ATHEOMASTIX: Clearing four Truths, Against Atheists and Infidels: 1. That,
There is a God. 2. That, There is but one God. 3. That, Jehovah, our God, is
that one God. 4. That, The Holy Scripture is the Word of that God.
All of them proved, by Natural Reasons, and Secular Authorities; for the
reducing of Infidels: and, by Scriptures, and Fathers, for the confirming of
Christians.

By the R. Reverend Father in God, MARTIN FOTHERBY, late Bishop of Salisbury.

The Contents follows, next after the Preface.

Psalm 14. 1. The Fool has said in his heart, There is no God. Romans 1.
20. But, The invisible things of God, that is, his eternal Power, and
Godhead, are seen by the Creation of the World, being considered in his
works. LONDON, Printed by Nicholas Oaks, dwelling in Foster-Lane. 1622.

TO THE RIGHT HONOrable Knight, Sr. ROBERT NAVNTON, Principal Secretary to the
Kings Majesty, and of his most Honorable Privy Council; all Happiness,
answerable to his Virtue and Worthiness.
MOST worthy Syr^ you cannot but remember, that, from the first beginning of
our old acquaintance, I have always made you the Aristarchus of my writings.
The exactness of whole judgment; I have ever found, so pleasingly tempered,
with Sharp, and Sweet, that, to the one of these, your sharpness, in
discerning the least escapes and errors, there could nothing more be added: of
the other, your sweetness, in pardoning the greatest, there could nothing more
be required. The recordation of which mixture, has given me now the boldness
(notwithstanding the greatness of your affairs, wherewith I ever find you
pressed) yet, to offer unto your censure, this imperfect work, as matter of
contemplation, for your more reserved time: wherein, I nothing doubt, but you
have your often returns, to meditations of this kind. The heads which I have
proiected, in this work to be discussed, are all of them such, as though most
needful to be believed; yet least labored in by Divines, to further our
belief; and therefore the most subject, both to question and doubting:
Especially, with men of the sharpest wits, the greatest spirits, and the
richest endowments: whom Nature has prepared, for the search of the highest;
and most difficult matters. These men (out of the penetrating and dividing
nature of their fiery wits) do trouble themselves with many Quaere's and
doubts, in all these four Positions which never creep into the heads of
simpler and unlearned persons; framing sometimes such Objections, as to which,
they themselves cannot give good and sufficient Answers, but are, ipsi sibi
respondentes, inferiores: as it was said of Chrysippus; even for this very
cause. For the better help of which men, and to rid them out of the snares of
their own curiosities, wherewith they oftentimes entangle themselves; and to
prevent, that they do not, ipsi se compungere suis acuminibus, that they wound
not themselves, with the sharp needles points of their own pricking wits; I
have done the best I could, to join my help with theirs, by answering all
Objections, which I could conjecture might any way trouble, their sciences, or
Consciences. For this so mean a work, I affect no great Patronage. Satis*
magnum alter alteri the atrum sumus. Your love is the greatest: which I have
ever found ready to cover my greatest: wants. The summitie of my ambition is,
that, as you have given a noble testimony unto the world, of the incomparable
faithfulness of your love toward me: so I might yield a return of my like
fidelity of thankfulness toward you. Your gracious acceptance of this mine
imperfect work, shall be a brazen wall unto me, against the maleuolous
disposition of all detracting spirits.

Your Honors eternally obliged friend to serve you: MAR^^N SARVM*

The Preface to the Reader, expressing the Reason of the whole Work.
IT is not so much of man's own free election, as of Gods special disposition,
that every man in his writing, is particularly addicted unto the handling of
this or that Argument. Not all unto one: for so, all but one, should be left
vnhandl^^* and the world of many excellent knowledges bereaved: but some unto
one, and some unto another; that we might not lack instruction in any
profitable matter. Diversis etenim gaudet Natura ministris,
Vt fieri diversa queant ornantia Terras.
Ne^ patitur cunctos ad eandem curreremetam,
Sed varias iubet ire vias, variosque labores
Suscipere, vt vario cultu sit pulchrior orbis,
Says the Christian Poet: Nature herself delights herself in sundry
instruments, ^aling. in Scor. page 217.

That sundry things be done to deck the Earth with Ornaments.
Nor suffers she her servants all should run one single race,
But will's the walk of every one frame in a diverse pace:
That diverse ways and diverse works the world might better grace.
Yea, and even the very Heathen do likewise confess, this to be the proper
work of Gods gracious providence; calling every man to that wherein he best
foreseeth him, most able to do good: and yet, not enforcing, but inducing him
to do it. Eam enim mentem Dij singulis dant, vt communes vtilitates in medium
afferant; says the Athenian Orator. Is^crat. ^rat. ad Philip. p. 267.
Yea, and he illustrateth his position by example of himself there: That God
had put into his mind to make that present Oration, for the general good of
the whole Greekish Nation: ascribing that his inclination, not unto his own
selfe-motion; but unto Gods providence disposing his affection. And so likewise
does Plutarch his* Intellige non sine efficacitate coe^stium, Plut* lib. de
Fato Tom. 2. p, 670.
vel me nunc scribere isthaec, velte, quic quid agis, eo modo agere quo agis.
And so likewise does Galen of his book De vsu partium: Galen lib. 10 de Vsu
partium, p, 313.
Deus aliqu^s iussit, and primum scribere, and declarationem eius, ille ipse
novit me scire: ascribing all his writing unto Gods inward commanding: who knew
best his ability to write of that argument. Which is indeed, a very true
ascription: yea, and much truer in spiritual matters, than it is in any
civil. For, therein it is most evident, that, The same Spirit, that has given
to every man his gift, has also assigned unto every man his task: 1. Cor. 12.
4. 5. etc.
calling one unto one Argument, and another to another; and every one to serve
his Church, with those (...) and graces, which he has bestowed upon him for
that purpose. And this we may plainly see, even in those holy Instruments,
that have been the writers of the holy Scriptures: how, as God had endowed them
with their several gifts, so he likewise appointed them to their several works:
calling some of them to the writing a^ holy Histories, as Moses, Joshua, etc.
some, of heavenly Mysteries, as Daniel, John, etc. some, of Hymns, as David in
Psalms, and Solomon in his Song: some, of Prophecies, as Isaj, Jeremy, etc.
and some, of Moral, and Civil Precepts, as Solomon in his Proverbs: every one
entertaining both a different matter, and handling the same in a differing
manner: yet not by his own election, but by Gods direction. For (as S. Peter
plamlyteacheth us) There is no Prophecy in Scripture, of any private motion,
neither of the will of man: 2. Pet* 1. 20* 21.
but the holy men of God did only speak, as they were inspired by the holy
Spirit: who disposed their affections, to serve the Church of God, with all
their best indowments and endeavors; and every one of them (according to that
Talent, which God has given unto him) to help to build it up, in true piety
and religion. So that, they all of them being ioynt-laborers together, and all
of them working in one common work, under one common master, there could none
have any cause to insult over another* not the Hymnographer over the
Historiographer, nor the Gnomographer over either, nor the Prophet over all, or
any of the rest; but every one to acknowledge other, as his own
fellow laborer, appointed by God himself, with that gift which he had, to
help forward the same building that he himself did.

And, the very same course has the holy Ghost observed, as well in the new
Testament, as he did in the old: For he has given unto his Church, some
Apostles, some Prophets, some Teachers, 1. Cor. 12. 28.
some Workers of Miracles, some Helpers, some Governors, some Speakers with
Tongues. For the gathering together of the Saints; for the work of the
Ministry, and for the building up of the body of Christ. Not all Apostles,
Ephesians. 4. 11. 12.
not all Prophets, not all Teachers, not all Governors, but yet, all
fellow laborers, 1, Cor. 3. 9.
and all builders up of the Church, and every one acoadiutor to the work of
all the other. We together are Gods laborers, 1 Cor. 3. 9.
and the Church his building. Th^odoret. S^r. 6. de Prouide^, To. 2. p, 600.
So that, as in the nature all body of a man, no one member can suffice for all
his need full uses; but, all of them stand in need of the mutual assistance
of all their fellow members: 1. Cor. 12. 19. 21.
so that, the eye cannot say to the hand, I have no need of thee; no, nor even
the head unto the foot, I have no need of thee: So likewise, in the mysti
call body of Christ, those members that are the chiefest, yet do need the
coassistance of those that are the meanest.

The same Providence (still careful for the good of the Church) has
continually raised up, throughout all succeeding ages, many learned, and wise,
and industrious Pastors, to instruct and teach his Church, in true piety and
godliness: some by preaching, some by writing, and some by both. But yet, in
no Age, has God shed out all the riches of his blessings, both of Wisdom,
and Learning, and all his high Illuminations, more graciously and plentifully,
than in this Age of ours. For, what learning, or what knowledge has God ever
bestowed upon any of all the preceding ages, which he has not greatly
amplified and enlarged in this of ours? Yea, and that to high degrees.

And, as he has in this our Age, bestowed upon many men, great variety of
Gifts, so has he also designed them to great variety of works. To some he
has given diversity of Tongues, and those he has called to examine
Translations: to some, skill in disputing, and those he has called to labor
in Controversies: to some, a faculty in Exhortation and Teaching, and those he
has called to instruct men by Preaching. And thus, as God has dispensed his
gifts diversely; so has he assigned men their Provinces accordingly: to one
after one manner, and to another after another; appoynting unto every one,
that, as he has received the gift, 1. Cor. 7. 7.
so likewise, 1. Pet. 4. 10.
he should minister as good dispensers of the manifold graces of God.

So that, now (God be praised) the Church of Christ goes up on all hands,
every man laboring in it with his several gift, to repair all the ruins and
several bracks of it: some as Architects and skillful Master Builders; some,
as Carpenters: some, as Smiths; some, as Masons,; yea, and some other, but as
Temperers of Lyme and Mortar: yet these also called Laborers; yea, and more
properly then the others. Whose work, though in view, it be less honorable
then therest; yet, is it in use, as profitable as the best: yea, and of so
great necessity, to the perfecting of the building; that, as in temporal
building, the greater Stones cannot be firmly laid, without mixture of the
less: so, in this spiritual building too; those other Arts, though
superior, yet cannot either perfect or perform their own work, Lapides
magos ^ine paruis, been struinegant Architecti. Plat. li. 10. de Leg. p. 877
without the help and ministry, even of those mean and inferior.

Amongst whom, it has pleased the providence of God, to call me, to make up
some decays in the foundations, which, either through tract of time, or
through corruption of manners, or through the vnder-mining of little Foxes,
mentioned in the Canticles, are grown by degrees, into the very lowest
ground-works. Can^. 2. 15.
I am called to vnder-pinne those four maine Corner-stones, which uphold (like
four pillars) the whole frame of the Church. I mean, the first, four
principles of all Religion: namely, That there is a God. That there is but one
God. That Jehovah our God, is that one God. And, That the holy Scripture is the
word of that God. These vnder-groundworks, has it pleased divine providence,
to assign me for my task. So that, whilst other men do so are aloft, like
Eagles in the air; I must creep here below, like a worm upon the earth. But
yet, let no man despise the baseness of this work; because it is about the
Basis of the Church. For, the work of the foundation, though it be in sight,
the lowest work belonging to the building, yet, is it not the least, but in
truth, the very greatest; as being the whole support and stay of all the rest,
even of the very highest: A Work which requires both the skilfullest head,
and the cunningest hand, unto the doing of it; if it be done as it ought.

And therefore, I could have wished, that some excellent Maisterworkman, more
plentifully abounding, both in leisure, and learning, would have taken it
vponhim. The work is due to such: 1. Cor. 3. 10.
yea, and our Church has store of such (Gods name be praised for it.) But yet,
no man (that I see) has set his hand unto it. Many work upon the walls, to
make them firm and strong: many upon the roof, to keep it close and tight:
many upon the pillars, to erect and straighten them exactly, ad perpendiculum:
some pariete and smooth it: some painte and adorn it; some furnish, Cic. Orat.
3. in Verrem. p. 79.
and garnish it with beautiful pictures, like apples of gold, in pictures of
silver. But yet, no man looks down into the groundwork of it, Prou. 25. 11.
that it be laid so low, as to reach unto the Rock. Whereby there is a space
left, for pioners and vnder-miners, and such like deceitful workers, which are
not able to break through the wall, yet do dig under the foundation, and so to
euert all. And therefore I have adventured upon this great task, though far
unequal to it; hoping that the the same Spirit which has given me the will,
will also assist me in the work, in some measure, to perform it. For, Phil.
2. 13.
Sort diuinaid recte efficere quisque potest, ad quod Musa quempiam incitauit.
Plato in Ionc, p. 171.
And so I have followed the advice of the Poet: Quin, hortante Deo, magnis
insistere rebus
Incipe --
Why then, begin, Tibul. leb. 4. p. 150.
since aid from God is sent*
Proceed, go on, dri^e forth thy great intent.


A Work, great indeed: yea, and that of much greater, both Difficulty, and
Variety, and Vtility, and Necessity, then will easily, at the first, be
conceived of many: of all which four, I will give you a little taste, in order.

The Difficulty of the work, arises from hence, that this Argument now
intended to be handled by me, is the most deserted part of all Theology; and
wherein the fewest Divines have bestowed their pains. For, whereas there be
but two ways, to bring men unto the knowledge and understanding of God (as S.
Augustine has well observed) namely, Creatura, and Seriptura, Aug. lib. 2. de
Trin. in proaem. (...). 3 p. 260.
the Creature, and the Scripture; the World, and the Word: there have so many
men labored in this latter, that, for number, almost they be without number:
but, in the former part, so few, that they likewise, in comparison, be
numberless too. Some few, I confess, have written before me, of this matter:
but none at all in this manner: as I leave it to be judged by the wise and
learned. So that, I may truly take up that excuse for all incident errors,
which Lucretius does, even in this very case, that, Auia Pieridum peragro loca,
Lucret. l. 1. P. 34.
nullius ante
Trita solo --
I walk a way less way, with uncouth pace,
Which yet no former Muse with foot did trace.


The natural Difficulty of the Argument, has deterred the most men from
writing upon it: and the paucitie of such writers, has begotten a second
difficulty unto me. Those whom I have seen to have written upon this Theme
(for I go not beyond the compass of mine own Library) are only these
following. Aquinas contra Gentiles; Raymundus de Sabunde, in Theologia
naturali; Bradwardinus de Causa Dei; and Valesius de sacra Philosophia. But
these four, dealing only Scholastically, by way of Logical Arguments, which
do not influere, they cannot affect, nor leave any great impression in the
mind of a man but (as the Orator aptly censureth such short and sharp
conclusions) Haec spinosiora, prius vt confiteamur nos cogunt, (...). 1. Tuse.
p. 110.
quam vt assentiamur. Such thorny and prickly conclusions of Logique, do rather
enforce men to confess them, then induce men to believe them. There is
further, Augustinus Eugubinus; who in his Book de perenni Philosophia, has
labored in this Theme, with singular learning, congesting out of Poets,
Philosophers, and Orators, an incredible mass of Authorities and Sentences.
But as the forenamed Authors dealt only by argument, without any testimony; so
deals he mostly by testimony, without any argument. There is yet further,
Ludouicus Viues, de veritate Fidej Christianae; and Philippus Mornaeus, of the
same both argument and inscription* Zanchius also, de Operibus Dej; and the
Second Part of the Book of Resolution: all which have done learnedly, in their
several kinds. But yet, for those heads, whereupon in this Book, I do
principally insist, they pass o^r them so slightly, and perstringe them so
briefly, that all of them may be truly affirmed, to have been, by those
Authors, rather touched, then handled. It has been mine endeavor, so to
temper my writing, that neither Authorities should lack their arguments; nor
arguments their Authorities; nor the Reader store of both. And yet in using the
writings of those forenamed Authors, I have entertained this course: that
whatsoever any of them has prolixely handled, that have I either wholly
pretermitted, or (at the most) but lightly touched. What they have
pretermitted, that have I sought out (so far as I could) and more copiously
enlarged. Whereby neither their writings shall be prejudiced by mine, nor mine
thought a Plagium out of theirs: and yet the Reader be enriched by the store of
both of us. And this has also bred a third difficulty unto me. A fourth there
grows likewise from the destinate end, and scope of this work: which is, to
compel the Heathens to preach the truth of Christians; and Philosophy to prove
the grounds of Divinity: yea and to enforce, by strength of Argument, both
Infidels, and Epicures, and Atheists, who will not believe God in his word; yet
to believe him without his word. Which every wise man will easily imagine, to
be a work not easy to be done. For, as it is truly observed by Tertullian;
Tertul. lib. de Testim. (...) c. 1. p. 84.
Magna curiositate, and maiore long memoria opus est ad studend^, si quis
velit ex literis receptissimis quibusque Philosophorum, vel Poetarum, vel
quorumlibet sapientiae secularis Magistrorum, testimonia excerpere Christianae
veritatis. It is a piece of business* both of great curiosity, and of greater
memory, and yet of greatest study, to gleane out of the writings of
Philosophers, and Poets, and other secular Authors, fit authorities, and
testimonies, for the proof of Christian truths.

Now secondly, for the Variety of this Work; that is such, and so great, as
none other could come near it; if it were handled as it should. For, this
Work entreats both of God, and all his Works; which contain all those
varieties, which God and Nature yields. In God there comes to be
considered, all those divine properties, which he has adumbrated in any of
his creatures; his Simplicity, his Immortality, his Immensity, his Eternity,
his Strength, his Wisdom, his Goodness, his Dominion, his Omnipotency, his
Omniscience, and his Omnipraesence; and such like; things incomprehensible in
themselves, but yet such, as may in part be sufficiently understood, by that
shadowy resemblance of them, which he has given unto our souls. In his
Creatures, there comes to be discussed, both the little World, with all the
faculties of his body, and all the powers of his mind; and the great World,
with all his most excellent and glorious parts; the Heavens, the Earth, the
Seas, and all the several creatures contained in all these* yea and the
admirable working of Gods divine providence, both in making, and preserving,
and in ruling of al of them. Which (as every simple man may easily see) be
matthers of the greatest Variety that can be. In all which points, I have given
the Reader so much taste as may delight him, yet not to glut him. For the full
handling of them, would both be nauseous unto him, tedious unto me, and
supersluous unto both of us; a mere deviation from the scope of this work;
and in it self an attempt, not only fond, but also infinite.

Now thirdly, for the Vtility and profit of this Treatise* that may partly be
collected from the varieties of it. For it is the Orators observation, (...) 3.
de. (...). page 214
That those things which carry with them the greatest delight, do commonly
carry likewise the greatest profit* Plerisque in rebus, incredibiliter hoc
Natura est ipsa fabricata, vt ea, quae maximam vtilitatem in se continent,
eadem habeant plurimum, vel dignitatis, vel saepe etiam venustatis. And he
gives for an instance, that great beauty and variety which we see in the
world: which carries also with it, no less utility and profit: the very
punctual instance of this our present purpose.

But to consider the profit of this our Treatise, absolutely in it self,
without any such reference unto his varieties. Can there possibly be any more
profitable contemplation, either to excite and stir up a man unto godliness,
or to incite him unto thankfulness, then religiously to weigh and pond^r with
himself, the immensitie of Gods goodness, who has made both heaven and
earth, and all the several creatures contained in them both, to serve only
for his use? This contemplation wrought in the Prophet David so strongly, that
it drove him almost into an holy ecstasy; forcing him to break out into that
patheticall exclamation; Psa. 8. 1.
O Lord our Governor, how excellent is thy Name in all the world. Thou that
have set thy glory above the Heavens. When I consider the Heavens, the work of
thy hands, the Moon, and the Stars, which thou have ordained: What is man
(say I then) that thou art so mindful of him, or the son of man, that thou so
visitest him? And mark here again, how the Prophet resumeth his first
admiration, by a Poetical Epanalepsis or reduplication; O Lord our Governor,
how excellent is thy Name in all the world! And indeed, this sensible
beholding of the invisible things of God, Romans 1. 20.
by the creation of the world, if it duly be considered and weighed as it
ought, it will minister a more effectual instruction unto our eyes, then any
that we commonly receive in by our ears. For, Segnius irritant animos demissa
per aurem, Horat* lib. de Art Poet p 170

Quam quae sunt oculis subiecta fidelibus, and quae
Ipse sibi tradit spectator --
Those things more slowly do affect the mind,
Which ears do hear, then those which eyes do find.
And erefore this work (as I hope) will not be without his profit.

Fourthly, as concerning the Necessity of it: Look what absolute necessity the
work of the foundation has, unto all the rest of the building; the same (and
no less) has the proof of these Propositions, unto all the other parts of
Religion: For let but these four positions be substantially proved; That there
is a God: That there is but one God: That Jehovah our God, is that one God: And
that the Scripture is the Word of that God: and then all the other parts of
Religion, in the whole Scripture contained, are soundly supported and vpheld.
For then it will follow of it self, that whatsoever is in the whole Scripture
prescribed, it ought to be obeyed, as the very word of God. But (on the other
side) let either all, or any of these positions be disproued; That either there
is no God; or, That there is not only one; or, That I^hovah is not that one;
or, That the Scripture is not his word: and then all Religion must needs
presently fall down, as an house that lacks his foundation. So that, whether
we consider the difficulty of this work in respect of the writer; or the
Variety, Vtility, and Necessity of it, in respect of the Reader: it will (as I
hope) be no labor ill spent, to bestow some time in the reading of it.

And yet I doubt not (courteous Reader) but this my labor and endeavor will,
of some men, be esteemed to be needelesse, and redundant: that in this so
clear a light and sunshine of the Gospel, I should go about to prove those
grounded principles of Religion, which so long have been received without all
contradiction: the very seeking to prove the undoubted truth of them, carrying
with it (in show) a secret doubting of them; at the least wise, a calling of
their truth into question, which has hitherto been questionless amongst all
good and sound Christians.

I represent the whole Objection in his true and proper form, as it formerly
has been represented unto me by some, neither ill-learned, nor ill-affected
toward me. Whereby I may collect, that from those which are more strange, or
more estranged Readers, I may probably expect that scomme of Theognetus: Laevas
didicisti (o nequam) Literas: Ath^naeus. l. 15. p. 500.

Everterunt tuam vitam libri.
Dum philosophareris, cum coelo acterra es confabulatus,
Quibus tui sermones minime curae sunt.
Fond man, thou have spent thy time in vain,
Much idle learning thus to gain:
Thy bookishnesse has been thy bane.
With heaven and earth thou talk I wis,
And yet thy talk by that, nor this,
Nor more, nor less, regarded is.


This measure (and no better) I but hardly shall escape, from those rash and
heady persons, who (like Sannioes) subsanne all things, but only their own
follies: not waighing the moment and nature of things. For, as Euripides very
truly observes, Indoctis -- nova proferens scita, ^urip. in Medea p. 185.

Videberis inutilis, and non sapiens esse.
Who broacheth ought that is new, Quicunque canunt pro foribus etiamsi quid
Doctum cecinerint, non reputati sapientes, opinionem sub^unt stultitiae. Clem.
Alex. lib. Strom p. 136.
to fools untaught, Galen. l. 12. de vsu partium. p. 358.

Himself shall judged be unwise, and good for naught.
Against whom I have put on Galens iron-resolution, as an armor of sure
proof: Non ignorantes hunc librum, and calumnijs and convitijs lacessitum iri
quam saepissime, cum velut infans orphanus in manus hominum ^briorum prae
stultitia and ruditate exciderit: tamen conamur scribere, gratia illorum
paucorum, qui dicenda audire recte, and iudicare poterunt.

And yet, for the better removing of the fore-alledged Exception, and diverse
other of like nature, which might minister any scruple, either unto the curious
or incurious Reader, I thought good to praemunite the succeeding Treatise, with
this praeceding Preface* to exempt out of their minds, all those scrupulous
exceptions, which (by way of divination) I could forecast would trouble them,
touching either the matter, or the manner of my writing. Using in the mean
time the same obtestation unto my beneuolous Reader, which Lucretius does to
his, in the very like matter: -- Vacuas aures mihi, Lucret. lib. 1. p. 2. 3.
and te --
Semotum a curis adhibe, veram ad rationem:
Nemea dona tibi studio disposta fideli,
Intellecta prius quam sint, contempta relinquas.
To Reason Lend me thine attentive ears,
Exempt thy self, from mind-distracting cares,
Lest that which I proiected for thy good,
By thee rejected be, e're understood.
Yea, and the reason, which there is alleged by him, will also not improperly
serve my turn: Nam, tibi de summa Coeli ratione Deumque
Disserere incipiam: and rerum primordia pandam.
My purpose is, to treat of Heavens high Nature,
Of All Is original, and of All Is Maker.


First therefore, as concerning the forenamed Exception, That all these four
Positions, which are the subject of this Treatise, be already amongst us
sufficiently believed; and that therefore it is superfluous to call them now to
be proved: Unto this Objection I answer three things. First, that the
principal scope and intent of this Book, is, rather to convince those that
believe them not, then to confirm those that believe them. Though this also be
intended as a secondary end, as it likewise is, in the Creatures of God* Romans
1. 20.
But the prime end of this Work, is, to confute all those, which either
dispute against Gods Essence and being, as the direct Atheist does; or, against
his Providence and governing, as the Epicure does, who is an indirect Atheist:
and to prove both of these to be men, not only destitute a^ all Piety and
Religion, but also of common sense and reason. And further, to show unto those
acute Naturalists, who hold it a seruility to be led with brutish-beleeuing,
and will therefore entertain no more of Religion then they find to be
consonant unto Reason; that here they may find reason for their Religion. All
which several kinds and degrees of Atheists, it is not more incongruous for me
to confute, amongst believing Christians, then it was for the Psalmist to
confute the same, Psalm. 14. 1. and
amongst believing Jews. Psalm. 53. 1.


But secondly, I answer, that my conceit is too shallow to sound the depth of
that bottomless reason, That it should not be lawful to prove those
Positions, because they be already believed of Christians. For if it were not
lawful to prove those points of Religion, which are now already accepted and
believed; then (if we will prove any thing) we must every day bring forth a new
Creed. For the old may not be proved, because it is approved. And then were the
writings of the most Divines, both ancient and recent, to be rejected. For,
what point of Divinity does any of them prove, in all their writings, but that
which was before admitted, and approved by all good and sound Christians? Is it
not lawful to prove the Articles of our Creed, because they be already
believed? or, is it lawful to prove all the rest; and is it not lawful to
prove the first? Is it lawful to prove, that our Sauionr was conceived by the
holy Ghost? borne of the Virgin Mary? suffered under Pontius Pilate? etc. And
is it not lawful^ to prove that There is a God? That he is our Father? That he
is Almighty? and, That he is the Maker of heaven and earth? What strange
infelicity is fallen upon this one Article (which is the very ground and
support of all the rest) that to seek to prove it should deserve reprehension,
when to prove all the other deserves commendation? I cannot reach (I say) the
profoundnesse of this Reason.

But, thirdly, I answer: that it is a false position, That either all, or any
one of these four forenamed positions, is so generally and constantly
believed, as that it has no need, to be proved and confirmed. For, there be
but too too many men that have their belief so imperfect in all of them, that
it is mingled with much haesitation, doubting, and wavering: so that, the best
of them may say with him in the Gospel, Lord, Mar. 9. 24. Plau^. in Market.
Act. 5. S^c. 4. p. 547.
I believe, help my unbelief: And with him in the Comedy, Credo, sed tamen
metuo miser. But yet specially, in the first point, of believing That there is
a God, that (...) of all the rest the most vnbeleeued. Ovid. l. 3. Amorrum.
Eleg. 8. p. 209.
For, that which Ovid confesses of himself, is also true in very many men, if
they would confess the truth, as Ovid plainly does. Solicitor, nullos esse
putare Deos.
Temptations often solicit me,
To think in heart, That Gods none be.
Yea and this solicitation of Satan, Alas sometimes I cannot shun, But some
p^ophane thoughts in my mind will runue, (...). 7. day, p. 235.
as it has much prevailed with diverse of the Heathens: Just. Mart. Dial. cum
Try^hon. p. 153.
so has it no less also, even with diverse Christians. Amongst whom, it is
but too true an observation which is made by Justin Martyr, an ancient learned
Father, Dici quidem nonnullos Christianos, esse vero nullius Numinis cultores.
That many men be called by the name of Christians, who yet be indeed no better
then very Atheists: though not such as Diagoras and Theodorus were, who made
(as it were) a profession of their Atheism; yet such as are noted by the
Prophet David, which say in their heart, Ps. 14. 1.
That there is no God. Theodoret. Sermon 1. De Prouiden ^ia. Tom. 2. p. 576
Yea and sometimes go further too, as is noted by Theodoret. Sunt quidam qui
Christianorum quidem nomine gloriantur, veritatis autem dogmata palam
oppugnant. There be some that are called by the name of Christians, and yet do
not only deny Gods Truth in secret, but also defy it, and oppugn it in
public, which comes not much short of the direct and professed Atheist.

Therefore it is not the name of a Christian that can free a man from Atheism;
nor reciting the Articles of our Christian belief that can make a true
Believer. To believe, is with the heart to assent: it is not with the tongue to
recite. Isai 29. 13.
For, many draw near unto God with their lips, whose hearts be far from
him. Therefore, Cord crediture, Ro^. 10. 10.
is a Christian man's Character, printed upon his heart, which many men do
lack, who have the mark of Christians printed upon their foreheads:
notwithstanding both the numberless multitude of preaching, and the cleernesse
of the Gospel, as bright as any Sun shine. For, though it cannot be denied,
that there never was in any age, such subtilty of wit, such plenty of learning,
and such study of all things, both Divine and Humane: Yet must it also be
confessed (if we will confess the truth) that the greatest part of those
excellent gifts, wherewith God has beautified and adorned this our age, are
rather the gifts of Illumination, than of Sanctification; and such as have bred
with many, rather a verbal Religion in their mouths, then a real in their
hearts. We may evidently see this, in the practice of common life: how all the
Streets do sound, all Tables and Ord^naries resound, with learned discourses in
every kind. The best Schools of Athens were never better able, to dispute de
omni scibili, then many men now do almost at every table. But yet this again
is very worthy observation; that all this sharpness of wit, and abundance of
learning, is oftentimes abused, but only to dispute, and make Objections
against God. So that he takes himself for the ioylliest fellow, that can
show himself best able to make some witty Objection against the Bible: thus
abusing the great gifts of their wit and understanding, even against God
himself, who is the giver of them.

Which profaneness so scandalized the Roman Orator Tully, Cic. l. 3. de Not.
Deor. p. 237.
that is drove him almost into another impiety; Prouidentiam repr^^ende^d^,
quae ration ^n dederit (...) and i^probe vsuros.
complaining against Providence; that surely in this point it was utterly
improuident, in giving so great Gifts and Ornaments unto those men, whom it
could not but foresee would so not ably abuse them.

Now this is the worst kind of Atheism of all other, when as Atheism is
grounded, not so much upon Ignorance, as it is upon the opinion of Knowledge.
And yet such is the Atheism of this our time. That which men at the first
(like good Christians) received with the simplicity of believing; they now
(being grown unto greater knowledge) desire to have proved, with the subtilty
of disputing: else, will they believe nothing. The greatness of men's wits
sharpneth many of them on, to see all things proved by arguments, and
demonstrated unto sense. The Scriptures (with many) have lost their authority:
and are thought only fit for the ignorant, and idiote: The World now swelling
with an opinion of learning, though it be indeed, in such men, but only an
opinion; yea, and that, a very false one. For (as the Apostle S. Paul has very
truly censured them) Wherein they profess themselves to be wise, Romans 1. 21.
22.
therein they do show themselves to be fools: there being nothing more
foolish, then either not to believe that there is a God, who yet may visibly be
seen by the creation of the world; Verse 20.
or, to believe that the world was never created, because we see not visibly
the first creation of it This, though such vain men do conceit and account
to be their wisdom: yet is it indeed their palpable folly: yea and that not
only in the Apostle Paul's judgment, but also in the judgment of the very
Heathen Poet, who calls such men's doubting, rationis egestatem, the very
beggary of reason. Tentat enim dubiam mentem rationis egestas, Lucret. lib. 5.
page 227.

Ecquaenam fuerit mundi genitalis origo.
It Is want of reason, or it is reasons want
Which doubts the mind, and Judgment so does daunt,
That Worlds beginning, mak's men not to grant.
Yea as thick and gross a folly, as if a man looking upon some goodly
building, should profess, he would not believe that it ever had been made;
because he himself did not see the making of it. For, how differ they?

Therefore it is but an erroneous opinion, to think, that either amongst
Christians there can be no Atheists; or, that secret Atheists are not to be
convinced, as well as the public: or, that the principles of Religion are
believed of all, by whom they be confessed: or that they ought not to be
proved unto those men, of whom they be already believed. All these (I say) be
very great errors, but especially the first. For beside the two forenamed
sorts of Atheists, the one both inword, and heart denying God; the other in
word confessing him, but in heart renouncing him; there is yet a third sort of
them (yea and those even amongst Christians) who though both in word and in
heart they confess him, yet do they in their works deny him. They believe
there is a God: but they live, as if they believed there were none: which the
Apostle Paul perstringeth as a real denying of him. Titus 1. 16.
They profess they know God, but by works they deny him. Yea, and his censure
is approved, even by the Heathen Poet: who sentenceth all wicked, and
licencious livers, to be no better, then a kind of pragmaticall Atheists. --
Tubulus si Lucius vnquam,
Si Lupus, aut Carbo, Cic. l. 1. de Not. Deor. p 192.
aut Neptuni silius,
Putasset esse Deos, tam periurus, aut tam impius fuisset?
Lucilius ask's, if any man can dream,
That Lucius, Tubulus.
Lupus, Carbo, and their crew,
Or Neptun's son, that impious Polypheme,
Themselves so perjured, or so vile would show;
If they had once, a thought but, that there is,
A God in Heaven, who plagues men for their mis?


Now all these sorts of Atheists, are to be convinced, and drawn, obtorto
collo, will they nill they, unto God. Which, I hope, is performed (I am sure
indeauoured) in this Book. Wherein, the first sort of those Atheists, which
deny there is a God; are forced, by strength of reason, to confess that, they
denied. The second sort of them, which confess there is a God, and yet believe
it not; are taught to believe, that which they have confessed. The third sort
of them, which both believe, and confess him, and yet have no care to worship,
or obey him; are here taught, to live as they do believe. So that, this Book
has great use, toward all those sorts of Atheists, which believe not these
positions. Yea, and no less (I hope) likewise, toward those that believe
them. For those true and sound Christians, which both confess the truth, and
believe as they confess, and live as they believe, it notably confirms, both
in their true faith, and in their good life. So that it will no way be idle or
super^luous, neither toward the Unbelievers, nor yet toward the Believers.
Not to them, for information; not to these, for confirmation.

But yet it may be, that some man will object, that Treatises of Devotion are
of much greater profit, and more fitting to the nature and capacity of the
Vulgar: and that therefore these our pains might more properly and profitably
have been bestowed upon such. Whereunto I briefly answer; That indeed there
is nothing more generally wanting, in the practice of our lives, then is the
exercise of true Devotion, nothing more defective in the diversity of our
writings, then discourses of that kind. So that this may likewise be
confessed, too truly, ^o be but a steril part of Divinity, tilled by very few.
But yet, even this present work, which we now have in hand, if it be well
considered, Qu^stio de Natura Dcorum, and ad (...) and ad moderandam Religio^em
necessaria. (...). l. 1. De Not. Deor. p. 184.
and duly meditated, does not want his instigation unto true devotion. Item,
vide Senecam (...) 6^^ p. 107. (...).
For what greater motive or incentiue can there be, to inflame the godly Soul,
with all faithfulness to deuote it self, wholly unto Gods holy service, then
seriously to perpend, and to recompte within it self, that God has made all
his several Creatures, to deuote them only unto our use and service?
Whosoever has in him any sparckle of goodness, he must needs, by this godly
and religious meditation, be greatly accended unto true deuoion. Now that point
in this Book is prolixly laid open. And certes, how the Reader will be
affected in the rea^ing of this Book, I cannot tell: but, my self in writing
of it, was no less affected, then was Tullie in the writing of (...) Book^ De
Senecture: being oftentimes so lively touched, (...)
that I never found in my self a more quick apprehension, both of Gods
incomprehensible Majesty and goodness, (...) of Man's most contemptible
pusillitie and (...) then by this contemplation of God in his creatures:
finding in my self the verity of that observation of Tully; that Est animorum
inge^^^^umque natural quasipabulum, Cic. lib. 4. Acad. p. 38.
consideratio contemplatioq, Naturae* Erigimur, latiores fieri videmur, humana
despicinus; cogitantesq, supera, atque coelestia, haec nostra, vt exigua and
minima contemnimus.

As for the capacity of the simpler Readers; all is not written to them; but
the most unto the learned, who are in most danger, with many Objections, upon
these points to be troubled. But yet, there be many passages, through out the
whole Book, which may easily be conceived, even of the (...) Readers: yea and
that even in the highest points, which I have (...) indeauoured to stoop and
demitte, even to the capacity of the very lowest, so far as the nature of
the things would permit. So (...) may happily be found true even in this
discourse also (at the least in respect of the subject matter handled, though
not in the form and manner of handling) which S. Gregory affirms of the
holy Scripture, Greg. Epist* ad L^andrum in (...)
that it is, Q^asi Fluuius, and planus, and altus; in quo, and Agnus ambuler,
and Elephas natet. That though there be some subjects so deep and profound,
that the Elephant may swim in them: yet be there (...) again, so obuious and
shallow, that even the Lamb may wade over them. And therefore the work (as I
hope) will not be without his fruit, neither toward the Infidels, nor yet
toward Christians; neither toward the Learned, nor toward the Unlearned:
which was the doubt of some men (themselves not unlearned) as concerning the
Subject and Argument of this Book.

It therefore now remains, that, having given satisfaction unto such, as have
objected against the matter of my writing, I should now likewise endeavor to
remove those Exceptions, which some happily may take against the Manner of it.

As first, it may be, that some Man, will except; that there is in this Book
so much Philosophy, and so little Divinity. Whereunto I breifely answer; that
with those Adversaries, against whom I am chiefly to deal in this Book, the
Divinity of Christians has much less authority, then the Philosophy of
Heathens; natural Reason a much higher place, then supernatural Religion; and
the writings of Philosophers much greater credit, then the holy Scriptures. So
that (in respect of the nature of those Adversaries) there is more cause of
exception that here is so much Divinity, then that there is so little. And yet
even for this also, there is a just Apology: That this is done, ex abundante,
rather to confirm those that believe, then to inform those that believe not:
that so the Book may not be without his profit, whether it light into the
hands of Christians, or of Pagans.

Some again (it may be) will except, That such a multitude of Testimonies are
congested to one purpose. But that has many uses, to the profit of the
Readers. For first, The Matter questioned, is, by multitude of Testimonies more
substantially proved. Secondly, though those Testimonies alleged, be by me
often applied, but to mine own present purpose: yet may the learned, Reader
make manifold use of them, unto diverse other purposes: and so in their
variety, have choice and election to take, or to leave, as will best serve his
turn. So that the writers store, ought not to be accounted the Readers sore:
if but in this respect. But thirdly, though many be alleged to one and the
same purpose: yet may it be observed, by the indicious Reader, that they do
not all proceed by one and the same tenor: but that (for the most part) every
one brings some thing that the other had not: which may serve the attentive
Reader, either for the better confirmation, or the clearer illustration of the
point, then in quaestion. Finally, if they will needs have this to be the
writers error; yet may I defend my self, with that same excuse, wherewith
Quintil. lib. 10. c. 1. p. 575.
Quintilian defends Stesicorus: that, Id si est reprehendendum, est tamen
nisi Copiae vitium. Which though it has made the Book some what bigger: yet
has it also (I hope) made it better. Athenaeus. lib. 3. p. 55.
So that I am the less fearful of Callimachus his censure, that, Magnus
Liber, est magno malo par. A great Book is little better then a great evil.
Yea and so much the rather, because in those sentences I have made choice of
mine Authors, not corrading out of all promiscue, and sine delectu, but taking
only such as are both ancient, and Classical, as well Seculars, as Divines. In
citing of whose Testimonies, I have not alleged them all pariter, as they
stand in their Author: but (leaving out all exorbitant and heterogeneall
Clauses, which ^itted not my purpose) I have taken only so much as was
properly incident unto mine own ends, and hindered not the context, and
roundnesse of the speech: yet always, with this care, neither to wrest, nor
wrong the sense of the Author.

Some again may except, against the citing of mine Authors so particularly;
Book, Chapter, and Page; as carrying with it, some touch (or at least, some
show) of Vanity. But, unto that I answer that it was not to ostentate, and
make show of mine own reading (which it greatly repents me to be so little)
but to help my Reader with it, such as it is: not envying his profit, but
seeking, with all my best endeavor, to promote it. And indeed, I have always
esteemed it a great oversight, yea and a kind of unkindness, in any writer,
in the citing of his Authors, to send his Reader to seek in an indefinite
compass, when as he himself can direct him unto the definite place: by that
means also, defeating, the very end and purpose of his own pains in writing*
which is, only to increase his Reader in all knowledge and understanding.
Besides, Whereas in the citing of those Authors, I do oftentimes allude but in
a word or two, unto many great Matters, which in the Authors themselves are set
down more prolixly: this directing of my Reader unto the plac^ so
particularly, will oftentimes serve him in stead of a Commentary, storing him
to every purpose, with a great deal of more matter, then I have extracted out
of the Author.

And yet, no man is hereby tied unto the same edition of the Authors that by my
self is used. I do but only direct them, which have the same editions, how to
make more ready use of them. As for those that have them not, I have noted, not
only the Author, but the Book also, and the Chapter: and so come as near
them, as I could possibly imagine.

Another Exception may perhaps be also taken: That Verses be sometimes cited,
and yet not as verses. But this may be defended, Fraz, Poet. page 141. Versorum
pro versuum.
with that excuse of Laberius, that, Versorum non numerorum numero studuimus. I
therein followed rather the power of the sense, then the number of the
syllables. Senec. Epist. 101. p. 251.
And, with another like, of Seneca's, that Animis ista scripsi, non auribus.

Some again may except that Greek writers are not cited in their own proper
language. Whereunto I answer: First, that the weight of those Testimonies,
which I have taken out of them, does seldom, or never, rest upon the
propriety of the Greek word or phrase: but mostly upon the matter, and the
sense. Secondly, that if it did: yet the credit of the Translator has no less
authority, then any Nomenclator, or Dictionarie maker, but rather much
greater: Because, he is led unto his translation; by exactly perpending the
true weight of every word as it is in that place used, rendering it most
properly out of the congruitie of those circumstances that he has before
considered, both in the anteceding and succeeding passages: which are the best
directions, and cannot be considered by the bare reciter of the words in their
several significations. But thirdly, and lastly (which stops all reply) I
have cited those Authors, as I had them: contenting my self with the use of
those Book, which were only mine own, and in mine own possession, not
affecting to be curious, either in this, or in any thing else which tends not
directly unto the profit of my Readers.

Again it may be objected; that the Sentences alleged are not exactly
translated. Aul. G^l. lib. 9. c. 9 p. 124.
Whereunto again I answer: that to the sense they be always, Horat. lib. de
Art. Poet. p. 169.
though, to the words, not always: For, that needs not: in the opinion of an
excellent Critic And the Poet tells us, that he may be a faithful
Translator that does it not. Nec verbum verbo curabis reddere fidus
Interpres --
It Is not his part, that is the best Translator,
To render word for word, unto his Author.
But, the Orator tells us, that he cannot be a delightful Translator that
does it. Cie. lib 3. De Fin p. 68.
Verbume verbo exprimere, interpretis est indiserti.

Again, yet an other, That I have not always cited them to the meaning of the
Author. To which I likewise answer: That, whenever I produce them, as
Testimonies for the confirmation of the point then in question, I cite them
exactly, unto the Authors meaning. But that is not always my end in alleging
them: but, sometimes, to (...) their words, by way of (...), rather then of
allegation, for the more commodious expressing of mine own sense and meaning.
A thing very usual and familiar with Plutarch; whose character, and form of
style I have (in that point) propounded to imitate.

Finally, it may be, that some men will except against the publishing of this
first part alone, before the rest be ready: in putting unto me, the incurious
error of Curio the Orator. Cic. in. (...). p. ^43.
Qui, aliquoties tria cum proposuisset, aut quarum adderet, aut tertium
quaereret. Who often times, propounding to speak but of three things,
commonly, either added to them a fourth, or else forgot to speak of the third.
But, for this course of proceeding, I am not without my reason: as namely.
First the example of very many learned men; whom we daily observe to practice
the same, and to propine unto their Readers an assay of their works, to take a
taste of them, how themselves are tasted by them. Secondly, because this first
part of the work has grown exceeding great, and beyond mine expectation,
being now come unto the measure and bigness of a Volume. And thirdly, it had no
little moment with me, that diverse of my learnedest and best affected Friends,
have often importuned me unto the publishing of it, hastening (in their love)
this imperfect work, unto the edition; peradventure, as an untimely fruit unto
his abortion: but without peradventure, (...). Orat* ad (...) p. 35.
unto that common condition, which is observed by Isocrates to be fatal, to
many Book. Vt dum adhuc in mentibus Authorum inclusi te^eantur, magnam sui
expectationem concitent: sed. perfecti tandem, and alijs oftensi, long
tenuiorem, quam pro concepta spe, gloriam consequantur. They stir up a
greater expec^ation, whilst they are in doing, then they are able to maintain,
when as they be done. But yet, the principal end and intent of my writing,
being only the good, and profit of my Readers; I should greatly wrong, both
their courtesy and equity, to make any doubt of their favorable acceptance.
Which, if they should not afforde, they themselves should wrong them both. For
what can be more contrary, both to courtesy, and equity, then either to
speak, or but to think evil of those, that have spent so much pains, only
to do them good? Mat. 5. 46. 47. Ca^^. ad Corn. Nepo^. p. 7.
This were the reward of worse then a Pagan: which I hope to be far, from
every good Christian. Quare habe tibi, quic quid hoe Libelli est. Such as it
is, I do willingly permit it unto thine equal censure: desiring nothing more,
then that the same mind, toward thine own good, may possess thee, in
reading it, that did me, in writing it: and then I shall not need to doubt of
thy profit by it: Which I will account, mine own exceeding great Reward. And
therefore, I conclude this preface with that prayer of Irenaeus: I^enaeus l. 3.
c, 6. p. 176.
Da (Deus) omni legenti hanc scripturam, cognoscere te quia solus Deus es, and
confirmari int te and absistere ab omni haeretica, quae est sine Deo, and impia
sententia. Grant (O Lord) unto all that shall be readers of this Book, to know
thee, to be the only true God* and in thee more and more to be strengthened and
confirmed: and to eschew all the impious opinions, of Heretics, and Atheists*
Amen.

Thine in the Lord, Martin Sarum.

The first part of this work Proves, There is a God.
And is contained in eight several Books; enforcing the probation, by eight
several Arguments.
The First Book proves it, from the simple and Categorical affirmation of
Nature: which cries out in all men, that, There is a God. The Second; from
certain grounds and consequents, in all manner of Arts, and Sciences. The
Third; from the structure of Man's Body. The Fourth; from the Nature of his
Soul, The Fifth; from the general view of the visible world. The Sixth; from a
particular surueigh of the most principal part's of it. viz. The Heaven, The
Earth, The Sea. The Seventh; from certain special works of Providence
observed by Cleanthes. The Eight; from the Confutation of the Atheists
Objections.
A Table of the Chapters contained in this Book.
CHAP. 1.
TO believe there is a God, is the ground of all Religion. 2. The end and
purpose of this book, is to prove that Position. 3. This cannot be believed,
but by the help of prayer. 4. It cannot be proved A Priorj. 5. Yet may it be
showed A Posteriorj. page 1.
CHAP. 2.
What manner of Authorities be the weightiest in this case. 2. That, they may
not here be used. 3. How yet they be here used. 4. What be the most proper,
in respect of the Adversaries. 5. Why they be more proper then any other. page
8.
CHAP. 3.
That there is an inbred persuasion in the hearts of all men, That there is a
God. 2. That this has been observed, by many learned men, among the Heathens.
3. That it has also bin observed, by diverse learned Christians. 4. Two notable
testimonies out of Tullie; asserting this persuasion, both unto all Nations,
and unto al Conditions, and unto all persons among men. p. 15
CHAP. 4.
That there is not any Nation, but it has his Religion. 1. Ancient histories
insinuate it. 2. New histories affirm it. 3. Travelers confirm it. 4. A
general surueigh of their gods declares it. 5. A particular surueigh of their
tutelar gods, proves it. p. 19. and 20.
CHA^. 5.
That all sorts of men, of all degrees and orders, do believe, There is a God,
is particularly declared by instance of Poets. 2. Of Law-giuers. 3. Of
philosophers. 4. And of all other several Arts and professions. page 29.
CHAP. 6.
That there is no particular person in the world, but that (in some degree) he
believes, There is a God. 2. No Swearer. 3. No Blasphemer. 4. No Idolater. p.
39.
CHAP. 7.
That a great discord may be noted among the Heathens, as concerning the
worship of their several gods. 2. Yet that this discord does not infringe the
general op^nion, as concerning God. 3. But that it much confirms it. page 49,
CHAP. 8.
Certain Objections touched, impugning the generality of the forenamed
consent, as concerning God. 2. The first of those Obiectio^s opened, directly
denying it. 3. The same Objection answered. p. 55.
CHAP. 9.
The second Objection against this universality of consent, unfolded: that
Religion is no better, but an humane invention. 2. That Objection confuted, by
the Aniquity. 3. Universality. 4. Consent. 5. Perpetuity of Religion. p. 58.
CHAP. 10.
The third Objection against the Universality of Consent in Religion,
propounded: viz. That it has been oppugned by diverse, both wise and learned
Philosophers, though called by the name of Atheists. 2. That Objection answered
from the smalnesse of their number. 3. The weakness of their learning. 4. The
mist^king of their opinion. 5. And their inconstancy in their assertion. p. 66.
CHAP. 11.
The two ends of Atheism; Not to serve, and Not to fear. 2. The Atheist in
the first of these two ends, is disappointed, becoming a base servant unto all
his own vices. 3. But more especially unto his ambition. 4. And his belly. 5.
All which service, he referring to himself, he becomes thereby, A god unto
himself. p. 112.
CHAP. 12.
The Atheists second end, is, to free himself from fear. 2. Yet no man
fears more: as he bewrays, at three times. 3. When he dreameth. 4. When it
thundreth. 5. When he dies. 6. This his fear, is a clear Argument, that he
thinks, There is a God. p. 121.
CHAP. 13.
That, beside the forenamed direct confessions of Atheists, diverse of them
have directly and expressly confessed confessed God. 2. Some of them,
unwittingly. 3. Some of them, unwillingly. 4. And some of them, both wittingly,
aend willingly. page 135.
CHAP. 14.
That though Atheists should never have confessed, neither directly, nor
indirectly; but always most obstinately have denied him: yet, that there is no
reckoning to be made of their opinion. 2. Because in the opinion of all wise
and learned men, they are esteemed no better then either Fools. 3. Or mad
men. 4. Or monsters of men. p. 147.
CHAP. 15.
That God has at all times, powered down his just judgments, upon the heads
of Atheists: by them sensibly declaring, That there is a God, 2. Examples out
of Scriptures. 3. Examples out of Ecclesiastical Histories. 4. Examples out of
Heathen writers. 5. An Objection answered, concerning the punishment of those
Atheists. p. 153
CHAP. 16.
That the general consent of al men, in agreeing so fully, That there is a
God, is an infallible argument, That there is one, indeed. 2. That, to this
end, it is alleged by those Authors, that have observed it. 3. In making it
the Law of Nature. 4. In making consent, a Symptom of truth, in all things. 5.
In making it, the chiefest Argument, that can be brought in this cause. p.
163. and 164.
The Chapters contained in the second Book.
CHAPTER 1.
THat all Arts lead to God. 2. The Metaphysickes, by two Arguments. 3. The
first is, the limitting of all finite things, as of natural Bodies. 4. And of
their natural faculties. 5. And yet not by the Sun, which it self is
limited. 6. Both in his own working. 7. And in his moving. 8. By the
limitting also of all artificial faculties. 9. And finally, by the limitting
of all spiritual Graces. page 171.
CHAP. 2.
The immensity of men's appeti^^s, does she^* That there is a ^od. 2. The
immensity of natural appetites. 3. The immensity of sensitive appetites. 4.
The immensity of intellectual, or spiritual appetites. 5. The immensity of
Desire. 6. The immensitie of Anger. 7. The immensity of will. 8. And yet God is
able to fill them all. p. 197. and 198.
CHAP. 3.
That, every thing in nature, has a Cause of his being. 2. That, nothing can
be the Cause of his own being. 3. That among the Causes, there is one first,
and supreme Cause, which is the Cause of all the rest. 4. That, this first, and
supreme Cause, is nothing else, but God. p. 212.
CHAP. 4.
That these sensible and second motions, direct us unto a first. 2. That a
first motion, does necessarily imply, a first Moouer. 3. That this first
Moouer, is the Cause of all the motions in the world. 4. And, that therefore,
this first Mouer, is nothing else, but God. page 224.
CHAP. 5.
That the true cause of Sickness, is Sin against God. 2. That God, for this
cause, does threaten, to send Sickness. 3. That he sends it according to his
threatening. 4. That Physicians obser^e the stroke of Gods Vengeance, to be in
many Sicknesses. page 234.
CHAP. 6.
That God is the giver of health unto men. 2. That he is the preserver of it.
3. That he is the restorer of it. 4. Both by giving medicinable herbs unto
men. 5. And by teaching them the right uses of them. 6. And by joining his
blessing unto their working. p. 244.
CHAP. 7.
Little Cities do rise to be great. 2. Great Cities do fall to be little. 3.
Yet is not this the work, of either Fate, or Fortune. 4. But of Gods own
Providence, and Preordination. 5. Who limitteth their powers. 6. Boundeth their
Domnions. 7. And prescribes their continuance. p. 260.
CHAP. 8.
God is, both the Physician, and Ethicall last end of all things. 2. He gives
us all virtues, which are the way to perfect Blessedness. 3. He impla^teth in
us all good affections, which are the previous dispositions unto virtues. 4.
He gives unto us the true and perfect Blessedness. 5. Nay he himself is,
our true and perfect Blessedness. p. 278.
CHAP. 9.
The Mathematickes show, that there is a God. 2. And more particularly,
Geometry. 3. Which by a Geometrical prick, does lead men unto some knowledge
of God. 4. Of whom (in diverse powers) it has a kind of resemblance. p. 492.
CHAP. 10.
Unity in Arithmeticke, does lead men unto God. 2. Which is affirmed hy
Philosophers, to be the Original of all things. 3. Yea, directly affirmed to
be God himself. 4. With whom it has indeed a very great res^mblance. page
298.
CHAP. 11.
That the motion of the Heavens, and Stars, is not natural. 2. Which yet is
so orderly, as if it were artificial. 3. That the order of their motion, has
a resemblance of a (...). 4. That the Heavens themselves do make music to
this dance. 5. That this ^rd^rly motion of the Stars, has led diverse men to
seek for a God, ^boue the Stars. 6. Because their orderly motions, can
neither be from chance, nor from their own wills. But only from Gods
wisdom, who is the maker of them. page 309.
CHAP. 12.
That God has made all his creatures, in Harmonicall proportion, and in a
kind of music. 2. That all creatures are naturally delighted with it. 3.
That they praise God in their kinds, with their natural musickes. 4. That
artificial music is the gift of God to men. 5. That the chiefest end of it,
is to praise God with it. p. 327.
CHAP. 13.
The other Liberal Arts, do, all of them, show, That there is a God: they
being, all of them, acknowledged, to be the gifts of God. 1. Grammar. 2.
Logic, 3. Rhetoric. 4. which three Arts have apparently, an adumbratio^ of
the Trinity. p. 345
CHAP. 14.
Philosophy leads a Man unto God. 2. It has in it a kind of resemblance of
God. 3. It is acknowledged to be the Gift of God. 4. And so likewise is
Poetry. 5. And so all other Arts in general. 6. Yea even the Mechanical. page
352
Because I have in this Book cited many authorities, exactly, and
particularly, unto the very page; that my labor therein, should not vanish
into nothing, but, work unto the benefit and profit of my Readers; I thought
good to set down a Catalogue of mine Authors; and, of their several editions:
that, such as have the same, may the better help themselves, to find out
those things that are alleged out of them. For others, which have them not, I
have given what help I could, to satisfy their desire, by directing them unto
the Book, and Chapter.

A
ABdias Babylon. Parisijs 1560. in 8uo. Aelianus. Tyguri. 1556. in Fol.
Aelianus Spartianus, cum Suetonio. Aelius Lampridius, cum Suetonio. Aeschylus.
in 16. Aesopi fabulae Lugduni. 1571. in 16. Agapetus in Bibliotheca Patrum. A.
Gellius. Venetijs 1515. in 8. Albertus Magnus. Colon. 1536. in fol. Alchymus
Auitus in Bib. Patr. Alcoran Turcicus. 1550. in fol. Alexander ab Alex. Franc.
1591. in 8. Ambrosius. Basil. 1567. in fol. Anacreon. Paris. 1566. in 12.
Anselmus. Colon. 1573. in fol. Apollodorus. Antwerp. 1565. in 8. Apuleius. Lug.
Bat. 1594. in 12. Aquinas cont. Gent. Lug. 1586. in fol. Aquinat. Summa.
Antwerp. 1585. in fol. A^^stoteles. Lugdun. 1549. in fol. Austophanes. Franc.
1586. in 8. Arnobius. Basil. 1560. in 8. Athanasius. Paris. 1581. in fol.
Athenagoras. in Bib. Patr. Athenaeus. Lug. 1583. in fol. Augustinus. Basil.
1543. in fol. Augustinus. Eugub. Lug. 1540. in fol. Aurelius Victor cum
Suetonio. Ausonius. Antwerp. 1568. in 16. Authors Linguae Latinae. 1595.
B
Bacchiarius. in Bib. Patr. Baptista Egnatius, cum Suetonio. Basilius. Basil.
1565. in fol. Beda. Basil. 1563. in fol. Bernardus. Basil. 1560. in fol.
Berosus Babil. Ludg. 1552. in 16. Bibliotheca Patrum. Margarini, Pa^isijs.
1575. in fol. Bion, cum Hesiodo. Boccatius. Venetijs 1511. in fol.
Bradwardinus. Londini. 1618. in fol.
C
Caesaris comment. Lugd. 1560. in 16. Caesarius frat^r Nazianzeni, cum Nazian:
in fol. Caelius Rhodiginu^. Fr^nc. 1599. in fol. Catullus. Basil. 1592. in 8.
Chrysostomus. Basil. 1547. in fol. Chrysologus: Paris* 1585. in 8. Cicero.
Paris. 1538. in fol. Claudianus Mamertus. in Bib. Pat. Claudius Marius Victor.
in Bib. Pat. Claudianus Poeta. Lugd. 1606. in 16. Clemens Romanus. Colon. 1563.
in fol. Clemens Alexandr. Basil. 1566. in fol. Cornelius Gallus, cum Catullo.
Cornelius Agrippa. Lugd. 1531. in 8. Cyprianus. Geneuae. 1593. in fol. Cyrillus
Alexandrinus. Paris. 1573. in fol. Cyrillus Hierosolym. Antwer. 1564. in 8.
D
Damascenus. Paris. 1577. in fol. Dares Phrygius: Basil. 1541. in 8.
Demosthenes. Venetijs. 1550. in 8. Dictis Cretensis. cum Diodoro Sic. Diodorus
Siculus. Basil. 1578. in fol. Dion Nicaeus* graece, Lutetiae. 1551. in 4.
Dionysius Areopag. Ludg. 1572. in 16. Idem. Colon. 1526. in fol. Dionysius
Halicarn: Franc. 1586. in fol. Dioscorides. Lugd. 1550. in 8. Dorotheus. in
Bib: Patr.
E
Elias Cretensis, cum Nazianz. Ephraem Syrus. Colon. 1603. in fol. Epiphanius.
Basil. 1545. in fol. Euripides. Basil. 1550. in 8. Eusebius Pamphili. Basil.
1579. in folio. Eiusdem Histor. ibidem. 1587. in folio. Eusebius Emissenus,
Paris. 1575. in 8. Eutropius, cum Suetonio.
F
Fabius Pictor. Lugd. 1552. in 16. Festus. cum Authoribus Linguae Lat. 1595. in
4. Fernelius de lue Vener^a. Antwerp. 1579. in 8. Flauius Vopiscus cum
Suetonio. Fulsbertus in Bib. Patr. Fulgentius. Antwerp. 1574. in 8.
G
Galenus de vsu partiu^^. Pa^is. 1528. in 4. Ge^^adius. in Bib. Patr. Gregoriu^
Mag. Antwerp. 1572. in fol. Grego^ius Neo^ae^arien^^s. in Bib. Patr.
H
Hegesippus. Colon: 1575. in 8. Heraclides* cum (...). Lugd. 15^7. in 16.
Hermes. in Bib. Patr. Herodo^^. Basil. 1583. in 8. Hesiodus. 1^00. in 16.
Hieronymus. Basil. 1537. in fol. Hilarious. Basil. 1570. in fol. Homerus: Latin:
1528. in 8. Gracolat. in 16. Horatius. in 16. Hugo de Scto. Victore. Venet.
1588. in f.
I
Iamblicus. Lugd. 1570. in 16. Ignatius. in Bib. Pa^^. Josephus. Franc. 1580.
in fol. Irenaeus. Geneu. 1570. in fol. Isidorus. cum Authoribus Ling. Lat.
Isocrates. Basil. 1571. in 8. Isychius. Paris. 1581. in 8. Iulianus Pomerius.
in Bib. Pat. Julius Capitolinus cum Suetonio. Julius Firmicus. in Bib. Patr.
Julius Obsequens. cum Plinio Iuniore. Iunilius. in Bib. Patr. Justinius Martyr.
Basil. 1565. in fol. Justinius Historicus Lug. 1573. in 16. Iustiniani Insti^^t.
Lug. 1559. in 8. Iuuenalis. cum Horatio. Iuuencun. in Bib. Patr.
L
Lactantius. Antwerp. 1570. in 8. Lae^tius. Paris. 1570. in 8. Leo Magnus.
Antwerp. 1583. in 8. Linschot. Land. in fol. Liuius. Franc. 1588. in fol.
Lucanus. Paris. 1543. in 16. Lucianus. Franc. 1538. in fol. Lucretius. Paris.
1565. in 16.
M
Macatius. Franc. 1594. in 8. Macrobius. Colon. 1527. in 8. Maffei Indica Hist.
Colon. 1593. in fol. Manilius. Lug. Bat. 1590. in 4. Marius Victorinus. in Bib.
Pat. Martialis Poeta, Antwerp. 1579. in 16. Martialis Martyr. in Bib. Pat.
Mathias a Michon, cum nouo Orb. Maxentius in Bib. Patr. Maximus Tyrius. Paris.
1554. in 16. Mornaeus. Antwerp. 1585. in 8. Moschus. cum Hesiodo. Munsterus.
Basil. 1559. in fol. Musaus, cum Hesio^o.
N
Nazianzenus. Basil. 1571. in fol. Nemesius. in Bib. Patr. Nicephorus*
Callisti. Franc. 1588. in fol. Nilus. in Bib. Patr. Nonius. cum Authoribus
Ling. Lat. Nouatianus. cum Tertulliano. Nouus Orbis. Basil. 1555. in fol.
Nyssenus. Basil. 1571. in fol.
O
Occu^enius. Paris. 1547. in 8. Olimpiodorus. in Bib. Patr. Origenes. Basil.
1571. in fol. ^Orpheus. cum Hesiodo. Orthodoxographa. Basil. 1569. in fol.
Ouidij Metamor. Cantabr. 1584. in 8. Fastorum. Paris. 1563. in 16. Amorum.
Antwer. 1583. in 16. *Orosius. Paris. 1583. in fol.
P
Pacianus. in Bib. Patr. Palingenius. Paris: 1564. in 16. Persius. cum Horatio.
Petrarcha. Basil: 1554. in fol. Petronius Arbiter. Paris: 1564. in 8. cum
fragmentis Poetarum. Philo Iudaeus* Basil. 1558. in 8. Phocillides. cum
Hesiodo. Picus Mirandula. Basil. 1601. in fol. Pisanus. in Orthodoxographis.
Plautus. Colon: 1577. in fol. Platina. Colon. 1593. in 4. Plato. Basil 1551. in
fol. Plinius Franc. 1582. in fol. Plinius lunier. Lugd. 1539. in 8. Plutar^hi
vitae. Basil. 1579. in 8. E^^sdem Moral. ibidem. 1572. in 8. Polycarpus. in
Bib. Patr. Pomponius Laetus* cum Su^tonie. Primasius. Paris. 1543. in 8.
Proclus. cum lamblico. Procopius. Tyguri 1555. in fol. Propertius. cum Catullo.
Prosper. Louanij. 1566. in 4. Prudentius. Antwerp. 1546. in 8. Ptolomaeus.
Basil. 1545. in fol. Pub Mimus. cum Seneca.
Q
Quintilianus. Lugd. 1580. in 8. Quintus Curtius. Lugd. 1551. in 16.
R
Ruffinus. Paris. 1580. in fol. Raba^^s Maurus. 1534. in fol.
S
Sabellicus. Basil. 1560. in fol. Saluianus. in Bib. Patr. Salustius. Lugd.
1551. in 16. Sedulius. Basil. 1528. in fol. Seneca Philosophus. Basil. 1590. in
8. Seneca Tragicus. Antwerp. 1588* in 8. Sextus Aurelius Victor. cum Suetonio.
Silius Italicus. Paris: 1531. in 8. Solinus Polyhist. Lug. 1552. in 16. Solon.
cum Hesiodo. Statius. Argentorati 1612. in 12. Stobaeus. Basil. 1549. in fol.
Strabo. Lug. 1559. in 16. Suetonius. Basil. 1546. in fol. Symmachus apud
Prudentium.
T
Tacitus. Antwerp. 1585. in 8. Tacianus. in Bib. Patr. Terentius. Venet. 1553.
in fol. Tertnllianus. Framkerae. 1597. in fol. Theocritus. cum Hesiodo.
Theodoretus. Colon: 1573. in fol. Theognis. cum Hesiodo. Theophilus Alexandr.
in Bib Pat. Theophilus Antiochenus. in Bib. Patr. Theophylactus. Antwerp. 1564.
in 8. Thucidides. Wittemberg. 1569. in fol. Tibullus. cum Catullo.
Trismegistus, cum Iamblico. Tertaeus. cum Hesiodo.
V
Valerius Flaceus. Paris: 1532. in 8. Valerius Maximus. Lug. 1158. in 16.
Velleius Paterculus. cum Suetonio. Varro. cum Authoribus Lingue Lat. Paulu^
Venetus.
Venetus. cum Nouo Orb. Virgilij Aeneid. Franc. 1583. in 8. Reliqua. Colon:
1612. in 16. Lodouicus Viues*
Viues de Verit. Christia. Religionis: Basil: 1543. in fol. Voyages of the
English. London, 1599. Volaterani Commentarij. Basil. 5159. in folio.
X
Xenophon. Basil. 1534. in fol. Idem, De Aequiuocis. Lug. 1552. in 16.
Z
Zacharias Mytilenensis in Bib: Patr.
Reverendissimo in Christo Patri ac Domino, D. Martino Fotherbeo, Episcopo
Sarisburiensi, viro docto, prudenti, pio, migranti.
CHare mihi ante alios merito, Martine, sodales,
Flos hominum, specimen morum, dulcissime rerum,
Tu qui me noras, notum constanter amaras,
I nimium dilecte Deo, cui cedere soli
Noram in amore tui, fruere, O fruere omnibus illis
Laetitijs animae emeritae; coeloq, receptus,
Quae te dimissum lugent, ne despice terras.
Quin saltem hanc animam agnoscis, te, funera amantem
Post tua, post mea amaturam. Quin attrahis ad te,
Te dignam, indignum te postquam hunc exuis orbem.
Eia individuos comites age reddat Olympus
Me tibi, teque mihi; cui te sine, caetera, mundus
Immundus, terra insuavis, nil dulce relicto est.
Interea quem das, luctus solamen, amoris
Mnemosynum, ingenij foetum, pietatis asylum,
Dum lego, dum verso librum, in quo mentis imago
Emicat inspirata tuae tam viva, resolvor
Protinus in lacrymas, visus mihi nempe meummet,
Dum lego scribentem, Martinum audire loquentem.
Mox vbi me falsum video, spe lusus inani,
Quae fuerant laetae lacrymae, fiunt modo verae,
Falsaque in immensos redeunt mihi gaudia fletus.
Flevit (...) Robertus Martinj relictus.

Typographus Lectori benevolo S.
HAbes, quicunque legis, Magni Operis, Magni item Author is specimen: immo ne
quidem specimen, tam clarae eruditionis, tamque multiplicis lectionis, atque in
hoc tam egregio emicuerunt Antistite. Id ipsum nemo, qui eundem in terris
degentem novit, non agnoscit. Idemque etiam Tibi liquido constaret, si
re^iduatantae Lucubrationis exantlasse, vel ista solum praeludia absolvisse
concederetur. Quod si suorum aliquis, hoc praeclarum facinus foeliciter
incoeptum, studuer it aliquando prosequi, Lubens curabo, in sequenti
chalcographia, vt ^i quid in praesenti erratum sit, and corrigatur; and
quicquid in posterum fuerit demandatum, sedulo excudatur. Interea, veniam a
quibusdam precabor serio, and eorum donabit clementia; quod haec ipsa tam sero
in lucem prodeant, ita iam olim defiderata: quippe qui vary impeditus, non
quod volui, sed quod potui, nunc demum praestiti De caeteris, non multum
gravabit tua, Lector, aequanimitas, quod multorum Elogijs, in honorem tanti
Praesulis, ascribendis supersedeam; and Epitaphium hic super addam, quale nuper
in frontispicio Monumenti, in Ecclesia Parochiali Omnium Sanctorum
Lumbard-Street London, extructi, insculptum vidi.

Quem Charis asseruit sibi, quem sibi Musa, suumque
Dixit and Haec, pariter dixit and Illa, suum:
Abstulit ambabus Deus Arbiter and Tuus, inquit,
Hic erat, atque Tuus* Nunc erit ille Meus.
Contra Atheos Athleta fuit Mihi, voce, styloque
Nunc est Athletae danda corona Meo.
Sum cinis, hic qua sum, sed and hic cinis emptio Christi est.
Caetera, quae mea pars, Pars mea Christus habet.
Vnisti, Deus, ambo semel: Deus, ambo revni:
Sic tecum totus, qui mea Pars es, ero.
DEPOSITVM.
REverendi in Christo Patris, ac Domini, Doctor is MARTINI FOTHERBEI, olim
SARISBVRIENSIS EPISCOPI; qui, ex antiqua, and vere generosa, de Grimes by
magna, in Comitatu Lincolniensi, familia oriundus; CANTABRIGLAM, inde accitus;
and Collegij Sanctaeac Individuae Trinitatis Socius meritissime cooptatus;
singulis, atque, ordine, summis Academiae gradibus est insignitus. Hic,
postquam celebris, Ecclesiae Cathedralis ac Metropoliticae Christi
CANTVARIENSIS, Praebendarius, annos viginti duos perdur asset; tandem, per
Serenissimum Regem IACOBVM, (cui and a Sacris erat) ad Episcopatum SARVM
evectus est. Vixit, omni Scientiarum Humanarum Divinarum genere, vir
instructissimus; Concionator idem disertissimus; Haeresin, and Hypocri^in
validissime perosus; Vitaeque ac moru^tum gravitate tum suavitate eximius;
Exteriori Corporis decore spectabilis; Politiori Sermonis elegantia praestans;
Potioribus Animi dotibus adornatus, Memoria nempe fideli, Ingenio foelici,
Iudicio acri, and, in rerum administratione, Prudentia plane admirabili;
Omnibus sane numeris, quos Humana capit conditio, ade^ consummatus, vt vel
primarijs viris facile exaequandus, nullis exuperandus esset. Adversus Atheos
doctissimum opus instituit: cuius auspicium, and quasi vestibulun^, Londini,
heu moriens, Typis mandandum reliquit. Corpus hic Sepulchro donari petijt, sub
beata Resurrectionis spe. Spiritum ipse suum immortalem, Patri Spirituum pie
placideque reddidit, Die Martij, 11. Anno AErae Christianae. 1619. AEtatis
suae. 60.

NOn sibi mellificauit Apis; sed crura tetendit,
Corda hominum Sacro melle replere suo*
Contra (...) penna pugnat, vitaque repugnat,
Et moriens viuit; sic probat esse Deum.
Qui legis, in Propriam Conuertas pabula Carnem*
(Viuificans vitae est, Spiritus arrha nouae)
Mortales immortales oracula reddent,
Non posse, his Saturos, experiere, mori*
Esse (...) Libro, Tibi funebre, Carmen
Qui fecit, voluit, Frater, Amicus, idem.
A Brother, and a Friend, has made this Verse,
To come to thy Books birth, become thy Hearse.
T. L.

Lectio, materies, ordo, stylus, om nia mira hic.
Haud miror tamen haec omnia. Cur? Stupeo.
O Praesul, miro mira scribis alite.
Stupidus sit hercle oportet, haec qui non stupet.
Persequere fausta, quod Libri reliquum est, avi.
Sed ocyus T^ prodeat superstite.
Ego Liberos, Librosque nolim posthumos.
R. C.

The Prologue to the work.
CHAP. I.
1. To believe there is a God, is the ground of all Religion. 2. The end and
purpose of this Book, is to prove that Position. 3. This cannot be believed,
but by the help of Prayer. 4. It cannot be proved, a Priorj. 5. Yet may it be
showed, a Posteriori.

THe very first foundation of all piety and Religion, To believe there is a
God the foundation of all Religion.
is To believe there is a God: as it is generally believed, and confessed by
all men, both by Christians, Jews, and Heathen, if they hold any religion. The
Apostle in the Epistle to the Hebrews, Heb. 11. 6.
lays this, as the first ground of all religion and Godliness, to believe,
That God is. For, as Lactantius very truly notes, Lactant* lib. De vero cultu.
c. 9. p 333 336
Caput est primum Diuinae Legis, ipsum Deum nosse: It is the very first head of
the law of God, to know and believe, that there is a God. And again, a little
after. Hic est Sapientiae primus gradus, vt sciamus, quis sit nobis verus
Pater: This is the prime degree of wisdom, Palingen. in Sagit. p. 268.
to know who is our true God and Father. Yea and Palingenius, unto the same
purpose.

-- Prima est virtus, prim^ est sapientia, Regem
Coelicolum Patremque hominum cognoscere --
It Is Man's prime virtue, Wisdom's chiefest thing,
To know his Father to be Heauen's high King.
Nay, Theoph. Alex.
Pietas in Deum est super omnia, quasi culmen and corona virtutum; says
Theophilus Alexandrinus: Nay, Epist. 2.
Virtutum omnium principium, says Philo Iudaeus. True piety toward God,
Paschal. Bib* Pat.
is not only the highest, but also the first of all other virtues. Neither do
Christians only reckon this, Tom. 1. p. 391.
for the first stone in the building of Religion: Phil. Iud. lib.
but the Jews do also confirm the very same. De decalogo p. 1018.
Aben Ezra, Aben Ezra apud Iosippu^ p. 297.
in his Exposition of the ten Commandments, says of the first of them, that,
Hoc primum dictum, est fundamentum omnium nouem verborum, quae sequuntur post
ipsum. The first of the Commandments, (which prescribes unto us the having of
a God) is the very true foundation of all the other nine. Yea and the same is
also confessed even by the very Heathen. Seneca affirms (and that very truly)
that it is primus Deorum cultus, Senec. Epist. 96. p. 237.
Deos credere. It is the first branch of the worship of God, to believe There
is a God. Yea and it is primus cultus too, not only Ordine, but also Honor:
It is the first in Honor, as well as in Order. For, Maiorem virtutem
religione, pietateque in Deum (says Plato) nullam in humano genere inveniri,
quisquam sibi per suadeat. Let no man be persuaded, that there is any greater
good in the Society of men, Plato in Epinom. p. 918.
then is true piety, and religion toward God. And therefore, it was
Chrysippus his opinion that, Cognitio de Deo, principium est cognitionis and
bonoru^ and malorum. Plut. lib. De Stoic. R^ pub. To. ^. Mor. p. 8.
The knowledge of this one thing, Phocyl. p. 100. Pythag. p. 12^.
that there is a God, is the beginning of all other knowledges, both of good
and evil things. Whence both Phocylides and Pythagoras begin their Poems,
with, Primum, cole Deum -- Remember first, Fear God thou must. So that, by the
confession of all sorts of men, this is the very ground of all Religion, To
believe there is a God.

And there can be no Religion, Where God is not believed all wickedness is
planted.
where this is not believed. For how can there be any godliness, where there is
no God? If there be no belief, no opinion of God, there cannot be possibly any
affection of godliness: no nor any effect of goodness neither. For as
concerning godliness, it is the observation of Plutarch, that the ignorance of
God, Plut. lib. De Supersti^. Tom* 1. Mor. p. 380.
is the root of all ungodliness. Deoru^ ignoratio in duris ingenijs impietatem
ingenerat. And as concerning goodness; it is the observation of Silius Italicus,
that the ignorance of God is the root of all wickedness. Heu primae sc^lerum
causae mortal^bus aegris
Naturam nescire Deum --
Alas, the cause of sin, is only this,
That Sinners know not, what Gods Nature is. Sil. Italic. lib. 4. p. 56. ^.

Which Abraham also, in a manner, confessed, when he thought thus in himself;
Genesis 20. 11.
Surely the fear of God is not in this place, and therefore will they kill me
for my wife. Senec. Epist. 96. p. 23^.
For where the fear of God is not, there even, Homo, sacrares, etiam per ludum
and iocum occiditur. There even the killing of a man, is but a sport unto them.
So that where there grows not true religion and godliness, there must grow of
necessity all kind of sin and wickedness.

2. And therefore the maine scope and purpose of this work, To believe there
is a God is the sum of all Religion.
is, to prove There is a God: and so to lay in men's hearts a foundation of
Religion. Which being once well and substantially done, all the other three
positions will follow in their order, every one with great ease in the neck of
another. For as Socrates collecteth in moral Philosophy, that, Cic. lib. 1. De
Orat. p. 147.
Quibus id semel persuasum est, nihil vt se malint, quam viros bonos esse, ijs
reliquam facilem esse doctrinam; That he that once has entertained but this
one resolution, that (come of it what will) he will be a good man, the learning
of all other things will be very easy unto him: so is it true likewise, in the
doctrine of Divinity; that he who once has entertained but the first of these
positio^s, in faithfully believing that there is a God; unto him all the rest
will be easy to be proved. For, if he once admit, that There is a God, he must
admit him to be God under those divine properties, which are natural, and
essential unto God: that is, he must yield him to be, both Optimus, Jupiter a
maio^ibus nostris Optimus Maximus appellatur. Cic. lib. 2. de Not. Deor. p. 210
and Maximus: which, by the common notion, are his proper attributes. From
whence it follows, That there can be but one God: which is our second position:
because Superlatiues are Singulars; and by their singularity, not communicable
unto many. Now, this being admitted, that There is but one God: then compare
Jehovah our God, with all the other Gods of the Heathen, and it will easily
appear, that he must needs be that one. For the Works which he does, they do
testify it of him. Now, Io. 5. 36.
this once being yielded that our God Jehovah is the only true God, it will
easily be proved, that The Scriptures are his word, by the divineness of that
doctrine, which is contained in them. And, that once being yielded, it will
follovv of congruitie that we must perform those duties, which in the same
word are prescribed: unless we will despise, both the will, and word of
God. All these points hang together, every one upon another, by an indissoluble
Chain. So that the whole consequence of all Religion, depends altogether
upon the proving, and approving of this first proposition, That there is a God.

3. But this point can never unto any good effect, Prayer must help us unto
understanding. Plato in Epin^m p. 918.
be either proved by me, Theodoret. Sermon 9. de Prouid. To* 2. p. 615.
or approved by you, without Gods special grace, and blessing upon us both.
For it is very true, which Plato affirms, Hoc nemo docebit, nisi Deus
adiuuerit No man can ever teach it, if God himself do not assist it. And
therefore Theodoret in his Sermons De Providentia, begins his ninth Sermon,
with an holy invocation, Prouidentia illa, quam impij oppugnant, in auxilium
vocata; calling to his assistance, in his fighting against Atheists, the same
divine providence, which they so fight against. And so likewise does
Epiphanius, Epiph. lib. 1. cont. Haeres. p. 1.
in the beginning of his works: Valde time^, vt qui moliar opus non vulgar,
et invoco ipsum sanctum Deum, etc. I ^ndertake no vulgar work; and therefore
invoke the holy God, to send his heavenly light into my mind etc. And
Nazianzen, Nazian. Orat. 21 Apol. f^g. p. 398.
in one of his Orations, prescrib's it for a rule, that, Quis quis vel
orationem aliquam, vel negotium auspicatur, non alium meliore^, commodior emque
ordinem, tenere potest, quam vt a Deo incipiat, et, in Deo conquiescat.
Whosoever does begin any solemn Oration, or any other kind of negotiation,
he cannot possibly observe any better order, then both to take his beginning
from God, and to make his ending in God. And herein, it is a matter of very
worthy observation, to note (in this point) the piety, even of the very
Heathen: of their Poets, Orators, The very Heathens v^ed Prayer in the
beginning of their works. Cap. 5. Sect* 1. Clem. Alex. lib. 5. Strom. p. 277.
and Philosophers: Cic. li. 2. De. leg. p. 320.
how all of them do auspicate the beginning of their works, Virg. Eclog. 3.
p. 8.
with prayers and invocations unto their Gods. Let me give you an instance or
two, to this purpose. For Poets we see it evidently both in Aratus, among the
Greeks; and Virgil, among the Latin's; that both of them begin their Poems,
with Ab Jove principium -- With Jove the Muses must begin, in plain and
express terms. And there is nothing more familiar amongst all the rest, then
still, with the proposition of their work, to join some invocation unto their
Gods, or Muses. For Orators, Pericles (amongst the Greek's) in all his
Orations, AElian. lib. 4. de var* Hist. c. 10. p. 423.
was wont still to make a prayer for good and prosperous success. Demost* To.
2. p. 3.
And the same we may see likewise in the Orator Demosthenes, how in that
weighty cause, his Oration De Corona, he began it with a prayer for a
favorable audience. Deos De^sque omnes precor, etc. And Pliny Junior, amongst
the Latin's, in his Panegyrical Oration unto the Emperor Traian, reports;
that it was not only an ordinary custom, but also a religious institution of
the Romans, Plin. in. Pa^egir* p. 360.
That they should begin with prayer, not only, in all their civil affairs,
but also in all their solemn Orations. Yea and Protagoras (though by some
esteemed an Atheist) yet he makes Precationem, cationem, Laert. in vitae
Protagorae. p. 321.
to be one of the essential parts of an Oration. Yea, and so did also diverse
other Orators beside him, as Laertius reports: but he makes prayer to be the
first of them in order. And for Philosophers, Plato reports the same of the
Athenians, which Pliny before did of the Romans, that they ordained a law, to
inioyne their Philosophers, to begin all their disputations with prayers.
Plato in Tim^o p. 704. 713.
Tua interest, o Timae, invocatis (secundum legem) Dijs, disputationem
exordiri. It is your part ( o Timaeus) by calling upon the Gods (as is
appointed in our Laws) To give a beginning to our intended disputation. And
again, in the same Book. Deum nunc disputationis servatorem in primis oremus.
God is the true maintayner (and, as it were, the moderator) of this our
disputation: and therefore, first of all, let us call upon him. Yea and Tullie
(among the Latin's) in his second Book De Legibus, begins there his
Treatise with invocation upon the Gods. Cic. lib. 2. De Leg. p. 320.
A Dijs immortalibus sunt nobis agenda primordia: citing for his defense, the
forecited religious example of Aratus. And this his pious imitation, is, in
the same place, very greatly approved, by his Brother Quintus. Yea and Xenophon
generally prescribes Omnem a Dijs actionem auspicari oportere: Xenoph. in Oe.
conom. p. 239.
That every humane act ought always to make his beginning with God. S^obaeus
lib. 1. Eclog. phys. cap. 3. p. 3.
Yea and Theodectus likewise; unto the same purpose A Dijs initium sumere omne
conuenit. It is always fitting, to take from God our beginning. Which Piety
of the Heathens, will, out of doubt, condemn the impiety of us Chr^stians, if
in our like businesses, we use not the like Godliness.

Now, if we ought to sanctify our ingresse, with our prayers, in all our other
attempts of importance: Prayer must help us to believe, That God is.
then ought we, most of all, to call upon God, when we come to dispute of the
nature of God: which is an attempt of the greatest importance. And therefore
Plato begins that his weighty disputation, wherein he sought to prove that
there is a God, by inuocating the help and assistance of God. Age igitur,
nunc, magis quam vnquam, Deum omni studio invocemus, Plato. lib. 10. De leg* p.
873.
cum Deos esse diligenter demonstrare conemur. Let us now, most of all, implore
the help of God, when we go about to show and to prove, There is a God:
because this can never be learned, if God himself do not teach it. Phi. Iud.
lib. De Monarchia. p. 1102.
For, as light (says Philo Iudaeus) cannot be showen by any other means, but
only by his own natural shining and brightness: so God (who is the true
light) can never be known of us, unless he do manifest himself unto us.
Plutarch lib. de lside, Tom. 2. p, 611.
And therefore (as Plutarch has very well observed) Cum omnia bona sint a Dijs
immortalibus petenda, tum maxim Deorum ipsorum cognitio. As all other good
things ought only to be begged, by Prayer, at Gods hands: so chiefly and
principally the knowledge of God: which is the very chiefest and principallest
good: quo neque maius Homo accipere, neque dignius homini Deus ipse dare
potest. Then which neither man can receive any greater, nor yet God himself
bestow any better: as it follows in the same place.

Now it is Aristotle's own collection; Arist. lib. 1. Ethic. c. 9. To. 2. p.
611.
that, if God be the Giver of the lesser goods, then must he needs much more be
the Giver of the greater. Si quod aliud est munus Deorum hominibus,
consentaneum est rationi, and felicitatem a Dijs ipsis dari: et eo quidem magis
quo caeteris humanis donis est praestabilius. If God has given any other good
gift unto men, it stands with all reason that felicity it self must also be
of his donation. And that so much the rather because it is more excellent then
any other. Plato in Epinom p. 913.
Nam ipsum bonorum omn^um Authorem (says Plato) cur non etiam maximi boni
causam arbitrabimur? For why should we not judge, that he, who is the author of
all good, should specially be the giver of the greatest good?

Which Religious is admonition I thought good to premise unto the Treatise
following, to work^ thereby, in my Reader some touch of religion: that as well
he in reading, as my self in writing, by inuocating divine grace, might have
Gods holy blessing shed out upon our labors. Without which if any man dispose
himself to reading, affying only upon his own wit and understanding; it will
be the next way to frustrate and make void, both all my pains, and his. For
then, I shall say nothing so consonant unto reason, which (by the conceit of a
strange reason) he will not seek to euerte; yea and take a pride too in it.
But, if in a godly humility, and with a Christian study, he prepare himself
to read, seeking only to edifi* himself in the truth, and following that good
counsel, Hieron. Epist. ad. Laetam. To. 1. p. 57.
which S. Herom prescribes, Orationi lectio, lectioni succedat oration: Let
reading succeed prayer, and prayer succeed reading; then, I doubt not, but by
this my poor labor and endeavor, both he may reap great profit, (...). li.
1 De Trinit. p. 1127.
and my self receive great comfort. For (as Boethius observes in this very
case) Sil vltra se humanitas nequit ascendere; quantum imbecillitas subtrah^t
vota suppl bunt. Since humanity cannot possibly ascend above it self, let
that which is wanting in our infirmity, be supplied by our piety.

4. So that all the hope of good and prosperout success, That God is, cannot
be proue^ ^ Priorj.
in the proof of this first position, depends especially upon the Readers
disposition. It will be a work, to me either easy, or difficult, to prove
There is a God, as the Reader is prepared, or unprepared to receive it. To him
that is disposed to believe it, there is nothing more easy to be proved: to
him it will be Facile, veritatem han^ ostendere, Quod Dijsunt: as Plato truly
notes. Plato. lib. 10. De Leg. p. ^70.
But to him that will deny it, Senec. li^. De Prouid. c. 1. p. 1.
there is nothing more hard and difficult. Seneca indeed, in his Book De
Prouidentia, makes no great account of difficulty in this Argument. Faciam
reni non difficilem (says he) causam Deorum agenti. I shall undertake a Work
of no difficult performance, to prove, that the world is ruled by Gods
providence. Epieurus, cum Pr^uidentiam su, ^ulit* D^u^^ ne^av^t esse, cum autem
Deum esse professus est, et prouidec^iam esse contess^t* Alterun enim c^^m sine
altern necesse pro^^as, nec in^ellig^ potest. Lact in. lib. De ^ra D^. ^. 9. P.
455.
And it is true in very deed, as the case then stood with him. For to him that
yeildeth, that There is a God; though he deny his Governing of the world, (as
the Epicure does, against whom he there writes) it is no great masterie, to
demonstrate Divine Providence: and so, from that which he grants, to enforce
what he denies: because Providence (in the order of our understanding) is a
Consequent unto divine essence naturally inhering in it, as in his proper
subject. Now Consequents are easily proved: because they have their
Antecedents. But to him that denies, that There is a God (as the Atheist does,
against whom I do write) it is a thing not very easy: but he may justly use a
clean contrary Exordium: Fa ci^ m rem haud ^acilem* Deorum causam agam. For
this is not a Conclusion but a Principle: yea, and that the very first of all
other Principles. For as God him self is prima veritas: Tri^^eq. Sto^^. Sermon.
(...) ^ohan ^u. Mirand. lib De ^nte. p. 204.
so this position of him is primum verum, that, There is a God. Now Principles,
in all Arts, are most difficult to be proved: because they have not
Antecedents, being Prima of themselves; yea and immediate propositions, which
have no Media to make them conclusions, Arist. lib 1. ^oster. c. 2. To. 1. p.
175.
no not in the most Demonstratiue scientificall Syllogismes: but shine only by
their own light: (...)
and therefore be called (...), That is, truths of such dignity, estimation,
and credit, that even for themselves, they ought to be believed. Such as, in
Geometry, that; T^tum est maius qualibet sua part: in Arithmetique, that; Ab
aequalibus si aequalia demas, remanentia erunt aequ li^: in Christianity,
that; Christ Jesus came into the world, only to save sinners. Of which
position, The Apostle there affirms, that It is both a true saying, and by all
means worthy to be received. 1. Tim. 1. 15.
It is both (...) and (...), both sermo fidelis, and fide dignus: and so, a
true pattern of a Theological axiom. And such is also this our present
position, that There is a God. A truth of such clearenes, as is worthy to be
received: but yet (even for the clearenes) the less able to be proved: Clem.
^lex. lib. 5. Strom. p. 273.
as Clemens Alexandrinus expressly affirms. Est haec de Deo oration omnino
difficillima: quoniam cuiusuis rei principium est inventu difficillimum: Th^s
our discourse of God is of all other the most diffic^lt, because the first
principle in all things is the hardest to be found out: adding (for this
principle, as concerning God) that it is omnino primum and antiquissimum
principium, (et ideo) difficillimum ad demonstrandum: the first and most
ancient principle, and therefore of all other the most indemonstrable.

For all Principles being Prima, and Notissima of themselves, are thereby made
in ^emonstrable: because whatsoever can be brought to prove them, must needs be
obscure and posteriour unto them. And therefore, for the admitting of
Principles in all Arts, if the learner be so dull, as not to perceive the
certain truth of them, and so do stragger in believing them, the Teacher yet
must beg of him, that he will admit them: because otherwise he cannot go on
in his teaching. Whereby (through the dullness of many learners) the first
principles of Arts, which in themselves be (...), yet become unto such, but
only (...) that is, Things granted, but upon ^urtesie, Cic. lib. 3. De Offic.
p. 380.
not yielded upon nec^ssitie. This the Orator observes to be true in
Geometry. Solent Geometrae, non omni^ decere, sed quaedam p^stul^re, vt sibi
concedantur, quo facilius quae volunt explicent: It is the custom of
Geom^tricians, not to teach all their doctrines, but to entreat that certain
of them may be yielded unto them, that so they may the better demonstrate the
rest. And The Apostle insinuates it likewise to be true in Divinity. For in
the Epistle to the Hebre^es, Heb. 11. 6.
he sets down these for two Diuinitie-Principles: That there is a God; and
That he is the rewarder of them that seek him. Which two postulata, if they be
not, at the first, presumed by the Hearer, and granted to the Teacher, there
cannot possibly be any proceeding unto the other grounds and rules of Religion.
And therefore he tells us, that Whosoever will come unto God, he first must
both believe, That God is: and that he is a rewarder of those that seek him.
And if these two be not granted, all is brought unto a stand: there can then
be no proceeding, neither in teaching; nor in learning: as even Tullie shows
most plainly in this very Case: Where he is forced to beg this postulatum of
Atticus: Cic. lib. 1. (...) leg. p. 313.
That the world is ^uled and guided by Providence: that so he may lay a ground
for the following disputation, which, without yielding of this, could not
possibly be done. Dasne igitur hoc nobis, Pomponi, Naturam omnem di^initus
regi? Do sane si postulas, says he. O Pomponius, do you then grant thus much
unto us, that the nature of all things is ruled by some God? I verily (says
he) will grant it if you will but desire it.

5. But here it may be objected: That God is, may be showed A Posteriori.
Why then should I take upon me to prove it, if it be, in nature, such as
cannot be proved? This must needs prove all my labor to be clearly lost:
especially the Adversary being so hard and refractarie, and so utterly
obfirmed, to deny it, as it must needs be with the Atheist: who cannot yield
unto this our position, without betraying the very fortress of his own
Irreligion.

But unto this Objection I answer, Arist. l^ b. 1. ^oster. c. 10. To. 1. p.
188.
out of the Philosopher: That, there be two kinds of Demonstrations, or
proofs. The one is a demonstrating of Causes by their effects: which is a
proof drawn a posteriori, and is called by Aristotle, (...), that is, Only a
declaring that such a thing is thus and thus, without rendering any reason, or
alleging any cause. The other is a demonstrating of the Effects by their
Causes: Which is a proof A priori, and is called, (...), that is, a declaring
why such a thing is thus and thus, and thus: rendering for it a good reason, and
alleging a true cause. By this latter kind of Demonstration, which shows
Propter quid sit, the Principles cannot be proved: they cannot be demonstrated,
A causa, and A Priori; because they have no prior or superior cause; being the
prime causes themselves. Aquinas 1. Quaest. 2. Art. 2. Arist. lib. 1. Poster.
c. 2. To. 1. p. 175.
But by the former Demonstration, which shows only Quod sit, they may well
enough be proved: they may be proved, Ab Effectu, and Aposteriori: which is
better known to sense, though the other be to Reason; better known to us
though the other be to Nature. Scaliger. lib de Subtle. Exerci^ 218 p. 697.
To make this plain, by a familiar example, for the better information of the
simple: That the Fire is hot, Nemini comp^rt^ ^unt in igne caloris principia
is a Physical Principle: Of which though no man can give a true cause or good
reason, Why it should be so; yet may every man demonstrate, and make it plain,
that it is so. Though no man can tell the cause, Why the Fire is hot, yet may
every man show by the effects, that (surely) it is hot; because it warmeth,
heateth, burns. And so it is likewise, in this our present instance. Though
no man can prove A caus^, why there should be a God; yet may every man collect
Ab Effectu, That there is a God: by that Wisdom, which we see to have been
in the Making; that Order, in the Governing; and that Goodness, in the
preserving and maintayning of the World. All which argue as effectually, That
there needs must be a God, as either Warming or Burning, That the Fire must
needs be hot.

Now these posterior Arguments, though they be not so strongly concludent,
Arist. lib. 2. Metaphys. c. 3. To. 2. p. 1388.
as the former; yet are they sufficient to carry the matter. For, as Aristotle
himself notes: Mathematica certitudo non est in omnibus quaerenda:
Mathematical certitudes are not required in all matters. And he practices
according to his rule, Arist. Ethic. lib. 1. c. 3. ^o. 2. p. 604.
in his Ethics: holding it sufficent (in matter of Morality) to give Rules,
which hold not always upon necessity; but, for the most part, or more
commonly. Then much less is it needful, in matter of Divinity, to bring such
invincible demonstrations, as reject all haesitations. Especially not in this
case: which has laid his foundation, neither in sense, nor in science but
merely in belief. Which (as Clemens Alexandrinus notes,) being founded but
upon the bare authority of Gods word; yet begets (in this point) a far
more clear vnderstan^ing, then can be wrought in us, by any demonstration.
Clem. Alex. lib. 5. Strom. p. 273.
Neque scientia accipitur demonstratiua: ea enim ex prioribus constat, et ex
notioribus: Nihil autem est ante ingenitum. Restat itaque, vt diuina gratia, et
solo, quod ab eo proficiscitur, verbo, id, quod est ignotum, intelligamus.
There is here no demonstratiue knowledge to be had: for that arises from those
things, which are both before, and better known then that which we
demonstrate. But before that, which is it self without all generation, there
cannot possibly be any thing. It therefore remains, that by the virtue of
Gods heavenly grace, and of his divine word, we come to know every thing, which
before was unknown. So that Demonstrations are here improper and unprofitable.
And therefore, I desire that aequanimitie of my Readers, Cic. lib. De
Vniuersitate p. 428. Plato, in Timaeo p.
which Tullie (out of Plato) does of his; even in this very case: that Si for^e
de Deorum natura ortuque mundi disserentes, minus id quod h^be^^us animo
cons^qu^mur; vt tota dilucide and plane ex^rnata oration sibi constet, et ex
^mnipar^e secum consentiat; haud sane erit mirum, contentique esse d^bebitis si
probabilia dicentur. Aequum est enim, meminisse et me, qui disseram, hominem
esse, e^ v^s qui iudicetis: vt si probablilta diceniur, ^e quid vltra
requiratis: If happily in speaking of the nature of God, and of the original of
the world, I cannot attain that, which I propounded, and desired; that my
whole discourse be both familiar, and eloquent, and cohaerent; it is no great
marvel, and you ought to be content, if I write but what is probable. For it
is fit you should remember that, I which write, am but a man, and that you who
read, are but men yourselues. And therefore, if I bring you but probable
reasons, you ought not to exact any more at my hands. For in this case, it is
sufficient to obtain the cause, if those Arguments, which we bring to prove
There is a God, Iod. Viues. lib. 1. De Veritat. Christ. Relig. c. 4. p. 14.
be of greater certainty, strength, and consequence, then those which the
Atheist brings, to prove There is no God. Which, I hope, shall be made
evident, in the eight and last Book.

CHAP. 2.
1. What manner of Authorities be the weightiest in this case. 2. That, they
may not here be used. 3. How yet, they be here used. 4. What be the most
proper, in respect of the Adversaries. 5. Why they be more proper then any
other.

IT is good in all causes, for every man, to understand, not only his
advantages, but also his disuantages: lest expecting greater matters then the
cause will afford, he be needlessly offended, when his expectation is
destituted. The Cause here in quaestion between Atheists, and Christians, has
two great disuantages. The first of them is this; that by the clearenes of the
Position now called into quaestion, Whether there be a God; we are cut off,
from the strongest kind of our Arguments, The best Testimonies, to prove, that
There is a God, are the Testimonies of the Sc^^ptures.
which contain the causes of their own Conclusions: as I have already showed
in the former Chapter. The second, that (by the infidelity of the Adversary)
we are likewise cut off, from our weightiest Testimonies: as I purpose to show
in this. The weightiest Testimony that can be brought, in this cause, to
prove, There is a God, is to produce (for the proof of it) the Testimony of
God, speaking in his own word. This is proper, this is natural, this is truly
inhaering in the very marrow of the cause. None other in the world can have
aequal authority. Io: 8. 13. 14.
And though the Pharisees objected against our Savior Christ, that his
Testimony was not trne; because he testified of himself: yet he answered them
truly again unto that, that it was no good consequent: but that, though he
testified of himself, yet his testimony was true. For what can possibly be
true, if the Testimony of Truth be not? Christ is the truth it self: and so
likewise is God: yea and so likewise is his word. John 14. 6.
Sanctify them with thy Truth: Thy word is Truth. John 17. 17.
It is not true in Concreto, but, Truth it self in Abstracto, without mixture
of any thing, but only pure and simple Truth. And therefore ( as Saluianus
very truly collecteth) Necesse est, Salvian: lib 3. De Prouiden. Bib. Pat. To:
3. p. 270.
quicquid incorrupta veritas loquitur, incorruptum sit Testimonium veritatis:
It must needs be a Testimony of uncorrupted Truth, that comes out of the
mouth of Truth. C^em. Alex. li. 5.
So that (as Clemens Alexandrinus affirms) Fide dignus est Deus, Strom. p. 273.
qui sua annunciet: God is a credible witness, though he testify for
himself. Nay (as Philo Iudaeus adds) Deus solus est idoneus, Philo Iud. lib.
de leg. allegor. p. 139.
qui de seipso pronunciet; God is the only fit witness, to testify of
himself. For, Cui potius quisquam credat, quam Deo? Xenoph. lib. 1. De^act.
Socrat. p. 157.
says even the heathen man Xenophon: Is there any man in the world, whom a man
ought rather to credit then God? That were utterly absurd. And therefore (as
Clemens Alexandrinus adds, in the fore alleged place) Est ergo hoc
credendum, Clem. Alex. vbi. supra.
ex Platonis quoque sententia, etiamsi absque probabilibus, aut necessarijs
demonstraionib^s, per vetus et per nouum Testamentum praedicetur: We ought to
give credit unto this, even by the opinion of Plato himself, not expecting
either necessary or probable demonstrations, though it be but only testified
by the old and new Testaments. Nay these two be indeed the only fit
testimonies, that can be brought in this case. Non enim relictum est hominum
eloquijs de rebus Dej, praeterquam sermo Dej: says S. Hilarie: Hilar. lib. 7.
De Trin, p. 95.
There is left unto men, none other fit Testimony for the things of God, but
only the holy word of God. Reliqua omnia (says he) and arcta sunt, et
conclusa, et impedita, et obscur^: All things else, whatsoever, saving only the
holy Scripture, are both straight, and scant, and intricate, and obscure. And
therefore it is a very good course, Orosius lib. 6. Hist. c. 1. p. 213. ^
whereunto Orosius directs us: Ab ipso audias, ipsique Deo credas, quod verum
velis scire de Deo: We must hear, and believe God, if we will know that truth,
which belongs unto God.

2. And yet these weighty and important Testimonies of God, and of his word,
Atheists reject the testimonies of the Scriptures.
so proper, and natural unto this cause, we may here in no case use: because
they be not allowed by the Atheists, our Aduersari^s. For they, as they deny
that There is a God; so do they deny likewise that The Scripture is his word.
Nay they must do this, by consequence. For, if they do grant, that The
Scripture is Gods word; they do contradict themselves, if they say There is a
God. And therefore, they do cast God, and his holy word, both together, out of
doors, as mere fables and devises: affirming directly of the holy Scriptures,
Lactant. lib. De falsa Relig. c. 4. p. 3.
that they be not Diuinae, sed H^manae voces; (as is affirmed by Lactantius)
They be not (say they) the Oracles of God, but the inventions of men. Look
Sect 5. following. Macrob. lib. 1. De Some: Scip. c. 2. p. 3.
Yea and they have no better opinion even of those Treatises of the Heathen,
which are written of God, and of his religion (as Macrobius likewise reports
of them:) Epicureorum tota factio, aequo semper errore, a vero deuia, et illa
aestimans ridenda quae nesciunt, Sacrum volumen, et augustissima irrisit
Naturae seria: The whole faction of profane and unholy Epicures, erring
aequally from all truth, and commonly scorning those things which they know
not, do vsaully deride, both all the holy Scripture, and also the most serious
and important works of Nature. Which peruersenes of theirs so greatly offended
the learned father Saluianus, that he will not vouchsafe to dispute the matter
with them: choosing rather to leave them in their own infidelity then to cast
away his pains upon them unprofitably. Si cum Christianis ago, probaturum me
quod ago, non dubito. Si autem cum Paganis, probare contemno. Non quia de
ficiam in probatione; sed quia profuturum, quod loquor, esse, despero.
Infructuosus est quippe, Salui^n. vbi supra.
et inanis labor, vbi non recipit probationem prauus aud^tor. If I have to do
with Christians, I shall quickly prove the cause: But if with infidels and
Pagans, I scorn to lose my pains. Not that I am in doubt to be defective in
my proof, but that I am out of doubt not to speak unto their profit. For it
needs must be an idle and unprofitable labor, when the proof is not received
by the evil disposed Auditor. This was the resolution of that learned Father.
But it is not mine. I purpose not, in this cause, to be so peremptory with
them: but to win them as I can, both by disputing, and persuading. And
therefore, the best way of prevailing with them, will be, only to urge such
Arguments unto them, as have passage amongst them; and such Authorities, as
have some credit with them. Now, that has not the Scripture, as you heard
before. And therefore, in this case, we must not prove by Scripture, that That
is a God: For that would be but a foolish kind of proof. It would be merely
idle, to call upon our Adversaries to hear an Argument, from Authority: and
then to cite such Testimonies, as with them have none authority: This would
make the cause ridiculous. But if we will prevail either with them, or against
them, we must bring only such authorities, as with them have credit and
reputation, that is, not the testimony of the holy Scriptures, The Testimonies
of the Heathens, are more regarded with Atheists, then the Scriptures Sect. 4.
and 5. Lactan. lib. De Iustitia. cap. 4. p. 268.
but rather the testimony of profane and Heathen Writers; whom, they wholly
accepting in all other matters, cannot wholly reject in this. And therefore
Lactantius reproves S. Cyprian, as being greatly ouerseene, that in his
disputation with Demetrian, an Heathen, he would seek to confute him by the
Authority of Scriptures: whom he should have confuted by Philosophers, and
Histories, and by natural Reasons. Qua materia non est vsus, vt debuit (says
he:) Non enim Scripturae testimonijs (quam ille vtique vanam, fictam,
commentitiam putabat) sed argumentis, et ratione fuerat refellendus: Cyprian
handled not his matter, as he ought to have done. For he should not have
confuted him by the testimony of Scriptures (which he held for vain, and
idle, and merely commentitious:) but rather by the strength of Arguments, and
Reasons. And again a little after. Huic oportebat quia nondum potu^t capere
diuinae, prius humana offerre testimonia, id est, Philosophorum, et
Historicorum, vt suis potissimum refutaretur Authoribus: He ought not, unto him
to have alleged any Divine authorities, but only human: because he was as
then incapable of them: that so he might convince his errors, by the credit and
authority of his own proper authors, that is, Philosophers, and Historians.
Yea, and this his castigation of the blessed Martyr Cyprian, is approved by S.
Hierome, as a just and deserved one. Hieron. Epist. ad Mag. Orat^rem. To. 2. p.
327.
Where he proves by the practice of a cloud of Witnesses, both of Greek and
Latin Fathers, that it is more proper and natural, to confute all kind of
Heathens, by the testimony of their own writers, then by the authority of
the Scriptures: because, with those men, these have small authority, or none.
Justin. Mart. Orat. ad Gent. To. 1. p. 48.
And therefore, says Justin Martyr, even in this very case: Non ex diuinis
historijs nostris, haec probare aggrediar, quibus vos nondum (propter
inveteratum in animis vestris Maiorum vestrorum errorem) fidem adhibere vultis:
sed ex vestrarum (nihil ad nostram Religionem pertin^ntium) literarum
monumentis. I will not prove these things unto you, out of our own writers,
which you do but smally credit (through an error implanted in you by your
Ancestors) but I will prove it unto you, out of your own Authors, which are no
way partial unto the faith of Christians. And Lactantius likewise, unto the
same purpose. Omittamus Testimonia Prophetarum, ne minus idonea probat^o
videatur, ab hijs quibus omnino non credit^r. Lactan. lib. De falsa Relig. c.
5. p. 10.
Veni^mus ad Authors; and eos ipsos, ad very probationem, testes citemus,
quibus contra n^s vti solent; Poetas dico, ac Philosophos. Let us leave the
Testimonies of the holy Prophets: because they will carry no fit probation,
especially unto such as distrust and discredit them. Let us therefore come
unto their own Authors; and use those men as witnesses for the Truth, whom
they commonly do cite and produce against the truth: I mean, Lact. lib. De
Diuino praemio. c. 13. p. 414.
their Poets, and their Philosophers. And again in an other place. Neque nunc
Prophetas in testimonium vocabo: sed eos potius, quibus istos, qui respuunt
veritatem, credere sit necesse. I will not, as now, cite the testimony of the
Prophets: but rather of such Authors, as those men, which refuse the truth, yet
have no power to refuse. So that, neither the testimony of God, nor of his
word; though they have in themselves the greatest strength of probation, yea
and be most incomparably beyond all exception; yet may be used by us, in this
our disputation: unless we would propine, both our selves, and our cause, unto
open and just derision. And therefore, whosoever will either convert, or
confute the Atheists, he must use such Authorities, as have some authority
with them, not such, as be derided, or rejected by them; such as be, both the
Prophets and Apostles, and all other holy Writers, all Christian Divines, and
generally, all Christi^ns. For all these, in this cause, are suspected by the
Atheists, as parciall and inclining witnesses. So that, by the weakness of
our Adversaries: we are forced to forbear the strongest of our Authorities:
and (after the Apostles practice) to feed them with their own milk, rather
then with our strong meat; because, as yet, 1. Cor. 3. ^*
they be not able to bear it. Not with the strong meat of the Scriptures,
though that were better for them: but with the milk of their own writers,
because this is fitter for them.

Ista quidem melius, Divinis edita libris, Prosper lib. De Provident. p. 180

Cognoscenda forent; vbi Legis in aequore aperto,
Promptum esset, ventis dare libera vela secundis.
Sed quoniam rudibus metus est intrare profundum,
In tenui primum discant procurrere rivo.
Says Prosper.
This Subject better seems from sacred writ
To spring, and better thence to have learned it:
Where in the Laws broad Sea, with wind and tide,
There Is happier sail, then any where beside.
But cause to ruder Novices, it is,
A province full of fearefulnes, I wis,
Into the great vast deep to venture out;
Some shallow River, let them coast about,
And by a small Boat, learn they first, and marck,
How they may come to manne a greater Bark.
3. And yet have I here used them, both frequently, The Testimonies of
Scripture why used in this work.
and largely: but not so much upon hope to do any great good upon the Atheist
with them, by pressing directly their Authority unto him, as indirectly to
grow somewhat upon him, by an Artificial circumduction of him: and that by
these two reasons following.

First, because of my often allegation of the holy Scriptures consenting so
fully with other Heathen writers, the Atheist may the better be able to
discern; that there is an universal agreement, and a general consent of the
whole world, against him; both of Christians, Jews, and Pagans: and thereby
see more plainly, his own nakedness and poverty; how bare, and weak, yea how
desolate he is, and utterly forsaken, both of God, and men: and by that
meditation, be more easily drawn, to apprehend the singular folly of that his
singular opinion: which has made him such a spectacle, both to Angels, God,
and Men: as it were some uncouth monster. And so indeed he is. A^g. lib. 22. De
Ciu. Dei. c. 8. To. ^. p. 13 39.
For, Magnum est ipse prodigium, qui, mundo credente, non credit (says S.
Augustine) He is (surely) some great Monster, that will abide in Atheism, when
he sees the whole world to believe, beside him. So that, in this respect, the
allegation of the Scriptures, will not be merely idle, toward the very
Atheists.

No, nor yet in an other: which is the second reason of my so frequent
alleging them. And that is, because the holy Scriptures (beside that divine
authority, which is naturally inhaerent in them) do oft-times, carry also
great strength of reason with them: which enforce many points more strongly and
effectually, against the Atheists, then the acutest reasons, brought by any of
the Philosophers. As that of the Psalmist, for the proof of Gods omniscience:
Psalm. 94. 9.
and that he needs must (of congruitie) both hear, and see all things. He that
planted the Ear, shall he not hear? and he that formed the Eye, shall he not
see? What Philosopher in the world could more necessarily conclude, from the
true and proper causes of the conclusion, then the Scripture here has done?
And diverse such places of the holy Scriptures, the Reader shall meet with,
throughout this whole Treatise; which press, yea, and even oppress, the
Atheists with the weight of their Reason: howsoever the weight of their
Authority be elevated by them. For though those sacred Authors have but small
authority with Atheists, speaking as mere Witnesses: yet, when their
Testimonies carry with them also reasons, those reasons must be answered, if
they will defend their cause. And if they cannot answer them, they must then
yield unto them: which is the second reason of my so often citing them.

Now unto these two reasons, in respect of the Atheists, I may also add a
third, in respect of Christians. And that is, that by this allegation of
Scriptures, and other the most learned Ecclesiastical Writers, even Christians
themselves will be the better confirmed, in those points of Christian Faith,
which are by them affirmed. For when they see these doctrines* which are
chiefly here proved by natural reasons, and by Heathen men's authorities; yet
not to rest wholly and only upon them; but to be such, as have both
Scriptures, and Fathers to approve them; it must needs much confirm them in
their received Faith: yea, and that a great deal more, for the simple
authority of the Scriptures themselves, then for the strongest reasons of all
the learnedest Philosophers. For this Authority alone, without any reason,
Illorum authoritas est omni rationabili facultate validior. Nazian. Orat. 47.
p. 770.
ouer-swayeth both all their reasons and authorities together; Salu^a^. l. 3.
De Prouid. Rib. Pat. To. 3. p. 270.
though they were a thousand more: because, Humana dicta argumentis et testibus
egent; De^ autem sermo est ipse sibi testis (as it is well observed by
Saluianus:) The word of a man stands need to be fortified, both by
arguments, and witnesses; but the word of God, is a witness to (...). And
therefore, as in the same place, he very truly collecteth, Non necesse est, vt
argumentis probetur, quod, hoc ipso, quia a Deo dicitur, comprobat^r: That
needs no other arguments to prove it, which is proved sufficiently, because
God has said it.

4 And yet the Authority of Gods word, as great as it is, The most proper
authorities in respect of the Adversaries.
is the little enough with Atheists: in whose foolish opinion, the testimony of
the holy Apostles, or Prophets, have a great deal less credit, then the
testimony of the Heathen Philosophers, and Poets. And therefore, in our
disputation against them, we must omit the former, and only use these latter;
Sect. 2.
if we will do good upon them: as Claudius Victor very wisely advises;
ascribing, by one instance a Rule of proceeding, in every like case.

Posse Deum, quicquid fieri non posse putatur,
Ipsorum ratione proba, qui credere nolunt.
That God can that, Claud. Vict. lib. 1. in Genesis ^ib. Pat. To. 7. p. 345.
that is thought it cannot be,
Pro^e this by their own saw's, that will not see.
According to which rule, Eusebius framed his practice. Suis testibus, Gentes,
non argumentis nostris, confundere instituimus. Eusebius. l. 6. De Praepar. c. 6.
p. 125.
I will confute the Gentiles, not by the Argument of Christians, but by the
testimony of Pagans. Yea, and even the holy Ghost himself, has taken also the
same course, disputing against the Heathens, by the Testimony and Authority of
their own Heathen Writers; in three several places: Yea, and in the last of
them, he honors a Poet, with the name of a Prophet. Act. 17. 28. 1. Cor.
15. 33. Tit. 1. 12.
Not that he thought him so; but because they esteemed him so: enforcing so,
his testimony, the more strongly against them, from that credit and authority,
which themselves ascribe unto him.

5 Then, The Testimonies of the Heathens, why here so much used.
the reasons, why in this our disputation against Atheists, we must use the
testimony of Heathen-Writers, and not of holy Scriptures, be both many and
weighty.

First, because in every disputation, both the disputants must consent, in two
general agreements: else they can never bring the matter, then in question,
unto determination. The first of them, is this: That they must both agree in
certain grounds and principles, which are common unto both. For, as two cannot
talk together, Qui sermonem invicem communicaturi sunt, oportet vt aliquatenus
invicem intellig^nt. Arist. l. 11. Me^aph^s. c. 4. To. 2. p. 1486.
unless they have some one common language, which they both understand: so
cannot two dispute together, except they have some one common principle, in
which they both consent. Now those principles and grounds, must not be
principles of Religion; but of Reason. Not of Religion; because that is proper,
but unto the one part: but yet of Reason; because that is common unto them
both. The second general agreement, wherein they must consent, is, Who shall
be their Judge, and unto whom they will submit, and unto whose decision they
will refer all their Question, as to a man impartial, and indifferent
between them? Now that cannot be the Scripture: but it must be Heathen
Writers. To the Scriptures, the Atheist will never submit; because then his
cause is lost: but to the Heathens, the Christian may submit; and yet his cause
be gained. For, the truth that is spoken by the most heathenish of the
Heathens, yet can never be repugnant to the truth of the Scriptures. Two lies
and untruths, may contrary one another; but two truths can never. So then,
the Heathens being made Judges of this cause, and admitted, as indifferent, by
consent of both parties; there can no other testimonies be so apt, and so
proper, to enforce a conclusion, as those that be produced from the writings of
the Heathen.

Secondly, because the writings of the Heathens (beside the great credit, and
authority which they have with our Adversaries) have also greater store of
artificial Arguments, to satisfy both natural reason, and sense: Whereas
Scripture, for the most part, presses rather the Conscience, by virtue of that
divine authority, which it has naturally in it, then leads our science, by
argument out of it. Sometimes it also argues, and that very excellently, as
before I have instanced: but this very rarely, relying most commonly upon his
own native authority.

Thirdly, Sect. 2. before.
because (if we seek to convert Atheists) the testimony of their own Writers
have with them far greater force and power of persuasion, then the Testimony
of the Scriptures, be they never so plain. And therefore (says Tertullian)
that De suis instrumentis, Tertul. lib. De Cor^na. Cap. 7. p. 181.
secularia pr^bari, necesse est. Yea, and improbari too: Whether we would
approve, or reprove the opinion of the Heathens, we shall do it most
effectually out of their own writings. For, firmum est genus probationis
(says Nouatian) quod ab ipso Aduersario sumitur, vt veritas, Nouatian. lib. De
Tri^it. cap. 18. Apud Tertul. p. 631.
ab ipsis inimicis veritatis, probetur: It is a very forcible kind of proof,
which is drawn from the Adversary himself, when the truth is proved by them
that oppose the truth. Not that the Atheists do give credit to the Heathens,
any more then to us Christians, in their direct assertion and affirmation of
God, (for therein they hold us both to be equally unequal unto their cause,
and indifferently vn-indifferent unto themselves;) but yet in their Axioms,
belonging to Philosophy, and to other humane Arts, they will believe them
readily, as being Masters in those Sciences. From which (notwithstanding) it
will follow as necessarily, that there needs must be A God, as if they had
affirmed it, in direct and express words; as I purpose (God willing) to make
plain, in the second of these Books.

Fourthly, because (if we seek to confute the Atheists) the testimonies of the
Heathens are the fittest means; Lactan. l. 1. c. 6. p. 17.
that so we may, eos suorum testimonijs reuincere, (as Lactantius advises us)
convince them by their own authorities: which is the strongest conviction,
Chrysostom. Hom. 3. in Tit. Tom. 4. p. 1614.
that can fall upon them: as is truly observed, by S. Chrysostom; Tunc illos
maxim reuincimus, cum suorum, in eos, dicta retorquemus; we do most forcibly
convince them, when we can retort their own saying against them: alleging
this for the reason, why the Apostle confuteth them rather by their own Poets,
then by the holy Scriptures. And therefore (says Lactantius, in another place)
that it is, satis firmum testimonium, ad probandam veritatem, ^^ctant. lib. De
vera Sapientia. c. 12. p. 211.
quod ab ipsis perhibetur inimicis: It is a sound argument, for the proving of
the truth, which is fetched from the enemies of the truth. Yea, though it were
but a weak one, in it self; as the Orator obser^^th in the very like case;
Cic. Orat. Pro. P. Quint. p. 12.
Tuum testimonium, quod, in altenare, leve est; id, in tua, quoniam contrate
est, grauissimum esse debet. Thy testimony (says he) which is but light and
frivolous, in another man's cause; yet is weighty in thine own, Tertul. li. De
Anima cap. 2. p. 262.
when it is against thy self. So that (as Tertullian observes) Ex aemulis
nonnunquam testimonium, sumere, necessarium est, si non aemulis prosit.
Sometimes to derive a testimony from the mouth of the adversary, is an
excellent help when it makes against the Adversary. For to confute Atheists by
their own proper Authors, 1. Sam. 17. 51.
is to cut off Goliah's head, with his own proper sword: which is of all other
the most grievous kind of wound. Whereas, to confute them by the authority of
Scripture, were, in effect, no better, then to cast holy things unto Dogs, Mat
7. 6.
and precious pearls before Hogs, which tread them under foot. And therefore,
I have chosen to fight against the Atheists, the ^ighters against God, not with
a chosen company of Apostles, and Prophets (who are too worthy persons to
stir their least finger, for such unworthy Adversaries, which so contemn
their holy writings) but rather with a company of Infidels, and Heathens. By
whom, notwithstanding, I hope (God assisting) to cut in sunder that band of
profane and wicked Atheists, which band themselves against heaven and against
God himself. For, as God himself once compelled the wicked Egyptians,
Muscas, and Ranas illis immisit; vt rebus vilissimis, superbia domeretur. Aug.
Tract. 1. in Johan. Tom. 9. p. 12.
by flies, and frogs, and grasshoppers, and other such like contemptible worms,
to confess the power of his divine Majesty; not vouchsafing to adact them by
any other of his creatures, more generous and worthy: so will we likewise
compel these ungodly Atheists, to confess, There is a God, by the arguments
and testimonies of the Heathen Philosophers; not vouchsafing them the writings
of the most holy Authors. Which weighty and important reasons, of my so
frequent alleging of profane and Heathen Writers, I request the Christian
Reader, to carry along with him, throughout this whole Treatise, for my
perpetual defense. The cause, you see, requires it: the Adversary exacteth it.

CHAP. 3.
That there is an inbred persuasion in the hearts of al men, That there is a
God. 2. That this has been observed, by many learned men, among the Heathens.
3. That it has also been observed, by diverse learned Christians. 4. Two
notable testimonies out of Tullie; asserting this persuasion, both unto all
Nations, and unto all Conditions, and unto all persons among men.

I Have largely unfolded in the two former Chapters, both what manner of
Arguments, and what manner of Authorities, are most proper to this cause, and
most effectual with our Adversaries, either to bend them, or to break them. Let
us therefore now, come on to the laying of them open. Now they be of two sorts:
they b^ either external or internal Arguments. For as it is true one way,
Senec. in prae^at Not. Quaest. p. 3.
which is observed by Seneca, that Deus et extra, et intra, ten^t opus suum:
that God vpholdeth all his works, both without them, and within them: so is it
also true another way, that, Deus et extra, et intra, tenetur ab opere suo:
that God is beheld of all his works, not only without them, but also within
them: Nature her self lending us light, to see the God of Nature, even in the
most obscure and interior parts of us. God has planted in all men a certain
persuasion, That there is a God. Cognitio diuino ru^ suit semper in (...) p. 7.


The first Argument then, to prove There is a God, is an internal Argument:
and that is taken from a natural and inbred conclusion, which is generally
ingrafted into the hearts of all men; that surely There is a God. This is the
most ancient and general praenotion, that Nature has begotten in the mind of
a man. Which natural persuasion, though it be both bred and borne together
with us; yet must it needs be a syence of Gods own planting in us. For if it
be true, which is affirmed by Seneca, that, Insita sunt nobis omnium artium
semina, sed Magister ex occulto Deus, producit ingenia: That it is God, that
has implanted in the soul of a man, Senec. lib. 4. De Benfi^. c. 6. p. 50.
the first seeds and principles of other humane Arts: then must he needs
much more have implanted in him this first seed and principle of all religion,
which is the proper Art of Gods holy worshipping: an Art, of which himself is
the true and only Object. For Pietas, is nothing else, Laert. vita Zenonis p.
248.
but only scientia Diuini cultus: an art of worshipping God aright, as Zeno
rightly defines it.

And therefore, it is not probable, that he, which has replenished the soul
of a man, with those notions and conceptions, that are the first seeds of all
other Arts and Sciences, should only leave out that which belongs to
himself. But howsoever the Atheist be persuaded in this point, that this
inward persuasion is implanted by God, or not; yet can he not deny, but that
there is in man's heart such an inward persuasion: because, all the world
confesses it, every man's experience teaches it; and all learned men, both of
Christians and Heathens, do both know, and acknowledge it.

2 Let me give you some instance for the demonstration of it. Testimonies of
Heathens, that all men believe There is a God.
Plato, in his tenth Book De Leg. taking upon him to prove by force of
Argument, that there needs must be A God; he brings this, as one principal
probation; that there is, Cap. 6. Sect. 1. Plato lib. 10. de. leg. p. 878.
et Graecorum et Barbarorum omnium consensus, Deos esse fatentium: that there
is in this point, a general consent, both of Greeks and Barbarians, that
surely, There is a God. And Xenophon, Xenophon lib. 1. De fact. Socrat. p. 166.
even in this respect, preferres the soul of a man, before all other
creatures: because none of them has any sense of their Creator; none of them
understands, either that there is a God; or that he is the maker and Creator
of the world, or of those great good things which therein are contained. Cuius
alterius animalis animus cognoscit, maximarum optimarumque rerum conditores
esse Deos? Does the soul of any other thing know God, to be the maker of every
good thing, but only the soul of man? No (says the Egyptian Philosopher)
Spiritus, de animalibus cunctis, Thismegist. in Asclep. c. 3. p. 483.
humanos tantum sensus, ad diuinae rationis intelligentia^ exornat, erigit,
atque sustollit. Among all other creatures, the spirit of only man is adorned,
and erected by the spirit of God, to the knowledge and understanding of Gods
divine wisdom. And so says the Roman Orator. Ex tot generibus, Cic. lib. 1.
De leg. p. 313.
nullum est animal, praeter hominem, quod habeat notiti^m aliquam Dei: ipsisque
in hominibus, n^lla gens est, neque tam immansueta, neque tam fera; quae non,
etiam si ignoret qualem ^abere Deum deceat, tamen habendum sciat. Among so many
kinds of several Cre^tures, there is none, but only man, that has any sense
of God. But, amongst men, there is none so intractable, and savage, but, though
they do dissent, what, a God they ought to have, yet they fully do consent,
that a God they ought to have. There is no other kind of Creature, that
knows this point: and yet no kind at all of men, that are ignorant of it.
For, as even the very Heathen Poet confesses, -- separat haec nos Agrege
mutorum; Iu^enal. S^t. 15. p. 69. b.
atque ideo venerabile soli
Sortiti ingenium, divinor^mque capaces*
Religion it is, that does distinguish us,
From brutish Heard. Men only have to know;
And can with understanding argue thus,
A God there is; Dumb creatures cannot so.


And this general persuasion (as Aristotle affirms) has always, in all
ages, been carefully implanted into Children, by their parents: to be held* as
a most certain, Arist. lib. De Mundo. To. 2. p. 1566.
and infallible truth. Vetus est fama, et haereditaria mortalium omnium; Omnia,
et a Deo, et per Deum, nobis esse constituta: It is an ancient opinion derived,
among all men, from the father to the son, that all things are made and
ordained for us men, both by God, and through God: agreeing very well with that
of the Apostle, that, Of him, Romans 11. 36.
and through him, and for him, be all things: to him be glory for ever. Amen.
And this, he says, descends, as it were an inheritance, from generation to
generation: acknowledging both the antiquity, and universality of it, to be
exceeding great, that it is both vetus, and haereditaria omnium; ancient, and
universally haereditary unto all Men. But yet he restrains it, to have had
his propagation, but only from Tradition. But Iamblicus asserteth it to an
higher condition; fetching the original of it further, and affirming it to be
a mere impression of nature. Ante omnem rationis vsum, Iamblic. lib. De
Myster. c. 1. p. 5. Cap. 9. Sect. 2.
inest, naturaliter insita, Deorum notio: Even before all use of reason, the
knowledge of God, is naturally ingrafted, into the mind of a man. And
therefore it cannot be of Institution, or Tradition.

Which yet may further be gathered, by an observation of AElian: that though
the Greeks (of all other men) have been commonly most careful of their
Childrens institution; AElian. lib. 2. De var. Hist. c. 31. p. 395.
yet, that more of the Graecians have proved notable Atheists, then could ever
yet be found among all other nations, though most Barbarous and savage. Nemo
Barbarorum, ad contemptum Deor^m, vnquam excidit: neque in du^ium vocant,
Sintne Dij, an non sint? et curentne res humanas, an non? Nemo, neque Indus,
neque Celta, neque AEgyptius, eam cogitationem in animum induxit, quam, vel
Euemerus Messenius, vei Dionysius Phryx, vel Hippon, vel Diagoras, vel Socias,
vel denique Epicurus. There is none of the Barbarians, that ever yet brake-out,
into contempt of the Gods, There is none of them that ever called into
quaestion, Whether there be Gods, or no: or whether they regard the things of
men, or no? (These be the Graecians problemes) No Indian, No Celt, no
Egyptian, did ever admit any such cogitation, as either Euemerus the
Messenian, or Dionysius the Phrygian, or Hippo, or Diagoras, or Sosias; yea or
even as Epicurus. Whereby it appears, that the very Barbarians, which lack
all good instruction; yet are further from Atheism, then the Graecians, which
have all. And therefore, it is neither institution, that gives; nor lack of
institution that depriueth of Religion: which is nothing else, but a natural
impression; as immediately given, by God, unto the soul, as the soul is
immediately, by God, unto the body. So that ( as Caecilius very truly
affirms) Omnium Gentium, Arnob. lib. 8. cont. gent. p 747
de Dijs immortalibus (quanvis incertasit vel ratio, vel origo) manet tamen
firma consensio: There is a strong consent, that there needs must be a God,
dispersed through all the nations of the world: and yet we cannot under stand
either the reason, whereupon that consent should be grounded; or the original,
from whence the same should be raised. But all know, that, so it is: yea,
Senec: Epist. 118 p. 295.
and that, among all Nations. Insomuch, that Seneca expressly pronounces,
that Nulla gens vsquam est, adeo extra leges moresque proiecta, vt non aliquos
Deos credat: There is no nation so devoyd both of good Laws and manners, but
that it entertayneth some or other of the Gods.

3 Which general consent, Testimonies of Christians That all men believe There
is a God.
and agreement of all men, in believing There is a God; is not only recorded
unto us, by the Heathens, but the same has been also observed, even by
Christians. Clemens Alexandrinus directly tells us, that, Dei manifestatio
erat, apud omnes, omnino naturalis: That the knowledge of God, Clem. Alex. lib.
5. s^^om. p. 274
is naturally ingrafted into the minds of all men: referring the Original of
this general persuasion; not, as Aristotle, unto Tradition: but, as Iambl^^us,
unto Natures information. In which point, Arnobius agrees fully with him.
Arnob. lib. 1. cont. Gent. p 47^
Quis quamne est hominum, qui non, cum istius Principis notione, diem primae
nativitatis intraverit? cui non sit ingenitum, non affixum, im^, ipsis poene in
genitalibus matris, non impressum, non insitum; esse Regem ac Dominum,
cunctorum, quaecunque sunt, moderatorem? Is there any man, that does not bring
a notion of this great Prince, into the world with him? Is there any man, in
whom this is not naturally begotten, to whose breast it is not nailed, nay, in
whose heart it is not printed, and (as it were) ingrafted, even whilst he is
yet in the bowels of his Mother, that surely there is a King, and a Ruler, who
is the Governor of all things, all the whole wide world over? Note his
earnestness in this point, by the multitude of his words, Ingenitum, Affixum,
Macarius ^om. 12. p. 153.
Impressum, Insitum, Inbred, Infixed, Imprinted, Ingrafted. Macarius likewise
consents with both of them. Absque Scripturis, homines, naturali ratione
sola, cognoscunt esse Deum. Men do know there is a God, even by natural
reason, of it self, though without any testimonies out of the holy Scripture.
Haec est enim vis verae diuinitatis (says Beda,) vt Creaturae rationali, iam
ratione vtenti, Beda. in cap. 17. Ioh. To. 5. p. 792.
non omnino et penitus possit abscondi. God the Creator, cannot totally be hid,
to any reasonable Creature. The same is affirmed likewise by Prosper
Aquitanicus. Prosper. lib. De Prou^d. p. 180.


Qua iacet extremo Telius circundata Ponto,
Et qua gens hominum diffusa est corpore mundi,
Seu nostros annos, seu tempora prisca revoluas,
Esse omnes sensere Deum, nec defuit vlli
Authorem Natura docens. --
Where farthest Sea encompasseth the land,
Where ever men do dwell in worlds great wa'st;
Let our late years, let ancient times be scanned,
There is a sense of God still vndefac't.
This Lesson Nature-selfe has all men taught,
Whereby to know their Author they are brought.
And again a little after.
Innatum est cunctis, genitorem agnoscere verum.
It is innate to all, to own
Their father true, by Nature known.
So likewise Theodoret. Veram theologiam, Theodoret. lib. de Angelis. Tom. 2.
p. 498.
ab initio, hominibus Natura tradidit: diuina subinde eloquia confirmarunt.
True divinity, from the beginning, was first taught to men by Nature; and
afterward confirmed unto them by Scripture. By which alleged authorities, both
of Christians and Heathen, it does evidently appear, that there is hardly a
greater consent of all men, in believing There is a God; then there is in
observing this consent of their belief. And it is also a thing not unworthy
the observing, that so many learned men, of so distant times and places, and so
different in opinions; yet should utter and express, one and the same
sentence, in so many forms of words.

4 Which yet may be made a little more evident, Testimonies of Tullie, that all
men believe, There is a God.
by addition of two other places, out of Tullie, that express the whole
notion, a great deal more excellently: which I have purposely reserved unto
this last place: because they do afford a notable gradation, whereupon I have
founded the whole Discourse ensuing. The first of them is in his first Book Of
the Nature of the Gods: the second, in the first Book of his Tusculan
Questions. His first place is this. Quae est gens, Cic. li. 1. De Not. Deor. p.
190.
aut quod genus Hominum, quod non habeat (sine doctrina) anticipationem quandam
Deorum? quam appellat (...), Epicurus, What Country is there, or what kind of
men, which have not in their minds (without any teaching) a certain
preconceiued opinion of God? Which Epicurus calls a Praesumption, or
Praeception. Mark the steps of his gradation, Qu^e gens? Quod genus? What
nation of men? or what condition of them? His second place is this. Cic. lib.
1. Tusc. p. 112.
Nulla est gens tam fera, nemo omnium tam imm^nis, cui^s mentem non imbuer it
Deorum opinio. There is, neither any nation so barbarous, nor any person so
savage, but that his mind is endued, with some opinion of the Gods. Mark here
again, Nulla gens, Nemo omnium: No people, nay, no man at all. From whence we
may gather, by these two places of Tullie compared together, that this
praenotion of God, is so generally spread, that there is neither nation, nor
condition of men, no nor any singular person; (neither gens, nor genus, nor
vllus) but he has in him this persuasion, That their is a God. Let us tread
in his own steps; and see the truth of this his consident assertion; and
whether he be deceived in any one of them. And first, as concerning Nations;
then, Conditions; and finally, Persons.

CHAP. 4.
That there is not any Nation, but it has his Religion. 1. Ancient Histories
insinuate it. 2. New Histories affirm it. 3. Travelers confirm it. 4. A
general surueigh of their Gods, declares it. 5. A particular surueigh of
their tutelar Gods, proves it.

YOu have seen before, All Nations have their Gods, by the Testimonies of
Histories.
how confidently it is affirmed, both by Heathens, and by Christians; That
there is not any Nation but it has his Religion; not any People in the world,
but that they have their God. Let us now come to see, how this saying can be
proved. For, it is easy to say any things. But those things that are said, if
they be not duly proved, may, with the same facility be rejected, that they be
affirmed. So that, we cannot, in equity, exact a belief, where we do not
exhibit (if not en exact) yet a competent proof. But in this case now
present, easy proof will be competent. For, it requiring nothing of us, but
an historical faith, we need exact no more, but an historical proof:
because historical positions, are sufficiently proved by historical
probations. Why then, the highest proof that we can use in this case, is to
confirm it by the testimony, of either such Historiographers as have credibly
related it, or else, of such Travelers, as have visibly seen it. They two
will be sufficient. For these two in this case be more authentical witnesses,
then either Philosophers, Orators, or Poets; yea or then Divines themselves:
because, this rests only upon the credit of History: Wherein we have
testimonies in very great plenty. For, look into all the most ancient
Historiographers, who have either Geographically described the Regions, or
Histo^ically the Nations of the whole world, so far as it was open, and known
in their time; and yet you shall find none of them, that have certainly or
assertiuely branded any nation with the mark and stigme of Atheism* neither
Herodotus, nor Diodorus, nor Strabo, nor Ptolomee, nor Mela, nor Solinus, nor
Pliny, nor Iustine, nor any of the rest. They which have marked, with very
great curiosity, the memorable things of every Country; yea and have noted
the Atheism of some particular men; would never have left it unnoted upon any
general nation, Diodor. Sicul. l. 13. p. 317.
if they could have inured any such upon them. It is true that Strabo writes
of the Cala^ci; Strabo. lib. 3. p. 328.
a rude and a savage people of Spain; that, Calaicis Deum nullu^ esse, quidam
aiunt; that some affirm, that they have no God. But yet, Cap. 8. Sect. 3.
he neither affirms so of them; nor yet tells us, who they were that
affirm this of them himself; nor yet subscribeth unto their affirmation: but
leaves all in the uncertainty of, Quida^, and aiunt; which is a very weak
proof. For, if such ungrounded reports might go for proofs, Christians
themselves should be Atheists: Arnob. l. 8. cont. gent. p. 748.
who (as Caecilius reports) do, et Templa despicere, et Deos despuere: both
despise the Temples, and despite the Gods. The nations that have been most
infamed with imputation of this point, C^^lius Rhodigin lib. 18. cap. 28. p.
862.
are the Massagetae, and Scythians: who (by the vulgar) in old time, were
thought to be destitute of all pieti^ and Religion, because they were so far
from civility and reason. But, Herodot. l. 4. p. 278. 279.
Herodotus expressly freeth them both from that impiety. For, Lucian. lib. De
Sacrifici^s, p. 57. b.
the Scythians, acknowledged diverse of the Greekish Gods: Jupiter, Tellus,
Apollo, Venus, Mars, and Hercules. Hos cuncti Scythae Deos arbitrantur, says
he: These all the Scythians hold for Gods. Lucian adds, Diana; unto whom (as
he reports) they were wont to offer Men: But, their own peculiar God, whom
they chiefly worship, above all the rest, is every man's old Sword: ferreus
acinaces, Herod. vbi. supra.
qui singulis vetustus est. Idque est Martis simulachrum: cui annuas hostias
offerunt, cum aliorumpecorum, tum equorum: et plus huic acinaci quam caeteris
Dijs: They call it the image of their great God Mars: and they offer unto it
their yearly sacrifices, both of horse, and other beasts; yea and more to this
alone, then to all the Gods beside him. This was the religion of the ancient
Scythians. And, for the Massagetae their neighbors; he testifies of them
likewise, that though they renounced all other Gods; yet, that they held the
Sun, Herodot. l. 1. p. 100.
for a God. Ex Dijs vnum Solemn vener antur, cui equos immolant: Among the other
Gods they worship the Sun, and they sacrifice their Horses unto him. So that,
in the writings of all the ancient Historiographers, we cannot, as yet, meet
with any Nation of Atheists: unless we should believe the fictions of the
Poets, in their report of the Cyclopes.

2 And the same may be likewise observed in the Neoterickes. Munster, All
Nations have there Gods, by the testimoni^ of new Histories.
in his Cosmographie, has notably described the universal world, so far as
(in his time) it was known, and inhabited: and Ortelius, in his Theatrum
Orbis; has placed the same, as it were, upon a Stage, to be plainly seen of
all men: yea and both of these two writers have delivered unto us, not only a
Chorographicall description of all countries, but also a Morographical
description of their manners. In all whose large volumes, yet neither of them
(so far as I remember) has noted any Nation, to be without all Religion; none
to be professed in Atheism. So that, we cannot find, by authority of
History, either ancient or modern, that ever the sin of Atheism ouerspred
any whole Nation: as yet diverse other sins have done. For, if there had ever
been any nation of Atheists, throughout the whole world, they should surely
have been noted. And, if we can neither see, nor hear, nor read, that there
were ever any such; why should we be so light as to believe there should be
such?

But, because an argument from Authority, does not follow negatiuely; let us
go one step further, and prove it affirmatively. There be published to the
world, two notable Books, of great learning, and good use. The one by Master
Samuel Purchase: which he calls his Pilgrimage: the other by Master Edward
Grimestone: which he intituleth, The Estates and Empires of the world. In both
which, are excellently described, not only the Geographicall site of all
Regions, but also the Conditions of all their Inhabitants: their riches,
forces, governments, commodities, histories; and (amongst the rest) their
Religions, Yea, and before the rest, in the first of those two Authors; who
makes their religions, the very first of his purposes; and all the rest but as
seconds and thirds. So that (by the commendable pains of those two industrious
writers) the Aheist cannot name unto us any nation, but we can name again
unto him their religion and that they be not of his. Or, if any be (happily)
omitted by them; it is not, because they have no religion; but, because their
Religion is, as yet, not fully known. None are noted, as known, to be without
all religion. For all people inhabiting upon the face of the whole Earth, Tres
sunt in Mundo Religiones; Iudaeorum, Paganorum, Christianorum. Athanas. in
D^^put. cont. Arium p. 517. But time since his time hafh brought forth a fourth.
are either Christians, who worship the holy Trinity; or Mahometanes and
Jews, who worship God the Creator; or pure Gentiles, who worship the Stars,
and other Creatures; or Idolaters, who worship Images. Into these four sects,
the whole world is quartered, and all these to be found, in every quarter of
it: though Christians do hold the praedominance, in Europe; Mahometans, in
Asia; Gentiles, in Africa; and Idolaters, in America. So that all of them be
worshippers: and all of them have their Gods.

3 And, Travelers find, that every nation has a God.
that those forenamed Writers do neither abuse us, nor yet have been abused
themselves, in their forenamed relations; we find all to be verified, by
the report of Travelers, who have seen it with their eyes: which is the surest
foundation, and ground of all Histories. Wherein we can have no better
testimonies, then those of our own Travelers: who have taken more pains, in
searching out the world, then any other people of the world: as we may plainly
see, by the commendable, and industrious Trauells, of Mr. Richard Hackluyt, in
collecting our English Voyages. Amongst which, there is relation of two worthy
Gentlemen, of this our own nation: who have compassed the Globe of the whole
Earth about. Which notable exploit has not by any other Nation, as yet, been
twice achieved. The first of which, Eng. Voyag. vol. 3. p. 737. 738.
was Captain Drake; who, in his furthest travel unto the North-west, taking
land in Noua Albien, he saw there the Savages busied about a Sacrifice: who,
when they had tasted of our men's liberality, they supposed them to be Gods,
and diverse times offered unto them their sacrifices. Which they never would
have done, but that both they were persuaded that There is a God: and that,
offering of sacrifice is a part of his worship.

The second of those Gentlemen, Ibid. p. 819.
was Captain Candish, who, in his furthest travel unto the South-East, taking
land in the Island of Capul, observed the Inhabitants, to be the worshippers of
the Devil. And the like may be observed in diverse other of their voyages: who,
even in the furthest and most remote parts, could never, as yet, find any
Nation of Atheists. They never yet took landing, but if they once found men,
they found also some religion: which they never brought with them when they
came; nor carried with them when they went; but both found it there before
them, and left it there behind them. So that, no Traveler could ever
out-trauell religion: but, (as Maximus Tyrius affirms) Quanvis ad
Oceanilitora accesseris, Max. Tyr. Ser. 1. p. 6.
ibi quoque Deos invenies. Hos quidem, prope Orientes; illos vero prope
Occidentes. Though a man should travel all the skirts of the Ocean, Cap. 6.
Sect. 1.
he shall still find, There be Gods, both rising in the East, and setting in
the West. Which is almost all one with Anaximanders opinion: Cic. lib. 1. De
Not. D^o. p 187.
Natiuos esse Deos, longis intervallis, et orientes and occidentes: That there
is a kind of native Gods, who in distance of time do sometimes rise up, and
sometimes fall again. For, it is Plutarch's observation, that, if a man should
travel throughout the whole Earth; though he might happily meet with some
people without Governors, yet should he not ever meet with any without Gods.
Siterras obeas, invenire possis vrbes, Muris, Literis, Regibus, Plut. Cont.
Colot. Tim. 3. Mor. p. 532.
Domibus, Opibus, Numismate* carentes, Gymnasiorum etiam and Theatororum
nescias; Vrbem, Templis Dijsque carentem, quae precibus, Iureiurando, Oraculo
non vtatur; non bonorum causa sacrificet, non mala sacris avertere nitatur;
nemo vnquam vidit: If thou walk through the world, thou may happen to
find, some City without walls, without letters, without Rulers, without
Houses, without Riches, without Coins, without Schools for exercise, without
Theaters for plays: but yet none at all, without Temples for their Gods. None,
but they have their Prayers, their Oaths, their Oracles, their Sacrifices, for
either the obtaining of such things as are good, or for the declining of those
that are evil. A City without these things, was never yet seen with man's
eyes. Which observation of his, is likewise confirmed, even by our own
Travelers: who in what place soever they set foot upon ground, in any of the
inhabited parts of the world; wheresoever they have found Cities, they
likewise have found Temples, and Altars, and Priests, and sacrifices, and
vows, and invocations, and other the Nisi Diuina sin^, vbique tollitur
Sacrificij virtus, lambli. c. 6. P. 15. lib. De Mysterijs. Cic. lib. 1. Offic.
p. 358.
Essentials of religion. And yet in their voyages, both to the East and West
Indies, they have met with diverse people, without Law, without Government,
without Order, without Garment, Pet. Martyr. Decad. 1. lib. 5. p. 30. b. Aug.
lib. de Haeres. To. 6. p. 18
walking op^nly starck naked, Genesis 2. 25. Paul. Venet. lib. 3. c. 14. p. 390.
etiam sine subligaculo; and yet are not ashamed: but that, not upon
impudency, as the Adamite Heretics, but upon mere simplicity, as Adam
himself in the time of his innocence: who, though he then were naked, yet
was he not ashamed, nor ever sought this subligaculum, until sin had brought
in shame. They meet (I say) in diverse Countries, with many people, without
Garments, without Laws, and without all civil orders; but none at all,
without Gods: as Paulus Ventus observes of the people of Ferl^ch: Nullam
habent legem, sed bestialiter viuunt: quicquid tamen ill is ma^e primuin
occurrit, adorant. They have no Rule of Laws but live like Beasts, religiously
adoring what they first meet every morning.

They find no people, no Country, no Nation, either so disordered in their
affection, or so despoyled of all reason, Eng. Voyages. vol. 1. p. 281.
as to be without religion; Alex. ab. Alex. Geneth. Lib. 6. c. 26. p. 321. b.
or to be without a God, though never so base, or bad; though but a stick with
a nicke, as the Samoeds have of the river Ob. Which several Gods of several
nations are largely recorded by Alexander ab Alexandro, in the sixth of his
Books of Geniall days. c. 261. p. 321. b.

4. Which base and vile things, The ridiculous Gods or diverse Nations.
no man would ever worship, but that there is a radical and fundamental
conclusion, immovably grounded in the heart of a man, that he ought to have a
God. And so not knowing where to find him, he will rather worship any thing,
then he will worship nothing. Hence some of the Heathen do worship the Sun,
Cap. 7. Sect. 1. Clem. Alex. Protrept. p. 11.
the Moon, the Stars: some the Fire, the Water, the Earth, the Air; some
unreasonable Beasts; as Oxen, and Horses: some hurtful Serpents; as
Crocodiles, and Vipers: Yea and some the very Devil himself, Cacodaemones, as
Clemens Alexandrinus there notes: Daemonem Soradeum, as Athenaeus reports of
the Indians: Athenaeus. lib. 1. p. 21.
nay ipsum (...), Lact. lib. 2. c. 16. p. 120.
in figura sua, sine vlla dissimulatione; as Lactantius speaks in this very
case: They worship the devil, in his own proper form, without any
dissembling: Yea and that in the most ougly, that they can possibly imagine.
Which idolatry continues in those Eastern Countries, Munster. lib. 5.
Cosmogr. p. 1087
very common and familiar, Masseus, lib. 6. Hist. Indic. p. 118.
even to these our own days. A thing almost incredible, that the eye of Man's
reason should be so clean put out; but that even the Holy Scriptures do
avouch it for a truth, that the Devil heretofore has so blinded the minds of
wicked men, as to make them to worship, even him for their God: as he most
impudently attempted it, even with our Savior Christ, Mat. 4. 9.
his Lord and his God; whom yet he would have had to have worshipped him, for
his God. And though with our Savior he could not prevail, but received a
foul foil, yet prevailed he with the Heathens, and brought almost all of them
to forsake God, and to worship him. For, as the Prophet Moses testifies: Deuteronomy.
32. 17.
The Heathens when they worship their Idols, under the name of Gods, worship
indeed nothing elss, but only the Devil himself. The Heathen (says he) do
offer unto Devils, and not unto God. And, that this is very true, we may
evidently see, by comparing the old Testament, with the new. For, that same
Idol Beelzebub, 2. King. 1. 2.
which in the Old Testament is called the God of Ekron, is called in the New,
Luke 11. 15.
The chiefest of the Devils. So that it appears, that, rather then a man
will have no God at all, he will worship the very Devil. He will worship even
the meanest of the creatures of God, rather then he will lack a God: AElian.
l. 12. De Animal. c. 5. p. 250.
A Weasell, as the Thebanes; A Mouse, as the Trojans; yea, even an Onion, or a
Leeke, as they did once in Egypt.

Porrum, Iuuenal. Satyr. 15. p. 60. a.
et caepe, nefas violare, ac frangere morsu.
A Leeke, an Onion, O it is wickedness!
These once to violate; and to eat, no less.
Which their notorious folly, he scoffeth and derideth, in the same place wost
worthily: O sanctas gents, quibus haec nascunt^r in hortis
Numina. --
Sweet Saints they are, and holy ones, I trow,
To whom their Gods do in their gardens grow.
Deos ollares, Aristop. ia Nub. Act. 5. sec. ^. p. 228.
as such ridiculous Gods are called in contempt by Aristophanes. Plin. l. 2. c.
7. p. ^.
Yet such is the force of Religion in a man, that it will make him worship any
thing. He will Monstra quoque colere, as it is noted by Pliny: He will worship
the foulest monsters: yea, he will carry his Gods upon his very fingers, as he
adds in the same place: yea, he will fall to worship his own very members:
Humerum dextrum, Lucian. In Jove Tragaedo, p. 210. a.
aut sinistrum, aut Capitis dimidium, as is noted even by Lucian. He will
worship his own hand, if he have none other God; yea, or the work of his own
hand, or any thing whatsoever comes next unto his hand. For the Bramenes in
the East, Linschot. c. 36. p. ^0.
and the Lappones in the North, do both of them worship, P^t. Mar. Dec. p. 284.
for the God of that day, the first thing that they meet, when they rise up in
the morning, Masseus l. 1. p. 24. Linschot c. 44. p. 81.
whatsoever it be, though but a Mouse, a Worm, a Fly. In another Province of
the East India, they adore and worship the Tooth of an Ape: and have made
bloody wars to be possessed of it.

In another province of the northern Climate, called Baida, they do worship
for their God a piece of a red clout, tied unto a cross stick, in the manner
of a Banner. Ort^l. Chart. Cosmogr. 104.
Neither can they give any good account, why they should worship such a God,
but only that it has been left unto them by an old Tradition, by their
Ancesters before them. It may seem in probability, some relic of
Christianity, and some remembrance of Christ's Cross; since that region once
was Christian; though now the true use of it be corrupted through time: it
differing not much in the out-ward form, from that Banner, which we read to
have been made by great Constantine in the representation of our Savior
Christ's crucifying. For we read of a like example, in the Islands of Acusamil,
where they do worship a Cross, for the God of the Rain; and yet cannot tell
who made it, nor from whence it came. But, it is very likely, to be some
monument of Christianity, left there by some Christians, who have heretofore
taken landing in that place: for in diverse others they do meet with like
signs, which are likewise abused by those simple Indians. Those foolish gods,
do those foolish Nations worship; more foolish indeed, then the gods whom they
worship. The Athenians, not much in this point wiser, did consecrate, amongst
their Gods, Contumeliam, and Imp^dentiam: which Tullie very justly reproves in
them, (...)
that they should, Viti^ consecrare: That they should consecrate for their
gods, the very vices of Men. But, (...)
above all, the folly of the Romans does well deserve the Bell. For they
worshipped, not only many idle and ridiculous gods; as, Fortunam, Victoriam
Volupiam: (...)
but also, diverse Bawdie gods; Floram, Venerem, Faul^m, and Priapam: (...)
Yea and some Beastly gods two; as, Cloacinam, and Sterquilinum: insomuch that
(as Clemens Romanus reports) they did, Crepitus ventris venerari pro
Numinibus. -- A filthy Dunghill of stinking gods, (...)
well deserving that reproach, which is cast upon some of them, by Aristophanes,
that they be but Dij merdiuori. For, so, their Cloacina may be truly said to
be. And so the Prophet Moses calls them, in express and plain words,
Dunghill gods, as the Original is rendered by our last Translators. Deuteronomy. 29.
17.
And diverse other such absurd gods they worshipped, which it is almost a shame
but to have named, as Sybilla has truly noted.

-- Haec adoratis, (...)

Et alia multa vana, quae sane turpe fuerit praedicare,
Sunt enim Dij hominum deceptores stultorum.
These foolish gods, and many more
Like vain, Ye worship and adore,
Which filthy were to name in Schools,
Such filthy gods deceive but Fools.
And therefore I ouerpasse them with S. Augustines transition; Non omnia
commemoro, quia me piget, quod illos non puduit: These gods make me half
ashamed to name them, Aug. lib 4 de (...). De^. c. 8. p. 231
although they themselves were not ashamed to worship them. Which seems to me
little less then a wonder, that the Romans, so wise and so severe a nation,
yet should show themselves so foolish in the use of their Religion. But this
sedulitie of man's soul about such false gods, must needs importe unto us, that
it thinks there is a true one. And thus you plainly see by all the former
instances, that there is no Nation so Barbarous, but it will have a God, though
never so ridiculous. Which evidently proves, that this one conclusion [ That
there is a God.] is a general principle, throughout the whole world, wherein
all kind of people remain still of one language, even after the general
confusion of tongues: conspiring more fully in this one common principle, then
they do in any other, either of Art, or Nature. For which I refer you, to
the next ensuing Chapter.

5. Let me only here (for the Close of this present) give you but this one
note. That I find it observed, The peculiar Gods of diverse Countries and Cities.
by diverse of the learned, that, beside those great and most renowned gods,
which were called Dij maiorum Gentium, and were worshipped generally throughout
the greatest part of the world; every several Country (and almost every
City) selected to themselves, Cap. 5. Sect. 4. Cap. 7. Sect 1.
their peculiar gods, which they called, Deos Tutelares, that is, the
Guardians, and Defendors, and Patrons of their Countries: of whom Tullie gives
us some instances, that, the Alabandians, did worship for their Patron,
Alabandus; Cic. l. 3. de. Not. Deor. p. 231.
the Tenedians, Tenes; the whole Country of Greece, Hercules, AEsculapius,
Castor and Pollux: and these he calls nouos and ascriptitios Cives, in Coelum
re^ceptos, that is to say, new gods, taken lately into heaven, as new Citizens
are received into their new City. Lucian. lib. De^ Sacri^ic. P. 57. ^.
So Lucian. Per Regiones, illos distributos colunt, ^^sque velut in ciuitatem
suam receptant: As the Gods have gratified Men, in receiving some of them
amongst themselves into heaven: so Men have regratiated them again, in
receiving of them into their Cities upon earth, as their proper and peculiar
Gods. And then he gives some instances: Apollinem, Delphi Delijque Minervam,
Athenienses; Argivi, Iunonem; Migdonij, Rheam; Venerem, Paphij; Cretenses,
Iovem. And a great many other he reckons up in Jove Tragaedo. Tertullian, p.
110 Tertul. in. Apo. log c. 24. p 54.
he gives us diverse other instances. Vnicuique Prouinciae, and Ciuitati, Deus
suus est: vt Syriae, Astartes; vt Arabiae, Disares; vt Norici, Belenus; vt
Africae, Coelestis; vt Mauritaniae, Reguli sui: There is no Country, no City,
but it has his proper God: the Syrians, Astartes; the Arabians, Disares; the
Noricians, Belenus; the Affricans, Coelestis; and the Mauritanians, their own
Kings. And then he proceeds to declare, that this is not only the general
Religion of every Country, but also the particular of every City: whereof he
has also given instances unto us. Crustuminensium, Belventinus; Narni^nsium,
Viridianus; Asculanorum, Ancaria; Volsiniensium Nersia; Ocriculanorum,
Valentia; Sutrinorum, Nortia; Faliscorum, Curis; etc. naming the neighbor
Cities round about Rome it self: who yet, not contented with the general Gods
of their Country, would needs have their peculiars, Lactant. l. 1. c. 15 p. 39.
every City for it self. Item Isidor. l. 8. orig. c. 11. p. 1023.
Lactantius yet adds other instances unto these. Summa veneratione coluerunt
AEgyptij, Isidem; Mauri, Iubam; Macedones, Cabyrum; Paeni, Vranum; Latini,
Faunum; Sabini, Sancum; Romani, Quirinum; eodem vtique modo Athenae Mineruam,
Samos Iunonem, Paphos Venerem, Lemnos Vulcanum, Naxos Liberum, Delphi
Apollinem. The Egyptians do worship their Cabyrus: the Carthaginians their
Vranus: the Latins their Faunns: the Sabines their Sancus: the Romans their
Romulus: and so the Athenians their Minerua: the Samians their Juno: the
Paphians their Venus: the Lemni ans their Vulcane: the Naxians their Bacchus:
the Delphians their Apollo. And the like no doubt they could easily have showed
of all the other Nations and Cities of the world, if they had purposely
intended a set work upon that point, which here they have touched but lightly
by the way, as we may partly see by that rabble of them, which Rabshakeh so
rouled out, in his luxurious and Asiaticall Oration unto King Hezechiah. 2.
Kin. 18. 34.
Where is the God of Hamah, and of Arpad? Where is the God of Sepharuaim,
Heuah, and Ivah? But a great deal more plainly in that reprehension of
Jeremy, wherewith he perstringeth the idolatry of the Jews, ^er. 2. 28.
that; according to the number of their Cities, was the number of their Gods.
Whereby it appears, that they contented not themselves with their own God,
Jehovah, though he were, unto them, Deuteronomy. 4. 1.
both Deus Patrius, The God of their Fathers, The most ancient God; and Deus
Tutelaris, The God of their Country, their most careful God, The Keeper of
Israel, Psalm. 121. 4. 5
Protecting and defending them, Psalm. 127. 1.
and watching over them, a great deal more vigilantly, then ever any Watchman
does over his own City: as the Prophet David has expressly testified. But
yet, for all that, they would have (beside him) over every several City, a
several God: else could he not have said, that the number of their Gods had
equalled the number of their Cities. Which vanity they affected, upon an
itching humor, Ex. 32. 1. 1. Sam. 8. 20.
to be like unto their nei^^bour Nations, as well in this, as in many other
things. And this also may be gathered, by those High Places, which Solomon
builded for his idolatrous Wives: wherein they worshipped the several Gods, of
their several Nations: Ashtareth, the Goddess of the Sidonians; and Milcom,
the God of the Amorites; 1. King 11. 5. 7.
Chemosh, the God of the Moabites; and Molech, the God of the Ammonites: and so
likewise for all the rest of his Outlandish Wives, which burnt incense and
offered unto their Gods. Whereby it appears, that every several Nation had a
God of his own.

As yet further may be seen by the practice of those Nations, which Salmanezer
transplanted into the Samaritane Cities: of whom it is recorded, that, 1. King.
17.
though they feared the Lord, yet they worshipped every one his own peculiar
God: Verse. 33.
Of whom there is a Catalogue in the same place set down; Verse. 29. 30.
The Babilonians, Succoth-Benoth; the men of Cuth, Nergal; the men of Hamath,
Ashima; the Auites, Nibhaz and Tartak; the Sepharuites, Adrammelech and
Anammelech.

Neither did Nations and Cities only affect, to have every one unto
themselves, their own peculiar and several Gods, The particular Gods of
Families. Cap. 5. Sect. 4.
as their Patrons and Defenders: but the same was likewise followed, even by
all their several families: who still had their Lares, and their Deos Penates,
that is, their Household gods; as the Protectors of their families: whom,
because they set up in the secret, and most inward parts of their houses, the
Poets use to call, Deos Penetrales. And with how great a religion they adored
them, we may partly see in Plautus: Cic. l. 2. de. Not. Deor. p. 210.
where, a Lar familiaris expresses his worship thus.

-- mihi cotidie,
Aut ture, Plaut. Prolog. in Aulular. p. 103.
aut vino, aut aliqui, semper supplicat:
Dat mihi coronas. --
Or Wine, or incense She lay's down:
She offer's something every day.
Her Garlands do mine Altars crown:
And always to me she does pray.
And the same we may likewise collect, by that wonderful perturbation, which
is reported to have been, both in Micah, Genesis 31. 30. 33. Iud. 18. 24.
and Laban, when their Household Gods were stolen from them. Ye have taken
away my Gods, and my Priests, and go your ways, and what have I more? Yea,
and (as Pliny reports) not only several families had their several Gods,
but also every several person would adopt a several God of his own: insomuch
that he thought the number of Gods to be multiplied above the number of men.
Mayor Coelitum populus, etiam quam Hominum in telligi potest, cum singuli
quoque, ex semet-ipsis, Plin. l. 2. ^. 7. p. 2.
singulos Deos faciant, Iunones, Geniosque adoptando sibi. We may see greater
multitudes of Gods, then of Men: seeing every man adopteth, as he pleases,
both greater, and smaller Gods, unto himself.

And thus, you plainly see, that there is neither Nation, nor City, nor Family,
in the world, but that it is persuaded, that There is a God; and that they
cannot contain, but that they needs must worship him, at the least in their
intention, howsoever there be error or imperfection in their action. So that,
for the first branch of Tullies gradation; you see he erred not, That there is
not any Nation, but it has his Religion: None of them all so wicked, but
believes There is a God. Quod quidem non solum fatetur Graecus, Max. Tyr. Ser.
1. p. 6.
sed and Barbarus; sed and Insularum, and Continentis habitator; and ipsi
denique, qui sapientiam abnegant: as Maximus Tyrius affirms. This (says he)
is confessed both by Greeks and Barbarians; both by Islanders, and
Continenters, yea, even those which renounce al understanding and wisdom; yet
do not remove Religion; but hold that fast within them. And as, in a like case,
by Seneca it is observed: Seneca Epist. 116. P. 292.
Totus populus in alio discors, in hoc conuenit. All the people of the world,
though dissenting in all other thing, yet consent, There is a God. Let us
therefore now proceed unto Tullies second instance, and see whether, as all
Nations, so all conditions of men, be inwardly persuaded, that There is a God.

CHAP. 5.
That all sorts of men, of all degrees, and orders, do believe, There is a God,
is particularly declared by instance of Poets. 2. Of Law-giuers. 3. Of
philosophers. 4. And of all other several Arts and Professions.

OF all those general Notions which are begotten in the mind, (...)
and are thought to be the first grounds of the very law of Nature; there is
not any one of them, which is either so early bred, or so largely spread, or so
deeply rooted in the hearts of all men, as is this one conclusion; That There
is a God. Nay, a Conclusion it is not (if we will properly speak) but rather a
Principle, yea and that so naturally bred in the soul: that (as Aristotle
affirms) it needs not any corporeal instrument, to make it believe it.
Anima intelligit Deum scientia ^uiusmodi, Arislot. lib. 12. de Theelogia. cap.
8.
quae non est per organon corporale. Nay, the name of a Principle is not
sufficient for it: It is Ante Principium, rather then Principium: or (as
Aquinas calls it) Praeambula ad Articulos: A Praeamble unto the first
Articles of Christian belief. (...)
For, many men believe this, that believe none other Article in the body of our
Creed. (...)
Nay all men agree, in the belief of this one point, who agree not in any
other, either of Art, or Nature: not in Laws: for many men do live without
any rule of Law; as in the old time, the Cyclops: yea, and sometime, the very
Israelites themselves: Not in marriage: for many have lived as licentiously,
(...)
and loosely, as if they were brute beasts, having only the name of Marriage,
as a cover for their lusts: as the 1 Babilonians, and 2 Lacedaemonians, the 3
Gindanes, and 4 Tyrrheniaus. No not in Society it self: for diverse people, in
diverse nations, do live, as mere Nomades: that is, Stragglers and Wanderers:
Hic non habentes manentem ciuitatem, as the Apostle speaks, not having any
fixedor certain place of abiding. Only therein do al agree, (...)
in all the corners of the Earth, that they will have a God, such an one as he
is. And this we have seen verified, by all the known Nations and Cities of
the World. (...)
Let us now go one step further, and see; whether, as we have found the truth
of this in all Nations, so we can find it likewise in all Conditions of men:
(...)
which was Tullies second instance.

For our better and more orderly proceeding wherein, (...)
I will tread in Plutarch's steps: (...)
who has named unto us three special sorts of men, that are known, of all
other, to agree least together: and yet, in this one point, of believing, There
is a God, do so notably consent, as if they all were led but by one and the
same spirit: that is, Poets, Lawgiuers, and Philosophers. Omnes Poetae,
Leguml^^or^s, Philosophi, (...)
vnoore dicu^t, Deum esse. All Poets, Lawgiuers, and Philosophers, do affirm,
There is a God, with one consenting voice (says he.) Let us look into the
parts of this Enumeration, and examine the truth of every one of them.

And first, concerning Poets: Cap. 1. Sect 3. All Poets believe, There is is a
God. (...)
I have showed you before, that all of them, in the beginning of their Poems,
do usually call upon, either the Gods, or the Muses: as may easily be
demonstrated out of all their writings, especially in their greater and more
solemn works: and is generally observed of them, by Lucian, in his book De
Sacrificijs. Which evidently proves, that they had within them a grounded
opinion, that There is a God. For no man is so mad, as to invoke any thing,
that he thinks has no being. But, as concerning Poets, it is commonly
believed, both by themselves and others, that their very Art has a more
special and immediate dependence upon a divine influence, then any other of
all the Arts beside. In which point let me deliver unto you the opinion of
Plato, who handles it ex professo, in his Dialogue called Io: where he
delivers expressly, these three positions, unto us. First, that, P^ato. In
Ione. p. 170. 171.
Ipsa Musa Poetas diuino instinctu concitat, That the Muses themselves do use
to stir up Poets, Cic. lib. 2. Epist: ad ^ Fra^. Ep. 12. p. 211. Isa. 6. 6. 7.
by an inward and a divine instinct: whereupon they be called by Tullie, (...),
A Musis tacti: or (in some sense) de coelo tacti; as the Prophet Isaiah was,
when as one of the Angels had touched his lips.

His second position is, that, Omnes Poetae in signs, non art, sed diuino
inflatu, praeclara poemata canunt: That all notable Poets make their excellent
poems, not by virtue of their own art, or former instruction, but only by
means of a divine inspiration. Isidor. lib. 8. Orig. c. 7. p. 1018.
Whereupon they are called Vates, a vi mentis (as Isidore observes) out of
Varro: and by Ennius, Theodoret. l. de Principijs. Tom. 2. p. 491.
Sancti: because they be diuino quodam spiritu afflati. His third, That
therefore prius canere non possunt, quam Deo pleni sint: Cic. Ora. pro. Archia
Po^ta. p. 365
They be not able to make any poem, before they be even filled with the breath
and spirit of God: as Pipes cannot make any musical harmony, if the breath of
some Musition be not breathed into them. And thereupon (in another place) he
called them, Deorum Prophetas: as S. Paul likewise does; that is, the Prophets
of the Gods, Plato. l. 2. De Repub. p. 548. ^it. 1. 12.
or Speakers outwardly of those divine things, which before have inwardly been
inspired into their minds: for so the name of a Prophet signifies. Whereby he
insinuates, that the whole faculty of Poets depends much more upon a divine
incitation, then either upon any natural gift, or any artificial instruction
and teaching. And this he there confirms, by two observations. The first
whereof is this, that diverse of the Poets, being (at their beginning) but very
ignorant Bardes; yet have had on a sudden, a notable faculty infused into
them, whereby they have made very excellent Poems: as in the same place he
instanceth in Tynnichus Chalcidensis. Max* Tyr. Sermon. 22. p. 264.
(And Maximus Tyrius affirms the same of Hesiodus.) From whence he there
collecteth, Poetas nihil esse aliud quam Deorum interpretes: That Poets are
nothing else, but only Gods Interpreters. The Poems they make are his; and
they, but the Reciters. Quod quidem Deus ostendere volens, de industria, per
ineptissimum Poetam, pulcherrimam cecinit melodiam (says he in the same
place,) Which God being willing to make known, he purposely in spired the
simplest Poet, to make the excellentest poem. The second of his observations,
is this: That in all Poesy (if it be good and worthy) there must be, not only
an incitation, and commotion; but also an elocation, and emotion of the mind.
The Poet must be, extra se positus, and a mente alienatus. Nam quamdiu quis
mente valet, neque fingere carmina, neque fundere oracula quis quam potest. As
long as a man is in a calm, and settled estate of his mind, he can neither make
verses, nor give out oracles. From whence he insinuates, that it is not he
himself, but his inward God that speaks. Which his two observations, (...)
Argument. ^n plat Ion. p. 168.
may further be confirmed, by a third of Ficinus, in his Argument of that
Book: That oftentimes, many Poets, when they read their own poems, do hardly
understand themselves; or, what they meant, in many verses, apt enough unto the
matter, and plain enough unto their reader, yea plainer then to themselves:
which could not have fallen out, if those verses had bin made, by their own
proper spirit, and not by some other, within them; Just. Martyr. Orat. ad Gent.
To. 1. p. 78.
yet working far above them. And Justin Martyr alleges this for one reason,
why Sibilla'es verses be not made in true members: because, being spoken in an
ecstasy, she knew not what she said, and that motion being ended, she could not
amend them, having not the same spirit.

Yea, and even the Poets themselves have the very same persuasion, that their
whole Art depends upon a divine inspiration. From which only opinion, grows
all their forenamed so frequent invocation, to have their Gods to breathe into
them: -- Dijcoeptis -- Ovid. l. 1. Met^m. p. 2.

Aspirate meis --
Ye Gods, aspire
To my desire.
acknowledging expressly, that all their faculty is from them. Ab Jove
principium Musae -- Virgil. Eclog. 3. p. 8.

-- illi mea carmina curae.
My Muse beginn's by Ioue's behest:
He mak's my Verses in request.
Yea, and Plato, in the forealledged place, affirms, that the Poets hold
themselves to be, Pla^^an Io^e. p. 170.
as it were, but the Bees of the Muses: a Musarum viridarijs, collibusque,
carmina decerpentes; Flori^eris vt apes in saltibus omnia limant. Omnia nos
itidem depas^imur aur^a dicta. Lucre. l. 3. p.
quemadmodum mel ex floribus apes: Gathering their Verses, out of the hills and
meadows of the Muses, as Bees use to do their honey, out of flowers. Which we
may see to be true by Lucretius his confession, using the same comparison.
Whereby they insinuate, that, as Bees be not the Makers, but the Workers of
their honey, which naturally falls with the dew from heaven: so they be not
the makers, but the bringers of their Verses: As Bees their honey seek and
suck from every flowery spring:
instar apum volantes, ad nos afferunt: (says Plato) but the verses themselves
they do distill from heaven; as Manilius confesses of them. -- Coelo carmen
de^cendit ab alto. So Poets do their golden sawes from other Authors bring.

The golden shower of Poets sweetest strain,
Dropp's down from Heaven, and so it flowe's amain.
It it not the work of the Poets, but of the Gods. Yea, Plat^, vbi supra.
Manil. lib. 1. As^ronom. p. 4.
and Martial also insinuates the same, even in his scoffing and carping at
Tullies versifying. Carmina quod s^ribis, Martia. 2. Epigr. 89. in Gaurum. p.
68.
Musis, and Apolline nullo,
Laudari de bs, hoc Ciceronis habes.
No spark of Muses fire shine's in thy strain,
That Is thy chief praise, for lo, it is Tullies vain.
Ascribing the cause of his ill success in Verses, to be lack of the
assistance of Apollo, and the Muses: who are the proper, and tutelar God of
Poets. Now they, that are possessed with this religious opinion, that their
own Art proceeds from an immediate inspiration; and who use, in all their
poems, to begin with invocation; how is it possible, that these men should be
tainted with Atheism? Nay, Poets are so far from the sin of Atheism, that
they have bin the chiefest broachers of the sin of Polytheisme.

2 Let us now come to the second of Plutarch's instances; All Lawgiuers do
believe, That there is a God.
that is, unto Lawgiuers; and see, whether any of them have been Atheists? or
any so ungodly, as to be without a God? For which point, it is a thing that is
worthy observation, that, though diverse of the Lawgiuers have been so carried,
with an inward emulation, that, only upon mere envy, they have oftentimes
condemned, what their neighbors have allowed; and oftentimes allowed, what
their neighbors have condemned; as we may evidently see, by the contrary
Constitutions of the Lacedaemonians, and Athenians: yet, that no envy, no
aemulation was ever able to work so great a distraction between any of them,
as to make them decerne, there should be no God, because their neighbors had
allowed it. But, Max. Tyr. Sermon. 1. p. 5.
In tanta pugna, ac dissonantia, nusquam gentium cernere est, aut leges, aut
rations, non in hoc saltem omnes conuenire, Quod vnus Deus, princeps ac pater
omnium existat (says Maximus Tyrius:) In all their great dissension, both
about their Laws, and about the reason of their laws; yet they still consent
in this, That there is a God, who is both the Ruler, and the father of the
World. All of them in this are fully of one mind, that they will have a God;
as knowing well enough, that Piteie is the bond of all human society, and
Religion the foundation of every City, both gathering men, and holding them
unanimously together; who else would quickly shatter clean asunder.

And therefore (says Plutarch) that, Plut. contr. Col^t To. 3. Mor. p. 532
In constitutione Legum, opinio de Diis et primum est, et maximum: That in the
making of Laws, both the first, and the greatest point, is to plant in men's
minds an opinion of the Gods: without which, he there affirms, Facilius
vrbem condi, si^e solo, quam civitatem coire, sine opinione de Deo: That it is
not more impossible, to build a City without a foundatiou, then to gather
Citizens without Religion. And therefore, all wise Lawgiuers do place those
Laws first, and (as it were) in the front of their Tables, which they have
ordained for the honor of God: and then those that belong to the good of the
kingdom: Ex. 20. 3. 32. 15. 16. Deuteronomy. 10. 4.
as we may see, in Moses Laws, whose first law is this; Thou shall have none
other Gods but me. This is Gods own method, and that both in speaking, and in
writing of his Laws: and the same has likewise been followed by diverse other
Lawgiuers, even of the very Heathen. Zaleucus begins his Laws with this
preface: (...)
Omnes homines, qui vrbem and regionem inhabitant, persua^os esse oportet, esse
Deos: All the Men in the world, that either inhabit any City or any Country,
ought firmly to be persuaded, That there is a God. And then he proceeds to
set down certain Rites and Ceremonies, for the worshipping of the Gods,
before he praescribe any, for the society of men. And so likewise Tullie in
the setting down of his Laws: the first whereof be these. Ad Diuos adeunto
cast. (...). l. 1. de Leg. p. 322.

Pietatem adhiben^o.
Opes amovento.
Qui secus faxit, Deus ipse vindex erit.
If any man do otherwise, God himself will revenge it.
Come chastely and purely unto the Gods.
Use Piety, when you are come.
Do things comely, but not costly.
These be his first Laws: which (as you see) directly belong unto God. So,
those Fragments of the twelve Tables, which, as yet, are to be found; have the
first of them, belonging unto God. Sacra priuata perpetuo manento:
establishing, not only those holy Constitutions that have been ordained by
public Laws; but also, even those likewise, that have been appointed by
private families, Ros^^us l 8. De Antiquit. Romans c. 6. p. 330.
for their own proper religions. Yea and even those Laws, which are referred
to the ancient Roman Kings, long before those twelve Tables; yet have the
first of them belonging to the Gods. Ne quid inaugurato faciunto. Let nothing
be done but by sacred diuillation.
Patres, sacra Magistratusque soli peragunto, ineuntoque
Let only Senators be Magistrates, Idem. l. 8. ^, 5. p. 323.
and perform holy actions.
Both appointing sacred actions, and who shall be their Actors. Which argues,
that none of them have been without their Gods: Sieve putantes rem diuinam esse
Leges, sieve vt citius Populi Deum timore legibus obtemperent. Diodor. l. 1. c.
2. p. 43.
either upon piety, Genesis 47. 22. Arist. l. 2. Pol. c. 6. To. 2. p. 773.
or, Diod. Sicul. l. 1. c. 5. p. 42.
at least, upon policy. Pharaoh would not buy the lands of the Priests, though
he bought all the rest. Hippodamus gave the third part of the whole land unto
them: and both these, in honor of their gods. Yea, and this also is a thing
that is very obseruable, that all the ancient Lawgiuers, have given out unto
their people; that in the making of their Laws, they have been assisted, by
some or other of the gods. By that means, both to bring unto their Laws
greater reverence; and to work their people toward them, unto greater
obedience, as Diodorus Siculus collecteth, who reckons up a whole Catalogue
of those Lawgiuers, who have fathered their Laws upon the Gods: as namely,
Menes, the Lawgiuer of the Egyptians; who persuaded that people, that he
received his Laws from the learned god Mercury. So Minos, the Lawgiuer of the
Cretians; who persuaded that people, that he received his Laws from the mighty
god Jupiter. So Lycurgus, the Lawgiuer of the Lacedaemonians; who persuaded
that people, that he received his Laws from the wise god Apollo. So
Latraystes, the Lawgiuer of the Arians (or Arimaspians, for so the Greek is)
persuaded that people, that he received his Laws from the mighty god Jupiter.
So Lycurgus, the Lawgiuer of the Lacedaemonians; who persuaded that people,
that he received his Laws from the wise god Apollo. So Latraystes, the
Lawgiuer of the Arians (or Arimaspians, for so the Greek is) persuaded that
people, that he received his Laws from a certain god whose name is not
expressed. So Zamolxis, the Lawgiuer of the Getians; persuaded that people,
that he received his Laws from the holy goddess Vesta. And he adds also
Moses, the Lawgiuer of the Jews, who persuaded that people, Just. Mart. To. 1.
p. 50.
that he received his Laws from the holy goddess Vesta. And he adds also
Moses, the Lawgiuer of the Jews, who persuaded that people, that he received
his Laws from the mouth of God Ioa: Psalm. 68. 4. Ex. 20. 1.
alluding, as it seems, to the Hebrew word, Iah. Yea and he might well
persuade them so: for they themselves heard God himself when he spoke to them
with his own mouth. Unto which Lawgiuers, thus named by him, I may add diverse
other, who are named elsewhere: Ficinus Argum. in Plat. Mino. p. 49.
as namely, Numa Pompilius, the Lawgiuer of the Romans; who persuaded that
people, that he received his Laws from the M^ses, and from a Nymph called
Egeria. And so likewise Zaleu^us, the Lawgiuer of the Locrians, Plut. in vita
Numae, To. 1. p. 138.
persuaded that people, Plut. l. de laud sui To. 2. p. 262.
that he received his Laws from the goddess Minerua. Homer. l. 1. Iliad. p.
7. a. b.
And generally the Greeks ascribed their Laws unto the making of Jupiter, as
to their supreme Lawgiuer: as it may be gathered out of Homer: where Achilles
swearing by his Scepter, he says, it is Insigne Praiorum Principum, in iure
populis dicundo, and in custodiendis ex Jove Legibus. The Ensign of the
Grecian Princes, both in judging of their Subjects, and in keeping of their
Laws, received from Jupiter, the chiefest of their gods. So that they thought
a^l their Laws to draw their first original from Jupiter, as from their first
Author; though conveyed to particular Countries, and Cities, by the ministry
of other inferior gods. But unto gods they all ascribe them: the wiser sort,
unto the Author; the simpler, unto the Messenger. Whereupon Architas calls
the gods, parents, ac Principes scriptarum Legum: The Lords and parents of the
written Laws. Stobaeus Sermon. 41. p. 261.
And therefore, Stobaeus. Sermon. 39. p. 229.
says Hierocles, that we ought to observe the Laws of our Country, as if
they had in them a kind of divinity. Oportet Leges Patriae, tanquam alteros
Deos obseruare. Plato lib 1. De Leg. p. 746.
For, as Plato truly notes in the very beginning of his Book. De Legibus: It
is Deus. et n^n Homo, qui legum condendarum est causa. It is not Man, but God,
that is the true cause of the making of good Laws. Which honor is ascribed to
God himself, even in the holy Scripture: Pro. 8. 15.
By me Kings reign, and Princes decree Justice, that is, make just Laws.
Injustice they may decree of themselves (and there is a woe pronounced against
such wicked Lawmakers) but they cannot decree Justice, but only by him. So
that, it is truly said in Job: that Nullus ei similis in Legistatoribus: There
is none like unto him, amongst all the Lawgiuers. Nay, he is indeed the only
true Lawgiuer; Job. 36. 22. in. vulgata.
and, in the whole world, there is not another: as the Apostle S. James
plainly testifies unto us: There is but one Lawgiuer, who is able to save,
and to destroy, Ia. 4. 12
and that is he. So that, all other Nations, as well as the Jews, may truly
profess; The Lord is our Judge, Isa^. 33. 22.
and the Lord is our Lawgiuer, or (as it is in the Hebrews) Statute-maker:
Howsoever the Heathen Lawgiuers have robbed the true God of that honor, and
ascribed it falsely unto others. But thus you see, that all Lawgiuers, as it
were, by a compact, have agreed together in this common sense, to ascribe all
their laws, unto the making of their Gods. And therefore, none of them could
possibly be Atheists, at least in outward profession; no not even by their
profession, in that they were Lawgiuers.

Neither could the people that were under them be of any other disposition:
both because of that inward natural instinct, which inforceth every man to
worship some God; and because, by nature also, all Subjects are Imitators of
their rulers; and because again, all rulers praeserue their own Religion by
coerciue Laws: as Josephus instanceth in Socrates, Anaxagoras, Diagoras,
Joseph l. 2* cont. Apion. p. 914.
and Protagoras, all of them severally mulcted for the opinion of their
impieties against the Gods. So that, if any man would not be religious, for
love; yet durst he not be irreligious, for fear.

3 Let us now proceed unto Plutarch's third instance, that is, All
Philosophers believe that There is a God.
unto Philosophers; and see, whether any of them have been Atheists. Wherein
it cannot be denied, but that those infamous persons, who have been noted by
their name, to be Atheists; have, all of them, been, by their profession,
Philosophers. But yet this again may be truly affirmed of them: that,
howsoever some particular men of that profession, may happily have been infected
with Atheism; yet that there was never any Sect or Family of them, but that
it was of a clean contrary profession. There was never any sect of
Philosophers that were professed Atheists: No, nor yet never any, but professed
the clean contrary. And yet, it cannot be dissembled, but that all the
Philosophers have had so infinite auiditie, and appetite of glory; that none of
them could say any thing, though with never so great reason, but that some
other would oppose it, and hold the contrary unto it, were it never so absurd.
Yea, and this fell out, as well among their whole families, as amongst private
persons: the Stoics, perpetually opposing the Epicures; the Peripatetikes,
them both; the Academikes, them all. Insomuch, that their contentions and
digladiatious grew to be so notorious, as made them all ridiculous: as that
bitter scoff of Seneca very notably declares; That, Facilius inter
Philosophos, quam inter horologia convenit: That Philosophers agree together
like Clocks. But yet in this grand point of acknowledging a God, Plus
diuersitatis inu^nias inter Philosophos, quam societatis. Tertul. l. de Anima
cap. 2. p. 262.
there is amongst them all an incredible agreement. Senec. in Ludo, p. 247.
Here, the Clocks strike all together. You may see a Catalogue of all their
opinions, in Tullies first Book of the Nature of the Gods, representing unto
us so notable a discord, in their particular conceits, What this God should be,
that never Clocks iarred more: but yet so great a concord, in their general
opinions, That a God there is, as never Clocks agreed better. There, every man
venteth his own private conceit, what he thought to be his God: No man
denies him, No man adorneth disputation against him, Nay, no man so much as
once doubts of him: No not, even Protagoras himself, if he be rightly
construed: though his words were rackt unto it, and for that cause he exiled.
For he said not, that he doubted, whether there were gods, or no, but, that he
would not, as then, dispute, whether there were any, or no? De Diuis, neque vt
sint, neque vt non sint, habeo dicere: giving only a reason of his silent
praetrition. Cic. l. 1. De. Not. Deor. p. 192*
And therefore, Arnob. l. 8. cont. Gent. p. 748. Cap. 8. in sin.
Caecilius does secretly perstringe the Athenians injustice, and excuses
Protagoras, that he did consulte potius, quam profane disputare: He spoke more
warily, then wickedly. So that, all these recited do affirm, There is a God.
There is no man says of God, as some do of the Soul, Nihil esse omnino Deum,
et hoc esse totum inane nomen: Cic. Tusc. p. 111
That God is a thing of nothing, and that the name of God is but an empty name:
but they all do acknowledge both the Name and the Thing.

Now look into these four several sects of Philosophers, which are the most
noted, and noble of them; and you shall see, that they do all notably agree in
this, though in very few things else. Plato, the father of the Academikes,
Plato lib. 10. De Leg. p. 870.
not only affirms, Eusebius. l. 11. De pr^parat. c. 6. p. 229.
that There is a God; Ex. 33. 11. Just. Mart. Orat. ad Gent. To. 1. p. 45.
but he also confirms it, by invincible reasons. Yea, and every where almost,
he speaks so divinely, of Gods divine Majesty, that (as Eusebius reports)
he was called Moses Atticus, that is, the Athenian Moses: as if he had seen
God face to face, as is reported of the Hebrew Moses, as Justin Martyr notes.
Plato perinde atque coelitus descenderit, atque ea quae sursum sunt accurate
didicerit, ac peruider it omnia; Summum Deum, in ignea essentia esse dicit:
Plato, as if he were newly dropped down out of heaven, and had there learned
exactly those things that are above; he makes his God to be of a fiery
substance. Yea and even therein also he agrees in some sort, with Moses: The
Lord thy God is a consuming fire.

Aristotle, the Father of the Peripateticks, affirms, Arist. l. de Mundo. To.
2. p. 1566.
not only That there is a God; but also, that he is both the Maker, and the
Savior of the world. Deus, sine dubio, Seruator omnium est, et Parens eorum,
quae in mundo conficiuntur: God, without all doubt, is both the Conseruer, and
Creator of all things in the world. A most divine saying of an Heathen man! And
many other the like there be throughout that whole Book. Which has occasioned
some men, Aristotle's Book De Mundo.
to doubt of the credit and authority of it, as not being truly his; grounding
upon but slight and very weak conjectures. I may not stand to discuss upon
every Authority: whether the Book then alleged be the Authors properly? For
then we should have so many, and so great digressions, as would turn to be
transgressions. And therefore in all places, I take them, as I find them,
without any curious or strict examination: knowing, that even those Books,
which are thought to be supposed; yet are, for the most part, both ancient, and
learned: and that, if they appeared in the name of their own Authors, they
would be no less approved, then they be now in theirs, upon whom they be
fathered: as I could plentifully instance. Yea, and Viues coniectureth, Lod.
Viues in l. 4. Aug. De. Ciuit. Dei. c. 2. 10. 5. p. 222.
even in this present instance, that though it were not Aristotle's; yet it
might be Theophrastus his. But, both Lucius Apuleius, in his Book De Mundo;
and Augustinus Eugubinus, asserteth it directly, unto Aristotle himself: Yea,
and Eugubinus affirms it to have been, Lucius Apul. l. de Mundo. p. 2.
as it were, Aug Eugu^. l. 4. De peremi Philosoph. c. 4. p. 176. 177.
his Retractation. Wherein he has both recognized, and epitomized all his own
former writings; reforming his own errors: and reporting both the opinions of
other Philosophers more truly; and his own more plainly, then in all his
other works. But, howsoever this be: though this book were none of his; yet
does he affirm as much in his Metaphysikes, which are, Arist. lib. 1.
Metaphys. c. 2. To. 2. p. 1372.
without all quaestion, his. For there he says directly, that Deus est rerum
omnium, et cause, et principium: That God is both the cause, and the beginning
of all things. A direct and plain Confession.

So Zeno the Father of the Stoics (as Tully expressly calls him) does not
only believe, That there is a God; but also, That there is but one only God:
and that he is the Maker and Creator of the world, who is sometimes called
Men's, sometimes Fate, sometimes Jove, and by diverse such like names. Vnum Deum
esse; Cic. l. 3. de Not. D^or. p. 229.
ipsumque and Mentem, Laert. in vita Zenonis P. 253. 256:
and Fatum, and Iouem, mult^sque alijs appellari nominibus. And then he
proceeds to declare, in what order, this one God created the world. Yea, and,
a little after, he defines God, to be, Animal immortale, rationale, perfectum,
ac beatum; a malo omni remotissimum; prouidentia sua Mundum, and qu^e sunt in
Mundo, administrans omnia. A substance living, everliving, reasonable, perfect,
and blessed; far removed from any evil; ruling, only by his providence,
both all the whole World, and all the things therein contained.

And so likewise Epicurus, Mornaeus lib. De verit. Relig. c. 1. p. 15.
the Father of the Epicures: Qu^m nihil pudendum pudet, tamen Deum negare
pudet: as one very wittily writes of him: Though he were not ashamed of any
shameful thing, yet was he ashamed to deny There is a God: as reckoning this
the greatest shame that can be: because all the whole world affirms the
contrary. Even he (I say) though he deny, that God rules the world; yet does
he not deny, but That there is a God: Nay, he affirms that: accompting it a
less absurdity to have a God that is idle; then to be so idle, as to have none
at all. Their Notion of the gods was, that they were Beati, and Aeterni: sed
nec habere ipsos quicquam negotij, nec exhibere alteri: That they were blessed,
and eternal: neither having any business to do of themselves, nor yet
exhibiting any unto others. Cic. l. 1. de Not. D^or. p. 190.


Thus all the four Patriarchs of the chief Philosophers were fully of one
mind, that there needs must be a God. And Josephus affirms the like of all
the rest. Et Pythagoras, Josephus l. 2. cont. Ap^on. p. 907.
and Anaxagoras, and Plato, and post illos Philosophi Stoici, and paene cuncti
videntur de Diuina sapuisse Natura: Nay, not paene cuncti, but plane cuncti:
Max Tyr. Orat. 29^. 358.
as Maximus Tyrtus affirms: Opiniones Deorum a cunctis Philosophis receptae
sunt. Both Pythagoras, and Anaxagoras, and Plato, and the Stoics* and almost
all the other (nay altogether all the other) have had some under standing of
the Divine Nature. In this point, even the Philosophers themselves are
Christians. Tertul^. ^. 2. cont. Marc^on c. 27. p. 382.
And therefore Tertullian calls God Philosophorum Deum: because they did so
generally, all the sorts of them, confess him.

So that we may truly say with Varro: Ecce, ad nos accedit cana veritas,
Attic^e philosophiae alumna: Behold, the ancient truth comes now directly to
us, even from the Philosophers of Athens: Nonius in voce Canum p. 532.
the very Heathens in this point, agreeing with us Christians. Nay, Christians
themselves agree not so well about many points, even of their own Religion; as
in this point the very Heathens consent and agree with them. Tertul. l. 1.
cont. Marcion. ^. 21. p. 360.
For (as Tertullian observes) Alij de Idolothyto edendo, alij de mulierum
velamento, alij de nuptijs vel repudijs, nonnulli and de spe resurrectionis
disceptabant: de Deo, nemo: Even of professed Christians, some have doubted,
and disputed, of meat offered unto Idols; some of women's vayles and wimples;
some, of marriages and divorces; yea, and some of the hope even of the
Resurrection: but yet none at all of God. No man here makes any doubt, no man
moves any question, no man adorneth any kind of disputation: not only no
Christians amongst themselves; but none of all the Philosophers, Vnus est verus
Deus in quem omnis set siex diuersis opinienibus) secta concurrit. Oros. 16.
Just. 1^. 213. Ovid Metam. l. 3. p. 100.
neither one against another, Iaert. in Pro^^. p. 3.
nor yet any against Christians. They that in all other things are like Cadmus
his men, every one of them killing and striking down another; yet all here
agree together, all fully do consent, in admitting of a God. Yea, and not
only the Philosophers among the Greeks, but even the Magi, in the extremest
East, among the barbarous Indians; and the Druides, in the extreme West, among
the barbarous Gauls: as Laertius observes, Gymnosophistas, ac Druidas,
obscure, ac per sententias philosophari, Colendos Deos -- Magos Deorum vacare
cultui. The Gymnosophists and Druides do teach in obscure sentences; That we
ought to worship God -- Yea and so do the Magi too.

4 And the like consent there is also among all other Arts; as Tyrius Maximus
observes. All Arts do hold, That there is a God. Max. Tyr. Sermon. 1. p. 5.
Si Arts omnes in consilium vcces, iubeasque simul vno decreto, de Substantia
Dei sententiam far; censesne, aut Pictorem, aut statuarium, aut Poetam, aut
Philosophum, diuersa, intellecturos? Sed nec Scytha, nec Graecus, nec Persu,
nec Hyperboreus dissentiet. If thou should call all the Arts unto one
general Council, and bid them speak their mind, as concerning God: do thou
think that the Painter would tell thee one tale, and the Caruer another, the
Poet another, and the Philosopher another? No, they would agree all together.
Yea, there would be amongst them so full a consent, that neither S^ythyan, nor
Grecian nor Persian, nor Hyperborean would dissent. In the first part of which
sentence, you may observe the general consent of all Arts; in the second, of
all Natitions, and nominatim of the Scyth^ans* who have been held for Atheists:
So that in this point, there is an incredible agreement, not only of all
Nations, but also of all Conditions, of all Arts and Professions: who yet agree
in nothing else, as he observes in the same place. Alij tamen aliter de rebus
alijs, nec idem, sed diuersa sentire videntur: vt non modo gens genti, ciuitas
ciuitati, domus domui, viro vir, sed nec quisquam sibi ipsi demum consentiens
sit. Yet diverse men judge diversely in all other matters, insomuch, that not
only no Country agrees with another, but no City with City; no house with
house; no man with man: but in all things almost therebe, Quot homin^s, tot
sententie: So many men, so many minds. Nay more minds then men: ^eren, in
Pho^m Act. 2. (...). 4. p. 218. b.
for every man has many minds almost of every thing: Nec quisquam sibi ipsi
demum consentit: as it follows in that place of Tyrius. Yea, and Augustinus
Eugubinus observes, even of the wisest and learnedest Philosophers, who have
founded their opinions upon the soundest reasons; yet that still they find new
reasons, which make them to forsake their old opinions, and entertain new in
their steads. As Plutarch observes, Aug. Eugub. lib. 4 De pe^en. Phi. los. c.
4. p. 177.
both in Aristotle, Dem^critus, Plut. lib. de virtute Mora^. To. 2. p. 496.
and Chrysippus: Qu^ nonnulla prius sibi probata decreta, absque tumultu,
doloreque, and quidem libenter, dimiserunt. Who did willingly forsake diverse of
those opinions that before were allowed by them, not holding it any disgrace
unto them.

Insomuch, that it may be observed, in the most of them, that they do not
only retract many opinions in their age, which they defended in their youth,
but also, that almost every six or seven years, they betake them unto new
opinions. Which he ascribes, not so much unto the imconstancie of their
judgment; as to a greater experience, and further parefaction of the truth
that reformeth it. But yet, in this one point, of believing there is a God;
there is neither difference of opinion between nation and nation, profession
and profession, person and person; no, nor change of opinion in any singular
man: but, as all men agree in this, in all places; so does every man agree with
himself, at all times; when he is himself, and not, by the violence of
inordinate passion, transported out of himself. Only this change we may
observe: that some men, who in their youth have denied God, have changed their
opinion; and in their age confessed him: as we shall see hereafter, in a
several Chapter. Cap. 13.
But no man, that in his youth confessed God, did ever change his opinion. So
that, though the Philosophers (as it were a kind* of Gentile Pharisees) desire
the pre-eminence, Mat. 23. 6. 7.
and prioritie in all things, and to be the ringleaders into all opinions: Yet
in this one Opinion, That there is a God, they are content to be followers, and
therein to subscribe, even unto the poorest and ignorantest Artizans: Who,
though of infinite diversity in their trades and professions; yet have no
diversity at all in their judgments and opinions, as concerning this one
point, to believe, There is a God.

And this may evidently be seen by this one observation; that there is almost
none of them, The Tutela^ gods of several Arts. Cap. 4. Sect. 5.
no not even the very meanest, but, beside the general gods of their
countries, who were worshipped by them all, they had some particular gods of
their own, Chp. 4. Sect. 5.
whom they worshipped in special, as the Patrons, and Tutelar gods of their
Arts. Senators and Counselors had their Consus* Plut. in vit. Romuli. p. 54.
who did in consultando iuuare. Mercurius praeest Sapientiae et eloquio.
I^mblic. l. De Myster. c. 1. p. 1.
Poets, Arnob. l. 3. co^t. Gent. p. 581.
their Muses; Lactant. l. 1. ^. 20 p. 51. 54.
Orators, Varro. l 6. p. 52.
their Mercury; Horat. l. 1. Epist. 16. p. 114. ^.
Physicians, their AEsculapius; diuiners, their Apollo; Merchants, their
Mercury again; Soldiors, their Mars; Husbandmen, their Pan; Smiths, their
Vulcan; Mariners, their Portunus; Shepherds, their Pales; Gardiners, their
Flora; Bakers, their Jupiter Pistor; Costermongers, their Pomona; Yea, and even
Thieves, their Lauerna. -- Pulchra Lauerna da mihi fallere: Lady Lauerna,
teach me to steal. And so likewise, in those Arts, that are exercised by
women: Midwiues, had their Lucina; Nurses, their Cunina; Maidens, their Festus
in voce Ancilla. p. 251. Aug. lib. 4. c. 8. De Civit. Dei. Item c. 11. and^.
Arnol. l. 3. cont. Gent* ^. 581. and^ Tertul* Apolog. c. 46. p. 76.
Aucula. And diverse such like, which it were tedious to reckon up: but yet are
reckoned, by S. Augustine; and by Arnobius, who sets down both their names,
and their offices: which, even without his interpretation, might well be
gathered by their names. So that, there was no Art or profession, amongst all
the Heathen, but they had both their general and their special gods. And
therefore none of them could possibly be Atheists. Much less could those
Artificers that are professed Christians: of whom Tertullian truly writes,
that, Deum quilibet opifex Christianus et inuenit, et ostendit. That every
Christian being a Christian, can easily both find out and show forth God.
Besides, it is a thing that is worthy the noting, that, of all the Arts in the
World (though there be innumerable of them) yet there is not any one that is
founded upon Atheism. No Art is grounded upon this supposition, that There is
no God; No Art dissolved, by believing, there is a God. But many Arts and
professions are grounded upon the contrary supposition; that There is a God:
and presently dissolved, by believing, There is no God; as all Priests, and
Prophets, Diuiners and Sacrificers, and all those other Arts, which either
depend upon Temples, or Altars. All which as they have their immediate
foundation, in men's believing, That there is a God: So have they their
immediate dissolution, 2 King. 10. 25.
in believing There is no God. As we may see in Baals Priests; it being once
believed, that Baal was no God; you see how his Priests were all presently
destroyed. And so likewise, when by S. Paul's preaching, it began to be
believed, Act. 19. 24. 25. 26. 27.
that Diana was no goddess; in what a fear was Demetrius, and the rest of his
Siluer-Smiths, that their Art would be dissolved? So that, there is no Art,
which either has his being, by believing there is no God; or, which loses his
being, by believing there is a God: but there be many Arts, which both have
their being, by believing there is a God: and which lose their being, by
believing there is none. And therefore no Artist (as an Artist) is fit to be an
Atheist: because religion and piety is the very maintainer of many Arts
immediately; and of all the rest mediately. For all Arts have their very being,
upon the coalition of humane society: which if it were dissolved, all Arts must
(by consequent) of necessity perish with it. And perish it surely would, if
religion did not hinder it. For the chiefest tie, and bond of all humane
society, is neither reason, nor speech, nor indigency; but religion, and piety.
Qua sublata, confusio ac perturbatio vitae sequitur (says Lactantius) Take but
away Religion, and there will follow in man's life, great disorder and
confusion. Lactant* L. De Ira Dei. c. 8 p. 453.
Nay the Orator goes further: Cic. l. 1. De Not. Deor. p. 184.
Haud scio, an pietate aduersus Deos sublata, fides etiam, et societas generis
humani, et vna excellentissima virtus, Iusti^ia tollatur. I know not (says he)
whether if piety, and religion toward God, were removed, both faith and
justice, yea, and even society amongst men, would not presently be dissolved.
So that, all Arts whatsoever, depending upon society, and society it self
depending upon religion; it follows that no Artificer whatsoever, can fall
into Atheism; but he needs must dig up his own foundation. Ficinus Argum. l.
4. Plat. de Legib. p. 782.
And therefore Ficinus sets down this position, that, Nulla ars aduersari
Deo potest: That there is not any Art, that is opposed unto God. No Art can
resist his working; much less refute his being. And thus you see the second
branch of Tullies assertion verified; that as there is Nulla Gens; Cic. l. 1.
de Not. Deor. p. 190.
so there is nullum genus hominum: There is no sort, no order, no condition of
men: neither Jews, nor Gentiles, Greeks, nor Barbarians, Learned, nor
Unlearned, Civil, nor Rude; None at all (I say) from the highest Ruler to the
poorest Artificer, but they are inwardly persuaded, that There is a God. So
that (as Saint Augustine affirms in another like truth) Hoc ita manifestum
est, vt nulla huic doctorum paucitas, nulla indoctorum turba dissentiat: Aug.
l. de v^ra Relig. c. 14. To. 1. p. 686.
This is truth so manifest, that neither the paucity of the learned, nor the
multitude of the unlearned doc dissent from it. And therefore, let us now
proceed unto his third; that, as there is no sort of men, so there is no Man.

CHAP. 6.
That there is no particular person in the World, but that (in some degree) he
believes, There is a God. 2. No Swearer. 3. No Blasph^mer. 4. No Idolater.

AS I find it observed, by diverse of the learned; that it is a common
Principle, All several men do believe There is a God.
in every people, to believe, There is a God: so is it likewise observed by
them; that this Principle has his force, not only in all Nations, and in all
sorts of m^n; but also in all persons, that live amongst them. And this may
evidently be seen, Cap. 3. Sect. 2.
in the most of those sentences, which before I have alleged, from the
generality of this natural impression; that they extend and stretch
themselves, not only to all Nations, but also to all persons, upon the face of
the earth. Aristotle says, that it is haereditaria fama, ^ortalium omnium;
omnia and a Deo, and per Deum, nobis esse constituta. Arist. l. de Mu^. do To.
2. p. 1566.
It is an haereditarie tradition which is common amongst all men; that all
things are praedecreed unto men by God. Mark, mortalium omnium: common unto
All men. Tullie says that Nemo omnium tam immanis, cuius mentem non imbuer it
Deorum opinio. Cic. l. 1. Tus^. p. 212.
Amongst men there is not any so savage and barbarous, whose soul is not
possessed with an opinion of the Gods. And again in the same place: Omnes,
esse vim and naturam Diuinam, arbitrantur: All men have a persuasion, that
there is a certain power and nature Divine. Who can be excepted, out of these
two so absolute generalities, of Nemo, and Omnes? of No man, and All men? So
Clemens Alexandrinus: Clem. Alex. l. 5. Str^^. p. ^74.
Dei manifestatio erat apud omnes, naturalis. There is a natural manifestation
of God unto all men. Ar^^b. l. 1. cont. Ge^t. p. 476
So likewise Arnobius: Quisquamne est hominum, qui non, cum Dei notione, diem
primae natiuitatis intrauerit? Is there any amongst men, that brought not in
with him a notion of God even with his first entrance into the world? So Beda:
Beda. In Psalm. 58. To. 8. p. 741.
Naturaliter omnis homo habet cognitionem Dei. Every man has naturally some
knowledge of the Deity. So likewise Prosper: Prosper. l. de. Prouiden. p. 180.
Esse omnes sensere Deum; nec de fuit vlli,
Authorem Natura docens. --
All men have found a God to be;
Nor ever wanted Nature,
To teach this Truth; that only He,
Of every thing is Author.
Now unto these Testimonies, alleged before (though to another purpose) I may
add diverse others, as yet not alleged; as namely that of Sibilla: Omnibus en
patet is, clarusque and apertus inerrans.
Lo God, so clear* so known, so open does lie,
That he does enter into every eye.
And that likewise of Aratus, cited also in the same book, by Clemens
Alexandrinus: Clem. Alex. l. 5. Strom. p. 280. P. 277.
A Jove principium: assiduis quem laudibus omnes
Concelebrant homines: for a sunt Iouis omnia plena.
Compita cum pagis, Cap. 4. Sect. 3.
omnes and cum aequore portus.
Begin with God, whose praises All Men sing;
All Cities, Streets, all Villages of Him
Are full; All Seas, Shores, Havens, every thing.


MARK: Omnes
Concelebrant Homines -- All celebrate his praise.


So likewise that of Ennius. Cic. l. 2. de Not. D^or. p. 201.
Aspice hoc sublime candens, quem inuocant omnes, Iouem.
Behold this bright and lofty sky;
Here all Men pray to Jove most high.


Mark: Quem inuocant Omnes: To whom All men direct their Prayers. Yea, and
this he spoke, assensu omnium, as is noted in the same place, that is, with the
general assent of all men. And yet he called him there both Iouem, and
Dominatorem rerum, and omnia motu regentem: and patrem Diuumque Hominumque; and
praesentem ac praepotentem Deum: Both the great God Jupiter, the great Ruler of
all matters, the only Mouer of all things: the Father both of Gods and Men;
yea, and himself, both a present, and a potent God. All which high Titles he
ascribes unto God, with all men's general applause and consent: affirming, in
the same place, that God is as clear and as evident as the Sun: and adding,
that, Hoc qui dubitet, haud sane intelligo, cur non idem, sol sit, an nullus
sit, dubitare possit: That he, which doubts, whether there be a God, may,
with as great reason, doubt; whether there be a Sun. So clear does that
Orator make the matter unto all men. Yea, and even profane Lucian, L^c^an. in
Iou^ Trag^* d^. p. 210.
though he reprove this general opinion; yet is forced to confess it; Omnes
homines and Gentes turpiter decipiuntur, Deos esse existimantes: All persons
and nations are foully deceived in believing there be Gods. Reproving it as the
error, not only of all Nations, but also of all Persons: but yet confessing,
that it is an opinion, which is commou unto all of them: though in (...) show,
for the present, he would seem to condemn it.

2 And ^et there be three several sorts of men, who may seem (it any other)
the most likely to deny him, All Swearers do believe There is a God.
because they so little honor him. The first are, Common swearers, who use to
rend and to tear him. The second are; Blasp^emers, who use to curse and revile
him. And the third, Idolaters, who abase and dishonor him, by ascribing divine
honor unto an Idol, their own Creature. These three (^xcept the Atheist, for
whom I do reserve a special Treatise by himself) are the most direct enemies
that God indeed has. But yet none of all these, if they duly be considered,
can justly be numbered, as denyers of God. For indeed, all their sins are
absolutely grounded upon this supposition; that There is a God: without which
they were no sins. For, how should either swearing, or blaspheming, or
idolatrizing, be sin; if there were not a God, against whom they were
committed? Nay, all these several vices, considered of themselves (though not
as sins, but as actions) yet are done upon supposall, that There is a God,
God is the very object of every one of them: as we may evidently see, if we
will severally examine them. For, first, as conc^rning swearing; it is
Plutarch's opinion; that Oaths do as necessarily presuppose There is a God;
as either Temples, or Sacrifices, or inuocations. Vrbem, Templis, Dijsque*
carentem; Plut. cont. Colo^. To. 3. Mor. p. 532.
quae precibus, Iureiurando, or aculo non vtatur, n^^o vnquam vidit. A City
without Temples, without gods, without prayers, without Oaths, without
Oracles, was never seen by any man: reckoning all these (even Oaths amongst
the rest) as equally belonging unto God: and all of them presuming, that there
must needs be one; else should they have no being.

And this point, as concerning Oaths, may yet further be confirmed, by diverse
other Arguments: as namely, first, by the very definition of an Oath, delivered
Aristotle, Arist. Rheto. ad ^lex. c. 17. To. 2. p. 1038.
that Iusiurandum est cum diuina veneratione dictio probationis expers. That an
Oath is, an affirmation above all probation, pronounced with a fear and
reverence of God. He makes an Oath the highest kind of proof: Heb. 6. 16.
as the Apostle does likewise, when he says, that an oath is an ending of all
strife, Secondly, the same appears by the form of an Oath: which a calling
of God himself to witness. So S. Paul, God is my witness, whom I serve: So
he again. I witness before God, that I lie not.

Yea and this form the Heathans held, as well as the Christians. Romans 1. 9.
Gal. 1. 20. Plaut. Menech. Act. 5. Sce. 2. p. 446.
So Plautus. -- summum Iovem, Plaut. in Cap^. Act. 2. Sce. 3. p. 159.

Deosque detestor.
Itestifie,
The God most high.


So again. Id vt scias, louem supremum, testem laudo.
To make thee well assured of this,
The highest God my witness is.


So Tullie. Est Iusiurandum affirmatio religiosa. Cic. l. 3. Off 15. p. 390.
Quod autem affirm^tur quasi D^o test promiseris, id tenendum est: An Oath is
not a civil, but a religious affirmation. Now, that which we promise, calling
God to witness, ought faithfully and religiously to be performed of us.
Whereby it appears, that the common and usual form of their Oaths, was to
call God to witness. Thirdly, Heathens and Christians have honored their
Oaths, in calling their swearing, an Oath of God. Cic. vbi supra^
So Ennius: O fides alma, ipta pinnis, and iusiurandum Iovis:
O uncorrupted faith, mounting with heavenly wings:
Jove's sacred Oath before his Throne it brings.


So Moses: Exodus 22. 11.
An Oath of the Lord shall be between them. The one of them calls it, an
Oath of Jove; the other of Jehovah. Because the Infidels do use to swear by
their false gods, the faithful by the true one: as may be evidently seen in
the Oaths of Iaacob and Laban. Genesis 31 53. 4
But yet, both of them swear by that, which they esteemed for their God.
Fourthly, the same appears by that Ceremony, which was commonly used, in
taking of an Oath; to lay his hand upon the Altar, as acknowledging that he
spoke in the presence of God: and that he offered up the inward truth of his
soul, upon the Altar of God. This Ceremony Tullie mentions, in his Oration
pro L. Flacco: where he says of Falcidius Cic. Orat. (...) Flacco. p. 346.
(as if his name had been Falsidicus) that Huic, si aram tenens iurar^t, nemo
crederet: That no man would believe him, although he should swear, holding the
very Altar. So Plautus: Plaut. in Rudent. Act. 5. Sec. 2. p. 692.
Tene Aram hanc-Deiura.
Hold the Altar here,
Let Us see thee swear.
Whereby it appears, that it was a common ceremony amongst the Romans, to
take hold upon the Altar, when they solemnly swear. Unto which Roman custom
there seems to be a kind of allusion, in the Gospel of S. Matthew: where our
Savior Christ reproves the Doctrine of the Pharisees, for making it a light
matter, to swear by the Altar. Where the Greek Text has (...), and the
vulgar Latin, Mat. 23. 18. 5
in Altars: Whosoever swears in the Altar, or upon the Altar. Fifthly, the
same appears, by that great Religion, which even the very Heathens have
placed in Oaths: yea, and that both on the part of him that takes it, and of
him that exacteth it. First, for the swearer^: they utterly detested him for a
villain, that under the religion of an Oath, ^^nophon l. 2. D^ Cyri expedit.
p. 293. 1. Ioh. 1. 10.
durst avouch any false thing, as violating, and Deorum and Hominum fidem: both
the truth of God and Men: as it is censured by Xenophon: making God himself a
liar: as auouching of him, as a witness unto their lie. Yea, and they placed
so sacred a Religion in an Oath, that they held it a profaneness, but even to
dally with it; as bringing the most holy thing into contempt: insomuch, that
they condemned Socrates unto death, nominatim for this (among his other crimes)
quia nova iuramenta iurauit (as Josephus Joseph. l. 2. cont. Apion. p. 914.
reports) because he used to swear by unlawful Oaths. For their usual
swearing was, by Jupiter and the Gods: as appears in Plautus. Plaut. Menech.
Act. 5. Sc^ 7 p. 455.
Per Iovem adiuro patrem: Ibid. Act. 4. S^e. 2. p. 439.

I swear by God our father. Plato in Hippia maiore. p. 115.



And again: Per Iouem, Deosque omnes adiuro: I swear by love and all the
other Gods.

But Socrates was wont to swear by a Dog: per Canem: as appears in Plato.
Which profanation of an Oath, they interpreted, as an impiety against their
Religion: and therefore, that (in piety) they oug^t to condemn him. And, as
they reposed great Religion in an oath, in (...) of the Actor: so did they
likewise, respect of the Exactor: accounting it a kind of profaneness in any
man, Stob^us. sermon. 27. p. 194.
when an Oath was orderly performed, not to give credit to it: as Stobaeus
collecteth out of Antiphanes: -- Cum aliquis contemnit iurantem*
Tum ille mihi Deos ipsos contemnere videtur.
Whos'ere he be, contemnes a man, when taking solemn Oath:
He does contemn, not man, but God; nor God and man; them both.
And therefore, Menechmus, in the fore-alledged place, when he had taken his
Oath: Per Iovem, Deosque omnes adiuro, Vxor.
I swear by Jove and all the Gods, good wife, Plaut. Men^ch. Act. 4. S^e. 2.
p. 439.

He adds immediately: Satin' hoc est tibi?
Let this suffice, for ending of our strife.
Pleading, that having so religiously protested, he ought to be believed. For,
as the reverence of God ought to adact the Swearer, to the speaking of the
truth: so likewise, the Hearer, to the believing of the truth. Heb. 6. 16.
An Oath ought to be the stinting of all strife.

Sixthly, the same appears by a secret Religion, which enters into the
Swearer himself, even in the taking of his Oath. And that is twofold: the one
toward men; the other toward God. Both observed by Soph^cles, in one and the
same sentence. Apposito iureiurando, cautior and diligentior
Animus fit. Stobaeus vbi s^pra.
A duobus enim sibi tum cavet;
Et, ne laedat amicos; et, ne peccet in Deos.
Man's very soul, by sacred oath adiur'd,
More wary proves, and circumspect by ods:
For then he dreads this double forfeyture,
T offend his friends, and sin against the gods.


Seventhly, the same appears, because that every Oath has a secret
execration annexed to it, and a curse against the swearer, if he swear not the
truth, For (as Plutarch truly notes) Omne iusiurandum in ex^crationem peri^rij
desinit. Plut. Quest. Romans 44. Tom. 1. Mor. p. 575.
Est autem execratio res tristis, and mali ominis: Every Oath (says he) does
end in a latent execration against perjury. Now every execration is a very
heavy and discomfortable thing, and f^ll of evil forecasting, and
signification. And this we may see in the form of diverse Oaths, recorded
both in Scriptures, and in Heathen Writers. We read oftentimes in Scriptures.
God do so, and more also: implying a tacit and latent imprecation, 1. Sa. 14.
14. 1. Sa. 25. 22.
if they do not thus and thus. So in Plautus:

Quid si fallis? Ly. Tum me faciat quod vult magnus Jupiter. Plaut. in Aulular.
Act. 4. Sce. 10. p. 138.
It may well be rendered by that phrase of Scripture; then God do so and more
unto me. Yea and the Romans in their solemn Oaths; were wont to use this
ceremony, as Rhodiginus observes out of Servius. They used to throw a stone
out of their hand, with this execration: Si sciens fallo, Co^l. Rhodigin. l.
21. c. 15. p. 981.
qui me despicit (salua vrbe ac art) bonis eijciat, vt ego hunc lapidem. If I
willingly deceive thee; then God that is above me (preserving the City) cast
me out from all good men, as I cast out this Stone. And the like execrationis
also pronounced by, Abigail, against the enemies of David. The soul of thine
enemies shall God cast out, as out of the ^iddle of a sling. 1. Sa^^. 25. 29.
And so God also did unto impious Capanaeus; who boasting that God himself
should not be able to hinder him, he was presently stricken with lightening, and
cast from the top of the wall, as it were out of the middle of a sling. For so
Euripides expresses his falling. -- a scalis autem
Deijciebatur, velut e funda. Eurip. (...) 154.

He was cast down the Scale with such a fling,
As if a Stone were thrown from out a Sling.


By all which weighty Reason, both out of the Heathen writers, and out of Holy
Scriptures, it evidently appears, that all men in their swearing, both
presume, There is a God; and that he truly hears, whatsoever is spoken; and
that he will revenge him, of the impiety of those men, that by their false
swearing dishonor his holy name. And therefore, no Swearer can be possibly an
Atheist, even by the very nature of his own proper act, if he thinks as he
swears. For the very act of swearing, presupposes there is a God, not only
in the inten^ion of the exactour, but also in the extension of the performer,
be he whosoever; yea though the veriest Atheist, that ever liu^d in the world.
For, though in his heart, he may (happily) believe there is no God: yet, in his
act, he would seem to believe, there is one: even by his action of swearing,
he would have other men to believe, that he believes, there is one. Because,
the congruitie of very Reason requires, that he, which swears by God, should
certainly believe, that There is a God, to by sworn by: or else he swears
vainly. Nay, he that swears by God, if he think that there is none,
disableth the very force of his own asseueration For, no man would ever
swear, but to be the better believed for his Oath. But, he that desires to be
believed for his swearing by God, if he think, There is no God, is as utterly
absurd, as if he should desire, that men should believe him, when he professes
before hand, that he swears by nothing: and, as impu^ent, as if he should
request them; I pray you to believe me, for I swear (By nothing) that this I
say is true. His just reward in swearing by nothing, should be to be believed
in nothing. Thus Swearers (as you see) if they properly be Swearers, they
cannot properly be Atheists: the very action of swearing, destroying directly
the opinion of Atheism. And therefore, Aristoph. in Nubibus. Act. 1. S^e. 3.
p. 168.
whereas Socrates, in Aristophanes, professed, that he believed not the usual
gods: Strepsiades presently replied, Quomodo iuratis igitur? An per numm^s
ferreos, si^ut Bizantij? How then do thou swear, if thou believe not the
gods? Do thou swear, like a Bizantian, by their iron pence? Accompting it
most justly, for a very gross absurdity, that any man should outwardly swear
by the gods, that inwardly believes, that there is no God: or, that any man
should swear by any thing, but only by God. And therefore, when Toxaris the
Scythian swear, Per Ventum, et Acinacem: M^esippus derided him for swearing by
such things, Lucian in Toxari. p. 192.
as were no gods: but he defended himself, that among the Scythians, those two
were held for gods. So that it appears by the concurring opinion both of the
reprehender, and of the reprehended, that nothing is to be sworn by but only
God And consequently that all Swearers must presuppose There is a God. All
Blasphemers do believe There is a God.


3 And the like may be also said of Blasphemers, that is, of such as are
Reuilers or Cursers of God: for unto that use only the word is now restrained:
as S. Augustine has observed: A^g. l. 2. De moribus Manichaeo rum. ^. 11. To.
1. p. 75^.
Est blasphemia, cum aliqua mala dicuntur de bonis. Sed iam vulgo Blasphemia
non accipitur, nisi mala verba de Deo dicere. De hominibus namque dubitari
potest: Deus vero fine controuer sia bonus est. Blasphemy is to speak any
evil of good. But now commonly, Blasphemy is to speak only evil of God.
For of Men, we may doubt, whether they be evil or good: But of God we cannot
doubt, but that he must needs be good. So that, the word Blasphemy has two
significations: the one a lardger, which is to speak evil of good: the other
a stricter, which is to speak evil of God. Against the first of those
Blasphemies, God has pronounced a woe: Woe unto them that speak good of
evil, and evil of good: Isay: 5. 20. Ex. 22. 28.
but against the second of them, he has ordained a Law: Thou shall not rail
upon the gods: no not, upon the earthly gods, much less upon the heavenly. Yea
and that under a penalty: Whosoever cu^seth his God, he shall bear his
iniquity, that is, He shall be surely punished, Leuit. 24 15. 16.
for so the Chaldee Paraphrase reads it: Sustinebit poenam suam: Yea and that
severely too. For it follows, in the next words, He that Blasphemeth the name
of the Lord, shall be put to death; the Congregation shall stone him. The
execution of which Law, we may read in the same place: where the son of the
Isra^litish woman was stoned for blaspheming; giving occasion very justly, of
the making of that notable Law against Blasphemy. Wherein we may observe, that
the Blasphemer was no Atheist. And that, by two reasons: the one drawn from
his person; the other from his action. For first, for his person: he is said to
have been the son of an Israelitish woman, and of an Egyptian: by neither
of which parents he could be instituted in Atheism. For first, Leuit. ^4* 10.
for the A^gyptians; they were so far from being Atheists, that they were of
all other the most palpable Polytheists. And for the Israelites; though they
were the worshippers of an invisible God; yet had he showed amongst them so
many visible signs of his omnipotent power and goodness, as that he was
confessed, even by the very Heathens: and therefore could not be denied by any
of the Israelites. Blaspheme him they might (as this Israelite in his fury,
Josh. 2. 10. 11.
and impatience did) but deny him they could not; the evidence of his
wondrous works was so great. And this is the first reason, why he could not
be an Atheist. The second is this: that this Law against Blasphemy, being made
by occasion of this Blasphemers fact, and forbidding only that, which he had
committed, does evidently show that he was not an Atheist. For then, the Law
would have run against the denying of God: Whosoever denies God, let him be
stoned. But, because this man's sin was not a denying unto God a being (which is
the sin of Atheism) but a cursing of that God whom he believed to be;
therefore the law was made, not against the denying, but against the cursing of
God: He that blasphemeth the name of God, shall be stoned. And therefore,
blaspheming does not suppose a denying, nor the blashemer, upon neccessitie, to
be a denyer of God. Nay, indeed, it directly supposes the contrary: it
supposes there is a God: As may plainly be collected, both by the beginning
and the end of that irreligious passion, which begets in them the sin of
blaspheming. For, first, from the beginning of their passion: it is a sudden
anger conceived against God, upon a supposition, of either some evil received
from him, or of some good denied by him. For blasphemare (as Aquinas defines
it) est contumeliam vel conuitium infer, Aquin. 2. 2. quaest. 13. Art. 1. p.
29. ^
in iniuriam Creatoris: To blaspheme, is, to offer, either contumely, or
obloquie, by way of dishonor, unto the Creator. Which necessarily supposes,
that he needs must have a being. Otherwise, he must needs confess, that he
is angry with Nothing: and so might, Homer. l. 9. Odyss. p. 66.
as justly be derided, as that foolish Polyphemus, who raued for that wrong
that was done to him by Nullus. Again, the same may be collected, from the
end of their passion: which is, desperately to provoke God to be angry with
them: because they before have been angered by him, and so to quitte him with
his own. Which likewise must needs infer, that they think he has a being.
For, otherwise, they should be as utterly absurd, as if they should endeavor
to move Nothing, unto anger; spending all their railing, as foolishly against
him, as the Dogs do their barking, when they howl against the Moon. And
therefore it follows not, that though some men do Blaspheme, and rail
against God; that therefore they think that there should he none: but rather,
that there is one: Which they manifestly acknowledge, even in their very
railing; unless, they will make themselves to be known for noted-fooles. Who
would rail upon a thing, which they think to have no being? Yea, and diverse
of the Heathens were so far from supposing, that railing and blaspheming
should infer, there is no God; that they made it the essential worship of
diverse of their gods. For Nazianzene reports it of the Lindianes, Nazianz.
Orat. 47. p. 770.
that they worshipped their Hercules, Plin. l. 2. c. 7. P. 3.
only with railings: Deum illum, non alio, quam conuitiorum et maledictorum
honor, afficientes: And Pliny reports the same, of their goddess Fortune:
Conuitijs colitur. She is worshipped with railing and blaspheming. And
therefore Blasphemy does not infer impiety: Nor, that he which blasphemeth
God, must of necessity deny God. For, of necessity he grants him, though
of impotencie he blaspheme him. So that, neither common Swearers, nor yet
Blasphemers, be Atheists. That they be great offenders, it cannot be denied:
but that they be Atheists, it cannot be affirmed. Their sin is not Atheism:
it is of another kind. The Blasphemer, is not Atheus, but rather Antitheus: as
Lactantius speaks. And his fault is not Atheism, Lactant. l. 2. c. 9. p. 103.
or lack of religion; but outrage against the true Object of religion. Which
yet (in a large acception) may be called Irreligion: though it be not a
privation of all religion; because it is an impugning of the true religion.
For, as Tertullian affirms of the Romans: Non modo n^gligendo, quin insuper
expugnando verum Deum, Tertul. Apologet c. 24. p. 54.
committitis crimen verae irreligio fitatis: Not only by neglecting, but also
by oppugning him that is the true God, you truly incur the crime of
Irreligion.

4 Let us now come to Idolaters: which is the third of our instances: and see,
All Idolaters do believe, That there is a God.
whether they can be numbered as Atheists. But that indeed they cannot, their
very profession is against it. For what can be more distant, then Polytheisme,
and Atheism? then impiety, and idolatry? I mean privative impiety, which
depriueth men wholly, of all sense of Religion. Idolaters be Polytheists and
therefore not Atheists. They worship many gods: and therefore they cannot
deny, that there is a God. Nay they must needs confess one, that admit many.
They cannot exclude one, that confess many. And therefore, (as I said before,
of Swearers, and Blasphemers) so may I now, of Idolaters: that they are taught,
by their profession to deny and renounce Atheism; and by it strictly tied, to
believe There is a God. As we may evidently see, in all the several degrees of
Idolatry. For, would a man ever worship, either the Sun, or the M^one, or the
Stars; as did the most Nations both of Greeks and Barbarians (which diverse
of the Heathens have confessed to be but Creatures) but that he is persuaded,
Plato in Cratil^. p. 313.
that There is a God? Plato in Civilly. p. 205.
Surely, he never would. But it may be alleged; that happily, the glory and
beauty of these Creatures prevailed more with men, Vniuersum hoc Deus ipse
regit alque rotat. Item Aristoteles.
to occasion them to worship them; then did the strength of this inward
conclusion. For much is insinuated in the book of Wisdom: where he both
reports, and reproves this opinion: Cic. l. 2. de Not. Deor. p. 215. Haec
tanta opera Deorum sun^.
and yet partly excuses those, that were deceived by them; though not a toto,
yet a ta^to: that though it be a great fault, to worship any thing but God: yet
that it is a less fault, to worship those Creatures, that are of Gods making;
t^en to worship those Idols, that are of man's making. But, to take away this
excuse, Wis. 13. 2, 3, 4, 6, 7. 8, 9, 10.
which is grounded upon their beauty; would a man ever worship the Fire, the
Water, the Earth, and the Air (as the Persians did) but upon this persuasion,
that, There is a God? These be not of such blazing beauties. But it may be said
again: that, though not the beauty; yet the commodity, Strabo. l. 15. p. 525.
which men receive by these things, Cic. ^. 1. de Not. D^or. p. 200.
were the chiefest inducements, to consecrate them for gods. For, that was
Prodicus his opinion (at the least his relation) That whatsoever thing was
profitable unto the life of man, might justly be reckoned, as his God.
Therefore to take away this Objection also: Would a man ever worship a Wolf,
Plutarch l. de Iside, To. 2. Mor. p. 209. 210.
or a Crocodile, as the Egyptians did, but that he is persuaded; That there
is a God? These be not things of profit. But yet, even for these things,
something may be said: namely, that, though it were not the hope of any profit
by them; Plutarch l. 1. de Placitis Philosoph. c. 6. To. 2. Mor. p. 13.
yet was it the fear of receiving hurt from them, that caused men to worship
them. A. Gellius l. 5. c. 12. p. 82. ^.
For I^em Plinius l. 2. c. 7. p. 2. Itaque nomina etc.
as they had their good Gods, whom they worshipped for love: so had they their
evil gods, whom they worshipped for fear: Deos quosdam vt prodessent,
celebrant; quosdam ne obessent, placabant: says A^ Gellius. They did worship
some gods, to receive some profit by them; and they served others, to escape
evil from them. Well, be it so. Yet hereby it appears, that, even the very
Heathen, in worshipping things of so diverse natures, were inwardly persuaded in
their minds; that the nature of God was glorious, and therefore to be
honored; liberal, and therefore to be loved; powerful, and therefore to be
feared: which manifestly argues, that they believed, there was a God. But, to
remove all those Objections at once, wherein those forenamed considerations,
may seem to be the ground of their Religions; and, to instance where none of
all these can be found, but where only the hidden sense of this inward
conclusion, that There is a God, does carry the whole sway: would a man ever
worship a Stock, or a Stone, made by his own hand in some artificial form;
but that this is a burning conclusion in his heart, That there is a God? This
wooden god, can have neither any glory, to allure him; nor any profit, to
persuade him; nor any fear, to constrain him. Wise. 13. 13.
For (as the wiseman teaches) it is but a knotty piece of wood, and indeed the
most thri^^les and unprofitable part of all the whole Tree, whereof it is made;
yea more vprofitable then the very chipps, Isay 44 19 16 10.
that are hewed away from it. For by them yet the Carpenter warmeth himself.
So that they are good for something: but the Idol it self is good for just
nothing, as the Prophet Isay directly affirms. But it may yet be objected:
that the artificial beauty, and workmanship of the Idol, may happily prevail to
make men worship it, as a God; though in it self, Aug. Sermon. 2. In Psalm. 113.
To. 8.
it have none other good. For so indeed Saint Augustine collect^th. Ducit, and
affectu quodam interno rapit infirma corda mortalium, form similttudo, p.
1305. 1307.
and membrorum imitata compago. The likeness of the form, and imitation of
the members, which men do see in Idols, does, with a strong affection, steal
away their weak hearts. And again in the same place: Plus valent simulachra,
ad curuandam infoelicem animam, quodos habent, oculos habent, aures habent;
quam ad corrigendam, quod non loquuntur, non vident, non audiunt, non ambulant:
An Idol has greater force, to infect a simple soul, in that it has a mouth,
it has eyes, it has ears; then to instruct it, in that it has no speech, no
sight, no hearing, no moving. T^^refore, to take away this objection too, as
well as all the rest: Would a man ever worship informem, and rudem lapidem; as
the Romans did under the name of God Terminus; Luctant. lib. 1. c. 20 p. 55.
but that they are persuaded, that a God there is? This God has neither form,
nor beauty, to allure them to worship him. No form; for it is informis. No
beauty; for it is rudis, as Lactantius notes. Whereas every God ought to have
such perfect beauty, (...) 1. de Not. (...) p. 194.
that Tully reckons it as a foul absurdity, not only that any other thing
should be more beautiful then God; but also, that among the gods, any one of
them should be more beautiful then another. They ought all so to excel in the
highest degree of beauty. And therefore so rude and unformed a god, as this
Terminus is, a man would never worship; but that he must needs be worshipping
of some God; and so, not knowing what is best to worship, he worshippeth that
which is nearest unto hand. Ci^. l. 1. de Not. Deor p. 200.
And therefore (as Tully defines of Atheists) that it is impossible, for any
of the^ to be superstitious: so it is true in Idolaters (who are all of them
superstitious) that it is as impossible, for any of them to be Atheists. For,
Idolaters yield two Arguments, which necessarily conclude, that they think
there is a God. The first is, the enormous pride of some of them. The second,
the abject baseness of other some. For the first. We read of diverse men, who
have been so monstrously ouerswolne with pride and vanity, that they have
invented a strange kind of Idolatry; to idolatrize themselves, and to make
themselves gods; or rather indeed Idols, under the name of gods; as
Nabuchodo^osor, Caligula, Judith 3. 8. Sueton^^ vita Cal^g. c. 22. p. 61.
Aurel. (...) vita D^mi^. p. 387.
Domitian; and diverse others of the Roman Emperors. Which honor, no man
would ever have affected, but that he is both persuaded himself, and would
have others too, persuaded, That there is a God. So that, this kind of
Idolaters declare by their pride, that they think, There is a God. For
Autotheisme cannot possibly be Atheism. The other kind of Idolaters, declare
the same, by their baseness. For man, being by nature so proud and ambitious,
that no honor can suffice him, but that he will affect even the name and place
of God: what is it, that can make this gallant so to stoop, and to abject
himself so basely unto a Stock, and a Stone, as to creep and kneel unto
them; but, that only the force of Religion adacteth him? telling him within
his bosom, both that There is a God; and that he is purposely created for his
worship: Who, because (through his pride) he gives it not where it is due; he
leaves him (through his baseness,) to give it where it is not due. So that,
even Idolatry it self, though it be both the nurse and mother of lies; yet
teaches it this truth, to believe, There is a God. And though it self
dishonor him; yet teaches it us to honor him. For whatsoever the Idolater
worshippeth for his false God, it teaches us much more to worship the true
God. Clem. Alex. Stro. l. 5. p. 277.
Yea, even Jupiter himself (as Clemens Alexandrinus notes) Etiam ipse
Jupiter, qui Poetarum ver sibus canitur, in Deum refert cogitationem. Even
Jupiter himself, whom the Poets make a false god, yet erecteth our thoughts
unto the true God. And thus you plainly see, how Tullies observation is
perfectly verified in every branc^ of it: and that there is no Nation, neither
civil, nor rude; no condition of men, neither learned, nor unlearned; no
several person; though never so profane, neither Swearer, Blasphemer, nor
Idolater, but he is inwardly persuaded That there is a God. And that therefore
the Atheist, in seeking to deny it, Plutarch. l. De Iside To. 2. Mor. p. 174.
does (as Plutarch truly censureth him) immobilia mouere; and bellum infer,
non tan^um longo tempori, sed and multis hominibus gentibus, and familijs; quas
religiosus D^orum cultus, quasi diuino furore correptas, tenuit: He seeks to
shake that, which cannot be moved; and boldly bids battle, not only to
many men, but also to many Nation, Countries, and Families; whom the religious
worship of God has so deeply possessed, that it has almost even ravished
them: fighting so, himself alone, both against all Antiquity, Universality,
and Consent, which do make a threefold Cord, Eccles. 4. 12.
not easy to be broken.

CHAP. 7.
That a great discord may be noted among the Heathens, as concerning the
worship of their several Gods. 2. Yet that this discord does not infringe the
general opinion, as concerning God. 3. But that it much confirms it.

PLutarch, in his first book Of the Opinions of the Philosophers, affirms,
that the first propagation of Religion among men, and the first spreading of
this opinion, as concerning God, has bin brought to pass by some one of these
three means: aut naturali forma, Plut. l. 1. De ^lacitis Philosoph. c. 6. To.
2. Mor. p. 13.
aut fabulosa, aut legum testimonio. Naturalem Philosophi, fabulosam Poetae,
docent; Leges autem suas, singulae habent Civitates: that is, either by means
of such natural reasons as have bin delivered by the learning of Philosophers;
or by such fabulous adumbrations, as have been devised by the wit of Po^ts; or
by such political constitutions, as have been enjoined by the authority of
Magistrates. And it is true indeed, that (for traditionall divinity) it was
among the Heathens especially propagated, by some one of these three means.
But there was a natural Theology, ingrafted in the soul before them all:
ante omnem rationis vsum (as Iamblicus affirms) even before all use of
reason, Iamblic. l. De Myster. c. 1. p. 5.
and all capacity to receive instruction: whereby they were disposed, and in a
sort prepared, to admit any one of the forenamed instructions, though it came
but single of it self. But in the former discourse, Cap. 5. Sect. 1.
I have joined them all together: showing, by a general consent of all
Philosophers, all Poets, and all Lawgiuers, that There is a God. So that there
is not so universal an agreement in any one thing in the world, as there is,
in believing, that There is a God.

But yet, I find it again observed, Great disse^tion what God i^.
that there is not in any thing so great a disagreement; as there is, in
defining, what that God should be. Res nulla est (says Tullie) de qua
tantopere, Cic. l. 1. De Not. Deor. p. 184. 177.
non solum indocti, sed etiam docti dissentiant: There is nothing, where in
there is so great a discord, not only amongst the unlearned, but also among the
learned. And he makes good his assertion, by a particular enumeration of the
several opinions, of all the Philosophers. Which are several indeed; yea, and
so distantly severed, that no two of them do agree in any one opinion: some
worshipping the Heavens, some the Stars some the El^ments, some one thing, some
another. So that (as one wittily observes of them) Colebat quisque quod
volebat: Coe^iu^ Rh^di^ l. 23. c. 3. p. ^^27.
Every man worshipped whatsoever he would. Only, this seemed to be the common
study and endeavor of them all, that none would have that god whom any other
had. Nay, by and by after, he will have another god, then he himself had
before; as we may evidently see, in the forealledged place of Tullie; both in
Plato, Aristotle, Theophrastus, and Cleanthes, and in diverse others. Teren.
Phor. Act 2. S^c. 4 p. 218.
So that, Te^tul. i^ Apol* c. 47. p. 77.
if any where, the proverb here is verified; that, Quot homines, tot
sententiae: So many heads, so many wits; so many men, so many minds. For (as
Tertullian observes by them) Alij incorporalem asseuerant, alij corporalem; vt
^am Platonici, quam Stoici: alij ex atomis, alij ex numeris; Cap. 4. Sect. 4.
vt Epicurus, et Pythagoras: alij ex igne; qualiter Heraclito visum est. Et
Platonici quidem, curantem rerum: contra, Ep^^urei ociosum et inexercitum, and
(vt ita dixerim) neminem humanis rebus. Positum vero extra mundum Stoici, qui,
figuli modo, extrinsecus torqueat molem hanc: intra mundum Platonici, qui,
gubernatoris exemplo, intra illud maneat quod regat. Some of the Philosophers
make God to be spiritual, some other of them, corporal; as the Platonicks and
Stoics. Some make their god of Atoms, and indiuidual moates; some of diuidual
numbers; as Epicurus, and Pythagoras. Some make him all of fire; for so it
seemed to Heraclitus. The Platonicks make God provident, and wonderful
careful, that all things may go well. The Epicures make him idle and
sloathfull, and as good as no body in all human affairs. The Stoics, they
place God without the world, turning about the Heavens, as Potters use to do
their wheels: the Platonicks within the world, ruling it within it, as Pilots
use to rule their ships. And many other like differences are set down between
them, Cic. l. 1. De Not. Deor. p. 187. etc. Plu^. l. 1. de Placit. Ph^. c. 7.
p. 14.
both by Tullie, in the fore-alledged place; and, by Plutarch, in his
fore-alledged Book. So that there is not a more notable consent of all sorts
of men, in the general notion, of Gods existence and being, then there is a
notable dissent amongst them, in the particular notion, what this God should
be. Which difference in opinion, profane Lucian snatcheth, as a fit occasion,
to deride both God and all his religion: Lucian in love Trag. p. 210.
A gentium opinione, quam de diis obtinent, maxim licet intelligere, quam
nihil firmum and stabile in se habe^t, quae de Dijs fertur oration. Multa enim
est, and conturbata opinionum confusio: ac plane alij alia opinantur. By the
opinion of all Nations as concerning their gods, we may easily conceive how
much they are deceived, and how fondly they build upon a weak ground: so great
a confusion may be seen in their opinions, Cap. 4. Sect. 5.
and so great a difference between their defenders. And then he proceeds to
set down the dissension that he finds among the^: Scythae, acinaci sacrisicant;
Thraces, Zamolxidi, homini fugiti^o, quem ex Samo ad illos delatum esse
constat; Phryges autem, Lunae; Aethiopes Diei; Cyllenij, Phaleti; Columbae,
Assirij; Persae, Igni, Aegytij, Aquae. Caeterum priuatim, Memphitis quide^^,
Bos Deus est; Pelu^iotis vero, Cepe: Iam, alijs, Ciconia; aut Crocodilus;
alijs, Cynoeephalus; aut seles, aut Simia. Pra^terea, vicatim; his quidem,
dexter humerus; caeteris vero, eregione habitantibus; sinister: item alijs,
dimidia pars capitis; alijs, poculum samium, aut catinus. The Scythians do
sacrifice unto their sword; The Thracians, unto a certain fugitive, called
Zamolxis, who fled unto them, out of Samos; The Phrygians, to the Moon; The
AEthiopians, to the Day; The Cyllenians, to Phaletes; The Assyrians, to a Dove;
The Persians, to the fire; the Egyptians, to the Water. Yea, and more
privately, for their Cities, The Memphians worship an Ox, for their God; the
Pelusians, an Onion; others, a Storke; some, a Crocodile; others, a Beast that
had an head like a Dog; a Calt, or an Ape. Yea, and yet more particularly,
for their several Villages; some, do worship their right shoulder; and some
other again, their left: some do worship, the one half of their head: some,
an earthen Pot; and some other a Platter. Upon all which he concludes, Nonne
haec tibi videntur risu prosequenda? Are not these to be derided? He seeking
from this difference and dissension to make but a mock, and a scorn of all
Religion: as though this general opinion of God, were but only a matter
merely feigned, and devised.

2 But, that Conclusion does not follow from this dissension. It infringeth
neither the generality; The dissension of men about God does not conclude That
there is no God.
nor yet the verity of this notion, That there is a God: Nay, indeed it
confirms them both. For first, as concerning the generality of it; that
follows, by necessity, upon the affirmation of the particularitie. Qui
Socratem dicit, Hominem dicit. He that affirms Socrates to be, he must needs
affirm, a man to be because, Socrates is a man. And so, he that affirms
either Jupiter, or Apollo, or Mars, or the Sun, or Moon, or Stars, or any
other particular either Person, or Thing, to be a God; he must needs, by
consequence affirm the general, That there is a God. Yea, and though a
thousand should dissent, as concerning this or that particular God; yet, if
every one of them do name some one particular God, though he deny all the
rest; yet, even in that one particular, he must needs conclude the general,
that There is a God. As for example: if one man should say, that Socrates were
no Philosopher, but yet grant that Plato is; another, that Plato were none, but
yet that Aristotle is one; another, that not he, but Xenocrates; and so in
infinitum: all these agree in the general, that A Philosopher there is: though
they disagree in the particular, Who he is. And so it is likewise, in the
opinions of the Heathens, as concerning their gods. Though they particularly
deny this, or that thing, to be God; yet, in affirming some other particular,
they do generally affirm, that there is a divine nature. Their dissent in
destroying of this, or that particular, does not argue a consent, in destroying
of the general; no nor a dissent of any one of them from that; but a general
consent in it. As well may be observed, both in Tullie, and Plutarch: who, in
the same sentence and complexion of words, wherein they report the general
dissent of all men in their particular gods; yet confess their general
consent, in having of some God. So Tullie. Multi, Cic. l. 1. Tusc. p. 112.
de Diis praua sentiunt: id enim vicioso more effici solet; Omnes tamen,
essevim, et Naturam Diuinam, arbitrantur: Many men do think many evil things
of the Gods: for that they have learned by wicked examples. But yet all men do
confess, That a God there is. So Plutarch. Omnes hoc vno ore dicunt, Plutarch
l^ A^at^rio T^. 3. Mor. p. 416.
esse Deos. De Numero eorum, Ordine, Natura, Potestate, maxim sunt inter ipsos
dissensiones. All men do confess, as it were with one mouth, that gods
(surely) there be: herein they all agree. But, for their Number, their Order,
their Nature, their Power, they do utterly disagree. So that their
disagreement, as concerning the number, and order of their gods, dissolueth not
their agreement, in their being and essence; but that herein they all agree.
Omnibus innatum est, et quasi insculptum; Cic. l. 2. De Not. Deor. p. 203.
esse Deos, says Tullie again. Quales sint, varium est: esse, nemo negat: It
is naturally engraven into the minds of all men, to believe There is a God;
What an one he is, is doubted of many: but that one there is, is not denied of
any. And yet again, in another palce. Nulla gens est, Cic. l. ^. (...). p. 313.
neque tam immansueta, neque tam fera: quae non, etiamsi ignoret qualem habere
Deum deceat, tamen habendum sciat. There is not any people so feirce and
uncivil; but, though they may be ignorant, what they ought to make their God,
yet they fully are persuaded, that they ought to have a God. Whereby it
appears; Just. Mart. lib. Christ. Qu^est. To. 1. p. 3^* ^.
that (as Justin Martyr notes) Non differunt inter se, in universally Dei
cognitione, sed in speciali opinione: They differ not among themselves, in the
general Position of having a God; but in their particular Opinion of having
this, or that God. So that, this dissension does make no opposition against the
universality of the former opinion.

No more does it neither, against the verity of it. For, it follows not, by
so much as a color of consequence, that there should therefore be no God,
because men cannot agree about this or that God: as though Gods being, or not
being, Non quia assirmatio, (...) est aut negatio, ideo res e^it, aut non erit.
Arist. l. 1. de Interpret. c. 8. To 1. p. 63.
depended upon men's agreeing, Pal^^gen. in Scorp. p. 211.
or not agreeing. It is not man's opinion, that either gives, or destroys, or
alters, the being of any thing in the world: and then, much less of God.
But, all things are, as they are; whatsoever we think of them: they change not
their being, for our change of opinion. For, as it is truly observed by the
Poet. Nostrum scire quidem, aut nescire, nihil variat res.
Things still persist, and vary never a jot:
Whether we know them, or we know them not.


And therefore, if there were ten thousand differing opinions as concerning any
thing; yet all they could not alter any whit in his being. How many differing
opinions are reckoned up by Aristotle, (...) l. 1. de Anima. c. 2. To. 1. p.
785. etc. Cic. l. 1. Tusc. p. 1^1
as concerning the soul: and how many more by Tullie? yea, and those in great
variety. Has a man therefore no soul; because the Philosophers cannot agree
what it is? or, has the soul no being; because Pherecrates affirmed the Soul
to be Nothing? Or, may we believe that a man has a soul; notwithstanding
their dissension about the soul? And may we not believe, There is a God;
notwithstanding their dissension and strife about God? This were against all
reason. Or, may we not believe, that there be Stars in Heaven; because of
their Plut. l. 2. de Placit. c. 13. To. 2. p. 27.
dissension, about the substance of them? Whether they be burning Stones, or
shining Clouds, or polisht Cristals or such like? This were against all sense.
And yet is, neither the former opinion more directly against reason, nor this
against sense; then it is against them both, to believe there is no God;
because of Men's dissension, who, or what should be that God. For, how can
either Men's souls give greater evidence unto reason, or the stars themselus
unto sense, of their true being and existence; then God does of his, unto them
both? If the soul shows his true being unto the eye of Reason, by those
notable operations, which it works in our bodies, and in all the parts
thereof; does not God, much more show his, by those glorious operations, which
he works in the world, and in all the parts thereof? Again, if the Stars
do show their being unto the eye of sense, by the glorious brightness and
shining of their bodies; does not God much more show his, by his shining in
those bodies? who (as Ecclesiastious testifies) is ten thousand times brighter
then the Sun. Ecclu^. 23. 19.
And therefore he that doubts whether there be a God, or no, may as justly
doubt whether there be a Sun, or no: Cic. l. 1. De Not. Deor. p. 201.
as the Oracle collecteth: Quid enim est hoc, illo euidentius. Therefore,
neither the generality, nor the verity of this grounded opinion, that There is
a God, is any whit impaired by the particular dissension, that is among men
about it. Because it may truly be affirmed of them (as Plutarch does in the
very like case) Singulos non recte pronuncia^se: Plut. de ^ide To. 2. p. 189.
That though in their particular, they have eu^ry one erred, yet that in their
general, they are not deceived.

3. Nay, The dissension of men about God shows There is one. Chrysos^. Ho^.
1. in Mat. To. 2. p. 11.
it is thereby greatly fortified. For, as Saint Chrysostom collecteth in
another like case; that the differences of the E^angelists in some smaller
matters, proves their consent in the greater, to be the voice of truth; and
that they did not, ex compacto, agree all together, by an excogitated and
composed tale, to deceive the world: (For then they would in all points have
morefully agreed, polishing and concinning their History, so smoothly, that
there should not have been found the least note of diversity) so may we
likewise collect, from the dissension of the Heathen, in the particular
Hypothesi^ of this or that God; that their consent in the Thesis, of having
some God, must needs be the voice of truth: in that one nation did not borrow
their opinion from another; for then they would have accorded better, and that
God which one had, the rest would all have followed. But now, there being such
a jar and contention among them, as concerning their particular gods, every
one of them scorning the gods of another; and yet in the general, agreeing all
together, That some God they will have; this shows (as the Orator very wisely
collecteth) that, Hoc non collocutio hominum, aut consensus efficit; Cic. l. 1.
Tusc. p. 112.
non institutis ^st opinio confirmata, non legibus: but only, Lege Nature:
That this opinion of having a God, is not begotten in the minds of men, either
by conference or consent of one Nation with another; not yet implanted ^n them,
by the Laws and discipline of their own private Nation; but it is inwardly
begotten, by that general Nature, which they have all in common. It is a
Principle of Nature, which is equally imprinted into the minds of them all,
none following by imitation another example. For, it cannot be the policy of
the Greeks, or Romans, or other ciuiller Nations, that has so largely
diffused this opinion of God: because we see the most barbarous Nations, who
never had trade or commerce with them, yet to be possessed with this same
opinion. Again, it cannot be the rudeness of the barbarous Nations (abused in
their ignorance) that has dispersed it so wide: because we see the civil
learned Nations to be possessed of it likewise; who would scorn to take up
their opinion of the barbarous. The learned Nations would not borrow their
opinion of the rude, whom they held in such contempt: and the ruder could not
borrow their opinion of the learned, from whom they were so distant. For how
could the opinions of the Greeks, or Romans, pierce into the extremest
India's: where their names were never heard? especially into the Western
India's? Where yet, they have their gods. Therefore the Orator directly
concludes, that cum non instituto aliquo, aut more, Cic. l. 1. de Not. Deor.
p. 190.
aut Lege, sit opinio constituta; maneatque ad vnum, omnium firma consensio;
intelligi necesse est, esse Deos: quoniam insitas little, vel potius innatas
cognitiones habemus: Seeing this general opinion of God, is not grounded upon
any instruction, any custom, any law; but that all men do consent in it, as if
they were but one man; we may hereby understand, that surely There is a God:
because there is so general a notion of him, not grafted into our minds, but
naturally bred in our minds. So that this great variety of idolatrous Nations,
in their particular opinions, as concerning their proper and peculiar gods, is
rather an argument of the verity of that general conclusion, Plut. l. de
Iside. To. 2. p. 190.
That there is a God; then of the falsity of it. As Plutarch likewise
insinuates, from the very same grounds: where he says, that it is
vetustissima opinio, a sacrarum rerum professoribus, and legumlatoribus
deriuata, authore incognito, sed fide firma; non in sermonibus tantum, and
rumoribus, sed and in mysterijs, and sacrificijs, tam Barbaris, quam
Graecanicis, extans; non casu ferri, and a Fortuna pendere Vniuersum hoc,
Mente, and Ratione, and Gubernatore destitutum: That it is a most ancient
opinion, derived by Priests and Lawgiuers from an uncertain Author, but yet
believed with a most certain faith; not founded upon rumors, but upon the
general practice both of Greeks and Barbarians, in their mysteries and
sacrifices; That the world is not ruled by chance, but by Providence. Yea, and
Plutarch, in the same book, is so far from concluding, from the dissension
of Nations about their several gods, that therefore There is no God; that he
rather collecteth from this their dissension, that they all intended, That
there was but One: and that all, with joint consent, had a purpose to worship
him; though in those diverse Countries he were called by diverse names; as the
Sun is, and the Moon: Which yet, in their own nature, are but one and the
same, and to all alike in common. Neque vero alij, apud alios, Plut. ibid. p.
205.
sunt Dij, aut Graecis quidem sui, Barbaris autem sui: alij Septentrionalibus,
alij Austrinis. Sed quemadmodum Sol, Luna, Coelum, Terra, communia sunt
omnibus: tantum, aliter ab alijs appellantur: ita, vnius Mentis hoc Vniuersum
temperantis -- alij apud alios honores, alia nomina, legum instituto, habentur:
There be not diverse gods among diverse Nations: The Greeks have not theirs, and
the Barbarians theirs: the Northern men one sort, and the Southern men
another. But, as the Sun, the Moon, the Heaven, the Earth, are the same unto
all; though they be in diverse places called by diverse names: So likewise it is,
with that divine Spirit, which governs the World: though he be one in
himself; yet has he, in diverse Nations, both differing honors, and differing
names, and those appointed by the Laws. And so likewise, Maximus Tyrius.
Aliter atque aliter nuncupatus est Deus. Perinde, vt alia atque alia Maris
pars, Max. Tyr. Sermon. 23. p. 285
dicitur, Aegeum, Ionicum, Myrthoum, ac Cretense; cum tamen omnes, Pelagus
sint, ^iusdem generis etc. God is diversely called, in diverse Countries; as the
Sea it self is; which in one place, is called the Aegean sea; in another
place, the Ionian; in another, the Myrthean; in another, the Cretian; and yet
all those Seas are but one, and the same. And so likewise is God; though he be
called by diverse names. But howsoever this be: whether they all intended to
worship but one God, under diverse names (as those Authors insinuate;) or
whether they applied the incommunicable name of God, unto diverse things, as the
Apostle teaches, 1. Cor. 8. 5. 6.
that though there be indeed but one God, yet were there many, that were called
gods: Yet hereby it appears, that their dissent in their opinions, as
concerning their gods, did not argue a consent in denying of God; but rather,
in accepting him. And thus (as Lactantius well observes) Difficile non est,
Lactan. l. 1. c. 2. p. 5.
paucorum hominum praue sentientium, red ^rguere mendacia, testimonio populorum
atque Gentium, in hac vna re non dissidentium. It is an easy matter, to
confound and overthrow, the false opinions of a few wicked Atheists* by the
Testimonies of so many whole people and Nations; especially consenting and
agreeing all together, more fully in this one thing, then they do in any
other. For; as Seneca affirms in another like matter; Omnes in hoc vrbes,
Senec. Epist. 81. p. 260.
omnes ctiam ex Barbaris regionibus Gentes conclam^bunt. In hoc, bonis malisque
conueniet; Omnes hoc vno tibi ore affirmabunt; and in hoc tam discors turba
consentiet. All Cities, all Countries, all Nations, even those that are most
barbarous, yet do consent in this. In this, both good and bad agree. This all
men affirm with one and the same mouth: yea even the rude rabble of the common
people do subscribe unto this truth.

CHAP. 8.
Certain Objections touched, impugning the generality of the forenamed
consent, as concerning God. 2. The first of those Objections opened, directly
denying it. 3. The same Objection answered.

I HAVE showed the generality of this natural praenotion, Cap. 3. and 4.
That there is a God, by the uniform consent of all the Nations of the world,
both civil and barbarous; both Christians, Jews, Mahometans, and Gentiles. By
the like consent again, of all sorts of men, both learned and unlearned; Cap.
5.
both of Poets and Philosophers, Lawgiuers, and Artificers. And finally, by the
same consent, of all particular persons; yea, even of those that may seem to
be Gods directest enemies; namely, Swearers, Blasphemers, and Idolaters.

All these consent in this, to believe, That there is a God; as in the short
Epitome of our humane Creed. And this I have confirmed by a cloud of
witnesses, both Grecians, and Romans; both Christians, and Pagans. So that he,
which dare gainsay a thing so generally received, and set himself to stand
against so strong a torrent, may justly be censured to be impudent: and that
(as Clemens Alexandrinus notes him) he does omnem exuere verecundiam aduersus
veritatem: Clem. Alex. ^. 5. Strom. p. 274.
He shakes off all shamefastness, against the truth. But yet, if we will be
equal judges, and esteemers of matters, we must be content, to hear, as well
what can be said against them, as what can be said for them. Now against the
generality of this consent alleged, there be three exceptions objected by the
Atheist. The first, that there is no such general consent, as is pretended; no
not, even among Nations, and much less, among persons. The second, that if
there were, yet were not this a natural, but an artificial consent. The third,
that there have always been some men of a contrary opinion, who could not be
denied to have been very learned, and counted among the number of
Philosophers: howsoever by them blemished with the name of Atheists. Plut. l.
1. de Pl^cit. c. 7. To. 2. Mor. p. 14.
All which Objections must both be opened and answered, before our cause can be
sufficiently confirmed.

2 First therefore, for the first of them. It is familiarly known, The
Atheists Reasons that al men believe not There is a God.
unto those that are conversant in the writings of Tullie, Cic. l. 1. De Not.
Deor. p. 190.
that he, Ibid. p. 192.
oftentimes, under the person of an Academick, does play the part of a very
Atheist. He brings this praecognition and anticipation of God, as a very
good argument, to prove, There is a God: and he again brings Exceptions
against it, seeking utterly to disable it, playing so upon both sides, and
abusing the liberty of that licentious profession (which was to speak for and
against every thing) to the utter overthrow of all Religion. And he begins
with the infringing of this natural praenotion, which is the first foundation
of all piety and Religion. The sum of his exception against it, is this. That
it is, cum leave per se, tum etiam falsum: That it is, both a light argument,
and a false. The lightness of it, he lightly ouerpasseth: but upon the
falsenesse of it, he somewhat more insisteth. And that he seeks to prove by
these four reasons. First, because we cannot know the opinions of all Nations.
Vnde tibi notae sunt opiniones Nationum? Secondly, because he was verily
persuaded, that there were diverse Nations, which had no opinion of God. Multas
esse gentes sic immanitate efferatas, vt apud e^s, nulla suspicio Deorum sit.
Thirdly, by the naming of diverse special Atheists, that openly denied, that
There was a God: where he points upon Diageras, Theodorus, and Protagoras.
And fourthly, by the instance of sacrilegious and perjured persons, and such
like wicked livers: who, if they had believed, that there were a God, they
would never have dared to be so impious and wicked. -- Tubulus si Lucius
vnquam, Cic. l. 1. De Not. Deor. p. 192.

Si Lupus, aut Carbo, aut Neptuni filius --
Putasset esse Deos; tam periurus, aut tam impius fuisset?
This is the short sum of his whole Objection.

3 Let us now come to answer it, The At^eists Reasons against the general
consent in Religion, answered: Cic. l. 1. Tusc. p. 112.
and every part of it. And first, for his Leve, that it is but a light
argument: I am sure, that this is but a light answer unto it. An answer, then
which there cannot be a lighter: which he would never have given, if he had
had a better. He himself, in another place, makes this argument as weighty,
as here he makes it light. Firmissimum hoc est cur Deos esse credamus: quod
nulla gens tam est fera, nemo omnium tam immanis, cuius mentem non imbuerit
Deorum opinio. This is the strongest argument, that can possibly be brought,
why we should believe, that there is a God: because there is no Nation so
uncivil, no person so vile, whosi mind is not possessed with the opinion of
some God: Here you see no light account made of this Argument: but a great and
weighty testimony for the weightines of it. And therefore, all the lightness
is rather in the disputant, then it is in the Argument, that turne^h off that
so lightly, which he here esteems so weighty. This is lightness indeed. For
if he had any weight, when he alleged it for weighty; then has not it, but he
lost his weight, when he accounts so lightly of it: contrarying his own
praeceeding judgment. So that the same censure, which he passes of Antiochus,
may as justly be passed upon himself: that Quanuis fuerit acutus vt fuit, Cic.
l. 4. Acad. p. 22.
tamen inconstantia leuatur authoritas: that though he were very witty (as he
was indeed most certainly) yet by his inconstancy, he lighted his authority.
And therefore, passing over his Leve thus lightly, let us now come to his
Falsitie, that it is not only Leve, but also Falsum: which may truly be
affirmed to be a false Exception.

But yet this he seeks to prove, by four several Arguments: unto which it is
behooffull, to give their several answers. The first whereof is this, That we
cannot come to know the opinions of all Nations: and therefore cannot say, that
all agree in one. But, unto this I answer, that we may as surely know the
Religions of all Nations, as they can know their Regions. For the same means,
which can serve to instruct us in the one, can with the same facility instruct
us in the other. For, whereby does the Atheist know, that there be such and
such Countries, Scythians, Barbarians, Indians, and other such like Nations,
whose eyes he never saw? If he answer, that he knows it by the credible
relations of Histories, and Travelers, that have seen them with their eyes:
we may answer him again, That by the self same Authors we know also their
Religions: yea, and their general consent, in this general ground, that they
all will have a God: Cap. 4.
as I have already proved.

Now, for his second proof; that there be such savage Nations, as he verily
is persuaded, not to have so much as the least conceit of God: as he affirms
it very weakly, Equidem Arbitror: so he confirms it much more weakly, Cap.
4. Sect. 1.
naming not so much as one; which evidently proves, that he had not one to
name. for else, he would as well have recited the several names of particular
Nations, as he does, in the next, of particular persons. And we may note the
same defect in Pliny likewise: Plin. l. 2. c. 7. p. 2.
who says, that, Alijs est nullus Deorum respectus: that with some there is no
respect, no reverence at all of God. But yet he names none (though he
affirms some) neither there, nor yet throughout his whole Book; though in
all other matters, he be mostly very curious. But indeed, he could not name any
particular Nation: and therefore contents himself with this general
assertion, of Alijs; without adding any instance. Now here must needs be very
small store of good proofs: when as Arbitror, and Alijs, are the strongest
Arguments. Cap. 4. Sect. 1.
For I have showed before, that there is not, in the whole world, any Nation of
Atheists: No Author, either old, or new, does certainly report it. And
therefore it is Liberum Arbitrium indeed, upon his own bare Arbitror, to
affirm it.

For his third proof, Cic. l. 3. De Not. Deor. p. 227.
by instance of diverse named Atheists, I will quit him with his own words,
even in this very case. Placetne igitur tantas res, opinione stultorum,
iudicari? Are Fools, the fittest Judges, to determine so great matters? This
Objection he himself makes, against both the general consent of all men, and
praescript of all time, as though all the world (excepting only Atheists) were
now turned fools. Are all those wise Lawgiuers, who have given Laws and
orders to all people and nations, on a sudden become fools; because they
believe a God? And are all the great Philosophers, whose wisdom and learning
the whole world admireth in all other matters, become also fools, for this
only cause? And is only the Atheist wise, because he denies God? Is this the
only wisdom, to deny there is a God? We should then have a wise world.
Arist. l. 4. Metaphys. c. 5. To. 2. p. 1406.
For then it would fall out indeed (as Aristotle imagined) that if all the
world were fools, and but two or three wise men in it; they should be counted
fools, and all the rest to be wise. And so it is indeed; if the Atheists be
the wise men: for they are condemned for fools, Cap. 14. Sect. 1.
by the general consent of all other men: as we shall hereafter see.

Now, for those noted Atheists, whom he names in that place, Diagoras,
Theodorus, and Protagoras: It may be, that none of these could be truly
counted Atheists, though they all were called so, by the censure of the vulgar:
who strictly examine not the proper application of names unto their things.
For, Diagoras (as I find it reported of him) did potius Gentilium Deos ridere,
(...)
quam Deum negare: He rather derided false Gods, then denied the true. Morn^^^
Cap. 1. De verit. Relig. p. 16.
And Clemens Alexandrinus makes the same defense, for all the rest of them;
freeing them all expressly, from the crime of Atheism. For Theodorus, though
at the first he was noted of Atheism; Clem. Alex. in Protrept. p. 10.
yet at the last, he fell into Autotheisme: professing himself a God, as
Laertius records. Now this he could not have professed, if he had maintained
that there was no God. Yea, and it may be gathered out of Plutarch, that, even
in his former opinion of Atheism, he might be mistaken. Laert. in vita
Aristip. p. 73. 77
For, even he himself complains of the iniquity of his auditors, that he did
rations suas dextra porrigere, illos vero laeua accipere: Plutarch. l. De
Tranquid. To. 2. p. 312.
That he delivered his speeches with the right hand, but his hearers received
them with the left. In which place also, Plutarch, rendering the reason, why he
was called Atheos, alleges no more, but this, Quod Deos esse videretur
negare: Because he seemed to deny, that there was any God. Was not here a fair
proof think you? And, for Protagoras, he neither denied God, no, nor so much
as doubted of him. He did but only profess, that he would not as then,
entertain the disputation, Whether there were a God or no? Which Coecilius
ascribes not unto his profaneness, Arnob. l. 8. cont. Gent. p. 748. Cap. 5.
Sect. 3.
but rather to his wariness. He says, that in declining that slippery
Question, he did Consulte potius, quam profane disputare; as before I have
noted. So that none of all his instances does handsomely fit his purpose.

And for his fourth Exception, of sacrilegious and perjured persons; they
cannot properly be reckoned in the number of Atheists. They may justly be
condemned, Malachi. 3. 8. The Jews spo^led then God, and yet denied him not.
as profane and wicked persons, who dishonor God, yea and perhaps contemn
him: but yet not properly as Atheists, who simply deny him. So that, no part of
his Objection concludes for pure Atheists.

CHAP. 9.
The second Objection, against this universality of Consent, unfolded: That
Religion is no better, but an human invention. 2. That Objection confuted, by
the Antiquity. 3. Universality. 4. Consent. 5. Perpetuity of Religion.

AS there is nothing in the world, wherein all the whole world does so
generally consent, as they do in believing that There is a God: so is there
nothing again, wherein they do secondarily so generally consent, as they do
in the acknowledgement of that general Consent. All men do believe, that
There is a God, and all men do believe, that all men do believe, that There is
a God. As the belief it self is general: so is the belief of the belief
general: the Atheist only exempted: who, as he is an Adversary unto God
himself, so is he likewise an Adversary unto this consent. And, as he denies
the one: so does he likewise deny the other of them: knowing, that if this
consent be granted, it will from thence follow, that there needs must be a
God: as you shall see hereafter proved in the last Chapter of this Book. And
therefore, he fights against this consent, with no (...) endeavor, then he
does against God: seeking to expugne the verity of the one, by oppugning the
Universality of the other. And so, he chardgeth upon this consent, with three
several Objections; as it were, with three Bands.

The first of his three Objections against it, is a simple and categoricall
denying of it: that there is not among men any such general consent, as is
generally imagined, and commonly praetended: unto which, in the former Chapter,
I have answered.

The second (unto which I am now to answer) is this: The Atheist's second
Objection. That Religion is but an human invention.
That, though there were such a general consent, as is conceived; yet, that
this is not a natural, but an artificial consent: not begotten in men's hearts,
by a natural instinct, but implanted in them, by the cunning of evil art.
For that, all divine religion, is indeed nothing else, but an human
invention; artificially excogitated, to keep men in awe: that they, who will
not live virtuously, for the love of i^stice; yet might shun to live
wickedly, for the fear of vengeance. This does the Atheist make to be the true
foundation of all Religion: reducing it so, from a divine infusion, to be in
truth no better, then an humane illusion.

And indeed this is a very sore Objection, striking at the root and the heart
of all Religion. Which, though it be in truth but a mere idle fiction,
conceived without all ground of truth or reason; yet has it obtained a far
greater credit, with many learned men, then ought to be affoorded to so vain
a suspicion. Plut. l. 1. de. Placit. Cap. 7. To. 2. Mor. p. 14.
Wherein, the chiefest Ringleaders are these three: Euripides, the Poet;
Tullie, the Orator; and Seneca, the Philosopher. Euripedes, a secret and
concealed Atheist, not daring directly to vent out his Atheism, for fear of
the law, devised an artificial mean, how to broache that impiety in another
man's person, which he durst not in his own. And so he suborned, in his
Tragoedie, the person of Sisyphus, to express all his ungodliness, and to
teach it from the Stage: telling by him a long and a formal Tale; How the life
of men in old time, was like the life of beasts: the stronger, by violence,
oppressing the weaker; until, at last, men were forced to devise severe laws,
for the repressing of such injustice. But when they found (upon some trial)
that all those laws could do^ small good; because they could only take hold
upon such, as were open and public offenses, and not upon close and secret
ones; there step't up among them a subtle politic man, who taught them a
mean to provide for that mischeife too: and to praeuent close offenses, as
well as open, ones. And that (says he) is this; If they will but teach the
people, and beat in to their heads: Quod sit perenni vita aliquis vigens Deus,
Quicernat ista, et audiat, atque intelligat.
An Everliving One, there is, whom God we call,
And he both hear's, and see's, and understands all.
This Tale tells Euripides, by the mouth of Sisyphus: Veritati tenebras
mendacio offundens, seeking to obscure the truth with the darkness of his lie
(as Plutarch very truly censureth his bad artifice) seeking so to teach the
people that impiety from the Stage, which he durst not from the Pulpit: and
that by a fey^ed person, which he durst not in his own. An usual practice of
all disguised Atheists (as Plutarch instanceth again in the person of
Herodotus) who secretly intending to blaspheme the gods, Plutar. lib. De
Herodoto To. 3. Mor. p. 630.
he expresses his own impiety in the person of Solon; Dijs maledicens sub
persona Solonis: Railing upon the gods, under Solons name. -- And so likewise
does Lucian. Lucian In love (...) p. ^02.
He suborneth in one place, Item ^n love Tragoedo, p. 109.
Cyniscus, a Cynick; in another, Damis, an Epicure, to dispute against God, in
the person of Jupiter. But, in this kind has Tullie played his part, most
artificially. For he, (fearing the rigor of the Laws among the Romans, as
Euripides did before among the Athenians) has imitated his policy, in
expressing his impiety: and suborned Cotta, as an Academike, to dispute
against God: who, by the liberty of that licentious profession, Cic. l. 2. De
Diuinat. p. 285.
might more safely do it. For, the sect of the Academikes would determine
nothing: but yet did profess, that they would freely dispute, both for, and
against every thing. And so, by that occasion, he divulged that impiety, in
the person of Cotta, which he durst not have done, in the person of Cicero: as
even he himself, in a manner, confesses. For, being demanded, An sint Dij? he
answers, that it is, Difficile negare, si in concione queratur; Cic. l. 1. De
Not. Deor. p. 192.
sed in privato sermon et confessu, facillimum. If the Question (says he) be
moved, Whether there be a God? it would be dangerous to deny it, in the
praesence of the multitude: but yet, safe enough, among the wise and learned.
Whereby he insinuates, that the most part of the learned did propende to that
opinion; though, for fear of the multitude, they durst not publish their
irreligion. And therefore, by the forenamed Cotta, he insinuates, Cic. l. 1.
De Not. D^or. p. 200.
that there were not a few; Qut dixerunt, totam de Dijs immortalibus opinionem,
fictamesse ab hominibus sapientibus, Reip: causa; vt, quos ratio non posset,
eos ad officium Religio duceret: There be diverse, that have affirmed, that this
whole conceit as concerning God, is indeed nothing else, but a witty
invention, devised by wise men, for the public good, to hold those men in
their duty, by the awe of Religion, that would not be restrained by the rule
of reason. Yea, and Seneca gives countenance unto the very same Opinion:
ascribing unto them, the title of wise men, that were the first Authors of that
invention. Ad coercendos animos imperitorum, Senec. l. 2. Not. Quaest. c. 42 p.
35.
sapientissini viri indicauerunt ineuitabilem metum, vt supra nos aliquid
timeremus. V^ile erat in tanta audacia scelerum, aliquid esse, aduersus quod
nemo sibi satis potens videretur, Ad conterrendos igitur eos; quibus
innocentia, nisi metu, non placet, posuere, super caput, vindicem, et quidem
armatum: wise men have invented, for the terror of the ignorant, That there is
above their he^ds a power greatly to be feared, and not to be avoided. For it
was indeed convenient, that in so huge a license and boldness of offending,
men's minds should be possessed with a certain persuasion; That there is a
Nature omnipotent, which cannot be resisted. And so, for the terror of those
men that regard not virtue but only for fear, they have placed above them,
not only a most rigorous and severe revenger, but him also armed with
lightening and thunder. These be the chiefest Patrons of this impious fiction,
That Religion is no better then an humane invention. Let us now proceed to
answer them.

2 Now, that it is but a mere fiction [ That Religion should be a fiction]
having neither any substance, nor good color of Reason; it appears by many
Reasons: as namely, by these four, among diverse other, to wit, the Antiquity,
Universality, Consent, and Perpetuity of Religion. All which are Arguments of
the Verity of it: and that it is not a fiction devised.

First, The Antiquity of Religion. Cap. 5. Sect. 1.
for the Antiquity of it: that may be considered two several ways: either
particularly, as it is in every several man: or generally, as it is in the
generation of al men. Both which two Antiquities, do notably confute the fable
of Euripides. Cap. 3. Sect. 1. and 2.
For the first of those Antiquities, I have showed you before, that there is no
notion so ancient in the mind of a man, as is the notion of Religion. Arnob. l.
1. Cont. Gent. p. 476.
Which Arbobius affirms to be begotten in us, even whilst we are in the womb
of our mothers, ipsis pene in genitalibus Matris. Where, I am sure, we could
hear no such politic old Tales, as Euripides affirms to be the first
be^^tters of Religion in us. Yea, Iamblic. l. de Myster. c. 1. p. 5. Cap. 3.
Sect. 2.
and Iamblicus, an Heathen, affirms of Religion; that it is implanted into
the mind of a man, Et^am ante omnem rationis vsum: Even before he have any
use of reason: as before I noted of him. Which, if it be true, then could not
Religion be a politic invention, to beguile the simpler sort of men. For, how
could it then be imprinted into Children? yea, and that before they have the
use of reason? When as Aristotle affirms of politic doctrine, that it is
too high for the reach of any young men: Arist. l. 1. Ethic. c. 3. To. ^. p.
605.
then much more of young Children. For, if Iuuenis be not idoneus auditor
ciuilis Disciplinae; then much less is Infants. And therefore it has not any
color of reason, that Religion (being so timely begotten in them) should be
first implanted by the means of such a fabulous instruction. There is (I say)
no color of reason in this reasonlesse fiction.

Now for the general Antiquity of Religion, and that ancient possession, which
it has had in the world, Plutarch. (...). Stoic. To. 3. p. 564.
Plutarch says, that it is so ancient, that no man can tell the first
original of it. And he applies to this purpose those verses of Sophocles:
Non nunc enim, neque heri sunt ista prodita:
Semper valuere, nec quando inierint, liquet.
These things were not of yesterday or lately brought to pass:
They ever were, and no man knows when their beginning was.
But, for the true Antiquity of it, let us but follow the stepps of it, as they
be expressed to us in the word of God, and we shall find, that Religion is
more ancient, then any fiction; and the practice of piety, then any devised
lie. For, when there were but three men in the universal world, Genesis 4. 3. 4.
we read, that two of them offered up their sacrifices unto God: when as yet
there was neither cause of the making of laws against public oppressions,
nor, of diuising such fables against secret offenses. And therefore, Religion
could not grow from either of those causes. Nay, it appears even in their
examples, that oppression (though per accidens) grew rather from religion, then
religion from oppression. For, before those two Brothers had offered up their
sacrifices, there was no oppression: but when they were once dispatched, it
presently followed; the one brother violently oppressing the other; yea and
that merely upon this one emulation, because he was better accepted in his
religion. Whereby it appears, that religion is almost as ancient as man; nay,
altogether as ancient. For the very first man is said to be cre^ted in the
image of God: Genesis 1. 27. Ephesians. 4. 24. lames 1. 27. Exodus 28. 36.
which the Apostle Paul expounds to be, in righteousness and holiness: which
are the two essential parts of religion, his matter, and his form. Nay,
religion is yet more ancient. It is more ancient t^en man. It is as ancient as
the Angels: as is plainly insinuated in the book of Io^. Where wast thou, Job
38. 7.
when the stars of the morning praised me together? and when all the sons
of God shouted for joy? Here was the vs^ and practice of religion, even before
the making and creation of man. And therefore, religion could not be an human
invention, unless either there was a man, before there was a man; Tert. l. de
Testimon. (...). c. 5. p. 86.
or that man was able to invent, before he was made. For, as Tertullian has
very well observed: Prior anima, quam litera; and prior sermo, quam liber; and
prior sensus, quam stilus; and prior homo, quam Philosophus, and Poeta. There
was a soul, before there was a letter; a speech, before there was a book; a
sense, before there was a style, a man, before there was, e^her a poet, or
philosopher. And yet, there was Religion before there was a Man.
And therefore, it could not be an huma^ne invention.
So that Time, which prescribes against all humane inventions, and which
chalengeth the honor of Antiquity from them; yet it self is prescribed
against by religion, and loses the honor of priority with it: because
religion is as (...) Tertul. l. de Virgin. veland. c. 1. p. 188.
latuit: Tertul. l. 2. cont. Marcion c. 2. p. 368.
semper illuxit: etiam ante Romulum, says Tertullian. Yea, and ante Homulum
too, as before I have showed you. God has been known from all beginning: he
never lay hid: he ever was manifest, even before the first King: even before
the first thing.

And therefore, if his own Rule be true: Idem esse verum, Tertul. l. cont.
P^axeam c. 2. p. 494.
quod^unque primum; id adulterinum, quodcunque postcrius: That that which is
the ancientest, must n^eds be the truest: then cannot Religion be an humane
invention: because it is more ancient then man. And consequently, that
Euripides his Tale, whereby he seek^th to discredit Religion, must needs be a
false, and an idle f^ctio^, without ground of truth, or reason: it being but a
late, and a posteriour invention. Yea, and such, as has ^or it, not any,
either known or certain Author, to credit it. So that, it may more justly be
numbered among thos^ Be^^eselenas, Plutarch l. 1 de Placit. c. 7. To. 2. Mo^. p.
15.
those headless Old-wiues Tales, which Plutarch in the same place so justly
derideth; then Religion it self can; which it seeks to deride, under that
very name. But, the true Antiquity of Religion does free it from any such base
imputation, and declare it to be a lesson of Gods own first teaching: Just.
Mart. l. Quest. and R^spons. Quaest. 73. 74. 70. 3. p. 104. 105.
because it was practiced by Adam, the first man, who could have no other man
to ^each him. From which obse^ation, Iustine Martyr collecteth, Quod, ante
errorem, veritas obtinuerit: That Religion is more ancient then superstition.
Yea, and in the same place, he brings this substantial reason; that Malum
posterius est bono: qui^, nihil est aliud, nist boni deprauatio: That evil is
posteriour unto good, because it is nothing but the corruption of good. So
then, the Antiquity of Religion does prove, that it cannot be an human
invention.

3 Yea, and so does likewise the Universality of it. For there was never yet
any human invention, so generally spread, as the use of Religion: no not
those, that seem most necessary for the use of men. Not clothing of our
bodies, which is for mere necessity: nor covering of our shames, which is for
public honesty. For, we meet with diverse nations, among the west Indians,
Fet. Mart. Decad. 1. l. 5. p. 30. b.
which neither cloathe their bodies, nor cover their shames; and yet can meet
with none, but that they have their gods. Which sense of Religion, could not
possibly be implanted into every Nation, either by imitation from their
neighbors; because some be so wild and savage, that they do not admit of any
entercouse or commerce: Nor yet by institution among themselves; unless we
should imagine, that in every Nation, there should suddenly step up such a
politic wise man; and (as it were by fate) tell the same Tale of Religion: or
that Euripides his man had compassed the whole world about, like the Sun, and
read his profane lecture in every Nation. Both which suppositions were idle
and ridiculous. And therefore it is apparent, that Religion cannot be of humane
institution; but that the same common Nature, which has given unto all men
their hearts, has also given Religion into all their hearts, Lactan. l. 3. c.
10. p. 143. Item l. 2. c. 3. p. 75.
to be among them, as common, as their natural form. For so indeed does
Lactantius esteem it. He accompteth Religion, to be the most proper and
essential difference, between a man and a beast; more, then either Risus, or
Ratio, or Oration; then either Laughing, or Speaking, yea, or Reason it self.
All which he there proves to be (in some degree) communicated unto Beasts; but
Religion to be proper and peculiar unto Men: and yet common unto all men. But,
that, neither by domestical instruction at home; nor yet, by mutuation, or
imitation abroad: but only, by that natural instinct and disposition, which
God has ingrafted, into the hearts of all men: as Alexander ab Alexandro,
Alex. ab Alex. l. 6. Genial. Dier. c. 26. p. 384. b.
has very truly observed: Primi mortales, nulla doctrinae schola, Ratione, aut
Lege; sed suo quisque ingenio, numina coluerunt. The first men, were neither
taught by any learning, nor persuaded by any reason, nor compelled by any law;
but only, of their proper and natural inclination, betook themselves unto
the worshipping of gods. Yea, and that so generally, throughout the whole
world; that there is not any nation under heaven excepted. Which universality
of religion, declares that it is not an humane invention, but a divine
impression; yea, and a Diuinity-lesson, of Gods own heavenly teaching. As we
may see by his schooling of the first man Adam, Genesis 3. 3.
whom he catechized unto the obedience of God, both by giving him a
commandment, and by annexing to it a punishment.

4. And the same may likewise be proved by that vniform^ consent, The Uniform
Consent in Religion.
which is among all men, as concerning Religion, of whatsoever degree or
condition. Which in this one thing is far greater, then it is in any other of
what nature soever: as I have showed before. We see by experience, Cap. 5.
that not only diverse Nations have diverse fashions, and diverse conceits, and
opinions in most things; but that, even in the same Nation, that diverse Cities
have diverse guises, behauiours, habits, speeches, and manners: as our
Countryman Sir, S. 10. Mandeuile part 2. c. 24. Eng. V^yag. p. 45.
John Mandeuile well observed, in his travel. And yet, in believing that There
is a God, there is no difference at all, throughout the whole world: no City
iarres with City, no Country with Country: but among them all an universal
agreement: wherein, both the learned and unlearned do consent. Tertul. l. de
Praescrip. c. 28. p. 209.
From which head, Tertullian concludes the verity of Religion. For, Quod apad
multos vnum invenitur, non est erratum, sed traditum. The consent of all men,
as concerning God, does show it to be no erring humane invention; but a most
certain divine tradition. For, if Religion were no better, but a politic
device and invention of man, it was a very marvelous felicity in lying, that
he had, which first devised the tale of Religion: that he should tell his fable
in such a fortunate hour, as to beguile the whole world with it, and that for
ever after. This was a cunning Iuggler indeed, that could cast so cunning a
glaucoma, Plaut. Mil. Glor. Act. 2. Sce. 1. p. 467.
and such a (...) mist before the eyes of the wisest; as to dazzle, Lact. l. de
Ir^ Dei, c. 10. p. 462.
not only the unlearned and simple Idiots, but also the wisest and grauest
Philosophers: as Lactantius well observes. Quae tanta felicitas mentiendi, vt
(...) indoctos, sed Platonem quoque and Socratem fallerent? and Pythago^am,
Zenonem, Aristotele^, Maximarum Sectarum Principes (...) facile deluderent?
What a strange kind of efficacy had that man in his lying, that could bewitch
with one Tale, not only the unlearned; but also Plato, and Socrates, and
Pythagoas, and Zeno, yea, and Aristotle himself, the principallest Masters of
all the learned Sects? This lie was begotten in a strange constellation, if it
were a lie, that one wise man should make fools of all the wise men of the
world: and yet, by all their wisdom, never be descried. Therefore, we may
conclude with Seneca, Senec. l. 4. de Benefic. c. 4. p. 49.
that if Religion were a siction; Non in hunc furorem omnes mortales
consensissent, alloquendi surda numina, and inefficaces Deos: Surely, all the
whole world would never have conspired in this madness, to call upon such deaf
and idle gods.

Beside, as Lactantius truly notes in the very same place, (where he does, ex
professo, dispute this very case) He could not be a wiseman, that was the
Author of this so false a fiction. For the end of true wisdom is to draw men
out of error, and not to lead them into it, as this false impostor did. And
therefore he concludes from this so general a consent in Religion, that it
could not be possibly an humane invention.

5 And yet the same may be further declared by the perpetual succession, The
Perpetuity of Religion.
and propagation of Religion: which has thriuen, from the beginning, with such
admirable prosperity, that it has not decayed in any Country, or City: but,
wheresoever it has been planted, there has it ever flourished, and could never
be supplanted. Which shows it to be a Plant, both by God himself first
planted, and graciously ever since, with the dew of his blessing, watered.

For, Mat. 15. 13.
as Christ himself teaches us, Every plant, which the heavenly Father has
not planted shall be rooted out. And therefore, if Religion had been but a
plant of man's planting and setting, it would long since have been blasted,
yea, and utterly starued. For, no humane invention, had ever, either such a
prosperous increasing; and such a long, and a firm continuing in the world, as
Religion has had: but all the conceits of men, though for a time they may
shoot-out, and have a kind of flourishing; yet do they quickly decay again;
time blasting and withering them, Ps. 129. 6. Cic. l. 2. Offic. p. ^69.
as the grass which grows upon the topps of houses. For, as the Orator has
very truly noted: Ficta omnia, celeriter, tanquam flosculi, decidunt: All
feigned devises, come quickly to an end, as flowers shattered by the wind. And
again in another place unto the same purpose: Opinionum commenta delet dies,
Cic. l. 2. De Not. D^or. p. 201.
Naturae iudicia confirmat: Time destroys all those fancies, which have none
other ground, but only humane opinion; but, it strengthens all those
judgments, which are founded upon truth, and sound natural reason. As for
example. The particular conceit of all the heathen gods, has time now
devoured; because that was nothing else, but opinionis commmentum: But, the
general belief, that There is a God, it has in all places confirmed; because
this belief is Naturae iudicium. And therefore Religion, which thus grows
stronger and stronger by time, and has continued so firmly, from the very
beginning, without any decaying, must needs have a better ground, Senec. Epis.
121 p. 307.
then a mere humane opinion. For, as Seneca has well observed; Falsa non
durant: False things continue not. And therefore this thriuing of religion, and
this perpetual succession of it, have even the Heathen collected, to be a true
argument, of the infallible truth of it: and that it is impossible, that it
should be no better then a fiction devised: Quod, Cic. l. 3. de Not. Deor. p.
227.
et omnium esset, et quotidie cresceret: because it was both so generally
received, and believed of all men, and so prosperously continued from the very
beginning: concluding no less, from the Perpetuity of it, then from the
Universality; that it is a plant of natures own breeding: and therefore
cannot be any politic invention. And consequently, that Euripides, in his
forged invention, That Religion should be nothing but an humane invention, did
(as Plutarch truly censures him) mendacio veritati tenebras offundere: Plut. l.
2. de Placit. c. 7. To. 2. Mor. p. 14.
He sought only, to obscure the truth, with a lie. And therefore, for this
his profaneness, in this his device against religion and piety, he better
deserves that inured note of Tullie [Capitalis Euripides] then for his
injustice against right and equity, Cic. l. 3. offic. p. 387.
in that his other sentence: Nam si violandum est ius, regna^di gratia
Violandum est; alijs rebus, pietatem colas.
If Justice may be wronged at all, then for a Crown it may:
Except a Kingdom's case, in all, let Piety thee sway.
Here yet was, in some things a conservation of equity: but his Tale against
Religion imported in all things, an extirpation of piety: as the Orator
observes, Cic. l. 1. de Not. deor. p. 200.
and that very truly: Qut dixerunt totam de Dijs immortalibus opinionem fictam
esse -- Omnem Religionem funditus sustulerunt: They that shall affirm all
opinion of the gods to be but a fiction, do utterly take away the sum of
Religion.

Now these things considered, it evidently appears, that it is not Religion,
that is a fraudulent invention, to beguile and deceive men: but rather this
slander of Religion, that it should be but a fraudulent invention, this is a
fraudulent invention indeed: yea, and that a very wicked one: as even Tullie
himself insinuates, Cic. l. 1. de. divine. p. 241.
nay plainly expresses, when he says of their Religions; that, Periculum
est, ne, aut his neglectis, impia fraud, aut susceptis, anili superstitione
obligemur: That there is no little danger, lest either on the one side, by
neglecting of Religion, we be circumuented by the fraud of Atheists; or on the
other side, by accepting of Religion, we be entangled with the superstition of
old wives. Where I cannot imagine, what other fraud of Atheists he should
rather mean, then this, of their affirming, that religion is nothing else but
an humane invention: which is indeed a very fraudulent suggestion, and a fable
artificially invented, and composed against religion: But, so is not religion
against the truth. It is not, fabula, art composita, as S. Peter truly
teaches. 2. Pet. 1. 16.
But that this was falsely feigned, I hope I have plainly proved.

CHAP. 10.
The third Objection against the Universality of Consent in Religion,
propounded: viz. That is has been oppugned, by diverse both wise and learned
Philosophers, though called by the name of Atheists. 2. That Objection answered
from the smalnesse of their number. 3. The weakness of their learning. 4. The
mistaking of their opinion. 5. And their inconstancy in their assertion.

THere is yet a third Objection behind, The Atheists third Objection: oppugning
the universality of consent in Religion, by their own dissenting.
which may be made by the Atheist, against the Supposition of this so
universal a consent in Religion: and that is this following: That though it
could not be denied, that both all Nations, and all professions of men in the
world, do believe There is a God: yet that it cannot be affirmed, that all
several persons have also therein consented. Because, there be recorded, in
the writings both of Heathens and Christians, the very names of diverse men,
that have directly denied it; yea, and openly defended, That there is no God.
Amongst whom, though they have been branded with the name of Atheists, as with
a note of infamy, as crossing the current of that general opinion with among
other men was received, and believed most confidently; yet were they not denied
to have bin both wise and learned; as ranked, even by their adversaries,
amongst the number of Philosophers. And therefore, their opinion cannot (in
common reason) but have far greater weight, then the whole multitude of the
unlearned: because (as Lactantius very truly observes, Lactan. l. 2. c. 19. p.
124.
Plus est momenti in paucioribus doctis, quam in pluribus imperitis: There is a
great deal more weight, in a few, that are learned; then in a many, that are
ignorant. So that, a multitude of the vulgar, are not able to counterpoise so
much as one Philosopher: their judgment being branded with that note of
infamy, Cic. l. 1. D^ Diuinat. p. 274.
that Nihil est (...), quam nihil sapere, vulgar: That there is nothing so
common, as for the common people to understand nothing. And therefore,
notwithstanding all the cry of the vulgar (who obtain their opinions, not by
reason, but by clamor) that may fall out in this case, Cic. l. 8. ad A^^ic. ^
p. 3. p. 309.
which is noted by the Orator: vt altera res verbosior sit, altera verior. That
the one part may be the truer, though the other be the louder.

2 But now unto this Objection, The number of Atheists very small.
I answer three things. First, that for their number, the Atheists do well not
to stand upon that plea; but to disclaim it utterly, and not to vie with their
Adversaries in that point, for the victory. For the number of those that have
denied God, is so little, in comparison of those that confess him, that (to
use the Orators comparison) it is but stilla muriae, Cic. l. 3. De fin. p. 73.
ad mare Aegeum: but as one drop of brine unto a whole Ocean. Their multitude
is so great, and so infinite above their opposite. Neither these only, a
multitude of the ignorant and unlearned, but also even of the wise and learned.
All the learnedest Philosophers, and all the wisest Sages, that ever were in
the world, may be numbered in this multitude, that confess there is a God. So
that if any cause can gain any estimation, either by the number, or honor of
those that defend it; or by the fewness, and baseness, of those that oppugn
it; no cause has more advantage, in both these points, then this.

For first, as concerning the number of those Atheists, it is so poor and
contemptible, that it is an infinite disgrace, and reproach unto their cause,
to have been, in all men's eyes, so abject, and profligated, as to be able to
get no more defenders, since the world was first created: especially, being
taught by such learned Philosophers, as they would insinuate. This is a foul
disgrace unto their cause, that so great learned Teachers, could get so few
Disciples; especially being followed by so many Auditors: as Laertius observes
in Bion of Boristhenis, one of the chiefest Atheists, that; Nemo illius
Discipulus inscribitur, cum tot habuerit auditores. So that, in all ages, there
have been but very few, either Masters or Scholars in the doctrine of
Atheists. And this Tullie obiecteth unto Epicurus, Cic. l. 1. de fin. p. 58.
another of their principallest Atheists. In vestris disputationibus, historia
muta est. Nunquam audiui in Epicuri schola, Lycurgum, Solonem, Miltiadem,
Themistoclem, Epaminondam nominari; qui in or^ sunt caeterorum omnium
Philosophorum: All history is mute in the school of the Epicure. We hear
there, no naming of Lygurgus, Solon, Miltiades, Themistocles, or Epamniondas;
which use to rattle in the mouths of all other Philosophers. Atheists could
never get any such men to be their Disciples: no, nor yet any other, that had
either worth, Aug. in Ps. 52. To. 8. p. 509.
or number. S. Augustine says of them, that it is, Rarum genus hominum, Bedai^
Cap. 17. Job. To. 5. p. 792.
qui dicunt, Non est Deus: It is rare to sinde any man that denies There is a
God. And Beda likewise, unto the same purpose: Exceptis paucis, quibus natura
nimium deprauata est, vniversum genus hominum, Deum, mundi huius fatetur
authorem: Except only a few of a depraved nature, all mankind does acknowledge
both a God, and a Creator. Yea, and he adds there this reason: Haec est enim
vis verae diuinitatis, vt creaturae rationali, iam ratione vtenti, non omnin^
ac penitus possit abscondi: This is the power of the divine nature, that it will
not be hid from any reasonable creature. By which testimonies of these Fathers,
it evidently appears, that the number of Atheists has been but very few:
but Pauci, says Beda; nay Perpauci, says Augustine, in the place that before
I cited out of him. Lactaentius affirms, that there were but two or three of
them: Lact. l. de Ira. c. 10. p. 461.
Exceptis duobus, tribusve calumniatoribus vanis, constat, Diuina prouidentia
Mundum regi: Except only, two, or three vaineglorious Cauillers, all the whole
world believes, that the world is ruled by providence. And that this is not an
artificial diminution, of an extenuating Christian; it is expressly confirmed,
Max. Tyr. Sermon. 1. p. 6.
by the testimony of an Heathen. In vniverso aeuo (says Maximus Tyrius) duo,
aut, ad summum, tres exortisunt, etc. There have, of those Monsters, two, Cic.
l. 1. Tusc. p. 112.
or three (and not above) been brought forth, in all ages. Nay, Tullie says,
There have been none: Nemo omnium tam immanis, cuius mentem non imbuerit
Dcorum opinio. So that now, they are brought unto a very low ebb: their number
is so little, that they are now, nullo numero.

And indeed, This Chap. Sect 4. in fin.
if we speak of Atheists strictly, and properly, for such as have simply
denied all divinity, and denied it constantly; Tullies sentence is most true,
that there never was any such creature in the world (nay never any such
Monster) as simply and constantly to deny God. The name of an Atheist in this
sense, is but, Nomen ociosum; A name without a thing.

If we speak of Atheists in a larger sense, for such as have openly (though
not constantly) denied the Divinity; Maximus his sentence is true, that, of
such professed Atheists, there have not been past two or three. Nay, if we
speak of Atheists, in the largest and most extended sense, for such as have
either not denied Gods essence, but only certain of his properties, as his
providence, his justice, his goodness, and such like: or, if they have denied
it, yet have done it but weakly, rather upon some sudden passion, then any
settled resolution: yet, even so, their number has scarcely amounted unto a
dozen, or a score; I mean of such open Atheists, as have made any public
profession of their Atheism, though but even in these secondary points. As we
may partly see in Aelian, Aelian. l. 2. var. Hist. c. 31. p. 395.
who has made a list of them, and named all he knew: and yet (God knows) they
are but very few. There be not above six of them: who yet, all of them did not
deny God himself; but some of them, his providence, and some other his
praedictions; as appears by those Dogmata, which, in that place, he
recounteth. Now, if we should search into the monuments of all Antiquity, both
of Greeks and Latins, we should scarcely be able to add half a dozen more,
unto those that are named by Aelian before. Whereby it appears, that, for
their number, they be miserable: God, in his merciful providence, ordai^^i^g,
that there should not, in all ages, be found many Atheists; as not many
Basilisks, and destroying Serpents.

3 And, as their number was but little, The learning of Atheists not very great.
so their learning was not great. They were of no great value, neither numero,
nor pondere. The value of their wisdom they have showed, in the choice of
their foolish opinion: which has made them no less scorned then abhorred of
all men, and justly to incur that note of derision, which the Prophet David
has imprinted upon them, Psalm. 14. 1.
that they justly may be esteemed, to be rather Fools, then wise men. At the
leastwise, far unworthy of the name of Philosophers: as Laertius (for the
like cause) censureth the Poet Orpheus. L^ert. in ^roem. p. 2.
Equidem is, qui de Dijs talia commentus est; an Philosophus appellandus sit,
nescio. Videant certe, qui ita volunt, quo sit censendus nomine: Surely he,
that devised such things of the Gods, I know not whether he justly may be
called a Philosopher. Let them look unto it, that will have them so called,
whether that name be fit and properly applied.

And for their learning, though it cannot be denied, but that diverse of them
were learned; yet was not their learning in any such excellency, as was able to
sustain their impiety and arrogance. And beside, if they be compared with
those learned men, of the contrary opinion, which either lived with them, or
before them, or after them, their learning will come as short in proportion, as
the light of a candle does, of the brightness of the Su^ne. For what
comparison can Diagoras hold with Pythagoras? or Protagoras with Anaxagoras? or
Euemerus with Empedocles? or Theodorus with Theophrastus? or Bion with Chilon?
or Epicurus with Epicharmus? or Pherecides with Parmenides? To be silent of
Socrates, and Plato, Aristotle, and Zeno, Xenocrates, and Demetrius, Cleanthes,
and Democritus, Diogenes, and Melissus; and very many others, which can find
no parallels, among all the Atheists, being so eminent above them, Quantum
lenta solent inter viburna Cupressi: Virg. Eclog. 1. p. ^.

As much as loftiest Cedars show,
The lowest Shrubs do ouergoe.
So that, if this cause be esteemed, by either Number or Learning* the Atheists
(as you see) can hold no comparison. Lact. l. De Ira Dei. c. 10. p. 461.
Non est enim quisquam (says Lactantius) qui Diagorae, Theodorique sententiam
praeferre audeat, vel authoritati illorum septem priorum, qui sunt appellati
sapientes; vel Pythagorae, vel Socrati, vel Platonis, caeterorumque summorum
Philosophorum, qui esse Prouidenti^m iudicauerunt: There is no man that dares
prefer the foolish opinion of Diagoras and Theodorus before the authority of
those seven that are called the Wise men: no, nor yet before either Pythagoras,
or Socrates, or Plato, or the rest of the Philosophers which have all of them
acknowledged and confessed a divine Providence. So that, whether we consider
their Number, or their Learning, their cause reapeth both ways an infinite
disreputation, their Adversaries do in both points so mightily ouersway them.
Lactantius censuring Diagoras and Theodorus (which were the chiefest Patriarchs
of the Atheists) he says, that they lived but in an age of ignorance; cum iam
Philosophia defloruerat, Lactan. l. De Ira c. 9. p. 455.
when Philosophy had lost the chiefest luster of her glory; and that they
themselves were accordingly but only Minuti and inertes Philosophi, a simple
and an ignorant kind of Philosophers. And Tullie passes (in effect) the very
same censure upon Epic^rus, another of their pillars. For he says, Cic. l. 2.
De Not. Deor. p. 211.
he was a man without all manner of learning. Homo sine art, sine literis,
insultans in omnes, sine acumine vllo, sine authoritate, sine lepore. A man
without Art, and without all good learning, and yet insulting over all men:
but, without any wit, without any gravity, and without any good conceit. Yea,
Lactan. l. 3. c. 17. p. 164.
and Lactantius says of him, that, Hoc sano and vige^e, nullus aeger ineptius
delirauit: No man ever so doated in his raging sickness, as this man did in
his flourishing health: deriding L^cretius for bestowing such enormous
commendations upon him. These were their very Principalls, and the Leaders of
the others. Now if their chiefest were none other, the rest (surely) were no
better. So that, as the smalnesse of their number brings great disadvantage,
so the weakness of their learning brings but small advantage, unto the
cause of Atheists.

4 But now, The noted Atheists were no true Atheists. Cap. 8. Sect. 3.
it may be doubted (yea, and that not without some probability of reason)
whether those men, whom the Heathen have so branded for Atheists, were pure
Atheists indeed, or no? For the pure Atheist (according to the propriety of
that name) is he, which generally and constantly denies all Divinity; Psalm.
14. 1. Ille propri^ est Atheos qui nullum Diuinitatis sensum habet, and omne
(...) qualecunque (...), ridet. Calu. in Ephesians. 2. 12.
and believes, as he says. The Prophet David affirms in general, that the
Atheist is a Fool, which says in his heart, There is no God. And indeed, he
that properly is an Atheist, must both say generally, There is no God; and
believe it constantly in his heart. For, if either he believe any one God,
though he deny all the rest; or confess God in the end, whom in the beginning
he denied; he cannot truly and properly be said to be an Atheist. But such an
Atheist was none of all those, whom the Heathen have called Atheists, and whom
they have proclaimed to deny all that is called God. There was none of them,
such pure and absolute Atheists, as simply to deny all Deity. As we may
easily see, if we will but look into their causes; and examine (but even by
their own records) those several crimes and actions, that have been laid
against them, in their several judgments.

And first, for Diagoras; who was (in their reckoning) the most noted man of
all of them, and the first Antistes of their impious profession: all the rest
of the Atheists being counted but his followers, Theod^ret, l. 2. De Prouid.
To. 2. p. 523.
Diagorae sectatores, as Theodor^^ affirms: insomuch, that his name was
grown prouerbiall among them. For, when they would note any profane and
impious person, they would call him prouerbially, Suidas in voce Diagoras. p.
231.
Diagoras the Melian. Diagoras Melius, de prophanis, and per^idis, and impijs
dicitur, says Suidas. And yet, the Action which the Athenians commenced
against him, was no more but this; that he did eliminate, and divulge the
mysteries of their gods; Theodorusdixit, eos impi^tatis teneri; qui Mysteria
nondu^ initiatis aperirent. La^rt. in Aristip. p 78.
and, Joseph. l. 2. cont. Apion. p. 914.
by deriding of them, auert and turn men from them, as he notes in the same
place. Which two crimes, though very far in nature differing; yet were (among
the Heathen) indifferently comprehended, under the name of Atheism; as though
they were both one; which is a very large acception of Atheism. So that
Diagoras his crime was not, that he denied all Gods: but, that he derided the
Athenian gods. For so Josephus reports it: Aduersus Diagoram, talentum
decreuerunt, si quis eum occideret; quoniam eorum mysteria deridere ferebatur:
They appointed a talent to him that should kill him; because he derided their
Religion. Now this he might justly do, and yet not be an Atheist. He might
justly deride the foolish Orgies of their false gods (as Elias did the follies
of Baals Priests) and yet therein not be an Atheist, 1. Kin. 18. 27. 28.
as Elias was not. For their Rites were so unholy, and their sacrifices so
bloody, that any man might (even by common reason) collect, that he, which was
delighted with such a wicked kind of worship, Arnob. con. Gent l. 8. p. 749.
could not be possibly indeed a true God: because they were, Sacra, Sacrilegijs
omnibus tetriora: Holies, more unholy then Sacrilege it self: as Coecilius
speaks, Lact. l. 1. c. 20 p. 51.
though to another purpose. Of which impure Holies, Lactantius has given us a
notable instance, in the feasts of their Floralia. And therefore, Plutarch, in
some sort, excuses those men, that have revolted unto this kind of Atheism,
upon the contemplation of the filthiness of their Ceremonies, and the
barbarousnesse of their Sacrifices: affirming direct Atheism to be a better
religion, then so lewd and profane a kind of worshipping. Lustr^tiones
impurae, Plut. l. De Superstit. Tom. 1. Mor. p. 391.
sordidae castimoniae, Barbarica and iniusta in Templis supplicia, occasionem
praebuerunt nonnullis, dicendi; Praestare, nullos esse Deos, quam qui talia
probent, ijsque delectentur: Their impure purgations, their unchaste
chastities, their cruel and unjust Sacrifices, have given many men occasion to
say; that it were better, That their should be no Gods, then such as are
delighted with such profane worships. Yea, and in the same place, he seems
to allow of their sentence. So that Diagoras, by these means, might easily
discover, the Heathen gods to be but false; though (perhaps) he could not
light upon, and find out the true one. Which yet, gave him just occasion, to
scorn and deride them, as Lactantius well observes: Lact. l. 2. c. 3. p. 75.
Impugnatae sunt a prudentioribus falsae Religiones; quia sentiebant esse
falsas: sed non est inducta vera; quia qualis, aut vbi esset, ignorabant. Wise
men have always impugned, and derided false Religions; because they perceived
them to be false: but yet have not always found the true one; because they
neither knew it, nor where they should seek for it. But, that Diagoras was not
a mere Atheist, it evidently appears in the beginning of his Verses; where
he makes this profession (which is the foundation of all Religion) Quod a
Numine summo, Mornae. l. de Verit Relig. c. 1. p. 16.
reguntur omnia: That all things are ruled by one most high God. Which, (if it
be true) Diagoras could not possibly be such an absolute Atheist, as he was
commonly reputed.

Let us therefore come from Diagoras, unto Protagoras, whom the Athenians, in
like sort, condemned for an Atheist: yet not for denying God; but for seeming
to doubt of him: Because, in the beginning of his book he propounded this
problem: De Dijs quidem statuere nequeo; neque an sint, nec ne: Adding there
also this reason: Laert. in vita Protagorae p. 320.
Sunt enim plurima, quaeid scire prohibeant; quippe and summa rei incertitudo,
and breuis hominis vita. As concerning the gods, I cannot resolutely determine,
neither whether they be, nor whether they be not; Because there be many things,
that let the knowledge of it; namely, both the uncertainty of the thing it
self, and also the breuity and shortness of man's life. This report does
Laertius make of his doubting. Cic. l. 1. de Not. Deor. p. 192.
But, by Tully it is expressed, a great deal more favorably. But yet, by this
his seeming doubtfulnes, the Athenians were so incensed, that they mulcted him
with exile, and decreed, that his books should be publicly burned. And yet,
that Protagoras was not a pure Atheist, we may probably gather, by two
Arguments, out of that description of his life, which is written by Laertius.
The first of them, that he makes precationem [(...)], Laert. vbi supra p. 321.
that is, Prayer, and Invocation to be the first fundamental part of an
Oration: which I have formerly showed, Cap. 1. Sect. 3.
to have been put in practice, by all the most renowned Orators. Therefore, he
could not think, that there was no God. For, he would never pray to nothing.
If he had been persuaded, that the name of God, were but an idle name, and that
there were no thing, that were answerable to it, he would never bestow his
prayers upon it.

Again, among his works, there was one of his Books inscribed, De ijs que
sunt apud inferos. Ibid. page 322.
Now, if he thought that there were Inferi, he must needs think that there
were Superi. For Infra, and Supra, have so necessary a relation, that the one
of them can neither stand, nor yet be understood without the other. And
therefore, in admitting of the one, he must needs admit of both. As Socrates
plainly proves: If there be Damones, there must needs be Deus. Plato in
Apologia. p. ^13.
Eiusdem viri est, Daemonia simul, and Diuina putare: It necessarily belongs
unto the same man, that will believe there be Devils, to believe, that there is
a God. (...) verit. c. 1. p. 18.
And, as Mornaeus reports, unto the same purpose Legimus, quibusdam, qui non
nisi visa crederent, art Magica Daemonas exhibitos: his conspectis, Deum etiam
credidisse: As we read of some men, who would believe nothing but what they
have seen; that, Devils being showed them by the power of Art Magic, they
then presently believed, That there was a God. So that, for any thing that has
hitherto been said, Protagoras was no Atheist: he was not a denier, but a
doubter of the gods, at the most. Now, doubting implies not Atheism. For,
diverse of the Prophe^s themselves, have sometimes doubted. Job, in one place,
doubts of Gods al-seeing providence: How should not the times be hid from the
Almighty? Job 24. 1.
And David, in another place, Psalm. 73. 13.
doubts of his Justice and vprightnes; Verily, I have Alense^ my heart in
vain, and washed my hands in vain. This doubting, might argue their weak
faith in God (especially for the present) but it could not conclude their
denying of God. And, no more could it in him: especially his other writings
implying, that he believed him.

Let us yet proceed further, and consider of Euemerus: who was condemned for an
Atheist, no less then Diagoras: whose opinion Theodoret affirms to have been
prophanam indeitatem, a profane denying of God: coupling him with Diagoras,
Theod. l. de Principijs, To. 2. p. 498.
and Theodorus, the most infamed of the Atheists. But yet it appears, that
his crime was not a general denying of all Gods, but only a denying of the
heathen gods: and an affirming of them, to have been but men: as Saint
Augustine notes of him: affirming that he had imprinted into Virgil the same
opinion, Aug. Epist. 44. To^. 2. p. 154.
by reading him. So then, Euemerus his Atheism was no more but this, that he
affirmed of Saturn, Jupiter, Plut. l. de Iside To. 2. p. 174.
Hercules, and the rest (whom the Heathens adored, and worshipped for their
gods) that they were indeed no gods: but either mighty Kings, and Emperors; or
great Captains by Land; or great Admiralls by sea; or such like great persons,
in their times. And this (he says) he read with his own eyes, written in
Golden letters, among the Pancheans, and Triphilians. Whose report, though
Plutarch there does seek to discredit; imagining the name of Triphilians, to
be but a trifling and an imaginary name, there being no such Triphilians in the
world; yet therein indeed he discrediteth himself. Str^. l. 7. p. ^68.
For, Strabo, both affirms that there was such a Nation, and describes the
place of their habitation, and gives a reason of that appellation. Yea,
Lactan. lib. de falsa relig cap. 11. p.
and Lactantius gives credit to the relation of Euemerus: and affirms, that
Enntus followed his authority, in his History. So that from hence there lies
no exception, no not against his relation; much less against his opinion.
Which was indeed a most true one. For, if that opinion were Atheism, then were
all Christians Atheists, who confidently hold, that the gods of the Heathen
were no better then men. Nay, then were the greatest part of the heathen
themselves, Atheists: especially the wisest part of them. For they did al of
them hold the same opinion. And, though they durst not openly publish it; yet
did they certainly believe it; and now and then they would secretly confess
it, where they might securely do it. As appears by that letter, which King
Alexander sent unto his mother. Aug l. 8. de Ciuit. D^i. c. 5. To. 5. p. 442.
Wherein he reports, that, in a private conference with an Aegyptian-Priest,
he secretly confessed unto him, that those, whom they worshipped for their
gods, Athenag. legate. pro Christ. To. 8. Bib. Pat. p. 21.
yet were indeed but men. Yea, and Athenagoras affirms, that diverse of them
confessed as much unto Herodotus. Herodotus, and Alexander Philippi filius, in
Epistola ad Matrem (qui vtique in diuer sis ciuitatibus Aegypti, Heliopoli,
Memphi, and Thebis, in colloquium cum Sacerdotibus venisse dicuntur) homines
illos fuisse, ex ijs se cognouisse aiunt. Which Herodotus himself expressly
confesses: Herod. l. 2. p. 165.
Deos in Aegypto, fuisse Principes; That the gods of the Egyptians, were but
their Kings. Yea, and Tully (under the same benedicity) tells Marcus Brutus*
Cic. l. 1. Tus. p. 112.
That all those, whom they worshipped as Gods in heaven; yet had been (in their
times) but only men upon earth^ and that this he might safely impart unto him;
because he was initiated into the secrets of their mysteries. Quid? totum prope
coelum -- nonne humano genere completum est? Si vero scrutari vetera, and ex
ijs, quae Scriptores Graeciae prodiderunt, eruere coner; ipsi illi maiorum
Gentium Dij qui habentur, hinc a nobis profecti in c^elum reperientur. Quare,
quorum demonstrantur sepulchra in Graecia, reminiscere: (quoniam es initiatus
quae tradantur mysterijs) tum denique, quam hoc late pateat, intelliges. The
whole heaven, is, in a manner, replenished with men. And if we would search out
Antiquities, and gather those secrets together, that have bin bewrayed by the
Greeks unto us; we should find, that even the greatest of all the gods, have
from us been translated into the heavens. Wherefore, remember but with your
self, whose Sepulchers the Greeks show us (for you are now initiated into the
mysteries) and then you shall perceive, how far this truth stretches. Which
observation, that here he delivers so covertly, is expressed by Xenophon a
great deal more openly. For he apertly professes, that Saturn, Jupiter, and
Hercules, were but men: and that every country had both a Saturn, a Jupiter,
and a Hercules of their own: the first King, in every nation, being called
their Saturn; the next, his Son, their Jupiter; and the third, his Nephew,
their Hercules. Saturni dicuntur, familiarum nobilium, Regum, qui vrbes
condiderunt, Xenoph. l. de Aequivocis in Antiquit. Author. p. 64.
antiquissimi; primogeniti eorum, Jove's, et Iunones; Hercules vero, Nepotes
eorum fortissimi: Patres Saturnorum, coeli; Vxores, Rhea, et Coelorum V^st^e.
Quot ergo Saturni, tot Coeli, Vestae, Rheae, Iunones, Jove's, Hercules.
Therefore, to hold this, that the Heathen gods were men, was no profaneness,
or impiety; but a solid verity: which though it might not be publicly
professed; yet was it privately understood, and believed. Whereby it appears,
that Euemerus his Atheism, was not to Diuulge any untruth against the true
God; but to diuulge a truth, against the false gods. And, the rather may this
be believed to be true; because Theophilus Antiochenus reports, Theophil.
Antioch. l. 3. ad Autolic. Bib. Pat. To. 5. p. 156.
that Euemerus did hold, not only Animae immortalitatem, but also Dei
vnitatem: not only the immortality of the soul, but the unity of the
Deity. Neither of which points can congruously be held, by him, that holds
There is no God. The word indeed which Theophilus there uses, is but,
disputarit. But, that he disputed it; not problematice, but assertine,
concluding there was a God; it appears by this; because he says, that
therein he was contrary unto himself, in his former denying him. Which, though
he do there impute unto his inconstancy; yet may it be probably thought, to
have been his palinodie: if he ever before had held, That there was no God.
For I will not peremptorily define, neither for him, nor for any of the rest,
that they were no Atheists; but only dispute the contrary, upon probable
grounds: and that the accusations which have been laid against them, do not
neccessarily convince, that they were absolute Atheists; or that they generally
denied all gods, though they denied those, with whom they were charged in their
accusations. And this interpretation, I desire to be applied both unto all
those Atheists, that have gone before; and unto all those, that do follow
after. Let us therefore now proceed.

For Theodorus, Theop. Antioch. l. 3. ad Autolic. Bib. Pat. To. 5. p. 156.
and Bion of Boristhens: though it should be granted (as it is of them
reported) That they generally denied, There was any God, yet can it not be
affirmed, that they constantly denied it. For, the one of them, Theodorus,
fell, in the end, into that madness, Laert. in vil. Arisstip. p. 77.
as ridiculously to profess that He himself was a God. Laert. in vita Bion^s.
p. 144.
The other of them, Bion, fell into that repentance, as to confess those gods,
at the last, whom, at the first, he had denied. And therefore, neither of
these two (being such apostates from their Atheism) can justly be reckoned in
the number of Atheists. But both him, and Diagores, and Euemerus, and diverse
others, (whom the Greeks accounted Athe^sts) does Cl^mens Alexandrinus
nominatim excuse, Clem. Alex. in Protr^pt. p. 10.
as men of good life, and of a deeper insight in discovering the false gods,
then the rest of their Neighbors.

As for Epicurus; he denied not Gods essence; he denied only his providence.
Cic. l. 1. De Not. Deor. p. 191.
He granted, that there was a God; though he thought him to be such an One, as
did neither evil nor good. Placet Epicuro esse Deos; Quia necesse sit, Cic. l.
2. De Not. Deor. p. 207.
praestantem esse aliquam Naturam, qua nihil sit m^li^^s: The Epicure is
induced to believe, There is a God: Because there must needs be, an excellent
Nature, which is superlatiuely good. Yea, and (as it appears again out of
Tullie) he himself writ a book, instructing men unto Piety: which he
inscribed, De Pietate aduersus Deos: Of Religion and Piety toward the Gods.
Which argues, Cic. l. 1. de Not. D^or* p. 199.
that he thought there were gods. Nay, in that same Book he spoke so
religiously, and holily of the gods; Vt Coruncanum, aut Scaevolam, Pontifices
maximos, le audisse dicas (as in the same place he reports) as if it had
been spoken, by Coruncanus or Scaeuola; who were their high Priests.

And for Pherecydes; Aelian. l. 4. de var. Hist. c. 28. p. 428.
who denied to give worship unto any of all the heathen gods (whom he might
easily discern to be no true gods) he was therein not an Atheist, (if he
went no further:) For Daniel refused to worship god Bell; Hist. of Bell. v. 4. 5.
D^n. 3. 18.
and the three children refused to worship the golden idol: yet made them that,
no Atheists: neither likewise did it him: but, in their false opinion. And that
his Atheism was nothing else, but only an inu^ighing against the heathen
Idols, it appears by Laertius; who, in his life, reports that his Position
was; Laert. in vit. Pherecidis p.
Neque aurum, neque argentum honorandum: That neither Gold, nor Silver, is to
be worshipped: and that Hercules had commanded him this in a dream. Now this
is no Atheism. For, the Apostle Paul tells us the very same, Act^ 17. 29.
That the Godhead is not like unto Gold or Silver; nor any other such like
matter. Senec. Epist. 31. p. 50.
And Seneca likewise unto the same purpose: Non potest, ex h^c materia, imago
Deo exprimi similis: speaking of Gold and Silver: There cannot of such matter,
be any image framed, that is like unto God. Again, that he was not a pure
Atheist, may be gathered from the testimony of Theopompus: who says, that he
was, Primus omnium, qui scripsit de Dijs: that he was the first man, that
wrote of the Gods. And, that he handled that Argument not profanely, but
religiously, it may likewise be gathered, in that they called him not Atheos,
Laert. ibid. p. 43. Ficin. Argumen. in l. ^. Platon. de Repub. p. 616.
but Theologus: not an Atheist, but a Divine: Yea, and Ficinus asserteth him,
inter summos Theologos, and moribus diuinos: among the chiefest Divines, and of
the best life. And so likewise for Dionysius; he in deriding of those Idols,
Cic. l. 3. de Not. Deor. p. 238. 1. Kin. 18. 27.
whom his Contrymen did worship, was not therefore an Atheist; as Elias was
not in his deriding of Baal, and in his spoiling them, he was not so much an
Atheist, as diverse of those that seem to be their most devoted worshippers:
who yet make no scruple or religion, not only of deforming them, but even of
basely transforming them: De Saturno in Cacabulum, and De Minerva in Trullam,
Tertul. Apog. c. 13. p. 36.
as Tertullian writes of them, which is the foulest cont^mpt that can be
offered unto them. So that even the most infamous and notorious Atheists (for
any thing that has bin proved against them) might all of them have bin rather
deriders of the false gods, then deniers of the true. Whom, though they
perfectly knew not, yet might they ignorantly worship; as the Athenians did
their unknown God. Act 17. 23*
Whom you ignorantly worship (says S. Pau^^) him show I unto you. They might,
I say (that they did so, I say not) either worship the true God ignorantly; or
some other false gods idolatrously: though they renounced those gods which were
worshipped in their countries. Either of which, if they did, they could not be
counted Atheists. And; that some of them did so, it evidently appears in the
example of Socrates: whom when the Athenians accused of Atheism, he renounced
that crime, and openly pronounced, that though he did not acknowledge their
City gods; yet that he believed there were other Gods. Ego Deos esse puto:
neque omnino sum absque Deo. Neque in hoc iniusteago: ^lato in Apog. p. 472.
quan vis, non eos, quos habet ciuitas, sed alios esse doceam: I do believe
that there be Gods: neither am I my self without a God. Neither in this do I
offend; though I hold not those to be my gods, whom the City holds to be
theirs. He disclaimeth the general denial of all Gods, though he proclaims
his particular denial of their gods: And therefore could not justly be numbered
among Atheists. For (as Laertius truly notes) Impius non est, Laert. i^ vit.
^picuri. p. 370.
qui tollit mul^itudinis Deos, sed qui Dijs, multitudinis opiniones applicat.
He is not an Atheist that denies the gods, whom the people do imagine; but
rather he that appl^eth the imaginations of the people unto the gods. And
therefore it follows not, that Socrates did generally deny all gods, because
he particularly denied the Grecian gods. And the same may be likewise
observed in Damis: in whose fained person, profane and impious Lucian has
vented all his Atheism. For though by him he derided all the gods of the
Gentiles, not sparing even Jupiter himself: yet when Timocles objected, that he
was a general despiser of all the gods, and a general enemy to their Altars
and Religions; Lucian in Jove Trag^^^lo. p. 210. a.
he detested that crime, and protested unto him; Haud omnes aras subuerti
cupio, O bone Timocles: I do not desire an utter subversion of all Religion.
So that (for any thing that I can find) there is none of those Philosophers,
whom the Heathens have purs^ed with such an Hue-and-Crie for most damnable
Atheists, but that, if their cause be indifferently examined, they may probably
be thought to have acknowledged a true God, in some measure and degree:
howsoever they derided and declaimed against the false. Yea, and even their
renouncing of those false gods, was also (in some degre^) a confessing of a
true. Tertul. Apolo. get. c. 15. p. 39.
For (as Tertullian collecteth) Subiacet intelligi, verit ^tis esse cultores,
qui mendacij non sunt; nec errasse amplius in eo, in quo errasse se
r^cognoscendo cessauerunt: It may well be conceived, that they are followers of
the truth, that are not followers of lies: and that they will therein err no
more, wherein they have acknowledged their former error. At least (as Clemens
Alexandrinus collecteth, Cle^. Alex. in Pro^rept. p. 10.
even in this very case.) This finding of their own error, in worshipping
those false gods, was, non parvum semen, ad excitandam scintillam,
intelligentie veritatis: it was (as it were) a seed, or a sparckle to kindle
the knowledge of the truth.

Now if none of all those men, that have been most noted and renowned for
Atheism, not only by the writings of Pagans, but also of Christians, yet were
not truly Atheists indeed; but that, notwithstanding their derision of those
false gods, they might well believe that there was a true one: then can none of
their examples (no nor all of them) serve to infringe the generality of our
former position: that There is no man in the world, but that at some time or
other, in some degree or other, he believes There is a God: no, not even the
Atheists themselves excepted. Who (as you have partly seen here, and shall
more fully hereafter) do directly confess, Cap. 13. Why they were condemned
(...) Atheists.
That there is a God.

But here now, two Questions do come to be discussed. First, that if these men
were no true Atheists indeed, why were they so condemned? and why have they
been infamed for such, if they were not such? Whereunto I briefly answer: that
this was only through the jealousy and tenderness of the Heathens, in
defending of their Countrey-gods: over whom they were so tender, that whosoever
denied them, they held that he held none: and though he professed that he
believed others; yet they held, that he rejected all, if he received not
theirs. And this we may plainly see, in the judgment of Socrates: Xenophen l.
1. de factis Socrat. p. 157.
in whose very accusation, they laid to his charge, that he did, Priscos Deos
non colere, and novos introducere: That he denied their old gods, and brought
them in new. Item Plato in Apologia p. 471. Idem in Euthyphrone p. 54. P^ato
ibid. p. 473
Where, though they confess, that he believed certain new gods; yet they
condemned him, as an Atheist, for rejecting of the old: as though that had
been to reject all. And though Socrates justly taxes them, as clean contrary
to themselves, in the two maine heads of their accusation; to charge him with
Atheism, that is, a denying of all gods, in the one head; whom they discharge
in the other, by obiecting his new gods: deriding this foolish intoxication, to
be (in effect) as if they should have said: Contra leges agit Socrates, Deos
non putans, sed Deos putans; yet their zeal in their religion prevailed so
far, as to work his condemnation: accounting it not much less impiety, to
assert any new gods, then to deny all gods. As we may see also by their
catching at the speech of S. Paul: Act. 17. 18.
He seems to be a setter-out of strange Gods. And it is like enough, that if
he had stayed there, it might have cost him his head. For, though his new God
were, in truth, the true God; yet, because he disliked their old gods, they
would have held him for an Atheist: Athenag. Orat. pro. Christian. apud Just.
Mart. To. 1. p. 234.
as they did (for the same cause) the whole sect of Christians: as Athenagoras
reports. Illi nobis Atheismum impingunt, propterea quod non eosdem, quos ipsi
norunt, arbitremur esse [Deos:] They object even to Christians, the crime of
Atheism; because they do not worship the same gods with them. For, this was
their account, that he which rejected their gods, could not know any other; and
therefore rejected them all together. And^ it may be they erred not, but that
diverse of those Atheists, which rejected their gods, did it of a profane
humor, not regarding any other: and therefore were justly condemned by them,
of impiety and Atheism. But if there were any such (as I will not obstinately
contend, but there might be some) yet this I hold of them, that they did not
constantly hold out their opinion: but that oftentimes they so checked
themselves, that they could not but inwardly believe there was a God, though
they outwardly denied it. Yea, and it may be likewise, that diverse of them,
upon vain glory, or upon study of singularity, that they might seem to be
wiser then other men, have outwardly professed (though not inwardly believed)
that There is no God.

But then, here the second Question comes to be resolved. To what end, this
whole work serves, which is written against Atheists, if they be few, or none
such? Whereunto, though I have partly answered in the preface to the Reader;
yet, I here will add this further: That though there be but few such Atheists
(or rather indeed none) as resolutely and constantly believe with their hearts,
that There is no God; yea, and not many such, as profess it with their
mouths, though not believing it constantly: Yet be there very many, that
believe it weakly: and, that being overcome by sudden passions and
temptations, do oftentimes doubt, and distrust; whether there be any God? As we
see it ingeniously confessed, by Ovid. -- Ignoscite fasso; Solicitor, Ovid l.
^. Amor. Eleg. 8. p. 209.
nullos esse putare Deos.
Confess I do, and pardon crauc;
I tempted am, No gods to have.
Yea, and the same is acknowledged by Claudian, a Christian. Saepe mihi dubiam
traxit sententia mentem; Claudia^ l. 1. in Ruffin. p. 51.

Curarent Superi terras? an nullus inesset
Rector, and incerto fluerent mortalia casu?
This troublous thought has often perplexed, and plunged my doubtful mind;
Whether a God, or whether none, or whether Fortune blind
Did care the Earth, and rule the World, and actions of Mankind?
And few men can escape the very same temptations. Therefore, of this sort of
Atheists, there is as great a plenty, as of the first sort, a scarcity. Nay,
there is almost no man, but at some time or other, he falls within the
compass of this doubting. Aug. in Psalm. 52. To. 8. p. 509.
So that (as it is truly observed by Saint Augustine) Hoc intellectu discusso,
inuenietur esse in plurimis, quod in paucis, and raris, and pene in nullis,
esse putabamus: In this larger signification, we shall find this sin of
Atheism to be in very many, which we thought before, to be almost in none, or
(at the most) but in a few. Therefore, many may reap profit, by the reading of
this book, Note.
not only by exempting them from all impiety of doubting, but also by
instructing them, in the most point of Religion, which, in some place or other
of it, present themselves to be discussed. And, Cap. 10. Sect. 2. Cap. 15.
Sect. 5.
whereas in diverse passages of it, we affirm, that there be no Atheists; and
yet, in other places, do acknowledge many, and dispute against them: for the
avoiding of offense by this seeming contradiction, Nec assidue repetendum est
quod superius iam dixi: sed hoc recolendum, vbicunque isla locutio in meis
literis inuenitur Aug. l. 1. Retract. c. 4. To. 1. p. N^uatian l. de Trim. c.
8. Apud Tertul. p. 626.
I desire the Reader to carry along with him this distinction: that I be not
often driven to make this repetition: namely, that when we deny that there be
any Atheists, as be properly so called, which generally and constantly believe
There is no God, and hold so unto the end: (Of which sort there can be none,
though many have been so reputed and taken: because (as it is truly observed
by Nouation) Deum, men's omnis humana sentit, etiamsi non exprimit: There is no
man, but in his soul he does inwardly feel, That there is a God; though he
do not outwardly confess it.) When we confess, There be Atheists, and dispute
against them; we understand only such as deny there is a God, rather by
outward profession, then by inward persuasion: or, if they have indeed any such
inward persuasion, it is but only upon some sudden passion: which vanishes
as suddenly, as it was conceived fondly. And of these sudden and passionate
eruptions, may that place of the Psalmist be understood: Psalm. 14. 1.
The Fool has said in his heart, There is no God: if we will refer it unto
practical Atheism.

5 And such were indeed all those renowned Atheists, Atheists hold but weakly
their opinion of Atheism.
whom we find to be most celebrated, in the monuments and writings, not only
of heathens, but also of Christians. There was not one of al them, that could
constantly hold out, and maintain his opinion, though he outwardly professed
it with never such a color and show of resolution. We see among Philosophers,
that many other of their opinions (though very strange, and almost monstrous)
yet have bin, with great pertinacy, defended by them, and stiffly persisted in,
even unto the end. But so was never Atheism. There was never Atheist yet,
which entertained that impious opinion against God, that could ever hold it
mordicus, and defend it constantly unto the end. But, even whilst they held it,
they both believed it so weakly, and left the belief of it so easily, that it
could not, in common reason, Laert. in vit. Bionis p. 145.
be accounted their opinion: as Laertius infers upon the recantation of Bion
of Boristhenes. Si quidem illud dogma tueri perstitisset, merito dicendus
esset, sensisse, vt visum fuisset, et si male visum esset: If he had held out
his opinion unto the end, he might justly have been said to have meant, as he
said; though his meaning were but bad. But now, by his reuolting, he
insinuates, that his Atheism could not justly be said to have been his
opinion. For, opinionem omnem sequitur fides: nec fieri potest, Ar^st. l. 3. de
Anima c. 3. To. 1. P. 828.
vt ijs quisquam non credat, quorum habet opinionem: says Aristotle. Every
opinion begets a believing. And therefore, where there is a leaving of our
belief, there also cease to be an opinion. Now it is Platoes observation,
that all Atheists, who profess in the beginning, Plato l. 10. de Legibus p.
871.
that they believe, There is no God; yet still do forsake that belief in the
end; and so quit te their opinions. Nullus eorum, ab adolescentia vsque ad
senectutem, in hac opinione, Quod Dij non sunt, preseuer avit: There was never
yet any man, which believed, There was no God, that was able to hold out, and
maintain that opinion and belief unto the end. Which position of Platoes is
notably confirmed, by Tullus Hostilius, a great derider of the Romane-gods, and
of that Religion, Plut. in vita Numae. p. 156.
which Numa had brought in. But yet (as Plutarch observes of him) In hoc
audaci instituto non perrexit: sed morbo graui and multiplici, ad mutandam
sententiam compulsus est. He was not able to maintain and to hold out his
Atheism: but was enforced by sickness, to change it into superstition, the
clean contrary extreme. For the contrary conclusion [ That there is a God] is
so deeply rooted in the hearts of all men, that sooner shall they be able to
pluck out their hearts out of their bodies; then to pluck that conclusion out
of their hearts. Arist. l. de Mundo. To. 2. p. 1569.
Which Aristotle illustrateth, by this witty comparison, that, as Phydias, that
renowned Caruer of Images, did grave his own image into the buckler of Pallas,
with such singular Art and cunning, that it could not by any means be
removed; unless the whole work it self were defaced: so God has stamped his
image, so deeply and firmly into the world, and especially into the heart of
a man, that it cannot be removed, unless the heart it self be dissolved:
though it be with never such cunning dissembled. Cic. l. 2. de Not. Deor. p.
203.
Unto which conceit of Aristotle, Tully seems to have a kind of allusion:
when he tells us, that it is not only, Innatum; sed etiam in animo
insculptum, esse Deos: It is not only naturally bred in the mind; but it is
also artificially engraven into it, That there is a God. It is (as the Prophet
Jeremy speaks) not only written in man's heart, Ier. 17. 1.
with a pen of iron; but also graven there, with the point of a Diamond. A
conclusion, which cannot possibly die, so long as the soul it self does live.
(...) To. 1. p. 195.
For, Ibid. p. 204.
the very first truth which God has engraven into the soul of a man, is, That
there is a God. And, as the Schoolmen teach us: Nulla res, qualiscunque est,
intelligi potest, nisi Deus intelligatur prius: There is nothing, that can
possibly be understood, unless we first understand, That there is a God. This
is Primum verum: the very first truth, which God has taught unto the soul of
a man. Cic. l. 4. de (...). p. 83.
Now, Natura suae primae institutionis non obliuiscitur: says the Roman
Orator. Nature can by no means forget her first lesson. And therefore, though
the Atheist do never so carefully or cunningly dissemble it; yet can he not
but know, that There is a God. He cannot but inwardly know it, Philo. Iud. l.
^e Giga^^ibus p. 401.
though he outwardly dissemble it. For, Quis est adeo rationis expers aut
animae, (says Philo Iudeus) vt nulla vnquam de Optimo illo, Maximoa, eum
volentem nolent emue subirit cogitatio? There is no man so deuoyd of either
sense, or reason, but that he sometime thinks of God, either willing or
nilling. Nam, and nolentes sciunt, and fatentur inuiti: says Maximus Tyrius.
Max. Tyr. Sermon. 1. p. 7.
They, even against their wills, do both know it, and acknowledge it. And
therefore they cannot constantly deny it. Yea, and Clemens Alexandrinus
rendereth a very good reason, why God cannot be unknown unto the soul of any
reasonable man: because it was inspired into him by God. Clem. Alex. l. 5.
Strom. p. 274. (...) in voc^ Poesis p. 725.
The Souls first generation, was Gods immediate inspiration. And therefore
says he; Long abest, vt sit homo expers diuinae notionis, quem scriptum est
fuisse participem inspirationis in generatione. So that, as Lucilius observes
of Homer: that -- Nemo qui culpat Homerum, Prepetuo culpat: --
There Is none, that Homers name
Still constantly does blame:
So may it be truly affirmed of God too; that, Nemo, qui Deum negat, Perpetuo
negat: That, No man which denies God, does constantly deny him. No, nor
confidently neither. Tertuli de carne Christi. c. 23. p. 311.
Impudently they may: but confidently they cannot. They do, but Dubitatiue
pronunciare, as Tertullian speaks. They speak inwardly, but doubtfully;
though outwardly more stubbornely. Their denial of God, is no settled
resolution. It is but a weak, and a flickring opinion, which suddenly passes
through the heart of a man, and suddenly vanishes again; having no rooting,
nor footing, no not even so much as in their own persuasion. But is like unto
those weak and imperfect assents, which drunken men give unto things in their
dreams; or mad men, in their frenzies. Cic. l. 4. Acad. p. 19.
Which the Orator expresses unto us, in this manner. Dicimus, non eandem esse
vim, neque integritatem, dormientium, and vigilantium. Ne vinolenti quidem,
quae faciunt, eadem approbatione faciunt, qua sobrij. Dubitant, haesitant,
reuocant se interdum; hisque quae videntur, imbecillius assentiuntur. We may
truly affirm, that there is not the same power and perfection of sense, in
men, when they sleep; and in the same men, when they wake. Neither do men, in
their drunkenness, any thing with that assurance, that they do in their
soberness. They doubt, they stagger, they call back themselves; and they
yield but a feeble assent unto all things. And such is that assent, which the
confidentest Atheist gives unto his Atheism. He so assenteth to it, that he
doubts of it: or rather, by a contrary assent, clean supplanteth it. So
that, no man believes; That there is no God, with that confidence and
assurance, that all men believe, That there is a God. No man is carried into
Atheism, with that (...), and fullness of persuasion, that he is into a sense
of God, and Religion. From which (as Tertullian observes) there is nothing
that can hinder him. Anima, Tertul. Apol^^. ^. 17. p. 42.
licet carcere corporis pressa, licet institutionibus pravis circ^mscripta,
licet libidinibus and concupiscentijs evigorata, licet falsis Dijs exancillata:
cum tamen resipiscit, vt ex crapula; vt ex somno, vt ex aliqua valetudine, and
sanitatem suam patitur, Deum nominat. The soul of a man, though it be shut up
in the prison of his body, though depraved and misled by corrupt and wicked
teachers; though weakened with manyfold lusts and concupiscences, though (...)
trained up in the service of false gods: yet when it once beginn^th to
recollect it self, and to lift up his head, as it were, out of his
drunkenness, his sleep, or his sickness, and attaineth his true health, then
it thinks, and calls upon God. This is the proper and natural motion of
the soul, to move upwards toward God. And this course it holds, sometimes,
even in the very Atheists, as well as in others. And, though clogged with all
the forenamed impedimen^s; yet breaks it oftentimes through them all, to
look God in the face. For (as Orosius truly teaches) Men's ratione
illustrata, (...) ^. 6. Hist. c. 1. P. 212. ^.
in medio virtutum, quibus genuino favore (quamvis vitijs inclinetur) assurgit,
scientiam Dei, quasi arcem, prospicit: The soul of a man being enlightened with
reason, and assisted by virtue, unto which it has a natural liking, raises
up it self, and mounteth upward, to obtain the fuller sight and clearer
knowledge of God. So that, their profane Atheism, being Motus contra naturam,
A motion against nature; and coming but now and then, only by fits unto them,
may more justly be esteemed, to be but only their frenzy, or their dream,
then to be their elected or resolved opinion. For so Tullie calls some of
their opinions; which were a great deal better settled in them then this,
Portenta and miracula, (...). 1. de. (...). D^or. p. 186.
non disserentium Philosophorum, s^d somniantium. The monsters and miracles of
dreaming Philosophers.

And yet, I deny not, but that there may be some men so foolish and impious,
as to say, even in their hearts, That there is no God. For the Prophet David
says it: a man worthy to be believed: The Fool has said in his heart, Ps.
14. 1.
There is no God. Yea, and some may have their hearts so hardened in
profaneness, as not only to gibe at God with scoffs and derisions, as did
the Tyrant Dionysius; (...). l. 3. de Not. Deor. P 238.
but also seriously to dispute against him, as did the Epicure Velleius; (...).
l. 1. de Not. Deor. p 186. etc. Ibid. p. 199.
yea, and Epicurus himself, who, even in that same book, which he wrote, De
pietate aduersus deos, Of piety toward the gods; yet praeuaricated most
impiously against the gods: Non manibus (vt Xerxes) sed rationibus, deorum
immortalium templa and aras euertens: as is noted in the same place; He
overthrew the temples, and altars of the gods, not by force and arms (as
Xerxes) but by force of Arguments. But especially Diagoras, who wrote certain
Orations against the gods: wherein he reposed so singular a confidence, Suidas
in voce Diagoras. p. 231.
that he gave them the title of (...), quasi turrium destructrices, The
destroyers of Towers. Whereby it appears, that in these men, their Atheism
was (for the time) a settled opinion; and not any light or flickering cogitation.

But unto all this, I answer with the Roman Orator. Quid attinet glorio^e
loqui, ^ic. l. 2. de Fin. p. 61.
nisi constanter loquare? What boo^eth it to speak gloriously, if a man speak
not constantly, and stick not firmly unto that which he speaks? As neither
David's fool does, who denied God; nor Diony sius, who derided him; nor
Diagoras, or Epicurus, who writ their books against him. There is none of all
these, if they intended their speeches in general, against all Gods (and not
rather in particular, against the Heathen-gods, Cap. 10. Sect. 4. etc.
*as some have coniecture^) that can constantly and resolutely think as they
speak. There is not the lusti^st and most resolute Ath^ist, that ever lived,
that can resolutely and constantly believe, there is no God. There be many,
that sometimes (in a fit of iollity) affirm, There is no God: yea, and seek
wholly to forget him; that so they may wallow more securely in all sin. But
yet still, when the heat of that lust and lustiness is past, and they be come
again unto their cold blood, they do then say in their hearts, that, Surely
there is a God. Yea, and then they believe it too, more firmly, then they
would. They do then, with the Devils, lam. ^. 19.
both believe it, and tremble at it: fearing Gods severe judgment, and their
own due punishment for the denying of it. So that it may truly be said of
Atheists, that though they do, ample, and elate loqui; yet do they, Ci^. l.
5. Tus^. p. 170.
but humiliter, and demisse sentire: though they speak lustily, yet they
think but basely. They do but, hoc in labijs, Aug. Epist. 20. To. 2. p. 588.
non in cord dicere: as S. Augustine speaks: They speak it but with their
lips, they believe it not with their hearts: at the least, not with a constant
assent unto it. For, as he notes in another place, Aug. in Psalm. 52. To. 8. p.
509.
Difficile est, vt incurramus in hominem, qui dicit in cord suo, Non est Deus^
It is a hard thing to meet with any man, that can say in his heart, There is no
God. We may meet with many that can say so with their mouths* but with very
few, or none, that do think so in their hearts, though it be but by short
spurts, Anselm. in Prosolog. c. 2. 3. To. 3. p. 29.
as Anselmus plainly proves. So, that the Atheist, for the greatest part of
his life, is no Atheist indeed. He is an Atheist but by fits, in the time of
some passion; but he is no Atheist all the calmer time of his living. And
therefore it may be said of Atheists (as well as of Epi^ures) That, Cic. l. 2.
De sin. p. 60.
as all other Philosophers say better then they think: so these think better
then they say. For they say, There is no God: but they think, There is one.
Yea, and they can do no otherwise. For, Anselm. in Prosologi^. c. 3. ^om. 3. p.
29.
Deus vtique sic vere est (says A^selmus) vt ne^ cogitari possit, Non est:
For, God so truly has his being; that it cannot once be thought, he should
have no being.

As for the Atheists deriding of God; it is nothing else, but Risus Sardonius:
A forced and faincd laughter; 2. Cor. 5. 12.
A rejoicing in the face, and not in the heart: as the Apost^e Paul expresses
it. For they cannot by all their scoffing at him, extinguish that knowledge of
him, which they have within them. For (as Tertullian truly notes) Illum
reprehendere magis possunt, Tertul l. 2. cont. Marcion c* 2. p. 368.
quam negare: They can sooner reprehend him, then truly deny him. And Orosius
likewise unto the same purpose: Deum contemnere, quilibet hominum, ad tempus,
Oros. l. 6. Hist. c. 1. p. 212. B.
potest; nescire in totum, non potest: Every man may, for a time, contem^e and
scorn God: but yet no man can totally be ignorant of him. Even then, when they
scorn him, yet they cannot but know him, and fear him too. And therefore their
deriding him, is but the disguising of their inward fear, with the counterfeit
^emblance of a lying countenance: such, Euripid. In Ione p. 819.
as in a like case is described by Euripides.

Vultus quidem iucundus; interiora vero
Tristia. Quis enim beatus, quis foelix,
Qui in metu est; and qui suspectam habens vitam,
Vitam degit?
Their countenance is smooth and fair; but inward parts are sad,
For who can pleasant be, and blessed, that lives in fear and dread:
And having life suspected, does it still suspected lead?
And yet, such is the state of the Atheist, even when he seems the
pleasantest. He still fears that Gods vengeance will overtake his pleasa^ce^:
thereby inwardly acknowledging him, though he outwardly deny him.

And for the Atheists disputing against him: it is indeed no better then a
mere (...), 1. Tim. 6. 4.
an idle altercation, and contention about words. He denies the name of God:
but he grants the thing; as he shows by his fearing. So that his heart
never thinks that which his tongue speaks. For, when his tongue says
outwardly, that, There is no God: his heart says inwardly, that, There is a
God: and so his heart tells his tongue, that it lies. And when he seeks,
Persius Satyr. 5. p. 11.
by Reason, to prove there is no God: Stat contra Ratio; and s^cretam ganuit in
aurem:
A stronger Reason stands against, and whispers in his e^re,
His Nay is naught: --
and tells him, There is one. So that, the persuasion of Atheism is but weak,
and without all firmness; but short, and without all continuance; but
unconstant, and without all assurance. And therefore, even the very Atheist
himself, is no important or material instance, to give a just exception,
against the universality of consent in Religion: as (beside all the forenamed
arguments) I purpose to declare, by diverse others, in the next ensuing Chapters.

CHAP. 11.
The two Ends of Atheism; Not to serve, and, Not to fear. 2. The Atheist in
the first of these two ends, is disappointed; becoming a base servant unto all
his own vices. 3. But more especially, unto his ambition. 4. And his Belly. 5.
All which service he referring to himself, he becomes thereby, A God unto
himself.

I Have showed, The two Ends of Atheism.
in the former chapter, that the Atheist does but weakly believe, There is no
God: if he believe so at all. But there by many strong Arguments, whereby it
may be proved, that indeed, he does strongly believe, There is a God: though
he outwardly dissemble it. He believes it not, with such a belief of faith,
as is able to save him: but yet with such a belief of knowledge, as is able to
condemn him. And this he plainly shows, not only by his ^eeds, but also by
his words. By his deeds, in an oblique and direct confession: by his words, in
a very direct and express one. His deeds, whereby he confesses, that There is
a God, be two: the enormous excess of his love unto himself: and that inward
griping fear, which he feels within himself. For I find it observed among
the learned, that the destinate ends, which the Atheist propounds unto
himself, in the choice of his impious and damnable opinion, are principally
these two: Non seruire, and, Non metuere: That he may not serve, and, That he
may not fear. The first of which two Ends, is instanced by S. Augustine.
Quidam, Aug. de v^ra (...). c. 36. To. 1. p. 702.
propterea putant, nihil colendum esse, ne seruiant. Some men will needs
believe, there is no God to be served, because they would not serve him. The
second of them, (...) l. de (...). To. 1. Mor. p. 381.
is instanced by Plutarch. Finis, non credendi Deum esse, est, metu vacare: The
end of men's not believing a God, is, to be free from fear. And for the
attaining of these two ends [ that he may not serve, and, that he may not
feare] will the Atheists needs believe (even beyond all belief, fide sine
fide) That there is no God. For, no man would ever engage himself in Atheism
(so odious and so detestable an opinion) but only to free himself from
serving, and fearing. But indeed, he is greatly deceived in the^ both; and
utterly frustrated of his hoped end. For, no man serves more, no man fears
so much. So that he manifestly proves, by both these two means, that he thinks
There is a God; by which he seeks to prove, that he thinks there is none. And
so (as the Orator observes of Philo the Academick) In idipsum se induit,
(...). l. 4. Acad. Quaest. p. 13.
quod timebat: He t^rusteth his head into the very same snarewhich before he
feared. So that he may truly say with Job* a far more holy man; The thing
that I greatly feared is fal^e upon me: and that which I was afraid of, is come
unto me.

2 For the first end of the Atheist, which is, Ioh. 3. 25. The Atheist serves
many masters.
Non seruire: there is nothing more certain, then that the Atheist
entertaineth his impious opinion, especially for this end: that so he may
attain to be A free man; and not either to serve, or to observe any other man:
no nor any God neither. As it evidently appears in Pherecides Syrus; who
shamed not to glory (but his glory was his shame) That he had never served any
of the gods, Aelian. l. 4. var. (...). c. 28. p. 428.
all his life, and yet h^d always led a very pleasant and merry life. So that,
this was the end which he aimed at, in his impiety, that he might not live
seruilely; as he accounted that he should, if he worshipped any God: reckoning
Piety to be Seruility: which is indeed, clean contrary*. D^o parere libertas
est. Sen^^. l. De vita beat. c. 15. p. 115.
It is the only true Liberty. Hoc ipsum, Philosophiae serulre, libertas est.
Senec. Epist. 8. p. 10* 2. Cor. 3. 17. 2. Pet. 2. 19.
For, as S. Paul testifies, Where the Spirit of the Lord is, there is
liberty. And their impious Liberty, is indeed true Seruility; according to that
of S. Peter: Whilst they promise to others liberty, they themselves are the
servants of corruption. And the Holy Ghost adds a reason: For, of whom a may
is overcome, of the same is he brought in bondage. They make themselves
servants, unto all the corrupt fancies of their own addle heads; and to all
the corrupt desires of their own idle bellies. For these two be the Atheists
chief and principal masters: whom they serve, with more base and abject
seruility, then ever any slave served, in the cruellest captivity. And well may
they be so. For, according to the Paradoxe of the Stoics, mentioned by the
Orator: Omnes improbi, Cic. Paradox. 5.
serui: All wicked men are slaves. They that will not serve God himself, who
is their only true master, are given over, by Gods justice, to serve two
other Masters, exacting vile services, The Ambition of vain glory, and, the
lusts of their own belly. Two most unjust and imperious masters: insulting,
and dominering over them, as over slaves: commanding, and enjoining them every
base thing: and yet enforcing them to obey them, with no less exactions then
the Egyptian taske-masters. E^od. 5. 10. 11. etc.
The first of them, compelling them, as it were to gather straw, by serving the
vain breath of the peoples fond applause: the other of them compelling them to
labor in the Brick-kilne; by serving the burning lusts of their own wicked
bellies: thus detaining them in more then Egyptian slauishnes. So that, in
their declining of the service of God, they gain not that freedom, which they
hoped, and propounded; but fall into that thraldom, which they desired to
avoid: as Saint Augustine has truly, and wisely observed. Nego, esse quenquam
istorum, qui nihil colendum existimant; qui non, Aug. l. de V^^a (...). c. 38.
To. 1. p. 702.
aut carnalibus gaudijs subditus sit, aut potentiam vanam foueat, aut spectac
ulo aliquo delectatus insaniat. Ita nescientes diligunt temporalia, vt inde
beat^tud^nem expectent. His autem rebus, quibus quisque beatus vult effici,
seruiat necesse est, velit, nolit. There is none of all those men, which desire
to serve nothing; but that he, either serves his own carnal desires, or his
vain ambitions, or his giddy pleasures. So loving these outward and temporal
things, that they think to find in them a perfect happiness. Now, every man
s^rueth all those things, will he, nill he, whereby he is in hope, to attain
unto felicity. Concluding in the same place, that Sua sibi vitia dominari
patiuntur; vellibidine, vel superbia, vel curio sitate damnati: They suffer,
even their own vices, to dominere, and rule over them; their lust, and their
pride, and their curious ambition. And this (as Saint Paul teaches) falls
out, Romans 1* 24 25. 26. 27. 2^. 29.
by the hand of Gods most just vengeance, that They who refuse to serve their
Creator, should by him, be given over, unto their vile affections; yea, even
into a reprobate sense, to serve their own lusts, and uncleanness, and all
manner of unrighteousness; fornication, wickedness, covetousness,
maliciousness, envy, debate, deceit; and a number of such like, which, even
there, he reckons up. And therefore the Atheist is very far, from that
supposed liberty, which (in choosing of his Atheism) he promised unto
himself: being thereby made a servant, not only of many Masters, but also of
most base and unworthy Masters. Turpissimus seruus, Dominorum turpiorum: a
most base servant, of more baser Masters.

3 But yet more particularly of Vainglory, The Atheists base serving of his
own Ambition. Cic. l. 1. Tus^. p. 113.
and of Luxury. These two, above all the rest, are most served, by the Atheist.
For, first, for Vainglory. It is noted by the Orator, that of all sorts of
men, there is none of them transported, with the wind of ambition, more
greatly, then those persons, which have been of greatest name among the
Philosophers. Who, even in those Books, which they have written against
V^ine-glory, as openly condemning it; yet have added their own names, as
secretly affecti^^ it. And therefore, Tertullian gives them deserved titles,
(...). 1. p. 26^.
when he calls the Philosophers, but Gloriae animalia, and Famae
negociatores. The Creatures of ambition, and the Traders for a name. In (...).
c. 4^. p. 72.
Unto which two, Hierom adds, Hier. Epis^. ad Iulianum To. 1. p. 2^7.
that they be, Vilia popularis aurae mancipia: The base Slaves of the Peoples
praise. But yet, of all the Philosophers, I do not find any, so infinitely
possessed, with the wind of V^ine-glory, as those men, that have been most
possessed, with Atheism: as we may see, (...). in vita ^ionis. p. 142.
for an instance, in Bion of Boristhenes. Who, seeing that by all his Lectures
of Atheism, he could not gain, so much as one Disciple to follow him: that he
might not seem, so utterly deserted and despised, he hired a company of
Sailors, to follow him up and down, in the habit of Scholars, through the
chief streets of the Town, and with them he went ietting toward the
Schools, as if he had bin followed, with a great train of Disciples. Now,
what a miserable servant of Ambition was this man, that durst thus impotently
affect it, where he might so easily be detected? And the same servile
affectation of Vainglory and Ambition, Lact. l. de Ira Dei. c. 9. p. 455.
may likewise be observed, in all the rest of them. Insomuch, that Lactantius
makes their ambition, to be the very fountain of their impiety, and Atheism.
And, he gives there for instance, Diagoras, and Theodorus, who, having not the
wisdom, to give honor to themselves, by any new invention of their own;
they sought to clime unto it, by confuting the received opinions of others. And
so chose, for the subject of their contradiction, that most ancient, and most
generally approved opinion, That there is a God. And this (for their glories
sake) they would needs confute. In the second of which two, that is, in
Theodorus (who, for his notable impiety, was called cognomento, Atheos) it is
a thing that is very worthy of observation; that, as by mere ambition, he was
led unto his Atheism: so by the same ambition, he was led to renounce the
same again. Lae^t, in vita Ari^tip. p. 77.
And that by this witty strategeme. The Philosopher Stilpo, on a time, came
unto him: and, being willing to make a trial, whether he could inwardly be
persuaded (as he outwardly pretended) That there was indeed no God? he set
upon him, with this Question. Tell me (o Theodorus) whether thou be such a one
indeed, as thou art commonly esteemed? He, thinking that he had meant; Whether
he were indeed, a true Atheist, or no? answered him; He was so: that he was
the very same, that the people esteemed him. Why then (says Stilpo) thou art
surely, no Atheist; but thou art, indeed a very God: artificially insinuating,
that so the people esteemed him. With which idle conceit, Theodorus being
tickled, and loath to repel so glorious an asscription; he thought it better
to renounce his former opinion. And so, from thence forward, he held, That
there was no God; unless that he himself were (happily) a God. By which his
ambition, he cast himself into so great a scorn; that he, which before was
called in detestation, Theodorus (...), Laert. in vita Aristippi. p. 73.
Theodorus the Mock-God; was called afterward, in derision, Theodorus (...),
Theodorus the Mockt-God. Whereby it appears, that the Atheist is truly a very
slave of Vainglory; serving it more basely, then ever any servant did the
cruellest Tyrant. For, Tyrants can compel their servants, but unto outward
observance: but they cannot enforce them, unto any inward opinion, as you see
Vainglory can. It can compel the Atheist, not only to accept, but also to
reject his Athe^sme. And therefore, the Atheist cannot be a free man. He
gayneth not his liberty, by all his impiety. But, though he renounce Gods
religion; because he would not serve him: yet serves he much more basely,
unto his own Ambition. And in serving of it, he serves the Devil himself:
because he will not serve God. For Ambitionis via, est Diaboli adoratio:
Bernard in Psalm. 90. Sermon. 6. p. 291.
if we may believe Saint Bernard: The way of ambition, is the Devils
adoration. So that now, the Atheist has not only a Master, but also a God to
serve: though, by the choice of his Atheism, he sought to exempt himself
from both of them. But in them both, he is entangled. For that, being a base
servant, he must needs have a Master, and he must needs have a God. And so,
renouncing the true one, he has light upon another, that is more worthy of
him. A base God, and a base Master, for a base servant, and a base worshipper.

4 But, as yet we have not seen all his baseness, in his serving. For, The
Atheists base service of his Belly.
beside his own ambition, he serves yet another Master; yea, and with no
less devotion. And that is, his idle Belly. For, the serving of whose
appetite, it is incredible, what base and servile pains he does take. He
rises up early, and he goes to bed late; he sweateth, he freezeth, he
toyleth, he labors, he lies in wait to spoil the heaven of all her
fowls, the earth of all her beasts, (...). To. 2. P. 106.
the sea of all her fishes. And all this, to s^rue his Belly: that so (as
Saint Hierom speaks) he may, ex cibis quam preci^sis, stercus confi^ere. That
he may turn the costliest meat, into the vilest (...). For (as Sen^^a truly
notes) Omnia ist^, tam solicit scrutata, vari^^ (...), cumsubicri^^ ventrem,
vna atque eadem foeditas occupat. All these delicacies, that are sought so
carefully, and sawc't so daintily, when they come into the belly, they are
wrapped up together, in one and the same foedity. Is not this a noble service?
And yet all this, (...). To. 1. p 103.
and much more, does the Atheis^ most basely offer unto his belly: serving it
not only with many dishes, but also with many rancks of dishes. Struices
con^innat patinarias (as the Comic speaks) He makes such vpheaped piles of
dishes. (...). Epist. 111 p. 2^0
Yea, and not only with wholesome and natural meats, (...) A^t. 1. Sec. 1.
P. 4^9.
to satisfy his true appetite; but also with curious and artificial sawces,
to procure a false appetite: provoking lust it self, further then it provoke
him; (...)
and even oppressing it with his services, and thinking that he has never
served it enough. But (as Seneca well observes) Non sunt ad P^pinam dentibus,
and ventre, and ore contenti: oculis quoque gulosi sunt. They are not content,
to be Epicures, only in their teeth, or in their bellies, or in their mouths;
but they affect to be gluttons, even in their eyes. Sen^c. ^ 3 not. Qu^est. c.
18. P. 51.
Yea, and even Solomon observes the same kind of Epicurisme: Pro. 23. 31.
Sen^^. ^p^st. 93. p. 217.
Look not thou upon the wine, when it is red, etc. Now, he that thus seruilely
attends to his Belly, must needs be very far from the state of true Liberty.
For, Nemo liber est, qui corpori seruit; says Seneca. Nay, Multis seruiet, qui
corpori seruit: as in another place he adds. He cannot be a freeman, that is
a servant to his body. Nay, he that serves it, is a servant to very many.
Epist. 14 p 21. Aug. l. de vera (...). c. 38. To. 1. c. 38 To. 1. p. 702.
Omnibus mund^ partibus seruiunt (says Saint Augustine) qui proptere^ nihil
colendum esse putant, ne seruiant: They become the base servants of all the
Creatures in the world, who, for the fear of serving, do refuse to worship
God. Now, in thus serving his belly with such a Religion, he makes it, in
effect, to become a god unto him. Nay, who among all the heathen, does worship
any God, either so carefully, or so costly, as the Atheist does his belly? Who
makes his Kitchen, his Temple; his Cook, his Priest; his Caldron, his Sensor;
his Nidor, his Incense; his Table, his Altar; his meat, his Sacrifice: and he
offers it up unto his own idle Belly; as it were, Hugo. de. Scto. Vict. l.
2. ^ Claustro Anim^. c. 19. To. 2. p. 37.
unto the idol Bell, or Dagon: as Hugo de Scto. Victore, has allegorized very
wittily. Solent Dijs, Templa construi, Altaria erigi, Ministri ad seruiend^^
ordinari, pecudes immolari, thura a concremari: Deo siquidem ventri, Templum,
est Coquina; altar, mensa; ministri, conqui; immolatae pecudes, coctae carn^s;
fumus incensorum, odor saporum. And, as Ter^ullian further adds (who lights
into the very same Allegory, and maintains it most excellently) Deus illi,
venture est; and pulmo, Templum; and aqualiculus, Altar; and Sacerdos, Coquus;
and Sanctus spiritus, Tertul. l. cont. (...) c. 16. p. 598.
nidor; and condimenta, charismata; and ructus, prophetia: His Belly, is his
god; his Lungs, his Temple; his Stomach, his Altar; his Cook, his Priest; his
holy spirit, the fume of his meat; his Sawces, his Graces; and his belchings,
his Prophecies. And so (as it follows but a little after) Apud illum Agape,
Cap 17.
in caca^is seruet; fides, in culinis calet; spes, in ferculis iacet: His
charity, boyleth in his K^ttles; his faith, fryeth in his victuals; and his
hope, lies in his dishes. And thus, that which Varro affirms of the
Epicures, is true also in the Atheists: that, Ganeonibus, ^^lina est viuendi
modulus: that the walls of their Kitch in, Nonius in voce Culina, p. 514.
are the bounds of their living, and their lust their only desire of life.
For, this may be generally observed in all of them: that he, that is an Atheist
in his opinion, he is always a belly-god for his Religion. And he, that has
no other God, he will always have his own belly for his god. Which the
Apostle teaches plainly, in telling us, there be some men, Whose god is
their Belly. And Gregory delivers in a very fit allegory, Phil. 3. 19. Greg.
l. 31. Mor. c. 26. T^. 1. p. 195. 4. King^ 25. 10.
that Princeps Coquorum destruxit muros Jerusalem: as it is recorded in the
last book of the Kings. Nabuzar-adan the chief Steward (or, after some
translations, The chief of the Cooks) destroyed, and cast down the walls of
Jerusalem, that is, (in his mystical exposition) The lust of the belly
destroys all Piety. Quis enim Coquorum princeps, nisi venture accipitur; cui
diligentissima, a coquentibus, cura seruitur? Who is this Prince of the Cooks,
but only the belly; unto whom so many Cooks do attend, with such seruility?
Muros igitur Jerusalem, princeps Coquorum destruit: quia virtutes animae (dum
non restring^tur) venture perdit. Then the Prince of Cooks destroys the walls
of Jerusalem, whilst the belly being pampered, overthrows the virtues of the
mind. So that, where the belly is a god, there it will have noue other God;
and where there is none other God, Non potest D^minum Deum suum dice^e is, cui
ve^ter est Deus. Orig. in c. 1. Romans To. 2. p. 463. Pl^. de ora. defect. To. 1.
p. 674. Cic. l. 2. de Diuinat. p. 268. C c. l. 5. Tu^c. p. 171.
there the belly is a god. As Plutarch Observes in blasphemous Polyphemus: who
professes, he contemned all the other gods; and yet confesses, that he
sacrificed to his Belly, as his God: which he calls, Geniorum maximum: the
greatest of the gods. And the Orator exemplifieth the same, in Epicurus: who
being once grown unto that profanenes and impiety, that he did, but, Deos ioc
andi causa, introducere: that he made mention of the gods, only by way of
sport: he was led from thence, into that wantonness and luxury, that he did,
with Metrodorus, Omne bonum in visceribus medullisque condere: that he placed
both his God, and all his good, in his Belly.

Yea, and Aristophanes insinuates the same thing unto us: when he makes
Diagoras (a known Reuiler of all their other gods) yet to be a true worshipper
of the drunken God Bacchus. -- Iaccum cantu celebrant, more Diagorae.
With solemn Songs, Aristoph. in R^nis. Act. 1. Sce. 7. p. 250.
they Bacchus grace,
After the manner of Diagoras.
Thus the Atheist (as you see it directly proved) is neither without Master,
nor a God: but is indeed, a base servant, both of many Masters, and of many
gods. For, though he do most impiously reriounce all others gods; yet serves
he, most basely, these three Belly-gods; Bacchus, Ceres, Venus. All whom, the
Comicall Poet conioyneth in one sentence: Sine Cerere, Terent. E^nuch. Act. 4.
Sce. 5. p. 82. ^.
and Libero, friget Venus.
Poor Venus staru's with cold, and soon will dye,
If Wine, and Belli-cheere, make not supply.
So that, though all other gods do frigere, with the Atheist; yet those three
forenamed Belly-gods, do incalescere plus satis: his service of the first two,
of Bacchus, and Ceres, drawing in (of necessity) his service of the third; his
service of Venus: as you see it expressed in the former sentence. For (as Saint
Hierom well observes, unto the same purpose) Luxuria matter libidinis est,
Hieron. Epist. Am^ndo. To. 3. p. 135.
ventremque distentum cibo, and vini potionibus irrigatum, voluptas sequitur
genitalium. Est pro ordine membrorum, and ordo vitiorum. R^otousnesse is
always the mother of wantonness. For the belly being filled well with meats,
and watered with wines, begets the pleasure of her neighbor parts. And so
there follows an order in the vices* according to the order of the members.
And Tertullian also unto the same purpose, Tertul. l. cont. (...). c. 1. p. 590.
Monstrum haberetur libido, ^ine gula; cum duo hec tam vnita, atque concreta
sint; vt si disiungi omnino potuissent, ipsi prius ventri pudenda non
adhaererent. Specta corpus and vna r^gio est. Denique pro dispositione
membrorum ordo vitiorum: It were a plain monster to see lust without
Belly-cheere. For these two vices are so straightly conjoined, that if you
^nd^^uour to have them disioyned, you must cut off the parts of lust from your
bodies. Consider of your bodies, and of their several Regions, and you shall
find the order of those vices, to follow the order of those members.

Thus the Atheist, though he seek to make himself a freeman, by the choice of
his Atheism: yet is he, in very deed, the greatest bondman in the world;
serving his own most base and refuse parts, with all most denout and humble
service; compelling the most excellent and imperial parts of his soul, to
serve the most abject and ministerial parts of his body: and honoring (in a
sort) those parts, as his gods, which are scarcely worthy to be his servants.
Which is indeed, a true servitude, yea, and a most base one too.

5 But it may be here objected, That in all this, The Atheist is a base slave
unto himself. Cic. Paradox. 5. p. 424.
he serves but himself, and not any other thing. And therefore is truly and
properly a freeman. Because, Libertas, est facultas viuendi vt velis: Freedom,
is nothing else, but only a faculty, to live as we please. So the Orator
defines it. And so the Poet confirms it. An quisquam est alius liber, (...).
Sa^yr. 5. p. 10. b.
nisi ducere vitam,
Cui licet, vt voluit; Licet vt volo viuere; non sum
Liberior Bruto?
Can any man be free, but he, that may live as he list?
Le me live, so; then I as free, as Brutus as the best.
But unto this I answer, that it may fitly be added, which there follows in
the Poet: -- Mendose colligis, inquit
Stoicus hic, aurem mordaci lotus aceto.
You gather wisely, says the Stoic here,
Whose Ear is steept in biting vinegar.
Nay, it is a false collection, not only in the judgment of those rigid
Philosophers, but also of all sober, and wisely-iudging Christians. For, first,
he is not a freeman, that does scruire sibi; but rather he, that does sibi
imperare: He is not a freeman that is a servant to himself, but he that is a
master over himself: that does, cupiditatibus suis imperare; that rules and
commands over his own lusts and appetites: as the Orator observes in the
fore-alledged place. Where he describes a freeman by these commanding
actions. Refraenct prius libidines, spernat voluptates, iracundiam teneat,
coerceat auaritiam, caeteras animi labes, repellat. Tum incipiat alijs
imperare, cum ipse improbissimis dominis, dedecori, and turpitudini parere
desierit. Dum quidem his obedierit, liber habendus omnino non erit. Let him
restrain his lusts, refrain his pleasures, curb his impatience, repress his
covetousness, and repulse his other vices. And then let him begin to rule
over others, when he has learned, not to obey those forenamed dishonorable and
most wicked masters. For whilst he obeys them, he cannot be a freeman.
Agreeable unto that sentence of Solomon: He that rules his own mind, Pro.
16. 32.
is better then he that wins a City.

Again, it is to be observed, that he defines not, Liberty to be a faculty,
to live as we lust; but to live as we will. Now between lust, and will, there
is this substantial difference: that, Lust is a faculty of the unreasonable
soul: as Aristotle affirms, Fit in participe rationis voluntas; and in
ratione vacant cupiditas atque ira: The will is in the reasonable part of the
soul: but anger and desire in the unreasonable part: as we may see in brute
beasts: who being wholly led by lust, their actions accordingly be filthy and
beastly. But the Will is a faculty of the reasonable soul: as we may see in
men, that are guided by discretion. For, Arist. l. 3. de A^ma. c. 9. 10. 1. p.
839.
Voluntas (as Aristotle expressly defines it) est appetitus bonicum ra^ione:
The will is an appetite or desire of some good thing, directed according unto
reason. Quis igitur viuit vt vult (says the Orator) nisi qui recta sequit^r?
No man then lives as he would, Est voluntas intellectus exte^sus. Scaliger.
Ex. 307. 3. p. 923.
unless he does follow the thing that is good: So that, Aris^. 1. R^etoric. ad
Theodec. c. 10. To. 2. p. 1210.
those things which a man does according to his will, he always does
according unto reason: Cic. vbi. supra. Rom* 7. 19. 20.
but those things that he does according to his lust, as they most times are
contrary unto reason; so sometimes they be contrary, even unto his will. As we
may evidently see in the Apostle S Paul: I do not that good thing that I
would; but the evil which I would not, that do I. Now, if I do that I would
not, it is no more I that do it, but the sin that dw^lleth in me. So that,
his will, that led him unto good: his lust, and his appetite (which in that
place he calls the law of his members) that led him unto ill, contrary to his
will. Neither may this be seen only in the Apostle S. Paul, whose will was
regenerated and directed by religion; but also, in diverse of the unregenerate
Heathen; who were directed only by their reason. Phaedra, in Seneca, Se^ec. in
Hippol. Act. 1. Sec. 2. p. 176.
complains in this fashion.

-- Quae memoras, scio
Vera esse, Nutrix: sed furor cogit sequi
Peiora: vadit animus in praeceps sciens,
Rem^aque frustra, vana consilia appetens.
I know those things thou say, are true, good Nurse:
But fury forces me to follow worse.
My mind is hurried headlong up and down,
De^iring better counsel, yet finds none.
And we may see the same conflict in Medea, Ovid. l. 7. Metam. p. 249.
in Ovid.

Sed trahit invitam noua vis, aliudque cupido,
Men's aliud suadet. Video melior^, proboque,
Deteriora sequor. --
Strange violent forces draw me on unwilling,
Reason persuades me this, my love rebelling.
I see, and know the better. Here Is my curse:
That, notwithstanding, I embrace the worse.
And so likewise, Plaut. in (...). Act. 3. S^e. 2. p. 736.
Lesbonicus makes his complaint, in Plautus. Sciebam, vt esse me deceret:
facere, non quibam, miser.
Ita vi Veneris victus, otio captus, in fraudem incidi.
I knew, poor soul, what me became: But yet I could not do it.
Mine idle lust me overcame: And led me captive to it.
Where he confesses directly, that he yielded unto them, as a slave and a
Captive; and not as a free man. Yea, and the Apostle S. Paul confesses the
same thing, Romans 7. 23.
that the law of his members, rebelling against the law of his mind, did lead
him captive into sin. Now he that is a Captive, he surely is a bondman: He
cannot be a free man. As Tullie plainly proves, in the fore-alledged place,
enforcing it out of the definition of Bondage; that, Seruitus est obedientia
fracti animi, and abi^cti, and arbi^r^o carentis suo. Slavery is the obedience
of a vanquished and a broken mind, (...) Parado^. 5. p. 425.
which has not the freedom of his own will and judgment. From whence he
there infers, Quis igitur neget, omnes leaves, omnes cupidos, omnes d^mque
improbos, esse servos? Who can therefore deny, but that all light, all
covetous, and all wicked persons, must of necessity, be servants? because
these be the desires, not of their wills, but of their lusts, leading them
violently as Captives.

Neither does his willingness to continue in this service, Senec. Epist. 47 p.
73.
prove him to be no servant: but rather to be a more servile servant. For,
Nulla turpior est seruitus, quam voluntaria: says Seneca. There is no so vile
slavery, as that, which is voluntary. Because this argues that even his v^ry
will is subdued, (...)(...)
and forced to yield unto it; and that the most Prince-like and Hegemonical
part of his foul, which ought to rule over all, is now it self become
servile, and a slave unto all. So that, his willingness to serve such base
things, Ex. 21. 5. 6.
is the great brand of his slauishnes: as it was among the Israelit^sh
servants; when they were content to continue still in their Bondage. When the
Servants Prof^ssed, that they so loved their Masters, that they desired not to
be free from their service; then the Master was appointed, to bore their ears
through, with a Nawle: and so to mark them, for perpetual servants. So that
the Atheists willingness, is the very note of the extremity of his baseness;
and that he is no better, then a perenni-seruus: as the Comic speaks,
(...). in Persa. Act. 3. s^e. 3. 4. 640. 640.
a branded and a perpetual Servant. For, as the Apostle Paul teaches us: To
whomsoever we give our selves as servants to obey, (though never so willingly)
his servants we be: Whether it be of sin unto death, Romans 6. 16.
or of obedience unto righteousness.

As for that Objection, that the Atheist bestows all this service, upon none
other thing, but only upon himself: I have showed, that to be otherwise. But
let it be granted, that the Atheist indeed, both intends, and extends all
his actions, counsels, and endeavors, but only to himself; making so his
own self, the very end of himself: Yet, even from hence it will follow, that
this his excessive love of himself, in thus honoring and serving himself,
above all things; and regarding nothing else, but only himself, and for
himself; does make him become a very god unto himself. And so, even this way
too, he^ is not without his god. For it is a true rule, that is given by
Origon, that, Orig. Hom 2. in Iud. To, 1. p. 341
Quod vnusquis^ praecaeteris colit, and quod super omnia miratur, ac diligit,
hoc illi Deus est: What thing soever any man does most affect, and what thing
soever he honors and loves best, that same is unto him a God. Which
sentence is so agreeable both unto truth and Godliness, that it is confirmed by
diverse other of the fathers, Ma^^^. Him. ^3 p. 474.
almost in the same words. Ad qu^mcunque remcor alicuius deuincitur, and quo
cupido eius trahitur, illa res est eius Deus: says Macarius. To what thing
soever a man most straightly tyeth the desire of his heart, that same is unto him
his God. And so likewise, S^dulius: Non potest Deum suum dicere is, cui venture
est Deus, aut cui gloria seculi, (...) in cap. 1. Rom p. 3. a. Item Origin* in
c. 1. Romans To. 2. p. 463.
and pompa mundi, aut potentia rerum caducarum Deus est: reckoning up
nominat^m, all the Atheists forenamed gods. He cannot truly say, The Lord is
his God, that has his Belly for his god, or that has the glory of the world,
and the pomp of these earthly things for his God. What then? He presently
adds, Qu^c quid vnus quisque, sup^ a caetera colit, hoc illi Deus est.
Wh^tsoeuer a man loves and honors most, that he always makes his God. And
so the Atheist, loving and honoring himself most of all things, does thereby
make himself his own^ God. For, the principality of our love and our service,
is so peculiar unto God, that he which has it not, is not to us a God,
although he be the true God: and that he, which has it, he is to us a God,
although he be a false God. Why then, the Atheist, giving the principality of
his love and service, only to himself, does thereby become a God unto
himself. And therefore cannot be said, to be without a God. For, in making
himself an Idol-God, he becomes both an Idol-maker, and an Idol it self,
and an Idol-worshipper: offending so, most grossly, in all the three several
degrees of Idolatry. So that, howsoever the Atheist denies God i^ words; yet,
even by his self-love, he confesses him in deeds, which is a more real, and a
powerful confession. For (as Leo truly notes) Multo validiora sunt exempla,
quam verba; and before opere docetur, quam voce. Examples and actions, are
more forcible then speeches; and works are a great deal better teachers, Leo
Sermon in fest. St^ Laurent p. 176.
then words. And therefore the Atheist, affirming in his deed, That there is a
God; and denying it but in word, we may justly reject his denial, with that
scorn, Cic. l. 3. Tusc p. 147.
Quid verba au diam, cum facta videam? What should I hear his words, when as I
see his deeds?

CHAP. 12.
The Atheists second end, is, to free himself from fear. 2. Yet no man
fears more: as he bewrays, at three times. 3. When he dreameth. 4. When it
thundereth. 5. When he dies. 6. This his fear, is a clear Argument, that he
thinks, Th^re is a God.

AS the first end, which the Atheist propounded, in the choice of his Atheism,
The Atheist de^^ (...) fear Plut. l. De supers^it. To. (...) p. 281.
is, Non seruire: To free himself from s^ruing; so his second end in it, is,
Non metuere: To free himself from fearing. Which (as the Orator has well
observed) is another kind of servitude. Omnis metus servitus est. All
fearfulnes is a kind of slauishnes. Serui enim est timere: says Diogenes: He
is but a slave, Cic. Pa^^d. 5. p. 425.
that lives in fear. Yea and a base slave too. For (as the Orator observes)
Habet humilitatem metus: L^e^t. in vita (...). p 201. Cic. l 3. Tus. p. 143.
All fearefulnes has in it a kind of humble baseness. Cic. l. 5. de. (...). p.
106.
And there is indeed no slavery, which the soul does naturally more detest
and abhor, then it does to live in fear. Neither is there any liberty, that
it desires more earnestly, then it does, to be freed from fearfulness and
dread. Insomuch that Democritus esteemed it true Happiness, for any man to have
Animum terrore liberum: To have his soul, free from all terror and fearing.
Without which security, it cannot enjoy so much as a shadow of any fe^citie;
nay, not of any comfort, or of any contentment: as it is very truly observed,
(...)
by Plutarch: Anino, gaudium aut laetitiae ingenerari non potest, (...)
vacuitatem metus, and fiduciam, ac tranquillitatem is pro fundamento
substernat. The soul cannot have in it, any true joy, and comfort; unless the
some be founded, both in security, and in confidence, and in tranquillity. All
which do imply a vacuity from fear.

And therefore, the Atheist indeauoureth by all means, to shake off this yoke
of fearing, as well as he does the former yoke of serving: hoping then, to be
indeed an absolute freeman. But this freedom from fear he can never
attain, as long as he harbors in his heart, any sense of Religion. Because,
Religion it self is a kind of fear. Religion is nothing else, but the fear
of some God: as the Creator himself has expressly defi^ed it. Religio est,
Cic. l. 2. (...). p. 98. and 84.
quae superioris cuiusdam Naturae (quam Diuinam vocant) curam ceremoniamque
aff^rt. Religion is an affection, which begets a care of worshipping a
certain superior Nature, which is commonly called God. Yea and (as in the same
book he teaches) This care is not without a fear. Religio, in metu and
ceremonia Deorum est Religion consists in the fear and worship of the Gods.
Mark, not only in the worship, but also in the fear of God. For indeed
wheresoever there is any Religion, or any opinion, that There is a God; there
goes (upon necessity) a fear of him with it. And therefore, it is the great
complaint of all Atheists; that the religion of the gods, is a very oppression
unto the souls of men. Lucretius complains, that there was a time: Humana
a^te oculos foede cum vita iaceret, l* ^^ret. l. 1. p. 3.

In terris oppressa* graui sub Relligione:
When as with shame, man's life on earth did groan,
Pressed down with burden of Religion:
until a certain Greek, a very deep wise man, began to plant in men a
contrary opinion; and so to free their minds from the terrors of their gods.
And Metrodorus likewise (as Tully reports of him) clamat, Dijs omnium
mortalium mentes esse perterritas: He cries out, (...) Deo^. p. 195.
that the received opinion of the Gods, has filled all men's minds with fears,
and affrightments. Yea, and Epicurus himself complains against all the
Philosophers, that, by their believing of a provident God, Ibid. p. 191.
they did, imponere ceruicibus nostris sempit^rnum Dominum, quem dies and
noctes timeremus. They have set upon our shouldars an everlasting Master, whom
both day and night we cannot choose but fear. Adding in the same place: Quis
enim non time^t omnia prouidentem, and cogitautem, and animadvertentem, and
omnia ad se pertinere putantem; curiosum, and plenum negotij Deum? For, who can
choose but fear, a provident, a remembering, and an observing God; a God so
curious, and so full of business, that he thinks all things to belong unto
himself? And therefore, the Epicare, to free himself from this fear; though
he be forced by strength of reason, to confess, There is a God: yet has
fancied such a god, as need not to be feared: making him to be one, that
neither gives regard, nor takes account of the actions of men: Nec quicquam
alieni curans, nec sui: Neither regarding his own, nor any other man's
businesses, Cic. l. 2. de Diuinat. p. 278. (...) p. 36.
more negligent and supine then Aesops Incuriosus, that cared for just nothing.
So, by denying God his Providence, seeking utterly to extirpe all his fear out
of himself. For, he that regards no body, needs not himself to be
regarded of any But this is to be, but a Semi-Atheist. And therefore, the
perfect Atheist, know^^g, that if a God be granted, his Providence cannot, with
any reason, be denied; therefore (to make all sure, and to secure himself
from fear) he thinks it the (...) way, to deny Gods essence, as well as his
Providence: and simply to pr^nounce, that There is no God. For then it will
follow, that he ne^de not to be feared, if at all he be not.

2 Thus the Atheist, to rid himself from that inward fear, which rides on
his conscience, God has planted a fear of himself in all men.
and which naturally accompanies the opinion of God, if that once be admitted;
he affirms, There is none: yea, and strives to believe it too. But yet all
this in vain. For, as God has ingrafted into the minds of all men, a notion
of himself; so has he likewise, a fear of himself: as a sense of his being,
so a sensible fear of him. As even Lucretius himself confesses. He that will
not confess, that There is a God; yet, confesses, (...). l. 5. p. 226.
that all men have a fear of God in them. -- Est mortalibus insitus horror;
Qui delubra Deum nova toto suscitat orbi
Terrarum, and ^estis cogit celebrare diebus.
There is an inbred fear in all men's hearts,
Which has begotten this, on all men's parts;
T'erect new Temples, and new Holy Days
Unto their gods, to celebrate their praise.
Making this inward fear, to be the first beginning, of all piety and
religion. Yea, Aug. l. de vera Relig. c. 17. To. 1. p. 688.
and so likewise does Saint Augustine. Psalm. 111. 10. ^actan. l. de Ira Dei, ^.
11. p. 465.
Pietas timore inchoatur, charitate perficitur: True Piety is begun by fear,
but perfected by charity. Yea, and the Psalmist, in effect, confesses the
same: where he tells us, that, The fear of God is the beginning wisdom. And,
Lactantius confirms it, when he says, that, Religio nulla esse potest, vbi
metus nullus est: That there can be no Religion, where there is no fearing. And
therefore, Isidore deriueth the Greek word, (...), which signifies God,
Isidor. l. 7. Orig. c. 1. p. 977.
from another Greek word, (...), which signifies Fear: Quod, eum colentibus,
sit timor: because, they that worship him, do also ^eare him. And so likewise
does Festus. In which signification of the name of God, Fes^us, in voce, Deus.
p. 279.
they may seem to allude, unto that appellation, of the Patriarch Jacob; where
he calls the true God, Genesis 31. 42, 53.
(as it were by periphrasis) The fear of Isaac his Father. Because, as God
has imprinted into the hearts of all men, a natural persuasion, That there is
a God: so has he likewise implanted in them, Ter. l. de Testim. Any. c. 2. p.
85.
a natural reverence, and fear of that God. So that, Terfullians question
has an easy solution. Vnde naturalis timor animae, in Deum? Whence comes
this natural fear of a God, which every man feels within his own mind?
Surely, it comes only from that God, who ought only to be feared, as the
Prophet Jeremy has expressly testified. And therefore, ler. 32. 40.
Statius affirms, that by this inward fear, the Heathens first were moved,
to believe, and worship God. Primus in orb Deos fecit timor.
Fear was the first, S^atius l. 3. Thebaid. p. 243.
that gods begot:
Till fear began, the gods were not.
And so likewise does Dares Phrygius: who calls Fear, the father of the
gods, D^o r^m Genitorem. Quippe, Dares Phrygius l. 1. (...) Bello Ir^iano. p. 6.
D^um Genitore Metu, men's caca creavit
Ditem Vmbris, Coelo Superos, and Numina Ponto.
Through god-begetting Fear,
Man's blinded mind did rear,
A Hell-god, to the Ghosts;
A Heau'n-God, to those Hosts;
Yea, gods unto the Seas;
Fear did create all these.
Whereby it appears, that the fear of God, is as naturally ingrafted, into
the minds of all men, as is the opinion of his being: this being a true
consequent unto that, and following it as naturally, as the shadow does the
body: And that generally in all men, without exception.

But yet, The Atheist fears God more then any other man.
most specially in the Atheist, above all other men. They ^aue, indeed, the
true fear of God which begets Religion, a great deal less then any other
men: but, that servile fear, which begets confusion, a great deal more. It
is not all their Atheism, that can free them from his slavish fear: but it
begets it in them rather. There is no man that fears God so much, as they
that would seem to fear him least: no man so basely fears him, as those men
that seem the most to cont^mne him. For, it is the work of Gods justice, that
they which refuse to fear him as his Sons, shall be compelled to fear him
as his slaves. And so indeed they do. For (as Eliphas teaches in the book of
Job) There is a continual sound of fear, in his ears* and a contin^^^ sword
before his eyes: the fear of Gods wrath, Job. 15* 20. 21. 22.
and the sword of his iustic^: Cic. l. 5. Tusc. p. 175.
which, like Dam^cles his sword, hangs still over his head. Yea, and not
only so (for these things they have great and just cause to fear) but (as the
Psalmist further teaches) They are oftentimes afraid, Ps. 53. 5. Pro. 28. 1.
where no fea^e is. So that (as King Solomon observes) The wicked flies, even
when no man pursues: Omnia tuta timens: being chased by the terrors of his
own guilty mind, as it were, by hellish furies. Thus be there no such base
cowards, as those lus^y Gallants be, which would seem so courageous, as not to
fear even God himself: whereas indeed, they fear the shaking of every little
leaf. For, God himself seems, even in scorn and derision, to sport
himself, with the Atheists, his enemies; and with that panick fear, which he
has cast upon them, I will also laugh at your calamity: I will mock when your
fear comes. Pro. 1. 26. Lucret. l. 5. p. 228.
and appointed continually to infest, and to chase them. Vsque adeo res humanas
vis abdita quaedam
Obterit, and pulchros fasces, saevasque secures
Proculcare, ac ludibrio sibi habere videtur,
says the Poet.

There is a certain secret power unknown,
Which human powers treads and tramples on.
It Princes Scepters, Crowns, all State of men,
But scorns, and spurns, and makes a sport of them.
For, as the Psalmist plainly teaches, When the Kings of the earth, and
Princes of the world, Ps. 2. 2. 4.
do band themselves together against God, He that dwells in the Heaven, does
laugh them to scorn, and the Lord he has them in d^rision. And this is also
confessed by another Heathen Poet: Ergo Deus, quicunque aspexit, ridet, and
odit.
God, (...) Sat. 1^. p. 68. ^.
which beholds it, he does it deride,
Not only so, but hates it beside.
So that, God is not feared by any of his creatures, with greater terror and
horror, then he is by Atheists. For, it may truly and generally be affirmed of
Atheists; which Caecilius very falsely affirms of Christians; that, Deos,
quos, negant, reformidant: That though in words they deny God, Arnob. l. 8.
Cont. Gen^. p 752.
yet in their hearts they fear him: and consequently confess him.

And this fear the Atheist bewrays, at three special times, more eminently
and evidently, then he does at any other; as I have observed out of learned
Writers. Namely, first, when he sleeps: secondly, when it thundreth: and
thirdly, when he dies. At these three special times, when he has not the
command of himself, to use that artificial obluctation, and facing out of the
matter, which he does at other times; but that his soul appears naked, in
his true and simple form, without any a^ting, or fained palliation; then
shows it most plainly that inward fear of God, which before it dissembled,
and artificially veyled.

3 For the first of which three times: to wit, The fear of Atheists in their
dreams.
the time of their sleeping: it is most certain, that no man can endure so
great trouble in his waking, though pressed with never so many outward evils;
as the ungodly man endures in his sleeping, by those fearful dreams and
visions, which at that time seize upon him, and make even sleep it self, with
Euripides calls, Morbi levamen suaue -- Plut. l. de Supers^it. To. 1. Mor. p.
382.

The sweet asswager of ^ll other grief:
yet to become unto them, a grievous terror and vexation. We may partly see
this in Job: who complains in his Book, that, Job. 7. 13. 14 15
when he thought within himself, that his Couch should relieve him, and his
bed bring comfort to him: that then he was so feared with dreams, and
astonished with visions, that his soul desired rather to be strangled, then
with so great anxieties to abide in his bones. So that sleep (even to this
good man) was but, Aug. l. 22 De^iu^t. D^^. ^. 22. To. 5. p. 1374.
Quies inquieta; a restless rest (as S. Augustine speaks) because of those
fearful dreams, wherewith it was disquieted. Then must it needs much more
be so, for their punishment and torment. It is surely true in them; which
Plutarch has observed, that, Somnus, corporis quide est requies, animo interim
terrores obuersantur, somnia and tumultus. Their sleep is indeed a kind of
rest, Plut. l. de. virtut. and vit. Tom. 1. Mor. p. 226.
unto their bodies; but, in the mean time, they do find no rest in their
souls, but terrors and dreams, and perturbed cogitations. As we may plainly
see, in those dreams and visions, that molested the Egyptians, in the time of
their dreadful darkness; with which they were so troubled, that their very
souls fainted: as it is reported, Wis. 17. 13 etc.
in the Book of Wisdom: where he notably describes them. So that (as
Plutarch very truly observes) Somnia, and spectra, and oracul^, and de coelo
seru^tiones, Plut. l. de his qui ^ero (...). To. 2. p. 229.
and quic quid aliud diuinitus obijci videtur, tempestatibus and t^rroribus
percellit male by conscios. Dreams, and Visions, and Oracles, and ^ignes in
the Heavens, and such like divine tokens, do terrify the minds of men of
evil conscience. And this fear grows unto Atheists, from a double cause;
which both of them are founded in their servile fear of God. The first is the
conscience of their own impiety and wickedness: which they needed not to
fear, if they thought there were no God. The second is, the terror of those
nocturnall apparitions, that represent themselves unto them in their dreams:
which they might easily contemn, for vain and idle fancies; but that they are
printed deeper, then can be blotted out, with all their artificial and forced
irrisions.

For the first of those two causes, that is, the conscience of their own
wickedness: though they can easily pass it over in the day time, when they
wake; yet returns it unto them in the night time, when they sleep: and then
tormenteth and afflicts them, with the fear of those punishments, Plato. l.
1. De Repub. p. 532.
which they doubt may expect them after their deaths. As Plato truly notes:
Qui multas habet, in vita, iniquitates, ex ipso somno (tanquam puer^)
frequenter excitus, extimescit, and in pessima speviuit. Those men, that are
guilty of many iniquities in their life, are often times (like fearful
Children) wakened out of their sleep, and lead their lives with very little
comfort. And therefore Tullie (by a kind of moral exposition) interprets
those Furies, which are represented in Tragoedies, affrighting the minds of
impious and ungodly persons, to be nothing else, Cic. 1. De Leg. p. 317.
but the affrightments of their consciehces which fall upon them in their
dreams. Impietatum nulla expiatio est --. Sed impios agitant, insectanturque
Furiae; non ardentibus t^dis (sicut in fabulis) sed angore Conscientiae,
fraudisque crucialu. There is no satisfaction, no sacrifice for Atheism. For
the minds of all Atheists, are tormented by Furies; yet, not with burning
Torches (as we see it, in Tragoedies) but with the grief and anguish of their
own guilty Consciences. Now, what reason can be alleged, why they should be
so perplexed and affrighted with their Consciences (especially in their secret
and hidden transgressions) but only, that they know, that they will be their
accusers, to lay them all open, unto the great Judge? This then is the first
night-torment of the Atheist; the terror, which he sustayneth, from a corrupt
and guilty Conscience.

The second is, the terror of diverse strange dreams, and fearful visions;
wherein God does sometimes, only confer and talk with them: and sometime
beside, plainly show himself unto them, not only conferring, but also
appearing. For the first of those two sorts, Job tells us in his Book, that
God will speak unto a man, Job. 33. 14 15.
once or twice, though he see it not, in dreams and visions of the night. As
we may see in King Abimelech: with whom God conferred, Genesis 20. 3.
and talked in a dream, and threatened him with death, for detayning of
Abraham's wife away from him. And these interlocutorie and dialoguising dreams,
were not unknown, even to the very Heathens; as it evidently appears by that
position of Possidonius: That, Cic. l. 1. De Diuinat. p. 251.
Dij cum dormientibus colloquuntur: That the Gods do oftentimes talk with men
in their sleeps. Of the second of those kinds; wherein, not only a voice is
heard, but also an image and resemblance seen; we also read in the Book of
Job: where Eliphaz gives himself for an instance, Job. 4. 12. 13. etc
saying: In the thoughts of the visions of the night, when sleep falls upon
men; Fear came upon me, and dread, which made all my bones to tremble. And the
wind passed before me, and made all the hayres of my flesh to stand up. Then
stood one; and I knew not his face; an image was before mine eyes, and in
silence I heard a voice. And this kind of apparition was likewise known unto
the Heathen: as appears in Iamblicus: who describing the visions, which are
sent from God, he says, that they do commonly come between sleeping and
waking: and that then, Iamblic. l. De Mysteriis. c. 22. p. 52.
Breues audiuntur voces, quid agendum sit admonentes; and aliquando Spiritus
quidam, non corpulentus, non tractabilis, se iacentibus circumfundit. Qui tamen
non perspicitur, sed alio quodam sensu, and animaduer sione percipitur. We
hear certain short voices: which, of diverse things admonish us: Yea, and
sometimes certain Spirits (though not corpulent, nor palpable) do compass
round about us: which, though they be not visibly discerned, yet may they, by
another kind of sense, be perceived. The like appears in Lucretius. who
numbreth these fearful visions, among the first causes, which begat in men's
minds, an opinion of the Gods. Egregias animo facies vigilante videbant,
Lucret. l. 5. p. 226.

Et magis in somnis, mirando corporis auctu.
Their waking mind, in hideous dreams, does see a wondrous shape,
Of Bodies strange, and huge in growth, and of stupendous make.
By which appearance of God, so immediately unto the mind, the best men are
oftentimes much perturbed and troubled: though there be none other cause, but
only the Majesty of the Creator, striking a natural fear and awe into his
Creature. As we may evidently see, in that example of Eliphaz who confesses,
his own vision to have bin with fear and trembling; though it contained
nothing, but a most gracious and mild instruction. Then must it needs appear,
both with terror, and horror unto the Atheists; when it gives them
signification of Gods wrath and judgments. Their visions, must needs be such,
as the Orator describes, that, Cic. l. ^. de Diuinat. p. 281.
Visa somniantium, sunt perturbatiora, quam insanorum: That the visions of such
men, in their dreams, are oftentimes more perturbed, then the ragings of
madmen, in their fits. As we may evidently see, in Nebuchadnezzares dream
when he saw the watchman coming down unto him, Dan. 4 10. 11. 14 ^.
and crying, Hew down that great Tree: He confesses that his dream made him
sore afraid, and troubled his thoughts, upon his bed. And, of this kind, are
all those dreams and visions, which appear unto Atheists. They be always the
Messengers of Gods wrath and judgments. And therefore they are always
tormented with them, and (as it were) set upon the very rack by them. As the
Poet Iuuenal has notably described them, comprizing both the two forenamed
causes of their fear, together in one sentence, namely, both the guiltines of
their own corrupt conscience, and the fearful apparitions of strange sights
and visions. Nocte, breuem si forte indulsit cura soporem, ^^^enal. Satyr. 13.
p. 60. B.

Et toto versata toro iam membra quiescunt;
Continuo Templum, and violati Numinis aras:
There is the torment of his terrifying conscience. Now follows the torment
of his visions. Et, quod praecipuis mentem sudoribus vrget, Deorum apparentium
magnitudo totum ^^^lum occupare v^detur.

Te videt in somnis, Iamblic. l. De Myster. c. 19. p. 36.
tua sacra, and mayor imago
Humana, turbat pauidum, cogitque fateri.
Here is the torment of his terrifying visions. The sum of which verses, is,
in effect, thus much. If once his nightly cares spare him a little sleep,
If once his restles limbs their rest on bed do seek;
Then straight appears a sight of his impiety,
Temples, and Altars of the wronged Deity:
And that, which most affright's his soul; in sweating Agony,
Thee God he see's, in fearful dream's, thy sacred Majesty:
A far more glorious form of thine, then any mortal face;
The which, such terror forces him confess to be thy Grace.
Yea, and Plutarch has likewise well expressed the same Argument: instancing
in the very same two causes of fear in the superstitious, that I have
expressed before of the impious. So that, Atheism and Superstition, the two
extremes of Religion, Plut. l. de Supersti^. To. 1. p. 382.
are made equal in their fearing. Obliuiscuntur herilium minarum serui
dormientes: qui in compedibus sunt, ijs vincula somnus alleuat: inflammationes,
vulnera, saeuacarnis and serpentia vlcera, doloresque, acerrimi somno
mitigantur. Soli huic, nullae sunt per somnum induciae, neque vnquam quiescere
animum patitur, neque se colligere, acerbis and molestis, de Numine,
opinionibus dimotis: sed, veluti in impiorum regione, simulachra terribilia,
and visa monstrosa feruntur. All servants, in their sleeping, forget their
Masters threatening. Prisoners, forget their shackles. Diseases, wounds, and
cancers, by sleep are greatly eased. Only, unto these men, their sleep can
bring no quiet, nor freedom from those fears, which they conceive of the
gods. But, as if they inhabited in the Region of impiety, fearful visions and
apparitions do infest them continually.

Yea, and this fear, which these men have of God, begets a fear in them,
of every thing in the world: as Plutarch, Plut. ibid. p. 381.
in the same place, has truly observed. Qui Deos metuit, omnia metuit: terram,
mare, aerem, coelum, tenebras, lucem, rumorem, silentium, somnium. He that
seruilely fears God, he seruilely fears all things: the earth, the sea, the
air, the heavens, darkness, and light, noyses, and silence; but especially
his own dreams: then which nothing is more troublesome, nothing more grievous
to him: partly, out of the consciousnes of his own impiety and wickedness:
and partly, by those fearful apparitious and visions, which God purposely
sends him, to revoke and deter him from that his ungodliness.

4 Neither fears he only in the time of his sleeping; The fear of Atheists,
in ^ lightning and thunder.
when he may seem to be destitute of his reason to comfort him: but also
oftentimes, even whilst he is waking; when he has all his senses and reason
about him: especially, when it happens to thunder, and lighten. Iuuenal,
having before described those notable terrors, which afflict the Atheists;
partly out of the conscience of their own impiety against God; and partly out
of their fearful apparitions in the night; he proceeds, to show, his mind
to be no less perturbed in the^ day; especially, if it begin to thunder and
lighten. Hi sunt qui trepidant, Iuuenal. Satyr. l 13. p. 60. b.
and ad omnia fulgura pallent.
Cum tonat, exanimes, primo quoque murmr coeli.
These be the men, that trembling quake, appalled at every lightning:
Every flash them lifeles strikes, and crack of every thundering.
Yea, and in the same place, he directly tells us, that all this their fear
of lightning and thunder, proceeds from none other cause, but only from
their inward fear of Gods vengeance; though they outwardly dissemble it, and
seem to contemn it. Hi sunt qui trepidant; and ad omnia fulgura pallent.
Non quasi fortuito, nec ventorum rabie: sed
Iratus cadat in terras, and vindicet ignis.
Lo these be those, that with each Thunderclap do shake.
Not so, as if blind Chance such fearful noise should make:
Nor, ^s if ragefull winds should bring this rattling sound:
But, lest to take revenge, Gods fire should fall to ground.
Neither is ^his the foolish fear of the simple and base people; who (not able
to reduce things unto their true causes) are easily terrified with every
uncouth accident: but it is a fear, that seazeth upon the greatest and
mightiest Kings, and affrighteth them, as well as their meanest Subjects; if
they be impious Atheists. As even Lucretius himself confesses. For he says,
that, when the Heavens do begin once to lighten: -- Et magnum percurrunt
murmura coelum; Lucret. lib. 5. p. 228.

Non populi gentesque tremunt? Regesque superbi
Corripiunt Di^um perculsi membra timore:
Ne quod, ob ad Missum foede, dictumve superbe,
Poen^rum grave sit soluendi tempus adactum?
When rattling Thunders run along the Cloud's;
Do not both People poor, and Princes proud,
A terror feel, as struck with fear of God?
Do not their trembling joints then dread his Rod?
Lest, for foul deeds, and black-mouthed Blasphemies,
The rufull time be come, that vengeance cries?
Out of which sentence of Lucretius, we may gather many Arguments; that even
the most impious Atheists in the world, do inwardly believe, That there is a
God; though they outwardly dissemble it. For he says, that th^ybe, Divum
perculsi timore: that they be stricken, with a terror and fear of the Gods.
Ergo, they must needs believe, That there be Gods. For no man fears, that
which he believes not to be.

Nay this testimony of Lucre^ius, if it be well examined, contains twelve
maine Articles of the Atheists Creed: which are all of them so true, The
Atheists Creed.
so Orthodoxe, and Christian, that no man can disclaim from any one of them.
Whereby it will appear, that though the Atheist would deny both God, and all
Religion, yet that he is inwardly enforced to believe them: and to ho^d (even
against his will) many notable points of Christian Religion, in despite of all
his obstinate resolution for Atheism. All which may naturally be collected,
from his evident fear of lightning, and thunder. As namely these which follow.

First, he believes, that, There is a God: or else he needed not to fear
him.

Secondly, he believes, that, God is such an one, as is to be feared: or else
he would not (nay, he could not) fear him.

Thirdly, he believes, that, God is not an incurious God, (as the Epicure
conceiteth him) who sitting idly in heaven, regards nothing that is done
upon the earth: but that he is a most curious and observing God; both seeing
all that is done, and hearing all that is spoken: or else, he need not fear
the punishment, neither of his admissa, nor of his superbe dicta.

Fourthly, he believes, that God is present in all places: or else he could
neither see his evil deeds, nor hear his evil words.

Fifthly, he believes, that God does not only look upon things as an idle
beholder; but also as a just rewarder; for else he needed not to fear his
beholding, if afterward he intended to do nothing. But he fears him as a
just Revenger, to execute judgment upon every offender. He believes, both
that God is, Heb. 11. 6.
and that he is a just rewarder: as it is in the Epistle to the Hebrews.

Sixthly, he believes, that God is of that power, as is able to humble, and to
inflict due punishment, upon the greatest Prince and Pote^tate of the World.

Seventhly, he believes, that Lightning and Thunder do not come, either by
Chance, or by Nature: but that they have God himself for their maker. For
else, though he feared them, yet he needed not to fear him.

Eighthly, he believes, that God has made those creatures, as the instruments
of his wrath, to strike and to punish, when he purposes to take vengeance.

Ninthly, he believes, that Impiety and wickedness do justly deserve Gods
heavy wrath and judgments.

Tenthly, he believes, that God is just: and therefore will pay them,
according to their desert.

Eleuenthly, he believes, that there is a time appointed, when this payment
shall be made.

And twel^ly, he believes, that when it lightneth and thundreth, then that
appointed time is come; and that God will certainly take vengeance upon him.

All these consequents do follow, by necessary connection, upon the Atheists
fearing of thunder and lightning, especially, as the arrows of Gods wrath and
vengeance. And thus, the Atheist, who denies, there is a God: yet is forced to
believe many truths concerning God. He believes his Essence; he believes his
Power; he believes his Providence; he believes his Omnipresence; and he
believes his Justice. All this he be^eeueth, though not with a true faith, to
further his salvation: yet (as the devils themselves do) with an invincible
persuasion, Iam. 2. 19.
which works in them both a Fear, and a Trembling.

And, this we may plainly see, not only by the testimony of these
fore-alledged Poets, in a general speculation: but also by the testimony of
the most approved Histories, Exodus 9. 27.
giving particular instances. Pharaoh, that proud King, who was as stiff, and
as intractable, as a rock, against the stroke of many other plagues; so that
they could not make any impression into him: yet, when the plague of Lightning
and Thunder fell upon him, (which is able to break even the hardest stony
rocks) that also brake him, and pierced his stony heart; diminishing his former
confidence, and forcing him to confess, that now he saw, that the Lord was
just; but that both himself and his people were wicked. This powerful
operation had, with that profane man, the fear of Thunder and Lightning.

And the like effect is reported by Suetonius, to have been wrought in the
Emperor T^^erius: whom he censureth, to have been, Su^ton. in vit. ^ib^r^. c.
69. ^. 55.
Negligentior circa D^os, and R^ligi^nes: A very great neglec^er of the Gods,
and their Religions. And yet, that whenever it happened to thunder, he was
terrified and afraid, beyon^ (...) and measure. In so much, that he was wont to
incompasse his head (...) a Laurel Garland, to defend him from the stroke;
Because it is a commonly received opinion, that the leaves of the Bay Tree
cannot be t^uched with Lightning.

But above all other, most notable is the example of Caligula, Su^eon. in vit.
Caligu^ae, c. 22. p. 161.
the Emperor T^^^rius his next and immediate successor, who so greatly
despised all the other gods, that he himself would needs be ho^oured for no
less then a god. To which end, he commanded a Temple to be erected,
Sacrifices appointed, C^r^monies ordained, and all honor to be exhibited, to
this new Jupiter La^ialis: the old Jupiter Olympius, being so despised by him,
Senec. l. 1. de Ira. c. 16 p. 34.
that he would oftentimes scoff, Hom^r. ^. 3. Il^ad. p. 122. Gracolat.
and oftentimes rail at him, calling him the most pernicious and (...) of all
the other gods. And yet, this new god, when he heaad the true God to thunder,
he would oftentime hide himself underneath his bed, for fear. Qui Deos
tantopere contemneret, ad minim^ tonitrua and fulgura, co^^ivere, caput
obvoluere: ad vero maiora, proripere se e strato, sub l^ctumque cond^re
solebat. He that so little regarded the Gods, Sueton. vbi. sup^. ^ c. 51. p. 68.
yet feared so gre^tly the least thunder and lightning, that he would wink
with his eyes, and wrap up his head, so escape the terror ^f the clap: But, if
it chanced to be a little more vehement, he would rise up from his bed, and
hide himself underneath it. Now what a miserable and a slavish fear did this
wretched man endure? He could not so effectually, have declared his true
belief of a God, by building unto him a thousand Temples, as he did by thus
fearing his Lightnings and Thunders.

5 But yet there is another time, The ^^are of A^heists in their sickness, and
after death. L. 2. c. 5. Sect. 4.
wherein much more he fears him: and that is, in his sickness, and at the
time of his death. For, when he feels himself attached with any grievous
sickness; though he have not, as yet, the apprehension of death, yet
begins he to think that (surely) that sickness is sent unto him from God,
to punish and to scourge him, for his former blaspheming and denying of him.
And this point is likewise delivered by Iuvenal, as well as both the former.
For, Iuvenal. Saty^. 13. p. 60. b.
he there has accumulated all the three of them together. Praeterea, lateris
vigili cum febre dolorem
S^co^pere pati; missum ad sua corpora mor^u^,
Infesto credunt a Numine: sax^ Deorum
H^ec, and tela putant. --
If they but'gin to feel an Agues fit,
That roughly shakes them; straight they construe it,
A sickness sent them from some angry god:
These are Gods arrows: this (say they) Gods rod.
For so Job indeed, Job. 6. ^.
calls his sores and his sickness: The arrows of the Almighty are in me,
The venom thereof does drink up my spirits; and the terrors of God fight
against me. And so likewise does the Psalmist: T^^ne Arrows stick fast in me,
Psalm. ^8. 2. 3.
and thine hand presses me sore. There is no ^ealth in my flesh, because of
thy displeasure: neither is there any rest in my bones, (...) of my sins: So
that, even the very Atheist, in the time of his (...), has a right conceit,
both of God, and of his sickness. Of God; that he (...) a punisher of
wickedness, and impiety: Of his sickness; that God punish^^^ him for it, by
that weakness, and infirmity. And thus, even the very Atheist, who in the
time of his health, and of his perfect strength, grows wanton against God,
and suffers his tongue to roue through the world, setting his mouth against
heaven, and against God himself: yet in the time of his sickness, Psalm. 73. 9.
11.
is brought unto a far better temper; and to thi^^e more s^riously of
Religion and piety: as even Lucretius himself obs^ru^th: Mult^que, in rebus
a^erbis, Lucr^t. l. 3. p. 92.

Acrius advertunt animos ad Relligionemque
And a little after: Nam verae voces, tum demum, pectore ab i^^o
Eijciuntur; and eripitur persona, manet res.
Men insad taking, bitter'd with affliction,
Better attend, and mark, and mind Religion.
For then, true Voices issue from their hearts:
Then speak they what they think, in inmost parts.
The truth remaynes. They cast off ^ayned Arts.
And so likewise Solon: Nos vero mortales ita cogitamus: idem valet bonus,
Solen in Ele^^s p. 232.
and malus.
Quam sententiam, vnusquisque tam diu retinet,
Donec aliquid patiatur: tum rursum luget.
We men imagine, in our iolitie;
That it is all one; or good, or bad to be.
But then anon, we alterre this again:
If happ'ly we feel the sense of pain.
For then, with are turned into mourning strain.


But now, if their sickness do chance to bring unto them, but any little
impression, or apprehension of death; no tongue can express with what a terror
it strikes them; not only, of their own present death, though that be
terrible enough of it self; but also, much more, with a terror of God; and
what shall become of them after they be dead. This thought is that, which
troubles them. This afflicts, and tormenteth them. No dream, no vision, no
thunder, no lightening, does so affright the Atheist, as the thought of death
does; and what will follow, after death. Because, Lightening and Thunder do
represent unto him, but only a present, and a bodily death: but the cogitation
of a state after death, does strike him, with a fear of an eternal death. As
is noted, S^obaeus Sermon. 42. p. 279.
by Zaleucus, in the proeme of his laws: Morituros omnes, iniuriarum, quas
commiserunt, memor^s, poenitentia invadit; and vehemens cupiditas, qua vellent,
exactam sibi vitam omnem ^uisse iustam. All men, when they begin to draw on
unto their death, have in them, a fresh remembrance, of all those wrongs and
evils, which they have done in their life: and there presently inuadeth them,
a grievous repentance and sorrow, for committing them: and then, they feel in
their hearts, an earnest with and desire, that all their former life had been
virtuous, and pure. Yea, and the same obser^^^^^ is also confirmed, by Plato.
Certo scias (o Socrates,) says Cephalus) (...) deuenit aliquis, vt breui iam
moriturum se opin^tur, Plato l. 1. de Repub. p. 532.
incidit in (...) timor, and cura quaedam, eorum, quae in superiori vita
neglexit. Etenim fab^^ qu^ de Inferis dicuntur, quemadmodum eos, qui unjust
egerunt, poenas illic d^re op^rteat, irrisaehactenus, movent tunc animum, ne
forte verae sint, suspicantem. Know this (o Socrates) for a certain, that when
a man is once come so far, that bes^eth, he needs must die; there rusheth a
maruailous fear upon him* and (...) anxious care, of very many things, which
before, in his former (...). For then, he begins to doubt with himself,
whether those reports, that he had often heard, of Hell, and of Devils, and of
infernal punishments (which before he was wont to deride, as mere fables) now
may not (h^pl^) be truths: which thought, does very greatly afflict, and vex
his mind. So likewise, Tullie: Morbo graui and mortifero afflictis, C^c. l. 1.
de divine. p. 251.
occurrunt plerumque (...) gines mortuorum: tumque vel maxim laudi student,
eosque, qut secus quam (...), vixerunt, p^^^lorum suorum tum maximee poenitet.
When they draw unto their death, there do walk before their eyes, the images
of dead men: then they only think of virtue, and then they deeply repent, of
all those sins and offenses, which before they have committed. Thus they,
that will not fear God, in the time of their life, are driven to fear the
Devil, at the time of their death, and to tremble at the thought of that
eternal punishment, which they fear to be after death, decreed for them, by
God. As we may evidently see, in Bion of Boristhenes: who seeing himself to be
near unto his death, he was so afraid of it, that he would have endured any
torment, rather then to have di^d. For, Laert. in Vita Bion. p. 145.
as Laertius reports it: Morbo tabescens, and mori pertimescens; qui, Deos
non esse, dixerat, Fanum non viderat, Mortalibus qui illudebat, veris dum Dijs
immolarent; nec, Peccaui, dixit: cuncta tamen perpeti magis, quam mori, paratus
erat. ^is sickness increasing, and his health diminishing, and ^e fearing much
to die: Though he had denied the Gods, despised all their Temples, derided all
their worshippers, and never once said of himself so much, as, I have sinned:
Yet was h^ ready, to have suffered any kind of grie^^^s torment, rather then
to have died. And why so? Not so much for the f^are of death it self (though
it be very fearful) as because he feared, that after his death, he should be
committed by God (whom he had always despi^^d) into the hand of the Devil, to
be tormented. And therefore, at his dying, he put out his hand unto him, to
bid him welcome; seeking to leni^^^ him, toward him, with this flattering
salutation: Salve, Pluto, salve: Welcome Devil, welcome. And this is that,
which makes the cogitation of death, of all other t^rribles, to seem the most
terrible, Arist. l. 3. Eth. c. 6. To. 2. p. 634.
even to the wicked Atheist; because, after his death, he fears a judgment
and, a punishment. This is that, which affects him. This is that, which
afflicts him. This is that which tormenteth him. And this makes, not only
death it self to be fearful unto him, at the time of his dying; but also,
the very remembrance of death, to be bitter unto him, Ecclus. 41. 1.
in the time of his flourishing. o Death, how bitter is the remembrance of thee,
unto a man, that lives at rest, in his riches? Bitter, not only for the loss
of all those good things, which he respects; but also, much more, for the
fear of those evil things that he expects. As Tully observes of Epicurus:
that, though no man seemed more to contemn, both God, and Death; yet that no
man feared more, (...).
both the one, and the other. Non quenquam vidi, qui magis, ea quae timenda
esse negaret, timeret: Mortem dico, and Deos. Thus you see, that, howsoever
some men in the time of their health, may so hoodwinke their conscience, and so
obscure their own knowledge; as (for some short time) to think, There is no
God: yet that mist is soon dispelled; and the contrary opinion has many
returns unto them; and cannot be repelled by them: but, as the Poet very
truly observes: Naturam expellas furca (...).
tamen vsque recurret.
Though thou do Nature strive, with forke and force to expel,
Yet still she will retire, and all thy force repel.
But much more, when the mind is (as it were) enforced, either by fearful
visions, or by terrible thunders, or by the dread of death. At these three
times especially, the Atheist is compelled, to bewray his inward fear, of that
God, whom he outwardly would seem to hold in great contempt.

6 Now, ^he fea^e of the Atheist, she^^^h, that he thinks, Th^re is a God.
t^is inward fear, which the Atheist has of God, and outwardly bewrays,
upon so many occasions, is no less an Argument, that he believes, There is a
God, t^en if he should plainly confess it, in word. Nay, indeed a far
greater. For, this is a real confession of God; whereas the other is but
verbal. That fear of God, which the Atheist has, when he dreameth; that
fear of God, which he has, when it thundereth; that fear of God, which he
has, at his death; are so many real, and effectual confessions, that he
believes, There is a God. And so is likewise, his fear of the Devil. For (as
Sen^ca well coll^^^^th) Non leave m^mentum apud nos habet consensus hominum,
(...) 118. p. 295.
aut ^imentium inferos, aut colentium, The consent of men, in either fearing o^
worshipping of Devils, is an effectual Argument, to prove, that there be
such. And so is it likewise, to prove, There is a God: at the least, in their
opinion, that so either fear, or worship them. Their worship, showing it
directly; their fear, indirectly. But yet, no l^sse effectually: nay, indeed a
great deal more. For, those sudden s^ares, breaking out at those times, with
so great a violence, through all those artificial disguisings, which they had
purposely prepared to cover and hide it, are a more su^stantiall proof, to
confirm it; then if they should openly, in express words, confess it. As the
Ora^or collecteth (upon the like grounds) against the Catilinarian
Censpirators. Cum illa ^^rtissima visa sunt argumenta, (...).
atque indicia s^el^ris; tabulae, signa, manus, denique vniuscuiusque
confessio; tum t^la mul^o certiora; color, oculi, vultus, taciturnitas. Though
those were very strong Arguments, and indications of their wickedness; their
letters, their scales, their hands, and their confessions: Yet these were much
stronger; the pal^nes of their color, the heaviness of their eyes, the sadness
of their countenance, and the sullenness of their silence. And then, he
proceeds to declare, certain other signs and tokens of their guiltiness;
which he concludes for more strong and evident Arguments, then their open and
direct confessions. And so may it likewise be concluded, for those fears and
affrightments, Max. Tyr. Se^. 1. p. 7.
which I have before unfolded. And thus (as Maximus Tyrius observes) we may;
Per illos, ex obliquo, Dei vestigia conspicari: We may behold, even in the
Atheists, by a kind of obliquity, diverse manifest foote-stepps, and
acknowledgments of a Divinity: Whom, though they would seem artificially not
to know; yet do they, by their fear, Nazian. Tract. 51. de Fide. p. 832.
acknowledge: as Nazi^^zan well notes. Quem nesciunt, and metuendo sciunt.

CHAP. 13.
That, beside the forenamed indirect confessions of Atheists, diverse of them,
have directly and expressly confessed God. 2. Some of them, v^wittingly 3.
Some of them, unwillingly. 4. And some of them, both wittingly, and willingly.

I Have showed, in the two last preceding Chapters; that (beside the
confessions of all other sorts of men, of all nations and conditions
whatsoever) even the Atheist himself, though he directly deny God; yet
indirectly confesses him: partly, by his own excessive self-love; whereby
he makes himself, a God unto himself, serving nothing but his Belly, and
the neighbor parts of his Belly, Ventrem and Venerem, as the Poet notes of
him: -- Nihili pendunt animi bona; Palinge^ in Sagit. p. 262.
solaque ventris
Et Veneris (pecudum ritu) oblectamina quaerunt.
They naught esteem the goods of mind: it is only Belly-cheere,
And beastly lusts, their sought delight: as if brute beasts they were.
As I have largely showed before, in the whole eleventh Chapter. And partly
again, by his inward fear; whereby he confesses another God, beside
himself. Whom, though in some sudden fits of bravery, he do sometimes deny,
and would resolutely seem at all times to contemn; yet by other sudden fits
of fear, seazing violently upon him, and quashing all his formerly pretended
iollity, he really confesses him, whom he verbally denies. Yea, and that in
far more base and abject manner, then any other man in the world, whosoever.
There is no man, that professes the fear of God, which fears him so
slauishly, as the Atheist does, who yet would seem to contemn him most
considently. As I have likewise declared in the whole twelueth Chapter.

But yet, this is not all that the Atheist does, Three sorts of confessions of
God from the Atheist.
in acknowledging of a God. For, if we look further into the Atheists life,
and surueigh the tenor of it unto his death, we shall find, that (beside those
oblique and indirect confessions, expressed in the forenamed Chapters) even
the most resolute and dissolute of all that impious rank, which glory to be
compted the deniers of God; yet have sometimes confessed a God, as directly, as
any that ever adored him most religiously; as expressly, in plain and apert
terms, confessing him, as ever they used in their denial of him. Which
confessions of the Atheists, may (for distinctions sake) be ranged into three
diverse orders and ranks: that Some of them be made unwittingly, and beside
their will; Some of them unwillingly, and by an extorted will; and Some of then
both wittingly, and willingly, by a free-working will.

2 For the first of those three kinds, Unwitting confessions of Atheists.
the Prophet David tells us, that, There is not a word in the tongue of man,
but that the Lord knows it, yea, Psalm. 139. 4.
and makes it too. For King Solomon plainly tells us, that Though the
preparations of the hear^ ^e of man, P^o. 16. 1.
yet that the answer of the tongue is of God. So that no man is master of his
own tongue, to speak at all times what he himself speaks: but he
oftentimes speaks that displeases himself, to speak what God pleases. He
always speaks what God pleases, though not always what pleases God: no,
nor what pleases himself neither. For, God oftentimes opens the lips,
even of the wicked, and makes even their mouth to show forth his praise. And,
though they themselves do sometimes vainly boast, Psalm. 12. 4.
that their tongues are their own, and that they will speak, for who is Lord
over them? yet they are deceived in all, for their tongues are not their own,
neither can they speak what they would; but they have a Lord over them, who
oftentimes compels them to speak as he would, though sometimes that which
they themselves would not.

This we may evidently see, in the covetous Prophet Bal^am, who, though he were
a false Prophet, yet delivered he true Prophesies, both as concerning Christ,
Number. 24. 17. 5.
and as concerning the Israelites. Whom, though he intended for money to have
cursed; yea, and had conceived a curse already in his mind, yet could he never
bring it forth: but still, in stead of a cursing, ^here came out a blessing;
his tongue rebelling against his own private spirit, and obeying the command
of a superior Spirit. Insomuch, Ve^s. 13.
that he himself professes, that he had no power to pass the commandment of
the Lord, were it good, or were it bad: no not, though the King would give him
an house full of Gold. And yet, he well declared, that he would have done all,
whatsoever he could, for Gold.

And the same we may likewise observe, even in Atheists; and in those that have
been the deriders of God; that oftentimes, when they think to curse, and to
blaspheme him, God so confounds their language, and makes their tongue, so
to falter within them, that in the same sentences, they do oftentimes confess
him. Let me give an example, or two, to this purpose. There be certain
Atheists, mentioned in the book of Job, who make but a scoff at the
Omnipotency of God; asking there most profanely, I^b. 21. 15.
Who is the Almighty, and why they should serve him? and what profit they
should reap, if they should pray unto him? And again, 22. 17.
a little after: What it is, that the Almighty is able to do for them? Where,
there evidently appears a manifest confusion, both of their speech, and of
their reason. For, what can be greater madness, then either to call him
Almighty, of whom they ask, What he can do for them? or, to deny that God can
do any thing for them; when as they acknowledge him to be Almighty? Their
purpose was to deny his Omnipotency: and yet the Omnipotent so ouer-ruled
their tongue, that he made it, in the same sentence, to confess his
Almightinesse: sending a spirit of giddiness, into the minds of his enemies;
and enforcing them to speak for him, even with the same breath, wherewith they
intended to speak against him. As we may further see, by another sort of
Atheists, mentioned by David: who made but a scoff at the Omniscience of God,
demanding very scornefully; whether there were any knowledge in the most High?
Where note the strange precipitancie of their tongue; Psa. 73. 11. Job. 22. 13.
14.
how grossly it crosses and thwarteth it self. They deny him to have any
knowledge in him, whom yet they acknowledge to be the most High. Things, that
cannot cohere. For, he that is the most High, (as the Prophet David
testifies) beholds all those things, that are done here below. Who is like
unto the Lord our God, Psalm. 113. ^. 6.
who has his dwelling so high; and yet hum^leth himself, to behold the
things, that are done here below? Yea, and even Wisdom it self affirms,
Ecclus. 24. 3.
that she came out of the mouth of the most High. Which even the Heathens
themselves, do symbolically shadow out, in fayning Minerva (who is the
goddess of Wisdom) to have been bred in Jupiters head; who is their highest
god; and unto whom they give the title, Lucian. Dial. Vulcani and ^ouis. p. 22.
not only of Optimus, Plaut. Menech. Act. 5. Sec. 2. p. 446.
and Maximus; but also of Summus. -- Summum Iovem
-- Detestor --
I call the most high Jupiter, In this to be mine Arbiter.
So that, in their calling of God, The most High, they directly confess, not
only his being, but also his wisdom. They confess that same Omniscience,
which they intended to suppress.

And the same intoxication may yet again be seen, Wisd. 2. 2. 6.
in another sort of Atheists; of whom there is mention in the Book of
Wisdom; who make but a scoff at the Providence of God, affirming, that all
things do fall out, at all adventures: holding with Epicurus (in all natural
things) that there is, Nihil ratione in natura factum: and with Theophrastus
(in all civil matters) that Vitam regit fortuna, non sapientia: There is
nothing in the world, Cic. l. 1. de Not. Deor. p. 196.
done according to reason: Cic. l. 5. (...). p. 170.
but that man's life is ruled by fortune, not by wisdom. Thus ascribing all to
Fortune, as though there were no God at all in heaven. And yet, in the same
place, they by and by confess him. Come therefore (say they) and let us
chierefully enjoy the creatures of God. They that before affirmed, that all
things fell out by chance, as though there were no God; now directly confess,
that al things in the world are the creatures of God. Thereby plainly
acknowledging, both that there is a God, and that he is also the Creator of the
world. There confessing his Essence, where they would deny his Providence: nay,
there confessing his Providence, where they would deny his Essence.

And a like inuolution, is observed by Laertius, in Theodorus, called Atheos.
Who, though he were persuaded, that there were no gods; yet he, railing upon
one, that before had offended him, he told him in his passion, that he was one
that was hated of all the Gods. Thus pleases it God oftentimes to ineb^iate
the minds, Laert. in vit. Aristip. p. 78.
and to confound the tongues of Atheists. And so to make them in one and the
same place, with one and the same breath, to confess him, when they think to
blaspheme him: and directly to speak for him, when they think indirectly to
speak against him. Which manner of speaking the truth so unwittingly, Lact. l.
6. c. 8. p. 333.
Lactantius interprets to be a kind of prophecy. Ego quidem, eos, qui vera
imprudenter loquuntur, sic habendos puto, tanquam diuinent, spiritu aliquo
instincti: I verily think of them that speak the truth they know not, as if
they were inspired with some divining spirit. And we may see his observation
apparently verified, Io. 11. 50. 51.
in Caiaphas his prophesying: who delivered a most excellent prophecy of
Christ: and yet he knew not what he said.

3 Now, Vnwillingconfes^^io^s of Athei^s.
as God sometimes works his enemies to confess him, by confounding of their
tongues, and making them to speak unwittingly against themselves: so does he
it oftentimes, by enforcing their confessions, and extorting them from them
against their wills. Thus dealt he with King Pharaoh; who was at the first so
irreligions, that, when as Moses charged him in the name of God, Thus says the
Lord; he presumptuously demanded, Ex. 5. 2.
Who is the Lord? as holding scorn to obey him. But yet, afterward, he being
scourged by the righteous hand of God, and brought unto some better
understanding of himself, he was forced to confess, that the Lord was just,
Ex. 9. 27. 8. 28.
and righteous; but that both he, and his people, were wicked and impious: Yea,
and beseech Moses, to pray for him, unto the same God, whom before he had most
impiously contemned, and despised. Thus dealt God likewise with Herod Agrippa:
who, Iosep. l 19. Antiquit. p. 565. Act: 12. 21. 22. 23.
araying himself, one day, in most glorious Apparel, spangled all over, and
spread with plates of gold and precious Stones, assembled all the people, to
speak unto them, in a solemn Oration: wherein he purposely so disposed
himself, that the shine of the Sunbeams should reflect upon his foresaid
Spangles, and Jewels: through which artificial reflection, he seemed to shine
more bright then the Sun. With which glorious sight, and his eloquent
Oration, the people being stupefied, they gave him this impudent acclamation;
that His speech then unto them, Act. 12. 21. etc.
was the voice of a God, and not of a man. Unto which their impious
assentation, he more impiously assenting, God sent his Angel, presently to
strike and to punish him. Who, quickly finding this stroke to be mortal, and
that it was inflicted upon him from heaven; though before he was silent, and
would not confess God, but was well enough contented, that the people should
substitute him into his stead: yet now, he confessed him, most humbly;
acknowledging both the peoples error, and his own mortality. Whose repentant
confession, Joseph: vbi supra.
is notably expressed by Josephus, in these words. Conuersis in amicos oculis;
En (inquit) Ille ego, vestra appellatione, Deus, vitam relinquere iubeor;
fatali necessitate, mendacium vestrum coarguente: and quem immortalem
salutastis, ad mortem rapior. Sed ferenda est voluntas coelestis Numinis. He
casting his eyes, upon his flattering friends: Now behold me (says he) whom,
but even now, you saluted for a God; how I am commanded to forsake this world:
my fatal necessity conuincing your flattery of a lie. He, whom you blazoned
to be immortal, am now carried violently unto my death. But it is meet, to be
subject, unto the will and pleasure of the highest God.

This notable confession, he made before he died: which, if he would have
made in time, he had surely lived. Thus likewise, God dealt with Antiochus
Epiphanes: who was so madded with malice, 1. Mac. 1. 46.
against the God of Israel; that he blasphemed his Name, overthrew his Altars,
destroyed his Temple, violated his Laws, and persecuted his People; yea and
that with all the immanest examples of the bloodyest cruelty, that he could
possibly devise. No Atheist, in simply denying of God, could be so great an
enemy unto him, as this profane King was, in fighting against him. But the
hand of God so seized upon him, and smote him with so sore and incurable a
disease, that it forced both his pride and his malice to submit; and to begin
his forced submission with this humble Confession; 1. Mac. 9. 10. 11. 12. etc.
It is meet to be subeict unto God, and that a man, who is mortal, should not
think himself aequal unto God through pride. Making many vows and
supplications, unto that same God, in vain, whom before he had compelled all
his people to blaspheme.

And a very like example is reported by Eusebius, of the Emperor Maximinus, as
furious a persecuter of the Christians, as Antiochus was before of the Jews.
Whom he answered so exactly, both in his Impiety, and in his Calamity, and in
his Palinodie; that a more perfect parallel, can hard^y be found in all
Plutarchs Lives, then was between these two profane and bloody Kings. For
first, for their Impiety. As Antiochus, in a profane contempt of the
Israelits true God, 1. Mac. 1. 50.
caused diverse Temples to be builded, Idols to be formed, and Altars to be
erected, unto the Heathens false gods: so likewise did M^ximinus too. He did,
(...) 8 Eccl^. Hist. c. 16 p. 108
Templa erigere, and delubra, temporis prolixit^te ^iruta, studiose restaurare,
and simulachrorum sacerdotes in omnibus locis constituere. He erected new
Temples, and repaired the old ones; and appointed, in all places, new Priests
for his Idols. Secondly, as Antiochus forbade unto all the Jews, the use of
their own Laws, 1. Mac. 1 13. ^1. Eusebius. l. 9. Hist. c. 2. p 110.
and the exercise of their Religion: so likewise did Maximinus too. He did,
Christianis libertatem in coemeterijs conveniendi, praetextu quodam adimere.
Under colorable praetences, he denied unto Christians, their common
assemblies. Thirdly, as Antiochus commanded the Jews to worship his Idols: so
likewise did Maximinus to the Christians. Which he calls a returinig unto
their right minds: 1. Ma. ^ 45.
Reditionem ad rectum animi propositum. Fourthly, Eusebius. l 8. Hist. c. 18. p.
109.
as Antiochu^ persecuted all those that refused it, with all the exquisite
torments that could be devised: so likewise did Maximinus too; burning them,
killing them, drowning them, hanging them, and whatsoever a wicked wit could
invent to torment them: Ignem, ferrum, 1. Mac. 1. 63. ^4.
crucifixiones, feroces bestias, maris fundum, membrorum amputationem, and
adustionem, oculorum expunctionem, totius corporis mutilationem, Eusebius l. 8.
Hist. c. 16. p. 108.
famen praeterea, and vincula. Fire, sword, crucifying, devouring by wild
beasts, drowning, cutting off the limbs, burning, boring-out the eyes, laming
the whole body, fam^shing, and shackling. Yea and as he adds, in another
place, Eusebius. l. 1. De vit. Constantini c. 51. p. 139.
Novorum suppliciorum inventione, sese insolenter efferens: He seeking to
excel all other men in cruelty, took a pride in inuenting of new torments, as
yet unknown. And thus, in all the several points of Impiety, there was so
full and exact an agreement, Genesis 49. 5.
as though they had bin two Brothers in evil: so precisely did this latter
tread the steps of the former. So that it was a wonder, that he, seeing
himself to follow him, in all the several degrees of his wickedness, did not
fear he should follow him, in all the several degrees of his vengeance. As
Tullie expressly notes in the very same case. Te miror, Antoni, Cic Philip.
2. p. 553.
quorum facta imitere, eorum exitus non perhorrescere: Imeruaile, Anthony,
thou should not fear their falls, who have followed all their faults. For,
Mirum non est, Eurip. in Oresic. p. 53.
pati gravia eos, qui patrant. It is no marvel, that they should suffer
grievous things who have committed grievous sins. And he had good cause to
fear it, as the sequel plainly showed. For, there was no one stroke of Gods
vengeance, inflicted upon the one, but that the same was after, inflicted upon
the other. So that, they might seem to have been Brothers in this evil too,
as well as in the former: in malo poenae, Tertu^. l. 2. cont. Marcion. c. 14.
p. 375. 2. Mac. 9 5. Eusebius. l 8. Hist. c. 17 p. 1 8. 2. Mac. 9. 5.
as well as in malo culpae; in malo supplicij, as in malo delicti: as
Tertullian distinguishes them.

For first, as Antiochus was stricken with the revenging hand of God: so
likewise was Maximinus too. Corripuit eum supplicium, diuinitus ill atum. A
punishment from heaven did suddenly attach him. Secondly, as Antiochus his
plague was seated into his bowels, 1. Mac. 9. 5. Eusebius. ibid.
which tormented him with an (...) torture: so likewise was Maximinus his too.
Sub^ta illi accidit in medijs corporis arcanis suppuratio. A sudden
putrefaction did seize upon his (...) Ulcer: so his most secret parts.

Thirdly, Ibid.
as Antiochus his plague break out into a (...) likewise did Maximinus his
too. He had, in imis partibus, vlcus sistulosum. He had a fester'd ulcer in
the bottom of his belly.

Fourthly, 2. Mac. 9 9.
as there issued out of the body of Antiochus, an infinite multitude of most
loathsome worms: so did there likewise, Eusebius* ibid.
out of the body of Maximinus: Indicibilis mul^itudo vermium ebullijt: An
innumerable multitude of worms crawled out.

Fifthly, 2. Mac. 9. 9.
as those worms of Antiochus bred so noisome a stink, that they made him
odious, both to himself, and others: so likewise did Maximinus his too. He
did, Eusebius. ibid. p. 109.
laethi fi^um foetorem exhalare, vt Medicorum aliqui incredibilem foetorem
far non valentes, occiderentur. He breathed out a deadly stink: insomuch
that diverse of his Physicians not being able to endure his abominable savor,
were killed with the very air. And, in these miserable torments, they both of
them exhaled their execrable souls. Thus exactly did God proceed, 2. Mac 9. 28.
from point to point, in all the several degrees of their punishment;
equalling the one of them unto the other in their vengeance, as they had
equalled themselves together in their wickedness. Thereby plainly declaring,
Ecclus. 5. 4. Heb. 11. 6.
that he is ( though a patient) yet a most just Rewarder; proportioning exactly
the measure of his Justice, according to the measure and proportion of the
wickedness.

But to proceed on to the third part of our comparison; which is their
confession, and repentant recantation, the point which most properly belongs
unto our present Treatise. As those two profane Kings did answer one another,
Pro. 27. 19.
as exactly, as two faces use to do in the water, both in their impiety, and in
their calamity; so did they likewise in their Palinodie. For first, as
Antiochus, being seized upon, by Gods Justice, b^gan straightway to see his
own injustice, 2. Mac. 9. 11. E^seb. l 8. Hist. c. 18. p. 109.
and wickedness: so likewise did Maximinus too. Cum tantis malis
afflictaretur, tandem sentire coepit, quae contra pios Dei cultores gesserat.
When he once was afflicted with so many evils, then did he begin to have a
sense of those evils which he himself had inflicted upon Gods holy Servants.
Secondly, as Antiochus was inwardly persuaded, 1. Mac. 6. 12. 13.
that all those evils invaded him, only for his impiety against the God of
the Jews, in persecuting his servants: so was Maximinus persuaded, that all
his evils happened, only for his impiety against the God of the Christians,
in persecuting his servants. Haec se, Eusebius. l. 9 Hist. c. 10. p. 116.
proper insantam contra Christum praesumptam, merito, and vltionis vice,
perpeti confessus est. And this he confessed to have been justly inflicted for
his impious praesumption and fury against Christ. Thirdly, as Antiochus,
repenting of his wickedness, published new edicts, in favor of the Jews: so
likewis^ did Maximinus, 2. Mac. 9. 14. 15. Iuseb. l. 8. Hist. c. 18. p. 109.
in favor of the Christians. Praecepit, vt a persecutione Christianorum
cessaretur; legeque, and edicto imperial^, Ecclesiae eorum restaurarentur. He
commanded, that pers^cutions against Christians, should be inhibited; and their
Churches again repaired. Fourthly, as Antiochus prayed unto that same God, 2.
Mac. 9. 13. Eusebius. ibid.
whom before he blasphemed: so likewise did Maximinus. He did, Deo omnium,
delicta sua confiteri. He confessed his sins unto the great God. Fifthly, as
Antiochus besought those same Jews, whom before he had pers^cuted, to
supplicate, and pray unto their God for him: so likewise did Maximinus, E^s^b.
ibid.
to the Christians. Deo suo pro salut^ nostra supplicent. He entreated the
Christians, to pray and entreat their God for his health. Sixt^y, 2. Mac. 9.
17.
as Antiochus now religiously vowed, that he would not, from thenceforth, have
any other God, but the God of the Jews: so Maximinus professed, that he would
have none other, but the God of the Christians: Quem, verum esse Deum, ipsa
experientiase ^omperisse, I^useb. l. 1. d (...) Consta^ fini c. 5^. p. 140.
Ibid.
testatus est: Whom, by (...), he had ^ound, to be indeed the true God. And
thus (to conclude with our own point, of his p^linody, and confession)
Christianorum Deo se (...) con^iteri; and qu^s contra Deum pugn^s sus^^perat,
pala^ elocutus, palmodiam (...): as he not (...) the same place. He confessed
himself openly unto the Christians God; acknowledging the persecution, that he
h^d stirred up against him and making a solemn ^ecantation. These notable
confessions, did God, by his plagues and punishments, extort from the mouths
of these two his most notable enemies: the one of them, for the credit of his
Law: the other, of his Gospel: so triumphing by his justice, over their
impiety and wickedness.

Another such like extorted confession, (...) l. 6. c 2 p 511.
did God again force, from the Emperor Iultan; although proceeding from a
far unlike passion. H^e, being sometimes a professed Christian, and afterward
reuolting from his faith and Christianity, obtained to himself, the name of
Apostata, in a kind of si^gu^arity. Yea, and that very justly. For he, not
contented to renounce the says of Christ, but boiling with an unplacable
hatred against him, spent all the whole time of his wicked Apost^^y, in
persecuting of Christians, with all extreme cruelty. Until, at the last, he
being draw^e by Gods veng^ance, into a dangerous warr^, against the Persians,
was there suddenly slain; and yet no man can tell by whom. But the himself,
being privy unto his own impiety, and to that inwar^ hatred, which he bare
against God, confessed it, to be the stroke of his hand; and the judgment of
that Christ, whom, in his members, (...) persecuted. And therefore, he objected
it unto Christ, and to none other: against whom, he threw up his own blood
into the air, ending his wicked life, with this true confession in his mouth:
Vicisti, Galiaee. Thou have no^ overcome me, o thou Jesus of G^lilee. T^erein,
both confessing his own wickedness and impiety, in fighting against Christ;
and Christ's most glorious v^ctory, in subduing such an enemy. Simul tum
confessus, Theod. l. 3 hist. Eccl^s. c. 20. Ta. ^. p. 256.
and Victori^m, and blasphemi^m: as Theodoret notes of him.

Which confession of his, drew another like confession, from another of the
Heathen: and yet proceeding from another passion. For, when it was reported, in
what a strange fashion, that Emperor was slain; one of the Heathen, that then
heard it, spent this biting scoff upon it. Quomodo Ch^istiani di^unt, H^er. l.
b. ^ ia Habae. c. 3. ^06 p. 243.
Deum suume esse patientem, and (...)? Nihil ir^cundius, nihil ho^ suror^
pr^sen^ius: ne m^dico quidem sp^tio, indignationem suam differ po^u^t. How
can the Christians truly say, that they have a pati^nt God? when ^e plainl^ see
him so angry and impatient, that he could not de^e^ his anger, so much as for
(...). Thereby plainly confessing (though in scurr^lous heathen fash^on) that
it was the God of the Christians, that gave that blow to I^lian.

In which three last examples, it is not unworthy of our observation, to note
the several humors, wherewith they were possessed, in making those
confessions: The first of them, making it, in mere sorrow and contrition: The
second, in stomach and indignation: The third, in lightness and derision. But
yet, -- Ridentem dicere verum, Ho^a^. Sermon. 1. p. 129. a.

Quid vetat? --
Why may not he that laughes,
Laugh out a truth?
Thus, God directed all their several passions (yea, even the prophanest of
them) to draw from all of them, a true confession of him.

Another like confession, did God also enforce out of the mouth of Tullus
Hostil^us: Who succeeding to Numa in his Kingdom, Plut. in (...) Numae. p. 156.
and being a martialminded man, made a scorn and derision of all Numa's
religion, as tending to nothing else, but only the effeminating and weakening
of men's minds. But he, being smitten with the stroke of Gods justice, and cast
into a grievous and a dangerous sickness; in the end, repented him of his
profaneness, renouncing his former ungodly opinion. Morbo graui ac
multiplici, ad mutandum sententiam compulsus est. Yea, and (as Liuie expresses
his mutation, a great deal more ful^y) Adeo fracti simul cum corpore, Liuie l.
1. p. 12.
sunt spiritus illi feroces, vt qui nihil ant^ a ratus esset minus regium, qu^m
sacris dedere animum, repent, omnibus magnis parvisque superstitionibus
obnoxious degeret, religion^busque populum impleret. The extremity of his
sickness, did so both abate his strength, and so abase his spirits; that he, who
before thought nothing more unworthy the majesty of a King, then once to stoop
unto any action of Religion, now grew, upon the sudden, most servile, and
slavish unto all superstition: which he not only observed himself, but also
transfused into all his Subjects. But yet, he, not seeking unto the true God,
but changing one kind of superstition for another, was at the last, destroyed
by Lightning and Thunder. Yea, Eutrop. l. 1. p. 401.
and (as Eutropius reports it) Fulmine ictus, cum domo sua, ar sit. He was
not only himself consumed by Lightning; but also his whole house and family
with him.

Yet another like confession (and by the like means) did God again extort,
out of Bion of Boristhenes: who was so confirmed and obstinate an Atheist,
Laert. in vita Bion. p. 144. etc.
that all the time of his health, he denied there was any God: but in his age,
he being stricken with a most grievous sickness, and finding it to be the
finger of God: inductus est, poenitentiam agere super ijs, quae peccarat in
Deum: He was thereby induced to repent him of all his impieties against God.
Whose folly and madness, Laertius in the same place very sharply
perstringeth. Stultus qui mercede voluerit, esse Deos. Quasi tum demum Dij
essent, cum illos B^on esse voluerit. Was not this a fool (says he) who would
think, there should be Gods, when he would have them, and none, when he would
none? Thus, all those professed and noted Atheists, have expressly confessed a
God in the end; though in the beginning, they most obstinately denied him:
detesting and renouncing that impiety at their death, which they practiced in
their life: and then, with all humility, acknowledging their profaneness: as
Thieves use to confess their offenses at the Gallows, For, as I observed
before out of Lucretius: Verae voces, Lucret. l. 3. p. 92.
tum demum pectore ab imo
Eijciuntur: and eripitur persona; manet res.
For then, true words ascend from out the deepth of heart:
The mask is taken off, the truth then plays his part.
And therefore God at that time exacteth his testimony, when (of all other
times) it is most ponderous, and weighty: Enforcing them unto their con^ession
by tortures, as he sometimes forced Devils: and, Mat. 8. 29.
as Magistrates use to force Malefactors to the question, by stretching them
upon the Rack.

Yea, and even the very Heathen themselves, do insinuate, that the justice of
God so presses the Atheists (though they be his most hardened, and confirmed
enemies) that it not only inforceth them to confess him upon earth; but al^o
to proclaim him out of Hell it self. And from thence to confess, both their
own sin and wickedness, and Gods most just vengeance: exhorting all others
to take heed by their examples. This Pindarus insinuates in the person of
Ixion, whom he makes to call out in the midst of his torments, Pindarus in
Pythijs Ode 2. p. 181.
To take heed of unthankfulness unto our Benefactors, and to avoid that
odious vice, that had brought him unto that place. Deorum mandatis, Ixionem
aiunt, hae^ mortalibus dic^re, dum in alata rota circumqu^que volutatur:
Benesactorem placidis remunerationibus excipientes, persolvere gratiam. And
this (he says) the Gods compelled him to proclaim. And, Virgil likewise, in
the person of Phlegyas, shaddoweth out the very same. -- Phlegyasque
miserrimus, Virgil 6. Aeneid. p. 264.
omnes
Admonet, and magna testatur voce per vmbras:
Discite iustitiam moniti, and non temnere Divos.
Most m^serable Phlegyas warnes all men,
And amongst the ghastly Ghosts thus skriching cries,
With hellish voice: Admonisht now ye been,
Learn Justice, and the Gods not to despise.
Thus does he preach both God and godliness out of Hell; who renounced them both,
while he lived upon earth. Yea, and our Savior Christ himself represents
the very same point, Luke 16. 27. 28.
in the historical parable of Dives; who being tormented in Hell himself,
yet desired to have his brethren forewarned of that wickedness and
ungodliness, which had worthily brought him unto that misery and
wretchedness: The meaning of all this is no more but this; that God will force
the tongues of those men, to confess him, that have bin most ungodly and
impudent in denying him. He that made the Devils confess him upon the earth,
will make the Damned confess him out of Hell.

4 But yet we may meet with diverse other wicked ones, Willing confessions of
the Atheists.
with whom God has taken a more mild and gracious course: not enforcing them
to confess him by his justice and judgments (as he did the former) but
inducing them unto it by his mercy and goodness: inlightning their minds with
his heavenly knowledge, and so bringing them to see their own former
blindness. Thus dealt he with Iethro, an Idol-Priest of Midian: who, Ex. 18.
1. 11.
though he were not in the highest degree of Atheists, in denying of all Gods;
yet might he be numbered in an inferior degree of them, in denying the true God,
and worshipping profane and wicked Idols in his stead. But yet he wisely
obabseruing those great plagues and judgments, which God had poured down upon
the Egyptians, for the deliverance of his servants, he thereby received
instruction, and openly brake forth into this notable confession: Now I know,
that the Lord is greater then all the Gods. For as they have dealt proudly with
them, so are they recompensed. Thus dealt he likewise, with the Apostle Paul,
Act. 9. 1. 3 4.
as furious a persecuter (in his small authority) as ever the Church had any.
But yet Christ, in his great mercy, appearing unto him, and, out of heaven,
reproving him; he likewise received instruction: and, reforming his former
error, became afterward, as zealous a Preacher, as ever before he had been a
persecuter. In so much, that it passed of him, as a Proverb, that, He which
persecuted them, in times past, now preached the faith, which before he
destroyed. This blessed Apostle, Gal. 1. 22. Theod. l. 3. Eccle. Hist. c. 2 p.
247.
holding a diverse course, from that cursed Apostata; who destroyed the same
faith, which before he had preached. And yet, in the end, was enforced
again, to confess the same faith, Sect. 3. hu^us Cap.
which he sought to have destroyed: as before I have declared.

The like Confessions, and recantations, may be here accumulated, of diverse
other of the Heathens: who have plainly renounced their impieties and
profaneness: and, in the end, acknowledged a God, whom at the beginning they
denied. It is reported of Diagoras, the most renouned of all that are called
Atheists, that he began his Book of Poems, with this Exordium: Quod a Numine
summo reguntur omnia: Morn^us. l. De verit. Relig. c. 1. p. 16.

That all things are ruled by the highest God.
Which may probably be thought, to have been the recantation of his former
opinion. For, his Atheism and impiety (if it were truly such) he had from
the common opinion of his country, the Island of Melos: which held a
scornful opinion of all the Greekish gods. And therefore this so direct a
contradiction of his former opinion, cannot otherwise be construed, then as his
retractation. And the like may be thought, as concerning Theodorus; who, for
the opinion of his impiety, was likewise named Atheos. And yet Laertius
affirms, La^rt. in vita (...). p. 77.
that even he himself had seen a Book of his, entitled De Dijs; and that
it was, Liber non contemnendus. Which judgment he would never have passed
upon it, if he had handled that Argument, as an Atheist. For then, both the
Writer, and the writing, had been very worthy to be contemned: which Laertius
denies. And therefore that Book, being censured, to be a work not worthy to
be contemned; yea, and that by the same man who before had taxed him for his
Atheism; may also probably be thought, to have contained a retractation of his
former opinion. And so likewise Euemerus, whatsoever his opinion was, which
among all the Heathen was so condemned for Atheism: Whether it were a general
denying of all the gods; or but a particular denying of the Heathen gods: yet
evidently appears, out of Plutarch, that when he grew old, he grew cold, in
defending it. A manifest Argument, that he repented of his broching it. Which
his coldness in asserting it, bred also a like coldness in the peoples assent
unto it. As it evidently appears in those verses of Callimachus, Plut. l. 1.
de Placit. c. 7. To. 2. p. 14
wherein he perstringeth the impiety of Euemerus. Venite frequentes, ante
muros, in fanum,
Vbi, qui vetustum, ex aere, tonantem formauit
Senex loquax, cum libris impijs friget.
Come hither thronging, and approach this wall.
Enter this Temple. Where, now, find you shall
The Old prattling fellow; which so scornful was,
And called the Thund'rer, but a piece of Brass:
For all his former fire, and stately Looks,
Well cooled now, with all his impious Books.
Meaning those Book (says Plutarch) which before he had composed, to prove
There was no God. Hos dicit, quos composuit; Non esse Deos, docens. Which
coldness, from the heat of his former opinion, may be interpreted, as (in
some degree) a recantation. For, I rather apply those verses unto his own
coldness, in pursuing his former opinion; then unto the coldness of the
people, in following it; though this might also be intended. But, unto him I
apply it: because Theophilus Antioch nus (as I have formerly observed)
reports it for his opinion, Cap. 10. Sect. 4. The^phil. A^^^och. l. 3. ad
^utolic. (...). Pat. To 5 p. 156.
that he defended, Dei vnitatem; not Nullitatem. Which evidently proves, that
he, not only believed, that There was a God; but also, The unity of the
Godhead. From whence, it must needs follow, that either the heathen were
utterly mistaken, in their conceit of his opinion; and that he never was indeed
an Atheist: or, if sometimes he were one; yet, that, at last, he recanted it.
For Socrates; though he died for Atheism: yet that he died not, an Atheist; it
appears by this, Plato in Ph^do^ c. p. 520. (...). ^polo. c. 46. p. 75.
that, at his death, he appointed that a Cock should be offered to AEsculapius.
Which Tertullian observes in him, as a renouncing of all his forme^
irreligion. And so likewise, Aristotle though all his life long, he had
ascribed all things, but only to their inferior and secondarie causes: yet
lifting up his mind much higher, at his death, he implored the mercy of the
highest and first cause: Prime causae misericordiam intentius implorabat: as
Caelius Rhodiginus writes. It is likewise reported of Numa Pompilius, Coel.
Rhodigin. l. 17. c. 34. p. 814.
that Priest-like King of the Romans: who (like another Moses) was the first
author and institutor of all their holy Ceremonies; yet that, Plinius, l. 13. ^
13. p. 195.
in the end he retracted all those false religions, Ilem Plut in vit. Numae.
p. 155.
which himself before had instituted: writing a Book against them, and
commanding it to be buried in his Sepulcher with him. Which Book was not found
until five hundred and five and thirty years after Numa was dead; written
only in paper; and yet no where perished. Which, even Pliny himself ascribes
to a miracle: No doubt, that the confutation of that false religion, might not
be decayed, until it were published. And, though that Book of his, was, by
the Commandment of the Senate, Lact. l. 1. c. 2^. p. 62.
in public, burned: Yet (as Lactantantius well observes) the cause of the
burning of it, being publicly known to be his disclayming of their Religion,
who was the first founder of it, it might greatly uncertain the minds of the
people about it, and breed in them a just suspicion, that they were not rightly
founded in the true Religion. All these notable recantations of Atheists and
Idolaters, disclaiming and renouncing their irreligious and false religions, I
find in the writings of classical Authors. Which are evident demonstrations,
that true Religion has far stronger rooting in the mind of a man, then either
has Atheism, or Superstition. For otherwise, men, when they dr^w near unto
their (...) would never, with such feruencie, seek after the true religion,
and (...) their false. But then (if ever) it most of al imports them, to find
out the tr^th: then, when, if they miss it, they shall never after find it.
And, that before they had not found it, (no not in their own persuasions) they
manifestly show, by their forenamed recantations. Which, yet, may be further
seen, by the recantation of Orpheus: which (above all the rest) is most noble,
and ingenuous. For he, having before bin educated, in the idolatrous religion
of the Gentiles, accordingly expressed the same, in his Poems. But, Johan.
Francis^. Pic. 4. Epist. Scto. Lu^ensi. To. 2. p. 882.
after he had read the writings of Moses; and from them, received some light of
the truth; he renounced his former errors, confessing them so humbly, and
retracting them so willingly, and delivering the truth so plainly, that I
wonder not, to find, that his notable confession, Clem. Alex. in Prot^^pt. p.
26. Just. Mart. O at. a^ Ge^t. To. 1. p. 55.
in diverse of the fathers, Idem* lib. de Monarchia p. 106.
so much insisted on. For it is indeed most excellent, both for matter, and for
form. And he begins it thus; as his Cygnea cantio, or last exhortation,
unto his Son Musaeus. Solis canto pijs; omnes procul este prophani;
Tu, Musaee, audi, Luna prognate silenti.
Perniciosa prius, vitaeque infesta futurae,
Ex me cognosti: sed nunc te vera docebo.
Respectans verbum Diuinum, huic totus inhaere.
Pectoris, hoc, mentem s^cri, gressusque guberna;
Incedens recta, Regemque hunc orbis adora.
Vnicus est, per se existens, qui cuncta creavit.
I only sing to godly souls. Profane men, all, be gone.
O my Musaeus, harken thou, the Moons beloved Son.
Thou heretofore have learned of me, things most pernicious,
Contrary to the life to come, starcke false, and vicious.
But now, i will teach thee truth indeed. R^spect Gods sacred word.
Cleave wholly to it, it alone. And this to it afford;
To make it the only Guide, and Rule, of all thy thoughts and ways.
And look thou walk in upright paths, before him, all thy days.
This King of all the world adore; whom thou may Only call:
He only being of himself, who has created All.
And then, he proceeds, with a notable description of the only true God; of
his Providence, his Greatness, his Mercy, and his Justice; more like an holy
Prophet, then like an heathen Poet: as plainly will appear, unto such as
please to read it. Thus, does God oftentimes produce, a direct and an evident
confession, out of very Atheists; and thereby, very notably, both manifests
and magnifieth his own divine glory. For, what greater glory can be given unto
him, then that the same mouth should be forced to confess him, which had armed
it self, with all obstinacy, to deny him? In which examples likewise, we may
evidently see, Plat^. l. 10. de Legibus. p. 871.
the infallible truth of Plato's observation, That never any Atheist continued
always constant, in his impious opinion: but that, though perhaps he
maintained it stiffely, sometime in his life; yet, that he still renounced it,
at the time of his death. So that, the maine ground of this first book, is so
generally true [ That all men believe, That there is a God,] that even the
Atheist himself is not from thence exempted: but that, howsoever he may, for
a time (upon some passion or bravery, or some other ungrounded fancy) run
against (...) ^ommon stream, in denying of God; yet that still in the end he
closes wit^ all other men in directly confessing him.

CHAP. 14.
That, though Atheists should never have confessed, neither directly, nor
indirectly; but alway^s, most obstinately, have denied him: yet, that there is
no reckoning to be made of their opinion. 2. Because, in the opinion of all
wise, and Learned men, they are esteemed no better, then either Fools. 3. Or,
Mad^e^. 4. Or, Monsters of Men.

THE opinion of God, is so generally rooted, in the minds of all men; that
th^re is none, but does believe it: none, but (at sometime or other) does
confess it: no not, even the very Atheist. Who, though he do not constantly,
and piously confess God, as those men that do religiously believe him: yet is
he oftentimes enforced to confess him; even then, when he strives most of all
to deny him. For, the belief of God planted in the heart of man, is like a
burning fire, that cannot be quenched; but flameth out the more, the more men
seek to smoother it: being kindled more vehemently, by that Antiperista^^s of
a contrary renitency, in those that endeavor to suppress it: and so, flashing
out, like the Lightning, when it is in danger to be choked. And this we may
evidently see, in the two holy Prophets, David, and Jeremy; who, Psalm. 39. 1.
2. 3. Ier. 20. 9.
whenas they had obstinately resolved with themselves, to make no more mention
of the name of God; but to suppress it, in their hearts: yet, Incaluit animus,
exarsit ignis: Their soul waxed hot, and the fire flamed out. Their inward
belief of God, being like a raging flame, which, by a secret scortching,
compelled them to confess him. Crediderunt, and propterea locuti sunt: They
bele^ued, and therefor they could not but speak. And so is it likewise, 2.
Cor. 4. 13.
even with the Atheist too. He inwardly believes That there is a God: yea and
^e cannot do otherwise. And therefore he cannot choose, but sometime confess
it, for all his endeavor to suppress and smoother it. So that, even Atheists
themselves, who profess to be the Deniers of God; yet are found oftentimes, to
be confessors of him: believing, with a stronger and more serious persuasion,
That there is a God; then they can believe, That there is none: though they
vendi^ate this, as their selected opinion. For, they deny God, but wantonly;
but they confess him, seriously: yea, and, even in their denying him, they do
but, contra fidem credere, ^il. in ps. 52. p. 368. Cap. 10. Sect. 5.
as is noted by Saint Hilarie: They do but seem to believe that which indeed
they believe not: as I have showed before.

But, be it that the Atheist had always constantly believed, as he confidently
pronounces, That there is no God: Be it, that he had never, at any time,
neither directly, nor indirectly confessed any: Be it, that he had always
stuck as close unto his received opinion, as an Oyster unto that Rock which
it grows upon; and neither in his life, nor at his death recanted it: yet
could not all this infringe the Catholic and universal verity of this
general position, that, All men believe, That there is a God. For, he that
denies, there is a God, may justly be denied, to be a man, (...)
in Lactantius his opinion. Non po^est rationem hominis obtinere, qui Deum,
animi sui parentem, nescit: Then much less, Qu^ negat. He cannot justly be
ranked into the condition of a man, that is ignor^nt of God, who is the father
of his soul.

But, (...)
what is the Atheist then, if he be not a man? I find it affirmed, in the
writi^gs of the learned, both of Divines, and Philosophers, both of Christians
and Pagans; yea, and that by full consent; that all impious Atheists, and
deniers of God (how vainly soever conceited of themselves) yet are, in very
deed^, no b^tter then mere Fools. Who, being destitute of reason, (the true
sp^cificall difference of a man) cannot truly be called men, but in an abusiue
and improper acception.

And therefore, Psalm. 14. 1. 74. 18.
the Prophet David affirms in express and plain terms, that the Atheist is
a Fo^le. The Fool has said in his heart, There is no God. Which, that it may
appear to be no sudden censure, b^t a thing well concocted, and meditated by
him, he iterateth (in another Psalm^) the same words again: The fool has
said in his heart, Ps. 53. 1. An^el. in Prosolog. c. 3. Tom 3. p. 24.
There is no God. Et ^ur d^xit ins^peens, quod non est Deus? says Anselmus,
Cur, nisi quia stultus, and insipiens est? Why is it, that the fool does s^y,
There is no God? Forsooth, even f^r this ^^use, because he is a fool. But why
says he in his heart, rather then in hi^ mouth, that There is no God? Quia,
Hilar. in Ps. 52 p. 368.
si vel^ hoc verbis eloqui (says Saint Hilarte) Stultus esse (^^cut est)
publi^i assensus iudicio ^rgueretur: Because, if he should utter it in his
words, as he smothers it in his thoughts, he should publicly be known to be a
f^ole, as he is; and so be commonly esteemed by a general cons^nt. For, what
other account can there justly be made of him? who (as Saint Bas^l obseru^th)
is so notably besotted with his own gross opinion, that he does, Neque
oracula Dei audire, Basil. in Ps l. 2^ To. 1. p. 239.
n^que Naturae suae sensum recipere: That he neither will harken to the word of
God, without him, nor yet to the voice of his own nature, within him. For,
both these do^ teach him, that, There is a God: both the word of God, and the
vo^ce of Nature. And yet, the Atheist (contrary to both these) will impudently
affirm, that There is no God. And therefore, very worthily, is reckoned but a
Fool. For, as Aristotle observes out of the Poet He siodus: He that is
neither able to find out the truth himself, Arist. l. 1. E^^. c. 4. ^o. ^. p.
606. He^iod. opera and D^es p. 16.
nor willing to receive it when it is found out by others; may worthily be
r^nked in the high^st degree of Fool^s.

Neither do the Scriptures only, or Ecclesiastical Writers, account of
Atheists, as no b^tter then very fools: but, even Heathen Writers also
condemn them for the same. Caecilius, the Poet, expressly affirms that,
Deum, Cic. l. 4 Tus^. p. 164.
qui non summum pu^et;
Aut Stu^tum, aut rerum esse imperitum, existimes.
Who thinks, There is no God above, that all did make;
Him for a fool, or silly Soul, thou well maist^ake.
This censure he pronounces upon him, that acknowledges not their Cupid, for
a God. Then, much more must he be such, that will acknowledge no God. He must
needs be an extreme Fool, Clem. Alex. in Protrept. p. 11.
as you heard before, out of Aristotle. For (as Clemens Alex^ndrinus very
truly affirms) Imp^etas, and Superstitio, sunt ignorantiae extrema:
Athe^sme, and superstition, are the two extremities of folly and ignorance.
And therefore Plutarch defines Atheism to be Stup^r quid^m, D^os non
sentientium: A kind of senseless sottishness, without all touch of
godlin^^se. Here, Plut. l. de Superstit. To. 1. p. 325.
he makes it, not folly, but plain stupidity. Yea, ^^d in another place, he
is carried with so great a detestation, against Atheists, that he protests it
to be a kind of violence and wickedness, to ascrib^ unto such men, Plut. in
Gryllo. p. 102.
any faculty of Reason. Improbum est, and violentum, rationem ijs ascribere,
qui notitia Dei ^arent. So that he counts all them, Fools, that count not
Atheists to be Fools; and all them to be violently wicked themsel^es, that
do not abhor their impiety and wickedness. Yea, and Maximus Tyr^^s passes
yet, a more base and abject censure of them. For, he says of all Atheists,
Max. Ty^. Sermon. ^ p. 6.
that they are, Abiectum genus hominum, and sine sensu. Vide caetera. An abject
kind of people, and without all sense: denying unto Atheists, not only all
use of Reason, but also of very sense too. And so likewise does (...) videntur,
mentem, sensum, oculos denique ipsos, non habere: They neither have reason nor
sense, no nor eyes. And it is true indeed, Arnob. l. 8 Con^. Gent. p. 757.
Quis enim, mundu^ contuens, Deum esse non sentit? says Saint Hilarie. How can
a man possibly, Hilar. in Ps. 52. p. 368.
look upon the world, but he must needs conceiu^ presently, that, surely,
There is a God? And therefore, Auicenna also affirms (as I find him cited,
by learned Du Plessis) that, Mornaeu^. l. De verit. relig. c. 1. p. 3.
Quicunque Deum, aut Numen non agnoscit; non ^antum ratione, sed eti^ sensu
caret. Whosoever confesses not, that there is a God; he is not only destitut^
of the reason of a man, but also of the very sense of a beast. For, as Plutarch
well observes, Plut. in Gryllo. To. 2. p. 102.
There is no beast, that differs so much from man by nature, as one man
differs from another: especially the Atheist, who differs from all men, and
that in the maine ground, both of religion, and of reason. And therefore, is
not worthy to be numbered among men.

Thus you see, how base and vile account all Atheists have had, at all times,
amongst all wise and learned men: who have esteemed them none otherwise, then a
kind of vainly conceited fools. Which is the worst kind of folly, and the
least to be hoped of. See thou a man that is wise in his own conceit? there
is more hope of a fool, Pro. 26. 12.
then of him: more hope, even of a mere Natural: for such is the wisemans
fool here. And though perhaps, those Atheists, in the hight of their pride,
and thickness of their ignorance, make as small account of wise men, as they
can do of them; accounting them for the fools, and themselves to be the only
wise: yet matters it nothing, whom they that be fools, do either esteem to
be fools, or to be wise men: but whom wise men so esteem. For (as the Orator
very truly observes) Statuere quis sit sapiens, Cic. l. 4. Acad. p. 11.
vel maxim videtur esse sapientis: To judge who is a wise man, does specially
belong unto the judgment of a wise man. And Xenophanes likewise unto the same
purpose. Sapiens sit necesse est, Laer^. in vita Xenoph. p. 310.
qui norit explorare sapientem. It is fit, that he himself should be a wise
man, that will assume to judge, who is a wise man. He is not a wise man, whom a
fool accounts a wise man: but he is a fool, whom a wise man accounts a fool:
then much more, whom all wise men. And therefore, whenas Atheists do either
deny God, or make a mock of him, they do but as fools do, who make a mock of
every thing: yea, even of sin it self. The Fool (says the wise man) makes
but a mock of sin, Pro. 10. 23.
yea, and that even of Atheism, which is the greatest sin: yea, and of God
himself too. They make but a mock of God, as though there were no God. Upon
whom have ye ieasted, Isai. 57. 4.
upon whom hau^ ye gaped, and thrust out your tongue? says the Lord by his
Prophet. Are ye not rebellious children, and a false seed? Thus impudently, do
Atheists make a mock of God himself. But yet, as the Philosopher, when it was
told him, Hi t^ rident: Plut. l. De (...) To 2. p. 2 ^ 5.
These men deride thee: very wisely answered: Ego autem non rid^or: But I am
not to be derided: So may it be truly said of God: that though such fools do
mock at him, yet God himself is not mocked, as the Apostle plainly
testifies: Gal. 6. 7.
but is infinitely superior unto any such contumely, or scurrility. And
therefore, in their mocking of God so foolishly, they make but fools of
themselves, and bewray unto the world the extremity of their folly; giving to
others just occasion to deride and mock at them: yea, even to God himself.
Who (as the Psalmist testifies) laugheth them to scorn; having both them,
Psalm. ^. 4.
(...) 4. and their folly in extreme derision. Yea, and the same is likewise
affirmed, Cap 12. sect. 2.
even by the Heathen Poet: as before I hau^ obs^rued. -- Deus quicunque (...).
Satyr. 15. p 68.
aspexit, ridet, and odit.
What God soever sees it, C^c. l. 2. Epist. ^am. Ep. 15 p. 20
The same derides, and hates it.
He does, in Stomacho ridere, as the Orator speaks. He hates them, as wicked
men; and yet laughes at them, as fools. Yea and, as they be ^ooles, so he
makes them known for fools. He both knows them, to be fools himse^fe, and
makes them known to be fools of others: Yea and so to be esteemed throughout
the whole world. Which is a greater scourge unto those proud fools, that so
ambitiously affect to be compted wise men, then the whip it self is: Which,
the wise man affirms, to be properly belonging unto the back of fools.

And, Prou. 26. 3. Atheists be madmen.
as all wise men do account of Atheists, as fools: so many of them have
esteemed them, as distracted and madd men. They make them to be, Ex stultis
insanos: as the Comic speaks. Nay, Tere^t. (...). Act. 2. S^^. 2. p. 61.
in that they be fools, they be therein also madmen. For it is indeed an
Orthodoxe; though it be numbered as a Paradoxe; that, C^c. l arad. 4. p. 423.
Omnes Stulti insaniunt: that All Fools are madd, and men deprived of their
wits. And so are likewise all Atheists. They be indeed both fools, and
madmen: though in their own conceit, they be the only wise men, with whom
wisdom does surely live, and after whom it will surely d^e. But what
reckoning soever, I^b. 12. 2.
those men make of themselves, and of their own high wisdom; yet wisemen
indeed have ever reputed them, Act. 26. 11.
for no better then madmen. Saint Paul calls it his madness, that he had ever
been so impious, at to persecute the Christians. Whilst he was in that
madness, John. 16. 2.
he compted it his wisdom, and imagined that he had done high service to God
therein. But when God has endued him with the light of true wisdom, then he
saw it was madness in him. And if it be a madness, but to persecute Gods
servants; then is it much more madness, to deny God himself: which is the
highest kind wherein he can be persecuted. And therefore, not only
Christians, but also the very Heathens, have censured all Atheists, and deniers
of God, to be indeed, but madd. Plutarch says, that, Deos esse, omnes sana
mente praediti, Plnt. l. de Hols. ^o. To. ^. p. 106.
arbitrantur: That all, which have their wits, do believe, that there be
gods. From whence it must needs follow, that they, which deny, that there is a
God, are indeed out of their wits. They be not, Cic. l. 2. de Not. D^or. p. 207.
sana mente praediti. Which, the Orator also affirms expressly: Esse Deos,
ita perspicuum est, vt illud qui neget, vix (...) It is a thing so evident,
Cic. l. 2. De Not. (...) p. 207.
that there is a God; that whosoever denies it, is (surely) out of his wit.
Which, as in this place he confi^meth: Quis potest esse tam auersus a vero,
Cic. Orat. 3. in (...). p. 3^9.
tam pr^ceps, tam me^te captus, qui neget, haec omnia, quae videmus, Deorum
immort^l^m nutu, atque, potestate administrari? Who can there be possibly, such
an ene^^e to all truth, nay of such an he ^ddy rashness, nay of such a frantik
madness, (...) to de^^e, that all those things, which we see with our eyes, are
ruled by the pleasure, and power of the Gods? He reckons of such men, not
only, as o^ rash men, but also, as of madmen. And so likewise did Socrates,
Xenoph. l. 1. De ^at. Soerat. p. 157
as appears in Xenophon. Si qui sunt, qui nihil a divina prouidentia putant
pendere, (...) ille asserebat insanire. Those men that deny the power of Gods
pro^idence, he plainly affirmed, to be out of their wits. And so likewise did
Euripides. Eur^p. in Heracl^d^s. p. 729.
-- Non conuenit vnquam, hoc priuari,
Vt colas Deos: qui negat vero,
Ad insaniam vertitur.
This holy Rule to leave, were too too bad,
To worship God: whom who deny's, is mad.
Yea, (...) To. 3. p. 50.
and that in the highest degree of madness; as S. Chrysostom affirms. Deum
vel non esse, vel malum esse, opinari; non san^ hominis sed insani potius, imo
vltimo furore perciti, merito dixerimus. He that either denies God to be at
all, or affirms him to be the author of evil, he is not (sure) a wise man,
but rather a mad man, Yea one that is enraged, not with frenzy, but with
fury. And thus Atheists (as you see) in the opinion of all wise men, are
esteemed not only as fools, but as madmen. Yea, Philo. Iudaeus. l. Quod
mundus incorrupt. p. 1274.
and as Philo Iudaeus pronounces in another like case; not only Insani, but
also insanabiles: Not commonly mad, but incurably mad. Now how little account
is to be made of mad men, or of any thing, whatsoever they can either do, or
say, we may evidently see, in the Prophet David, when he feigned himself mad:
Of whom, when as Achish very greatly rejoiced, 1. Sam. 21. 14. 15.
at his first sight and coming; yet whenas he appeared unto him to be mad, he
was angry with those, that had brought him before him, and asked, Whether they
thought that he had any need of madmen? So that, if Atheists, be no better
then madmen: as their professing of God, could bring him no honor; so their
denying of him, can bring him no dishonor: But to proceed yet one step
further.

4 As many wise men have reckoned and esteemed of Atheists, Atheists ^e
Monsters of men.
some to be fools, and some to be madmen: so diverse have esteemed them, to be
no men at all; but very monsters of men, Lactant. l 7. c. 9. p. 404.
or beasts in men's form. So Lactantius. Illos, qui nullum omnino Deum esse
dixerunt, non modo non Philosophos, sed ne homines quidem suisse dixerim: qui,
mutis simillimi, ^x solo corpore constiterunt, nihil videntes animo. Those men,
that have affirmed, that there is no God; I dare boldly affirm, to have been
no men; much less to have been Philosophers; who like unto brute beasts, as
if they were all body, could s^e and understand nothing at all with their
mind. Cic. l. 2. De Not. Deor. p. 215.
So Tallie. Quis hunc, hominem dixerit, qui, cum tam certos coeli motus, tam
ratos astrorum ordines, tamque inter se omnia connexa and apta viderit, neget
in his inesse rationem? Who can esteem for a man, that seeing so constant a
motion of the heavens, so orderly a course and progress of the Stars, and so
apt a fitting and knitting of one thing unto another, can deny this to be
done, by the strength and power of Reason? Which is the usual word, whereby
Philosophers express the working power of Gods divine Providence.

Now, if Atheists be not men, what can they be else, but monsters of men? who
have the outward shape and lineaments, but want the inward faculties and
habilements, that is, the light of the mind and understanding; which is indeed
the true and proper nature of man. Cic. l. de some. Scip p. 307.
For, men's cuiusque is est quisque: and which whosoever lacks, he is not
properly, but equi^ocally, a man: as Scaliger collecteth out of Avenrois:
Scalig. Exercit. 9. p. 49.
because he has not man's proper and specificall nature, Te tul. l. de corona.
c. 5. p. 181.
and so may justly be reputed a monster. For, omne quod contra naturam est,
monstri meretur nomen: says Tertullian. Whatsoever is contrary to the order of
nature, that does justly deserve the name of a Monster. Now, what can be more
contrary unto the order of Nature, then to have the outward shape, and figure
of a man; and yet to lack reason, which is his inward form? This much better
deserves the name of a monster, then many of those do, at which men so much
wonder. It is a far greater monster, then, if either a man, should be borne
with four feet; or a beast, but with two. And indeed Palingenius, alluding to
this comparison, he called such impious persons, but a kind of two-footed
Asses. Paling. in Pisc. p. 358.
O bipedes Asini etc.

specifying more particularly, what kind of monsters they be, in his fancy: as
if they were no better then mere scapes and errors of particular nature, and
unnaturally degenerating into beasts. And therefore, Cic. l. 1. Tusc. p. 113.
if Consensus omnium be vox naturae, as the Orator affirms; what can they be
then, but monstra naturae, who refuse to hear the general voice of nature,
teaching There is a God? Especially, Theodoret Ser. 1. de Prouid. To. 2. p. 577.
seeing it calls out so loud unto them, not only Loquendo, but tantum non
Clamando, as Theodoret affirms: and tells them so constantly, by all
estates, and degrees, and conditions of men, that there must needs be one. This
is, most evidently, a monstrous infidelity. And therefore, Saint Augustine
doubts not, for this hardened obstinacy in their impiety, Aug. l. 2. de C^u^t.
Dei. c. 8. To. 5. p. 1339.
to call them by the name of monsters directly. Magnum est ipse prodigium, qui,
mundo credente, non credit. He, surely, is a monster, and that a very great
one, that refuses to believe, A. Gel. l. 17. c. 1. p. 236.
whenas all the world beside believes round about him. And so likewise does A.
Gellius. Quidam fuerunt monstra hominum, qui, de Dijs immortalibus, impias
falsasque opiniones prodiderunt. There have been certain monsters of men, that
have broched their false and impious opinions, against the Gods. Yea, and
Tully, he goes farther. For he not only denies him to be a man, that denies
there is a God; but him also, that confesses him, if, upon the consideration
of his infinite goodness, he return not unto him, Cic. l. 2. de Leg. p. 322.
all possible thankfulness. Quem astrorum ordines, quem di^rum (...)
vicissitudines, quem memsium temperatio, quem ea quae gignuntur nobis ad
fruendum, non gratum esse cogunt; hunc, hominem omnino numerari, neque decet.
He, whom the order of the stars, the enterchange of days and nights, the
temper of the seasons, and the benefits which we reap and receive from all
these, enforce not unto thankfulness, he ought not to be reckoned in the
number of men by us. Note the notable piety, even of the very Heathen; that
those, whom they noted of impiety to their gods, they likewise exterminated out
of the number of men. Now, these varying opinions of so many learned men, both
Christians, and Heathens, against the Atheists, in thus calling them both
Fools, and Madmen, and Monsters of men, does evidently declare, that they
wanted words, to express their conceits of them, and to deliver unto the full,
that notable detestation, and abject estimation, wherein they held them.

So that, to recollect our intended Argument from the sentences before recited:
As it may truly be affirmed, that all men in general, have the gift of reason;
though Fools, and Madmen, and Monsters have it not (who yet, in a gross and
common acception, are numbered as men:) so may it as truly be generally
affirmed, that All men believe, that there is a God; though the Atheist deny
it. Because he is to be accounted none other, then either as a Fool, or a
Madman, or a Monster: as has been showed before.

CHAP. 15.
That God, has at all times, powered down his just judgments, upon the heads
of Atheists: b^ them sensibly declaring, That there is a God. 2. Examples, out
of Scriptures. 3. Examples, out of Eccle^iasticall Histories. 4. Examples, out
of Heathen writers. 5. An Objection answered, concerning the punishment of
those Atheists.

BUT let us suppose, that Atheists were neither Fools, nor Madmen; but the
wisest, and learnedest, of all other men. And again, let us suppose, that they
were not such a poor handful, and so contemptible for their paucity, as they
be; but multiplied, and increased, unto the number of an army. Let us yet
suppose further, that they had ever most obstinately maintained their opinion,
without either any wavering, hesitation, or doubting; and that they had never
c^nfessed any God, neither sleeping, nor waking; neither in thought, word, nor
deed; neither directly, nor indirectly; neither in their lives, nor at their
deaths: (all which I have evidently showed, to be very far otherwise.) Yet God,
by his exemplarie punishments inflicted upon Atheists, more severely, and more
constantly, then upon any other wicked ones, does evidently declare, not only,
that There is a God: but also that he is the King and Ruler of the world: a
God, that both hears, and sees all their wickedness, and that knows well
how to revenge him upon all his enemies, but specially, upon Atheists his
deniers, and blasphemers; for whom, he has reserved his selected plagues and
punishments. So that, though they deny him in words: yet he confesses himself
in deeds: and, by their punishments, both inforceth diverse of those Atheists to
confess him, who before had denied him: and all the godly to rejoice, Ps. 58.
10. 11.
who before had confessed him. The righteous shall rejoice, when he sees the
vengeance (says the Prophet David:) he shall wash his feet in the blood of
the wicked. And men shall say, Verily there is a reward for the righteous;
Doubtless, there is a God, that judges in the earth.

For, if we look with judgment, into the lives and deaths, of those profane
persons, that have been Gods most direct and professed Enemies, and most
gloried and triumphed in their impieties and blasphemies, as though there were
no God at all to regard them; we may easily observe, that non^ of them has
escaped the revenging hand of God, but that all of them have constantly fallen
into great calamity, and evermore ended their ungodly lives, with unnatural,
untimely, and unfortunate deaths. Which constancy, in those men's so certain
infelicity (more then in other men's, that are in other kinds wicked) does
openly proclaim, that this their punishment comes not out of the dust; Job.
5. 6.
neither is sent unto them by blind chance and fortune (for, there is no such
constancy,) but that it only proceeds from that divine providence, which
both hears, and sees, and knows all things: Yea, and takes special
notice of those that are Atheists, as of his most daring and audacious enemies:
culling them out by the head, from among all other men, to be the selected
spectacles of his wrath and indignation. That they who disclaimed him in their
lives, yet might proclaim him in their deaths: declaring unto all men, that
the God, whom they denied, had now, by their punishment, proved himself a God
indeed: As though he had made them to no other purpose, but to glorify
himself, by taking just vengeance upon their ungodliness. As he himself
professed unto Phar. oh, King of Egypt: For this cause have I appointed th^e,
Ex. 9. 16.
to show my power in thee, and to declare my Name throughout all the world.
For, as the wise man also expressly testifies, Pro. 16. 4.
The Lord has made all things for himself; yea, even the wicked man against
the day of vengeance.

2 And indeed, Atheists punishments recorded in Scriptures.
God has so notably inflicted his vengeance upon Atheists, and so directly
powered down the full vialls of his wrath, upon the heads of them; that there
can almost none of them be named, neither in the holy Scriptures, nor in
Ecclesiastical Histories, nor in Heathen Writings; but that it will appear,
that the judgment of God has brought them unto a fearful and an abhorred
end. As I will declare unto you, by some two or three instances, in every one
of the three forenamed Heads.

The most renowned, for professed ungodliness, are these. In the Holy
History; King Pharaoh, and Antiochus, the King of Tyrus, and the two Herod's.
In Ecclesiastical History; Caligula, Domitian, Maximinus, and Julian. In
profane History; Protageras, Diagoras, Theodorus, Socrates, Epicurus, Bion,
Pherecides, and Dionysius. Of all whom, there was not one, that died in his
nest, of a fair and kindly death, 2. Pet. 2. 3.
saving only this last; Whose d^mnation yet slept not: being, though respited,
yet not removed. But for all the rest of them, there was not any one, but he
ended his life, by the stroke of Gods justice; either mediately pronounced by
the mouth of a man; or immediately inflicted by the hand of God. For the first
of them, King Pharaoh: as he was a notable mirror of obdured ungodliness so
was he likewise a mirror of Gods most just vengeance: being purposely
designed, and appointed by God, unto none other end, (...). 9. 16.
but only to be an example of note, and eminent document, unto the whole
world, that, Whosoever contemns, and despises God, be he never so great and
mighty a Potentate, shall, for his impiety, be most severely punished. For, so
indeed he was: yea, and that not with one punishment; but with all the
varieties of Gods most heavy judgments: which were by God inflicted, not only
upon himself, but also (for his sake) upon his people and subjects. Who were,
Ex. 7. 20. 21.
all of them, plagued, by blood in their waters; by tempests in their corn; by
Caterpillars in their fruits; by Grassehoppers in their grass; by Murraine in
their Cattle; by Flies, and Lice, and ulcers, Ex. 7, 20, 21 8, 9, 10, 11, 14,
28.
in their own bodies; by the sudaine death of all their first borne Sons;
and finally, by the drowning of themselves. Who (as Moses expresses their
destruction in his Song) did sink down unto the bottom like a stone. And all
this fell upon them, Ex. 15. 5.
for the only impielie of their Prince; the hardened prophanenes of an impious
King, bringing a general plague upon his whole Kingdom. Which plagues were so
exemplarie, and so immediately from heaven, that even the very Sorcerers, who
were set to affront Moses, and to show that all his miracles were but
sophistical delusions; yet were forced to confess, that they were Gods
immediate plagues, and judgments: This is the finger of God. Thereby plainly
declaring, Ex. 8. 19.
not only There is a God; but also, that He is a God of so omnipotent a power,
that he is able to subdue the most proud and potent of all his enemies, by the
basest and meanest of all his creatures: by Frogs, Flies, Lice, and such like
contemptible worms. A notable Example of that fearful curse, denounced by
Moses; that such, as will not fear and obey the Lord, shall, in every part of
their estate, be cursed: Cursed in the Town, Deuteronomy. 28. 15.
cursed in the field, cursed in their basket, and cursed in their dough, cursed
in the fruit of their bodies, in the fruit of their land, and in the fruit of
their Cattle; cursed in their going out, and cursed in their coming in. All
which curses fell apparently upon the Eg^ptians, as the v^ngeance of God, for
their wicked Kings ungodliness.

Now, for the second of them, Antiochus, whose sacriledges and profaneness
can hardly be recounted, they were so many and so heinous: there was never any
man, whom the judgment of God did cast headlong down, from a greater
arrogancy into a greater misery. For, he purposing, in the height of his
impiety and profaneness, 2. Mac. 1. 2. etc. 1. Mac. 1. 22. S^^das in voc^
(...), p. 18. Cic. Orat. 6. in Ver. p. 166.
to have robbed the Temple of El^m^is, in Persia; as he had done before of
Jerusalem in Judea: and so to have trussed up, Sacra in saccum, as it is in
the Proverb; to have sacked, and ransacked, and made good prize and booty, of
all consecrated and holy things: he was shamefully beaten, and repelled by the
Citizens (as Verres, in the like attempt, was by the Agrigentines.) And
understanding in P^rsia, of the overthrow of two of his Armies in Judea: he,
breathing out fire against the Jews, and hasting toward them to take his
fierce revenge; he was cast down from his Chariot, to the bruising of all his
bones. But the vengeance of God not having yet done with him, struck him with
a most odious and incurable sickness, which so corrupted and putrified his
body, 2. Mac. 9 3, 4. 7, 5, 9, 10. 8, 28.
that loathsome worms crawled out of it, in exceeding great plenty: whereby,
the smell of his rottenness grew so exceeding grievous, that it made him
odious both to his friends, and to himself. And so (as the book of Maccabees
concludes his story, noting both the two forenamed points, of his Arrogance
and his Misery,) He that a little before, thought that he might command the
stoods of the Sea (so proud was he beyond the condition of a man) was now cast
down to the ground. And thus the Murderer and Blasphemer suffered most
grievously, and died a miserable death in a strange Country. They be the very
last words of his story.

For the third of them; the King of Tyrus: who, in the pride of his heart,
called himself a God, Ez. 26. 2. 6.
and thought himself equal unto the highest God: the highest God tells him,
V. 8.
that He will bring him down, and that he shall die the death of those, that
are slain in the midst of the Sea: Who are not only killed, but also
commonly drowned, and cast into the waters, as a prey unto the fishes. So that,
though he boasted himself to be a God; yet should he find himself, Ez. 28 9.
to be but a Man: yea and a miserable man, in the hand of him, that was
appointed to kill him. Which fore-threatened destruction, was afterward
fullfilled, upon that whole kingdom. Yea, and that, with so great a
desolation, and such incredible cruelty, as the like was never exercised
before, upon any City. Insomuch, that the Calami^^e of the Tyrians, did pass
as a Proverb, in men's ordinary speech. Quae, ex antiqua Tyro. These things
are more grievous, Er^s. C^^l. p. 966.
then those that are reported of the ancient Tyrus. Of whose fearful
destruction, Ezeckiel foretells, that it should be lamented, with this
pitiful eiulation. Quae, est, vt Tyrus, quae obmutnit in medio mari? What
City is like Tyrus, Ezech. 27. 32.
destroyed so fearfully, in the midst of the Sea?

For the fourth of them, King Herod the great; who was indeed the greatest
persecutor, that ever the Christians had (for all other persecutors did but
only persecute Christ, Mat. ^. 13.
in his members; but he persecuted Christians in their head) he struck at the
very head of Christianity, and persecuted Christ in his own immediate person:
His impiety escaped not Gods just, and heavy judgment. For, as he intended,
most cruelly to have murdered the Son of the living God: so God abused his
cruelty, to the murdering of his own sons. Whereby, he became so infamous
to the world, that it went of him, Macrob. l. 2. Satur. c. 4. p. 237.
as a common Proverb, that, Melius est, Herodis esse porcum, qu^m filium. It
is better to be Herod's Swine, then his Son. But yet, here the judgment of
God left him not: but struck him with so many, and so grievous diseases
together, that to read, it, it is a wonder. Which Josephus expresses, in very
fearful manner. His words thereof, be these. Regi, morbus factus est grauior,
poenam impietatis exigente Numine. Lento enim calore torrebatur, Iosep. l. 17.
Antiquit. p. 503.
qui non tam externo tactu deprehenderetur, quam intus popularetur v^scera.
Aderat and vehemens voracitas, cui necesse esset continuo cibos suggerere.
Simulque vexabatur intestinorom exulceratione, and colicis passionibus. Pedes
tum^bant flegmate humido and pellucido, similiterque inguina. Ipsa quoque
verenda putrefacta scatebant vermiculis, accedente foeda, nec minus molesta
tentigine, non sine foetore gravissimo. Super haec omnia, nervorum contractione
laborabat, and difficultate anhelitus. Quamobrem, constans erat, inter Divinos
and Fatidicos opinio, Regem laesae tot modis pietatis, Deo poenas expendere.
Hitherto Josephus. The Kings sickness grew every day more and more grievous;
God punishing him severely, for his former impiety. For first, he was scorched
and broyled with a lingering fire; which though it could not outwardly be felt
with men's hands; yet did it inwardly eat and consume all his bowels. He was
taken, beside, with a doggish Appetite, which called for meat almost every
moment. Further, his intestines brake out into putrid ulcers, and grievously
tormented him with colique passions. His feet and flanks, swelled with a
flegmatike humor, and his secrets were possessed with an unnatural tumor:
corrupting most loathsomely into worms, and exhaling continually most odious
stinkes. Yet further, he was grievously vexed with the cramps and conuulsions,
and greatly tormented with shortness of ^reath. All which things considered, it
was constantly resolved, amongst all Divines, and South sayers, That they were
nothings else, but the strokes of Gods veng^ance, inflicted upon him for his
former ungodliness. Here was a perfect pattern of a miserable man tormented
under the hand of God: having none of all his members exempted from his
plagues; but every several part, having his several torment: dying, in a
living death; and living, in a dying life. A mirror of that infernal
punishment, which God has in hell appointed for the Atheist.

And, not much an unlike judgment, fell likewise upon the fifth of them, H^rod
called Agrippa: Who making (upon a time) an eloquent Oration; the people (after
the manner of their hyperbolicall flattering) applauded him with this
blasphemous encomion, Act. 12. 21. 22. 23.
That he spoke, like a God, and not like a man. Which excess of commendation,
Cic. l. 3. Offic. p. 386.
though he knew to be most impious; yet (as the Orator speaks in another
like case) Alieni facinoris munus^ulum non repudiavit: He would not refuse
their present unto him, though he knew it was their sin: It being so kindly
offered he would not unkindly refuse it; Iosep. l. 19. Antiquit, c. 7. p. 566.
but (though it were their blasphemy) yet did willingly accept it. Hanc impiam
adulationem nec castigans, nec repellens, as Josephus punctually observes:
Neither repelling, nor rectifying, this their impious adulation. But God who is
jealous of his honor, and, who will not give his glory unto any other, Isai.
42. 8.
he sent his Angel to punish that impious intruder: who smote him with so
grievous a disease, that his body corrupted all into worms. And thus was his
end.

3 Let us now proceed unto those other Examples, Atheists pnnishments recorded
in Ecclesiastical Histories.
which before I have named out of Ecclesiastical Histories. Of whom, the
first, Caligula; as he was a cruel Tyrant, in all his other government: so,
in the end he grew unto that madness, as to assume the highest divine honors
unto himself. Whose impiety and profaneness, Joseph. l. 18. Antiquit. c. 9.
p. 535.
Josephus expresses in these words unto us. Inflatus potentiae magnitudine,
oblitus est se esse hominem; and contumeliosus in superos, ad reliquam
insaniam, divinos etiam honores vsurpare ausus est. He being puffed up with the
greatness of his power, forgate himself to be a man: and growing proud
against the gods, added this unto all the rest of his madness; that he
presumed to appoint unto himself divine honors. Sueton. in vit. Caligula c.
22. p. 61.
Templum numini suo proprium, and sacerdotes, and excogitatissimas hostias
instituens: as Suetonius, adds. He appropriated a special temple unto his
own godhead; Yea and appointed both Priests and sacrifices for it: accepting
even the title of Jupiter Latialis. But, what was the end of all this wicked
glory, and of his profane consecrating himself for a God? Did God leave it
unrevenged? No. But, as Solomon, 1. Kin. 11. 14. 23. 26.
when he had forsaken God, God likewise (in some degree) forsook him, and out
of his own Servants stirred up many dangerous adversaries against him: so did
he likewise with this man; permitting him to fall into their hands, Sueton. in
vit. Calig. c. 58. p. 69. Joseph. l. 19. An^tiquit. c. 1. p. 551.
and to be murdered of them, with no less then thirty grievous wounds; as
Josephus reports them. Confecerunt eum, illatis certatim crebris ictibus.

For the second of them; Domitian; whom Eusebius affirms, Eusebius. l. 3. Hist.
Eccles. c. 15 p. 34 Aurel. Vict. in Domitian. p. 387
to have bin the true successor of Nero, for his impiety, and Theomachie: and
who (as Aurelius Victor reports) more Caligulae, Dominum se, Deumque vocari,
coegit: Who, like impious Caligula, commanded himself to be called, both Lord,
and God: but with the same success. For, as he was an imitator of Caligula's
impiety: so was he likewise his successor in his misery: Suet^n. in vita
D^^^tian c. 17. p. 120.
being murdered (as he was) by his own servants, and slain, with no fewer,
then with seven deadly wounds. And this was the end of that immortal god.

For the third of them, Maximinus, a perfect aemulus of the bloody King
Antiochus, both in the impiety of his life, and in the misery of his death; I
have largely extended that parallel between them, Cap. 13. Sect. 3.
in many points of the comparison: both of them being stricken with most
horrible sicknesses; and both of them confessing, the stroke to be Gods. Only,
with this note of difference, that this Maximinus, before his loathsome
sickness, by which he lost his life, was stricken from heaven with lightning;
by which he lost his eyes. Eusebius. l. 1. de vit. Constant. c. 51. 52. p. 1. 40.
And this (as Eusebius affirms) was the stroke of Gods justice. That he, who
before had burned out the eyes of many faithful Christians, should now
himself have his own eyes burnt out.

And for the fourth of them, Julian; whose infamy will never die, for his
blasphemy against Christ, S^zomen. l. 6. Hist Eccles. c. 2. p. 511.
and cruelty against Christians: he was very strangely killed, in his war
against the Persians; being suddenly stricken with an uncertain hand, but yet
making a certain wound. Peraduentnre by one, who, in his simplicity, shot his
arrow at randon; not purposing, either to hurt him, 1. King 22. 34.
or to hitte him (as it fell out in Ahab, another profane King:) but, without
peradventure, God directing the shooter, and leuelling the shot, at his own
appointed mark: which he failed not to hit, and to strike home, so sure, 1.
Sam. 26. 8.
that (as Abishai said) having stricken himonce, he need to strike him no
more. And so there he died, directly ascribing his death unto Christ: as before
I have observed.

4 And diverse such like fearful judgments, Cap. 13. Sect. 3. Atheists
punishment recorded in secular writers.
do even the Heathens themselves report, to have happened unto Atheists: as may
evidently be seen, in all those men, whom before I have reckoned up, by their
names; as infamed in their writings, for the principallest Atheists. For the
first of whom, Protagoras; though his fault were nothing else, but a seeming to
doubt, whether there were a God? yet, even that scepticall impiety, escaped not
the censure, of the Areopagitae; but, by their decree, received the punishment,
not only of infamy, Cic. l. 1. de Not. Deor. p. 190.
but also of banishment; they sentencing, that his books should be publicly
burned, and himself perpetually exiled. Yea, and where humane punishment left
him, (...) in vit. Protag. p. 322.
there divine ouertooke him. For sailing over the sea, in the time of his
banishment, he was by it devoured, and swallowed up.

For the second of them, Di^goras: who is noted, as one of the principallest
Atheists, in the writings, not only of Christians, but of Heathens. He, in his
impiety, was so public, and notorious, that he was not only condemned, but
also proscribed, Suidas in voce Diagor. p. 231.
by the people of Athens: Who propounded a Talent, unto any man, that should
kill him; and two, unto any, that could bring him forth alive. Which
punishment, though, at that time, he escaped by flight; yet could he not
escape from the punishment of God. No flight could save him from it. For, he
attempting diverse times to have taken the Sea, it ever, upon his first entering
into it, grew so raging and violent, that he still was forced again to
forsake it. Until, at last, he aduenturing, and putting all unto the hazard,
to avoid the ^ruelty of his fierce pursuers; he (as Protagoras before) was
swallowed up of the waves: God taking his punishment, into his own hands. For
this, Athenaeus l. 13. p. 455.
even Athenacus observes, as the work of Gods Justice, inflicting due
punishment upon his ungodliness. Yea, and Tully reports, that, when he was
in the tempest, Cic. l. 3. de Not. Deor. p. 239.
and before he was drowned; those that were in the ship with him, objected
it unto him, that it was for his ungodliness, that that tempest so afflicted
them: (even as in a like case, the Sailors objected it, Jonah 1. 6. 7.
unto the Prophet Jonas.) And though for the present, he turned it off, with a
scoff; yet he paid for that profaneness, with the loss of his life: All the
rest of the Company, being punished by God, for one Atheists impiety. A thing,
which so commonly falls out, Xenop. l. 8. de Pedia Cyri. p. 110.
that (as Xenophon observes) all men, in their sailing, desire, for their
Companions, to have rather religious persons, then Atheists. Qui nauigationem
eligunt, cum pijs potius eligere solent, qu^m cum ijs, qui impium aliquid
perpetrarunt. And they do wisely in it; lest through other men's impiety, they
be punished for company: as it fell out, Act. ^7. 24. 43. 44.
both with Jonas, and Diagoras. Whereas, on the contrary, S. Paul's piety
preserved all his Company.

For the third of them, Theodorus; who, Athenaeus vb^ supra. Item Laert. in
vit. Aristip. p. 77. Psalm. 60. 3.
for his notable profanenes, was surnamed Atheos, as (before him) was Diagoras:
he, for that his impiety, being questioned publicly, was, by the sentence of
the Judges, both condemned, and executed; being forced to drink a cup of
deadly wine, as it is in the Psalm. For, that was the punishment appointed by
their Laws, for the death of such profane and impious persons: That they,
which had made others drink in the poison of their wicked opinions, should
themselves, by drinking poison end their own wicked lives.

For the fourth of them, Socrates; though he were a man, so rare and excellent,
for all moral virtues, Cic. l. 5. Tusc. p. 168.
that he is said to be the first, that ever called Philosophy down out of
heaven, and brought it to be familiar, and to converse among men: yet, because
his moral virtue was not seasoned with the Theological virtue of true Piety;
but, that he was esteemed (though falsely) to be a derider of all the Gods;
the same Law, which before had seized on Theodorus, took hold likewise on him:
and sentenced him to the same condemnation, whom it held to be guilty of the
same crime. And so, he drinking of the very same Cup, did end his life also
with a draught of poison.

Now, if any man do think, that the judgments of those forenamed persons, are
not rightly ascribed, to be the judgments of God; because they were
pronounced, by the mouth of men; he is greatly deceived, in his opinion. For
(as the Prophet Moses very truly affirms) The judgment is the Lords, Deuteronomy. 1.
17. Psalm. 82. 1.
whose soever the mouth be. He (as the Psalmist testifies) not only stands
among the Gods; but also judges among the Gods: as not only present with
them, but also president among them. So that, though their judgment was framed
in the Council of men; yet was it decreed by the counsel of God. He it was,
that decreed the sentence, though he appointed the mouth of a man to pronounce
it. The same God, who gave the sentence; that, Leuit. 24. 14.
that Blasphemer should be executed, among the Jews; was he, that gave the
sentence, that Theodorus, and the rest, should likewise be executed among the
Athenians. So that, though they died by the judgment of man; yet died they,
not without the judgment of God. But, to proceed with the rest.

For the fifth of them, Epicurus: though he denied Gods providence, yet he died
not without Gods providence: but had such a death befallen him, as was most
repugnant unto his opinion. For, whereas he placed his whole felicity in
pleasure; he ended his days in most miserable torture; being tormented in the
Bladder, for fourteen days together. For the easing of which pain, he so
excessiuely drank wine, that thereof he died drunken: as Laertius testifies
in his funeral Epigram. -- sitientius hausit
Suaue merum: Laert. in vit. Epicuri. p. 346.
hinc Stygias cbrius ^ausit aquas.
Whilst he sweet wine full fast did swallow down:
The Stygian Lake his drunken soul did drown.
And so, as he lived like a Swine, he died like a Swine: wallowing in all
fi^thy pleasure in his life, and dying drunken at his death. For the sixth of
them, Bion, a great derider of the gods: he was smitten with a very grievous,
and a most painful sickness. Of which, after many paineful remedies
attempted in vain, he finally died in extreme pain and torture: ^aert. in
vit. Bion p. 144.
ascribing all his torments to be Gods most just vengeance, for his former
ungodliness.

For the seventh of them, Pherecides; who boasted himself in the presence of
his Scholars, Aelian. l. 4. var. Hist. c. 28. p. 428*
That though he never offered unto any of the gods, yet would he lead as
happy, and as pleasant a life, as those that should sacrifice their fattest
H^catombs: he upon this his vainglorious and blasphemous ostentation, was
suddenly stricken with a most horrible sickness; so grievous and so
loathsome, that he was feign to avoid the society of men, and to shut up
himself (as it were) in a close prison. So that, whenas any of his friends
resorted to visit him, he was grown so deformed, and so ashamed of himself,
that he would never be seen of them. But when they called to him, and inquired
of his health; he would show them his finger through the rift of a door, most
miserably consumed and eaten up with lice: and then tell them that his whole
body was just in the same case. And this, AElian reproteth as the just
vengeance of God, inflicted upon him for his former impiety and irreligion.

And, for the eighth of them, Dionysius; it is true, that he was a most
impious and notorious Atheist: and that he had not only sacrilegiously
despoyled, Cic. l. 3. de Not. Deor. p. 238.
but (that which is worse) irreligiously derided all the sorts of their gods,
not sparing even Jupiter himself. And it is also true, that he was so
prosperous, and so fortunate in his wickedness, that he was never punished,
neither by fire, nor sword, nor sickness, by any of the gods; though he had
blasphemed them all. In so much, that Tullie pleads his prosperity in his
impiety, as a notable instance against divine providence: insinuating, that if
there had bin any, it would surely have revenged such sacrilege and blasphemy.
But yet, for all that, Valor. Max. l. 1. c. 2. p. 19.
Valerius Maximus observes, that his profaneness escaped not, but had his due
punishment: which fell upon it, in the time of his Son, though it did not in
his own. Tame^si debita supplicia non exoluit; dedecore, tamen filij, mortuus
poenas rependit quas viuus effugerat: He sustained that punishment after his
death, which he escaped in his life, and had it paid home in the person of his
Son, which fell not immediately upon his own person. For, his Son being
driven out of his Kingdom, and carried away (as a Captive) to Corinthus, was
forced to live there (as a private man) inglorious: and in the end, to take
upon him, the teaching of a School, for lack of better ^^intanance. From
which, Aelian. l. 9. var. H^st. c. 8. p. 453.
he being also expelled for his notable tyranny and plagosity; he was forced
(for his last shift) in most contemptible manner, to beg his living from door
to door, with a Pipe and a Taber. Now, what death, or what torment could have
possibly been so bitter unto that old Tyrant, as to see this great misery of
his Son, if he could have foreseen it. No drowning, no burning, no rotting,
of any of all the forenamed Atheists, could have been so grievous unto his
own person, as this great calamity, which fell out unto his own Son. For,
it is the heauiest of all Gods heavy punishments, when he visits the iniquity
of the fathers upon the children, especially in the next generation. And such
eminent calamity of the children, Arist. l. 1. Eth. c. 10. 11. To. 2. p. 612.
613.
does Aristotle himself affirm to be effectual, if not euacuate, yet greatly
to shake the felicity of their Parents, even after their deaths.

So that, none of all the forenamed Atheists escaped the stroke of Gods
revenging hand; but all of them have died such miserable deaths, as were due
unto their wicked and ungodly lives. Now, Psalm. 55. 23.
when God strikes men with such untimely and unnatural deaths, that they be
not permitted to live out their days, it is a great argument of his wrath: as
the Prophet Moses, in this very case concludes: If these men dye the common
death of all men; or, Numb. 16. 29. 30.
if they be visited after the visitation of all men; the Lord has not sent
me. But, if the Lord make a new thing, and the earth open her mouth, and
swallow them up, with all that they have, and they go down quick into the
pit; then ye shall understand, that these men men have provoked the Lord.
Concluding, that their strange and uncouth death, is, not only the work of
God, but the work of his wrath. Yea, and Plutarch (upon the like occasion)
insinuates the same. For he notes it, as the judgment of God, not only upon
Tullus Hostilius (who was an open Atheist) but also upon all those other his
Successors, that were wicked Kings; thar, Plut. in vi^. Number. p. 156.
Nullus eorum obijt, secundum Naturae leges: That none of them had their
deaths according to Natures laws. Which may, much more generally be affirmed
of Atheists, then of any other sort of unjust and wicked persons: that none of
them do die fair and natural deaths; but all violent and unnatural. By
which immediate judgments of God, falling down so certainly, and so directly
upon the heads of Atheists, more then upon any other wicked ones; yea, and so
generally too, upon every one of them, without all exception; God does much
more effectually prove himself to be, in the evidence of those works; then
all the Atheists in the world can prove God not to be, by the efficacy of
their words.

5 But, here it may be objected, that diverse of those men, An Objection
answered concerning those Atheists.
whom I here condemn of Atheism, and produce, as examples of Gods wrath
against Atheists, have been heretofore, by my self excused, and proved to be
no Atheists indeed: howsoever in the received opinion, Cap. 10. Sect 4
they were commonly so esteemed. Whereby it may be thought, that either there
or here, I have done wrong unto the truth. For, if they were not Atheists; why
were they by God punished? If they were indeed Atheists; why were they by me
excused? For the better remoouing of which semblance of contradiction, I
answer; that mine excusing them in that place, was not simply to free them from
all those degrees of Atheism, Cap. 10. Sect. 2. Item Cap. 10. Sect. 4.
which God might in justice punish; but only to free them from that highest
degree of Atheism, which in the vulgar opinion was imputed unto them: Namely,
from being such desperate and obdured Atheists, as simply and constantly denied
there was any God. For, it is very true, which Plato affirms, that there was
never in the world any such kind of Atheist; but that, Plat. l. 10. De Leg. p.
871.
All of those who denied God in the beginning, yet still confessed him in the
end. And that therein he held a very true opinion, I plainly exemplified, by
all those known Atheists, that have been most noted and branded for such: who
have all of them, at sometime, and some of them, at all times acknowledged some
gods: notwithstanding they denied the gods of their own countries; to be truly
gods. So that, mine excusing of them, was not, to free them a toto, but a
tanto. Not to free them universally, from the whole sin of Atheism; (which
has a great latitude, and is a body consisting of many parts and members: as I
purpose, Lib. 8.
God willing, hereafter to make plain) but to free them from the crime of
denying all gods; which is the highest pitch, and (as it were) the ^ead of it.
And yet, even this also, not by peremptory assertion, but by probable
collection, only out of those heads of their accusations, which have been
most enforced against them, by their enemies.

Now, though they were not guilty of this highest degree of Atheism, in
generally and obstinately denying all gods: yet might they be guilty of many
other inferior degrees of Atheism; for which God might justly punish them:
and, by their example, teach others to beware of them. For, as it follows
not, on the one side, that, because they denied their false gods, that
therefore they must needs deny the true God too: so follows it not, on the
other side, that, because they denied their false gods, they must needs
confess the true.

For first, they might deny their false gods to be Gods; and yet never seek
further to find out any other, upon a mere dullness, and negligence of
Religion. And so live, without any opinion at all of God. At the least, for the
most part, though totally they could not. As those men, of whom the Apostle
speaks, that they were, Ephesians. 2. 12.
without any God in the world. Which is a privative kind of Atheism* ^or
which, God might as justly punish those Heathens, as he did his own people,
Hos. 4. 6.
whom he suffered to perish, for their lack of knowledge.

Secondly, they might deny their false gods; and yet therewithal, deny the
true God too. Which is a positive kind of Atheism; by having an opinion There
is no God: as the ^ormer was a privative; by having no opinion, That there is a
God. Of which sort of Atheists, the Prophet David speaks, when he tells us,
that, The Fool says in his heart, Psalm. 14. 1.
There is no God. Which wicked opinion, though none of them all can constantly
maintain, but hold it weakly and infirmely and with many interruptions: yet
might God (even for this impiety) as justly punish them as he did that
blasphemer, Leuit. 24. 14.
who offended but in passion. And, though diverse of those Atheists, whom before
I have named, have both repented, and recanted; whereby they might divert the
severity of Gods judgment: yet might either their repentance be too weak to
turn away the decree of their punishment; as King Ahabs was: or it might come
too late; as Antiochus his did: or, 1. Kin. 21. 29. 22. 38.
they might, for the present submit and confess; and yet afterward return
unto their former wickedness; ^. Mac 9. 13.
as King Pharaoh did. All whom, notwithstanding their former confessions, Ex.
9. 27. 34.
yet he iusty punished, for their former blasphemies.

Thirdly, they might deny their false gods, and seek about for another; and
yet not hit upon the right: because they sought him no, wthere they should,
that is, Athen ^g. Legate. pro. c^r bib. Pat. ^o. 8. p. 6.
in his own most holy and sacred word. As Athenagoras observes of the Poets,
and Philosophers. Deum inquirere, tanqu^m inventuri, nimia de se fiducia,
conati sunt: non tamen illum vel reperire, vel animi cogitatione complecti
potuerunt. Et merito quidem: Quod Dei notitism, non ab ipso peterent Deo, sed
intra se quisque cum disquireret. The Poets and Philosophers did, ^^th of them,
seek God, praesuming that they could not miss him. But yet, indeed they could
not find him, no nor understand him neither. Because they sought not the
knowledge of God, by God; but only by confidence* in themselves. So that (as
Lactantius has very well observed) It was easier for them, Lactant. l. De ^ra
c. 11. p. 464.
to discern their own gods to be false, then it was, to find out, who was
the true. Tullius dissoluit publicas religiones: sed tamen veram, quam
ignorabat, nec ipse, nec alius quisquam introducere potuit. Vt ipse testatus
est: Falsum quidem app^rere, veritatem autem latere. Tullie (says he) could
dissolve the false religions: but yet, he could not find out the true;
neither he himself, nor yet any other of them: because it was unto them
unknown. Insomuch that be professes, That falsehood still appears, but Truth
always lurketh.

Fourthly, they might (in some degree) find out the true God, and yet ascribe
his works unto other false gods: as the Heathen did, the ruling of the heavens
unto their Jupiter; of the Sun, unto Apollo; of the Seas unto their Neptune;
and, Ex. 32. 4 28.
as the Israelites themselves did, their deliverance, unto their Golden Calfe.
Which their dishonoring of him, he punished, with the death of about three
thousand of them. And might therefore, as justly, punish the same sin, in the
Heathen.

Fifthly, they might deny their own false gods, to be gods; and yet accept of
others, as false. As we may plainly see, Plato. in Theag. p. 12.
in Socrates: who openly denied the Athenian gods; and yet believed his own
familiar spirit, to be a god, which was, indeed, but a Devil. Now, X^noph. l.
1. de fact. Socrat. p. 157.
this was not to renounce his false Religion: but to exchange one false
Religion for another, wherein, his latter impiety, was greater then his
former. For which exchange of superstition, even Plut^rch pronounces of Tullus
Hostilius; that he was justly destroyed, Plut. in vit. Number* ^. p. 156.
by lightning.

Sixthly, they might deny their false gods, for a time; and yet relapse unto
them again. As Socrates again did. Who, Plato. in Phae. done. p. 520.
notwithstanding his former denying of all the Athenian gods: yet at his death,
commanded a Cock to be offered for him, unto Aesculapius.

All these ways (and many more) might those men be impious, against the true
God; though they both denied, and derided their false gods. For the least of
all which manifold impieties, God might, in his justice, take vengeance upon
them, as upon the true Enemies of his true Religion: though they were not in
the highest degree of Atheism. And therefore, there is no wrong done, neither
unto the truth, in excusing them, from some degree of Atheism; nor yet unto
Gods Justice, in punishing them, for other some.

CHAP. 16.
That the general Consent of all men, in agreeing so fully, That there is a
God; is an infallible Argument, That there is one, indeed. 2. That, to this
end, it is alleged by those Authors, that have observed it. 3. In making it,
The Law of Nature. 4. In making Consent, a Symptom of Truth, in all things. 5.
In making it, the chiefest Argument, that can be brought in this Cause.

THE maine purpose of this first book, is, to prove, There is a God: yet,
neither by the view of his works; nor by the voice of his word: but only, by
that inward praenotion, and persuasion, which nature has implanted in the
mind of every man; That a God (surely) there is. A Lesson, not taught from one
man to another, but imprinted in all of them, by the same common nature. It is
(as the Orator asseuereth, in another like matter) Non scripta, (...)
sed nata lex; quam non ^idicimus, accepimus, legimus; verum ex ipsa Natura
arripuimus, ^^usimuo, expressimus. It is not a Law, that is written in Tables;
but a Law, that is originally begotten within us. A Law, which we have, neither
learned, nor received, nor read; but which, by very Nature, we have inwardly
bred. A Law, as largely diffused into the hearts of all men, as the very humane
nature is communicated unto them. Cap* 4.
For (as I have formerly declared) there is not any Nation, neither Greek, nor
Barbarian, neither Christian, nor Heathen, but that they have their God; their
Priests, their Temples, their Altars, their Sacrifices, and other such like
naturalls of Religion. And yet, all these, so differing one of them from
another, that it evidently appears, that none of them have learned their
Religion, from their Neighbors; neither by institution, nor yet by imitation:
but only erected it of themselves, from these two general grounds of Nature:
That there is a God; and, That he is to be worshipped. Again, Cap* 5.
that, as there is no Nation of men, in the world: so be there no men of any
condition, in the world, but that they have their God: neither superior, nor
inferior; Magistrate, nor Subject; learned, nor unlearned: as I have largely
declared, by particular instance, both of Poets, Lawgiuers, Philosophers, Cap*
6.
and Artizanes. Nay, yet again, that, there is no particular person, in the
world, but, in some degree or other, at some time or other, he believes, There
is a God: yea even those men, that do seem the most to contemn him:
Swearers, Blasphemers, and Idolaters. Nay, Cap. 11. 12. 13*
even the very Atheists themselves, who make it their profession, to profess,
There is no God: yet do evidently enough confess him, in their deeds; though
they deny him, in their words. They do really confess him; both by that
excessive self-love, whereby they idolize themselves; and by that inward
fear, which they have of another God, above themselves. Yea, and sometimes
they are driven to confess him in words too: and openly, both to acknowledge
and to renounce their former ungodliness. Finally, that, though none of all
the Atheists should ever have confessed God; neither verbally, nor really;
neither directly, 2. Tim. 2. 13.
nor indirectly: yet that God, who is faithful, and cannot deny himself, he
confesses himself, by those remarkable, and exemplarie punishments, which he
notoriously and constantly inflicteth upon Atheists; more evidently, then upon
any other sort of Offenders: Thereby, even proclaiming himself, both to be,
and to be unto the Atheist, a professed enemy. So that, there is no part of all
the universal, from God unto the Devil, but that it proclameth God: no part
of nature so disordered, or distorted, but that in this one point it retains
his rectitude, to believe there is a God. Yea, even the Devils themselves, in
whom the greatest auersion is. Which admirable consent of all the parts of the
world together, in this one position, more then in any other, Cap. 3.
has been noted and observed, almost by all the learned: as I have formerly
declared.

2 In which their allegation, The Consent of all men in believing a God is
alleged by Authors as an Argument of the truth of it.
this may further be observed (which I have purposely reserved, for the close
of this first Book) that the Authors there alleged, have not only related it
historically, that such a general consent there is, in believing that there is
a God: but they have also pleaded it logically, as a good and a sound Argument,
to prove, that therefore there is one indeed: inferring the truth of the thing
so believed, from the universality of men's consent, in believing it. In which
their probation, we may observe this Gradation, consisting of three degrees.
First, that they affirm this general consent, and agreement of all men,
without the dissent of any man whosoever, to be the very voice of nature.
Secondly, that they affirm, a general consent, in any other matter whatsoever
it be, to be a good Argument of the truth. And thirdly, that they affirm, that
in this particular truth, which is questioned by the Atheist, it is the
strongest Argument, that can be brought to prove it.

3 For the first step of which Climax, That this general consent of all men,
in believing There is a God; is not, either any casual, To believe a God is of
the Law of Nature. Cap. 3.
and accidental agreement; nor any politic composition, made by mutual
stipulation: but the simple and uncorrupted voice of nature, working alike in all men, and speaking unto them, with one and the same tongue, though they be of
diverse tongues, it is expressly affirmed, by diverse learned Authors; both
Philosophers, and Divines; both Heathens, and Christians.

Tully says expressly, that, Omnium consensus, est Naturae vox: That the
consent of all men, is the voice of Nature. Nay further that it is, not only
the voice of Nature, pronouncing; but also, the very Law of Nature,
prescribing. Omni in re, consensio omnium Gentium, Cic. 1. Tusc. p. 113. 11^.
Lex Naturae putanda est: The general consent of all Nations, in all matters,
is to be reputed for none other, then for the very Law of Nature. Which
general definition, he pronounces in that place, upon this particular
occasion, that, Omnes, esse vim, and Naturam divinam, arbitrantur; That all men
generally hold, That there needs must be a God. Yea, and in another place, he
reckoning up the parts of the Law of Nature, he instanceth Religion, to be the
very first of them. Naturae ius est, quod nobis non opinio, sed quaedam innata
vis asserat: vt, Religionem, Cic. l. 2. de Invent. p. 84.
Pietatem, Gratiam, etc. The law of nature is that, which is not implanted into
us, by other men's opinion; but begotten in us, by an inward sense of our own:
as Religion toward God; Piety, toward our Parents; and thankfulness, toward
our Benefactors. Where he makes religion, to be more natural unto us, then
that natural love, which we owe unto our parents. Yea, Xenoph. l. 4. de (...)
Socrat. p. 207.
and so likewise does Xenophon. Lex apud omn^s homines vnaest, and prima, vt
Deos colas: and, vt Parents item honores. This is one general Law, among al
men, and the first of all, To worship the Gods; and to honor our Parents.
Where he also makes Religion toward God, the very first branch of the Law of
Nature; and Piety toward our Parents, but the second. Yea, and in another
place, he infers, that, because it is of the Law of Nature, it is also a
truth. An tu putas, opinionem hominibus a Dijs innatam fuisse? Sufficientes eos
ad been vel male agendumesse, Xe^oph.
si non essent sufficientes? Ac arbitraris, homines perpetuo deceptos nunqu^m
sensisse? Do you think that the Gods would ever have implanted this opinion
into the minds of men, that they are of power to do both good and evil, if
they (...) not of such power? Or can you once imagine, that men should ser ever
in this point be deceived, and yet never find their error? Conclu^ing, that
because it is an inbred opinion, that therefore it is a truth. And the rather,
because no man, as yet, could ever prove it false.

Neither is this the judgment only of Heathen Philosophers, but also of diverse
of the learnedest Christian Fathers. Tertullian says, that Ipsum Deum,
secundum naturam, prius novimus: Our first knowledge of God, Tertul. l. De
corona. c. 6. p. 181.
is by the inward teaching and instruction of Nature. Which therein has
lessoned us so perfectly, that, as he there adds, in another like matter:
Quaeres igitur Dei legem habens communem istam in publico mundi, in naturalibus
Tabulis? We need not to seek it in the law of God: we may read it so
plainly in the law of the world, in the natural tables of our hearts.
Inferring in the Chapter following, Agnoscant interim Naturae authoritatem,
communis parentis nomine: Let them therefore acknowledge the authority of
Nature, as of their common Mother. Insinuating, that this lesson, is of her
first teaching. So likewise Gr^gorie Nazianzene, Esse Deum, cum ipse nos
asp^ctus, tum Naturae lex, docet: That there is a God, Nazian. Orat. 2. De
Theolog. p. 24
not only the visible sight of our eyes; Lactan. l. 6. c. 9. p. 333.
but also the very law of Nature, Job 12. 7. 8. Isal. 43. 20. Cem. Alex. l. 5.
Strom. p. 274.
does teach us. So likewise, Lactantius. Naturalis legis caput primum est,
ipsum Deum nosse: The very first Chapter of the law of Nature, is to know,
There is a God. Yea, and this law of nature is so largely diffused, that it is
infused even into very Beasts: as God himself professes. Yea, and as
Xenocrates Carthaginensis also confesses; Qui non omn^ spem abiecit, quin
et^a^ in rationis expertibus animantibus, sit Dei notitia: He was not without
some hope, but that, even the brute beasts had some knowledge of a God. So that
he stretches this Law of Nature, to as large an extent, Justin. l. Institut.
Tit. 2. p. 16.
as the Emperor Justinian does in his Institutions: who says, that Ius
natural, non est humani generis proprium, etc. He makes the law of Nature not
to be a law peculiar unto the nature of man; but to be a common law, unto every
living thing: as the natural conjunction of male and female, the procreation
of young, and such like. Unto which extended signification of the law of
Nature, yet this first head of it, concerning the knowledge of God, extends
it self no less, then those his named instances. Nay, indeed much further; as
Proclus affirms. For he says, that not only things endued with life, but
also things without life, have every one, in his kind, not only a knowledge,
but also an acknowledgement of God; unto whom they all do sing with such a
voice, Proclus l. de. Sacrisicio. p. 275.
as he has given them. Cuncta pr^cantur, hymnosque con^inunt, ad ordinis sui
ducem; alia, intellectuali modo; alia, ration^li; alia, sensiti^o; alia,
naturali. All things do both pray and sing unto their Captain, and to the
Author of their order. Some, after an intellectual kind and manner, as
Angels; some, after a reasonable, as Men; some, after a sensible, as Beasts;
and some after a natural, as insensible Creatures. Yea, a 59, b 82* c 81, 79,
^58, ^ 6^, f 6^ ^ 78, h 7^. S^ng of the 3. (...). 148. 1. 2. 3. etc.
and the three Children, in their Song, allude unto the same: when they call,
not only upon a Angels, b Men, and c Beasts; but also upon the d Heavens, the
e Stars, the ^ Winds, the g Waters, the h Hills, and the Mountains, to bl^sse
the Name of the Lord, to praise him, and to magnify him for ever. Yea, and the
Prophet David does also the very same. Yea, and even the very Devils
themselves (as the Apostle James teaches) do not only believe God, but also
tremble at him, Yea, Iam 2. 19.
and as S. Matthew testifies, Mat. 8. ^9.
They do also confess him. Which though they do not willingly or purposely to
honor him, Man. 1. 24.
yet do they therein (though unwillingly) honor him. So that this law of
Nature is so forcible in every creature, that it compels all of them to
acknowledge their Creator; yea, even those that are the most unwilling to do
it; the Devil, and the Atheist. Now, how comes this law of Nature to be so
forcible in them, as to be able to enforce them? Surely, only by that reason
which Zeno has alleged, that The Law of Nature is the very Law of God:
Naturalem legem, Cic. l. 1. de Not. Deor. p. 189.
esse Diuinam. This is that which compels them to confess him: That he has
given it for a law unto all his creatures, Ps. 148. v. 6. 2. 7. Apoc. 12. 3.
which they cannot pass: even from the very Angels unto the very Dragons: yea,
even to the great red Dragon. This then is the first collection, from this so
general a consent, in believing There is a God; that it is nothing else, but
that Law of Nature, which God has imposed upon every creature; that they shall
in some degree, both know him and confess him. And to this very purpose it is
alleged, by the forenamed Authors.

4 Now, as the forenamed Authors have esteemed of his so full a consent, in
believing There is a God, to be a branch of the Law of Nature, A general
Consent is an Argument of truth in all things.
and consequently an infallible truth: so have diverse others collected it to
be a truth; because there is so full a consent in it. The former sort,
deducing the Consent from the Truth; and the second sort, arguing the Truth
from the Consent. For the same Nature which does Nihil facere frustra, it does
also, Nihil dicere frustra too. For, Nullius rei vel sine causa est ortus,
Arist. l. 1. De Coelo. c. 4. To. 1. p. 556.
vel sine ratione praenotio: as Plutarch truly affirms, There is no
generation, without a cause; nor no praenotion, without a reason. So that,
Plut. lib. de EI. 1. To. 1. Mor. p. 685.
Nature neither says, nor does any thing in vain. And therefore, if Nature
say, That there is a God, it is not vainly said: but there is surely one
indeed. Now, that which all men affirm, they say it not of themselves; but it
is Nature that says it in them. For, as I have showed out of the Roman
Orator, Consensus omnium, Cic. l. 1. Tusc. p. 113.
est Naturae vox: The Consent of all men, is the voice of Nature in them. And
therefore many learned Authors, both of Heathens and Christians, do reckon
such Consent, to be always a concomitant of the truth: yet not following after
it, as an ordinary seruitor; but going before it, as a Gentleman Usher. For, it
follows not, that such a thing is true, and therefore there is a general
Consent in it. But it follows, There is in such a thing a general Consent:
and therefore it is true.

For as Aristotle observes: Quod vniversis videtur, id, esse, Arist. l. 10.
Eth. c. 2. To. 2. p. 730.
dicimus. That which all men affirm, is taken of all men, to be true and
firm. And, in another place, he ascribes as much certainety to Consent, as
unto any thing, Arist. To. 1. p. 907 Lib. de pr^^sen^^one per somnum.
that has been found to be true, by experiment. Quod omnes aut plures
autumant, adducit homines, vt existiment, hoc ipsum dici, tanquam vsu
perceptem, aut experimento cognitum: That which all, or the greatest part of
men, do believe, may justly be believed, to have been found (upon trial) an
experimented truth. Yea, and in another place, he cites the testimony of the
ancient Poet Hesiodus, Arist. l. 7. Etbic. c. 13. p. 699.
unto the same purpose, Hesiod. Opera* and dies p. 42.
Quam populi celebrant, omnino fama perire
Nulla potest --
What all men speak, and Fame does crown,
That cannot easily be laid down.
And therefore is not likely, to have been rashly taken up. Certus abest
Author; Martial. l. 7. Epigr. 5. p. 1^2.
sed vox hoc nuncia^ omnis.
Credo tibi, verum dicere* Fama, soles:
says another to like purpose. There is a constant rumor runn's; Ye^ want's a
certain (...).
But, Fame, thou use to speak truth: I credit thee, the r^ther.
Now, if a common fame be such an Argument of the truth, which many men divulge
against their inward persuasion: then, how much more is the inward persuasion
it self, when it is universal, and begotten in the mind, not by any outward
fame, but by a natural inward worki^g? As it is in this persuasion; That there
is a God. Here, the persuasion grows not out of the fame; but the fame out of
the persuasion. And yet, is the fame as large as the persuasion: as Aristotle,
in plain words, doubts not to affirm. Vetus est fame, Arist. l. de. Mundo.
To. 2. p. 1566.
and quidem haereditaria, mortalium omnium; Vniuersa, a Deo, and per Deum,
nobis esse constitu^a. It is both an an^ient, and a natur^ll fame, universally
diffused into the minds of all men; that from God, and by God, proceeds all
our good. Alleging this universality of consent, to be a good argument, of
the undoubted truth of it. The same Philosopher defines that to be probable,
Arist. l. 1. Topic. c. 1. To. 1. p. 235.
which seems to be true, either unto all men, or to the most men, or, at the
least, unto wise men. Probabilia sunt, quae aut omnibus aut pluribus, aut
sapientibus videntur. Then, must that needs be more then probable; Quod, and
omnibus, and pluribus, and sapientibus videtur: as this does, That there is a
God. This can be thought no less then a necessary truth. For (as Seneca
observes) Multum dare solemus praesumptioni omnium hominum. Veritas argumentum
est, Senec. ^pist. 118. p. 295.
idem omnibus videri. We use to ascribe much unto a general persuasion. It is
an argument of a truth, to seem a truth unto all men. Nay, it is more then an
argument of a Truth. It is (as Tullie too affirms) a very necessary truth.
De quo omnes consentiunt, id verum esse necesse est: That, whereon all men are
agreed, Cic. l. De. Not. D^o^. p. 190.
that must needs be true indeed.

Neither do these Heathen men only, give this great ascription, unto the
consent of all men: but diverse Christian Divines, do also the very same.
Chrysostom Chrys^st. Hom. 1. in Mat. To. 2. p. 11.
says, that it is Grande indicium veritatis, cum vnoore idem pronuncient. It
is a great argument of the truth, when many do speak the same. things, with
one mouth. Pleading this, for the consent, even of the Holy Evangelists: and
out of their consent, concluding their truth, as by a firm Argument. And
Hierom says likewise, that, Etiam si Scr^pturae authoritas non subest; Hieron.
Dial. cont Lucifer. To. 2. p. 139.
tamen orbis consensus instar praecepti obtin^^. That though there ^e no
express warrant of Scripture, yet the consent of the world, is as good as a
praecept. Which, though he there pronounce, in the person of an Heretic: yet
in the person of the Orthodox, he does not revoke; confirming by his silence,
what he reproues not by his speech. So great an estimation, ^aue all learned
men ascribed, unto the consenting of all men. Yea, and diverse of them have
been so zealous, in defending it, that they set a stigma, and a note upon all
that impugn it. Aristotle censureth them, to be a carping and captious kind
of men, who love to reprove all othere men's opinions, and yet can bring ^o
better themselves. Qui fidem [consensus] tollit, Ari^t. l. 10. (...) c 2. To*
2. p. 730
non valde probabiliora dicet. Tullie goes a step further, and passes an
harder censure; imputing v. to them not boldness, but malipertnesse. For,
though he were one of the Academikes himself, who challenged unto themselves a
Liberty of speaking, both for and against every thing: yet de^^ieth he, even
to Academikes the liberty of speaking against Consent: pronouncing that, to
be, not liberty or and a city, Cic. l. 1. De Not. Deor. p. 185.
but petulancy and procacie. Tum demum mihi procax Academia vid* b^tur, fi
omnes consenserint: Yea, and Caecilius censureth it, to be such a kind of
boldness, as he cannot so much as think on, without great impatience. Cum
omnium Gentium, Arnob. l. 8. cont. Ge^t. p. 747.
de Dijs immortalibus, quanvis incerta sit vel ratio, vel origo; maneat tamen
firma consensio; neminem fero, tanta audacia, tamque irreligiose, nescio qua
prudentia, tumescentem, qui hanc religionem, tam vetustam, tam vtilem, tam
salubrem, dissoluere, aut infirmare nitatur. Seeing there is a generally
received opinion of God, through all the nations of the world, wherein the
consent of them all is most certain; though both the reas^n, and original
thereof, be uncertain; the boldness of those men is not to be endured, nor
their profanesse to be suffered, who (swelling with an opinion of their own
proper wisdom) dare presume, to impugn so ancient, so profitable, and so
wholesome a Religion. Clem. Alex. l. 5. Strom. p. 274.
Clemens Alexandrinus taxes those men (which consent not with all other men,
in this general and natural belief of a God) to be not insolent, or
malipert; but to be plainly impudent: and says, that they do, Omnem exuere
pudorem, Zach. Mytile^. l. De Mundi creat. Bib. Pat. To. 5. p. 751.
aduerus veritatem. And Zacharias Mytilenensis, he censureth them, to be no
better then madmen. Commun^m omnium sententiam destruere, est dementissimum.
To impugue the common opinion of all men, is the action of a Madman. Thus you
see, how great Authority, all learned antiquity does ascribe unto Consent;
and how tender they be over it, making it so certain an Argument of truth,
that they cannot brook any man, that does seek to oppose it.

5 Now, as this general Consent of all men, is an Argument of truth, Consent
in the strongest Argument to prove, There is a God.
in every other thing: so is it most of all, in this our present Question. To
prove, There is a God. For though many other Arguments may be brought ^o
confirm it; and so be, by learned Writers, both of Heathens, and Christians:
yet is none of them all, of greater weight, and importance.

Tullie says, that, Firmissimum hoc afferri videtur, Cic. l. 1. Tusc. p. 112.
cur Deos esse credamus; quod nulla gens tam fera, nemo omnium tam sit immanis,
cu^us mentem non imbuerit Deorum opinio. This is the strongest reason, why all
men should believe, that there is a God; because all men do believe it: And,
because there is not any, either Nation so fierce, or Person so savage, but
that his mind is endued, with some opinion of the Gods. And again in another
place. Intelliginecesse est, esse Deos; quoniam insitas eorum, Cic. l. 1. de
Not. Deor. p. 190.
vel potius innatas cognitiones habemus. We must needs believe, that therefore
there be Gods; because the opinion of them is so generally ingrafted, or rather
indeed inbred in our minds. And again, in the same place. Esse igitur Deos,
Cic. ibid.
consitendum est: -- quoniam fere constat inter om^es, non Philosophos solum,
s^d etiam indoctos. We must needs confess, that therefore there is a God:
because, both Philosophers and ignorants do so generally agree in it. Pressing
still this consent, as a good Argument to conclude it. Yea, and Velleius,
observing, with how great an applause, this natural anticipation, and
presumption of a God, was received and urged by all the Philosophers; he
seeks cunningly to derive the whole credit of the first invention of this
Argument, unto his Master, the Epicure: affirming, that though diverse other
Philosophers had observed, that a general consent there is, in believing a
God: yet that only Epicurus was he, that collected, that this Consent had the
force of an Argument, Cic. l. 1. de Not. Deor. p. 190.
to prove it. Epicurus solus vidit primum, esse Deos; quod, in omnium animis,
eorum notionem impressisset ipsa Natura. Other Philosophers, do but only
report, and note this Consent; that we may know that such a thing there is. But
the Epicure notes this of it, that a sound and firm conclusion may be gathered
from it. Which, his so strong ambition, to make his Master, the Epicure, to be
the first Author of this subtle invention, does evidently show his great
conceit of it; and how strong, and invincible an Argument he thought it. But,
Co^^^, the Academike incountereth Velleius, in that his assertion, and will not
suffer him to steal away the glory of this Argument, only unto Epicurus, from
the rest of the Philosophers: which he ascribes unto them, as well as unto
him. Commune hoc est argumentum aliorum etiam Philosophorum, Cic. l. 1. de Not.
Deor. p. 192.
This is a common Argument with other Philosophers, as well as with Epicures.
And, that he spoke no more then the truth in it, we may evidently see in Plato:
who, among diverse other arguments, to prove There is a God, nominatim
instanceth, in this generality of Consent. O amice, facile est veritatem hanc
ostendere; Plato. l. 10. de Leg. p. 870.
Quod Dij sint. -- Primum enim, Terra, Sol, Sydera, ipsumque Vniversum;
temporum quoque ornatissima varietas annis men sibusque distincta id ostendunt;
Graecorum praeterea Barbarorumque omnium Consensus, Deos esse fatentium. It is
easy (my good Friend) to make evident this truth, That there needs must be a
God: The Earth shows it, the Sun shows it, the Stars shows it, the
World shows it, the most beautiful variety of times and of seasons, of
years and of months shows it: And, the general Consent both of Greek; and
Barbarians, confessing a God, that likewise shows it. Where it evidently
appears, that he not only reports, that there is a Consent, both of
Greeks and Barbarians, that There is a God: but also, from thence collecteth,
that therefore there is one indeed: pressing this Consent, as a principal
Argument, which proves the truth of it. And the same we may likewise see,
Cap. 3. Sect ^3.
in all those other Authors, whom before I have alleged to be the Reporters of
this general Consent; that al of them intend it, to this only end, to urge it
as an argument, to prove, There is a God. So then* the whole sum of this first
book, may be contracted into this short Syllogism:

That, which has at all times, and in all places been believed of all men,
that cannot possibly be false, but needs must be a Truth.

But, That there is a God, has at al times, and in all places bin believed of
al men.

Ergo, this cannot be false, but must needs be a Truth.

The Mayor is proved to be true, because, Consensus omnium, est v^x Natural.
The Consent of all men is the Voice of Nature: which is not the voice of Error.

The Minor has been proved, Cic. l. 1. Tusc. p. 113.
through the tract of this whole Book.

And therefore, the Conclusion cannot be denied.

The End of the first Book.
The second Book:
Of the Grounds of Arts.
CHAP. I.
That all Arts lead to God. 2. The Metaphysics, by two Arguments. 3. The
first is, the limiting of all finite things: as of natural Bodies. 4. And of
their natural faculties. 5. And yet not by the Sun, which it self is
limited: 6. Both in his working: 7. And in his moving 8. By the limiting also
of ^ll artificial faculties. 9. And finally, by the limiting of all spiritual
Graces.

I Have in the former Book instructed the Atheist, out of The voice of Nature;
and proved unto him, That there is a God, by that natural persuasion, which is
generally begotten in the hearts of all men. Which, like a private and
domestical Schoolmasters, teaches the Atheist that Lesson, by a secret
suggestion, as it were, the A, B, C, and first elements of Religion. The force
and power of which inward instruction, the very Atheist himself feels
sensibly within him. For, there is no Atheist in the world, so obdurate and
hardened, but he is oftentimes enforced to confess, There is a God. Yea, and
that not only against his will, by the stroke of Gods judgments, which extort
an unwilling confession from him; but also sometimes, by his will, and of his
own free motion, without any violence or outward compulsion, only by the
force of this inward persuasion. Nay, there is none of them all, so desperately
wicked, but that, at some time or other, in some sort or other, he will serve
some God, though he pretend to contemn all. Or, if he refuse to serve him; yet
he cannot choose but fear him, even because he serves him not: as being
conscious unto himself, even by Natures inward lessoning, that his service is
due unto him. And that therefore, for his neglect of it, he is subject to due
punishment: which is a real confession of him, yea, and that a very strong
one. Thus forcible an operation, has this inward voice of Nature, in the
hearts of all men, even in the wickedest among them.

Now, having thus, in the former Book, All Arts lead to God.
instructed the Atheist in this first principle of Religion, by the voice of
his own Nature, as of a domestical and private Instructor: in this Book I
intend to bring him out, a little further, and to send him abroad unto the
Heathen Philosophers, as unto the School of more public and expert Teachers.
For that, which dame Nature does but only affirm upon her bare word, that do
the Philosophers both confirm by reasons, and declare by sensible
Demonstrations. And though none of all those Arts, which they invented, do
purposely propound to entreat of God, as of their proper subject; neither any
of them have this our present position [ That there is a God] for one of their
principles, as Theology has: Yet is there none of them, but that it affords
us some matter or other, from whence we may collect, that there needs must be
a God. As we may evidently see, in all the several parts of Philosophy. Let
me give you but a taste of some few, for all the rest: because the Argument is
not popular. And therefore, it is but equal, that my stay upon it should be
the shorter.

The instances whereupon I will chiefly insist be these: Two, out of the
Metaphysics: The bounding and limiting of all finite things; and the extending
of men's app^tites beyond all bounds and limits. Two, out of the Physickes: The
first Cause, and, The first Moouer of all natural things. Two, out of Physic:
Diseases, and their Remedies. Two out of the Politics: the growing, and
decaying of Kingdoms, and Empires. Two, out of the Ethics: the way to
Felicity, and Felicity it self. Four, out of the Mathematics: Punctum in
geometry; Vnitas in Arithmeticke; Ordo in Astronomy; and Harmonia, in Music.
Finally, there is no Art, neither liberal, nor illiberall; but it comes from
God, and leads to God. And this is the substance and economy of this second
book. Arist. l. 4. Meta p^ys. ^. 2. To. 2. p. 1399.


2 Let us first begin with the Metaphysics; which Aristotle calls, The
first Philosophy, Primam Philosophiam: and so by degrees, descend down unto
the rest. The Metap^ysicks arguments for God.
It affoordeth us two considerations: from whence we may collect, even by the
light of nature, that There needs must be a God. The first is, The bounding
and limiting of all finite things. The second, The boundless and unlimited
appetite of men's souls.

3 For the first of which two points; look through the whole world, The bounding
of natural bodies is the work of God
and through all the sensible bodies, therein contained, and you shall evidently
see, that though many of them be great, yet that none of them is infinite:
there is none of them so great, as to be without his limit. As even Aristotle
himself, both affirms and proves, in his first book, De Coelo. Arist. l. 1
de Coelo c. 7. To. 1. p. 559.
Where, he plainly and categorically sets down this conclusion: Corpus
infinitum, in ratione rerum, esse non posse. That it is a thing, contrary to
the nature of things, that there should be any body, without his terms and
limits; No, not even the body of the universal world it self: as, Ar^st.
Ibid. p. 564.
in the conclusion of the same chapter he expressly infers. Vniuersi
corpus, infinitu^ esse non posse, ex ijs, quae diximus, patet. Then much less
can any part of the world be infinite, if the whole be not. Unless we should
make the whole to be less then his own part: which were utterly absurd. And
therefore all the parts of the world, must needs be limited, and determined.

Let me give you an instance or two, Arist. l. 4. Phys^. c. 5. To. 1. p. 462.
to this purpose: and that out even of Aristotle himself. Terra in Aqua; haec,
in Acre; Aer, in Aethere; Ether, in Coelo est collocatus. Ipsum vero Coelum,
nullo in alio corpore est vlterius collocatum. The Earth, that is bounded and
limited with the Water; the Water with the Air; the Air, with the Fire; the
fire with the Heaven. The heaven is not bounded, with any further Body. How
then is the Heaven bounded, if it be not boundless? Why thus. Every one of the
lower heavens is bounded or limited, by the conca^e, or hollow part of his
higher: until we come to that, which is the highest of all, and contains all
the rest, being contained of none. And yet, even that is not without his
bounds, but is limited and determined, within his own conuexe or swelling
superficies: as a man is, by his skin^e, or a bubble of water, by his thin
filme. So that, there is not, in Nature, any Body, that is infinite, nor any
that is without all limit. To be unlimited and boundless, is only the
Prerogative of the Maker of all things: as Prosper very well, and truly
observes. Nilque adeo magnum est, Prosper. l. de Prouid. p. 181. ^.
quod non certus modus arcet.
Et Coelum, and Terras, and totum denique mundum,
Limes habet. Meta est altis, and meta profundis.
Sed nusquam non esse, Dei est: qui totus, vbique,
Et penetrat Mundi membra omnia liber, and ambit.
There Is naught so vaste, as to be void of limit.
Both H^au'n, and Earth, and all the world has bounds.
All heights and depths have terms, is we esteem it:
Height never so high, be Depth never so pro^ound.
Unlimited, and no where not to be,
Agrees to God alone: Who wholly is
The whole World through, and every least part: He
Within does pierce, without does compass this.
So that, there is not any Body, in Nature, so infinite, but that it is
pre^^^ed within some bound and limit. Now, every finite Body, being thus
bounded and limited, it must needs have had those bounds prescribed unto it, by
some other thing, and not by it self. For, every thing, by nature, being
desirous of scope, and seeking to enlarge it self, as far as it is able; if
it had the setting of his own bounds and limits, it would set none at all; but
would be as infinite, as God himself is: who has the setting of limits unto
all things. And therefore (as you see) has set none unto himself: but is
illimitable, and boundless. Nullis neque finibus, neque Hilar. in Ps. 118. p.
516.
spacijs ^oarctatus: as Saint Hilarie teaches: Being no way straightened, by any
space, or place. And so would it be with all other things too; if they had the
assigning of their own bounds and limits: they would all of them, be
boundless. Because all bounds, be like bonds, and like shackles, unto all
things: which they would never put upon them, if they could be without them.
For (as Scaliger well observes) Vnicuique enti, Scalig. Exercit. 9. p. 52.
insita est appetitio infinitatis, There is in every thing, an appetite to make
it self infinite. The Sea, if it could eat up the whole Earth, and make all
the Globe, Sea (as it once was) it would surely do it. For, the waters do
desire, Ps 104 9. 6.
to stand above the mountains; Ps 104 9. 6.
as the Prophet David testifies.

Again, the Earth, if it could utterly close up the Sea, and make all the
Globe, dry-land, 2. Esdr. 4. 13. etc.
it would surely do it; as Esdras notable expresses in a witty apologue. I
came (says he) into a Forest, in the plain, where the Trees held a Council,
and said; Come let us fight against the Sea, that it may give place to us, and
that we may make us more woods. Likewise, the floods of the Sea took
counsel, and said; Come, and let us go up, and fight against the Trees of the
wood, that we may get another Country for us. But the purpose of the wood, was
vain: for the fire came down and consumed it. And the purpose of the Sea, was
also vain: for the sand stood up, and stopped it. Whereby it appears, that
there is, in all things, a desire to dilate, and to ingreat themselves. And
therefore would never shut up themselves, within bounds and limits, as it were,
in a prison; if they themselves had the setting and appointing of them.
Therefore, as it is true, S^^l. Exercit. 6. Se^. 3. p. 27.
that Nullum ens finitum, est a se: so it is likewise true, that Nullum ens,
finitum est a se. As nothing, that is finite, is of it self: so nothing that
is, is finite of it self. But all the finite things, in universal nature,
have both their being, and their bounding of some other. And they all do feel
within them, the imperial power of a superior Nature: which has appointed,
and prescribed those limits* unto them: and therefore are well content, to
contain themselves within them: as obeying the command of him, that rules
over them. Nonne vides ( says Claudian) operum, Claudian in 4. Con^alat.
Hono^^. p. 186.
qui se, pulcherrimus ipse,
Mundus amore ligat? nec, vt connexa, per aevum,
Conspirant Elementa sibi? qui, limite Phoebus
Contentus medio? contentus littore Pontus?
Et qui perpetuo terras ambitque, vehitque,
Non premat incumbens oneri, nec cesserit aer?
See not the World, of Natures work's the fairest, well I wot,
How it, it self together ties, as in a true-loues knot?
Nor see how the Elements, aye combined, maintain one constant pl^^?
How the midst of Heaven content's the Sun? and Shore contains the Sea?
And how the Air both compasses, and carries still Earths frame?
Yet neither pressing burdens it, nor parting leaves the same?
This abiding of those things within their bounds and limits, clean contrary
unto their natural Appetites, does evidently declare, that those bounds were
never set unto them by themselves, but appointed unto all of them, by some
other, whose prescribed law they are compelled to bear.

Now, who can this be, that thus circumscribeth all things, within their set
limits, but only God himself: who is, both the Maker, and Ruler of all
things? For, what other could set bounds, both unto Heaven and Earth, but only
the Creator and Maker of them both? who, must needs be God. And therefore he
it is (as the Prophet David testifies) that has both Psalm. 24. 2.
founded the Earth, upon the waters; Psalm. 33. 7.
and bounded the Sea, within his banks; Psalm. 104. 2. 9.
and spread out the Heaven, as it were, a curtain. He it is (as the Prophet
Isay testifies) that does, Isay 40. 12.
Palmo, coelos; pugillo, aquas; digitis, terras metiri: that counts out the
heaven, with his span; and measures the waters, with his fist; and
comprehends the dust of the earth, in a measure; and weighs the mountains
in a wait; and the hills, in a balance.

So that, the bounding and limiting of all the forenamed things, is the work of
none other, but of God, their Creator: who (as Boethius truly calls him) is
Principium, ^oet. l. 3. de consolat. M^tro. 9. p. 1042.
Vector, Dux, Semita, Terminus, idem.
The first Beginner, and the Bringer on,
The Guide, Path, Term and all, is God alone.
And this is confessed, not only by Christians; but also by diverse of the
Heathens themselus. Ovid, describing the creation of the world, he ascribes it
expressly unto a God, though he could not tell what God. But he numbreth as
his works, all the forenamed particulars; Of compassing the earth about, with
the water; that, Ovid. l. 1. Me^am p. 4. 5.
with the air; and that, with the heaven; of the bounding of the Seas within
their shores; of the stretching out of the feilds; the raising up of hills; the
pressing down of valleys; the growing up of woods; and diverse such like. All
which, he pronounces to be the works of God. Yea, and that, not only in
respect of their creation, and making: but also, even of their circumscribing,
and limiting. -- Limitibus, dis^revit omnia, certis.
With bounds distinguished, all things are limited.
Insisting, nominatim, upon this point of their limiting. So likewise, Orpheus.

Tu mundi terminos habes Vniuer si. Thou, Pausa* l. de. Oscul^. ^. 63. p. 364.
God, Idem. ibid. c. 20. p. 101.
have in thy hands, Of all the world the bounds. So likewise Pindarus: Sed
discriminat omnia, interminata vis and potentis.
It self a boundless power is,
That sets bounds to all things else.
And, that this was not the idle fiction of Poets, we may see by the grauer
sentences of the learnedest Philosophers: who casting about, with the best wit
that they had, from whence this limiting of things should proceed; have, at the
last, been constrained, to ascribe it unto God. Anaxagoras affirms, that
there is, a certain infinite Spirit, Cic. l. 1. de Not. Deor. p. 187.
[Mens] whose power and understanding has given bounds and limits, unto every
finite thing. And of the same opinion was likewise his master Anaximenes; as
Tullie reports, in the very same place. Anaxagoras, qui accepit ab Anaximene
disciplinam, primus, omnium rerum descriptionem and modum, Mentis infinit^e vi
ac ratione, designari, and confici voluit. And, indeed, Anaxagoras did so
totally ascribe, Laert in vit. Anaxagor^ p. 47.
all the noble works of nature, unto the working of this M^ns (which was his
Philosophical appellation of God) that they used to call him, Men's, in
derision. Yet, and, even Aristotle himself, seems to tax him, for it: and,
yet, Arist. l. 1. De Anima. c. 2. T^. 1. p. 786. and 787. Arist. l. 3. Phys. c.
4. To. 1. p. 447.
he agreeeth with him in the very same point. For he says, that there is,
Quid. dam infinitum, cuius non est principium: sed hoc, principium caeterorum,
quod, and continet ipsum omnia, and gubernat. There is (says he) a certain
infinite thing, which is it self without all beginning: and yet is the
beginner of every other thing: yea both their maintainer, and their governor.
So that, this Infinitum, is both the beginning, from whence all things do
proceed; and (as it were) the place, wherein all things are contained; yea,
and the very Governor, by whom all things are ruled. And this Infinitum (which
does thus finire, and continere omnia) he calls afterward, Divinum, that is,
a Divine thing. Yea, and this, in the same place, he plainly affirms, to be
the common Tenet of all the Philosophers. Omnes, Ibid p. 446.
qui digne Philosophiam tetigisse putantur, de Infinito sermonem fecerunt. Ac
omnes, ipsum, vt principium quoddam eorum quae sunt, posuerunt. All those, that
have been worthy to handle Philosophy, make mentiom of that Infinitum. Yea,
and all of them confess, that infinite thing to be the first beginner, and
original of all things. And that it may appear, that he recites not this
opinion, as reproving or disliking it, he, in plain words, confirms it: and
says, that it was, with great reason, that they affirmed it. Principium omnes,
infinitum ponunt, Ari^t ibid p. 447.
cum ratione. Now Aristotle was a man, as greatly addicted, unto his (...); as
Anaxagoras was, unto his (...): ascribing all things, so absolutely, unto the
power of Nature, as if he had been hired to write in her behalf. Insomuch
that, as he called Empedocles, Arist. l. de Mundo. To. 2 p. 1569.
Naturae interpretem: Suidas in^^oce Aristoteles. p. 138
The interpreter of Nature: so Suidas calls him Naturae Scribam, The
Scriuener of Nature. And therefore, he would never have transcribed this
circumscribing power, from his beloved Nature, unto any such supernatural
cause, as that Infinitum Diuinum was; if, with the Egyptian Sorcerers, Ex. 8.
19.
he had not been constrained to confess, that in this work, is the finger
of God. Which yet, in another place, he more plainly affirms. For he says,
that, God is therefore called, (...), a (...), Id est, Arist. l. de Mundo. To.
2. p. 157^.
circumscribi omnia: and quia nihil in rerum natura sit, quod in infini^tum
ex^urrat. God is called Pepromene, from his bounding of all things, and leaving
nothing undefined, without his bounds and Limits. For, nothing can exceed those
terms and limits, which Fate has prescribed. Which work, Philolaus also
ascribes directly unto God: affirming expressly, Vn^versa, tanquam in
carcere, ^theuag. legate. pro Christ. B. b. ^at. 10. 8. p. 4.
a Deo contineri: That all things are shut up, by the appointment of God,
within their bounds and limits (as it were) into their prisons. And this work,
of thus bounding and limiting of all things, do the Greeks acknowledge, to be
the work of God, in calling their great God Jupiter, (...), Limiferum, or,
Rerum terminos afferentem, Homer in Hym^is. p. 827. Gaecolat.
as Homers Translator renders: him that is, The appointer of limits unto all
things. And the Romans likewise, do seem to acknowledge the very same, in
calling the same God, Iovem terminalem: that is, Jupiter the Limiter, or the
Bounder of all things. Thus, (...)
the bounding and limiting of all natural bodies, does lead us, by the hand,
unto the knowledge of a God.

4 And so does likewise, the bounding of their natural powers and faculties.
For, in these inferior parts of the world, The bounding (...) natural
faculties, ^ the work of God.
we may observe a fiue-fold difference among the Creatures: every one of them,
having their proper and peculiar faculties, so defined and circumscribed, that
none of them can exceed the bounds of his own nature, nor exalt it self to
the state of his superior; but abides in his own; and can go no further. By
which Hierarchy of the Creatures, we may easily ascend, and climb up unto
God, as it were by an Ascendent, consisting of five steps. For, (as the
Orator truly affirms) Si a primis, Cic. l. 2. De Not. De^^ p. 205.
inchoatisque naturis, ad vltimas perfectasque volumus procedere; ad Deorum
naturam perveniamus, necesse est. If we will first begin with the imperfect
works of Nature, Theodoret. l. De Provident. To. 2. p. 530.
and by degrees ascend unto those that are perfecter; they will lead us, by
the hand, to know the nature of God. And therefore, Aug. in Ps. 144. To. 8. p.
1673.
this Argument is much insisted on; Gr^g Hom. 8. in ^zech. To. 2. p 71. b.
both by Tullie, the Orator, in the forealledged place; and by Plotinus, the
Philosopher, as Theodoret records; and by the learned Fathers, S. Augustine,
and S. Gregory: and yet, most fully, by Raymundus de Sabunde. Wherein, I have
observed, that every one of them, Raymundus de Sabunde in Theolog naturali Tit.
3.
though they handle the same matter; yet, have put upon it a several form.
And therefore, I will not tie my self, unto any one of them: but (imitating
their example) will cast the Argument, into a mold of mine own.

Now, those five degrees of Creatures, be these. That some things have bare
essence and being, allotted unto them; and yet not either life, or sense: as,
in si^ple bodies; the Heavens, and the Elements: in compound bodies; Stones,
and Metals, and such like. Some other things, have both Being, and Living* and
yet not either sense, or motion: as Trees, and Plants. Some other things, ^aue
both Being, and Living, and Feeling; and yet have no proper, or animal-motion:
as Oysters, and Muscles, and such other like conchylia; which have no natural
motion of their own, but are only carried, as the water drives them. And
therefore, Aristotle, very wittily, calls them, Arist. l. 3. de generat.
Ani^al. c. 11. To. 2. p. 354.
Aquatiles plantas; A kind of Waterplants: as he calls earthly plants,
Ostreaterrena; A kind of Land-Oysters: because they have no more selfe-motion,
then these, Arist. l. 5. de Hist. Animal^. 15. To. 2. p. 90.
I mean Lation, or local-motion from one place to another. Some things again,
have both Being, and Living, and Feeling, and Moving; and yet have no Reason,
nor Understanding: as Birds, and Beasts, and Fishes, and such like. And some
things again, have all these powers and faculties united in one, both Essence,
and Life, and Sense, and Motion, and Reason too: as we see they be in Men. And
these distinctions of Creatures, are so obuious to all men, that he, which
notes them not, is more worthy to be numbered among beasts, then among men. Now,
if it should be demanded; Why a Stone has not life, as well as a Tree? or, a
Tree, not sense, as well as a Beast? or, a Beast, not reason, as well as a Man?
wha^ other reason, can be given of all this, but only, that those powers are
not in their own power, to take so many of them, as they themselves think
good: but, that they be limited and assigned unto them, by a nature far above
them: even the same nature that made them. And that they therefore have them
not; because that Nature gave them not.

From whence, there follow these two Conclusions. First, that all those
forenam^d faculties and powers, though they be in those things, that have them;
yet they be not of those things, that have them. They have them, in themselves;
but they have them, not of themselves. For then, all would have all of them,
and none would content themselves with any part, were it never so great. Would
a Tree (think you) be content to stick fast in the earth, as a dead and
rotten stake; if it could give it self motion? Surely, no. The blind man, in
the Gospel, that thought he saw men walking like unto Trees, Mar. 8. 24.
should surely see Trees walking like unto men, if they could take unto
themselves the faculty of moving. Again, would a Beast be content, to be so
subject unto man, if it could give it self Reason? Or would a Man be content,
to live here upon the earth, if he could flee up into heaven, and make himself
a God? Surely, he never would. That which Tertullian affirms of the Roman
Emperors, is true also, in all others, that; Si ipsi, Tertul. Apol. c. ^1. p.
33.
se Deos facere potuiss^nt; certe quidem, homines nunquam fuissent. If they
could have made themselves Gods, they would never have continued Men. And so in
all other things, as well as in these, they would all have all those faculties,
if they could give them to themselves. Therefore, seeing that, which has only
Being, cannot give it self Life; and that, which has only Life, cannot give
it self Sense; and that which has only Sense, cannot give it self Reason;
this evidently shows unto all that have any Reason, that the ampliating, or
restrayning of those natural indowments, is not in their own free
disposition, or election: but in his only power, who freely bestows them.
This is the first conclusion.

The second, That seeing those forenamed faculties are not in the power of the
things themselves, that have them; therefore they must needs proceed from
some other power that gave them; and that has in it self, the whole power of
dispensing them. And that can be none other, but a divine and heavenly power.
For, that nature must needs be supernatural and divine, which is the
fountain and wel-spring both of Being, and Living, and Moving, and Sense, and
Reason: and which has the power, to derive the streams of those divine
graces, unto all other creatures, in such differing degrees, limiting and
proportioning unto every several creature, that power and faculty, which
stands best with his pleasure: To some of them dispensing, but only one
faculty* to some two; to some three; to some four; to some five: as the
householder, in the Gospel, Mat. 25. 14. 15.
distributed his Talents unto his servants. This inestimable treasure of so
many precious Talents, and this admirable wisdom, which is used in dispensing
them, Genesis 1. 1. 9. ^0 21. 2. 5.
cannot, in reason, be ascribed, but only unto God. He it is, that made the
heaven, the earth, the sea, which have only being: the trees, the herbs, Genesis
1. 27.
the plants, which have both being and living: the birds, the beasts, the
fishes; which have both living, sense, and moving: Yea, and Man himself too;
which (beside all these forenamed) has also understanding. As Mo^es plainly
shows in the Book of Genesis. Yea, and the Apostle Paul confirms it, Act.
17. 28.
in his affirming, that it is only God, in whom we live, and move, and have
our being: naming in express terms, three of those five properties, which
before were named by us, Living, Moving, and Being.

Yea, and adding for the rest, which he has not named (as a general
conclusion, to this particular enumeration,) Act. 17. 25. Philo. Iud. l. de
lingu. confus p. 479.
that it is he, which gives unto all, both life, and breath, and all things.
So that it is God (as Philo Iudaeus notes) qui suas potentias cincundedit
rebus omnibus, tanquam fortissima vincula; and hijs, eas indissolubiliter
astrictas esse voluit. God has given unto all things, their natural powers,
with which he has bound them, as it were, in strong bands; so that they have
no power to enlarge themselves. Yea, and even the very Heathen themselves, have
(by reason) been compelled to confess, as well in this point, as they did in
the former, that this must needs be the work of God, and not of any other.
Arist. l. De Mundo. To. 2. p. 15^9.
Aristotle says expressly, that; Omnes, Aeris, Terrae, Aquae, res, Dei opera
dicere possis: Dei (inquam) qui mundum continet. We may truly affirm of all
things, which are either in the Air, or in the Earth, or in the waters, that
they be the works of God: Yea, even of that great God, which contains the
whole world. Psalm. 95. 4.
In whose hand (as the Psalmist teaches) are all the corners of the earth.
Yea, and Aristotle in the same place, confirms his own assertion, by the
testimony of Empedocles, who has plainly delivered as much in his verses,
recounting all these things following, nominatim, as Gods works. Omnia quae
fuerant, quae sunt, Arist. ibid. vbi supra.
quaeque ipsa sequentur,
Plantarum genus, atque hominum generosa propago,
Atque ferae, volucres, pisces in fluctibus alti.
What things or have been, be, or what things ever shall,
Of Plants the kinds, man's noble race, beasts, birds, and fishes all.
[May, all of them, be numbered as the works of God.]
Yea, and Virgil affirms the same thing, though in other words* where
speaking of the powerful spirit of God, which pierces through every part of
the world, he says, that: Inde hominum, pecudumque, genu^, vitaeque volantum,
Et quae marmoreo fert monstra sub aequore pontus; (...). p. 267.

Igneus est ollis vigor, and coelestis origo.
From him, both men, and be^sts, and birds, and fishes too proceed,
And whatsoever Monsters strange, in marbly Seas do breed:
All have a vigorous kind of warmth, by an eternal law:
And all their first original from heavenly powers draw.
But yet, not from the Heavens, as of their proper influence; but from the
Ruler of the heavens, as of his grace and goodness. For (as Proclus truly
t^stifieth) Q^icquid bonum, Pro^lus l. de d^^ua p 19^.
ac salutare competit animabus (yea and animalibus too) caus^m a dijs definitam
habet. What health or good soever there comes to the creatures, it is
definitely appointed unto them by God. For (as Aristotle affirms unto the
same purpose) Et virent, (...)
and occidunt, diuinis parentia de^retis* They both s^^rish and perish by the
decree of God. I might be plentifu^l in this point, if I would pursue that
multitude of testimonies, both of Po^ts and Philosophers, which every where
occur, ascribing unto God the creating of all things; both of those that have
more, and of those that have fewer Talents. But these now alleged, are (for a
taste) sufficient.

5 Only here, let me answer unto one Objection; which has crept into the
heads of diverse learned men, The Sun is not the (...) of natural facalties.
as concerning the limiting of those last named faculties: before I proceed
unto the rest of the instances; and that is briefly this: That though it be
apparent, that those forenamed Bodies, be so distinguished by their natural
properties, that some have only being; some other, life, and motion; and
others, sense and reason: yet does it not appear, that it is only God, that
has so distinguished and distributed those faculties; we see not, that God
does it: but we see that the Sun does it: Whom Aristotle cal^eth, Authorem
rerum procreandarum: Arist. l. 2. d: Gen^rat c. 9. l ^. 1. p. 674.
The very Author and Parent of all generation: And unto whom Trismegistus
ascribes, Omnium reram, in m^ndo, opificium; vt qui imperet omnibus, and
faciat omnia: the making of all things in the world, as to him that rules all,
and to him that does all. We see, that the Sun begets daily in the earth,
not only Stones and Metals, which have only being; but also Trees and
Plants, which have also life; yea, and Flies and Worms too, Diodor. Si^ul. l.
3 p 69.
which have both sense and motion: (...) in Arc. p. 322.
yea, and if we should believe the reports of the Heathen, it has also
begotten Men, with their Reason and Understanding. So that this great work,
which we ascribe unto God; and which we use as an Argument, to persuade men,
that there is a God; ought rather to be ascribed unto the Sun: by whom we see
it apparently done. And therefore does not lead us by any consequence, unto
Gods unless we will acknowledge the Sun to be God.

But unto this objection I answer: that if the Sun perform this by his own
power and virtue, it must then needs be a God; as performing that work,
which is proper unto God. For who can give life and motion, and sense, and
reason, unto things, by his own power, but only the Maker and Creator of all
things? Who by those very works declares himself to be a God. So that our
forenamed instances, in leading us unto the Sun, do lead us unto a God; if
he be the giver and distributer of those powers, by his own strength and
power. But, if the Sun do this not by his own proper power, but only by
the delegated power of his Maker and Creator, who uses him but as his
minister: then do our forenamed instances lead us unto a God; who is above
the Sun, and is the God of the Sun. Yea, (...) ibid.
and this, even Trismegistus himself confesses, in the very same place. For,
though he professed of the Sun, that he does, Hunc colere, ipsumque opificem
agnoscere: Yet he adds this restriction; Post primum illum, and vnum: That
though he acknowledge him, to be the Maker of all things; yet that it is, but
under another, who is far superior; being the first, and the only, before
all the rest. So that, both ways, the limiting and distributing of those
natural faculties, in such diverse measures, unto diverse subjects, do
necessarily lead unto a God: either unto the true one; or unto one in opinion.
Which against the Atheist, is fully sufficient. That, by way of supposition.
But now, for our position: it must be resolutely held, that, though the Sun
does perform diverse of those great works, in giving those faculties unto
certain bodies, according unto their several capacities: yet that it neither
gives them all (for it gives not Reason, which is the chiefest of all)
neither yet those which it gives, does it give, by his own virtue; but only
by a kind of limited faculty, which God his Creator has given unto it, to
work thus and thus, as the matter is prepared. So that, if the Sun (the
supposed giver of all those other faculties) could but take unto it self the
faculty of speaking, it would certainly make the very same protestation,
which was made by Saint Peter, in another like matter. Ye men of Israel, why
marvel ye at this, or why look ye so steadfastly on us? Act. 3. 12. 13. 16.
as though we, by our own power, had made this man to go. The God of Abraham,
Isaac, and Iaacob, he has glorified his Son. -- And his name it is, that
has made this man sound. And this same profession which the Apostle here
makes, for giving motion unto this Lame man, would the Sun also make (if it
were able to speak) for his giving of motion unto any other thing. Yea, La^t.
l. 2. c. 5. p. 84.
and even for his own motion. For (as Lactantius truly teaches) Inest
syderibus ratio, ad peragendos meatus suos apta: s^d Dei est ill a ratio, qui
and fecit, and regit omnia; non ipsorum syderum quae mouentur. The Stars have
a mean and a power in them, to dispatch their own motion. But it is only
God, that has given that power unto them; Who is both the maker, and ruler of
all things. It is not a power that is proper to the Stars. And therefore,
Trismegistus, Trismeg. in As^lep. c. 10. p. 523.
though he ascribe much to the Sun; yet he calls him, but, Secundum Deum,
hunc mundum gubernantem: But a second Governor of the world, under God.
Whereby it appears, that the Sun is not that infinite limitour, which
gives several gifts, and sets several bounds, unto all other things;
being it self boundless; but, that it must be numbered, among things limited.
Yea, and that a great deal more straightly limited, then many other things, that
seem inferior unto it. And this may evidently be seen, both in his
Working-power; and also, in his Mouing-power.

6 For first, The Sun is limited in his working.
for his working-power; it is most plain and evident, that the Sun is two
ways restrained in it, that is both, in the Matter, and in the Manner of his
working. By both which it appears, that he has not an omnipotent, but a
limited power in him.

And first, for the matter. We see this by experience, that it is not in the
Suns power, to put every form upon every matter: but is confined, to the
ability and capacity of the matter, as it is either prepared, or unprepared
by nature. The S^nne cannot, by that heat, put hardness upon wax, by which,
he puts hardness upon a stone: Nor, by that heat, put softness upon
clay, by which he both softneth and dissolueth the Snow. This cannot be done
by him: because the matter will not suffer him. Again, the Sun has not
power to give every natural property, unto every natural body. He cannot
give (...) unto a Tree, upon that hard Rock, where yet he gives Being unto a
Stone: Neither can he give being unto a Stone, within that soft Dunghill,
where yet he gives both being, and Living, and Moving, and feeling, unto a
Worm. These things, he can work in one place; because the matter is prepared
for him: in another he cannot; because the matter is unprepared for such and
such a form. For, he cannot work any where beyond the possibility or
receptiuitie of his matter. Which evidently shows that the Sun is not the
first and unlimited limitour, which distributeth those faculties, as he
himself pleases: but is a mere servant, that is limited himself, to do no
more then his Master pleases. Now, who is it, that limiteth this power unto
the matter; that some matter should only be capable of life; some other both of
life, and sense; some other (beside these) of motion; and some of none of
these, but only of simple Being? This distribution the Sun cannot make, in
every matter, but only where the ability thereof will suffer. Therefore, the
limitour of this susceptiue power unto the matter, in such differing degrees,
and measures, and manners, can (in truth) be none other, but only that
omnipotent Creator of the Matter: of whom it is said, Genesis 1. 1. 2.
in the beginning of Gods Book; that, In the beginning, God made Heaven and
Earth: and the Earth was void, and without form. God having therefore made
the matter, without any certain form of his own, that it might be capable of
every other form. And yet, not delegating so large a power unto any Creature,
as to superinduce any form whatsoever, but only as he limiteth the
capabilitie of the matter. And yet, unto himself he has reserved an infinite
power, to put any form upon any matter. Which he always finds plyant, and
obsequent to his pleasure, even against the propriety of its own particular
nature. Eusebius. l. 4. De Praepar. c. 8. p. 155.
For (as Eusebius cites out of Dionysius) Penitus nefandum est, si quis putet
(sicut Artificem) ad materiae aptitudinem, primam se causam accommodare. It is
not to be spoken, that the first cause of all things, should (like an
Artificer) be tied to the aptness and ability of his matter. For, he can
easily work, beyond all the power and possibilty of it. He can give weight
unto the fire, which is the lightest of all things; and make it to fall
perpendicularly down, as it were a shower of rain; as he did upon the
Sodomites. He can give hardness, and consistence, Genesis 29 24.
unto the soft, and fluide waters, and make them to stand as stiff as a wall*
Ex. 14. 22.
as he did unto the Israelites. He can make dirt and clay, Ioh 9. 6.
a Collyrium for the eyes; Number. 2 ^. 28.
as he did unto the blind man. Mat. 3. 9.
He can make the mouth of a dumb Ass to speak, as he did unto Balaam. Yea,
and he can; of very Stones, (...) Supartium. p. 339.
raise up Children unto Abraham. Though Galen deny that power unto him. But
yet the Scripture ascribes it: which is of greater credit. Yea, and even the
Heathens Mythologie attribut^s it, in Deucalions transformation of Stones into
men. Inque breui spacio, (...) l. 1 Metam. p. 29.
superorum numine, saxa
Missaviri manibus, faciem traxere virorum,
In little space, by Gods high power, which all things makes,
Stones, cast from out Man's hand, put on men's shapes.
So that God, who is the true limiter and distributer of these faculties, is
not limited himself unto any matter, (...)
though Plato think he be: but, he can make, at his pleasure, Ex quovis ligno
Mercurium. He can make, Quidlibet ex quolibet: which the Sun cannot. And
therefore, it is God alone (and not the Sun) that is both the Determiner, and
the Dispenser of those natural faculties, unto their natural bodies. Giving
where, and when he pleases, a passive possibility unto every matter, of
receiving every form. Which power he has not left, in the power of the Sun.

Now for the manner of his working, it may again be demanded: Who it is, that
has so co^fined, and circumscribed the power of the Sun, that, out of such a
matter, he should be able to produce only life; and yet, out of another
matter, to produce both life, and sense? This evidently shows, that the Sun
is not able, to work and effect what it will, where it will; but, like a mere
Artificer, is co^fined to the hability, or imbecility of his matter, and can
go no further. Which shows that he is not an omnipotent worker, as is God the
Creator.

7 And, The Sun is limited in his (...).
as the Sun is restrained in his working-power; so that he cannot effect,
what he will: so is he likewise in his mouing-power; so that he cannot go,
whither he will. But is, as strictly tied unto his set-motion, as a Mill-horse
to his Mil^: which cannot go possibly out of his Circle. For, when he comes
to a certain point Northward, he can go no further that way; but returns
back again. And, when he comes to a certain point Southward, he can go no
further that way; but returns back again. Whereupon those two points are
called his two Topics, or his two Returns. Between which two points, he
spends his whole time, moving this way and that way, in going and returning:
as the Sea does, in his ebbing and flowing. And, when he is come unto his
period, he can go no further: but obeys the law of God his Creator. As the
Sea likewise does. For the very same God, which has set bounds and limits unto
the Sea, and given it a commandment which it cannot break: Job 38. 11.
Hitherto shall thou come, and no further, and here shall thou stay thy pr^ud
waves: has also given the same commandment to the Sun. Which it obeys
accordingly. Yea, and that, by so strong and invincible a necessity, that (as
B^laam prof^ssed, in a very like case) it has ^o power to transgress: Number.
24. 13.
It cannot exceed the commandment of the Lord. By whose law and commandment,
it is more narrowly confined unto a strict motion, then any other planet is, in
all the whole heaven. For, it is, as it were, imprisoned in the Ecliptike line,
Johan. de sacro Bosco. c. 2. p. 23.
and tied fast unto it, as with a chain of Adamant: so that it has no
latitude at all in the Zodiake. Now, who is it, that binds the Sun, with such
a necessity, but only God himself? who (as the Apostle expressly
testifies) has both assigned the times, Act 17. 26.
and set down the bounds of the habitations of men. Here is plainly, Jupiter
terminalis: the true setter of bounds, and limits, unto things: whose bounds
and limits, though the Sun it self have no power to alter; yet God, the
setter of them, has. He can change and alter them, at his pleasure. As he
plainly gave good proof: first, unto Joshua; Josh. 10. 13.
in so holding the Sun from moving, that he could not go forward: and
secondly, unto Ezechias; 2. Kin. 20. 11. Eccle. 48. 24.
in so withholding, and pulling him, that he made him go backward. Which
manifestly shows, that the Sun, in his moving, is not in his own power,
but under the command of a superior Ruler: who turns him, and returns him,
at his own will and pleasure. So that, the Sun, of it self, has not so
much scope and liberty in his motion, as many a man has: nay, not, as any
Beast has. For they can run, either this way, or that way, at their
pleasure: but so cannot the Sun. He is moved by another; by whom he is so
tied unto a strict and unalterable motion, that Astronomers can surely tell
(unto the very minute) all the Eclipses, that shall ever fall out, so long as
the world it self shall last. As the Roman Orator has expressly observed.
Cic. l. 2. de Not. Deor. p. 224.
Defectiones Solis and Lunae, praedicataeque in omne posterum tempus, quae,
quantae, quando futurae. The Eclipses of the Sun and Moon, are both known,
and can be prognosticated, for all ages to come; both in what fashion and in
what quantity, and at what time, they shall happen. Now, these praedictions
could not be so infallible, but that the Sun is tied unto a course
unalterable. Which notable captivity of the Sun, more then of any other of Gods
Creatures, is excellently described, and set out by Prudentius.

Solemn certa tenet regio, Prudent. c. nt. Symmachum. p. 235. b.
plaga certa coercet.
Temporibus varijs distinguitur, aut subit ortu,
Aut ruit occasu, latet aut sub nocte recurrens.
Non torquere facem potis est, ad signa Trionum;
Orb nec obliquo, portas Aquilonis adire;
Nec solitum conversus iter reuocare retrorsum.
Hic erit ergo Deus, praescriptis lege sub vnae
Deditus officijs? Libertas laxior ipsi
Concessa est homini: formam cuiflectere vitae,
Atque voluntatis licitum est: se^tramite dextro
Scandere, seu laeuo malit decurrere campo:
Sumere seurequiem, seu continuare laborem,
Seu parere Deo, sieve in contraria verti.
Ista, ministranti regimen solenne dierum
Haudquaqu^agrave;m Soli datur, a Factore potestas.
Sed famulus subiectus, agit quodcunque necesse est.
The sum and effect of which verses, is thus much. A certain Region does
restrain the Sun,
Which is designed for times distinction:
It never wanders past the Tropicks Line,
It Is either rising, or it does decline,
Or else, by night, lies hidden and returning,
And never varyes from its common running.
It cannot wreathe it self to the Northern Starr's,
Nor can it reach, in oblique Orb, so far
As to the Southern Lists; nor change it place,
Nor once call back again it wonted race.
Can he then be a God, whom one law ties,
And servant makes, to such set officies?
Surely, a greater freedom granted is,
And much more large, to every man, then this.
For he can change his ^orme of life at pleasure,
And move which way he will, to every measure:
Whether the up, or down, he lust to take;
The right hand, or the left, to sleep or wake;
Whether to labor he intend, or rest;
God to obey, or not; what likes him best.
This liberty the All-maker has not lent
Unto the Sun, whose glorious regiment
All days solemnize. It does subject stand,
And still attends Necessities command.
So that, though diverse of the Heathen have foolishly collected, from the
constancy of his motion; that the Sun must be a god: Yet Prudentius (as you
see) a great deal more prudently, collecteth the contrary: Concluding, that
this argues him rather to be a mere servant, then a god. Yea, and so likewise
does Lactantius. Lact. l. 2. ^. 5. p. 83
Argum^ntum illud, quo colligunt, vniversa coelestia, Deos esse; in contrarium
valet. Nam, si Deos esse idcirco opinantur, quia certos and rationabiles cursus
habent, errant. Ex hoc en^m appa^et, Deos non esse; quod ex orbitare, illis, a
praestitutis itineribus, non licet. Caeterum. si Dij essent, huc atque illuc
passim, sine vlla ^ecessitate serrentur: si^ut animantes in terra: qu^rum, quia
liberae sunt voluntates, huc atque illuc vag ^ntur, vt lib^it: and, (...) me^ns
duxerit, eo fer^ur. That argument, from when^e the H^athen do collect, that
the stars must needs be gods, does most pl^inely prove the contrary. For,
if they take them to be gods, because of the cert^inty of their courses, they
b^ therein much deceived. For this plainly proves, that (indeed) they be no
gods: because they be not able to depart from their courses. Further, if they
were gods, they would move, both this way, and that way in the heavens, as
freely, as living creatures use to do upon the earth. Who, because they have
the liberty and freedom of their will, they wander up and down, whither they
themselves will. From whence he there concludes, Non est igitur astrorum motus
voluntarius, sed necessarius: quia praestitutis legibus officijsque deseruiunt.
The motion of the stars is not voluntary, but necessary: because they be so
tied unto set laws and offices. Which Zacharias Mitylenensis also expressly
confirms. For he says of the Sun, Zach. Mitylen. l. De Mundi Creat. Bib.
Pat. To. 5. p. 739.
that, Habet motum voluntatis expertem, velut seruus: That his motion is
involuntarie, like the motion of a servant: which must be directed by his
masters commandment. Now, if the Sun be but a servant, both in his working,
Ps. 19. 4. 5. Hugo de S. Victore l. 7. Erudit. Didasc. c. 8 To. 3. p. 19.
and in his moving: who is then his Lord and Master, that sets him so on
doing? The Prophet David cleeres that question. It is God that has set a
tabernacle for the Sun, in the Heavens, and appointed him as a Giant, to run
his race. Quis, Solemn per hiberna descendere signa praecipit? (says Hugo de
Victore) Quis rursum, per aestiva eum signa ascendere facit? Qui^, eum ab
orient in occidentem ducit? Quis iterum, ab occidente in Orientem reuehit?
Haec cuncta sunt mirabilia: sed soli Deo possibilia. Who commands the Sun
to descend and go down into the signs of the Winter, and who, to ascend
back again into the signs of the Summer? Who leads him along from the East
into the West? And who fetches him again, from the West into the East? These
works to us are wonderful: but only to God are possible. So that the Sun
is so far from giving bounds and limits unto other things, that it self is
the most straightly bounded and limited of all things. And that (as before I
noted) not only in his working, but also in his moving. In his working:
because (as Zacharias Mitylenensis observes) Nihil potest vel efficere vel
operari, Zach. Mitylen. vbi supra.
quam quod constitutum sit a Deo, ordinis Dictatore: He can neither do, nor
work any thing, but as God, the prescriber of order, has appointed him. In
his moving: because (as in the same place he affirms) Continuum faciens
motum and modulatum, non excedit terminos, ab Opifice sibi impositos. Though
he be in a continual and perpetual motion; yet does he not exceed those
bounds, that are praescribed him by that workman that made him. So that God
alone is the limiter of the Sun: and consequently of every other thing: Act.
17. 25.
Giving unto all, both life, and breath, and all things: as the Apostle
plainly testifies. And therefore God may more properly be called the Sun,
for doing those things as the principal Agent; then the Sun can be called
God, for doing them none otherwise, but only as Gods instrument. For, those
things, though instrumentally they be wrought by the Sun; yet are they
originally wrought, only by God. And therefore, as Boethius very wittily
collecteth: Quem, Bo^l. l. 5. de Consol. metro 2. p. 1100.
quia respicit omnia solus,
Verum possis dicere Solemn.
Whom, for he solely every thing does see,
Thou may well say the true Sun for to be.
But to proceed.

8 As it is in all the forenamed natural powers, that they be limited and
dispensed, All Arts are limited.
according to the will and pleasure of the giver: so is it likewise in all
artificial faculties. There is no man, adorned and endowed with all of them.
But some man has one, and some man another, but no man has them all together.
Non enim omnia pariter, Hom. l. 4. Iliad. p. 441.

Dij hominibus dare consueuerunt:
says Homer. Nor all at once, nor all alike, nor ever has it been,
That God should offer, and confer his favors upon men:
but dispenses them by degrees, as he himself pleases. Which may as
evidently be seen, in his dispensing of Knowledges, of Arts, and of Sciences;
as as in any of the forenamed natural faculties. For, though all the several
Arts and Sciences in the world (which are in number infinite) have been
devised, and invented by the wit of man: yet had never any man so infinite a
wit, as to know and understand the depth of all of them. Nay, no man of many of
them. Nay, no man of any of them. No, not of that one Art, which by himself is
professed, and wherein he desires to be accounted excellent. All which
notwithstanding, are so limited by God, that they are not, either confounded or
coincident: yet is our capacity so much straitlier limited, that it cannot
reach to any of their limits. Let me insist a while upon the several steps
of this gradation: and give some light, by instances, in every one of them.

That no man has the knowledge of all Arts and Sciences, but is still limited
and confined, No man has the perfect knowledge of all Arts.
either unto some one, or else (at the most) but unto some few of them: we may
evidently see, if we will take a survey, either of the Mechanical, or of the
liberal Arts. First for the Mechanical, and manuarie Arts: we see by
experience, that the Plowman knows not, what belongs unto the Ship; nor the
Shipman, unto the Plow. But, as it is in the Poet. Navita, Propert. l. 2. Eleg
1. p. 193.
de ventis; de Tauris, narrat Arator;
Enumerat Miles, Vulnera; Pastor, Oves.
The Seaman, does discourse of Winds;
The Plowman, talk of Oxen find's;
The Soldior, does recompt his knocks;
The Shepherd, reckons up his flocks.
Nay, even in those inferior and ministerial Arts, which are subjected unto
others, as to their Architectonicals; we see, by like experience, that all of
them are limited, within their own precincts: and none of them acquainted with
the mysteries of others: No not, though they all depend upon the same head and
principal. As namely, for example. The Art of the Sadler, although it be
ordained unto the art of the Rider; yet has not the Sadler any skill in
Riding, but only in making of Saddles to ride in. And so likewise, downward.
The Rider has not the Art of making his own Saddle, nor his Bridle, nor his
Horse-shooe, nor his Bit: but there be several Arts belonging to all these;
and yet all of them subseruing unto the Art of Riding: whereof all they be
ignorant: as the Rider, of all these: and each of these of others. And so it is
likewise, in both our former instances. The Ship-wright, though he have the
art of making a ship; yet has he not the art of guiding a ship: No more then
the Saylor has the art of the Ship-maker. And the same we may likewise see, in
the Plowman; which is our second instance. Plato. l. 2. De Repub. p. 550.
Non sibi Agricola aratrum conficit, neque ligones, and rastros, etc. sed sunt
fabri lignarij, and ferrarij; says Plato. The Husbandman makes not his own
Plow, neither his own Plowshare, nor his Rakes: But they are the works of
Carpenters, and Smiths.

So that, though the Plowman have the knowledge of the plowing of his ground;
yet has he not the skill of making his own plow: but that belongs to the
Carpenters occupation: who yet, has not the skill and art of plowing. Now, who
is it, that thus distributeth, and limiteth these meaner, and inferior arts
unto men? It is only God himself, by the Heathens own confession. Maximus
Tyrius affirms, that, though all those men forenamed, be every one ignorant
of another art; yet that God is not ignorant of any one of them: but has the
perfect and general skill of them all, imparting unto men, but certain small
parcels and fragments of those knowledges, and reserving to himself, as his
own prerogative, to have the full and perfect knowledge of all of them. Non
enim, Max Tyr. Sermon. 22. p. 270.
si aerarius faber, architecturae faciendae minime sufficiat; aut, si agricola,
nauticae sit artis ignatus; si navicularius, medicine; aut alius quispiam
terrestrium munerum peritus, maritimis; ac vicissim, maritimorum, terrestribus
ineptus sit; ita etiam Deus, ab vnatantum circumscriptus est art. It follows
not (says he) that though the Brazier, be ignorant of the Art of the
Carpenter; or, the Plowman, of the Shipmans; or, the Pilo^, of the Physicians;
or, any other that is skilful in the affairs of the land, be utterly unfit for
the affairs of the Sea; that therefore God should be so limited, as to have
the knowledge but only of one Art: because we men have, of no more. For, (as
he there adds, a little after) Deus, singulas Arts, tanquam haereditatem
possidet; and tradere potest. God poss^sseth all Arts, as his proper
inhaeritance, and so ^e delivers them to others.

And, as it is in those illiberall Arts; so is it likewise in all liberal
Arts, that no man has all of them. For, though they all be thought to be
lincked all together, Cic. l. 3. De Orat. p. 195. Quintil. l. 1. c. 10. p. 59.
as it were, in a Chain; or rather, that they all do make one single Ring, in
that (...), whereof the Philosophers do so pleasa^tly dream: yet the
Astronomer, is ignorant of the art of Music; and the Musician of Astronom^e;
the Geometrician, of Arithmetic; and the Arithmetician, of Geometry. And yet,
all of those, be Mathematicians. And so likewise, in those four Arts of
speaking, which dwell, all of them, in the tongue; Grammar, Logic, Rhetoric,
and Poetry. The Grammarian, is ignorant of the Art of Logic; the L^gician,
of Rhetoric; the Rhetorician, of Poetry; notwithstanding their near
affinity. So that, no man can attain unto the knowledge of all of them: but
is confined to his portion, as unto his Dimensum; which, in comparison of the
whole, is (God knows) a very little one.

Now, who is it, that limit^th these artificial faculties unto men, as well as
the natural; but only God himself? It is he, and none else: as even Homer
plainly testifies. Coelestes etenim, Homer. l. 8. Odys p. 53.
non omnibus omnia praebent.
Eloquium, Ingenium, Membrorum gratia, Vires,
Non vni eveniunt. --
God has not all his gifts bestowed on all, or any one.
Words sweetness, and Wits sharpness, beauty, strength of bone,
These rarities of mind and parts, do all concur, in none.
Where, he rendereth the true Reason, why all men have them not: because God,
who is their Giver, bestows them not. Nay, the strength of the body, and the
sharpness of wit, are seldom, by God in any one man conioy^ed: as by many
learned men, Diodor Sicul. l. 17. p. 572.
I find it oftentimes observed. Haud facile fit (says Diodorus Siculus) vt
quisquam, and ingen^es corporis vires, and ingenium subtle habe^t. It falls
not commonly out, that the same man should have, both strength of body, and
strength of wit. But (as Maximus Tyrius observes) Qui minine validus est ad
gerendum negotium, Max. Tyr. S^rm. l p. 83.
ad obeundam speculationem, expeditum nactus est ingenium: contra, qui
speculationem non sustinet, acriter agit. He that is but weak for action, is
commonly good for contemplation: and he that is but dull in contemplation, is
often vigorous in action. Raro, Faling. in Libra p. 199.
vtrumque Deus cuiquam largitur; vt idem
Sit sapiens, and sit robusto corpore pollens:
says Palingenius. It Is seldom seem, that God should give, both these, all
men among;
That one should be both wise in mind, and of a body strong.
But, as Cato affirms on the one side; that, Consilio pollet, Cato l. 2.
Distich. p. 22.
cui vim Natura negavit:
He commonly excells in Counsels reach,
Whose outward valor, Nature does impeach
So Palingenius again affirms on the other side; that, Ingenio plerumque
caret, Palingen. vbi sup^a.
qui robore praestat.
He for the most part, wants wisdoms Lore,
In Bodies strength, that others goes before.


Nay, even in the gifts of the body only; we see, that he, which is excellent
in some one, is, oftentimes, defective in many other. Corporum vires (says
Seneca) non ad omnia, Senec. l 3. Controuc^san pro^^m. p. 74.
quae viribus perficiuntur, ^ptae sunt. The strength of the body, is not apt
for all those things, that are done by strength only. And he illustrateth his
position, by diverse pregnant instances. Illi, nemo, luctando, par est: ille, ^d
tollendam magni ponderis sarcinam, praeualet: ille, quicquid appre hendit, non^
emittit; sed in procliue nitentibus vehiculis, moraturas manus imicit. One man,
is very strong in wrestling: another strength lies all in bearing, in
listing, and carrying of great and weighty burdens: another strength lies
all in holding whatsoever he casts his hand upon; as in staying of heavy
carts, Homer l. ^. Odyss. p. 53.
and wagons, when they are running down the steepest hills. As Homer notably
illustrateth, in describing the games of the Phaeacians, in Running, Wrestling,
Leaping, Coyting; he names a several Victor, in every one of them. But no
man, could win in Two: much less, in All of them. Now, who is it, that has
given this strength unto men, in so strange and differing both measures and
manners? Homer answers that question, in Agamemnons expostulation with
Achilles: Quod singulari, Homer. l. 1. Iliad. p. 6.
praeter caeteros, robore praeditus es;
id vero non Tutibi, sed Dij ded^runt.
That thou in strength art singular, and others do excel;
Thou not thy self, but God to thee, has given it, know we well.
It is the Lord that is our Strength: Psalm. 28. 7.
as the holy Scripture also teaches us. Psalm. 59. 17.


Yea, Senec. vbi sup^a.
and Seneca, in the former place, goes further, and shows, that those
faculties are limited, not only unto men; but also unto Beasts too. As, in
dogs; some of them are only strong in fighting, some others, in running. And
so in Horses too; some of them are only strong in riding; some other of them,
in only drawing. And this gift, thus limited, even to these brute beasts, does
God plainly assume unto himself. Have thou given unto the horse his strength?
Job. 39. 22.
says God unto Job: meaning, that this was not the work of a man, but the
proper and immediate work of God.

Thus God, who has the free disposing of all excellent gifts, in his own only
hands, bestows them as he pleases, both unto men and beasts: giving unto
some of them, more, and unto others of them, f^wer; after the only motion of
his own goodwill and pleasure. But all of them he has not given, unto any one
man. Nay, not all, to any Nation. All nations are not eloquent. All nations are
not Warlicke. All nations are not learned. And yet, as God has given all gifts
unto none: Senec Suasor. 2. p. 227.
so has he deprived none of all. But as Seneca obseruet^) Omnibus sua decora
sunt. Athenae, eloquentia, inclytae sunt; Thebae, sacris; Sparta, armis. Athens
is glorious, for her eloquence; Thebes, for her holia^^se; and Sparta, for her
arms. And the like may be said of diverse other C^^^tries, unto whom God has
given to excel, in diverse particular gifts: But, to excel in all, to none:
much less to any Man. For, as Homer again testifies: Alij tribuit Deus
bellica opera; Homer l. 13 Ibid p. 49^ in Grae^ola. God has taugh the^^ hand
to war^ and them singers to fight. Psalm 144. ^.
alij saltationem;
Alij cytharam, and cantum: alijs -- animum p^udente^.
God gives some, force of Arms, and arts of war;
To others active nimblenes to dance;
These in the Harp, and singing, skillful are;
Those have a soul to wisdoms height advanced.
Which sentence of Homer, implies these two things. First, that all these
forenamed things, are the only gifts of God. And secondly, that he powers
them not lauishly, upon all men, without diser^tion; but disp^nseth them
advisedly, according to his wisdom. For (as Tertullian very truly observes)
God is not a Lauisher, Tertul l. 1. cont (...). c. 24. p. 862.
but a Dispenser of his blessings: Dispensator bonitatis, non Profusor.

But here it may be objected, that Elaeus Hippias had the knowledge of all
Arts. For he openly professed: Cic l 3. de Orat. p. 208.
Nihil esse, in vlla art, ^erum omnium; quod ille nesciret. That there was
nothing in any Art, of which he was ignorant, instancing, not only in liberal
and ingenious Arts, but also in fordide and ignoble: As namely, that he had
made with his own proper hands, both the Cloak upon his shoulders, and the
Rings upon his fiugers, and the Shoes upon his feet. Whose vain ostentation
is worthily scoffed with scomme of the Orator, Cic. ibid.
Scilicet nimis hic quidem progressus est: He surely went a step or two, too
far. And the like vain profession, did Gorgias also make: whose custom it
was, to call openly upon all men, to come and oppose him in any thing: for that
he was well prepared, to dispute of every thing: yea and to say all, of all
matters, that could possibly be said of them. And so likewise Demecri^us, Cic.
l. 1 de ^ ^ 137.
who began his speech thus: Haec loquor de vniuersis. Nihil excipit (says the
Orator) de quo non profiteatur. Cic l. and de (...) p. 2^.
Quid enim esse potest extra vniuersa? I speak this of all things, he
excepteth nothing. For what can be with out the compass of All things? (...)
Much is also reported of the Emperor Hadr^an, for the great variety of his
learning. But much more is reported of the wise King Solomon; and much more
truly too* whose knowledge was so general, that there was not almost any
thing, whereof he had not spoken. Whereby it appears, that though many men
have attained but to few arts; yet that some men have attained unto many. Yea
almost unto all. For so it is reported of Democritus; (...). in vit. Democriti.
p. 316.
that he was, in Philosophia (...): quia and Naturalia and Moralia, and
Mathematica, and liberalium disciplinarum rations, Artiumque omnium peritiam
callebat. That he was, in all Philosophy, an absolute man: having an excellent
knowledge, both in the Physickes, and Ethi^^es, and the Mathematics; and in
all the rest of the liberal Arts. But unto this I answer, with the Roman
Orator: Cic. l. 3. de Orat. p. 204.
That a slight and perfunctorie knowledge, may easily be attained, of many of
those Arts: but a full and perfect, scarce of any; and much less, of all. So
that, for those men forenamed; it rather may be thought, that they knew many
Arts superficially, then any substantially. For, if they knew so many, they
knew them not all fully; much less knew they all absolutely. They knew,
perhaps, more then others: but they kn^w not so much, but they might have
learned more themselves. Their knowledge was but such, as Simo reports to
have been, in his son Pamphilus, that he knew, Terent. Andrea Act 1. Sce. 1.
p. 4.
Nihil egr^gie praeter caete^a: sed omnia mediocriter, They knew many things
indifferently; but nothing exactly.

For first, for Elaeus Hippias, that vainglorious Sciolus; how great his
knowledge was, there is no man ever testified, but only he himself. He says
or himself, that he was ignorant of nothing. But Tullie censure^h this, in
him, to have been nothing else, (...). l. De Orat. (...). 208.
but his boasting and ostentation. Cuncta pene audiente Graecia, gloriatus est.

For Leontinus Gorgias, that bombasted Sophister, the greatness of his
learning was rather in the peoples false opinion and ascription; then in his
own true possession: (...) H^st. c. 23. P. 377.
as Aelian notes of him. Veterum Graecorum aetate, s^mmae gloria floruerunt
Gorgias Leontinus, and Protagor as Democriti filius: saptentia vero, tantum
abfuerunt, quantum a viris pueri. In ancient time, among the Greeks, there were
not men more renowned, then Gorgias, and Protagoras: Who yet came as short of
many other, for their wisdom, as the weakness of a child, from the strength
of a man. So that, for all their great fame, yet were they, in truth, but of a
little learning.

And for the Emperor Had ian, whose variety of learning is set out unto the
full, Aurel. Vict. (...) vit. Hadr. p. 389 (...). ^part. vbi supra.
both by Aurelius Victor; and by Aelius Spartianus: yet if it were no greater
then is there reported, it came so far short of an universal knowledge in
all Arts, that it might truly be said of him, that, the greatest p^rt of those
things which he knew, were indeed, but the least of those things which he knew
not.

And for King Solomon though he had a singular prerogative in wisdom, 1. Kin.
3. 12.
yet was he so far r^m attai^^^ unto the perfection of all knowledge, that
he ingenuo^sly professes, Eccles. 1. 13. 17. 18.
that he was (...) utterly tired, in se^king that which he had not: and
notably vexedly that, Eccles. 2. 12.
which he had ^ot. So that, for all these we cannot yet meet with any man, but
that he had all his learning and knowledge limited out unto him: yea, and that
by a scant scantli^g And therefore the va^rting of Hipp^as, and Gorgias, of
such an universal knowledge, that they would (...) all that (...) be spoken;
was rather an argument of their solly, then it was of their (...); as even
Aristotle expressly has censured such vainglory. De omnibus eniti quidpiam
dicere, nihilque praetermittere insgnis stultitiae (...) videbitur esse, Arist
l 2. de Coelo. c. 5. Tom. 1. p. 583.
aut animi valde parati. To endeavor to speak unto cu^ry n^atter, and to
leave out nothing, is either an argument of exceeding folly, or of very rare
learning. Scoffing at their vanity, that imagined themselves to know all things
so perfectly. Therefore,

Let us now come unto the second step of our forenamed Gradation: No man can
have the perfect knowledge of many Arts. X^noph. l. 8. De Paedia Cyri. p. 112.
and there we shall see the truth of this conclusion, a great deal more
plainly. For it is not or ely true, that, No man can have the perfect
knowledge of many Arts. Which Xen^phon directly, in express terms affirms:
Non potest fieri, vt qui multis v^^^ur ^rtibus, is homo omnia pulchre faciat:
It cannot be, that if any man apply himself unto many several Arts, he should
practice them all, either cunningly, or comely. In which his opinion, Plato
likewise concurreth with him: yea, and goes one step beyond him. For the same
impossibility, which Xe^^phon ascribes unto the learning of many Arts, does
Plato ascribe unto the learning, but of any two of them. Duas arts, aut studia
duo, (...)
diligenter exercere, human^ naturae non potest. It is above the power of our
humane nature, for any one of us, to be excellent, in either two Arts, or two
Studies. No, not even in two mechanicals. And therefore he appointed it for a
law in his Commonwealth, Vt n^mo, aerarius simul and lignarius saber sit --
sed sing^l^ opifi^^s, singulis artibus vacent. That no man shall be both a
Brazier, and a Carpenter: but that every several workman, shall have his
several occupation. Which law he would never have ordained, but that he was
persuaded, that two Arts together, cannot perfectly be l^arned. And therefore,
Tullie is deceived in both the parts of his sentence, when he says, that,
Interdictum non est, aut a rerum natura, Cic. l. 2. De Orat. p. 1148.
aut a lege aliqua, tque more, vt singulis hominibus, non amplius, quam
singulas arts nosse, liceat. That it is not forbidden, neither by Nature, nor
by law, that any man should be learned, but only in one Art. For Xenophon
affirms, that Nature has forbidden it; Fieri non potest: and Plato has
appointed a Law to forbid it. Yea, and that upon this ground, because Nature
has forbidden it; Humana natura non potest.

And this we may plainly see verified, even in Tullie himself, to go no
further for an instance. For, if any two Arts can be perfectly attained, by one
and the same man; it is Oratorie, and Poetry: because these two are so near,
that they be all one in a manner. Ci^. l. 1. De Orat. p. 133.
Est sinitimus Oratori Poeta: A Poet is the very next Borderer unto an Orator.
Nay, there is not only a very near neighborhood, but also a kindred between
those two Arts: Cic. l. 3. de Orat. p. 197.
Poetis, est proxima cognatio cum Oratoribus: as Tullie himself confesses.
And yet, he himself, indeauouring to attain unto both of them, both with as
great a wit, and as great a study, as ever did any man, came so far short, in
the one of them; that, that censure of Cat^^lus (with a little deflection)
might very fitly be applied unto him, that he was, Tanto pessimus omnium
Poeta, Catul. ad M. T. Cic. p. 33.

Quanto -- optimus omnium Patronus.
Of all the Poets, he the worst by much;
Who, of all Orators, was the true Nonesuch.
So that, for all his excellency in Oratorie; yet could he scarce attain to a
mediocrity in Poetry. Which his weakness and deficiencie, the Poet Iuvenal,
in his Satyr, derideth very bitingly: giving instance in that noted verse of
his: O fortunat^m natam, Iuuenal. Satyr. 10. p. 46.
me Consule, Romam:
O Rome, thou fortunate,
While I thy Consul sat:


And scoffing at it there, with this bitter Sarcasmus, Antoni gladios potuit
contemnere, si sic
Omnia dixisset. --
If Tullies pleas,
Had all been such as these;
He might defy,
The sword of Anthony.
Yea, and Seneca observes the very same defect in him: and compares him with
another: who being a very rare and excellent Poet; yet proved but a mean, and
a very silly Orator. Virgilium, illa felicitas ingenij, oratione soluta
reliquit: Ciceronem, eloquentia sua, in carminibus, destituit. Yea, Senec. l.
3. contro. in Proam* p. 74
and he proceeds in the same place, unto other examples. Orationes Salustij,
in honorem historiarum, non leguntur. Eloquentissimi viri Platonis oration, qu^e
pro Socrate scripta est, nec patrono, nec reo digna ^st. Virgils happiness of
wit forsook him in his proof: and Tullies eloquence, him, in his verses.
Salusts orations, are no honor to his history; and Platoes made for Socrates,
is utterly unworthy. So that, Virgil was a good Poet; but he was no goo^
Orator: Tullie a good Orator; but yet no good Poet: Salust a good
Historiographer; but no good Declamer: Plato a good Disputer; and yet no good
Orator. All which, with all their wit and labor, yet could not attain to be
excellent in two Arts: though both, almost of one nature: and though they
sought after them, with great study and endeavor. And therefore Seneca, in the
forealledged place, sets it peremptorily down, as his resolute opinion, that,
The excellentest wit, that ever was, yet cannot get to excel, in any mo^e,
then in one thing. Magna quoque ingenia, quando, plus, quam in vno, eminuerunt
op^re? When did the greatest wits, excel, in any more, then in one only Art?

Nay, No man can have the p^^fect knowledge of any one Art
not in any one Art, to the full perfection of it: which in our Gradation, is
the third, and the last step. For, no man ever yet had any Art so perfect,
but that he still found, that he could learn somewhat more in it: and that
there was somewhat, which, as yet, he had not learned. So that he had not
attained unto the last quiddities, and uttermost bounds of it. Which
Hippocrates insinuates, Hi^p^crat. Aphorism. ^art. 1. ^. 9.
in the first of his Aphorisms: Where, he seems to complain, that man's
life was so short, that he could not reach the fullness and perfection of any
Art. Cic. l. 3. De Orat. p. 20^.
Vita breuis, Ars longa: Man's life is but short; but Art is very l^ng. Yea, and
that so long: Vt discentes vita deficiat: as the Orator observes, even in t^is
very case.

And therefore, Theophrastus was wont to complain of natures injustice, that
she had given so long a life unto Crows, Cic. l. 3. Tus^. p. 150.
and unto Stags, that could make no good use of it; and denied it unto men,
that could so profitably employ it. All which their complaints, are builded
upon this ground, that, by the shortness of our life, we are cut off, from
attayning unto any one single Art, in his full and true perfection. Whereof
Xenephon has given vsa very pregnant instance, but in a manuarie-Arte; yea,
and that, one of the meanest, to wit, the Art of Shooemaking; wherein, a man
would think, that there were not such deep skill, but might easily be
attained, by the shallowest skull. And yet, even in this mean Art, he there
observes, that no man was perfect in in all the works of it: but that, Calceos
facit, hic quidem, virorum; ille, m^lierum. Some are Shooemakers for men;
Xenoph. l. 8. De Paedia Cyri. p. 112.
and other some, for women. As it is with us in Taylers: that some are Men's,
and some are women's: and hardly one is excellent in both. And yet, maintains
himself well, by that his mutilated skill; though it be, in very deed, but a
piece of an Art. Yea and he glories greatly too, if he can excel, but even
in that: as Xenophon observes in the forealledged place. Satis est, etiam vna,
cuique, Ars, ad alendum; ac saepe, ne t^ta quidem vna. One Art is sufficient
to maintain every man: ye^, (...) that, oftentimes not a whole Art, but a
piece of one. So hard a thing is (...) full perfection, but of any one Art;
though it be but a mean (...)* As we may likewise see, in Platoes forenamed
instances of his Smithes, (...) his Wrights: how many several Arts there be,
under both these (...). Some, Goldsmiths; some, Braziers; some Blacksmiths;
some, Farriers; some, Locksmiths. And so likewise, in the other of these heads.
Some, Housewrights; some, Shipwrights; some, Cartwrights; and some, the loyners
of smaller works. And yet all of these, but one Art, of Wright-Craft; and one
Art, of Smiths-Craft: though no man can attain to be excellent in all of it.
Which Tullie also shows, even in his own Art of Rhetoric: and in those
six persons, whom in his Books, De Oratore, he made his Interlocutors:
Crassus, (...). l. 3. De Orat. p. 197.
and Antonius, Caesar, and Catulus, Cotta, and Sulpitius. Who had, every one of
them, a several form of eloquence of his own, and yet was, as good as
Nobody, in any of the kinds of any of his fellows. And the like he there
declares, by diverse instances, both of Greek, and Roman Orators. Who, though
they all professed the same Art of Rhetoric; yet could none of them attain,
unto all the graces of it. Nay, none indeed to many: but every one had his
own; an^ that was commonly but one. Suavitatem, Cic. ibid.
Isocrates; subtilitatem, Lysias; acumen, Hyperides; sonitum, Aeschines; vim,
Demosthenes habuit. Quis eorum non egregius? tam^n, quis, cuiusquam, nisi sui
similis? I socrates, had his sweetness; Lysias his slynesse; Hyperides his
sharpness, Aeschines, his voice, and Demosthenes, his force. Every one of
which Orators, were excellent, in their kinds: and yet none of them like any,
but only like themselves. And he exemplifi^th it, yet further, by diverse
other instances, among the Roman Orators. Grauitatem, Africanus; Lenitatem,
Lelius; asperitatem, Galba; profluens qu^ddam habuit Carbo, and canorum. Qui^
horum, non princeps, temporibus illis, fuit? and suo tamen quisque in genere
princeps. Africanus, had his gravity; Lalius, his mildness; Galba, his
austeritie; Carbo, his profluence. Every one of all those, were the principals
of their times: and yet every one excelled but only in his own kind. Whereby
it appears, that, even this one Art of Rhetoric though it be an art,
concluded within his definite terms; Canco^lis circumscripta scientia; Cic. l
1. De Orat. p. 132.
as even the Orator himself acknowledges: yet is a faculty, of so large and,
so wide an extension, that all the bounds of it, could never yet be reached, or
touched by any man: but that, every one thought it, to be glory enough for him,
if he could but attain to any reasonable portion: though in diverse others
parts, he had many great defects. Which Seneca also observes even in this
very Case. Senec. l. 3. Contro in pro^^. p. 74.
In ipsa oratione, quanvis vna materia sit; tamen ille, qui optime
argumentatur, negligentius narrat: ille, non tam been implet, quam praeparat.
In pleading (says he) though the Art be all the same; yet some man argues
excellently, who opens the cause, but negligently: another has the art to
stir up his hearers, unto diligent attention, and cannot hold them, when he
has done. And he gives, for an instance, his friend Passienus. Passienus
noster, cum coepit dicere, s^cundum principium, slatim fuga fit: ad epilogum,
omnes reuertuntur: media, tantum quibus necesse est, audiunt. Whenas Passienus
pleads, all his Auditors forsake him, when he has done his exordium: and yet
all return again, to hear his conclusion: but ^is middle part no man
hears, s^uing only those men, unto whom it belongs. Whereupon he there
concludes, that, Magna, and variares est eloquentia: (...) vlli sic indulsit,
vt tota contingeret. Sat^s foelix est, qui in aliqu^m ^ius p^rtem est receptus.
Eloquence is a faculty, of an exceeding great variety; which yet has never
been so favorable unto any, as to give it self unto him entirely, (...)
and wholly. That man is well, for his part, that can get but a piece of it. So
that (as Saint Hilary admonishes very wisely) Non tantum confidendum est, ^n
prudentia humana, vt perfectum se quis putet, sapere quod sap^at. No man should
be so confident, of his own high wisdom, as to conceit, that he has
attained unto a perfection. And, as it is in pleading: so is it also, in
disputing: Suid^s reports of Heraiscus: (...)
That he could excellently confirm a truth, but he was not able to convince a
lie. And Hierom reports of Lactantius: That he could be^^^r conf^^e a lie,
then confirm a truth. Vtinam tam nostra confirmar^ potuisset, quam facile
aliena destruxit.

Now, who is it, that thus narrowly confineth this faculty of the tongue,
which no man can ^ame, God is the only (...) 3. 8 (...) 50. 4. ^. x. 4. 10. etc.
but wildly runs throughout the whole Earth; but only God himself? He it
is (says the Prophet) that gives unto men, the ^ongue of the learned: and
that bestows eloquence, upon whom he pleases: as even he himself
professes, unto Moses. For when he detrected his going into Egypt, upon a
pretense, that he was not eloquent: God presently asked, Who it was, that had
given the mouth unto man? and who had made the deaf, and the dumb?
Insinuating thereby, that it was only he. And this we may evidently see to be
true, in those strange tongues and languages, which were by him bestowed, upon
the Apostles. For, when the Holy Ghost descended upon them, they began, every
one, to speak in a strange tongue: yet not, as they themselves were pleased;
but, as the Holy Ghost permitted. They spoke with other tongues, Act. 2. 4.
as the Spirit g^ue them utterance: he that gave them the gift, giving also
limits to it. So that, both their languages, and their utterance, were the
gifts of God: yea and limited unto them, in one and the same measure: but unto
some of them, in one; and unto others, in another. For, the Apostle Paul
professes, that he spoke with diuer^ tongues, 1. Cor. 14. 18.
more then all his others fellows. And, that we should not suppose, that he
got those tongues by study, as it is with us, he expressly ascribes that gift,
unto none other, but only unto God, as to the proper Author. To one, there is
given the diversity of tongues; to another, the interpretation of tongues; by
the very same Spirit. And therefore, he bese^cheth the Colossians, to pray to
God for him, Coloss. 4. 3.
that a door of utterance might be opened unto him. Whereby he plainly
acknowledged, that both the diversity of tongues, and the measure of
utterance, are the only gifts of God.

Yea, and the self same is likewise acknowledged, even by the very Heathen.
Among all those graces, which Homer affirms to be the gifts of God, and by
him to be diversely distributed unto men, the first of them, is, Eloquium, that
is, Homer l. 8. Odys. p. 53. B.
Eloquence of tongue. Y^a, and Pindarus also, in express terms,
acknowledges, God himself to be the only giver of Eloquence. A Dijs, and
prudentes, and fortes, and loquentes nascuntur.
Or wise, Pindar. in l^yth. Od. 1. p. 167.
or strong or eloquent,
Both one, and all, from God are sent.
Yea, and even profane Lucian (for all his scoffing spirit) yet affirms,
that, Eloquence is given us, (...)
by the Spirit. He says that men do, vim and potestatem dicendi, a Spiritu
acciper^. Meaning there, the Holy Ghost; though he would seem^ to deride it.
But God (that gives the tongue) ouer-ruled his tongue, and made it speak the
truth, against his will. Yea, and all the Orators themselves, both of the
Greeks, and Latins, do plainly confess the same: when, in the beginnings
of their solemn Oratio^s, they call upon God, to give them good success. And
so do Poets likewise: Lib. 1 Cap. 1. Sect. 3. H^siod Op^^ a and Dies p. 1. ^
(...) p 130.
when they invoke the Muses, and ^aine them to be their god Jupiters
Daughters: They plainly therein confess, that their faculty of Poetry, is
given them, by the gods. Deceived they are, in the particular, of ascribing
that gift, unto their false gods: but yet, right, in the general, of ascribing
it, to God: unto whom, it is, indeed, of right, (...) 2. Bib Pa^. 10. 1. p. 308.
to be ascribed. As Pacianus has plainly, and truly affirmed: Dic, oro,
^rater, Musae literas repererunt? Nonne per Dominum omnia? and a Deo omnia?
Tell me (o my good Brother) were the Muses, the first inuenters of learning? Is
it not from God, and by God, that a man knows every thing? Yes, surely. For
(as it is affirmed, in the book of Job) Though there be a spirit in a man; Io^
32. 8.
yet is it the inspiration of the Almighty, that gives him understanding. Then
it is not, either the spirit of the Muses, nor the spirit of his Masters, nor
yet his own private spirit, that teaches a man any thing: but it is only Gods
Spirit; 1. Ioh. 2. 27.
by his only anointing. Vnctio vos docet omnia: Ye need not (says S. John)
that any man should teach you, any thing; For the anointing teaches you all
things. John 16. 13.
He is the Spirit of truth: and he it is, that leads a man, into all truth;
as well in Philosophy, as he does in Divinity. And (as Plato well observes,
unto the same purpose) If any man be not taught by him, Plato. in Epinom p 918.
it is but in vain^, V^tur (...) Deus, ca^sis (...). Quod autem been s^ habet,
ipse in si^gulis agit. Plato in Timao p 723.
that he gives himself to learn. For, Nemo docebit, nisi Deus adiuuer it. No
man can ever teach us, if God himself do not help us. So that, all a man's
knowledge, in all the Arts forenamed, is only infused into him, by God, and
by the breathing of his spirit; sometimes, working with his labor: yea and
sometimes, without it. For it is generally true, which the Orator has
affirmed, that, Nemo, vir magnus, sine aliquo afflatu diuino, vnquam fuit. That
no man ever was excellent, Cic. l. 2. de Not. Deor. p. 225.
in any one Art, if we were not inspired, with a special spirit for it. So
then, it is God likewise, that limiteth unto every man, all his Arts. And it is
God likewise, that limiteth unto every Art, all his faculties. Plato in Ione.
p. 172.
For (as Plato truly teaches us) Cuique Arti, facultas a Deo tribuitur, certi
cuiusdam operis indicandi. God has given a faculty unto every Art, to judge
but of his own^ prop^r and definite work. Neque enimea, quae gubernatoria art
cognoscimus, medicina quoque percipiemus; neque etiam, quae medicina
perspiciemus, arch^ectura animadvertemus. We know not those things, by the Art
of the Pilot, that we do by Physic; nor yet those by Physic neither, that
we do by Architecture: but every Art is tied unto his own proper matter: and
is precisely limited, both to his Subiectum in quo, and to his Subiectum cirea
quod. And this Limiter, he affirms expressly to be God. And thus the
limiting and bounding, not one of all natural bodies, and their natural
powers; but also the limiting of all humane Arts, and Sciences, is the work of
God: who (as Iustine Martyr notes) does, Just. Mar^. l. Cont Dog^ata Arill.
To. 1. p. 280.
and Naturae, and Arti, finem ponere: give limits, both to Nature, and to Art.
Yea, and the contemplation of it, does lead us, by the hand, unto the
knowledge of a God: who is, both the Author, and the (...) of them, by the
direct confessions even of the very Heathens.

9 Th^n, (...)
much more, must needs the limiting of all spiritual graces be his, which
are immediately ^men, by his own most gracious hands. A^l which though (...)
^iueth very liberally, and bountifully: yet does he not give them, either all,
without measure; or unto all, in the same measure: but unto every one such a
proportion, as seems best unto his divine wisdom. As Saint Paul plainly
declares in the first of his Epistles unto the Corrinthians, where he han^leth
that Argument, 1 Co^. 12. 8. 9. etc.
ex professo. Unto one (says he) is given by the Spirit, the word of
Wisdom; to another the word of Knowledge, by the same Spirit: to another, is
given faith, by the same Spirit; and to another, the gift of ^^aling, by the
same Spirit; and to another, the operations of great works; and to another,
pr^phesies; and to another, the discerning of Spirits; and to another, the
diuer (...) of tongues; and to another, the interpretation of tongues. And all
these, works even the self same Spirit, distributing to every man severally,
a^ he will. Out of which place o^ Saint Paul^, we may observe these three
things. First, that none of all those graces, can be assumed of any man, as he
himself pleases: but they must be given to him, as their bestower pleases.
Secondly, that they are not a^l given unto any one man: but some of them unto
one, and some unto another; as God does all his works; Wisd. 11. 20.
in number, weight, and measure. Thirdly, that the measure of all those
Donatiues and Graces, is only at the absolute will of their Giver. But who is
then this Gi^^, that in such sort disposes those graces, as he pleases? That
also the same Apostle, a little before expresses. 1. Co^. 12. 4. 5. 6.
There are diuer s^ties of gifts, but the same Spirit. There are diuer s^ies of
administrations, but the same Lord. There are diu^rsities of operations, but
^od is the same, who works all in all. So then, the Limiter of all those
graces, is the Spirit; and that Spirit is the Lord; and that Lord is God. It is
the Spir^t of God, and God the Spirit, who is the limiter and disposer of all
spiritual gifts unto men, in that manner and measure, as he pleases to
bestow them. Russ^^. in Psalm. 73. To. 2. p. 175. ^.
(...) erim Deus gra^iam suam, quam dat Ecclesiae suae ad mensuram, says
^uffine. Non (...) proficit vnusquisque in virtute, and grat^a quantum ^upit,
sed quantum pl^et ei^d^uider, qui ^erminos pon^t. For, God limus all th^se
(...), which he bestones upon his Church: not giving to every man so much as he
de^^reth: but only so much, as he (...) Giver pleases. And this Tertulli^n
very notably confirms, Tertul. l. 5. c^nt. Marc. c. 8. P. 463
by comparing this p^ace of S. Paul the Apostle, with another like place of
Isaiah the Prophet: where this limiting and confining Spirit, Isa^. 11. 2.
is called by that Spirit: The Spirit of the Lord, the Spirit of Wisdom and
understanding; the Spirit of counsel and strength; the Spirit of knowledge,
and of the fear of the Lord. By a parallel of which two places, he
perempto^^y concludes, ^h^t the Apostle and Prophet, speak both of the same
Spirit. Compara species Apostoli, and Isaiae: Alij (inquit) datur, per
Spiritum, sermo s^^entie: statim and Es^^as, Spiritum s^p^entiae p^suit. Alij,
sermo sc^^^tiae: hic erit intelligentiae, and consilij. Aly fides in eodum
Spiritu: hic erit spiritus religionis, and (...) Domini. Alij^ donum
c^rationum; alij, virtutum: hic erit valentiae spiritus. Alij, prophetia; ali^,
distinctiones spirituum; alij, genera linguarum; alij, interpretat to
li^guarum: hic erit agn^tionis Spiritus. Compare the Apostle^ place with
Isaies. To one (says the Apostle) is giu^n by the Spirit, the word o^
wisdom: the Spirit (says the Prophet) is the spirit of wisdom. To another
(says the Apostle) is given the word of knowledge: the spirit (says the
Prophet) is the spirit of understanding, and couns^ll. To another (says the
Apostle) is given faith, by the same spirit: the spirit (says the Prophet) is
the spirit of Religion, an^ of the (...) of God. To another (says the Apostle)
is given the gift of healing; to another, the operation of great works, by the
same spirit: the spirit (says the Prophet) is the spirit of power and
strength. To another (says the Apostle) is given propheci^; to another, the
discerning of spirits, to another, the diuer^ity of tongues; to another the
interpretation of tongues: the Spirit (says the Proph^t) is the spirit of
knowledge. And he concludes with these words: Vides Apostolu^, and in
di^tributione facienda vnius spiritus, and in (...) interpretand^, Prophet^
^^^nsp^rantem. Thus you see, that the Apostle, both in distributing the
several gifts of one and the same Spirit, and in specifying by interpretation,
who was that one Spirit, does fully conspire and agree with the Prophet. And so
indeed, they do^^ speaki^g both of them the same things in differing words:
yea, and sometimes not in diff^ring words neither* but in the very same words.
So then, it is none other but the holy Spirit of God, that is the giver and
distribut^r of all spiritual g^aces. Which, as he severally dispenses unto
several persons; so does he likewise, in several manners. As we way evidently
see, in all the forenamed instances. This Spirit distributed Wisdom and
Knowledge, unto many: but in such measure as unto Solomon, 1. Kin* 9. 1^.
not unto any. It distributed faith unto all the beleeu^rs: but yet, it
distributed it in differing measures. The C^nanitish woman is commended, Man.
15. 28. 16. 8.
for a great faith. The Apostles themselves are reproo^ed for a little one. It
distributed unto diverse, the power of working miracles: but it distributed it
unto them in differing proportions. The rest of the Apostles healed but where
they were present: ^ct. 19. 12.
but the Apostle Paul, even where he was absent: The rest, but by their bodily
touching; Act. 5. 15. 2. King 13. 21. (...) 48. 14. Number. 12. 6. 7. 8. Act. 2.
4. 1. Co^. 14. 18.
but P^ter, by his only shadowing. The rest of the Prophets, but only whilst
they lived: but Elish^, after he was dead. It distributed unto all the
Prophets, the high gift of prophesying: but in such measure, as unto Moses, it
gave it unto none of them. It distributed the gift of tongues, unto all the
Apostles: but yet unto Saint Paul, more largely then to them all. Thus the
holy Spirit of God is both the only giver of all spiritual gifts, unto men;
and the only distributer of them all among men; and the only limiter of the
same in all men. And thus, the limitation of all finite things, both of
natural bodies, and of their natural powers; and of artificial ^aculties;
and of spiritual graces; do all of them conclude, That there is a God: unto
whom, and to none other, that work can be ascribed: And this, both by the
consequence of natural reasons; and also, by the testimony of the weightiest
authoriti^s* both humane and divine. Which is the first Metaphysicall
Consideration.

CHAP. 2.
The immensitie of men's appetites does show, T^ere is a God. 2. The immensitie
of natural appetites. 3. (...) appetites. 4. The immensitie of intellectual
or spiritual app^tites. 5. The immensitie of Desire. 6. The immensitie of
Anger. 7. The immensitie of will. 8. And yet God is able to fill them all.

THe second Metaphysicall consideration, from whence we may collect, that There
is a God, is taken, from a place of a contrary Nature unto the former. For, as
the former concluded it, from the limited and bounded circumscription of all
finite things; which cannot be the work of any other Agent, but only of God:
so this concludes it, from the unlimited and unbound extension of the
Appetites of Man; which can have none other sufficient and replenishing Object,
but only God. The defining and circumscribing of all finite things, does show,
There is a God; by whom they have been limited. And the dilating and extending
of man's infinite appetites, does show There is a God; by whom they must be
filled. For an infinite appetite, cannot be replenished, but by an infinite
Object. So that, though the Soul of a man, have many diverse powers and
faculties in it, which represent unto us, diverse notable images of Gods divine
properties (as shall, God willing, be declared in a special Treatise intended
to that purpose: Viz. lib. 4.
) yet is there none of them all, which repr^senteth Gods Infinity, but only
that one faculty, which by Philosophers is called (...), that is, the burning
Appetite, and Desire of the Soul. Which is a thing so spacious, and in some
sort so infinite, that it cannot be filled with any finite Object: as the
Prophet Habakuk has expressly declared: who, in this respect, compares it unto
Hell, and unto Death, Habak. 2. 5.
that cannot be satisfied. From whence, it must needs follow, that, seeing no
finite Object is able to fill up that gaping Chasma, and insatiable gulf of
the Souls appetite; that therefore there must needs be some infinite Object
provided for it; Pro 30. 15.
which is able to fill it, until it cry, Enough.

For (as Aquinas well observes) Quael^bet potentia appetit obiectum sibi
conueniens. Aqui^. 1. Qu^^st. 78. Art. 1. 3. p. 168.
Every faculty, in nature, requires such an Object, as is fitting unto it.
And therefore Appetitus and Appetitum, must be fitted, as just together, as
Locus and Locatum: or else there should be Vacuum in rerum natura: yea, Arist.
lib 1. Eth. c. 1. To. 2. p. 604.
and Vanum too. For, if the appetite be never filled, and never attain his
end; then (as Aristotle observes) Inanis, and vanus erit Appetitus: Our
appetite shall both be vacuus, and vanus. And therefore, that Nature, which
has made the appetite so large, if it had not appointed some fitting and
proportionated Object unto it, whereby it may be filled; it has framed and
fashioned it so large in vain, and transgrest in her proportion. But, that,
Nature has not done. She has made, in all her works, neither vacuum, nor
va^um: Arist. Prob. Sect. 8. (...). 9. To. 2. p. 461.
She has made nothing in vain, as Aristotle in plain terms expressly
affirms. For first, for vacuum; he says, that, vacuum esse, Naturae ratio
non patitur: The very nature of Nature, will not suffer any Vacuum. And
secondly, (...). l. 1. De Coel^ ^. 4. 10. ^. p. 556.
for Vanum; he expressly says again, that, Deus and Natura, nihil faciunt
frustra: That neither God nor Nature, does any thing in vain. But the
largeness of the appetite, should in vain have been created, if there were
not in all nature, some Object to fill it. Which, no finite Object can possibly
perform. And therefore, it follows, There must needs be some Infinite. And
that can be nothing, Aquin* 1. Quest. ^. Art. 2. p. 14.
but only God: as Aqui^as plainly proves.

2 Now, look into all the several appetites of Man, of what nature soever;
and you shall find them all, Natural Appetites are insatiable.
to be of an infinite, and insatiable nature: and such, as that none of them
can be filled, with that ordinary Object, which, in common understanding, is
appropriated unto it: but expects, yea and exacteth, some other, of a more
extended, and infinite, nature; before it can be filled, (...) p. 127. (...)
Quaest. 60. Art^. ^. ^. 129.
and thoroughly contented. Aquinas divides the general Appetite, into these
three special kinds: that, Some of them, be natural; Some, sensible; and
some intellectual, or Spiritual. In all which, we may see an infinite
auiditie: and such, as cannot be satisfied, with any finite Object. Let me give
you, in every head, some Examples, to illustrate it.

And first, for Natural Appetites: Aristotle, in one place, gives instance,
of three of them; Arist. l. 3. Eth. c. 11. To. 2. p. 640.
which are, the most common, and familiar unto all men. And they be, the
Appetites of Eating, of Drinking, and of Sleeping. And yet, none of them all,
is able to content the appetite of the soul. As King Solomon, nominatim,
gives instance, in all of them. For eating and drinking; he expressly
affirms of them, that though all the labor of a man, be only for his mouth;
Eccles. 6. 7.
yet that (for all that) the soul is not filled. Whereby he insinuates, that
though the Belly may be filled, both with eating and drinking; yet the appetite
of the Soul, is not filled, with either of them. And we see his observation
to be verified, even to sense, in the daily practice of Gluttons, and
Drunkards: who lose not their appetites, with the filling of their stomachs;
but, even then, when their Bellies are distended, and full; yet their appetites
are ieiune, and empty; and still desire more, even when they have too much:
yea, and even provoking their oppressed Stomachs, to eat yet more, with their
sawces; and to drink yet more, Deuteronomy. 29. 19. Isai. 5. 11. Plaut^ in Menech.
act. 1. S^e. 2. p. 421.
with their salt^ meats so, adding thirst unto drunkenness: rising up early,
to follow it, and sitting up late, at it: as the Prophet complayneth, Yea,
even, ad diurnam stellam matutinam potantes: as the Comicke speaks: drinking
down the Evening st^rre, and drinking up the Morning star; making so their
ipsum viuere, to be nothing else, but Bibere. Nec sitis est extincta prius,
Ovid. l. 7. M^^ tam. p. 28.
quam Vita, bibendo.
His Thirst, yea and his Life, in drink,
Were quenched together, and extinct.
As though they had purposely been made, for nothing, but only, for the
actions of eating, and drinking. And therefore Aristotle very truly calls
them: Furentes circa ventrem: Men out of their wits, with the pampering of
their bellies: Arist. l. 3 Ethi^. c. 11. To. 2. p. 640 Arist. ibid. c. 10.
giving a notable instance, in the Glutton Polyxenus; who wished, that his
neck were as long as a Cranes, to prolong his pleasure, in eating, and
drinking.

And yet, Haggai. 1. 6.
that curse of God does continually pursue them, that though they eat much,
yet they have not enough; and though they drink much, yet they are not filled.
Their stomachs may be filled: but so are not their appetites. For (as Solomon
truly notes) Vente^ impiorum, est insaturabilis: The righteous eats, to the
satisfying of his soul: Pro. 13. 25.
but the belly of the wicked ever wants. And so it is likewise, in the third
of his instances: the appetite of sleeping: which is, as insatiable, as any of
the rest, if a man do give himself unto it: as Solomon also observes in it:
who, so elegantly characterizeth the drowsie-headed Slug gards, that no
Character in Theophrastus, is more graphically described. Which he has done,
in the form of a short Colloquie or Dialogue, by an excellent (...). Wherein
first, he rowseth him up, and calls unto him, to wake him out of his
slothful and heavy sleep. How long will thou sleep, o Sluggard? P^o. 6. 9.
10. 11.
and when will thou arise out of thy sleep? Then, he brings in the Sluggard,
very earnestly entreating him, that he would not molest him, but yet a while
permit him, to have a little further sleep, a little longer slumber, a little
more folding of the hands together. And finally, he plainly threateneth him,
that if he continued in that Lethargy of his sleeping, his poverty would
presently overtake him, as a Traveler; and seize upon him, like an armed
Soldier. And yet would not all this serve the turn. He was so deeply
possessed with his veternus, and sleeping sickness, as if he had been
metamorphosed into a very Dormouse. So that, this drowsy humor likewise, is
not diminished, by feeding it: but rather (like a dropsy) it is the more
increased.

3 And, Sensible appetites be ins^tiable.
as it is in natural appetites: so is it, in sensible appetites too. They
cannot be satisfied, no more then the former. But even, when they have what
they would, they yet still call for more. And this also, King Solomon
illustrateth, by two direct instances; in Seeing, and in Hearing. The eye
(says he) is not filled with seeing, Eccles. 1. 8.
nor the ear with hearing. The Eye, I grant, may be wearied with seeing: but
filled it cannot be. As Musaeus expreslie notes: Intuens defessus sum;
satietatem non inveni aspiciendi.
My sight is wearied out with looking on; Musaeus de Herone, p. 342.

And yet my self, satiety have none.
For, Pro. 27. 20.
as the Grave and Destruction cannot be filled, so cannot the eyes of a man be
satisfied: says Solomon again, in another place. And so likewise the Ear. It
may be wearied with hearing: but yet it cannot be filled neither. As Socrates
likewise expressly observes. Aures suscipiunt voces omnes: nunquam vero
implentur. Xenophon, l. 1. de sact. Socrat. p. 166.
Our ears do receive all manner of voices: and yet be there none of them, that
be able to fill them. And the like may be said, of all the rest: as I partly
have showed before, in the Taste: and that, both in our eating, and also in our
drinking. Whereof Tully has given us a very notable instance, in the Persian
King Xerxes: who, having tired himself out, with all ancient, and known
pleasures, propounded great rewards unto the inuenters of new: whereof when he
had tasted; yet could he not with all of them, be contented. Praemium proposuit
ci, Cic. l. 5. Tusc. p 170.
qui invenisset nouam voluptatem; qua ipsa, non suit contentus.

4 But in a man's intellectual, All intellectual appetites are insatiable.
or spiritual appetites, (for so, in a large sense, I account of all, which
any way have their seat in the Soul) the same may a great deal more
evidently be showed. Them, Aristotle reduces, unto these three heads:
Cupiditas, Ira, Voluntas: Desire Anger, and Will. All of them, Arist. l. 1.
Mag. Moral. c. 13. To* 2. p. 931.
having their place in the soul: and yet every one, in a several part of the
soul. For, whereas the Soul is divided into three parts, or powers, or
faculties: (...)
Concupiscibilis, Irascibilis, and Rationalis: in every one of these several
faculties, there be placed, by nature, their several appetites. Cupidit is, in
Concupisc^bili; Ira, in Irascibili; and Voluntas, in Rationali: In the
Concupiscibl^ part or faculty of the soul* is seated the appetite of Desire;
in the Iras^^^le part, the appetite of Anger; and in the reasonable, the
appetite of Will. So that (as, in the same place, he concludes) Si anima
diuidatur in tres parts; in earum vn^ qu^que inerit appetit^^: If the Soul be
divided into his three parts; you shall find, that every part has his own
proper appetite. Yea, and all of them too, in their nature, to be infinite.

5 And first, The (...) of a man's desire.
for Cupiditas, or Desire: there be four principal Objects, about which it is
chiefly occupied: namely Power, Honor, Riches, and Pleasure. In all which, it
bewrays it self to be infinite, and such as cannot be contented and
satisfied. Whereby we may see it plainly verified, which Aristotle has
observed, that, Cupiditatis natura est in finita: that A man's desire is of an
infinite nature. (...)


For first, as concerning Power; (...)
if a man do but once set his appetite upon it, he has left himself no power
to cast limits about it: but it will grow to be so infinite, that all the
power of the world will not be able to content it. As we may evidently see, in
Alexander the Great. Whose appetite of Power, was so infinitely great, that
when he heard, Democritus to hold, There were many Worlds; he fell into great
sorrowing, because that, as yet, he had not conquered one. Aelian l 4. var.
Hist. c. 2. 9. p. 429.
Whereby it is evident, that all the power of one world, could not satisfy his
appetite, though he might have had it all. Nay, though there had been as many
worlds, as Democritus dreamed of, though he might have had all of them, yet
would they not all have contented him. For, as the Tragical Poet has truly
observed, Auidis, duidis, natura parumest.
To such as are ambitious, and so greedy, Senec. in Herc. Oe^^o. Act. 2. S^e.
2. p. 77.

All Nature self does seem to be too needy.
Which Petronius Arbiter very notably exemplifieth, in the insatiable ambition
of the Romans. Orbem iam totum, victor Romanus h^bebat:
Qua mare, Petron. Arbit. (...). vet. Poet. p. 393.
qua terrae, qua sidus currit vtrumque
Nec satiatus erat. --
The conquering Romans got into their hand,
The whole worlds compass; even as far as Land,
Or any Sea^, or Heaven it self extended*
And yet this Nation could not be contented.
For, H^bakuc 2. 5. Li^ie decad^. l. 1. p. 71.
the ambition of the proud inlargeth it self, like Hell; and is like unto
Death, that cannot be satisfied: as the Prophet observes. Yea and Liuie also
not obscurely insinuates. Animus hominis insatiabilis est, eo quod fortun^
spondet. The mind of a man, will not be satisfied with any thing, if fortune
do still promise, to bestow more upon him. Neither was this the particular
humor of those men forenamed; whose greatness of ambition, might easily be
bred in them, by the greatness of their Fortune: but it is the general humor
of all men, be they never so mean. For (as Isocrates very truly affirms)
Vniuer si mortales, Isocrates Orat. de Pace. p. 391.
in eo elaborant, vt plus alijs possint. It is the common desire and endeavor
of all men, to have prerogative of some greater power, then there is in other
men. Insomuch, that every man, be he never so good, yet desires a power, if it
be but to do evil. And though he never mean to use it; yet he desires to
have it. -- et qui nolunt occidere quenquam, (...) 10. p. 45 b.

Posse volunt. --
says the Poet. who have to hurt, nor heart, nor Will;
Yet wish ^ have power, even to kill.
So Pilate, though he had no intention to hurt Christ; yet boasted unto him,
that he had power to do it. 10. 19. 1^.
Know thou not that I have power to crucify thee, and have power to loose
thee? And yet he used all means to save him. Yea, and ^^ban, Genesis 31. 29.
though his power was by God himself restrained, yet he boasted that he had
it. To conclude, a man has not less power over himself in any thing
whatsoever, then when he once fixes his appetite upon Power.

And so it is likewise, Am^ition o^ Honor 1. insatiable.
in the next Head of Honor. If a man do chance, to set his desire upon that,
it grows, by and by, so infinite, that he cannot be contained within any
bounds and limits, neither of Reason, nor of Duty; no, nor of his own Safety.
As we may see by examples, in all these several heads. For the first of them.
The bounds of Reason, how grossly they oft^ntimes transgressed by ambition,
Cic. l. 1. (...) p. 113. (...)
the Orator has pointed us, to a notable instance, in the Heathen
Philosophers. Of whom, though there were diverse so rigid, and stern, as to
publish whole Books in contempt of Vaine-glor^e, yet was the taste of that
Vainglory so delightful to themselves, as that in the same books, they
published their own names. Which manifestly shows, that howsoever they
outwardly would seem to contemn it, yet they inwardly affected it. So they
affected glory in writing against Glory; and showed themselves vain, even in
calling it Vain. Which folly they would never have committed so evidently
against their outward profession, but that their Reason was dazeled, and
blinded by ambition.

And the like may be seen in the ambition of old men: who (contrary to all
reason) are as greedy of Honor, in their decrepite old age, when they must by
and by forgo it; as they were ever in their youth, when they might long enjoy
it. (...) l. 2. p. 124.
For (as Thucidides well observes) Sola dulcedo Gloriae, ^en senescit. The
only humor of ambition, does never grow feeble, or old in any man: but even
in those that are the oldest, and most decayed men, yet their ambition is still
young. Yea, and he reprooueth in the same place, that usual proverb, as a
very false position: that, In senecta, lucrari magis delectat, quam honor
affici: That all men, in their age, are rather delighted with gain, then with
fame; with riches, then with honors. This he holds to be false. And we may
see the truth of it, Plut in vita Mary To. 2. p. 94.
in old Caius Marius: whose ambition sprouted green, when his body was dry and
withered, and in effect, half dead. Which manifestly shows, that though old
men's experience do teach them many other things; yet that this is a lesson
which it can never teach them: To set down a stint unto their own ambition.
So far does it transgress all the lines and bounds of Reason.

And so does it of duty too: yea, and that in a very high degree. Whereof two
Tragicks have given us two notable instances, in two ambitious brothers, or
rather indeed monsters, E^eocles and Polinices; who were both of them so
inflamed with the rage of ambition, and carried so violently through all the
bars of duty, justice and virtue, that Euripides brings in one of them with
this execrable sentence: Nam si violandum est ius, (...) 387.
Regnandi gratia,
Violand^^n est: alijs rebus, pictatem colas.
If Justice may be violate, for any cause at all,
Then surely, for a Kingdoms sake, this violence may fall.
In all things else, keep Piety inuiolated you shall.
Thereby plainly declaring, that the ambition of honor is more violent then
any other: breaking all the bonds of duty, both to justice and piety. Which yet
in his brother, may be seen much more plainly. For him Seneca brings in
with another sentence, as impious as his brothers was, and a great deal worse:
-- Pro regno velim
Patriam, (...). 4. Sce. 4. P. 286.
Denates, coniugem stammis dare.
Imperia, precio quolibet, constant ben^.
I could well, for a Kingdom, be content,
To see my country, gods, and wi^e ybrent.
All cost to get a Kingdom, is well spent.
Whereby it plainly appears, how immoderate the desire of glory and Honor
is: contemning all the bonds of all the strictest duties that are between
either God, or Man, and us.

And, as ambition leads men, to transgress and violate all the bounds of
duty: so does it oftentimes, to transgress the bounds likewise, even of their
own Safety. Whereof, Homer has left a notable example, in the ambition of
Achilles: Hom. l. 9. Iliad. p. 101. B.
who, having the condition propounded unto him; either of a short life, with
great glory; or of a long one, with little; he was so ambitious of praise and
commendation, that he preferred the short life before the long. But Dion
Nic^eus has left us a more notable example, in Agrippina, the Empress: Dion
Nic^us, in Ncron^. p. 147.
who being foretold, that if Nero her son ever came to be Emperor, he
would surely kill her: yet she was so ambitious of being mother to an
Emperor, that she presently answered: A (...): Let him be a murderer, so he
first be an Emperor. Thus for the love of Vaineglory, she despised her own
safety. But Laertius has left us a most notable example, Laert* in vi^d
Empedoclis p. 295.
in the Philosopher Empedocles: Who, having by the cure of a dangerous disease
(which was held for incurable) obtained great credit, and by certain vain
people, hyperbolizing his fact, being palpably flattered; that he could never
(sare) have done it, if he had not been a god; he grew by their flattery,
into that madness of conceit, as to hope, that he might so art it, as indeed
to be taken and believed for a god. And so, sleeping one night in the open
fields, with diverse of his neighbors, he s^ily stole away, and cast himself
secretly into the mouth of burning Aetna; hoping by that his sudden dispearing,
and never being heard of among men again, to have confirmed the growing
opinion of his godhead. But he was greatly deceived: for the violence of the
fire casting back again his pantofle, discovered the fraud, and bewrayed
which way he went, and so was he foully frustrated of the opinion of his
Godhead, which now he had a great deal too dearly bought. So infinite and
insatiable was his ambition of Glory; that in comparison of it, he despised his
own safety. Yea, and Horace is of opinion, that if it were yet to do, he
would do it again. He would again destroy his life, upon hope of that
foolish glory, which he sought for in his death: -- Deus immortalis haberi,
(...)

Dum cupit Empedocles, ardentem frigidus Aetnam
Insiluit --
Nec semel hoc fecit, nec si retractus erit, iam
Fiet homo, etc ponet famosae mortis amorem.
While proud Empedocles would a God, immortal seem to be,
And so be thought, into the flames, of Aetna leapeth he.
Nor this so done, the same recalled, and made to draw new breath;
The Man would not depose the love, of such a famous death.
Thus unquenchable is the thirst of ambition, (...) p 379.
if it once be thoroughly grounded, and rooted in any man. And the like Suidas
reports of Heraclides Ponticus.

And, The desire of (...)
as a man's appetite is infinite after Honor: so is it no less, after Riches,
and Treasure. For, if he once do settle his desire upon it, the Riches of the
whole world, will be too little for it. Nec Croesi fortuna vnquam, Iuuen.
Saratyr. 14. p. 67. b.
nec Persica regna,
Sufficient animo, --
says the Heathen Poet. Nor all King Croesus wealth, nor Persian Kingdoms can
Suffice the greedy mind, of th'auaricious man.
And therefore (says Lucilius) Qu^ credimus, (...) p. 734.
divitias vllas animum expl^re posse? How can we believe, that the abundance
of any Riches, should be able to satiate a covetous man's mind? Abundance of
Riches, may well, inflare animum: but, it can never, implere: It may well be
able, to puff up the mind (for so the Apostle Paul insinuates it does) but
yet, for all that, it can never ^ill it. 1. Tim. 6. 17. Cic. 1. Parad. p. 421.
For, ^ Nunquam expletur, nec satiatur cupiditatis sitis, says the Roman
Orator: The covetous man's thirst, cannot possibly be quenched. But it grows
upon him, like the thirst of a Dropsy, which is the more increased, by
drinking, to extinguish it. For, Crescit indulgens sibi dirus hydrops, ^^rat.
l. 2. (...). Od. 2. p. 28. a.

Nec sitim pellit, --
says another Poet. This cursed Dropsy, by ind^^lgence, grows
To such a thirst, as no repelling knows.
No, nor replenishing neither: though, even the covetous man himself, at the
first, Arist. l. 2. Po^t. c. 5. To. 2. p. 773.
thinks it may. For (as Aristotle observes) Primo, dicunt pauca sufficere,
atque minima: mox vero, vbi illa sunt consecuti, plura semper appetunt quousque
in infinitum procedant. At the first, themselves imagine, that a few things
will content them: but, when they have gotten them, they still seek for more,
after them: until at last their appetite grows in them to be infinite. And
so likewise, Aristophanes: Nec quanquam hominum [Pluti] caepit satietas:
Aristoph. in Plut. Act. 1. Sce. 2. p. 32.

Nam si quis acci piat talenta tredecim,
Auidius contendit parare sedecim.
Si and hec confece rit, quadraginta appetit.
And so is infinitun. There never yet was man, with wealth so well content,
But though he had attayn'd to treasure competent,
He yet would strive still more his state for to augment.
For, as the fore-alledged Poet has truly observed: Crescit amor nummi,
Iuuenal. Satyr. 14. p. 63. b.
quantum ipsa pecunia crescit;
Et minus hanc optat, qui non habet. --
The love of wealth increases still, as wealth does self improve;
And he loves Riches ever least, that has the least to love.
For, he that most loves them, is always least able to be satisfied with
them. Cupit hic gazis implere famem; Senec. in He^c. Oetao. Act 2. Sce 2. p. 77.

Nec tam^n omnis plaga gemmiferi
Sufficit Istri, nec tota sitim
Lydia vincit,
says the Tragical Poet. A man, with Treasure, seek's to stake
That hunger, which does Riches rake.
But all the gemm's of Ister shore,
Nor all the gold of Lydia's store,
Can fill the greedy Appetite.
It is a thing, so infinite.
For (as Solomon affirms of it) He that loves money, Eccle. 5. 10.
he will never be satisfied with money. Never. Take himself for an example of
his own position: yea, and that, a very good one. It is reported of him, that
he had congested and amassed together such infinite moneys, that, Silver, in
his time, was as common, 1. Kin, 10. 21.
as Stones. 1. Kin, 10. 27.
And yet, for all this his unmeasurable store, 1. Kin, 10. 22.
he still had a desire of getting more and more. To with end, he still
continued his new-begunne Trade, unto the land of Ophyr: furnishing out a new
Navy, every third year. Which is a manifest Argument, that his appetite, with
all that he had was not satisfied. For, as the Poet has very well collected:
-- nondum impleui gremium, Iuuenal. Satyr. 14. p. 67. a.
si panditur vltra.
He has not filled his lapp, that still does hold it open.
Yea, and (as before I noted, of the appetite of Honors) that it breaks all
the duties both unto God, Senec. l. 4. Not. Quaest. c. 18. p. 84.
and Man: so does Seneca set the same note, upon the appetite of Riches. Per
hominum Deorumque iras, ad aurum ibitur. We run madding after Gold,
contemning all the anger both of men and God. Whereupon Virgil truly notes: --
quid non mortalia pectora cogis,
Auri sacra fames? Virgil. l. 3. Aeneid. p. 166.

Of cursed Gold the hunger. starued love,
What is it, whereto man's heart it cannot move?


And, The desire of Pleasure (...) insatiable.
as insatiable as is the desire of Treasure: so insatiable, is also, the desire
of Pleasure. For, if a man do but once set his appetite upon it, let him
ingurgitate himself never so deep into it; yet shall he never be able to fill
his desire with it. (...) p. 51.
For, as Aristotle also in this head observes: Voluptatum appetitio, est
insatiabilis. There is nothing whatsoever, that is able to satisfy the
appetite of pleasure. And Tully likewise, unto the same purpose. Vnum n^scio,
quomodo possit, qui luxuriosus est, finitas habere cupiditates. This one thing
(says he) I cannot understand: How a man, that is intemperate, should have his
desire and concupiscence finite. Whereof, Eusebius yields an instance, in the
Emperor Maxentius, (...) c. 27. p. 134.
of whom, he reports, that, Quamuis infinitas fere, liberas and ingenuas
mulieres, per vim, flagitiose violasset; nullo tamen pacto, poterat
intemperantem and effusam animi sui libidinem explere. Although he had defiled
an innumerable number of matrons and freewomen; yet was he never able to
satisfy the appetite of his filthy unmeasurable lust. And the same we may see
likewise, in Messalina the Empress: a wonder, nay, a monster, for her
following of filthy pleasure. For, she was so prodigiously given unto it, that
she might truly say, as it is in the Poet, In me, Horat. l. 1. carm. Od 19. p.
17. a.
tota ruens Venus,
Cyprum deseruit.
That Venus had forken her famous kingdom Cypres,
And wholly placed her seat, in this lascivious Empress.
For she, because she would even glut her self with fleshly delights, conveyed
her self once into the common Stews, and there enjoyed her filthy pleasure,
until she was never the nearer. Her lewd and filthy appetite was still as
greedy of it, as it was before. So that, at her parting, she was forced to
complain that she had wasted, and wearied her self, in vain: being, as that
Poet notes, but only, -- Lassata vitis, Iuuenal. Satyr. 6. p. 22.
nondum satiata --
Not filled, only tired, with pleasure she desired.
Neque enim vnquam finem inueniet libido: Cic. l. 5. Tusc. p. 170.
says the Roman Orator. Plato in Philebo p. 90.
For lust is an Appetite, that can never find an end: It being, indeed,
infinite; as Plato affirms of it. Voluptas est infinita, eiusque generis,
quod nec principium, nec medium, nec finem in seipsa, suapte natura, continet,
aut aliqundo continebit. The appetite of Pleasure is infinite; and of that
nature, that it knows nor beginning, nor middle, nor ending in it self; nor
does, nor can, nor will content, or contain it self.

6 And, The desire of Revenge, is insatiable.
as our appetite is insatiable in matters of Concupiscence; which is Aristotle's
first head: so is it also, in matter of Revenge; which is his second head. A
thing so sweet unto our corrupt nature, that, as it is observed, by the
Heathen Philosopher: Seneca in Prouerbijs p. 278.
Inimicum vlcisci, vitam accipere est alteram: For a man to be revenged of his
enemy, seems as sweet as to receive a second life given him. As it does
evidently appear, in King Nabuchodonozer: who, having conceived a grievous
displeasure, against some of his Neighbors, Judith ^. 1, 2, 3.
he calls out his Captains, and gives them a charge, to go out, and to
revenge him upon all the whole earth, and to destroy all flesh, that would not
obey the command of his mouth. Thereby, plainly declaring, that, as the
Tragic notes, -- Arma non servant modum, (...) 3. p. 17.

Revenge extreme, can hold no mean^.
But, as in another place, he describes it. It is, -- Nulla dolor Contentus
p^ena; querens supplicia horrida, Seneca in Herc. (...). Act. 2. S^c. 1. p. 65.

In^^gitata, infanda; Iunonem docens
Quid odia vale^nt; nesciens iras^t satis.
Revenge is such a grief, as no pain can content,
But seek's out horrid, strange, and uncouth punishments,
It teaches Juno rage, and angers rudiments.
As we may evidently see, in those immane cruelties, which diverse have
exercised, even upon men's dead bodies. A notable example of which barbarous
inhumanity, there is recorded unto us, by Tully, in those notable immanities,
which Dolabella exercised, upon the body of Trebonius: of whom he thus writes.
Suam insatiabilem crud^litatem exercuit, Ci^. Philip. 11. p. 605.
non solum in viuo, sed etiam in mortuo. Atque in eius corpore lacerando, atque
vexando, cum animum satiare non posset, oculos pauit suos. He exercised all his
insatiable butchery, both upon him alive, and upon his dead body: seeking to
feed his eyes, by renting him in pieces, seeing he could not fill his
appetite, Herodotus in Thalia p, 190.
with any cruelty of punishment. And, Herodotus reports the like, of
Cambises: who so hated King Amasis, that he caused his dead body to be taken
out of his grave, Deinde, verberibus caedi, ac vellicari, and stimulis pungi,
omnique contumelia insestari: Then to be lasht, and drawn, Platina in vita
Sergy terij. p. 149.
and stuck, and stabbed, and infested with all reproaches, and unworthy usage.
And the like cruelty, did Pope Sergius practice upon Formosus: whom he dug
out of his grave, and iudicially condemned, as if he had been alive: and cast
out into Tyber, as unworthy of any Sepulcher.

7 And, The appetites of a man's will are insatiable.
as it is in matters of Revenge; which is Aristotle's second head: so is it
also, in matters of Will; which is his third head. Which will, though it belong
unto the reasonable part of the Soul; yet does it oftentimes, so far exceed
all the lines and bounds of reason, that Aristotle perstringeth it, for this
absurdity, that it oftentimes desires things of mere impossibility. Arist. l.
1. Mag. moral. c. 18. To. 2. p. 933.
Voluntas, eorum etiam est, quae fieri non possunt. Our will and affection
reaches oftentimes to such things, as cannot possibly be done. We oftentimes
desire those things, that are unlawful: yea, and sometimes we desire those
things, that are impossible. And he gives this for instance; That we desire
to be immortal; although both God and nature has made us purely mortal.
Neither does our will only transgress the prescript lines of reason, in
desiring of those things, which, in themselves, are unlawful: but also, in
desiring even of those things, which are lawful: when we desire them, in
unlawful either manner, Ovid. l. 10. Metam. p. 399.
or measure.

As for example, the love of Children unto their Parents, is both natural and
lawful. And yet, the love of Mirrha unto her Father, was wicked and unlawful:
Arist. l. 7. Eth. c. 3. To. 2. p. 690.
because she loved him, in an unlawful manner. And so was likewise, the love
of Satyrus, unto his: because he loved him in an unlawful measure. Whereupon,
he was called Patris amator: The lover of his Father: as it were, by a
nickname. And so is it likewise, on the other side too: when the love of the
Parents is too great unto their Children; 1. Sam. 2. 29.
as Niobe's was to hers. A vice, which, in old Eli, even God himself
reproves. Thou honor thy Children, above me.

Now, Arist. vbi supra.
these excesses, in our intellectual appetites, does Aristotle condemn, for
mere exuperances, and vices. So that, these intellectual appetites, are
oftentimes no less excessive and immoderate, then either the natural, or the
sensible. Let me give yet one instance more, of a truly intellectual obi^ct,
exactly adequated and proportioned unto the intellectual appetite. And that is
Learning, and Knowledge. Upon which, if a man do but once set his mind, it
carries him after it, with so infinite an appetite, that the more he gets
of it, the more he still desires it; and yet can never be filled with it.
Ecclus. 24. 21.
For (as Ecclesiasticus observes of it) He that eats of wisdom, shall have
the more hunger; and he that drinks of her, shall have the more thirst. A
thing, which even the very Heathen have likewise observed, of Knowledge, and
Learning. That though it be, of all things the most sweet and pleasant: yet
that it cannot possiby either glut, or fill the Appetite: Nec poteris artibus
animum saturare, Theognis. p. 7^0.
nec sapientia explere: says Theognis. Thou can not glut thy soul with
learning; thou can not fill it with wisdom and understanding. Non enim
possunt Praeceptores, quemadmodum qui in vas infundunt, implere mentem* says
Philo Iudaeus: Philo Iudaeus l. De sacrificio Abel. p. 198.
No master can fill the mind of his Scholar, as men do use to fill a vessel
with water. For there is no part of learning, that can fill the Soul, though
there be no part of it, but that greatly delights it. Tullie notes of
Philosophy: that there was in Cato, inexhausta aviditas legendi, quae satiari
non poterat: There was in him, an insatiable auidity of reading, which could
not be satisfied, Cic. l. 3. De Fin. p. 67.
Whom therefore he calls, Plutar. lib. Non posse suauiter viui secundum
Epicurum. To. 2. p. 155.
Helluonem Librorum; A deuourer of Books. Cic. l. 2. De Not. Deor. p. 216.
And Plutarch observes the same of Histories. Quae etiamsi animum oblectant;
tamen perpetuum veritatis studium non explent: Though Histories do much
delight and please the mind; yet can never replenish that infinite auidity, end
desire of the truth, which in them the soul seeks. And Tullie again
affirms the like of Astronomy, and the motion of the Heavens: Quorum
contemplatione, nullus expleri potest animus: With the contemplation whereof,
it is impossible that the mind should ever be satisfied. So that, no part of
learning (no nor all of it, together) is able to fill the mind. When a man
has once settled his appetite upon it.

Thus all the Appetites of man do carry him headlong, beyond all the bound
both of virtue and reason. And yet, when he has followed them, until he be
tired with them, he can find no sound contentment in any one of them. Take
King Solomon himself, for an example of examples, in all of them. For so he
seems to propose himself, in every one of the forenamed instances. For he
ingenously confesses, that one while he set his mind upon nothing, Eccl. 2. 1
2 3 4 5 6
but on pleasure, and to pass his time merrily, in pleasance and iollity. But
he found himself quickly to be wearied with that, and to grow into so great a
dislike of all mirth, that he said unto Laughter, Thou art madness. Again,
another while he gave himself wholly unto Eating and Drinking. Another while,
to Building. Another while, to Planting and Gardening. Then, to Water-workes,
Eccles. 2* 7. 8. 12
and Fishing. Then to pomp in great Housekeeping: entertaining a huge train
of servants, and followers. Then, another while, to priuatenesse and heaping up
of Riches. Another while, to the study of learning and Wisdom. And thus was
he driven to shift and change his desire, from one thing unto another, finding
solid content in never a one of them: but (after some small experience) great
irkesomenesse in them all. So that, his poor soul (like the Dove, which was
sent out of the Ark of Noah) could find no sure footing upon any one of them.
Whereupon, he pronounces of them all, without exception, that there is nothing
in them but Vanity and Vexation. Thus, all the appetites of man, though they be
almost innumerable, yet are all of them insatiable; Pro. 30. 15.
and do, all, with Agurs horseleech, cry nothing but Give, Give. And yet, when
you have given them all that ever you can, they are still as bare and empty,
Genesis 41. 20. 21.
as were Pharaohs lean kine: being, for all they do devour, yet never a whit
the fatter, never a whit the fuller. So that, as S. Bernard notes of all of
them: Fit vt per varia, and fallacia mundi oblectamenta, vagabundus animus,
Bernard. lib. De diligendo Deo, p. 1096.
inani labor discurrens, fatigetur; non satietur. It comes to pass, that
the mind of man, wandering over the world, through diverse delightful and
deceitful pleasures, and spending her strength and travel in vain, is at
last wearied and wasted out, is surfeted, and yet not satisfied with them.

8 Now, what is the end of all this long discourse, God is able to fill all our
appetites.
but only that, which I noted in the beginning of the Treatise? That seeing
God has made the appetite of man, of such an infinite extent in every branch
of it, that none of all these objects is able to content it, which are supposed
to be the most natural unto it; that therefore there must needs be some
supernatural Object appointed for it; which is able in every corner to fill
it: or else it must be vnfilled: which were to bring a vacuum and emptiness
into the works of God. Which is utterly absurd. For as God in his providence
did never make any belly so great, but that he provided sufficient meat to
fill it; yea, even the great belly of that great beast Behemoth; Job. 40. 10.
15.
which himself so greatly magnifieth: so likewise, in his wisdom, would he
never have made a man's appetite so great, but that he has appointed some
object that can fill it: yea, and every corner of it. Now, that the whole world
is not able to do. As may be well understood, by this Hierogliphicall
conceit: That the world is of a circular form: but the heart of a man is of a
triangular. And therefore, as if we should put a circle into a Triangle, we
can never so fill it, but that all the corners will be empty in it: so if we
should put the whole world into a man's heart; yet could it never fill it, nor
reach into every corner of it. And therefore the only object that is able to
fill this three cornered heart, cannot be any thing else, 1. Io. 3. 20.
but only the Holy and undivided Trinity. This is an all-filling object, that
is greater then our heart: and therefore is easily able to fill it, Psalm. 23. 5.
and to radiate into every corner of it. Yea, so to fill a man's appetite, in
every channel of it, until, like David's Cup, it even run over. For he is
able to fill all our natural appetites, Psalm. 145. 16.
both of eating, and drinking, and sleeping, and such like. For, Psalm. 127. 2.
He opens his hand, and fills with his blessing, every living thing. And He
it is, that gives unto his beloved sleep.

And, Psalm. 81. 10.
though the mouth of our appetite do gape never so wide; yet he opens his
hand wider, Psalm. 17. 14.
and fills both the mouth, and the belly, with his hidden treasure. And so
likewise, for our sensible appetites, of Hearing, Seeing, and Tasting, 1. Cor.
2. 9.
and the rest: he can easily fill them too. For, he has provided such
excellent things for us, as neither Eye has seen, nor Ear has heard, nor
yet, by the heart of man can be conceived. He can fill all our intellectual
appetites, 1. Pet. 5. 4.
both of Power, and Honor, and Treasure, and Pleasure. For he has provided
for us, 1. Pet. 5. 4.
an incorruptible crown of glory. And, In his presence, is the fullness of
joy; Ps. 16. 11.
and, at his right hand, are pleasures for ever more. Thus (as the Psalmist
notes) God can, Ps. 36. 7. 8.
Replere in bonis, de siderium nostrum: He can, even fill our desire, Ps 10 2.
5.
with every good thing. And therefore, in another place, he professes, that,
Psalm 73. 34. 71. 4.
There is nothing in heaven that he desires, but him; nor any thing on earth,
in comparison of him. He fixed his whole desire upon God: because he alone
could fill the whole of it, without any diminution. As the Psalmist again, in
another place, confesses: I will behold thy face, in righteousness: and when
I awake, Psalm. 17 15.
I shall be satisfied with thine image. God is a fantasme, that can fill the
fantasy; and an Object, that can still the appetite. Which, nothing in the
world can do, without him; no, not the whole world, nor all that is in the
world: but only God himself. For, as S. Augustine truly writes. Aug. in
Manua^^ c 3 To. 9 p. 793.
Si cuncta, quae fecit, Deus dederit, non sussicit, nisi s^^^sum dederit.
Though God should give thee all he has, yet would all that be n^thing, if he
gave thee not himself. Whereupon he professes in another place, that
Quicquid igitur mihi vult dare Dominus meus, Aug. in. Psalm. 26. To. 8. p. 141.
auferat totum, and se mihi det. There is nothing in the world, that unto me
seems pleasant, but only God. And therefore, if God would give unto me, al:
that ever he has; let him take all that away, and give me only himself. For,
there is nothing else, that can fully content us, Aug. l. 1. Confess. cap. 1.
To. 1. p. 61.
as in his Confessions he plainly professes: Domine, quia fecisti nos ad te,
inqutetum est cor nostrum, donec requiescat in te. O Lord (says he) because
thou have purposely made us for thy self, therefore our heart can no where
find any quiet, until it do come to rest in thy self: Not in all the
honors, not in all the riches, not in all the pleasures of the world. As is
likewise very notable observed, by S. Bernard: Bernard. Sermon. De bonis de
serendis. p. 1146.
Ad imaginem Deifacta animarationalis, caeteris omnibus occupari potest,
repleri non potest. Capacem Dei, quicquid Deo minus est, non implebit. Inde
est, quod naturali quidem desiderio, summum quiuis probatur appetere bonum;
nullam, nisi adepto eo, requi^m habiturus. The soul of a man, being made unto
the image of God, may be busied about many other things, but can be filled with
nothing but with him. For that, which is capable of God himself, cannot be
^illed with that, which is less then God himself. Hence every man naturally
desires the chiefest good, and can never rest, until he have found it. For, as
Bellarmine B^llars. l. De (...) grad 3. c. 1. p. 76.
very aptly and wittily illustrates it, As the body of a man, cannot rest in
the air, be it never so wide; nor yet in the water, be it never so deep; but
still sinketh down, until it come unto the earth, because that is his proper
and natural place: so the Soul of a man can never find repose, neither in
the aereal and stickering Honors, nor in the earthly and dirty Ri^hes, nor in
the watery and softening Pleasures of this present world; but only, in God
alone, who is indeed, the proper place, and true Center of man's Soul, in whom
it can only repose it self securely. I will lay me down to rest, and sleep
in peace, (says the Psalmist) for it is the Lord only that makes me dwell in
safety. Psalm. 4. 8.
Here is the true repose, and natural rest of the Soul, when it lodges up it
self, under the shadow of Gods wings. Psalm. 17. 8. 57. 1. 61. 4. 63* 7.
And therefore, David beseeches the Lord, that he would hide him, under the
shadow of his wings. Professing in another place, that, under the shadow of his
wings, should be his refuge. And in another, that, his trust should be, under
the shadow of his wings. And in another that, he will rejoice, under the shadow
of his wings. Thus, under the shadow of Gods wings, the Soul finds her true
reposednesse, her refuge, her assurance; and her fullness of joy: so that when
she is come thither, she can desire no more. For, as a Buble (says Gregory
Nyssen, Greg. Nyssen. in (...) Orat. 11. p 407.
using a contrary comparison unto Bellarmines) cannot stay it self below, in
the botome of the water; but, by degrees, ascends up, until it come unto the
top: and, when it is come thither, it then strives no longer to ascend up any
higher; but there breaking his thin filme, powers forth it self naturally,
into the open air: so likewise, a man's Soul cannot content and stay it self
in any of these earthly and inferior things; but naturally ascends upward,
until it come to God: Whither when it is once come, it then has no desire to
ascend up any further, but there naturally rests; Yea, and like the Bubble,
beforementioned, (with the Apostle Paul) desires, P^il. 1. 23.
to be, even dissolved, that it may be with God. And here a Man's desire has
his uttermost stint. For God (as Nazianzene Nazian. Orat. 31. De Athanasio. p.
524.
truly teaches) is, Intelligibilium omnium summus vertex, in quo desiderium
omne consistit, ac defigitur, nec, supra eum, vsquam fertur. God is the highest
pitch of all our understanding, and the total sum of all our desiring. So
that our understanding can desire to fly no higher, because he is the highest;
and our appetite can desire to comprehend no more, because he is the greatest.
Aug. l. de Spiritu and Anima, cap. 55. To. 3. p. 895.
Nec aliquid est quod extra illum quaeratur, quia totum in illo invenitur quod
desideratur, says S. Augustine: We need not to seek for anything out of him,
because all that we desire we may easily find in him. 1. Cor. 15. 28. Bed. in
1. Cor. 15. To. 6. p. 571.
For (as S. Paul teaches us) God is, Omnia, in omnibus: all, in all. From
which very place, Beda draws this conclusion, that therefore, Deus est finis
desideriorum nostrorum: That God is the last end of all a man's appetite. For,
he that has God, has all. And he that has all, he can desire no more;
because there is no Object for his desire to covet. And therefore (says he)
when God promises unto us, Ego ero illorum Deus; he says all one in a manner,
as, Ego ero vnde satientur; I will be their God, that is, I will fill their
appetite.

Now, Hugo. de Victor. l. 7. Erudit D^das c. 8. To. 3. p. 19. X.
says Hugo de Victore, Cogita qualis esse possit, qui omnium vi^entium sensus
fabricat, appetitus creat, ac in singulis quibusque an^mantibus, and quid
appetere, and quantum appetere debeant, ordinat. Consider with thy self (says
he) what an one, be must needs be, that has both given unto all living things,
all their senses; and created in them all, all their several appetites: yea,
and further has appointed unto every one of them, both what, and how much,
they must desire in euerything. Surely, he that has created so many infinite
appetites, in so infinite many things, and yet is able to suffice them all, can
be none other, Genesis 17. 1. Irenaeus. l. 2. c. 1. p. 95.
but that one infinite Object, which is God all-sufficient. Who (as Irenaeus
truly teaches) is, omnium rerum pleroma, that is, the true plenitude, and
^ulfilling of euerything. Thus the infinite appetite of the soul, which cannot
with any finite thing be fully satisfied, does lead us directly unto God. Aug.
l. De Spir. and Anima. cap. 59 To. 3. p. 898.
For (as Saint Augustine well observes) Men's, dum inhianter cogitanda appetit,
and repent denuo cogitata fastidit, docetur, quod aliunde pendet. Ad Deum
quippe suspensa est, a quo solo formata est. Man's soul (says he) whilst it
greedily desires every thing that it thinks of, and by and by despises what
before it was greedy of, is taught, by this loathing of every inferior
creature, that it has his whole dependence upon a superior Nature; that is,
only upon God, by whom only it was made.

Whereupon, he there concludes, that Quia omne, quod infra appetit, minus est;
iure ei non sufficit, quicquid Deus non est. Because a man's appetite is so
great and so infinite, that all earthly things are too little for it, it must
needs from thence follow, that that which can suffice it, can be nothing else
but God. And therefore (as Pisanus very Christianly exhorts us) Cum,
Laurentius Pisanus in Enchirid. Orthodoxograph p. 915.
sine Deo, nulla Creatura sibi satis sit; qui studet sibi sufficere, Deum
quaerat. Seeing no Creature is sufficient for it self, without God: let him
that would suffice himself, seek his sufficiency in God. 2. Cor. 3. 5.
For (as Saint Paul truly teaches us) We are not of our selves sufficient for
any thing, but all our sufficiency is of God. And here only, the soul of man
does find his, Ne plus vltra: Because, God only is both Summum verum, who can
fill the understanding, and Summum Bonum, who can fill the affection. This is
the second Metaphysicall consideration, which leads a man unto the knowledge
of God; the infinite auidity and extent of his appetite, which cannot be
satisfied, but with an infinite obi^ct, which nothing is, but God.

CHAP. 3.
That, every thing in Nature, has a Cause of his Being. 2. That, nothing can
be the Cause, of his own Being. 3. That, among the Causes, there is one first,
and supreme Cause, which is the Cause of all the rest. 4. That, this first, and
supreme Cause, is nothing else, but God.

IN the two former Chapters, I have unfolded, two Metaphysicall considerations,
from whence we may collect, That there is a God: Namely, the limited
circumscription of all definite things; and the unlimited dilatation of men's
infinite appetites. In these two next Chapters, I purpose to unfold two
Physical Considerations, which import the same inference. The first is, a
C^usa, that is, from the first cause of all natural things. The second is, a
Motu, that is, from the first Moouer of all moveable things. Both which do
conclude, That there must needs be a God: as being indeed nothing else, but two
Philosophical terms, in sense aequipollent unto the very name of God, and so
oftentimes promiscuously used. For the first of which two heads, to wit, The
first cause of all thing; I will fashion the argument into the form of a
Sorites; wherein we may ascend, by four steps, and degrees, unto the very
presence, and intuitiue vision of God. The first of them is this, That there is
nothing in Nature, but it has his Cause. The second, That nothing in Nature,
is the Cause of it self. The third, That among all the Causes, there is one
supreme and first Cause, which is the true Cause of all the rest. The fourth,
That the first Cause of all things, is nothing else, but God. All which four
positions, are held and maintained, by a general consent, both of Christians,
and Heathens, with great confidence and assurance: yea and that, not as
questionable, or disputable problemes; but as most undoubted, and irrefragable
axioms.

For the first of which four points, Nothing is without a Cause. Plato in
Timae^. p. 704.
That there is nothing in Nature, but it has his Cause: Plato directly
affirms it, in express and plain terms. Quicquid gignitur, ex aliqua
natura necessario gignitur. Whatsoever is begotten, is begotten, is begotten of
something. Yea, and Tully confirms it, almost in the same terms. Quicquid
oritur, Cic. 2. de Diuinat. P. 27^.
qualecunque est, causam habeat a natura, necesse est. Whatsoever thing is
bred, of what sort soever, it must needs have some cause of his breeding in
nature. (...) c. 5. p. 1487. Item Trismegis. Pimand. Dial. 2. p. 385.
For, Ex nihilo nihil fieri, That nothing can be made of nothing, (as Aristotle
testifies) is a common Principle, among all the Philosophers. Non enim est,
vel cogitari potest, vt sit aliquid, non per aliquid: says Anselmus: It cannot
be imagined, that there should be any thing, which has not his beginning and
being, from something. For, Nullius rei, sine Causa, est ortus: says Plutarch:
There can be no being, where there is no Cause of being. And so likewise Tully.
Nullius rei, Causa remota, reperiri potest origo. Take away the Cause from any
thing, and you take away the beginning of his being. And therefore, in another
place, he peremptorily pronounces, That nothing can be made, without his
Cause: Illud exploratum habeto, Nihil fieri posse, sine Causa. Which,
Palingenius also expressly affirms, -- sine Causa,
Esse potest nihil, Auselm. in Monologio. c. 3. To. 3. p. 3. (...) To. 1. p.
685. Cic. de vniuersitate p 427. Cic. l. 2 de Diuinat. p 271.
aut fieri --
Without a Cause, nor being, nor ought can have beginning.
And thereupon, Tully derideth it for a gross and a palpable absurdity, and a
paradox against the very grounds of Philosophy, to affirm that there can any
thing (without a Cause of it) be either made, Cic. l. 1. de finibus p. 39.
or done. Nihil turpius Physico, quam fieri, sine Causa, quicquam dicere: There
can be no fouler error in a natural Philosopher, then to affirm this, That
any thing can be done or made, without a Cause. And, it is a very foul error
indeed. For, to say, that any thing is made without a Cause, is to say, it has
a being, and yet no power of being. For, Ramus l. 1. Dialecticae, c. 3. Plato.
in Ciuil^. p. 210.
Causa is defined to be, cuius vi, res est: A Cause is a power, whereby every
thing has his being. And, as Plato affirms directly to that purpose: Causa
est, qu^^ principaliter rem facit.

So that, for the truth of this first position, that every thing in Nature has
a Cause of his being: you see it, to be clearly put out of al question, by the
consenting testimonies of many learned men. Yea, and the most of them, no way
engaged in our Religion; but following only the light and guidance of Reason.

2 And therefore, let us now proceed unto the second; That nothing in nature
can be the Cause of it self. Nothing can be the Cause of it self.
Which is a position, as evidently true, as that Nothing can be the Maker of it
self. For (as a Christian Philosopher has very well collected) Quod facit,
est actu; quod fit, non est actu. Non magis igitur potest aliquid facere
seipsum, Vallesius l. de sacra Philosophia c. 1. p. 31.
quam simul and esse, and non esse. That which makes any thing, must needs be
actually in being: that which is but in making has as yet, no actual being.
And therefore, it is as impossible for any thing to make it self, as it is at
the same time, to have both being, and no being. For, if it be impossible (as
Aquinas affirms) Vt aliquid sit simul and actu, and potentia, Aquin. 1.
Quaest. 2. Art. 3. p. 5.
secundum idem: then it is much more impossible. Vt aliquid sit simul and actu,
and non actu; or that Aliquid simul and actu sit, and actu non sit.
Trisinegist. in Pimand. Dial. 14. p. 470.
A necessary disconuenience, Greg. Nyllen. De Infantib. praemature abroptis p.
133.
where any thing is allowed to be cause of it self. And therefore
Trismegistus sets it down for a peremptory position, that, Nihil, quod est
genitum, a se genitum est. Yea, and Gregory Nyssen directly subscribeth unto
him: Nullam rem sui ip sius principium and causam esse. That nothing can be the
beginning or cause of it self. Yea, and Palingenius, genius also expressly
confirms it. -- nil se gignit, P^ling* in Scorp. p. 206.
nil provenit a se:
Nilque sui causa esse potest. --
There Is nothing, that it self begets, or from it self proceeds:
There Is nothing of it self is cause, nor ought that causeless breeds.
The Reasons, wherefore nothing can be the cause of it self, be principally
two. The first, because, every cause is a several thing, in nature from his
own effect. The Cause, and his Effect, are so by nature severed, that they
cannot be confounded. For, Arist. l. 2. mag. Moral. c. 8. To. 2. p 962.
Causa, and cuius est Causa, aliud est, says Aristotle. The Cause is one
thing, and that whereof it is a cause, is another. And so likewise Palingenius,
in the fore-alledged place. -- causa, necesse est, Paling* vbi supra p. 205.

Vt suo ab effectu distet, diuersaque res sit,
Needs must the cause be differing:
And from the effect a diverse thing.
Yea, and Plato likewise expressly confirms it: not resting in the bare
position: Plato in Hippia maiore. p. 115.
but forming it into a very strong reason. Aliud, est causa. Neque enim causa,
ipsius causae causa esse potest. Causam enim efficientem esse constat. Ab
effeciente vero effictum fit, non efficiens. Aliud autem est efficiens, aliud
effectum. Non ergo caus^, ipsius causa est; sed eius, quod ab ipsa efficitur.
The cause is of one nature, and that, which is of the cause, is of another.
For, the cause is not the cause of a cause, but of an effect: because the cause
is an efficient: and an efficient brings not forth another efficient, but
only an Effect. Now, an effect is always a thing different from his
efficient. Therefore, a cause is not a cause of a cause, but of an effect,
which is made by that cause. This is the first reason, why nothing can be the
cause of it self: because then, it should differ from it self, and should not
be the same thing with it self.

The second Reason is: because the cause is always before his effect. Causam,
causato, dicimus esse prius.
The cause, before the caused, we do ever asseuere to be.
Efficiens and effectum vnita quidem sunt invicem (says Trismegistus) sic
tamen, Trismeg. in Pimand. Dial. 14. p 470.
vt vnum praecedat, alterum vero sequatur: The efficient and effect are united
together, by a mutual dependence one upon another: and yet is the one of them
before the other. Zach. Mytilen l. de Mundi Creat. Rib. Pat. To. 5. p. 746.
For (as Zacharias Mytilenensis observes) Oportet effectorem antiquiorem esse
effectu, and opificijs Opificem: siquidem, id quod fit, secundum est ab co quod
efficit. The Efficient is more ancient then his own effect; and the Workman,
then his work. For, whatsoever thing is made, must needs be posteriour unto
his Maker. So likewise Palingenius: Causa, Paling. in libra. 167.
suo effectu prior est, Authorque, opere ipso.
The cause does always his effect fore-goe:
Before the Work, the Workman is, we know.
Yea, and so Aristotle himself. Effector opificium praecurrere debet. Nihil
autem, scipso, Arist. l. De communi Animalium motu. To. 1. p. 916.
prius and antiquius est. The Workman must needs be more ancient then his
Work. But nothing can be more ancient then it self. And therefore nothing can
be the work of it self: and consequently, nothing the cause of it self. For
(as Aquinas from this place very truly collecteth) Impossible est, Aqu^n. 1.
Quaest. 2. Art. 3. p. 5.
vt aliquid sit causa efficiens sui ipsius: quia sic esset prius seipso. It is
merely impossible, that any thing should be the cause of it self. For then it
should be before it self. Yea, and Aristotle again presses the same Reason;
yea, and backeth it with another not inferior: that if any thing were the cause
of it self, it should not only be before it self, but it should also be
superior unto it self. For, Arist. l 10. De. Theo^eg. ^. 17.
the cause is superior unto his effect. Whereupon he there infers, that,
Nequaquam conuenit, quod aliquid nuncupetur, vel sit, causa sui: vt falsum est,
quod aliquid Prius, qua prius, sit posterius seipso; and superans, quatenus
tale, sit superatum. It is utterly absurd, that any thing should be called, or
be the cause of it own self: as it is false, that any first thing, as it is
first and priour, should be posterior to it self, and that the excelling, in
as much as such, should be the excelled.

So that, nothing can be the cause of it self: no not even God himself. who
is the cause of all things. For, if he were the cause of himself, then must
he be also the Effect of himself; which destroys his Omnipotency: he must
be another from himself; which destroys his Unity, and Immutability: he
must be after himself; which destroys his Aeternity: Yea, he must be the
Work and Creature of himself; which destoyeth his Infinity. But none of all
these can fall into God. For (as Hilary truly notes) Neque aliud est, Hilar.
l. 6. De Trinit. p. 64.
neque aliunde, quod Deus est. God can neither be another from himself; not of
any other, but himself. Therefore God, though he be the cause of all other
things; yet can he not be the cause of himself; for the forenamed
inconveniences.

It cannot be denied, but that God is of himself: but not, as of a cause. He
is of himself: Aquin. 1. Quaest. 2. Art. 4 p. 7. 2. Art. 4 p. 7.
because his Being, and Himself, are indeed all one; his Essence, and his
Esse, as Aquinas proves plainly. For, his subsisting of himself, Eusel. 7.
De Praeparat. c. 8. p. 115.
is indeed, his very substance: as Eusebius proves out of Dionysius.
Non-genitus Deus, per se est: vt, ipsum nongenitum esse, substantia sua est.
The unbegotten God subsisteth of himself; and his being unbegotten, is indeed
his very substance. And therefore, when Seneca says, Senec. La^. l. 1. c. 7.
p. 19
that, Deus ipse, se fecit: and Lactantius, that Deus est ex seipso procreatus:
their meaning is no more but this; that he is, ab alio nullo factus, aut
procreatus. He is therefore said to be the Maker and begetter of himself;
because he had none other maker, nor begetter but himself: no, nor indeed
himself neither, but is altogether unbegotten. And so, Lact. ibid.
when God is called by Apollo, (...); and by Sibylla, (...): that is, one that
is made of himself, and begotten of himself: the meaning is no more but this;
that he is, (...), and (...): that is, Unmade, and unbegotten: as it follows
in the same place: Neither made nor begotten, of any other, no, nor of himself
neither.

For (as Justin Martyr truly writes) he is neither (...), Just. Martyr. in
Confut. Graecar. Respons. To. 1. p. 336.
nor (...): He is neither produced out of himself, nor yet out of any other
thing but himself. He is neither ex se; nor ex alio; no nor ex nihilo; as
Anselmus adds: yea, Anselm. Monologo. 5. To. 3. p. 3
and proves very wittily in his Monologie. Where he summeth up all these
things together, unto the same reckoning, that I have done before: that seeing
he is not made, or begotten of any thing; that therefore he must needs be
unmade and unbegotten. Id. ibid. c. 17. p. 9
Quoniam igitur nec per se, nec ex se, nec per aliud, nec ex alio; nec per
nihil, nec ex nihilo, habet principium; n^llo modo habet principium sedneque
finem habebit. Because (says he) God has his beginning, neither by himself,
nor of himself; neither by any other thing, nor of any other thing; neither by
nothing, nor of nothing; it follows therefore, that he has no beginning: as
he shall have no end.

And the truth of this doctrine is expressly confirmed, even by the very
Heathen: (...)
who hold it for a Maxim, that God is unbegotten. Quaecunque gignuntur,
procedunt ab altero: says Trismegistus. Est ergo aliquis factor istorum; atque
is ingenitus, vt genitis sit antiquior. Those things that are made, are made by
some other: and therefore they needs must have a Maker, who must needs
himself be unmade; because he is more ancient then any thing that is made.
Thales likewise confirms the same unto us. Lac^^. in vit^ Th^le^^ p. 12.
Deus est antiquissimus: est enim ingenitus. God must, of necessity, be the
ancientest of all things; because he is not made, or begotten of any thing.
For, Ingenitus praevenit omnia genita: says Philo Iudeus: Philo. Iudaeus l. de
Sacri^i. Abel. p. 199.
That which is unmade must needs be more ancient then those things that are
made. Now, if nothing be without a Cause (as I have proved, in the former
paragraph,) and yet nothing can be the cause of it self, (as I have proved,
in this;) then must it needs follow, that every thing that is, has the Cause
of his being, without it self: saving only God himself, who has no cause of
his being: but is himself all one with his own being: John 5 26.
as life it self is all one with its own living. Anselm. (...) monologio. c.
5. To. 3. p. 4.
For, God is nothing else but Life. Tu es ipsa vita, qua viuis; and Sapientia,
qua sapis: says Anselmus: Thou art the Life it self; whereby thou live; and
the Wisdom it self, whereby thou know. And therefore, as Life is not the
cause of its own living, but the very same identity with its living: so God is
not the Cause of his own being, but one and the same thing with his being.

3 Now, There is among the Causes but one first cause.
if nothing can be the Cause of it self; then must every thing needs have a
cause without it self, which is another thing from it self. For, we see by
experience, that there daily be produced, many strange and notable effects in
the world: which all of them proceed not from one and the same cause: and yet
none of them is brought forth without his cause. And therefore, it comes, in
this place, to be discussed; Whether, among those Causes, there be no first
Cause at all, but an endless proceeding and going on, in infinitum? or,
whether, among them, there be many first Causes? or, whether, there be but one
which is Causa causarum, that is, The true Cause of all the rest, and whereof
all other Causes are but mere Effects?

For the first of which three problemes, were may daily see by sense, how one
Cause produces, and begets another; and that, another; and that, another:
and, that every one of these, though it be a cause of some inferior effect;
yet is it an effect of his own superior Cause. As for example: the beating of
the Sun upon the Earth, works in it an heat; that heat produces many
kinds of fruits out of it; those fruits beget nourishment, both in men and
beasts; that nourishment begets that Semen genitale, whereby young ones are
begotten, in all their several kinds: and so from generation, to generation,
continued. Now, in this connection and series of Causes, if we ascend upward, we
must needs either ascend in infinitum, without all end: or else, in the end,
to arise unto some highest Cause; where we must be forced to rest, and can go
no further: because there is no higher. To proceed in infinitum; Cic. Orat.
Pro. Q. Ros^^o. (...) p. 137. Anselm in Monologio. c. 4. (...). 3. ^ 3.
that (as the Orator speaks) is Auribus Animisque hominum absurdum: It is an
absurd thing, both to the ears and minds of all men of understanding. And (as
Anselmus pronounces, even in this very cas^) Hoc, nemo non putat obsurdum,
n^si qui nimis est absurdus: There is no man, but thinks this very absurd, if
himself be not too grossly so. And therefore, Palingenius very truly
affirms, that there cannot be, in Causes, an infinite progress. -- Ergo
infinitus
In Causis processus erit? (...). in Sco^ p. p. 206.
Minime, sed oportet
Nimirum esse aliquid primum: a quo maximus ordo
Causarum incipiat; qui a summo tendit ad imum.
What then, in Causes can there be an infinite process;
And can no End be found? Oh no. There can be nothing less.
But there must needs some first maine Cause of all the rest be set:
Which the order great of Causes all beginning does beget;
And in which, Highest, Lowest, Midst, are all together met.
Thus he rejects this innumerability of Causes, and fixes them, at last, in
some one, that is the first. So that (as Aristotle himself affirms) Est
principium aliquod: neque sunt infinitae entium causae: Arist. l 2. Metaphys. c
2. To 2. p 1385.
There is some first cause, and the causes of of things are not infinite. For
if there should be, in causes, an infinite proceeding, and no first cause among
them; Aquin. 1. Quaest. 2. Art. 3. p. 5.
then (as Aquinas very wittily collecteth) there could be no second neither,
nor no third, and so none at all. For these numerall terms of First, Second,
Third, and so forward, are not only names of number, but also of order. So
that, as nothing can be first, which has any thing before it: so nothing can
be second, which has not a first before it; nor third, which has not a
second, and so on, in all the rest. From whence it must needs follow, that, if
there be no first cause, there can be no second, nor third, and by consequence
none at all. But we see by experience, that there be second causes; and
therefore by necessity, there must needs be a first. We see there be inferior
causes, and therefore there must needs be also some superior; and by
consequence, from which they all descend, and upon which they all depend. For
(as Aristotle himself affirms) Necesse est, quod prius est, Causam esse
eorum, Arist. l. 2. Metaphys. ^. 2. To. 2. p. 1386
quae post illud sunt. In the series of Causes, that which goes before, is
alway^s the cause of all them that follow after.

But now, comes the second Problem, that, If there must needs be some
supreme and first cause: Whether there be Many of them; or, Whether be but one?
That there cannot be Many Firsts, the very name of First does necessarily
import. For, if any thing be either before that, or with that, which we intend
to be First; then cannot it truly be called the First. If any thing be before
it; then is it not Primum, but Secundum. If any thing be with it; then it is
not Prius, but Simul. So that, if it be first, it can be no more but one.
Besides, if there should be many firsts; there would follow another very great
inconvenience, For then (as Palingenius observes) Tunc discordabunt inter se,
ac magna ciebunt
Praelia, tot Reges: quia Regni summa potestas
Non patitur plures. Sic, mundus non erit vnus,
Nec pulcher: namque est Ordo, pulcher^ima rerum.
So many Kings would never accord, but raise a grievous broyle,
For supreme Power suffer's not that many rule the soil:
And so the World it self nor one, nor beautiful should be;
As lacking Order: Order it is does all things beautify.
But, we evidently see, those things to be clean contrary. We both see, that
there is but one world, and not many: and yet, that it is full both of order
and beauty. And therefore it cannot have many first Causes in it: as
Palingenius, in another place, concludes. Quare, Paling. in Libr. p. 168.
non possunt plura esse exordia rerum,
Ast vnum; quia perfectum non amplius vno est:
A quo, sicrerum aeternus ducitur ordo:
Vt monade a prima, innumeri generantur.
Wherefore, more first beginnings cannot be
Of things that ord'red are, but one prime Cause:
Because no more but One is perfectly;
From which, all order tak's eternal Laws.
As from a single union, who sees not;
Innumerable numbers are begot?
Yea, and Trismegistus, from the forenamed inconveniences, expressly
concludes: Impossible est, Trismeg. in Pimand. dial. 1. p. 437.
duos aut plures esse factores: neque enim ordo vnus probaretur in multis.
Praeterea, qui inter illos imbecillior esset, potentiori invideret. It is
impossible, that there should be two or more Creators: for one and the same
order would not be approved of many. Besides, he that should be the weaker and
more impotent, Cyprian in Praefat. ad Cornelium. p. 482.
would ever envy the more potent and mighty. So Cyprian. Non potuerunt multa
and diuersa rerum esse principia. Quia, nisi ad vnum oninia respicerent,
discordia and infinita cuncta volverentur in chaos. There could not be many and
diverse first causes of Creatures. Because, unless all had respect and
reference unto one prime and supreme cause, all would return into their fist
Chaos.

Anselmus, our learned Primate, has, of set purpose, disputed this point: and
proved, by strength of reason, that, among all the Causes, which are in the
world, though they be in number infinite, yet, that there can be no more of
them, Anselm. in Monologio, c. 3. To. 3. p. 2.
but only one First. His reason is this following. Quicquid est, non nisi per
aliquid est. Quod cum ita sit, aut est vnum, aut sunt plura, per quae sunt
cuncta quae sunt. Quod si sunt plura, tunc aut ipsa referuntur ad vnum aliquod,
per quod sunt; aut eadem plura singula sunt per se; aut ipsa per se inuicem
sunt. At, si plura ipsa sunt per vnum, iam non sunt omnia per plura, sed potius
per illud vnum, per quod [illa] plura sunt. Si vero illa plura singula sunt per
se, vtique, est vna aliqua vis vel natura existendi per se, quam habent, vt per
se sint. Non est autem dubium, quod per illud vnum sint, per quod habent, vt
sint per se Verius ergo, per ipsum sunt cuncta, quam per plura, quae sine illo
vno esse non possunt. Vt vero plura per se inuicem sint, nulla patitur ratio:
quoniam irrationalis cogitatio est, vt aliquares sit per illud, cui dat esse.
The whole sum of whose reason, is, in effect, thus much: Whatsoever thing
has being, must needs have it, by Something. And that thing, which gives it
being, must needs be, either some one special thing asunder, or else many
things together. If many things concur, to give being unto any thing; then
must they needs be such, as that either all of them have their being, from some
one other thing; or, that all of them have their being, every one of himself;
or that all of them have their being, every one from another, by a kind of
interchangeable and mutual power. Now, if all those many-things do themselves
receive their being from any other One-thing; then are not all things made by
those many-things; but rather by that one-thing, which made all those
manythings* Now again, If all those many-things, have every one of them his
being of it self; V^^e drist. de l^eis ins^cabilibus. To. 2 p. 1595.
then must there needs be one certain power or Nature of Selfe-being; by
participation whereof, they all have their being of themselves. And then, they
must needs be, all of them, only by that One-thing, by which they do all
receive their selfe-being. Therefore, all things have their being more truly
from that one-thing, then from those supposed many-things, which themselves do
receive all their being from that One-thing. As for that other opinion; that
many things should mutually give, each to other, his being; that is clean
against all reason. For it is a senseless imagination, that any thing should
from that receive his own being, unto which it self has given a being. A
very good, and a sound reason; though somewhat, perhaps, perplexed unto the
vulgar understanding, through the often iteration, and implexed application of
the terms, of One, and Many, and Being, and Selfe-being, so intricately wouen
into so many several parts and branches of the sentence. But unto those that
be learned, it is clear enough and liquid.

So that, though the Series of Causes be never so long, yet must we needs, at
last come, by degrees, unto some first; which is the true Cause of all the
rest: and cannot be the effect of any: because all other are of it. For, as
Palingenius writes: Ens primum, causa est, and non effectus: at imum
Effectus tantum debet, Paling. in Scorpio. p. 206.
non causa, vocari.
Quae media existunt, his nomen adhaeret vtrumque.
In Nature, and in order of all things in their respect,
The first and highest called is a Cause, and no Effect:
The last and lowest an Effect: but not a Cause at all.
But those that stand twixt first and last, thou may by both names call.
Both Causes, and Effects. Causes of their inferiors, and Effects of their
superiors. As in the Series of the Categories, the highest, is only a Genus,
and not a Species; the lowest, is only a Species, and not a Genus; the
subalternes, are both, in their diverse relations; Genera, to their inferiors;
and Species, to their superiors. But the highest can be no Species. And, no
more, can the first Cause, be the Effect of any other: because it is not under
any form or higher: Arist. l. 3. Metaphys. c. 4. To. 2. p. 1393.
but is the highest it self: and is Ingenitum, as Aristotle teaches. And
therefore Trismegistus expressly affirms, that, Ex vno principio cuncta
pendent. That all things have their being, Trismeg. Pimand. dial. 20. p. 426.
and beginning, of one thing. And that, in the same place, he affirms, to be
God. And this, Nyssen Nyssen.
affirms to be the received opinion of all men. Constat inter omnes, ex vna
causa pendere res omnes. It is confessed of all men, that all things depend
upon the supreme Cause.

And therefore Aristotle bids us, that, in searching of the causes, we
should, Arist. l 2. Phys. c. 3. To. 1. p. 433. Greg. l. 16. Mor. c. 18. To. 1.
p. 95.
semper exquirere summam causam: That we should never cease, until we are
come, unto the supreme and the first cause. And so Gregory likewise, unto the
same purpose: In omni causa, solus ipse intuendus est, qui principaliter est.
In every cause, he only is to be eyed, that is the principal, and principally
is. For, upon it do all the rest depend, as Iamblicus likewise expressly
teaches. Ab vna causa integra, tota dependet multitudo: S^o^aeu^ l. (...)
Phys. c. 9 p. 13.
Adque summam causam, plures alia referuntur. The multitude of all inferior
causes, depend upon one entire supreme cause: and to that, which is the
highest, are all the rest referred. Thus, the multitude of these inferior
causes do lead us unto one supreme and first Cause: which can be nothing
else, but God: which is the sum and substance of the fourth, and last
paragraph.

4 Now, That first and supreme Cause, is nothing else, but God.
if every thing that is, must needs have a Cause: and, if nothing can be the
Cause of it self; and, if, among all the Causes, there can be but one first,
and principal Cause; which is the true Cause of all the rest, and of all those
Effects which proceed from all of them: then must needs that first Cause be
nothing else, but God. For, what can that be, which gives being unto all
things, Damasc. l. 1. de Orthod fid. c. 12. p. 184.
but only God? whom Damascene calls, Infinitum quoddam essentiae pelagus,
that is, A boundless Ocean of pure and simple being* which out of his
fullness, imparteth their being unto all other things, as the Ocean does his
waters, unto fountains and rivers. For, if this first Cause, which has given
their being unto all the innumerable things of this world, be something else,
and not God: then, what has God done? or, what has God to do? to whom has
God given any being? or, how can he possibly be a God, which has given being
unto nothing? or, how can that be any other thing then God, which has given
their being unto all things in the world? Therefore, whosoever yields, that
there is a first cause, he must needs yield, by consequence, that, that first
cause is God.

And this we may see verified, by a general consent, both of Christians, and
Heathens. Of whom, some do call this first Cause, by such titles and
appellations, as do necessarily insinuate, that it must needs be God. Some
collect it, by such reasons, as do necessarily conclude it. And some, in
direct and express terms, affirm it. For the first of which three heads, to
wit, the titles, that are given to this first Cause, Palingenius (as before I
showed) calls it, Ens primum: Ens primum, Paling. in Scorp. p. 206.
causa est, and non Effectus. --
The first Ens, is a pure mere cause, it cannot an Effect be called.
Both which two titles, are the titles of God: both to be, Ens; and to be,
Primum. For first, for Ens. Demascene expressly affirms, that, of all Gods
other names, Damasc. l. 1. Orthodox. fid. c. 12* p. 184.
the name of Ens, is most proper unto him. Ex omnibus nominibus, quae Deo
tribuuntur, nullum aeque proprium videtur, atque Entis nomen. Of all the names,
which are attributed unto God, there is none so proper, as is the name of his
Essence, or Being: he being named from his own Being, I am. And for Primum:
even Aristotle himself affirms, that God is, Et primum, and principale
principum: Arist. l. 11. Metaphys. c. 6. To. 2. p. 1409.
both the first, and the principal principle of all things. Yea and, even God
himself chalengeth both the same titles directly unto himself. For he calls
himself, Exo. 3. 14.
I am: which is al one, with Ens: and he calls himself, The Ancient of
days: Dan. 7. 9.
which is all one, with Primus. Nay, Primus, in express terms: Primus, Isay
41 4.
and novissimus, Ego sum. Yea, and Aristotle further affirms, this primum
Ens, to be, Ipsum quid est: Arist. l. 7. Metaphys. c. 1. To. 2. p. 2433.
which is all one, with I am: and to be, not an Accidens, but a Substance. Now,
Aristotle, in another place, gives to this first and supreme Cause, another
title, which is as proper unto God, as either of the former. Arist. l. 4.
Metaphys c. 1. To. 2. p. 1397.
And that is, To have his being of it self. Suprema causa, est Natura, per se:
The highest cause, is such a kind of Nature, as has his being of it self.
Orig. Hom. in lib. Reg. To. 1. p. 362.
Which, (as Origin teaches) is proper and peculiar unto God. Tu solus es, ^ui,
quod es, a nullo datum est: Thou only have a being, who have not thy being
given thee, by any other thing. So that, this title of, Natura per se, is the
proper and peculiar title of God: Trismeg. Asclep. c. 11. p. 525.
as Trismegistus expressly affirms. Solus Deus, and merito solus, in se, and a
se, and circum se, totus est plenus, and perfectus: isque, sua firma est
stabilitas. It is God (says he) and nothing else but God, that has, both in
himself, and of himself, and about himself, his fullness and perfection: and
it is only he, that is his own strength and stability. Yea, and Plato
affirms of this, Plato. in Sophis^a p. 188.
Natura per se; that, Ab eo, quod vere est, non abest, nec motus, nec vita, nec
anima, nec sapientia: That thing which truly is, and has his being of it
self, has also both his moving, and his living, and his spirit, and his
wisdom, and all, of himself. Which are the mere properties and attributes
of God: Ioh. 5 26.
who (as the Scripture testifies) Has his life in himself. This is proper
and peculiar unto God, to be, Natura per se. All other things are, Natura, per
aliud. There is none of all them, that have either their living, or their
moving, or their breathing, or their being, of themselves; all which nominatim,
Plato ascribes unto the first Cause: but all these things they do only
receive from God, as the Scripture nominatim affirms of all of them. In him
they live, Act. 17. 28
and move, and have their being. And he it is, that gives unto all, Act. 17.
25.
both life, and breath, and all things. Who (as Palingenius affirms,) Est per
se viuens, sapiensque, bonusque;
Anullo accipiens quod habet, Paling. in. Libra, p. 169.
verum omnia ab illo
Accipiunt: igitur quod habent, amittere possunt, etc.
He by himself alone does live, self wise, self good he is:
From none receiving what he has: but all receive of his:
And therefore they, what^er'e they have, have power it to lees.
Trismegistus gives it another title, which is likewise the proper title of
God. For he calls it, Trismeg. Pimand. Dial. 10. p. 426.
Vnum principium, ex quo cuncta dependent. And in another place (as though he
had not yet spoken enough) he corrects himself. Ex vno cuncta pendentia, ex
eo potius defluentia. He says, that there is but one principal Cause,
Asclep. c. 8. p. 505.
upon which all things do depend; or rather indeed, from which all things do
descend. Now, this can be nothing else but God. For (as Anselmus very well
collecteth) Id quod per se est, Anselm. in Monologio. c. 4. To. 3. p. 3.
and per quod alia cuncta sunt, summum esse omnium existentium, ratio docet.
That which has his being of it self, and which gives being unto every other
thing, must needs be, even in reason, the highest and most principal thing
that has a being. Now, God has his being only of himself: and he likewise
gives being, unto every other thing: for there is nothing in the world, which
has any being, but it has it, by participation from him. So that, nothing
indeed can primarily and properly be called Ens, but only God. Every other
thing, as it has his dependence upon this first Cause, so can it be called
Ens, but in an improper and secondarie acceptance: as the Accidens, which has
his whole Esse in his Substance.

And this, even Aristotle himself expressly confesses. Caetera Entia dicuntur,
eo quod, Arist. l. 7. Metaphys. ^. 1. To 2. p 1433.
Entis proprie dicti, quaedam, sunt Quantitates; quaedam, Qualitates; quaedam,
Passiones; quaedam, aliud aliquid tale. The other Categories, are called Entia,
Beings; as being some, Quantities; some, Qualities, some, Passions; and the
like; of that Ens, or Being, which is properly so called. And that is the prime
and only Praedicament of Substance. And so it is, between the first Cause,
which has his being of it self; and all other things, which have their being
from it. They be indeed, but as Accidents, in comparison of it. And their
being, unto his, is no better then nothing: O^^^. Hom. in l^b. Reg. To. 1. p.
362.
as is plainly and directly affirmed by Origin. Et quae in Coelo sunt, and
quae in Te^ra, quantum ad naturam Dei pertinet, non sunt. Neither the things in
Earth, nor the things in Heaven, in comparison of God, have any true being. And
immediately above. Nam, and vmbra, ad comparationem corporis, non est; and
fumus, ad comparationem ignis, non est. The shadow being compared with the
body, has no being; and no more has the smoke neither, being compared with
his fire. So that, all other things, in comparison of God, are, but Fumus, and
Vmbra. And therefore this Vnum Principium, ex quo cuncta dependent, is nothing
else, but God. Whom, even the Scriptures themselves call (as Dionysius
Areopagita affirms) Causam omnium, Dionys. Areop. l. De Divine. Nom. c. 1. p.
194.
and Principium, and Essentiam, and Vitam. The cause, Beginning, Being, and the
Life of all. Ex quo suspensa sunt omnia, says Seneca: Senec l. 2. Not. Quaest.
c. 45. p. 36.
Of whom all things depend. Yea, and in the same place, he affirms, that
only of him, Sunt omnes causae causarum. That God is such a cause, as
produces the causes of all other things. For, all other causes bring forth
nothing but Effects: but God is such a cause, as brings forth causes.
Trismeg. Pimand. Dial. 10. p. 426.
He is tale Principium, quod quidem movetur, vt rursus extet principium: as
Trismegistus affirms. He is such a cause, as, by his moving, produces
another ^ause. For he is, Causa Causarum: and no cause could have his
operation, as a cause, but only by the power of his gracious assistance. Psalm.
65. 11.
It is only Gods blessing, Psalm. 68. 9.
which gives unto all causes their proper operation. The Heavens, which drop
down fatness upon the Earth, do it only by the virtue of the blessing of
God. For, it is only he, that sends a gracious rain upon his inheritance,
and refreshes the same, when it is weary. And so likewise, Heb. 6. 7.
the Earth though it drink in the rain, yet can it bring forth no fruit,
unless it receive a blessing from God. And so likewise the Father, which
begets his Child, receives all his generatiue power of God. Behold
children are the inheritance of the Lord, and the fruit of the womb is his
reward: Psalm. 127. 3.
says the Prophet David. Yea, and Euripides likewise, unto the same purpose: A
Dijs, dantur liberi mortalibus. Eurip. ^n lone. p. 814.

Children are given to men:
It Is God that gives them.
So that, not only all things in the world, are the works of God, but also all
the Causalitie, which is to be found in any of those things, is only the
Effect of God, the first cause. Nay, as Bradwardine very truly teaches; All
the Effects, which are wrought in things by their second causes, yet are more
immediately wrought by God, who is the first cause, then they be by their
nearest causes themselves. Bra^^a^d. l. 1. c. 3. p. 1^1.
Nulla res potest aliquid facere, sine Deo. Et nulla res potest aliquid sacere,
nisi Deus, per se, and immediate faciat illud idem; imo, and immediatius,
quolibet alio faciente. And thus the very titles, which Authors have given unto
the first cause, do necessarily imply that it must needs be God.

But yet, Damasc. l. 1. Orthod. Fid. c.. 3. p. 166.
diverse of them go further, and collect the very same, by way of Argument.
Damascen proves, that the first cause of things, must needs be God, by this
Sorites. Quae mutabilia sunt, etiam creata sunt. Quae autem creata sunt, dubium
non est, quina quopiam creata sunt. Conditorem porro increatum esse, necesse
est. Nam si ipse quoque creatus est, a quopiam quoque creatus est. ldque
tantisper locum habebit, quoad ad aliquid minime creatum pervenerimu^.
Increatus est ergo summus ille opifex, atque immutabilis. Hoc autem, quid aliud
esse qu^at, quam Deus? Whatsoever things are mutable [as are all, that be
sensible] they must needs have been created. Whatsoever is created, is created
of some Creator. That Creator himself must needs be uncreated. Or, if he also
be created, he must be created by something. And this holds on, so long,
until we come at last unto something uncreated. Therefore that great
workman, that is the maker of all things, must needs himself be both
uncreated, and immutable. Now what can that be else, but only God himself?
This is Damascenes reason: whereby he does conclude, that the first cause of
all things, can be nothing else, Trismeg. Pimand. Dial. 14. p. 468.
but God. Trismegistus, in like sort, does press the very same Argument, in
matter fully agreeing, though in words somewhat differing. Quae sensu
percipiuntur, facta sunt omnia; Genita non a seipsis, sed fiunt ab altero. Est
ergo aliquis factor istorum, atque is ingenitus, vt genitis sit antiquio^.
Those things that are subject unto sense, have all of them been made. Those
things that are made, have not been made of themselves, but of something else.
And therefore, they must needs have had some maker. And he must needs be
unmade: because he is more ancient, then any thing that is made. He there
proceeds further, disputing much, both of the Power, and Wisdom, and
Goodness, of this First cause, and Creator: and of his Dominion over every
creature: being much sollicitous, by what name he should call him: whether by
the name of God, or of Maker, or of Father, or of all these three together? And
he resolves his own doubt: that he may worthily be called, Deus, propter
potentiam; Factor, propter actum; and Pater, propter bonum: A God for his
power; a Creator, for his work; and a Father, for his goodness. This is that
Heathen man's discourse, upon the first cause. And Seneca he brings in,
another Argument, unto the same effect: which, though in the passage it be
somewhat different; yet, in the conclusion, it fully agrees with it. For he
reckons up five differing causes of the world. Senec. Epist. 66. p. 106.
Id ex quo, Id a quo, Id in quo, Id ad quod, Id propter quod: that is, The
Matter, the Efficient, the Form, the Exemplar, and the End. But the power of
all these he ascribes unto the Efficient: making it, in effect, the only true
cause: and all the rest, to be rather as instruments unto it, then Concauses
with it. Quae nunc retuli, non sunt multae and singulae Causae, sed ex vna
pendent; ex ea quae facit. It is only the Efficient, whereupon they all
depend. The Efficient is that, which praepareth the Matter, imposes the Form,
conceiueth the Pattern, and propounds the End. And this Efficient of the
world, he expressly affirms, to be nothing else, but God. Faciens hic, Deus
est. And thus, they do not only insinuate, The first Cause to be God: but
also, by Argument, they endeavor to prove it.

Yea and diverse of them, in express terms, affirm it: which is our third
head. Senec. l 4. de Benefic. c. 7. p. 50.
Seneca, whom I last named, shall be the first of them. He says expressly of
God, that, Senec. Epist. 66 p. 1^7.
Ille est prima omnium Causa, ex qua caeterae pendent. God is the first and
chiefest Cause of all things, whereupon they all do hang. And again, in
another place. Quaerimus quae sit Causa? Ratio faciens, id est, Deus. Do we
inquire what is the Cause? Even the Reasonable Spirit; that makes it. And that
Reason or Spirit, Trismeg. Pimand. Dial. 14. p. 470.
is God. The second is Trismegistus, whom I named next before him: who says,
that, that Efficient which is more ancient then any Effect, is nothing else but
God. Efficiens and Effectum, vnita quidem sunt inuicem: sic tamen, vt vnum
praecedat, alterum vero sequatur. Praecedens sane Deus Essiciens: sequens vero,
id quod est effectum. The Cause and his effect are always united: yet so, that
the one of them goes before, and the other follows after. The Cause which
goes before, is nothing else but God: the thing which follows after, is the
Effect of that Cause. Yea, and in another place, he defines God to be nothing
else, but only a general Cause of all things. Deus profecto men's non est;
Trismeg. Pimand. Dial. 2. p. 386.
at vero, vt sit men's, Causa est: nec spiritus; sed causa, qua spiritus extat:
nec lumen; sed causa, qua lumen existit. God is not understanding; but the
cause of Understanding. Job, 32. 8.
[It is the inspiration of the Almighty that gives vnderstanding] God is not a
spirit, but the Cause of all spirits; Heb. 12. 9.
[ The Father of Spirits] God is not a light, but the Cause of all light. [The
Father of Lights.] So that, in his verdict, this first and chiefest Cause, is
nothing else but God. James 1. 17.
Whom, in another place, he calls, Bonum efficiens, Bonafaciens omnia: That
good Efficient Cause, which brings forth all good Effects. Trismeg Pimand.
Dial. 5. p. 403.
The third of them, is Aristotle; whom I named before them both: who expressly
affirms, that Deus est rebus omnibus and Causa, and Principium: that, Arist.
l. 1. Metaphys. c. 2. To. 2. p. 1372.
God, is unto all things, both a Beginner, and a Cause. Yea, and in another
place, he affirms, (...). l. de Mun^o. To. p. 1506.
that he is, causa, quae continet omnia: making him, not only the first and
chiefest Cause, (...). l. de Pla^^^. ^ 3. To. 2 p. 7.
but also, the general cause of all thing. The fourth is Pythagoras; (...)
who calls God directly, causam and efficientem and formantem. Both the
Efficient, and the Forming cause. The fifth is, Macrobius: who writes thus of
God: Macrob. l. 1. in Some. c. 14. p. 47.
That Deus, qui prima causa and est and vocatur, vnus, omnium quae sunt,
quaeque videntur esse, princeps, and origo est. God, who is both called the
first cause, and is so indeed; he is, both the Ruler, and Maker of all things.
Unto which five forenamed, I will only add a sixth. And that is Pindarus:
Pind. in Pyth. Od. 5. p. 263.
who directly affirms, that God is the Efficient, and Author of all things.
Omni rei Deum Authorem superponere oportet: We must acknowledge God to be the
Author of all things. The Greek word is (...). And thus (as you see) the
yielding of a first Cause, (which we must yield of necessity) does forcibly
draw us on, to the yielding of a Deity.

CHAP. 4.
That these sensible and second motions, direct us unto a first. 2. That a
first motion, does necessarily imply, a first Mouer. 3. That this first Mouer,
is the cause of all the motions in the World. 4. And, that therefore, this
first Mouer, is nothing else, but God.

I Have already dispatched the first of those two physical considerations,
which I purposely selected, to declare, There is a God: taken from the first
Cause, and Causer of all natural things. I am now come to the second: (which
is taken from the first Motion, and Moouer, of all moveable things. Wherein, I
may be the shorter, because this Argument runs almost in the same tract,
which was traced by the former. But it is an Argument, so much insisted on,
both by Philosophers and Divines, that I know not any other, that is either
urged oftener, or enforced further. And therefore, for the better understanding
of our order in proceeding, I will contriue this Argument, into this gradation.
Fir^^ that second motions direct us, by necessity, unto a first. Secondly,
that this First Motion, does lead us yet further, unto a first Mouer. Thirdly,
that this first Mouer is the only cause, of all those several Motions, that
are found in all things. And, fourthly, that therefore this first Mouer, can be
nothing else; but God.

For the first of those four Steps; There is a first motion.
That these second and inferior Motions, do lead us by degrees, unto one first
and supreme Motion; Plato proves by this reason. Plato l. 10. de Leg. p. 874.
Quando aliud ab alio movetur, illudque rursum semper ab alio* eritne in
talibus aliquid, quod primo mouetur? At, quomodo id, cum ab aliquo moveatur,
eorum quae moventur primum erit? Certe, impossible id est. Sed quando aliquid,
seipsum mouens, aliud quoque mouebit, illudque aliud, and sic deinceps plurima
movebuntur; an aliud totius motus principium erit, quam mutatio eius quod
seipsum mouet? When as one thing is moved by another, and that still by
another, and so in infinitum; can there then be any thing, that has a first
motion? [no, surely, there cannot.] For how can that be the first moving of
all other, which it self is moved by another? This is a thing impossible. But,
if we grant, that there is something, which is moved only by it self, and
not by any other thing; if that move another thing, and that another, and so
there be many things moved in their order; then, the first beginning of all
those motions so moved by others, can be nothing else, but only the Impulsion
of that one first Mouer, which moves of himself. Out of which discourse of
Plato, we may gather these two Aphorisms. First, that, if there should be in
those motions, which are moved by another, an infinite progress, there could
none of them be first. Secondly, that, we must needs come, in the end, unto
some such thing, as is moved only of it self, and not of any other thing. And
thirdly, that, this on^ thing, which thus moves of it self, is the true
cause of motion, unto every other thing.

Aristotle, in like manner, though, in many other points dissenting from his
Master; yet, in this point of Motion, he consents fully with him: yea, and
presses the same reason, almost in the same form. Omne quod mouetur, ab
aliquo moueri necesse est. Arist. l. 8. Physic. c. 5. To. 1. p. 528.
Et, aut ab eo quod mouetur ab alio, aut ab eo quod non mouetur ab alio. Si ab
eo mouetur, quod ab alio motu cietur, mouens aliquod esse primum, quod ab alio
non mouetur, necesse est. Fieri enim non potest, vt in infinitum proficiscatur
id, quod mouet, atque mouetur ab alio: Quippe, cum infinitorum nihil sit
primum. Whatsoever thing is moved, must needs be moved of something; and
that thing which moves it, must needs it self be moved, either of another,
or not of another. If it be moved by such a thing as is moved of another, we
must come, by necessity, unto a first moouer, which is not moved by any other.
For it is impossible, to go still on for ever, in those things that are moved
by another. Because, in those things that are infinite, there can none of them
be first. And therefore, where there is granted to be any first thing, there
cannot be held to be an infinite proceeding.

Yea and again, a little after. Fieri non potest, vt id, quo motus affertur,
moveat absque eo quod movet a seipso. It cannot be, that that which is moved by
another, should be moved but by that which is moved by it self. And he gives
these examples. Baculus mouet lapidem, and mouetur a manu, quae ab homine
mouetur. The Staff moves the stone, the hand moves the staff, the man moves
the hand: and the man is moved (in some sort) of himself. For (as the Roman
Orator affirms) Quod animal est, Cic. l. 1. Tusc. p. 116.
motu mouetur interiore, and suo. Every living thing is moved, by an internal
motion of his own. So that the sum of those two forenamed Reasons, which I
have above set down in their Authors own words, is (in effect) thus much.
That, Whatsoever thing is moved must needs be moved by something: and that
thing, must either be moved by it self, or by some other thing. By it self
can no inferior or second thing be moved, but always by some former and
superior. For, as it subsisteth not by it self, but by another; so moves it
also, not it self, but by another. Motum enim suum non sibi debet, Hilar. l.
3. De Trin. p. 31.
sed Authori, (says Hilarie.) It owes all his motion, not unto his own
power, but to his Author and first Mouer. So that no inferior thing is moved of
it self, but only by the power of the supreme and first Mouer. Now, if all
these sensible and inferior things be moved of some other (as we plainly see
they are,) then may we, by them, ascend, as by steps and degrees, from the
lower to the higher, until we come at last, unto that first Mouer. For, in
those things that are moved by another, we cannot proceed in infinitum; but
must, at last, stay in one, which is the Mouer of all the other and yet it
self is moved by none other, but has both his motion, and his being, of
himself. And therefore must needs be God. This is the whole sum and effect
of that Argument. Whereby this first point is evidently cleared: That the
contemplation of these secondarie motions, do lead us, by necessity, unto a
first. Aquin. 1. Quaest. 2. Art. 3. p. 5.
Yea (and as Aquinas very wittily observes, as well in Motions as in causes)
There can be no Second, if there be no First; no inferior, if there be no
superior; no posterior, if no prior; nay, no last, if no first. And this
holds, not only in these relative denominations, but also in the true
existence of the very things themselves. So that, the motions of these inferior
Bodies, which we see, by sense, must lead us, of necessity, either to grant a
first Mouer: who is the Author of all the motion in the world: and therefore
must needs be God: or else, to yield, in motion, an infinite proceeding: which
is absurd, even to Reason, and utterly destroys all order in things: or else,
to hold, that There is no motion at all; as Melissus did, Motum non esse, sed
videri esse: Which is the greatest absurdity of all. An absurdity so gross,
Laert. in vita Melissi, p. 312.
as is confuted, even by sense. As Diogenes very wittily proved, against a
Philosopher, maintayning that error, that There was no motion. Behind whom he
slily coming, whipped him suddenly about the Legs. And then, whilst he was
running, he scornefully asked him, Whether now he thought there were any
motion? Not esteeming him worthy to be confuted by reason, but only to be
derided by that sensible demonstration. Joseph. l. 2. Cont. Apion p. 902.
For (as Josephus very well observes to this purpose) Insen satos, decet, non
verbis, sed operibus arguere: or rather indeed, verberibus, as Diogen^s did:
The best kind of arguing with mad men, is, with a word and a blow; not with
reason, but with stripes. And yet, even this gross absurdity would follow,
unless, from these secondarie motions, we should arise unto some first. For,
Si primum nihil est, omnino causa nulla est, says Aristotle, If there be no
first cause, Arist. l. 2 Metaphys. c. 2. To. 2. p. 1386.
there can be no cause at all. And so, If there be no first motion, there can
be no motion. Which, sense shows to be false. And if there be any second
motion, there must needs be a first. This, Reason shows to be true. Arist.
ibid.
And therefore, for this first point, I conclude it with Aristotle, that, Si
media sunt, necesse est finem esse. If there be any mean motion, there must
needs be an end of them. Arist. l 3 Meta. c. 4. To. 2 p. 1393.
And if an end, then a beginning. Neque enim infinitus est a^^quis motus, sed
cuiusque finis: says he, in another place: There is no motion so infinite,
but, in the end, it has an end; and consequently, a beginning. For, as the
Poet has truly observed, -- Finisque ab Origin pendet. Manilius. l 4. Astron.
p.

This is a Rule, That every End, On some Beginning must depend.


2 Let us therefore now ascend, There is a first Mouer.
from the first step, unto the second; that, If there be any first motion, then
must there needs be a first Mouer, which moves only of himself, and not by
any other. For, in every motion there be three things to be considered: The
Mouer, The Motion, and The thing moved: And these three things are never
confounded, though they ever be conjoined. But, as the Motion is one thing, and
the Moved another; so is it likewise between the Moved, and the Mouer. For (as
Picus Mirandula observes, very truly) In quolibet moto, Johan. Pic. Mirand in
Conclusi inibus su^s, To. To. 1. p. 58.
Motor est alius are mobili. In every motion, the Mouer is distinguished from
the thing that is moved. Yea, and Aristotle himself, unto the same purpose.
Quod mouet, and quod mouetur, diuisum esse videtur. Arist. l. ^. Phys. c. 4.
To. 1. p. 526.
That which moves, and that which is moved, are a diverse thing, and plainly
divided.

But yet, though these three be joined all together; yet is the Mouer, in
order, before either of the other, even by the law of Nature. The Motion cannot
be before the thing moved; nor yet the thing moved before the Mouer of it: but
always, the thing moved is before his motion; and always the Mouer before
either of them. For, as Philo Iudaeus affirms of the Motion; that Fieri non
potest, Philo Iud. l. De O^i^ic. Mundi. p. 7.
vt motus rem motam praecesserit: It cannot be, that any motion be, before the
thing moved, be. And so Aristotle affirms also of the Mouer; that, Arist. l.
de comm^ni An^malium motu. To. 1. p 916.
Motor rem mobilem praecurrere debet. The Mouer must forego the thing moved.
Now, if the Mouer be distinguished both from the motion it self, and from the
thing that is moved; yea and so distinguished, that it is before them both:
then, as every Effect does argue his Cause; so does every motion, argue his
Mouer: and consequently the first motion, his first Mouer: Whom, though we do
not see with the Eyes of the body; yet may we easily collect by Reason, Cic. l
2 de. Not. Deor. p. 215.
the Eye of the mind. To illustrate this point, by that familiar comparison,
which the Orator points at, in explication of this Reason. We see, by
experience, in a Clock (which is, as at were, an Artificial Heaven, measuring
out unto us the divisions of time) that every Wheel is moved every one of them
by another, until at last we be brought unto the weight it self, which moves
them all together. Whither when we be come, we can proceed no further by
sense; and therefore, must collect the rest by reason. Now, Reason plainly
teaches us, that though the weight do move all the wheels of it self; yet
that it could not tie it self unto the line: but that, that must needs be
done, by some other thing. And that therefore, there must needs have been some
Author, and contriuer of that cunning piece of work: who first conceived in
himself, by a mental Idea, the whole reason and conueiance of all these
several motions; and then accordingly disposed all the wheels, and waights,
into their several places. So that, the motion of the wheels, in every Clock,
does manifestly tell us, that there must needs have been an Author of that
curious work: whose artificial workmanship and contriuing, is that, which
has given, unto all those wheels, their motion. And, as it is in a Clock
(which I called before an Artificial Heaven, because it measures unto us the
divisions of time) so is it also in the Heavens themselves: which may as fitly
be called a natural Clock, for their measuring, by their motions, the
distinction of time. We see, by experience, in them, that all these inferior
and elementarie Bodies, do receive their motions from the Heavens, their
superiors: and so likewise, even in the Heavens themselves, that the lower is
still moved by his next higher, until we come, by degrees, unto the highest
of all, called Primum mobile; that is, the first moveable body, which moves
all the rest. Now, when we are come thither, sense can lead us no further.
But yet Reason can. For then, we must collect, that as the wheels in a Clock
could not set themselves on moving; but that this must needs be the work of
their Maker: so likewise the Heavens, though they move without all ceasing; yet
have not taken unto themselves their motion, but have had it given them, Arist.
l. 2. de Generat. c. 10. To. 1. p. 676.
by their Author and Mouer. For, as Aristotle truly teaches, Si motio cietur,
necesse est, praeesse motorem aliquem: Wheresoever there is motion, there must
needs have been some Mouer before, and some Moderator and guider of that
motion, from whom, at the first, it received his beginning. So that, Primum
Mobile does necessarily imply, that there is a Primus Motor; which must needs
be God: be he who, or what soever. For, Quodnam erit, Nazian. Orat. 2. de
T^eol. p. 28.
obsecro, (says Nazianzene) a quo vniuersum hoc mouebitur? Quidnam illud
vicissim mouebit? Quid item illud? Idque adeo in infinitum? What, I pray you,
is that which does move the whole world? What is that, which moves it? And
what again that, which moves it? and so in infinitum? Even Aristotle himself
resolves that Quaestion: Arist. l. 8. Phys. c. 5. To. 1. p. 529.
that Omne quod mouetur, a superiore mouetur: Whatsoever thing is moved, is
moved by some superior Mouer. From whence it must needs follow, that even
Primum Mobile it self, which the Orator calls, Cic. l. 2. De. Not. Deor. p.
215.
Extremam oram, and determinationem mundi, that is; The furthest coast, and
frontier of the world: though it be, among the Heavens, the highest of all
other, yea, and that, which moves them all together; yet has it, above it, a
superior mouer, by whom it self is moved: Which can be nothing else, but God.
And thus, the first Mouer may necessarily be gathered out of the first motion,
even by consequence of Reason. Yea, and so it is likewise, Arist. l. 8. Phys.
c. 5. To. 1 p. 528.
even by Aristotle himself. Si quid ab eo mouetur, quod ab alio motucietur,
mouens aliquod esse primum, quod ab alio non mouetur, necesse est. If anything
be moved, by that which is moved of another, it will bring us, at the last,
unto a first Moouer, which moves only of it self, and not by any other

3 Let us now come to the third step: The first Mouer is the first Cause of
all Motion.
that, If there be a first Mouer; as has formerly been proved; and, if he
have the fountain of all true motion in himself; as is generally confessed;
that then, he must needs be the first Cause of motion, unto every other
thing. And this is likewise testified, by the principal Philosophers, Plato l.
10. de Legib p. 874.
with an uniform consent. Plato says directly, that, Initium omnium motionum,
primumque motum, illum, fateri necesse est, quo quid seipsum mouet. Et, hanc
esse antiquissimam omnium, potentissimamque motionem. We must needs confess,
that the very first motion and beginning of all motions, is only that motion,
whereby a thing moves it self. This is both the most ancient, and the most
potent motion. Now, there is nothing in the world, that moves of it self, but
only God himself. No not, even the soul of any living thing, Arist. l. 2. de
Anima. c. 1. To. 1. p. 799.
if we will properly speak. For, though it be defined to be, Actus primus
corporis naturalis, that is, the very first act of a natural Body: yet must
that be understood, but only of his own body: yea, and that only, but in
respect of our sense. That is therefore said to be, Actus primus; because
there is not evident any sensible mouer of it, as there is in bodies: but in
respect of this invisible first Mouer (which is its Author and Creator) it is
but Actus secundarius. Not a thing that is moved by his own proper power, but
only by a power received from another, namely from this first Mouer, who is
Actus primus indeed, and in whom the Soul has only both his Living, Act. 17.
28.
Moving, and Being. And so is it likewise in every other thing. There is no
motion in any thing, but it flows from this first Mouer, as from his first
fountain: as Tully affirms in express and plain terms. Cic. l. 1. Tusc.
p. 116.
Quod seipsum mouet, caeteris quae mouentur fons est, and principium mouendi:
That which moves of it self, is the fountain of motion unto all other
things.

So Aristotle likewise, Arist. l. d^ communi Animal. (...). To. 1. p. 912.
almost in the same words. Id, principium aliarum motionum est, quod sibi motum
affert. That is the Beginner of other motions, that is the Giver of motion to
it self. And again, in another place: Fier^ non potest, Arist. l. 8. Phys. c.
5. To. 1. p. 528.
vt id, quo motus affertur, moueat, absque eo quod mouet a seipso. There is
nothing can be moved, but only by that, which is moved by it self: meaning, as
by the first Cause: though not, as by the Next. And again, in an other place,
he gives direct instance, that, In Medijs, that is, in second and subalter^e
motions; that which is inferior, is always moved by his next superior; and
that, Arist. l. Metaphys. c. 2. To. 2. p. 1386.
by his next; and that therefore all the rest must be moved by the first, from
the highest unto the lowest. Mediorum, quorum, extra, aliquid primum and
vltimum est, necesse est, quod prius est, Causam esse eorum, quae post illud
sunt: In those middle motions, which have any first, the former is always the
Cause of the latter: and so by consequent, The first, of all the rest. And
this, in another place, Arist. l. de Mundo. To. 2. p. 1567.
he directly affirms to be God. Natura diuina, de simplici quodam rei primae
motu, virtutem proximis largitur: atque, de ijs iterum, ad remotiorae; quoad
per vniuersum trans^at. The divine Nature, from a certain simple motion of the
first thing, gives a moving virtue to the next; and so, by them, unto the more
remote, until it have pierced and passed throughout all the whole world. For,
as Plutarch well observes, Plut. l. de Pythiae Or^^ulis. To. 3. Mo^. p. 493.
to this purpose: though, Quaeque res suo mouetur modo: yet, vnicum est, quod
mouet omnia. Though every thing move, after his own proper manner; yet they
all of them are moved, by one first and general Mouer.

And that we should not think, that there can be in motions a perpetual
ascent, which can never find an end; that Aristotle rejects, as an absurd
conceit. Non est enim generatio to infinita sursum versus. And so not Motio
neither. But, Arist 2. Metaphys c. 2. To. 2. p. 1386.
as in another place he directly affirms, We must needs, at the last,
ascend up unto some first. Non in infinitum hoc proficiscitur, sed stabit
tandem alicubi; atque er^t quidpiam, quod primo Causa erit vt omnia moueantur.
Arist. l. 7. Phys. c. 1. To. 1. p. 511.
We cannot proceed unto infinity in Motion: but we must stay our selves at
last, and come unto some one thing, which is the first Cause of the motion of
all things. And this (as in another place he affirms) is not only his own
particular opinion, dissenting, upon sigularitie, from others; but the general
Tenet, of all the Philosophers. Consid^rare oportet, vtrum sit causa motus and
principium, Arist. l. 8. Phys. c. 1. To. 1. p. 530.
id, quod motu seipsum ciet; an id, quod ab alio ^gitatur? Illud, omnes vt^que
ponent. He moves the question, Whether of the twain is the beginning of
motion? That, which moves of his own power; or, That, which is moved of
another? And he resolves it, that, All men do agree upon the former.

So that, by the general Consent of all men, it appears, that the first
beginning of all motion, must be by some such Mouer, as is not moved by any
other: but has all the power of motion shut up in his own power. And that
therefore, this First mouer must needs be God, and none other. Which is the
forth step of this Chapter.

4 For, The first Mouer is God.
if these secondarie and lower motions do lead us up unto a higher: and those
unto an higher, until at last we ascend unto some highest Mouer; which is the
Cause of motion unto all the lower: then, what can this highest Mouer be else,
which moves all other things, but only God himself? This Tullie, in plain
and express terms, affirms: where he puts both those properties, which
before I have named, into the very definition of God; that he is, Cic. l. 1.
Tusc p. 116.
both Omnia mouens, and Ipse praeditus motu sempiterno. He is both the Author
of motion unto all other things, and the Cause of motion in himself. Both
these he affirms to be the properties of God. And so Aristotle affirms,
that Local motion, Arist. l. 12 Metaphys. c. 8. To. 2. p 15* 5.
in what body soever, does only proceed from some divine Power. Si namque
Latio Lationis Causa erit, illam quoque oportebit aliorum gratia esse. Quare,
cum non ^it processus in infinitum, finis omnis Lationis, erit diuinorum
corporum aliquod, quae in Coelo feruntur. If one Local motion should be the
cause of another; then it also should be caused and be from others, and for
others sake. Wherefore, seeing there is no infinite progress in things
moveable; the end of all Lation (or Local motion) must be some one of those
heavenly Bodies, which are carried about. Yea, and that we should not think,
that, by those Divine Bodies, he means any of the Stars: in another place
he affirms, Arist. l. 12. Metaphys. c. 10. To. 2. p. 1508.
that this first and supreme Mouer, is a thing, above all sense; whereas all
the Sarres are sensible. For, si non erunt alia, praeter sensibilia (says he)
non erit principium, nec ordo, nec generatio; sed semper principij principium:
If there should be no other then sensible things; then should there be no
beginning, nor order, nor generation of things: but always a Principle to
every Principle. Whereby he infinuateth, that the first and supreme Mouer, is
not of a sensible, but of a divine, and a spiritual Nature. Yea, and Tully
expressly affirms; that it is God, which gives motion, even unto the very
Heavens. Dedit autem Diuinis, duo genera motus, Cic. l. de Universe. p. 431.
etc. He has given to the Heavenly bodies, Arist. l. de Mundo. To. 2. p. 1567.
two kinds of Motions, etc. Yea, and Aristotle again in another place,
compares God unto those Players with Puppets, that by the pulling of one
string, can set the whole Engine, and every part of it, on moving. Which
Anaxagoras plainly acknowledges, when he makes his Men's, Arist. l. 8. Phys.
c. 5. To. 1. p. 529.
to be Principium motus: Trismeg. pimand. Dial. 1. p. 369.
by which word, Laert, in vita Zenonis p. 253.
he means nothing else but God. Men's enim est Deus: says Trismegistus. God,
which is Men's, is the beginning of (...) motion. And, as Zeno likewise expressly
affirms, this title of Men's, is but the Philosophers name and appellation of
God. Deum vnum esse, ipsumque Mentem appellari. There is but one God, and he is
called Men's. So that, when Anaxagoras called this first Mouer, Men's; his
meaning, by Men's, is nothing else, but Deus. And, that we impose not a forced
sense, upon that word, by other men's expositions; the same may be gathered,
even out of his own writings: and that, by two substantial reasons. First, by
those titles and appellations, which he bestows upon it: and then, by those
works, which he ascribes unto it. Both which, are peculiar and proper unto
God. The titles, which he bestows upon his men's, be these Mentem, Arist. l.
1. De Anima. c. 2. To. 1. p. 787.
esse Principium omnium, solamque, rerum omnium, ipsam esse simplicem, and non
mistam, and puram esse sinceramque. Atque eidem Principio haec vtraque
conuenire, Cognitionem, and motum; Vniuersumque mentem hanc mouisse. This men's
(says he) was the first Beginning of all things, being it self most simple,
and without any mixture, most pure, and most sincere. And having, in it self,
the true and real possession, not only of knowledge, but also of motion: yea,
and that all the whole world is moved by this mind, and by this Spirit. Now,
these be the peculiar properties of God: in whom (as the Apostle testifies)
are all the treasures both of knowledge, and Wisdom. Yea, Col. 2. 3.
and of motion too: for, Act. 17. 28.
in him we both live, and move, and have our being. So that, by this
description, his men's must needs be God. Yea and so is it likewise, by his
ascription too. For he ascribes unto this men's, the very making of the world:
which is the work of none other, but only of God. Cum omnia simul essent,
Arist. l. 8. Phys. c. 1. p. 519.
atque infinito tempore quiscerent; men's mouit, ac segregauit. When as all
things had lain quiet, for an infinite space together, it was men's that first
moved and ordered them asunder: alluding unto that confused Chaos, wherein, as
the Poet speaks, there were, Non been iunctarum discordia semina rerum, Ovid,
l. 1. Metam. p. 1.

There disagreeing seeds were clearly seen,
Of things which had not well conjoined been.
Now, this was the proper work of God. Yea, and this was the proper Spirit of
God, that did it: as even Plutarch, in plain and express words, records it.
Anaxagoras dixit, initio constitisse corpora, Dei autem mentem ea digessisse,
Plut. l. 1. de Placitis c. 7. To. 2. Mor. p. 15.
atque omnium rerum ortus effecisse; Anaxagoras said, that there were bodies in
the first beginning; but that the mind and hand of God digested and ordered
them, and effected the original of all things. Mark, Dei mentem. This m^ns,
the Primus motor, which first gave things their being, and reduced them into
order, was nothing else, but Dei men's, The wisdom, and the Spirit of God: Pro.
8. 27. etc.
who (as it is also testified in the holy Scripture) when he prepared the
heavens, was ther^, and when he set the compass upon the deep^. Yea, and this
was not the singular opinion of only Anaxagoras; but the common opinion of the
most of the Philosophers. Yea, and of the Poets, too. Virgil says in express
terms, that the first mouer of the world, was only this Men's: Men's agitat
molem, Virgil. l. 6. Aen^^d. p. 267.
and magno se corpore miscet. Yea, and that we should understand, that under
the name of men's, he understands nothing, but the Creator of the world, he
adds in the next words: Inde hominum, pecudumque genus, vitaeque volantum.
That massy Chaos bodies huge was moved by this Men's.
And men, Beasts, Birds, and Creatures all forthwith proceeded thence.
All which works, in another place, he expressly attributes unto God, under
his own express name. He is the mouer of the World, he is the maker, both of
men, and beasts, and birds. -- Deum namque ire per omnes Virgil. l. 4. Georg.
p. 94.

Terr^sque tractusque maris, calumque profundum.
Hin^ p^cudes, armenta, viros, genus omne ferarum. etc.
God walks through the World, in every Coast,
And goes the winding Seas Tract uttermost:
Yea, and the most high Heavens. From him, all living
Both men, and Beasts receive their life, and being.
Thus, that which before he shadowed, under the name of men's, he plainly now
expresses, under the name of God: making him the first mouer, and Creator of
the world. And so likewise does Plato. For he says, that there is a certain
Anima, Plato, l. 10. de Leg. p. 875.
or Spirit, which does, in omnibus, quae mouentur, habitare, and coelum and
cuncta gubernare: which dwells in all things, that have any motion, and which
gou^^neth both heaven, and every other thing. So that, though he alter
Anaxagoras his term; yet he means the self same thing. For, as Parmenides
affirms, Laert, in vita Parmenidis, p. 311.
Anima and men's idem sunt: Though they differ in name, yet are they one, and
the same thing. Yea, and Plato, in the same place, affirms this Anima, which
is the mouer of all things, to be God, and nothing else. Deumesse, omnes
arbitramur. We all suppose, There is a God. And so likewise does Theophrastus:
who denies, even Nature it self to be the first mouer, even of natural
bodies: ascending up higher, and ascribing all their motion unto a superior and
more divine power. Theophra^^i, in Metaph. c. 1. Apud Aristot. To. 2. p. 1539.
Hoc, alij cuidam meliori ac priori relinquendum est potestati. We must ascribe
this, unto another, and a better, and a superior power. Now, what is there
either better, or superior to Nature, but only the God of Nature? Yea, and a
little before, he expressly affirms, that this first mouer, and Beginner, is
indeed nothing else, but the very God of Nature. Diuinum omnium principium
existit, per quod and sunt, and permanent vniuersa: That first Beginner, from
whence all things have both their consisting, and existing, is a divine power
and Nature.

To conclude this whole Chapter. All those Arguments, which Tullie brings, to
prove the Soul to be immortal, are much more concludent, to prove God to be
aeternal, whose Motion is both of himself and perpetual. For, there he
plainly tells us, that there is a certain thing, which moves only of it
self, Cic. l. 1. Tosc. p. 116.
and yet gives motion unto all other things. Quod caeteris fons est, and
principium movendi. And therefore is, both without all beginning; quia,
Principij nulla est origo: Of a Principle there is no Original: and without
all ending; quia, Quod seipsum mouet, quontam nunquam deseritur a se, nunqu^m
moveri quidem desinet. That which moves it self, inasmuch as it never
deserteth it self. it never desisteth to be moved: and consequently must needs
be aeternall. For, Quod seipsum movet, aeternum est. That which moves it self
(and is mou^d of no other) is aeternal: Now, none of all these properties,
which here he sets down do agree unto the soul, but only in some
comparison. For, the Soul has neither his motion of it self, nor yet gives
motion unto all other things, nor is aeternal or without all beginning. This is
proper and peculiar unto God himself alone, whose title is, The aeternall.
Genesis 21. 33.
As for the Soul, though it may be called Immortal; yet can it not,
aeternall. Immortal it is, because it has no end: but aeternall it is not,
because it had a beginning. But God is truly the mouer of himself, and the
giver of motion unto all other things. He is truly aeternall, both without all
beginning, and without all ending, as one that has all his being only of
himself: and therefore can never cease to be, because he cannot forsake
himself. Quic quid enim per se est, Paling. in. Libr. p. 169.
semper durare necesse est,
Cum nullo indigeat, cum solo pendeat a se;
Cum vi non possit, cum nolit sponte perire,
says Palingenius. What e're subsisteth of it self, must needs be
euer-lasting,
As needing other none; and selfe-dependence neuer-wasting.
And therefore perish cannot it by an external sway,
Nor by internal vnfor'ct mind will perish or decay.
So that, all those high properties, which both Plato and Tully do apply,
Plato. in Ph^dro p. 450.
but improperly, unto the Soul; may, most truly and properly, be applied,
unto God: That he, both has all his motion of himself, and gives all motion
unto all other things, and that he has neither beginning nor ending; but is
truly aeternall from all everlasting: being not only The first Mouer, but the
sole- mouer of all things, in whom, all other things have their only motion,
and from whom they do all of them receive their only being. So that, we may
truly affirm, as it is in the Epigram, that, Principium Deus est Mundi, quo
cuncta moventur, Prosper. Epigr. 58. p. 169.

Et quae permittit, vel iubet, Author agit.
The Worlds beginning, lo, it is God, by whom all things are moved:
And what he suffer's, or command's, he does, as Author proved.
Especially in Motion (as Bradwardine very notably declares in these four
true positions: that, Qualibet Creatura mouente, Bradwardin. l. 1. c. 4. p.
172. 174.
Deum necessario commouere, That what Creature soever moves, God always
moves with it. The second: That nothing can move any other thing, except God
himself do properly move the same thing. The third: That nothing can move any
other thing, except God do immediately move the same thing. The fourth: That
nothing can move another, except God move it more immediately, then any other
second Mouer.

So that; to recapitulate the sum of this whole Chapter; If these second and
inferior motions do lead us unto a first, and that unto a first Mouer, which
is the very fountain of motion in all other: then must needs this First Mouer,
be God himself, and none other. But, the first of these three points has
been sufficiently proved, in the first three Sections of this Chapter. And
therefore, the Conclusion follows necessarily from them; That this first
Mouer must be God, as we have seen in this fourth. Yea, and that (beside the
force of the consequence) by diverse direct Testimonies, both of Heathens, and
Christians. Which is the second Consideration, borrowed from the Physics,
whereby it may be proved, That there is a God.

CHAP 5.
That the true cause of Sickness, is Sin against God. 2. That God, for this
cause, does threaten, to send Sickness. 3. That he sends it according to
his threatening. 4. That Physicians observe the stroke of Gods Vengeance, to be
in many Sicknesses.

I Have hitherto unfolded certain Considerations, from whence we may collect,
that There is a God: first, out of the Metaphysics; and then, out of the
Physics. Let us now come unto Physic. For, Vby desinit Philosophus, ibi
incipit Medicus. Where the Philosopher ends, there the Physician enters. And
therefore, let us propound some Considerations, out of it. For, it has many in
it. But in this, as in the former, I will insist, but upon two: letting pass
all the other: that is, upon Diseases; and, upon their Remedies. Both which are
acknowledged, to be the proper and peculiar works of God, almost by the
general confession of all men, both Christians and Heathens. For our better,
and more orderly proceeding wherein, I will reduce this first discourse as
concerning Diseases, unto these four heads. First, that they both confess,
the first and original cause of sickness, to be only men's sins. Secondly,
that God, for this cause, has oftentimes threatened to punish men, with
sickness. Thirdly, that accordingly, he has sent diverse kinds of grievous
sicknesses, unto many. And fourthly, that even Physicians themselves do find
in many sicknesses, that they be divine punishments.

For the first of which four Heads: What is the true Original cause of
sickness: S. Chrysostom tells us, Chrysostom. Sermon. 10 in Romans To. 4. p. 100.
that it is the part of every good Physician; inquirere semper in morborum
radic^m, tque ita pervenire ad ipsum mali fontem: to s^arch into the root of
diseases and sicknesses, and so to proceed unto the fountain of those evils.
And S. Basil he tells us, that it is the part of a discreet and wise
patient, not to leave this inquisition only to the Physician, but he himself
also to search into a the causes of his own diseases, that so he may the
better attain to know their remedies. Nos, Basil* Asceticis. To. 2. p. 292.
plagas a Deo suscipientes, qui been and prudenter vitam nostram moderatur;
principio quidem inquiramus cognitionem rationis, ob quam nos flagellet.
Whenever we are scourged and chastised by God who guides our whole life by
his wisdom and goodness, we ought first to search carefully, for what cause
he so corrects us. For, the cause being once found, the Remedy is half
found, and the cure, in a manner, already half performed. Medici, Cic. l. 3.
Tasc. p. 142.
causa morbi invent^, curationem esse inventam, putan^. Physi^ians, having once
found out the cause of a disease, they think they have found the cure.

Now, for the true cause of diseases, Sin is the first cause of Sickness.
and Sicknesses; Plut. l. 5. de Placitis. c. 30. To. 2. Mor. p. 65.
Hi^ron. in c. 3. Naum. To. 6. p. 209.
though it greatly have puzelled, Item Sto^aeus Sermon. 98. p. 542.
both the greatest Philosophers, Et Sermon. 99. p. 545.
and the learned Physicians, to find out, what it is: some assigning them,
unto the excess or defect of the primary Qualities of Heat, Cold, Moist,
Dry: some, unto the impuritie and corruption of our meats: some, unto the
infection of unwholesome and putrid airs; and to diverse such other Material
causes; wherein they be greatly divided amongst themselves: Yet is there a full
agreement, both of Heathens, and Christians, that God is the first Efficient
cause of them; and that Sin is the true Impulsiu^ cause, which inforceth him
to send them. This the Prophet David expressly declares, when he called
Sickness, The Rebuke of God: and affirms, Psalm. 39. 11.
that, For sin, he inflicts it, upon man. When thou, with rebukes do
chasten man for Sin, Romans 5. 12.
thou make his beauty to consume away. This also the Apostle Paul expressly
declares, when he tells us that, By one man, Sin entered into the world;
and Death* by Sin. And again, in another place; 1. Co^. 11. 30.
where he tells the Corinthians, that, for their Abuses in receiving the
Sacrament, they were stricken by God, with diverse kinds of punishments: some of
them, with Sickness; some of them, with Weakness; and some of them, with
Death. Yea, and this our Savior Christ himself expressly declares, when he
bids the sick-man, whom he had lately cured, to go, Ioh. 5. 14.
and sin no more, lest a worse thing come unto him. Thereby plainly
declaring, that his Sin was both the cause of his former Sickness, and would
be also of his future, if he sinned any more.

And, that Sin is indeed the true cause of diseases, we may see it plainly
verified, in all these memorable Sicknesses, that are recorded unto us, in the
Holy Scriptures. The Botches, Ex* 9. 10.
wherewith the Egyptians weary smitten, was, for their rebellion against God,
and their oppression of his People. The Leprosy wherewith the Prophetess
Miriam was smitten, Number. 12. 8. 10.
was, for being so envious against the Prophet Moses. Number. 25. 1. 2. 9.
The Pestilence, wherewith the Israelites were smitten, was for their adultery
with the Daughters of Moab; and for their idolatry with their profane god. 1.
Sam. 5. 6 9.
The Emerods, wherewith the Philistines were smitten, was, for their Impiety in
detayning the Ark of God.

And so generally, in all the rest. There is almost, in no place, any mention
of any greiuous and exemplary Sickness, but there is, in the same place, some
mention of that Sin, for whose punishment it was sent. In which forenamed
instances, we may observe these two things. First, that, not only the
pestilence, and leprosy, and such like grievous and infectious Sicknesses
(which are called Morbi Sontici, that is, mischeiuous diseases) are the
scourges, A. Gellius. l. 20. c. 1. p. 280. b.
and strokes of God: but also all other inferior diseases, as Emerods, and
Botches, and such like smaller annoyances, Deuteronomy 28. 27.
as even he himself professes in another place. Secondly, that those
diseases are sent by God unto men, to correct and chasten them, for their sin.

Neither is this the testimony of the Holy Scripture only, but also of the
Heathens, even in their own Histories. Wherein, we may observe, that
whenever there befell them, the public calamity of any general sickness,
they still imputed it unto their sins, provoking the anger of some or other
of their gods. As may be manifestly showed, Herod. l. 1. p. 51.
by manifold instances. Herodotus ascribes that greiuous sickness which was
sent upon the Scythians, to their sacrilege, Pausan. in Achaicis, p. 279.
in sacking the Temple of Venus. Pausanias ascribes that devouring sickness,
which was sent among the Jones, unto the profane lust of Menalippus, Idem, in
Arcadicij, p. 313.
and Comaetho: And that general abortion, which happened among the Caphyens
wives, only unto the cruelty of their bloody husbands; in stoning (for a
^leight cause) certain young and wanton Children. The hand of divine Justice
inflicting their punishment, in the very same subject, wherein they had
offended. Their cruelty exercised upon other men's Children, being justly
punished by the death of their own, in a most equal retaliation. Idem in
Beot^cis p. 353.
The same Author ascribes the dropsy and lousie-sicknesse of Cassander,
Herod. l. 1. p. 66.
unto his cruelty and infidelity unto Alexander his Master. And Herodotus
again reports of the Persians, that they generally held, that whosoever was
smitten with the leprous infection, he was surely a profane person; and had
(doubtless) committed some great and grievous sin, against their god, the
Sun: though they knew not what it was. And therefore, they banished them, out
of all their Cities: collecting from the sickness, the stroke of Gods Justice,
even in an unknown Cause. And this, which we have seen in the Histories of
the Greeks, we may see yet more plainly, in the Histories of the Romans.

For, Plut. in vit. Romuli. p. 67. Liuie l. 6. p. 112.
Plutarch ascribes that destroying plague, which happened among them, in the
time of Romulus, unto the treachery, which was practiced in the murder of
Tatius. And Liuy ascribes another such like plague, which followed the
condemnation of Manlius Capitolinus, unto that injustice, which was used in his
death. And thus have, even the Heathen, been taught, in the very School of
Nature, without going any further, that the true cause indeed of all sickness
and diseases, are only men's sins, provoking Gods Justice to take vengeance
of their wickedness. Psalm. 38. 3.
As David plainly confesses in one of the Psalms, There is nothing sound in
my flesh, becouse of thine anger; neither is there rest in my bones, because of
my sin.

2 Which Lesson, may, God threatens sickness for men's sins. Leuit. 26. 16.
15. Deuteronomy. 7. 15.
yet a great deal more perfectly, be learned, in the holy School of God. For
there, he himself threatens (and that, in many places) that, if men do
refuse to obey his Commandments, he will punish their disobedience, with
diverse greiuous sicknesses. Of which places (for example) I will instance but
in one: which is, indeed, most excellent; and which, very sufficiently, may
serve for all the rest. It is, in the Book of Deuteronomy. Where, God
threatens most severely, Deuteronomy. 28. 15. etc.
that, If they will not obey the voice of the Lord, to keep, and to do his
commandments, and ordinances: that then all these Curses shall come upon them,
and overtake them. Cursed shall they be in the Town, and cursed in the field.
Cursed in their basket, and cursed in their dough. Cursed in the fruit of
their body, in the fruit of their land, and in the fruit of their Cattle.
Cursed when they go out, Deu. 28. 21. 22. 27. 28. 35. 59.
and cursed when they come in. Yet further. That the Lord will make the
Pestilence to cleave unto them, until he have consumed them. That he will
smite them, with the consumption, and with the fever, and with the burning
ague, and with the fervent heat, and with the sword, and with blasting, and
with mildewe. And with the botch of Egypt, and with the Em^rods, and with the
scab, and with the itch; so that they cannot be healed. And with madness, and
with blindness, and with astonyi^^^^ (...). And that he, will smite them, in
the knees, and in the thighs, with a sore b^tch^* so t^^t they cannot be
healed; even from the sole of the foot, unto the ^^ppe of the he^d. And that
he will make their plagu^s wonderful, and the plagues of their seed, even
great plagues, and of long continuance; and sore diseases, and of long durance.
So that, they shall want that common comfort of al sicknesses; Si longus, leuis;
si grauis, breuis, that if it be long, Cic. l. 2. De ^in. p. 62.
it will be the lighter; and if it be fierce, it will be the shorter. But he
threatens such a sickness, as shall be, both Longus and Grauis: both fierce,
and of continuance. And he brought such a one, 2. Chro. ^1. 13. 14. etc.
upon the King Iehoram: whom, for his cruelty and idolatry, God threatened to
plague, with an incurable sickness, which should exhaust and consume him, by
the rotting of his bowels. Which sickness, being sent accordingly unto him,
it dispatched him not at once (as it did Herod, and Antiochus) but, Acts 12. 23.
2. Mac. 9. 9.
held him in greiuous torments, for the space of two whole years. Now, thus
many threats of so many sicknesses, God would never have made, but that he
knew his own power, and could command all manner of diseases, at his will and
pleasure. For, to threaten, is ridiculous; but even among us men, where, there
is not a power, to inflict, what one does threaten?

3 But, that he threatened not more in word, then he was well able to perform
in deed, God sends all kinds of sicknesses unto men.
we may evidently see throughout the whole tract of the holy history. Where
there is so particular mention, of all those same diseases, to have been
really inflicted by God, which, before, by name are mentioned, that it
manifestly appears, that God is both mindful and true of his word* most
faithfully performing, not only what he promises, but also what he
threatens And therefore says S. Augustine. Nemo dicat, in cord suo; Verum
est, quod promittit; falsum, quod minatur. Nam sicut, quod promittit verum est;
sic quod minatur, certum est. Let no man once surmise, Aug. in Psalm. 94. To. 8.
p. 1070.
that God is true, in his promises; but false, in his threatenings. For, as
that, which he promises, is true: so that, which he threatens, is sure. As we
may evidently see, in all those particular diseases, which, in the
fore-alledged place, God reckons up unto us. For the first of them, the
Plague: God in^licted that sickness, upon his own people, Number. 16. 41, 46.
the Israelites, for their grudging and murmuring against the Prophet Moses.
For the second of them, the Consumption: he inflicted that sickness upon the
wicked King Iehoram: of whom it is recorded expressly, that he was, Longa
consumtus tabe. Yea, 2. Chro. 21. 19. in Vulgata.
and the good King David was also touched with it, as it may be gathered out
of his own complaint: I am even consumed by the stroke of thine hand. For the
third of them, Psalm. 39. 10.
the Fever: he inflicted that sickness, both upon Peter's wives mother, and
upon Publius his father. For the fourth of them, The fervent heat: he
inflicted that sickness, at another time, upon the Israelites. The inhabitants
of the Land, are burned up, and few men are left. Yea, Isay. 24 6.
and even herein also he spared not his own beloved David. Psalm 38. 7.
Who complains again, That his Reins are full of burning, and that there is
nothing sound in his flesh. For the fifth of them, Exodus 9. 10.
Boyles and Botches: Isay, 1. 6.
though they be called in that place the Botch of Egypt; yet inflicted he it,
not only upon the Egyptians, but also upon the Jews. From the sole of the
foot unto the head, there is nothing whole, but wounds, and swelling, and
sores: full of Corruption. For the sixth of them, 1. Sam. 5. 9. 12.
the Emerods: he inflicted that disease, upon the Philistims. For the seventh
of them, the itch and the scabb: he inflicted that disease, Job. 2. 7. 8.
upon his servant Job. For the eight of them, Madness: he inflicted that
evil, Isai. 19. 14.
upon the Princes of Noph, by mingling among them, the spirit of giddiness.
For the ninth of them, Blindness: he inflicted that evil, Genesis 19. 11. 2.
both upon the Sodomites, Kin. 6. 18.
and upon the Aramites. And for the tenth, and last of them, that is to say,
Amazement and Astonishment of heart: he inflicted that disease upon King
Antiochus. 1. Mac. 6. 8 9. 1^
When the King had heard these words, he was astonished and sore moved:
therefore he laid him down upon his bed, and fell sick for sorrow:
confessing that his sleep was departed from him, and that, for very care, his
heart failed within him. So that, there is none of all the forenamed
sicknesses, which he threatened in word, but he shows that he had power to
inflict the same in deed. By all which memorable instances, it evidently
appears, that there is no sickness at all, neither so great nor so little,
but that God can inflict it, both when, and where he will.

Yea, and even the very Heathen confess also the same. For, even their own
Histories, as well as the Scriptures, do number all the forenamed diseases to
be nothing else indeed, but only divine punishments. For the first of them the
Plague: that memorable Pestilence, which Homer so describes to have fallen
among the Greeks, in the Trojans war, is by him ascribed unto Apolloes
anger: Apollo, plenus irarum, Homer, l. 1. Iliad p. 3.
noctique ipsi assimilis.
Apollo, full of wrath and rage, Seems like an hideous night's praesage.
And that fearful plague, Thucid. l. 2. p. 130.
which Thucidides describes to have fallen upon the Athenians, in the
Peloponnesian war, is ascribed by him also, unto the anger of Apollo. And
that wasting and devouring pestilence, which Ovid describes to have fallen
upon the Aeginets, is by him ascribed unto the wrath of Juno: Dira lues
populis, Ovid, l. 7. Metam. p. 278.
ira Iunonis iniquae,
Incidit. --
A cursed Plague upon the People fell,
It was, cause Juno was not pleased well.
And that destroying plague, which fell again upon the Athenians, for their
condemning of Socrates, is ascribed by another unto the wrath of Jupiter. Pro
Iovis offensa, Pestis accessit. Max. Tyrius Scr^. ^9. p. 485.
Where he calls it expressly, the Judgment of God. Eiusmodi iudicijs vtitur
Deus. They all of them directly reputing the Plague to be nothing else, but the
vengeance of God. They were wrong in the particular, in ascribing those
sicknesses unto their false gods, who being but dead men, were not able to do
them either good or harm: but yet right in the general, in ascribing them to
God; for God indeed was he that sent them, though happily he used the Devils
ministry in them. For the second of them, the Consumption: Pausanias
reports of Phyallus, (...) p. 390.
Captain of the Phocenses; that he first was threatened by Apollo in a dream,
that he should consume, as bare as a certain brazen (...), which was
consecrated unto him, in his Temple, by Hippocrates. Which miserable
consumption, he afterward accordingly did bring upon him. For the third of
them, the fever: Quintus Curtius reports of Alexander Magnus, Quint. Curt. l.
10. p. 415.
that he, abusing the consecrated vessels of Hercules, in the very same City,
yea and in the same manner, as (...) had before, Dan. 5. 2. 3. etc.
in his abusing of the vessels Gods holy Temple: he was suddenly strooken,
in the midst of his Banquet, even as he was in drinking. Nondum Herculis
Scypho epoto, repent, velut telo confixus, ingemuit. He suddenly cried out, as
if he had been shot with a deadly dart. Which stroke was none other, Sabel.
Aeneid. 4. l. 6. p. 807.
but only the sudden blow of a fever: Sueton. in vit. ^iti. c. 10. p. 115.
as Sabellicus relates his disease. And with the same disease was Titus also
smitten, as Suetonius reports: Yea and that no less suddenly, in his
returning from their plays. Which stroke he well perceiving to be inflicted by
God himself upon him, he ca^e his eyes up unto heaven, most pitifully
complaining, that he had most unjustly and without his desert killed him. For
the fourth of them, the fervent heat: Ovid reports, that together, with that
grievous plague, which Juno inflicted upon the men of Aegina, there was joined
with it, so fervent a heat, that when they cast themselves upon the earth, to
have cooled their bodies, the earth it self was so suddenly and so vehemetly
heated by their bodies, that they could receive no benefit, nor comfort at all,
from it. Dura sed in terra ponunt praecordia: Ovid. l. 7. Metam. p. 279.
nec fit
Corpus humo gelidum: sed humus de corpore feruet.
They cast their naked bodies on the ground;
Their bodies by the Earth not cooler found:
But the earth from bodies does with heat abound.
And thereupon another Poet calls the plague, -- Pestem flammiferam. For the
fifth of them, Cic. l. 4. ^cad. p. 25.
Boiles, and Botches: Aurelius Victor reports, that Galerius Maximianus was
smitten with that disease: whereby (as he relates it) Defecit, Aurel. Vict. in
vita Gallery p. 395.
consumptis genitalibus. But Pomponius Laetus describes his disease, more
filly to the purpose. Pompon. Laetus p. 445.
Incidit in morbum: vlcus inguinibus innatum virilia exedit: marecescente tota
illa corporis part, vermes pullularunt: remedia deerant: medici desperauerunt.
He fell into a foul disease. An ulcer, bred in his secret parts did eat off
his priuities: and all that part of his body, rotting away, and full of
crawling worms, perished. Noremedies were present. All Physicians despayred.

And this his greiuous sickness, Eusebius affirms, to be nothing else, but
the stroke of Gods vengeance: Vltio diuinitus illata. For the sixth of them,
Eusebius. l. 1. de vita Constan. (...). c. 50. p. 139.
the Emerods: Cael. Rhodigin. l. 6. c. 1. p. 228.
Caelius Rhodiginus reports, Volateran. l. 23. p. 547.
that Philoctetes was smitten with it, Bap. Egnat. l. 2. Ror^. (...). p. 703.
for his killing of Paris. Pausan. in Ac^aicu p. 281.
For the seventh of them, the Scab: Volateran reports of the Emperor
Copronymus, that he was strooken with it, and died of it. Perijt, Elephantiae
morbo. And Baptista Egnatias adds, that he died of it in great extremity of
torment. Post infinita flagitia, exquisitissimo cruciatu consumptus. For the
eighth of them, Madness: Pausanias reports, that the Calidonians were
stricken with it, by Bacchus, at the earnest prayer of his Priest, Homer, l. 1.
Iliad p. 3.
Cor^sus: as the Greeks were, with the Plague, at the like request of Apolloes
Priest, Chryses. And this sickness (as the Poet Caecilius affirms) is
absolutely in Gods hand, to inflict where he pleases. Deo in manu est, quem
esse dementem velit, Cic l. 4. T^sc. p. 1^4.

Quem s^pere, quem sanari, quem in morbum inijci.
Sic enim Lambinus.
Whom God will have a fool, or wise be found,
He shall be so, and so; or sick, or sound.
For the ninth of them, Blindness: Herodotus reports of Phero, King of
Egypt, Herod, l. 2. p. 1^6.
that he was suddenly smitten blind, as by the dart of God. And for the tenth
of them, Astonishment, and Stupiditie of mind: Aelianus reports that the
Celtish nation were so possessed with it, Aelian. l. 12. var. Hist. c. 23. p 481.
that they would not so much as run out of an house, when they evidently saw
it, either falling upon their heads, or burning about their ears: but would
rather choose, voluntarily to perish, then wisely to withdraw themselves from
their death. Which, though that Author ascribe unto a kind of valor: yet may
it, much more truly, be reduced to Stupiditie. And thus, even the Heathens, as
well as we Christians; and secular Histories, as well as Holy Scriptures, do
number all the forenamed sicknesses, to be nothing else, but the punishments
of God. Yea, Plut. de ijs qui se^o puniun^ur, To. 2. p. 233.
and so do they also, all other, not named. As Plutarch, in the Delphians
gives an express instance; Deum iratum hominibus, omnis generis tetros m^rbos
intulisse: That, their God being angry and offended with them, sent all m^nn^r
of greiuous dise^ses, among thom. Whereby it appears, that diseases and
sicknesses do not come unto men, by blind chance and fortune, 1. Samuel, 6.
9. Job, 5. 6.
as the Philistims would feign imagine: but (as they found unto their cost)
they be sent unto men by the ordinance of God. They come not out of the dust:
as Job teaches in his book, that is: Not only from their second and inferior
causes, but from God their first Cause. Who, as sometimes he works with
those natural Causes, by infecting the air, and corrupting the water; and
blasting our fruits, Deuteronomy. 28. 22.
with unwholesome dewes and mildewes, as he himself professes: so works
he oftentimes without them, by his own immediate stroke: As when he sent his
Angel into the host of Seneherib, 2. Kings, 19. 35.
and, in one night destroyed to the number of an hundred and fourscore and
five thousand. And therefore Saint Hierom, inquiring into the true cause of all
sickness, he flies above those inferior and natural concauses, unto the
supreme and supernatural Cause. Non dubitemus, ista dicere, vocem flagellorum
esse: Licet nonnulle, haec, Hieronym, in c. 3. Naum. To. 6. p. 209. c.
vel ex corrupto aere, vel ex escarum and corporum diuer sitate, accidere
dicant. Let us not doubt, but that sickness is the lash of Gods scourge:
though some men do impute it unto the corrupnes of the air, or to the
uncleanness of our meats, or to some one diuesity or other in our bodies. But
the true, and the first cause, indeed, is only God. For, as Stobaeus has
noted, out of Euripides: Morbi mortalium alij, nostraculpa, fiunt, Stobaeus
Sermon. 98 p. 539.

Alij diuinitus immittuntur.
Some sicknesses, by men's own fault; and some
By Gods just judgment, sometimes on us come.
Nay always by Gods judgment. And then, most of all, when they come by our
fault; whether our fault in feeding, or our fault in living; they still come by
Gods sending. For as the Tragical Poet has very truly noted: Quicquid
patimur, Senec^. (...) Act 5. See. 2. p. 257.
mortale genus,
Quicquid facimus, venit ab alto.
Whatever we suffer, or what e're we do,
Com's from above, and is not bred below.
And another of them, unto the same purpose: Deo volente, quisque, (...) in
(...) p. 17.
and ridet, and dolet.
As God will, so Men laugh, or weep.
For, as S. Ambrose, to this purpose, very truly observes, Omnia, (...). in
Psalm. 118. Sermon. 10. To. 4. p. 66^.
iudicio Dei fiunt: vt aegrum corpus aliquis habeat, aut salubre; vt dives, aut
pauper sit; vt iuuenis moriatur, aut senex. All things do fall out, by the
judgment of God. Whether a man be sick, or in health; whether he be rich, or
poor; whether he die young, or old. All these, are appointed unto him by God.

4. Ye^, and that Sickness is nothing else, but the very stroke of God,
sometimes instructing us, Sickness is nothing else but the Sroke of God. Lib 1.
Cap. 12 Sect. 5. Basil in As^^ticis. To. 2. p. 292.
not to sin; and sometimes correcting us, for our sin: S Basil plainly
teaches us. Saepe, disciplinae gratia, in morbos incidimus. And a little
after. Saepe, peccatorum sunt flagella, infirmitates. Sicknesses are often sent
us, for our instruction sake. Oftimes, our sorrows and infirmities, are the
scourges of our sins and iniquities. And this we may further see, by the
judgment of Physicians; unto whose art it more properly belongs, to search
out the true causes of all diseases. For, they oftentimes do find, in many
Sicknesses, that, beside the disor'red and peccant humors of men's bodies, which
are the material cause of all Sickness, there is in it beside, the special
stroke of Gods hand. Whereunto they are enforced to reduce it, as unto his true
and proper Efficient. Because they see it oftentimes to fall out that many
diseases, which they, at the first, thought to be but slight and contemptible;
yet do prove, in the end, to be mortal, and incurable: do they all what they
can; the power of their medicines, being manifestly hindered, from their
natural working, in the body of this man, which yet work most kindly, in the
body of another man. For (as Solon observes, to this very purpose: Saepe, e
modico dolor, Solonin Elegijs, p. 134.
morbus fit magnus:
Quem nemo soluerit, blanda remedia praebens.
Ofttimes we see, from small green wounds, and from a little grief,
A greater Sore and Sickness grow's, then will admit relief.
So that, as another Poet, in the same case, Ovid. l. 1. De Ponto Eleg. 4. p
160. b.
observes: Non est in medico semper, releuetur vt aeger:
Interdum, docta plus valet art, malum.
It is not always in Physicians skill,
To cure the Patient, that is sick, and ill.
For sometimes sickness on the Patient's part,
Prou's stronger far, then all Physicians Art.
Yea, and in another place, he confirms his own observation, by a real
demonstration, Ovid. l. 7. Metam. p. 278.
in the plague of the Aeginets: Exitium superabat opem, quae victa iacebat.
The Poison of the Malady, Was stronger then the Remedy.
The malice of the sickness surpassing all the help of the most approved
medicines.

And this incurablenesse in every sickness (which is, indeed, the very soul
of the sickness, whereby it lives, though the Patient dies) does himself
challenge, Deuteronomy. 28. 27. 35.
to be his own peculiar work. Ecclus. 21. 3.
The Lord will smite thee, with the Botch of Egypt, and with Emerods, and with
the Scab, and with the Itch; so that thou shall not be healed. And therefore,
Hippocrates gives this good counsel unto all Physicians, that when they come
unto their Patients, they should consider with themselves; Hippocrates. l. 1.
Praenotionum, c. 2. p. 366.
whether there be not, Diuinum quiddam, in morbis: The stroke of God, in the
Sickness. Because, then it should seem, that he held his case for desperate:
and that it was but in vain, to apply any medicine. For, Cic. l. 16. ad Attic.
epist. 339. p. 408.
as the Roman Orator has recorded of him: Desperatis, Hippocrates vetat
adhibere medicinam: Hippocrates forbids the Physician, to apply any
medicine, to a desperate man. But yet, by the leave of that learned Physician,
the Case is not so despereate. For then, no sickness should be cured. Because,
in every sickness, there is the stroke of God. There is no sickness so little,
but God has a finger in it, if it be but the aching of thy little finger. For,
Plutarch in A^^atorio. To. 3. p. 403.
though there be in the body, but only one disease, that is called Sacer
morbus: yet is it most certain, that there is, Sacrum quiddam, in omni morbo:
There is the stroke of God in every sickness. And yet every sickness is not
unto death, Io. 11. 4.
as our Savior Christ testifies. But, that sicknesses and diseases, are
nothing else, but Gods stripes, we may see it plainly verified, both by God
himself, who chalengeth it; and by the Scriptures, which ascribe it; and by
the Fa^thers, who teach it; and by the very Heathen themselves which confess
it. For the first of which four proofs, to wit, the challenge of God: The Lord
himself expressly threateneth in the fore-alledged place, That he will smite
them with the Consumption, and with the ^euer, Deuteronomy. 28, 22.
and with the burning Ague, and with the fervent Heat, and with the Sword, and
with Blastings, and with Mildew. Mark, God will smite them, with all these.
Thereby plainly insinuating, that all those diseases are as truly Gods
smiting, as his smiting with the Sword, which he numbreth there among them.
And again he threateneth, in the very same place, that he will smite them,
with the Botch of Egypt, Deuteronomy. 28 27.
and with the Emerods, Deuteronomy. 28 28.
and with the Scab, and with the Itch. And yet again: that he will smite them,
with Madness, and with Blindness; and with Astonying of heart. So that, all
those Sicknesses, he chalengeth and assumeth to be his strokes, and his
Smitings.

Yea, and the Scriptures themselves ascribe the same unto him, yea, and under
the same name: and that in both Testaments. In the Old, the Lord denounces
against King Pharaoh, Ex. 4. 14.
that if he will not let the Israelites depart, he will send all his plagues,
upon his heart. The words of the Text are (as Arias Montanus has ad verbum,
translated them) Mitto omnes plagas meas, in cor tuum: I will send all my
strokes, upon thy heart. Therefore all the Egyptian plagues, were nothing else,
but Plagae, that is to say, Gods smitings. So again, in another place; the
Leprosy is called, Deuteronomy. 24. 8.
Plaga Leprae, that is, the stroke of Leprosy. And so the Prophet David
beseeches the Lord, to take his plague away from him. Amoue a me plagas tuas
Calling his diseases, Psalm. 39. 10.
plagas, that is, the strokes of God. And so likewise, in the New Testament;
diseases and sicknesses are called Gods scourges: Flagella, his whipps, or his
rods. The Evangelist Saint Mark, calls the woman's bloody issue, her scourge,
or her rod. And, in another place, he says, that there pressed upon Christ,
but only to touch him, so many as had plagues. Mar. 5. 29.
The Greek signifies Scourges. Mar. 3. 10.
And so likewise, the Evangelist Saint Luke he says, that our Savior cured
many, of their sicknesses, and plagues. The Greek again is, Luke, 7 21.
Scourges. (...): He cured them of their Scourges. Therefore Sickness are
Scourges.

Yea; and the Fathers, in their writings, do perpetuate the same phrase. S.
Basil calls Sicknesses, Plagas, Basil, in As^eticis To. 2. p. 292.
and flagellationes Dei: The strokes and Stripes of God. Hieron. in Cap. 3.
Naum. To. 6. p. 209.
And Saint Hierom he calls them, Flagella Diaboli; The Scourges of the
Devil: In corporis malis, flagellum Diaboli intelligimus.

The one Father, from the Author, calls them, the Scourges of God: the other,
from the Instrument, the Scourges of the Devil. As we see they were, in Job:
and, Job, 2. 7.
in that crooked woman, Luke, 13. 16.
whom our Savior Christ healed. But yet, the Author of both their infirmities,
was God: because the Devil could do nothing, but as he was fore-limited. And
therefore, even the Heathen, who before confessed sickness to be sent from
God, yea and to be sent, as a punishment, for sin, against God, do also
acknowledge it, to be the Stroke of God. The Philistims call their Emerods, 1.
Sam. 6. 9.
the stroke of Gods hand: even as plainly and directly, Psalm. 39. 10.
as David himself does: I am even consumed, by the stroke of thine hand. Yea,
and the Poet Iuuenal affirms of all the Heathen in general, that, -- missum
ad sua corpora morbum, Iuueual, Satyr. 13. p. 60. b.

Infesto credunt a numine. Saxa Deorum
Haec, and tela putant. --
If they but feel a little Sickness sent,
To touch the body: Then they think it meant
Even from some angry God, whom they have grieved,
For Sin inflicted. And being thus mischieu'd.
They deem and name Diseases, miseries,
The Slings and Darts of wronged Deities.
This he reports for the common opinion of all the Heathen, that all of them
believe, both that God is the sender of all kinds of sicknesses, and that they
be the Strokes of his darts, and arrows. Which, we may further see confirmed,
by that Censure, which Homer gives of the plague of the Greeks: which he
both ascribes unto their God, Apollo; and calls it there expressly, Telum
Dei. A title, which, even the Scripture it self gives also, Homer, l. 1.
Iliad. p. 18. in Graecolat.
to that Sickness: Thou shall not be afraid of the fear of the night; nor yet
of the arrow, Psalm. 91. 5. 6.
that flies by day; nor of the pestilence, that walks in the darkness:
expressing in the latter words, what he meant in the former, to wit, that, by
that arrow, he understood, the pestilence. Neither is this Sickness only, called
one of Gods arrows: Psalm. 38. 2, 3.
but all other Sicknesses too. Thine arrows light upon me (says the Psalmist
of his Sicknesses) and there is nothing sound in my flesh, because of thine
anger, neither is there any rest in my bones, because of my Sins. Which place
of the Psalmist, expresses in effect, the whole sum of this Chapter, and of
every Branch of it. First, naming the Cause of his sickness, to be Sin
Secondly, the Effect of his sin, to be Gods anger. Thirdly, the fruit of
Gods anger, to be his sickness. And fourthly, the form of his sickness, to
be (as it were) the stroke of an Arrow. Now (to form this whole discourse,
unto our present purpose:) If the true cause of sickness, be only Sin
against God: If God himself do threaten, for this cause to send sickness: If
he truly has performed, as much as he has threatened: And, if sickness be
nothing else, but the Stroke of Gods hand: Then must there needs be a God,
which works all those things. But all the forenamed points have sufficiently
been proved, not only by Scriptures, and the doctrine of Christians; but also
by the testimony, even of the very Heathen. And therefore, That there is a
God, does need no further proof. This first consideration of Physic, of the
nature of Sickness, is proof more then enough.

CHAP. 6.
The God is the giver of health unto men. 2. That he is the preserver of it.
3. That he is the restorer of it. 4. Both by giving medicinable herbs unto
men. 5. And by teaching them the right uses of them. 6. And by joining his
blessing unto their working.

THat sicknesses and diseases do not come to men by chance, nor (...) out of
the dust; but are sent by the Justice and Judgment of God, either to correct
men for sinning, or to restruine men from sinning; I have already proved in the
former Chapter. Now, that the Remedies of diseases are also sent from God, and
from none other author, I take to prove in this Chapter. A thing, which
follows, in a manner, upon the granting of the former. For, if we grant,
that God is the Author of diseases; we must also grant, that he is the Author
of Remedies. Or else, we shall be forced to yield unto the one, of these two
gross absurdities: Either, that there be two Gods; or else, that something,
which is not God, yet is better then God. For, if we yield, that diseases come
from one Author, and their Remedies from another; then do we make two diverse
Authors: Duo Principia, Plut. l. De Iside. To. 2. p. 190.
Two Principles, and two Gods, as Zoroastres did. And if we hold, that that
Author, from whom Remedies do come, is not God; then hold we, that something
is better then God. For, it is better to give Remedies, then it is to give
diseases: as it is better to give good things, then it is, to give evil. So
that, except God be the Author of Remedies, as well as of diseases, he shall
not be the Sovereign fountain of Goodness, but shall have a more base and
inferior office, then some of his own creatures. And so, God shall not be God:
But that other, which is the giver of good things; Plato, l. 2 De Repub. p 554.
shall be God. For, (as Plato truly teaches) Bonorum, solus Deus, causa est:
malorum vero, quamlibet aliam, praeter Deum, caus^m quaerere decet. It is only
God, that is the Cause of all good things: but evil things have not God, but
some other thing, for their cause. Therefore, for the clearing of this doubt;
that there be not two diverse Authors and Princes in the world; the one sending
diseases; the other, their Remedies; but, that both of these do come from one
Author, who is God, and none other; it is evidently anounched, in the Holy
Scripture, as it were of set purpose, for the preventing of this error.

Thus the Prophet Moses tells the Israelites, that, Deuteronomy. ^. 15.
If they will obey al Gods holy commandments, the Lord will both take from
them, all their own in firmities, and will not put upon them, any Egyptian
diseases. Thereby plainly insinuating, that it is absolutely in Gods power,
both to impose diseases, and to send releases. Thus Eliphaz, without all
insinuation, Job. 5. 18.
affirms in express and plain terms: God makes the wound, and he binds
it; he smites, and his hand makes whole. Thus Hannah, in her song, The Lord
kills, 1. Sam. 2. 6.
and makes alive; he brings down unto the grave, and heraiseth up. Thus
Moses, in his Psalm, Psalm. 90. 3.
Thou turnest a man unto destruction; Again thou say, Return, ye sons of
Adam. Hos. 6. 1.
Thus likewise Hosea: The Lord has wounded, and he will bind us up. By all
which Testimonies, it evidently appears, that there is not one God which
strikes us, and another which heals us: but it is one and the same God,
which does both these unto us. Vna manus nobis vulnus, Ovid. l. 1. De Remed.
Amor. p. 292.
opemque feret. As it is in the Poet. All is but one, and self same hand, that
thus,
Both one while hurts, and that helps us.
It is but one and the same God, Tertul. l. 3. cont. Marcion. c. 24. p. 400.
Qui and caedit, and sanat: as it is in Tertullian Who both kills and cures.

Who yet is not good in the one action, and evil in the other; but truly good
in them both. Just, when he afflicts, which is one kind of Goodness; and
Merciful when he releaseth, which is another kind of Goodness. Nay, then
also merciful, even when he afflicts: being Deus, ad inferos vsque
misericors. And therefore, Optimus, si reddit placatus, quod abstulerat iratus:
as it follows in the same place. He is such a God, as is merciful, even
down unto hell. And therefore must n^edes be very excellently good, if he
restore that health again, when he is appeased, which he took away when he
was displeased. So that the very necessity of Reason infers, that if God be
the sender of diseases unto men (as I have formerly proved him) then must he
also be the sender of remedies unto them. Else can he not be God; nay, else
can he not be Good. For how can he be either God or good, who is willing to
hurt us, if he know, that he has not the power again to help us? But God is
truly and perfectly good, and has in this point as great a power, as he has
in any other; and extends it as graciously unto the benefit of all men: being
indeed both the Giver and the Preserver, and the Restorer of health unto them;
from whose only grace and favor, all these heavenly blessings come.

For the first of which three points: That God is the Giver of health unto men,
God is the Giver of health.
the Prophet David expressly affirms it, Psalm. 28. 7.
in calling God in one place, Psalm. 27. 1.
His strength; Psalm. 94. 5.
and in another, His salvation; and in another, The strength of his salvation.
The Fathers they acknowledge it: Philo Iudaeus delivers his opinion in these
words: Philo Iud. l. 2. de leg. allegor. p. 131
Sic opinor, Sanitatem meram, quam nullus morbus praecessit in corpore, Deum,
perse, solum largiri: liberationem autem a morbo, etiam per artem, aut
medicinam; ipse sanans vel per haec, vel citra horum operam. This is mine
opinion, That pure and perfect health, which has not been attainted with any
sickness, is given immediately by only God himself. But a release from any
sickness, he oftentimes works by the means of Physic; yet healing us, as
he pleases, either with it, or without it. Acknowledging God directly, not
only to be the bestower of health, but also the deliverer from sickness. So
likewise Gregory Nyssen: Hoc est perfectae Prouidentiae opus, Greg. Nyssen, l.
de Infantibus praemature abreptis p. 138.
non solum contractos curare morbos, verum etiam prohibere, antequam
contrahantur. This is the work of Gods perfect Providence, not only to cure
Diseases, when they are come upon us, but also to prevent them, before they
come unto us. So likewise Saint Augustine: Salus Hominum, Aug. in Psalm. 35. To.
8. p. 270.
a quo? A Deo. Tell me, from whom it is, that health comes unto men? He
answers that Question, that, It only comes from God. Aug. l. 5. de Ciuit.
Dei c. 11. To. 5. p. p. 303.
And again, in another place. Deus dedit carni, originem pulchritudinem,
valetudinem, propagationem, foecunditatem, membrorum dispositionem, salutem. It
is God that has given unto the body of a man, both his beginning, and his
beauty, his strength, and his foecunditie, his comeliness, and his Health.

Yea, and even the very Heathen acknowledge also the very same. Critias says
expressly. -- bonam valetudinem,
Dij, munus iucundissimum, Athenae^, l. 10. p. 323.
dederunt hominibus.
It is God that has given good health unto men,
Which, of all other gifts, is most sweet unto them.
To this end, the Romans did consecrate, Salus, among their other gods:
Insinuating thereby, ^iuie, l. 10. p. 170.
that it is God, that is the Giver of all health, and all safety. And
therefore, among those other titles, which they bestowed upon God, they called
him (...). Cicer. Orat. 4. in Ver. p. 105.
Sotera, that is to say, A Savior, quia Salutem dat: as the Orator expounds
it. Is nimirum Soter est, qui salutem dedit: He only is a Savior, that gives
health unto men. By which very name, they worshipped, Pausan. in Corinthiacis,
p. 97.
even Jupiter himself, among them; as Pausanias instanceth, in the
Troczenians: Adesi and I^vcs fanum, ^^gn^mine Seruatoris. They have a Temple of
Jupiter, surnamea the Savior. A title so essential and proper unto God, that
Basil reproves it, Basil.
as a kind of profaneness, for any man to give it unto his Physicians, and to
call them, Saluatores, or Saviors: though, by them, they have been saved, from
never so grievous sicknesses. Because all Physicians, even then, when they cure
their Patients, yet do it not by their own power, but by the power of God,
who is the true Savior: yea, and the only Savior too. For, Beside him there
is no Savior. Isay, 43. 11. Aelian, l. 12. de var. Hist. c. 51. p. 489.
And therefore, King Philip of Macedon did justly deride the dotage of
Menecrates, a fantastical Physician, for calling himself Jupiter, that is, A
helping Father: as that name is etymologized by the Roman Orator: Jupiter id
est, Iuuans Pater: as though he (like another Jupiter) had, Cic. l. 2. de Not.
Deor. p. 210.
in his hand, a full power, to bestow health and safety, upon any man
whomsoever. Which folly that wise King derided very sauorly: and, in that his
derision, acknowledged, that Health comes only from God, Cic. Orat. Pro
Quinto Ligario, p 541.
and not from the Physician. And therefore says the Orator, that, Homines ad
Deos, nulla re propius accedunt, quam salutem hominibus dando. That Men not
come nerer unto God in any thing, then they do, in giving of health unto men.
But yet, this is not enough, to make them called Suiours. For he that properly
is a Savior, must save, only by his own power: as our Savior Christ did.
Who, Mat. 11. 5.
both healed all infirmities, Mat. 10. 1. 8.
and gave all kinds of healths, by his own only power: Sight, unto the
blind; Strength, unto the lame; Hearing, to the deaf; Clensing, to the Lepers;
and life unto the dead: as is expressly testified. So that, even in this respect
(though there were none other) yet might he truly and properly be called a
Savior and (...): as indeed he is. But, Luk 2. 11.
as for his Disciples, though they did, all the same works; yet could none of
all them properly be called a Savior: Ioh. 4. 42.
because they did them, not by their own power, Act 3. 7. and 5. 15. and. 19.
12.
but by his. As the Apostle S. Peter ingenuously confesses. Ye men of Israel
(says he, Act 3. 2. 6. 2. 7. 12. 16.
when he healed the Creeple, at the gate of the Temple) why marvel ye at this
thing? or why look ye so steadfastly upon us? as though we by our own power,
had made this man to go. It is only the name of Jesus, that has made this
man sound. Not, that the name of Jesus (though it signify, A Savior) does
carry with it any necessary Charm, Mat. 1 21.
for either healing of diseases, or casting out of devils, as some men vainly
have imagined: for in the sons of Scaeua the Jew, the contrary was plainly
proved: but, the Name of Jesus, Act. 19. 13 etc.
that is to say, the power of Jesus, has given this man his strength. For, all
the miracles, which his disciples wrought, were done only by his power; As is
expressly testified, by plain words in the Scripture: He gave them power,
against unclean spirits, Mat. 10. 1.
and to heal every sickness. They had all their power, but only by his gift.
But he wrought all his miracles, only by his own might. They wrought theirs,
but Precando: but he his, Imperando: as Hegesippus distinguishes. Hegesip. l.
2. de excidio vrbis. c. 12. p. 261.
And therefore, though they saved many from very grievous sicknesses: yet they,
doing those works, not by their own power, but only by our Savior Christ
Jesus his power; not they, but he meriteth the name of a Savior: as being the
very fountain, from whence all health springs unto every man. So that, it
is, neither the strong constitution of our parents, nor the well-tempered
complexion of our selves, Ps 3. 8. Wi^d. 16. 7.
that is the true fountain of our health: but as the Psalmist very truly
acknowledges, Domini est salus, It is only the Lord that is the giver of our
health. Who therefore is worthily called a Savior.

2 And, as God is the only Giver of health unto men, so is he likewise the only
Preserver of the same. It is none of all those things, God is the Preserver of
health.
whereof Tullie gives instance, as the principallest means for the
preservation of health, that are able to continue it; if God himself put not
under his gracious hand, to sustain and uphold it. Neither, Cic. l. 2. Oss^c.
p. 376.
Notitia sui corporis; nor Obseruatio, quaeres aut prodesse soleant aut obesse;
nor, Continentia in victu atque cultu; nor, Praetermissae voluptates; nor, Ars
eorum, quorum ad scientiam haec pertinent. Neither the knowledge of our own
bodies; nor the Observation, of either helpful, or hurtful things; nor
abstinence in meat; nor continency from pleasures; nor the art of Physicians:
No, nor yet, those other helps, Cic. l. 16. Epist. sam. Epist. 18. p. 180.
praescribed by him also, unto his servant Tiro: neither (...), nor (...), nor
(...), nor (...), nor (...): neither the procuring of ready concoction, not the
avoiding of wearisome laboring, nor the entertayning of moderate walking, nor
the disposition unto liberal recreation, nor the benefit of facile and soluble
egestion: no nor any thing else, that can preserve health unto us, if God
himself do not sustain us. But, notwitstanding all those helps, yet, if we
want his special help and blessing, we shall soon be driven to complain
with Job, Job. 30. 15.
that, Our health does vanish away like a Cloud. And therefore the Prophet
David, with thankfulness, professes, that, It is the Lord only, that makes
him dwell in safety, that is, Psa 4^
which preserves and continues him in health. Of whose fatherly protection,
in preserving of his from sicknesses, he has composed a notable Psalm,
wherein he gives men assurance, Psalm. 91. 4. 7.
that they are kept so safe under the shadow of Gods wings, that the Plague
shall not come near them, though a thousand should fall at their side, and ten
thousand at their right hand. And therefore Job calls him, Job. 7. 20.
Custodem hominum, The Preserver of men. What shall I do unto thee, o Thou
Preserver of men? Which Tittle he there gives him, not only, because he
preserves men from sickness; but also vpholdeth them in their health. Without
whose special providence, in keeping them, they shall never be able, to
perserue themselves, though they use never so great carfulness, or have, at
their elbowes, never so great Physicians. For, Hier. in Cap. 26.
as S. Hierom very truly teaches us; Nisi Dominus custodierit Ciuitatem,
Isai. To. 5. p. 110
frustra vigilauit, qui custodit eam: sic nisi Dominus custodierit Sanitatem,
in vanum custodiunt, qui praecepta Salutis custodiendae edunt. Except the Lord
keep the City, the Watchman watches but in vain: And so, except the Lord
keep thy safety, the Physician lesson's thee in vain. The Lord, that first
has given it, he also must keep it: else both thou and the Physician, do,
but in vain, endeavor it.

Yea, and even the very Heathen do hold, in their Religion, that God is not
only the Giver of health, but also the Preserver and maintayner of it. The
Mantinenses dedicated two Temples unto their great god Jupiter: the one of
them, Pausa. in Arcadi cis, p. 300.
Iovi Datori; the other, Iovi Servatori. The one of them, unto God the Giver;
the other of them, unto God the Preserver. And therefore Menander brings in
certain persons making of this prayer. Deos omnes coelestes precamur,
Athenaeus Lib. 14. p. 491.

-- nobis vt salutem dent.
Integram valetudinem, bona multa:
Et eorum, quae iam parta sunt,
Laetum ac commodum vsum.
We pray the Gods, that safety they
And perfect health would grant to us;
With all the many Gifts, that may
Men happy make. Not only thus,
But this beside we further crave,
A joyous Use of what we have.
Ascribing to their gods, not only the giving, both of health and all good
things, but also the continuing of the prosperous use of them. And so likewise
Terence, he brings in, another, making, in effect, the same Prayer: -- O
Jupiter, Terent. Eunuch. Act. 5. See. 9. p. 96.

Serua (obsecro) haec nobis bona.
O God, these goods which we possess,
We pray, with thy praescruing bless.
Acknowledging the continuing, as well as the giving of all good things, to be
only of Gods goodness. But, above all the rest, the continuance of our
health. For, as Tullie records; among Jupiters other Titles, he was called,
Salutaris, that is, The Giver of Health. Of which his appellation, he renders
this reason; Cic. l. 3. de. Fin. p. 76.
Quia salus hominum in eius sit tutela: Because all a man's safety, is only in
his custody. Yea, and even the profane Emperor and Persecutor Maximinus,
though otherwise most irreligious; yet ascribes it only unto Gods especial
goodness, ^useb. l. 9. Hist. c. 7. p. 112.
that the corruptions of the air do not infect all of us: quod corrupta coeli
temperies squallentia corpora in mortem non conijciat. Thereby plainly
confessing, that it is God only, and none else, which is the Preserver, and
Maintainer of man's health.

3 Now, as God is both the Giver, God is the Restorer of Health.
and Preserver of health: so is he also, the Restorer of it. He both gave it
unto us, when we had it not: and preserves it unto us, whilst we have it: and
restores it unto us, when as we have lost it. And this point may also, as
clearly be demonstrated, by the Testimonies, both of Holy Scriptures, and of
Heathen writers, as any of the former. Of which Testimonies, some be such, as
do only express their opinion, in words: some such, as declare the strength
of it, by deeds: and some such, as demonstrate the truth of it, by effects.
For the first of which three heads: the Prophet Moses assures the Israelites,
Deuteronomy. 7. 15.
that, if they will obey Gods holy Laws and Ordinances, he will, not only
take all infirmities from them, but also, will not put any evil disease upon
them. Thereby plainly declaring, that God has a power in him; both to
preserve men in their health; and to bring them unto sickness; and to deliver
them from sickness. The Prophet David likewise expressly confesses, that it is
the Lord only, Psalm. 103. 3.
which both forgiueth all our iniquities, and heals all our infirmities.
Taking first away the Cause of our Sickness, which is only our sin: and
then applying his own healing grace, as a sovereign Medicine. And so likewise
Iehoram King of Israel confesses, by insinuation, even the very same thing.
For, when the King of Aram writ unto him, that he should heal the Leprosy of
Naaman: he asked in great passion; 2. Kin. 5. 7.
Whether he were a God, 2. Kin. 5. 15.
that he should do this great thing? Thereby manifestly insinuating, that the
power of healing is the work of a God, and not of a man. Yea, and even Naaman
himself, when the work was done, acknowledged, that God was the only doer of
it: Now I know, there is no God, in all the world, but in Israel. And how came
he to know this? He knew it, by the miraculous healing of his sickness. For,
as Ecclesiasticus directly testifies: The power of healing, Ecclus. 38. 2.
comes only from the most High.

Yea, and even the very Heathen do hold the same opinion. Coelius Rhodiginus
reports out of Plutarchs Symposiachs, Coel. Rhodigin. l. 19. c. 11. p. 1354.
Plut. l. 4. Sympos. Quaest. 1. To. 3. Mor. p. 239.
of a very notable and learned Physician, named Philon; that he, having
confected diverse excellent Medicines, Regia quaedam, and auxiliaria
medicamenta; called those his Medicines, (...), that is, the hands of God.
Which glorious appellation, whether he do irreligiously apply unto his own
medicines, as though they were able to procure a man's health, as well as Gods
own hands; or religiously, as not being able to work any health, without the
help of Gods hand: yet both ways, he acknowledges, the working of health, to
be the power of Gods own hand.

And so does Tully likewise, Cic. l. 14. Epist. Fam. Ep. 7. 162.
when he writes thus, unto his wife: Statim ita leuatus sum, vt mihi Deus
aliquis fecisse medicinam videatur: I was suddenly so eased, as if a medicine
had been sent unto me from God. Thereby plainly acknowledging, that the hand
of God is the most sovereign Medicine. And thus, both Christians and Heathens
have delivered their opinions, in express and plain words: That it is only
God himself, that is the Restorer of men, unto their health.

And, that this is not, in them, only a verbal profession, or a volant and
fleeting imagination, but a very strong persuasion, both inwardly settled and
deeply grounded in them, as a sprout of natural Religion; they have, both of
them, declared, as well by their deeds, as they have by their words: which is
the second sort of our Testimonies. For, ever, when they have been afflicted
with any kind of sickness, either public, or private, they have still sought,
to obtain their remedy from God, by offering up unto him, both Supplications,
and Sacrifices; as unto the only Restorer of their health. Thus did Moses;
when, Number. 11. 1, 2.
by the fire of God, very many of the Israelites were devoured and consumed, he
sought for the remedy, only at his gracious hand: using prayer, for his water,
to extinguish that fire. Thus likewise did Aaron; when a grievous plague was
sent by God himself, among them, he sought only for the remedy, Number. 16. 47,
48
at that hand which had smitten them, by offering up incense, for a savor of
rest, and making an atonement for the people, with God. And thus likewise did
King David; when, 2. Sam, 24. 25.
at another time, another like plague happened, he sought for the remedy only
at the hand of God, by appeasing of his wrath, with Burnt-Offerings, and
Peace Offerings.

Yea, and even the very Heathens themselves, in all their like Calamities, have
ever held this, for the chiefest of their Medicines, to obtain release of God,
by their prayers and supplications. Whereof, even their own Histories afford
us both great plenty, and great variety of Examples. In that great plague,
Homer, l. 1. Iliad p. 5. B.
which happened in the Camp of the Greeks, at the siege of Troy; they sought
only, for their remedy, at the hand of God, by lenifying his anger, with
sacrifice and prayer; precibus and sacrificijs. In that great plague, which
happened unto the Aeginets; their King sought for remedy, at the hand of God
only. Ipse ego sacra Ioui pro me Patriaque, Ovid. l. 7. Metam. p. 280.
etc:
Even I my self, do, for my self, and for my Countries sake,
To Jupiter by sacrifice, our whole atonement make.
In that great plague, which happened among the Athenians; they consulted with
Apollo, what should be their best remedy: unto whom, when he answered; That
they should purge and cleanse their City: whenas they were devising how to do
it, La^r and. in vit. Epimen. p. 39.
by other means; Epimenides advised them to perform it by sacrifice: which is
indeed the best purgation, and the most certain expiation.

Yea and the Roman Story affoords no less variety: as we may evidently see,
in many places of Liuie. In that great plague, which happened among the Romans,
in the time of Tullus Hostilius, they all of them went into this opinion: Vnam
opem aegris corporibus relictam; si pax veniaque ab Dijs impetrata esset: That
there was but one Remedy, Liuie, l. 1. p. 12.
for those that were sick; and that was, to obtain peace and pardon of God.
And that their practice was suitable unto their opinion, he has given us, in
another place, a very notable instance, Liuie, l. 5. p. 91.
in that great plague, which happened in the time of Camillus. Where their
expiation was performed with so great a solemitie, as equalled almost that of
Josias, 2. Kin. 23.
for ceremony. Which in these words is described, and set out, by Liuie:

Tristem hi^mem (sieve ex intemperie Coeli, raptim mutatione in contrarium
facta) gravis pestilensque omnibus animalibus aestas excepit. Cuius insanabilis
perniciei, quando nec causa nec finis inveniebatur, Libri Sibyllini, ex
Senatusconsulto, aediti sunt: duumviri, sacris faciundis (lectisternio tunc
primum in vrbe Romana facto) per dies octo, Apollinem, Latonamque, and Dianam,
Herculem, Mercurium atque Neptunum, tribus (quam amplissime tunc apparari
poterat) stratis lectis, placauere. Privatim quoque id sacrum celebratum est:
tota vrbe patentibus ianuis, promiscuoque vsu rerum omnium in propatulo posito:
notos ignotosque passim aduenas in hospitium ductos ferunt, and cum inimicis
quoque benign and comiter sermones habitos, iurgijs and litibus temperatum.
Vinctis quoque dempta in eos dies vincula; religioni deinde fuisse, quibus eam
opem Dij ^uli^^at, vinciri. There followed, after an heavy winter, a most
contagious Summer: Whether it grew from the vnwholsomnesse of the Air,
occasioned by many sudden alterations, or from some other cause: but
pernicious it was unto all living things. Of which incurable evil, whenas they
could neither find out any cause, nor perceive any end, the Senators decreed;
that the books of Sibylla should be searched; that two officers should be
appointed, to look to the performance of their holy service: their holy
feasting in their Temples (which they call their Lectisternium) being at that
time first ordained in the City of Rome; for eight whole days together, they
appeased the anger, both of their God Apollo, and of his mother Latona, and of
his sister Diana; and of Hercules, Mercurius, and Neptunus: the Feast being
held as sumptuously, as in those days could be possibly, in three several
places. Yea, and the same Feast was kept holy, as well privately, as publicly.
All the doors in the City were then set wide open: All things, for the time,
were used in common: all men, both known and unknown, yea and even the very
Strangers, were ^alled into their houses: Loving conferences were used, even
with their very enemies; and an utter cessation of all suites, debates, and
quarells: Yea the Prison doors were opened, during all those high feast-dayes.
And those, that, by the benefit of their gods, were then released, were never
after that (upon mere Religion) imprisoned. Thus ^arre proceeds Livie. Out
of which his narration we may observe these two things. First, that though this
great plague might, in part, be attributed unto the often and sudden
alteration of the air, as unto an immediate and inferior Cause: yet that they
looked higher, unto the first Cause, and ascribed it to God, from whom it came
indeed. Secondly, that, as they acknowledged the disease to come from God: so
they sought for their remedy, no where else, but of God. So confessing him
directly, to be both the sender of sickness, and the Restorer of health. As we
may evidently see, in the very same Author, by diverse other instances, in
diverse other places: as namely. Lib. 7. p. 121. 129. Lib. 10. p. 187. Lib. 27.
p. 308. Lib. 38. p 482. Lib. 41. p. 528. In all which places, Livi.
he, reporting of very greiuous plagues, shows still, that they sought for
their remedy at God, by appeasing of his wrath, with their Sacrifices and
prayers. This sense has God ingra^ted both into Christians, and Heathens.

Neither does Religion only teach them, to seek their remedy at God, in such
public calamities, but also even in their private sicknesses. King David,
Psalm. 41. 4.
being afflicted with a dangerous sickness, makes this request to God, Heal
me (o Lord) I have sinned against thee. Thereby plainly insinuating these
three things unto us. First, that only sin is the cause of all sickness.
Secondly, that only God is the restorer unto health. And Thirdly, that only
Prayer is the means of obtaining that grace. And though it may seem a very
strange request, to desire God to heal him, because he had sinned against
him: which was the very cause, for which God had smitten him: yet it is not so
indeed, if the words be well resolved. For his meaning is no more but this:
that God, who had stricken him, for committing of his sin; should now again
heal him, for confessing of his sin. As if he should say, as it is in the
Orator, Cic. Epist. Octaviano, p. 223.
Sit erranti medicina confessio. Let my confession be my Medicine. Or, as in
other words He expresses it, but to the same effect: Let my prayer ascend up
before thee, as incense; and the lifting up of my hands be as an evening
Sacrifice. Thus, Psalm. 141. 2.
in his private sickness, as well as in the public, he sought for all his
help, at the only hand of God.

And the same disposition is also ingrafted into the minds of the Heathen: Who
( as Iuuenal observes) if they chance but to feel the least touch of a fever,
they straightway interpret it the effect of Gods Anger: and therefore they do
presently betake them to their vows, and seek to appease him by the promise
of some sacrifice. They do, Iuuenal. Satyr. 13. p. 60. B.
-- Pecudem spondere sacello
Balantem, and Laribus cristam promittere Galli.
They vow unto the Shrine, a bleating sheep,
And to the Gods that do their Houses keep,
They vow their Cocks heads, etc.
Thus have they been taught, even by the light of Reason, that, if the disease
have proceeded from God, the ease must also be sought for at his hand. For (as
Aquinas has very well observed) The Remedy must always be proportionated
unto the Meladie: else will it do^ no good. Medicus (says he) non tanto magis
sanat, quanto maiorem dat medicinam; sed quanto medicina est morbo magis
proportionata. The Physician does not always then heal the most strongly,
when he gives the strongest medicines; but when the medicine, which he
ministers, is best tempered, and proportioned unto the quality of the
sickness. And therefore, if the sickness have proceeded from God, it is but
Medicina proportionata, that is to say, a Medicine made in his due proportion,
that the Remedy should also be fetched from him.

And, that, in thus doing, they have not been deceived, neither in their
practice, nor in their opinion, God himself has declared, by evident
demonstration: by sending a present release from every sickness, whenever
they entreated it by their prayers and supplications, This Chap. this Sect.
prec^d.
as all the forenamed Authors, in all the forenamed places, have left
testified unto us: which is the third rank of our testimonies. For in all the
self same places, where there is mention made both of the diseases to be sent
from God, and of help to have been entreated of him; there is also mention
made, that, at their supplications, it has been sent unto them. As the Reader
may plainly see, in all the fore-alledged places, both of the holy Scriptures,
and of the secular writers. Unto whom, for breuities sake, I refere him.

By all which Examples and Testimonies, Nonius in voce, preca^tur.
it appears that the most sovereign Medicine, for the cure of any sickness,
is, vti Serapi medicina, and quotidie precari: as Varro advises: to use the
medicine of Serapus; and to power out unto God, our continual and daily
prayers. And therefore the wise King Solomon, in that solemn and excellent
prayer, which he made when he dedicated his new built Temple unto God, 1.
Kings, 8. 37. etc.
he made this request for one; that, if either Famine, or Pestilence, or
Blasting, or Mildew, or Grasshopper, or Caterpiller, should at any time afflict
them; if they came into that house, and there should powreout their
supplications unto God; that their prayer might be accepted, and their
punishment released. Thereby plainly insinuating, that Prayer unto God, is
Panchrestum medicamentum, Cic. Orat, 5, in Ver. p. 137.
as the Orator speaks, A salve for every sore, and a Cure of every sickness.
A probatum est, whereof we may see in Hezechiah, who being attatched with a
dangerous sickness (some think it was the Plague) yet did heal himself more
soundly by his effectual prayers, 1, Kings, 20. 2. etc.
then could a whole College of the learnedest Physicians. And therefore the
Patient, he is appoined to pray: My son, Ecclu. 3^. 9.
fail not in thy sickness to pray unto the Lord, Ecclu. 3^. 14.
and he will make thee whole. The Physician, he is appointed to pray: They
shall pray unto the Lord, that he would prosper that which is given for thine
ease, and their Physic for the prolonging of life. And the Congregation they
are appointed to pray: Is any man sick among you? Let him call for the Elders
of the Church, and let them pray for him, James, 5. 14. 15.
and anoint him with oil in the name of the Lord. And the prayer of faith
shall save the sick, and the Lord will raise him up: and if he have committed
any sin, it shall be forgiven him. In which place is congested, the whole
sum of all those heads which before I have collected, both in this present
Chapter, and also in the former, namely; First, that Sin is the true cause of
sickness, upon whose forgiveness there follows a release, as Matthew, 9. 2.
Secondly, Matthew, 9. 2.
that God for this cause, sends sickness unto men. Thirdly, that God is not
only the sender of sickness, but also the restorer unto health. And fourthly,
that the principal means to recover, is earnest and hearty prayer; our own,
our Physicians, and our faithful Ministers. So that, in this Case, it is not
amiss (though Tullie deride it, Cic. l. 2. Te Divine. p. 263.
as a kind of madness) ad aegros, non Medicos adducere* sed Vates, and
Ariolos: to bring unto the Patient, 2. Kings, 20. 5. 7.
not a Physician, but a Prophet. For so did God himself unto Hezechiah, in his
sickness. He sent unto him, not Medicum, but Vatem, the Prophet Isay to visit
him: by whom notwithstanding he was both comforted, and cured. Thus God (as I
have showed you) is both the Giver, and the Restorer of Health; yea, and that
oftentimes immediately of himself, without all external means: sending it
down sometime immediately out of heaven, 1. Kings, 18. 36. etc.
by the only power of prayer, as he did Elias his fire. Thereby plainly
declaring, that it was both a false and impious opinion, which was held by
Leogorus: Se fortuito potius, quam Dei voluntate, valetudinem recepisse: Suidas
in voce (...) p. 278.
That he recovered by Fortune, rather then by Gods blessing. For, it was not
by Fortune, that even Pheraeus Jason recovered health, Cic. l. 3. de Not. Deor.
p. 236.
when his Enemy smiting him chanced, to break his impostume. This was only
Gods blessing. He was his Physician.

4 Yea, God is the Giver of all Medi^in^^ unto Man.
and so is he likewise unto all other men, even when they use their best
means: because all the virtue of them is only given by him. He it is, that
has given all medicinal herbs and plants unto man. He it is, that has given
the Art of the Physician, and the skill how to use them. And he it is, that
only gives all the efficacy unto them, by joining his blessing with them.
And all this is confessed, as well by the very heathens, as it is by us
Christians.

For the first of which three points: that God is the giver of all medicines
unto Man; we see this by experience, that there is a sanatiue and medicinable
power given both unto herbs, and unto roots, and unto stones, and unto
mineralls; yea and even unto diverse kinds of pure and simple earths; called
Terrae sigillatae, because they be printed and sealed for diverse several uses
in man's sicknesses and infirmities. With all which several medicines the body
of the earth is so every where replenished, yea and the sur-face of it so every
where ouer-strewed, as if the whole earth were nothing else but a great bolus,
or mass of sovereign medicines, made up, by God himself, for man's several
diseases.

Now the Question is, whence this healing virtue comes, unto all the
forenamed Simples? whether, from the quality of the earth, wherein they grow?
or, from the influence of the stars, whereby they grow? or, from some inward
nature in themselves? or, from fate? or, from chance? or, from divine
providence? For, it needs must proceed from some one of these. But that it
cannot come from any one of the five first imaginary causes; it is (by divine
providence) most evidently declared, in the Book of Genesis: Where, it is
expressly testified (as it were for the preventing of this fond opinion) that
God made every plant of the field, Gen 2. 5.
before he put it into the Earth; and every h^rbe, before it grew. A work of
so great carfulness, as he has not expressed in any other of his Creatures:
man himself alone excepted. Now this place discharges all those forenamed
causes of doing any work in this notable effect. The Earth, that has not
given this virtue unto plants: because they all were made before they were put
into the Earth. The Stars, they have it not given unto them: because all the
plants were made before them. For the plants of the Earth were made the third
day: but the Planets of Heaven were not made before the fourth: no, Genesis 1. 12.
13. 14.
nor the sixth Stars neither, as appears in the Scripture. Their own power
and nature has not given it unto them: because they had not their very being
of themselves, but received it of another, even the Divine Creator. Fate, that
has not given it unto them: because they always possess it not, neither
work, by necessity, unto their own effect. Chance, that has not given it
unto them: because then, the remedies could not have answered so aptly unto the
diseases, nor so constantly, in all places. Now, if neither Earth, nor Heaven,
nor Nature, nor Fate, nor Fortune, have given those qualities unto Herbs, and
Plants: then must Providence needs have done it. For, Plut. l. 1. de Placit.
c. 1. To. 2. p. 4.
as Plutarch collecteth, in the very like case, that, Omnia quaeneque fortuito
fiunt, neque necessario, neque diuinitus, res sunt naturales: so may we
collect, from the very same division, using a little inuersion: that, Quae
neque fortuito fiunt, neque necessario, neque natura, ea fiunt diuinitus. Those
things, which are neither done by Fortune, nor by Fate, nor by Nature, they
must needs be done by Providence.

And, for our present instance; that the virtues of herbs are given to them by
Providence, we may further collect, by two other Observations. The first
whereof, is this: That the body of a man is not subject unto any sickness,
though never so dangerous, but that it has some remedy provided for it; if
man were as skillful, in discerning of them as God has been bountiful, in
providing of them.

And therefore says Bachiarius: Ab sit hoc a fide mea, Bachiar. Epist. de
lapsis, (...). Pat. To. 1. p. 419 Ier. 9 22.
vt aliquam dicam esse plaga^, qu^e non haebeat consolationem: cum mihi
Propheta proclamet: Nunquid Medicus non est in Galaath? aut resina non est
illuc? Far be it from me to believe, that there can be any malady, which
has not his remedy: seeing that the Prophet calls out unto me; Is there no
balm in Gilead? and is there no Physician there? Whereby it appears, that
those medicinal qualities were bestowed upon plants, by such a providence as
was full of all goodness, entertayning a general care for all of us; yea and
for every disease that might befall any of us; that there should not be any one,
but that it had his medicine.

The second of those observations is this: That those medicinable plants are so
graciously disposed, in all the parts of the earth, that, as there is no
sickness, but it has his redress: so is there no place, but it may be found
in it: no region but it has a natural medicine, to cure every sickness that
is naturally bred in it, if man, in his ignorance, did not mistake it. Yea and
that so universally, that (as Pliny observes) Ne Syluae quidem, Plin. l. 24.
c. 1. p. 350.
horridiorque naturae facies medicinis carent; sacra illa parente rerum omnium
nusqua^ non remedia disponente homini. Even the woods themselves, and the
roughter face of Nature, be not without their medicines; the holy Parent of all
things providing helps for men, in all coasts, and all places. Whereby again
it appears, that those Medicines were ordained, by such a kind of Providence,
as both had infinite wisdom, to understand, what medicines were fit, for what
diseases; and infinite power, to produce them, in all places. For, as Galen,
Gal. l. 3. de vsu partium.
no less religiously, then wisely, collecteth: Invidere nulli^ bona, est
perfectae bonitatis; invenire cunctis bona, est summae sapientiae; sed efficere
cunctis bona, est, insuperabilis potentiae. To envy good to nothing, is a note
of perfect goodness; To find out good for all things, is a note of perfect
wisdom; But to do good unto all, is a note of perfect power. So that, as
concerning those medicinable plants, it is very true, which S. Basil observes,
that, Non sponte sua ex Tellure germinant Herbae, Basil, in Asceticis. To. 2.
p. 291.
quae contra quoscunque morbos accommodae sunt: sed, eae, voluntate Opificis,
ad nostram vtilitatem productae sunt. Those Herbs which men use for the cure
of all diseases, do not grow out of the earth of themselves: but, by their
Creators goodness, they were made to profit us. And so likewise Theodoret,
unto the same purpose: Creator rerum, Terram quoque, Theodoret. Sermon 4. De
Provident. To. 2. p. 592.
multas Herbarum species, non advescendum modo, sed and eas, quae esui inutiles
sunt, germinare iussit: quandoquidem non alimento modo, verum etiam valetudinis
^ura, nobis opus est. The Creator of all things commanded the Earth to produce
all kinds of Herbs; not only such herbs, as are fit to be our meats; but
also such Herbs, as be unfit for that purpose: because a man stands in need,
as well of medicines, as of meats. So that, all kinds of Herbs, with all
their virtues, Ecclus. 38. 4.
whether nutritive, or sanatiue, they be only the gifts of God unto Man: Who
(as Ecclesiastic^^ testifies) has created all the Medicines of the Earth: and
he that is wise, will not abhor them.

Yea, and even the very Heathen confess also the same. Tullie reckons up
this, Cic. l. 2. De Not. Deor. p. 221.
as one of the greatest bounties of Nature, that there be, in all places great
store of wholesome medicines: Medicamentorum salutarium plenissimae Terrae. And
Pliny speaking of simple medicines, Plin l. 24. Cap. 1. p. 350.
refers their frequencie unto Natures benignity. Naturae placuit, esse
remedia parata vulgo, inuentu facilia, ac sine impendio. Nature has provided,
that all her wholesome Medicines should be ready at hand, easy to be found,
and not dear to be purchased. Adding a little after, that, Remedia vera,
pauperrimus quisque coenat. That the best, and truest Medicines, are every day
eaten, even by poor men, in their Suppers. As for exotic and compounded
medicines; he affirms, in the same place, that they have only been i^uented
by the fraud of Physicians, rather to give a false credit to their Art, then to
bring any true benefit unto their Patient.

Now, though both these two Authors, do ascribe the making of those plants
unto Nature: yet, under that word, they understand God. When they praise the
benignity and bounty of Nature, for giving such medicinable plants unto men,
they do mean, The divine Nature. Or if they mean by Nature, any settled and
fixed order of generation; then, when they ascribe those plants unto Nature,
they mean only in respect of their present propagation; and not in respect of
their first Creation. For, that themselves confess to be the work of God: as
Trismegistus expressly acknowledges; Constat, Trismeg. As^lep. Cap. 13. p. 537.
de Herbis, de Lapidibus, de Aromatibus, vim Diuinitatis naturalem in se
habere: It is certain, both in Herbs, and in Stones, and in Spices, that they
have a natural force of Divinity in them. So that, it is so natural, that it
is also divine. It is natural, in respect of their present propagation; which
holds a natural course, in their generation; but it is supernatural and
divine, in respect of their first Creation. It is so, Vis naturalis; that it is
also, Vis Divinitatis; as he plainly there affirms.

5 And, God is the Giver of all skill in Physic.
as the Heathen acknowledge, that medicinable Qualities are given unto plants;
and plants, with their Qualities, are given unto men, only by the gift of God:
so do they also confess, that the finding out of those Qualities in them, and
the skill how to use them, is only the work of his goodness unto man, and
not the effect of Man's own invention. Mirari licet (says Tullie) quae sint
animaduersa a Medicis Herbarum genera, Cic. lib. 1. Dediu^^a. p. 242.
quae Radicum* ad morsus bestiarum, ad oculorum morbos, ad vulnera: quorum vim
atque naturam ratio nunquam explicavit. It is a wonder to consider, how many
sorts of Herbs, and how many kinds of Roots are observed by Physicians for
the biting of Serpents, or other hurtful Beasts, the diseases of the Eyes, and
the healing up of wounds. The nature and power of all which several plants is
so infinite an invention, as could never have been found out by Man's wit and
reason. Now if the wit of man could not find out this great secret: what was
it then, that has found it out? Surely nothing else, but a divine
illumination, and inspiration of God. And this, even the Heathen themselves
have confessed. Deorum fuisse apparet (says Pliny) aut certe divinum, Plin.
lib. 27. cap. 1. p. 387.
etiam cum Homo inveniet. It is apparent that this was Gods invention, or, at
the least, that it was a divine invention, even though it were invented and
found out by man: But he resolves, that this is so high a skill and
understanding, as was rather given by God, then ever found by man. Eandem
omnium parentem, and genuisse hac, and ostendisse, nullo vitae miraculo maiore,
si verum fateri volumus. That universal Parent and Creator of all things, who
first created those Medicines for man, has also declared the use of them unto
him. A thing most strange and miraculous, if we will confess the truth. And, a
little before, he rendereth a reason, why the knowledge of those things must
needs be rather the teaching of God, then the invention of man. Because, if God
has only given those virtues unto plants; and man, without God, has found
them out; man has done the greater work, and God the less: Superata hoc modo
videri posset naturae ipsius munificentia, si humani operis esset inuentio. And
therefore, a little after, he concludes, that, Si quis illa forte ab homine
excogitari posse credit, ingrate Deorum manera intelligit: If any man do
think, that such things could have been found by the wit and reach of man, he
is an unthankful interpreter of the gracious gift of God. Unto whom Homer also
ascribes this blessing, that for all kind of Medicines, it is only he that
possesses them: Pharmaca cunctorum Jupiter vnus habet: St^ba^ l. Eclog. Phys.
c. 3. p. 3.

God only has the remedy,
For every kind of malady.
And thus, even the very Heathens themselves do expressly acknowledge, both the
plants themselves to be the works of God, and the knowledge of their uses to
be the gift of God.

Neither stay they only here, in this particular branch of Physic; but they
acknowledge the whole Art, Coel. Rhodig. l. 29. c. 11. p. 1353.
to be the gift of God. Hippocrates affirms it, in express and plain words;
Medicam facultatem Deorum esse munus. And so Tully likewise: Cic. l. 1. de
Divine. p. 142.
Medicinae vtilitas Deorum immortalium inuentioni est consecrata. The Art of
Physic, is of so great a profit, that the invention of it, is ascribed unto
God. So Pliny: Dijs inuentores suos assignauit. Yea, Plin. l 29. c. 1. p. 416.
and it is expressly affirmed by Homer, Plut. l. de Homero. To. 11 p. 145.
to be both a divine Science, and greater then any other. Ast, Medicum,
reliquis diuina scientia, mayor
Instruit.
Yea, and Apollo, one of their chiefest gods, does boast of this invention to
be his, Ou^d, l. 1. Metam. p. 39.
and none others. Inuentum Medicina meum est, opiferque per Orbem
Dicor: and Herbarum est subiecta scientia nobis.
The Art of Physic, it is mine
Invention, and an Art Divine.
And I am called, the World all over,
The common Helper of their sore.
The Nature of all Plants is known
Only to Me, it is mine own.
And therefore they called Apollo, Vlion, Salutiferum, and Artemidem; ex eo,
Strab^, l. 14. p. 347.
quod integros faceret, as Strabo reports: because he made men whole. But
Plutarch reduces this Art, a great deal higher, referring it, not to Apollo,
Plut. l. contra St^icos, To. 3. p. 566.
but even unto Jupiter, or if there be any God, who is greater. For he
condemns it, as one of the greatest absurdities of the Stoics, that they do
ascribe this Art, unto any of the petty and inferior gods, and not rather unto
him, that is the chiefest of them. Wherein he erred not. For it is, indeed,
the gift of the greatest God. It is he (says Ecclesiasticus) that has given
men this knowledge, Ecclus 38. 6.
that he might be glorified, Ecclus 38. 1.
in his wondrous works. And therefore he exhorts us, To honor the
Physician, because of necessity. Adding there this reason: For the Lord has
created him. He has created him; not only as he is a man; but also as he is a
Physician. As it is expressly testified, by Saint Augustine. Illa corporis
medicina ^on inuenitur, Aug. l. 1. de Moribus Eccles. c. 28. To. 1. p. 738.
vnde ad Homines manare potuerit, nisi a Deo: Cuirerum omnium status salusque
tribuenda est. It cannot be found out, from whence the Art of Physic should
come unto men, but only from God: unto whom the health and safety of all
things ought to be ascribed. So Basil: Ars medica, Basil. in As^^ti^^^, To. 2.
p. 291. Theodoret. Ser. 4. de Prouiden. To. 2. p. 592.
a Deo, vitam nostram moderante, concessa est. The Art of Physic is given us
of God who only rules our whole life. So Theodoret: Quia Deus, qui te
mortalem in hac vita condidit, sciuit, te morbis quoque exercendum fore, simul
medicam artem te docuit: cuius scientiam morborum incur sionibus opposuit.
Because God, who made man mortal in this present life, foresaw, that he needs
must be exercised with sicknesses, he therefore taught him the Art of
Physic: opposing that knowledge, Ephraem Syrus, Sermon. de Fide, p. 81.
against the assaults of all kinds of diseases. And so likewise Ephra^m Syrus,
comprehending in one sentence both these last forenamed points; Deus, Herbas,
and Terrae pharmaca, and Medicorum studia, ad morbos corperis curandos
concessit: God has given us, both Herbs, and other wholesome Medicines; and
beside, both the study, and skill of Physicians, to cure all the maladies, and
diseases of our bodies. So that, it is only he, which has given both all
medicinable plants unto the Earth, and all skill to the Physician, in what
manner to use them. And thus, both the Heathens, and Christians agree, that
both the Physic, and the Physician, are the only gifts of God, for the
health, and good of man.

6 But yet, neither of both these can do any good unto him, if they be not
assisted with Gods special blessing. For first, Gods blessing is it, that
heals, more then the Medicine.
for the Physician: that it is not in his power, with all his skill, to make
any sicke-man whole; we may see it, 2. Ch^on. 16. 12.
in the old Testament, by the example of King Asa: whose too great confidence
in his Physicians, and too little in his God, was that which brought him unto
his end. And the same we may likewise see, Mar. 5. 25, 26.
in the new, in the woman diseased with the bloody issue: Of whom it is
testified, that though she had suffered many things from her Physicians, and
continued long with them, and used great change of them, and spent all she had
upon them; yet was she never the better for them, but rather much the worse.
And the like is also reported of the Emperor Adrian; that he, Dion Cassius in
Hadriano. p. 135.
at his death, was forced to complain, that, Turba Medicorum interfecit Regem:
The multitude of Physicians had brought the Emperor unto his death. Whereby it
appears, that no Physician has power to heal any man, if God do not give a
special blessing unto him. As the Philosopher Taurus insinuated to that
Physician, A. Gel. lib. 18. cap. 9. p. 263.
that came to heal A: Gellius. Cum Dijs been volentibus, opera tua, sistas
hunc nobis sanum. Implying, that his labor and Gods blessing must work both
together, before the sick-man could recover. For, as Ecclesiasticus expressly
testifies, Neither the Apothecary can finish his own work, in making of the
Medicine; nor yet the physician, his, in applying of the medicine; if they be
not assisted, with Gods special blessing. The Apothecarie (says he) does make
a confection: and yet he cannot finish his own work. For of the Lord comes
prosperity, and wealth, ou^r all the Earth. Then he comes from him, unto the
Physician: Give place to the Physician, Ecclus 38. 8. 12. 13. 14.
for the Lord has created him. Let him not go from thee: for thou have need
of him. But what? can he heal thee when he list? No. But he adds: The hour
may come, that their enterprises may have good success. But how? He adds
further: For they shall pray unto the Lord, that he would prosper that which is
given for ease; and their Physic, for the prolonging of life. So then the
Physician touches: but it is God that heals. There is greater efficacy unto
health, in the Physicians prayer, then there is in his power: the whole
prosperity of the medicine depending upon Gods blessing. And therefore says
S. Hierom: Hier. in. cap. 26. Isai. To. 5. p. 110.
De omni infirmitate dicendum est, quod absque misericordia Dei, medendi ars
nihil valeat. In all a man's infirmities, without Gods special goodness, the
art of the Physicians is of very little worth. And in another place, he
confirms his own assertion, by the forenamed instance, of the diseased
woman. Hier. in cap. 7. Am^s To. 6. 124.
Quis Medicorum sanare (...) potuit, nisi tu solus? ad cuius contactum
fimbriae, flatim redijt sanitas. which of all the Physicians could heal that
diseased woman, but only thou alone? Who wast able to restore her health unto
her, by touching, but only, the hemme of thy vesture.

Yea, and the same Father again reports of Hilarion: that, when a like
diseased woman was brought unto him, desiring to be cured, and complaining that
no Physic could do her any good, that holy Father replied: Si quae in Medicis
perdidisti, Pauperibus dedisses, Hier. in vita Hilar. To. 1. p. 144.
curasset te verus Medicus Jesus: If that, which thou have lost upon thy
Physicians, thou had bestowed upon poor and needy persons, Jesus Christ, the
true Physician, would have cured thee long agone. And therefore S. Basil has
given us a good Caveat: not to repose so strong a confidence in any kind of
Physic, be it never so good; because all is but weak, Basil. in Ascetici^
To. 2. p. 291.
without the blessing of God. Satagendum est, vt h^c Art, si quando illa opus
est, ita vtamur, vt non omnem illi causam sanitatis ascribamus. We must take
heed, that when we use the help of Physic; yet that we ascribe not all our
health unto it. For, as he adds a little after: Irrationale est, p. 292.
propriae salutis spem in manus ponere Medicorum. It is against all reason, to
put all the hope of our health in the hand of the Physician; who has it not in
his hand: as before I have showed.

And, as it is not in the Art of the Physician to give health unto the
sicke-man: so is it not also in the power of any Medicine. For, as it is
affirmed in the Book of Wisdom (speaking of those Israelites that were stong
and bitten by the fiery Serpents) It was neither Herb, Wis. 16. 12.
nor Plaster that healed them, but the word of the Lord, that heals all
things. Nay, it was not the Brazen Serpent that healed them, though for that
very purpose it was specially appointed; but it was only God himself that
healed them by it, as is expressly there affirmed: Wise. 16. 7.
He that turned toward it, was not healed by that thing which he saw, but by
thee, o Savior of all. Whereby it appears, that it is not the outward
medicine, but the inward blessing, that heals. And that, as S. Augustine
observes, our health comes unto us, only from God, the Creator: Aug in.
Psalm. 34. To. 8. p. 250.
even then, when we receive it, by means of the Creature. De Creatura mihi
salus est? A Deo est. And this we may see verified, both in the old, 2. Kin 20
^ 5.
and new Testament. God appointed King Hezechiah, to apply a plaster unto his
sore* but, in the same place, he tells him, that it is he, that does heal
him. And, Ia. 5 14. 15.
S. James bids the Elders, to anoint the sick m^n with oil; but, in the
same place, he adds, that it is the Lord, that does raise him up. So that, as
S. Augustine very well observes, Aug. l. 4. (...) D^^^ (...). 16 (...). 3. p.
79.
Corporis medicamenta, quae hominibus ab hominibus adhibentur, non, nisi ijs,
prosunt, quibus Deus operatur salutem. Qui, and sine illis mederi potest; cum,
sine ipso, illa non possunt. Those bodily Medicines, which are applied by men,
do profit none but those, unto whom God himself does work, for their health.
Yet he can heal, without any Medicine: but so cannot any medicine without
(...). And this also is confessed, (...) p. 281. Psalm 107 2^. (...) 16 12.
(...) 291. Mat. 8. 3. Psalm. 3. 8.
even by the very Heathen: Etiam, sine Medico, medicinam dedit Minerua. God can
heal any Sickness, even without a Physician. He can heal, even by his only
word. He sent his word, and healed them. Nay, he can heal, by his only will,
as is noted by S. Basil. Sola voluntate contentus. And he gives this for
instance. Volo: mundare. I will: Be thou clean. Thus, it is only God that
heals, whether it be with the Medicine, or without the medicine. For, All
health is of him; as is testified in the Psalm.

Now, to recollect all these Heads; and to apply them unto that, which is our
maine purpose. If God be both the Giver and the Praeseruer, and the Restorer of
health: if he have both given us all those Medicines, that uphold and maintain
it: and taught us, the true and right uses of them: and given his blessing, to
assist their working: then must there needs be a God, that procures all this
good. But, that the first of these is true: it appears in the several
sections of this Chapter. And therefore, the second must likewise needs be true.

CHAP. 7.
Little Cities do rise to be great. 2. Great Cities do fall to be little. 3.
Yet is not this the work, of either Fate, or Fortune: 4. But of Gods own
Providence, and Praeor dination. 5. Who limiteth their powers. 6. Boundeth
their Dominions. 7. And praescribeth their continuance.

THe next Consideration is taken from the Politics: and therein from the
rising and falling of Cities, of Kingdoms, and Commonwealths. Which great and
notable works, though diverse of the Heathen have partly ascribed to Fate, and
partly unto Fortune; yet falsely unto both of them: as being in very deed the
only work of God. Who, as sometime he raises poor men, out of the very
dust, Psalm. 113. 7 8.
and lifts up their heads, to make them sit with Princes, calling them (as he
did David) A caula ad aulam: so does he oftentimes, Psalm. 78. 70. etc
with Cities, and Nations, advancing them from poor Originals, to be great and
mighty Monarchies. Carthage, which at last grew so mighty and potent, as to
fight with Rome it self, Cic. l. 1. Offic. p. 346.
for the Empire of the world: Virgil. l. 1. Ae^^id. p. 123.
yet was, Plut. in Vit. Remuli. p. 49.
at first, no larger then could be encompassed with the thongs of a Bulls hide.
Yea, and even Rome it self, which obtained that Empire, and Lorded it over all
with an iron Scepter: yet was extended no further by Romulus, but only to the
number of a thousand houses. In so much that the Italian Poet wondereth at the
wonderful increasings of it: Aspice, nec long repotam, Sil. Ital. l. 15. p.
186.
modo Roma minanti
Impar Iudenae contentaque crescere Asylo,
Quo se extulerit dextris.
Lo; but of late, how little Rome;
To what a greatness now She Is come!
Yea and Venice, at this time the Venus of all Cities, and the strongest
Fortress and Balwarke of all Christians; yet was, Will. Thomas, p. 86.
at first, but a Marish, inhabited by poor Fishers. And the like may be
observed, almost of all those other renowned and famous Cities: whose glorious
gests and victories have so greatly innobled them, in the register of
Histories: they have, most of them, been raised from such ignoble and
contemptible originalls; that, when they view themselves in the ruff of their
greatness, they are utterly ashamed, to think of their first littleness.

2 And, as we may observe diverse poor and little Cities, Great Cities fall to
be little.
to have grown great and potent, being raised from the dust, to sit among the
Stars: so may we likewise observe, on the contrary part, diverse great and
potent Cities, to have become very little ones, being plucked down from the
Stars, to sit down in the dust. Obadiah, v, 4.
God threatens against Edom, that though they exalted themselves like unto
Eagles, and placed their nest among the Stars, yet would he bring them down.
And he calls unto Babel, that proud Monarch of the East: Come down, o
Daughter Babel, and sit in the dust: sit upon the ground: for there is no more
throne, -- Sit still, Isay. 47. 1.
and get thee into darkness: Isay. 47. 5.
for thou shall no more be called, The Lady of Kingdoms. And, that this his
threatening was not brutum fulmen, an idle flash of Lightning; but that it had
his full effect, upon that proud City, we may evidently see, by comparing this
place of the Prophet; wherein she is said to be, Tender and delicate; with
another place of the Psalmist, wherein she is said to be, Psalm. 1378. A^ias
Monta^us.
a City wasted with misery. Babel vastata. Whereby it appears that this
threatened deuastation, had, even in those days, begun to seize upon them.
Which happens oftentimes so suddenly, Isay, 15. 1.
that that which in many years was not builded, yet is, in a moment,
destroyed: as Isaiah gives instance both in Ar, and Kir: which both were
destroyed, and brought to silence, in a night. And Phauorinus observes the
same of Helice, and Bura: that they were suddenly swallowed up. Absorptae
sunt, and tanquam nauigantes perierunt: and perished in a moment, as Saylors
do, Stob^ns Sermon. 103. p. 564.
by Shipwreck. And the like may be observed, of diverse other mighty Cities,
heretofore the Imperial seats of great and potent Monarchs; that now they are
so utterly demolished, as that, even their very places can no more be found,
nor no man say, that, Here they stood; as Niniue, Susis, Ecbatane, and diverse
others recknoned up by Pausanias. Mycenae, Pausan. in A^cadicis, p. 325.
quae in bello Troiano imperarunt Graecis; Ninus deinde, in qua Assyriorum
Regia fuit; tertio, Th^bae Boeoticae, quae principem olim locum in Graecia
obtinuerunt: hae omnes ad internecionem vsque sunt desolatae. Mycenae, which,
in the time of the Trojan war, was the head of all Greece; and Ninus, where
was sometimes the Royal Palace of the Assyrian Monarchs; and Thebes of the
Boeotians, one of the chiefest Cities of all the Graecians, are now quite
destroyed and made utterly desolate. Upon which occasion, he enters a
meditation of the notable ^ragilitie of all humane prosperity; giving, in that
place, diverse other very pregnant and remarkable instances, of Thebes in
Egypt, and Orchomenus, sometimes two rich and populous Cities, but now reduced
beneath the fortune of diverse private persons: So likewise of Delus, sometimes
the most frequented and common Mart of all the Graecians, now utterly deserted
and forsaken of all Nations: So likewise of Babylon, sometime the greatest
City that ever the Sun looked upon; but, at that time, so little, that there
was nothing there left, but a Wall, and at Temple. Contrariwise, of Alexandria,
and Seleucia; which, though they were builded but even the other day; yet
started up so suddenly to great wealth and glory. Whereas Chryse and Hiera,
sometimes two famous Islands, at that time lay drowned, and buried in the
waters. Concluding his meditation, with this ^piphonema: Sic res mortalium sunt
momentaneae, and nulla ex part firmae: Thus the things of mortal men, are
both of small continuance, and subject unto great mutabilitie of chance. And it
should seem this meditation had made a deep impression into diverse other of
the Heathen, and not a little troubled them. Ovid, lighting into it, adds
diverse other instances unto those of Pausanias: Nunc humilis veteres tantummodo
Troia ruinas, Ovid, l. 15. Me^amo^p. p. ^19.

Et pro divitijs tumulos ostendit avorum.
Clara fuit Sparte, magnae viguere Mycenae,
Necnon and Cecropis, nec non Amphionis arces.
Vile solum Sparte est: alta cecidere Mycenae.
Oedipodioniae, quid sunt, nisi nomina Thebae?
Quid Pandioniae restant, nisi nomen, Athenae?
Now humbled Troy is turned to dust, and nothing has to show,
But rubbish, for her riches; and the ruined Toombs, I trow,
Of ancient Inhabiters. So Sparta famous was;
And Mycene great, and glorious; and Theb's a stately place;
Renowned Athens was the like. But now, fair Sparta is
A Soil most vile; and Mycene high is fallen full low, I wis:
And as for Theb's and Athens both; to both betides the same;
For both, and all, have nothing left, besides a naked name.
So that, Obadiah, v. 16.
as the Prophet Obadiah speaks, They are now become, as if they had never
been. Strabo, l. 16. p. 572.
And Strabo notes the same of diverse other Cities, about the mount Carmel:
which, he says, are nothing now, but Oppidorum Nomina, mere names of Cities:
vt Sycaminorum ciuitas, and Bubulcorum ciuitas, and Crocodilorum ciuitas: As
the City of the Sycamines, and the City of the Cowheards, and the City of
the Crocodiles. And that, which these Authors have observed of Cities, Philo
Iudaeus, l. Quod Deus sit immutabilis, in fine, p. 445.
has Philo Iudaeus observed of whole Kingdoms. Quod si non libet singulorum
fortunas perquirere, vide regionum integrarum and gentium mutationes, etc, If
you list not to insist upon the particular fortune of Cities, consider the
mutations of whole Countries, and Nations: how (as Lucr^tius also observes:)
Augescunt aliae gentes, Lucret. l, 2. p.
aliae minuuntur.
Some Nations flourish,
Other some do perish.


3 Now, The rising and falling of Cities is neither by Fa^e nor Fortune.
whence comes this rising, and falling of Cities; and why does this happen
rather unto the principals, then it does unto others? It appears in Plutarch,
to be an old conceit, to attribute this to Fate, and to a kind of Destiny
bestowed upon those Cities, in their genethliacks, and natiuities, by the
aspects and positure of the Stars. Plut. in Vita Romuli. p. 52.
But this the Psalmist rejects, in express and plain terms: Psalm. 75. 6.
Promotion (says he) comes neither from the East, nor from the West, nor
from the North, nor from the South. It comes not from the East, from whence
the Stars do come in their diurnall motion: nor yet from the West, from whence
they come again in their natural motion: nor yet from North, or South, from
whence they go and come in that motion of theirs which is called Trepidation.
From none of all these motions does Promotion come. But (as it follows in
that Psalm) It is God, that is the Judge; he puts down one, and sets
up another. And this is true, as well in the fortunes of Cities, and Nations,
as of particular persons. As we may evidently see in the prophecy of Isaiah.
Behold (says he) it is the Lord that makes the earth empty, Isai. 24. 1.
and he makes it waste; He turns it vpside down, and he scatters abroad
the Inhabitants of it. And therefore Plutarch derideth this opinion of the
Stars, Plut. in Vita Romuli. p. 52.
that they should give fortune unto Cities: and reckons it among the number
of Fables. Yea, and that very worthily. For, if it were fatal for those Cities
to rise, how come they to their fall? Is there now crept in a mutabilitie into
Fate? Is it now become contrary unto it self; to depresse the same thing,
which before it self advanced? Or, have things two Fates? the one, whereby
they be advanced, and the other, whereby they are depressed? These things do
not cohere. And therefore some have run a clean contrary course, Manil. l.
1. p. 16.
and ascribed all to Fortune. So Manilius. -- Quoties Fortuna per orbem,
Seruitium, imperiumque tulit, varieque revertit?
How often has Fortune, through the world, think I,
Brought Slavery, borne Imperie, and wheeled diuers^y?
So Seneca. Imperia sic excelsa Fortunae obiacent, Senec. Oedip. Act. 1. p.
220. Pausanias in Arcadieis. p. 325

So highest Empires stoop to Fortunes feet.
So Plutarch, who ascribes all the prosperity of the Romans, only to their
Fortune: writing a Book of that Argument: De Fortuna Romanorum. So Pausanias,
who affirms, Vniversa, tum firma, tum imbecilla, quaeque recens facta sunt,
quaeque perierunt, a Fortuna immutari, eiusque arbitratu, summa vi and
necessitate, omnia trahi. All things, both weak, and strong, both things done
now of late, and things done long agone, are subject unto Fortune: she drawing
all things after her, at her own will and pleasure. And he gives, in that
place, diverse fit and pregnant instances, as well in the rising, as falling of
Cities. For the rising of them, he there names Alexandria, and Seleucia, of
whom he affirms, that, Ideo ad tantam magnitudinem and felicitatem
excreuerunt, quod Fortuna eos, tanquam manu, duxerit: That they therefore grew
unto such greatness and felicity, because Fortune led them to it, as it were,
by the hand. In the falling of Cities, he names these before mentioned, of
Thebes, My^enae, Delus, Babylon, and the rest: of whom he adds this
Conclusion, that they all were destroyed, by the iniquity of Fortune: Et haec
quidem prorsus Fortuna abolevit. So that he ascribes, as well the rising, as
falling of Cities, to be the work, not of Providence, but of Chance. But, that
herein he is deceived, it appears by this argument: That both the rising,
and falling of many Cities, have been truly and certainly foretold: Which
they could not have been, if it had been by Fortune. For, these things which
are fortuitous, cannot be foreseen by Providence: and therefore not foretold.
Who can foretell, that at such a time, such a man shall have a fall? No more
could any man foretell, that at such a time such a kingdom should have his
fall, if it were merely casual. But we see, by experience, that both the
rising of some Cities, and the falling of others, have bin certainly foretold,
by diverse of the Prophets. Dan. 2. 31. etc.
The Prophet Daniel, not only foretells, both the rising, and the falling, of
the four grand Monarchies; but also graphically describes them, by their
several properties: yea and paintes them out, unto our eyes, in two lively
emblemes: the one, of the foure-parted Image; the other, Dan. 73 etc.
of the four fearful Beasts. Yea, and in the translation and succession of
those Monarchies, he plainly describes the falling of one of them, and the
rising of another, under the figure of a Battle, between a Ram, Dan. 8. 3,
etc.
and a Goat: wherein the Goat prevailed. Which Goat, he there affirms, to
be the King of the Graecians; as he does the R^mme, to be the King of the
Persians. Where, if the event had fallen out contrary unto his praediction,
Dan. 8 20. 21.
he being so definite, and confident in his asseueration, he had been utterly
shamed, Deuteronomy. 18. 21. 22.
and had justly incurred the note of a false Prophet. But he knew whom he
believed, 2. Tim. 1. 12.
and that he could not be deceived: because these things were by God himself
revealed; by whom they were both fore-knowne, and fore-appointed. So likewise,
the Prophet Jonas, in his foretelling of the destruction of Niniveh, was as
definite and peremptory in appointing the certain days, as Daniel was
before, in naming the certain Nations. Yet forty days and Niniveh shall be
destroyed. Jonah. 3. 4.
Which final destruction (though the means be unknown) yet had certainly
happened, if by their earnest repentance, it had not been auerted.

Another like destruction, there is also foretold, by the Prophet Balaam; to
happen from the Grecians, Number. 24. 24.
or Romans, unto the Kingdom both of the Assyrians, and of the Hebrews. The
Ships shall come from the Coasts of Chittim and shall subdue Assure, and shall
subdue Heber, and he also shall come to destruction. A very true prophecy,
though uttered by a false Prophet. For, whether we take Chittim for the Greeks,
or the Romans, (as it is sometimes for both,) by those two Nations, were those
two Kingdoms subdued; and the latter of those Kingdoms, by the latter of
those Nations, was not only subdued, but also subverted, according to the
prophecy in that place delivered. Now these things could not have been thus
certainly foreshewne, if they had not been as certainly foreseen. And that
they could not have been, if they had fallen out by Fortune. So that, as
concerning Fate; Solon excludes that, in one of his Elegies, Demost, Orat. de
falsa legate. To. 24 p. 63.
cited by Demonsthenes. Nostra quidem Fato Iovis vrbs non occidet vnquam:
Our famous Cities glorious State
Shall never fall by force of Fate.
And, for Fortune, Cic. in. Fragment p. 298.
Tullie excludes that: Nostris vitijs, non Cas^ aliquo, Rempub. ^misimus. We
have lost our State, by our offenses, and not by any Fortune. Nay even
Pausanias himself, in the very same place, where he so resolutely ascribes
this work unto Fortune; yet (as either forgetting himself, or remembering his
error) has plainly confessed, that it is the work of God. Minime mir^r,
Megalopolin omnia ornamenta ac pristinam felicitatem amisisse, Pausan. vbi
supra.
cum Deum sciam nouis semper rebus delectari. I marvel not, that the
magnificall City Megalopolis, has lost all her ornaments, and ancient
eminence; whenas I consider, and know well, how God delights himself, with
the changing of Cities and States. Nay, Luke, 4. 6.
even the Devil himself, in assuming the disposing of all kingdoms unto
himself, even there asserteth them unto a kind of providence, and denies
them both unto Fate, and unto Chance.

4 Therefore we must hold this, as a fixed and certain truth, that both the
rising and falling of Cities, The Rising and Falling of Cities is only of God.
Kingdoms, and Common wealths, are the decrees and appointments of Gods only
Providence. Wherein we have many very pregnant and clear testimonies: Yea, and
that not only of the Holy Scriptures, Pro. 8. 15, 16.
but also of Heathen and Secular Writers. King Solomon says, in the person of
God: By me Kings reign, and Princes decree justice. By me Princes rule, and
Nobles, and all the Judges of the Earth. For, as Tertullian truly teaches,
Inde est Imperator, vnde est and homo, Tertul. Apolog. c. 30. p. 59.
antequam Imperator: inde potestas illi, vnde Spiritus. By him a man is made a
King, by whom he was made a Man, before he was a King. He gave him his
dominion, that gave to him his breathing. Act^, 17. 25.
Now that is only God: who (as the Apostle testifies) has given unto all
men, both life, and breath, and all things, He it is (says the Prophet Daniel)
that has power over the Kingdom of men, Daniel, 4. 32.
and that gives it, unto whom he pleases; yea, even unto the very abiects.
Whom afterward, if they grow proud, he casts down again. Dij and secunda
elatos fortuna, qu^m celerrime, cum velint, euertere, and abiectos excitare
facile possunt, says Xenophon. God quickly can, at his pleasure, depresse
those, X^noph. l. 3. de Cyriminor. exped. l p. 301. Sabellicus Ae^eid 8. l. 1.
To. 2. p. 425.
that are prided with prosperous Fortune; and easily advance those, that are
dejected with adverse. Yea, and it was Platoes opinion (as Sabellicus reports
it) Nullam posse Ciuitat^m, sine fauore Numinis, vel prospere constitui, vel
constituta feliciter administrari. That there cannot any City, either, at the
first, be happily planted, or afterward, be prosperously governed, without the
special blessing, and favor of God. And this may be observed, to be
particularly affirmed, of all those four great Monarchies forenamed For the
Babilonian Monarchy; the Prophet Daniel expressly ascribes that unto God.
Daniel, 5. 18.
The most high God (says he) gave unto Nebuchadnezzar, both a Kingdom, and
Majesty, and honor, and glory. For the Persian Monarchy; King Cyrus himself
ascribes that unto God. For he says, Ezr. 1. 2.
that, The Lord God of heaven, had given him all the Kingdoms of the Earth.

Yea, and Themist^cles likewise confessed it, in plain words, unto Artabanus,
one of the Persian Princes. Plut. in vita Themistoclis p. 265.
Ego parebo vestris legibus, quando ita visum Deo, qui Persas extulit: and
propter me plures, quam nunc sunt, erunt, qui vestrum Regem adorent. I am ready
to obey your Persian Laws, seeing God has so ordained, who has so greatly
exalted the Persians. And I my self will be a mean, that many more, then now
do, shall give honor to your King. For the Grecian Monarchy; Daniel, 7. 6.
the Prophet Daniel again ascribes that unto God. For he says, that the
third Beast, which was like unto a Leopard (wherein the Grecian Monarchy was
prefigured,) had his power, and dominion given unto him. And therefore he had
it not of himself: as Hananias, one of the seauenty two Interpreters, very
plainly proves unto King Ptolomeus, by this familiar reason. Apotheg.
Hebrae^o^um. l. 2. p. 39.
Non quenquam esse Regemex sese, inde patet, Quia omnes cupiunt consequi hanc
dignitatem, sed non possunt: cum Dei donum sit. It appears, that no man can
make himself a King, because all men do desire it, and yet cannot attain it;
because it is Gods gift. As Seneca acknowledges in the person of Nero: Munus
Deorum est, ipsa quod seruit mihi Roma, and Senatus. It is Gods gift, that the
City and the Senate are subject to me. And for the Roman Monarchy; Plutarch
ascribes that directly unto God. For, Plutarch. in (...) Camilli. p. 282.
he says of Rome, that it could never have grown, a tam vili and paruo
initio, ad tantam gloriam and potentiam, sine Numinis praesentia: From so
despicable and poor a beginning to so admirable a power and glory, without
the presence and providence of God. And this he there reports, not as his
own single and particular opinion, but as a vulgar and common, received and
maintained among the most of them. And, Plutarch l. de Fortuna Romanorum, To.
2. p. 409. 411.
in another place, he affirms of Rome, that, Fundamenta Romae iecit Tempus
cum Deo: That the Foundation of Rome was laid by God and Time. It was laid by
God, to continue for a long time, as he wittily there expresses, by this fit
device and fiction: That Fortune quickly flew over both the Persians, and
Assyrians, and Macedonians, and Egyptians, and Syrians, and Carthaginians:
but, when she came unto the Romans, she then put off her wings, as purposing
to stay with them, and not to fly from them. So that God gave them their
beginning, in laying their foundation: and he vpheld their continuing; in
given to them Time. This is Plutarchs judgment of them. Yea, and Tully
likewise ascribes all the Roman greatness, unto none other cause, but only
to the bounty and goodness of their gods. Quis est tam vecors, qui, cum Deos
esse intellexerit, non intelligat, eorum numine, hoc tantum imperium esse
natum, and auctum, and retentum? Who is there so mad, but knowing there is a
God, he must also understand, that by his special goodness, the great Empire
of the Romans is both founded, and increased, and continued? Yea, and in the
same place he ascribes the dilatation of their Empire, rather unto their
religion, Cic. Orat. de Arusp. Respons. p. 405.
then either unto their valor, or unto their wisdom. Nec numero, Hispanos;
nec robore, Gallos; nec calliditate, Poenos; nec artihus, Graecos; nec hoc ipso
huius Gentis ac Terrae domestico natiuoque sensu, Italos Latinosque: sed
pietate, and Religion^ atque hac vna sap^entia, quod Deorum immortalium numine
omnia regi, gubernarique perspeximus; omnes gentes nationesque superauimus. We
have not ouercom the Spaniards, by our number; nor the French, by our power;
nor the Carthaginians, by our pollices; nor the Graecians, by our Arts; nor the
Italians, or Latins, by the natural sharpness, and finenesse of our wits:
but it is only our piety, and religion, and this special wisdom of
ascribing all things to the government of the gods, that has subdued unto us
so many Countries, and Nations. Thereby plainly insinuating, that the
greatness of their Empire was bestowed by God upon them, only as a reward of
their piety, and religion. Which Caecilius also expressly confirms. For he
says of the Romans, Arnob. l. 8. cont. Gent. p. 746.
that, Imperium suum, vltra Solis vias, and ipsius Oceani limits, progagarunt,
dum exercent in armis virtutem religiosam: The exercise of virtue, and of
Religion, was that which enlarged the Roman dominion. For (as he adds a
little after) Dum vniversarum Gentium sacra suscipiunt, etiam Regna meruerunt.
While they receive the Religions of all Nations, they deserve also their
Dominions. This he falsely ascribes unto their false religion: which yet may
truly be ascribed unto the true one. And Camillus, Live. l. 5. p. 103.
in his Oration recorded by Liuie, expressly affirms, that all the calamities
of the Romans sprung only from there offenses against God; as, on the contrary,
all their prosperity grew only from their piety. Which is true, in very deed,
if it be rightly understood, and be referred, as it ought, unto to the true
God. Ecclus. 10. 22.
For (as Ecclesiasticus very truly affirms) It is the fear of the Lord,
which causes, that the Kingdom fails not: but a Kingdom is lost, by
cruelty and pride. And therefore King Ochus, being asked by his son, by what
means he had preserved his kingdom so long? answered, Atheneus. l. 12. p. 407.
That this was done, Pietate, in Deos; et iustitia, in Homines: By his Piety,
toward God; and his aequitie, toward men. Job. 36. 17.
For (as Elihu truly tells us) Judgment and aequitie maintain all things:
P^o. 16 12.
Yea, even the very throne it self, as King Solomon acknowledges; The Throne
is established by Justice. But it is supplanted Ecclus. 10. 8.
and overthrown by wickedness (as Ecclesiastcus) observes Because of
unrighteous dealing, and wrongs, and riches gotten by deceit, the Kingdom is
translated from one people to another. So that, as King Solomon himself in
another place affirms, Pro. 14. 34.
Justice exalts a nation: but sin brings a people to confusion. A notable
example whereof, God himself has left unto us, Ier. 25. 12.
in the Babilonians: whose kingdom and Nation he professes that he will
bring unto utter desolation, for their sins and iniquities. And this we may
observe to have been a strong notion, very deeply imprinted in the minds
even of the Heathens: That, as nothing praeserueth Kingdoms more firmly, then
virtue; Au. Gell. l. 20. c. 1 p. 281.
so nothing destroys them more certainly, then vice. A. Gellius ascribes the
rising of the Romans only unto their virtues. Omnibus virtutum ganeribus
exercendis, colendisque, Populus Romanus, e parua origin, ad tantae
megnitudinis instar emicuit. The Romans (says he) ascended from their low and
mean beginnings, to such an height of greatness, only by their practice of all
kind of virtues. And Tullie on the contrary, he says: They lost their
greatness by degenerating from their ancient virtue unto vice, in the
fore-alledged place: Nostris vitijs, non casu aliquo, Rempub. amisimus; It is
not by chance, but it is by our vice, whereby we have decayed and lost our
commonwealth. And therefore in the same place, he pronounces, that, There is,
Cic. in Fragmentis. To. 4. p. 298. 297.
Nihil tam inimicum Ciuitati, quam iniustitia; quae, sine magnae iustitia, nec
geri, nec stare potest. That there is no such Enemy unto any City, as
injustice is, and injury: because, without great Justice, there cannot any
City be either well governed, or safely praeserued. For, as the Tragical Poet
has very truly noted: -- Vbi non est pudor, Senec. in Thyes^e Act. 2. Sce. 1.
p 296.

Nec cura iuris, sanctitas, pietas, fides;
Instabile Regnum est.
Where is nor modesty, nor equity, nor sanctity,
No piety, no verity, no, nor civilitie,
In such a Kingdom, certainly,
There can be no stabilitie.
Which sentence of the Tragic, is also confirmed, by another of the Comic:
Where he brings in a servant, disputing with a Virgin, about the
fortification and munition of their Town. -- Vt munitum muro, tibi visum est
oppidum? says he.

How like you here, the warlike strength of this our walled Town? Unto which
she answered presently. Si incolae been sint morati, pulchre munitum arbitror.
Plut. (...). 4. p. 644.

Perfidia, and peculatus ex vrbe, and avaritia si exulant.
Quarta invidia, quinta ambitio, sexta obtrectatio,
Septimum periurium, octaua indiligentia,
Nona iniuria, decimum (quod pessumum aggressu) scelus.
Haec nisi vrbe aberunt, centuplex murus rebus seruandis parum est.
If Citizens be manner'd well; well manned and walled, I deem it.
If City Sins be banished all; then strong, may all esteem it.
If Treachery, and Robbery, and Avarice be gone,
If Envy, and Ambition, and Backbiting he none;
If Perjury, if Idleness, if Injury be out,
And truly, if that Vilainie, the worst of all the rout.
Unless these Vices banished been, what ever forts you have,
An hundres Walls together put, will not have power to save.
Because, by those vices, they do even enforce God to overthrow their Walls, as
sometime he did Hiericoes. For, as Bacchylides truly affirms, Josh 6. 20.
Athenaeus. l. 2. p. 31.
-- Alta a coeli sede
Diruit oppida -- superba,
Qui summum in Omnes imperium tenet.
It Is God, that rules over all,
Who giu's proud Cities such a fall.
Nay, wicked Citizens, by their vices, do overthrow their own Cities, and
dig down their Walls, as Solon well observes. Nostra quidem Fato Iovis vrbs
non ^ccidet vnquam,
Propitijsque Dijs, salua manner potest.
Moenia sed ciues stolidi, cupidique lucrorum, Demost. Orat. de fal^a Legate.
To. 2 p. 63.

Ardua, subverti, per sua facta student.
It is not Fate our City can destroy:
We may, long time, in safety it enjoy,
The Gods to us being propitious.
But Citizens themselves, so vicious,
So foolish are, and covetous; that they
Their own walls raze, and utterly decay.
And therefore says Theognis unto the same purpose: Nullam vnquam (Cyrne) boni
Ciuitatem perdiderunt viri.
Sed quando, Theognis. p. 8.
contumeliosis esse, malis placuerit,
Populumque corruperint, iudiciaque iniustis dederint,
Propriorum lucrorum causa, and potentiae;
Existima, non diu illam civitatem quietam fore,
Et si nunc manet al^a in quiet.
Good men did never their Cities ruin bring.
But when evil men shall injuries begin,
Not caring to corrupt and violate
The Judgments seats, for their own Lucres sake:
Then look, that City cannot long have peace,
Though for the present it have rest and ease.
Now, this consent of the Heathen, in thus generally ascribing the rising of
Cities and Commonwealths, unto virtue; and their falling, unto vice; implies,
that they believed, that God is the Author and worker of both these. Because
he is the Rewarder of virtues, and the punisher of vices: who for the
transgressions and wickedness of men, both abateth and abaseth, and
transformeth, and transferreth all their Kingdoms and Commonwealths, as he
himself pleases. Of all which, the Holy Scriptures have left us evident
examples.

He abated the Kingdom of the Israelites; when he took from Rehoboram, ten
of the twelve tribes, and bestowed them upon Jeroboam. 1. Kings, 12. 16, 17.
He abased the Kingdom of the Caldeans; Isay. 47, 1.
when he called unto Babel, to come and sit down in the dust: and drove out
their proud King from the company of men, compelling him to live among the
brute Beasts: And all that, to teach him but this very lesson, which I now am
in proving: That the most High bears rule over the Kingdoms of men, and that
he disposes them, Daniel, 4. 22.
as it seems best unto him. He transformed the Kingdom of the Israelites;
when he changed it from their Judges, unto their Kings: as he likewise did
the Romans, from their Consuls, unto their Emperors. In which change of that
State, it is worthy observation, which is written by Plutarch: That God,
Plutach, in vita Bruti. p. 863.
determining to alter the Commonwealth of the Romans, from their Optimacie, to
a Monarchy; he purposely suffered Brutus to be overthrown by Octauius, lest
he should be a mean to overthrow that government, which God then determined
to set up, he being a known Enemy unto the state of a Monarchy.

And finally, he transferred them; the kingdoms of the Canaanites, unto the
Israelites; of the Israelites, unto the Caldeans; of the Caldeans, unto the
Medes, and Persians; of the Persians, unto the Graecians; and of the Graecians,
unto the Romans. All which, have, in the Scripture, their particular
testimonies, to be the works of none other, but only of God himself: who (as
Job affirms in his book) both loses the Collar of Kings, and girdeth their
loins with a girdle; both increases the People, and destroys them; Job, 12.
18.
both inlargeth the Nations, Job. 12. 2.
and brings them in again. Daniel, 2. 21.
And (as Daniel adds, unto the same purpose) He both sets up Kings, and
takes away Kings. So that (as Tertullian well collecteth) Ille Regna
dispensat, cuius est and orbis qui regnatur, and Homo ipse qui regnat. -- Ille
Civitates extollit, and deprimit, Tertul. A^ol^ge. c. 26. p. 57.
sub quo fuit aliquando sine Ciuitatibus genus humanum. He disposes of
Kingdoms, whose both the World is that is ruled, and the Men that rule it. He
both exalts and depresseth Cities, whose Subjects men were, before they had
any Cities. And this was understood, even of the very Heathen: as we may gather
out of that prayer, which King Darius made, before his battle with great
Alexander: which Plutarch thus reports. Dij natales, atque regij, id primum
vos precor, Plut. in vita (...) p. 562.
Quam mihi Persarum fortunam dedistis, came restitutam ego vti posteris
relinquam; vti victor, Alexandro rependam, quae in meos, mea calamitate ictos,
contulit beneficia. Sin fa^ale adest tempus, itaque visum est Nemesi, and rerum
vi^issitudini, vti Persarum regnum cesset; vt nemo hominum, praeter vnum
Alexandrum, in Cyri sedeat solio. Oye immortal Gods, that are men's Creators,
and Kings Protectors, first of all I beseech you, that I may leave the same
prosperity of the Persians unto my Successors, which from you I received by my
Predecessors; that so I may repay unto Alexander, those great benefits and
favors, which, in this time of my calamity, he has royally bestowed upon my
dearest friends. But, if the fatal period of time be now come, wherein the
Persians Kingdom must needs change, and be undone; then again I beseech you,
that the succession of King Cyrus his Throne may fall unto King Alexander, and
unto none other. In which prayer it appears, that he verily believed, as well
the preservation, as translation of Kingdoms, to be seated in the power of God.

So that, for this point, of the rising and falling of Kingdoms and
Commonwealths; it seems utterly absurd, not only to the religion of well
believing Christians, but also to the reason of understanding Heathens, to
refer and ascribe it unto any other cause, then only to Gods providence.
Especially not to chance. For, can we think, that that providence, which is
so precisely curious, as to mark and observe the falling of Sparrowes, should
be so supinely incurious, as to slight and neglect the falling of Kingdoms?
Matthew, 10. 29.
This were absurd to think. For; (as Saint Augustine collecteth from diverse
other the like works of providence:) Qui non solum Angelum, and Hominem, Aug.
l. 5. de Ciuit. Dei c. 11. T^. 5. p. 303.
sed nec exigui and contemptibilis animantis viscera, nec auis pennulam, nec
herbae flosculum, nec arboris folium, sine suarum partium conuenientia
dereliquit; nullo modo credendus est, regna Hominum, eorumque dominationes, and
seruitutes, a suae prouidentiae legibus alienas esse voluisse. That God, who
has made, not only Men, and Angels, but has also ordered, with so great a
conuenience, the very entraills of the least and most contemptible ^east, the
feather of every Bird, the flower of every Herb, and the leaf of every Plant;
cannot in any wise be thought, to leave without the laws and compass of his
providence, the dominions, and slaueries of Kingdoms, and Commonwealths.

5 And this may further be seen, by an other observation: that God has
encompassed all the Kingdoms of the earth with a threefold restraint; to wit,
God limiteth the power of all Kings and Kingdoms.
a limitation of their powers; a circumscription of their bounds; and a
prefinition of their periods. There was never, as yet, any kingdom in the
world; which either for his power, was illimitable; or, for his place,
universal; or, for his time, perpetual. But, God, in his providence, has so
encompassed all of them, that evermore their powers, have bin reduced unto
measures; their dominions, unto bounds; and their continuance, unto periods. As
we may see, by plain examples in the holy Scriptures. And first, as concerning
the restraint of their powers: that may evidently be showed, in three Eastern
Kings. The first of whom, is Saul: who pursued the Prophet David, 1. Samuel,
26. 20. 21.
with such implacable hatred, that he hunted him in all places, as a Partrich
in the wilderness. And yet, when he offered himself into his hands, he had no
power to hurt him; but (as Esau in the like case pursuing his brother Jacob)
though he came out against him with a purpose to kill him; Genesis 32. 6 7.
yet, Genesis 33. 4.
contrary unto his purpose, he both lovingly and humbly reconciled himself
unto him. So that, it might be said, as it is in the Tragic: Otium e tanto
subitum tumultu
Quis Deus fecit? Senec. ^ Thy^st. Act. 3. Sce. 3. p. 3. p. 309.

What God, so soon, so great a calm
Could bring, from out so great a storm?
Surely even the same God, who, (as a King testifies) has the hearts of all
Kings in his hand, Pro. 21. 1.
and who turns them, like rivers of waters, whither he thinks good. He it
was, that so restrained the power of this wicked King Saul, that he had no
power in him, once to touch his Anointed, Psalm. 105. 15.
or to do his Prophet any harm.

The second of those kings, is Nebuchadnezzer: who was so vainly inflated,
with the conceit of his own power, that he commanded his Captains to go
fortn, and to see him avenged upon all the earth, Judith 2. 1. 3, 7.
to fill all the face of the earth with his Armies, Judith 3. 8.
and to destroy all flesh that obeyed not his commandments: yea to destroy all
the gods of all other Nations, and to set up him to be worshipped for the God
of the whole world. And thus he proiected to extend his own power, beyond all
due measure, and to advance his own honor above humane Nature. So that (as
the Heathen Poet speaks) he did Coelum ipsum petere stultitia. Horat. l 1
Carm O^. 3. p. 7.

He sought, in his deep foolishnes,
To climb into Heavens Holiness.
But, what was the event of this his proud conceit? Surely this his exorbitant
and unmeasurable ambition, and impotent desire of inlardging his power, beyond
humane condition, was, by a superior power, restrained, and himself of all
vain purposes defeated. His Captains were destroyed, his army dispersed: His
honor blemished, by the hand of a woman. Yea, Iud. 14. 18.
and even his own person was banished from among the society of men, Iud. 15.
2. etc.
and forced to live wild among the beasts of the field. Dan. 4. ^0.
So that (as Olympias complained Aeliand. 13. var. Hist. c. 30. p. 504.
over her son Alexander, in the very like case) Whilst he affected the
honor of a God, he was deprived of the honor of a man. And all this (as even
he himself confessed) did fall out unto him, Dan. 4. 31. etc.
by the appointment of God.

The third, and the last of these Kings, is Senaherib; propounding unto
himself the like amplification of his power and dominion, fell himself into
the like, or a greater confusion. For he sending out all his warlike forces and
powers to the siege of Jerusalem; 2. King. 18. 17. 33. 34. 35. 29.
and there, by the mouth of his grandiloquus Orator, insulting over all the
gods of the Heathen; yea and not forbearing the very God of Heaven: when he had
even devoured that kingdom in hope, and swallowed it down, for as good as his
own: God himself puts his hook into the nose of that Lion, and brought him
back again the same way that he came, destroying, 2. King 19. 28. 35. 36. 37.
in one night, an hundred fourscore and five thousands of his Soldiers, and
giving him to be destroyed, by the hands of his own Sons. Thus God, who
always resists the proud, 1. Pet 55.
resisted the attempts of these three proud kings; curtailling their power, and
restrayning their ambition; and thereby evidently showing them, that, Mat. 6.
27.
as No man can add one cubite to his stature; so no man can add one ynch unto
his power, be he never so great a King. For (as the Apostle Paul teaches us)
there is no power but of God, and the powers that be are ordained of God. Romans
13. 1. Just. M^rt l. de Monarchia Dei To. 1. p. 205.
Yea, and this the very Heathen themselves confess likewise. Summi est
potestas omnis, and gloria Dei: as our Savior Christ testifies. And, no man
has either kingdom, Mat 6 13.
or power, or glory, but only from him. And therefore king Solomon has given
unto kings a very good exhortation, to remember whence their rule and power
comes. Give ear ye that rule multitudes, and glory in the number of your
people. Wi^d. 6. 2. 3. 4.
For the rule is given you of the Lord, and power by the most High: adding,
that they be but the officers of his Kingdom.

6 And, God circumscribeth all Kingdome^ within Bounds
as God has limited unto all kingdoms their powers: so he has also
circumscribed their dominions, reducing them into compass, and confining them
within their own bounds and limits. For, as he has given unto no king or
kingdom an infinite power; no more has he given them an infinite Dominion.
Infinity is Gods own property: which is so peculiar unto the divine Nature,
that it is not communicable unto any Creature whatsoever. Much less to any
man, whose largest dominion cannot reach beyond the Circle of the Earth: which
is but as a prick. And yet even this Earth, as small as it is, was never yet
allowed unto any one King, were he never so great: no, nor yet a quarter of
it. It is true indeed, that the mighty Roman Monarchy was amplified so
exceedingly by certain of the Romans, as though they had gotten the whole
world into their hands: and, as though it might truly be affirmed of them (as
it is of God himself in the Psalm) that in their hands were all the corners
of the Earth. Psalm. 95. 4.
Tullie says of the Roman Empire, that it was, Orbis Terrarum terminis
definitum, That it had no other limits, but the limits of the world. Cicero.
Orat. pro P. Seslio. p. 442.
And, in another place, he, speaking of those notable victories, which the
Romans had obtained by Cn. Pompeius, he affirms of them, Cicero. Orat. 4.
in Catilin. p. 315 A^no^^ius. ^. ^. cont. Gentes. p. 746.
that they were, ijsdem, quibus Solis cursus, regionibus ac terminis contentae:
contained, within no fewer Regions, then the Sun incompasseth in his course.
This seemed not enough unto Caecilius. For he says, that the Romans did,
Imperium suum, vltra Solis vias, propagare: They enlarged their dominion beyond
the course of the Sun. And Ovid, he comes not a step behind them, in
this their exaggerated amplification. For he says, that if God should look
down from heaven upon the earth, he could see nothing there, without the power
of the Romans. Ovid. l 1. ^astor. p. 3. b.
Jupiter, arce sua, totum cum spectet in Orbem,
Nil, nisi Romanum, quod tueatur, habet.
Yea, Egesip. l. 2. de Excid. o Hieros. p. 244.
and (as Egesippus records) there were many, that thought the Roman Empire
so great, and so largely diffused over the face of the whole Earth, that they
called, Orbem Terrarum, Orbem Romanum: they called, the Globe of the Earth, the
Globe of the Romans; the whole world, the Roman World. And the same folly,
which possessed the Romans for their power, possessed also the other Monarchs
for theirs. Nebuchadnezzer the Monarch of the Caldeans, Daniel, 3. 31. 2. 38.
conceited, that he had under him, all nations, and languages. And Cyrus, the
Monarch of the Persians, professed, that he was the Lord of the whole world:
The Lord God of Heaven, has given me all the Kingdoms of the Earth. Thus
blind and bewitching a thing is Ambition, that it dazeleth the sight of common
sense and reason. For, Ezra. 1. 2.
all this great ostentation is indeed nothing else, but, either the rhetorical
amplification of hyperbolizing Orators; wherein there is truly audacia Tropi;
or, the vain imagination of those forenamed Monarchs, doting upon their own
greatness. For, the two first Monarchies of the Caldeans and Persians, were
both of them shut up, within the lists of Asia, and scarcely touched the skirts
of either Europe, or Africa. The Grecian Monarchy wrought Eastward into Asia
too: which, though it stretched further then either of the former; yet were
there many great Countries, even in Asia it self, both Northward, Southward,
and Eastward, where it never so much as touched. The Roman indeed stretched
furthest of all the rest, as being possessed of large Kingdoms and Dominions,
both in Asia, Europe, and Africa. But yet, for all that, they were so far
from obtaining the Empire of the whole world, that they could never get wholly
any of these three parts of it: but there were in all of them diverse Regions
and Countries, Vbi nec Pelopidarum facta, neque famam audiebant: Cic. l. 15.
Epist. ad Attic. Epist. 326. p. 394.
Where they never so much as heard, Macrob. l. 2. de Some. Scip. c. 10. p. 111.
either the facts or the fame, of either Grecians, or Ronames. As Macrobius
ingenuously acknowledges: Gangem transnare, aut Caucasum transcendere, Romani
nominis fama non valuit. The fame of the Romans, as great as it was, yet was
never so great, as either to be able to swim over the River Ganges, nor yet
climb over the mountain Caucasus. So that, even their Fame came far short
of those swelling amplifications, which before you saw used, by their Orators,
and Poets. But their Dominion came much shorter: as is expressly affirmed by the
fore-alledged Author, Totius Terrae, Macrob. ibid.
quae ad Coelum puncti locum obtinet, minima quaedam particula, a nostri
generis hominibus, possidetur. That though the whole Earth, compared with the
Heavens, be no bigger then a Center in the midst of a Circle; yet that scarce
the least parcel of this little Earth, did ever come into the hands of the
Romans. Thus, even these great and mighty Monarchies, which were the highest
Columns of Majesty upon the Earth, yet have, all of them, been reduced
within their bounds and limits: yea and those very straight ones. And therefore
none of the minor and inferior Kingdoms could be left without limits. As
Tertullian plainly proves, by a particular enumeration of the greatest, and
most famous of them. Si Solomon regnauit, in finibus tantum Iudeae; a Bersabe
vsque Dan, termini eius Regni signantur. Si vero Babilonijs and Parthis
regnauit Darius; non habuit potestatem vlterius, vltra fines Regni sui, non
habuit in omnibus gentibus potestatem. Si Aegyptijs Pharaoh, vel quisque ei in
haereditate Regni successit, illic tantum potitus est Regni sui dominium. Si
Nabucodon^sor cum suis Regulis, ab India vsque Aethiopiam, habuit Regni sui
terminos. Si Alexander Macedo nunquam Asiam vniversam, and caeteras Regiones,
postquam devicerat, tenuit. Si Germani adhuc vsque limits transgredi non
sinuntur. Britanniae, intra Oceani ambitum, conclusae sunt. Maurorum gens, and
Getulorum barbaries a Romany obsidentur, ne Regionum suarum fines excedant.
Quid de Romany dicam, qui de legionum suarum praesidio imperium sunm muniunt,
nec trans istas Gentes porrigere vires Regni sui possunt?

If Solomon reigned as a King, yet was it but only in the Kingdom of Judea:
the borders of his Kingdom extended no farther then from Dan unto Beersheba.
If Darius reigned over the Babylonians and Parthians; yet had be no dominion
beyond the bounds of his own Kingdom: he could not command over every other
nation. If Pharaoh and his Successors reigned over the Egyptians, yet all his
dominion was only over them. If Nabucodonosor and his Princes have reigned
from India unto Aethiopia, yet there his Kingdom ended. So Alexander himself
could never obtain whole Asia, nor yet long retain those Regions which he
there had conquered. The Germans are not suffered to go beyond their limits.
The Britains are shut up within the compass of the Sea. The Moors and
Getulians are kept in by the Romans, so that they cannot come without their
bounds. Nay, the Romans themselves are feign to guard their dominions with
their Garrisons and Legions, and cannot extend their Empire over all nations,
at their pleasure. And that which he affirms of those forenamed Nations, may
likewise be obseru^d in all others. There is no Kingdom in the world, but it
is shut-vp and included within some limits: yea and those oftentimes but very
mean and weak ones: sometimes, a shallow River; someties, a narrow Hill;
sometimes, a field of sand. So weak means of inhibiting so strong desires,
and so feeble, of resisting so unbridled ambitions, that it is utterly
impossible for so weak and simple bounders, to be able to keep in such men
within their bounds, if God himself were not the Bounder of them. But he, as
he has by his power appointed, that a little weak sand should stop the
rage of the swelling waters; so has he likewise appointed, that such weak
terms and limits should keep in the proudest and most ambitious Princes, as
it were raging Lions, with their grates, Job, 38. 11.
and cages. As if God, that has said unto the Sea, Hitherto shall thou come,
and no further; and here shall thou stay all thy proud and swelling waves:
should likewise have said unto Kings, and their Kingdoms, (as Seneca well
expresses it) Vltra Istrum, Dacus non exeat. Istmus Samothracas includat.
Seneca, l. 1. Not Quaest. ^a Praesat, p. 2.
Parthis obstet Euphrates. Danubius Sarmatica ac Romana disterminet. Rhenus
Germaniae modum faciat. Pyrenaeus medium inter Gallias and Hispanias iugum
extollat. Inter Aegyptum and Aethiopias arenarum in^ulta vastitas iaceat. Let
the Dacians be contained within the river Ister. The Samothracians within their
proper Istmus. The Parthians within Euphrates. Let Danubius distinguish
between the Romans and Sarmatians: and Rhenus restrain the daring Germans.
Let the mountain Pyrenaeus divide the French, and Spaniards: and the
wilderness of Sand the Aethiopians, from Egyptians. And in like manner also
be all other Kingdoms: they are bound within their bounders, as it were in
bands; aad shut-vp within their limits, as it were in prison. Now the Bounder
of all these, Cap. 1.
is only God himself: who (as I have before showed) is the Bounder of all
things.

And this also appears by the liquid and clear testimonies, both of Holy
Scriptures, Deuteronomy. 32. 8.
and of Heathen writings. The Prophet Moses affirms, that it is The most High
God, that divided unto the Nations their inheritance, and separated the sons
of Adam, and appointed the borders of the people. And Ecclesiasticus affirms,
That it is God, that appointed a ruler over every people, when he divided the
Nations of the whole Earth. Ecclus. 17. 15.
So that, both the erecting of Kings, and separation of Kingdoms, are the
only works of God. And therefore Trismegistus calls God, Terrarum
distributorem; The distributer of Countries. Trismeg. Pimand. Dial, 13. p. 464.
And Demosthenes cites this sentence, out of the inscription of an Altar, that
-- Jupiter ipse
Rex superum medius limite signat agros. Demost. Orat. de Halonesa, p. 26.

God Jupiter himself, I ween, the King of Gods, is he,
That causes Countries, by their Lists, distinguished to be.
And this to preserve the people from contentions: as in the same place, he
affirms. For, where there be not such limits to distinguish them, there al
ways do the people contend about them. As Salust exemplisieth by a notable
instance, (...).
between the Cathaginians, and the Cyreneans. Who hawing long contended about
their limits (and yet for a vaste field of unfruitful bar^rea Sand) when they
had even wearied themselves with diverse mutual slaughters, in the end (for
the ending of all contention) they fell upon this Conclusion. That they should
both of them send forth at a certain praefixed time, certain Messengers from
their borders; and that the place, where they should meet, should be the
Bounds of both Nations. The Carthaginians sent for them two Brothers called
Phileni: by whose speed and diligence, they obtained great advantage. Which,
when the Cyrenians challenged, as being fraudulently gotten, by their setting
forth before the appointed time; they offered them this condition; that, either
the Phileni should be content to be buried quick, in the place where they met,
and which they challenged for other limits; or else they should permit the
setting of their limits unto those Cyrenians, under the same condition which
was propounded unto them. Which condition (though unequal) yet the Phileni
accepted: and so were both of them in the place buried quick. Unto whom, for
their valor the Carthaginians there erected, and consecrated an Altar: as an
aeternall monument, both of the limits of their Dominion, and of the honor of
these two noble Brethren, by whom they had obtained the same. Out of which
memorable history, we may draw these three obseruatious, to our present
purpose. First, that where there be no known limits between Kingdom and
Kingdom, there be always contentions and quarells about them. Secondly* that
the way to quench those quarells, is, there to set up some artificial limits,
where there be no natural. And thirdly, that even those casual and
accidental limits, yet are in those places fixed by the secret decree and
appointment of God: which, both this Altar of the Phileni insinuated, and the
forenamed Altar of Demosthenes expressed: -- Jupiter ipse.
Rex superum, medius limite signat agros.


7 And, God gives the times of continuance unto Kingdoms
as God has circumscribed the dominions of all King, within their bounds and
limits: so has he also prescribed unto all Kingdoms and Empires the times of
their continuance. Both which points the Apostle Paul has expressed in one
sentence. God has made, of one blood, al mankind, to dwell upon all the face
of the Earth: Act. 17. 26.
and has assigned the times, which were ordained, and the bounds of their
habitation. He both appoints the bounds of their habitations; which was our
former point: and assigns the times of their contin^ance, which is our
present point. The same God, which has determined the days of al men, and
kept the just number of their months with him, Job. 14. 5.
appointing them their bounds which they cannot pass; he has also appointed
set periods of time, as well unto Kingdoms, as unto private persons: to some a
time; to some, two times; to some, Daniel, 7. 22. 12. 7.
half a time; to some, all these together, at his own will and pleasure.
Which times and periods being fulfilled (as the days of a man when they are
expired) they are by and by dissolved. And this we may see verified as well in
the great and mighty Monarchies; as in the smaller and inferior kingdoms. --
sublimes fregit Spartanus Athenas:
Atque idem Thebis cecidit: Cloutian. l. 3. in lauds Stilicon. p. 273.
sic Medus ademit
Assyrio: Medoque tulit moderamina Perses.
Subiecit Persen, Macedo: cessurus and ipse
Romany. --
The Spartane spoiled the Athenian State; the like befell to Thebes:
The Medes destroyed the Assyrian Stock; the Persian slew the Medes.
The Persian Monarch was subdued by that great Macedo:
The Macedon must shortly yield unto the Roman foe.
And the same may be seen in diverse other Kingdoms, as Bartus exemplifieth
by many notable instances. So that, as in the same place he observes: As when
the Wind the angry Ocean moves,
Wave hunteth wave and billow billow shoues:
So do all Nations iustle each the other, Bartus in his Colonies. p 442.

And so one People does pursue another.
And scarce a second has the first vnhoused,
Before a third him thence again has rowsed.
Thus the greatest Kingdoms for force, yet have been of small continuance,
being successively cut off by the sword of their enemies. But yet that, not by
chance, but by Gods special ordinance: who, when the number of their days
were expired (that is, Genesis 15. 16.
when they had fullfilled the measure of their wickedness) then sent upon
them, the sword of other Nations, for the punishment of their sins. For the
swords of men are but the Rods of God, whereby he scourges them that rebel
against him: as he himself affirms, both of the Assyrians, and of the
Babilonians, calling the one of them, the rod of his wrath, and the other his
Hammer and his weapon of war, wherewith he will break down nations and
destroy Kingdoms. So Isa. 10. 5.
So that though they whett the sword, Jer. 51. 20.
yet it is God that strikes the stroke. It is he that breaks in sunder those
Kingdoms with his hammer. Which yet he does not before their appointed time be
fulfilled. For (as Ecclesiastes expressly affirms) Unto all things there is an
appointed time. A time to plant, Eccles. 3. 1. 2.
and a time to pluck up. And the appointer of those times is only God himself
as by this one Argument it evidently appears; that he is so peremptory and
definite in foretelling the certain times of the continuing and falling of
diverse Kingdoms. He foretold of the great and mighty Kingdom of Babylon that
it should continue but only unto the third generation, Ier. 27. 6. 7.
and that then it should utterly be undone. I have given all these lands into
the hand of Nebuchadnezzer the King of Babel my servant -- And all Nations
shall serve him and his Son and his Sons Son, until the very time of his
Land also come, and then many Nations and great Kings shall serve themselves of
him: what could be more definite? And that he neither deceived nor was deceived
in it, the event which followed, openly declared. For in the time of Belshazzer
Nebuchadnezzers Sons Sons, Dan. 5. 28 30. 26.
the Babilonian Monarchy was dissolved, and that by the written decree of God,
who there professes that the number of that Kingdom was fulfilled. And as
definite as he was in appointing the set time of the disso^ution of Babylon,
so definite was he also in appointing the set time of the Jewish Captivity
under them. Ier. 25. 11, 12.
This whole land shall be desolate and an astonishment, and shall serve the King
of Babel seventy years. And when the seventy years are accomplished, I will
visit the King of Babel and that Nation etc. Which he did accordingly
perform. For first, for the deliverance and manumission of the Jews, it is
expressly testified, that that was fulfilled, as soon as the time, foretold by
Jeremy, was finished. 2. Chro. 36. 22. Ezra. 1. 1.
And, for the second part of the Prophecy, concerning the destruction of the
Babilonian Kingdom; it follows by consequent upon the former.

For Cyrus, who, in the first year of his reign, gave order for the return
of the Jews, was one of those Princes, who were the ouerthrowers of the
Babilonians. As concerning which Prince, in giving his name, almost an hundred
years, Isay. 44 28
before he was borne; Isay. 45. 1.
there is so great an evidence of Gods foreseeing providence, that a parallel
to that prophecy, cannot be given, in all the secular History. And as God
has been definite, in foretelling the very time of the destruction of Babylon;
so has he been likewise, in foreshewing the destruction, both of the
Ephraemites, and of the Egyptians: pointing down precisely, upon the very
number of the years: Within threescore and five years, Ephraem shall be
destroyed, from being a Nation. Isay, 7. 8.
And for Egypt, he says: I will make the land of Egypt desolate, for forty
years etc. But, at the end of forty years, I will gather the Egyptians from
the people, Ezech. 29. 12. 13.
where they were scattered. Now, this so peremptory assigning of a definite
time, as well of their captivity, as of their liberty, does evidently show,
not only that those times are certainly appointed; but also that this
appointment is only made by God. Who (as our Savior Christ teaches us) has
in his own power the seasons of all times: Acts, 1. 7.
and who (as the Prophet Daniel teaches us) is he, Daniel. 2. 21.
that changes those times and seasons, and that both takes away Kings, and
sets up Kings. And this also was not unknown, even to the very Heathen.
For, Jason, in Xenophon, expressly affirms, that it is God only, which does,
Et homines extollere, and potentes deprimere: Xenoph. l. 6. Rerum Gracarum p.
462.
That both lifts up the needy, and casts down the mighty. So likewise, He
siodus: -- homines sunt pariter obscurique, clarique, Hesiod, Opera and Dies,
p. 1.

Nobiles, ignobilesque, Iouis magni voluntate.
Facile enim extollit, facile etiam elatum deprimit.
Facile Praclarum minuit, and obscurum adauget.
Men are obscure, or eminent,
They noble are, or base:
But all is Gods appointement;
Who giu's the humble grace,
Exalting them that are but low,
And lofty ones depressing,
Abating of the prouder show,
And poorer sort increasing,
So Homer: Facile est Dijs, Homer, Odyss. l. 16.
qui coelum latum habitant,
Et gloria illustrare mortalem hominem,
Et malo afficere.
The God of Heaven, he easily can
Immortalize a mortal man,
with glory and with fame:
The same God, even as easily may
Afflict a mortal man, I say,
with sorrow and with shame.
And Simonides affirms, that God has not only the power of the thing, but
also the power of the Time. He both can do the thing, and appoint the Time. O
Filt, penes se habet Jupiter altitonans, finem
Omnium quae fiunt, Smonides cum H^siodo, p. 164.
and pro arbitrio suo disponit.
The Ends of all, in Gods sole power rest,
Which he disposes, as him pleases best.
So that (to conclude this discourse with Tertullians sentence,) Ille vices
dominationum, ipsis temporibus, in seculo ordinat, qui ante omne tempus fuit,
and Seculum corpus temporum fecit. Tertul. Apologet. Cap. 26. p. 57.
He it is, that ordained the interchange of dominions and Empires, in their
times, who himself is more ancient then any time, and who has made an
eternity of the body of time. Now, if Cities grow great, and little, neither by
Fate, nor Fortune; but by Gods praeordination; if he limit their powers,
circumscribe their dominions, and measure out their continuance; then must
there needs be a God, who performs all these works. But the Antecedent is
true; as has been proved in this Chapter. And therefore, the Consequent must
needs follow after.

CHAP. 8.
God is, both the Physical, and Ethicall last end of all things. 2. He gives
us all virtues, which are the way unto perfect Blessedness. 3. He implanteth
in us all good affections, which are the praeuious dispositions unto virtues.
4. He gives unto us the true and perfect Blessedness. 5. Nay, he himself
is, our true and perfect Blessedness.

LET us now proceed forward, from the Politics, unto the Ethics; which
afford us many Arguments, to prove There is a God: and that by the confession,
even of the very Heathen. For, as the Physics do infer, that there needs
must be a God; because there is noe more but one Primum Efficiens, Arist. l. 2.
Phys. c. 3. To. 1. p. 433.
but one first Efficient Cause, from which all things do proceed: so the
Ethics do enforce the same conclusion unto us; because there is no more, but
one vltimus finis, but one last final cause, unto which all things are
referred. Which last End; as Aristotle himself teaches, both in his Physics,
Arist. l. 1. Ethic. c. 1. To. 2. p. 604.
and in his Ethics; must needs be Summum bonum, ipsumque adeo Optimum: that
is, The chiefest and most sovereign good of all things. For, Quanto est
posterior, tanto est praestantior omnis
Finis. -- Paling. in l. conc. p. 103.

Among all Ends, the Latter, is evermore the better.
And consequently, the last must needs be the best. And so must needs be God.
Or else there should something be better then God. Which were utterly absurd.
For, he is the best of all. His title is, to be, Optimus. And therefore, as
God is that Primum Efficiens, Lib. 2. Cap. 3 Sect. 4.
by whom all things were made: so is he also, that Vltimus Finis, for whom all
things were made. As the Scriptures themselves have expressly testified. The
Apostle Paul tells us, that All things were made, not only of God, but also
for God too. Of him, and through him, and for him are all things. Romans 11. 36.
So that he is not only their Primum Efficiens, that is, Their first Author
from whom they came; but he is also, their Vltimus Finis too, that is, Their
last End, for whom they came. Both which points, King Solomon confirms in
his Proverbs, in express and plain words: The Lord has made all things for
himself; Pro. 16. 4.
yea even the wicked, for the day of evil. The Lord has made all thing:
therefore he is their Efficient. He has made them for himself: therefore he
is their End. Sic Deus est finis postremus and vltimus, Palingenius* in Le^ne.
p. 103.
in quem
Omnia contendunt, propter quem mundus, and omnis
Res mundi est: siquidem, propter seipsum, omnia fecit.
says the Christian Poet. God is the End, yea that last End,
Unto which One, all things contend:
For which the world, and all therein.
Was made: For he made all for Him.
And, as God is Finis rerum, condendarum, that is, The last End, for which all
things were created: so is he also, Finis rerum expetendarum: The last End for
which all things are desired. Whom have I in Heaven but thee? (says the
Prophet David) and there is none upon Earth that I desire in comparison of
thee. Psalm 73. 24.
So that, God is not only the natural end of all his Creatures; but also the
moral end of all men's actions and affections. And this also may be conclud^d,
by the reason afore-framed. For, Aristotle, affirms in the fore-alledged
place, Arist. l. 1. Eth. c. 1. To. 2. p. 604.
that, Si finis est quispiam rerum agendarum, quem, propter seipsum, caetera
autem propter hunc volumus; constat hunc talem Finem summum esse Bonum,
ipsumque optimum. If there be any such end of all humane actions, which we
only desire in respect of it self, and other things but with reference unto
it; it is apparent, that such an end must be that, which we call the supreme,
and chiefest good. Now, that must needs be God: unless something which is not
God, should be better then God: unless some other thing should be Summum
Bonum, and God himself: be but Inferius Bonum. But that God himself, and
nothing else, is both the last end of all humane actions, and that chiefest
good, which is aimed at in all of them, it is generally taught, in the Schools
of all the Heathen. Who deliver unto us these four special Doctrines, as the
principalls of their Morals. Yea, and that, with as great and as uniform a
consent, as in any other of their doctrines can readily be found. First, that
Virtue, which is the way unto Felicity, is given us of God. Secondly, that
good Affections, which are praeparatiues unto Virtue, are also given by him.
Thirdly, that Felicity, which is the salarie and reward of Virtue, is given us
of God. And Fourthly, That God himself, is our only true Felicity.

2 For the first of which positions, Virtue is the way unto Felicity.
and the first branch of it: it is a thing, which is agreed upon, among the
very Heathen, that the end of the Ethics, and Moral Philosophy, is to bring
men, by virtue, unto the true Felicity. Felicity is the end of all men's
actions and desires: but Virtue is the way, whereby men come unto that end. As
Tullie exemplifieth in the person of Hercules. (...). p. 113.
Abijt ad Deos Hercules: sed nunquam abijsset, nisi, quum inter Homines esset,
eam sibiviam munivisset. Hercules is gone unto the gods: but he never had come
there, if he had not made his way, whilst he lived here. He had never come
to Heaven, if he had not by his virtue paued himself a Causey thither,
whilst he lived among men. And therefore Seneca brings in Hercules, speaking
thus of himself, and of his own virtues: -- Virtus mihi
In astra, Senec. in Herc. (...). 4. Sce. 4. p. 126.
and ipsos fecit ad superos iter.
My Virtue it is, has made a way for Me,
Into the Heau^ns among the gods to be.
For, as he adds, in another place: Nunquam Stygias fertur ad vmbras
Inclyta Virtus. -- Sen^^. in Herc. Oclaeo. Act. 5. Sce. 5 p. 128.

Virtue never led to dwell
Among the Ghosts in Hell
And that, which Seneca affirms of Hercules, does Ennius of Romulus: Romulus
in coelo cum Dijs agit aevum. Cic. l. 1. Tusc. p 112.
Romulus now lives in Heaven, among the gods. But how came he thither? That
Tullie expresses in another place. Quibus tandem gradibus Romulus ascendit in
coelum? By what steps, did Romulus ascend, Cic. 1. Parad. p. 421.
and climb up into heaven? He answers his own quaestion: Rebus gestis,
atque virtutibus: By his nobles Acts, and by his virtues. And, that Virtue is
the direct and compendious way unto Felicity, Aristotle himself defines
plainly, in his defining of it to be, Arist. l. 1. Eth. c. 7. To. 7. p. 609.
Operatio per virtutem in vita perfecta: A working according unto virtue in a
life every way perfect.

But now, Virtue is not of Nature, Art or Industry
all the Quaestion is, Whence this virtue is? Whether it be, by natural
inclination, from our Parents? or, of artificial institution, from our
Masters? or, of moral acquisition, from our selves? or, of supernatural
infusion, from God? For, one of these four ways it must needs come unto us.
For the first of which four ways, to wit, for Natural inclination, Tullie
stands; (...). p. 70.
who sets down these positions: Omnia officia, a principijs Naturae
proficisci: That all good offices and duties do only arise, out of the
principles of Nature: And therefore, omnia officia eo referri, vt adipiscamur
Principia Naturae: Ibid. p. 69.
That all our duties do aim only at this end, to bring us to the first
principles of our Nature. For, as in another place he affirms, Est virtus,
Cic. l. 1. Acad. p. 5 Cic. l. 1. de leg. p. 313.
quasi perfectio Naturae: And yet again: Est virtus nihil aliud, quam in se
perfecta, and ad summum perducta, Natura. Virtue is nothing else, but Nature
brought unto her perfection and hight. And therefore he sets down this for a
Conclusion, that, Nature alone can lead us unto virtue, if we follow her
direction: Cic. l. 1. de. leg. p. 314. p. 326. in Lambini Edit.
Naturam ducem nactus, non est quisquam hominum, qui ad virtutem pervenire non
possit. Which sentences, in some sense, may be admitted, with good acceptance,
if they be interpreted of our original and uncorrupted. Nature. But, consider
of our Nature, as it is now depraved in us, and by the corrupt Conduicts of our
sinful Parents traducted unto us; and there is nothing more contrary unto our
nature, then virtue; nothing more consonant and agreeable, then vice. Arist.
Prob. Sect. 10. prob. 44. To. 2* p, 473.
And therefore Aristotle affirms, that, Natura etiam praue omnia facit: that,
Nature does all things out of order. And, in another place, he, disputing,
which of the two extreme vices, is most contrary unto the middle virtue, he
sets down this for a general rule; that, That vice is always most opposite
unto virtue, Arist. l. 2. Eth. c. 8. To. 2. p. 625.
unto which our own nature does lead us most willingly. Ea namque, medio
contraria magis esse videntur, ad quae nos ipsi quodammodo sumus propensiores.
Arist, l* 2. Eth. c. 1. To. 2. p. 616.
Which manifestly proves (as he also, in another place, expressly concludes)
Nullam fieri virtutem morum, in nobis, natura: That no moral virtue is bred in
us, by nature.

For the second Opinion, that it is framed in us by Art, and by the instruction
of our Teachers; Plut. To. 2. Mor. p. 252.
Plutarch not only approves it, but also has written a Book to prove it,
and, Vertutem posse doceri, inscribed it. Which (as Aristotle well
distinguishes) is true indeed in intellectual virtues: Arist. l. 3, Eth. c.
1. To. 2. p. 615.
as in Arts, and Sciences: they may be taught us. But in Moralls, it is false.
As out of the very name of moral virtues, in the same place, he collecteth:
That name importing, not institution, but custom; and that such virtues are
gotten, not by learning, but by practicing. And therefore Socrates professes
(yea and proves too) quod virtus nusquam discatur, Plato, in Protagora, p. 231.
nulloque praeceptore percipiatur: That virtue, can neither be learned, nor
taught. So that, as Tullie is confuted by Aristotle; That virtue is not of
Nature: so is Plutarch, Max. Tyr. Sermon. 22. p. 263.
by Plato; That it is not of Art. Which Maximus Tyrius also confirms. Non fit
ab Art, quod euadunt boni, sed potius beneficio Iouis: It is not by Art, that
men are made good; but rather by the grace and blessing of God. For, as Saint
Ambrose very truly observes, Vera virtus nihil requirit, nisi Dei gratiam:
Ambros. l. 2. de Jacob. c. 4. To. 4. p. 298.
True virtue requires nothing else, but only Gods grace. So that, it is
neither of Nature, nor of Art, as Plato in another place expressly affirms,
rejecting both those two forenamed causes, in one sentence: Apparet virtutem,
Stob^us Sermon. 1. p. 27.
nec disciplina, nec natura; sed diuina sort suis possessoribus accidere. It
neither comes by nature, nor by learning, but only by Gods giving.

And for the third opinion, That it is gotten of our selves, only by industry
and practice; that apparently is Aristotle's, in the fore-alledged place. Neque
natura, neque praeter naturam, Arist. l. 3. Eth. c. 1. To. 2. p. 616.
virtutes in nobis efficiuntur: sed idonei quidem ad suscipiendas sumus,
natura: Suscipimus autem ipsas, atque perficimus, per consuetudinem. Virtues
are begotten in us, neither by nature, nor beside nature: But Nature gives us
a fitness and hability to receive them. But it is only practice and custom,
Pindarus in Nemeis Od. 6. p. 405.
that ripens and perfects them. But yet (as Pindarus truly notes) All our
practice and custom, will but a little profit us, if God do not give his
blessing unto us. Ad summitatem virtutis pervenerunt, qui labores experti sunt.
Cum Dei autem fauore etc. There be many that have attained to the highest pitch
of virtue, by their labor and endeavor. But yet by the assistance of Gods
grace and favor. And therefore Pythagoras gives us advice, not to rely too
confidently upon our own endeauours, but to join our prayers unto them, for
Gods help and assistance. -- ad opus accede,
Deos, P^thagor cum (...), p 124.
vt id perficiant precatus.
Lay hand unto thy work, with all thy wit,
But pray, that God would speed and perfect it.
Otherwise, all thy pain shall be taken in vain. For, as Saint Bernard truly
teaches: Bern: Sermon. 22. in Cant. ^. p, 55^.
In cassum quis laborat, in acquisitione virtutum, si aliunde eas sperandas
putet, quam a Domino virtutum. In vain do men labor to attain unto ve^tues,
if they look for them elsewhere, then from the Lord of virtues. It is he only
that gives them, because he only possesses them: as Maximus Tyrius
affirms: (...). Sermon. 22. p, 271.
Virtutem, quam possidet, tribuit Deus. And therefore Theocritus advises King
Ptolome, (...), Fidyl. 17. p, 120.
that he should, Virtutem a Deo petere; Pray for virtue, at the hand of God.
So that, none of all the three forenamed are the causes of virtue: neither
Nature, Art, nor Industry. It is true, that all these, in some degree, may be
helps: but yet only as Gods inferior and ministerial instruments. Nature may
plant it, Art may prune it, Industry may water it: but, 1, Cor. 3. 7.
as the Apostle Paul teaches us, Neither is he that planteth, any thing; nor
yet he that waters, but only God, that gives the increase. And, he that
gives the increase unto plants, is he, that gives the increase unto virtues,
which are his heavenly plants: as even Homer acknowledges: Jupiter virtutem
viris augetque, Homer, l. 20.
minuitque,
Prout quidem voluerit. Iliad. p, 742.

God gives virtue his increase,
And lesseneth it, even as He please.


And therefore, God is the Giver of virtue unto men. Theophil, Antioch. l, 2.
ad A^to lic. Bib. Pa^. To. 5. p, 134.
it is confessed with one mouth, by all the Heathen, Pindar. Olimp. Od 9 p, 109.
that it is God, Theognis cum (...). p, 14.
that is the giver of virtue unto men. Proverb, 16. 4.
Which is the second Branch of our first position. Simonides says expressly,
that, Nemo, sine Dijs, virtutem accepit, neque vrbs, neque Homo: That neither
Man, nor City, without Gods special grace, could ever attain to virtue. So
likewise Pindarus, Boni and sapientes, ex Deo solo proueniunt: Men are made
both wise and good, only by the help of God. So likewise Theognis, Nemo
hominum, neque malus, sine numine, neque bonus: There is no man made either
good, or bad, but only by God. According to that of Solomon, that, God has
made all things, for himself; yea, even the wicked, for the day of evil. And
yet is not God the cause of men's wickedness. Because he makes them not
evil, inserendo malitiam, Aquin, 1. 2. Quaest. 79. Art. 3. p, 160.
but only, subtrahendo gratiam, as Aquinas distinguishes, Not by inserting
into any man the motions of sin, but by withholding his grace, which is the
bridle of sin: which being withdrawn, men rush violently of themselves, like
untamed horses, into all kind of wickedness. But, though God give not vice,
inserendo malitiam; yet gives he virtue, inserendo gratiam. And therefore the
Romans (as Saint Augustine observes) did consecrate virtue for one of their
gods. Aug. l, 4. de Ciuit. Dei, c. 20. To. 5. p. 252.
Thereby plainly acknowledging, that Virtue is of God: yea The free gift of
God, as Saint Augustine there affirms. Virtutem quoque Deum fecerunt, quae,
quia Dea non est, sed donum Dei, ipsa ab illo impetretur, a quo solo dari
potest. They have named Virtue, for one of their Gods. Which because it is no
God, but the gift of God, it must only of him be sought, who has only power
to give it, that is to say, of God: who (by the consent of the chiefest
Philosophers) is the only bestower of all virtues. Anax^goras says, that,
Men's (which is his word for God) is, Arist. l. 1. de Anim. ^. c. 2 To. 1. p.
786. Proclus l. de Anim ^. p. 193.
Bonirectique causa: The cause of all goodness. And so likewise, Proclus:
Quicquid bonum and salutare competit animabus, causam a Dijs definitam habet.
Whatsoever is good and healthful to the soul, it has his cause defined and
appointed of God, Yea, and he adds there also the opinion of Plato. Virtutum
omnium, corporaliumque bonorum, velut sanitatis, roboris, institiae,
temperantiae exemplaria, Plato probat procedere penes Deum. Plato proves the
Patterns of all virtues and of all corporal endowments, as of Health, of
Strength, of Justice, of Temperance, to proceed from God.

Yea, and as Plutarch observes, God has given unto virtue a kind of natural
sweetness, whereby it is no less delightful unto such as do practice it
then it is unto those, among whom it is practiced. Plut. l. de ira cohibenda.
To. 2. p. 292.
Deo adiuuante, placidi, mansueti, and humani mores, nemini eorum, quibuscum
viuitur, ita grati, iucundique sunt, vt ei ipsi, qui ijs est praeditus. And
this God does, to allure us unto virtue, by the sweetness of it. L. 2. c. 8.
Sect. 3. Iamblic. c. 31. p, 100.
Yea, and as Iamblicus observes, God does not only provoke us unto virtue; but
also reuoketh us from vice. Ad iusta quidem adiuuans, ab iniustis reuocans. And
this we may evidently see in the Scriptures, by diverse notable examples. Genesis
20. 6.
For when Abimelech intended to have corrupted Abraham's wife, 1. Sam. 25. 26.
3^.
God withheld him from it. And when David intended to have destroyed Nabal, God
withheld him from it. And Opheus in his hymn unto Venus (by whom he
understands Divine and heavenly Love) he makes a prayer unto her, to
withhold his mind from all filthy and vicious love. O Dea, nam vbique habes
audiendi acumen, Stob. Sermon. 61. p. 390.

Exaudi; and laboriosam vitae meae viam
Dirigas, tuis, o veneranda, iustissimis telis,
Profanarum extinguens horrendam libidinem cupiditatum.
O Goddess, hear; for thou can, whatever, where I pray;
Direct me, by thy righteous helps, in my life's tedious way,
Quenching profane and fearful lusts, that lead my mind astray.
He prays to God, to withhold him; because he could not withhold himself.
And so, Homer. l. 1. Ilid. p. 7.
when Achilles intended to have killed Agamemnon, Pallas withheld him from it,
as Homer also testifies: by that fiction, implying this unfeigned truth, that
it is God, which withholdeth us from evil, as well as which helps us in
good. Both which points together, we may evidently see, in the prayer of the
Pharisee: Luke 18. 11. 12.
O God, I thank thee, that I am not as other men are, extortioners, unjust,
adulterers. Here be the vices, from which God had withheld him, and for which
he thanketh him. He proceeds on, unto those virtues, wherewith God had
adorned him. I fast twice in the Week, and I give tithe of all that ever I
possess. So that, if a man be not infected with all kind of vice, he may
thank God for it. And, if he be endued with any kind of virtue, he may thank
God for that too. For it is only by the grace of God, 1. Cor. 15. 10.
that he is, as he is. In which action of the Pharisee, we may evidently see, a
direct confutation of Tullies observation, that, Nemo quod bonus vir esset,
gratias Dijs egit vnquam. And again in the same place, Cic. l. 3. de. Not.
Deor. p. 238.
that Virtutem, nemo vnquam acceptam Deo retulit: That no man had ever thanked
God, that he had made him a good man. For we see the plain contrary, in the
prayer of the Pharisee: He expressly thanked God, that he had made him so good.
So that here is a confutation of his first position. His second is this, That
no man ever acknowledged his virtue to have descended unto him from God. Which
we see again confuted, by all those several testimonies, that before I have
recited. For they all have professed, that Virtue is Gods gift. As for the
reason, which in that place he brings, to fortify his position; That men
are praised for their virtues; which they could not justly be, if it were the
gift of God, and not gotten by themselves: That is a very false and
insufficient reason. For, men are praised, both for their Beauty, and for
their strength of body. And yet are both these the good gifts of God, and not
purchased or gotten by our selves. And therefore, as error is always
unconstant, and never true unto it self; so he, in another place, both
renounceth his own position, and confuteth his own reason. His position he
renounceth by a contrary position, directly affirming, that, Si inest, in
hominum genere, Men's, Fides, Cic. l. 1. de Not. Deor. p. 212.
Virtus, Concordia; Vnde haec in terram, nisi a superis, defluere potuerunt? If
there be among men; either Wisdom, or Faith, or Virtue, or Peace; Whence could
any of these come to men upon earth, but only from the God of heaven? Naming
Virtue, among the rest. And his Reason he confuteth by the instance of
Metellus, Maximus, Marcellus, Africanus, Cato, Scipio, Laelius, who were the
most virtuous, and the most prayse-worthy persons of the Roman Commonwealth.
Cic. l. 2. de Not. Deor. p. 225.
And yet he affirms of them all, that Horum neminem, nisi iunante Deo, talem
fuisse, credendum est. That none of all these, could ever have been such a
man, as he was, if he had not been helped and assisted by God. So that he
ascribes their Virtues, and consequently their praises, unto God. Thereby
plainly ouer-throwing, the ground of his position: and showing, that virtue may
be praised, although it be of God. Thus you see the great agreement, which the
Heathens Philosophers have with the Scriptures, in ascribing unto God, to be
the Author of all Virtues.

3 Neither is God only the Author and giver of grown and perfect Virtue, God
is the Giver of all good motions and affections.
when it is formed into an habit; but also of all those good motions, and
affections, which are, as it were, the praeparatiues unto it: or rather indeed
the inchoations of it. Those good inclinations, and virtuous propensions, which
(being adult and grown up) do prove the true substance and bodies of our
virtues, are indeed not in us any natural dispositions; (as Tullie would have
them:) Sunt ingenijs nostris semina (...) virtutum quae si adolescere liceret,
ipsa nos ad beatam vitam Natura perduceret.
but supernatural inspirations, Cic. l. 3. Tusc.
and Gods own celestial seminations; Deuteronomy 30. 6.
as the Prophet Moses expressly affirms: Phil. 2. 13.
The Lord thy God will circumcise thy heart, that thou may love him, with all
thy heart, and live. So that the first motions of our love toward God, are
only the motions of his love toward us. He moves us to love him, that we
may live with him. Without whose grace thus moving us, we could have no motion
in us, at the least not unto good. For, the Apostle plainly teaches us, that,
it is God, that gives us both the will, and the work. He both gives us the
virtues, and the feed of them too, which are good affections. For, as the same
Apostle in another place tells us: We are not able of our selves, so much as
to think any thing, but all our sufficiency is of God: 2. Cor. 3. 5.
So that, with the Prophet Isaiah, we may truly profess: O Lord, thou it is,
that have wrought all our works for us. And this even the Heathen themselves
do acknowledge: Isai. 26. 12.
running through all the steps of the Apostles former doctrine. One of them
tells us, that, Lucan. l. 9. p. 127. b.
Nil agimus, nisi sponte Dei.
By us there can be nothing done,
But by the will of God alone.
Another of them, that we speak nothing, but by the will of God. Natura
humana, nec rationem, nec orationem de Dijs suscipere potest, sine Dijs;
^^mblic. c. 26. p. 1^.
nedum divina opera perficere, sine illis. The nature of man, can neither
conceive, nor utter any thing of the nature of God, without the help of God:
much less can it do any work of God, without him. Another of them tells
us, that we cannot think any thing, without him: because all our cogitations
and thoughts do come from him. Talis enim men's est terrestrium hominum, Homer,
lib. 18. Odys. p. 528.

Qualem quotidie ducit pater, virorumque, Deorumque.
says Homer. Such thoughts Men have, on earth that live;
As Men may crave, but God does give.
And so likewise Archilocus, unto the same purpose: Mortalium men's --
-- talem praebet identidem
Sese, Plut. lib. de Homero, To. 1. p. 129.
Tonantis summa qualem
Quotidie exhibuit voluntas:
Man's mind does daily such it self explay,
As Gods great Will does frame it every day.
So that all the good motions and affections of the mind, the very Heathens
do profess, to proceed from God. And therefore Orpheus, in his hymme unto
Nemesis, prays to that Goddess, to give a virtuous and good mind unto men,
and to remove all evil cogitations from them. Da vero mentem bonam vt
habeant; Stob. Sermon. 9. p, 100.

Extinguens odiosas cogitationes, profanas, nimis suprebas, and scelestissimas.
Give, Nemesis, o give a virtuous mind to men,
Repressing odious, base, and vile, proud thoughts in them.
Acknowledging all good motions, to be Gods inspirations. And so likewise, on
the contrary, they again profess, that all those wicked and depraved
affections, whereby the mind of a man is corrupted, and so led headlong into
all kind of vice, are indeed nothing else, but the suggestions, and
temptations of Devils, and wicked spirits. Demon vltor (says Trismegistus)
ignis acumen incutiens, sensus affligit, Trismeg. in Pimand. Dial. 1. p. 376.
and ad patranda scelera armat hominem; vt turpioris culpae reus, acriori
supplicio sit obnoxious, eumque, sine vlla intermissione, ad insatiabiles
concupiscentias inflammat. The revenging spirit, inflaming the mind with a
quick and sharp fire, afflicts our senses, and armeth a man unto all kind
of wickedness; that so he being guilty of a greater fault, may be obnoxious
to a greater punishment. And therefore he cease not to kindle in our minds
insatiable concupiscences. And again, in another place: Nocentes Angeli,
Trismeg. in Asclep. c. 9. p. 515.
humanitati commisti, ad omnia audaciae mala miseros (manu iniecta) compellunt:
in bella, in rapinas, in frauds, and in omnia, quae sunt animorum naturae
contraria. The ^urtfull Angels, insinuating themselves into men's minds, do
hale-on poor wretches, as it were by the collars, into all kinds of evils;
into wars, into robberies, into frauds, and into all those vices, which are
contrary unto the true nature of our souls. So likewise Orpheus: Daemones
humani saeui hosts, atque maligni, Aug. (...) lib. (...) Philoso* ^. c. 33. p,
474.

Qui nostris animis vacuis infanda ministrant,
Vt semper diram vitam cum crimine ducant.
The Devils, Men's fierce and cruel Enemies,
Object unto their minds strange vilanies,
To make their li^es cursed with Impieties.
Which is largely and notably laid open by Porphyrius, ^usib. l. 4. de (...).
11. l, 98.
out of whom it is transcribed, by Eusebius.

Thus, even the very Heathen, do both believe, that there be Devils; and,
that they be man's most hateful and cruel enemies: and, that they pi^rce, and
insinuate into the minds of men: seeking there, with all kind of wicked lusts
to corrupt them; that so they may bring them unto utter destruction. And so, on
the contrary, they do likewise believe, not only that there is a God; but
also, that he is the Author of all good: both giving unto us all kinds of
virtues, and giving unto virtues all their growth and increase; yea and their
first seeds too, by inspiring into our minds good thoughts and affections.
Sto^^ns* Sermon. 101. p, 554.
Insomuch, that Hippodamus affirms, that Homines habent virtutem, propter
diuinitatis commercium: That men attain unto virtues, only by the commerce
and conversation of the Gods. Who not only help us unto virtue, by furthering
and cherishing our good motions and affections: ^ib. 2. Cap. 8. Sect. 2.
but further, by extinguishing those wicked lusts and concupiscences, wherewith
the Devil endeavors to extinguish virtue in us. For, that also they add:
Adsum ego Men's, ijs (says Pimander in Trismegistus, who professes himself to
be the spirit of God, Trismeg. Pim^^d. Dial. 1. p. 375. 367.
Men's diuinae potentiae) qui boni, pij, puri, religiosi, sanctique sunt:
praesentia mea fert illis opem. I am present with those men, that are good, and
godly, pure, religious, and holy: And that my presence gives them great help
and assistance. In what manner, he shows after. Ipsa Men's, ianitoris munere
fungens, incidentes in insidias corporis, haudquaquam permitto finem consequi
suum. Aditus enim, per quos turpes blanditiae manare solent, iugiter
intercludo, libidinumque ^omites omnes extinguo. The Spirit (performing the
part of a Porter) when as any of them fall into the snares of the flesh, will
not permit and suffer them to finish their design, but shuts up the
passages of all flattering inticements, and extinguisheth the incentiues of all
filthy lusts: By faith thus quenching the fiery darts of the Devil, as the
Apostle speaks. For, this Spirit is water: in quo, omnia ignita illius peruer
si tela extinguuntur: Ephesians: 6. 16. Nazian. Orat. 40 (...) sanctum Baptisma. p,
621.
as Nazianzene observes. He is a Water, that extinguisheth all the darts of
the Devil, because they be of fire. And, as this good Spirit (like a Porter)
repelleth evil spirits, that they cannot enter: so he also (like a Soldier)
expels them again, if they chance to enter. He takes from those strong
men, the armor, wherein they trusted, and casts them out of the house, Luke,
11. 21, 22.
which they possessed. And this also, the Heathen then have expressly confessed.
Iamblic. c. 30. p. 97.
Dij vera bona dant bonis, quibuscum versantur (says Iamblicus,) suoque
commercio prauitatem, passionemque long ab ijs propulsant; suoque splendore,
tenebrosos inde spiritus arcent. Mali enim spiritus, intrante Deorum lumine,
velut sole, tanquam tenebrae subterfugiunt. The Gods do give to good men those
things that are truly good, when they come unto them; expelling by their
presence, all passions, and vices; driving from them, by their light, the
Angels of darkness. For the light of the Gods, when it enters men's minds,
drives away the Devils, as the light of the sun drives away darkness. So
that though the Devil be never so malicious, in seeking to do men hurt; yet
is God no less gracious, in seeking to do them good: the Devil, by evil
temptations, seeking to corrupt them, and so bring them to misery: God, by
good inspirations, seeking to correct them, and so bring them to felicity,
Which is our next point.

4 For, as the Heathen do confess, that God is the Giver of all Virtue, God
is the Giver of felicity unto men.
and Goodness: so do they likewise confess, that God is the Giver of all
Felicity, and Happiness. He gives us Virtue, as the way of Felicity: and he
gives us Felicity as the reward of Virtue. And therefore, the Apostle Peter
tells us, 2. Pet. 1. 3.
that God has called us both unto virtue, and unto Glory: to Virtue, as the
way; to Glory, as the reward. For, so, Aristotle himself has termed it
expressly, Praemium, finisque Virtutis, optimum, diuinumque quiddam, atque
beatum esse constat. Arist. l. 1. Eth. c. 9. To. 2. p. 611.
It is most certain, that the reward, and end of virtue, is such a thing, as
is both the best of all other things, and a divine thing, and a blessed thing.
He calls the reward and end of virtue, Beatum, that is to say, a blessed
thing: because it is Blessedness it self. He calls it, Optimum, that is to
say, the best thing: because there is nothing that is beter then Blessedness.
And he calls it, Diuinum, that is, a divine thing: because it is given by
God himself unto us. And this is plainly confessed, both by Christians, and
Heathens. Iam. 1. 17. Plato. in Euthryp^one. p. 59.
The Apostle James tells us, Hesiod. in Theogonia. p. 82.
that Every good gift is given us of God. And Plato confirms this testimony
to be true. Nihil nobis est bonum, quin Dij praebeant: We have nothing that is
good, but it is given us of God. And therefore Hesiodus calls the gods,
Bonorum Datores: The giuers of good things. Homer. l. 8. Odys. p. 218. Plut. l.
de Homero To. 1. Mor. p. 119.
And so likewise does Homer, Lamblic. c. 47. p. 176. Plaut. Bacchid. Act. 4.
(...). 4. 343.
in the very same words (...). Which Plutarch also observes in him. But
Iamblicus goes further. For he calls the Gods not only Datores, but also
Largitores bonorum: Yea and, Omnium bonorum, The bountiful bestowers of all
good things. God gives all good things: and he gives them not sparingly: not
digitulis duobus sumens primoribus; as the Comic speaks; not taking up a
little between his thumb and his finger: but in a far larger manner. He gives
to the full, with an open hand. He opens his hand, Psalm. 104. 28.
and fills all things with his goodness: measuring out his blessings, Plaut.
Prolog. in Menech. p. 416.
not modio, nor trimodio; but ipso horreo; as the Comic speaks, in another
place: not by the bushel, nor by the sackfull, but by the whole Barnefull. For
all the Barnesfull in the world, are nothing else, but Gods bounty, and Gods
gifts unto their Possessors. So that, he may be called truly Largitor
bonorum, he gives them so largly. And yet, as Turtullian truly notes, God is
not, Tertul. l. 1. cont. Marc. c. 24 p. 362 Tertul. lib. 2. cont. Marcion. c.
5. p. 370.
Profusor bonitatis; but Dispensator. He is not a rash powrer-out of his
benefits; but a wise Disposer of them. Because, as in another place he adds,
Nec ratio, sine bonitate, ratio; nec bonitas sine ratione, bonitas est. Neither
is reason, without goodness, reason; nor goodness, without reason, goodness. And
therefore God, Plat^. in (...) p 913. Arist. l 1. (...) 9. To. 2. p. ^11.
who is not irrationabiliter bonus, not good without reason, disperseth his
good things, with a liberal hand: but he disperseth them, with an exact and
upright judgment.

Now, if God be the giver of all good things: then must he needs be the giver
of Felicity too, which is the principal good thing: If of the smaller and
lower goods, then much more of Felicity, which is the greatest and highest.
(...)
For Plato makes that collection. Ipsum bonorum omnium authorem cur non maximi
etiam boni causam arbitrabimur? He that is the Author of all good, why should
he not be the Author of the greatest good? Yea, and Aristotle himself
infers the same conclusion: Si aliquod aliud Deorum est munus hominibus,
consentaneum est rationi, and felicitatem a Dijs ipsis dari, and eo magis, quo
(...) humanis bonis est praestabilius. If God has given unto men any other
gift or bounty, then st^ndeth it with reason, that he should also give
felicity: yea, and that so much the more, by how much that gift is better.
Whence he concludes, that Felicity is given to men by God: because it is the
best of all other gifts. As Plato, from the same ground, concludes the same,
for wisdom, in the place before alleged. Which, in another place, Plato in
(...). p. 256.
he affirms directly, to be the true Felicity. Sapientia, ipsa felicitas
est: Quod puer quivis intelligat. Wisdom is the true felicity: as every
Child may understand very easily. And therefore, Homer doubts not to affirm
expressly that it is only God himself, that is the giver of Felicity. Jupiter
ipse distribuit felicitatem Olympius hominibus. Homer. l. 6. Odys. p. 168.

The highest God, is the only He,
That gives to Men felicity.
And Solon prays unto the Muses, to obtain felicity for him, from the Gods:
-- Musae?
Felicitatem a Dijs immortalibus mihi praebete. Solon. in Eleg. p. 130. cum
He^iodo.

O Muses, bring me happiness,
Which must come from Gods Holiness.
For, as Eu^ipides truly notes: Nemo, Dijs invitis, vel felix est vel infelix.
Sio^. l. Eclog. Phys. cap 9. p. 11.

No man, against Gods will,
Is either well, or ill.
And, Aug l. u. de Ciuit De^. c. 18. To. 5. p. 249.
as I observed before of Virtue, so may I now again observe of felicity that
the Romans consecrated it, for one of their Gods: thereby plainly insinuating,
that as Virtue, so Felicity, is the only gift of God. Both which points are
affirmed, by Maximus Tyrius, in express and plain words: Ex Iovis nutu, Max.
Ty^. Sermon. 23. p. 363.
actiones virtutis, felicitatesque hominum pendent. Both the actions of virtue,
and all humane felicity, do absolutely depend upon the beck of God. Thus the
Heathens confess, that not only Virtue, which is the way unto felicity; but
also that Felicity, which is the reward of Virtue, are both of them, the gifts
of Almighty God. And therefore they must needs confess, There is a God,

3 Nay, God is the true Felicity of Man.
they go yet further. For, they not only teach us, that There is a God: and
that he is the Giver of Felicity unto men: but also, that he himself is the
true Felicity of them. Which the Romans employed, in consecrating Felicity,
for a God. For, thereby they insinuated, not only that Felicity is of God: (the
point before noted:) but also that God is the only true Felicity: the point
now in hand. Which they demonstrate unto us, by a Gradation, of three degrees.
First, that Virtue and Godliness^ do so strictly unite a man unto God, that,
in some degree, that it makes him partaker of the divine and heavenly nature.
Secondly, that this near conjunction of man unto God, does bring him unto
heaven, which is the place of Gods dwelling. And thirdly, that there it makes
him partaker of Gods most blessed and beatificall vision; which is the highest
summitie of all true felicity. And all these three points are so taught by the
Heathens, as though they had been catechized in the School of Christians.

For the first of which three points, it is the constant doctrine of the wisest
of the Heathen, that man's felicity, consists especially, in conforming
himself unto the nature of God, and in making himself to be like unto him. So
says Iamblicus: Felix est, qui Deo, quatenus fieri potest, similis est.
S^ohaeus, Sermon. 101. p. 453.
He is an happy man, that makes himself as like unto God, is he possibly
can. So Syrianus, the master of Simplicus: Boni causa est, vt cum Deo
similemur: It is the cause of all good, to make a man's self to be like unto
God. Now, A^g. ^ugub. l 10. de pere^. Philos. c. 18 p. 590.
that likeness with God, cannot be attained, by any thing else, but only by
Justice, Virtue, and Goodness: as Seneca truly teaches. Parem Deo pecunia
non facit, sed animus; and hic rectus, bonus, magnus. It is not thy money,
Senec. Epist. 31. p. 53.
but it is thy mind, which makes thee conformable and like unto God; if it be
a just, and upright mind, a virtuous, and good mind, a noble, and a great mind.
This virtue makes a man, not similem Deo, but parem Deo, says Seneca: not like
unto God, but, in some sort, even equal with God. For Aristotle cites it,
Arist. l. 1. Eth. ^. ^. To. 2. p. 685.
as a common opinion, that, Ex hominibus Dij fiunt, ob virtutis excellentiam:
That by the excellency of virtue, even men do attain to a kind of Divinity.
A very excessive and hyperbolicall speech: but yet diverse such there be used
not only by Heathens, but also by Christians, to express that great
affinity, and near conjunction, which virtue makes between God and man.
Saint Augustine says, that it makes a man partaker of God. Dei sunt
participatione foelices, quicunque sunt veritate, non vanitate, foelices. Aug.
^ib. 4. de (...). Dei c. 11. p. 303.
They that have indeed the true possession of blessedness, and not the false
imagination of it, are blessed, by a kind of participation of God. The Apostle
Peter says, that it makes a man partaker of the divine and godly nature. 2.
Peter, 1. 4, 5. Eusebius. l. 4. de praepar. cap. 11. p 97.
For, as Porphiry observes of wickedness and vice; that it transformeth a man
into the nature of a Devil: so is it also true, of virtue and goodness; that
it conformeth a man unto the nature of God. Yea, and some have gone so far,
as to say, it makes us Gods. So says Hierocles, that, Finis vitae, est, Aug.
Eugub. vbi supra.
Deum facere, ex homine: The end of man's life, is, to make a man become a God.
So Seneca, Senec. vbi supra.
in the fore-alledged place. Animus rectus, bonus, magnus, nihil est aliud,
quam Deus in humano corpore hospes: A good, and virtuous mind, is indeed
nothing else, but a very God, abiding for a time, in the body of a man. Neither
have Christians themselves abstayned from these exaggerated amplifications; the
better to recommend virtue, and goodness unto us. The Apostle Paul tells us,
that, He which is joined to the Lord, is but one spirit with him. 1. Cor. 6. 17.
And Boethius tells us, that God only is our blessedness: and that therefore,
whosoever by God is made blessed, Boet. l. 3. de Consolat. prosa 10. p. 10. 49.
he is made by him, A God. Deum esse ipsam Beatitudinem, necesse est. It is
absolutely necessary, that God himself should be man's Felicity. So likewise
Palingenius: -- Deus ipse supremum est, Paling. in Le^. p. 107.

Eximiumque bonum, proprie, vereque vocandus.
Quem qui habet, is debet foelix dici, atque beatus.
God is the only supreme good, so properly expressed,
Whom whosoever has, he may, be happy called and blessed.
And so it is indeed: because Felicity is Summum Bonum, that is, The supreme
and the chiefest Good. And therefore, if God were not The true Felicity, he
should not be The supreme good: but should have a superior good above him, and
himself be but a second and inferior good. Whereupon he adds but a little
after, that if God himself be the supreme Good, that he which obtains that
same supreme good, he therewith obtayneth to be made a God: Quoniam
beatitudinis adeptione fiunt homines beati; and beatitudo vera est ipsa
diuinitas; diuinitatis adeptione fieri beatos, necesse est; sicut iustitiae
adeptione iusti, sapientia, sapientes fiunt. Omnis igitur beatus Deus. Because,
by the getting of blessedness, men are made blessed; and true Blessedness is
nothing else but God; therefore, by the getting of God, men get to be blessed,
as by the getting of Justice to be just, and of Wisdom, to be wise.
Therefore whosoever is blessed he also is a God. Nazian. Orat. 6. de Sp. Set.
p. 174* 175.
So Nanzianzene proves the Holy Ghost to be God, because otherwise he could
not make him a God. Si eodem mecum est in ordine, quo pacto me Deum reddit? And
his Expositor, Elias Cretensis, delivers his sense in the same hight of
words. Nimirum Spiritus Sanctus, quum natura sua and sanctus sit, and Deus; nos
homines sanctificat, ac Deos reddit. The Holy Ghost being by nature both holy,
and God, by sanctifying us men, makes us become Gods. Dionys. Areopag. lib. de
Eccles. Hierar. c. 1. p. 90.
So likewise Dionysius: Salus non aliter existere potest, nisi ij, qui salutem
consequuntur, Dij fiant: A man cannot otherwise attain unto salvation, then if
he first be made a God. Which exaggerations of those fathers, and Scriptures,
must not be expounded, according to the letter, as though men could be made to
be Gods indeed: for that is a thing impossible: But the true meaning of them
is, that by our imitation of Gods virtue and goodness, we are made so like
unto him, and so nearly joined with him, that we may be said (in some sense)
to be made partakers of his divine nature: because all those virtues in him are
nature. 1. Peter, 1. 4, 5.
And therefore we may observe, in all the forenamed places, that there is a
mollification used, to reduce the forenamed Apotheosis and Deification, within
the compass of this sense. Dionysius Areopagita, where he says, that, All
they which shall attain the salvation of God, must first be made Gods: adds
(for explication:) Dei porro effectio, est Dei, quoad fieri potest, imitatio,
and cum eodem coniunctio, atque (vt ita dicam) vnio. The being made a God, is
nothing else, but the imitation of God, and a conjunction with him, and (that I
may so speak) a very union. Elias Cretensis, where he says, that the Holy
Ghost does make men Gods, adds, that it is, per adoptionem, and gratiam: that
this making of them Gods, is but only Gods adopting them, by grace, to be his
Son, So Nazianzen expounds, His being made a God, to be nothing, but only,
His conjunction with God. Quo pacto me Deum reddit? vel quo pacto me coniungit
Deo? Which conjunction with God (as Trismegistus teaches) is only effected by
religion, and godliness. Trism^g. As^p. c. 2. p. 479.
Prope Deos accedit, qui mente, qua Dijs iunctas est, diuina religione Dijs
iunxerit. That man comes near unto God indeed, that joins his soul unto
him, by piety and religion. So likewise Boethius, where he says, that, Beatus
omnis, Deus: That every one which is blessed is thereby made a God: he adds
for the qualification of that speech: Sed n^tura quidem vnus, participatione
vero nihil prohibet esse quamplurimos: Yet there is but one God, by nature, but
there may be many Gods, by participation. Not by the true participation of his
natural deity, but of his virtue, and of his felicity. Yea, and even the
Apostle Peter himself does use a further modification, even of this
participation. For, where he tells us, 1. Pet. 1. 4. 5. etc
that there be great and precious promises given unto us, That we should be
partakers of the Godly nature: lest we should misconstrue this participation,
to be intended of Gods true nature or deity, he expounds himself plainly,
that this participation of the divine nature must be gotten, by flying of
corruption, by joining virtue with our faith; and with virtue, knowledge; and
with knowledge, temperance; and with temperance, patience; and with patience
goodlines; and with godliness, brotherly kindenes; and with brotherly kindness,
love; Which is the bond of perfection, Col. 3. 14.
and tyeth a man strictly unto God. And this is the first degree of our
felicity with God, which is affoorded unto us, in this present life.

There be two degrees more: which come not unto men, before the life to come.
The first, that virtue brings us up to Heaven, which is the place of Gods own
dwelling, and there makes us to live aeternally with him. A thing plainly
confessed, even by the very Heathen. Pythagoras affirms, in his verses, that:
-- Si, relicto corpore, ad purum aethera perveneris, Pythag. (...) Hesiodo. p.
129.

Eris immortalis Deus, incorruptibilis, nec amplius mortalis.
When as our Souls our Bodies shall forsake,
And to the Heavens they shall themselves, betake;
Then shall we be, as Gods immortal been,
All incorrupt; no longer mortal men.
For we shall then enjoy God: who is our very life: Deuteronomy. 30. 20. Cic. l. de.
Amicit. p. 396.
as the Prophet Moses testifies: yea the life of our life, our vita vitalis,
as the Orator speaks whereas this our present life, 2. Cor. 5. 1.
is but vita mortalis: a transitory and a mortal life. But this (says the
Apostle Paul) we know, that if our earthly Tabernacle be dissolved, we have a
building given us of God, which is an house, not made with hands, but aeternall
in the heavens. And therefore says Musonius, that Vir bonus, est civis vrbis
Iovis; quae constat, ex hominibus, and Dijs. That he, which is a good; Stobae.
Sermon. 38. p. 234.
man, shall be a Citizen of the City of God; which is a City, common unto
Gods with men. Which is a probable aiming at the Heavenly I^rus^lem: which in
the Book of the Apocalypse, is described unto us. I saw the Holy City, Apoc.
21. 2. 3.
new Jerusalem, come down from God, out of heaven, praepared as a Bryde,
trimmed for her husband. And I heard a great voice, out of Heaven, saying:
Behold the Tabernacle of God is with men, and he will dwell with them, and
they shall be his people, and God himself will be their God with them. Upon
which our cohabitation with God, Cic. l. de Vniuersitate. p. 432.
Tullie says, that we are, Deorum quasi Gentiles; the Countrymen of the Gods:
Nay generis divini, the Kinsmen of the Gods, as he adds in that place: of
their own generation: as Aratus speaks. Act. 17. 28.
And therefore Tullie, in another place, speaking of the state of God, and
virtuous men after this present life, he says, that they shall live among the
Gods: Qui in corporibus humanis, Cic. l. 1. Tusc. p. 119.
vitam sunt imitati Deorum, his, ad eos, a quibus sunt profecti, facilis
reditus patet: Such as have lived the life of a God in the body of a man, shall
find an easy passage unto God: because from him they have descended. So that,
God calls those men to live with him in heaven, with whom he himself has
lived upon earth.

Now the way, whereby they ascend up into Heaven, there to live with God, is,
by instructing themselves in the knowledge of God: As some, even of the
Heathens themselves, Trismeg in Pimand. Dial. 10. p. 426.
have taught us. Trismegistus says expressly, that, Vnica salus homini, est
cognitio Dei: and haec ad Olympum ascensio. The happiness of man is the knowledge
of God: and this is our way, of ascending into heaven. Agreeing well with that
of our Savior Christ: This is life aeternal to know thee, John, 1 ^. 3.
to be the only true God, and whom thou have sent, Jesus Christ. For, as
Bernard truly notes, Summum bonum hominis, est plena and perfecta agnitio
Creatoris: Ber. Ser. 2. super Salu^ Regina, p. 1355.
The happiness of the Creature, is the knowledge of his Creator: Not a naked, or
an idle knowledge; but a knowledge, which is joined with the practice of virtues.
2 Pet. 1. 5.
As the Apostle Peter teaches us. Ioynes with virtue knowledge. For, if they
be not joined, they can neither of them profit. Nihil enim prodest exercere
virtutes, Hieron. Epist. Fab^ol^e: To. 3. p. 42.
nisi noveris Creatorem: says S. Hierom: Nec Dei veneratio proficit ad
salutem, nisi praecepta Conditorts impleueris. It profits nothing, to
exercise virtue, without the knowledge of God: and it profits as little, to have
the knowledge of God without the practice of virtue. We must therefore join
theorical and practical virtues together, Apoc. 2. 7.
and by them, as by two legs, ascend into Heaven. Which is the true Paradise,
where man's blessedness dwells. As Stobaeus alleges, out of Sophocles: In
Iovis tantum hortis, beata felicitas. Stob. Se^m* 101. p. 552.

The Paradise of God, Heaven, only is:
The only happy place of perfect blis.
And unto this heavenly Paradise, it is virtue that brings us. And that by
the confession, even of the very Heathen. For, -- Locum Virtus habet inter
Astra, Senec. in Herc. Oetaeo. Act. 4. Sce. 4. p. 112.
says the Tragic Seneca: Virtue enioyes her place among the Stars. And she
gives to the virtuous, their place above the stars, seating them among the
Gods. As they instance, in the Examples, both of Hercules, and Romulus: which
before were touched by us. Lib. ^, c. 8. Sect. 2
As the same Tragic in the same Tragedy affirms expressly: -- cum summas
Exiget horas consumpta dies, Senec. Herc. Oetaeo. Act. 5. Sce. vlt. p. 128.

Iter ad superos gloria pandit.
When the last hour is out, of the last wasted day,
Then Virtues glory is that, which unto Heaven mak's way.


And this is the second degree of our Felicity with God; that, by virtue, men
are brought to live eternally, in Heaven, which is the place of Gods own
dwelling.

The third of them, is this; That, by virtue, we are brought to enjoy Gods
blessed presence: whereby we enjoy that infinite happiness, that cannot
possibly be conceived by us. As the Apostle Paul teaches us: Those things, 1.
Cor. 2. 9.
which the eye has not scene, neither the ear heard, neither came into man's
heart, has God prepared for them that love him. The particulars whereof, if
they cannot be conceived, they cannot be expressed. Only the Psalmist (in the
general) expresses thus much, that, In his presence is the fullness of joy,
Psalm, 16. 11.
and, at his right hand, there are pleasures for evermore. And therefore, our
Savior Christ places the highest pitch of the blessedness of man, in the
sight of God: Blessed are the pure in heart, for they shall see God. Matthew, 5.
8.
And S. Chrysostom, he places the highest pitch of the misery of man, in the
deprivation of this beati^icall vision. Satius est enim, mill fulmina
sustinere, Chrysostom. Hom. 24. in Man. To. 2. p. 233.
quam vultum illum, mansuetudinis pietatisque plenum, nos tamen aversantem,
videre; and illos oculos placidissimos, nequaquam, nos aspicere, sustinentes.
It were better, to suffer the fearful flashes of a thousand lightnings, then
to see that sweet countenance (so full of piety, and mildnes) to be offended
at us, and those amiable eyes, not enduring to behold us. This is worse, then
to endure a thousand torments, and a thousand Hells: as he writes, in the
same place. Therefore, as no tongue can express the torment and misery of
condemned souls, in being shut out from Gods blessed presence: so can no
tongue express the comfort and blessedness of the souls of the righteous, by
enjoying the light of Gods most gracious countenance: which yields more joy
and comfort to the heart, then can be conceived by the heart. Whereupon the
Prophet David prays unto God, that he would but show him the light of his
countenance, and he should be saved. For, Psalm, 8. 3. 7. 19.
Deum videre, est vita animae: says Gregory Nyssen. The very life, Nyssen, lib
de Infa^^ib^ premature abreptis, p. 134.
whereby the Soul is maintained, is only the beholding of the glorious face of
God. And this is a Doctrine, which is not altogether hidden, even from the very
Heathen. Who teach, that, the enjoying of God, and of his gracious presence, is
the absolute perfection of all humane happiness. So says Ovid: Felices illi,
qui non simulacra, sed ipsos,
Quique Deum coram corpora vera vident. Ovid, l. 2. de ^^onto. Eleg. 8. p, 182.

Thrice happy such as see
Their Gods, in person true,
As in themselves they be,
And not in painted hue.
Groping at that Divinity Doctrine, that, Man's blessedness consists in
beholding of Gods countenance: not in a specular, and aenigmaticall vision; 1
Cor. 13. 12.
but in a clear, Aquinas, ^ Quaest. 12. Art. 2.
and immediate one, as Aquinas, or rather indeed, S. Paul himself, speaks.

And this was that, which Aristotle aimed at, if he could have hit it: when he
so much preferred the Contemplative Felicity, Arist. l. 10. Eth. c. 8. To. 2.
739, 740.
before the Active: because the Object of it, is God. And therefore affirming
of contemplative persons, that they be Dijs immortalibus amicissimi: The best
beloved of God. Because, Aug. Epist. 222. To. 2. p, 860.
as S. Augustine affirms, By Contemplation, they look God in the face: which
there he calls, Summitatem contemplationis: The highest ascending of our
contemplation. Aug. Epist 56. To. 2. p, 260.
Hence the Platonicks affirmed, that, Frui Deo, est summum hominis bonum, that,
The Blessedness of man, is, to enjoy God. An ancient Doctrine among the
Heathens: as appears in Trismegistus: who delivers the same sentence,
Trismeg. Pimand. Dial. 1. p, 377. Aug. l. 8. de Ciuit. (...)* 8. To. 5. p, 449.
almost in the same words: Summum bonum animorum, est Deo frui. Which fruition
of God, S. Augustine, in another place, expresses to be, Non sicut corpore
fruitur, aut seipso animus, aut amico amicus; sed sicut luce oculus. That
enjoying, which good and godly men have of God, is not like that enjoying,
which the soul has of the body; nor like unto that neither, which it has of
it self; nor like unto that, which a friend has of his friend: but like unto
that, which the eye has of the light. Which is indeed so great, that, without
it, the eye has no use of it self, but is as good as dead. And so is the
soul too, without the sight of God. And therefore says Boteius, Felix qui
potuit, boni
Fontem visere lucidum. Boeti^s, l. 3. de Consolat. metro. 12. p, 1^62.

That man is blessed, that can behold, and ever come to see
The blessed God, the Fountain clear of all good things that be.
For, With thee (says the Psalmist) is the fountain of life, Psalm, 36. 9.
and in thy light shall we see light. Thus, both Christians, and Heathens do
confess, that God himself is Man's true happiness, and the rich reward of all
true godliness: as S. Augustine truly teaches: Aug. in Sententijs, To. 3. p,
1488.
Deus, est cultus sui, merces. God is the true recompense of his own service.
And Beda Beda, in 1. Cor. c. 15. To: 6. p, 571.
likewise, unto the same purpose: Praemium virtutis, est ipse* qui virtutem
dedit. Our best reward of virtue, is, even he himself, who is the giver of
virtue. Yea, and this, even God himself professes of himself. For he
tells Abraham, that, He is his buckler, and his exceeding great reward. Now,
if God be both the giver of virtue, and the rewarder of virtue with felicity,
yea and felicity it self, Gensis, 15. 1.
which is the reward of virtue; then must there needs be a God. But, the
former of these is proved, both by Holy Scriptures, and by Heathen Writers. And
therefore the latter follows.

CHAP. 9.
The Mathematics show, that there is a God. 2. And more particularly,
Geometry. 3. Which, by a Geometrical prick, does lead men unto some
knowledge of God. 4. Of whom (in diverse powers) it has a kind of resemblance.

WE have now passed over, Mathematicus circa Abstracta speculatur, tollendo
omnia sensibil^a.
both the Metaphysics, Physics, Physic, Politics, and Ethics: in all
which several learnings we have learned, There is a God; both by Reasons, and
Authorities. We are now come to the Mathematics: Which, as they are something
more abstracted from sense, Arist. l. 11. Metaphyl. c. 3. To. 2. p, 1485.
and from sensible Objects, then any of all those forenamed Sciences; so can
they no^ yield us such sensible Arguments, to prove this great Conclusion,
Arist. l. 11. Meta. c. 4. p, 1486. and Seminar. Philos. p 797.
as the former can. For the proper subject of the Mathematics (especially of
those two Arts, of Geometry, and Arithmeticke; which I handle in this Chapter,
and in the next after) is only to consider, of Quantum, secundum se: Of
Quantities by themselves, Ficin. Argument in. l. 7. Platonis de repub. p. 616.
abstracted from their subjects. And therefore we must not look from them, for
either discourses, or demonstrations, or positions, directly and categorically
to this purpose. But yet we may draw, per obliquum ductum, similitudes, and
resemblances from both those two Sciences: whereby we may ascend in our
contemplation, even unto divine and celestial knowledges: as by the shape of
the shadow, we may gather assuredly, the shape of the body, For, as Ficinus
has truly observed, to this purpose; Mathematica ita se habent ad diuina, vt
vmbrae ad corpora: Ficin. Argument. in Platonis Theaete^. p. 134.
Mathematicals are proportiooned unto divinity, as the shadow to the Body. And
therefore says Alcinous that, Mathematicorum consideratio, est praeludium ad
diuinorum contemplationem. The consideration of the Mathematics, is as it
were, a praeludium; Alcin. c. 2. Seminar. philos. To. 2. p. 580.
unto the contemplation of divine and heavenly things. For, the very end of the
Mathematics (as Plato teaches) is nothing else, but this; Vt ad diuinam
naturam considerandam, nos conferamus: quatenus hanc hominibus inspiciendam
Deus largitus est. Plato in Epinome. p. 918.
Quam nunquam sine his artibus assequemur. The end of the Mathematics, is, to
lead us men intentiuely to consider of the nature of God, and to contemplate
of it, so far, as it is lawful to inquire into it. Which we can never
compass, without the knowledge of Mathematical Arts. And therefore Aristotle
calls the Mathematics, Divinam mathe sin, that is, a divine learning: Arist.
l. 1. Mete^r c. 3. To. 1. p. 691.
because they lead men unto the knowledge of divine and heavenly thing.

Now, under the name of Mathematics are comprehended four Arts: Geometry,
Arithmetic, Arist. 1. 2. Metap. c. 3. To. 2 p. 1388
Astronomy, and Music, Which Mathematical Arts and sciences (as some of the
learned have wittily observed) were practiced by God, in his creation of the
world. He used Arithmetic, in knitting all the innumerable parts of the world,
Vide Coel. Rhodigin. l. c. 2. p. 6.
in one body together: Geometry, in giving unto every one, his proper form and
figure: And Music, in joining them, in so concent-full an harmony, each of
them with another. Unto which Mathematical conceit, Wisd. 11. 17. Coel.
Rhodigin. l. 1. Ant, lect. c. ^. p. 6.
does Coelius Rhodiginus think that place in the Book of Wisdom directly to
allude: That God has made all things, in Number, Weight, P^^t. l 8. Sympos.
Quaest. 2. To. 3. p. 336. 337.
and Measure: referring Number, to Arithmetic; Weight, unto Music; and
Measure, to Geometry. And Plutarch, interpreting that position of Plato: Deum
semper Geometriam exercere, says, in express words: That God made all things,
Ratione, and Mensura, and Numero: in Wisdom, Measure and Number.

Out of certain grounds in all which Arts, we may collect, That there is a God
though not Mathematica certitudine (which, Mathematica certitudo non est in
omnibus quae^enda.
as even Aristotle himself yields, is not in all things to be required) yet
more then Dialectica probabilitate, Arist. l. 2. Metaphys. c. 3. To. 2. p. 1383.
I will give you but a little taste, in every one of those forenamed Arts:
because these Mathematical Subjects, being mere abstracts from sense, they
cannot so familiarly, Influere in sensus, nor be so plausible to the vulgar
understanding, as other more popular Arguments can.

2 Let us begin with Geometry: Geometry leads a man to God.
which (as Plato affirms) does Animum attollere ad veritatem; atque ita ad
Philosophandum praeparare, vt ad superior a convertamus quae nunc (contra quam
decet) ad inferiora deijcimus. ^l^t. l. 7. de Repub. p. 623.
Geometry (says he) erecteth a man's mind, unto the searching of the truth;
and so praepareth his thoughts unto Philosophy, that it makes him to direct
them, unto those things, which are above; which now he directs unto the
things which are below. Performing that office, whereunto the Apostle Paul so
earnestly exhorts us: to make us seek for those things, which are above.
Col. 3. 1.
Plutarch is more definitive, and punctual, in this point; expressing more
particularly, what those Superiora be: namely, that, by them is intended the
very nature of God. For he says, that the very end of Geometry is nothing
else, but only to sublime men's minds above their senses, ad naturae
sempiternae contemplationem: to the contemplation of Gods aeternall Nature.
Plut. l. 8. Simposia^. Quaest. 2. To. 3. p. 336. Ibid p 337. Man T^r. Sermon. 21.
p. 260.
Whereupon Max. Tyrius calls Geometry; Nobilissimum Philosophiae membrum: The
most noble part of Philosophy. And the Greek Philo calls it, Principem and
Metropolin reliquorum: The prime and Metropolitan of the Mathematical
Sciences: because it does, Intellectum veluti repurgare, and paulatim a
sensibus liberare. It purges men's understandings and refineth them from the
dross of their senses. As we may see, in Pythagoras; who having found out the
truth of a certain Geometrical Conclusion for which he had a long time before
been studying, Cic. l. 3. de Not. Deor. p. 239.
he offered up a Sacrifice unto the Muses: thereby insinuating, that his
illumination came from above: and so, by his Geometry, was led unto the
worship of the Deity; though under the title of the Muses. And therefore,
says Aristotle, that Qui dicunt, Arist. l. 13. Meta c. 3*. 2. p. 1513.
Mathematicas scientias, nihil de bono and pulchro dicere, falsum dicunt.
Dicunt enim, and maxim ostendunt. Nam, etsi non nominant; cum tamen opera and
rations ostendunt, nonne dicunt de ijs? Those men that affirm, that
Mathematical sciences do no way entreat of either Goodness, or Beauty, they
affirm it very falsely For the Mathematics do discourse of them both. And,
though they do not expressly name them; yet, when they entreat both of their
works, and of their reasons, do they not then entreat of the things
themselves? So that, though the Mathematics do not entreat directly of God,
who is that Bonum, and Pulchrum; yet, in that they do speak and entreat of
his works, they do obliquely speak of him. And though they conclude not so
directly and pere^ptorily, in this subject of divinity, as they do in their
own proper subject of Quantity; wherein, as the Orator observes they do not
persuadere, sed cogere; Cic. l. 4. Acad. p. 30.
yet, even here, they do afford us such apt and fit resemblances, as, though
they do not cogere, yet may they well persuadere: Such as well may induce us,
though they do not enforce us.

3 And first for Geometry, Punctum in Geometry leads men to God.
there is one maine position in it: which though it be proper and natural unto
that Art; yet leads it us, by consequence, unto that aeternall and
supernatural power, which is called God. And that breefly is this: Arist. l.
1. Metaphys. c. 7. To. 2. p. 1383.
that, Punctum est principium omnis lineae. So that, all magnitudes and
continuities are deduced from one original prick.

And therefore Proclus calls Punctum, magnitudinis parentem, and authorem:
he calls a Prick the parent of all magnitude. Which position, as it has
his Mathematical truth, Proclus in Euclid. l. 2. c. 11. Sermon. Philos. To. 2.
p. 765.
in Geometry; so has it his Physical truth, in natural Philosophy. From
whence it must needs follow, that all those so largely extended lines, in the
greatest bodies of the world, do lineally descend from one only prick; which,
in it self, is indivisible. Now, what can be this one indivisible prick or
point, which is the Author of all those huge magnitudes, which are evidently
seen in those vast, and extended bodies of the world, the heavens, and the
elements, but only God himself? Can all those huge dimensions of those
immense bodies, such heights, such bredths, such depths, and such thicknesses,
be possibly deduced from any other prick, then only from God? who, though
he be both higher then heaven, deeper then hell, broader then the sea, and
thicker then the earth; yet is he, like a prick in every line of all of them;
and, as utterly incapable of any division, as is the very prick of the
Mathematician, which cannot be divided, by the ege of very thought. Unto which
Mathematical conceit, of deducing all magnitudes, and all their dimensions,
from God, as from their true Original point; the Apostle Saint Paul does seem
to allude, when he exciteth us, Ephesians. 3. 18.
to comprehend, what is the breadth, and length, and depth, and height, etc.

4 And indeed, Punctum in Geometry resembles in some sort the nature of God.
if we consider of the nature and power of a point or a prick in a line, and
in all other continuities whatsoever, whether solides or plains; we may
easily perceive, that there is in a prick, a very great similitude and
resemblance of God. For first, as a point or prick is the very first fountain
of every line, which is indeed nothing else, but only fluxus Punctotum: so
this whole universality of things, which we call the World, is indeed nothings
else, but a production, and elongation, and dilatation of the natural
goodness of Almighty God. The goodness of God is the only true point, from
which all created things do proceed. Dionys. l. de coelesti Hierarch. c. 4.
p. 29.
For, as Dionysius Areopagita very truly teaches: Deus, bonitate ductus,
omnes naturas in lucem protulit. God, being only led by his own natural
goodness, was thereby induced to create and make all things. This is the true
Center of all good things, which are but as the radij, that be drawn from it.
And this is that, which the Pythagoreans aimed at, Arist. l. Metaphys. c. 5.
To. 2. p, 1375.
in holding this position, that, Mathematicorum principia, sunt omnium rerum
principia. That the Principles of the Mathematics, are the beginnings of all
things.

Secondly, as in every line, and in every part of it, wheresoever you cut it,
you shall surely find a prick; which was a communis Terminus unto both the
divided parts, being the beginning of the one, and the end of the other, and
which knitted, and united them both together: so, in every part of the world,
which soever you contemplate, you shall find the mighty power of the Spirit of
God; which, like a common bond, knitteth all the several parts of every thing
together, and unites them all, in one common nature. And this is manifestly
acknowledged, even by the Heathen Poet: Principio, Coelum, ac Terras, camposque
Virgil. l. 6. Aeneid. p, 267.
liquentes,
Lucentemque globum Lunae, Titaniaque astra,
Spiritus intus alit: totamque infusa per artus
Men's agitat molem, and magnose corpore miscet.
From first beginning, there has been a certain inward Spirit,
Supporting Heaven, and Earth; and Seas, Moon, Stars, and all things by it.
Which Spirit, like the Punctum is in Mathematicke body,
And so transfused in all the World, through all the parts that may be:
That, as the Soul (for such it is) by moving can be proved,
So all the Worlds vast body is, by this Soul, ever moved.


Thirdly, Arist. l. 11. Metaphys. c. 2. To. 2. p, 1484.
as a prick is the end of every line, Linearum terminus, as Aristotle
speaks, the extreme point, wherewith it is shut up and determined: so is God
the end of all his Creatures. He is both, that Terminus a quo, from which all
things do proceed; and that Terminus ad quem, unto which they all are
referred; and that medium per quod, by which they are all of them united. And
all this is confessed, even by the very Heathen: who do all affirm of God,
with one general consent, that it is he only, which does, Et principium, and
media, Arist. l. de Mundo. To. 2. p, 1572.
and finem rerum omnium tenere. That God holds in his hands, both the
Beginning, and Middle, and End of all things. Yea, and this also, the Apostle
Paul directly affirms, though in somewhat other terms, when he tells us,
Romans 11. 36.
that, Of him, and through him, and to him, are all things, Of him as of their
Beginning: Through him; as by their Middle, tie, and Bond; and, To him; as to
their End. For so, Origin Orig. l. 6. Cont. Celsum p, 766.
expressly interprets those threetermes. Ostendit, Principium omnium, ex ipso;
Conseruationem, Per ipsum; Et Finem, In ipsum. So that, God is that Punctum, in
every part of the world, from whom, every Creature in the world does proceed;
by whom, they are preserved; and unto whom, they be destinated. And this is
that resemblance, which Geometry affoordeth, to adumbrate the nature of God
unto us.

CHAP. 10.
Unity in Arithmeticke, does lead men unto God. 2. Which is affirmed by
Philosophers, to be the Original of all things. 3. Yea directly affirmed to
be God himself. 4. With whom, it has, indeed, a very great resemblance.

THE second of those Mathematical Arts, is, Arithmeticke: wherein we do find
another parallel position unto that, Vinity in Arithmeticke leads a man to God.
which formerly we found in Geometry. For, as Geometry teaches us, that
Punctum, est Principium omnis lineoe: so Arithmeticke teaches us, that Vnitas,
est principium omnis numeri. As all magnitude arises, from one only prick: so
all multitude arises, from one only unity. Arist. l. 1. Metap. c. 7. To. 2 p,
1383.
For Punctum, and Vnitas, differ no more but thus; that Punctum, est Vnitas
sine numero; and Vnitas, est punctum sine loco. And therefore, Zaratas, the
Pythagorean, Arist* l. 13. Meta. c. 8. To. 2. p, 1522.
called Vnitatem, numeri patrem. He calls an unity, the father of all
numbers. Because (as Boethius very truly teaches) Omnis pluralitas est ex
vnitatibus: All numbers are nothing else, but a conjunction of unities. Now,
Arist. ibid. Plut. lib. de Aninac procreat, To. 3. Mor* p, 93.
if unity be the parent of all multiplicitie, it must needs from thence follow,
that all this multiplicity, ^oet. lib. de Vnitate. p, 1276.
and variety of so infinite many things, as we see in the world, do draw
their original, from only unity. For, one unity is the beginning of all
plurality, as well in numero numerato, in that which is numbered, as in numero
numerante, that which numbreth: as Trismegistus expressly testifies.
Bradwardin. l. 1. de causa Dei c. 1. Correllar. 40. p, 135.
Omnes res ab vno fuerunt, iuredicatione vnius; and fuerunt nataeres omnes, ab
hacrevna, aptatione. All things proceeded from One, by the Law of that One; and
all things came of that One, by the adpatation of all unto that One.

And this was that, which the Pythagoreans aimed at, in holding this one
opinion so stisfly: Cic. l. 4. Acad. p, 30.
Ex numeris, and Mathematicorum initijs, omni proficisci: That all things
proceed from numbers, and from the first principles of the Mathematicians,
that is, from Punctum, and Vnitas. Which are prima, and (as it were) minima
naturalia, in the two principalls of all Mathematical Arts. Punctum, in all
Geometrical continuities; and Vnitas, in all Arithmeticall numbers. These two,
in the opinion of the Pythagoreans, are the very first beginnings, and
originalls of all things. But especially this latter, especially this Unity:
which they make the only cause of the whole university: maintaining this
position (as Aristotle reports their opinion) Numerorum elementa, Arist. l.
1. Meta. c. 5. p, 1375.
entium quoque cunctorum esse elementa. That the Elements and first (...) of
Numb^rs, are also the prime principles and originalls of all thi^^g. Now this
Numerorum Elementum, this beginning and principle of all Numbers, Plut. l. 1.
de ^lacit. c. 3. To. 2. p, 7.
is only Unity. And this Pythagoras made the original cause of all things.
Unto which he referred both the motions of the Heavens, and the generations of
living Creatures, Plut. l. de Homero. To. 1. p, 123.
and finally all things. Omnia numeris ac^epta ferebat, tam conversiones
syderum, quam ortus animalium. He derived all things from Numbers; as well the
revolution of the Stars, as the original of all Creatures.

2 Yea, and as it is held by the consent of Philosophers, that Arithmeticall
Unity is the cause of all numbers: Unity is the Au^hor and original of all
things.
Stobaeus, lib. Ecl^g. Phys c. 9. p, 13.
so is it held by them likewise, Idem ibidem, c. 13. p, 27.
that Metaphysicall Unity is the general cause of all things. Trismeg.
Pimand^Dial. 10. p, 426.
Iamblicus says, that, Quaecunque sunt, per vnum sunt. What things soever are,
are all by One. And Trismegistus says, that, Monas, est omnium, principium,
radix, and origo. Unity is the beginning, root, and original of all things.
And again, that, Exvno prin^ipio, cuncta dependent: Principium, ex vno. That
all things depend upon one first principle: and it, upon the unity of it self.
And that which he says, Anselmus plainly proves in Monologio, as I have
partly touched before. Yea, and so does Hugo de Victore too, Anselm. Monolog,
c. 3. To. 3. p, 2.
by this invincible reason; that, Si diuersa intus consilia praesidentium
essent, ipsi se foris rerum cursus ab inuicem aliquando diuiderent: Lib. 2.
Cap. 3. Sect. 3.
nunc autem, omnia dum sic concorditer ad vnum finem currunt; profecto
indicant, quod vnus est fons, and origo, vnde procedunt. Hugo de Sct. Victore,
lib. 7. Erudit. didasc. c. 19. To. 3. p, 21. X.
If there were diverse Authors, there would be diverse counsels; if diverse
counsels, diverse courses: whereas now all things running in an uniform
course, unto one, and the same end, do thereby evidently show, that they all
do proceed from one and the same beginning. Arist. l. 13. Metaph. c. 8. To.
2. p, 1521. 1520.
Aristotle he says, that, Vnum, est Dualitate prius: That Unity, is before
all Duality: which follows by necessity, upon the order of very nature. For
Principium, is, by nature, before his Compositum. Now Dualitie is nothing but a
composition of two unities. Yea, and in the same place, Arist-ibid.
it appears again, that there were certain Philosophers, which held this
opinion, that there is, Quoddam vnum, which is Primum omnium vnorum. That there
is a certain One thing, which is the first cause of All things. Which opinion,
though he there do pretend to confute; yet does he indeed confirm it. For
he himself says expressly, that, vnitas, est, natura, Causa, vt multa sint
Entia. So that, unity is not only before all Plurality, but it is also, the
Cause of all Plurality. It is before it, as the cause is before his effect.
Now, what can be that Vnitas, the Cause of all unities, Romane^, 11. 36.
but only that Vnus Deus; of whom, and through whom, and to whom, are all
things? Who (as Boethius observes) because he is but one in himself, he has
therefore given unto every thing that he has made, to be but one. Boet. l.
de Vnitate, p, 1274. Dionys. (...) lib. de Divine. Nom, c. 13. p, 328.
Qu^a Creator vnus est, ideo rebus, quas condidit, hoc in munere dedit, vt
vnaquaeque esset etiam vna. Insomuch that (as Dionysius Areopagita observes)
even those numeralls themselves, which seem to be contrary unto Unity, yet
have their existence and being, by Unity. As we say, Vna duernio, and Dec^s
vna, and vnum dimidium, and vna tertia pars, etc. As we say, in common speech,
One Couple, and one Tenth, and one half, and one Third part. All which have
their particular being, by being but One. And so, there is nothing in the
world, created by God, that is any more then One. God himself, by that created
unity, stamping upon every Creature, an image of the Unity of his own divine
nature. For (as Boethius adds, in the former place) Prima Vnitas, quae est
vnitas sibijp si, creauit aliam vnitatem, quae est infra eam. The first Unity,
which is one in it self (that is, God the Creator) has created another unity,
which is beneath it self, which is, unity in the Creature. Whereby, both every
thing is at one within it self and every part of the world has unity with
another: they agreeing all most lovingly, as fellow members together. Dionys.
Areopag. lib. de Divine. nom* c. 1. p. 192.
Hence Dionysius calls God, Vnitatem, vnitatis omnis effectricem: An Unity,
which is the efficient of all unities. Yea, and in the same place, he
alleges two substantial reasons, why God may truly be called One. The
first is, Propter simplicitatem vacuitatis partium (which Boethius before
calls, Vnitatem sibijpsi:) Because God is so pure, Ibid. p, 195*
and so simple an essence, that he is not compounded, so much as of any parts:
but is every way one, without any mixture or concretion. The second, Quia vi
vntiatis, quae vnum facit, vnum efficimur, diuiduisque nostris
dissimilitud^nibus, ac diuersitatibus, singulari modo connexis, in monada; quae
diuinam speciem refert, ac vnitatem, quae Deum imitatur, colligimur and
concrescimus: Because, by the force of unity (whose work it is to make things
one) all those diversities and differences, whereby we are divided, be, after
a special manner, conjoined, repraesenting in that unity, an image of the
Deity, which is, Eorum, quae coniunguntur, coniunctio, and vnitas: The
conjunction, and unity of all those things that are joined and united together.
Which deity, is that unity, not only whereby all things are made one, but also
whereby all things were made. There is no one thing in the world, but it is
both made, and made one, by the unity of the Deity. And therefore Pythagoras
maintained this opinion: Sine vnitate, nihil esse factum: That it is Unity, and
nothing else, that is the maker of all things. Yea, and the preserver of them
too: as Boethius affirms. For, Tamdiu est vnumquodque, id quod est (says he)
quamdiu in se vnitas est: cum autem desinit esse vnum, desinit esse id quod
est: Every thing continues so long in his being, as it continues in his
unity: Epip^. l. 3. Haeres. 80. To. 2. p. 519. Boet. l. de vnitate, p, 1274.
and when it loses his unity, it cease also to be. Whereupon he there
concludes, that, Sicut vnitate res ad esse ducitur: sic and, in illo esse,
custoditur. As by unity, all things are first brought unto their being; so are
they all, by unity, preserved in the same. Nec quicquam inuenire possis (says
Dionysius) quod non vno (ex quo omnis diuinitas nominatur) and sit id, quod
est, and absoluatur, Dionysius vbi supra p, 330.
and custodiatur: Neither can any thing be found, which is not both made, and
perfected, and preserved by unity: which is the very title of the Deity. Now,
that, by this unity, Pythagoras understood nothing else but God; it evidently
appears, in that he both makes his unity the Maker of all things: A quo sic
rerum aeternus ducitur ordo: Palingen. in Libra. p, 168:

Vt m^nade a prima innumeri numeri generantur:
as Palingenius expresses it: From whom all things proceed, by an eternal
Law,
As from the power of Unity all numbers we may draw.
And again, in that he makes it likewise, The fountain of all goodness:
Omnium bonorum principium. Plut. l. de Homer To. 1. p. 123.
For, both those two attributes, both to be the Maker of all things, and the
Giver of all good things, are ascribed unto God, in the Holy Scriptures, by the
two Brother-Apostles. The first of them, by S. John: By him were all things
made. John, 1. 3. James, 1. 17.
And the second, by S. James: Every good gift comes from the Father of light.
So that, God only is that unity, which Homer also not obscurely insinuates,
when he does, Vnitatis naturam p^nere in bono: binarij in malo: When he
places the nature of unity, in good: Plut. vbi supra.
and of Duality, in evil; making unity, the Cause of all kind of goodness,
both natural, moral, and civil: as, in the same place, he proves, by
diverse pregnant instances. Vnitatis natura (says he) si aeri insit, bonam
temperiem; ^i animo, virtutem; si corpori, sanitatem; si ciuibus and familijs,
pacem, and concordiam praestat. Contra, Bin^rij natura, aeri tempestatem;
animo, vitium; corpori, morbos; ciuitatibus and familijs, seditiones and odia
insert. The nature of unity is such, that, if it be in the air, it makes a
good temper; if in the mind, it brings virtue; if in the body, health; if in
the City, peace. But Duality, clean^ contrary in the air, procures storms;
in the mind, vices; in the body, diseases; and in the City, dist^actions. So
that Pythagoras his unity, which is the fountain of all goodness, cannot
otherwise be construed, but to be God himself.

3 But we need use no circuit, to prove this unity, to be God, The first
unity is nothing else but God.
in the opinion of Philosophers. For they themselves affirm it, in direct and
express terms. Trismeg. Asclep. c. 8. p. 505.
Trismegistus says of God; that he is, vnum illud principium, ex quo cuncta
dependent, vel ex quo potius defluunt: That God is that one original cause, on
which all things do depend; or rather, Item Pimand. Dial. 11. p, 438.
from which all things do proceed. And again, in another place: That there
is but Anima vna, and vit^ vna: and quisnam ille praeter vnum Deum? qui vnus
singula facit in multis. There is but one soul, and one life: and what is that
One, but only one God, who being but One, yet does all in all. Ephesians. 4. 6.
Agreeing exactly with the Doctrine of S. Paul: That there is but one God, and
Father of all, which is above all, and through all, and in all. So likewise,
Plut. l. 1. de Placit. c. 7. To. 2, p, 16.
both Socrates and Plato, they both affirmed of God, that he was: Vnum*
singularis, and per se subsistentis naturae; solitarium, and revera bonum. God
(say they) is but one thing; of a singular nature, and by it self subsisting;
truly good, and without any companion. All which names, and titles, (as
Plutarch there reports) they referred unto Mentem, to a Spirit endued with
understanding: which must needs be God: because nothing else has his being
of it self. Mornaeus, lib. de ve^i^. Relig. c. 3. p, 44.
And therefore ^ayth Simplicius, that, Vnitas, and Principium, and Bonum, and
Deus, do Vnam and idem sonare, do signify One, and the very same thing.
Plutarch, he proves God to be Vnum, but One, out of those two letters, E. I.
which were written upon the Gates of Apollo's Temple: which sound as much as
(...), Plut lib. de E, I, To. 1. Mor. p, 695.
or, Vnum es. Non enim multa sunt numina, sed vnum. For there are not many
Gods, but one God. And Iamblicus says of God, That, Iamblic. lib. de Mysterijs
p, 29.
Vnitas in Diis adeo superat, vt illorum esse sit vnitas quaedam. Unity in the
Gods, is in so great an excellency, that their very being, is only to be One.

So that, though by the error of his religion, he were led to affirm, that
there were many Gods; yet, by the strength and power of very reason, he was
forced to yield, that there was nothing in God, but a most pure and simple
unity: which is indeed Gods Esse, cui totum est, esse vnum: whose only being
is to be One: as Hugo de Victore notes. Hugo de Vict l. 7. Erud. didas. c. 19.
To. 3. p, 21 X. Iamblic. vbi supra p, 152.
Which Unity, in another place, Iamblicus affirms, to be the cause of the
whole University. Est Vnitas excelsa omnium causa. Now, what can this sublime
Unity be, which is the cause of all things, but only God? There is not any
other thing, that is the cause of all things. And therefore Xenophanes (as
Aristotle reports) looking up into heaven, Arist. l. 1. Metap. c. 5. To. 2.
p. 1376
unto this sublime Unity, affirmed it to be nothing else, but God. Xenophanes
ad totum coelum respiciens, ipsum vnum ait esse Deum. Yea, and diverse of the
Philosophers have gone so far, as not to think it enough to say, Deum esse
Vnum: but Deum esse Vnitatem: because Vnum is concretum; whereas there is nihil
concreti in Deo. So that, (as Citadimus very wittily collecteth in his
objections against Mirandula) Pic. Mirand. Object. 3. p, 181.
God may more properly be said to be Vnitas, then Vnus. Hence Pythagoras
affirmed (as Epiphanius reports) Deum esse Vnitatem: Epiphan. l. 3. To. 2. p,
519.
That God is that one thing, without which there is nothing. And Oenod^pes
likewise (transposing only the terms) Vnitatem esse Deum: as Athenagor^s
reports. Athenag. Orat. pro Christ apud Just. Martyr, To. 1. p. 223.
He makes Unity to be a Deity.

The reason of which their curiosity of speaking, was; because though all of
them found a true Unity in God, How God is not one.
yet found they it to be such, as could not be expressed by any word. But the
nearest they could come unto it, was the name of Abstract Unity. For though
God be one (as is confessed by them all) yet is he not so one, as any other
thing is one: but so, as nothing else is one: as S. Bernard in his fi^t Book
de Consideratione, has expressed very excellently. Where he gives instance,
of eight several ways, whereby things are said and made to be one. And yet
none of them does fully express the Unity of the Deity. Bernard. l. 5. De
Considerat. p, 1408.
Est Vnitas, quae collectiua dici potest, vt cum (verbi causa) multilapides
faciunt acervum vnum. Est vnitas constitutiua, cum multa membra vnum corpus
constituunt. Est Vnitas coniugatiua, qua fit, vt duo iam non sint duo, sed caro
vna. Est and natiua, qua anima and caro vnus nascttur Homo. Est vnitas
potestatiua, qua, homo, virtutis non instabilis, non dissimilis, sed vnus
sibimet semper nititur inueniri. Est consentanea, cum per charitatem, multorum
hominum est cor vnum, et anima vna. Est and votiua, cum anima votis omnibus
adhaerens Deo, vnus spiritus est. Est and dignatiua vnitas, qua limus noster, a
Dei verbo, in vnam assumptus est personam. There is an Unity, which is made by
collection; as when many Stones do make but one heap. There is an Unity,
which is made by composition; as when many members do make but one body. There
is an Unity which is made by conjunction; as when man and wife are now no more
two, but become one flesh. There is an Unity, which is made by stabilitie; as
when a man is constant in his virtue, whereby he is always one, and like unto
himself. There is an unity, which is made by consent; as when, through
Christian charity, there is found but one heart and one mind in many. There is
an unity, that is made by devotion; as when the soul adhaering unto God by
piety and religion, is thereby made but one Spirit with him. And there is an
unity, which is made by vouchsafing; as when God the word vouchsafed to assume
the nature of man, into the indentity of his own person. These be the eight
kinds of S. Bernards unity: wherein I will not censure, either any
impropriety, or any coincidency: because they all may well pass for several
kinds of Unity, in the popular capacity. But yet he affirms of them all,
that all these unities are but to little purpose if they be compared to the
Unity of the Trinity; much more then being compared to the Unity of the Deity.
Haec omnia (says he) quid ad illud summum, atque (vt ita dicam) vnice vnum,
vbi vnitatem consubstantialitas facit? All these unities are as good as
nothing, in respect of that unity, which is found in the Deity, by
Consubstantiality. Huic vni, quiduis illorum si assimiles, erit quoquo modo
vnum: si compares, nullo. To this unity, if you do but liken any of those
forenamed unities, they may, in some degree, be said to be unities: but, if
you compare them, in no degree at all. Whereupon he there concludes: Igitur,
inter omnia, quae recte vnum dicuntur, arcem tenet vnitas Trinitatis: qua, tres
personae vna substantia sunt. Among all the unities, that can be called unities
[of which Suidas names ten.) Boethius reckons up, Suidas in v^ce (...). p.
297 Boet. l. de vnitale p, 1276.
fourteen several sorts) The unity of the Trinity is the very chiefest:
Whereby three distinct persons are united in one substance. Aquin. 1. Quaest.
11. Art. 4. ^. p, 21.
Which sentence of S. Bernards, Aquinas attributes to Boethius: being, a little
perhaps, mistaken in the Author; but nothing at all, in the authority. Whereby
it appears, that the Unity in the Deity is so perfect and absolute, that the
world cannot afford a fit comparison to express it. Hugo, de Sct. Vict. l. 7.
Erudit. Didascal. c. 19. To. 3. p, 21. X.
Which Hugo de Victore acknowledges expressly, handling the very same point.
God (says he) is not one, either by Collection; as a flock is said to be
one, which consists of many Sheep: Nor one, by Composition; as a body is
said to be one, which consists of many members: nor one, by Similitude; as
the same word is said to be one, when it is uttered by diverse mouths. But God
is one, essentia, and identitate; as the soul of a man, which is but one in
one boby. Nay, God is more purely one, then the soul of any man. For, though
the soul of a man be vere vnum, yet it is not sum vnum, as he notes in
that place: It is, vnum essentraliter; but it is not, vnum invariabiliter. And
therefore, not sum vnum. For, that which is variabiliter vnum, that may be
quickly made Alterum: as a man in his sickness is from a man in his health.
For, Senec. Epist. 59. p, 95.
as Seneca truly notes, Nemo nostrum, idem est in senectute, qui f^it
i^uenis: nemo est mane, qui fuit pridie. But God, is both essentialiter, and
inuariabiliter vnus. James, 1. 17.
He never alters from himself. In him there is no change, nay, no shadow of
change.

Yea, and this, have some, even of the Heathen themselves, found: as we may
plainly see in Plutarch: who pleads very earnestly, for the Unity of the
Godhead, Plut. l. de E, l. To. 1. p, 695.
against all supposed plurality. And yet denies, that this unity of the
Godhead, is either such a kind of unity, as is among men; who though he be but
one, yet is he a congeries, ex infinitis diuersissimisque affectionibus vary
commixta: A mass of many unlike and repugnant affections: but God is one in
the most pure simplicite of his essence and being: so as nothing else is.
Whereby it appears, (as before I noted) that there is not any unity in the
world, sufficient to express the Unity of God. But that (as the Jews believe
in their Creed) There is, ^uxdorfius in Synagoga Iudaica. c. 11. p, 3
talis unites in Deo, qualis non reperitur in vllo alio. There is such a
special unity in God, as cannot in any other thing, be found. For (as
Dionysius very truly observes) Deus est tale vnum, quod cogitationem superat
omnem: Dionysius Arcopag. lib. de divine Nom. c. 1. p, 192 Dionys. ibid. c. 13
p. 330. Io. Pic. lib. de Ente and Vno, To. 1. p, 272
God is such an unity, as passes all man's cogitation exceedingly. And
therefore Dionysius, in another place, says of God, that he is not vnum; but
he does ipsum vnum superare: He surpasses One it self: or (as Mirandula
expresses it) he is, Super-bonum, Super-verum, and Super-vnum: a Super-good, a
Super-truth, a Super-one, a very Super-Superlatiue-one, as surpassing all other
Bonitie, and Verity, and Unity.

But how then can God be said to be One, if no created Unity be sufficient to
express him? How God is One.
Unto this point, I answer, that God may be said in a special manner, to be
One, three several ways: as I find it observed by learned writers. For his
Simplicity, for his Singularity, and for his Universality. The first way,
whereby God is said to be One, is, for the purity and simplicity of his
substance: which is not compounded with any thing else. For, that is most truly
and properly one, which is nothing but it self, and has none other thing
mixed with it. Vnum enim quod est, syncerum est, and mixtionis purum, says
Plutarch. Plut. lib. de E, I. To. 2, p, 695.
And such an one is God: who is so pure and simple an essence, that he is not
compounded so much as of parts. But, as I noted before out of Dionysius, he is
truly called Vnus, propter simplicitatem vacuitatis partium. Dionys. Arcopag.
lib de divine. Nom. c. 1, p, 192
He is truly called One, because he has no parts in him: but is solely and
wholly of his own self a^one, without any mixture, so much as of matter, as
Plutarch affirms in his description of him. Deus est Men's, and species
separata, Plut. lib. de Placit. c. 7. To. 2. p, 16.
syncera ab omni materiae admixtione, perpessionibus obnoxiae. God is a
separated mind, or form, who is pure from the mixture of any matter, which may
subject him unto any kind of passion. Yea, and Tully confirms the same in his
description: which though in words it differ, yet, does it not in matter: For
he defines God to be, Men's soluta, and libera, segregata ab omni concretione
mortali, Cic. lib. 1. Tusc. p. 118. B^et. l. 1. de Trim. p. 1122.
etc. So likewsse Boethius: Diuina substantia, sine materia, forma est: atque
ideo vnum. So that, all of them run upon this common notion: That God is a pure
substance, without any mixtion. Which his uncompounded simplicity, is the the
true matter of his Unity: For, wheresoever is mixture, there must needs be
number. Diuersitas enim, cum differentia enti^ ponitur: says Plutarch: Plat.
l. de E, l, p, 695,
Where there be diversities, there must needs be differences: and consequently,
numbers. And therefore Trismegistus says, that, Every compound body, is a
multitude of bodies. Eorum, quae in mundo insunt, corporum, vnumquodque est
multitudo. Trismeg. Piman. Dial. 12, p, 452.
And, In corporibus, quae composita sunt, corporis cuiusque numerus est. So
that, there is a number in every mixture. And so, if there were any mixture in
God, he could not properly be one. Whereas now, his simplicity is the true
cause of his unity. Quia nulla in eo diuersitas, nulla ex diuersitate
pluralitas, Boet. lib. 1. De Trinit. p. 1122.
nulla ex accidentibus multitudo; atque ideo nec numerus. As Boethius well
collecteth. There is in God no diversity, and therefore no plurality; no
multitude by accidents, and consequently no number. And this simplicity of his
substance, is the first of those three reasons, for which God is called One.

The second is, from his Singularity; as the first was from his Simplicity.
Because there is no more Gods, but one; God is not only one, but he is also,
The only One. He is such an one, as has no companion. Both which titles are
expressly ascribed unto God in the Scriptures: both that He is One, and that he
is The only One. The first of them, by the Prophet Moses: Audi Israel, Deuteronomy.
6. 4.
Dominus Deus noster, Deus vnus est. The Lord our God is One God. The second by
the Prophet Isay: Isai. 43. 10.
Before me there was no God, neither shall there be any after me. So that God is
so one, that he is The only one. He is not only vnus, but also vnicus: or, to
use S. Bernards word, Bernard, l. 5. de Consid. p, 1047.
Si dici potest, vnissimus est. If that word may be used, he is of all things,
the Onest. And in respect of this his Singularity, because he is One, without
any companion, is God called, Plut. l. 1. de plac. c. 7. To. 1. p, 16.
One, even of the very Heathen. Socrates and Plato, as before I noted, in their
definition of God, ascribe unto him Unity, with particular respect unto his
Singularity. For, they define God to be, Vnum, singularis, and per se
subsistentis naturae: To be one, of a singular and incommunicable nature: To be
by nature one, Cic. l. 1. de Not. Deor. p, 188
and of himself subsisting. So likewise Antisthenes, who directly affirmed,
Populares esse Deos, multos; naturalem, vnum. That, though there were many
Gods, in popular opinion; yet that there is in nature, but only one. Plut. l.
de E. I. To. 1. mor. p. 695
So likewise Plutarch: Macrob. l. 1. Saturnal. c. 23. p. 224.
Non multa sunt Numina, Luin. moral. poet. p, 1223.
sed vnum. There be not many Gods, but One. Which one God, he there thinks to
be the Sun: as Macrobius likewise does: who applies all the names of the
other Gods, only unto him, as if he only were all of them. Deus vnus, and
omnes, as Varro speaks: and they all, nothing else, but his several names.
Yea, and Plutarch, in that place, collecteth the very same, out of two several
names of the Sun. The first, that he is called, Apollo: Quod Vnicus sit, (of
Apriuatiue, and (...),) Voce multitudinis negationem arguente. The second, that
he is called Ieius: Macrob. l. 1. Satur. c. 7. p, 200 Varro. lib. 4 de Lingua
Latina, p. 13.
which sounds as much as vnicus, Item Cic. l. 3. de Not. Deor. p, 233.
and solus. Though Macropedius interpret that name otherwise. So that there is
but one God, as there is but one Sun: which therefore the Romans called
Solemn, quasi solum, that is to say, The sole One. And so may God be called;
likewise, for the very same reason: as Boethius very wittily observes; Quem,
quia respicit omnia, Solus,
Verum possis dicere Solemn. Boet. l. 5. de Con. Metro. 2. p, 1100

Whom, 'cause he looks to all,
Being solely one,
Thou may him truly call,
The very Sun.


And this is the second reason, why God is called One: in respect of his
Singularity, because there is no other God, but He.

The third is, Ruf. Comment. in Symbol. To. 1. p, 172. 1. Cor. 15. 28 Act, 17.
28 Io. Pic. Mirand. l. de Ente and ^no, p, 172
in respect of his Universality, because God is One, Non numero, sed
Vniuersitate: Not so much by his Singularity, as by his Universality: as
Ruffine distinguishes. For he is indeed, all things. He is All in all: as the
Apostle speaks. And as he is in all things: so all things are in him. In him
they live, move, and have their being. So that, as Picus Mirandula observes
out of Dionysius: Vnum dicitur Deus, quia vnice est omnia. God may be called
one; because he only is all things. An opinion maintained, by many of the
Heathen. ^aert. in vita Xenoph. p, 310. Trismeg. Asclep. c. 1. p, 475.
Xenophanes affirmed directly: Deum esse omnia: That God was all things. And so
likewise did Trismegistus; Omnia esse vnum, and vnum omnia: vt quae in Creatore
fuerunt omnia, antequam creasset omnia. He says, That All things are One, and
One is all: because they all were in their Maker, before the time that he made
any of them. And thereupon he concludes, that the name of God is, Omnia, that
is, All things. Nec immerito ipse dictus est omnia, Trismeg. Asclep. c. 8. p,
506.
cuius membra sunt omnia. His name is justly called, All things, whose parts
and members are all things. And again, in another place. Necesse est, aut
omnia esse eius nomen; aut ipsum, omnium nominibus nuncupari. Either his name
must be All things; or else, he must be named, by the name of all things. So
likewise, Stob. l. Eclog. Phys c. 1. p, 2.
both Zeno, and Melissus defined God to be, Et Vnum, and omne: To be One, that
is All things.

Which speeches of the Heathen, in making God All things, and in calling him by
all names; lest it should seem to imply an utter confusion of the Creator with
the Creature; Dionysius expresses them both, in a more qualified manner,
bringing a commodious exposition, to mollify the hardness of the position.
Dionys. l. de Divine. Nom. cap, 1. p, 201.
For he says, that God is, Omnia quae sunt, and nihil eorum quae sunt: He is,
in some sense, all things that be; and yet, in another sense, none of all the
things that be. Now, in what sense it is, that he calls God, All things; he
expounds himself, in the very same place: because, God is both in mundo,
circa mundum, and supra mundum: He is, both in the World, about the World,
Ibid. c. 13. p, 130.
and above the World. And somewhat more fully, in another place: because, in
divina vnitate, singillatim collecta and coniuncta sunt omnia, praestanti modo,
and ante, eximie insunt. Because all things had a being in God, after a
special, and most excellent manner, before they had any being in themselves.
And in this sense it must be taken, when they say; God is, Omnia. And so
likewise, Ibid. c. 1. p, 200.
for his name: he says, that God may be praised by us; hoth vt nomine
vacantem, and vt omni nomine: both as having no name, and yet as having every
name: Because every thing that has a name, is the work of God. Aug. lib. de
vera Relig. c. 1. To. 1. p, 675.
So that, to conclude this point with the sentence of S. Augustine: Vnitas
illa, a qua, omnis vniversitas and inchoatur, and perficitur, and continetur,
est Vnus Deus. That Unity, from whence the Universality is both begun, and
prefected, and praeserued, is only the unity of the Godhead. Wherein, though
there be a Trinity of persons; yet is there but an unity of substance: yea and
that an indivisible Unity too. Dionys. l. de Divine. Nom. cap. 2. p, 204.
For the Unity of the Trinity, is, not only, Vnitas coniuncta; but also,
plusquam coniuncta: as Dionysius truly notes. It is not an unity conjoined,
of things by nature differing: but more then conjoined, of things in nature
consenting.

4 Thus, Unity has in it a resemblance of God.
Arithmeticall unity, being rightly understood, and fitly applied, does lead
us, by the hand, unto the knowledge of God. Yea, and as I showed before, of
Punctum in Geometry; that it has diverse lines, as monogrammall draughts of the
image of God: so may the same be showed in Arithmeticall unity. First, it has
a resemblance of Gods omnipotent power: whereby he both makes and destroys
all things, at his pleasure. For, as the Prophet David affirms of God,
Psalm, 104. 198.
that, When he sends forth his Spirit, all things are created; and when he
but turns his face, they are all again destroyed: so may it be truly
observed of unity; that it has the like power, among his numbers, that God
almighty has, among his Creatures. For, all numbers have, not only their
greatness and perfection, but also their essence and being, from One. But it,
from none. As for example. If you desire to make Two, or a Binary, which is the
first number: add, but One, unto One, and you make Two. If Three, or a
Ternary; add but One, unto Two; and you make Three. And so, in infini^um. Nay,
the very name of all other numbers, implies no more, but so many Ones. An
Hundred, A Thousand, a Million, does signify no more, but an Hundred, a
Thousand, and a Million of Ones. Stob. l. Eclog. Phys. cap. 2 p, 3.
For, Numerus is defined, by Moderatus Pythagoricus, to be nothing else, but
Mon^dum congeries: All numbers are nothing, but a multitude of Ones. So that,
the very essence and being of all other numbers whatsoever, whether odd, or
even, depends but on One. Yea, and so does likewise their destruction, and
dissolution. As we may evidently see, if we will but walk rerograde, the same
way back again. For, take but One, from Three; and you not only utterly
destroy the odnesse, but also the essence of that number. Si quis a numero
vnitatem abstulerit, alius relinquetur nume^us. Arist. l. 1. de Anima, c, 4.
To. 1. p, 792. Plut. l. de E. I. To. 1. p. 686.
And so likewise, from any other. From what number soever, you shall take but
one, you destroy his nature. And to what number soever, you shall add but one,
you make it another. Take one from the greatest number, and you make it less.
Add one to the least number, and you make it greater. Take one from an odd
number, and you make it even. Add one to an even number, and you make it odd.
Vnitas, pari addita, imparem; impari, parem conficit numerum, says Plutarch.
And therefore, in another place he calls Unity, Plut. l. de Animae,
procreat, To. 3. p, 102.
commune principium, Trismeg. Pimand. Dial. 12. p, 452.
and parium, and imparium: the common principle, of even, and odd. So that,
both the creation, and destruction of all numbers, depends wholly, upon One.
One is the maker, and One is the marrer of every number. Vnitates quippe
gignunt, atque augent numerum: rursusque solutae inse numerum retrahunt: says
Trismegistus. Unities added together, beget and increase numbers: and again
dissolved asunder, reduce every number into themselves, and make of them
unities. Whereby it appears, that, as God does all, among his Creatures: so
likewise does Unity, among all numbers: which are, as it were, his Creatures,
produced only out of it self, by it is own foecundity, without borrowing any
thing thereto, out of any other: as God, in his Creation, produced all his
works, out of his own omnipotent power, and did not borrow any thing, from
any Creature. For, Mathematicians affirm that, Numerus par est mas; impar,
foemina: The even number is the male; Macrob. l. 2. de Some: Scip. cap, 2. p, 88.
and the odd the female: but, that, Monas est, and par, and impar: Unity is,
both even, and odd; masculine and feminine: and so that all numbers are
begotten of it, tanquam a mare and a foemina: as of a male and a female. Now
this fruitful Monas, which begets all things, is nothing else, but God: as
Trismegistus affirms; Deus vtriusque sexus foecunditate plenissimus,
semperque voluntate sua praegnans, Trismeg. Asclep. c, 8. p, 506.
parit, quicquid voluerit procreare. God who is filled with the fruitefulnesse
of both sexes, and always pregnant, according to his will produces whatsoever
his will is to have produced.

So that, c, 1. p, 475.
as in another place he affirms, he is Vnus omnia: Such an One as is all
things. Thus, in this point also, between Deity, and Unity, there is a great
affinity.

Secondly, there is in Unity a representation of Gods abolute perfection. For,
as God has his whole subsisting of himself, so that he cannot be made either
greater, or lesser, by any of his creatures: so likewise has Unity. It has
his own subsistence, absolutely in it self. For tho^g the essence of all
other numbers depends upon One; yet the essence of one depends upon none.
You cannot take any thing from one, to make it less: and you cannot add any
thing to one, to make that one greater. For, as Aristotle truly teaches:
Arist. l. 13. Met. c. 8 To. 2.
Vnum, as it is not p, 1522.
Diuisibile: so is it not p, 1520.
Combinabile. Unity can neither be divided nor increased. For, when One is
added unto One, there is by their conjunction, produced another number; but yet
neither of these two unities, is in it self, made greater, but abides firm
and steadfast, in his own stable nature; as God himself does. And therefore,
Justin Martyr, even in this respect, Just. Mart. lib. Quaest. and R^sp. Quaest.
113. To. 3. p, 137,
compares Unity unto God. Quemadmodum vnitati, id nihil confert ad
perfectionem, quod principium sit numeri: (Nam etiamsi principium numeri non
esset, perfecta tamen esset: and cum principium eius facta sit, non aucta tamen
est) sic Deus quoque, ante creationem perfectus erat, and post creationem
auctus non est. As it brings no perfection unto an Unity, that it is the
fountain and beginning of numbers: (For though it were not the beginning of
any number, yet is an unity perfect in its own proper nature: and being the
fountain and beginning of some number, it is thereby perfected never the more)
so God, who was perfect before the creation, yet is not made more perfect by
the creation. And this is the second degree of their comparison.

Thirdly, there is in Unity, a draught and resemblance of Gods Immutabilitie.
For, as God is always like unto himself, and not subject to so much as to a
shadow of Change: no more is Unity neither. It is not variable, by parity; Ia.
1. 17.
or imparitie; by multiplicity, or paucity; as all other numbers be: but it
still continues, in its own nature, immutably. An Unity is always at unity
with it self, Io. Pic. Mirand. in Heptaplo. l. 3. c. 1. p, 17.
and never varieth from it self. Est Vnitas (says Mirandula) omnino semper, a
se perfecta, non egreditur se, sed indiuidua simplicitate, and solitaria sibi
cohaeret. Unity is simple and perfect in it self, never going out of it self,
but sticking unto it self, unchangeably, only by its own sole and natural
simplicity. So absolute is the nature of One, in it self, that it cannot be
changed; and so omnipotent toward others, that it changes all numbers. So that
Monas (as Trismegistus observes) tanquam principium, Trismeg Piman. Dial. 41.
p, 396
radix, and origo, omnem numerum continet, a nullo contenta; omnem gignit, a
nullo genita. Unity contains all numbers, being contained of none; and it
begets all, being begotten of none.

Fourthly, there is in Unity, a true resemblance of Gods Eternity, or
Antiquity: who is named in the Scripture, Dan. 7. 9.
The Ancient of Days. For, as God is before all his creatures; so likewise is
Unity before alll numbers. Sine vno, multitudo non erit, Dionys. l. de Nom.
Divine. c. 13. p, ^. 9.
says Dionysius: Vnum autem erit, sine multitudine: Vt Monas omnem numerum
multiplicatum and auctum antecedit. There can be no multitude without one, but
one may be without a multitude: for, unity is before any multiplied number.
Which antecedencie of Unity, in the same place, he applies unto the Deity.
330.
Vnum illud, quod est causa omnium, est omni vno, and multitudine, omni toto,
and part, omni termino, and determinationis priuatione, omni fine and
infinitate antiquius. That one thing, which is the beginning of all things, is,
in Nature before both all Ones, and all, Manyes, all wholes, all parts, all
terms, and all indeterminations, all finites and all infinites. It is more
ancient, then all these. Yea so ancient, that (as Macrobius affirms) it is
without all beginning. Macrob. l. 1. in Some. Scip. c. 6. p. 16.
. And therefore he has reduced it directly unto God, Haec monas, initium,
finisque omnium, neque, ipsa principij finisque sciens, ad summum refertur
Deum: That one thing, which is, both the beginning, and end of all things; and
yet has neither beginning, nor end, in it self; cannot otherwise be
referred, but unto the most High God. Who (as Mirandula observes out of
Dionysius) ita rerum omnium principium est, Io. ^ic. Mir. l. de Ente and Vno.
p. 172.
sicut omnium numerorum principium Vnitas est. God is so the first beginning of
all things, as unity is the first beginning of all numbers. And thus, as Philo
Iudaeus observes, Vnitas, est prime Causae and primi Authoris imago. There is
in unity, Phil. Iud. l. De special. Leg. p. 1987.
a true image of the Deity who is the first Cause and first Author of all
things. And who, in respect of his own most inexplicable and incomprehensible
Unity, may truly be called by us, both (...), and (...): both One, and, The
only One.

CHAP. 11.
That the motion of the Heavens, and Stars, is not natural. 2. Which yet is
so orderly, as if it were artificial. That the order of their motion, has the
resemblance of a Dance. 4. That the Heavens themselves, do make Music, to
this Dance. That this orderly Motion of the Stars, has led diverse men, to
seek for a God, above the Stars. 6. Because their orderly Motions, can
neither be from Chance, nor from their own Wills: But only from Gods Wisdom,
who is the Maker of them.

THe third of the Mathematical Arts, is Astronomy: whose Object is, the
Motion of the Heavenly Orbs, and Stars; wherein there be many Arguments,
which may lead men, by the hand, to understand, There is a God. But because I
have instanced, Lib. 2. Cap. 1. Sect. 1.
but only in Order: I will therefore keep order and will only stand to it.
And yet, in this place, I will but lightly touch it: because in the seventh
Book, there falls out a more apt, and more ample consideration of it.

First therefore, as concerning the Motion of the Heavens, it has troubled the
Heads of the wisest Philosophers: of what Nature this Motion of the Heavens
should be? Tullie greatly approves of Aristotle's division, as concerning
Motion; Cic. l. 2, de Not. Deor. p. ^07.
That, Whatsoever things are moved, they must needs be moved, either by their
own natures; or, by force from others; or by a will in themselves. Now, for
the Heavens, he concludes, that their motion cannot be natural, because the
Motion of all natural Bodies, whether Simple or, Compound, is either Upward,
or Downward. For, all Bodies are, either Light or, Heavy. If Light, Arist. l.
2. Phys. c. 9. To. 2. p. 440.
they move directly upward, If Heavy, they move perpendicularly downward. And,
there is not any natural Body in the world, which is so aequally compounded
of Light, and Heavy, that it can hang in the midst, and propend neither way.
And therefore, the Heavens, if they were left unto the motion of their own
proper natures, they would either move upward, or downward, as the Elements
do; or else they must stand still. For, other Motion, from their matter, they
can have none, as they be natural Bodies.

No, nor yet from their Form neither, as they be teret and round Bodies. For,
though their Rotundity does give them an aptitude and disposition to be
carried about in their circular motion; yet gives it not the motion it self
unto them. As we may see in a wheel: which (for all his roundnesse) stands as
still as a stone, if it have not some other means to help it unto motion. It
may be objected; that the weightines of the wheel does settle it upon his
Axis, as in his proper place, where all things do stand still. But it may also
be answered; that the Heavens are in their proper place: and therefore should
stand still, yea though they had in them the principle of motion: much more,
they having none. As indeed they have not, if they be of such a temper, as is
neither Heavy, nor Light. For, if we could imagine, that nature had made any
thing, so equally tempered, and indifferently poised, of Heavy, and Light, that
neither were predominant; it must needs hang in the midst, and not move it
self, either upward, or downwards. Neither could it move about, in a circular
motion; unless it were impelled, by some other thing. For, Nature has made
nothing, which has, in it self, the proper principle of circular motion. I
mean, not as it is a Body. The rotundity of their form, that gives only,
unto them, an hability to that motion (as before I noted) but, the act, it
gives not. Neither can the vacuity of both Heaviness and Lightness, give
unto them that motion: because, that is rather the principle of station, Just.
Mart. in Con^utat. dogmat. Aristot. To. 1. p, 303.
then of Motion. And (as Iustine Martyr very well collecteth:) If the absence,
or privation of both Heaviness and Lightness, were a formal cause of circular
motion; then, Materia prima (which Aristotle makes, to be neither light, nor
heavy) should, from all eternity, have moved circularly: and so there should
have been a motion, before there was any Heaven. Which he derideth there, most
justly, as a gross absurdity. But, if we should grant: as Palingenius would
have us: -- Coelestia corpora, per se, Palingen. in Aquario. p, 329.

Atque suis formis; vt terra, ignisque moueri:
That Heavenly bodies, of themselves, by their own forms do move,
As does the Earth, that is below; and Fire, that is above.
Yet he teaches us, in the same place, that, it is only God, that gives them
their forms.

Nempe suis, res, a formis, tales generantur:
Quales praecepit, qui formas condidit ipsas.
Yet such are things, by their own forms begotten,
As He that made their forms,, does please t'allot them.
And therefore, the Orator proceeds on further, unto the other two members,
of his forenamed division of Motion. That this sphericall motion of the
heavens, not proceeding, in them, from any natural principle, inhaerent in
their bodies, it must needs, either be a violent motion, put upon them by an
external force, from some others; or else, a voluntary motion, occasioned by
an internal will in themselves. For, other principle, can be none, of this
circular motion. But, that it cannot be a motion, enforced upon them, he
assumeth from this ground: That there cannot be any force, without them, that
is strong enough to compel them: there being no force that is greater then
their own. Cic. vbi supra.
Quae enim vis potest esse mayor? What force can be greater? And again, Quid
potest esse mundo valentius, quod impellat, atque moueat? What power can be
greater, then the power of the world, that should be able to move it? He
supposes (though falsely) that there can no such power be. And therefore he
concludes, That the motion of the Heavens, must be, of necessity, a motion
merely voluntary, proceeding from nothing else, but only from their own
wills. Whereupon he there infers, that, Haec qui videt, non solum indocte,
sed etiam impie faciet, si Deos esse neget: That, this being admitted, he must
not only be ungodly, but also unlearned too, if he deny them to be Gods:
meaning, The Heavens and Stars. This is the sum of his reason, from the
motions of the Stars. Wherein, though he lead us never so far about; yet,
at last, he brings us home unto our Conclusion: That there needs must be a
God: and, that the Heavens, by their motion, do plainly prove the same. An
Argument largely handled by the Prophet David in the 19. Psalm. Psalm 19.
And though Tully, in that place, do bring the whole Argument unto a false
issue, building upon a false ground; That the motion of the Heavens is
voluntary, and of themselves; and that therefore, They be Gods: though, I say,
it be false, in the particular, That the Heavens and Stars, be Gods; yet it is
true in the general, that it proves most certainly, that There needs must be
a God; and, that this motion of the Heavens, cannot possibly be stirred by any
other cause, but only by God himself.

For, if the motion of the Heavens (being admitted to be voluntary) do
conclude them to be Gods; then must needs the same motion (being admitted to
be compulsory) much more conclude, that he, by whose force they be so violently
compelled, must needs be God. As, even Plato himself has plainly confessed:
from whom the former Argument of Tullies is borrowed. Cogitemus (says he) qui
fieri possit, vt tanta magnitudo, ab aliqua possit natura, Plato, in Epinome p,
915.
tanto tempore, circumferri? Ego igitur assero, Deum causam esse, nec aliter
posse fieri. Let us consider (says he) how it can possibly be, that the
Heavens, being of so great and so vast a body, should, by any power of nature,
^e driven so impetuously. And therefore (says he) I do confidently affirm,
that only God himself can be the mouer of them. This is his determination,
as concerning the Heavens motion. And where is now that Soul of theirs; which,
but a little before, he made the mouer of them?

2 But let us now proceed further, and come from the nature of their motion to
the Order. The motion of the Stars is very orderly.
Which is so great and excellent, that even Aristotle himself (who subiecteth
all other matters, with a kind of Tyranny, unto the power of his reasons) yet
here (leaving reason) he suddenly breaks out, into a passionate admiration:
Arist. l. de Mund. To. 2. p, 1565.
Quid vnquam poterit aequari coelesti ordini, and volubilitati? Cum sydera
conuertantur exactissima norma, de alio in aliud seculum. What can ever be
compared unto the order of the Heavens, and to the motion of the Stars, in
their several reuolutions? Which move most exactly, as it were, by rule and
square, from one generation to another. Which rule of their motion, David
affirms to be Gods law, that he has set them. Psalm 1486. Plato, in Timaeo.
p. 710.
God has made them fast for ever; he has given them a law, which they cannot
pass. And so likewise does Plato. For he says, that God, when he had made the
Stars, he did, Singulis leges fatales edicere: He gave unto them fatal and
unchangeable Laws.

And indeed, the very name of this Art, whereof we now entreat [the very name
of Astronomie] in exact signification, imports, that the Stars observe a
law in their motion. Which law is given unto them, by none other, but only by
God himself, who is their true Lawgiver. He is both their Maker, and their
Lawmakers. Yea, and this law of his, they observe so exactly, that (as the
Orator observes) there is in all their motion, Cic. l. 2. de Not. Deor. p, 207.
Nihil temerarium, nihil varium, nihil fortuitum: They neither iustle rashly,
one upon another; nor yet decline casually, one from another; no, nor vary in
the least point, from their prescribed order. Macrob. l. 2, de Some. S^p. c. 1
p. 83.
For (as Macrobius likewise notes) In Coelo, constat, nihil fortuitum, nihil
tumultuarium prouenire; sed vniuersa illic diuinis legibus, and stata ratione
procedere. There is nothing done casually, nothing disorderly, in the heavens:
but all things prescribed by most exact reason; and determined by order of most
divine laws. So that, he ascribes all the order of their motion, unto that
law, which God has prescribed them. And so likewise does Seneca: Senec. l. de
prou. c. 1. p. 1* ^
he says, that the Stars do, aeternae legis imperio procedere: They move by
the appointment of an eternal Law, that is, by the law of an eternal God.
Both of them agreeing with the Prophet David, that the only cause of their
orderly motion, is that exact law, which God has prescribed them. In which
point, Tullie also consents fully with them. For he, rendering a reason, why
certain of the Stars be called Planets: that is to say, Wanderers: yet
affirms, that it is not, because they wander in their motion, but, because of
that variety, which they have above others. As for their own motions, they
keep so strict an order, and so great a constancy, in observing of them, that
they swerue not from that law, which God has prescribed them. Et, Cic. l. ^.
de diu^^. p. 243.
si stellarum motus, cursusque vagantes
Nosse velis, quae sint signorum in sede locatae.
Quae verbo, and falsis Graecorum vocibus, errant;
Reuera, certo lapsu, spacioque feruntur:
Omnia iam cernes, diuina mente notata.
Mark, Omnia, diuina mente notata.

Would thou the motions of the Stars, and various courses know;
Which fixed are, and which are said to wander to and fro?
How e're the Graecians name them such; in very truth, they run
In certain tracts and distances, not wandering up and down:
But all directed thou may see, by Gods prescription.
But, Manilius, in this point, goes far beyond them all; both expressly
acknowledging, that the Stars, in their motion, observe a law prescribed
them: and that this Lawgiver, is none other, but only God, their Creator. Nec
quicquam, Manil. l. 1. p, 15.
in tanta magis est mirabile mole,
Quam Ratio, and certis quod legibus omnia parent.
Nusquam turba nocet, nihil vllis partibus errat.
There is not ought (a wonder it is) in such a wondrous mass,
More wonderful or strange then this, that Reason bring's to pass:
That all obey their certain laws; which he does still prefer;
No tumult hurts them, nor ought in any part does err:
From whence, by and by inferring, Ac mihi tam praesens ratio non vlla videtur,
Qua pateat, mundum divino numine verti.
To me, no reason stronger seems to prove,
The world, by power divine, thus still to move.
And a little after, p, 16.
asking the quaestion, At cur, dispositis vicibus, consurgere signa,
Et, v^lut imperio, praescriptos reddere cursus,
C^rnimus, ac nullis properantibus vlla relinqui?
Whence is it, that we see, the Stars in turns to rise,
And, at Command to stoop, and keep their ordered guise? etc.
He gives this for an Answer of their immutabilitie: that, it is the work of
the immutable God. -- Deus est, qui non mutatur in aevo. And indeed, it is a
wonder, that these Planets, still running sometime in diverse, and sometime in
adverse courses; yet should all of them observe, so unchangeably, their order,
that they never should impeach, or hinder one another. Senec. Herc. Fur. Act.
5. p. 52.
But though they do, Transuersos agere cursus: as the Tragic notes, in one
place: yet do they, Act. 4. p. 37.
Inoffensos, as he notes in another. They run in cross courses; and yet
do not cross one another, in their courses. Plato in Epinome. p. 915.
Nec errant (says Plato) nec praeter antiqunm ordinem reuoluuntur. Neither do
they run randon, nor are they rolled, beside their ancient order.

Which orderly motion of the Stars, both proves, There is a God; yea, and
that this is his work; by so necessary a consequence, that whosoever sees it
not, Cic. l. 2. De Not. Deor. p. 209.
him, Tullie affirms to be, without all sense. Coelestem admirabilem ordinem,
incredibilemque constantiam, qui vacare Mente putat, is ipse mentis expers
habendus est. He which thinks the admirable order and incredible constancy
of the Heavens to be without a Spirit, he may be thought himself to be
without spirit or understanding.

3 And indeed, The motion of the Stars has the resemblance of a Dance.
the motions of the Stars, are in so great Variety; and yet observed, with
such order, and constancy; that they have resemblance of a well measured
dance: some running directly, and forth-right, in their courses; some dancing
round about, in their Epicycles. Yea, and that with great variety, and change
of their motions, in Directions, Stations, Retrogradations, and such like:
wherein they do seem, as it were, to tread the Maze and (in their kind) to
dance their Measures. Cic. l. 2. De Not. Deor. p. 208.
Of which, Tullie gives instance, in the Planet Saturnus. Saturni Stella, in
suo cursu, multa mirabiliter efficiens, tum antecedendo, tum retardando, tum
vespertinis temporibus delitescendo, tum matutinis rursum se aperiendo; nihil
tamen immutat sempiternis seculorum aetatibus, quin eadem ijsdem temporibus
efficiat. The Planet Saturn, does make many strange and great wonders, in his
motion, sometimes going before, and sometimes coming after, sometimes
withdrawing himself in the Evening, and sometimes again showing himself in
the morning: Cic. l. 2. de Not. Deor. p, 208. 215
And yet changes nothing, neither in the order of times, nor in the nature of
things. And the like may be seen, in the rest of the Planets: as he himself
shows, in that very place. So that, Aristophanes his observation of the
Clouds, Aristop. in Nub. Act. 1. Sce. 3 p, 169. Plato in Timaeo, p, 709.
is much truer in the Stars: that they do, Art choream instituere. They
make in their motions, an artificial kind of Daunces. Plato affirms, that
God has purposely provided the Sun to give the Stars light, the better to
perform their well ordered motions: which he calls there, Their Daunces:
where he also calls their Courses, Deorum choreas, The daunces of the Gods.
For so he indeed esteemed of the Stars: But Philo Iudaeus more truly, Philo
Iud. l. de Cherub. p, 157.
Diuinas choreas, Divine and heavenly daunces. For so, in a sort, they may
truly be called: Diuinas reuera choreas agittantes, nec vnquam ordinem
deserentes. They daune in Gods presence (as David did before the Arc) and yet,
1. Sam. 6. 14
neither break their orders, nor stray from their place. So likewise
Palingenius: -- Nec se collidunt, Palin. in Aquar. p, 323.
concutiuntque,
Occurrendo sibi, sed certa lege, modoque,
Vna eademque v^a, leni, vertigine pergunt;
Et choreae in morem, placide, taciteque feruntur.
Nor do they dash together, nor make shock,
By meeting one another. But are locked
Unto a constant law, and one set way;
From which their smooth sweet windings never sway;
But run, as if they daunc't a Roundelay.


Whence, Max. Tyr. S^r. 25. p, 303.
Maximus Tyrius calls God, Coeli compositorem harmonicum, and Astrorum
circulationis, and chorea, supremum moderatorem: ascribing unto him, the melody
of the heavens, and the dancing of the stars. And therefore Plato again,
Plat, in Epinome p. 915
in another of his Dialogues, he says of the Stars, that they do Chorea
optima vti, omniumque chorearum magnificentissima: that they dance a most
stately and magnificall dance: harping still upon their dancing. From whence,
he there concludes, That therefore they have within them, Mentem: a certain
spirit, or soul, that directs them. And it is true, in very deed. But it is
not their own spirit, as he falsely supposed: it is only Gods Spirit. Psalm.
33. 6
By the word of the Lord were the heavens made, and all the host of them, by
the breath of his mouth: says the Prophet David. And so likewise holy Job: Job
26. 13.
His spirit has garnished the Heavens, and his hand has formed the crooked
Serpent. So that, the Spirit, which gives unto the stars their motion, is
only the Spirit, which gives them their being. It is only that divine
Spirit, Act. 17. 28
in which all things both live, and move, and have their being. Yea, and this
is also confessed, even by the very heathen. For, Tullie affirms, Cic. l. 1.
Acad. p, 7.
that Soul of the world, to be nothing else, but god: and that by the
Platonists own doctrine. Animam mande dicunt esse Mentem, perfectamque
sapientiam, quem Deum appellant. Plut. l. 1. de plac. c. 7. To. ^. p, 16
So Plutarch Men's est Deus: That soul is God. And again, Democritus ait, Deum
in igne globoso, esse mundi animam. Democritus says, that God in the fiery
globe, is the soul of the world.

Yea, and Virgil, speaking of that Men's, or Spirit, which gives motion unto
the heavens, he gives such a description of it, as an agree to no Spirit, but
to the Spirit of God. Principio Coelum, Vir. l. 6 Aeneid* p, 267*
ae terras, Campo'sque liquentes,
Lucentemque globum Luna, Titaniaque astra,
Spiritus intus alit: totamque infusa per artus
Men's agitat molem --
He says, the Heavens, the Earth, the Waters, and the Stars,
Receive their Motions, and whatever they are,
From an internal Spirit; which the Eternal is,
That unto all of them their Motion giu's.
Now, what Spirit can this be, in all those great Creatures, but only the
Spirit of God their Creator? Of whom, the prophet Jeremy affirms, that, he
fills both Heaven and Earth. Ier. 23. 24. Wis. 1. 7.
And the Wiseman in the Book of Wisdom: That he not only fills them, but
also maintayneth them: answering to Virgils-alit. This Spirit, that made those
Creatures, does also guide their motions. And their moving, in so exact both a
number, measure, and order, does evidently show; That God himself is their
Mouer. Max. Tyr. Sermon. 21* p. 256.
That God himself is their Mouer. Whom even the Heathen imagined, to be
delighted which their dancing, in such an order, before him. Yea, and that,
something too much: as the Tragic seems to challenge him; Cur tibi tanta est
cura, Senec. Hippolyt. Act. 3. Sce. 4. p. 206.
perenn^s
Agitare vias aetheris alti?
Why art thou so much taken up, oh why,
In those perpetual motions of the sky?
Yea, and even among us Christians, that renowned Poet, Bartas, though he go
not so far, yet he affirms that, -- sacred Harmony, Bartas in his Columns.
p. 493.

And numbrie law did then accompany
The Almighty most: When first his ordinance
Appointed Earth to rest, and Heaven to dance.


4 And therefore, The motion of the Heavens produces an Harmony. Cap. 12.
Sect. 1.
diverse of them, as they ascribe a rythmicall motion, unto the Stars; so do
they an harmonicall, unto the Heavens; ymagining, that their moving produces
the melody of an excellent sweet tune. So that, they make the Stars, to be
Dauncers; and the Heavens, to be Musicians. An opinion, which of old, has hung
in the heads, and troubled the brains of many learned men: yea, and that, not
only among the Heathen Philosophers; but also even among our Christian Divines.

The first Author and inuenter of which conceited imagination, Arist. l. 2, de
Coelo. c. 9. (...). 1. p 588.
was the Philosopher Pythagoras. Cic. l. 3. De Not. Deor. p. 229.
Who broched his opinion, Plut. l. de Musica. To. 2. p. 707.
with such felicity and happiness, Cic. l. 2. de Not. Deor. p, 205.
that he won unto his part, Plato. l 10 De. Rep. p. 670.
diverse of the most ancient, and best leaned Philosophers: as Plutarch
reports. Plato, whose learning Tullie so much admireth, that he calls him,
The God of all Philosophers: Deum Philosophorum, he affirms of the Heavens,
that Every one of them, has sitting upon it, a Sweet-singing Siren,
carolling-out a most pleasant and melodious song, agreeing with the motion of
her own peculier heaven. Which Siren, though it sing of it self, but one
single part; yet all of them together, being eight in number (for so many
Heavens were only held by the Ancients) do make an excellent Song, consisting
of eight parts: wherein, they still modulate their Songs, a greeable with the
motions of the eight celestial Spheres.

Which opinion of Platoes, Macr^. b. l. 2. de Some. Scip. c. 3. p. 90.
is not only allowed by Macrobius; but he also affirms of this Sirens Song,
that, it is a Psalm, composed in the praise of God Yea, and he proves his
assertion out of the very name of a Siren: which signifies (as he says) as
much as, Deo canens, A singer unto God. But Maximus Tyrius, he affirms of the
Heavens, that (without any such help, Max. Tyr. Sermon. 21. p, 256.
of those celestial Sirens) they make a most sweet harmony, even by their
proper motions: wherein they do, Omnes symmetriae numeros implere;
contrarioque nisu, diuinum sonum perficere: They, by their contrary moving, do
fill up all the parts of a most Divine and heavenly Song. Which, he affirms
to be most pleasant unto the ears of God; though it cannot be heard by the
ears of men. Lucian., lib. de Astrologi^* p, 166. B.
Yea, and the Sages of the Greeks, insinuate also as much, by placing of
Orpheus his harp, in Heaven: implying, in the seven strings of his well
turned harp, that sweet tune and harmony, which is made in heaven, by the
diverse motions of the seven planets, as Lucian interprets it. Unto which his
opinion, there may seem to be a kind of allusion, in the Book of Job, as the
Text, in the vulgar translation, is rendered: Concentum Coeli quis dormire
fac^et? Job. 38. 37.
Who shall make the Harmony of the Heavens to sleep? For so, likewise, the
Divines of Doway translate it.

Pliny indeed, as concerning this Harmony, does write somewhat doubtfully;
whether there be, Pliny lib 2. cap, 3. p, 1.
in truth, any such thing, or no? suspending his own opinion, with Non facile
dixerim. So that, as he does not defend it, for a verity; so does he not
again deny it, as a falsity; but leaves it, as uncertain. Whose doubting of
it (he being of so acute, and inquiring a wit) is rather a credit, then a
discredit unto it. But, much more is Aristotle's deriding of it: because (in the
end) he was forced to retract in. For, though in his Book, De Coelo, he
confute it, and make, in a manner, but a scoff, and scorn of it; yet, Arist.
l. 2. de Coelo, c. 9. To. 1. p, 587.
in his book, Arist. l. de Mundo, To. 2. p. 1569.
De Mundo, he allows of it, and confesses it to be the proper work of God.
For, there he says expressly, that, God does, In mundo, rerum omnium concentum
continere: That he keeps that Harmony, which is to be found, in all the
several parts of the world. And so likewise, Tully; although, in one place,
he do scoff at this Harmony, that Mundus should ad harmoniam canere: Cic. l.
2. de Not. Deor. p, 229.
That the World should sing unto a tune: yet, in another place, he not only
subscribeth unto it, but also, ascribes unto the working of it, all those
benign and gracious influences, which, from the Heavens, descend upon these
inferior bodies. Stellarum tantus est concentus, ex dissimilimis motibus, vt
cum summa Saturni refrigeret, media Martis incendat: Cic. l. 2. de Not. Deor.
p, 218.
His interiecta Iouis, illustret and temperet. infraque Martem duae, Soli
obediant: Sol ipse mundum omnem sua luce complete, ab eoque Luna illuminata,
grauidates and partus afferat, maturitatemque gignendi. There is so great an
Harmony, and concent of the Stars, arising from the diversity of their
motions; that, as Saturn cools, so Mars heateth, and Jupiter (which is
between them) he tempereth them both. The other two Planets, which are below
Mars, are both of them obedient unto the Sun; which fills the whole world
with the cheerful light of it: Wherewith it illumining the body of the Moon,
by it gives power of increase, and generation. Concluding, with these words,
his former observation: Quae copulatio rerum, and, quasi consentiens ad mundi
incolumitatem, coagmentatio naturae, quem non mo^et; hunc, horum nihil
reputasse, certo scio: This consent and agreement of those natural things, so
greatly advancing the good of the whole world, if it do not move any man, it
is only from this cause; That he never well considered them. Resolving, that
no man could ever observe them, but that they would make a great impression in
him. But Macrobius (leaving all those Allegorical allusions) asserteth this
Harmony, unto a true and real melody indeed; occasioned by the various
motions, and differing magnitudes of the Heavens. Which, he says* must needs
produce, Macrob. l. 2. de Some. Scip. c. 1. p. 83. etc.
. sonum dulcem, and musicum; non ineptum, and asperum: A sweet, and
delightful; not a harsh, and distasteful sound: as, by invincible reasons, he
says, may be collected. Which point, he indeed has labored exactly, Ibid.
c, 1. 2, 3, 4.
with much fi^enesse and subtility. Unto whom I refer them, that desire a
more curious discourse upon this Theme.

Neither is this an idle fancy, begotten only in the heads of conceited
P^ilosophers; but it is also entertained, for a certain truth, by diverse
learned Christians. Bed^ alleges this opinion, of the Harmony of Heaven,
Beda, lib. de Musica practica, To. 1. p, 417.
for the credit of Music. Which he would never have done, if he had not
allowed of it. Boethius doubts not, directly to affirm it: yea, and to prove
it too: Boethius, l de Musica. c. 2. p, 1374.
Non potest, ab hac coelesti vertigine, ratus ordo modulationis, absistere.
But, above all, Anselmus, though otherwise a severe and a very austere man; yet
is so sweetened, and mollified with the conceit of this Music, that he,
Anselm l. de Imagine Mundi. cap. 24. To. 3. p, 300.
not only asseuereth it; but also indeauoureth, with great pains and labor,
to set out the true musical proportion of it: as Macrobius before did.

Now, it is no less improbable, that so many learned men, of so many differing
bot^^ages and nations, should concur, with such an harmony, in defending of
this Harmony, if it were merely fained; then it is, that there should be such
an Harmony, indeed. Neg, enim hunc, tam certum syderum cursum, Senec. l. de
Prouidentia, c, 1. p, 1.
atque discursum, forturti impetus esse dixerim: says Seneca. These so
certain both courses, and recourses of the Stars, cannot possibly be the
works of blind Fortune, and Chance; but must needs be Gods own ordinance:
because they do not, sine aliquo Custode stare; but, aeternae legis imperio
procedere: as he notes in the same place: They neither keep their stations,
without a Keeper; nor move their motions, without a Ruler: whose aeternall law
they faithfully obey.

And, it was a thing no more hard unto God, to make the Heavens to move with a
sweet melodious harmony, then to make them move without it. For, if Queen
Cleopatra, when she came unto Antonius, Plut. in vita Anton. To. 3. p, 148.
could instruct the Oare-men, and Rowers of her Barge, to strike all their
strokes, in such order and number, that they made a most sweet harmony and
concent, upon the water, as exactly agreeing with her musical instruments, as
the sound of a Taber agrees with his Pipes (an Art also in practice sometimes,
among the Greeks, Max. Tyr. Sermon ^3. p. 280.
as may be collected, Wis. 11. 17.
out of Maximus Tyrius:) then much more can God do so: who orders all his
works, both in Number, Weight, and Measure. It is not hard for him, in such
sort to moderate, yea and to modulate, the Heavens, as to make them, to send
fo^th a sweet harmony, in their motions.

Yea, and it is not incredible, that he has also done it. For, seeing it is
impossible, that this so huge and vast a fabric of the Heavens, being truly
material and sensible bodies, and whirled about with such incredible swiftnes,
should move without some noise: Arist. l. 1. de Coelo, c. 9. To. 1. p, 567.
as Pythagoras well collecteth: and that noise (as Macrobius truly infers)
must be of necessity, either sweet and melodious, Arist. l. 2. de Coelo, c. 9.
To. 2. p, 587.
or harsh and absonous [ aut musicum, aut asperum:] it is far more probable,
that, that sound, which God has chosen to sound continually in his divine
Ears, Macr^b. l. 2. de Some. Scip. c. 1. p. 83.
should rather be tuned, like the sound of sweet Music, then harsh and
confused, like the creaking of a Cart. For (as Macrobius in the same place,
observes) Fragor turbidus, and inconditus, offendit auditum. An harsh and rude
crashing of things, offends the ear. And therefore it is not likely to be
found in the Heaven. In which, as there is Nihil fortuitum: so is there, Ibid.
Nihil tumultuarium: As there is nothing done rashly; so there is nothing done
disorderly. And, it cannot, in any probability, be thought, that God, who has
appointed us, in our singing upon Earth, To make a pleasant melody, Ephesians. 4. 19.
and to sing unto him with a grace in our hearts; Col. 3. 16.
would admit into the heavens themselves, any such untuneable and incomposed
noise, as has neither any grace nor melody in it.

But this I do not affirm, as a certainty; but only propose as a
probability: leaving every man unto his own liberty, to believe it, or not to
believe it, as he finds himself most inclined in his mind: Apologizing for
my self, as Gregory Nyssen does in a like case; That herein I do but,
Ingenium, ad m^ntem nostram, Greg. Nys^in ^^exam. p, 222.
in propositis exercere, non doctrinam expositricem posteris relinquere: I do
but only propound it, for the exercise of wit, as a probability; not commend
it, for a sealed and infallible truth, unto all posterity.

Therefore, be this opinion of the Harmony of the Heavens, as it may; be it,
but Lepide quidem, Arist. lib. 2. de (...). c. 9. To. 1. p. 587.
and musice dictum, factu autem impossible, as Aristotle censureth it: that
is: but a pleasant and musical conceit: Yet this so excellent a concent and
agreement in the heavens, to keep so constantly, their several ranks and
orders (notwithstanding the diversity of their courses) is a work, which by
themselves, cannot possibly be done, no more, then any musical Instrument can
put it self into tune. It is God the Musician (as Plutarch before calls him)
that keeps all in tune. Plut. lib. de primo frigido. To. 2. p. 615.
His power keeps them all in obedience: His wisdom guides them all in
their courses: and, his goodness makes them to produce those good effects,
which they work in the earth, and in these inferior Bodies. And therefore,
even Aristotle himself, who derideth so much the Harmony of the Heavens, in
any real sounds; yet, in respect of this harmonicall concent in the creatures,
he so much admireth it, that he compares God, in his working of it, unto a
Praecentor in a Quire: who both appoints and moderateth all the Songs, Arist.
l. de mundo. To. 2. p, 1570.
that be sung there. All which things declare, that God, as he is delighted in
order, so is he likewise delighted in number: Yea and in musical number too.
In which opinion Anselmus is carried so far, that he, not only affirms,
that God has given to the heavens an harmonicall number, in their motions; but
also from thence collecteth, that God has, in his kind, an harmonicall motion
even in himself. Anselm. in prosolog. cap. 17. To. 3. p, 32.
Habes haec in te, tuo ineffabili modo, qui ea dedisti rebus, a te creatis, suo
sensibili modo: Thou have this harmony, in thy self, after an unspeakable
manner, which thou have given unto thy creatures, after a sensible manner. Yea,
and even the very Heathen were in the same opinion: Com. ^atal. l. 9. Mythol.
c. 7. p. 982
who believed, all their Gods, to consist of Numbers, and musical proportions.

^ But, The motions of the Stars have led many unto God.
to leave this harmonicall motion of Heavens, as a problem, and not to
determine it, as as position: yet, certain it is, that the Heavens do move,
in such an exquisite order, that the contemplation thereof, has led many to
believe, that none other, but only God, can be possibly their Mouer. Suidas
affirms, that, even Abraham himself, was first occasioned, Suidas in voce
Abraham p. 6.
to seek after God, by considering the motion of the Stars. For, he being
by nation a Ch^ldean, (who, as Aristole observes, Arist. l. 2. De Coelo. c.
12. To. 1. p. 590.
are naturally given to that kind of contemplation) and observing, in their
motion, a wonderful order, and variety, and yet no less a constancy, he
presently collected, that these strange reuolutions could not possibly be
performed, if they were not directed, and guided, by some God. So that, his
first motive, to seek after God, was, that orderly motion, which he saw the
Stars observed. Yea and Orpheus himself insinuates also as much.

Vnus praeterquam, cui derivatur origo
Chaldaeum ex genere, is noscebat sydera Coeli, Clem. Alex. l. 5. Strom. p. 282.

Illorumque vias, and qui moueatur in orbem
Sphaera, and tellurem circumvertatur in axem,
Spiritus and regat hanc, and in aere, and in aequore fuso.
One only Man there was of old, and he from Chaldee sprang,
Who knew the Natures of the Stars, and courses that they ran,
And how the Heaven does wheel and ring all round about the Earth,
The Spirit also that rules all these, and Air, and Sea beneath.
Which description of Orpheus, is referred unto Abraham, by Clemens
Alexandrinus. Yea, Ibid.
and Philo Iudaeus collecteth, Philo Iudaeus. lib De Gigant. p. 408.
that this his sublime and celestial disposition, was ominously foretold him,
in his very name. For, Abram (as he interprets that name) does signify, as
much, as, Pater sublimis, that is, A sublime and high-spirited man: because his
spirit did not only mount-vp into heaven, but also unto God, who is higher then
the Heaven: and that chiefly, by the observation of the Stars, and their
motion. By which he was led, as it were by the hand, to understand, There was
a God. And so was likewise, Nigidius Figulus: of whom Lucane writes thus.
Lucian. l. 1. p. 13.
At Figulus, cui cura, deos, secretaque Coeli
Nosse, fuit, quem non Stellarum Aegyptia Memphis
Aequarel visu, numerisque mouentibus astra.
Wise Figulus, whose searching care, was perfectly to know
Heavens secrets, and the Gods themselves: Whom no Egyptian sage
Surpassed in his skill, nor could more exquisitely show
The motions of the Stars and Orbs, in numbered equipage.
He, being a great Astronomer, and obseruer of the Stars, was led, by his
curiosity, in observing of their motion, to search after God, who was the
Mouer of them. Yea, and Lucian interprets the fable of Bellerophon, Lucian.
l. De Astronom. p. 167
(wherein he is said, to have mounted up to Heaven, upon a winged Horse) to have
been nothing else, in truth, but only the ascending of his mind, in divine
contemplations* occasioned by considering the motion of the Stars. Which
carried him up, in a sort, into Heaven: but, not Equo, but Animo: not by
Horse, but by Heart; as he mythologizeth upon that fiction. And Tullie
reports, Cic. l. 2. De Not. Deor. p. 214.
out of Aristotle, that, If there were a subterraneous generation of men, who
had never once beheld the light of the Sun; and had but only heard, that
there was a God; if these men, upon the sudden, should be brought out of
their den, and but set to behold the wonderful motions of the Heavens and
Stars, they would praesently believe, both, that there were a God, as before
they had heard; and, that these so regular and orderly motions, cannot be any
others, but only his works. Haec cum viderent, profecto, and Deos esse, and
haec tanta opera, Deorum ^sse, arbitrarentur.

To conclude this point. Seneca alleges the orderly motion of the Stars,
Seneca. lib. De Prouodent. c. 1. p. 1.
as a visible Argument, to demonstrate Gods providence. And Cleanthes was not
only led, Cic. l. l. de. Not. Deor. p. 203.
by the very same Argument, to believe, There is a God: but he also alleges
it, as a sensible demonstration, to induce all other men to believe the same.
Where, though he congest diverse other great reasons unto the same purpose: yet
ascribes he the greatest force unto this: Quartam Causam esse (eamque vel
maximam) aequabilitatem motus, conversionem coeli, Solis, Lunae, Syderumque
etc. And, Plutarch affirms, generally of all men, that the very first motive,
which led them unto God, was that orderly motion, whereby the Stars are
carried. Plut. l. 1. de Placitis. c. 6* T. 2. p 13.
Homines coeperunt Deum agnoscere, cum viderent stellas, tantam concinnitatem
efficere: ac dies, noctesque, aestate, and ^reme, suos seruare statos ortus,
atque obitus. Men began first to acknowledge a God, when they considered the
Stars to maintain such a comeliness, and both day and night, in Summer and
Winter, to observe their designed risings and settings.

By contemplation whereof, a man is not only led, to know There is a God: but
also is sublimed, in some sort, above the nature of a man: as I have noted
formerly, Cic. l. 4. Acad. p. 38.
out of Tullie. Erigimur, and latiores fieri videmur, humana despicimus,
contemplantesque supera, atque coelestia, haec nostra, vt exigua, and minima,
contemnimus. We are lif^d up and enlarged, we despise things below; in our
contemplation of Heaven and things that are above, we trample under foot these
our baser and inferior fortunes, as being of very little of no esteem.
Bradward. l. 1. c. 1. p. 137.
So that, as Bradwardine observes out of Ptolomie: Scientia Astrorum;
assimilat hominem suo Creatori. The knowledge and understanding of the Heavenly
Creatures, does make a Man like unto his Creator.

6 And, The motion of the Heavens, is not by Chance. Arist. ^. 2. Phys. c. 8.
To. 1. p. 439. Natura duplex. Al^era quidetm, (...) Ma^eria* altera, vt. F^rma^
Nihil est tam contrarium ra^^^* and constantiae, quam Fortuna.
no marvel. Cic. l. 2. De Divinat. p. 265.
For indeed this motion of the Heavens (if it duly be considered) cannot
possibly proceed from any other Author, but only from God. As it appears by
this reason: That, this motion of the Stars, must needs be, a motion, either
proceeding from their own nature; or beside their nature. It must needs be
amotion, either secundum Naturam; or praeter Naturam. But, that their motion,
is not of their own proper nature, I have already proved, in the first Section
of this Chapter: because it has no beginning, neither from their Matter, nor
yet from their Form. And, other Nature have they none. Now, if it be beside
their Nature; th^n must (...) be, either by Chance, or by Prudence. By Chance
it cannot be: for then, they would neither move so orderly, nor so constantly:
because nothing is more contrar^^ (...) Chance and Fortune is, to constancy,
and reason. And therefore, th^^r motion, being so constant and orderly, must
needs be directed, not by Fortune, but by Wisdom. From whence, it must needs
follow, Cic. l. 2. de Not. Deor. p, 218.
that the opinion of the Epicure, who ascribes all the motions of the Heavens,
unto Chance; is an opinion, not only impious and odious, but also foolish and
ridiculous.

As the Orator makes it plain, by two notable Examples, of two Artificial
Spheres, Cic. l. 1. Tusc. p, 117.
made to the imitation of the heavenly Orbs: Cic. l. 2. de Not. Deor. p, 213.
the one of them, Non^^^ in voce Explica^e. p, 1654.
by Archimedes; the other of them, by Possidonius: and both of them, with such
singular Art, and cunning, that they did, (as Varro speaks) vias stelligeras
aetheris explicare, aere cauo. They showed, by their hollow brazen wheels, all
the several motions, of the Starry Heavens. Now (says the Orator, in that
place) If either of these Spheres were showed unto the barbarous Britains,
yea* or unto the very Scythians; they would, neither of them, doubt, but these
works were wrought by reason: then, much more, must the Heavens themselves
(for they are much perfecter) Nisi Archimedem arbitramur plus valuisse, in
imitandis Sphaerae conuersionibus, quam Naturam, in efficiendis. Unless we
should im^gine, that Archimedes could show more Art, in imitating the motions
of the Heavens, then nature could do, in making of them. Which were utterly
absurd: as Lactantius collecteth, Lactan. l. 2. c. 5. p, 84.
even from this very instance. Deus, illa non potuit vera, machinari and
efficere, quae potuit solertia hominis imitatione simulare? Shall not God be
able to do that, in truth, which a Man is able to counterfeite, by art? Qui
igitur conuenit (says Tully, Cic. vbi supra.
in the last alleged place) Signum, aut Tabulam pictam, cum aspexeris, scire
adhibitam esse artem; cumque procul cursum nauigij videris, non dubitare, quin
id ratione, and art moueatur; aut cum solarium vel descriptum, vel ex a qua
contemplare, intelligere, declarari horas art, non casu: Mundum autem, qui and
has ipses arts, and earum artifices, and cuncta amplectitur, consilij and
rationis expertem putare? What reason is there, that, when we look upon,
either a Statue, or a Picture, we should know, that it must needs be ruled, by
art; and when we look upon a Clock, or a Dial, we should know, that that
must needs be made, by art: and yet to think, that the World, which
contains all those Arts, yea, and their Artificers too, should be framed
without art? Cic. l. 2. de Leg. p, 322.
For, as he well infers, in another place, Neminem esse opportet, tam stulte
arrog^ntem, vt in se rationem and mentem putet inesse, in Coelo Mundo* non
putet. There ought no man to be so foolishly arrogant, as to think, that, in
himself, there is a spirit, and reason; and yet, that, in the heavens
themselves, there is none. Which are so far from being made without reason,
that their making cannot be conceived without great reason: as the Orator well
observes. From whence he truly concludes, that he needs must be a mad
man, that ascribes them unto Chance. Cic. l. 2. de Not. Deor. p, 218.
Haec omnis descriptio sydenum, at* hic tantus Coeli ornatus, ex corporibus,
huc and ill^c casu and temere cursantibus, potuisse effici, cuiquam sano videri
potest? This whole description of the Stars, and this so great beauty of the
Heavens, can it possibly seem to any man, that is well in his wits, to be an
effect of certain Bodies, moving up and down by chance, and at all
adventures? So that, with him, it is out of question; that the Heavens are
moved; ^^t by Fortune, but by Wisdom.

But yet, The motion of the Stars, is not by their own will, but by Gods.
a greater Question remains still behind: By whose wisdom it is, that the
Heavens and Stars be moved? For, if they be moved by Wisdom; then either
by their own, or by some others above them. As Horace insinuates, in the part
of his division: Stellae, Horat. l. 1. Epist. Ep. 12. ad Icci^m, p, 111.
sponte sua, iussaene vagentur, and errent?
The Stars all in their courses, move they still,
Or by their own, or their Commanders will?
Yielding, that, if it be not by the former, then, it must be, by the latter.
But, by the former, it is not. It is not by motion, of their own will, or
reason. For they have none in them. They are so far from being, either the
Authors, or Directors, of their own proper motions; as that they understand
not, so much, as that they move at all: as even Lucretius himself directly
affirms: Lucret. l. 5. p, 199.
Nam certe, neque consilio primordia rerum
Ordine se quaeque atque sagaci mente locarunt:
Nec, quos quaeque darent motus, pepigere prosecto.
Things, at the first, they did not certainly
Themselves dispose, by counsel orderly:
Nor did they, by a composition,
Appoint themselves their propper motion.
It was, a much wiser, and intelligent Author, that disposed all these things,
in so exquisite an order: Iay, 45. 9. Ieren^y, 18. 6. Romans, 9. 21.
which were in his hand, but merely passive, as Clay is in the hand of the
Potter; that neither understands, of what form, it is made; nor yet, for
what use, it is provided. And, no more do the Stars, in what manner they be
moved. For, though they should make such an excellent Harmony, as before I
have described: yet do not they themselves understand that they make it, Lyr^
egregie resonantes non sentiunt. Diogenes. Stob. Sermon. 23. p, 190.
no more then an harp, or other musical instrument understands the tune
that is played upon it. And, though they do produce many notable effects, and
benefits, in the earth, by that enterchange of seasons, which they occasion by
their motions; yet do not they themselves understand that they do it: no more
then the wheels in a mill do understand, what manner of Corn they grind. So
that, the Heavens do grind for us; yea, and find for us too* and yet they
themselves do not know what they do: because they do, volutatione haec, non
voluntate facere: Just. Mart. lib. cont. D^gmata Aristot. T^. 1. p, 304.
Dionys. Arepag. l. de Divine. Nom. c. 4. p, 227.
as Justin Martyr well observes: They do this, by their motion; they do it
not, by their meaning. Dionysius exemplifieth, by instance of the Sun: that,
Sol, non cogitatione, aut voluntate, sed, eo ipso quod est, omnia illustrat,
The Sun imparteth his light unto all things; but, not by any will or purpose,
but by being a light-some substance; as a Candle likewise does: Unto which
there is no man so simple as to ascribe a will. Neither can they to the Sun.
It is not, by his own will, that it shines upon all things: but, it is only,
by the Goodwill of that God, which made it: who has commanded and appointed
it, Mat. 5. 45.
to shine upon the bad, as well as on the good: as our Savior Christ
testifies. And this was not unknown, even to the very Heathen. Senec. l. 4.
de Benefic. c. 25. p, 60.
Gratuitos habemus Deos (says Seneca:) Nam and sceleratis Sol oritur, and
piratis patent maria: The Gods are most gracious, and bestow their blessings
freely: For the Sun does shine upon the wickedest persons, and the Seas are
open to the cruellest Pirates: Ascribing the shining of the Sun, not to his own
will, but to the gracious will of God, as our Savior before did.

And as it is in his shining; so is it likewise in his moving. His motion is by
Gods will; Lib. 2. Cap. 1. Sect. 6. Psalm. 104. 19.
and not by his own. And though it be said, by the Prophet David, that, The
Sun knows his going down: yet, that must be taken, not to be a proper, but
a figurative speaking: Implying, that the Sun observes his prescribed
motion, (which here, by Synecdoche, is expressed by his setting) so precisely
to the point, that in the least jot, he never erreth from it. And therefore
(by the figure, called (...)) he is said, Genebrard. in locum Psalmi. Basil. in
Psalm. 103. To. 2. p. 253.
to do the same upon knowledge and understanding. Non quod animatus sit, aut
ratione vtatur (says S. Basil, upon this place) sed quod, iuxta terminum
diuinitus praescriptum, ingrediens semper eundem cursum seruat, ac mensur as
suas custodit. Not that the Sun h^th any soul, or use of understanding, but
that it keeps his courses and measures exactly, according to Gods
prescription. So that, the Suns knowing his going down (as Baruch in his
Epistle expresses it) is nothing else (in true propriety of speech) but, his
obedience to Gods ordinance, Baruch, 6. 59.
in his going down. Which he likewise affirms, of all the other Stars: who
yet have no more sense or knowledge of their several motions, then an arrow in
the air knows, whither it flies; or, a ship in the water, whither it
sayleth; or, a Chariot on the earth, whither it runs. And yet, as when we
see an arrow, to fly directly to any mark, whereunto it is aimed; though we
see not the Archer, by whom it was shot; yet must we know, in reason, that it
surely was directed by some skillful person; because it goes so directly,
having yet no skill to direct it self: so, when we see the heavens to produce
upon the earth, so many good effects, by yielding unto it such fruitful
season. Genesis 8. 22.
and bringing out of it such plenty and variety of excellent fruits, whereby
both men and beasts are nourished: and that they, aiming at this end, do never
fail to hit their mark: we needs must understand (if we have any
understanding) that this course is directed, by some heavenly Sagittarius,
endued with excellent skill, and reason. For, as Aquinas well observes,
insisting upon this very comparison: Aquin. 1. Quaest. 105. Arct. 1. p. 218.
Sicut motus Sagittae ad determinatum ^inem, demonstrat aperte, quod sagitta
dirigitur ab aliquo cognoscent: a certus cursus nature alium rerum, cognitione
carentium, manifest declarat, mundum ratione aliqua gubernari. As the flying
of a shaft unto his certain mark, declares, that it was shot by one, that
well knew, whereunto he had aimed it: so the certain moving of all natural
things, which know not themselves any thing of their own motion, declares,
that they are moved, by on^ that has vnderstand^ng. And so likewise, for the
other two comparisons. When we behold a ship, to wind, and to turn, and to
fetch about, so diversely; and yet to come, at last, into that very haven, which
it intended, at the first: we must needs know as certainly, that it is guided
by the reason of some skillful Pilot, as we certainly know, that it has no
proper reason of it own, to guide it: as Theophilus Antiochenns observes,
insisting upon this second Comparison. Quemadmodum enim, Theoph. Antioch. l. 1.
ad Autolic. Bib. Pat. To. 5. p. 125.
si quis cernat navem, suis armamentis instructam, mare sulcare and in portum
appellere; certe credet aliquem, a quo gubernetur, in ea esse gubernatorem: Sic
certe; nemo adeo abiecti est animi, quin credat, Deum esse gubernatorem omnium,
quamuis oculis carnalibus eum non assequamur. As when a man shall see a Ship,
rigged out, with all her tacklings, to sail through the Sea, and directly to
arrive at her desired haven; he must needs know, she has, within her, some
cunning and skillful governor: So, no man can be so abiectly minded, but he
must needs know, God to be the Governor of all things, though he do not
behold him, with his bodily eyes.

And so likewise it is, in the moving of a Chariot. It cannot go whither it is
purposely intended, if it have not some skillful driuer, to direct it. In like
case, the Heavens themselves, they could never move, so orderly, and directly,
in their courses, if God himself were not the ruler, and director of their
motions: quasi Auriga, habenas, and gubernator, clavum tenens (says Philo
Iudaeus, insisting upon this third comparison) holding their raynes, like their
Driuer, and their helm, like their Governor. So that, though we grant, that
the motion of the Heavens; Philo Iud. (...). de Mundi opific. p. 13.
is performed by excellent art and wisdom; yet is it not, by their own
wisdom; but, by the art and wisdom of that ruler, Lact. l. 2. c. 5. p. 8. 4.
that guides them. As Lactantius plainly shows, by the Sphere of
Archimedes. Wherein, though there were great art and wisdom used, to make
that Sphere move so artificially, and orderly; yet was not that wisdom in the
Sphere it self; but, in the Maker of it, that so cunningly contrived it.

And so is it likewise, with the Heavens. Their turning, and returning, so
swiftly, so orderly, so constantly, to so many good effects, as they bring
forth in the earth, does manifestly show, that their motion must needs be ruled
by providence and wisdom. But yet, that wisdom, is not in themselves, that
have those motions; but, in their maker, that gave them. There is not in
themselves, Sensus officij sui, sciens: any sense, or understanding of those
offices, Ibid. p. 83. Ibid. p. 84.
which they perform. But they compass all their motions, Non suo consilio,
sed Artificis ingenio: as he adds in the same place. From whence he truly
concludes, that, Inest syderibus ratio, ad peragendos motus suos: sed Dei est
illa ratio, qui and fecit, and regitomnia; non ipsorum syderum, quee mouentur.
The Stars do show great wisdom, in the performing of their motion: but it is
none of their own. It is the wisdom of God, who both made, and rules every
thing. So that, it may truly be said of the Heavens, as it was of a carved
wooden head: that there is in them, Artis multum, sed sensus nihil: There is a
great deal of Art and cunning, in their making; but yet no sense at all of
their own moving. Aesop. fab.
And, though Seneca deride it, as a foolish opinion, to think, that so
constant, and so orderly a motion, can either be done, by Fortune, or by any
such Nature, as is ignorant of his own doing: Senec. l. 1. Not. Quaest* in
praesa^ p 3.
[ vel temeritate quadam, vel natura n^sciente quid faciat] yet, to think the
contrary, is, indeed, a greater folly: unless, by Nature, he mean, Naturam
Naturantem, The God of Nature: and not, Naturam naturatam, The Creature of God.
For, Natura naturans, he both knows, and orders all their motions, though
they themselves know them not, no more then the wheels do in a Clock. And
therefore Tullie himself (even from this very comparison) concludes, that it
needs must be from God, that they receive all their motion. An cum machinatione
quadam moueri aliquid videmus, vt Sphaeram, vt Horas, vt alia permulta, Cic. l.
2. de Not. Deor. p, 2 15.
non dubitamus quin illa opera sint rationis; cum autem impetum Coeli, cum
admirabili celeritale mou^ri, vertique, videamus, constantissime conficientem
vicissitudines anniversarias, cum summa salute, and conseruatione rerum omnium;
dubitamus, quin ea, non solum ratione fiant, sed etiam excellenti, divinaque
ratione? Mark, Divina ratione. When we see anything moved by an artificial
engine, as a Sphere, or a Clock, or any other such like thing, we never make
any doubt, but that those Works were wrought by reason: And, can we then
doubt, when we see the heavens to move, with such incredible celerity, and yet
to keep their yearly courses, with such admirable constancy, procuring unto
all things, both their health, and safety, that this must be the work, not
only of reason, but also of Divine, and most excellent Reason? Ascribing the
regularity of their motion, not unto their own, but unto Divine Wisdom. In
which sentence, though it should be thought, that Tully does but Platonize,
implying [by Divine Wisdome] none other, but their own, as reckoning the
Stars themselves, to be Gods: yet, even so, it proves the Cause: that the
motions of the Heavens being so constant, and orderly, cannot otherwise be
stirred, but by the wisdom of God. And consequently, that it shows, that
there needs must be a God. Yea, and in another place, he goes further,
affirming of this so apt and orderly a motion, that it not only cannot be
performed, in the natural heaven, without the power and wisdom of a God; but
also, not to be imitated, by Archimedes, in his Artificial heaven, without a
divine illumination from God. Cic. l. 1. Tusc. p, 117.
Quod si in hoc mundo fieri, sine Deo, non potest; ne in Sphaera quidem, eosdem
motus, Archimedes, sine divino ingenio, potuisset imitari. Which sentence of
his, cannot be understood, of the forenamed Star-Gods; but of that God, which
rules both the Heavens, and the Stars: which is the true God, as Arrianus
truly notes. Sto^eus, lib. Eclog. ^ hys^e, 5. p, 7.
He it is, Qui Solemn and fecit, and circumducit. He it is, that made the Sun,
and he it is that moves the Sun: Yea, and the Heavens, wherein they move too.

As for the forenamed dotage of opinion, that The Stars should have their
souls, and by them be moved, in those orderly courses, upon their own
voluntary wills; even Plato himself, the strongest defender of that
groundless fancy, yet speaks of it, but weakly, and doubtfully. For he,
(not knowing, what well to determine) affirms of those motions of the
Heavens: Impossible esse, Pla^^. in Epin^me, p, 915.
Coelum stellasque omnes, adeo exquisita ratione, annis, mensibus, diebusque
circumvolui, nobisque, omnibus bona omnia facere, nisi anima singulis aut
adsit, aut in sit: That it is impossible, that the Heavens, and the Stars
should move, in so excellent an order, distinguishing, by their motions, both
years, and months, and days, and so ye^lding unto us all good and
comfortable things, unless every one of them, had either a spirit present with
it, or a soul within it: Not determining this latter, but leaving it in
suspense, whether it may not be the former. But, Aristotle derideth it, as a
mere fable, that the Heaven should have a soul; Arist. l. 2. de (...), c. 1.
To. 1. p, 578.
and that their motion, from that principle, should draw his beginning. Which
he proves to be false, by the force of two reasons, The first whereof, is
this: That, if they had this perpetual motion, from their soul; it would be
wearisome and yrkesome, to be occupied still, in doing one and the same thing:
Neque talis animae vita, sine dolor, beataque esse potest. And the life of
such a soul, cannot be but full of grief, and clean destitute of bliss.
Max. Tyr. Sermon. 32. p. 392.
For, Natura varietate delectatur, The soul is delighted with variety. It is
dulled with identity. Especially, if it have no intermission, no alternation of
rest. Ibid. p. 577.
It will then be, Negotium, ab omni voluptate mentis semotum; si requies non
est. Yea, and, Eo magis laboriosum, quo magis perpetuum: as he adds, in that
place: That work can have but a little pleasure, that never gives leisure:
but is so much the more painful, by how much the more perpetual. Whereupon
he infers, That such a perpetual doing of one and the same work must
needs be as painful unto the soul, as Ixions turning upon his wheel. For,
if the Stars be gods, and moved by their own eternal souls; they can
neither have honor, nor profit, nor pleasure, in running still one course
perpetually, without any variety. For, Qualis honor, vel quale lucrum, vel
quanta voluptas, Paling. in Aquar. p, 328.

Esse potest Divis, versantibus aethera semper?
Nonne decet potius libertas maxima Divos?
Vt quocunque velint, faciles accedere possint,
Ne, tanquam dura devincti compede, nusquam
Ire queant, semperque loco teneantur eodem?
Aut tanquam figuli instantes operi* rotaeque,
Nunquam decedant scamno, nunquam otia captent?
Esine illis adeo dulcis labor ill^ rotandi?
And labor ille potest Divis nunq^am esse molestus?
What good, what gain, what honor, or what pleasures,
Can any gods take in their turning Measures?
Wherein they are always tied to move the Sphere?
The greatest freedom them most fitting were.
As that, where're they would, they might apply
Themselves, with pleasure and facility.
Lest they might s^eme, as chained to one set place,
And not elsewhere have l^aue to take their race:
But even as Potters, task't to tedious labor,
From stall, and wheel, and work do never give over.
What, is that toil of whirling Spheres so sweet,
Or, can that toil be still for gods so meet?
This must needs be very yrkesome, to continue still in one and the same
motion, without any alteration: especially, to any thing, that has a soul,
endued with either sense, Plato in Civilly. p^duobus a principio folijs.
or reason. And therefore, Plato affirms, that, Seipsum semper convertere,
ferme nihil potest; praeter id, quod cursum, agitatis omnibus, praestat. That
nothing can endure, to turn about it self ever; but only that one thing,
which gives motion to all things. Whereupon, he there concludes: Mundum
seipsum non convertere semper: putting the doubt, out of doubt: That the motion
of the Heavens is not voluntary of themselves.

His second Reason, Arist. l. de Coelo c. 8. To. 1. p. 587.
is this; that, Nature has not given a voluntary or animal-motion unto any
thing, but she has also given it fit means and instruments, to exercise the
same: as feet, unto Beasts; wings, unto Birds: and sins, unto Fishes; and
such like. But, unto the Stars she has given no such instruments, but made
them round and teret, like a globe, as if she had purposely deprived them of
all the means of voluntary motion. Vniversa videtur, tanquam de industria,
abstulisse, quibus per se procedere ipsa possent. From whence he collecteth,
that Nature never intended to bestow upon them any voluntary motion. Nequeo
enim animalia ipsi curae ^uere, adeo vero praestabiles res despexit. Unless we
should imagine, that Nature, which has showed such a care over these earthly
Creatures, would carelessly praetermit, or despise those Heavenly. This is the
whole sum of Aristotle's reasons, to prove, that the Stars have no
voluntary motions. Plato indeed rendereth a reason, Plato. in Timaeo.
why the Heavens have no need of any instruments of motion; as Legs, or
Feet. But they be such, as show plainly, that their motion is not voluntary.

Now, to recollect the sum of this long Chapter: If this regular, and orderly
motion of the Stars, be, neither naturally given unto them, either by their
Matter, or by their Form: nor accidentally fallen upon them, either by Chance,
or Fortune: nor voluntarily composed by them, out of their own election: then
must it needs be imposed upon them, by divine constitution: as Plutarch truly
collecteth: Plut. l. 1. de placit. Philosoph. c. 1. p. 4.
accompting this for a sufficient enumeration. But, the three former branches
are largely proved, in three Sections of this Chapter. And therefore, the
Author of their motions, must needs be God himself. It can be none other. Whom
Boethius truly calls, -- Terrarum, Coeli* satorem, -- qui perpetua mundum
ratione gubernat. Boet. l. 3. De Consolat. Metr. 3. p. 1042.

Earths planter and Heavens placer, who, Worlds vast circumference
Both made, and does maintain and rule, by lasting providence.
So that, for this point, I conclude with Lactantius; that, Tanta rerum
magnitudo, tanta dispositio, tanta in s^ruandis ordinibus temporibusque
constantia, non potuit, autolim, sine prouido Artifice, oriri, aut constare tot
seculis, ^ine incola potenti, aut in perpetuum gubernari, sine perito and
sciente Rectore. Quod ratio ipsa declarat. Such a greatness, in the Creature;
such a comelines, in their order, such, a constancy, in observing both their
courses, and their seasons; could never, either, at first, have been framed,
without a cunning hand; or, so long have been praeserued, without a powerful
inhabitant; or, so wisely have been governed, without a skillful Regent. As,
even Reason it self makes it plain and evident.

CHAP. 12.
That God has made all his creatures, in Harmonicall proportion, and in a
kind of Music. That all creatures are naturally deloghted with it. 3. That
they praise God in their kinds, with their natural Musicks. 4. That
Artificial music is the gift of God to men. 5. That the chiefest end of it,
is to praise God with it.

WE are now, at the last, come unto the last of the Mathematical Sciences:
which is the Art of Music: of which I purpose not to discourse, as a curious
Musician, but as a Divine. And therefore, I will not, Artem Musicam in trutina
examinare, as Aristophanes speaks. Aristoph in Ranis. Act. 3. Sce. 1. p. 271.
I will not strictly examine every croch^t and quauer, as it were, upon the
balance: but (looking directly upon mine own mark, with a steadfast eye) I
will only unfold those five points, unto you, which I have summed up before,
in the contents of this Chapter. And that but very lightly; to avoid all
curiosity.

First therefore, for the first of them. It was Pythagoras his position:
Vniversi, naturam Musicis fuisse rationibus fabricatam: Athenaeus. lib. 14. p,
471.
That the frame of this whole world, is made, in a kind of natural Music. And
the most of the old Philosophers (as Plutarch reports) concurred with him,
Plut. lib. de Musita. To. 2. p, 708.
in the very same opinion: A Deo omnia fuisse instituta, secundum Harmoniam:
That God has made all his works, exactly, unto the due proportion of a
Musical Harmony. And we may see it plainly verified, if we will take a
Survey, of all the Creatures of God; beginning which the highest, and so, by
degrees, descending the lowest.

And first, for the Heavens, the highest of Gods works: I have partly showed
before, The Harmony of the ^eauens lib. 2, c. 11. Sect. 4.
in the former Chapter, what an excellent Harmony God has bestowed into them,
both actually, in their motions; and virtually, in their influences, I do
leave the former of those Harmonies, to the liberty of the Readers, to
believe, or not believe, as it pleases themselves. But, this latter of them,
is a thing so evident, of their gracious influences upon these inferior Bodies;
that he must needs be destitute, both of sense, and reason, that denies it.
Neither, do the Philosophers, only believe the body of the Heavens, Macrob. l.
2. de Some. Sc^p. c 3. p, 9^ 92.
are made, in musical proportion; but also, that their souls and
Intelligences, from whence they have their motion, are also made, by the same
composition. Plato in Timaeo, p, 707.
Plato, describing the Creation of the Soul of the world, he sets down
exactly, all the several substances, whereof it is compounded: and names
there praecisely, both all the particular Ingredients, and all their several
doses. Macrob. vbi supra, c. 2. p, 87. 89.
In which Argument Macrobius likewise has taken great pa^nes, to express more
plainly, that which was delivered by Plato more obscurely; as concerning both
the Matters, and the Measures, of the Souls composition: which he reduces
exactly, unto Musical proportion: Yea and further ascribes, all the Musical
Harmony of the Heavens themselves, only unto that musical composition, which
God gave unto the soul of the Heavens, in his first Creation. Ergo, Mundi
anima, qu ae, ad motum, hoc, quod videmus, Vniversitatis corpus impellit,
contexta numeris, musicam dese creantibus concinnentiam, necesse est, vt sonos
musicos, de motu, quem proprio impulsu praestat, efficiat. The soul of the
World, which stirs the body of the World unto motion, being it self made
of such numbers, as beget in it self, a musical Harmony; must needs, in all
those motions, which it self procures, produce a musical Harmony likewise.
Yea, and a little after, he attributes unto this musical Composition of that
soul, not only the Harmonicall motion of the Heavens, but also, all that
delight in Music, which all living Creatures does take, here upon the earth.
Iure igitur, Ibid. c. 3. p. 91.
Musica capitur omne quod viuit; quia coelestis anima, qua animatur
vniversitas, Originem sumpsit ex Musica. By right, must every thing that has
life, be delighted with Music; because the soul of the world, which gives
them their life, is it self compounded of a kind of Music. This is the
conceit, which the ancient Philosophers have had, of the Music and Harmony of
the Heavens, not only in their Bodies, but also in their Souls. All of them
proceeding only, from that divine and heavenly Harmony, which Anselmus
affirms to be in God himself; A^selm. ^rosol. c. 17. To. 3. p, 32. Lib. 2.
c. 11. Sect. 4.
as I have before observed. I censure not their opinion, but only note it, to
declare, how strongly they were possessed, that all things in the world are
compounded, in a kind of Harmony, by God; yea, even the Soul of the world it
self.

Let us therefore now come down from the Heavens, unto the Elements. For, The
Harmony of the Elements. Plut. l. de primo Frigido, To. 2. p, 615. Vt Artifex
erga ar^em, sic D^us se habet erga Harmoni^m, Arist^us. Sto^. lib. Eclo^. Phys.
cap, 24. p, 45.
in them also the Philosophers have observed diverse Harmonies. Plutarch, in his
Book, De primo Frigido, reports an old opinion, that God is called, by the
name of a Musition. Which appellation he interprets to be given unto him,
for his skillful proportioning of the Elements, and their qualities, in the
mixture and temper of all compound bodies. Aeris mutationes, and effecta, quia
temperat Deus, Musicus appellatur. God is called a Musition, for his skillful
tempering of the air, and his effects, in these mixed Bodies: Non, quod gravia
acutis, aut alba nigris accommodet, interque ea consonantiam efficiat: sed,
quod caloris, and frigoris, in mundo societatem, dissidiumque ita gubernet, vt,
and coeant, and diseedant moderate; and (nimia vtrique, vehementia adempta) in
rectum modum componat. God is called a Musition; not, for his skillful mingling
of either flat, with sharp; or white, with black; and so making up his
Music: but, because he so guides the contrary qualities of Heat, and Cold,
in the World; that be makes them, both to come together, and to depart
asunder, in a very wholesome and temperate manner. This calls he, Gods
Music: which is, indeed, most pleasant, yea, and no less profitable, then
it is delightful. Because God has so graciously tempered the contrary
Qualities of the Elements together, that, as Manilius truly notes: Frigida ne
calidis desint, aut humida siccis, Manil* l. 1. Astro^^. p, 5.

Spiritus aut solidis; sitque. haec discordia concors.
That neither cold things want their hot, nor moist things miss their dry,
Nor sad things lack the Spirits power, to quicken them thereby:
So making Musical concent of contrariety.
Which Comparison, Ovid l. 1. Me^am. p, 35.
Ovid likewise uses, unto the same purpose, only changing the terms; and,
for his Discordia concors, concording discord, putting -- Concordia discors,
discording Concord. And so likewise does Horace, Hora^. Li. Epist. ad I^cium,
p, 111. a. Seneca l. 7. Not. Quaest. c. 27. p, 117.
keeping the same terms. -- Rerum concordia discors. Yea, and Seneca
expresses the very same thing, by the very same comparison: Tota huius mundi
concordia, ex discordibus constat: The whole concordance of the world consists
in discordances: maintaining still the same Musical conceit, for the aptness
and propriety of it: Whereby they insinuate, that, howsoever the Elements have
a discord in their nature; yet have they a concord in their mixture: Quae nexus
habiles, and opus generabile tingit, Manil. vbi supra.

Atque omnis partus elementa capacia reddit:
Which concord knits the Elements, in wholesome linckes together,
And makes them able to produce, even all this whatsoever:
as Manilius observes in the fore-alledged place.

And, as he ascribes the Generation: so Aristotle ascribes the Conservation
of all things unto this Harmonicall mixture of the Elements. For he says,
Arist. l. de Mundo, To. 2. p, 1565.
that, That power which created the World, did, Naturas maxim contrarias, ad
mutuam cogere convenientiam, and per hac salutem parere vniverso. It joined
things together that were contrary in nature: and yet thereby provided for the
s^fety of the whole World. Stobae^. Sermon. 101. p.
For, as Hippodamus truly notes, Nisi Harmonia and Prouidentia divina Mundus
regeretur, non possent amplius in bono statu permanere quae mundo continentur.
If the world were not governed by the Harmony of Gods providence, there could
nothing in the world continue in good estate. Yea, and Aristotle, in the former
place, he goes one step further; ascribing to this Harmonicall mixture, not
only the conservation, but also the Creation, Arist. vbi supra.
and exornation of the world. Rerum omnium constitutionem, Coeli, inquam, and
Terrae, vniversique mundi concretionem, vno exornavit and instruxit concentu.
It adorned the general Creation of all things, both of Heaven, and Earth, and
of the whole world, only by this sweet mixture, and harmonicall consent. Hugo
de Victore. l. 7. didasc. Erudit. c. 4. To. 3. p, 18. N.
And, Hugo de Victore observes the same thing: yet speaks of it, more
divinely, as being a Christian. Si Vniversitatis huius machinam intuitus
fueris; invenies, quam mirabili ratione, and sapientia, compositio rerum omnium
perfecta sit, quam apta, quam congru^, quam d cora. In qua, non solum
concordiam servant similia; s^de tiam quae (cre^nte potentia) diversa, and
repugnantia, ad esse prodierunt, dictante sapientia, ad vnam quodammodo
amicitiam, and foederationem convenient. If you well consider of the frame of
this world, you shall find, with how great wisdom, the same has been
wrought, and how aptly, how fitly, and decently, composed. For therein, not
only like things preserve peace and unity; but also things contrary do join
league and amity. And then he proceeds to exemplify his meaning, by our
present instance of the Harmonicall mixture of the Elements. Quid repugnatius
esse potest Aqua, and ^gne? quae tamen, in rerum natura, ita Dei contemperavit
prudentia, vt, non solum ad invicem societatis vinculum non dissipent, verum
etiam, noscentibus cu^ctes, vt subsistere possint, vitale nutrimentum
subministrent. What is more contrary in Nature, then Fire, and water? which yet
are so far from breaking the bond of their common conjunction, that, by a
joint consent, they minister unto all things, their vital food, and
nourishment? This is the Harmony of the Elements, consisting all of Concords.

Now, beside this, they have another, which consists all of Discords. And
that is, when any one of them does either exceed their due proportion, which
works a discord in all those bodies, that are compounded of them, and tends
directly unto their dissolution: or, when they digress from their right and
natural uses, and turn their benefits into punishments. Which oftentimes is
done, Exodus 9. 31. and 7. 19. 20. 21. and 8. 24. 13. 14.
for the sin of man. As it was, to the Egyptians: when the fire descended,
and destroyed their fruit: the water putrified, and turned into blood: the
air was poisoned, with noisome flies: and the earth corrupted, with the stink
of their froggs. Here was a great change, from that sweet and melodious tune,
which God intended in their first Creation, into an harsh and unpleasant one.
But yet, even in this change of their tune, they kept still a good harmony; and
harmony concording with Gods severity, though somewhat discording with his
mercy. As the Wiseman observes, in the book of Wisdom, Wisd. 19. 17.
where be expresses that perturbation, by this very comparison. The Elements
(says he) greed among themselves, in this change, as when one tune is changed
upon an instrument of Music, and yet the melody still preserved. These be the
two Harmonies of the Elements.

Let us now descend, as yet one step lower, unto those compounded Bodies,
which are made of their mixtures: and we shall see, that God has given the
like Harmonies unto them. First an Harmony of Concords; which evidently
appears in that amicable and loving agreement, that is seen between all the
parts of their bodies, in serving, and cherishing, and comforting one another:
which they do, and perform, with that true sympathy and compassion, 1. Cor.
12. 26.
that, if one member suffer, all the rest do suffer with it: and, if one be had
in honor, all the rest rejoice with it. And diverse other notes there be of a
singular symphonie and agreement between them. Hugo. de vict. l. 7. Erudit.
didasc c. 4. To. 3. p. 18. N
Wherein, as Hugo de Victore notes, Omnium membrorum iuncture tantam invicem
servant concordiam, vt nullum omnino possit inveniri membrum, cuius officum
alteri non videatur afferre adminiculum. All the members of the body, are joined
together, in so loving an unity, that there is not any of them, but that in
discharging his own proper office, it brings also some help unto his other
fellow members. Whereupon he there concludes: Sic omnis natura se diligit, and
miro quodam modo plurium dissimilium in vnum redactorum concordia, vnam in
omnibus Harmoniam facit. Thus euerything, by nature, is loving to it self, and
by joining things unlike in true concord together, after an admirable manner,
it makes, in the whole body, a most sweet and pleasant Harmony. This
Harmony of Concords has God generally disposed, into the parts and members of
al co^pounded bodies.

Now, he has also placed among them, another kind of Harmony, consisting all
of Discords: in mixing of things of contrary natures, throughout all his works.
The Harmony of compounded Bodies.
For, there is none of all his Creatures, but God has created something
contrary unto it; which contendeth with it, by the contrariety of Nature, as
one Enemy fights with another. And yet, all of them together, beget in the
world, a most sweet and wholesome Concord. I mean, not only of those
Sympathies, and Antipathies, which God has planted in diverse of his Creatures;
Phrygius. l. 8. Physic. p. 165. etc Plut. Symposiac. l. 2. Quaest. 7. To. 3
Mor. p. 200. Aelian. l. 8. De Animal. c. 27.
whereby some of them amicably embrace one another, as most loving friends;
others of them hatefully decline one another, as most mortal enemies; (A secret
in nature, whereof the learnedest men were never yet able to give any reason
(as Plutarch truly notes, Aelianus confirms) but, even in the other most
common and ordinary works of God, we shall find none of them so free, but that
it has in nature, in some sort, his contrary. So that, the frame of the whole
world, does seem to benothing else, but only a mixture and composition of
Contraries: striving still together, (though in more orderly manner) as they did
in the mass of their confused Chaos: wherein, as the Poet describes it,
Frigida pugnabant calidis, humentia siccis, Ovid. l. 1. Metam. p. 2.

Mollia cum duris, sine pondere habentia pondus.
Cold things with hot, moist things with dry did fight,
Soft things with hard, and sad things with the light.
And such is still the fight and conflict of contraries, even in this well
ordered and beautiful world, though the same hand, which then distinguished
them into their several orders, does now so moderate and keep them in order,
that their contraries and repugnancies tend, both unto the safety, and beauty
of the world; and not, either to the hurt, or to the blemish of it. In which
respect, S. Augustine compares that Natural order, which God has taken, in
mingling of Contraries, through all the rancks of his Creatures, to that
artificial order, Aug. l. 11. de Civit. Dei. c. 18. To. 5. p. 630.
which Musitions ofttimes take, in the making of their Songs. Deus ordinem
seculorum, tanquam pulcherrimum carmen, ex quibusdam quasi Antithetis, honest
avit. God has framed and compounded the order of the universe, in the manner
of a curious and elegant verse; artificially adorned with members, all of
Contraries. Like that sentence of S. Paul's: By Honor and dishonor by evil
report, 2. Cor. 6. 8. etc.
and good report; as deceivers, and yet true; as unknown, and yet known as
dying, and yet behold we live; as chastened, and yet not killed; as sorrowing,
and yet always rejoicing; as poor, and yet making many rich; as having
nothing, and yet possessing all things. Terent. E. unuch Act. 2. Sce. 2. p. 61.
a.
Not unlike that of Terence: Omnia habeo, neque quicquam habeo, nihil cum est,
nihil deest tamen. Whereupon S. Augustine, in the same place, concludes, that,
Sicut contraria contrarijs opposita sermonibus pluchritudinem reddunt; ita,
quadam, non verborum, sed rerum, eloquentia, contrariorum appositione, seculi
pulchritudo componitur. As contraries, opposed unto contraries, do yield a kind
of grace and beauty to the speech, so God, by placing contraries against their
contraries, in a kind, not of verbal, but of real eloquence, has given a
great grace and beauty to his work. Which conceit of S. Augustine, delivered
by him, Tertul. l. 1. cont. Marcion. c. 16. p. 357.
but in general terms, is illustrated by Tertullian; by the apposition. of
many very notable particular instances, and those very fit and apposite. Tota
operatio Dei, ex diversitatibus constat; ex Corporalibus, and incorporalibus;
ex animalibus, and inanimalibus; ex vocalibus and mutis; ex mobilibus and
stativis; ex genitalibus and sterilibus; ex aridis, and humidis: ex calidis and
frigidis; etc. The whole workmanship of God is compounded all of Contraries,
of things corporeal, and incorporeall; of things living, and without life; of
things loquent, and silent; of things moveable, and immovable; of things
fertile, and sterile; of things dry, and moist; of things hot, and cold; etc.
And the same that he has showed, by those instances, in the great world, he
proceeds to declare, in Man also, the little world. Sic, and Hominem ipsum
diversitas temperavit, tam in corpore, quam insensu. Alia membra fortia, alia
infirma; alia honesta, alia inhonesta; alia gemina, alia vnica; alia comparia,
alia disparia. Perinde, and in sensu: nunc laetitia, nunc anxietas; nunc amor,
nunc odium; nunc ira, nunc lenitas. In like case, Man himself is made by God
of merely Contraries: and that not only in his body, but also in his soul
too. Some parts of Man be strong, and some again be weak; some comely, some
homely; some double, some single; some aequall, some unequal. And so likewise
in his mind there is sometimes mirth, and sometimes grief; sometimes love, and
sometimes hate; sometimes feircenes, and sometimes mildness. So that, the
whole world is, Ecclus. 33. 3.
in effect, nothing else but only a massy Coagmentation of Contraries. As
Ecclesiasticus also directly observes. Evil is against good, and death
against life; the Godly against the sinner, Ecclus. 33. 14
and the unjust against the faithful. And so, in all the works of the most
High, thou may see, that there be ever Two: and the one of them, is against
the other.

Neither is this, the only Observation of religious Christians; but also, of
the irreligious Heathen. Wherein, many of the most learned have exactly
concurred, affirming, that God (like a skillful Painter to show the grace of
his work the better, has composed the whole world of opposite parts; as it
were, of Lights and shadows. Which as Trismegistus notes, is a matter, of so
pure and absolute necessity, that, without it, the world could have had no
beauty. For, if Contraries had not been thus mingled together, the curious
works of Nature could not have been distinguished one of them from another.
Trismeg. Pimand. Dial. 10. p, 424.
And therefore he pronounces, that, Ex oppositione and contrarietate constare
omnia, necesse est: neque alitor se habere, possibile est. For, as in a
Picture, if all were black, or all white, there could be no grace or beauty in
the work: so in all the works of Nature, if all were good, or all bad, there
could be no grace or sweetness in any of them, because no distinction.

And therefore Pythagoras (as Varro observes) maintained this opinion: Omnium
rerum initia esse bina: Varro l. 4. de lingua. Lat. p, 5.
vt, sinitum, and infinitum; bonum, and malum; vitam, and mortem; diem, and
noctem. That the first Principles of all things in all kinds, are two
contraries: as Finite, and Infinite; Good, and Evil; Life, and Death; Arist,
l. 1. Metaphys. cap. 5. To. 2. p, 1376.
Day, and Night; and such like. Whose opinion, is by Aristotle expressed more
fully: who sets down distinctly, ten several combinations of Contraries,
which the Pythagoreans defended, to be the first Principles and Originals of
all things: As namely these following. Finitum, and infinitum; Par, and Impar;
Vnum, and Plura; Dextrum, and Sinistrum; Masculinum, and Foemininum; Quiescens,
and Motum; Rectum, and Curvum; Lumen, and Tenebras; Bonum, and Malum;
Quadratum, and Longum; that is, Finite, and Infinite Even, and Odd; One, and
More; Right hand, and Left; Male, and Female; Resting, and Moving; Straight, and
Crooked; Light, and Darkness; Good, and Evil; Square, and Long. These
Contraries, they not only held to be in the world; but also, to be the
working Principles of all things in the world. And therefore their Effects must
needs be contrary, Arist. ibid.
as well as their Causes. In which opinion, Al^meon conspired so fully with
them; that Aristotle doubts, whether he borrowed his opinion from them, or
they theirs from him. Yea, and in another place he confesses, that it is the
common opinion of all the Philosophers: That the first Principles of all thing
must needs be mere Contraries. Arist. l. 1. Phys. c. 5. To. 1. p, 419.
Omnes, Contraria Principia faciunt. But he himself handles this point more
exactly, then any, and brings it home more properly unto our present purpose.
That, in this mixing of Contraries, in all sorts of Creatures, Nature
delights her self pleasantly, as with a most sweet Harmony: Natura, Arist.
l. 1. de Mundo. To. 2. p, 1564.
ad contraria, miro fertur desiderio; atque concentum ex his facit. Nature is
strangely carried with a strong desire, of joining contrary things together;
and yet makes of them a delightful and most melodious tune. And this he
illustrates in that place, by very pregnant instances, both in Civil, and
Artificial, and Natural things. For Civil things; he gives these instances:
That every City, though never so well composed, and in never so great concord;
yet consists of persons of contrary conditions; some poor, some rich; some
young, some old; some weak, some strong, some good, some bad. All which, though
they be many, yet make they but one City: and though, in nature, they be
unlike; Ibid. p, 1564.
yet make they a sweet concord, in the Civil State. In Artificial things he
observes, that, Ars, adimitationem Naturae, se componens, idem praestat. That
Art, as it imitateth Nature, in many other things; so does it also in this,
that it makes all her works of a mixture of contraries. Whereof he gives
these instances: The Art of Painting mixeth contrary colors in her Pictures:
as black, with white; and red, with yellow. The Art of Music mixeth contrary
sounds in her Songs: as Sharps, with flats; and briefes, with Longs. And the
Art of Grammar mixeth contrary letters in her words: as vowells with mutes: and
such like. In Natural things, he gives these instances, that, Ibid. p, 1565.
Vis quaedam, per omnia dimanans, and transiens, siccitatem humori, calorem
frigori, leave gravi commistum, and rotundo rectum; Terram omnem, Mare, Aethera,
Solemn, Lunam, and Vniversum exornavit Coelum cum Mundum frabricata esset, ex
diversis, and nullo modo immistilibus, aere, terra, igne, aqua, and imagine
vna, quae globos comprehendit. There is a certain power, which pierces, and
disperseth it self, through the whole world, joining dry things, with moist,
and hot things, with cold; light things, with heavy; and crooked, with strait:
and yet, by this contrary composition, very excellently beautifying, both the
earth, and sea, and sky, and Sun, and Moon, and generally all the heaven:
making the frame of this world, of things of far unlike nature, and such as
refuse to be mingled together; air, and earth, and fire, and water; and
Heaven, which comprehends all these Spheres, in his figure. Now all this
commixtion of things, so contrary, do not tend to the defacing, but adorning of
the world; as Concords, and Discords do, unto the better tempering of the
Harmony in Singing. For, by that very Comparison, does Aristotle express them.
Ibid. p, 1565.
Natura and Coelt, and terrae, vniversique mundi concretionem, principiorum
maxim contrariorum, vno exornavit, and instruxit concentu. Nature has
compounded, both heaven, and earth, and all the whole World, of contrary
Principles, to adorn it more beautifully, with a concent-full Harmony. Thus
(as Seneca observes, Senec. Epist. 108. p, 269.
joining instances of all the forenamed heads together) Nu^ilo, serena
succedunt; turbantur maria, cum quieverunt; noctem, Dies sequitur; pars coeli
consurgit, pars mergitur. Contrarijs, rerum aeternitas constat. After a storm,
there comes a calm; the Seas be troubled, after they have rested; after the
night, there appears day; One part of the Heaven rises up, another goes
down: The whole frame of the Universe, is compounded of Contraries.

And thus (as Trismegistus observes) Rerum singularum ordo, Trismeg. Asclep.
c. 6. p, 495.
concentum quendam, melo divino dulcisonum, conficit. The very natural order
of things, produces a pleasant Harmony, composed in a kind of divine and
Heavenly melody. And therefore he affirms, that, Musicam nosse, nihil aliud
est, quam cunctarum rerum ordinem scire: To know Music, is nothing else, but
to know the natural order of things. Max. Tyr. Sermon. 27. p, 319.
For, as Maximus Tyrius affirms, Natura, est perfectissima Harmonia. There is
no Harmony better, then the order of Nature. Thus God has made an Harmony, in
all his Creatures: by the joint observation, both of Christians, and Heathens.

2 But, the testimony of neither of them, All Creatures are naturally
delighted with Music.
no, nor of them both together, does so evidence the matter, as the things
themselves do; by that incredible delight, which all of them do naturally
take, in the sweetness of Music. For, there is nothing whatsoever, endued
with a living and a sensible spirit, but it is ravished, in a sort, and carried
out of itself, with the bewitching sounds of Music. I omit the fabulous
narration of Amphion: as a Poetical fiction: that the power of his Music was
so great, that he could, Saxa movere sono testudinis; Horat. l. de Ar^e Pocl.
p. 174. B.
and, prece blanda,
Ducere quo vellet. --
With Lutes alluring sound, and his sweet tunes, he could
Move the hard Stones, and make them stir where 're he would.
Which, though it be but an Hyperbole, and Excess of speech; yet the Poet made
choice of it, of set purpose, thereby to express, with a greater Emphasis, the
incredible power of Music, unto us. Which, indeed, is very great yea, and not
only with us men; but also with every other living thing: both with Birds, and
with Beasts, and with Fishes; yea, and even with very Worms. As we may see,
in all of them, if we will but look upon them.

First, for Birds: there is no man, but may observe, by his daily experience,
with what a singular delight, they use to solace, and entertain themselves,
with their natural Music; chaunting-out their sweet melody, upon the
pleasant branches of every green tree. A thing expressly noted by the holy
Prophet David: Psalm. 104. 12. 24.
and by him there ascribed, to be the work of God. Neither are they only
delighted with their own natural Music; but also with Man's artificial
Music. As we may evidently see, in Thrushes Linnets, and Blackbirds, and such
like, with what attention they will listen, unto the pleasant sounds of
Musical Instruments: yea, and how perfectly they will learn the tunes of
those Songs, that be whistled unto them. Which artificial notes, they could
never possibly either learn so quickly, or render so exactly, but that the
seeds of true Harmony, be sown in their souls, as well as in men's. Yea, and
their delight in Music is so great, that they oftentimes forget their very
safety it self, in comparison of it. As it is noted, by the Poet: Cato. l. 1.
p.
Pistula dulce canit, volucrem dum decipit auceps.
The Sweetness of the Fowlers pipe,
Deceives the Foul, with his delight.
Yea, even Bees, when they swarm, and are upon the wing, ready to take their
flight, whither either the wind drives them, or their Captain leads them:
yet, by the sounds of tinckling brass, are settled again, and retarded from
their course: held only, by that delight, which they naturally take in it;
Plin. l. 11. c. 20. Aelian. l. 5. de. Animalae. 13.
as Pliny observes. Gaudent plausu, atque tinnitu aeris, eoque convocantur:
Because they are delighted with that tune and tinckling, they are therewith
called together. Yea and Aelianus likewise says, Crepitaculis sonoris, tanquam
Syrenibus, retrahuntur: They are recalled, and as it were charmed, with those
shrill sounds.

Now likewise for Beasts: though their spirits be more dull, and their senses
not so subtle, Aelian l. 7. De Animal. c. 23.
as is the sense of Byrds; yet have they no less a sense of Music. For tame
Beasts: Aelian gives instance in the Arabian Sheep; that they grow fat, much
more by their Music, then they do by their Meat. And again in Elephants;
Idaem. l. 12. c. 41.
that they are allayed from their greatest rage, by the alluring sounds of
Music. And, of a contrary effect, does Job give instance, in the Horse; Job.
39. 28.
who being enraged with the warlicke sounds of Music, despises both wounds
and death: and hearing the Trumpet, he rejoices at it, smelling the battle
afar off, and saying in a iollitie, Ha, Ha: as in that place he expresses
it. And Aelianus in another description fitly paralleleth it. Yea, and yet
again, (...). l. 6. De. An^^al. c. 10. (...). l. 2. c. 41.
of another contrary passion, in the Libian Mares; that by the sounds of a
certain Hymenaean song, they are accended unto Venerie: Which otherwise they
decline. And, for Wilde-Beasts: Horace gives an instance, in Orpheus; that, by
the power of his enchanting Music, he did -- Lenire Tygrides, rapidosque
Leones.
Tame and make gentle Tygres feirce, (...).

And soften Lions furious.
Which, though the Poet there apply to an allegorical interpretation: yet does
Aelian confirm it, by an Historical narration. For he makes report of diverse
sorts of VVildBeasts, Aelian. l. 18. de Animal. c. 46. p, 269.
that be so far mollified, with the enticing sounds of Music, that they be
made by it, forgetful, both of their young ones, and themselves. As he
proves, in that place, by the practice of the Tyr^heans: who use to draw Wild
Boores, and Hearts, into their Nets, by the only sweetness of certain
Musical instruments. And Macrobius confirms the same, Macrob. l. ^. de Some.
(...). p. 91.
by the like observation: who reports, that, Nonnullae, vel aues, vel
terrenae, and aquatiles belluae, invitatae cantu, inretia sponte decurrunt. He
says That there be many, not only Byrds, and Beasts (which were our two
former instances) but also Fishes too, (which is our third instance) that being
enticed with the pleasing sounds of Music, do voluntarily rush into the very
nets. As Aelian gives instance, Aelian. l. 6. de. Animal. c. 30.
in those kind of Crab-fishes, which are called Paguri: which will follow the
sound of Music, even out of the waters: and so are taken when they come to the
land: And again, in another kind of Fishes, Idem. l. 17. c. 16. Plin. l. 11.
c. 37.
called Pastinacae. And Pliny also proves, by experience, in the Dolphins: of
whom he writes, that Et cantu mulcentur, and capiuntur, attoniti sono. That
they are allured by Songs, and taken, whilst they be astonished with their
sounds. Which delight of theirs in Music, Plutarch affirms, to be a thing
delightful unto God. Plut. l. de Sol^rtia Animal. To. 3 p. 90.
And he alleges to that purpose, certain verses of ^^indarus: who compares
his own desire of writing, unto the vehement incitation of a Dolphin: Quem,
placido e Mari, Suauis excivit Tibiae sonus.
Whom, out a peaceful Sea, the pleasant sound
Of well-tuned Pipe, did force to come aground.
Yea, and how greatly those Fishes be delighted with Music, we may see by
Herodotus his narration of Arion, Herodot. l. 1. Item Plut. In Conviv^o. To. 1
p. 373.
whom a Dolphin (being allured, by the seewtenesse of his Music) received upon
his back, and permitted to bestride him, as it were his horse, bearing him
safely to Land, out of the midst of the Seas. The credit of which report if any
man suspect, he confirms the truth of it, by the assertiue testimony, both
of the Corinthians, and the Lesbians; who searched the truth of it: beside the
monument of Arion himself, which he offered unto the Gods, for his wonderful
deliverance: a monument of brass, in the form of a man, riding upon a Dolphin.

Yea, Plini. l. 9. c. 8.
and Pliny, in his History, yields his assent to this narration of Arion;
being thereunto induced by many other instances of Dolphins, more stupendous.
Which he received, by report of persons, of great and unsuspected credit: as
Maecenas, and Flavianus, and Flavius Alfius: men, as, of great nobility; so
likewise of great gravity, and of undoubted testimony. Whose wonderful
narrations, of the great familiarity between men and Dolphins, and of the
singular delight which they take in Music, Plut. in Conuiuio, 7. Sap. To. 1.
p, 377.
(affirmed also by Plutarch) would exceed all credibility; but that they be
reported, by men of such authority. Item lib: de Solert. Animal. To. 3. p, 90,
etc.


But to come unto our fourth instance of Worms, and creeping things: though
they be, but of an imperfect generation, and of an heavy sense; yet we see
diverse of them, that practice a natural kind of Music, with no little
delight. The Cricket, by the fire; the Stobaeus Sermon. 29. p, 209.
Grasshopper, in the field; and the Frog, in the water, do all recreate
themselves, with their natural Songs: though they be no better, then mere
creakings, and croakings. And thus Musical harmony (in all kinds of
Creatures) does, Arist. l. 8. Pol. c, 5. To. 2. p, 902.
Animum abstrahere, and quodam modo rapere, as Aristotle testifies: It even
rapteth the soul, and abstracteth it from it self. Macrob. l. 2. de Some.
Scip. c. 3. p, 91.
So that (as Macrobius truly notes) Nullum est tam immite, tam asperum
pectus, quod non oblectamentorum talium teneatur affectu: There is not any so
intractable or ungentle a breast, but it receives some delight, by the alluring
sounds of Music. Which, above all other Creatures, is most evident, in man:
who is so naturally delighted with the Harmonies of Music, that it
transporteth his soul, into any affection, whatsoever it will. It comfort
him, in pain. It tempereth him, in pleasure. It solaceth him, in trouble: and,
it qualifieth him, in Anger. As Athen^us observes, Athenaus, l. 14. ^, 465.
in Clineas Pythagoricus: who ever, when he was angry, would go play upon his
Harp: and being demanded, for what cause he did it? he said, that he found,
that it allayed the raging fierceness of his mind. And the like effect it had
also, with King Saul: in whom, the raging of his furious spirit, I. Samuel, 16.
23.
was calmed, and allayed, by the enticing sounds of Music. And a contrary
effect it had, with Elizeus; in whom, the drouping of the prophetical spirit
was excited and stirred up, 2. Kings, 3. 15.
by the melodious tunes of Music. The contemplation of which strange effect,
so rapt the Poet Bartas, into admiration of it, that it made him to break out
into this passionate exclamation, of the might power of Music: O what is it,
that Music cannot do? Bartas in his Colum. p, 495.

Since the all inspiring Spirit, it conquer's too:
And mak's the same, down from the Imperial pole,
Descend to Earth, into a Prophets soul:
With divine accents, tuning rarely right,
Unto the rapting Spirit, the rapted spright.
So that, the sweetness of Music, as Ovid notes of it, can -- trahere
superis sedibus art Iovem. Ovid l. 3. Fast.
And so is it likewise, in all other affections. Music has a dominion over
every one of them. Macrob. l. 2. de Some. Scip. c. 3. p, 91.
So that, as Macrobius truly observes, Omnis animi habitus cantibus
gubernatur: All the several habits and dispositions of the mind, are disposed
and ouer-ruled by the Imperial power of Music. For Music, Arist. l. 8.
Pol. c. 5. To. 2. p, 902.
as Aristotle affirms of it, has, Naturalem quandam voluptatem; per quam,
illius vsus, cunctis aetatibus, cunctisque moribus est acceptus. It has in it
a natural kind of pleasure; whereby the use of it is made acceptable, unto all
sorts of persons, of whatsoever either ages, or manners. As we may see by
plain experience; how Countrymen do use to lighten their toyling; oldwiues,
their spinning; Mariners, their labors; Soldiers, their dangers; by their
several musical harmonies: and all other sorts of men, their griefs; as Ovid
truly notes: Hoc est, cur cantet vinctus quoque compede fossor, Ovid. l. 4.
Trist. ^leg. 1.

Indocili numero cum grave mollit opus.
Cantat and innitens limosae pronus arenae,
Adverso tardam qui trahit amne ratem.
Quique ferens pariter lentos ad pectora remos,
In numerum pulsa brachia versat aqua.
Fessus vt incubuit baculo, saxoque resedit
Pastor, arundineo carmine mulcet oves.
Cantantis pariter, pariter data pensa trahentis,
Fallitur ancillae, decipit^rque labor.
etc. Hence it is, the Delver bound and clogd in clowted buskin, sings,
By untaught tunes his heavier task to easier pass he brings.
So he, that grovelling streynes, and dragg's on muddy shore his boat,
That comes aslugg against the stream, help't-on with singing note.
And he, that bending slowly brings his tarrying Oar to breast,
His winding Arms keep stroke with songs, while he the water beats.
The wearied Shepherd, as on staff he leanes, or sitt's on Stone,
Does sweetly charm his flock with pipe, which does himself bemone.
And thus the maid that sings and spinnes, and plies her distaffe fast,
By songs deceiues the tediousnes of her praescribed task.
Yea, even sucking Infants, who have not almost any sense of their life, yet
have a sense of Music. For, when they are in their strongest passion, and
most fiercely crying; yet are they presently stilled with their Nurses singing,
and so charmed with it, as if they were enchanted with some Circes cup. Whence
Maximus Tyrius collecteth, Max. Tyr. Sermon. 21. p, 252. Plato. l. 3. de Repub,
p, 564.
Animum esse Musicae alumnum: That the soul is, as it were, the very
Nurse-Child of Music. So that, as Plato truly notes: Rithmus and Harmonia,
animi interiora, and penetrant, and pulsant: The Harmony of Music does
pierce, and affect, the very bowels of the mind. Whereby it does, Athenaeus
l. 14. p, 471.
Animum plurimum allicere, vt ea merito gaudeant, qui audiunt: It delights
the mind, with so strong an allurement, that all, which come to hear it, do
rejoice, and cheer at it. From whence, Aristotle collecteth, that there is,
Arist. vbi supra. p, 903.
Quaedam cognatio nobis cum Harmonijs: There is a kind of Affinity, between
the Soul and Harmony. Insomuch that diverse of the ancient Philosophers, Cic.
l. 1. Tusc.
held strongly this opinion: Animam, aut esse Harmoniam, aut habere Harmoniam:
That, either the Soul is nothing else, but an Harmony it self; Seminar.
Philosoph. To. 2. p, 415.
or else, at the least, has an Harmony in it. From whence, Ficinus collecteth,
that, Harmonia qui non est delectatus, non est harmonice compositus: That he,
which is not delighted with Harmony, he surely, is not made according to
harmony. Balthazar de Aulico. l. 1. p.
Yea, and Balthazar, in his Courtier, passes an harder Censure: For he says,
that, he is either Insensatus; or, that he has Spiritus discordes, and
invicem repugnantes. He is either a senseless, and a simple Fool; or, a man
compounded of repugnant Spirits.

Yea, and Music has not only a kindred with the Soul; but also, a kind of
affinity with the Body. For, there be diverse diseases in it, which are healed
and cured, Macrob. vblsupr^.
by the pleasant sounds of Music. As Macrobius observes in the fore-alledged
place. Corporum quoque morbis medetur. Beda instanceth, in the pain of the
Head, Beda. l. De Musica Practic. To. 1. p. 418.
and the Heart. Athenaeus, in the Sciatica and pain of the Hippes: and Aulus
Gellius, in the biting of vipers. So that, Music has in it, Athenaeus. l.
14. p. 465.
a Sanatiue virtue, not only against the perturbations of the Soul; but also
against the diseases of the Body. A. Gel. l. 4. c. 13. p. 71.
And therefore, no marvel, if every living thing do naturally take a
delight, and pleasure, in it.

3 And, All Creatures praise God with their Natural Musicks. Lib. 1. Cap. 16.
Sect. 3.
as God has created all things in a natural Harmony; Proclus l. de.
Sacrific. p. 275.
and given unto all of them, a natural property, to be delighted with
Harmony: so have all of them also, a natural instinct, to praise the same
God, with their natural Music; and to spend that his good gift, in the honor
of him that gave it. Proclus affirms of all Gods Creatures, that, Omnia
precantur, Hymnosque concinunt, ad ordinis sui ducem: alia, intellectuali modo;
alia, rationali; alia, sensitivo; alia, naturali. All creatures make their
prayers, and sings praises, to their Ruler: some of them, in a manner, which is
merely intellectual; some of them, in a reasonable; some of them, in a
sensible; and some, only in a natural. By Intellectual Singers, he
understanding Angels; by Reasonable, Men; by Sensible, Birds, and Beasts; and
by Natural, Trees, and Plants, and such insensible Creatures. As it evidently
appears, even by his own instances. Where, for Byrds, he gives an example
of the Cock; whose crowing, he interprets, to be his saluting of the rising
Sun, and his hymn unto Apollo. For plants, he gives instance in the
Heliotropium: whose turning continually toward the Sun, he interprets, to
be his service unto him: setting down, Bartas. Day. 5. p. 175.
in the same place, a notable hymn, wherein he imagines it to invocate and
praise him. As, our noble Poet Bartas, does the like of the Lark, in a notable
fiction: whose singing so constantly, in the morning, and evening, he
construeth to be, Plin. l. 8. c. 1.
her Morning and Evening Song, and her daily sacrifice in her Creators praise.
And, for Beasts, Pliny gives instance, in the Elephants; that they have not
only a sense of Religion, but also use a kind of Ceremony in their practice
of the same. Yea, and Aelian affirms of them (as Proclus before did, of the
Cock) that they do, Aelian. l. 7. de Animal. c. 39.
Exorientem Solemn venerari; proboscidem, tanqu^m minum, adversus Solis radios
alleu^ntes: They worship the rising Sun, and they lift up their Trunck, in
honor unto him. Concluding there his Chapter, with this notable increpation of
Atheists, and such like ungodly men: Ergone Deum Elephanti venerantur? Homines
autem, rationis participes, Sitne Deus, necne sit, dubitant? tum, si sit,
Humanasne res, curatione and administratione dign^tur? Shall an Elephant, a
Beast, adore and worship God? and shall a Man, a Creature endued with reason,
doubt, whether there be a God, or whether he regards the doings of Men? The
like Religion, Aelian. l. 4. De Animal. c. 9.
he affirms, Elephants to practice toward the Moon. Thus, even in the
opinion of the very Heathen, all the Creatures of God, in their several
kinds, do praise him. And, that in their opinion they be not mistaken, it may
evidently be seen, in the 148. Psalm. Where, even the Psalmist exciteth all
the forenamed sorts of Creatures, to offer unto God, their prayers and
invocations. Psalm. 148. 2.
Praise him, Psalm. 148. 11.
all ye Angels: his Intellectual Creatures. Praise him, all ye People: his
Reasonable Creatures. Praise him, Beasts and Cattle, Creeping things, Psalm.
148. 10.
and flying fowls: Psalm. 148. 4.
his Sensible Creatures: Psalm. 148. 3.
Praise him, Psalm. 148. 9.
Heavens, and Stars, Mountains, and Hills, Fruitful Trees, and Cedars: his
Natural and insensible Creatures. All these he calls upon, to praise the name
of the Lord. Which, he would not have done, but that all these Creatures, in
their several kinds, do, in their several manners, sing-out his due
praises. Psalm. 174. 7.
Yea, Psalm. 174. 8.
even the very Worms: as Dragons, and Creeping things; whom he also
calleth-vpon, in the very same Psalm: as he there does aso, upon both Fire,
Hail, and Snow, mere insensible things, Neither speaks he this, Psalm. 98 4.
only in a Rhetorical Prosopopoia, Psalm. 98 7.
as in the 98. Psalm. 98 8.
Psalm where he calls upon the Earth, Psalm. 98 1.
to make a noise; the Sea, to roar; the Floods, to clap their hands: and the
Mountains to rejoice; and all these together, to sing a song, in Gods praise.
He uses not, in the former, any such Poetical Figure: but simply and plainly,
in the feruor of his spirit, he calls upon all the Creatures forenamed, to
sing unto the Lord, with those several Harmonies, which he has given unto
their several kinds. Te^tul. l. co^t. Hermo^. c. 44. p. 243.
And thus (as Tertullian truly observes) Deo, etiam inanimalia, and
incorporalia, lauds canunt. Not only Angels, who have no Bodies; but also
other Creatures, which have no souls; yet do, in their kinds, sing-out Gods
due praises.

4 Now, for Man: he has not only a natural delight in Music, as other
Creatures have; and a natural ability, to express all the parts of it, more
then other Creatures have, Ecclus. 40. 21.
by the sweetness of his tuneable and melodious voice, far excelling the
sweetness of all musical instruments: But he has also enlarged his natural
Music, with all the several kinds of Artificial Music, both Vocal, and
Organicall. In which work, although he has labored, Genesis 4. 21.
and taken great pains, from the very beginning: yet could he never have
brought it unto any perfection, if God himself had not been a Scholemaister
unto him. And this is acknowledged, even of the very Heathen: who have expressly
affirmed, that Music is not the Invention of Man, but the very gift of God.
Plut. l. de. Musica. To. p. 688.
Plutarch affirms directly: Non Hominem aliquem repertorem fuisse Musicae,
sed omnibus virtutibus ornatum Deum Apollinem: That no man was the first
inventer of Music, but Apollo their great and honorable God. Yea, and, in the
same place, he adds, that Music ought to be honored; because it is the
invention of a God. Veneranda prorsus est Musica; Deorum inventum cum sit. In
which his opinion, he was not alone, but had diverse others, Plut. ibid. p. 694.
of the chiefest Philosophers concurring with him. Aristotle says of Harmony:
that it is, Res Coelestis; eiusque natura, and divina, and pulchra: That
Music is an heavenly thing, and of a nature, not only pleasing, but also
divine.

Theophrastus sets down, three original Causes: whereby Music was first
begotten in the mind of a Man; Plut. in Sympos. l. 1 Quaest. 5. To. 3. p. 168.
Dolorem, voluptatem, and instinctum divinum: The allaying of his grief, the
procuring of his pleasure, and the inspiration of a divine and heavenly motion.
But he acknowledges this instinct to be the chiefest of the rest. Yea and
Plato affirms, without all circuition, Musicam esse Hominibus, Plut. l. de
Supersl^t. To. 1. p. 384.
a Deo, datam: That music was first given unto men, by God.

But Macrobius handles this point, Macrob. l. 2. de Some. Scip. c. 3. p. 90.
a great deal more prolixely, then any of the rest do: proving, by many
Arguments, that Music, was not first invented upon earth, but descended down
from Heaven. Yea, and that, in the opinion of the very Heathen, delivered
expressly in their mystical Theology. His Reasons be these following. Hesiod.
in Theogon. p, 80.
First, that Hesiodus; who writes the generation of their Gods, recording
exactly, from whence they first sprang, calls one of their Muses, Urania;
which signifies, Heavenly. Insinuating thereby, that there is Music in
Heaven: and, that from heaven it first was brought, by the Muses, unto men. In
whom also we may observe, that he makes Harmonia, Ibid, p, 128.
to have been the Daughter of Mars, and Venus, two of the Heathen Gods: thereby
again implying, that Harmony was first begotten in Heaven. Another of his
Reasons is, that Hesiodus calls another of the Muses, (...): her name being
given, for the sweetensse of her voice; as Vrania's was, from the highness of
the place. Thereby again implying; that The sweetness of voice, has the
highest place in Heaven. Another: that the Heathen called Apollo, who was one
of their greatest gods, (...): quasi Ducem, and Principem Musarum: The Prince,
and Ruler of the Muses. Another: that, even their very Rusticks, called the
Muses, Camoenas, quasi Canenas; Acanendo dictas, that is, Singing Damsels.
Now, the Muses (as they all confess) descended first from Heaven. Another:
that, in all their funeral pompes, and solemn exequies, they still
carried-out their dead, with musical instruments: Mat. 9. 23.
which was likewise in practice, even among the Jews. And this, he says, they
did, to signify that their souls were now departed, unto the original house
of Music: Ad originem dulcedinis Musicae, idest, ad Coelum: in their own
interpretation. And this, again he says, is the true Cause, why every man's
soul is so much delighted with Music upon earth: Quia in Corpus defert
memoriam Musicae, ciuius in Coelo fuit conscia: Because it brings down with
it, into the Body, a remembrance of that Music, whereof, in Heaven, it had a
full fruition. These, and diverse such like Arguments he congesteth, in that
place, to prove, that Music descended first from Heaven. Of which, though
some be not greatly strong; yet they strongly show, that, even the Heathen
held this, as a sacred opinion, that Music is Gods gift, and not man's
invention.

Yea, and that which the Heathen have so ingenuously acknowledged, of the whole
body of Music; they likewise acknowledge, of both the kinds of it; both of
Vocal, and Organical. For Vocal Music. Homer expressly affirms of the Singer
Demodocus, (the most excellent in those times) that the Sweetness of his
voice, whereby he so greatly delighted all men, was a special gift, which God
had given unto him: -- divinum Cantorem
Demodocum: Homer, l. 8 Odys. p, 202.
huic quidem Deus excellenter dedit cantilenam
Ad oblectandum, quocunque animus ipsum impulerit canere.
A most divine, and heavenly Songster, Demodocus was:
Who did, in most delightful lays, all other men surpass.
What ere his mind did lead him to, he did excel in singing:
And all this excellency of his, was given by God unto him.
And, that, which he affirms particularly of him, does Seneca affirm, in
general, Senec. l. 4. de Benefic. c. 6. p, 50.
of all men. Ille, Deus est, qui non calamo tantum cantare, atque agreste and
inconditum carmen, ad aliquam tantum oblectationem, modulari docuit: sed tot
Arts, tot vocum varietates, tot sonos, alios, spiritu nostro; alios, externo,
cantus edituros, commentus est. It is God that has taught men, not only to
play, upon rude and homely pipes, fit for rude and Country song's; but that
first has invented all those Arts, all those varieties of voices, and all
those sounds, whereby, either with our own breath, or with others, we express
all those songs. And therefore the Psalmist concludes the book of Psalms,
with this Epiphonema: Psalm. 1506.
Let every thing that has breath, praise the Lord. That so God, who gave those
instruments unto men, might, with his own gift, be praised by them.

For so is Organicall Music, as well as Vocal: it also is Gods gift. Yea, and
that also by the Confession, even of the very Heathen. For so, Homer affirms
in express and plain words: Alij, Homer, l 13. Iliad. p: 494. In Graecolat.
tribuit Deus, bellicaopera;
Alij, autem saltationem: alij cytharam, and cantum.
God giu's to one, the feats of Arms; to another, art of dansing;
He giu's another, skill to harp; another, voice for singing.
So that, both playing and Singing he acknowledges, to be the gifts of God,
unto men. Max. Tyr. Sermon. 22. p. 264.
Yea, and Maeximus Tyrius reproves the Musition Demodocus, whom before I
named; because he ascribed not unto God, his gift in playng, as well as in
singing: Neque fide dignus Demodocus, cum de seipso dicit: Ipse mihi Doctor:
tribuerunt Numina vocem. Demodocus is not to be believed, when he vaunteth of
himself; That the Gods indeed had given him his voice: but, as for all his
cunning, he learned that, only of himself. This arrogance he reproves, as
unto God injurious; from whom he received the gift of them both. He was,
indeed, (...); and therefore not (...), as he boasted of himself.

Neither did the Heathen, only ascribe unto God, to be the giver of the skill
of playing upon all sorts of Musical instruments; but also, to have been the
first inuentor of making the very instruments themselves. Plut. l. de. Music^.
To. 2. p. 682.
Heraclides affirms of Amp^ion (who was Jupiters son) that he was the
first in the world, that ever taught men the use of the Harp. But he adds
there further, that he himself had learned that skill of his Father: Patre
nimirum docente. p. 689.
But Plutarch himself reduces it higher; not allowing of any mortal man to
be the first inuentor, so much as of the Pipe; but ascribing, even it (as well
as the Harp) to be the invention of the learned god Apollo. But Bion more
distinctly refers those instruments, unto those several gods, that we^^
their several inuenters; not heaping the glory of all upon one; but reserving
unto every god, the glory of his own invention. -- ^^stulam obliquam, Bion
Eidyl. 3. p. 318.
Pan invenit: Minerva, tibiam:
Tes^ud^^em, Mercurius. Et Cytharam, dulcis Apollo.
The crooked Pipe, was Pans device: Minerua's was the Flute.
The Harp Apollo did invent: and Mercury the Lute.
Thus, not only Music it self, of all kinds; but also all Musical
instruments, of all sorts, are (even in the judgment of the very Heathen)
confessed to be the gifts of God unto Men. Which, though they be made by the
hand of man; yet were they directed by the wisdom of God. And therefore the
Heathen have justly ascribed them, not unto him that wrought them, The
chiefest* end of Music is to praise God with it.
but unto him that taught them.

5 Now, as God has given unto man, a natural kind of Music, wherewith his
soul is delighted; so has he also given him a natural sense, and instinct
to worship God with it, as a tribute, due to him, from whom it was first given.
As may be evidently seen, by the general practice both of Christians, and
Heathens. Who, as they do agree by the light of Nature, in worshipping of God;
so do they likewise agree, by the same light of Nature, to use Music in his
worship. For the practice of Christians: the whole Book of Psalms is an
evidence of it. Which, as it was daily sung in the old Church of the Jews; so
is it still daily sung in all the Churches of Christians, through the whole
world of Christianity. In which Book (being penned by the Holy Ghost) we may
observe, three remarkable things. First, that, as God has appointed unto man,
a Sabbath day, wherein to praise and serve him: so has he also appointed them
to serve him, Ephesians. 5. 19. Col. 3. 16.
with hymns, and psalms, and spiritual songs. Yea, and, among them, has
selected certain special Psalms, from among all the rest, as specially
appropriated unto those Sabbath Days: As may be evidently seen, by the title
and inscription, of the 92. Psalm; A Psalm, Psalm 92.
or Song, for the Sabbath Day. Secondly, that he has further had a special
care, not only of the Dittie, but also of the Tune too. As it likewise
appears by the Titles and inscriptions of diverse other Psalms. Magistro
Symphoniae ad pneumatica instrumenta. Psalm. 4. 5. 6. 9.
Magistro Symphoniae fidium ad grauem symphoniam. Magistro Symphoniae acutae ad
medianam: and diverse others such like. Thirdly, that, not contented with the
Music of men's natural voices, he has further added to them (for the
quickening of devotion) the help of all sorts of Musical instruments. Psalm.
150. 3. 4. 5.
Praise him, in the sound of the Trumpet. Praise him, upon the Lute, and Harp.
Praise him, with Timbrels, and Flute, with Virginals, and Organs, and with high
sounding Cymbals. Thus, God himself has required, to have his Service
furnished, with all the several sorts of Music, Aug. l. 2. de Doct. Christ.
To. 3. c. 17 Isidor. l. 2. Orig. c. 18.
both Harmonical, Rithmicall, and Organicall. And therefore Boethius ascribes
unto the Art of Music, a principa^l honor, above all the other. Inter septem
Arts Liberales, principatum oblinet Musica. And Beda, who reports his
opinion, alleges for it a good Reason: Beda, lib. de Musica Practia. Tom 1.
p. 417.
Because it, of all other Arts, has only the honor to enter into the Church;
and there to be used, in Gods own immeditate service. For, this is an Art so
Heavenly and divine, that it seems to have been given by God, unto men, to
this special end; that by it Men might set out the glory of God. And
therefore Plutarch affirms, Plut. lib. de Musica To. 2. p. 707.
that, Primum, and pulcherrimum Musicae officium, est, grata aduers^m Deos
remuneratio: The first, and the fairest office of Music, is the return of our
thankfulness unto God, Psalm. 116, 12, 13
for his goodness. Which office the Prophet David accordingly put in
practice. What can I return unto the Lord for all his benefits? I will take
unto me, the Cup of salvation, and will call upon the Name of the Lord. Here is
the best return, that by man can be made to sacrifice the true thankfulness
of his soul unto God; as for all his other inestimable Benefits, so for this
among the rest, for giving us so Musical and tuneable a voice, whereby we
have a mean to praise him for all the rest. Pium est enim, Plut. vbi supra. p.
681.
and praecipuum hominum hoc studium (says Plutarch again) Lauds canere
Deorum, qui soli ipsis articulatam vocem sunt largiti. It is a pious and a
principal duty of man, to sing praises unto God; who only has given him that
articulate voice, whereby he is able to sing unto him. Thus this learned
Philosopher, both deriueth the Art of Music from God, as from his original
beginning; and refers it unto God, as to his principal end.

And this was not his opinion alone, but the very Religion, of all the rest of
the Heathen. As may be evidently seen, not only in Hesiodus, but also in
Trismegistus: Hesiod in Theogon. p 78.
two of their chief Divines. For the first of them: Hesiodus, he makes the
Muses (who were the Authors of Music) the Daughters of Jupiter: and therefore,
to draw their original from God. And he makes them again, to sing always
before him: and therefore to refer all their Music unto God. And
Trismegistus likewise, expressly delivers, both the very same points. Trismeg.
in Asclap. c. 5. p. 490.
For the first of them: he says that, Musarum chorus, est a summa Divinitate
demissus, ne terrenus mundus videretur incultior, si modulorum dulcedine
caruisset: That the Quire of the Muses, was sent down from heaven, from the
highest of the Gods; lest this terrene and inferior world should be barbarous
and rude, if it lacked the delight and sweetness of Music. And, for the
second of them, he adds: Sed potius, vt modulatis hominum cantilenis
concelebretur laudibus, qui solus dat omnia; vt Pater est omnium. But yet the
higher end of music was, that, by men's delightful music, he might be
only praised, who is the Giver of all; as being indeed the very Father of all.
So then Music was first given by God to Men; that Men might, by it, give due
praises unto God. For the true use of Music (as Athenaeus observes) is
principally this, Athenaeus. l. 14. p. 471.
Deorum lauds Musicis Canticis personare: To chante out Gods praises with
musical Songs. And therefore the ancient Music (as Plutarch records) was
only used in the Temples, for the worship of God; Plut. vbi. sup. p. 697.
and not in Theaters, Macrob. l. 2. de Some. Scip. c. 3. p. 90.
for the vain delight of men. Plut. vbi. sup. p. 689.
For the Custom of the Heathens (as Macrobius reports, and Plutarch by many
special instances confirms) was, to use Music and Songs, in all their
public prayers. Yea, and Plato well approves it: Rectissimum erit, vt Hymni
laudesque Deorum, precibus mixtae, canantur. He would always have Hymns,
intermixed with prayers, and especially, with their solmne sacrifices. Whence,
Maximus Tyrius, calls Music, Optimum in Sacrificijs comitem: A sweet
companion, Max. Tyr. Sermon. 21. p. 257.
in all their sacrificing. Yea, and there adds further, that it does,
Mysteria sanctificare: That it adds a further Holiness, unto their holy
mysteries. Arist. l. 8. Pol. c. 7 To. 2. p. 905.
Which opinion of his, Aristotle also confirms; who affirms of Music, that
it has a power in it, both purgative, and sanatiue: whereby a man's mind is
made both pure, and humble, and devout. And therefore we may observe, in the
practice of Heathens, as well a^of Christians; that they have not thought it
sufficient, to worship God only with prayers and invocations, but also with
Hymns, and Odes. Aelian records an Hymn of thanksgiving which Arion made
to Neptune, Aelian. l. 12. De Animal. c. 42. p. 268.
for his deliverance by the Dolphin. Galen Galen. l. de vsu part.
upon the contemplation of the admirable workmanship in the body of man,
breaks out into an Hymn, in the praise of him that made him. Hic compono
Canticum, in Creatoris nostri laudem. And Trismegistus upon the like
contemplations, Trismeg.
sets down diverse Hymns, which he made in Gods praise. Yea, and Homer has
made a set Book of Hymns, wherein he sets out the praises of all their
Gods. Which kind of Hymns, (as Macrobius records) were usually sung,
Macrob. vbi supra.
in the Temples of the Heathen, per Stroph^m, and Antistropham; for the
stronger elevation of their minds toward Heaven. As our holy Hymns are, in
the Churches of Christians, by Verses, and Antiphonies, answering one another:
And the like we may observe, to have been also in use, in the Church of the
Jews. As appears in all the Psalms; from the 146. unto the end of the
Psalme-Booke. Where, as every Psalm begins with an Allelu-iah, or, Praise
the Lord, by Stropha: so does it likewise end, with an Allelu-iah, or, Praise
the Lord, by Antistropha. And the same order of singing is observed, even in
Heaven. Where Saints, and Angels, be the Choristers; and God himself, the
(...); who bears also his part, in this Divine and Heavenly Harmony. As
evidently appears, Apoc. 19. 1.
in the Book of the Apocalypse. Where, a Multitude of Saints, singing unto Gods
praise, and beginning their Allelu-iah, by way of S^ropha, they were answered
again, by the Elders, and four Beasts, with another Allelu-iah, by the way of
Antistropha. And again, they both were answered, 4. 5. 6: 7.
with a voic^ from the Throne, with another Allelu-iah, rebounding, and
ecchoing from another place of Heaven. And, when they all had thus sung, their
several Allelu-iah, by themselves, asunder; then they joined in one, and sung
it altogether. Here is an adumbration of the Quire of Heaven: and the form of
the singing of Saints, and Angels therein. Whereby it appears, that God has
not only appointed, that Men should here praise him, with holy Harmonies, in
this present life; but also, with Heavenly Harmonies, in the life to come.

And this also was both known, and acknowledged, by the very Heathen: As it
evidently appears, by the testimony of Pindarus. Animae piorum Coelos
colentes, Theod^r^t lib. de Martyr. To. 2. p. 541.

Cantu, beatum and magnum in Hymmis cannut.
The Souls of godly blessed Saints inhabiting the Heavens,
Do chaunt and sound their blessedness, in holy Songs and Hymn's.
Yea, and Porphiry recites a certain Oracle of Apollo: wherein he affirms,
that God has created a certain order of Angels, which do nothing but praise
him, and sing continually before him. Praeterea, Porp^yr. lib. 10. Respons.
apud Pausam. lib. de Osculo. cap. 40. p. 202.
tertium quoddam genus Regum creasti;
Quite semper canunt, carminibusque laudant,
Volentem Te ipsi cupidi, praedicantque and nunc, and semper.
Thou God created have a kind of glorious Angel-Kings,
Whose spirit, in celestial Quire, thy praises ever sings.
By all which forenamed Reasons, it evidently appears, that this Heavenly
Art of Music is the gift of God, to men. And therefore, must necessarily
infer, that, There is One.

CHAP. 13.
The other Liberal Arts, do, all of them, show, That there is a God: they
being, all of them, acknowledged, to be the gifts of God. 1. Grammar. 2.
Logic. 3. Rhetoric. 4. Which three Arts have apparently, an adumbration of
the Trinity.

THIS second Book proving, That there is a God, from the grounds of Arts, has
now grown very great and prolixe, under mine hand: yea, and that, far beyond
both mine expectation, and intention. Wherein, I am not ignorant, that the
vulgar Reader can take but small delight: the nature of this Argument is so
far out of his Element. Neither yet can any other, but only a professe^
Scholar, unto whom these grounds of Arts are common, and familiar. And
therefore, all the rest, which are as yet behind, I will but only touch, and
that with a light finger, to make the way shorter, unto other more plausible
and popular matter. Now the residue of the liberal Arts, be these three in
number Grammar, Logic, and Rhetoric. Which, all of them, are acknowledged,
even by the very Heathen, to be Gods special Gifts and Blessings unto men.

And first, as concerning Grammar. That is defined, to be, Arts recte
Loquendi, Lilly Grammatica.
atque scribendi; An Art of rightly Speaking, and Writing. So that, the
natural, Grammar shows There is a God.
and, as it were, the homogeneall parts of Grammar, be two, Orthology, and
Orthography. In both which parts of it, God has had a special hand; as, even
by the Heathen themselves, is acknowledged: in the first of them, Orthology; in
teaching men the right imposition of names: in the second of them, Orthography;
in teaching them the rare invention of letters. Two works of so divine and
heavenly an invention, that, without them, humane life were nothing but
confusion.

For the better, and more clear demonstration whereof, we are to know thus
much. That the faculty of speaking is not natural unto a man, no more then to
a Beast. A man has no more given speech unto himself, then he has given
himself the Tongue, wherewith he speaks. But God is the giver of them both.
And the tongue of a man, would be altogether as dumb, as the tongue of a
Beast; if God himself, at the first, had not taught it how to speak.
Therefore, this gift of speaking, as it was at the first habitually infused
into Adam, so has it ever since been propagated from him, by only imitation.

I know, it is an old received opinion, that (notwithstanding this great
variety of several languages, which we see entertained in diverse nations)
yet that man has a natural speech of his own, as he is a man: which
language he would speak by nature, if he were not taught some other. But
this is but a dream: and has been twice refuted, by a double experiment. The
first was, Herod. l. 2. p.
by Psammeticus, a King of Egypt: who desiring to understand, which was man's
most ancient and natural language, he caused two Children to be sequestered
from all society of men, and to be nourished only by sucking two shee-goates,
forbidding all speech unto them. Which Children, continuing for a long time
dumb, at last uttered, Bec, Bec. The King being informed, that, in the
Phrygian Language, Bec, signified Bread, imagined that the Children called then
for Bread: and from thence collected, that, because they spoke that language
which no man had taught them, that therefore the Phrygian language was the
natural speech of man. A silly proof, Plut. l. 1. de Placitis, c. 17. To. 2.
p. 15.
God knows. His conceit of Bec, Bec, well deserving to be numbered with those
Becceselenae, those doting old tales, which have ever been contemned of those
that are wise. For the Childrens Bec, Bec, (as is probably collected) was only
that language which they learned of their Goat-nurses, when they came to suck
their teates. Who, receiving of them some ease by their sucking, saluted them
with Bec, the best language which they had. From whom the children learned it.
And so much as they heard, just so much again they uttered, and no more. And
if they had not heard it, they could never have pronounced it. As we may
evidently see, by an other experiment tried upon other Infants, Purchase,
Pilgrim* lib. 1. c. 8. p, 40.
(which is our second instance) by Melabdim Echebar, whom they call The great
Mogor. He likewise (upon the forenamed error) that Man has a certain proper
language by Nature, caused thirty Children to be brought up in dumb silence,
to find out, by experience, whether all of them would speak one and the same
language? having inwardly a purpose, to frame his religion, conformable to that
nation, whose language should be spoken: as being that Religion, which is
purely natural unto man. But the Children proved all dumb: though there were
so many of them. And therefore they could not speak because they were not
taught. Whereby it appears, that Speaking, which is the first part of
Grammar, is not in man by Nature. But the first man had it, by only divine
infusion; and all his posterity, only by imitation.

Now the first element and original of all speech, is the Imposition of Names.
Without which, there can be no distinction of things. I mean, not, quoad nos;
though, quoad naturam, they be sufficiently distinguished, by those
substantial properties which are their essential and specificall differences.
But yet, they could have no distinction in speech, if they were not divided by
their several names. No, nor in use neither. For, if things were not separated
by their proper names, Luke, 11. 11. 12.
then if a man should ask for Bread, they might give him a Stone; if for a
Fish, a Serpent; if for an Egg, a Scorpion. And so in all other things, there
would follow like confusion. As we may see, in the building of the Tower of
Babylon: how when the Laborers understood not the names of those things, for
which the Builders called, the work was brought unto a stand, and could not
go forward. So that, the right ordering of all humane affairs depends
chiefly upon the distinction of names, without which, Aug. l. de Magistro. c.
5. To. 1. Cicero de Fini^us p. 142. b^
there can be no knowledge of things. For, Nomen est a noscendo dictum: as S.
Augustine gives the notation of that name: and, Nomina be but Notaererum: as
the Orator notes of them: Names be the notes and marks, whereby we do know
things; which cannot be known, if they have no (...). Genesis 2. 19.
Whereupon, even God himself, as soon as ever he had made a man he brought
all things before him, that he might put names upon them. Full well
foreseeing, in his divine wisdom, that it was a thing most necessary for the
use of man. Else would he never have appointed it so timely to be done. And
therefore, even the Heathen have reckoned this nomenclature, and imposition of
names, Stobaus Sermon. 101. p. 556.
for one of Gods own works: holding it, for an invention, above humane
understanding. Euriphanus, though he ascribe the work it self unto Man, yet
he holds it to be done, Cic. lib. 1. Tusc.
by divine illumination: agreeing therein with the truth of the Scripture it
self. And Tullie, reckoning up certain admirable inventions, far
transcending the highest pitch of the capacity of man, he numbereth this for
one, The imposing of names so aptly upon things. Which (as Plato acknowledges)
Rerum istarum inuentio, Plato, in Cratylo. Aug. l. 2. de Do^^ Christ. c. 18.
To. 3.
acutius ingenium quam nostrum, exigit. The invention of these things, exacteth
a more peircing wit, then is ours. Which, all the Heathen in general,
ascribed directly unto their God Mercury. So that, for Orthologie, the first
part of Grammar, you see, that even the Heathen have two ways auerred it, for
a divine invention. Which does necessarily conclude That therefore there is a
God.

Now for Orthographie, the second part of Grammar, teaching the Art of
writing. That has also in it another strange invention: which, even by the
very Heathen, is reputed to be Divine. And that is, the invention and diuising
of Letters. A thing so essential and proper unto Grammar, that the whole Art
has his name and appellation from it. For, Grammatica (as S. Augustine
observes out of Varro) does signify Literatio: Aug. l. 2. De Ordine c. 12.
To. 1. Haec Literarum ^lementa^ invenit. Theod. Sermon. 4. de prouid. pro pesinem.
or, (as he refineth it) Litertura, that is, The cunning and skill of Letters.
Ipso se nomine profiteri literas clamans: Proclayming, even in his very name,
that it professes the knowledge of Letters. So Tullie. Studium Literarum
profitentur ij, qui Gramm^tici vocantur. They which are called Grammarians,
profess the Study and knowledge of Letters. Now the first devising and
finding out of Letters, is one of the rarest and most heavenly inventions of
all that are in use in humane society. Cic. l. de. Orat. 85. B. Nizol.
Yea, and that, whether we respect the notable subtilitie, or Utility of it.
For the first of which two points. It is almost a miracle, that a mean could
be invented, whereby words and sounds, which naturally be the Objects of the
Ear, should be made the Objects of the Eye. As we see the one is, by Letters,
in writing; the other, by notes, in singing. This is indeed an admirable
invention, that sounds and voices should, by the power of certain Characters
(as it were by Charms) be stolen away from their own proper sense, and
conveyed unto another, by Leger^du Main, and so made an Object of the same.
This (I say) is a very wonder: and, among all the senses, not to be found, in
any other. No invention ever yet could make the Object of Seeing, the Object of
Hearing; nor the Object of Hearing the Object of Smelling; nor the Object of
Smelling, the Object of Feeling. Only the Object of Hearing, by this invention
of Letters, is made (in some sort) the Object of Seeing. And this, by the
goodness of God unto man, for the increase of his knowledge and understanding.
Which is the second point, that I observed in it.

For, by this rare invention of writing, it cannot be numbered, how many great
Benefits be unto men conveyed. By writing, we may give direction for ourforaine
Businesses, though we stay at home: and for our domestical, though we be
abroad. By writing, we may confer with our absent Friend, as freely, as with
our present Neighbor; communicating all our counsels as secretly and closly,
as if we should whisper one in another ear: yea though we be divided many
miles asunder. Ita vt absens vltra Maris aequora, Res, quae illic gerantur in
aedibus, Stob. Sermon. 79. p. 469.
omnes recte intelligant: as Euripides notes, even in this very case. But
writing, we may record those things that are past, as freshly, as when we
remembered them present. By writing* we have the monuments of ancient times
communicated with us, and all good Arts and Learning derived unto us.

Yea (and that which far surmounteth all that hitherto has been said) by
writing, we have the comfort of the holy word of God: which, from writing,
receives his denomination, in being called Scripture: which is, nothing else
but, Writing. Finally (to come home unto this our own purpose, Theod. Sermon. 4.
de Provident.
with Theodorets instance) by writing we are furnished with invincible
Arguments, to fight against the Atheist, who armeth himself to fight against
God. These, and infinite like blessings, are conveyed unto men, by the benefit
of writing.

Beside which, this invention of writing, and the conueying of the voice unto
the eye from the ear, which I mentioned before, beguiling one sense of his
Object, to furnish another with it, does (by intermingling the Offices of those
two diverse senses) minister no less delight in expressing their uses, by way
of Questions and Riddles, then are usually made upon incestuous marriages. As
for example. If it should be demanded: How a voice may be seen? It may be
answered: By writing. How a man may speak, after he is dead? By writing. Et
moriens liberis aliquot literas
Scribendo animum aperiet. Stobaeu^ Sermon. 79. p, 469.

Says Euripides: Of dying man, his living mind,
By Written deeds, his Children find.
How two may talk together, without any word spoken? By writing. How two may
speak together, that are many miles a sunder? By writing. -- peragunt Linguae
Charta manusque vices.
Where distance sets on tongue a tie, Ovid, l. 5. de Trist.

There hand and paper make supply.
How a man may teach his hand to speak? By writing. How a man may hear
another speak, though he should stop his ears? By writing. How a man may
remember that which he has forgotten? Stob. Sermon. 79. p, 496.
By writing. Ibid. p, 468.
Whence Euripides calls it, Remedium oblivionis: The remedy of oblivion. And
Aeschilus, An help of memory: Literarum autem compositio memoriam produxit.
And many such like may the wit of man find out, many other ways expressing the
great uses of writing. All which have their dependence, upon the first
invention of letters. Cic. l. 1. Tusc.
And therefore the Roman Orator, as he ascribed before, the imposition of
names: so again he ascribes the invention of letters, only unto God: as
being an invention above the reach of man. And so likewise does Euriphanus,
Stobaens Sermon. 101. p, 556.
whom I cited before, joining both inventions together. Yea, and Plato
expresses of which of the gods: affirming of the Egyptians, that they
challenge the invention of letters, unto one of their own gods, Plato. in
Philebo. p, 85. Item in Phaedro. p, 463.
namely to their god, The^th: whom they held for the author of all good Arts
among them: as letters are the beginning of all good learning. Others ascribed
this invention to the Muses. But Pacianus directly asserteth it to God: Pacian.
Epist. 2. ^ib. Pat. To. 1. p, 30^.
to whom it is due, indeed. Dic, or^, Frater, Musae literas repererunt? Nonne
per Dominm omnia, and a Deo omnia? Thus Grammar, not only, by the imposition
of names; but also, by the invention of letters, does lead us, by the hand, to
believe, There is a God.

2 Yea, Logic proves, There is a God.
and so does Logic too. By the help and means whereof, both names were
first imposed, and letters first invented. For both these are done, according
to reason. And Logic (which is the Art of reasoning) is indeed nothing else,
but the practice of reason: Disputare is nothing else, but Ratione vti.
Roding^^ in Dialecticam Ra^i.
It is nothing else, but Oration ratione conclusa: as Tully speaks: A speech
concluded with Reason. Therefore not only Grammar; and Rhetoric (which is
nothing else but a dilated kind of Logic, Cic. Aca. p. 45. a. Cic. de Clar
Orat. 194. a. Nizol.
Dialectica dilatata, as Tully calls; it: and as Zeno exemplified it by his
fist and his hand: Quod latius loquerentur Rhetores, Cic. l. de Fin. p. 68. a.
Nizol. Aug. l. 2. de Ordine c. 13. To. 1. p. 489.
Dialectiei autem compressius) but also all other Arts, were both at the first
invented, and after perfected, and ever practiced; yea, and now, both taught,
and learned, by the help of Logic. As S. Augustine expressly affirms of it.
Haec docet docere: Haec docet discere: Haec sola scientes potest facere: Cic.
l. de Fin. p. 68* a.
This is the Art, which only teaches men how to teach: and which only
learneth men, how to learn: and which only is able to make a man understand.
And therefore he calls Logic, Disciplinam Disciplinarum: The Art of all
Arts: The Art, whereby all Arts are both taught and learned. For, as Tully also
notes, Haec vna continet omnem, and perspiciend quid in quavis re sit,
scientiam; and iudicandi quale quidque sit, ac ratione and via disputandi.

Insomuch that, Stobaeus. Sermon. 81. prope finem.
as Iamblicus has truly observed: Nulla Philosophiae pars, absque Dialectica
ratione, comparatur: There can no part of Philosophy, be perfectly attained;
without the help and assistance of Logic. As Aristotle shows in his
Topickes: Arist. l. 1. Topic. cap. 2.
where he reckons up the principal uses of it.

Yea, and it has also as great an use in Divinity, as it has in Philosophy.
Logic teaches the Preacher to Analize and divide his Text. It teaches to
collect true and proper Doctrines from it. And it teaches him to discover
those false, or idle Doctrines, which are wrongly built upon it. Ang. lib. 2.
de Ordi^^. c. 13. To. 1.
Nam hanc de finiendo, distribuendo, ^olligendo, non solum digerit, atque
ordinat, sed etiam ab omni falsitatis irreptione defendit: says S. Augustine,
comprehending in one sentence, all those three forenamed uses. The Art of
Logic, by D^finitions, Divisions, and Collections, does not only digest
things, and bring, them into Order, but also defends them from those captious
falsities, which otherwise would oftentimes creep into them. For, as the
Orator also observes: Cic. lib. de Fin. p. 105. ^. Nizol. Cic. lib. de Orat.
p. 123* a.
Habet Dialectica rationem, ne cui falso assentiamur, neue vnquam captios ^
probabilitate falla^nur. For it is, Ars, vera and falsa iudicandi: as he
again notes, in another place: It is an Art of discerning truth from
falsehoold. Again (another use) it assisteth the Preacher, both in confuting
of Haeresies, and in resolving of all doubts and questions: as S. Augustine
again, in another place, observes. Aug. l. 2. de Doct. Christ. c. 32. To. 3.
Disput ati^nis disciplina, ad omnia genera quaestionum, quae in liter^^ (...)
and dissoluenda plurimum valet. The Art of Disputing (...) of a spe^^^^ (...),
for discerning and deciding of all manner of Qu^stion^, which any where wise,
through the whole Scriptures. For, it does (...) intelligention: as the Orator
notes: It yields a certain knowledge of things doubtful. Yea, and the use
of it is so general, in all the parts of Divinity, that Iamblicus affirms of
it very resolutely, that, Omnia, quae considerantur de D^^s, Stobae. Sermon. 79.
p. 47^.
Dialectica ratione astruuntur: That every thing, which any way belongs to
God or Religion, is grounded upon, and confirmed by some Logical Reason. Ficin.
Argum. in Euthyd^mo.
Whence Plato himself (as Ficinus observes) uses the word Dialectica,
promiscuously, for Theologia, in many places of his writings; as being
aequivalent, and all one, in sense. And therefore, Iamblicus affirms of
Logic, that it is Deorum munus: A gift and token of God unto Men. Yea, and so
it is indeed: and that a very great one. Yea, and in the same place affirms
expressly: Stobaeus Sermon. 7a. p, 471.
Reuera, Deus quispiam fuit, qui Hominibus Dialecticam monstravit, and coelitus
demisit. Certainly, it was some God, which showed Logic unto men, and sent it
down from Heaven. Which some ascribe, to Mercury; some to Calliope; and some
to Apollo: who (as there he reports) did purposely deliver all his Oracles,
in obscure and aenygmatical terms, to excite men thereby unto the study of
Logic; which is the only Art whereby they can be opened. Cuius opera
quicquid ambiguum, and aequivocum est, dijudicatur: By the help of which Art
of Logic, whatsoever is ambiguous and doubtful, is cleared and distinguished.

3 And that, Rhetoric is the Gift of God. Lib. 2. c. 1. Sect. 8. fin.
which the Heathen have confessed both of Grammar and Logic, they confess
likewise of Rhetoricks: That it is also a special gift of God, For if Grammar,
which is but the Art of speaking, be so, then must Rhetoric, which is the
Art of Pleading, much more be so. It is a far higher gift, to plead then to
speak. To speak, is every man's gift; but to plead, the gift of few. And
therefore; as Plato collecteth in another like Case; If God be the Giver of the
lesser blessings, Plato in Epinom 913. p.
then much more of the greater. Ipsum bonorum omnium Authorem, cur non maximi
etiam boni causam arbitramur? And therefore Dionysius Areopagita expressly
affirms, That both these Arts of Speaking, are Gods special gifts. Deus, and
dicendi, and been dicendi munus, Dionys. l. de. Divine. Nom. c. 13. p. 332.
concessit. It is God, that has given, hoth the Art of Speaking, and the Art
of Well speaking. Tullie, that great Orator; speaking of the Art Oratorie,
affirms it, not to be a gift of Nature, but to descend from God, as from the
first Author: Primus eius Artis Antistes esse, Deus putatur. The first Author
of that Art is believed to be God. And though, in the same place, he be
driven to confess, Cic. l. 1. de. Orat. p. 146.
that the benignity of Nature has no little sway in it; yet there he further
adds, that even, Idipsum, quod est hominis proprium, non sit partum per nos;
sed divinitus ad nos delatum: That, even that natural ability, which any man
has unto it, is not gotten by himself, but is given him by God. It is God
that gives the Tongue of the learned: Isai. 50. 4.
as the Prophet Isay testifies. And therefore the same Orator, in another
place, affirms; not following any other man's opinion, but delivering his
own; That it is only God, that is indeed the Maker of every good Oration, by
his divine infusion. Mihi quidem ne haec notiora, Cic. l. 1. Tusc. p. 117.
atque illustriora, carere vi divina videntur: vt Ego, aut Poetam, grave
plenumque carmen, sine coelesti aliquo mentis instinctu, putem fudere: aut
eloquentiam, sinc maiori aliqua vi fluere, abundantem sonantibus verbis
vberibusque sententijs. He professes, that he is persuaded, that neither any
Poet can make a good Poem, nor yet any Orator a good Oration, if he be not
infused with a divine inspiration. Pindar. Pythi^rum Od. 1. p. 187.
For, as Pindarus also confesses, unto the same purpose: Et sapientes, and
eloquentes, Dei benignitate, fiunt. It is only Gods blessing, that gives unto
men, both eloquence and wisdom. So Origin. Quod verba quis fecerit, Orig.
contra Celsum. l. 6. 4. fol. aet. finem.
quae persuadendi vim habeant, id Dei munere fit; quod vero suadeaetur, non
semper ex Deo procedit. The power of persuading is always the gift of God;
though the thing persuaded sometimes be not. Yea, and God himself expressly
chalengeth the same to be his gift. Yea the whole Trinity chalengeth it, who
have all a true right in it. God the Father, he chalengeth it, unto the Prophet
Moses: who when he detrected his return into Egypt, upon pretense of his
stammering, Ex. 4. 10. 11.
God himself demanded of him: Who it was that had given the mouth unto man? Is
it not I the Lord? God the Son, he chalengeth it, unto his Disciples:
forbidding them to be careful, when they came before Magistrates what answer
they should make them; Mat. 10. 19. 20.
and assuredly promising, that, in that very hour, it should be given to them.
And the Holy Ghost, he chalengeth it, Act. 2. 4.
assuming unto himself, that gift of strange speaking, wherewith the Apostles
amazed all their hearers: They began to speak with other tongues, as the
Spirit gave them utterance. By all which specialties, this Conclusion is proved,

4 Thus, all those three Arts, Grammar, Logic, and Rhetoric, are all of them
given unto men, by God. Yea, and that by God the Word: who is the wisdom of
his Father: 1. Cor. 1. 24. lo. 1. 9.
and who is the true light, that lighteneth every man that comes into the
world. And this also, by the Confession even of the very Heathen. Eusebius. l. 13.
de Praeparat. c. 7. p. 278.
For it is Epicharmus his Tenet: that, Divinum Verbum omnes Arts hominibus
suggerit: It is only God the Word, which gives men the knowledge of all Arts
and sciences. Which if it be generally true, in all Arts; then is it most
specially true, in those Arts. For, all those three Arts, do carry upon them,
the very name of that God, who is the Giver of them. For, as God the son is
called (...): so likewise is every one of those forenamed Arts. There is (...),
Verbum: and that is Grammar. There is (...), Ratio, and that is Logic. And
there is (...), Oration: and that is Rhetoric. So that, as God the Son does
carry upon him, Heb. 1. 3.
the Character of his Father: so do those threearts the Character of their
Author. Every one of them is (...), as God the Son is. So that, (...), in
general, is like the nature of the Deity, which is common unto all the three
persons of the Trinity: and so is (...), unto all those three arts. So that as
in the Trinity it may truly be said; That the Father, is God; the Son is
God; and the Holy Ghost, is God: So may it be said, in the Trinity of those
arts; That Grammar, is (...), Logic, is (...), and Rhetoric, is (...), Here
they are al conjoined together as in one common nature. And, as in the Trinity
it may again be said; That the Father, is not the Son; nor the Son, the
Holy Ghost, nor the Holy Ghost, the Father: so may it be said likewise, in
those three arts, and sciences: That Grammar, is not Logic; nor Logic,
Rhetoric; nor Rhetoric, Grammar. Here again disioyned. And yet, in another
respect again conjoined. For, as in the Trinity, the Father does beget the
Son, and they two produce the Holy Ghost: so, in this other Trinity, (...),
Ratio, does beget (...), Verbum; and they two produce out of them, an other
third (...), which is Oration. So that those three arts are not only affirmed
to be the gifts of God, by the testmonie of the Heathen, but they also declare
it, by their very name.

CHAP. 14.
Philosophy leads a Man unto God. 2. It has in it a kind of resemblance of
God. 3. It is acknowledged to be the Gift of God. 4. And so likewise is
Poetry. 5. And so all other Arts in general. 6. Yea even the Mechanical.

HAVING now dispatched the liberal Arts and Sciences; and showed, how all of
them do lesson us to God; it rests, that we should ascend by them (as by
certain streams) unto Philosophy it self: which is the Fountain, and
Springhead, from whence they all do flow. Cic. l. 1. de Orat. p. 127. Damasc.
l. de Logica, c. 3. p. 419.
Tullie calls Philosophy, The Mother of all good Arts: Omnium laudandarum
Artium procreatricem quandam, and quasi parentem. And Damascene calls it, The
Inuenter of them. Per quam, Ars omnis and Scientia inventa est: By which all
Arts and Sciences were first found and invented. So that, what good soever we
have received, from all, or any of them, in teaching and instructing us, to
know, There is a God; all that we owe only unto Philosophy: which is the first
Fountain from whence it was derived: though by them, as by Channells, it were
brought and conveyed. Nay, that which they taught us but obscurely, and
indirectly, as occupied properly in another subject, that does Philosophy teach
plainly and directly, as having God himself for his natural Object. As we
may evidently see, not only by the notation of the Name, but also by the
definition of the Thing. Both of them implying, that Philosophy, in truth, is a
kind of Divinity: whose Object is only God. And therefore, Theaetetus, in
Plato, calls Philosophers, Plato, in Sophist. princip.
by the name of Divines. Omnes Philosophos, Divinos appello. And Socrates well
approves his calling of them so.

Yea, and the very name of Philosophy, being rightly expounded, implies, that
his principal Object is God. For, by interpretation, Philosophy signifies,
The love of Wisdom: as the Orator give th the account of that name. Now, The
beginning of Wisdom, Psalm. 111.
is the fear of God: as, is plainly affirmed, by the Prophet David. Nay, true
wisdom it self is nothing else, but, Cognitio Numinis, Stobaeus. Sermon 1. p.
15.
rerumque. Divinarum: The knowledge of God, and of those things that belong to
him: as Architas Tarentinus expressly defines. Nay, God himself is indeed the
truest and highest wisdom. So Aristotle: God is an Essentia de Sapientia
perfectissima. Arist. l. 3. de Theolog. c. 4. Pansa. c. 45. Arist. l. 1.
Metaph. c. 1.
And this is further yet confessed, by the learned est of the Heathen: as Pansa
reports and proves. Aristotle again, speaking of wisdom, says, that it
is not an humane possession, but an honor which is proper unto God. And he
cites Simonides, for confirmation of it. So that, if Philosophy be truly the
love of Wisdom; then is it the love of God, who is the truest wisdom. As
diverse of the Fathers have, from this ground, collected. Clem. Alex. l. 6.
Strom. p. 298.
So Clemens Alexandrinus. Philosophi apud nos dicuntur, qui amant Sapientiam,
quae est omnium opifex, and magistra, hoc est, Filij Dei cognitionem. They be
called Philosophers with us, that are lovers of that Wisdom, which is the
Creator and Ruler of all things: that is, in very deed, that are lovers of the
knowledge of the Son of God. Damascen. l. de Logica, c. 3. p. 419. I.
So Damascen. Vera Philosophia, est Sapientiae amor: vera autem Sapientiae,
Deus est: Ex quo conficitur, Amorem erga Deum, veram esse Philosophiam. True
Philosophy is nothing else but only God himself: Aug. l. 8. de Civil. Dei, c.
9. To. 5. p. 450.
From whence it must needs follow, that True Philosophy, is nothing else but
the true love of God. In which point S. Augustine consents fully with
Damascene: Id est Philosophari, amare Deum. And Theodoret, Theodoret in Hist.
Sanctorum Patrum To. 2. fin.
he fully consents with them both. Quiestre vera Philosophus, iure vocari
poterit pius, and Dei amans. He that indeed is a Philosopher, may justly be
called by the name of Gods Lover. As the Patriarch Abraham, was called, Gods
Friend. Yea, and some of the Heathen have confessed also the same. Trismegistus
Trismeg. Asclep. c. 6. p. 494. Plato in Lyside. sin.
defines True Philosophy, to be nothing but Religion, and divine
contemplation. And therefore Plato affirms of evil men, That they do not
philosophize: Mali non philosophantur: because, even in their being evil men,
they put on a contrary nature upon them. For the Nature of Philosophy is, by
loving of God, to make men become good. And, in this nature, every man ought to
be a Philosopher: Just. Mart. Dial. cum Tryphon. To. 2 p. 30. Arist. l. 1.
Ethic. c. 7.
Deum scilicet amando: yea even the simplest man that is, as Justin Martyr
teaches. For this is the chiefest work of man, even as he is a man. This is
that Opus Hominis, quatenus Homo: Whereby he is made blessed: His truly loving
God. And therefore, this, every man ought to make his first and chiefest work:
and all the rest, but seconds, and thirds: as Iustine Martyr notes, in the
fore-alledged place. So that, Philosophy teaches a man to love God, even by
his very name. And therefore it must needs assume, That there is one.

Again, Aristotle Arist. l 2. Metaph. c: 2.
calls true Philosophy, Scientiam veritatis: The knowledge of the Truth: and
affirms, that The end of it, is only Veritas, that is, to attain unto the
truth. Now, God is, prima veritas, God is the first Truth, as Trismegistus
affirms. Stobaeus, Sermon. 11. p. 134.
Primam veritatem, aio, Vnum, and solum illum, qui non est ex m^teria, corpore
non continetur, sine color, sine figura, mutationi and alterationi nulli
obnoxium semper existentem. I call the first truth, that one and only thing,
which has neither body, nor matter, color, nor figure, never subject to
alteration, and yet ever in perfect being. All which attributes, can agree unto
nothing else, but only unto God himself. Whom the Scriptures likewise call,
John 14.
by the name of the Truth: I am the Way, the Truth, and the Life. And this is
that Truth, which we first ought to seek for; as being the Way, which leads
us unto Life. This is everlasting life, to know thee to be the only true God,
John 17.
and whom thou have sent Jesus Christ. And the knowledge of Truth, Arist. l. 1.
Rhetor. ad Theodect. c. 1. m.
is the very end, for which man was created: as even Aristotle himself has
expressly affirmed. Homines ad veritatem nati sunt. Men are borne for nothing
else, but to seek for the Truth. So that, whether Philosophy be the love of
Wisdom; as Pythagoras intended: or, the knowledge of the Truth; as Aristotle
intended: yet both ways it leads a man unto God, who is both the highest
wisdom, and the chiefest Truth: Yea, and that, by virtue of the very name.

Now come we from the notation of the name, unto the definition of the Thing:
and we shall see it there again. For Philosophy, is defined to be, Omnium
rerum, divinarum, Cic. de Orat. p. 103. a. Item in lib. de Vniuerso. Senec.
Epist. 14.
atque humanarum scientia: The knowledge of all things, both divine, and
humane. Whence Seneca affirms, that, Nomen Philosophiae, est non solum
venerabile, sed etiam sacrum. The very name of Philosophy, is both honorable,
and holy: Honorable, in things humane; and Holy, in things Divine. Now, if
Philosophy teach us the knowledge of the things of God; then must it needs
lead us, to the knowledge of God himself. And so indeed, true Philosophy
does. For, there is none other way to come unto God, Psalm 37. 27.
but by eschewing of Evil, and doing of Good. And both these lessons does
Philosophy teach us. For it is, both Expultrix vitiorum; and Indagatrix
virtutum: The Expeller of vices; and Searcher-out of virtues. First, it
expels vices, as skillful Physicians do peccant and vicious humors. And
therefore, Cic. Tusc. 228. b. 191. a. 177 a.
in another place, he calls Philosophy, Medicinam Animi^ The Physic of the
Soul: and in another, Culturam Animi: The Husbandry and manuring of the
Soul: which rooteth out all vices, as noisome and hurtful weeds. So that, for
the first part of the way unto God; which is Flying of evil; Philosophy, not
only points it out unto us, but also, in a sort, does lead us in it by the
hand. Whereupon, in the fore-alledged place, he calls Philosophy, Cic.
Tusc. 228. b. Cic. de Fin. 90. b. Cic. in Pison. 95. a.
The Guide of our life: Ducem vitae. And, for the second part of the way; which
is Doing of Good; he calls Philosophy, Artem vitae: The Art of man's life.
Which Art contains in it (as in another place he notes) Et virtutis, and
officij, and been vivendi disciplinam: A full and perfect instruction both in
all virtues, and in all manner of well living. Neither does it only teach the
knowledge thereof unto men; but it also exacteth the practice of them. For, as
it is observed by the Roman Orator: Omnis optimarum rerum cognitio, Cic. de
Orat. 148 a.
atque in ijs exercitatio, Philosophia nominatur: Not only the knowledge of
every good thing, but also a working and exercise therein, is that, which can
worthily be named Philosophy. Finally, whatsoever godly Lesson is taught us,
either in the Metaphysics, or Physics, or Physic, or Ethics, or Politics,
or Mathematics, or Grammar, or Logic, or Rhetoric, or any other Art; all
that is taught us by Philosophy. For, all these are nothing else but the parts
of Philosophy. And therefore, when the Apostle exhorts us, to take heed,
that no Man deceive us through Philosophy; he speaks not against true
Philosophy: for that deceives no man: as is truly observed by the Heathen
Poet. Nam neque decipitur Ratio, neque decipit vnquam.
For true Philosophy, Manil. l. 2.
praeserueth men
From all deceit, and not deceives them.
For, Cic. l. de Divin. p. 125. a. Cic. de Not. Deor. p. 75. b.
in true Philosophy, there is, Nihil commentitijs fabellis loci: There is no
place for Fables. And true Philosophers be not, fabularum, but, rerum authors:
as the Orator teaches us. Therefore, it is not true Philosophy, which the
Apostle there reproves: but certain false, and sophistical Doctrines, which
many Impostors obtruded to their hearers, under the false name of Philosophy.
He speaks but of that Philosophy, which is falsely so called. For, true
Philosophy is the gracious gift of God.

2 Yea, and I find it observed, by some of the learned, that; as Philosophy
has in it, an image of Gods goodness, in bringing so many, and so great good
things unto us: so has it in it also (in diverse other respects) an image and
resemblance, not only of the Deity, but also of the Trinity. As I see the
lines drawn in Zeegedinus his common places. Zeeged. loc. com. p. 10.
Which though it be but, as it were, a monogrammal description, and a kind of
rude draught, as it were with a Cole: yet, because a man so learned, has
thought it worthy to be published, I will not think it unworthy to be here
represented. His conceit thereof, is this: That Whereas Philosophy has three
general parts; Natural, Rational, and Moral; Natural Philosophy, which
handles the causes of all things, represents God the Father, Acts 17. 25.
who is the Creator, and the general Cause of all things. Rational
Philosophy, which teache^h of reason and understanding, 1. Cor. 1. 24.
represents God the Son, who is the wisdom of his Father, and the sweet
disposer of all things. And Moral Philosophy, which is the rule of well
living, John 16. 13.
represents the Holy Ghost; who is the preserver, and the guide of all men
into truth, and virtuous life.

Yea, and the same resemblances may also be seen, in all the minor parts of
the forenamed Philosophies, as well as in their totals. For first, as
concerning Natural Philosophy: the parts thereof be three, The Metaphysickes,
the Mathematickes, and the Physickes. The Metaphysickes, considering the pure
essence of things, does therein resemble God the Father; who is nothing else
but a pure and simple essence, and the very first principle of all other
things. The Mathmetickes, considering of forms and figures, do therein
resemble God the Son; Hebrews 1. 3.
who is the character and engraven image of God the Father The Physickes,
considering the motions and operations of all natural bodies, do therein
resemble God the Holy Ghost; who is that divine spirit, by which all things
both live, Acts 17. 28.
and move, and have their being.

Now secondly, for Rational Philosophy: that has three parts too: Grammar,
Logic, and Rhetoric. Grammar, which teaches the forming and expressing of
words, resembles God the Father; who forms (like a mind) and expresses,
(like a mouth) the eternal Word, his Son. Logic, which teaches the power
of reasoning, resembles God the Son; who is (...), The high Reason, and
Wisdom of his Father. And Rhetoric, which teaches the faculty of
persuading, resembles the Holy Ghost; who both gives unto men the power of
persuasion, and the motion also to be persuaded by speaking.

And thirdly, for Moral Philosophy; that likewise has three parts:
Ecclesiastickes, Oeconomickes, and Politickes. The Ecclesiastickes, treating of
the knowledge of God the Creator, represent God the Father, in the authority of
his Creation. The Oeconomickes, treating of private life, and of those
provisions which belong unto it, represent God the Son, in the charity of his
Sustentation. And the Politickes, treating of Regiment, and well governing,
represent God the Holy Ghost, in the goodness of his Preserving. This is
Zeegedin's comparison, as concerning that resemblance of the Holy Trinity,
which shines in every part of Philosophy.

3 Now the Heathen, though they could not go thus far, as to see in
Philosophy an image of the Trinity (because that is a Mystery, far above
their Capacity) yet they could go so far, as to see, that Philosophy is the
gift of God, and not the invention of any mortal man. Cic. l. 1. Tusc. p. 117.
Tully calls it expressly, both Inventum Deorum, and, Donum Deorum, that is,
both a spark of Gods own divine Wisdom; and also his gracious gift unto men.
Which when he sent unto them, he sent together with it, all other Arts and
Sciences, to attend upon it. Clem. Alex. l. 1. Strom. p. 136.
As Clemens Alexandrinus has truly observed. Apparet, ill as liberales
Graecorum disciplinas, vna cum ipsa Philosophia, venire devinitus ad Hominem.
It appears, that even the liberal Arts of the Greeks, were sent down out
of Heaven, together wi^h Philosophy it self, unto men. So that, as the Orator
very truly affirms: Hoc bono, nullum optabilius, nullum praestantius, Cic.
l. de Universe. p. 204. a.
neque datum est mortalium generi, Deorum concessu atque, munere neque dabitur.
Then which the^e was never any greater good, nor more to be desired, either
given, Senec. Epist. 14.
or can be given by God unto Men. Yea, and Seneca proves it, by this excellent
reason* That, if Philosophy were not given unto men by God, they should be
more beholding unto Philosophy then to God. For they receive so many good
things, by the means of Philosophy, as they do from nothing else, but only
from God himself. This is that high opinion, which has been held of
Philosophy, even by the very Heathen.

4 And, Poetry is the Gift of God.
as they have thought of Philosophy: so have they likewise of Poetry: That it
is also the gift of God, and not a skill by any man invented. And this is, Cic.
de Divin p. 97. b.
not only by the Roman Orator confirmed: but also, even by the Poets
themselves acknowledged. Democritus affirms directly: Neminem, sine furore,
Poetam magnum esse posse. That no man can attain, to be a great Poet, unless
he first be rapt with some divine and heavenly spirit. And Plato, he says,
Plato in Io^e. pr.
That Poets use to make all their excellent Poems; non art, sed divino affl^tu
capti; not by their own Art, but by the inspiration of some divine spirit. And
Maximus Tyrius, speaking of Homer, and of his excellent gift in Poetry, he
says: That he was, surely, taught, by some of the Muses, if not by god Apollo
himself, Max. Tyr. Sermon. 16. p. 194.
Illum docuit vel Musa Iovis, vel pulcher Apollo.

And again, p. 195.
a little after: Et Homeri and Hesiodi carmina, vniversaque illa antiqua, Musa,
divinitus erat afflata. And that which these Philosophers affirm, the Roman
Orator confirms. Cic. Orat. pro Archia Poeta. p. 189. a.
Poeta, quasi divino quodam spiritu afflatur. Every Poet is inspired, with a
kind of heavenly spirt. Yea, and Apollo, the Poets special god, assumeth it
unto him: That Poesy is his gift. -- Per me concordant carmina nervis. Ovid l.
1. Metam. p. 39.

The Poets strings,
And what he sings,
That all agree,
It is by me.
Yea, and even the very Poets themselves (stripping themselves of all the glory
of that divine invention) do industriously maintain the very same opinion:
partly, by indirect insinuation: and partly, by direct confession. By
insinuation, in their inuocations to Apollo, and the Muses in the beginning of
their Poems. So Homer, in his Iliads. Iram cane, Hom. l. 1. Iliad.
Dea, Pelidae Achillis.
O Goddess, do thou streyne,
Achilles angry vein.
So again in his Odysses. Odys. l. 1.
Virum dic mihi, Musa, versutum.
Help me, o Muse, to sing of such a man,
As was so wise a Poli^ian.
Insinuating, that he could not tell what to say, if the Muse should not teach
him.

So Virgil, his Ape: Dic mihi, Musa, virum.
Prompt me the Man, my Muse.


So Nonius, in his Dionysiaca: (...) -- Tell, Goddess, tell.

So Ovid. Ad mea perpetuum deducite tempora carmen.
Yea gods draw on, perpetuate my rhyme,
From Worlds first being, to my present time.
And, as in the beginning of their poems, they use to insinuate, that they
cannot go forward, without the help of God: so, in the end of their poems,
oftentimes, they ascribe their felicity, in going so well forward, unto his
help. Euripides, in many of his Tragoedies, prays for victory: thereby
insinuating, that victory and excellency in Poetry, is only of God. Which,
Agatho the Poet, in a very religious manner, expressed. For he, having, in the
Olympiacke, Plato, in Convivio. p. 417.
obtained the victory, by his Tragoedie; he out of his thankfulness, the next
day, sacrificed unto the Muses.

Neither do the Poets, by these Insinuations only, acknowledge, that their
faculty is given to them by God: but also by their direct, and apert
Confessions.

So Virgil: Virg. Eclog. 1. p. 1.
-- Ille
Ludere quae vellem calamo permisit agresti.
That God of mine is he,
That grants this to me,
To sing, and pipe, and play,
My pleasing country lay.


So Horace. Deus, Horat. p. 18.
Deus nam me vetat.
God, God does me forbid.


So Ovid. Est Deus in nobis, agitante calescimus illo, Ovid l. 6. Fast.

Imp^tus hic sacrae semina mentis habet.
There is a God in us, and by his power we live,
This power of his the seed^ of sacred mind do give.


So Ovid again, in another place: Est Deus in nobis, Ovid. l. 3. de Art
Amandi.
sunt and commercia Coeli.
Sedibus aethereis spiritus ille venit.
A God there is in us, and with us Heavens commerce,
And thence that Spirit comes, that helps out our verse.


Otherwise, as Theocritus Theocrit cidyl. 10. p. 110.
ingenuously confesses: Arduae sunt Poetarum viae, absque Musis,
Et lovis consilio.
The paths that Poets trace, full uncouth prove,
Without I^ues aid, and Muses, from above.
Thus, All A^t^ acknowledged to be the gifts of God.
even the Heathen confessed, not only Philosophy, but also Poetry, to be a
Divine gift; and to be sent unto men out of Heaven, by God. But this point I
now pass over; because I have touched upon it, before.

5 And the like they acknowledge of all other arts too. Yea, and that (as in
the for^^er) both indirectly, by Implication; and directly, by Confession. The
^reekes insinuate, that all Arts come from God; in making (...), Daughter of
Jupiter: and to have had her generation, in his Diu^eb^^^^. For, thereby they
imply, that all Arts were first bred in Jupiters own head. Salust, in Ciceron.
For Minerva was the Mistress of all good Arts: as Salust, in his inuectiue
against Tully, insinuates: where, in derision, he affirms him to be a man,
Quem Minerva omnes Arts edocuit: Whom Minerua had adorned with all her Arts
and Sciences.

Yea, Cic. l. 2. de Not. Deor. p. 212.
and the Romans do also insinuate the same: in consecrating Men's, among their
other Gods. Whereby again they imply^, that all understanding is given to men
by God.

Neither do they only by Insinuation imply it; but also directly, in express
words confess it.

So Orpheus -- Iovis omnia munus. L. Apuleus, l. de Munde. Pansa, p. 97.

All goods are Gods: His gifts they are.


So likewise Pythagoras. -- sacrum genus est hominibus
Quibus sacra natura p^ofere^do in lucem omnia monstra^. Pansa. c. 3. p. 10.

He says, the holy God does bring to light,
Whatsoever M^n does understand aright.


So likewise Aratus. -- nos, ille benignus
Fausta docet --
It Is he alone, Stobaus Eclog. Phys. c. 3. p. 3.
even he, the God beningne,
That us instructs, in every blessed thing.
Yea, and as Philo Iudaeus observes; when he begins to teach men, he teaches
them to purpose. Phil^ Iud. p. 198.
Quando Fons Sapientiae, Deus, Scientias tradit humano generi, sine mora hoc
facit. Whenas God, who is the fountain of all wisdom, delivers any Art or
Science unto men, he quickly does dispatch them. H^ does it, not, instillando;
but, infundendo. He does it, not by instillation, but by infusion. He droppeth
it not in; but he powers it in. As we may see in the Apostles, when he gave
them the gift of toungs. And therefore it is a very false position, which is
maintained by Xenophon: That all Arts have been found out, rather by the wit
of man (using the benefit of long time) then by Gods special blessing. Non Dij
mortalibus principio oftendere omnia: sed melius quaerentes tempore longo
invenere. Stob Eclog. Phys. c. 11. p. 17.
It is true indeed, that God does not always, upon a sudden, power knowledge
into men (as he did into the Disciples) but teaches them by degrees, in
distance of times: but yet, men were not able, to get knowledge of themselves,
though they should labor for it, with never so great pain, and never so long
time; if they were not assisted, with his special blessing. And therefore
Orpheus, in the fore-alledged place, he ascribes unto God, not only the
beginning; but also the proceeding, in all kind of learning. Jupiter est Caput,
Orpheus in Pansa c. 19. p. 79.
and Medium: Iovis omnia munus. God is the Beginning, and God is the
proceeding: and All is of Gods giving. For Every good giving comes down unto
us from the Father of Lights. James 1. 17.
And, It is only in his Light, that we see Light. It is he (says the Prophet
David) that teaches a man knowledge. Psalm 36. 9. 94. 10.
It is he (says the Prophet Daniel Daniel 2. 21.
) that gives wisdom, unto all that be wise; and understanding, unto all that
understand. He gave to Ananias, and his fellows, their knowledge and
understanding in all manner of learning. Daniel 1. 17. 1. Kings 3. 12. 4 30.
31. 32. 33.
He gave unto King Solomon, all his excellent wisdom, which reached unto all
the parts of Philosophy. And no man has any thing, which he has not of his
teaching: no nor can have neither. For he gives, not only the possession of
all Arts; but also all possibility of attayning unto them. He both teaches
men; and he gives them the capacity to learn. He gives docilitie, together
with his doctrine. It is he (says the Prophet) that gives an ear to hear,
Isay 50. 4.
as the learned.

Yea, and this also, even by the Heathen themselves, is acknowledged.
Strepsiades, Aristoph in Nub. Act. 1. Sce. 2. p. 163. Aelian p. 423.
when he entered into the School of Socrates, to learn his abstruse Arts; he
prayed unto the gods, to lend him their assistance. So that, though Docility
may seem to be a gift of Nature; yet, even that nature is, the gift of God.
Nature may give the gift of docility to us: but God gives the gift of docility
to it. So that, all our capability of receiving any Art, is taught, even by the
Heathen, to be given of God. And we must fly above nature, if we will rightly
reduce it, to his true Original Author. God both gives all knowledge, unto
them that have it; and all capacity to receive it, unto them that have it not.
And thus (as Eusebius has truly observed) it is, Eusebius l. 13. de Prapar. c.
7. p. 278. Lib. 2. c. 1. Sect. 8.
Divinum verbum, quod omnes Arts hominibus suggerit; ^is only the Divine
word, which gives unto all men, all manner of Arts and knowledge. But this
point has also been touched by me, heretofore. And therefore I will not
press it, in this place, any more.

6 Let us therefore now come down, to the lowest degree of Arts: that is,
Manuary and Mechanical: Mechanical Arts are the gifts of God.
and we shall see, that even they, as well as the liberal, are, by the
Heathen, confessed to be the gifts of God. Trismegistus Trisineg. Pimand.
Dial. 10. p. 424.
says of all kinds of knowledge in general: that, Scientia est Dei donum:
That all manner of knowledge, is the gift of God; And Seneca, of all humane
Arts in particular: Senec. l. 4. de Benesic. c. 6. p. 50.
Neque enim nostra, haec, quae invenimus, dixeris; non magis quam quod
crescimus. Insita sunt nobis omnium Artium semina. Sed Magister, ex occulto,
Deus producit ingenia. Do not call those things our works, which we seem to
have invented: no more then it is our work, that we grow up. The seeds indeed
of all good Arts, are sown in our minds. But yet there is a secret Master,
within us, which gives us our wits. And that is God himself. So Clemens
Alexandrinus unto the same purpose. Cl^m. Alex. l. 5. Strom. p, 281.
Arts omnes divina Ratio docet. Non enim homo Artem aliquam invenit: sed Deus
affert. Hominis enim ratio, orta est a divina ratione. It is only Gods
wisdom, that teaches all Arts and Sciences unto men. For man cannot find out
any Art of himself: it is God that brings it to him. But be it that man
invented them; why yet all humane reason does draw his Original from Gods
divine wisdom. So that all is due to God. For, as Job, Job 32. 8.
in his Book, teaches us: Though there be a Spirit in a man; yet it is the
inspiration of the Almighty, that gives understanding. Though a man have, by
nature, a spirit in him; yet has not that spirit the light of understanding,
unless the Father of Lights inspire the same into him. And this, even
Aristotle himself also teaches: who expressly affirms; That, though God have
given docility into men's souls, by nature; yet has he not given them doctrine
it self, by nature: but gives that of himself, out of his own special
grace. Arist. l. 12. de Theol. cap 15.
A Natura non inest homini nisi docilitas; non autem doctrina: eiusque animus
creatus est, non eruditus, sed erudibilis. Man has only, by Nature, the power
of docilitie, he has not, by nature, the habit of doctrine. His soul is
created to be capable of learning: it is not actually created learned. And
therefore, as he notes in another place: In all a man's learning, Arist. l. 8.
de Theol. cap. 8.
Intellectus operatur, vt agens secundum; ac; per primum efficit, quicquid
efficit: His understanding works, but as a second Agent; and does all it
does, by the virtue of an higher understanding, which is above it. And this,
even the Heathen acknowledge to be true, as well in all inferior and
Mechanical Arts, as in the liberal and ingenuous. And therefore they have
ascribed the invention of all the several manuarie Arts, unto their several
gods: As namely, Plato. in Convivio. p. 428.
to Hercules, Pol. Virg de. Invent. l. 3. c. 6. p. 227.
the first invention of the purple dye: Virg. l. 1. Georg. p. 36.
Agriculture, Diod. Sic. l. 6.
to Ceres: Prima Ceres Ferro mortales vertere terram
Instituit: --
Navigation to Neptune: as Diodorus Siculus writes: whence his name is
etymologized by Tully: Neptunus a nando:
He is named Neptune from navigations.


Whereby it appears, that, even they themselves thought, the invention of the
meanest Mechanical Art, to proceed from a more divine understanding then
dwells in the heart, or in the head, of any man. And thus far they went
right. But now, here again, they err; that they ascribed those Arts, unto
their false gods, which of right do belong unto the true God. For, all those
Arts, are only his gifts. He is their true Author, and Inuentor. So that,
without sacrilege, they cannot be ascribed, unto any other. And therefore God
himself, Who will not give his honor unto any other, calls home all those
Arts, and chalengeth them by name, to be his own inventions.

He taught the first Shipwright, Genesis 6. 14. Psalm. 127. 1.
how to make his Ship. He teaches the Carpenter, how to build his house. He
teaches the Husbandman, how to plow his land. Ille colit terras: Virg. Eclog.
3. p. 8.

He tilleth the Earth.
The Earth Man tilleth,
As God him teaches.
He teaches the Art of Graving, in all kind of metals; and of Carving, in
either Wood, Ex. 35. 32, 33.
or Stone. He teaches the Arts, both of Weauing, 35.
and Imbroydering; and of curious working, in all kind of Needle work: and of
all such like other cunning inventions; as he adds in that place:
shutting-vp his own enumeration, with that general Conclusion, that no other
particular should be left out of it. All these several Artificers, he
professes, that he fills with the spirit of knowledge, Ex. 35. 31.
and understanding; in all their several Arts. Yea, and that which is very
worthy the noting, he assumeth to himself, to give the Art to teach them, as
well as to practice them. Yea, 34.
and though he be, The most High: yet he chalengeth the invention, even of
that simple Art, which among the rest may seem the most low: I have created
the Smith, that blows the Coals in the fire, Isay 54. 16.
and him that brings forth an Instrument, for his work. Theodoret. Ser. 4.
de Provident. To. 2. p. 591. Zanch, l, de Operibus Dei p. 61^^
But this point is largely handled, both by Theodoret, and by Zanchius. And
therefore I will prosecute it no farther. Thus now we see, who is the true
Author, of all those Arts and Sciences, which the Heathens have ascribed unto
their false gods. And withal, that there is none of them so mean, which he
has thought unworthy to be his own invention. So that now it appears, that
there is not any Art, neither Liberal, nor illiberall, from the Metaphysickes,
to the Mechanics, from the highest, to the lowest, but that some way or other,
it leads a man to God. Which is the maine scope, and intent of this second
Book. Here we should proceed to the third probation of our first general
head, argued, and urged, from The Structure of Man's body, etc. But the Hand of
Almighty GOD, at this present, on mine own Body, here stays my Hand.

(...).
FINIS.

