THE FIRST PART OF PARISMVS, THE Renowned Prince of Bohemia.

His most famous, delectable, and pleasant History.

Containing His Noble Battails fought against the Persians. His Love to
Laurana, the Kings Daughter of Thessalie: And of his strange Adventures in the
Desolate Island.

Dum spiro spero. VERITAS VIRESSIT VULNERE
TC

printer's or publisher's device

LONDON Printed by Thomas Creed. 1615.

AA


TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE Sir Robert Ratcliffe Knight, Earl of Sussex, Viscount
Fitzwaters, Lord Egremond, and Burnell, E. F. wishes health, honor, and
happiness.
THe most mighty Monarch Alexander, as well beheld the crooked counterfetit of
Vulcan, as the sweet picture of Venus. Philip of Macedon, accepted a bunch of
Grapes, presented by a simple Country Swain. The Widows mite, was as
graciously esteemed, as the great gifts of the wealthy. So I, (Right
Honorable, and my very good Lord,) have presumed to present your Honor with
this Fancy, entitled Honors Triumph. Imboldened thereunto, by the view of
those admired gifts of true Nobility, that abundantly adorn your Virtuous
inclination, vouchsafe the acceptance of this poor present: not for the
worthiness thereof, but for the good intent of the writer, who most humbly
sueth for your favorable protection, to countenance the well intending labors
of a Scholar, that has dedicated himself in all dutiful regard, to your
Honors command: with the poor Countryman, presenting somewhat, to show my
duty and afffection: and willing to give a worthier gift, if it consisted in
my poor ability.

Apoll^ gives Oracles, as well to the poor as to the Rich. The Noblest minds
have always as well esteemed the intents of the well meaning, as the
performance of the best able. Even so I trust your Honor, in whom the Essence
of true Nobility and virtue are united, will (under the Protection of your
Wisdoms favorable Censure) regard my dutiful meaning herein. Which has
not been satisfied with admiration, but longtime desirous to be one of the
participants of your Honors most laudable dispositious, whereunto I do wholly
submit my self. Resting in hopeful assurance, that notwithstanding,
whatsoever wants in me, or the works worthiness, yet your Honor will
daine to accept this small present, or rather therein my good will: which will
yield to none, in respect of dutiful douotion, though unable to compare with
the least of the Learned writers, that have past their works under the Title
of your Honorable Patronage. Which favor, I humbly desire your Honor, of your
abundant liberality, to impart to my poor talent, as to one that of duty
intermitteth not to sollicitie the Almighty, that he would always direct you
in the commendable race of virtue, enrich you with all spiritual and temporal
blessings, augment your Honors to the highest degree, and in the end, reward
you with immortal selicitie.

Your Honors most bounden and obedient in all duty, Emanuel Forde.

TO THE COURTEOUS READER.
EVen as an unskillful Pylote lying in safe Harbor, should in time of foul
weather launch into the deep, and so bring his Ship in danger: So I
(Courteous Reader) have aduenturously thrust forth this Fancy, to abide your
Censure: which if kind, care is past: If otherwise, to abide Shipwreck by your
discontent. But howsoever, I rely upon your courtesy, that although the
matter procure you not that delight my travels did expect, yet you will allow
the writers good intent. And although the phrase be not altogether agreeable to
your fancy, yet you will favorably judge thereof, as the first fruits of my
labors.

If my self were present to answer all Objections, those that are
discontented should rest better satisfied. But in mine absence, I crave your
kind opinion, wishing no other shelter wherevnder to shrowde the defects, then
your Courtesy.

This Knight was long since bred in Bohemia, but in Thessalia he wanne his
Title of Honor; where first began his Famous deeds, which if they please,
my reward is sufficient, if not, yet pardon: and by your Clemency, add life
to the second part, whose being rests in your power.

Expect not the high style of a refined wit, but the plain description of
Ualiant Knights, and the constant truth of Loyal Friends. Condemn not
unkindly, but Censure favorably, and impute the defects to my want, not my
will, that my desire may take wished effect, which is to please all, and give
offense to none: yet careless to satisfy the curious discontented, who
contemn all things, but amend nothing.

And thus for my recompense, let me have your kind words, and lawful favor,
and I ask no more.

Farewell, E. Forde.

THE FIRST PART OF THE MOST DELECTABLE and pleasant History of Parismus, the
famous Prince of Bohemia, his noble Battles fought against the Persians, his
love to Laurana, the Kings daughter of Thessaly: and his strange Adventures in
the desolate Island.
CHAP. I.
How Parismus, Son and Heir to the King of Bohemia, arrived in Thessaly, how
he was entertained by Dionisius the King, who kept his Court at the City of
Thebes, and of a strange adventure that befell to Osiris, one of Dionisius
Knights.

IN the most rich and famous Country of Thessaly, reigned one Dionisius, whose
discretion in government, and singular wisdom in ruling so mighty a Nation,
made the splendant fame of his renown to spread it self to the uttermost
confines of the world: and most Countries made continual traffic thither, by
reason of the good and equitable laws he had instituted for the quiet of his
Country. Among the rest of his external blessings, whereof he enjoyed
abundance, his Court was much renowned by the exceeding beauty, and virtuous
gifts of Oliuia his Queen, by whom he had one only daughter named Laurana,
whose beauty so far excelled all other Ladies, that (...) was esteemed (in
those parts of the world) the only Paragone for beauty, asides, the virtuous
qualities, and precious gifts of nature, wherewith her mind was abundantly
adorned, did so much extol her high commendations, that many Princes of far
Countries, did travel thither to attain her leave. In so much that by
continual access of many strange Knights, the Court of Dionisius daily
increased in dignity, who gave most coueteous entertainment to all, as fitted
to their honor, and accorded with his most bountuous wisdom. Amongst the
rest of the Knights that came to be eyewitnesses of the beauty of Laurana,
it fortuned the young Prince, Parismus, Son and heir to the King of Bohemia,
to arrive in the confines of Thessaly, being accompanied with diverse Nobles of
his Fathers Court. Who having before heard of the fame of Dionisius, the
courteous entertainment he gave to strangers, and the exceeding beauty of his
daughter Laurana, determined to travel either to try his fortune to win her
love, as also to be partaker of his bounty, being thereto drawn by a virtuous
inclination to imitate his honorable examples. And calling to him one of his
Knights named Oristus, willed him to go to Dionisius Court, and signify unto
his Majesty, that he was desirous to visit him, if it please him to accept
him as a guest.

Oristus making speed, soon arrived at the City of Thebes, where the King
then kept his Court, and being admitted his presence, delivered his message.
Which when Dionisius understood, he told Oristus that he would very wilingly
gratulate the Princes kindness, desiring him to certify his Lord, that he should
be most heartily welcome, wherewith Oristus departed.

Dionisius willing his Noble men to be in readiness the next day, for he
purposed to meet the Prince himself. In the mean time he commanded all
preparation that might be devised to be made, for his more honorable
entertainment. Early the next morning, Dionisius attended by his noble men,
rode forth to meet the Prince, some three miles from the City, whom he most
lovingly embraced, and welcomed with exceeding courtesy.

Parismus maruelling at this unexpected kindness in him, said: Most high and
magnificent King, I being altogether unworthy of this your exceeding favor,
most humbly entreat your pardon to my presumption, desiring you to impute my
rashness to my youth, which has attempted this boldness, without any hope in
the least degree how to deserve such kindness.

Dionisius taking him by the hand, desired him to leave off those speeches, for
that he esteemed his Court and Country insufficent to entertain him
according as he desired, telling him that he was the most welcome guest to
his Court, that might be: wherewith they joyfully departed toward the City,
but as they road, they heard a most grievous groan in the Thicket of a Wood
hard by. Whereupon Dionisius commanded his Knights to beset the Wood on every
side, himself, Parismus, and diverse Noble men, entered the Thicket, where they
found an Armed Knight most grievously wounded: At which pitiful spectacle,
Dionisius alighted from his Horse, viewed his face, and knew him to be his
trusty Knight Osiris, whom he most dearly loved. Wherefore he commanded
him to be conveyed to the Court, that his own Physicians might look to him,
and bind up his wounds.

In the mean time the King, Parismus, and diverse Knights, made diligent
search in the wood, but could find no creature there, and thereby no
certainty how Osiris should be thus wounded. That departing discontented, the
King was certified that there was great hope of his recovery, who speaking to
Parismus, said; Most noble Prince, I hope this mischaunce has not disquieted
you, for I would be sorry you should conceive any occasion of sadness thereat,
but I trust by that time Osiris be recovered, we shall easily come to the
knowledge hereof.

My Lord, replied Parismus, I have no cause to be grieved for my part, but to
see your Majesty hereby disquieted. Indeed said Dionisius, it some what
greeueth me, because Osiris is one that I love, being well worthy thereof, for
his virtues do far exceed many men's, of whose faith and fidelity I have had
sufficient trial, that a more loyal Knight cannot be found. By this time they
were come to the Palace gate, where was the Queen with all her train of
Ladies, to welcome Parismus, which was a most pleasing sight to behold, that
the Prince with the sudden view of their beauty, was driven into a deep
study, from which he was revived by the Queen, who most graciously welcomed
him, saying: In all kindness, I bid your honor welcome into Thessaly, where
we will endeavor to requite your friendship in coming to us.

Most virtuous Queen (quoth he) for this your honorable favor, both my
self and all that is mine, shall be continually bound to do you dutiful
service. The glory of the Palace made Parismus marvel, this honorable
entertainment, the sumptuous banquets, the rare Music, and gallant shows, too
tedious to rehearse, made him think that Fame had altogether darkened the
glory of that place, that all his senses were replenisht with variety of
delight.

At such time as Dionisius, and the Prince, entered the Court, Laurana, hearing
of the Princes coming, standing at her Chamber window, viewed them well, and
knew, or at least thought that to be Parismus, that came with her father,
noting well his gallant and comely proportion, said to one of her maids named
Leda, Is not yonder Knight that accompaineth my father, the Prince of Bohemia?
Yes (quoth Leda) I think so, for a more gallant Knight did I never behold.
Wherewith the crimzin color in Lauranaes cheek began to revive: which Leda
perceiving, said, it would become our Cou^ well, to have his presence
continually, for it cannot choose but a Knight of so fair prrportion, must
needs be endued with as excellent gifts. Why quoth Laurana, this Court cannot
long contain such guests: wherewithal she went to dinner, feeling a kind of
alteration in all her parts, which seemed strange to her, for even then love
began to kindle in her tender heart, which yet she did not well understand,
but afterward grew to a burning heat, as shall be declared. She used sildome
to come abro^d, but sometimes privately for recreation, for such was her chaste
resolve, that she delighted in nothing but virtuous meditations.

To relate the conference the King and Parismus had, were tedious, and
imperitinent to the History. But the Prince maruailed he could not see
Laurana, so famous for her beauty, being hereby drawn into many deep
cogitations, by which thoughts, and remembrance of the long iourny he had
passed, only to behold her person, and now could not be assures h^e had seen
the beauty he expected, was drawn into such a sad study, that in a manner
he neither heard what was spoken, nor cegarded where he was. At last reviving
his senses that were dulled with passion, he suddenly sighed, and smiling said
(fearing his heaviness had been noted) your Majesty may peradventure note my
sadness: the remembrance of your Knights injury, makes me study how he should
be so grievously wounded, and no man found that should act the same (which
words he only spoke to excuse himself.

Surely answered the King, some man by secret treachery has wrought him that
harm, which at more convenient time we shall find the truth thereof, which I
would effect with all speed, but that I hope to be ascertained by himself,
whom my Physicians say is in good estate of amendment. With these and many
other speeches. Dinner being fully ended, Dionisius, Parismus, and the Queen,
walked into a most pleasant Garden, where after a while he was entertained with
a most costly and rare banquet, provided in an Arbor or banqueting House,
adjoining to a Grove fraught with many pleasant Birds, whose sweet harmony
much augmented the pleasure of the place, all things being most artificially
contrived for delight, which when Parismus beheld, he then began to think
with himself, how shall I see the Princess Laurana, for whose sight I have
undertaken this travel, whose delightful presence shall refresh my tired
senses, and expel those inward cares wherewith I am thus perplexed. But when
he saw none but the King and Queen, he was much troubled in his mind, to
think what might be the cause, that thee whose fame had long since come to his
knowledge, was not to be seen, that by constrained mirth, he past away the
time in such Banqueting and other pastime, as the King entertained him withal,
which were such, as he much wondered at. And night being come, with all
stateliness that might be, he was by them conducted to his Lodging, which was
most sumptuously adorned with most precious and rich hangings, that the place
seemed a new Paradise, for there wanted nothing that might either delight the
ear or eye. Lodgings for his Noblemen, Knights and servants, were placed in
such manner, that they seemed by their situation to be gardiants to their
Lords person: having then taken his leave of the King and Queen, he betook
himself to his rest.

CHAP. II.
How Parismus having soiourned some days in the Thessalian Court, being
frustrated of seeing the Princess Laurana, imparted his mind to Oristus one of
his Knights, by whose means afterward he came to to a fight of her. And what
befell afterward.

AFter Parismus was come to his Chamber, he called to him Oristus, the only
man whom he trusted, and asked him how he liked the Court of Dionisius. My
Lord (quoth he) the small continuance I have had therein, might be suficient
to excuse me from sensuring thereof, but to satisfy your demand, I do
esteem and think of it, as a most renowned, and Honorable place. But said
Parismus, what if thy Lord shall here purchase that which shall be worse the^
death unto him, unless he have remedy? what would thou then think? I
would my Lord said he, speak my opinion, if I knew whence the original of
that evil should proceed. From my self said Parismus, for thus it is. Thou I
am sure have heard of the renowned Lauarana, and of the Hnoourable report that
is spread of her Beauty and virtues, which drives me into manifold thoughts,
because I cannot behold that beauty, therefore I impart my mind to thee, as
to the only man I trust, that unless I can by thy means have some hope of
comfort, I will both curse the hour of my Nativity, and remain hereafter in
continual grief: therefore counsel me what I were best to do herein.

My Lord said Oristus, since it pleases your Highness so much to favor me,
as to choose me to be your aid herein, I will most faithfully, and speedily, do
to my uttermost to accomplish your desire. I pray thee then do it, said
Parismus, with all speeds, for my restless passions require counsel. I have,
said Oristus, some acquaintance with Lord Remus, who is greatly favored of the
King, continually Resident in the Court, and well beloved of all, by whose
means I do not doubt, but both to have some certain knowledge of the Princes,
as also soon to bring you to her speech, and according as you have put me in
trust, so I will use all the means I can to purchase your content.

Much part of the night being past, Parismus betook himself to his rest, and
Oristus to his lodging. In the morning Dionisius being early up, used his
accustomed manner to visit his guests, and coming to Parismus Chamber, he found
him not there, but walking in a gallery thereto adjoining, and saluting him,
said: Noble Prince, if you are not weary of your late journey, I would request
your company to go ^n hunting this day, for that I have appointed to maet^ a
noble friend of mine at the Forest of read Dear (for so it was called, for
the abundance of those beasts that the Country breeds,) where you shall see
what pastims the Hounds can make. Which Parismus kindly accepted. Oristus he
stayed behind, to the end to brng his purpose to effect, and walking into the
Gardein, he chanced according to his desire, to meet with Lord Remus, who
having saluted him, said he was glad to find him at leisure, to have some
conference with him about their acquaintance: so that walking into a solitary
Arbor, talking of diverse matters, it chanced the Princes Laurana thinking to
recreate her self in the Gardein, for that she thought all the Nobles had been
gone with the King her Father on hunting, to come accompanied with her maiden
Leda, unto ye solitary place, where Lord Remus and Oristus were then talking,
and espying Lord Remus, who she presenly knew. My Lord, quoth she, I had
thought you had been on hu^ting this day, but I see your mind is busied with
some other excercises. Most noble Princes quoth he, if I had go^e on hunting, I
should have left this honorable Lord without company, so that I thought if my
duty to keep him from better studies, with my homely talk: so thee kindly
saluting them, told Oristus he was welcome to her fathers court, and therewith
departed. Quoth Oristus, My Lord, is this the Princes Laurana, of whom I have
heard such rare commendations in Bohemia? it is said he, the very same, and
the most virtuous and courteous Lady that lives this day, who very seldom
comes abroad, but continually gives her mind to practice excellent
qualities, amongst other virtuous Ladies. During this there talk, they had
walked about the Place, to the end that Oristus might behold the statelynesse
thereof, who having seen all things, and knowing which was Lauranas, lodging,
was in some measure comforted by that knowledge. Thus the day being spent, and
the King returned from hunting, Parismus came to Oristus, and required of him
if he had heard of Laurana, and what comfort there was for him. My Lord (quoth
he) I have beheld her, and heard her heavenly voice, which is able to astonish
any man with her exceeding beauty, relating unto him all the conference he
had with the Lord Remus, which did greatly rejoice him to hear, and so betook
himself to his rest, where he spent the most part of the night, in meditating
how to come to talk, or have a sight of her. Uery early the next morning,
taking a book in his hand, he went into the Garden that was under Lauranas
Chamber window, where having walked a while, he spied her looking out, that
he stood as one half amazed to behold her wonderful beauty, for though he
had never seen her before, yet his fancy persuaded him it was she, which
perceiving, slipping back, called Leda under her, asking herif she knew the
Knight that walked under her window, who certified her it was the Prince of
Bohemia: whereat Laurana blushed so exceedingly, that her heart seemed to leap
within her, then secretly looking out, she diligently beheld him, taking such
general view of his comeliness, that presently her fancy began to commend his
person feeling in her selte a kind of delight to behold him: but Parismus
seeing her gone, began to reprous himself of ^olly, that by his rashness had
deprived himself of her sight. By that time he had walked there a short space,
Oristus came to tell him that the King expected his coming into the gr^t
Chamber, which caused him to depart, giving a sad look to the window, as
very unwilling to leave the sight thereof, recounting to Oristus how fortunately
he had beheld Laurana. By this time they were come to the King, who saluting
Parismus, desired his company to go visit Osiris, at their coming they found
him very cheerful, which rejoiced Dionisius to see, and coming to him, told
him, that he with the young Prince of Bohemia, was come to visit him, and to
be assured of the accasion of his hurt. I yield my humble thanks said Osiris
to your highness, and to that noble Prince* for the care you have of my
welfare, being sorry that by my misaduenture you have been all disquieted.

But to satisfy your highness herein, thus it was; The same day that your
excellency ^ounde me so wounded, I being up somewhat early walking at the
nether end of my Orchard, espied an armed Knight, haling and pulling a
beautiful young maiden, in most rude and discurteous manner, and notwithstanding
the manifold entreaties she used, would not leave his cruelty, but used these
speeches unto her: Content thy self to be thus used at my hands, and take it
for a favor that I use thee not worse: for the injury thy brother has done
me, will I revenge on thee. Why said she, it was not my offense, nor procured
by my knowledge, he is a knight, and bears arms, revenge your self on him,
and do not attempt to dishonor me that am a maiden, but rather take my life,
that thereby I may be rid from the shame you intend to my honor. Nay proud
damzel quoth he, if thou think the usage I intend a shame, I will the rather
do it, to vex thee. I listened so long as I could to hear their talk, and
marking which way they took, I went in, and with all speed I could, armed my
self and followed after them, but could not overtake them before they were
gotten in ye wood, where by the cry of the damzell., I found him ready to
accomplish his villainy, threatening most grievously to torment her, if she did
not yield unto him. Traitor, said I, what moves thee to use this Lady thus
discurteously? ^t ill beseems a gentleman and a knight as thou seem to
be, to use such rygor to a distressed virgin. Sir begone, said he again, or I
will quickly send thee against thy will, and then tell thee my reason.
Wherewith the mayde^ desired me, I would pity her estate; telling me that she
was daughter unto a knight, belonging to the King of Salmetia, and was by this
knight violently taken sorth of her fathers garden, none being by to aid her,
and brought unto that poor estate, by the cruelty of that wicked homycide,
who meant to dishonor her, desiring me if I were a knight, and not ^ent to be
inhumane, that I would release her from his tyranny. Wherwithall (his mind
being puffed with villainy) he ran upon me, and Idefended my self, we had not
continued long, but there issued forth of the wood two other in armor, being as
it seemed, of the firsts acquaintance, and violently running upon me, not
speaking one word, left me in that estate you found me, but when the two last
came forth, the maiden fled away, and whether they found her again or no I
know not. This my sovereign is the true occasion of my mischance. Parismus
all this while stood very sadly musing, having his mind more busied on his
Love, then to listen to Osiris speech, being far inthralled to the beauty of
Laurana, on whom he placed all his felicity, till that Dionisius wakened him
from his dumps which this speech. My Lord said he, how was it possible that
these men should escape our hands, we coming so near, and besetting the wood
presently upon the noise? and I marvel how the dam^zell could escape unseen, we
having so nearly searched the wood throughout. My Lord (quoth he) either they
have some privy Cave wherein they convey themselves, or I cannot think how
they should so secretly depart, not knowing that there was any at hand so
rescue Osiris. Thus having conferred, and every ones censure diversely given,
Dionisius said: My heart earnestly desires to know how this is come to pass,
and to find that poor distressed maiden.

CHAP. III.
How Sicanus, son to the king of Persia, the king and Queen of Hungaria, the
Prince of Sparta, and the Lady Isabella, arrived at Dionisius Court, and how
Parismus in a mask (accompanied by Lord Remus, and diverse other knights of
Thessalia) courted the Princess Laurana, and how she became enamoured of him.

WHen Dionisius and Parismus had visited Oristus, and returned to the Court,
they heard the sound of most sweet according Music, which maid Dionisius
wonder, but it was soon certified him, that there was come to his Court
diverse Ladies of great account, from forth of Hungaria and Sparta, in great
mirth and royalty, whom the Queen had entertained, not knowing what they
were, because they concealed themselves, and that there were diverse knights
hunting in the Forest of red Dear, and intended that night to come to the
Palace, which made Dionisius, both admire what these new come guests should
be, and study how to entertain them on such a sudden. Therefore leaving
Parismus to be accompaned with others of his nobles, he gave order for the
entertaining that company of strangers. When Parismus was alone, he got
himself to his Chamber, and began to think that now there was such a company
of states that concealed themselves coming to the court, he being so
unfortunate, as not yet having made known his love to Laurana, some of them
might become his rival, and make first suit unto her, and so be first
accepted, and he disappointed of his chiefest felicity: therefore he
determined that evening to use all possible means he might, to make known
his affection: having spent most part of the afternoon in these and such like
m^ditations, he was certified by Oristus, the strange knights were come to
the Court, and t^t ^ee knew them to be Antenor, the young King of Hungaria;
and the young Queen, the kings son of Spar^a, named Turnus, and one young
knight that concealed himself, who seemed to be the greatest personage in the
company, and that the Ladies that came before, ^ere the Queen of Hungaria,
Lady Isabella, sister to the Prince of Sparta, and with them diverse Ladies of
account, which made Parismus muse what that unknown knight should be, and
began to be jealous of that, which as yet he had no likelihood himself to
obtain. Being thus troubled in mind, he resolved that night by a mask to
honor Dionisius his guests, thereby to win occasion if it might possible be,
to court his mist^esse. Therefore he willed Oristus to make some of the young
Nobles of the Court acquainted with his intent, and so to certify Dionisius
that he was scarce well, and desired to keep his Chamber, which when
Dionisius heard, he desired Oliuia to see that he wanted nothing, for he was
the only guest he esteemed. The Queen coming to Parismus Chamber to visit
him, found him very busy with the other knights about their mask, who
espying her, begane to be somewhat abashed, saying: Most noble Queen, I desire
your pardon, having taken me thus on a sudden. I did certify his highness that
I was not well, to the intent to bring our mask unlooked for. Noble Prince
replied the Queen, I am glad that you are in the good estate of health, and
thus ready to honor us with your virtuous exercises, promising you to keep
your intent secret to my self. And if you want any furtherance that I can
pleasure you withal, it shall be ready at your command: wherewith she
departed to Laurana, telling her, that she intended to make the new come states
a banquet, and therefore willed her to give order to have the same performed:
which news rejoiced Laurana to hear, for that she hoped there to see the
Prince of Bohemia, to whom she ^are an inward love and desire of acquaintance:
so that hasting all things to a readiness, and adorning her self in most
comely ornaments, she expected the wished time of their coming. When supper
was endde, the Queen commanded a gentleman to inuit Dionisius, the king of
Hungaria, the Prince of Sparta, and all the rest unto a banquet, in an
exceeding stately Gallery, where they were by the Queen most royally
entertained, all in general admiring the exceeding beauty, and comely
stateliness of the Princess Laurana, that almost they fed themselves as much
with her surpassing beauty, as with the dainties that were there prepared.
Laurana on the other side, maruailed, that amongst all those knights she could
not behold the prince of Bohemia, which drawn her into ma^ifold thoughts only
resting in hope to be afterward assured of the truth. By that time the banquet
was ended, and all ready to depart, they were stayed by the sound of most
sweet music, which unexpected noise, made Dionisius wonder: but to drive him
from those thoughts, the maskers e^tred in this sort: first entered two
torchbearers, apparelled in white satin, beset with spingles of gold, after
whom followed two Eunuchs, apparelled all in green, playing on two
instruments, then came Parismus, ateired all in Carnation saften, most richly
beset with precious stones, that the glistring restection thereof, with the
light of the Candle did dazzle the eyes of the beholders: next followed two
other torch bearers and Eunuchs apparelled as the former, and playing on
several instruments, when came two knights apparrelled in tawny, most richly
adorned: next them followed two other torch bearers and Cunuches, apparelled as
the first: after whom followed two other Knights, apparelled in tawnie as the
other: and last come two torch bearers, and two Eunuchs, apparilled, and
playina on seurall instruments: after whom followed Lord Remus, apparelled in
Carnation like Parismus, but not in such gorgeous manner, al together marching
thrice about the Gallery, whiles their music sounded, all the assembly well
liked this mask, especially Dionisius wondered of whence they were, for that
he was altogether ignorant, nothing suspecting that they were of his own
Court, saying to the Prince of Sparta, there is a young Prince in my Court, that
is now ficke, otherwise I should think he had been chief amongst them: the
eyes of the whole company were busied with beholding their comely persons, and
their ears delighted with the sweet sound of their music, Laurana advisedly
beheld those knights, thinking verily that Parismus was one in the company: for
she knew not of the message he had sent the king her father. While she was in
the midst of this meditation, Parismus came with great reverence to take her by
the hand to dance, which she courteously accepted: Lord Remus took the
Princess of Spartaes sister, Lord Oristus and other Lady of Sparta, and
likewise the rest. The first measure being ended, Parismus, reverently saluted
Laurana with these speeches. Most virtuous Princess, pardon me for presuming
to trouble your sacred ears with my speeches, for the virtue of your beauty
has ouermastered my affections, and my poor life is diuoted to your service,
desiring you to accept me for your poor servant, though altogether unworthy.
And though the small trial you have of my truth, may discourage you to credit
me: yet notwithstanding my unworthiness, I desire you to employ me any way,
thereby to try how willing I will be to merit your favor. Sir, quoth Laurana,
I thank you for your kindness, neither can I blame your speeches if your
meaning be good. But as I am unworthy to entertain such a servant, so would I
not willingly trust him I know not, but heareafter when your disguise is
banished, as I shall see good I will entertain you. Noble Lady, said Parismus,
I have taken this habit only, thereby to be so happy, as to make manifest my
affection to deserve your favor: that if you will vouchsafe to conceive a right
of my good meaning, you would say, he that profereth his service, would refuse
to do it to any but to your most worthy self. Sir (quoth. she) as I know you
not, so I am ignorant of your meaning, and therefore count me not unmannerly
to make no more estimation of your proffered courtesy. Parismus being ready to
speak, the second measure sounded, which being ended, Lord Remus began to
parlie with Lady Isabella, sister to the Prince of Sparta. Courteous Lady, I
being unknown, profer my humble service unto your self, unto whose
perfections I am so wholly bound, that unless it pleases you to accept of my
loyalty, I shall consume my wearisome days in sorrow. Sir, quoth Isabella,
your undeserved kindness I know not how to requit, and I would be sorry tha^
by m^ occasion you should be grieved, and I promise you as occasion serves,
hereafter I will entertain you. All this while Parismus was talking with
Laurana, using these speeches; Most worthy Princess, because I am disguised,
you may count my words to proceed, rather of course, then of true affection:
but assure you, never did any with truer zeal utter his fainting words, nor
more abborre unfaithfulness then my self does: being also unknown to you,
you may think my boldness to proceed of hope not to be known: but to
acquaint you with my name, it is Parismus, who have forsaken my Country and
friends, only to serve your virtuous self, and do you service. But since my
coming into your fathers Court, I could never be so happy until this happy
hour, as to enjoy your presence, which is the only comfort whereon my
happiness depends: therefore virtuous Princess, weigh my intent in the
balance of equity, and let me by your comfortable speech be revived. My
noble Lord, replied Laurana, I heartily thank you for taking so much pains for
my sake, being unworthy thereof, and also unable to be sufficiently thankful
unto you for the same: and for that you say your happiness res^eth in my
power, if I can any way work yourcontent to the uttermost of my endeavor, I
will do it. Parismus was so ravished with the heavenly voice of Laurana, that
he could have wished no other happiness, then to enjoy her presence, and was
by her kind and modest answer, so much comforted, that he resolved, no
misery or calamity whatsoever, should alter his affection. Laurana on the
other side, whose mind was never before in thraldom, began now to be so
far lied in the bonds of friendship, and good liking to Parismus, that she
was altogether unwilling to leave his company: by this time the rest of the
maskers having ended their speeches, the sound of the music made them remember
their third measure, which being ended, Parismus kissing the Princess hand,
with a heavy sigh, left her in the place where he found her, and being ready to
depart, Dionisius coming unto them, said: Most courteous Knights, I know not
what entertainment to give you, for that you are to me unknown: but request
this at your hands, that you take a banquet my daughter has provided: which
words caused Parismus to be willing unto, because it was the Princess doing,
whose presence was the sweet preservative of his life. Your Majesty (answered
Parismus) makes us so kind a proffer, that we cannot (being bound at your
command) deny your request: so unmasking himself, he came with great
reverence to Dionisius, who knowing him, embracing him, said, he was glad he
had no worse sickness then that, and that he was much indebted unto him for
honoring his Courts with his pastime. So saluting all the company, the Knight
that concealed himself, suddenly departed the presence, upon occasion as shall
hereafter be declared. All the assembly greatly commended Parismus, being
much delighted to behold his virtuous behavior, and was indeed worthy to be
accounted the Prince of courtesy. The Queen then told him, she had been his
secret counsel, keeper, and he humbly kissing her hand, thanked her, and being
come to the place where the banquet was provided, Dionisius told them, he would
leave them to be welcomed by the Queen and Laurana, whilst ^ent to accompany
his other guests: which Parismus was very glad of, and Laurania both, who all this while had so furfeited with beholding his comely person, that the deep
impression of lone was now fully settled in her heart. But Parismus not
forgetting to salute that saint he served, with reverence kiss her, thanking
her that she vouchsafed to take such pains, to prepare entertainment for
such undeserving guests: using many others speeches which delighted her to
hear, and him to utter, that they were so far delighted one in another
company, that it was death for them to part, she not knowing that his love was
grounded upon such firm resolve, nor he thinking she would so kindly accept
his proffred service. During the time of the banquet, a simple judging eye
might discern their love by their looks, that all the company began to deem
that which afterward proved true. Every one with kind salutations being
parted to their several lodgings. Parismus told Oristus, what kind and
undeserved favor he had received at Lauranaes hands, which Oristus was very
glad of, the very recital whereof, affected the Princes heart with an
exceeding joy.

Laurana making all the haste she could to be rid from the company of Isabella,
and other Ladies that accompanied her, because her heart was desirous to
meditate of her love, went into her chamber, where being alone much troubled in
her thoughts, she votered these speeches. How happy am I to be thus disquieted
with the sight of Parismus, not knowing whether his words proceed of custom or
affection: I that was erst at liberty, am now become captive to mine own
affections, and inthralled to a stranger. What of that, peradventure he is in
the same mind I am, neither have I any cause to doubt but that his words
proceed from the good will he bears me, and that the intent of his coming to
my Fathers court, was only for my sake, as he says: might I be happily
assured of the truth of these doubts, then would my disquiet mind rest highly
contented: and until that time I shall but spend my time in endless care, and
heaviness: if these words proceeded from the depth of true meaning, then will he
still prosecute the suit heee has begun: neither have I any cause to suspect
his honorable meaning. Well, I will content my self so well as I can, and
seek some means whereby to be assured, and rid my pensive heart of these
doubts. Early the next morning, she called Leda unto her, saying, that she had
a secret to impart unto her, that did concerue her life and honor, and
therefore willed her to be secret, telling her all that had passed betwixt
Parismus and her: and how that unless she might be certain of his intent, she
should but consume her self with care.

CHAP. IIII.
How Parismus by means of Leda, Laurananes waitingmaide, came to the speech of
the princess, and how they met in an Arbor in the garden. And how Sicanus
described the love betwixt Parismus, and the princess Laurana, and fearing to
be disappointed, declared the cause of his coming to the King, and what ensued
thereon.

DIonisius was early up as his custom was, to visit his guestes, and busy in
entertaining them with all roialty that might be, Parismus being as busy in
his mind (more then any knew) got himself into the Garden, under the window
of Lauranaes lodging, being frustrated of all other hope to see his beloved:
where he had not long walked, but was soon espied of Laurana, who being
delighted with his sight, called Leda, and willed her to make some excuse into
the Garden, where he was walking, to see it his coming into that place were
for her sake or no. Leda therefore taking a fair cloth in her hand, went into
the Garden, as if she intended to gather some herbs, and had not seen him.
When she came near the place where he was sitting under an open Arbor, in
deep study, having a sight of her, he suddenly started, and knowing her to
be the servant to Laurana, kindly saluted her, saying: fair Damsel, quoth
he, if I be not deceived, you are attendant on the Princess Laurana. Sir,
answered Leda, I am. I pray you (says he) how fares your Mistress, for I am
in doubt our last nights ^cise disquieted her, which if I knew, I would not
hereafter attempt such boldness. Indeed (quoth Leda) I know not, but I heard
my Lady much commend the Prince of Bohemia, to be a gallant Knight, and that
she was much beholding unto him, and used many gracious words in his
commendation. Do you not (quoth he) know Parismus, if you saw him? no sir, said
Leda: I am the man, said he, and thou bring me that comfort, by reporting
that my mistress thinks well of me, as if thou had saved my life, and I am
to entreat a favor at thy hands, which if thou grant, I shall rest bound unto
thee for the same. My Lord (said Leda) I humbly desire you to command me, and I
will both faithfully and secretly accomplish your request. Then this is my
request, quoth he, that thou would commend me unto thy Lady, and deliver
unto her this paper, certifying her, that I have thus holdly presumed to
^rouble her, being thereto compelled by her commanding courtesy, on which hope
I fully rely for pardon: withal giving her a rich Jewel, she departed
toward her mistress, telling him that she would return with an answer the next
morning. Parismus being much quieted in mind with this hope of comfort, went
into the great Hall, where he found the King and ye rest of the Nobles, and
having saluted them, he espied Sicanus, son to the king of Persia, between
whom and his father, the king of Bohemia had been long time in continual wars:
but now lately a peace was concluded. This Sicanus was the knight that
concealed himself, who the night before, seeing Parismus so much honored, and
beloved, could not endure to stay any longer, for that he envied him still as
an enemy. Parismus seeing him, and noting his last nights sudden departure,
dissembling as though he had not known him, spent the rest of that day in
company of Dionisius. Leda likewise being returned unto her mistress Laurana,
told her all the speeches that Parismus had with her, and delivered the letter
he had sent: which when she had received, she went into her closet, and with
great joy opened the same, and found the contents to be these.

To the most Virtuous Princess Laurana, Parismus wishes hearts content.
MOst Honorable Princess, I presume thus boldly to write unto your virtuous
self, thereby to ease my heart of the care wherewith it is perplexed, only
procured by your heavenly excellencies, that I here prostrate my self your
thrall, desiring you of pity to mittigate my martyrdom by your clemency. I
desire your gentle acceptance of my love, which have vowed constanly, to
continue perfect to your self: which being grounded upon the truest foundation
of sincere affection, is not to be blemished with any dishonor. I cannot
protest, but perform the part of a faithful servant, my true heart shall not
harbor untruth, but I rest yours, to preserve or destroy. If your excellency
would admit that I might come to speak with you, then would I give you farther
assurance of my fidelity, which if you vouchsafe to grant, it shall be no way
to your disparagement: and as from your self I first received my wound of
disquiet, so let your clemency save my perplexed misery. And thus committing
with this poor paper my life, into your custody, I cease.

Yours ever, or his own never. P.


When Laurana had read the Letter, she began to meditate with her self how
she should accomplish his request, in such sort, that it might no way blemish
her honor, nor give him cause to suspect that she were light, to be so easily
persuaded, for she esteemed her credit more then her life, and his love more
then both. At last she resolved to answer his Letter, and give directions to
Leda how he should come to talk with her, and no man privy thereto but
themselves: and calling Leda, told her that she should deliver the answer to
the Princes Letter, and withal this message. That if he would take the pains
the next night, he should find her in the Arbor at the farther end of the
Garden, that was under the window, about midnight, upon condition that her
maid Leda might be with her, and that he should bring no man with him, for
that he might easily come thither without danger. Leda being up early, hyed
her with all speed to Parismus Chamber, where being come, she delivered the
message Laurana gave her in charge, which reioiced Parismus to hear, and
withal the answer to this Letter, which when he had received, at the first he
was unwilling to tear the Seal that her sweet hand had impressed: often viewing
the superscription, but hoping the contents within would bring more ease to his
heart, then the outward view, he opened the same, and read as follows.

Laurana saluteth the Prince Parismus.
MY Lord, blame not a maidens rash reply, neither do you impute any fault to
my doubtful care. I was unwilling to answer your Letter, yet the credit I
repose in your virtue, makes me thus much to digress from my former
resolution, that I colud not choose but congratulate your kindness: I yield to
your request to speak with me, presuming that your princely mind cannot
harbor any ill meaning: and the rather, for that I find my heart yielding
without my consent: therefore I commit my self into your courtesy: my honor
being unblemished, which I trust you will not any way violate: So relying upon
your virtuous disposition, and good opinion of my rash attempt, I cease.

Yours as she may, Laurana.


Parismus was so ravished with this courteous reply, that he esteemed himself
the fortunatest man living, a thousand times kissing and reading those sweet
lines, that in his fancy ^e never felt any joy comparable to this his sweet
meditation, showing Oristus the sacred lines and sweet message Laurana had
sent, willing him to be ready to go with him to the place appointed, but
unseen, lest that the Princess should blame him for not fulfilling her
command. Thus spending the day which he thought to be longer then three days,
he again returned to his chamber, esteeming the time too long, and a thousand
times wishing the approach of the appointed hour. Laurana in the mean time,
being not unmindful of her promise, only with Leda was gone down into the
garden, by a door that opened out of her lodging: where being come, Scinthias
was proud to give light unto her maiesticall presence, and by the cleerenesse
of her splendour, had any beheld her, she might have been esteemed to surpass
the comeliness of Diana, walking in her chaste conceits. Parismus somewhat
before the hour, was likewise gone forth in his night gown, with his sword
under his arm, and coming to the gate he was wont to go in at into the
Gardeine, found it shut, and having no others means, he got over the wall,
and was gotten into a secret place to entertain love with a surfeiting
delight: but when he beheld his divine Goddess enter into the Arbor, his
heart was so surprised with joy, with her presence, that at his coming to her,
he could not utter a word, but with great reverence taking her tenderly by the
soft hand, which he was afraid to touch without her leave, at last he said,
Most virtuous Lady, since it has pleased you to grant me this exceedsng
favor, I here vow, that I will not speak a word, nor do any thing that shall
not accord with your mind. My Lord, said Laurana, had I not presumed upon your
virtue, I would not thus have come hither. Which kind speech, so much
imboldned Parismus, that he embraced her in his arms and kissed her, and sitting
down together, folded each in the others arms. Parismus began to recount unto
her his love, and how that his coming to Thessaly, was only to do her
service, vowing never to depart if she would not accept him for her poor
servant: with many other kind protestations proceeding from his unfeigned
affection, that Laurana being wounded with his entreaties, could not choose but
accept of his love, uttering these speeches.

My Lord, for that I am persuaded of the constancy of your love, and for that
you vouchsafe to profer such kindness to me that have not deserved the same, I
will manifest that which rather I should conceal, for that you may suppose my
yielding so soon, might proceed of light bred affection: but my Lord, I assure
you, that at such time as I saw you coming first into this Court, my heart
was then suprised, (procured as I think by the Destinies) that ever since I
have vowed to rest yours assured to command, so that you way pretend my wrong:
and therefore committing all that is mine to give into your hands, I here give
you affurance of truth, and true constant love. Thus they spent the night in
kind salutations and courteous imbracings, to the unspeakable joy and comfort
of them both. Leda all this while walking about the gardens, and carefully
looking about her, espied a light in Oliuiaes Chamber, whereof she gave those
two Lovers intelligence. Parismus thought that news unwelcome, whereby being
compelled to depart, which was done with much heaviness, Parismus desired to
know, when she would vouchsafe him her presence again, which she told him
should be at his appointment, for that she now was his to dispose of: so with
many a sweet embracing they parted. Laurana going into her chamber said, in
that she had so soon lost his company, and could not tell what misfortune
might befall him, and glad in heart to recount and think of his passed promise.
Parismus quickly got over the wall, and was soon safely come to his chamber,
where he recounted to Oristus his happy success in love, asking his counsel
how he might procure Dionisius good liking, to effect the marriage betwixt
them, which first he thought to motion himself, then he thought that Dionisius
would not like thereof, without the consent of his father first had, and also
might blame Laurana of undutifulness, if he knew it were with her priuity.
Again he thought it best to send Oristus into Bohemia, to give his father
knowledge thereof, and to entreat him to send Ambassadors to that effect.
Contrarily, he thought that in the mean time, some other of greater birth then
himself, might demand her in marriage of the King, and so have the first
grant, though he were sufficiently assured that Laurana should never yield her
consent. Being in this perplexity, he could not resolve upon any thing, but
walking in the garden to ease his heart with some recreation, he met the King,
with him were the King of Hungaria, the Prince of Sparta, and Sicanus, son to
the King of Persia, though unknown. The King for the more honorable
entertainment of his guests, made one most royal banquet for all in general:
the Queen, and a gallant train of beautiful Ladies, were there likewise,
which was not a custom amongst the rest: it fell so out, that Parismus was
seated right opposite to the Princess Laurana, which agreed to his hearts
desire, whereby he had means to satisfy himself with beholding that
inestimable Jewel, which as far excelled all the rest of the Ladies as the
Sun does the Moon, or white his contrary: who with such comely modesty
behaved her self, that her look did rightly resemble a countenance full of
mild, virtuous pity, able to ravish a multitude, being also not a little glad,
that she had occasion to bestow a kind look on her Parismus. Sicanus more
narrowly marked Lauranaes behavior then any other, because his coming was
only to request her in marriage of her father, and though both the young
Princes were very circumspect: yet Sicanus curious eye, found, or at lest
suspected, that there was some love betwixt them, which they full little
thought of, having their hearts busied with more pleasant meditations: and ever
after that, Sicanus inwardly malised Parismus in his heart.

Dinner being ended, the Knights spent some part of the afternoon in dancing,
when being ended, every man betook himself to what exercise liked him best.
Dionisius and Lord Remus, accompanied the Princess Laurana, and the Lady
Isabella, to their lodgings, which made Sicanus to fret inwardly, to think
that Parismus his only enemy as he thought, had gotten such possession in
Lauranaes love, which might debar him of his wished hope.

Parismus seeing Lord Remus talking to Isabella, saluted Laurana with these
speeches: My dear Lady, although I confess my self far unworthy that
kindness you have already granted me, yet I humbly request one farther favor
at your hands, which is, that you would vouchsafe to meet me tomorrow night, in
that happy place where I received the first assurance of your comfortable
kindness, for my passions are so extreme, that my life would perish, were it
not only maintained by enjoying your love, where I would impart a secret to
you, that now I have no time to utter.

My Lord said Laurana, you need not use such entreaties to her, that is not
unwilling, neither has she power to deny your request. The Queen coming into
the place where they were, caused Parismus with a heavy sigh to depart, and
Lord Remus with him, betwixt whom there began a firm league of friendship. Now
Lord Remus bear great affection to the Lady Isabella, and had oftentimes
solicited his suit unto her, which she in a manner yielded unto, which made
Parismus the rather choose him for his companion, by keeping him company, to
have the oftener access unto Laurana. The King of Hungaria, the Prince of
Sparta, and Sicanus, were walked into the Garden, where they were encountered by
the king, unto whom the king of Hungaria began to declare how that the Prince
of Sparta and himself had a matter to treat with his Majesty, if he would
vouchsafe them audience, from the mighty King of Persia, who having a great
desire to be allied to him, and having hard manifold reports of the virtuous
Laurana, had sent them to entreat a marriage betwixt her and Sicanus, his son
and heir of Persia, who was there present with them, though until this time
unwilling to make himself known. Dionisius most kindly embraced him, telling
him, that he thought himself much honored with his company, and that since it
pleased his father to treat of alliance betwixt them, he would give his consent
willingly, so that he would first get his daughters good will, whom he would
not willingly match contrary to her liking, promising to use his commandment
unto her for performance thereof. For which Sicanus thanked him. Thus having
spent the day in this and such like talk, supper was ready: which being ended,
they betook themselves to their lodgings.

CHAP. V.
How Dionisius sent for Laurana, and declared to her the cause of Sicanus
coming, which she sought occasion to make known to Parismus, and how she gave
him assurance of her love.

Early in the morning Dionisius sent a messenger, to will Laurana to come to
him. Laurana maruelling at her Fathers sudden sending for her, suspected that
he had heard some news of her love to Parismus, otherwise she could not tell
what the cause might be, but making her self ready, presently came to him:
having reverently done her duty, he used these speeches unto her.

Laurana, my chiefest care is, to see thee married according to thy state,
which has made me send for thee, to know whether that thou have already placed
thy affection or no: otherwise there is come into this Country, a King of great
estate and honorable parts, son and heir to the King of Persia, who
concealed himself until yesterninght, in whose behalf the king of Hungaria,
and the Prince of Sparta, are come from his Father to crave thee in marriage.
Now if thou can fancy him, thou shall highly honor thy self, have an
honorable husband and rejoice my heart to see thee so well matched before my
death, which will come very shortly: I have given my consent, so it be with thy
liking: for so dearly I love thee, that I would as well have thy fancy
pleased, as mine own mind satisfied, therefore let me know thy mind.

Laurana answered, My dear Lord and Father, I humbly thank you for the
manifold benefits received by your favor, being yet at liberty from all,
knowing it my duty to have your consent before I would presume to match my
self, trusting that I shall so place my affections, as shall be agreeable to
your pleasure. Well, do so then said her father, and this was the cause I sent
for you. Laurana departed with a heavy heart, wishing that the time of
Parismus coming were at hand, that she might impart this news unto him, which
grie^d her, and she knew would not please him, resolving with her self never
to give consent. After dinner, Laurana by the commandment of Oliuia the
Queen, accompanied the Lady Isabella, by means whereof, Sicanus had occasion
to court her whom he found of so mild behavior, and yet so far differing
from his mind, that he saw no likelihood of attaining her love. His
importunate demands (which he builded upon her fathers promise, and his own
hope of assurance) she answered so wisely and courteously, that his love thereby
increased, but his hope was no whit augmented, that seeing such a virtuous
resolution, or in manner absolute denial to his suit, he was persuaded,
Parismus was the only man that hindered his love, which the rather vexed him,
because he saw his virtues of every man commended, and himself by the beauty
of his excelent gifts disgraced, yt ever after he sought all means he could to
work his harm. And fearing that he should be frustrated of his expectation,
began very narrowly to pry into the behavior of Laurana toward Parismus,
that they could at no time talk, if he were in company, but would still be
attentive to their speeches, nor seldom were they at any time together, but
he would be in their company, dissembling a countenance of great frindship to
Parismus, having tha greater occasion to cross their loves, because of the
motion he had made to Dionisius, and of the kings speech to Laurana. In this
sort he continued his jealous behavior, yet far from the least hope of
procuring Lauranas favor. The wished time of these two Princess appointed
meeting being come, Parismus secretly leaping the wall which parted him from
his delight, ^ound Leda all alone attending his coming, and asking her where
her mistress was, she told him she stayed in her chamber for him, which she
thought to be ye fittest place for their private conference, for that she was
now fully assured of his honorable meaning, so directing him the way, he
quickly found Laurana, who was come to the staites head to meet him, whom he
kindly saluted, and she as lovingly welcomed him, spending their time in sweet
greetings, but far from any thought of vnchastenesse, their imbracings being
grounded upon the most virtuous conditions that might be: and sitting together
upon the beds side, Laurana taking Parismus by the hand, the tears standing
in her eyes, told him all the speeches her father had used unto her, and of
Sicanus love, repeating to him all that had passed betwixt them, which
extremely grieved Parismus to hear, not that he doubted her change, but for
that he was thereby disappointed of the first grant from Dionisius, whom he
was fully persuaded would have given his consent. Dear Lady (said Parismus)
since these mischances are unfortunately happened, I know not how to remedy
them: but it rests only in your power, either by granting him love, and so to
destroy me, or still continue your sauorable kindness toward me, and thereby
purchase displeasure of your parents, which would be more grievous unto me then
death. My Lord, replied Laurana, you need not use these speeches, or any way
trouble your mind, for I promise and protest, that the loss or displeasure of
my friends, nor any other misery or torment whatsoever, shall make me any way
infringe that promise I have made to you: for your love is more dearer unto me
then my life: but I desire you to tell me how I may any way work your content,
and I will do it? More she would have spoken, but the Crystal tears that
fell from her eyes, and extreme hearts sorrow, to see Parismus so sad, stopped
her speech, who likewise was drawn into such admiration to think of her
kindness, that he could use no words to comfort her, but with his cheek wiped
away the wet tears that bedeawed her face, and bestowed sweet kisses on her
coral colored lips. At last he said, Dear Laurana, dear Laurana, I would
desire you not to think, that I any way call your loyalty in question, but used
those speeches only to assure you, that whatsoever pleases you, I count my
greatest bliss: but since you vouchsafe to grant me that favor, to be content
to endure your Parents displeasure for my sake, that am unworthy of that
kindness, I will hereafter so fully rest at your command to do whatsoever
lies in my small power, that you shall say Parismus is not unwilling, though
unable to be sufficiently tha^kful. Thus thinking too much of their stole time,
spent about those unpleasant news, they began to use words of more comfort,
which were such as porceeded from the kindest friendship that might be. For so
pleasantly sweet were their lovely ioies, and true hearted meanings, that it
far surpassed the admirable kindness of Lovers, but might be termed the true
substance of perfect pleasure: wherein these two harmless souls continued
the greatest part of the night with such joy, that had Sicanus, who most envied
Parismus, seen and beheld them, he would never have attempted to part such
knide friendship. Now the dismal hour of their parting being approached, by
reason of the light that the Sun began to give unto the Chamber, Parismus
taking Laurana in his arms, drawing sweet breath from her lips, told her
that now (to his grief) he most leave her to be courted by his enemy Sicanus,
relating unto her the long wars that had passed betwixt their fathers, and the
late peace that was conciuded, and how that he knew Sicanus at his first
coming into Thessaly, desiring her to let him understand such news from her
as did concern their love, which she promised him she would, and withal, that
she would never yield to love him that was an enemy to Parismus, but would hate
her own heart, if it should but think a thought to wrong him. Thus a thousand
times embracing each other, they parted, he to his lodging, and she to her
rest.

CHAP. VI.
How Sicanus hired three Tartarians to murder Parismus, and how he was taken
up by certain outlawes, and had his life preserved. What sorrow Laurana made
for his loss, and what befell at Dionisius Court.

THe next morning, Sicanus sought all the means he could to solicit his love
again, but Lauranas used the matter in such sort that she kept her chamber
three or four days, to the end he should have no ocsion to speak to her,
which made him almost mad, and seeing himself frustrated of his desire that
way, his mind being apt for any impression, began to devise how he might
either find out the cause of Lauranaes strangeness, or revenge himself on
Parismus, whom he thought was the only man that hindered him in his love. And
studying how to bring that about, he began to weigh how greatly Parismus was
esteemed of Dionisius, and that his virtues made him so well beloved of all,
that to offer him abuse openly, every one would condemn him, and thereby his
honor should the more increase, and he himself be evil thought of by
Dionisius, and contemned by Laurana, and yet nothing the nearer his purposed
determination. At length giving his mind over unto all wickedness, and cruelty,
he thought the best course he had, was to murder him by some treachery,
therefore calling unto him three of his servants being Taxtarians, he used a
long circumstance of kind speeches unto them, promising that if they would
devise some means how to revenge him on an enemy that had done him great
injury, he would prefer them to great dignity, when he returned into his
own Country, and in the mean time, he would give them a thousand pounds
amongst them, for their maintenance. These villains being greedy of gain and
pre^erment, being poor and needy, swear that they would perform whatsoeur he
commanded them, so they might know the man. Sicanus therefore giving them the
many, told them that it was Parismus, who had la^e done him a monstrous
injury: (at whose name the villains began to stare one upon another, as
though they had repented them of their promise) and that, when as custom was,
he rode forth on hawking, they might wait opportunity until he was alone, and
then accomplish their intended murder, without suspicion. These villains
being fully bent upon their intended mischief, being heathens, therefore the
more easily drawn with the hope of reward to any treachery, awaited their
convenient time, with immovable resolution. Parismus being all that day in
company of the king and other nobles, having given his mind to quietness, for
that he was fully assured of Lauranas favor, nothing doubting the reason of
Sicanus, told Dionisius, that her intended to go on hawking, desiring him to
vouchsafe to see his Falcon fly, which Dionisius promised to do, for that his
hawk was esteemed the best of all other. Likewise Sicanus, the King of
Hungaria, and the Prince of Sparta, would bear him company. The next morning
very early, King Dionisius, Parismus, and the rest of the company, addressed
themselves to that pastime, and having spent most part of the day, toward the
Evening, Parismus lost his Hawke, which he loved exceeing well, being
procured by a tempest that suddenly arose, and thereby being wandered from the
rest of the company, chanced to hear the noise of her Belles, as he thought in
the Wood heard by, where he could not ride, and therefore alighted from his
horse, and got in on foot: where he was not entered far, but those villains
that Sicanus had hired, having followed him all that day, and now thinking and
finding this the fittest opportunity to execute their purpose, were come into
the wood, and hard at Parismus heels, who espying them, looking with gastfull
cou^tenances as he thought and with their weapons about them, (the villains
indeed being amazed with his very countenance, began to call to remembrance the
late mischance that Osiris had received in the same place: but that thought was
soon extinct, for that he knew them to be Sicanus servants: at last he
asked them if they had not seen his hawke, they answered not a word: but one
of them sta^ed about, as if he heard her near hand, which caused Parismus to
look diligently the same way. And in the mean time, one of them drawing his
sword, struck Parismus so violently upon the head, that he being
beare-headed, by reason of the heat, the blow having nothing to mittigate the
force thereof, so grievously wounded him, that he fell to the earth: and before
he could recover himself, and withal being disfurnished of his weapon (for
otherwise those three could not have withstood his force) they had given him
two or three mortal wounds: and seeing that he was now not able to resist
them, they began to consult what they should do with his body. In the mean
time, Parismus having gotten breath, began to entreat them to spare his life
(for threats in such a case would not avail) promising to reward them with
great kindness, if they would not murder him: persuading them withal, that
this their deed would be known, for that such wickedness is commonly
revealed, and always grievously punished: and he that had set them about that
villainy, would always hate them in his heart, although outwardly he might
pretend a show of friendship, telling them that he was a Prince, and able to
prefer and pleasure them, promising them that they should not need to fear
Sicanus displeasure, if they would save his life, and all men would hate them
for destroying him, and on the otherside all men would commend them, for being
so pitiful as to spare his life, that had never offended the^. Al these
persuasions could nothing preuail, but without making him any answer, thrust
their swords into his body in diverse places: that now thinking him dead, they
covered him with moss and leaves, thinking that some wild beast would come and
devour him: his horse they found tied without the wood, but him they unbridled,
and let go, to avoid suspicion: their own weapons they sunk in the bottom of
a deep poole of water that was by the woods side, and so departed. While they
were striving with Parismus in this sort, it chanced yt there was a knightas he
seemed in armor, that heard the noice, and hasting by guess so well as he
could to the place, at last he came to the place where Parismus lay covered,
and looking about he could see no body, but might perceive the earth trodden,
and all to be smeared with blood, and the moss torn up, and removed from his
natural place, and looking attentively, he saw the lump of moss and leaves,
where under Parismus lay covered, which was the only preservation of his life:
for the moss lying close about him, kept the air from forth his wounds,
otherwise he had perished. The knight remoouing the leaves, found the body of
the goodliest man that ever he beheld, most grievously wounded, and gasping
forth his latest breath of life, which mollified the knights heart, that he
used al ye means he could to recover him: but laboring in vain to bring him
to his senses, yet he might perceive the breath to steal forth by little and
little out of his mouth, that he was persuaded he was not past help, therefore
taking Parismus in his arms, he conveyed him unto the place of his abode,
which was within those woods: now you must understand that this knight was one
of the company of those outlawes that kept in that wood, being driven to live
in such obscure sort for fear of punishment, for diverse outrages they had
committed: and taking felicity in that kind of life, continued a great
fraternity amongst them, being the very same that had wounded Osiris, one of
Dionisius knights (as is before rehearsed) amongst whom we will leave Parismus,
to declare what happened to Dionisius, who greatly marvelled that when the day
was ended, Parismus was not returned, which made him and the rest (Sicanus
excepted) diuer^y conjecture: most thinking that he was gone astray, and being
unacquainted, might be gone to the palace not knowing which way to return to ye
place where he left the^. Sicanus likewise seemed as careful as the rest. At
last by the nights approach, they all departed toward the City: where when
they were arrived, Dionisius enquiring very earnestly for Parismus return,
could hear no news thereof. That having no other thought to be pacified
withal, he was persuaded that he might be gone so far in search of his hawke,
that he could not attain to the City that night, and therefore might lodge
by the way, and so come home the next morning. Thus with this hopeful
persuasion, being persuaded for the time, they betook themselves to their
rest. Sicanus being gladded with the news of Perismus want, called those three
actors of his most desperate and wicked confederacy unto him, and inquired
what they had done, who certified him of all their villainous exployt, being no
way suspected of any such fact, to whom he yielded many dishonorable thanks
for so impious a deed. Thus all continued in good hope, until the next
Morning, which being come, and most of the day spent, there was no succesfull
news of Parismus return, but all his men were come, and no man but himself
alone mussing: that Dionisius being therewith wonderfully grieved, and vexed in
his mind, speedily caused a hundred knights to make all diligent search and
inquiry that might be, to hear of him, who were all most willing, bearing an
inward love to ye young Prince above all the knights that ever arrived in
Thessaly. The Bohemian knights likewise made such lamentation for their Lord,
that it was snooe blazed to the hearing of all the Court, and City, that
Parismus was not returned from hawking: which at last came to the hearing of
Laurana: who at the fist news thereof, was so tormented in her thoughts, that
she could not contain her self from bewraying her love by extreme
complaints, as also by the manifold questiones and enquiries she made, with
whom he went, how long they mist him, and where, when and how they lost his
company: showing an extraordinary care of his welfare, that being driven into
a thousand sundry doubts of his welfare, as also to think what should become
of him, she could enjoy no quiet nor content: but her greatest comfort was,
that she still hoped she should hear some news of his return, by such
knights as were gone in search of him: amongst whom were his own knights:
whose care she thought would be greater then any others for his preservation.

Oristus likewise took his want in such heaviness, that he seemed to be out
of his wits by extreme sorrow. Sicanus having now accomplished the thing he
purposed, used oftentimes to visit Laurana, and earnestly prosecuted his former
suit, wherewith Laurana was so much grieved (to remember any other love then
Parismus, or to think that any other should offer Parismus that wrong) that
she showed her self so virtuously disdainful to the Persians suit, and seemed
so little to regard his words and protestations, that he began to despair of
obtaining her good will: yet he was still comforted in this, that he had her
parents consent, which might be a mean to procure her liking: besides, he
thought the greatness of his birth might be a great help to his furtherance.

Dionisius, Oliuia, and the rest, were diversely grieved to think of Parismus
loss, whom they all deemed to be fallen into some disaduenture, otherwise
they could not imagine what might be the occasion of his stay: so that the
whole court in general, was driven into such sadness, that it seemed not like
the same it was wont to be: especially the King and Queen took it so heavily,
that their joy was wholly turned to sorrow, and their pleasant countenances
into sad looks: but yet all continued in hope to hear some news of him, by
the return of such as were gone in search of him, who most of them returned
within some three or four days. Oristus being yet behind, at last returned,
having by diligent enquiry found the steed whereon Parismus rode, who was taken
up some twenty miles distant from the place where these villains had left
him: this augmented their grief, when they saw all that were in search of him.
returned with no good news, and Oristus, the last of their hope, in steed of
joyful tidings, bringing further cause of sorrow, in that they were fully
assured by finding the Horse whereon he rode, and he by no means to be heard
of, that he was fallen into the hands of such as had murdered him, or by some
misaduenture might be devoured by some wild beast, that had seized on him
unawares, that in general, al made such sorrow for the loss of so virtuous a
Princes, that it was to be wondered at, that a man in so short a time of
acquaintance, could behave himself so virtuously, as to be so well beloved of
all: Laurana exempting her self from all quiet, and banishing from her mind
all mirth and joy: withal, hearing the news Oristus had brought, fell into
such an extreme passion of grief, for that a good space, she continued as one
wholly deprived of life, and notwithstanding Leda and the rest of her maids,
used all the skill they had, yet could by no means bring her again, that with
wringing their hands, tearing their hair, and with grievous acclamation, they
made such an outcrie, that the brute thereof came to the hearing of the King
and Queen, and all the rest, by which occasion a new sorrow began, far above
compare: by that time the King and Queen were come into her Chamber, the
Princess began somewhat to come to her self, when heavily lifting up her
eyes, with a grievous sigh looking upon her father and mother, with such a
pitiful countenance (that they could not refrain from tears,) still looking
earnestly about her, to see if Parismus were yet returned: at last being fully
recovered, Dionisius asking her what might be the cause of this her sudden
sickness, and if it lay in his power to comfort her, she might be fully
assured he would not deny her any thing. Laurana kneelingdowne, thinking to
have spoken somewhat, was so overcome with the remembrance of her, dear
friends want, and extreme sorrow so fully possessed her heart, that her speech
was turned into tears, which abundantly fell from her eyes, which drove the
King and Queen into such sorrow, that their hearts could not endure to see her
heaviness, and therefore left her with the maids. When all were departed and
she alone with Leda, she began to lament in this manner.

Unhappie wretch that I am, to what a miserable stay am I brought, that have
lost my greatest comfort. and the only maintainer of my bliss, without whose
comfortable presence, I neither can, nor will enjoy my unfortunate life. Noble
and most virtuous Prince, what is beco^e of you? what misaduenture has
befallen you? what tyrant could be so barbarous as to do you injury? what
creature so inhumaine, as to wish your harm? or what mind so malicious, as
not to wish your good? Woe is me for the loss of my Parismus, heaviness is my
delight, care and sorrow shall be welcome to me, till my Parismus return: O
no, my heart gives me, he will never return, he is surely dead by some
untimely accident, or he would not thus long have been absent from me. My
dear Parismus, would I were with you, wheresoever you are, then would my heart
be at quiet, then should I be happy, then should I be rid from fear, from
grief, care, sorrow, and pain, for in you only is my comfort, joy, pleasure,
quiet, and delight. In these and such like plaints, she would have continued
still, but that Leda comforted her with all the persuasions that she could
devise, telling her that she ought not to grieve so much, for that he might
safely return again, and that he might absent himself for sundry and
special causes, not yet known to her: using many other devices, to draw her
from that extremity of sorrow, in whi^ estate she continually remained: but
yet somewhat (...) with hope of his return, being thereto persuaded by the
speeches of Leda, who used the same only to assuage her mistress sorrow,
though her self had no hope at all ever to see him again.

Parismus being all this while amongst the Out-lawes, (who kept themselves in a
Cave, that they had secretly and artificial made, under the side of a hill in
the midst of the ^ood, where they could hardly be found by any, and
therefore there they thought themselves very secure: (which were the same that
had wounded the Knight Osiris, and had with them Dina the virgin, in whose
rescue Osiris was hurt: yet by Osiris means she was preserved from the
outrage that was intended to her: for whose Outlawes were without a cabtaine,
and therefore thought themselves equalles, which happened well for the virgin,
for one of them that came forth with the noise of Osiris and the others fight,
took such liking of her, that he reproved the others cruelty, telling him,
that it were a villainous act to defloure a virgin that had not offended him:
by whose persuasions he resisted from further cruelty, and carried the maiden
to their cave, where she was appointed to dress such provision as they
brought in, which she willingly did, to defend her self from further injury.
Parismus comely proportion made him so well liked of all of them, who seemed to
them to be a man of good account by his apparel, and in time they thought
might do them many pleasures: therefore they commanded this virgin to use all
her skill and indeuoures, to recover him, and heal his wounds: who within two
days by her diligent endeavor, had brought him to his senses, that he began
to speak to them: which rejoiced them to hear: who being thus well recovered,
wondered into what place he was brought, because it was dark, and in a cave,
having in his presence a company of rude and ^hag haired fellows, and only
one woman, could not fully perswaide himself, but that he was metamorphosed:
but being of a manly courage, he boldly demanded of them, how he came to that
place, and what they were that had thus preserved his life? At last he that had
brought him thither, told him, that walking into the wood, being directed by a
noise that he heard, he found him covered with moss and leaves, almost past
all hope of life, and pitying his distress, he had brought him unto that
place, being all the habitation they had, for that they were such as wanted
wealth, and were driven to take that course of life, to maintain themselves
withal: and that he was by the diligent pains of that virgin, brought unto
the good estate he was in, and that their purpose was, to elect him for their
Captain, for that they thought very well of him.

Parismus thanked him, telling them withal, that he was a Trauailer, and had
lost his way in those woods, and meeting with some of their company (as he
thought) was by them le^ in the case they found him, without any cause of
offense that he had done the^. Thus ceasing to commune any further with them,
he began to meditate how fortunately God had ordained him to be preserved by
them, (that had destroyed many) to live in hope to be revenged on Sicanus, that
had so dishonourably pretended his ruin: that seeing himself in good estate
of recovery, he used all kind means he could to purchase the good opinion of
all those Outl-awes whom he durst not trust, because their minds were addicted
to villainy, but most of all, he marvelled why so beautiful a Damsel should
frequent their company. On a time when Parismus saw all the Out-lawes gone out
of the Cave, and he left alone with Dina, he enquired of her of whence she
was, and why she lived there, having also marked her behavior toward them,
he did wonder at her virtues, whereby she refelled the wicked behavior of
those rude people. She told him that she was daughter unto a Knight of the
Province of Salmatia, whom one of those Outlaws had violently taken forth of
her fathers Orchard, in revenge of a wrong he said her brother had done him:
withal she told him the whole manner of her coming thither. Whereby Parismus
understood, that she was the very same, in whose rescue Osiris was hurt.

By this time the Outlawes were come in, whereby the Uirgin left off her
speech, bringing in with them good store of money which they had taken from
honest passengers. Parismus lying very weak, yet marked well their behavior,
which made him marvel that men could be so inhumane, as by their own reports
they seemed to be, wishing himself with Laurana, who he thought would accuse
him of disloialty, or that he made choice of some other: if she did not so
misdoubt him, then the sorrow he thought she endured for his loss, which might
some way come to her knowledge, so galled him to the heart, that his inward
passions would not suffer his outward physic to do him any good, and the
continual care he was in did much hinder his health: being likewise as much
tormented with remembrance of the grant that Dionisius had made to Sicanus,
concerning the marriage twixt him and Laurana, who he thought might now be
enforced to yield her consent, when she was out of hope of recovering him:
this grief far exceeded all the rest, that all the whole company began to
note his sorrow, for he was scarce able to contain himself within the bounds
of reason. In these perplerities he continued by the space of three months, in
all which time, he could not fully recover his health. Where we will leave him,
to speak of Dionisius, who by tract of time, having somewhat mittigated the
remembrance of Parismus want, (most of his Knights being departed home into
Bohemia, Oristus only excepted, who by no means could be drawn to leave
Thessaly, because there he had lost his Lord) began to confer about the
marriage of Laurana, being often importuned by Sicanus, who caused the King of
Hungaria, and the Prince of Sparta, to be earnest solliciters in his behalf:
at whose instance, Dionisius promised to give them answer the next day:
therefore sending for Laurana, he demanded of her how she fancied Lord
Sicanus, who was a most honorable Gentleman, and one every way worthy to be
beloved, telling her that he had given his sul consent, and therefore it stood
not with her virtue to seem strange or show her self undutiful. Laurana
hearing her fathers speeches, being much amazed, stood still and gave no answer
a good space; at last kneeling down, she began in this sort: I most humbly
entreat your Majesty, to vouchsafe to hear my words with patience, and not to
impute any thing I shall desire at your highness hands, to undutifulness: I
cannot as yet fancy the Prince, though I confess my self far unworthy the
honor you proffer me, but have presumed (upon your favorable promise, not to
marry me to any without my liking,) to fuse the offer Sicanus makes, for that
my fancy persuaded me, he shall bring some sorrow to your highness, and all the
rest of this Court and Country: as also for that I am unwilling to this with
my better, but would entreat your majesty (if your highness will needs have
me marry) rather to bestow me on some honorable Gentleman of my degree, but
most of all my desire is to continue this my happy life, wherein I entend (with
your gracious liking) to spend the length of my days.

Dionisius wondering to hear her answer, began to wax somewhat angry with her,
and told her, that it was his pleasure she should marry with him, and he would
have it so. My dear Lord and Father, quoth she (because I am yours wholly to
dispose of) I humbly crave that I may have a months respite to advise my
self, and then I will accomplish your demand: which he granted, and so left
her. Laurana being alone, began to weigh in what estate she was, and how to
avoid this injury the should do to her self, for her honorable promise past
to Parismus, and to him for his love, that she determined, rather to destroy
her self, then yield to marry him, whom she accounted her dear loves enemy:
and with this resolution went to her lodging.

Sicanus the next morning attended Dionisius answer, who told him, that his
daughter had given her consent, upon condition he would grant her a months
respite to consider of her duty therein: wherewithal he was highly contented,
being now fully assured (as he thought) of his desire, and began more boldly to
visit Laurana, who little esteemed his friendship, though he used her kindly,
but far from any show of love, to the intent to breed no suspicion in him, of
that she intended.

CHAP. VII.
How Sicanus treason was discovered, who suddenly fled into his Country, and
how Diomsius departed toward Bohemia, unknown to any, in the disguise of a
Palmer, and what sorrow Oliuia the Queen made for his absence: who created
Lord Remus Regent in the Kings absence.

Whilst these things were acting, it happened (contrary to Sicanus
expectation, who now thought all things so buried in forgetfulness, that his
treachery could by no means be revealed) that the Tarrrians which murdered
Parismus, began to contend about the money Sicanus had given them, in so
much, that one of them struck the other such a blow on the head, that he had
wel-neere slain him, and would have struck him again, but that by chance
Oristus coming by, reproved the other that had struck his fellow, and
defended him that was already wounded from further harm: and diverse other of
Dionisius knights coming together, they conveyed him that was hurt into a
Chamber, and the other was carried before the king, to be examined upon what
occasion he did strike him: who answered Diomsius, that he would not be
examined of any but his own Prince, which made Dionisius the more earnest to
know the cause: therefore willed Lord Remus to entreat Sicanus to come unto him
to end a doubt, which none but he could decide. Sicanus maruelling what the
cause should be, immediately came, but seeing one of the Tartarians that he had
hired to murder Parismus, standing before the King, began to fear (according
to the guiltiness of his conscience) that his treason was bewraied:
notwithstanding, he demanded why he had so wounded his fellow: the villain
being amazed to see his master so ready to examine him, and not rather to
excuse him, could not readily tell what to say, but in that little respit of
deliberation, he answered, that he had done him wrong, and that was the cause
he had struck him: which words he uttered with great fear, staring upon
Sicanus (as if he should have instructed him what to say.) Dionisius noting
Sicanus countenance, and the villains answer, whom Sicanus would examine no
further, began to misdoubt some former mischief had bred this contention,
commanded the other Tartarian that was wounded to be brought before him, who
feeling himself almost past estate of life, confessed the cause why thy fell
out, and how that they had the money of Sicanus, for murdering Parismus, whose
want was procured by their means. Sicanus standing by, and hearing his speech,
suddenly drew his dagger and stabbed him, before he could utter any more of his
treachery. Which so amazed all the company, that a good space they knew not
what to say: at last Oristus (being filled with fury) boldly stepped to Sicanus,
and challenged him as a villen and traitor, for conspiring his masters death,
who being likewise moved with rage, struck at Oristus, to have stabbed him
likewise: but he easily avoided the blow, and with his fist struck him with
such violence, that the blood ran abundantly from his mouth, which his knights
perceiving, began to draw upon Oristus, who had been their flaine, but that
many of Dionisius knights (dearly loving Parismus, and hearing the villains
co^session) likewise drew, and assailed the Persian Knights, so fiercely, that
many of them were wounded, and Sicanus himself had there died, had he not
fled. And notwithstanding Dinisius labored all that he could to pacify this
uproar, yet before he could do it, three of Sicanus Knights were flaine, and
the rest fled with their maeer. After the tumult was appeased, Dionisius began
to examine the matter more narrowly, and found by all circumstances the
Tartarian had said true. Sicanus with great hazard of his life, having escaped
out of the Court, with some forty in his company, being ashamed (as knowing
himself guilty of the fact,) with all the haste that he could, got to the
harbor where his Ship lay, and with all speed hoised sail, not once taking
his leave of the King, which was a suffient persuasion to all, that Parismus by
his means was murdered, the remembrance whereof began their sorrow a fresh.

The King of Hungaria, and Prine of Sparta, being much ashamed of Sicanus
behavior, in whose company they came, desired Dionisius not to impute his
impiety any way to their dishonor, for that they would forever abhor him for
that monstrous act, and rest ready to defend him, if ever he should stand in
need of their aid, to revenge this injury: who determined to stay still with
Dionisius, if they could, to drive out of his mind the remembrance of this
mischance. Dionisius being most extremely overcome with rage, and grief,
began to take the murder of Parismus with such sorrow, that he determined to
spend the rest of his days out of the company of all men, and the next morning
(giving delay no scope to hinder his purpose) having disguised himself that he
could not be known, in Palmers weeds, he departed secretly from the Court:
and first took his course to travel into Bohemia, to hear whether Parismus
Father had knowledge of the death of his son, or no. Dinner time being come,
Dionisius was wanting, which made the Queen marvel, for that he was not wont
to be absent, but thinking he was gone alone by himself to meditate, made no
great enquiry: but after Dinner, going her self to seek him, could by no
means find him, which made her make open enquiry, yet none could hear of
him, that upon the sudden there began such an vproare (when they had searched
all the Place, Gardens, Orchardes, walks, and every place) such acclamations,
such lamentation, and such outcries, that all seemed comfortless, yea, rather
mad and lunatike: some running this way, some that way, every one carefully
to do his best, yet all to no effect, which both made the Queen, the King of
Hungaria, the Prince of Sparta, and all the rest, in that miserable estate of
misdoubt, that they neither could tell what to do, nor what to conjecture of
his absence, seating least Sicanus had likewise by some villainy, procured his
death. Diverse Knights went in search of him, but could not find him, and yet
saw him, but knew him not: for they often met with him in Palmers disguise, and
asked him for himself, which made him oftentimes in mind to return, but yet
his former determination continued firm.

These news of Sicanus departure, and of Dionisius want happened in two days,
yet neither of them was come to the knowledge of Laurana, who absented her
self from all company, by reason of the extreme care she endured for
Parismus: Sicanus treason, and Parismus murder was concealed from her by Leda,
who loved her dearly, and therefore would not suffer it to come to her
hearing: but contrary to Lauranaes thought, and Ledaes expectation, Oliuia the
Queen came to her lodging, wringing her hands, and making a great lamentation,
and espying her, said: O daughter, what shall betide us? that villain Sicanus
having murdered Parismus, has likewise destroyed thy Father. Laurana hearing
her mothers speeches, stood as one amazed, not once sitting, speaking, or
moving hereie: at last thinking it was strange news to be true, said; dear
mother, I trust these unwelcome news cannot be true, nor that your grace
speaks of proof: whereupon the Queen told her all that had happened to
Parismus, by Sicanus procurement, wherewith Laurana (not being able to hear
the rest that her Mother would have uttered) immediately fell down amongst the
Ladies dead, who indeauoured to recover her, but were not able to bring her to
life again, by the space of half an hour, which began a new sorrow amongst
them, she seeming to be past all hope of recovery: all being tired with
extreme grief, gave their minds no respite to consider of the adversity they
were in, but still continued making such lamentations, as the place seemed a
desolate habitation of sorrow. Laurana at length coming to her self, could
not yet utter a word, for the extremity of care had such full possession in
her heart, that she could neither ease it by lamentation, nor tears, that all
the whole company were constrained to employ their best endeauours to remedy
this present evil, the last of there hope: for if she had perished, the heir
of Thessalie had been lost. Lord Remus being a man of great wisdom and
government, began to weigh the fickle estate of the people and Country, who
having been a long time subject unto peace, therefore were not able to endure
the brunt of war, and that it was likely Sicanus would seek to revenge
himself against them, and take, if he could, out of their hands the Princess
Laurana, heir apparent to the Crown, and thereby get the kingdom into his
possession, which the Thessalians could not endure: reuoluing these thoughts in
his mind, he came to the Queen, and the rest of the Nobles, and requested her
and them together, to have some regard to their Country, and not to show
themselves unprovided to defend themselves from further mischief: whose
counsel all liked well, especially Oliuia, who with the consent of the rest of
the Peers, made him Lord Regent of the Country: upon which charge committed to
him, he presently gave order for mustring of men, and fortifying of Castles,
and places of defense, appointing Captains and Governors, under whose charge
he committed those places of defense, and within a short space brought all
things to such perfection, that the Country was well fortifyed, and able to
resist a great enemy.

The Queen being diversely tormented in thought, now was (by return of such as
were gone in search of the King) ascertained that he was no where within the
bounds of Thessaly alive, and therefore assuredly thought he was dead, which
so inwardly tormented her, that she gave her self only to mourning, not
giving her mind one minutes respit of quiet, in which estate for a time we
will leave her.

CHAP. VIII.
How Parismus in Palmers weeds found means to see the Princess, unto whom he
would not discover himself, hearing of Donisius absence, and what befell to
Dionisius in Bohemia.

AFter that Parismus had well recovered himself, being able to walk up and
down, he was desirous to hear some news from Dionisius Court, but could
not devise how to bring the same to effect: but thus fortunately it fell out,
those outlawes were so far in love with him, that they with one consent
entreated him, that he would vouchsafe to continue among them, and be their
captain, for that they were without a guide, and thought so well of him, as
that above all men they were desirous he would be the man, which he began
to refuse, alleging, that he being a stranger in that country, and
unacquainted with their customs, was altogether unfit, using many reasons, as
excuses: but considering with himself, that it might much avail him to his
purpose, at their entreaties was contented, and so behaved himself, that
within a very short time, his word and counsel was an Oracle amongst them,
and by his wisdom he kept them from doing much harm, and yet seemed in
their fancy to further them greatly.

Oftentimes he was in mind to go and make himself known at the court, and so
enjoy his mistress sight, which grieved him to want, but being diversely
minded, at last this was his resolution: he fitted himself on a day in Palmers
weeds, and disguised himself so artificially, that (by hi^ disguise and long
sickness, which had somewhat altered his complextion) none could any way know
him: telling the Out-lawes that he was determined to see the Court, which he
had heard was so famous, and that he would return at night.

When he was somewhat near the City, he might see upon a plain hard by,
great preparation for war, which made him much marvel, at last coming to the
Kings Palace, he got himself unto the place where Laurana every morning
usually at her coming from Chapel, gave her alms, and put himself amongst
the rest of the Palmers, and being taller then any of them, he was much noted
of many: when the princess came to give her alms, (being in mourning attire)
she called them all unto her, and began to demand of whence they were, what
Countries they had travailed, and whether they had heard any news of Dionisius
the King, who was missing: or whether they heard any in their travail, speak
of the dead body of the Prince, which by chance might be found, being
murdered by Sicanus of Persia: which words she uttered with such sorrow, that
the tears ran abundantly down her cheeks.

Parismus being ravished with the sight of his precious Jewel, and seeing her
weeping for his loss, and withal hearing from her mouth that heanie news of
Dionisius want, could not (though he striued to the uttermost of his power)
refrain from letting fall a few tears, which Laurana perceiving, and viewing
him withal, began to feel a sudden alteration in all her parts, that she
was not in quiet till she had found means to commune with him: and giving all
the rest their alms, they departed, but to him she would give nothing, to the
intent he should stay: but he seeing the rest gone, was departing with them,
till Leda (being by her Mistress commanded) called him back, whom he very
well knew, and being returned, Laurana demanded of him what was the cause
that he wept when he heard her speak of Dionisius loss, and Parismus death.

Parismus, said: Most virtuous Lady, I wept not to hear Parismus named, but
to hear of Dionisius loss, for Parismus I know is at this present living,
and in good estate of health, with whom I had some talk within these three
weeks, in the Country of Salmatia: which was the cause of my coming hither,
being sent by him unto a Lady in this Court, whom I know not how to speak
withal, nor will not name to any.

Laurana hearing the Palmers words, blushed exceedingly, and withal, entreated
him to tell out his news, for that it might be, she was the party Lord
Parismus meant: for I am Laurana quoth she, whom Parismus did think well of,
with that she wept again.

Parismus kneeling down said, then to your Highness I will do my message,
for unto you I was sent. Lord Parismus, growing into some good liking of me,
and having received my oath to be his faithful messenger: willed me to give
your highness this Jewel, whereby you should be assured he was living, but
constrained to absent himself, for causes that hereafter he will let you
understand, he desired you to let him (though unworthy) enjoy but the least of
your virtuous promises, and he shall ever hereafter account himself to have
received his life and liberty from you.

Laurana seeing the Jewel which she well knew to be the same she had
before given him, and hearing the Palmer credible report, that he was in
perfect health, and being fully assured of the truth of that message, by the
certain and firm protestation of the most Noble Parismus himself, in the
disguise of a Palmer: she was so surprised with joy, that she could not
refrain from kissing the jewel, saying welcome sweet token from a faithful
friend: and calling Leda unto her, told her the news the Palmer had brought,
rejoicing with such virtuous kindness, that Parismus thought himself the
happpyest man living to enjoy the love of so virtuous a Lady. Laurana coming
to him, told him, that she was so much bound unto him for bringing her those
happy news, that she did not know which way sufficiently to recompense him
for his pains: and were it not (quoth she) but that I stand in some doubt
hereof (as being too good to be true) I should rest in such happy content by
thy news, that no adversity whatsoever should cause my sorrow, but only his
absence, though my fathers loss does neeerely concern my happiness. The
Palmer used such pro^ stations, that Laurana could not choose but believe him,
as also by reason of the Jewel which she knew she had given Parismus. So taking
a Jewel from forth her bosom, she gave the same to him, which he willingly
received, and kissing her hand departed. When he was out of sight, he began to
meditate of the virtues of Laurana, and therein took such felicity, that
before he was aware he met with Oristus, who had been walking solitarily
abroad, in such heaviness, that it would have caused any to pity him.
Parismus seeing him, was in mind to have revealed himself unto him only: but
being passed by him, he could not choose but turn and look after him, his
mind was touched with such kindness: but the remembrance of Dionisius loss
did so much grieve him, that wasting the time with those thoughts, unawares in
a heavy dumpe, he was suddenly arrived at the Cave, where he was kindly
welcomed of the Out-lawes, who used such commendation of the Court, as it
liked them to hear, and told unto them how the king was missing, and no man
could tell what was become of him, and that he thought there was some
preparation for wars by the mustring of soldiers that he saw before the
City.

When he was alone, he began to condemn himself of hard heartedness, that
seeing the most virtuous Lady living to mourn for his loss, yet he being safe
and in her sight, would not make himself known to her, thereby to rid her
from her grief: but yet his comfort was great on the other side, that he saw
her love so firm, being past all hope of ever seeing him again, that he
accounted himself far unworthy the favor she showed him, growing so far
in admiration of her constancy, that no thought was pleasant, but the
remembrance of her love.

Dionisius as before is said, having met with many of his Knights that went
in search of him, was almost through remembrance of the sorrow he knew would
arise by his absence, altered from his former determination, yet remembering
Parismus murder, which he knew could not choose but come to the knowledge of
his old friend the King of Bohemia, whereby his honor might be called in
question (of which he was jealous) he therefore resolutely determined to travel
thither, and having iourneyed many days, he arrived in Bohemia, where lighting
into company with anancient Palmer of that Country, he enquired of him what
were the news at the Bohemians court? who taking Dionisius to be but a Palmer,
told him that the news was chiefly of the Prince Parismus, who being in the
Court of Dionisius King of Thessaly, was there murdered, or by some other
treason destroyed, but by whom, or how, it was not known: by means whereof
there was such heavy lamentation in that Country, and especially in the Court,
that he thought the like had never been heard of in any place. Which report
caused Dionisius to grieve exceedingly, and was so much tormented in mind,
that he resoulued there to bide unknown to any, until he saw how the King
of Bohemia would digest this grief, and also to hear the general report
would be given of him, for that he did not revenge the death of the Prince on
Sicanus, when he had him in Thessaly: as also to see the intent of these
stratagems: having good store of money and Jewels, he gate him a lodging in an
ancient Burgomaisters house, where for his money he was kindly used. His
wanted costome was, every day to go to the Kings house, where he heard nothing
to comfort him withal, but saw the King his old friend in most heavy plight
for his sons death, all the joy he had, was that he heard all men
notwithstanding the death of their Prince, report very honorably of him, that
he continued (as he thought) secure, being not known, or of any suspected,
to be the man he was, but at the last, thus contrarily it happened. The
Burgomaster having diligently marked the behavior of his guest, found him
far differing from all other Palmers, in person and quallities, and besides,
seeing the daily charge he was at, began to suspect him, having such store of
coin to maintain that charge, that when Dionisius went to his lodging, he
would listen at his Chamber door, to hear his speeches, and mark his
behavior, where he oftentimes heard Dionisius bewayling his estate in most
heavy plaints, naming himself, and oftentimes naming Parismus, and on a time
declared the same to a Noble man of the Kings Court: who coming secretly to
the Burgomaisters house, and having marked the Palmers behavior, did suspect
him to be some spy, apprehended him, and caused him to be cast in prison
without any examination: which made Dionisius to wonder, fearing lest he should
be known, but yet he thought that could not be, therefore with patience he
endured this imprisonment: where he continued in the most vildest place
amongst roagues and rascals, being exempt from the clear light of the Sun to
comfort him withal, by the space of some six days, by reason that the noble
man which laid him there, was gone about affairs of his own, but at his
return, he certified the King of such a suspicious person that he had found.
Wherefore Dionisius was sent for, who being examined, told the king, that the
occasion of his coming into that Country, was to no ill intent, but if it
liked him to hear him privately, he would declare unto him the whole intent of
his coming. The King hearing his speeches, commanded all to depart,
whereupon Dionisius disclosed himself. The King of Bohemia knowing him, being
amazed at his strange disguise, suddenly caught him in his arms and embraced
him with great kindness. Dionisius discovered unto him the heavy l^sse of
Parismus, and his own sudden departure out of Thessalie, requesting him that
he would join with him aganst Sicanus, to revenge the death of so noble a
Prince: which the Bohemian King most willingly yielded unto: so with many other
speeches that passed betwixt them, let us leave Dionisius to be entertained by
the King of Bohemia.

CHAP. IX.
How the King of Persia at his sons entreaty, brought a mighty army of
Persians into Thessalie, and how Lord Remus slew a multitude of them, at their
landing. And how Parismus wanne Horse and armor from a Knight of Persia.

AS s^ne as Sicanus was returned into Persia, he fully resolved either to
obtain Laurana in marriage, or waste Thessaly with continual war, wherefore
he came unto his Father and told him, that being in Dionisius Court, he was
accused by two perjured villains, for the death of Parismus, son to the King
of Bohemia: whereupon Dionisius having before promised him his daughter, both
denied her unto him, and also had he not escaped by flight, he had been slain
in the presence of Dionisius, with three of his Knights that were slain in his
rescue: and kneeling down, most humbly entreated his Father to grant him a
band of Persians, to revenge the disgrace and wrong he had received.

The King of Persia, by his countenance bewrayed the inward fire of the heart,
that without giving any consideration to the truth of his sons report, he
presently vowed to redress those wrongs, or else bring perpetual infamy to
his posterity: and to that effect, commanded a mighty army to be made in a
readiness, which was so innumerable (having called all his contributories
together) that it was the mightiest host that ever went out of Persia, and
also provided a mighty navy of ships: which being soon in a readiness, they
with all the haste that might be, having wind and weather at will, hoysed
sail, and made for the Country of Thessaly. A poor Fisherman of Thessaly,
that was abroad at sea, having espied such a mighty navy of ships, with all
speed brought word to the Court, to Oliuia the Queen, who desired Lord Remus
to defend the Country by his uttermost endeavors, because the trust thereof was
wholly committed to his charge: who having some doubt (as before is rehearsed of
such a mischief) of a sudden had gathered together 60000. footmen, and twenty
thousand horsemen, being all expert soldiers, and got them to the Haven
secretly, where he knew ye Persians would land, who thinking to find no
repulse, whereby they might land without contradictio^, had lest on shore some
twenty thousand Persians, which Lord Remus and Oristus perceiving, suddenly
issued out upon them, and slew the greatest part of them being disordered, and
thereby unable to resist the force of the Thessalians coming unawares: which
when the King of Persia saw, being full of rage and fury, violently thrust
all his ships into the harbor, and with all speed landed the whole army, in
which time of landing, the Thessalians had destroyed of the Persians to the
number of thirty thousand: that the color of the waters were turned into
purple, which so vexed the King of Persia, and his son Sicanus, that causing
a trench to be made for the fortifying the place of their landing, without any
further great impeach, they landed their whole army: which was so huge, that
the Lord Remus (though he were a man of invincible courage, and the Thessalians
being but a handful in respect of so mighty an host) began somewhat to
discomfort themselves, and therefore returned to the City of Thebes, to defend
that from the force of those Persians that were sufficiently provoked to anger,
by the slaughter the Thessalians had already made amongst them, and fortified
the same with all kind of provision, being invincible, unless it were
destroyed with famine.

The Queen seeing her self thus distressed, yet showed such magnanimious
courage, that the like has not been seen in a woman, which provoked the
hearts of all her subjects, to such resolution, that they resolved never to
yield to the force of the Persians.

The King of Persia having landed his Army, began to march into the Country,
where they could scarce find victuals to suffice such a multitude: the Country
being large and full of deserts, forests, and wildernesses, but at last they
came to the plains of Pharsaly, where in times past were the thundering wars
of Caesar and Pompey, being of such a huge length and breadth, that they are
thought to exceed all plains in the world for largeness and bigness: on the
one side whereof, runs the River Peneus, which running down from the foot
of Olimpus, by means the hills bowing gently on both sides with woody
bottomes, makes the Thessalians tent, where the Persians encamped themselves
toward the farther end thereof, being distant not about twelve miles from the
City of Thebes, whither they might easily march, and soon return, and
therefore fortified that place for their carriage. Immediately Sicanus, with a
hundredth thousand Persians, made toward the City, which the watchmen
perceiving, fired their Beacons. But Lord Remus and Oristus, gave present
commandment, that there should be no sign or show made in the City, whereby
the enemy might know that they had any knowledge of their coming. Where we will
leave them within the City, making all the preparation that might be to
withstand the enemy, and Sicanus at the walls begirting the same, to speak of
Parismus, who all this while being in the Cane amongst the Outlawes, still
devised how he might have further trial of Lauranaes constancy, and therefore
determined still to conceal himself, until he might hear news of Dionisius
return, and also to know wherefore there was such preparation for wars.

And on a day he could endure no longer from beholding his Mistress, but
disguising himself in his Palmers weeds, he wandered from the Cave toward
the city, with intent to have seen her giving her wonted alms, whither he
was no sooner come, but he espied the band of Sicanus soldiers, which struck
such an amazeme^t into his mind, that he stood like one without sense: being
enraged with fury to see the City begirt wherein his dear Lady was, which
struck him so near unto the heart, that sitting down upon a mossy bank, he
uttered these heavy plaints. Unhappy wretch that I am, into what a distressed
estate am I brought, that by my misdout^ful mind, have so much wronged ye
constantest virgin living, and thereby have deprived my self of her sight,
which I might have enjoyed, but now by my own folly am shut from it by a
multitude of enemies yt seek the destruction of my beloved: what sufficient
recompense may I make her for this my monstrous ingratitude? or how may I
without shame call her my beloved, when I have shown my self too strange,
being in her sweet sight, and hearing the plaints she made for my absence, yet
would not make my self manifest unto her, thereby to drive away such passions,
as I know she endures for my sake well, since my unlucky stars have allotted me
this hard fortune, I will either recompense this wrong I have done her, and
purchase her liberty by chasing away these enemies which besiege my beloved, or
lose my worthless life in her defense. In this sort he complained, until that
he was wearied with uttering such heavy passions: at last starting up as one
new raised from a trance, he ran with all haste toward the Cave, purposing to
get some armor and weapon, wherewith to defend himself, and by the way he met
a knight al in black armor, being mounted upon a gallant black Courser, being a
goodly proportioned man, with all furniture readily appointed for war, making
speed toward the City, whom Parismus, supposed to be one of their company
that besieged Thebes, and therefore boldly coming to him he said: Stay I pray
you sir knight, and let a Palmer demand on question of thee. I may choose said
the knight, and so scornfully rode on. Wherewith Parismus was so enraged with
fury, that catching at a great stone, with all his might he flung it at this
discurteous kinght, and hit him with such violence on the back, that it made
the blood start out at his nose: the knight turning about, came back toward
Parismus, and alighting from his steed, pulled forth of his pocket a cord,
wherewith he threatened to bind him, and so drag him at his horse heels: and
laying hands on Parismus, (thinking easily to have bound him, for that he took
him to be a Palmer) who contrary to the Persians expectation, ^ooke the knight
such a blow on the face with his fist, yt he staggered as one amazed, and
therewith catching hold on his sword, told him, that unless he would declare
unto him of whence he was, and what army that was that besieged the City of
Thebes, he should there die with his own weapon: which words the Persian took
so disdainfully, being ashamed to be so ouermatched by a Pilgrim, that with
his foot he struck Parismus such a violent blow on the belly, that he with
much pain could scarce stand, which caused him to strike the knight so
vehemently with the pommel of his sword, that he fell down half dead, and
seeing himself in that estate, desired Parismus to be contented, and he would
declare the whole truth unto him. I am quoth he of Persia, my name is Toledo,
belonging to the king of Persia, and am now come in this country with my Lord
the Persian king, and his son Sicanus, and his contributary Kings, who are
come hither to revenge themselves on king Dionisius, who fally accused Sicanus
for murdering Parismus prince of Bohemia, who I think is run away from his
Court for some notorious fact he has committed, and since they have accused my
Lord for his death: as also he is come to fetch from hence, the Kings daughter
by forc^f arms: and therefore my Lord is himself now before the walls of the
City with a hundred thousand armed Persians, and the rest of his forces have
encamped themselves here hard by on the plains of Pharsalia.

Parismus being moved into extreme choler, could not contain himself, but
his mind being ouercharged with fury, burst forth into these speeches: Traitor
that thou art (quoth he) though unknown to any but thy self. Behold Parismus
whom thou have so falsely belyed, and whom the Traitor Sicanus did intend to
murder, though I was reserved by the Almighty, to be the death of twenty
thousand Persians: and since I see thy graceless mind so far from piety,
that in this extreme peril of thy death, thou will scandalize that honorable
King, of whom thy base tongue is not worthy to speak: thou art the first that
shall die by the hand of Parismus, wherewith drawing out his sword, he soon
ended his life. And pulling the armor from his dead corpse, armed himself
therewith, and mounting his Horse, set his spear in his rest, and made toward
the City.

CHAP. X.
How Parismus slew three of the Persian Knights in three several Combats. And
how the Persians had taken him prisoner, if he had not been rescued by the
Knights of Thessaly. All which was done in the sight of the Queen and the
princess Laurana.

WHen Parismus came to Sicanus Camp, he waued his spear about his head,
thereby challenging the Knights in Sicanus company, wherewith one singling
himself from the Army, came with his spear ready coucht against Parismus,
who setting spurs to his Horse, ran at him with such force, that his spear
passed quite through the knights body, wherewith he feldown dead, and catching
with such nimblenesse (as it made the whole Army admire at him) the vanquished
knights spear, he waued the same the second time above his head, at the sight
whereof, an other Persian knight ran at him, whom Parismus likewise so
valiantly encountered, that he overthrew both horse and man to the ground, in
which fall, the knight burst his leg, whereof he died.

Sicanus seeing two of his Knights thus foiled, commanded one Bruster, a mighty
huge proportioned man, and esteemed to be one of the best knights in Persia
(except his two brethren) to encounter that Knight, who coming forth on a
mighty horse, met Parismus with violence, that shiuering the spelles of their
Lances into the air, Parismus left one of his stirrops, and Bruster lay
senseless backward upon his horse rumpe, but with the springing of the horse,
was raised into his saddle, and by that time he came to himself, he saw
Parismus flourishing his sword, which made him draw also, and betwixt them,
began so brave a combat, that their Armor began to fly in pieces, and the
blood by reason of their wounds issued out of many places, especially from the
Persian knight, whom Parismus so firecely assailed, that he drove him only to
ward such such blows as Parismus lent him: which Parismus espying, taking the
advantage, struck a forcible blow at his arm, and parted the same quite from
his body.

The Persian seeing himself brought to that low estate, turned his Horse and
fled toward Sicanus Camp, which so amazed Sicanus, that he thought the black
Knight (for so they called him) to be some monster in the shape of a man, sent
to torment them, who notwithstanding these their combats, seemed to be as fresh
as he was in the beginning, still attending if any durst make any further
combat.

The Queen of Thessaly, Laurana the young Queen of Hungaria, Lord Remus,
Oristus, and Osiris, having knowledge of the coming of these Persians to the
City, were gotten to the top of a tower to behold their Camp, and at their
first coming they beheld the arrival of Parismus in the black armor, and the
three noble combats he had fought with the Persian knights, which made them
marvel greatly who that knight might be, that had so valiantly slain three of
their enemies. While they were in this meditation, Laurana having well marked the
black knight, began to suppose that it might be Parismus, but again, she
thought that was impossible, at last she saw a great troop of Knights assail
him all at once, which made her call and cry, help, help, her senses being so
far drawn with fear and remembrance of Parismus, that she neither thought
of the place where she was, nor in whose company. Lord Remus and Oristus,
seeing this brave and worthy knight in such distress, issued forth of the City
with twenty thousand horsemen, and commanded forty thousand of the best
Soldiers to come out an other way on the back of the Persians, under the
conduct of another brave Noble man: all this while the black Knight so bravely
and courageously defended himself, that before the Thessalians were come to
his rescue, he had slain above forty Persians: but being unable to strive
with so many, he was constrained to lose his weapon. Contrarily, Lord Remus
sudden issuing out, so amazed the Persians, and made such slaughter amongst
them, that they quickly set the black knight at liberty: who having recovered
his horse, being cheared with the comfortable sight of Lord Remus, and his
trusty knight Oristus, with his sword made such havoc amongst the Persians,
that none durst abide his coming, but wheresoever he went, he made a large
lane for the rest to follow him.

The Persians by this time having joined all their forces together, thronged by
such multitudes upon the Thessalians, that they were constrained somewhat to
retire, but in their retreit, the black knight sent the Ghosts of many
Persians to hell, and behaved himself with such magnanimity that all the whole
army were amazed at his valor. By this time the Thessalian footmen assailed
the Persians on ye other side, which drove them into such a fear, that
thousands of them were determined to fly: but seeing no hope of safety by
flight, were so amazed, that their force was quite turned into cowardice: which
the Thessalians perceiving, assailed the^ with such fury, that they had
destroyed in a short space, a great number of them that all the earth was
stained with the blood. The black knight still followed his enemies with such
fury, that (by the death of many Persians) he was gotten into the midst of
the whole army, where he found Sicanus encouraging his Soldiers, and knowing
him by the richness of his armor, ran at him with such force, that with a
mighty blow he beat him quite from his horse, and had it not bin for the two
brethren of Bruster, who attended on him, he had been trodden to death. The
black knight still rushing amongst the thickest of the Persians came where
Oristus was unhorsed, and assailed grievously, who seeing him in that
distress, laid on his blows with such swift fury, that happy was he that
could get him farthest from him: by which means Oristus recovered his horse.
Thus all the day the battle continued, to the terror of the Persians, comfort
of the Thessalians, and honor of the black knight: who behaved himself with
such magnanimity, that both the Persians, and Thessalians admired his valor.
Like wise the queen and Laurana, (who all this while beheld the battle) could
not otherwise judge, but the black Knight to be the most valiant Knight of the
world.

Thus the day being spent, the Thessalians sounded retreit, which the Persians
were glad of, only the black knight went away discontent, for that he thought
he had not yet sufficiently recompensed his kind loves favors: but secretly
conveyed himself unseen of any) unto the wood wherein was his Cave. Where we
leave him to be entertained of the Outlawes, and to be cured of his wounds, by
the virgin I spoke of before.

Lord Remus and Oristus (having retired their men into the City) sought for the
black Knight, but could not find him, which made them marvel what should
become of him, whose behavior had been such, as it made him known to all the
whole Army: but seeing themselves frustrated of seeing him, they gave order for
such as were maimed, and having viewed their whole troops, found but a
thousand Thessalians missing, and with great joy went to the Palace: where
they were joyfully received by the Queen and Laurana, and relating the whole
circumstance of their exploit, their chiefest talk was of the worthy fortitude
of the black knight.

Sicanus on the other side, seeing himself so bruised with the fall he
received, and also his Persians so weakened, and such a multitude of them
slain, departed toward the Camp, on the plains of Pharsalia, being not
able to lodge before the City walls, by reason the ground was so wet with the
blood of the Persians: who lay upon such heaps, that had not the Thessalians
the next day conveyed their bodies into a deep pit, the stench of them would
have annoyed the whole City.

CHAP. XI
How the King of Persia removed his Camp from the place of Pharsalia, and
besieged the City of Thebes: how Dionisius, the King of Bohemia, the Prince of
Sparta, and the King of Hungaria, landed in Thessalie, with a mighty army of
soldiers. And what afterward befell to Parismus, called the the black
Knight, and battle fought betwixt the Persians and Thessalians.

THe King of Persia seeing his son thus foiled, and so sore hurt, and such a
number of Persians slain, and by so small a company of Thessalians, (his men
beeng three to one) was so inwardly vexed and enraged, that he gave
commandment to remove all his force unto the City, which was so innumerable,
that within three or four days all the City was round begirt with soldiers.
The King of Persia himself lay upon a hill hard by the City, in a Tent most
richly and rarely contrived: and all the Tents of his contributories round
about him; which made such a show, as though a whole multitude of nations had
been gathered together to destroy the whole earth: which when the Thessalians
beheld, they coniectured, that unless God should raise some extraordinary
succor to aid them, it were impossible for them long to withstand this
mighty force: but yet some hope they had in the King of Hungaria, and Prince
of Sparta, who were gone into their countries to prepare soldiers to aid the
Queen and Laurana, and the time of their promised return was almost ^ome.

The King of Bohemia likewise having knowledge of the Persians being in
Thessaly, being urged with hope to revenge his sons death, mustered up all his
forces, and gathered out of them a mighty band of expert soldiers: who were
most desirous to deal with the Persians, because of all nations, they hated
them most: the one half marched under the conduct of Dionisius: and the other
fifty thousand he led himself: and having all things in a readiness, within a
short space, they arrived on the coast of Thessalie. Dionisius by his spies,
having knowledge where the Persian Camp lay, conveyed his men secretly into
the wood, where Parismus Cave was: and the King of Bohemia, with his fifty
thousand, marched over the Plains of Pharsalia: and encamped themselves near
unto the City, and hard by the Persians: but soon the King of Persia had
knowledge of the King of Bohemia. The same day the Prince of Sparta had landed
three score thousand men at Arms, all under his own conduct, and encamped on
the other side of the Persians. The King of Hungaria likewise, with fity
thousand soldiers, had pitched his Camp on the back of the Persians: so that
they were environed round with Bohemians, Hungarians, and Spartans, and before
them the City. Which much amazed the Persians, but yet by reason of their
multitudes, they thought themselves secure.

Oliuia, Laurana, and the Thessalian Lords, seeing such a multitude of
Soldiers encamped so near to the Persians, thought them likewise to be
enemies: and being much disquieted, sent out a messenger to enquire the truth
thereof: who returning with joy, certified them, that only the blewe Tents,
were Persians, the red Tents, the Bohemians, the white Tents, the Spartans, and
the green Tents, the Hungarians forces: Which news so comforted the Queen,
that she could not tell how to contain herself from exceeding rejoicing: had
not Dionisius been wanting. Laurana especially hearing that Parismus Father
was come to defend her, and revenge his sons wrong, (whom all men thought to
have been dead) continually praised God, and prayed for the preservation of
that worthy King, and oftentimes, her petitions proceeded from such kind
virtue, that together with the remembrance of his great kindness, her Fathers
loss, and Parismus absence, the Cristall tears ran with abundance down her
Crimson cheeks, like drops of Pearl: at last the Queen called one of her
Gentlemen, to go with a message of thanks, unto the Camps of her friends,
but Oristus desired that he might be the Messenger, whom the Queen well liked
of: who departed out of the City unto the King of Bohemia, being his Lord,
and kneeling down did his message from the Queen: the King knowing him, and
withal remembering that he was the only man, whom Parismus most esteemed,
most kindly welcomed him, with tears for grief trickling down his
whitebeard, and not able to speak one word with extreme care for the death
of his Son.

Oristus likewise was so moved to see his King so kind, that he could use no
words but sorrowful sadness, and having saluted the King of Hungaria, and the
King of Sparta, returned unto the Queen.

Dionisius had so secretly lodged his Troops in the woods, that the Persians
had no knowledge of his being there, but would oftentimes disguise himself
into the Palmers weeds, and so behold the City, how it was encompassed with
Soldiers, which struck such sorrow to his heart, to see his Country ready
to be wasted, his Subjects in distress, his Queen and his fair Daughter,
ready to be surprised and taken by the Enemies, and such a multitude of bloody
minded Persians, unto whom he never had done wrong, ready to destroy all
things, that he could not refrain from exclaming against Fortune and his own
destines that had allotted him such mischaunce: and having diligently viewed
the Camp, he espied the Tents of the Hungaria^ King, and of the Prince of
Sparta, who had given him their faithful promise to aid him against the
Persians: and therefore he was some what comforted with their presence. at last
he espied Osiris coming toward the City, who had prepared in a readiness
twelve thousand Thessalian horsemen, and had lodged them some twelve miles from
the City, and knowing him to be a man of most rare courtesy, he said unto
him: Worthy Knight, might I be so bold as ask this one question, wherefore
such a multitude of soldiers have begirt this city?

Osiris most courteously answered, Father those with the blewe Tents are the
Persians, who without any just quarrel are come to destroy this Country.
Those with the red Tents are under the King of Bohemia, come in revenge of his
sons death against the Persians. The green and white Tents are the King of
Hungaria and Prince of Sparta, who are come to aid the Thessalians. Indeed we
are but a handful in respect of the Persians, but the greatest hope we have is
in God, and we are also much comforted by the aid of a black knight (for so we
call him, for that he is unknown) whose valor is able to discomfort a
multitude of Persians, who have already tasted of his invincible force: for
first he slew three of the stoutest Persians in three single combattes, and at
last, he defended himself against a multitude of them, that like cowardes came
running upon him, but at last he was aided by Lord Remus and Oristus, who
seeing his person indaungered by so unequal a company, issued out of the
City with their power (but before they could come to him, he had slain
forty Persians) at which time by the asistance of that worthy Knight, there
died of Persians almost fifty thousand: amongst the rest, this black knight
encountered Sicanus of Persia, and at one blow, overthrew both horse and man,
that had he not been taken up, he had then been trodden to death: but this is
our care, that we know not what is become of him, for he privily got himself
from forth of the field. Whilst Osiris was telling this news unto the Palmer,
diverse were gathered about him to hear his talk, by which means the report
of the black knight came to the knowledge of the King of Bohemia, the King of
Hungaria, and the Prince of Sparta, so that all the whole multiude were
desirous to see that valiant Knight. Dionisius hearing this news, was so
comforted therewith, that he went unto his Soldiers, and sent a Messenger unto
the Bohemian King, that he would have some conference with the King of
Hungaria, and the Prince of Sparta, to give a sudden onset on the Persians,)
who were mightily enraged, when they heard that the king of Hungaria and Prince
of Sparta were come against them.) The Messenger returned answer, that they
were determined to give the onset the next morning. Parismus by this time had
fully recovered his health: therefore being still desirous to revenge himself
on Sicanus, as also to be assured in what estate his beloved Laurana was,
thinking himself too slack in performing his promised vow, armed himself in
the black Armor, and hasted toward the City: where he was no sooner come,
but seeing such an alteration, he was so perplexed to see such a multitude of
enemies, in compassing the person of his beloved, that without any further
advise, he determined to assault the whole multitude, and so die amongst his
enemies. At last calling to mind the former passed Love betwixt him and
Laurana, he thought it an undutiful part to destroy himself whom she so
tenderly loved: and taking to himself a more stayde resolution, he came into
the Persians Camp, and viewed the same, next, he espied the Green Tents, and
thither he went: and coming to one of the Soldiers, demanded whose Tent
that was, who answered him that it was the Kings of Hungaria, and from thence
he went unto the white Tents, and asked of a soldier whose that was, who told
him, that it was the Princes of Sparta: at last he espied the Red Tents, which
he well kn^we to be his Fathers, which caused an extreme fear in him, least
his Father should be also come against the Thessalians, and coming thither,
he met with one of his Fathers Knights, of who^e he demanded the cause of the
coming of the Bohemian King into Thessalie? The Knight presently thought that
he was the Black knight, of whom such general commendation had been given,
and therefore told him the whole cause of their coming, and withal, that the
Hungarians and Spartans, were on their side: which news so revived the black
Knight, that his joy exceeded. The Persians all this while viewed the behavior
of the black knight, and likewise the knowledge of his coming, was come to
the hearing of the whole field, which caused many thousa^ds to forsake their
tents to behold him, which he no sooner beheld, ^ut getting himself into the
midst of the plain, which was betwixt the camps, and wauing his spear above
his crest, challenged the Persians, who beholding their terror come again to
torment the^, stood staring on one another: at last one Brant a mighty strong
knight, belonging to the Bosphore of Thrace, one of the contributories, buckled
on his Armor, and mounting himself, came out to meet the black knight, who no
sooner espied him, but setting his spurs to his horse, incountred the Persian
with such fury, that with the blow of his spear which hit him full in the sight
of his beuer, and shiuering into small pieces, struck into his brain, wherewith
he tumbled from his horse dead: which the Persians seeing, none of the^ would
come forth at that time, so that the black Knight departed greatly
discontented, that he could make no further proof of his valor, leaving
thousands praising him, some commending his person, some his comeliness, some
his courtesy, and all his powers: and as he was going toward ye cave, he
espied the troop of soldiers that lay hidden in those woods, which made him
wonder greatly, but would not inquire of any, because he knew the^ to be his
subjects by their ^lags: so privily getting into the cave, he declared to the
outlawes what a multitude of soldiers were come into the country. Whilst he
was in this discourse, one of the outlawes came in, and began to tell that
there was an host of men in the wood, and withal, affirming that Dionisius the
King was amongst them, which he provoked by so many likelyhoods, that Parismus
could not choose but believe him, being now strooken with such an inward joy,
that he showed himself so pleasant and merry, that the Outlawes wondered at
this sudden alteration, having neue before in all the time of his being amongst
them, seen him merry Uery early ye next morning, the Bohemians, Hungarians, and
Spartans, by the soun^e of a drum which they heard within the city, had
knowledge that all were in readiness, therefore they marched all at once to the
Persians, being half a mile asunder, upon a goodly plain, where they were no
sooner met with their armies, but there began the cruellest fight that ever was
seen, but all their force did nothing prevail against the Persians (though
they assailed them in three several places) who kept themselves so strongly
together (being five to one) that the Bohemians, Spartans, and Hungarians, had
the worst. By this time the Thessalians were issued out of ^e City: and so
furiously invaded the Persians, that thousands of ghosts were sent to Elis^um:
the fight continued for the space of two hours, in all which time neither
party had advantage of other, but still ye Persians kept with a head, that the
adverse party could not break their ranks. Also by this time Dionisius was
come near the battle, which when the Persians saw, they could not tell what to
think: likewise the Thessalians wondered at the Hungariaias and Spartans, also
fearing lest they had bin Persians: at last Dionisius (being in his youth a
most brave and gallant sou^dier) setting spures to his horse, ran furiously
against a Persian knight, and with his Lance struck him through the body,
wherewith his forces joined with the Bohemians, which some what discomforted
the Persians, when began such shiuering of Lances, clattering of armor,
sounding of Trumpets, noise of Dru^es, neighing of horses, that all the City
was filled with the noise thereof: Wherewith Oliuia, Laurana, and the rest of
the Thessalian Ladies, were come to the top of a tower to behold them: at which
very in^a^t they espied the black kn^t coming with all speed toward the
Camp, who hearing the noyce of the battle, was come to satia^e himself with
the blood of the Persians, rushing in amongst the thickest. The first that he
met, he ran quite through the body, another head cut off, that the
Persians began to throng about him by multitudes, whose ininuin^ble force they
were not able to withstand: for he laid such blows upon them, that he that
was next him, or within compass of his sword, oyed. The news of his coming
was soon known, which so encouraged those on the Thessalians party, that
every one was resolutely determined to dye, or conquer. The black knight
having continued an hour and more in this cruel fight, having slaughtered
many of the Persians, waued his sword above his head: which the Thessalian
horsemen perceiving, made a head after him, and by his valor disranckt the
Persians, and was gotten into the midst of the Persian battle, and with him
the King of Hungaria, Oristus, and the Prince of Sparta, whom he very well
knew, where thousands of the Persians dyed, by the unconquerable force of
these worthy knights. At last they four encountered with four of the
contriburaties, two of them being the brethren of Bruster, two of the valientst
knights that ever were in Persia, exceeding the ordinary stature of men, the
one named Brandor, the other named Ramon. The black knight encountered Brandor,
the King of Hungaria encountered Ramon, and the Prince of Sparta, and Oristus,
the other two: between whom began such a cruel battle, that the earth was
all stained with the blood that issued from them. In this cruel manner they
continued by the space of half an hour, wherewith the black knight was so
enraged, seeing himseffe resisted by one Persian, that all his senses were
turned into fury, that taking his sword in both his hands, he struck such a
blow at Brandor, that with the force thereof his swordebrast, and the lesser
end thereon in the rebound, struck his horse that he fell down under him
and Brandor: fell down from his horse as one dead: which the black knight
e^ing, snatched his sword from him* and mounted Brandors horse, and girding his
spurs into his sides, ran at Ramon with such fury, that had he not avoided
his blow, he had spilt him in pieces, and so he left him. The prince of Sparta,
the king of Hungaria, and Oristus, still keeping together. Thrice afterward
did the black knight rescue Dionisius from the Persians: and thrice did he
mount, his father having his horse slain under him: such noble acts and
valiant exploits did he there perform, that my dulled pen is not able to
express the same, that the Persians lay slaughtered upon heaps, and the earth
was died into red with their blood. When it grew toward night, Osiris came in
with his twenty thousand horses, which fresh supply made such a slaughter
amongst the Persians, that they were constrained to use all their skill how to
defend, and not to offend, which gave such encouragement to the Thessalian
party, that they seemed no more discomforted, then at the beginning. The black
Kinght all this while ranged up and down amongst the Persians, being driven
hither and thither with the throng of the Soldiers; at last he came unto the
place where the Persian king was, who ran at the black knight with his
Spear, and burst the same, but the black knight would not strike at him, but
bowed his body in reverence of him, which made him wonder: also he met with
Sicanus, with whom he could not meet before, and being glad he had gotten a
sight of him, he determined now either to end his life, or die himself in
pursuit thereof: therefore brandishing his Sword, he stroke at Sicanus with
such fury that he made the fire start out of his eyes. Sicanus likewise gave
such a violent thrust at the black knight, that lighting near the buckle of
his Armor, it pierced into his side, wherewith the black Knight being closed
with Sicanus, caught hold of his Beuer with his left hand, and with the pummell
of his Sword stroke him so violently, that the buckles brast, and his Beuer and
Helmet fell from his head, and the blow having passage by the weakness of his
Armor, bruised his face, that he fell from his horse, and had not Brander and
Ramon been by, with other of the Contributa^ies, he had the second time dyed
by the black Knights hands, which so enraged the black Knight, that like a
mad man he furiously ^lung up and down, slaughtering infinite numbers of
Persians, destroying all that he met, that his horse and armor was all to
be stained with the Persians blood, and would have continued longer to the
terror of the Persians, but that the day was ended, whereof the Persians were
glad, and sounded retrait, having lost so many of their men that all the earth
was covered with dead bodies. The Persians having recovered their tents, in
heaviness began to curse the black knight, who had made such slaughter, that
all the army was almost discomforted with the remembrance of him. Dionisius
because it was night, conveyed his soldiers unto the wood again. The
Bohemians, Hungarians, and Sparta^es, being gone to their tents, the
Thessalians to the City, and Osiris back to the place from whence he came:
where I leave them, to speak of the Queen and Laurana, who all this while had
viewed the whole camp, being amazed to see the slaughter that was made amongst
the Persians, but especially by the black knight: they also marvelled what
force that should be that came from the wood, but most of al, they wondered that
the black knight concealed himself: which made Laurana so desirous to know,
that she sent out a Page to mark his going from the Camp, to tell him that
she entreated him to lodge within the City, that the Queen and she might
yield him some part of amends for his kindness, for coming to aid them.

The Page diligently attending his business, espied the black knight hasting
from the field, and calling unto him, told him that the Princes Laurana had
sent unto him, to request him to lodge within the City, that they might show
some thankfulness unto him, for the pains he had taken to defend them. The
black knight willed him to ^ender all dutiful thanks unto his Mistress, whose
request he would most willingly fulfill, but that he was bound to the contrary
by a solemn vow, but within a short time he would most diligently atte^d her
pleasure: for that he had dedicated his life to be spent in her defense, which
he would not desist to hazard whilst she had an enemy living: wherewith,
rewarding the Page very boun^ifully he departed: and by the way he began to
consider, that if he should not manifest himself, all men would think that
Sicanus had been wrongfully accused, and his own honor called in question:
therefore yet again, he once more resolved not to manifest himself, until
such time as Sicanus had confessed the fact that was laid to his charge, and with
this resolution went to the Cave. Laurana expected ye return of her Page, with
such an earnest desire, that she could not be quiet until he was come, who
delivered his message according as Parismus had willed him, which drove her
into a thousand sun dry imaginations: one while she thought it was some strange
Knight that sought her love by his valor, and an other while she thought it
was Parismus, but that cogitation was soon extinguished by a thousand doubts,
that with extremity of passion, she burst forth into these laments. What
distress and terror is this, that I endure by want of my dear Parismus: who I
cannot suppose to be living, because he is thus long a^sent, who I know would
not be out of my Company, if he might enjoy the same: but my Destinies by his
want do intend to work my overthrow, yet nevertheless, were I but assured he
were living, then should my heart be at quiet, for I know he would preserve his
life for my sake: or were I but assured that he were dead, then would I soon
resolve to follow him, that my fainting Ghost might enjoy his company: and
knew he but how dearly I loved him, then I am sure that he would soon
return, but he has heretofore met with some false Cre^ed, and therefore he
only absenteth himself, to make trial of my Truth, were I but sure that this
were the effectual cause of his absence, then would I rest in quiet, but my
lucklesse Stars bode me no such good Fortune. And to my grief, I fear me, he
poor soul is destroyed by the treachery of that wicked homicide Sicanus, who
is not contented with his tragedy, but also seeks my destruction. Well* with
what patience I may, I will live in hope once again to see my Lord, for I do
not doubt but the Pal^ers news were true: or else how should he come to
possess that Jewel, which my dear Parismus sent me? In these, and such like
complaints she spent all that night, refusing to be comforted, that the pure
Crystal tears ran from her eyes abundantly, that it would have forced a
stony heart to relent at her doleful lamentation.

CHAP. XII.
How Donisius discovered himself to the Queen, and of the joy was made in the
City: how Parismus determining to see Laurana in his palmers disguise, lighted
upon a pretty adventure, at the first dangerous, but in the end pleasant: and
what battles he afterward fought with the Persians.

DIonisius very early the next day after the battle fought against the
Persians, came marching with his troops (of whom very few were missing,
toward the City, from whence he found the Persians removed further by half
a mile: for they having viewed their forces, found them so much weakened, by
the last days infinite slaughter, that they thought themselves scarce able to
resist an other assault, and therefore began to entrench themselves: by which
means those of the Thessalian party had free access to the City, and by the
appointment of Dionisius, all the soldiers were conveyed into the same, every
band lodged severally by themselves, al things being ordered for a sudden
assault (if need should require.) The Bohemian king requested the king of
Hungaria, and Prince of Sparta, to go with him to the palace, to visit the
Queen, amongst whom was Dionisius, not yet known to any but the Bohemian
King, they marched in their armor with Drums and Trumpets. The Queen ^auing
knowledge of their coming, came to meet them in mourning attire, and with her
Laurana, and the Thessalian Ladies, the fair young Queen of Hungaria, and the
Lady Isabella, (who had all this while remained with Oliuia,) and all the
Thessalian Lords, showing by their outward habit, their inward sorrow, for
want of him that was amongst them: by this time they were met, and most kindly
saluted each other the Queen giving them most hearty thanks for their
friendship, and they protesting never to forsake her in time of need. Oliuia
marvelled who that might be that concealed himself, which both Laurana and all
the rest diligently marked, and being drawn by that means into heavy
cogitation of her lost Lord, she uttered these speeches: Most worthy King of
Bohemia, I am sorry that the King of Thessalie is wanting, to give honor to
your simple encertainement, whose absence is most grievous unto us, being our
only defense and comfort, by which means we cannot give you such a joyful
welcome, as we should, if our Sun were not darkened, but are compelled by our
plaints, to make you pertakers of our woe: as also the death of that noble
Prince your valiant son, (being unfortunately acted in our Court,) has so
overwhelmed us with care, that you cannot expect ought from us but sighs and
mourning, that all the entertainment we can give, is to bid you welcome to a
feast of sorrow: wherewith she and the virtuous Laurana, showing a countenance
full of mild pity, stood weeping and lamenting, that all the whole company
were grieved to see their sorrow, which struck such a deep impression of
pity into Dionisius heart, that with the tears standing in his eyes, he
unbraced his helmet, and coming suddenly to Oliuia, said. Dear Queen,
behold one salve to cure your sorrow: the Queen and Laurana were so amazed,
that they could not tell whether they might give credit to their eyes or no,
but at last with such unspeakable joy, Oliuia embraced him, that it delighted
all to behold their kind reioycings.

Laurana kneeling down did her humble duty, and Dionisius seeing her
kneeling, and with blubbred cheeks as he thought bewailing his absence, most
willingly took her up and kissed her, which he had never before done, since
she was a child: which so ravished Lauranaes passionate heart, that her joy
for hie return, and grief for Parismus want, might be compared to two mighty
forces striving to over master each other. The Lords of Thessaly, were so
renewed with the presence of their king, that twenty thousand hosts of Persians
could not daunt their undaunted hearts, such mirth and rejoicing was throughout
the whole City, that for ever after they continually kept that as a holy and
festival day: so exceeding was the Citizens joy, that the belles rung, the
Drumes and Trumpets sounded, and they made bone^res and tryumphes throughout
the whole City: the noise whereof made the Persians wonder, and astonished, to
see them in such mirth, and so little to regard their forces, which doubts were
soon ended by the news of Dionisius reurne, whom we leave now in his own
Court in great joy, welcomming the strangers, and himself welcomed by his
subjects.

Parismus the same day was come out of his Cave in Palmers weeds, because he
knew he should not have occasion to use his Arms, and coming to the City, he
found the Persians di^odged, and all the rest within the walls, and hearing
the joy that was made, he marvelled what should be the cause, and easily got
into the City, (because under that habit he was not mistrusted,) and soon had
knowledge of Dionisius his return, which he had heard of before. He began then
to think with himself in this sort, how unkind am I, that will not manifest
my self unto my dear and Uertuous Laurana, whom I know endures much sorrow
for my sake, she will keep me being alive, secret from men, and why then may
I not comfort her and my self, by having some private conference with her? And
with this resolution, he went unto the Palace, and there walked up and down,
not having a sight of Laurana, nor Leda her maid all the day, nor possibly
knowing how to come to give her knowledge of his being there without suspicion.
Thus he stayed until it began to be dark, and having no other means, he lept
over a mighty high stone wall into the Garden, where diverse times he had
enjoyed the sweet presence of his beloved: and there hid himself in a little
grove that was by Art made for pleasure, whereunto seld^me any came, in which
grove he was constrained to stay most part of the night, by reason that the
King of Bohemia, and the rest, lodged in the Palace, it was very late before
all were at rest. Yet nevertheless when there was none to hinder him, he was
without any hope to see his Mistress, and all things being silent, he spied a
light burning in her window, under which he got himself so near as he
could, and to his comfort heard Laurana sing this song to her Lu^e.

Lauranaes Song,
What careful breast ere bid such bitter throbbes,
As vex my mind with sorrows pinching smart:
Which waste my life with watrie eye-swolne sobbes,
And breed sad cares that stick full near my heart.
Sorrow's my food, and grief my whole delight,
Care fills my heart, sad thoughts possess my mind:
Each object sweet that counterviewes my sight,
Soon turns to sower, all pleasure proves unkind.
The cheerful day renewes my endless cries,
And Phoebus beams are shadowed with my tears:
The silent night that lends rest to eyes,
Yeeldes me no ease, but hearts consuming care.
Thus am I rackt, no rest to smart can find,
The smallest time, to pain yields no relife:
No fortune sweet, will my ill rate unbind,
But worse to worse, and care I add to grief.
My love is lost, by dismal lucklesse fate,
My chiefest joy has felt the sting of death:
The bad survive, to work me more debate,
And virtue sweet can draw no longer breath.
Fraud conquereth Fame, and vertu's thrall to vice,
Faith stands exilde, and reason rules in place:
The good proves bad, and trust as brittle y^e,
In constant deeds, do constant love deface.
My Sun shines dim, and darkened be despite,
Spite suckes my blood, yet sueth for my love:
Valor lies thrall, dispoiled of his might,
Vain flattery does constancy remove.
Base minded Lust has Loialty betraide,
False Treachery does sue and seek for grace:
Fraud by his force has honesty dismayed,
And forced wrong, does right with might displace.
All this and more, by proof I find to true,
By hard mischance and absence of my Knight:
Whose luckelesse death, my sorrowing sobs renew,
Whose presence pure, did breed my sweet delight.
He valor was, whom fraud has brought to death,
He honor was, where virtue shined most clear:
In his kind breast, true loialty drew breath,
Fame in his looks, and glory did appear.
Hope speaks me fair, and tells me Fame does live,
Which adds more doubts unto my troubled head:
The Jewel sweet the Palmer did me give,
Breeds firm belief that valor is not dead.
My friendly foe, that sueth for my grace,
Has hemmed me in, with strickt besiege of war:
And seeks by force my virtue to deface,
And from my soul all comfort does debar.
Had I my Love here folded in mine arms,
Or might I once enjoy his pleasing ^ight:
I would him guard from force of Persian harms,
And love should quell frail fortunes canckred spite.
But dismal woes expel such blisfull joys,
My lucklesse Stars such pleasure does detain
Carking distress and sorrows me annoyes,
No ease to care, nor end I find in pain.
Thus am I ^ost with endle^e misery,
Care is my bed, exceeding pain my rest:
Sorrow's my sleep, my ease adversity,
And thousand griefs, still tumble in my head.
Affliction gives me food, despair relief,
Danger hems me in, Death stands still in ^ight:
Each Day and Night, each thing renues my grief,
And grisly War, my senses does affright.
What rests then for me to put in ure,
But welcome Cares, in absence of my friend:
Who for my sake such torments does end^re,
As has, or will, soon bring his life to (...).
Parismus hearing the contents of this heavenly Harmony, and knowing the voice
to be the virtuous Laueranes, was so contentedly pleased with the same, that
his spirits were drawn into a divine contemplation of her perfections, wherein
he continued a great space, at length, when he heard that sweet delighting
Harmony to cease, he cast up his eye to the window, to see if he could have a
sight of his beloved through the Glass, weereof he was disappointed, by reason
the candle was suddenly extinct, which drove him into sundry cogitations how
he might give any instance unto her of his being there, but saw no possible
means, being a thousand times in mind to knock at the stairs door that
came into that garden, from which he was discouraged by as many contrary
doubts, least he should put herin some sudden fear, by such unwonted
noyce: Again, he knew not who might be in her company, which might be a
means to bring her name in question, if he should be seen there. Whilst he
continued in these doubtful thoughts, the night was far spent, and the
clear day began to appear, which drove him into another study which way to
get out of that place again, for he was loath to linger there all the next day,
and so by misfortune be discovered.

At last being driven to take any shifte for current, he got to the top of the
back wall, which encompassed the Palace, and thought that was the best way to
escape without suspicion, for if he had attempted to have gone back by the
same way he came in, he could by no means have escaped vnespyed, so
aduenturously leaping from the hight of the wall, by great misfortune (the same
being far heigher then he thought,) he had a most grievous fall, and by the
noice thereof awaked two mighty fierce Mastyffes, which were usually kept for
to defend that place, wherein a Rich Citizen continually laid great store of
War and March^dize, which no sooner espied him fallen down, but they ran
upon him with open mouth, (the Dogs in Thessalie being so strong and fierce
by Nature, that they fear not to encounter with the mightiest Lions,) which
drove Parismus to his uttermost shifts, having no weapon to defend himself
withal, but a little pocket dagger, drew back unto the corner of the wall,
by which means the Dog could not come behind him, that with ease he slew
them both, and having espied this danger, being bitten in diverse places before
he could kill them, he knocked at the merchants door, thinking to make some
excuse to pass by that way, through which he must needs go, for there was
no other way for him to get out: the Merchants Daughter hearing one knock,
looked out at the window, and taking Parismus for another, came running down
to the door, and kindly taking him in, locked the door again, and being in
the dark entry, clasping her tender arms about his neck: Sweet Friend
(quoth she) how could you escape the danger of the Dogs, that you adventured
to come in on this side of the House? but as I wonder, so I am glad you have
escaped them, and most lovingly kissed him an hundredth times.

Parismus marvelled much at this great kindness, and willingly dissembled, as
if he had been the man she took him to be: for her tender and kind
empracings were sufficient enticements to procure his consent. That night she
had appointed a young Gentleman (unto whom she bore affection, without the
consent of her Parents) to come unto her, and with the joy of his coming, she
made no doubt how he could come in on that side, which caused him to use the
like kind Salutation to her, rejoicing in his mind, to see how suddenly he
was fallen into such a sweet labyrinth of Love, having so lately escaped a
mischief.

The Marchaunts Daughter thinking verily it had been her accustomed Loving
Friend, used all courteous and most kind welcomes that might be, with
wonderful protestations other Love, being such indeed, as proceeded from deep
grounded affection, which made Parismus use the like courteous imbracings, and
thankful gratulations, finding by her speeches, and by many other likelyhoods,
that she was none of the ^sest, but might be of better parentage then, he
took her to be, which somewhat enticed his mind to a wandering delight in her
kindness, that he determined with her to taste what love was. By that time
they had continued their kindness a good space, she desired him to come up
into her Chamber, whether she led him in the dark, the poor soul having
no other intent but chaste and virtuous, and nothing suspecting him to be a
stranger, which Parismus well perceived by her behavior. As Soon as they were
come thither, she kindly desired him to sit down on the beds side, whilst
she went to light a candle, as well to be delighted with beholding his person,
as otherwise. She was no sooner gone, but Parismus secretly stepped to the
door, with purpuse to behold if her beauty and person were agreeable to her
other conditions, and saw her to be a most gallant and beautiful Damsel,
which sight so enticed his mind, that as soon as she was coming to him with
the candle, he blewe the same out, and told her that a light fitted not at
that time, for it might be a means to bewray their secret meeting, which she
allowed for a sufficient excuse: wherewith Parismus beeganne to entertain her,
with such kind dalliance as erst he never tasted, she kindly reproving his
behavior, yet had no power to resist: at which time (to both their delights)
he deprived her of the Jewel she was unwilling to loss, but with his pithy
persuasions yielded unto: he using such a sweet attractiue virtue, as was able
to conquer the chastest. Parismus reaped such sweet content from this Uirgins
pure delightful body, that he was altogether unwilling to leave her pleasant
imbracings, but at last remembering his estate, told her that he would work such
means for sauegard of her honor, as she should well like of: she poor soul
with weeping eyes and hearty sighs, badde him adiue. Kindly kissing at the
parting, he gave her a rich Jewel, which he desired her to were for his sake,
and took from her finger a King, which he promised he would everlastingly
wear as her favor. As Soon as he was forth of doors, comes the appointed
lover, who having stayed somewhat long, feared some displeasure, but yet
knocked, which made Violetta (for so was she called) open the door again,
maruelling that he should be so soon returned: but he at his coming saluted
her with a fresh salutation, and kissed her, excusing himself for his long
tariance, which drove her into such a perplexity, that she could not tell what
to say, nor what to think: at last she said, what need you use such excuses,
when you were so lately with me? Dear Love (quoth he,) account you it so
lately, when (I protest) I thought these three days sithence I saw you, to be
longer then three years: by which speeches she perceived that another had
ouerheard their appointment, and by that means deceived her, which made her
grow so much in loathing of her present suter, that ever after she shunned
his company, and ^ent her mind wholly to meditate how to know him that had
trapt her love, vowing never to love any but him, and resolving never to enjoy
any quiet, until she had knowledge what he was. Parismus was no sooner come
forth of the Merchants doors, rejoicing at his last pleasant banquet, but
presently he hasted to his Cave, where he found the Out-lawes, sadly
respecting his return, of whom being kindly welcomed, he betook himself to
his rest, and the contented meditations of the Merchants daughter, had not ye
remembrance of Lauranas Uertues, somewhat restrained his affection, he had
fallen to a loose and dissolute conceit. But calling to mind her perfections,
and his unconstant Act, he tormented himself with grief, that he had done
her that wrong: but yet it troubled his mind the less, because he knew it
was not revealed to any but to himself only, and likewise somewhat it urged
his mind of ingratitude, if he should altogether forsake Violetta, from whom
he had taken the best Jewel she had: in which diversity of thoughts he spent
that mornings repose. The king of Persia, calling his contributaries
altogether, by the advice of all, concluded to send into Persia for more
Forces, as also to request diverse of his alliance to aid him, in revenge of
such injurious wrongs, as he alleged he and his son Sicanus had sustained at
Adonius hands. This message being so secetly dispatches, that the The ssalians
had no knowledge thereof, by which means they continued in great security and
joy for the great victory, they with the aid of the black knight had made
against the Persians: yea so secure would they have been (had not the
remembrance of Parismus death somewhat calmed their exceeding joy) that the
Persians might many times have surprised them, but the black Knight was still
such a let unto them, that their enemies could attempt nothing but he would
discover it, by which means, the Thessalians had knowledge thereof. Many days
continued the Persians before the walls of Thebes, never giving any assault,
nor once coming forth of their Trenches, which caused the Thessalians to
count them half vanquished. During which time, Parismus (known by the name of
the black knight) did fight many brave combats with the Persians, by which
means the Court of Dionisius was filled with the resounding echoes of
exceeding praises made in commendation of his prowes and unconquered chiualry,
but most of all they wondered at his strangeness to be known, and the rather,
for that none could learn where he made his abode, knowing that it could not
be far from the City. The Persian messenger made such expedition in
performing his message, that in short space there were gathered together of
sundry nations, another mighty Army: first came the king of Natolia, being
nearely allied to the Persian, with a great army of Natolians, the King of
Libia, with thirty thousand Libians, and the King of Licia, with forty thousand
men at arms, and of Phrigia twenty thousand: and to repair the decayed camp
of the King of Persia, came fifty thousand. This last Army soon landed in
Thessaly, and pitched their Tents on the plain of Pharsalia, of whose approach
both the Persians and Thessalians had knowledge, to the comfort of the one, and
to the discomfort and terror of the other: by means whereof the Thessalians
being before in mirth, began to wax careful of their estate: and therefore
sent twenty thousand horsemen well armed out of the City, to this end, that
at al times they might succor them with a fresh supply, for that they knew
they should need all the help they could possible make: who being abroad,
soon took order, that the Persians in their Roades could scarcely find any
cattle or other vi^tualls.

These new Forces being all joined together with the Persians, besette the
City anewe with double Trenches and Fortifications round about, so that there
could none pass in or out, which caused Dionisius and the Bohemian King
(having made survey of their store) to consider that there was not provision
enough within the City for such a number of Soldiers for one month, making
account that it was the only course, either vallantly to drive back the
enemy, or ignominiously to abide their mercy, and therefore determined the next
day to issue out upon them, which they in policy did, not with hope to
vanquish such an Army, but to let the Persians know, that they were not
discouraged with their huge multitudes: which purpose of theyrs was thus
furthered by the black Knight, who early on the next morning had buckled on
his Armor, and was come before the Tents of the Persians, and espying such a
huge and mighty multitude of new come Soldiers, that already had united
their Forces with the Persians, and by enquyrie, he soon learned who they
were, and therefore resolved to use his woonted manner of challenge: which when
the Persian King beheld, he made relation thereof unto the King of Natolia,
and also what valiant acts the Black knight had done, entering so far in
commendation of him, that the King of Lycia standing by, being of a haughty
and proud disposition, began to disdain to hear him so highly commended,
thinking himself able to conquer and overcome any, for he was esteemed to be
one of the be^ Knights in the World: which made him reply unto ye king of
Persia in this sort, that he would soon prove that there was no Knight in
Thessaly able to combatte the King of Licia: therefore a^ming himself, he
went forth to meet the black knight, who no sooner (...) him, but he set
spurs to his horse, and ran at him with such force, that he overthrew both
horse, and man to the ground: the King of Licia seeing himself thus foiled,
soon got up and drew his sword, but the black knight disdaining to cope any
further with him, whom he had already conquered, turned his horse, and rode
from him, which so vexed the King of Licia, being enraged to see his own
shame, and with anguish of the bruis^ he received in the fall, that he would
have murdered himself, but that his knights hindered him.

CHAP. XIII.
How Parismus met with Pollipus of Phrygia, and knowing the devise in is
Armor, refused to combat with him: and how a peace with certain conditions
was concluded betwixt the kings of Persia and Thessalie.

PArismus being ready for the next encounter, there was in the Tente of
Phrigia two knights, esteemed the only men in the world for valor, one
whereof had before time served the Persian king, in his wars against Bohemia,
whose name was Pollipus, the other named Zoylus, whose match or equal in arms
he had never met withal, being withal so unmerciful and tyrannous, that by
his treachery in fight he had subdued many thousand knights in his travels. This
Pollipus was desirous to try his force against the Black knight, and soon
mounted himself, being a most gallant proportioned and comely knight. The
black knight being still ready for any encounter, met Polipus with such force,
that both their staves were shiuered in pieces, the black knight not once
moving in Saddle, but Pollipus with the focre of his bl^w lost one of his
stirrops. The black knight, not once moving in his saddle, but Polippus with
the force of the blow lost one of his stirrops, the black Knight having drawn
his sword, ready to combat Pollipus, espied upon his Armor the devise of three
Falcons, and suddenly put up his sword again, which when Pollipus perceiving,
he marvelled there^t, and asked him the combat, the black knight said, pardon
me worthy sir, for I am bound not to combat any that wears that Armor, and
without any more words departed. Polippus wondering thereat, at last remembered,
that when he was with the Persian king, besieging Bohomia, he made a covenant
with Parismus, never to combat any, that had the devise of the branch of roses
upon his armor, which was Parismus armor, and Parismus likewise promised him
the like, therefore he thought that the black knight was either Parismus
himself, or some knight whom Parismus had bound by the like oath. The occasion
of which vow passed betwixt Parismus and Pollipus, was grown through the
exceeding love and kindness that had passed betwixt them from their youth, being
brought up together in the university. Wherefore Pollippus studying what he
might be, and rejoicing that he had so worthy a knight to his friend, rode
back to the Persians tent, who stood gazing to see event of this Combat, but
marvelled that they parted so friendly.

Pollipus being returned, told the Kings of Persia and Natolia, that he
refused the combat, the reason was as he thought the black Knight knew him,
otherwise he knew not what might be the cause. Adonius, the King of Bohemia,
Oliuia, Laurana, and the rest, all this while wondered at the black Knights
behavior, but most of all to see him part so friendly with the Phrigian
Knight. Whilst they were in this admiration, they beheld the most valiant
Zoylus ready to encounter the black knight, the Persians now thinking to see
the black Knights downfall, for that Zoylus had vowed never to depart until
he had destroyed him: with whom the black Knight met with such advantage,
that maugre the force of Zoylus he overthrew him to the ground, and himself
had lost both his stirrups. Zoylus soon recovered his Horse, and with furious
rage they both met with their swords drawn, when began a most terrible and
cruel battle, that all that beheld the same, were amazed at the valor of
both the knights, in which cruel manner they contined for two hours space,
both being grievously hurt, but never weary nor willing to leave off: at last
the black Knight seemed weary, and only warded the furious strokes that Zoilus
gave him, Zoylus thinking indeed, that he had fained, laid on such blows
with such swiftness and force, that all the whole company of the beholders,
deemed the black knight almost vanquished. Zoylus still pursued him with
forcible blows, and the black Knight still warded: so long they continued in
this manner, that the Phrygian began to wax weary, and also to suspect the
black Knights policy, therefore staying his hand, he said: Knight, I give
thee leave to ask pardon for thy life, or else be sure thou art but dead.

The black Knight casting his eyes toward the Tower, where his beloved
Laurana stood beholding the combatte, and wauing his sword most courageously
about his head, answered: No dastard Phrygian, (quoth he) I scorn thy
proffer: with which words, he so freshly assaulted the Phrygian, that in short
space he drove him to devise how to save his life: for he had mangled and cut
his body in many places, that his Steed was all colored with the blood that
ran from his wounds, which caused the Phrygian to thrust at the black
Knight, with such force and fury, that he wounded him most grievously on the
left side, which wound, and withal the remembrance the black Knight had who
beheld the combatte, caused him with both his hands to strike such a deadly
blow at the Phrygian, that lighting full on his Beauer, the force and vigor
thereof, both unbuckled the same, and his Sword cut off his right ear, and
wounded him so sore in the face that he fell on his Horse necks senseless, the
black Knight struck another blow at him with such a maine force, that had not
the Phrygians Horse started with the glimmering sight of his sword coming, he
had there parted his head from his shoulders, and the Horse ran loose about
the fields, at last the Phrygian began to recover himself, and looking about
him, he espied Parismus with his sword put up, and himself without a weapon,
that what with shame and fury, he was almost mad.

These Combattants were no sooner parted, but the Thessalian horsemen by a
privy Watchword, from out the City, rushed suddenly upon the Persians at
unawares, who expected no such matter, and had their minds otherwise busied,
so that before they could be in Arms to defend themselves, the Thessalians
had made a great slaughter amongst them, which the black Knight perceiving,
though he were grievously wounded, made such hauock among the Persians, that al
men deemed him rather to be a Devil then a mortal creature, with whom
Pollipus met, but would not once offer to offend him.

Dionisius, the Bohemian King, the King of Hungaria, the Prince of Sparta, Lord
Remus, Osiris, and Oristus likewise issued out upon the Persian forces in
several Troops, which so amazed the Natolians, Phrigians, and the other
Nations of the Army, that they marvelled whence the Thessalians could have such
aid, but their coming amongst them on such a sudden, made so cruel and
mighty a slaughter, that by that time the day was ended, they had slain of ye
Persians fifty thousand, which caused them ever after to be more circumspect
and wary. All the Soldiers being retired into their places, the black Knight
likewise withdrewe himself toward the Wood, Pollipus having all this day very
diligently followed him being almost come to the Woods side, set spurs to his
horse and ouertooke the black Knight, who espying him, stayed his coming, and
knowing him to be the knight with whom he had combatted that day, by the three
Faulcons on his Armor most kindly saluted him, and demanded what might be the
cause of his coming unto him. Who replied thus: Most worthy Knight (quoth he)
my humble suit unto you is, that you would vouchsafe me so much favor, as to
let me understand the cause you refused the Combat with me this day? Gentle
Knight (quoth Parismus) you must needs pardon me for that, until I know
whether you are the worthy Pollipus of Phrygia, whom I judge you to be by those
Arms.

Indeed (quoth he) I am the same Pollipus, and the chiefest cause of my
coming unto you, is my earnest desire to be acquainted with you, though
unworthy, for that I know you could not come to the knowledge of me, but by
the virtuous Parismus, who is now dead, in whose defense if you bear arms, I
will with you do my endeudur to revenge his death against mine own Country,
for I am thereunto bound. Worthy knight (quoth he) if you will vouchsafe to
take such simple entertainment as my poor lodging does afford, I will make
known unto you my whole desire: which Pollipus willingly accepted, and being
come to the Cave, Pollipus marvelled to see so worthy a knight in such an
obscure place, but being come in, he was soon unarmed, and then Parismus knew
him to be his friend, and taking him by the hand, led him aside, and then made
himself known unto him: whereat Pollipus wondered, and so with exceeding joy,
most lovingly embraced him: and after supper was ended (which was provided by
the Outlawes, and cleanly dressed by the Damsel,) Parismus declared unto him the
whole circumstance of this tragedy, wherewith Pollipus was so inwardly vexed, to
hear of Sicanus falsehood, yt he vowed for ever to remain his professed enemy,
they continued in the cave all the night, the one recounting unto ye other their
forepassed friendship, at last it was concluded betwixt them, that Pollipus
should still continue there, and therefore provided him other Armor, that
thereby he might not be known. It was some three weeks space before Parismus
could recover his wounds, during which time the Thessalians had received much
damage by their enemies, growing into fear of Famine, for that their victuals
began to wax scant, their courage being likewise somewhat abated, for that
they saw not the black knight in all that time come into the field, as his
wonted manner was: therefore they concluded by a general consent to Parley
with the king of Persia, and appointed Lord Remus to be the messenger: who
coming to the Persian king, told him that Dionisius king of Thessalie did
desire to parley with his Highness whom he knew not that he had any way
offended. Whose message, the Persian King kindly accepted, and upon his Kingly
promise protested to continue a truce for that day, appotniting the place of
meeting, to be on the Green before the west gate of the City: whither he came
with the Kings that were with him, and Sicanus his Son: whither also
Dionisius, and the King of Bohemia, with all the rest of the Potentates on the
Thessalian party likewise came. Many things being alleged on both sides, the
one in accusation of Sicanus, the other in defense of his innocence, at last by
consent of all, a peace was concluded for twenty days, and on the twentieth
day it was concluded that this Controversy should be decided by battle, and
the conditions were these: That if Dionisius could not bring three knights to
combat with three of the Persians, that then he should acknowledge himself
subject to the Persian king, and also should deliver unto Sicanus, his fair
daughter Laurana, to be at his disposition, and Sicanus to enjoy the Crown
after his death: and if the Thessalians should conquer the Persian knights,
then immediately the Persian should remove his Forces, and Sicanus should
acknowledge the truth of the Fact, upon which conditions the peace was
concluded, and firmly ratified, by the general Oaths of both the kings of
Persia and Thessalia. During which time of peace Parismus and Pollipus would
usually come abroad, both armed in white Armor, with Plumes of white feathers,
and white Steedes gallantly attired: and be held the Persians and Thessalians
continually every day combatting for trial of their manhood, but still the
Phrygian Zoylus, and ye two Persians, Brandor and Ramon, bore away the victory,
that the Thessalians would no more encounter with them: which drove Dionisius
into such a deep study what Knights to provide against the appointed day of
combat, altogether dispairing of the Black Knight, for that he has not been
seen a long time amongst them, and also for that Oristus and Osiris were so
grievously hurt that it was impossible for them to recover their health by the
time appointed. Parismus hearing of this conclusion, told Pollipus, that if he
would accompany him to be one of Lauranaes Champions, he would be for ever
^ound to requite that courtesy: which gentle request Pollipus kindly accepted.
The third that Parismus had appointed, was one of the Out-lawes that perserued
his life, whose valor exceeded most of the Kinghts in Thessalie, though he
endured some secret disgraces.

Laurana marvelled that during the time of those wars (being so famous as
they could not choose but be spread through most part of the world) she could
hear no news of Parismus, judging him now for a certain truth to be dead,
for otherwise she thought it could not be, for she knew if the least report of
those wars were but come to his hearing, he would return to aid her from
Sicanus, whom she so much abhorred, that it was a grief to her to hear him
named: withal, remembering in what peril, both her Father, her Country, and
her self, were brought by his tyranny, and that this misery exceeding all the
rest, was now fallen upon her, that she must find Champions to defend her, or
else she must be thrall to him, which was ^ore grievous unto her then ten
thousand deaths: the remembrance of which extremities, caused her to brust
forth into these exclamations: Most unhappy and accursed wretch that I am, how
can I exclaim sufficiently against my hard destinies, that have brought me in
danger of him whom I mortally hate, whose very name is odious in my hearing,
who by his treachery has robbed me of my hearts delight, and continually
works my endless torment: had my unlucky stars allotted me to some untimely
death, or otherwise wrought my misery, then could I have endured this
martyrdom with patience, and quietly have suffered the extremest calamity,
but my evil destiny far exeedeth all misery, and has shut me from all hope
of comfort in this my affliction, by the death of my virtuous Lord, and dear
friend Parismus, whose ghost is busied with divine contemplations, and not
tormented as I am with temporal vexations. I would willingly follow him to
Elysium, there to retain the fruition of his heavenly company, but my
destinies likewise have allotted me a cowards heart, not daring to execute my
will upon my self: my forward mind likewise disswadeth me by many impossible
persuasions, that in this extremity, I know not whose aid to implore: my
Parismus is dead, my Fathers Knights mangled for my sake, and all things so
contrary to good success, that unless I be delivered from this tyrant
Sicanus, by some admirable and strange means, I must of necessity fall into
his loathsome power, whose serpentine breath does infect my heart with deadly
fear. With these and such like exclamations, Laurana tormented her self
continually: At last the appointed day of combat was come, against which time
(by the appointment of Dionisius) there were stately scaffolds erected for the
beholders, one for the King of Persia, at the one end, and the other for
Dionisius and the Thessalian Peers.

CHAP. XIIII.
How Parismus and Pollipus, and one of the Out-lawes, sent Dina the Virgin to
the Court at Thebes with a message, and how they fought a battle against three
of the Persians, according to the peace concluded. And how Sicanus refused to
perform the condition of the peaee, whereupon Parismus unknown, challenged him
the Combat.

THe night before the Combattants should meet, Parismus with counsel of
Pollipus: attired Dina the Uirgin like a Forest nymph, in most rich apparel,
and sent her unto the Court of Dionisius with these Uerses written.

In time of need do not defpaire, distressed wrong shall conquest have:
Though yet unknown, the Knight is by, that against thy foes does combat crave.
Treasons reward is open shame, the lost from death may be preserved:
With patience bear thy crossed state, this Knights good will has trust
reserved.
The damsel being instructed of Parismus what she should do, made all haste
unto the Palace, where she was no sooner come but she was conducted into the
great Hall, where was Dionisius, Oliuia, the King of Bohemia, and the King of
Hungaria, with his fair Queen Armida, the Prince of Sparta, and the Lady
Isabella his sister, with a number of other Lords and gallant Ladies. Who
beholding the damsel, marvelled with what message she came, who being before
the King, humbly reuerencing her self upon her knee, told him, that she had
a message to deliver unto the Princess Laurana, who being sent for, the
Damsel presented unto her a scutchion, wherein was portrayted a Knight,
wounded by three slaves, and a description how they covered his body as dead,
with Moss, and underneath, how the same knight was found by another Knight,
and carried to a Cave, which was done in most exquisite manner. Laurana having
a while vewed the same, and red the verses written underneath, delivered the
same unto the King: who having likewise read the verses, most kindly thanking
the Damsel for her pains, referring the answer to his Daughter, who willed
the damsel to signify unto the Knight that sent her, that she did most
willingly accept him for her Champion, willing her to deliver unto him a rich
imbroydered scareff, which she requested he would wear for her sake. The
Damosoll having received her message, and rich reward, departed.

As Soon as she was gone, all the Court was comforted by this Message, and
prepared to attire themselves in their stateliest robes the next day, the more
to discourage the enemy. This Damsel soon returned to Parismus, and
delivered the message Lauerana had sent him, and the scarffe which she
requested him to wear as her favor, which he kissed, and rekist, because it
came from the most virtuous Mistress of his affection.

The next day, the Thessalian King, the King of Bohemia, the King of Hungaria,
and the rest, seated themselves on the Scaffolde, likewise Oliuia the Queen,
the Queen of Hungaria, and the beautiful Laurana, whose splendour so darkened
the beauty of the rest, that she appeared like golden Scinthia, amongst the
twinkling Stars, the crimson color shining so fresh in her Crystal
cheeks, and as Claret wine and Milk mixte together, being so comely fair,
so virtuous and chaste, so courteous and constante, so mild and merciful, as
she was no way to be equalled, and yet bearing a mind so far from pride,
that she disdained not the meanest person in Thessaly, whose Royal personage
seemed an Ornament to all the whole assembly. The King of Persia, the Natolan
King, the King of Licia and Libia, were seated on the Scaffolde, and next under
them the Persian contributories, which when the Thessalians beheld, they
supposed one part of the world was come to destroy them. The Persian
Knights came into the lists, the first being the valiant Zoylus, attyred all
in read, with most rich caparisons of beaten Gold, with a plume of read
feathers bespangled with Gold, next came the valiant Brandor, and Ramon,
attired in most rich colors of blewe, nothing differing, because they were
Brethren, who gallantly managed their Steedes with such feature, that one
would have judged three comelier Knights could not have been found, and
ranging three or four times about the listes, but seeing no enemy
approaching, they stared and gazed as if they thought scorn to stay the
Thessalians coming: but stare, gaze, and stay they might, for the Thessalians
Champions came not an hour after that, which drove Dionisius into such an
agony, that he could have torn his hair from his head, fearing least the
message the Damsel brought, might be devised by the Persians to delude him
withal, that he and all the rest were driven into such an ecstasy, that they
sat like men amazed, not knowing how or which way to save themselves from
dishonor. Laurana likewise, seeing her expectation crossed, and doubting now
the worst, waxed fainte with inward grief, and the lively read began to
fade out of her Cheeks, that she had fallen from the place where she satte,
had she not been revived with a sudaine showt the people made, who espied
the three Champions come galloping along the plains, which so revived the
rebated hearts of the Thessalians, that they seemed like men newely raised
from death to life. The sudden rejoicing somewhat daunted the Persians,
because they were before per sixaded they shoul have the conquest without
battle, and also they feared least th Black knight might be one of them that
were the Combat tants.

By this time Parismus, Pollipus, and the Out-lawe were come to the Listes,
their Armours being ^iluered all over, thrir Apparel, Plumes and Steedesall
white, their Staves, Caparisons, and Furnitures all alike, nothing differing in
all their Ornaments, but that Parismus wore the Scarffe Lauarana had sent him,
and Pollipus in his Crest a fresh branche of bloomed Palm, and having in most
gallant manner marched twice or thrice about the Lists, they came back to the
Races end, and there attended to know Dionisius pleasure.

Parismus still having his eyes seated on the Uertuous Lady Laurana, at last
Dionisius came down from the seat of State, and most kindly saluted him,
telling them, since it was their pleasure so much to do him honor, as to
become his Combattants, he would (if it pleased God to grant them the
Uictorie,) not be unmindful of their Courtisie, nor ungrateful for their
pains.

No sooner was Dionisius Seated again, but the Trumpet (according to the
woonted manner,) began to summon these Champions to the battle. Parismus
looking back upon Laurana, (as if from thence he had fetched his being,)
waued his Lance about his head, and the Champions met with such fury, that
shiuering their Lances into a thousand pieces, they passed by without any
harm at all, then drawing their swords Parismus encountered Zoylus, Pollipus
Brandor, and the Outlaw Ramon, between whom began a most firce, terrible, and
cruel battle, that in short space the Armours ^lue in pieces, and the blood
ran down abundantly on either party, in which most cruel fight they continued
by the space of two hours, neither party seeming to yield. At last Parismus
being enraged at the valor of his enemy, and knowing that it was now no time
of daliance, because he saw the Outlaw begin to faint, assailed the valiant
Zoylus so fiercely, that he could scarcely withstand his fury, and soon had
died by the vnconquering arm of Parismus, but that the Outlaw had received
such a wound by the hand of Ramon, that he fell down dead under his horse,
which somewhat refreshed Zoylus, for that Ramon taking the advantage, also
assailed Parismus, which drove him to his uttermost shifts. At last he espied
a piece of Armor broken from Ramons arm, in which place he gave him such a
wound, that he let his Horse raynes fall, and his S^eede being at liberty
began to wander disorderly about the lists. Zoylus in the mean time, being
well refreshed with the aid of Ramon, struck such a forcible blow at
Parismus, that it pierced his armor on his left arm, and lighted so full on
his Thigh, that he was grievously wounded, which blow, turned Parismus senses
into that extreme fury, that with all his force, striking with both his hands
at Zoylus, he ^mote him on the head with such fury, that he fell down from
his horse: at which blow all the field showted, and Parismus swords burst.

During which time, the two other two Champions continued the Combat most
bravely, and with much commendation, but greatly to the disadvantage of
Brandor, who was a mighty strong, and big boned Knight, and struck his
blows with such force, that had not Pollipus nimbly avoided them, he could not
have endured his fight. At last Pollipus having espied his advantage, thrust at
Brandor with such might, that the sword lighting full on a broken place of his
armor, ran quite through his body, and he fell down stark dead: by which
time, Ramon had recovered his senses, and seeing Parismus to have vanquished
Zoylus, assailed him (weaponlesse as he was) and wounded him in two or three
places, but soon Parismus got within him, clasped him in his arms, and with
maine force threw him forth of his saddle, and in the fall, burst his shoulder,
whereof he died: wherewith the whole assembly gave such another shout that the
earth seemed to shake with the voices, presently the whole States on the
Thessalian party, conducted the Combattans with all Solemnity, unto a most
rich Pauillion, erected only for the same purpose: where they were no sooner
arrived, but Dionisius most lovingly embraced them in his arms, and with
infinite courtesies thanked them for their pains, de^ring them to unarm
themselves, that his Physicians might search their wounds, which they refused
to do, until the conditions and covenants of the combat were performed by the
King of Persia, who hearing their just request (could not in that honorable
assembly, so much dishonor himself, as to break his word) presently gave
order that all his Forces should be dismissed. And also calling Sicanus unto him,
commanded him upon the* duty and reverence he bare unto him, to confess
the certainty indeed, whether he or any by his procurement, had slain
Parismus. My Lord and Father (quoth he) by the reverence I owe your Majesty,
and the rest of the Kings in this assembly, I am constrained to refrain from
uttering what I would, but under your honorable corrections, I denounce him
for a villain and a Traitor that accuses me for Parismus murder.

In the like reverence, to this most honorable assembly (quoth Parismus,) I
return that Uillaine and Traitor to thy self Sicanus: for yt thou lie, for
thou hyredst three of thy Tartarians with promises of great preferment, who the
same day that Parismus was missing, murdered him most treacherously in the
Wood hereby, my self found his body, and here I stand to prove against
thee, that like a Uillanie and a Traitor thou did this deed: In whose
behalf, I dare thee to the Combat, and forasmuch as thou think Parismus had
no feiends for ^o to maintain his just quarrel, I charge thee as thou art a
knight and honor Arms, not to refuse this Combat: which challenge Sicanus
in a great rage excepted, and presently went to arm himself, thinking that he
might easily be overcome, for that he was already grieuouslie wounded. Did
what Dionisius, and the King of Bohemia could, Parismus still demanded the
Combat, whose constancy and resolution they maruailed at, and the whole
assembly were so desirous of his conquest, that with applaudes and
commendations, they extolled his honorable resolution. Laurana seeing her
Champion ready to undertake a fresh battle, came to him, and with hearty
thanks for his honorable pains taking in her behalf, desired him to desist
from the combat, for that it might much endaunger his person, Parismus lighting
from his horse, reverently kissed her hans, the very touch whereof, revived his
spirits with joy, and told her, that if it were her pleasure Parismus wrongs
should go unrevenged, he would soon desist: otherwise being vowed her poor
Knight, he would either at that instant make Sicanus confess his treason, or
spend his latest breath in pursuit of that quarrel: and therefore he most
humbly craved her pardon.

Laurana with a curious eye marked him whilst that he talked with her, and
though he were much altered, and changed his voice as cuningly as might be, yet
she deemed it like the voice of her dear Parismus, which she was the rather
induced unto, for that she saw a Ring on his finger that she had before given
to Parismus, which drove her into such an agony between hope and despair,
that had not her father and many others been by, she had there resolved her
self of that doubt: wherewith, and with the sight of the blood that issued out
of his wounds, she endured such an inward affliction and torment of mind,
that her senses were ouermaistred with a pitiful regard of his estate. But
presently came Sicanus mounted on his Courser, so Parismus humbly taking his
leave of Lauarana, mounted his steed, and coming toward Sicanus, began to
unbuckle his white armor, which was so artificially made, that it was but a
case to his armor underneath, which was no sooner off, but he was presently
known to be the black knight that had fought so valiantly in the behalf of
Thessaly, and had slain in several Combats an incredible number of Persians,
which so daunted the hearts of the Persians, that they allotted him the
conquest, before ever that he began the Combat.

The black Knight at the first encounter, burst two of the Combattants ribs,
and in short time, with forcible blows, beat him from his Horse, and
allighted to have parted his head from his shoulders, but the King of Persia
seeing his son in that perell, ran to the place, and desired the black
knight to spare his life, which he obtained: and unlacing his Helmet to give
him breath, found that it was not Sicanus, but another Knight that he had
hired in his steed, for that himself durst not meet so valiant a knight hand
to hand: which Parismus seeing, in great rage would have slain him, but he
was dissuaded by Pollipus. This cowardly Jest was so odious, that ever after
Sicanus was accounted the most recreant knight living, but being of a
shameless disposition, he nothing regarded the same.

CHAP. XV.
How Parismus and Pollipus, were conducted to the Court in tryumphant manner,
and how Parismus discovered himself. And of the joy Lauerana made for his
return. And how Oristus was the occasion of his own death.

THe black Knight having ended this combat to his unspeakable commendatio,
was with Pollipus in most brave and tryumphant manner conducted unto the
Palace, with the noise of Drums, Trumpettes, and ringing of Belles, by the
Kings of Thessalie, and Bohemia, and by the Persian kings, who so well liked
the black knights behavior, that they resolved to stay some days there, as
well to be acquainted with this valiant knight, as also to do him all the honor
they could, thought by his valor they had lost the victory. The streets
where they passed, whereby the Citizens strowed with flowers, the windows and
doors, and house tops, were filled with abundance of people, (that they seemed
like stages) they came to behold these conquerours. Some presented them with
garlands of Bays, in token of victory, some with roses, some with gifts, some
with commendation, every one with exceecting praises of their valor, that it
were a tedious toil to rehearse the manifold honors that were done them as
they passed along the streets: and as they passed by the Merchants house,
where Parismus had lately escaped the danger of the dogs, he espied Violetta
standing in her fathers door, attended by three or four maids, very neatly
apparelled, who presented Parismus with a most rich embroydered scarffe, so
artificially wrought, that it excelled all the most curious works in Thessaly:
wherein we had most exquisitely drawn out of the whole manner of Parismus
adventure with her in her fathers house, which gift he most kindly accepted,
being by that time he had vowed the same, come to the Palace, where they were
welcomed by the Queen and her Daughter Laurana, with soundes of Music, and
exceeding joy: after the Queen had used some speeches, Lauarana most heartily
thanked him, that he vouchsafed to be her Champion, but her countenance be
wrayed her inward care, and her sad behavior, her mournful thoughts, her
mind being drawn to the extremest limits of respite, and given over it self
to the most bitter pangs of sorrowful meditation, that Parismus maruailed to
see her constant resolution, that could be altered by no means of joy, nor
once forgette him that had been so long missing. Dionisius likewise welcomed
thither the King of Persia, and the rest of the kings in his company, whose
royal entertainment was m^uailously liked, and commended of all. The Champions
(according as the custom was) were seated at a table ordained for the same
purpose, with great state and Dionisius and the King of Bohemia came unto them
(as the manner was with them) to disarme them for their more honorable
entertainment. But Parismus seeing his Father coming to do an office of
duty to him, rose from his seat, and kneeling down requested a voone at his
hands: the King of Bohemia, seeing him kneel, willed him to ask what he
would. My Lord, said he, my suit is, that you would forgive Parismus enemies:
the King of Bohemia (little thinking that would have been his request) wondered
what reason he had to ask pardon for his sons enemies, and said unto him.
Sir knight, I would gladly know why you ask pardon for them that have murdered
my son? My Lord, answered he, because Parismus is living, wherewith he pulled
off his Helmet, and the King his father knew him, and caught him in his arms
with such exceeding joy, that the tears ran down his white beard in
abundance.

Dionisius and Oliuia likewise espying him, embracing him, with a thousand
hearty welcomes, and the whole Court was filled with exceeding joy for his
return. The king of Persia and all the rest of his part^ likewise, came unto
him, and desired him to remit all discontent, that had passed betwixt them, for
that now they did repent them for the injury they had done to him: the like
honor was done to the Phrigian Pollipus, al admiring the wonderful virtues of
Parismus: and recounting the famous acts he had done, seemed to be ravished in
mind, with joy that it was he, that had so honorably defended himself
against all knights that did combat with him. Presently they were all seated at
a most royal feast. Where Parismus before the King of Persia, and all the
Kings present, rehearsed the whole truth of Sicanus conspiracy against him,
and how he was perserued, and how that he had lived ever since in the cave
amongst the Outlawes, and how he came by the black armor which discourse did
so much disgrace Sicanus, and extol his own commendations, that every one
rejoiced at his good fortune, and contemned Sicanus falshoode. Parismus having
ended his discourse, marvelled that he could not see Laurana to welcome him,
but she being nothing delighted with any news, but of his return, and
nothing at all thinking he had been her companion all that while, absented her
self from their company, for that her fancies were otherwise busied, and had
withdrawn her self to her chamber, only accompanied with Leda her maid.
Dionisius seeing that Laurana was not there, willed one of his gentlemen in the
hearing of Parismus, to signify unto her, that her champion stayed for her
welcome. Parismus hearing his speeches, desired him the favor, that he might
go and visit her himself, wherewith Dionisius was well contented, and he, and
Pollipus with him, being unarmed, went to Lauranaes lodging, which they found
fast shut, but Parismus longing to behold her perfections, whereby his life was
maintained, knocked at the door, and Leda came and opened the same, who seeing
him, was so surprised with joy, that she ran in again without speaking a
word, and told her Mistress that Parismus was at the door: at which word,
Laurana started, saying: I pray thee do not torment me with these news of
joy, for I know they cannot be true, for ^ull often thou have kindly deceived
my expectation. Dear Mistress, said she, believe me it is most true, and again
ran to the door, telling Patismus that her Mistress would be very glad to see
him.

Parismus entered the Chamber, and with such seruency* delighted himself to
behold her presence, that his, wits were ravished with a heaven of joy, and
Laurana having espied him, was so surprised with virtuous amazement, to behold
his person, that the tears fell from her eyes, and her heart lept in her
breast. Who being met, most lovingly kissed each other, so much surfeiting with
delight each of others presence, that their speech was turned into a
delightful embracing of hearty content, not to be expressed: which being
ended, Laurana came to Pollipus, and welcomed him, with so sweet a kiss, that
had she not been the beloved of Parismus, he would have vowed himself her
continual servant. At last Laurana being ravished with beholding her dear
Parismus, taking him by the hand, uttered these words. Most virtuous Prince,
your presence and preservation, has brought unto me that content that I am
not able to express: your welcome, is a maidens humble and hearty thanks for
your pains taking in my behalf, which is all the reward that I can make you:
I acknowledge my self so far bound unto your virtues, as I shall endeavor
during my life, to require your kindness to my power. I can count my self to
have received my life at your hands, the preservation of my parents, and
welfare of my Country, that all that may be ascribed unto happiness, is mine
only by your virtuous power: that I protest, wherein soever I may be in any
degree thankful unto you, I here offer to be ready at your disposition. I had
entertained, sorrow, but you have banished the same from my heart, and brought
me that happy content, that I acount my self so far indebted unto you for
the same, as I shall never be able to requite: which words she sealed upon his
lips with many kisses.

Parismus answered, my dear Lady, whatsouer I have done I account as nothing,
in respect of that my willing heart would have attempted for your sake, and my
deserts nothing worthy the thanks you render to me for the same, being so far
bound to you in the bonds of perfect duty, as I account my life, and all that I
have, unworthy to be spent in recompense of the least of your favors, humbly
thanking you for reteining so good opinion of my unworthiness. Laurana knowing
that her Father and the King of Bohomia, stayed for Parismus return, with a
joyful countenance accompanied them down into the Hall: and being come to the
King, My Lord and Father quoth she, I desire your Majesty, that these worthy
knights may be committed to my charge, to have their wounds cured which they
have received in my behalf.

Daughter said Dionisius, I commend the regard thou have of their health, and
commit them into thy hands, being a charge of an high account, praying thee to
use them in the kindest sort, for they have worthily deserved to be well
esteemed: And my Lord Parismus, (quoth he) sithence it is my Daughters
request, I hope you are contented to be her Guest. My Lord, said Parismus, else
I should show my self much ungrateful.

Laurana presently conducted them unto two most rich adorned chambers, which
she had most sumptuously beautified with jewels, and costly furnitures, wought
of the most richest work in the world, all of green and crimson satin,
bordered with Gold and Azure, his bed was framed most curiously, standing in
manner of a Pauillion, the posts that bare it were of Iuory, beset with Rubies,
the c^rds of green silk, the cover of the rich Arabian silk, beset with
Pearl, the curtain of the same, the Chambers adorned with most beautiful
Pictures to delight the eye, the stateliness of this lodging seemed in
ri^hnesse nothing inferior to the monument of Mansolus, being one of the
worlds wonder, they had not there remained long, admiring the beauty of the
place, but their ears were delighted with the sound of most pleasant music,
unto which having a while listened, Laurana desired Parismus to accept of this
for his lodging, telling him that Pollipus lodging was likewise adjoining unto
his, that at their pleasures, they might enjoy each others company, whither
Pollipus was honorably directed.

Parismus most kindly thanked her, whose heart was exceedingly delighted with
beholding her beauty, the Kings Phys^ions were by this time come, which caused
Laurana with a kind Farewell, to bid Parismus Adieu for that night, whose heart
began to wax sad at her departure, the Physicians had soon dressed his wounds,
which were many, but none mor^all, and being wearied with his days exercise,
these two worthy Knights willingly gave themselves to rest, where for that
night we leave them. Oristus hearing that Parismus his Lord was returned, being
then in the extremest danger of his life, by reason his wounds were then
fresh, could by no means be persuaded but that he would go to see him, and
therefore the next morning very early without the knowledge of any, ^ole down
to go to his masters lodging, being weak and ^eble, but he received a fall,
which made a rupture of his wounds in such extreme sort, that they fall again
to bleeding afresh, but ^auing a strong heart he again recovered his feet, and
with much ado go^ to Parismus lodging, by which time the Physi^ians that
attended him, mist him, and suspecting the truth, following him by the tract of
blood, to the Princes chamber, where ^augre the best skill of all the Kings
Physicians, his blood could not be stanched, that there he dyed in his Lords
arms, whose death struck such a passionate sadness to Parismus heart, that
in many days he could not banish the remembrance thereof out of his mind.
This news was soon come to the knowledge of the King of Bohemia, and all the
rest, who generally lamented his death, for that he was a Knight of good and
honorable qualities. Parismus continued many days in this Heavenly Paradise,
where he wanted nothing that ^ight bring comfort to his disquiet heart, being
so diligently tended by the virtuous Laurana, until that he had fully
recovered his health: During which time, he often enjoyed the Princess
presence, and recounted unto her the whole truth of that which he had passed
sithence his departure from the Court, (only leaving out ye discourse of the
Mercha^ts Daughter,) rejoicing much the Lady Laurana to hear the same: who
with kind and loving kisses, blamed him for that he would not make himself
known to her in the Palmers weeds, with many other kind conferences.

CHAP. XVI.
Of Sicanus death. How Parismus wedded the princess Laurana, and of a general
triumph that was held for seven days.

MAny days continued the King of Persia, with the rest of the Kings of his
party, in Dionisius Court, in which time many were intrapped in the snares of
Lauranaes beauty, which was such as would dazzle the eyes of the beholders, and
astonish the hearts of no simple judgments, with a divine conceit, that the
king of Natolia was determined to require and demand her in marriage of her
Father, had he not been kept back by Sicanus, who caused his father the
Persian King, earnestly to solicit Dionisius to that effect: whose answer
was, that his promise relied upon his Daughters choice, though indeed he never
meant she should marry the Persian, for that his behavior and treachery had
made him hated and odious in all men's sight.

Parismus now in like sort determined to work both his own and Lauranaes
contentment: and to that purpose on a certain time walking very solitarily in
the Kings garden, studying how to move his Fathers good will to this match, in
the midst of his dumps, he was encountered by the Princess^ Laurana, who only
attended by Leda, was come down also into the Garden to take the air, who
awaking Parismus from his dumps, with a courteous greeting, uttered these
speeches My dear Parismus (quoth she) may I be so bold as bear yo^ company in
this your solitarines, or would you but vouchsafe to impart the cause of your
sadness unto me, that I might be partaker of your sorrow, then should you soon
perceive, that whatsoever can procure your disquiet, shall likewise purchase my
discontent. Parismus most reverently taking her by the hand, said: Most
virtuous Lady, I acknowledge my self so far bound unto you for many worthy
favors undeservedly bestowed upon me, that I know not which way to yield
you sufficient thanks for the least of them, much less to requite them: and
if I should deny to fulfill your request herein, unto whom I am perpetually
bound, I should show my self altogether void of manners: Therefore know (most
virtuous Lady) that my supposed coffeehouse, was a pleasant and delightful
meditation. And calling to remembrance your manifold virtues, and undeserved
favorable assurance you have given me of your affection, that I was now
determining to speak to the King my Father, to request a consummation of our
happiness, at the King you Fathers hands, so it stand with your good liking.

My Lord (said Laurana) I wholly commit the matter to your wisdom, whom I am
bound to obey, by the choice I have made of you to be my Lord and Husband,
therefore I desire you to use that prerogative over me, that by right belongs
unto you.

In these and such like kind conferences they continued talking in the Garden,
to both their unspeakable ioies, being so united in the bonds of perfect
amity, that it was impossible to remove their settled friendship. But Dinner
time being come, they departed to their several ways, being both highly
contentented with the others faithful promise.

Parismus no sooner found opportunity, but he made his love to Laurana known
to his Father, who was glad of his sons virtuous choice, and promised him to
motion the same to Dionisius, which he presently did by this occasion. As he
was walking alone, he was encountered by Dionisius, and Oliuia the Queen, not
accompanied by any: and having kindly saluted each other, Dionisius began to
talk of the worthiness of Parismus, and telling him that he esteemed him the
most fortunate man living, to be the father of so virtuous a child, enting so
far into commendation of him, that the King of Bohemia thought he could have
no fitter time to motion the marriage then that, and therefore answered; My
Lord, I thank you for entering into such good liking of my Son, whom I cannot
discommend, for that he has well deserved honor, but I have an humble suit
unto you and the Queen here present, in his behalf, which if you will
vouchsafe to grant, both he and I shall be bound unto you for the same.
Dionisius and Oliuia earnestly requested him to manifest the same. My Son
(says he) entreated me to request your honorable favor, to contract a
marriage betwixt him and your most virtuous Daughter, unto whom he has wholly
dedicated his affections, that I am now become an humble sutorin his behalf.
Dionisius, and the Queen hearing his request, were so exceeding glad thereof
(being the only thing they desired) that taking the King of Bohomia by the
hand, they told him, they were highly contentedit should be so. Thus al things
falling out to their contentments, they parted for that time: Dionisius the
next day assembled al his counsel and noble men together, and there mentioned
the contract unto them, who most willingly consented thereto, by means whereof
the news of this marriage was soon published, that it came to the hearing of
Sicanus, who being enraged with grief and shame, abandoned the company of all
Knights, and in short time grew to such a desperate conceit of his impaired
honor, that with grief thereof he died, which brought some heaviness to the
King of Persia, and the rest: but his death was soon forgotten, for that his
Father esteemed him not worthy the name and estimation of a King, and had
lately grown into great dislike of him, and altogether favored the next Son
Lennilus, who far excelled his brother Sicanus in virtuous quality. The
solemnization of Parismus marriage was appointed to begin within forty days,
to the unspeakable joy of Thessalie, but especally, of the two young Princes,
in which time Dionisius sent messengers to inuit thither many Kings and
Potentates, by means whereof, the Fame of these nuptials was spread in most
places of the world, and many hundredth Knights determined to meet there to do
honor to Dionisius, whose virtues by report, had been made known unto them.
To this marriage came the famous Emperor of Constantinoble, with many other
worthy knights. The Emperors son of Greece, named Siches, with many valiant
Knights, Prolomie the kings son of Egypt, the King of Frize, famous for
Chiualry, and the most famous Champion of the world, Guido of Thrace: with many
others too tedious to rehearse, who all upon the appointed day, were royally
entertained by Dionisius.

Parismus and Laurana were with all solemnity brought unto the Temple of
Diana, where their rites were performed with admirable pomp, the Bridegroom
being accompanied with above eight Kings, and the Bride being led by two
Emperors, and attended by Queens and many Ladies of great account: the rites
and solemnities being performed with such dignity, that it excelled the
stateliness of Hecuba, Queen of Troy.

Thus all things being ended for that day, the night approached, most part
whereof, was spent in Maskes and many other courtly pastimes. needless to
rehearse: and at last, the bride was conducted to her Bride-chamber by the
Queen of Hungaria, and the Queen of Sparta. Where we leave her to her
exceeding content, to entertain her beloved Parismus: who behaved himself so
kindly thatnight, that Lauranaes fortress of virginity was battered down,
and he had the scaling of that sweet Fort, and spotless purity, and of a
virtuous virgin she became a chaste wife and that night he made her the
happy mother of a goodly, boy, as shall hereafter be declared.

Dionisius for the more royal entertainment of the States there assembled,
caused a most stately Tilt to be erected on a goodly green before the Palace
gate, the stages being most cunningly made, by expert workmen, and proclaimed
a Tryumphe to be made there for seven days, against all comers. The first
days triumph, the Prince of Sparta and his knights held, as chief
Challengers, who appeared before the whole assembly of States, who were seated
upon the Scaffoldes, in such royal manner, that the glory of them seemed to
excel the stately pomp of the mighty Monarch Alexander. Amongst the rest,
Laurana was seated in a Chair of state, Crowned with an Imperial Diadem, as
Lady of the Revels: who had prepared several gifts for the Conquerours,
shining like golden Phoebus, and her eyes twinkeling like two bright shining
stars, that her beauty made the whole assembly of strange Knights admire
her excellency. The Prince of Sparta had his Tent pitched at the first entering
into the Listes, being as white as milk, showing his single estate, on the
top whereof, was artificially framed a Golden Sun, which with his splendour
beautified the Listes. This days tryumphe was performed by the Prince of
Sparta, and his Knights, with exceeding valor, himself having unhorsed above
forty Knights, of strange Countries, and had given to him by the Bride a
pair of silver Gloves, made by the cunningest workman in the world.

Thus in great royalty, to the exceeding pleasure of the beholders, was the
first day spent, till the dark evening caused the knights to give over, and
betake themselus to their nights repose.

Early the next morning the knights were summoned to the Listes, by the sound
of Trumpets, the chief Champion for that day, was Lord Remus of Thessalie,
richly mounted upon a Thessalian steed of Iron graye, his Tente pitched near
unto the other, being of the color of the Raine-bowe: on the top whereof, was
artificially tramed a swift running Heart, whereby the country of Thessaly was
famous: before him, went four Pages richly attired, carrying some several
scutchions: on the first, was portraited his Mistress picture: on the second,
three silver Doves, signifing his innocence, far from vain ostentation: on
the third, a bleeding heart: and on the last, a man seeming desperate: who
behaved himself with no less valor, then the Prince of Sparta, to the great
joy of his Lady Isabella. The third day the worthy knight Pollipus was chief
challenger, who had his tent richly picht over against the Stage, being of the
color of blood, on the top whereof stood a Lion Rampant, his steed furnished
with costly abilaments of beaten Gold, his armor after the Phrigian manner,
whose matchless chiualry unhorsed that day an hundred knights, and won the
prize from all the knights that encountered him. The fourth day Lord Osirus of
Thessaly, was chief challenger, whose tent was pitched in manner of a hollow
tree, from whence he issued, so artificially ouerspred with moss, that he
seemed to be nothing but a lump thereof, running up and down the field, but
so honorably he behaved himself, that he was allotted that days conquest.

The fifth day Prince Lemulus, son to the King of Persia, was chief
challenger, whose tent was of the color of the sky, his abilaments was of the
color of Azure, beset with stars of Gold, who behaved himself with great
honor most part of that day: but at last he was encountered by the valiant King
of Frize, by whom he was unhorsed, by reason that his steed stumbled, and so
the conquest returned to the adverse party. The King of Frize, unhorsed
afterward many worthy knights, to his exceeding commendation,

The sixth day the King of Frize was challenged over the adverse party, who had
not continued long, but he was unhorsed by the King of Libia, who most part of
that day bare away the Prize, until he was encountered by Guido of Thrace, and
by him unhorsed: Guido for that day bare away the Prize, having unhorsed many
hundred Knights, and was likely to atchiue the chiefest honor of the
Turnament. The seventh day Guido of Thrace came with great triumph into the
Listes, having his Tent pitched in full view of the whole assembly, being of the
color of the bright gold, supported by four Elephants, himself mounted upon
a colored steed, most richly behung with abiliments of beaten gold, who
behaved himself most part of that day, to the shame of the Thessalian and
Persian Knights, that the whole assembly admired his valiantness. Which
Pollipus seeing, notwithstanding his days trinumph was past, yet he armed
himself, and encountered Guido most bravely. The first cariere they met and
broke their staves only: likewise they had some five or six courses more, in
which maugre all the force Guido used, he could not once move or disadvantage
Pollipus. Pollipus likewise was extremely vexed, that he could not unhorse
Guido, that each of them being sufficiently stirred to wrath, addressed
themselves for an other encounter, when they met with such fury, that they
were both unhorsed, which Guido seeing, forgetting where he was, and disdaining
to be encountered by Pollipus any longer, drew his sword, and Pollipus did the
like, when they began to combat, which Dionisius espying, commanded his Heralds
to part them, and being both mounted again, ready to make further trial for
the victory: the Judges considering the mischief that might arise (for that
there began to be a tumult in the field) sought to appease the Champions, and
dissuaded them to give over, and so let the honors of those triumphs rest, to
both of them, which Guido in great disdain refused, without hearing what
answer Pollipus would make.

Laurana by the advice of Parismus, sent messengers to Pollipus, to request him
for her sake, to give Guido leave to end that days challenge, for that he
himself had sufficiently shown his Knightly chivalry, withal she sent him
one of her gloves. Whose command Pollipus presently obeyed, being a Knight of
exceeding courtesy, whereby he wan more honor then Guido could atchiue by the
conquest. The rest of that day Guido unhorsed many Knights and was like to
carry away the honor of the Triumph, maugre all all Knights that afterward
encountered him, which grieved Parismus to behold. With all noting his pride, he
secretly stole from the stageand presently armed himself in armor which he had
caused to be made of purpose, seeming to be old, torn and rustie, but yet of
as good proof as might be, being made of the purest Lydian steel, his
abiliments and furniture, seemed to be such as had lain up unused seven
winters, and all to be eaten with Moathes, his steed he made to trotte like a
country Cart horse; and his plume was of russet feathers: and accompanied with
some thirty of his knights, attired like rude Country fellows with battes and
staves on their necks, and in a manner in the midst of the Thracians victories,
he enters suddenly and rudely into the Lists, seeming indeed to be a very
natural Country peasant, elected by a company of rude fellows to make
pastime, and being espied of the people, he was welcomed with exceeding showts
and laughters, that now the eyes of all the beholders were bent upon him: being
come to the list, he offered to run, but Guido disdained to cope with one so
base, to whom Parismus Knights came and told him, their Master came to run
with one but himself, and therefore he should either break a Lance, or else
they would beat him out of the field. Wherewith Guido (with a scornful
laughter) took a staff and ran at this rustic Knight, who notwithstanding
his outward show, encountered Guido so valiantly, that had he not been an
approved good Knight, he had measured his length on the ground, which so vexed
the Thracian, that he ran the second time, thinking then verily to
overthrow him: but it fell out contrary to his expectation, for he could not
with all hi^ power move this country Champion in his saddle: but at the third
course, he was himself unhorsed with such violence, that both horse and man
lay tumbling on the ground. Cuido having received this exceeding foil, in a
great rage departed the field, and none of the contrary party encountered this
Knight, but they were all foiled and overthrown, that at last there was none
would run against him any more: which he perceiving, lighted from his Horse,
and went up the Scaffolde, whereas the Bride sat, and rudely offered to have
kissed her, but thee courteously reproved his boldness, with that all began
to laugh at his rude behavior, and so^e began to thrust him back: at last
he discovered himself, and (...) knowing him, woondred to see him armed. Thus
the whole honor of the triumph redouned to Parismus, as most worthy of the
same, whose behavior was so highly commended, that all men much applanded this
his last devise: and Guido knowing him, was not greatly discontented to be
foiled by so worthy a Knight. By this time the nights black mantell began to
ouerspread the whole earth, that Dionisius with the rest of the Kings,
conducting Laurana in triumphant manner, hasted to the Palace, where after
supper was ended, they continued a good part of the night in Dancing, and
other Courtly pastimes, their entertainment being so honorable, that they
admired the exceeding Royalty of Dionisius Court, where they afterward
continued many days, spending the time of many Martial exercises.

CHAP. XVII.
How Parismus rewarded the Outlawes that preserved his life. How Pollipus was
in love with Violetta: and how Violetta forsook her Fathers house, in the
disguise of a page, and was entertained of Parismus, and of the care Pollipus
took for her absence.

LOng time the Out-lawes continued in great pensiveness, for the want of their
Captain, much maruelling what should be become of him, and the other two that
went with him: but at the last they were eased of that care, for Parismus
remembering the benefit he had received by their means, desired Dionisius
to remitte their offen^s, who willingly granted his request, and therefore
Parismus, sent for them, who having knowledge that he was the man whom they had
preserved, willingly came, and at his hands received their pardon, with large
and bountiful rewards. The Damsel likewise came amongst them, whom Parismus
caused to be worthily used, reporting very honorably of her virtues. The
Emperors and Kings of Persia and Natolia, being present at the coming of
these Outlawes, greatly praised Parismus for the honorable care he had of
these poor people. Amongst the number of Knights there assembled, the Father
of the Damsel chanced to be present, who very diligently beheld his Daughter,
but knew her not, for that she was mighty allered: but at last, hearing
Dionisius make recital of her tragedy, and how that Osiris was hurt in her
resu^s, by circumstance, comparing the time of her departure with the same,
knew her to be his own Daughter, and in the presence of them all, with
weeping eyes for joy, embraced her, and she with great delight was glad of his
presence. Parismus ever after used her father most kindly, and much esteemed
her f^r that she had taken great pains to cure his wounds.

During the time of Parismus aboade in the Country of Thessaly (after that the
two Emperors of Constantinople and Greece were departed, with the rest of the
Knights that came to the selemnization of the Wedding, and likewise the King of
Persia, and the rest of the famous Potentates, on his party, had solemnly
taken their leave, (Pollipus excepted) the chief Governors of the City of
Thebes, invited their King and Queen, the King of Bohemia, the two new married
Princes, the Prince of Sparta, and the king of Hungaria and his Queen, the
Lady Isabella, Lord Remus, Pollipus, and many other Knights, unto a selemene
feast which they prepared in their great Hal, called the Counselhouse: whose
gentle courtesy was kindly accepted, and at the appointed day they all went
thither in great Royalty, where they were so heartily welcomed, and so
honorably entertained by the Citizens, as it were a tedious toy^e to
rehearse. Such Pageants, such delightful shewessuch Music, and such general
triumphing and rejoicing, such gifts and Commendations, given to the two young
Princes, as the like was never presented to any Prince by his subjects before
in those Regions. Amongst the rest of the Citizenst, he father of Violetta (the
Damosel whom Parismus had kindly received, as before is mentioned) was one
of the chiefest that had ordained, this banquet, with whom likewise was his
daughter, whom as soon as Parismus espied, a ruddie blushe began to
ouerspread his cheeks, being touched with the remembrance of the injury he
had done her. The Damsel Violetta, behaved* her self with such modesty in
this Princely assembly, that she was generally nored, and well liked of al.
Insomuch that Laurana having precisely viewed her comeliness, began greatly to
commend her unto the Queen her Mother, who espying occasion, called Violetta
unto her, demanding of her whose daughter she was, who humbly reuerencing her
self upon her knees, answered that she was the daughter of Signior Andrugio a
Citizen. Whilst she kneeled before the Queen, Pollipus took such view of her
perfections, that he was suddenly stricken with Cupids fiery dart of Love, and
began vehemently to affect her beauty and person, that his heart was
entangled in the intricate Labyrinth of her perfections, but seeing her depart,
he thought therewithal his vital spirits had begun to decay, and with a
heavy sigh he breathed out his longing desire to be acquainted with her.
Parismus likewise stood in a study (...) how he might make some amends to
Violetta, and therefore seeing her talk with the Queen and Lauarana, he came
unto them, and asked what Damsel that was that talked with them. My Lord
(quoth Laurana) it is a Merchants Daughter, whose behavior so well pleases
me, that I could wish her to spend her time in some honorable place to her
preferment. Quoth he* if your lease. I will speak to her Father, that she
might attend your self: wherewith he came to Pollipus, who stood like one with
a flea in his ear, and desired him to enquire which was the Father of that
Damsel, and that he would request him to come to speak with him. Pollipus
being glad of such an opportunit^, soon found out Violetta, and greeting her
with a kind kiss, told her, that he was sent by the Prince Parismus, to
entreat her Father to come and speak with him. She told him that her Father
was hard by, and that she would presently let him understand his pleasure: who
having knowledge thereof, immediately went unto the Prince, who used such
entreaty, that (although very unwillingly) he yielded to his request, and
coming back, told his daughter to what effect he was sent for, which she was
glad of, though outwardly she made a show of unwillingness. Pollipus having
understood the cause why Parismus sent for her Father, (Parismus loving him so
dearly that he would not conceal any thing from him) revealed unto Parismus
the love that he bare to Violetta, who promised to further him in what he
could: by this time ye banquet was ended, and the King departed to the Palace,
with great joy and exceeing triumph, and soon took order to have Violetta
sent for, but her father seeing the messenges come, began to take such sorrow
for their departure, that it would have melted a heart of steel into tears,
to hear his complaints, that the messengers pitying the sorrows old
Andrugio made, returned without her: which drove Pollipus to such an ecstasy of
desperate sorrow, that he seemed altogether impatient to endure want, but
seeing on another furthera^ce to his love, he often repaired to old Andrugios
house, and manifested his suit unto her, who used him most kindly, but still
delayed his suit with such excuses, that he was thereby further intrapped in
the snares of love, and yet nothing the nearer of obtaining his suit.

At last, it was concluded betwixt Parismus and him, that Parismus should
accompany him in some disguise, and make himself known to none but Violetta,
thereby the sooner to procure her good liking to Pollipus, which she was the
more willing to do, for that he thought upon manifesting himself unto her,
she would not deny Pollipus request, and therefore finding a convenient time,
they went to old Andrugeos house where they were kindly used of Andrugio and
his Daughter Violetta, who welcomed these more kindly, then ever she had done
Pollipus coming alone, being thereunto drawn by an inward forwardness which
she felt, contrary to her former disposition, where they had not long
continued, but Parismus found opportunity to greet Violetta in this sort: Fair
damsel, quoth he, I am come unto you an humble petitioner in the behalf of
my friend Pollipus, whose love is such and so fervent toward your self, that
unless you pity him, and yield some comsort to his care, you will be the
death of the worthiest knight living: therefore I desire you that I may be the
happy Oracle, to declare unto him his happy Fortune, pronounced from your
sacred lips. Violetta all this while stood as one amazed, feeling such an
exceeding throbbing at her heart, that she could not well tell what to answer:
at last, being touched with remembering of his love that had reapt the fruits of
her virginity, she replied in this sort: Gentle knight, quoth she, I would not
willingly be any man's death, if I could otherwise choose, but to grant to this
suit I cannot, without doing another as great wrong as might be: for so it is,
I have already placed my affections, and have already vowed never to alter them
whilst life does last in me. Which sudden and resolute reply of hers, Parismus
much commended, yet used many persuasions in the behalf of Pollipus, and began
to demand of her to whom she had vowed her love, using many entreaties, that
at last she said, it was but a folly to ask the question, for that she was
resolutely determined not to declare who it was. Said Parismus, what would you
say, if I name the man, wherewith Violetta blushed exceedingly: and Parismus
pulled out of his bosom the scarf which she had before given him. Quoth he,
behold in this scarf, your self have set down a description of your loves
first coming unto you, which was the Prince of Bohemia himself, unto whom you
presented this, who leaping down the Palace wall, slew your Fathers dogs,
and what kindness he received at your hands, your self know best, and since
it is impossible to obtain any recompense at his hands, being wedded to the
Princess Laurana) let Pollipus, who in Chiualry is inferior to none, be the
man that shall possess the second room in your good liking. Violetta hearing
him make so true a rehearsal of her adventure, and so affirm by many reasons
that it was Parismus, was strooken with such a sudden fear and shame to see
her secrets disclosed, that she was ready to swound with grief, and kneeling
down, with the tears standing in her eyes, began to entreat him not to
reveal the same to any, for she was fully resolved not to love any but him,
although it were Parismus: and although it were impossible to attain any
fauouror recompense at his hands. I will not (quoth he) reveal it to any, for
none but Parismus knows thereof, who is here present with thee, wherewith
he most lovingly took her in his arms and kissed her, she yet being in
some doubt that it was not he, until at the last, Parismus made himself
known unto her, and by such private tokens, as she both certainly and
assuredly knew that it was he, which so rejoiced her heart that she most
humbly upon her knees entreated him to pardon her boldness, and vowed never to
love any but himself: which protestation so grieved him, that he began to
persuade her, not to wrong her self so much, for that he was no way to break
his Wedlock vows to pleasure her. My dear Lord (quoth she) if I had a
thousand lives, and every life ten thousand times dearer then this my life, I
would most willingly spend them in meditating on the first fruits of your kind
nesse toward me. He seeing her firm resolve, could not tell what other
means or persuasions to use to alter her steadfast resolution, but passing some
time with her in that private talk, till he saw Pollipus expected with heavy
sighs, his happy or unhappy news: therefore he departed, and came unto him,
telling him, that there was some hope of obtaining her love, upon which
comfortable speech, Pollipus still earnestly proscecuted his suit unto
Violetta, who hearing that Parismus was departing toward his own Country
determined to adventure her life and credit to go with him, and therefore
fitted her self in Pages Apparel, which so well became her, that she seemed
to be the most excellentest workmanship that ever Nature had framed, her suit
being green Satin, her buskings of the finest Spanish Lether, fastened to her
dainty leg, with Crystal buttons, her hair wreathed with a carnation
Ribbin, and all things else so neat and decent upon her delicate body, that
she was most comely to view and behold: and so in this changeable sort
apparalled, she secretly stole away from her Fathers house, and soon gate to
the Palace, where although there were a general search made by Andrugios
means (who soon mist her, and the report of her loss came to Parismus
hearing) yet she was not in that habit any way suspected, where she continued
many days together, in which time she labored by all means to be entertained
by Parismus.

And on a time espying him with Laurana, walking privately in the Garden, on a
sudden she came toward them, who beholding her comely shape and delicace
complexion, they deemed her rather a Divine, then a mortal Creature, who being
come near unto them, Parismus demanded whose Page she was? My Lord, said
Violetta, as yet I have no Master, but I would gladly be entertained: quoth he
then, would you give diligent attendance on the Lady Laurana, and my self, if
it please her to like you? I am (quoth she) in all humble duty ready at your
command.

Many questions Laurana asked the Boy, (as she supposed, demanding and
enquiring of him both his Name, his Country and Parentage. Violetta answered,
my name is Adonius, my Country Greece, and my parents are all dead, and the
fame of the Nobleness of this Court, made me travel into this Country with
the Emperor, with determination to get my self some good service, which you
have vouchsafed me, and herein my duty and endeauours shall be such, as I
trust you shall hereafter well like of. Which speeches poor Violetta uttered,
with so pretty a grace, that they both took great delight in her behavior,
whom now we will call by the name of Adonius.

CHAP. XVIII.
How Parismus and Laurana, with diverse in company, departed from Thessalie, and
how they were dispersed from the King of Bohemia, and set upon by Pirates, whom
they vanquished.

ALl this time Parismus and Laurana continued in such blisfull estate of
contented love, still daily increasing in Honor and affectionate kindness,
as though the one could not live without the others presence, he still growing
into greater favor (if greater might be) in the Thessallians hearts, that
when the day of his departure was come, the Citizens of Thebes with mournful
hearts and watery eyes, bewailed the same, all being sad and heavy, no
instruments of music, nor sight of joy, nor sound of rejoicing being heard,
as though their departure were a sign of some ominous event to ensue.

Laurana with many a salt tear, bad her Countrymen adieu, and poor Violetta,
seeing her Father stand at his door, as it were comfortless, uttered such
passionate lamentations that were beyond compare.

The two Princes being conducted by Dionisius and Oliuia, the King and Queen
of Hungaria, the Prince of Sparta and the Lady Isabella, and most of the
Thessalian Peers, unto the Haven where they should take shipping, this parting
being in such heavy sort, and with such abundance of tears Parismus uttered
these speeches. Most Noble Princes, these sad tears which you shed at our
departure, shows your unwillingness to leave us, whose company you shall not
long want, for your Daughter Laurana and my self will very shortly return
again, that she may be a Comfort to your aged years, therefore I humbly
beseech you to cease your grief. Dionisius said: Most noble young Prince, our
grief must needs be great, to loose the company of such assured friends, as
your noble Father and your self, have shown your selves to be, therefore for
our last Farewell, we pray, that the Gods would prosper you in this your
journey.

Laurana having received their blessings, with most heavy hearts, they
committed these two Princes to the Seas, who hoysing sail with speed,
launched into the maine, where they were soon out of ^ight, and Dionisius and
the Queen, sadly returned to Thebes.

The King of Bohemia had not sailed above two days space, in great hope soon
to recover the Coast of Bohemia, but the winds began to blow aloft, and the
Seas to rage and swell, and such an exceeding Tempest arose, as though the
Heavens and Earth had conspired their utter overthrow, so that their ships
were disseuered, and their Mariners expected nothing but present death: that
Parismus, Laurana, and Pollipus, were disseuered from the rest of the company,
and they all in despair ever to see them again. The cruelty of the Tempest
continued for the space of three days, in such raging and extreme sort, that
the Mariners were compelled to cut their Sails, and to heave their Mastes
ouerboord, and by the violence of the wind were driven past their knowledge,
but when the storm ceased, the Mariners ken^ed a far off an Island, and with
such provision as they had, sailed thither.

Parismus being glad that they had so well escaped the fury of the Seas, with
most comfortable speeches, revived the fearful Spirit of the Pri^sse Laurana
from her sadness, in this sort, Dear Laurana, since the destinies have
allotted us this mischance, to be thus disasterly severed from our company, and
driven into an unknown place, comfort your self in these extremities, with
hope of better success, for I do not doubt but we shall well recover the
company of my Lord and Father, who by these bitter misfortunes is severed from
us, but I trust the Seas will not be so unmerciful, as to drench his aged
years in these spacious gulfes: my dear Laurana, were you safely on these
spacious gulfes: my dear Laurana, were you safely on shore, then would my heart
be at rest. Many other speeches be used to comfort her in her sadness, who
was the more comfortable, for that she was in his company: they had not long
continued in this good hope of recovering land, but they espied a ship making
toward them with all speed, who being come near to him, they knew him to be a
Pirat, who presently began to board the ship wherein Parismus was, but the
Mariners resisted them, wherewith began a fearful battle. Parismus being
under ha^ches, soon armed himself, and made such a slaughter amongst the
Pirates, (most of his own men being slain) that he with the help of Pollipus,
had soon destroyed the greatest multitude of them, and the rest yielded unto
their mercy.

Afterward they boorded the Pirates (who were belonging to Andramart of
Tartaria, the Scythian Pirate, that had filled the whole world with the report
of his tyranny) and believing them upon such protestations and oaths, as the
villains made, they conveyed such riches, Jewels, and provisions as they had,
aboard the Pirates ship, for that their own was shrewdly weather beatten. And
likewise having shifted Laurana, Leda, and Adonius, into the same, sunk their
own, and placed such few Mariners as they had left alive, for governors over
the Pirates, they made toward the Island which they saw before them, and soon
landed, determining there to refresh themselves, where they found the Country
waste and desolate, without any inhabitant, yet well replenished with wild
Dear and Foul, of which they got good store. Parismus demanded of the Pirates
if they knew that Island, who told him, that they gave it the name of the
Desolate Island, for that they never saw any living creature there: but they
told him that there was a beautiful Castle, that stood upon the top of a
mighty Rock, in the midst of the Island, inhabited as they thought by some
Devils, for that many of their fellows had oftentimes gone thither, but none
of them ever returned, nor they never saw any creature in any place of the
Island besides: though there were many goodly Towns not inhabited. Which
strange news made them wonder: some two days they continued upon the coast of
this desolate Island. And on a time, Parismus and Pollipus, only attended by
Adonius, straied from their ship to kill Uenison, leaving Laurana aboard,
little mistrusting any treachery, and trusting too much to his own men. But
the Pirates having awaited such a convenient time, by policy conveyed most of
the Bohemian Mariners under Hatches, saving some two or three whom they easily
overcame, and fast bolted down the same, and before the Knights were returned
from killing their Uenison, they had hoised sail, and were launced quite out
of sight: they under board, not yet knowing that they were so betrayed.

CHAP. XIX.
How Parismus, Pollipus, and Adonius the page, going a shore in the Desolate
Island, were betrayed by the pirates. And how Lauerana was conveyed to the
Castle of Rocks, under the custody of the Tyrant Andromart.

SO soon as Parismus and Pollipus had sufficiently stored themselves with
fresh v^ctualls, they returned toward the ship, which they found launched
and gone, which Parismus seeing, and missing his beloved Laurana (now too late
suspecting the Pirates treachery) fell into such an extreme rage of sorrow and
vexation against his own carelessness, that he tare his hair, stamped on the
earth, cursed the day and hour of his birth, and was so far ouermaistred
with the extremity of vexation, that he feared like a man extremely mad or
frantic, oftentimes being in mind to leap into the Sea and drown himself,
and oftentimes attempting to destroy himself, that all these unsupportable
passions concurring together, so overcame his senses, that he fell into a dead
trance.

Poor Adonius seeing his Lord in this extreme case used all the skill that
was possible to recover him to his senses, that seeing nothing to avail, he
begaune to make such woeful lamentation, as would have made the sto^ie Rocks
relent at his pitiful exclamation, where Violetta continued rubbing his pale
cheeks with her soft hand, a thousand times kissing his cold lips, and
washing the same with salt tears, that Pollipus seeing his friend in that sort
raging against Fortune, and ^earing the grievous lamentation the poor Page
made, (full l^ttle suspecting who it was) by viewing their infirmities, most
prudentlie governed himself, and by what he could with poor Adonius, to
recover him, but their labor was in vain: then he began to meditate on
this affliction: thinking that if he should rage so excessiuely as Parismus
did, he should be no whit the nearer any hope of remedy, but should thereby
give encouragement and example to him to continue in that sorrow, which was
beyond the compass of compare.

But seeing Parismus come to himself, looking like one ouermaistred with care,
and staring upon him like a mad man, fearing that this sudden grief had
altered his wits, uttered these speeches; Most noble Prince, since it is
allotted unto you to be thus crossed in your happiness, I be seech you bear
the same patiently, and remit this extreme care, which so ouermaistreth your
virtues, that their splendour cannot shine in such perfect sort, as wontedly
they have done: what can helples grief avail you? what can care herein
pleasure you? or what can this distemperature sorrow help you in the recovery
of your lost friend? then do not show your self so inconsiderate, to destroy
your senses in this sort, but let us consult which way to recover them for
these sorrows, and ten thousand times as many, cannot any way pleasure you. It
ill beseemes your honor in this sort to cast your self down, but rather with
quietness bear your afflictions, and with wisdom devise how to ease you of
this grief. Pollipus spoke these words with such feruency, that it made
Parismus somewhat remember himself, that rising from the earth, beholding his
poor Page kneeling by him with blubbred cheeks, sorrowing to see his sorrow)
he uttered these speeches. How can I contain my self within the compass of
reason, when my loss exceeds the bounds of reason? how can I with patience
bear this affliction, when my loss is such as all the worlds wealth cannot
counteruaile? How should wisdom bear sway in me, when she was my only
wisdom, and with her precious self, all that was mine is departed from me?
Why should I not torment my self, when through my self she is perished? Why
should I not rage, sorrow, and lament her loss, procured by my negligence?
Accursed Traitor that I was, that left my dear Laurana, yea the most virtuous
Lady living upon the earth, so slightly in the custody of barbarous people.
What will she say of me, but that I regarded her not? how may she condemn me
of humanity, that have suffered her thus to be taken from me? Can there be any
limits given to this my sorrow? Can I never recompense this extreme wrong I
have done her? Is there any hope that I shall ever see her again* No Pollipus,
no. What know I how these villains will use her? what can I tell whether they
will convey her? Or what know I the grief she will endure? This, this,
torments my heart, that I am past all hope ever to see her again. How then can
I assuage my grief, but rather increase the same? what sufficient torment can
I inflict upon my cankred careless heart, that left her in their custody, and
by that means have lost the fruition of her Divine presence, whereby my life
was maintained?

No, no, Pollipus, my sorrows are such as can no way be salued, therefore it
were but in vain to persuade my self that there is any hope left to redeem
this my incomparable loss, and lost Friend: Here you see we are left in an
unfrequented place, environed round with the Sea, and no means to escape a
miserable death by famishment, upon this accursed Land, that was ordained to
be my grave: then Pollipus, what counsel have you left to comfort us withal?
Or how can you think well of him, by whose means you are brought to this
hazard of your life? My Lord answered Pollipus: Let us do the best we can to
get forth of this solitary place, which once attained, there is no doubt but
we might in continuance of travail, meet with some that can give us knowledge
of whence those Pirates were, the which (if by happy chance,) we can once
find out, then shall we soon hear what is become of Laurana, in the mean
time with patience let us endure the search for her diligently: for I vow,
that if she be any where to be found, I will never desist travail, until I
can come to hear some happy tidings of her abode: which speeches of this
worthy Knight, so revived Parismus, that he altogether abandoned that
effeminate kind of grief and lamentation, but with a mind puffed full of
inward sorrow, he kindly thanked Pollipus, and with this resolute
determination, these two worthy Knights armed, saving only their swords,
having no company, but only their Page, began to travail along the Coast
side, to see if happily they could find out any Shipping, that might lie upon
those Coasts. In which travail we will leave them for a space, to speak of
the King of Bohemia.

As Soon as the storm was ended, the King of Bohema, missing the Ship wherein
Parismus was, began to take the same most grievously, fully assuring himself
that they were perished, but he himself was driven into the confines of
Frigia, whereas he peaceably soiourned, until he had Fraughted his ships
with all things needful, and within short space lande^ in Bohemia: where he
gave himself to a solitary and austere life, and such sorrow and lamentation
was generally made for the loss of their Prince, as is not to be described.
Likewise the news thereof was soon conveyed to Dionisius Court, where the
sorrow they made was such, as the like was never heard of in any age.

The Tartarians very joyful of their Booty, made all the haste they could
home toward their own Country, not any v^der hatches for a good space
misdoubting their Captivity, ye Princess her self, being fallen into a
sweet and silent sleep. Leda being with her, marvelled why Parismus stayed so
long, and seeing her Mistress fast a sleep, stole out of ye Cabin, and found
the Mariners all carelessly quaffing, and leaving them, she would have gone up
above hatches, for that her heart could not be at quiet, but finding them fast
shut, she called alowde to the Mariners to come and open the same: but they
likewise finding the same fast boulted, soon perceived the Sippe was under
sail, and they all betrayed, that being desperate, what with shame and grief,
that there began a very great Mutiny amongst them, that most of them were
slain in this rage, not knowing almost what they did, and the rest that
suruiued, desperately murdered themselves: which Leda beholding, assuredly
persuaded herself they were betrayed, and with abundance of tears went to
her Mistress again, who still was fast a sleep, but at last she awaked, and
seeing Leda weeping, her heart began to fail her, and demanding the cause
of Leda, she could not answer a word, wherewith Laurana was driven into such
an extreme passion of fear, that all her joints began to tremble and shake,
her color went and came: but at the last, which with entreaties, and
threatenings, she caused Leda to declare the circumstance of their woe. Laurana
no sooner heard Leda say they were betrayed to the Tartarians, and that their
Mariners had in a mutenie slain one another, but there she fell down dead,
that do what Leda could, she was not able to recover her to her Senses in a
good space: but at last her breath began to make passage through the sweet
Condute of her throat, and she lifted up her eyes, looking with such a ghastly
and pitiful countenance upon Leda, that she was almost afraid to behold
her. Then Laurana began to tear and spoy^ her golden Tresses, and dishiueled
her fair and precious hair, and rent her costly Garments from her comely and
delicate body, wringing her hands, beating her breasts, and knocking her
precious head against the boords, that had not Leda with all her might hindered,
her she had there destroyed her self. In this sorrowful sort, she on the one
side continued her lamentations, and Leda on the other side wept her fill, that
the conduits of their eyes were dried up, and not able to shed another tear,
and her heart was sore with throbbing, and she desperately and with a constant
resolution, attended the coming of those vilains that had betra^ed her, who
knowing themselves to be past the reach of the two knights, began to lift up
the hatches and called to those that were below, but none made answer, which
caused one of them to go down, and found all the Bohemia^s lie murdered, and
with that joyful tidings came up to his fellows. One that was the chief, and
Captain over the rest, allotting every one his several office, went down to
see where Laurana was, whom he found (as is said) making such mo^ne, that
himself (notwithstanding his barbarous disposition) could not refrain from
pitying her grief: and in that case, without speaking a word he left her,
and returned again within two hours, thinking by that time she would have
ceased her complaints: but she not giving her thoughts any respite of
consideration, but only to think on Parismus, still continued in her sorrows,
altogether refusing to be comforted by any persuasions, and for two days
space, utterly abstained from all kind of sustenance, by means whereof she was
brought to extreme hazard and peril of her life, which caused Leda to utter
these persuasions. Dear Mistress, quoth she, if you would vouchiafe to hear
me speak, then I would not doubt but to ease your heart of some of the care you
so impatiently endure. You know that my Lord Parismus, Pollpus, and Adonius,
are yet living, and no doubt in good estate, but only for the loss of you, for
whose sake my Lord Parismus will preserve his life: why should you then destroy
your self, that he so much tendereth? and not rather use all possible means
to preserve your self, until you can by some means hear of him: for there
is no doubt that he will search most part of the world, but he will find you,
and by his valor make the place where he comes speak of his worthiness, so
that I do not doubt, but it will by some accident or other come to your
hearing: then were it vain for you by destroying your self, to destroy him
likewise, whereas otherwise you may happily meet, to both your erceeding
comforts: your virtues have the power to rule strangers affections, let them
then restrain you from doing your self harm. What will Parismus think? and
what think you will be his grief, when he has traveled many strange
Countries, and endured many thousand perils in search of you, and in the end
finds that you have foulely made away your self, and were the only cause of
his sorrow? I beseech you dear Mistress, consider of these things aright, and
weigh the estate that we are in, and then I do not doubt, but your wisdom
will consider, that it is better for you to preserve your self for his sake,
then by destroying your self, be guilty both of your own death and his too.
With these forcible perswasious, Laurana began somewhat to pacify her self,
and with a settled resolution, determined to endure what misery so ever should
light upon her: and therefore began to confer with Leda about their hard hap,
and miserable estate, which drove her to her very wits end to think of. But in
the midst of their thoughts came to the captain, who beholding Lauranes
maiesticall countenance, and exceeding beauty, was so amazed therewith, as he
condemned himself of villainy, to have procured so divine a creatures discon^.
Laurana seeing him stand gazing upon her, began boldly to demand of him what he
would have, he humbly kneeling, told her that he had provided her dinner, if
she pleased to taste thereof, which she willingly consented unto, and began
consideratly to recall her former senses, but yet so inwaidly sorrowful, as it
was a rare virtue in her, so suddenly to ouermaister her intemperate grief, and
yet still remain so ^ul of grief, that the very substance of her senses was
perfect sorrow. By this time the pirates had safely landed their ships in the
Island, where their mais^er Andramart was, which was encompassed with such
mighty rocks of sto^e, that it was impossible, but only one way, in which way
a few were of power safficient to keep out a whole army of men, and soon
they co^ueied Laurana, and Leda to ye castle, where they presented her (with
such jewels as they had with her) to Andramart, who being a man of a most proud
and hautie disposition, and maiestically seated in an imperial seat) was so
ravished at ye first view of Lauranaes bewty, that he stood advisedly beholding
her: at last he came to her, to have imbrast her tender body in his rough
arms, but she abhorring him, thrust him from her, with a disdainful scorn,
^herewith h^ began to fawn upon her like as a dog will do on his master, when he
has bin newly beaten, and began to make shows to them of great welcome, and
kindly brought the^ to stately and gorgeous chambers most richly furnished, and
seen all things needful were therepresented unto her, by such women as were
in the Castle. Laurana seeing her self thus kindly used, and not evil
entreated, was therewith somewhat comforted, and used her self according to
the condition of the time and place, and kindly accepted all their courtesies:
but the love which Andramart made unto her, seemed so hateful in her eyes,
that it was worse unto her then a thousand deaths, to endure his sight. The
night being come, and after they had Supped, (being served in most stately
manner, and with most costly and delicate cates) she with Leda her maid,) who
lodged with her,) betook themselves to their rest, where she could by no
means give one minutes respit to her sorrows by sleep, but uttered most
heavy playnts, and lamentations bewayling the loss of her deer Lord, that the
very walls seemed to grove forth the Echoes of her complaints, in which sort
she continued most part of the night. Early the next morning she was saluted by
Andramart, who could give his mind no rest nor quiet, but in her company, and
his love was so exceeding toward her that he could not do any thing that
was offensive unto her. In this miserable kind of happy estate, Laurana
continued by the space of a month, in which time she had knowledge of a
number of prisoners that this tyrant kept within the castle, by the grievous
cries they made, some for want of food, some with pains of tortures that he
inflicted upon them, being himself hated of all men, and therefore he hated
all mankind, but such whose minds accorded to his wickedness. Lauerana in
this time used her self so, that she still deferred his importunat suit, and
had him so tied in the snares of love, that what she commanded, he could
presently execute: but so odioue was his love unto her heavy heart, that she
was oftentimes ready to swound with the remembrance there^ but still by the
counsel of Leda, she held it the best course to keep themselves in his
favor, until they could by some means escape out of his cruel hands, where
we will leave poor Lauarana in this comfortless place, amongst rude and
uncivil people by night, and by day, her music being the dismal noise of
pitiful cries of poor prisoners, and clogd with loathsome love of Andramart,
without hope how to escape from that miserable place of bondage, where you may
judge the sorrow she endured, was such, as no tongue is able to express.

CHAP. XX.
The miserable travel Parismus endured in the desolate Island, and how he was
succored by Antiochus, and afterward how they were imprisoned in the
Enchanted Castle, by the Inchantresse Bellona.

PArismus traveled many days along the coasts of the desolate Island, their
food being wild fruit that grew upon trees, and their drink the clear
fountain water, their lodging the hard and cold earth: in which travel they
beheld many goodly ancient towns, but altogether unpeopled, the houses being
for the most part stored with many rich and costly ornaments, which caused
these two knights greatly to marvel, and desired to know the cause thereof,
and remembering what the Pirates had told them, that in a stately Castle,
situate in the midst of the Country, it was likely there were some that
inhabited, they determined next to travel thither: for they saw no hope how to
get from that Island, being grown very weak, by reason of their faint food,
and hard lodging: which travel poor Adonius most willingly endured, thinking
all pain a pleasure in his masters company, unto whom he behaved himself
with such tender care that Parismus would oftentimes extol and commend him to
Pollipus. For when Parismus at any time slept, he would cover his face with his
thinnest garment, and made a pillow of the rest for his head, and oftentimes
drive from his mind many heavy thoughts by his sweet songs, that Parismus
thought he could never have endured that tedious journey with patience, if
Adonius had bin absent. These worthy knights, having continued a long while in
this their solitary walk, took their journey by guess toward the midst of ye
country, in which travel they continued some 3. weeks, in which time they were
often in danger of drowing, by reason of many deceitful quicksands, and often
like to be famisht for want of sustena^ce, and often in danger to be devoured
by wild beasts, that were abunda^tly in this country, and yet nevertheless they
were nothing ye nearer their wished expectation. At last Parismus and Pollipus
begu^ utterly to despair of ever accomplishing the means of getting from yt
vnfreque^ted place, and they traveled all a day and a night, over a mighty
plain, where there was neither water to stanche their thirst, nor fruit to
assuage their hunger. Early in the morning, they espied a mighty wood, where
they thought (although there were no other comfort) yet there they should find
fruit: but being come thither, their expectation was frustrated, for there was
nothing but thorns and briers: and so s^ick, that they could by no means enter
the same, yt there they surely expected naught but famishment. And Parismus,
what with extremity of hunger, and grief for the loss of Laurana, and lastly,
for Pollipus and Adonius sake, sat him down under a mighty oak, and with a
heavy heart uttered these plaints. How unfortunate am I above all men, to be
driven to this exigent of miserable calamity, yt by my ill fortune have betrayed
the most chaste, virtuous, and beautiful Lady living, into the hands of tyrants,
to her endless grief, and by my means have brought these my friends in danger
of a lamentable death by famishment. Had all these bin proper to my self, then
would I in despite of my crooked destinies have endured them, then should not
they complain, then should my virtuous Laurana have bin in the pleasant court
of Dionisius, whose tears at my departure, did prognosticate my unlucky
success: in this extremity what hope is left for my comfort? how may Laurana
curse my unfortunate destinies? how may Dionisius accuse me of dishonor for
losing his daughter? how many Frigia^s condemn me for the loss of the worthy
Pollipus? and how may I suffiently recompense all the wrongs? Despaite shall
attend my steps, and sorrow shall be my food, affliction shall be mycompanion, and
care my rest: ye day will I spend in tears, and the night in groans: let the
heavens pour down the vengeance on my head, and the earth work my sorrow: for
I ye most unfortunate of al men, have deserved the greatest punishment yt ever
was inflicted upon man. In that vexation of mind continued Parismus, and poor
Adonius lay weeping at his feet, almost dead for want of food, Pollipus he went
up and down, raging inwardly in his mind, his heart being so full fraught with
grief, that his eyes were swollen with extreme vexation. All the while that
these worth^ Knights had continued in this simpathy of sorrow, there was an
aged Hermit had beheld their complaints, and understanding by their behavior,
that they were some distressed strangers, pitied their passions, and came
toward them, being all three laid under the oak together lamenting, and
saluted them with these kind speeches? Worthy knights (said the Hermit) for
that I see you are strangers and distressed, if my poor Cell may any way ease
you, and such simple victuals as the same yields, refresh you, or my self, or
counsel, may any way pleasure you, I desire you to go with me thither, and
you shall be welcome. Parismus beholding this aged man utter such kind
speeches, as one ravished with joy rose from the ground, and kindly with
thanks told him, that he willingly accepted his proffered courtesy: for
courteous old man ( quoth he) you could never have come in a time of more need,
for we are now given over to despair, therefore we may say, happy old man, you
shall do us a friendly deed, which we will thankfully accept, and willingly
requit, if it lies in our powers: then I pray you quoth he, go with me, for I
perceive your bodies are wearied with travel, and your hearts tired with grief:
so they joyfully went to his Cel, being glad of this comfort, and in little
space attained thither, which was in a large cave under the earth, most
secretlyco^triued: where they were soon well refreshed with wine and venison,
which this old man had always ready. After that they had well satisfied their
hunger with this good cheer, the old man requested to know of whence they
were, and by what disastred mischance they were arrived on that unhappy Island.
Parismus told him how he was son to the King of Bohemia, and that his
Companion was a Knight of Phrigia, rehearsing unto him all their whole
misaduenture, and the loss of Laurana, uttering the same in such doleful wise,
that the old Hermit could not refrain from grief. By that time Parismus had
ended his Tragical discourse, it waxed dark, and therefore the old Hermit had
brought them unto their lodging which was the same bed whereon he laid
himself (there being no other) on which Parismus was very unwilling to lie,
thereby to displace this good old man: but by the manifold entreaties of the
Hermit, he yielded, and soon addressed himself thereunto, desiring Pollipus to
be his bedfellow, and for that Adonius was somewhat sickly, they laid him in ye
midst betwixt them, for that he had done them many pleasures in their travel,
Parismus being so far in love with him, as he would have ventured his own life
to do him good. Poor Adonius with blushing cheeks, put off his apparel, and
seemed to be abashed when he was in his shirt, and tenderly lept into ye bed
betwixt these two worthy knights, who little suspected that it was Violetta,
where she poor soul lay close at Parismus back, the very sweet touch of whose
body seemed to ravish her with joy: and on the other side not acquainted with
such Bedfellowes, she seemed (as it were) metamorphosed, with a kind of
delightful fear: but had Pollipus known it had bin his dear Violleta, he
would have more kindly regarded his bedfellow, who seemed to start if Pollipus
did but stir. Thus they all took their rest that night, the two Knights
only being glad of this quiet repose after their long travel: and Adonius
having in his heart a thousand delights of joy, by touching Parismus sweet body,
early in the morning Adonius was up, being afraid to uncover her delicate
body, but with speed soon araid himself, and had so neatly provided althings
against these two Knights should rise, that both of them admired his behauior,
having provided most wholesome bathes for their feet, which did them much
ease, that they were sore bruised with travel. The good old Hermit, seeing
these worthy Knight ready to take their leave (for that they were unwilling to
stay to trouble him) requested them yt they would stay with him some days to
refresh themselves. Good Father (said Parismus) if we be not troublesome unto
you then will we stay, and bring our selves further into your debt. Not so
worthy knights (quoth he) for I know you will get from out of this country,
unless you will stay some time with me, for I assure you that there is no
means but one, which must be atchiued with much hazard of your lives, which
many have attempted, yet never could effect. I pray you good Father, said he,
let us be so much beholding unto you, as to know the means, for were it never
so dangerous, most willingly I shall undertake the same, seeing there is no
means to escape, for I greatly desire to know what is become of the virtuous
Lady Laurana: wherewith the Hermit began in this manner. Most worthy Prince
(quoth he) I now begin to rehearse a history of the most viledest Traitor
living on the earth, whose name is Drubal, sometime a subject of mine, but now
my superior, for know worthy knights, my name is Antiochus, sometime the
unhappy ruler of this Island. This Druball sometime served me, unto whom I
committed my secrets, as the man I most trusted, who in time grew so proud,
that under color of my favor, he could commit many bad actions, that he was
much hated amongst my Noble men, and my subjects began to accuse me as
accessory to his evil facts, and for that I was so blinded with his flatteries,
they began slatly to rebel, and being reproved for his misde meanour by my
eldest son, he offered in my presence to have slain him, which made me so
odious, that by the importunities of mynobles, I banished him my court and
country, which he took in such disdainful sort, that ever after he devised to
do me mischief, and joined himself to Bellona, my greatest enemy, which dwelt
in a neighboring Island, the most wickedest hag living upon the face of the
whole earth, using with crafts, sorceries and enchantments, to further their
purpose against me: and came unto this my Country, having many friends, first
won many of my Subjects hearts, and afterward made open wars against me, and
by their strength put me to flight. When having gotten my Crown, they
imprisoned my Queen and two sons, and a daughter, which I had living, but
notwithstanding they could never quietly enjoy the government, but were
oftentimes disturbed by my subjects, who utterly refused to live under his
tyranny, for that he daily grew more odious amongst them, that by continual
war his Country was almost wasted, and by the counsel of that wicked Hagge
Bellona, he with his consederates betook themselves unto a Mountain here
hard by, and there Fortified themselves, and by witchcraft framed an invincible
Castle, from whence they continually issued forth, and vanquished and slew most
of my noble men, the rest remaining now in their custody, in most miserable
servitude. But not contented with this cruelty, they were so much given to
Devilish fury, that they destroyed all this whole country, not suffering
man, woman, or child, to live, neither can any creature land here, but by
their sorceries they will destroy them. In which kind of cruelty they have
continued many years: my self have been secretly hidden in this place, from
whose hands I have been preserved all this time by divine operations, and by
the virtue of a Jewel that was given me by an old Art^man of Tartaria. The
Castle wherein they remain is distant from hence some three miles, being the
goodliest thing to the outward show that ever eye beheld, where Druball and
Bellona without dread, live in great mirth, continually formenting my Queen
and poor Children with continual torments. Now most worthy Knights (quoth he)
unless you can by some means overcome these Furies, there is no other hope to
escape from hence, for long you cannot remain, but they will know of your
being here, for all passengers do utterly shun this place as a hateful and
ominoue coast. They having heard this Hermits strange discourse, wondered at
the cruelty of Bellona, and were confounded in their thoughts with the danger
they should endure to conquer their enchantments, that suddenly they could not
tell what to determine off: but craving pardon of Antiochus for their rude
behavior toward him, who^ before they knew not, most lovingly saluted him.
Parismus said that he would the next morning without delay travel
thitherwards. My Lord (quoth Pollipus) were I sure to abide a thousand deaths,
I would bear you company, for I would not now loose your sight, nor abstain
any hazard for your sake.

The next morning they were early up, determining to leave Adonius with
Antiochus in his Cave, but notwithstanding all their persuasions, he would not
stay, but what with tears and humble entreaties, he obtained Parismus consent:
who was unwilling to have him go, least he might be hurt in this attempt.
Antiochus conducted them until they were within the sight of the Castle, but
then left them, returning to his Cell, Inuocating and praying after his manner,
for their good success.

When they had well viewed the Castle, which was beautifully seated upon a
strong Rock, encompassed with a mighty huge deep Lake, they sought round
about the same, but could find no passage thereto: having neither bridge nor
other way to go on foot. At last they heard a little Bell ring within the
Castle, which was by the Watch, by the sound thereof, giving warning to those
that were appointed to keep the same: upon which noise, they saw a boat with
six armed Knights in it coming toward them, as soon as they were landed,
Parismus demanded of the^ who was lord of the castle: one of ye knights
answered, come with us, quoth he, and thou shall soon see, wherewith they began
to lay hold on them. Stay said Parismus, let me ask you one question: say on,
said one of them. Is the Lord of this castle amongst you said he? No, said the
other. I would he were (quoth Parismus) for I vow were he here, I would have
his traitors head, before he returned: wherewith Pollipus and he drew their
swords (being otherwise unarmed) and so valiantly assailed those six Knights,
that they were al slain within a short space, they themselves having very
little damage or hurt.

The Ferrie men seeing their six Champions lie weltring in their purple gore,
ran toward their boat, but Adonius seeing his Master and Pollipus had
slain their enemies, was before gotten down into the same, and seeing the
Rowers coming toward him, and Parismus and Pollipus pursuing them thrust the
same past their reach, by which means they had soon taken these slaves, and
put them to death, who by no means would manifest any thing of the secrets of
the Castle.

And Parismus coming to Adonius, most kindly embraced him, and with exceeding
praises extolled his wisdom in performing this exploit to Pollipus, who
admired to see so great wisdom in so young years, but his wit and wisdom was
such, that had they known the party, they would have more admired his virtue.

By means of this boat, they had passage unto the other side of the river,
where they were no sooner landed, but they heard such a hideous noise within
the Castle, such Thundering and rattling in the Skies, that it would have amazed
the stoutest Champion in the world: but they were nothing abashed thereat,
saving Adonius stood quaking and shaking with extreme fear, when issued out
of the Castle two mighty huge proportioned Monsters, seeming rather to be
Devils then natural men, who assailed these two worthy Knights with such,
fury that had they not nimbly avoided their blows, they had at that very
instant perished: who prosecuted their strokes with such fierceness, that the
very earth seemed to shake therewith, and what with labor and rage, that they
could not offend those Knights, they were so hot (the Sun* being then at
the highest) that their eyes were dazeld with sweat that fell from their
brows, which advantage these Champions soon espied, and with their swords
(having gotten within compass of their mighty Maces) soon ended their
wretched lives, who gave such groans, that all the Castle wr^ng with the
noise thereof: which cry, so amazed Druball and Bellona, (being then at their
pleasure) that they came hastily running to behold these two worthy Knights,
who were then entering the Castle, and no sooner come into the inner Court, but
they beheld the most excellent beauty of the Castle, being the most gorgious
and stately buildings that ever they had seen: where they had not long stayed,
but they beheld Bellona coming toward them, whom they thought to have been
some Queen enclosed in that Castle, for that she was crowned with an Imperial
Diadem: who with her sorceries so bewitched their senses, that immediately
they fell into a dead and sound sleep: presently she commanded them to be
conveyed into a strong prison, and there fettered them which Irons.

At such time as they awaled, they were exceedingly amazed to see themselves in
that manner imprisoned: and Parismus, was so enraged with extreme sorrow that
he tare his hair, and re^t his garments, rayled on his misfortune, cursed his
destinies, and vexed his own heart with extreme passions of sorrow, that his
speech was returned into bitter sighs, and his senses forgot their former
virtue, and he was so desperately sad, that no grief might be compared to that
he endured.

Pollipus on the other side, continued his wonted manner of enduring
afflection, which was presently to study how to rid himself and his friend
from the same, which might be accounted the rarest virtue that ever was in
knight, he only studied for his release, and never raged nor railed against
himself, nor otherwise distempered his senses, but overcame his inward
sorrows (which were exceeding) with such patience, that Parismus would highly
extol him for the same; and poor Violetta woondered at his government, as a
most rare virtue, which she never beheld in any but himself: which made her
oftentimes accuse her self of unkindness, that she had so ungently refused
so courteous a Knights love, which very thoughts touched her so near the
quick, that she was oftentimes in mind to yield to love him, and began
afterward to affect his virtuous qualities exceedingly. They continued in
that dark Dungeon all that night, so laden with Chains and Irons, that they
could not one help the other, without sustenance, not able to take any rest,
with the care they endured, at the pitiful groans and cries of a number of
poor distressed people, which were imprisoned hard by them, that it seemed
more terrible to Violletta, then death it self. But they were still comforted
by Pollipus, who hearing the sorrow poor Adonius made, and seeing the
heaviness of Parismus, uttered these comfortable speeches. My Lord, do not
discomfort your self, neither be discouraged, or so much as disquieted with
their crosses, for I do not doubt but in short space we shall free our
selves of these bands, and therefore bear the loss of Laurana, with more
patience then you have done: what though she be in the hands of Pirates and
Uillaines: Assure your self that there is none so barbarous, or in humane, as
will once offer to injury her. And were it not for the care she has taken for
your absence, I durst assure my self she is in good health: and for your own
safety or ours, you need not grieve your self so extremely, as it seems to
me you do: for that is not so greatly to be feared, as we need any way to
despair: for do but follow my counsel in this, to contemn these pity
miseries for a while, and regard them as they were not, and you shall soon see
by that means we shall come by our freedom, much rather then by our effeminate
lamentation, which will make our enemies rejoice at our affection, and not
pity us. Dear friend (quoth Parismus,) your comfortable speeches were of
force to revive a dying heart, but so great grief attaineth my mind for the
loss of the fair Lady Laurana, that felt you but the inward grief of such a
sweet Friends absence, and fear never to see her again, you would say that
I did not grieve sufficienly. My Lord (replied Pollipus) I have often made
trial of your Uertues, which makes me the bolder to try your patience: I
confess that the loss of such a Friend as Laurana is, cannot be sufficiently
lamented, for my self do feel such sorrow for the loss of my dear
Violletta, that my heart endures that torment my tong^e is not able to
express, which makes me silent in my griefs, for that I would not put you in
remembrance of yours by mine: for my Violetta is as dear to me as ten thousand
lives, if I had them, and I do not doubt but one day I shall see her virtuous
beauty, for whose sake my heart will never be at rest: the remembrance
whereof, restrains me from many desperate attemptes, that otherwise I would
inflict upon my self, that have not deserved the Love of so virtuous a
Damsel.

But why do I utter these speeches, when she is not by to hear them, and
little regards the torments I endure by her unkindness? But I beseech you
comfort your self in these afflictions, for a comfortable heart is now
necessary: wherewith the water appeared in his eyes, and poor Violetta
hearing his speeches, so much pitied his sighs and sadness, that for very
kindness she wept for company, and resoluted to grant his suit, which had
well deserved to be beloved: but the love she bare to Parismus, so altered and
changed her thoughts, that she could not determine what to do: at last she
began to consider, that in loving Parismus, she did wrong to Laurana in some
degree, and that she might no whitte alter her true friendship to him, being
only virtuous, and yet accept Pollipus offer, and yield him love for good
will. In these and a thousand such like thoughts, she spent the night, and the
Knights continued busy, bethinking themselves how to work their delivery.

Early the next morning (fast bound in Irons) they were brought by a company
of ragged hunger-starued fellows, into a goodly Hall, most richly furnished
with stately hangings, at the upper end whereof, sat Druball and Belona,
before whom they wefe no sooner come, but Druball with a tyrannous look,
demanded of whence they were, and what was the cause they had so evil
entreated and slain his servants.

Parismus so much disdained to be examined by so base a Uillaine, that he
could not for extreme anguish of mind speak, nor could he (would he) have
answered him: but Pollipus stepping forwards, answered, we are strangers that
have suffered shipwreck: and were unluckily cast upon this hateful Island,
made so by thy treacheries, where we have been often in danger of Famishment,
and coming to this Castle, thy servants offered us violence, and we have
rewarded them, and thou like a Tyrant have unjustly imprisoned us, not using us
as all Knights should be used, and not by valor, but by Sorceries, have
brought us into thy subjection, which if not our selves, the Heavens will
revenge. Which words he uttered with such a disdainful countenance, that the
Tyrant was amazed at his resolution, and told him, that he would soon abate
his haughty mind, commanding them to Prison again.

CHAP. XXI.
How Bellona the Inchauntresse, fell in love with Pollipus, by which means,
he released himself and Parismus out of prison: and finished the
inchauntment. And how afterward Antiochus was restored to his kingdom. And how
Adonius the page fellsicke, and was restored by Pollipus.

BEllona all this while took such view of their personages, that she thought
them the goodliest men that ever she beheld, and at that instant, vowed either
to obtain their loves by fair means, or inflict such torments upon them,
that they should yield by force to her lust: wherefore she secretly commanded
her servants to load them with more Irons, which they performed, where these
two worthy Knights lay by the space of a week in the most cruellest torment
that might be: their food being bread and water, their bed the hard and
cold earth, in a most loathsome stinking prison. Which pain they patiently
endured, but were both so grieved for poor Adonius, that their hearts were
almost ready to burst with grief, who continually (notwithstanding his
weakness) seemed to be of great comfort. But being al his life time tenderly
brought up, he began to wax very sick with ill savor, and hard fare, in this
loathsome prison, that they thought he would have at that instantended his
life: but Pollipus, what with devices and forces, wroong himself from the
place where he was fastened, and made such means (notwithstanding his heavy
Irons) that he came to poor Adonius, and unloosed many of his Boltes and
Irons) from his weak body, and continually made him sit on his lap) being
all the means he had to comfort him withal,) that he poor soul being almost
dead with lying on the cold ground, felt great comfort by Pollipus warm
body: which kindness poor Violletta so kindly accepted, that ever after she
began to love him most entirely, and remembering an impossible of enjoying
Parismus, her affections was settled on the worthy Pollipus, thinking that
since he was so kind to her, being taken as a Page, he would be much ^ore
kind if he knew her to be Violetta. Every day they were served by a rude
uncivil slave, in such sort that it would have made dainty fare loathsome to
be so handeled, which Bellona did upon pretense: first to use them hardly, and
then by better usage, to draw them to a good opinion of her gentleness: for on
a time she came to visit these prisoners, being no ways drawn thereto by a
virtuous inclination, but of a most unchaste and beastlike disposition: and
colourably seemed to reprove the Iaylor, that he had used them so hardly,
commanding him to remove them into a more delightsome place, where they had
very soft bedding, good air, and far better diet, which kindness of hers,
they both commended. In which place they remained many days: during which
time, Pollipus and Adonius were bed-fellowes, he full little knowing who it was
he so tenderly regarded, for by reason that he was sickly, (Poilipus being
drawn thereto by a virtuous inclination proceeding from mild pity) would
oftentimes fold him in his arms, and so kindly cherish him, that by his
means poor Violetta had recovered her former health: which imbracements of
Pollipus, at the first seemed strange to her, but in continuance she took
such virtuous delight in his sweet company, that his presence was her whole
delight, and these kindnesses did so much rejoice her heart (by the knowledge
of her own estate, and remembrance that she was unknown) that she was a
thousand times in mind to reveal her self to him, when she lay soulded in
his arms: (he having not the least thought that she was a woman,) and a
thousand times that determination was crossed by contrary thoghts, that kerioy
seemed without compare, had it not bin for remembrance of the estate they
remained in, but her heart was so cheered with these delights, that by her
pleasant devices she would drive many sad thoughts from the vnchearfull
hearts of these imprisoned Champions. Which so greatly admyred their Pages
virtues, that they were both dr^wne into an exceeding love of his qualities.

Bellona had all this while (by remembering the comely proportions of her two
new come prisoners, kindled such sparks of immodest love within her loathsome
breast) that the burden thereof was intolerable to her to endure, and
therefore arming herself with an vnshamelaste countenance, she^ resolved either
speedily to work her own content, by enjoying one or both of their persons
to satisfy her appetite, or to work their endless torment, and her own
death, which devilish resolution took such deep roole in her impure heart,
that she presently came unto the place where these two Knights were, and with
a fawning countenance saluted them: being attired as she thought most
gorgiously to delight their eyes, but so unseemly she became those rich
attires, that it would have altered a deep grounded affection to extreme
disdain, to behold rich attire on so unseemly a carcass.

Parismus nothing regarded her: but Pollipus advisedly marked her behavior,
and his fancy iumpt rightly on her disease, that at the very first, he rightly
conceited this her amorous passis. As Soon as she was entered and had saluted
them, she began to enquire of Pollipus (for that he seemed to be the
cheerfullest) of what country they were, and how they arrived in that coast?
Pollipus told her, that they were Knights of Phrygia: that traveled toward
Tartaria, but by a mighty tempest they were driven vp^n that Island, where
their ship and men were all cast away, but themselves and their little page,
being thereby driven to travel, and by chance lighted on that Castle, intending
to try if they could get passage into Tartaria, for that the Country was no
where else inhabited, and since our arrival worthy Lady, your self know what
misery we have endured, being inflicted upon us for no offense that we have
given to the Lord of this castle, therefore fair Lady, if there be any
virtuous pity in you, grant our releasement from his bondage, which can no
way benefit you: we are such, as never intended your harm any way: but by
necessity were compelled by this place, which has proved so miserable.
Bellona being tickled with this flattering speech of Pollipus, (which seemed to
agree with her disposition) made him this answer. Worthy knight (quoth she, if
it lie in my power, to release you, I will most willingly do it, for such good
will I bear you, and such pity I take for your hard usage, that I have caused
you to be removed from the miserable prison wherein you were before, and have
both bettered your lodging and your diet, and would do all that you wish, or
venture my life in pursuit thereof, if you would condescend to stay with me in
this country: for worthy knight, though it ill beseemes my sere to begin the
motion of love, and show their beloved the depth of their affection, yet (for
that paraduenture your inclination is not so bent, I here but offer you
freedom, and what else you will require, so that you will yield to love me.

For at the first view of your person, my heart so surfetted with delight of
beholding your perfection, that ever since I have enjoyed no quiet, but only
the hope to enjoy my desired wish: therefore gentle Knight, resoule me of my
doubt, and grant this my suit, and thereby ease your self of further pain,
and set these your friends at liberty.

Pollipus hearing her speeches, thought it the best course to gloss with her,
and therefore answered; Most worthy Lady, this request of yours is dangerous
for me to perform, for if the Lord of this Castle, should any way hear
thereof, then would he inflict a miserable death upon me, (as he might well
do) and also my heart is oppressed with a heavy passion of fear, least these
your kind speeches should proceed of no good will, but only to try me
withal, and thereby bring me in danger, being already surprised with love of
your Uertues, which are such as might content a far better man then my self.

Bellona hearing his kind speeches, and having privily received a sweet kiss
of him, neither Parismus nor Adonius seeing the same, was now indeed fettered
in the snares of love, whereas before she intended nothing but lust, and
therefore resolved to obaine his love, and to work the downfall of Druball,
thereby to possess the same, without any let or impediment, and therefore with
oaths, protestations, tears, and unfeigned vows, she gave him assurance of
her love, which was so kindled in her adulterous breast, that she would (...)
hazarded a thousand lives to possess the same, and taking her leave of
Pollipus, she went out of the Prison, by a private Key which she had always
about her, promising him to return thither about midnight, when he should
have full assurance of her love. Parismus marvelled what communication had
passed between Bellona and Pollipus, but seeing him unwilling to unfold the
same, would demand no further of him. Violetta likewise wondered why he would
not reveal the same, that her heart was oppressed with such a sudden doubt,
that she could not refrain from tears, and getting into a corner secretly by
her self, began to study what might be the cause of her long talk, fearing
least Pollipus heart might be drawn by her inchauntments, to some
inconvenience, or altered by some devilish devise which she might use:
likewise she began to call his loyalty in question, which she thought was the
truth indeed, because he would not reveal it, for that she thought some
amorous conference had passed between them, which thought could by no means
pass from her mind, but continued still in her careful breast, wherewith
she was much grieved, and so continued all that night, but when she saw that
Bellona came about the appointed time to Pollipus, she poor Soul, lay in her
unquiet bed, tormented with infinite cares and griefs, that she all bewette
the place where she lay with salt tears. Bellona and Pollipus departed
together out of the room, for she had made Druball sleep with a somniferous
spel, she had infused upon his body, yt a mighty volly of canon shot could not
have awaked him, and she being greedy of the sweet delights of Uenery, hasted
to the lodging where Pollipus was, who expected her coming, and took him by
the hand, fast locking the door, and conducted him with amorous speeches into
a most goodly garden, where Flora in her summer weeds was comely dect, and
from thence unto a most galla^t summer house, so richly adorned with precious
^e^ts, that it made Pollipus admire, and had his paramour so well liked him as
that delightsome arbor, he would have wished no other felicity: where they were
no sooner come, but kindly (though far from any good intent) he embraced Belona
in his arms, who was therewith so greatly pleased, that she used many thousand
protestatio^s of the love she bore him, and yt it was such as she had yet never
professed to any, vowing that in requital of his kindness she would do any thing,
yea though it were to destroy Drubal and ye Castle, which consisted in her
power. Which words of hers well pleased Pollipus, who hearing her say, the
power of that Castle wholly consisted in her, had that he would have, and
having his full liberty, framed an embracement of kindness, and with all his
might caught her by the cursed head, and with maine force wrong a two her
neck, wherewith she gave many a grievous groan, and there arose such a mighty
tempest in the Garden, as though legions of internal spirits had arrived
there, which hideous, noise almost amazed the valiant knight, that with all the
haste he could, gat out of the garden, and by that time Phoebus began to
^eautifie the earth with his splendour, he was safely come unto ye place where
Parismus was, and by the key Bellona had (which he had taken up, as being
careful thereof) he entered in and locked the door again, but the noble minded
Parismus marking his ghastly looks, being somewhat affrighted, would not
question with him, and poor Adonius was somewhat comforted with his presence,
but otherwise wonderfully perplexed in thought. As soon as he was in, he
walked up and down sadly a good space, by which time came the Iaylor with
their breakefast, whom Pollipus presently caught hold o^, and with many
threats, compelled the villain to unloose all the letters from Parismus, and
Adonius, which when he had done, he took up a bolt of Iron, and beat out
his brains, and locking fast the door, came to Parismus, and told him the
whole truth that had passed between him and Bellona, which when he had
declared, Parismus with a thousand kind imbracings, extolled yt worthy act,
and poor Adonius was so inwardly vexed with grief, to think of the ini^rie
she had done him by her jealous thoughts, that she began to weep afresh, and
renew her former kind of sorrow, which she used against him, in accusation of
her self. These two knights, thought it not good in this time of need to use
delay, but finding the bunche of keys the Iailor carried about him, and
fitting themselves with such weapons as the place yielded (being the longest
bolt of iron) issued out of that place into the Court, where they saw no
creature stiring, at length they espied two or three of Drubals servants, who
no sooner saw these two knights, but with open exclamations they ran toward
Drubal, and they with all the haste they could followed them, and at the very
entrance in at a door, slew two of them, and the third yielded himself,
promising if they would save his life, he would di^ect them to the place where
Druball was, and also help them to Armor. Upon which condition, he brought
them into a mighty large room, where they beheld many brave and rich Armours,
being the Armor of such Knights as were imprisond and destroyed in that
Castle, and befitted themselves with the best they could choose, for they knew
they should have occasion to use the same, and by that time they were armed
they heard a great noise and muttering of people, for Druballs somniferous
spell was ended, and he missing Bellona, and hearing the cries of his
servants, fearing some treason, caused his Larumme Bell to be rung, and
presently they were gathered to him a hundred of his servants. With which
noise, these knights well armed, came out into the Court whom Druball no sooner
espied, but he caused his men to ass^ult them, thinking because there were but
two, he should easily overcome them, but the first that offered to lay hands
on Parismus, had his arm parted from his body, and he ran about the court:
another leg was by Pollipus lopt off, and he compelled to lie and tumble on
the earth, some lost their heads, some had their bodies pierced quite through
by the unconquerable hands of these worthy Knights, and happy was he that came
not within compass of their weapons, that by that time the Sun was mounted
to the highest Zodia^e, the greatest part of Drubals servants lay weltring in
their blood, and these valiant knights still continued their Mas^acre among
them, that the rest seeing themselves also likely to perish by the matchless
Chivalry of these Champions, with a general consent cast away their Weapons,
and yielded to their mercy: which when Druball saw, being of a traitorous
disposition, ran at Parismus with all the force he had, thinking either
desperately to kill him, or die himself, but Pollipus with a quick eye
marking his intent, struck him so mighty a blow upon the head, that he ran
staggering up and down, and by the commandment of Parismus, his own men had
taken away his weapon, whom Parismus caused to be laid in the most vildest
Prison in the Castle, which so vexed Drubal, that there he grew to such a
desperate rage, that he would have slain himself, but that he was in the
hope still to be relieved by Bellona. Most part of his Servants they likewise
committed to safe custody, and being more at quiet, demanded if Antiochus
Queen, and his two Sons and Daughter were living, who told him, that they
were living in wonderful poor and miserable estate. Wherefore by the
direction of one of Drub^lls Servants, they were brought unto the Prison, where
they were no sooner come, but they heard the most greeuouses^ groans, c^ies,
and lamentation, that ever Ear heard: and being entered, they beheld a number
of Prisoners, in the most grievous and pittifullest manner lying on the earth,
that their hearts were wonderously grieved to behold the same. Amongst the
rest, they beheld an ancient woman Fettered and chained unto a post, and
right opposite against her, a comely young Maiden, chained in many chains,
their apparel being all torn from their bodies, saving some little that
shadowed their middle parts, whom the servant told him, was the Queen and her
daughter, and two that lay chained with their backs together, were Antiochus
two Sons. Parismus and Pollipus commanded them to fetch some Apparel to
cover their bodies. In the mean time they began to commune with the Queen:
who was much ashamed at her nakedness, but seeing some comfort in their
looks, told them that she was sometime Queen of that Country, but had long
continued imprisoned in that sort by the treachery of Druball.

Parismus told her, that now the time of her delivery from that bondage was
come, which so rejoiced the poor Queen, that with a cheerful countenance,
she smiled on her daughter, the messenger being returned, Parismus covered the
Queens body with rich apparel, and with his own hands loosed her bands.
Pollipus did the like to Freneta her daughter, and all the rest of the
prisoners were set at liberty: Parismus and Pollipus led the Queen and
Freneta unto convenient lodgings, being scarce able to stand, they were grown
so feeble, where they had all things convenient ministered unto them by Adonius,
who was willing to undertake that office, and there left them whilst they
took order to release the rest of the Prisoners from their misery, which were
a great number: amongst whom were many knights of strange countries, that they
admired the cruelty of the Tyrant Druball, which exceeded the compass of
reason. Afterward they viewed the whole Castle, where they beheld in sundry
places, the dead carcasses of thousands of Men, Women, and children, consumed
to ashes, for as soon as the tyrants had satisfied their appetites in sundry
^bominable sorts with them, they burnt their bodies. At last they came unto the
maine castle (wherein the servants of Druball told them, they never saw any to
enter) which they found fast shut, and assayed by all means they could to open
the same, but their labor was in vain, which caused them to marvel what
might be the cause thereof. But they were no sooner departed (determining to go
see where Bellona lay dead) but immediately the winds began to blow with such
veheme^cy, that with much adoo they could stand upright: wherewith such
thu^drings and te^pests began to arise, that all the whole Rock shook whereon
the castle stood, and the buildings quaked, in such manner, that such as were
within the compass of the roofes, ran forth into the open court, and the lower
wherinto Parismus and Pollipus would have entered, seemed to turn into a mighty
flame, from whence came such a smoke, as darkened the whole place where they
stood that they could not see one another. In which sort it continued a good
space, when presently the smoke vanished away, and the Tower and buildings of
the castle were never after that any more seen: which so amazed the worthy
Knights, that with the fearfulnes thereof, they stood like men aghast. Neither
was the body of Bellona any where to be found, for the term and date of her
Enchantment then took end. The river, over which they had passed, was not to
be seen, nor any other goodly thing, that before seemed most admirable for
beauty. Wherefore Parismus commanded a Tent to be picht for their habitation,
being no other there to be had. Druball being (as before I said) in prison,
hearing this noise, and seeing the darkness that ouerspred the Castle, soon
knew, for Bellona had reported the secret thereof unto him before, that Bellona
was dead: he by that means desperately without any hope of aid, beat out his
own brains against the stone walls, and his body being found in that sort
murdered, Parismus commanded to be cast as a pray to the beasts of the field,
for that he was not worthy of burial. After which, the two Knights came to
the Queen, who was in the Tent, accompanied by her two sons and daughter,
who by Adonius good tendance were well strengthened, and they no sooner saw them
come in, but with a thousand commendations, they began to applaud their
magnanimious virtues, that had wrought the downfall of those two wicked
Tyrants, that had long time kept them in thraldom, yielding unto them so many
hearty thanks, that Parismus requested them not to use such Ceremonious thanks
to them that were altogether unworthy thereof, and began to demand of the
Queen, whether the king of that Island were living or no: wherewith she told him
that he was slain in a battle by Drubal, many years since, the remembrance of
whose death, caused the tears to trickle down her cheeks in abundance.
Weep not dear Queen (quoth Parismus) for things past recovery are no way to
be lamented, but (quoth he) this comfort is yet remaining, that Antiochus is
living, and in good health, for since our coming into this country, we have
bin preserved from famishment by his courteous means, and to morrow (so please
it you, my dear friend Pollipus and my self, will conduct you unto the place
of his abode. At which words, the Queen, her daughter, and two Sons, were so
revived with exceeding joy (assuredly believing his words) that with many
thanks and courtesies they prostrated themselus before these worthy knights,
that had every way brought them happy news: where many other speeches passed
betwixt them, till by the nights approach, they all betook themselves to their
rest within those Tents, where all things were orderly provided by Drubals
servants: and they quietly rested until the next morning, Adonius still being
Pollipus bedfellow, who was now grown into such admiration of the splendour of
his splendant Uertues, that the resolved rather to die a thousand deaths then
to lose one jot of his love, which by many infallible tokens she knew to be so
loyal, that no thought of chance could take root in his constant heart: and
indeed so it was.

For Pollipus was so fervently affectioned ^o her love, that although he knew
not what was become of her and at her last being in her Fathers house, had from
her self received a flat denial, yet he determined (after that Parismus
had again recovered Laurana) to spend the rest of his days search of her, who
was more privy to his actions, then he was aware off.

The next morning Parismus early came to visit the Queen, where after some
salutations, they departed toward the cave, where old Antiochus was, who
hearing no news of these Knights, was fully persuaded, that they were
imprisoned by Druball, as many had been before, and therefore was now out of
al hope of hearing any good news by their return, and gave himself to his
former austere kind of life: and being in the midst of a sorrowful
meditation, he suddenly beheld Parismus and Pollipus within his Cave, coming
toward him, whom at the first he knew not. By reason whereof, he was
attainted with such a deadly fear, as if had been attached by his enemy
Druball, but with a more attentive aspect, beholding these Knig^ts, he knew
them, and with great joy reioiced at their prosperous return. My Lord (quoth
Parismus) we have by the Divine providence, and the virtue of the worthy
Pollipus, destroyed that wicked Drubal, and the Inchantresse Bellona: whilst
they continued this talk, the Queen and her Children (being guided by
Adonius) entered the Cave, who no sooner saw her Lord Antiochus, but presently
she knew the form of his countenance, though much altered by age, and upon her
knee saluted him, who kindly took her up, requiring to know why she used such
reverence to him? Parismus seeing that he knew her not, told him that she was
his Queen and children came to visit him. Wherewith Antiochus with thousand
kisses and embracings welcomed them, that it delighted the Knights to behold
their exceeding joy: in which salutation, they continued to their mutual
comforts a good space, and at last departed toward their tents. In which
journey Parismus unfolded the whole manner of their adventure, and how by the
wisdom of Pollipus they attained the conquest of that Hellish Castle, where
they continued some days, spending the time in great joy. After their troubles
in the Inchaunted Castle were ended, Parismus began to renew the remembrance of
his lost Laurana, (by seeing the joy these parted friends enjoyed by their
happy meeting) that he could not be quiet, but began to cenf^rre with
Pollipus, how to get shipping to go in search of his beloved Princess.
Therefore they came both unto old Antiochus, to ask his devise therein, who
told them, that since it was their desire to depart, he would use all the
means he could to purchase their content, and therefore went toward the sea
side, where stood a goodly Town, being sometimes the chiefest of that
Country, and there determined to make his abode, and to seek traffic
amongst other Nations, as in times past, where the King dwelt many days,
having some two hundred to inhabit the same City, being such as were servants
to Druball, and prisoners in the Castle, where he caused his flagges of truce
to be hung out, which was a token unto such as passed by, that there they might
safely arrive without danger. In this place Parismus and Pollipus remained in
good hope to get passage many days. Where we will for a season leave them, to
declare what happened to Laurana.

CHAP. XXII.
How Andramart finding no hope of Lauranaes favor, committed her to the
custody of Adamasia his sister. How Laurana was delivered of a goodly Boy,
and named him Parismenos. The miserable life Laurana endured, and how
Parismenos Nurse saved him from death, which was intended by Adamasia.

LAurana all this while remained in the Island of Rocks, kindly entreated (as
is before rehearsed) by Andramart, who was surprised with such desire to
obtain her favor, that it was a grief to him at any time to see her sad,
and on a time he came unto her (being in her Chamber, accompanied by Leda her
Maid) and having obtained her consent, uttered these speeches. Most beautiful
Lady (said he I beseech you show some favor upon poor Andramart, who
languisheth with desire of your love, you see that now you are in my power, and
it were but folly for you to seem so scornful, and so slightly to regard my
proffered love, whereas I might (if I pleased) inflict some grievous punishment
upon you thereby to compel your consent, but you likewise see that my mind is
not bent to any cruelty but I have ever since your arrival, humbly sued and
entreated your friendship, which I esteem more dear then my life. Here shall
you abide in great quiet and pleasure, not subject unto any, but shall be
chief Governor of this Castle, my self, and all that is mine. Divine Lady, if
you will grant me love, I Will have you clad in costly robes and Damask vestures,
imbost with diamonds, and the richest burnisht gold, perfumed with Camsire,
Bisse, and Syrian sweet perfumes, a hundredth Uirgins clad in purple, shall
daily attend thy person, as many sweet recording Instruments shall bring thy
senses to their quiet sleep. Thy food shall be the precious delicates of the
world, they drink more costly then Nectar and Ambrosia: my self will be,
obedient at thy call, and all my servants shall bow at thy command. If all this
will not purchase thy sweet content, I will prepare a sumptuous Chariot made of
the purest gold, wherein thou shall be drawn by kings, along the pleasant
fields of this Country, whereas the evening air shall breath a coolness,
far more sweeter then Ambergreece, upon thy crimson cheeks, and make thy
splendant beauty shine like the purple Palace of Hyperion, when he leaves
Aurora blushing in her bed, whereby all creatures shall admire thy
excellency. All this and ten thousand times more, will I perform, to delight
your virtuous self withal, but if all this will not suffice, then shall I
spend my days in endless sorrow, and your self purchase thereby your own
discontent. Therefore sweet Lady let me receive some comfortable answer to
mittigate these my sorrows. Laurana having heard his speeches, was so
surprised with a virtuous disdain to hear his flattering, yt she was resolved
not to answer him at all, but at last she replied in this sort. It is in vain
Tyrant (quoth she) for thee to think to purchase any love at my hands by thy
flatteries, there fore desist thy suit, which is as odious to me as thy self,
which think because by treachery I am brought into thy cruel hands I will
yield to thy allurements: no Tyrant, no, inflict what punishment thou can
upon me, I will never yield to show thee any favor, that deseruest to be hated
of all men: besides, thou see my estate unfit to listen to ye allurements of
love, therefore if thou have any virtue in thee, (as thou she west thy self to
have none) show that thou love me, by desisting to trouble me any more with
the harsh sound of thy odious instruments: wherewith she turned from him, and he
in a monstrous rage departed the chamber. Afterward coming unto a sister which
he had with him, named Adamasia, he began to unfold unto her the sum of his
affection to Laurana, and how disdainfully she had used him, requesting her
counsel to further him therein: who being an evil disposed creature, and rather
ready to entice him to evil then to dissawaded him fr^ ye same, she promised
him, that if she might have the custody of Laurana, she would not doubt but
soon to bring her to consent unto his desire, which Andramart was in some doubt
to suffer, for that he was loath any should have the keeping of her but
himself. But at last being intised by hope of obtaining her good will, gave
his consent, and the wicked Adamasia had the charge of the most virtuous
Laurana, unto who^ she unfolded the cause of her coming, using many
persuasions to Laurana, to consent to love Andramart, telling her that she was
unwise to refuse the good will of him that was so mighty a man. Laurana seeing
a worse plague then ever she before endured, to be now befallen her, by being
troubled with such an impudent solliciter, was so overcome with sorrow and
grief, that this last vexation seemed more grievous then all that ever she
endured: and would give no answer unto her impudent sollicitings: by which
means Adamasia was frustrated of al hope to obtain her liking, but many days
she used the virtuous Laurana very kindly, and seemed so loath to offend her
that she would not long time after motion any thing in the behalf of her
brother, which the wicked hag did, only to feel the disposition of the
virtuous Laurana: and also perceiving yt she was great with child, told
Andramart that it was to no effect to deal any further in their suit, until
she were delivered. Wherefore with all diligence they ministered all things
necessary, and the time of her delivery being come, she was enriched with a
goodly boy, whom she named Parismenos, whom Andramart caused to be nursed, and
to be most delicately brought up many days in that castle. After a few days
Andramart grew so impatient in his love, that with many entreaties, he
requested Adamasia, either speedily to work his content (by obtaining Lauranaes
liking) or else he told her she should soon see his death for without the same
it was impossible for him to live. Wherewith Adamasia began to settle her
self to the task she had undertaken, and finding (as she thought) a
convenient time when Laurana was alone, she began to feel her mind in this
sort. Uertuous Lady (quoth she) I have long diligently marked the doleful
plaints you secretly utter, which makes me muse, that you having no cause at
al, should spend your days in such heavy sort, whereas you might (if you
plesed) enjoy such happy delights as many thousand ladies would wish for. You
are here in a happy place in my opinion, where nothing is wanting that might
procure your content, where no injury is offered you, that unless you endure
some secret grief, I know not what to conjecture of your discontent: and the
love of Andramart in my judgment fair Lady, should bring you that happy
consent, that yet you never enjoyed the like, who in all respects bears such
an entire affection to your self, that whatsoever he has or can command,
rests wholly at your disposition. But if it be so that you have some friend
already, unto whom you are any way tied in the bands of love, and for him you
endure this pensiuenes, that by some mischaunce is perished, then let the
famous Andramart possess the second room in your gentle heart, and let me be
the messenger to carry these happy tidings, to ease his torment. Laurana
having heard this cunning insinuation of Adamasia, well understood her meaning,
and therefore told her that her greefes were best known to her self, which she
determined not to reveal, and as for Andramart, she told her she esteemed his
love worse then his hatred, and that she had rather endure ye greatest force of
his malice, then the loathsome profers of his love, and therefore willed her not
to prosecute any further her vnwelcommed suit, which should make her less
welcome unto her company. Adamasia hearing Lauranaes resolute answer, was so
kindled into anger with the same, and being of a proud disposition, could not
refrain from uttering her inward rancor, but replied as follows. Proud Lady
(quoth she) know that Andramarts more favoring thee then thou deseruest, has
appointed me to entreat thy favor, but thou disdainfully reiectest his proffered
courtesy, and make scorn of my speeches, which I cannot endure, for thou
shall well know that I am the better, and I tell she that thou shall yield
unto his just suit, or repen the time that ever thou were so coy, therefore let
me have thy answer to morrow, which is the uttermost respit yt I will give
thee. Auant foul Hag (quoth Laurana) my answer thou shall now receive: that
for thy detested sake I will never yield unto his suit. Which words so enraged
the rude Adamasia, that coming to Laurana, she struck her such a blow on the
face, that the blood ran abundantly from her mouth, wherewith she departed and
left Laurana in yt sort bleeding, with her blood mingling her Crystal tears,
which in abundance ran from her eyes. This hag was so inragde with the sharp
answer of Laurana, that presently she came to Andramart, and told him that
there was no dealing with her in gentle sort, rehearsing how disdainfully she
refused all the proffers and suits she could make; using such persuasions, that
Andramart consented to be wholly ordered by her, nothing regarding what she
intended, so he might have his desire. Adamasia therefore purposing to bring
her business to effect, first caused Leda to be prisoned and restrained from
her mistresses presence, which was an insupportable grief to her. Next she
caused young Parismenos with his Nurse, to be kept from his Mothers knowledge,
and such things as Laurana had before enjoyed for her use, were now quiet kept
from her, and her diet scanted, being served of such as ill agreed with her
stomach. Laurana seeing her self thus used, began to fear some harder
measure, which very shortly fell out true: for Adamasia longing to execute her
cruelty upon the virtuous Lady, came unto her, and asking whether as yet she
would condescend to yield her love to Andramart: for (said she) it is now no
dallying, for I will either purchase his content by thy consent, or work thy
sorrow. Laurana would make her no answer at all, but with silence heard her
talk, rail, stamp, and rage, in such extreme sort, that she thought she would
with fury at that instant have run mad: for Lauranas silence enraged her more
then the sharpest answer she could have given would have done, that in an
extreme rage she locked the chamber door, and depated presently, devising how
to torment her. And choosing unto her two old women, fit to execute any
evil action, having instructed them what they should do, sent them to her,
where they were no sooner come, but they beheld her sitting upon the ground,
having elected the darkest place in the chamber, as fitting to her mournful
disposition, with her cheeks besmeared with old dried tears, and fresh drops,
resembling the purest crystal pearls, ready to fall, leaning her arm upon
her knee, and her head upon her hand, her hair being carelessly attired, and al
her ornaments so diffusedly hanging (but yet so delightful to behold) that ye
old hagges could not devise how to find any occasion to execute their intent,
but were so abashed at her countenance, that they were oftentimes in mind to
return, without once offering to trouble her. Laurana seeing the^ stand gazing
upon her, rose from the place where she sat, and demanded what they would
have, whom they answered not: but she suspecting that they were sent by
Adamasia, for no good intent, began to utter these speeches. Fear not (quoth
she) to execute the will of her that sent you, who seeks for that at my
hands, she shall never, obtain, it is not all the torment she can devise,
shall cause me alter my vow, for I am resolutely determined to endure them, and
death too, if it be her will to give it me. Cruel fortune has wrought my
sorrow and inflicted greater punishment upon me then she ca^ devise, by the
loss of my dear Lord, and husband, whom I know not what fortune keeps thus
long from redeeming his poor Laurana, nor into what place of the world he is
wandered in search of me, that in all this time I can hear no tidings of his
happy arrival. But why do I wish his coming hither, when there is no means
to escape death, if he once fall into the hands of these tyrants? Worthy and
virtuous Lord, all happiness attend his royal person, and shield him from
harm, and all woe and sorrow belong to me. Come furies, come e^ecute your
will, or return to the cruel Beldam that sent you, and tell her that Laurana
scorneth to entreat any favor at her hand. She had no sooner ended her
speeches but they began to bestrip her delicate body, and disrobed her of all
her ornaments saving her white smock, which they unfolded down to her tender
waste, and scourged her with whip^ until the pure purple blood began to
trickle down her precious body, which torment she endured so patiently, as it
was a most rare virtue in her so quietly to enduce grief, in defense of her
honor. And having executed their cruelty in most extreme sort, left her
alone, who covered her bleeding body (which was such a lamentable spectacle to
behold, that had Andramart seen her distressed estate, he would have run
mad with extreme fury) and gave her self to continual sorrow, expecting
more hard usage: for she knew, unless she would yield her body to be embraced
by the hateful Andramart, she should endure many other torments, which she
would not in any wise yield unto, though she endured ten thousand deaths. The
next day comes to her again Adamasia, whose countenance bewrayed the
guiltiness of her conscience, and demanded whether as yet she would give
answer to her demand. Laurana was so inwardly tormented, to hear any more
motions that tended the breach of her loyalty, that she would not endure the
thought thereof, and knowing that this wicked fury would continue a long
circumstance of odious persuasions, she interrupted her with this answer
Wicked woman (quoth she) think thou by thy cruel usage to purchase my
dishonor? No, were I so intended, for thy sake would I revoke my disposition,
and tell the tyrant Andramart, that he shall sooner see my body torn into a
thousand pieces by his detested cruelty, then yield to his beastly desire.
Execute thy rage, and practice all the devilish devises thy hateful heart can
invent, they shall no whit fear me, for thy tamned, self, thy hearse voice
and abominable suit, are as deadly poisons to my Senses, and the thought of
them so odious, that do what thou can, I will never condescend to the least
thought of granting thy request: therefore trouble me no more with thy
serpentlike hissing forth of Hellish protestations, for my soul has vowed in
despite of all the cruelties, and uttermost devises of detested tyranny, to
give thee no other answer. Proud disdainefull trull (quoth Adamasia) I see thou
art willing to work thine own sorrow, being some straggling mate, or base
borne huswife, that art not worthy the love of Andramart, and think to esape
my hands, by thy resolute replies, and denials. No: know foolish contemner of
thine own good, that nothing shall satisfy me but thy consent, which thou will yield I fear me, when it will be too late. The downefull of thy self,
thy son, and all that is thine, shall not appease my fury, but thy consent to
love Andramart: and since thou will by no entreaties be persuaded, all this
and more will I inflict upon thy proud heart, that so wilfully denyest his
request, and therefore either speedily yield thy unworthy fancy to attend his
liking, or resolve to behold the tragedy of thy infant.

With which words she departed, and left Laurana so terrified with her
speeches, that her senses were overcome with fear, and she fared like one
without sense: but reviving her self from that heavy dumpe, with abundance of
tears she bedewed her Crimson cheeks, and in silent sorrow spent her time,
still expecting the heavy news of Parismenos tragedy, which within few days,
the wicked tyrannous Adamasia effected in this sort: She caused the nurse that
kept Parismenos, to bring him to his mother with this message that unless she
would in all respects fulfill the request that Andramart had made, she must
presently destroy him before her face: who hearing the nurse utter that dismal
doom of her Son, she fell into a deadly swound, in which sort, she
continued a good space, in which time the nurse was departed with young
Parismenos, which when Laurana perceived, she began to utter many heavy
plaints, that the very walls seemed to pity her distress, but being
diversely tormented with fear, to think what was become of her young son, she
got to the window, and there beheld Adamasia with the nurse ready to strangle
the Infant before her face: but ye nurse pitying the infant, who looked with
such a smiling countenance, that the cruel Tigers would have spared his life)
upon her knees with abundance of tears entreated the hard hearted Adamasia to
spare his life, who was no way guilty of his mothers offense: but all the
entreaties she could use, nothing auailed: but she taking the infant from the
nurse adressed her self to execute her cruel intent. Which Laurana espying,
being therewith terrified, called aloude from the window unto her, and desired
her to hear her speak, before she spilt the innocent blood of her young
son, which caused Adamasia to stay, but still she continued like a furious
Lioness, standing ready to devour her pray, and Laurana from forth her window
uttered these speeches. If thou were ever borne of a woman, be not so inhumane
as so destroy that harmless infant which is of no power to work thy
discontent: wherein has it offended thee, or how has it any way deserved such
an untimely death? What will it profit thee at all, to see his destruction? It
is I that have offended thee: it is I that may appease thy cruel mind: it is
my blood that may suffice thy devouring appetite: then inflict thy wrath on my
head, revenge thy self on me, that here offer my self willingly to
destruction. What merciless creature would be so tyrannous, as to destroy an
harmless innocent, when they have in their power a fitter subject to appease
their ire? Cruel Adamasia, or let me call thee gentle cruel woman: let my
plaints move thy heart from acting that cruel deed: let my humble tears,
and remembrance of a mothers love to her child, revoke thy cruel doom: let
my pains and entreaties so much prick thy flinty breast, as to cause thy
heart relent, and stay thy hand from that merciless deed. here I am that
have offended, why will thou not then revenge thy self on me, that may
satisfy thy will? and spare that tender babe, whose death will make thee so
odious, that the very earth will refuse to bear thy hateful body, the Sun
will send noisome vapors to poison thy soul, the air will infect thy
intrailes, and the very fowls will work thy downfall. Remember that his life
may be a means to alter my mind, but his death wi^harden my heart so much,
that it will be forever impossible for thee to attain the thing thou seek
at my hand. Then be not so cruel as to spill the blood of that silly Lamb,
that is not altogether as yet ready for the slaughter. Adamasia hearing the
conclusion of Lauranaes speeches, perceiving that they showed some likelihood
that she would change her inclination (wherein she was deceived) delivered
Parismenos again to his Nurse, with many oaths protesting, that if Laurana
did not the next day grant her request, he should surely die. Laurana was
somewhat comforted, by this short time of Truce, she had gotten for Parismenos
li^e, but still rested in such ca^e and perplexity of grief, that she was in
the most woefullest estate of misery that ever any Lady was in, her Senses
being so stuffed with abundance of sorrow, that she could neither resolve
what to do, nor once study how to avoid these intolerable mischiefs. The
Nurse having received the young Parismenos, with great joy departed to the
place of her abode, where she was no sooner come, but she then began presently
to devise how to save the sweet Babe from death: for although she was a
stranger to Laurana, a woman of a rude and barbarous Nation, and altogether
void of Civility, yet by the Divine operation, she was so far in love with
that most sweet countenance of the young Infant, and therewith, she took such
delight to educate so gallant a Child, that she determined either to save him
from Adamasias cruelty, or thereby work her own destruction: therefore in the
midst of the dark night, when all things were at silence, she stole away
from the Castle with Parismenos, and by that time it was day, she was traveled
some twenty miles from the same, where she gate into a wood, and there made
such provision, that she carefully brought up Parismenos, as conveniently as
was possible for her to do, in that unfrequented place, of whom we will
speak more hereafter.

The next morning Adamasia came again to Lauranas chamber, demanding the
accomplishment of her request, who by that time had sufficiently determined
what to do: and weghing the distressed estate she was in, considered that if
she should condescend to love Andramart, she should both disrobe her self of
chastity, and do a most monstrous injury to the noble Parismus, she
resolved rather to see the destruction of her Son, and endure death. And
therefore told Adamasia, if nothing but her dishonor would content her mind,
she might do all as pleased her, for she was resolved never to yield to
violate her chastity, but yet most humbly entreated the hard hearted hagge, to
spare her Sons life, showing such manifold reasons, that it would have pierced
the heart of the cruellest Tyrant living: but Adamasia was rather inflamed to
fury, then any way mollified with her gentle entreaties, that in an extreme
rage she departed, with full intent to excute her unsatiate revenge on
Parismenos: but coming into the nurses Chamber, and not finding him, nor his
nurse, she could not tell what to think, and making further inquiry (being
thereby assured that they were not to be found) she was enraged with such
mad and Devilish frenzy, that she came unto the two old hagges, that had
executed her commandment before on Laurana, stamping and staring, and
discovered unto them all that had happened, and how that the nurse was fled
with the young Infant: who by her wicked commandment for many days after,
continually tormented the virtuous Laurana, with such extreme tortures, that
it was impossible for her long to endure that extreme misery, wherewith she
was brought into a most dangerous estate of death, being void of all comfort,
and continually she spent her time in bemoning the loss of her Lord, and the
untimely slaughter of Parismenos, whom she thought assuredly to be dead.

CHAP. XXIII.
How Aadramart understanding how Adamasia had used Laurana, and missing young
Parismenos, would have slain her, but she hasting to avoid his fury, burst
her neck down a pair of stairs.

ANdramart all this while continued in good hope of Lauranas favor, which he
was in some sort assured of by Adamasias persuasion, who continually used all
the delays she could to hinder him from visiting Laurana: for she was assured,
that if he had any knowledge how she had misused her, it would turn to her
great displeasure. But he having a long time endured her absynce with an
afflicted mind and seeing that he could not attain the fellicity he
expected, but was still delayed by the fair promises of his sister, which came
to no effect determined himself to visit her, which he had not done in many
days, and therefore with a pleasant countenance, he entered her Chamber, where
at his coming in, he found such an alteration, as he was astonished to behold
the same: for Laurana ^ate by her beds side, upon the floor, shedding
abundance of tears, her ornaments all betorne by the two cruel Hagges, that
used daily to torment her, her golden tresses hanging disheuered about her
shoulders, her crimson colored cheeks turned to a pale hue, her Face mangled
and scratched with their hellish nails, and all things so disordered contrary
to his expectation (little suspecting the cruelty that the cruel Adamasia had
used) that in a marvelous perplexity he stood coniecturing what might be
the occasion thereof. One while thinking, that her own impaciency had caused
her use that cruelty against her self. Aga^de he began to suspect Adamcsia,
for that he mist Leda, Lauranaes Gentlewoman. At last Laurana having espied
him, being abashed at his sudden coming, for that she was so disrobed, arose
from off the place where she sat, fearing least his coming thither might be
to offer her some violence. But Andramart humbling himself upon his knee,
uttered these speeches. Most virtuous Lady, vouchsafe to hear your vassal
speak: whose heart is oppressed with a thousand griefs, to see the extreme
sorrow you remain in: I have according to your command, absented my self,
from manifesting my desire, so be acceptable in your sight, this long time,
trusting that your gentle heart would in time pity the extremity of my
passions, and now being oppressed and ouerburdened by a longing desire to
enjoy your heavenly presence, I have presumed to show my self in your gentle
Aspect though contrary to your command, trusting to have some good hope of your
gentleness but contrary to my expectation, I find my self frustrated of all
comforts, and your self to be in that equipage, that I know not how to utter
these my speeches, nor conjecture of the cause of this your sorrow, which
drives me into a thousand doubtful cogitations, least I am now more unwelcome
to your company then I have deserved, being altogether ignorant of any cause
of offense that I have given you. More he would have said, but that Laurana
interrupted him in this sort. It ill beseems a man of thy sex to use
dissimulation, for that the cruel usage I have endured, cannot be unknown
unto thee, but procured by thy means: and now further to torment me (that am
altogether resolved to abide thy greatest fury) thou come with dissembling
and counterfeit flatter^es to excuse thy tyranny, thinking by thy counterfeit
ignorance, to purchase that which thy tyranny cannot effect. But be assured
that I am now so far from co^descending to conceive any good opinion of thee,
as it is but in vain for thee to utter any more speeches: but think and be
persuaded, that by thy cruel devises, thou have given me such cause to hate
thee, that I will for ever estoome thee the hatefullest Tyrant living, and the
cruellest homicide that is in the world. These speeches drove Andrmart into
such an amazement, that with many thousand oaths vows and protestations, he
requested Laurana to manifest unto him the occasion of these her speeches,
which she was urged to do, wondering at the many entreaties he made, for she
thought assuredly it had been by his procurement, but at last by his
protestations, she suspected the contrary, and began to declare to him the
manner of her usage: How she was daily whipped and beaten by two old merciless
women, and how Adamasia had murdered her son Parismenos, with remembrance of
whose death she uttered such abundance of tears, that Andramart was likewise
ready to weep, to see the sorrow she endured. This hard usage (quoth Laurana)
I have endured by your cruel means, besides the imprisonment of my servant
Leda, or her death, for that I have not of long time seen her, and now in
fraudulent manner, I fear me, you come to spill my blood, which is here ready
to abide your tyranny. Most virtuous Lady (quoth Andramart) if any of these
evils have happened by my means, or any ways by my consent, then esteem me
the most cruellest creature living, then let me never enjoy any title of your
favor, which will be more grievous unto me, then a thousand deaths: then let
the heavens pour down their vengeance upon my detested carcass, and all the
furies of hell, eternally possess my soul. Let the earth receive my bated body
into her bowels, and let we for ever be detested and abhorred of all creatures.
Which words he had no sooner vtted, but Adamasia was entered Lauranaas chamber,
and seeing her brother in that rage, would have departed again: but he espying
her, called her unto him. And Laurana now assuredly persuading her self that he
was no way guilty of her cruel usage, abhorring the sight of the tyranness,
said: Behold the cruel executer of Parismenos tragedy, and your tyranny: at
which words Andramart drew out his fauchion which he continually ware about
him, determining to end her detested life, but she fearing his cruelty, and
being terrified with his ghastly countenance, ran with such swiftness from
his presence, that missing her steps, she fell down a high pair of stairs,
and dashed out her hateful brains, and in that manner according to her own
wicked life, she desperately ended her days. Andramart thinking her death not
sufficient to make amends for the cruel torments Laurana had endured, in
furious sort, ranged up and down the castle, until he had found the old hags
that had bin Adamasias instruments of fury, one of them he immediately slew,
and the other fled into the court, whom he pursused, and in the sight of his
mistress, (who was beholding the dead body of Adamasia) at one blow he parted
her cursed head from her filthy body. Which in some sort, rejoiced Laurana to
see, but he still ran up and down, raging in such cruel sort, that his servant
fled from his presence, and hid themselves for fear of his fury. At last he
came to the place where Parismenos was nursed, but finding him gone, and
withal, remembering Lauranaes speeches, for very grief he tare his hair and
stamped on the earth, at last by directions of his servants, he came to the
place where Leda was imprisoned, (being used in most vile sort) and uttered
these speeches: Fair damsel if you have conceived any hard opinion of me for
this your usage, I beseech you remit the same, for it was altogether without my
knowledge, and assure your self I have so handled the unworthy procurer
thereof, that she shall never hereafter purchase your discontent, humbly
destring you to pardon my negligence, by means whereof, you are fallen into
this mischance: and also I pray you certify your noble mistress that
Andramart is no way to be blamed, for the remembrance of her grief, has
brought such terror to his heart, that he shall never rest in quiet until he
has wrought her the happy content she desires, which if he knew what it were
he would presently put it in practice. And taking Leda by the hand, with all
humilility, he brought her unto Lauranaes Chamber, who rejoicing at her sight,
lovingly and with joy, embraced her, and Andramart departed, presently
commanding all things to be ministered unto Laurana in such diligent sort, that
she could not choose but commene his good nature, whom she assuredly believed,
was no way privy to his sisters actions: for that he had sufficiently shown
the contrary, and still labored by all the means he could to purthase her
good liking. Leda aa I said, being come to her mistress, so rejoiced her
heart, that she began to leave off her sad and pensive thoughts that still
oppressed her mind, and declared unto her, the cruel usage of Adamasia,
withal, the report of Parismenos, which news made her again begin her former
sorrow: but by the comfortable persuasions of (Leda, whose counsel she much
esteemed) she gave her mind unto much quiet. In which quiet state, let us once
again leave her.

CHAP. XXIIII.
How Parismus and Pollipus departed from the Desolate Island, in a ship of
Hungaria: And how they were endaungered by Pirates belonging to Andramart, by
whose means they won the narrow passage into the Island of Rocks.

PArismus and Pollipus continued many days in the Desolate Island, expecting
the happy arrival of some ship, wherein they might have passage to go further
in search of Laurana, for whose abse^ce they endured much sorrow. At length it
chanced, that a merchants ship of Hungaria, passed by this desolate Island,
which they well knew and shunned for the danngerous report they had heard
thereof. Coming against the City where the King lay, the mariners above
hatches had sight of flagges that were spread upon the top of the Castle and
signified the same unto their chiefetaine, whose name, was Barzillus, who
hearing their report, woondred what might be the cause, and being desirous to
know the certainty, made thitherwardes, where he durst not bring his ship to
shore, but taking his cockboate himself, with such as rowed him, landed at the
Castle: which such as attended the same, espying, came and saluted Barzillus,
certifying him, that he need not now fear the fury of Bellona, for that
there were two Knights in the city that had destroyed the Castle, and freed
their, King and Queen out of thraldom, who would be very joyful to hear
that any passengers were la^ded, Barzillus hearing their report, without fear
(believing their speeches went with them unto the court, which was but small,
yet there he was most kinely welco^med by the King and Queen, but especially by
Parismus and Pollipus, who enquired of him, of whence he was. He certified them
he belonged unto the king of Hungaria, his name Barzillus, and that seeing the
flagge of truce, he came to see what adventure had happened in that desolate
Island. Friend (quoth Parismus, you coming hither may greatly preasure my
self and this worthy knight, my friend Pollipus of Phrigia, by whose prowess
this Island was reduced to his former happy estate. Barzillus hearing him name
Pollipus, suspected him presently to be the famous Prince Parismus of Bohemia,
of whose loss at Sea, he had heard many reports by diverse ships he had met
both of Thessalie, and Bohemia, that were gone in search of them and therefore
with great reverence he uttered these speeches. Most courteous Knight, I have
in my travail often times heard of that worthy Knights name, and also of the
famous Prince of Bohemia, by many Knights that are in search of them, whom I
suppose your self to be, and therefore accounte my self, the happiest man
alive, to be an occasion to pleasure you in any respect: therefore most
worthy Knight, if my self, my men, or ship, may any way do you service, I
here most humbly offer them at your virtuous command. Parismus kindly
thanked him, assuring him that he was the same whom he had named, and that a
long time he had remained in that Island, for want of shipping to go in search
of Laurana Daughter to the King of Thessaly whom they had lost: and that if he
would show them that courtesy as to leave his further travail for his
Merchandise, and accompany him in his travails, he would make him such
sufficient recompense, as he should never after need to travel to get wealth.
arzillusB told him, that (notwithstandding his Honorable proffer, he would
have all that was his at commandment. So giving him all the courteous
entertainment that might be, they soiourned still with old Antiochus, until
they had furnished themselves, with all things convenient, and finding a fit
time, (with all courtesy, taking there leaule of the Kinh and Queen, and
Freneta, who took their departure most heavily, for that these Knights were
so grasious in their eyes, as they accounted the one part of their soul
departed with them, having obtained a promise of them, to visit them, (when
they found their wished friend,) having wind at will, they launched into the
maine, not knowing which way to take their course, but committed themselves to
the direction of their good or ill Fortune. They had not Sailed three days,
but Barzillus gave them to understand, that they were near the Province of
Tartaria, where he told them it was dangerous traveling: for those Seas were
still frequented with Pirates, and Robbes, whose words immediately they found
true. For they had not Sailed the space of two hours, but they espied a far
off, a ship making toward them amain, whom Brazillus presently knew to be
Pirates, and therefore uttered these speeches. Most worthy Knights, now prepare
your selves to resist the enemy approaching us, whom I know to be such as
seek the destruction of all passengers, (into whose hands if you fall, you
may expect nothing but cruel tyranny and hard usage. By that time he had
ended his speeches, the Pirates had laid the^ aboorde, and began to enter
their ship, but Parismus and Pollipus, having Armed themselves, with their
weapons drawn, demanded of them what they would have? their General hearing
their speech, told them he would have them yield. Yield (quoth Parismus,)
that we will, wherewith he struck one of them so violently, that he cleft his
head, Pollipus did the like to another, who seeing themselves so handled,
assailed these champions with great fury, being a multitude in respect of their
small company. But they resisted them with such valor, that ye Pirates were
greatly discomfited, and a great number of them slain: in which conflict,
Pollipus (not regarding the peril he was in, nor the treachery the Pirates
might use) was gotten aboard the Pirates ship, and there made such hauock, that
they disparing of victory, hoysed their sails, and before Pollipus could
again recover his own ship, were launched from the other a good way, which
Parismus espying, desired Barzillus to make out after them. Pollipus seeing
himself in that sort betrayed, laid about him with fury, that none durst
come to near him: at last, the General noting his valor, came unto him with
these speeches, Knight (quoth he) yield thy self, and do not he p^worse
mischief upon thy head, by procuring my further displeasure against thee, for
if thou will ask mercy at my hands, I will give it thee, otherwise, know that
I am of sufficencie to abate thy corrage, and bring thee in subjection, in
despite of the best resista^ce thou can make. Pirate (quoth Pollipus) I
scorn thy proffered friendship, and dare thee to use ye best skill thou can
to conquer me, for I am resolved to try thy valor. Which words being ended,
they assailed each with such fury, yt it had bin a sight worth ye beholding (if
any had bin by,) to see the bravery of their fight: but Pollipus assailed his
enemy with such valor, that he had mangled and cut his body in many places,
who being grown fainte with the effensio^ of his blood, fell down at his
feet dead: which ye mariners perceiving, all at once assailed Pollipus, who so
valiant withstood them, that they could little or nothing at all indamage him:
One amongst the rest, offered him a thrust, which lighted on his left side, at
the skyrtes of his Armor, which grieved him worse then all the wounds he had
received, and so enraged him, that he chased them up and down with such
furious blows, that many of them in shunning his keen sword, tumbled
ouer-boorde: many of them were dismembered, and the rest seeing themselves
unable to withstand his force, got themselves under Hatches, and Pollipus was
left alone. Who seeing none to trouble him, and being sore wounded and weary,
satte him down, as well to rest himself, as to consider of the estate he was
in.

Parismus hasted after the Pirates ship with all speade he might, but do what
Barzillus could, they had lost ye sight thereof, which drove Parismus into such
sorrow as was strange, and poor Adonius seeing the Knight she dearly loved,
fallen into such mishap, gate her self into a secret place in the ship, and
there uttered these plaintes.

How unhappy am I, that have caused the loss of so worthy a Knight as my
dear Pollipus is, who has given himself to a careless desperateness for my
loss, who am not worthy for my unthankfulness to be esteemed of him. Now is
he fallen into the hands of such as will soon abridge his days, it is
impossible for him to withstand the force of such a multitude, but fall into
utter ruin. O that my unworthy self had been in his company, that I might
have taken part of the afflictions he is likely to endure, and have comforted
him in his distress. Accursed and discourteous that I was, in so many fit
occasions as I had, that would never manifest my self unto him, who
continually sorrowed for my absence, neuermore shall I enjoy his sweet
Company, never more shall I lie folded in his Manly arms, the touch of
whose embracings were more pleasant then all the joys I shall ever hereafter
endure. What rests now for me, but to spend the rest of my accursed days in
continual sorrow for his absence?

Having ended these speeches, she suddenly started up, and with abundance of
tears, came to the place whereas Parismus was who seeing the sorrow he made,
exceedingly woondered whence such kind love and affection, and so many Uertues
as he continually beheld in him, should proceed. By this time the night
approached, and they still made forwards, till by the counsel of Parismus they
cast ancker, determining to stay there until the next morning. Pollipus
likewise seeing the ship wherein he was, sailed so fast from the company of
his friends, with his sword cut asunder all the tackles and cords, that the
Sails fell ouerboorde, and he all Night lay hulling upon the Sea, the weather
being very calm, determining the next morning to compel such as were remaning
under Hatches, to conduct him back to the other ship, whom he knew would not
stray far from his company. The morning being come, the ship was with the tide
brought back again, that the mariners of Barzillius ship, gat a sight
thereof, with which news they came to the Prince, who was accompained by
Adonius his page, which news so revived him, yt presently he came up, by which
time they assuredly knew it was the pirates ship and Pollipus seeing them,
stood wauing his sword above his head in sign of victory, and being both met,
Parismus with great joy embraced him, comme^ding his valor: and poor Adonius
stood by being affected with such inward joy, as I altogether want the skill to
express. When Pollipus declared unto the^ the manner of his victory, and
called up such as were in the ship, who expecting nothing but death, were
unwilling to show themselves, but at last came like men aghast, being many of
the^ so greeuo^usly wounded, yt it pitied Parismus to see ye estate they were
in: he demanded of them of whence they were, who told him yt they had sworn
not so reveal the truth thereof to any. But since it was so that they must
needs, they began in this sort. We are servants unto Oswald, ye General of our
company, who^ this worthy knight has slain himself a servant likewise unto
ye migghtie Andramart, Governor of the I Will of rocks, so termed, for that ye
same is not to be entered, but one way, by reason of ye mighty Rocks that
inco^passe the Island. My master continually brought unto him such riches as he
could get upon ye sea, and had you fallen into his hands, thither would he have
conveyed you as prisoners, from whence you should never have escaped, and we
being subjects were compelled to take this kind of life. In which we have
continued a long time, but being fale^ into your hands, we entreat you to save
our lives, whose deaths will nothing at all profit you. The Prince hearing this
report, was wonderfully troubled in mind and began to couiecture yt the same
pirates that had betrayed the^ in the desolate Island, and fled with his espoused
Laurana, were likewise of Andramarts servants. Which caused him to confer with
Pollipus, whs waa troubled with the very same thought, and grounding their
hopes thereon, they determined to make trial thereof, but first they questioned
with Oswaldes Servants, to see if they could gather any comfortable report from
them, who told them, that it was a great while since they were in the Island,
and therefore they could no way inform them thereof. But these noble Knights
hearts were so revived with this report of Andramart, that they assuredly
persuaded themselves that they should hear some news of Laurana, and with
that determination they chose such of the Pirates as were fittest for their
gu^es, and with all haste they could, hasted thitherwards, once again
committing their Fortune, to the mercy of the Seas. Not many days after, they
by happy success in teauell, were come near the Island of Rocks, the wished
place of their expectation) then Parismus and Pollipus began to consult betwixt
themselves for their best landing, for that it was assured them, that it was
impossible to enter by force: for the passage was continually strongly
guarded, and all things so artificially contrived, for the disadvantage of such
as should attempt any thing, that it was altogether vain to think that way to
enter. These discomforts, drove them to the trial of their uttermost wits, for
by the persuasion they had to find Laurana there, they determined (though the
attempt were never so dangerous) to make trial thereof, or Parismus rather
determined to be detained there as a prisoner, then to leave any thing
unperformed, whereby he was put in any comfort of his long and wished
expectation. Therefore calling to the^ such as were the servants of Oswald, they
told them that the conquest of that place wholly rested in their powers:
therefore Parismus said, if you will condescend to follow my direction herein,
I do not doubt but easily to accomplish the same, and for your truth reward you
so kindly, as you shall no way need to fear the fury of Andramart, who
makes no other account of you, but to keep you as his vassalls and slaves, in
bondage and cruel servitude, whereas if you will be faithful and true unto me,
I will set you at liberty, and reward you, to your hearts content. For I my
self am Governor of a country far exceeding this place, whither I will
conduct you with me, if I happily atchieue my desire herein, or if my
determination fails herein, you shall safely retire into our ships, and be
acquitted from all fear of his revenge.

The Pirates hearing the courteous speeches of Parismus, having also in the time
they had been in his company noted his Princely behavior, and on the other
side weighing the estate they remained in, being his prisoners, on whom he
might inflict a cruel punishment, if they should refuse to aid him in the
request he made, and also considering the little account Andramart had always
made of them, and the cruelty he used to them: All these considerations
wrought such a change in the hearts of these poor slaves, that they freely
condisended to follow his directions in any thing he should demand.

Parismus was glad of their consent, but fearing to trust them, he uttered
these speeches. Syrs, I thank you for your willingness to pleasure me, but
pardon me, though I make some question of your loyalty, for that I have been
already deceived by men of your profession: and as I suppose, of Andramarts
servants, by whose unfaithfulness, these miseries that we are fallen into
have happened. Whereupon he took occasion to report unto them the treachery
of the Pirates in the desolate Island, thereby to make unfaithfulness seem
odious in their sights.

The Pirates vowed with such confidence to be true unto them, that they were
fully assured of their faith, and being now near the place of their landing,
admiring ye wonderful strength of the same, thus they continued their
stratageme. Parismus, Pollipus, and Barzillus (who would needs accompany them
armed themselves with the best armor they had, and putting on sea gowns
(whereunder they had conveyed their swords so secretly, that none could
discern the same) were conducted as conquered by the Pirates, unto the passage
into the Island, and Adonius in their company (who by no means would leave
them.) Which the gardians perceiving, and knowing Oswalds servants, and
thinking the rest to be prisoners, carelessly laid aside their weapons, nothing
suspecting their intent, kindly welcomed their fellows, and conducted them
with joy, past their places of resistance, which the knights perceiving,
suddenly severed themselves, and with their weapons drawn, valiantly laid
about them, that they soon had slain such as resisted them. The pirates seeing
this happy success, went on with Parismus and Pollipus, toward Andramarts
Castle, which when they had shown them, they desired (being terrified with
fear of Andramarts cruelty) to return unto their ships, who laughing at their
timorousnes, gave them leave to depart with Barzillus, who undertook to keep
the passage, that none might enter to endamage them.

CHAP. XXV.
With what danger Parismus entered Andramarts Castle and how they were by him
brought in danger of their lives: and how afterward they ^ew him, and his two
brethren.

AFter this conquest obtained, and all things as yet falling out according to
their wished desires. Parismus and Pollipus, only attended by poor Adonius,
made toward the Castle, where by reason that it was late, they could not
enter, but secretly conveyed themselves into a heap of short shrubbes, and
bushes that grew by the Castle wall, sufficient to hide them in, and there
determined to take their nights repose. This exploit was so suddenly performed,
that those within the Castle had no knowledge thereof, which fell out well for
the two knights, who quietly rested in that place, being no way moiested that
night, but were exceedingly grieved to hear the groves, cries, and grievous
complaints, of such as remained in prison, which continued in such misery, as
it were too heavy to report. Early the next morning, these Noble minded
Knights, having with wise consideration, weighed the greatest peril of this
their attempt, attended their fittest opportunity, which thus fell out.
Sitting in their secret shroud, they espied some of the servants pass in and
out at the Castle gate, whither they presently went, and came to the porter
with these speeches. Porter (quoth Parismus) open the gate, and let us in. The
Porter seeing them, was so amazed, that he stood like one that were senseles:
but calling his better remembrances together: Sir knight ( quoth he) it is
perrillous to enter here, for be assured, if you once come within the gates it
is impossible for you to return. Go too ( quoth Parismus) open me the gate. With
that, the Porter began to ring a Bell, with all his force, but was soon hindered
from proceeding by Pollipus, who gave him so deep a wound on the arm, that he
was enforced to let go: but that little time of ringing, was a sufficient
warning to those within, who by multitudes came flocking to the gate, and
opened the same. When presently Parismus offered to enter, but they being
stronger by reason of their number, shut too the same again, and run unto
Andramart, who hearing their report, presently comanded 20. of his best
knights to arm themselves, himself likewise armed himself, and went down to
the gate, which he commanded to be opened, and seeing no more but only two
knights, (himself not vouchsafing to speak to them) commanded his servants to
carry them to prison, by which means they had occasion to enter within the
gates, when drawing their swords they stood upon their defense, which
Andramarts men began to laugh at, thinking the^ foolish to resist them: but it
fell out to their sorrow. For Parismus began to lay about him, and Pollipus to
desend himself, that immediately they had slain 2. of Andramart servants,
which the rest perceiving, all at once began to assail these champions: who
placed themselves in such order, yt they easily withstood their force, and by
exquisit skill, furthered themselves that still the assailants perished, and in
short space they had slain the one half of them, and the rest seeing their
party still decrease began to draw back, which turned to their destruction: for
these Knights perceiving them to quail, so furiously assaulted them, that they
all there ended their lives: which others that stood by perceiving, fled into
another Court, and shut a strong gate against the knights that pursued them,
and in the mean time, by the commandment of Andramart, they were enclosed
within that Court, by such, as while they were in this fight, went out at a
postern gate, and fastened ye gate at which they entered, so suresy that it was
impossible for them to get out by which means they were enclosed in that court.
Which when they behold, they perceived it to be no other then a strong prison
for it was encompassed within a mighty stone wall, and no passages, but the two
gates, by which means they were betrayed into the hands of Andramart, unless
by some strange means they should be delivered. This drove these Knights into
such veration, that they could not tell what to do, nor how to behave themselus.
Andramart seeing his men thus flaughtered only by two knights, greatly admired
their valor, and also maruelling what the occasion of their quarrel might be,
which he desired to know, fearing the treachery of his servants that kept ye
passage by means whereof, before that time, he ever thought himself in
security: he spoke unto them (looking from over the wall) in this sort. Knights
(quoth he) what seek you in this place, that has moved you to offer such
outrage against my servants? If any that belongs unto me has offered you
discourtesse, Iam ready to see him make you sufficient satisfaction: if none
has done you offense, I would wish you depart without bringing your selves in
further danger: for so much I regard your good (beholding your valor) that I
would be loath to seek revenge of these my servants death, but set you at
liberty, so you will promise to depart, with offering me no further injury.

Parismus thus replied, If thou art the owner, and ruler of this Castle (as I
suppose) then know that we are such as go in search of a lost friend, whom we
assuredly think thou unjustly detainest, for none but thy self would do
such a discourteous deed: as also hearing of the treachery thou use to
travelers, and the continual outrages thou attemptest by Sea, whereof we
have had sufficient trial, we determinately came, as well to find our lost
frind, as also to requite the discourtesie we have found by thy servants, since
which our coming thou know what we have begun, and our determination is
to go forwards, unless thou will vouchsafe of courtesy to let us see the
prisoners thou detainest, which if thou deniest assure thy self we are fully
bent to purchase the thing we came for, or in pursuit thereof, hazard our
dearest blood: therefore resolve us what thou will do, for we challenge thee,
if thou have any spoke of honorable Knighthood, to show the same, in
honorable, and not in treacherous sort, which will make our revenge more
sharp. Andramart hearing the speeches of the valiant Parismus, could not well
tell in what sort to answer him, one while purposing to detain them in that
place: but not confidently trusting the strength thereof, that thought was
soon vanished, Then he began to conjecture that Laurana was the Lady, in whose
search they came: with all remembering that she should be taken from him, which
was more grievous then a thousand deaths, he resolved to offer them the sight
of the prisoners, fearing that they would otherwise do him some mischief. At
last, a multitude of sundry cogitations so oppressed his mind, that he
determined to try the uttermost of their power, and to put them in the most
extremity that might be: and therefore returns them this answer. Proud Knight
(quoth he) whose malice I nothing fear, know that I will not in any respect
yield your request, and therefore content your selves with this answer, that I
am determined (since you refuse my gentle offer) to detain your here, until
your pride be somewhat abated, and by that time, I hope you will wish you had
accepted my offer: and with those words departed, which vexed the two Knights,
the rather for that they were void of means to seek revenge: being enclosed
in such sort, that there was no way for them to escape Famishment: Where they
continued all that night in most heavy case, not being able to take one
minutes ^est. In which time, Pollipus according to his woonted manner, tired
his wits with devising how to vnfasten the Gates, or escape their imminent
danger.

Parismus on the other side, had his mind troubled with a thousand
cogitations, of his beloved Laurana, whom he thought assuredly to be there
imprisoned, which drove him into such good hope, that notwithstanding the
extremity of Andramart, he showed a countenance of greater joy then before he
had used, which rejoiced Pollipus and poor Adonius, whose heart was much
grieved to see the peril his dear friends were like to endure.

Andramart began to conjecture, that if Laurana were the Lady of whom they
sought, then it was his best course to keep them as prisoners still in that
place, and not to destroy them by famishment, as before he had determined: but
to rid himself of that doubt. he privily called Leda unto him, and brought her
unto a secret place, where she might behold the two Knights with these
speeches, Damsel quoth he (there are newly arrived at my Castle, two Knights,
whom I suppose are come in search of thy missresse Laurana: therefore I desire
you to resolve me. For if you know them, I will not use such rigor toward
them, as I am determined: But for her sake in whose sight I still desire to be
gracious) I will remit the offense I have taken against them, for the slaughter
of my servants, whom you see lie dead at their feet.

Leda all this while had diligently beheld these Knights, but knew them not,
by reason of their strange Armor: but at last she espied Adonius, whom she
very well knew, thereby assuring her self, that it was Parismus and Pollipus
that were in Armor, and fearing that the speeches Andramarts used, rather did
proceed from a policy to fit her mind, then otherwise to intend their
g^d, for that he was full of treachery, she made him this answer. Sir, I
know not whence these Knights are: neither did I ever see them before: but I
would that I might be so happy, as to carry any such good news to my Lady,
or were he so happy as to arrive in this place, that he might be, at your
courteous disposition, who, I am sure, for my Mistress sake, would ^eate him
well, but had Andramart, well marked her countenance, it would have bewrayed
that which she concealed, and he desired: For thee thought the time very
long, until ^hee were come to her Lady, with these joyful news: and he
being satisfied with her answer, let her depart unto her Mistress Chamber,
where she was no sooner entered, but she declared unto her the cause why
Andramart had called her forth, and that she was assured Parismus and
Pollipus were arrived: rehearsing how they had slain above twenty of
Andramarts Servants, and that they were inclozed in a Yard, where they
remained in very good estate.

Laurana was revived with such joy to hear her dear Lord named, that her
heart leapt within her, and a thousand times embraced Leda, for bringing that
happy News. Then she began to consider of the estate they remained in, being
inclozed that they could not get out, which thought was most grievous unto her:
but by the comfortable speeches of Leda, she was in great assurance of their
happy escape out of all dangers, in which g^d hope she remained, with a most
longing desire, to hear some more News of them. Andramart determining not to
use such rage as to famish them, (for that he had in him some sparks of
H^nitie) caused sufficent meat to be ministered unto them, fortifying his
Castle so strongly as he could possibly devise. H^e was likewise given to
understand, that the Passage toward the Sea was strongly fortified, and
defended, that none could pass^ that way, which brought a great terror to his
mind.

The Imprisoned Knights continued in great care, earnestly studying to rid
themselves from that thraldom. At last they concluded in the s^ent time of the
^ght, to se^ Adonius on the Wall, who could get down (...) go ^o Barzillus,
to will him send them some Cords, (...) with they could make a Ladder, which
was the readyest means to further their intent: which Violetta undertook most
willingly, nothing regarding the danger, she should put herself into thereby:
and so with much adoo they got her to the top of the wall, whose heart began
to fail, when she saw the height she should leap down, being unaccustomed
to such perils. But remembering the parties, for whose sake she should
undertake that hazard: arming her self with an unwonted courage, not
agreeable to her Sex and weak nature, she leapt down: and (the Earth
refusing to harm so sweet a Creature) safely escaped the danger of the fall,
and with a joyful heart went toward the place where Barzillus remained, which
she could scarcely find, by reason that it was dark: and remembering the
danger of the place, she thought every Bush that encountered her view, had been
her enemy. But with more then accustomed boldness in her Sex, she soon
arrived at the Passage, where Barzillus was: not sl^eping, but carefully
attending his change. Who espying Adonius, requested to know how his d^re
Lord and Pollipus fared; who declared unto them effectually the estate they
remained in, and the cause of his coming, which Barzillus presently performed:
having good s^ore of such provision aboard his Ship: and leaving the custody
of the Passage, to such of his Company, as ^ee knew to be both Courageous and
faithful: he departed and went with Adonius unto the Castle wall, and with
their Ladder mounted the top of the same: so that both of them went over unto
the Knights, who most joyfully welcomed Barzillus. Who having saluted them,
and conferred about their Exploytes, at their entreaty he departed again
unto his charge: whereon depented the chie^est stay of all their safeties, for
that they knew diverse of Andramarts Servants were abroad, whose arrival
might much endamage them. To prevent which it behooued them to have an
especial regard: being glad that they had g^tten this d^ce, they presently
put the same in execution, and got over into the next Court the stateliness
of which place, in their opinion, excelled for sumptuousness, all the
buildings that ever they beheld. In the midst of the Court stood a most stately
erected Fountain, whereon werr placed many beautiful Images, of most curious
engraven work, the pleasantness of which place, much delighted their troubled
cences to behold: under which fountainet hey stayed, to behold the gallant
buildings, stately Turrets, and sumptuous walls, that outwardly adorned the
place, expecting the cheerful light of the Sun to comfort them in their
distress, which presently began to show his splendant beams, which glistered
upon the glass window, that the place seemed another Paradise, and there
they attended the conclusion of their attempt, either to their comfort, or
confusions.

The first that entered the Court they laid hands on, and by compultion urged
him to declare what force was in the Castle. Who (upon promise that they would
not offer him violence) told them, that lately there arrived at the Castle two
of Andramarts Brethren, being esteemed men of great courage, which inhabited
the further parts of that Island, who were determined to make trial of their
strength that day: the eldest, named Guilmor, the other Bramon. And that
Andramart determined, if that his Brothers failed, himself would make trial
of his fortune, but if all of them failed, he had a hundred servants ready in
Armor to aid him.

Parismus hearing his speeches, began greatly to despair of victory,
considering that su^d a number were in readiness only against them two, but
such was the constant resolution of these two Knights, that choosing the ^test
place, for their furtherance in Fight, they detemined to try the uttermost of
their Fortune Andramart being early up, and discoursing with his Brethren
about their affairs, by chance looked out at a window, and espied where the
Knights (that he thought had been sure enough) were walking at liberty,
which struck such a terror to his mind, that at the very sight thereof, his
heart failed him, which so altered his former purposes of cruelty, that he
thought it his best course to use himself toward them, as agreed with an
honorable mind. For notwithstanding that oftentimes in tyrannical manner,
he persecuted such ss never offended him, yet he often showed many tokens of
a courteous and virtuous mind, though altogether darkened by his cruelty:
which together with the fear he had of these Knights valor, and seeing their
resolution, caused him to come to his Brethren with these speeches. Behold
(quoth he) yonder are the Knights that have escaped out of the place I had
enclosed them in, and are come to work my further danger, having already by
their valor slain twenty of my best servants: two more goodlier knights did
I never behold, which makes me pity the estate they are in, being likely
now to suffer death by your Invincible strength, and were it not that I had
sent for you to aid me herein, and that it might in some measure touch me
with the name of a Cowarde, I would use them in the kindest sort I could
devise, and remitte all further cause of strife. For I suppose they are come in
search of a Lady that remains in this Castle, whose presence is the only
preserver of my life, which being taken from me, will soon end my days:
Therefore good brethren resolve me of the best course to be used herein.

Guilmor being of a proud and haughty disposition, and scorning at the
lenity of Andramart (whose heart was touched with an insupportable fear,)
would make him no answer, but presently went and armed himself, which they
beholding, did the like, and altogether went down into the Court,

And without any speeches, the two brethren being full of scornful pride,
fully assuring themselves of the victory, assailed Parismus and Pollipus.

Who seeing no greater odds, but one to one, entered the Combat so ^hearefully,
as it had been a sport or pastime, which continued a good while betwixt them,
without any great disadvantage, on either par^e: the noise of whose weapons
(clashing on their Armor, came to Lauranaes hearing, who could by no means
take any rest that night, for fear and thought taking, least Andramart should
work the death of her dear Lord and friend, that on a sudden starting to a
window that looked into the Court, she ^spyed the four Knights Combatting
assuring her self, that her friends were two of them: whom she knew not,
but as she was informed by Leda to be those in the blewe Armor. Whose sight
revived the afflicted heart of Laurana: but on the cont^ary part the danger
she saw them in, as much tormented her with fear.

Andramart standing by, to behold the issue of this Combat (having an eye to
the window where Laurana was) unfortunately espied her looking out: Where
upon immed^ately he sent four of his Servants to remove her into a strong
and close Prison, far from their sight, which so tormented the mind of
Laurana (together with the fear she conceived for Parismus, having no friend
but Pollipus, environed with a number of enemies) that had not Leda labored
the contrary, she had there overcome her vital senses with extreamitie of
sorrow, Still continued the Combat betwixt the Champions, but Pollipus
seeling himself sore wounded by Bramon, was so enraged with fury, that with
all his force and skill, he labored with such puissaunce against his
assayling enemy, that he had soon laid him at his foot dead. Which
Andramart perceiving, came to Pollipus with these speeches.

Knight (quoth he thy task is not yet ended, for here am I to revenge the
death of him thou have now conquered, wherewith he began to assail Pollipus
with all his force: who answered his blows with the like courage, by which
time Parismus had left his enemy breathless, who lay wallowing at his feet,
strangled with his own blood.

Andramart seeing the same, would have ^edde, (fearing his own downfall) hut
Pollipus seeing his intent, thought now or never to show preefe of his valor:
therefore to rid themselves from further danger, with both his hands
struck with such violence upon his crest that the weakness of his Armor,
yielding to the sharpness of his sword, and force of his blow, so astonished
him, that he staggered: Wherewith Pollipus closing with him, overthrew him on
the ground, and thrust his sword through his body in diverse places.

By which time Andramarts servants seeing the distress their Master was in,
all at once assailed Parismus and Pollipus, who could not well tell how to
endure and further assault, but drawing back to the corner of the Court,
placed themselves in such sort, that their enemies could not greatly indammage
them, but still received the woorste, most of them being in small continuance
of sight, sore wounded, and many of them were slain, so that they seemed
therewith like men that were desperate? One amongst the rest, that Andramart
had before taken Prisoner, but for his good qualities had again released,
as one of his chiefest servants, whose name was Tellamor, seeing Andramart
slain and marking the brave and valiant courage of these two Knights, used all
the persuasions he could to withdraw his fellows from their madness: who
still followed their revenge eagerly, without any consideration of the little
good they could reap thereby, at last some of them began to listen to them,
by which means Pollipus have re^pit to breath himself, and Parismus
perceiving them to stand doubtfully, debating matters between themselves,
began to speak to them in this sort. Masters quoth he, me thinks men that
are endued with reason (as you should be,) should not show themselves in
inco^sideratie, as (...) seek revenge against those that never harmed you:
what causes you thus wilfully to endanger your selves by offering us violence?
you will say, the death of your master: why what was he but a Tyrant, what
account did he make of any of you? but to keep you as his vassalles and
slaves, in bondage and extreme servitude: how was he esteemed of any? but as a
cruel homicide, a robber and spoyler of poor personages, whereby him self
and such as were his servants were hated and despised of all good people. Did
he not continually tyrannise over you in most cruel sort, that many of you
were put to shameful offices, and for every displeasure in danger of death and
imprisonment, by his fury? what do you think was the cause of our arrival
here? not (as you suppose) to make you captains, nor to get wealth, or the
spoil that thieves and robbers seek after, nor yet to offer violence to
Andramart, or any of you, but to redee^e a loss friend that your master has
wrongfully detained. Then let that wisdom rule your minds, that should be in
men, and thewe what you require at our hands, and we will in any reasonable
respect satisfy you. We are not determined to stay among you to bear rule
over you, thereby to spoil you of your wealth, but will leave this Castle and
the riches thereof, as yours to dispose of, which you may quietly enjoy, now
your cruel master is dead, whose life would have been cause o^ your further
servitude, but by his death you are freede from the crue^ bondage and slavery
wherein you lived, and have by the same occasion, the choice of electing, or
refusing of quiet content, and peaceable wealth. Parismus had no sooner, ended
these speeches but, by a general consent (being persuaded thereto by Tellamor,
whose counsel they highly esteemed) they cast down their weapons, and yielded
themselves: which greatly cheered the hearts of both the knights, being before
that, in great peril and hazard of their lives, having taken the faithful oath
of their loyalty. Pollipus pulling off his Helmet, began greatly to extol and
commend their wisdom, in that they had that good consideration, to conceive
aright of Parismus speeches: promising them, that by his consent, Parismus
should so highly content them before their departure, that they would for ever
account themselves happy by their arrival. And having taken order for their
security, (not trusting them, notwithstanding their oaths, because they knew
them to be unaccustomed to virtuous humanity) they were conducted to very
fair and sumptuous chambers, by Tellamor, and there had their wounds carefully
dressed by Adonius, whose tender heart bled drops of warm blood, to see the
purple gore that issued from their mangled bodies, whose care and diligent
tendance, was a great comfort unto them at all times: by means whereof, they
made such account of him, that they would not have parted from him for any good
in the world. Tellamor having been virtuously brought up (being also a knight
of good account, and honorable parts) carefully provided all things necessary,
and with such affection tendered their safety, that there could no mischief
be attempted by Andramarts servants, (whose heads still ruminated on
treachery) but he would still seek to appease and prevent the same, whose
diligence was well marked of the two knights, whereby they grew into good
liking of him, and much commended his courtesy.

XX. VI.
How Parismus being past all hope to find Laurana, at last found her to his
exceeding joy. And how afterward leaving the custody of the Castle to four
of Andramarts servants he departed toward Thessalie: and by the way visited
old Antiochus, in the desolate Island.

PArismus all this while could by no means be quiet for thinking on Laurana,
theremembrance of whose absence was continually in his mind, more the^ was
wonted, whereby his perswasson of some happy news of her abode in that place,
still increased: which caused him the next day to resolve himself by
searching, for otherwise he could not learn, for that Andramart would not
suffer any of his servants but only four to see or have any knowledge of
Laurana, who were all slain with their master, that coming to Pollipus they
went to search the Castle. And first of all being directed by Telamor, they
came to the prisons, where were many strangers of sundry Nations, lying in
the most woeful and lamentable misery that ever eye beheld: their joints and
flesh being worn with the weight of the Irons wherewith they were fettered;
who then began to fear there utter destruction, which they had long
expected: but contrary to their thought and expectation, they were set at
liberty, which greatly comforted their dying hearts.

From thence they went unto the Dungeons of the Castle, wherein were many
distressed wights remaining, that of long time had not seen the pure light,
nor felt the comforable heat of the Sun, and now to their joy were set at
liberty, who highlye applanded the labor and bounty of these two most noble
and courteous knights. Parismus having not yet found the joy he expected,
could not ha^bour in his mind any ^est, until that he had searched all
over the Castle, saving the place wherein Laurana was, which was so serresly
conveyed amongst the other buildings, that the way thereto could hardely be
found, whereby Parismus was deceived. And thinking verily that there was no
place but he had already searched, entered into most heavy and sorrowful
cogitations: and being wonderfully discouraged of all comfort, wandered from
Pollipus, who was earnestly in talk with Tellamor) and by chance happened on
a dark entry, which place seemed to agree with his heavy disposition: into
which having entered, and a while walked up and down, he found a door at the
further end thereof, fast shut, which caused him to cease his mourning, and
study how to open the same, which he had soon effected: and entering further,
he found a most stately chamber, wherein were diverse signs that it was not
unfrequented, but being unarmed, he would not too rashly go further, least he
might unawares run into danger. Therefore softly he lifted up the hangings,
behind which was a door into another Chamber, where he beheld a Lady sadly
sitting upon the earth, with her (...) toward him, leaning her head upon the
beds side. At which sight his heart began to throb and pant exceedingly, but
looking more narrowly, he espied a damsel with blubbered cheeks, weeping to
hear the restless plaints her mistress had made: who having with extreme
sorrow be wailing her unfortunate estate, being likewise terrified with
remembering the danger Parismus was in, and griese to be abridged his sight,
was fallen into a silent s^mber: wherein she had not long continued, but at
the very instant when Parismus entered the chamber) she dr^med he stood behind
her, wherewith she waked, and earnestly looking about her she espied him,
wherewith she was extremely amazed, fearing least she had still heene in a
dream, that she stood fearfully trembling between an earnest hope, and
acomfortlesse despair. But Parismus as soon as he beheld her face knew her,
and took her in his arms, with such exceeding joy to them both, as that the
tears, proceeding from kind affection, ran down both their cheeks in
abundance. And Led a seeing her Lord, kneeled at his feet, with such exceeding
joy, as is not to be expressed, who had no leisure to speak to her, his heart
was so replenished with exceeding content, by the sweet and delectable
presence of his virtuous and loving Laurana: whom a thousand times he folded in
his arms, and as many times greeted her ruddie lips with sweet kisses, in
which loving imbracings, they continued a good space, being unable to think of
anything else. But at the last, having somewhat recreated themselves with that
kindness. Parismus uttered these speeches: Most kind and loving Princess,
since we are thus happily met, and that we have now no further cause of sorrow,
it would be grievous to make rehearsal of our said mishaps since our parting,
therefore let your heart be at quiet, and now forget all former griefs, which
were unfortunately occasioned by my negligence, and accept my acknowledgement
of offenses, for a sufficient satisfaction, and let your virtuous bounty,
still bring me farther in admiration of your virtue, unto whom I am most
infinitely bound in all the bonds of true and loyalfriendship. To recount my
noble friend Pollipus kindness (by whose valor I have escaped many imminent
dangers) and the kind tendance I have had of poor Adonius, craves a longer
circumstance, and therefore at this time I will omit the same, only desiring
you to make such estimation of them, as of my most dearest friends, but by
whose means I had never enjoyed the fruition of your heavenly company. I now
account all pain pleasure, and the reward of my travails so bountiful, as
all the worlds dignity cannot counteruaile: Having at last attained the hight
of my desire, and fullness of all felicity, by enjoying your virtuous
presence, whose absence was more bitter unto me, then a thousand deaths. Many
other most loving and kind speeches past their Lips, being often interrupted
with sweet kisses, and hearty embracings, that in this delight, they would have
continued a long time, but that the de^e Parismus had to acquainte Pollipus
with h^s happy ne^s, and Laurana to see her friend, caused them to break off
and walk out to him, who had quickly mist Parismus, and began earnestly to
enquire for him: in which time of his absence, he had sought in most places of
the Castle, but still mist the dark passage wherein he was entered, which
drove him into a careful wonder, what should be become of him. Wherewith he
began greatly to fear, that he was by some treachery endangered, but suddenly
in the midst of this perplexity, he espied him with Laurana, coming toward
him: which sight exceedingly rejoiced his heart, with an inexplicable joy. When
coming to Laurana, he reverenced her with all humility, and she most
kindly saluted him, yielding him many hearty thanks for his honorable Love
and kindness shown, in the manifold pains he had taken for her behoof.

Likewise speaking to Adonius, she greatly commended, and kindly thankt him
for his diligent service to Parismus, promising to reward him with all
kindness. So with exceedin^ joy on al sides, they spent the rest of that day,
in pleasant communications, having all things necessary, readily provided by
Tellamor, and diligently ministered by such prisoners as had received their
liberty: who had now so well refresht themselves with wholesome meats, that
they were of sufficient strength, both for their own defense, and the safety
of those that had set them at liberty, whom they exceedingly tendered.

Parismus presently sent a messenger to Barzillus, to certify him of their
happy success, who leaving the custody of the Passage to his trustiest
Soldiers, came to be partaker with them in their reioycings.

But not withstanding, when all thought there was no more cause of sadness,
their quiet and pleasures were darkened by the heavy countenance of Laurana,
who could not forget the death of her young son Parismenos, but still was
purposed to conceal the same from Parismus, which made them greatly to
marvel. And upon a day when Pollipus by the entreaty of Parismus had
rehearsed the whole discourse of all their Adventures in the Desolate Island,
and the occasion of their arrival in that place, Laurana with these sad
remembrances, was put in mind, deeply to compare her own miseries with
theirs, and found them to be greater, for that they were all in safety, but
she missed her young Son, who was untimely lost, which struck such a
sadness into all her Senses, that suddenly she burst into abundance of
tears. Which drove them all into an admiration, that Adonius and Leda seeing
her tears, could not refrain from partaking with her in that sadness, but
(as the custom of Women is) wept for company. Parismus maruelling what was the
cause of her sorrow, and desirous to know the same, for that his heart
therewith was exceedingly tormented, most earnestly entreated her to unfold
the cause of her grief, that he might (i^ it were possible) comfort her
therein.

Laurana being unwilling in the least degree to show her self undutiful to
his will, began to declare the manner of her bringing to that place by the
Pirates, after they had betrayed him on the coast of the Desolate Island, as
also the kindness she had found at Andramarts hands, and how that from time
to time, he had used her in most honorable sort.

But my Lord (quoth she) Andramart had a Sister named Adamasia, who many
times urged me to yield to Love her Brother: Which when she could effect by
no persuasions: First she imprisoned my Servant Leda, next she withhelde from
me (the cause of this my sadness,) my young Son, that was borne in this
unlucky place, whom I caused to be named Parismenos, and with cruel torment
afflicted my body, and daily caused two Olde-Women to whippe me in most
cruel sort, which I was contented to endure. But when she saw that all this
would not prevail, she caused the Nurse that kept Parismenos, to come unto me
with a Message, in this sort; That unless I would in every respect fulfill her
demand, ^hee would before my face strangle that tender Babe.

And being about that cruel deed, I entreated her to refer his punishment
and unnatural Doom, until the next day, since which time I never saw my
tender Babe; nor is he, or his Nurse any where to be found: and afterward
again, she centinued her former manner of cruelty.

Now Andramart all this while by persuasions of his Sister, absented himself
from me (for that she had promised him to obtain my consent to his request)
nothing misdoubting the cruelty she daily used to me. But at length seeing
his suit still frustrated, and finding (as well by mine own report, as by
other manifest prooses) her treachery, and my misery, he would with his
Sword have slain her: but she running away, to avoid his rigor, burst her
neck down a pair of stayres.

The two Olde-Women he likewise slew with his own hands: my Servants he sent
unto me, and ever after again, used me in most kind and good sort. And the
very day when you entered in fight in this Court, he caused me to be lodged in
the place where you found me. The greatest cause of this my sadness is, the
loss of my young Son, whose death was untimely, and whose presence would
have expelled such sad thoughts as have possessed my mind: and disquieted
the happy content I should receive by your honorable presence.

Parismus having heard the sum of her Tragical report, could not choose but
grieve, especially to think of the misery she had endured, and the death of
his young Son, whom he had never seen, that what with his, and Lauranaes
sadness, all the whole company were grown into heaviness. But with the
comfortable persuasions of pollipus, the remembrance of these griefs were
somewhat mittigated. Many days after they stayed in this Castle, in good and
quiet estate, until the longing desire Parismus had to return into Thessalie,
caused him to make provision for his Departure. Tellamor having knowledge
thereof, desired that he would vouchsafe he might attend on him in his
Trauells, for that himself was of Salmatia, who traveling in the search of a
Sister that he had lost, was taken by those Pirates, rehearsing the whole
truth thereof; whereby Parismus knew him to be brother unto the Damsel, in
whose rescue Osiris was wounded, as has been before declared: which caused
him make greater account of him, then before he had done, and enter into a
deep insight of his former courteous behavior, and with all the best
kindness he could, yielded him thanks for the great Friendship he had
showen him, and his friend Pollipus since their arrival: telling him, that he
needed not make any further search for his Sister, for that she was in the
Court of Thessalie, in good health, repeating the whole circumstance of the
Favors he had found a^ her hands, and the manner how she was taken by the
Outlawes. Which news much gladded Tellamors heart, as also that he had lived
to be so happy, as to be esteemed o^ so worthy a Knight as Parismus was: that
having assurance of his Sisters safety, and his own happy Fortune, to have so
fit an occasion to rid himself from bondage, he ever after endeavored by all
dutiful means to grow further into his good favor.

Parismus and Laurana, remaining in happy and peaceable contentedness, by
means of their good success, having respite to view others griefs, began to
note the sad countenance of Pollipus, which before they did not mark: which
caused Parismus suspect that his old Sore was not cured, which was, his Love
to Violetta, wherein he aimed aright: for Pollipus seeing his trauells for
Laurana, were at an end, began to desire to hear some news of Violetta.

And though there was no likelihood fore him to attain her Love, yet the
extreamitie of his affections were such, that he thought he could no way
content himself better, then to spend the rest of his life in her service,
still purposing (according to a most noble and constant Resolution,) never to
desist from showing the true zeal he bare to purchase her favor. Oftentimes
he could spend many hours in secret complaints and Protestations of his
true and loyal Love: wherein (according to the humors of Loue-sicke people)
he thought he did in some measure ease his heart. Which behavior of his,
Violetta well noting, (as being infected with the selfsame disease) would
oftentimes interrept him in his sad Lamentations with such conceytes, that
Pollipus woondered to see such wisdom in a Boy: but by reason that she was
taken to be no other then a Boy, he entered into no deeper consideration of her
actions. In the silent Night time Violetta did with such kindness affect his
complaints, that when he sighed, she likewise sighed: and if he chanced at
any time to complain of his hard Fortune, Violetta would as often bless the
happy time, and hour when she first saw him, and that she was so happy to
be beloved of so honorable a Knight. The variable difference of whose Joys
were contrary: For Pollipus (little thinking his Violetta had been so near
him) continually spent his time in heaviness, not being any way able to
comfort himself with any hope of attayning his wished desire, being eftsoons
terrified with the remembrance of her last doom, and denial to his suit, as
also the manifold mischaunces that might befall her, or that she had so
wilfully thrust herself into, with a thousand other displeasant thoughts,
sufficient enough to discourage any from presuming upon any good success. By
means whereof, he continually remained in most heavy and sad Estate, still
devising how to ease his heart of that care it endured, wherein he greatly
excelled in constancy, the fickle and wandering thoughts of diverse, which are
discouraged from persisting in their first Resolutions, for every small
discom^ture.

Violettaes Joys were as exceeding, as his sorrows were extreme; For ^hee
beheld continually beheld the constancy that reigned in his heart to her
wards, the noble gifts wherewith his mind was endued, the comlines of his
goodly proportion; which might well please a curious Ladies eye, his
unconquered Ualour and prowess, whereby he achieved incredible victories
with great Fame: the friendship and courteous behavior that abundantly flowed
from his gentle heart, whereby it was apparent, that he did not disdain the
meanest persons. Besides, hearing the continual complaints he made of her
hard sentence, and the constancy of his Resolution, for that he determined to
spend his life in her service: and all the pleasure she took in his company,
being never from him in the day time, and his Bedfellow in the night, that she
was privy to all his actions, using many kindnesses, which he full little
thought proceeded from such affection.

And nothing deeming Violetta had been so privy to all his Cogitations, though
she poor soul, never touched his body, but with a trembling fear,
remembering her own Nakedness, still using such a Modest kind of bashfulnesse
in her actions, as if many Eyes had been privy to her Disguise, and
watchfully noted her behavior, wherewith her joys continued in such a secret
content, as is not to be expressed. And one night when she had shrouded her
self within the Bed, as Pollipus lay tossing and tumbling, by reason of the
restless thoughts he endured: In the midst of his heaviness, Violetta
pitying his sorrows, and to draw him from remembering them, uttered these
speeches.

Sir knight (quoth. she) I marvel what passion that is, which so distempereth
your quiet Sleeps, and if my talk be not offensive unto you, I beseech you
make me acquainted with the same: for in all my life time I never beheld the
like in any man. Poor Boy (quoth. Pollippus) it were but folly for me to
express that to thee whereof thou can not judge: for that thy years are not
of sufficiency to entertain such divine cogitations; Divine (quoth. she) Can
divine cogitations so distemper men's wits? Yea (quoth Pollipus) for Love is a
divine and heavenly gift, and Love it is, that so tormenteth me: Not that I
Love, but that I am not beloved again. For in Thessalie I loved a Damsel
named Violetta, whose excellent Beauty, and virtuous gifts, have so inthralled
my Senses, that I fear me Boy, it will be to me a cause of perpetual
heaviness. Whose absence is cause of my grief: and not only that she is
absent, but that I know not where to behold her Attractiue beauty, for even
at my coming from Thessalie, she was (I know not by what misaduenture) missing
to my great sorrow, in whose continual search I am determined to spend the
rest of these my wearysome days.

It is very much, me thinks (quoth she) that you will so much regard her
good, that has shown her self so discourteous toward you, and surely you
are not of my mind, in that you will take such pains to find her out, and in
the end peradventure reap nothing but disdain for your good will: For it is
likely she has made choice of some other Knight, not so worthy to be beloved
as your self, with whom she is departed: Then why will you hazard your
person in the dangers incident to travel, and spend your time, in purchasing
nothing but your own discontent?

Well (replied Pollipus) howsoever I am rewarded, a thousand more perils then
I can imagine shall not discourage me. For were I but so happy as once to
find her, then would I commit the rest to my good Fortune, which shall be
sufficient, if I can but once again make my Love known to her, that she may
have some further trial of my service. If she should not regard you (quoth. she)
according to your hearts content, I should account her the most discourteous
Lady living: and were I in her case, I would endure a thousand deaths, rather
then show my self ungrateful to so honorable and kind a friend: and because
I would see the issue of your love, I desire you that I may be partaker with
you in your Trauells: For though I am altogether unworthy to be esteemed of
you, yet if you would vouchsafe me that kindness, I would both show my
self dutiful and diligent, and also rest continually bound unto you for the
same. And thus far I presume (though my words may seem ridiculous) that if
ever you meeto Violetta, she will yield unto your just suit, for I know
Violetta well, and have been better acquainted with her thoughts, then I was
worthy of, though she now has forsaken her Fathers house, and has absented
her self I know not for what occasion.

Pollipus hearing the Pages words, smiled to think how far it was from his
power, and yet how kind he was to put him in such comfort. Gramercies (quoth.
he) for thy good will, and if ever I meet Violetta, I shall be willing to
yield thee recompense for thy kindness. Then (quoth. she) set your heart at rest
and trouble not your self with those cares, but live in hope of some better
success: for my mind persuades me, that you shall find Violetta safely
returned at your arrival in Thessaly, and if you find it not so, then never
hereafter credit my words, for I have already had trial of the event of my
presaging thoughts, that I have oftentimes found things fall out even according
as I have before deemed. Pollipus hearing the boys speeches, at the first
took them as spoken of course, but being drawn into a deeper consideration of
all his former qualities, began to make a doubt whether he should repose any
credit in them or no, that his heart even with those speeches (yet in his
fancy, bearing no show of likelihood) was somewhat revived, and therefore
determined to make trial of the boys* divination: such virtue had Violettas
speeches, that they wrought an expected event of persuasion, in the heart of
the Loue-sicke Pollipus, who was easily drawn to yield conceit of any
comfort, because he thought Violetta might be still in Thessalie, and so the
Pages words proved true. The rest of that night they past in slumbring
Sleep. The next morning Pollipus came to Parismus Chamber with a far more
cheerful countenance then he was wont, which caused them marvel at his
sudden alteration: and afterward they spent some few days in great pleasure,
and in the mean time made provision for their departure toward Thessalie,
committing the government of the Castle unto two of Andramarts Servants, taking
their oath to yield the same to Parismus again upon his demands, leaving all
the rest likewise so highly contented, as that they account his arrival the
best good fortune that ever befell them. The rest that had been Prisoners
there, departed every one that way that liked them best. Parismus finding the
wind lie convenient for their passage, hoysed sail: himself being in
Barzillus ship with Pollipus and Laurana, having in his company,, three other
ships laden with exceeding riches and treasure, such as Andramarts Pirates had
taken at sea, and made toward the desolate Island, according to the promise
past to Antiochus: where within few days (the wind and weather, favoring
them, they safely arrived) where they were most honorable and lovingly
welcomed, by the king and Queen, and especially by the kings two sons and
daughter, who admired the wonderful beauty of Laurana, accounting the
travails those knights endured, worthily spent, to redeem such and so
virtuous a Lady.

CHAP. XXII.
How Freneta was exceedingly in love with Pollipus. who remembering his love to
Violletta, shunned her company, and how Freneta after his departure,
desperately ended her life.

PArismus, Pollipus and Laurana, soiourned many days in the Desolate Island, in
great joy and mirth, till their hearts began to desire the sight of their
native countries: wherefore, they appointed their time of departure within one
month, which grieved Freneta to hear off, for that she was far in love with
Pollipus, unto whom she used many kind kindnesses, thereby to give him
knowledge of her affections, but so far was his heart from thinking of any
other love then Violetta, that he never note^ the extraordinary kindness she
used to him, which on the other side, caused Freneta to increase the heat of
her affections more and more. But in the end seeing him so little to regard
her, nor scarce at all to entertain her courtesy with good looks, she
determined (though it might be some blemish to her modesty) to manifest her
affection to him, which she presently effected: for finding him walking alone,
attended only by Adonius, she came into the Gallerie where he was, kindly
saluting him as though she would pass by. But Pollipus finding himself idle,
thought to entertain the time a while in some conference with her, and as
kindly saluting her, said. Fair Lady, may I be so bold as to stay your
journey, or if your bustnesse be not great, vouchsafe me your company, that am
alone.

Sir (replied she) my business is not over great, therefore I am the
willingler to stay, especially to bear you company, unto whom I am much
bound, and a greater favor then my company would I grant, so that it stood
with my honor to fulfill: therefore this liberal proffer I make unto you
(whom I know will request nothing but that which is virtuous) that if in any
convenient sort, I may do the thing which may pleasure you, it shall be your
fault if you have not the same. I thank you heartily (quoth Pollipus) and if I
should be ungrateful unto you for this your kindness, I should do much
amiss. And for such desert in me as you speak of, I know none at all, but it
is your abundant Courtesy, that vouchsafes me such favor, which I know not
how to requite, neither can I be so bold, as to bring my self further into
your debt, until I have by my endeavors labored to show my self thankful
for that which you have already granted. Many other speeches past betwixt
them, which if Pollipus had diligently marked, he might easile have seen the
love Frenetta bare him, but he having his devotions vowed to another saint,
perceived it not, which none else but himself would easily have discerned.
Which still increased her burning affection, that at last, fearing to miss the
fit means was offered by so sweet opportunity, taking him by the hand, and
withdrawing to a window that looked into a pleasant garden, with a blushing
countenance she uttered these speeches, Sir knight, contrary to the manner of
modest maide^s, I am compelled to hazard the revealing of ye which may turn to
my disshonor unless it please your virtuous wisdom, to give a favorable censure
of my good meaning, which I am constrained to do, as procured thereto, by the
short abode you determine to make in my fathers Court, as also for that I see
your mind cannot conceive thereof, without I my self make demonstration of the
same. Wherefore most noble knight, relying upon your understanding that love
has seized my heart with a desire to be loved of you again, which makes me
manifest the thing that modesty wills me to conceal. Therefore I desire you to
use that charitable opinion of me, as that my honor may no way be misconceited,
and my grief relieved, which I would never have uttered, but that I shall for
ever heareafter be banished your heavenly company, the affection I bear you
being such, that unless you pity my estate, your depar^re will be the
shortening of my days, and my restless sorrow thereby augmented, in such
sort, that I shall for ever remain in heaviness. Pollipus hearing her
speeches, was half astonished, and now calling to mind her former behavior,
well understood that her kindness proceeded from the affection she had
uttered, that of a sudden he could not tell what answer to make her, that
might in some measure quiet her mind, and rid himself from discourtesie.
Uertuous Lady (quoth he) I see that I am more beholding unto you, then I
either expected or have deserved, being sorry that you have placed your
affection on him yt had not recompenst your kindness by any merit, and one that
is altogether unworthy to be so higly esteemed at your hands: but lady, as I am
now in no measure able to yield you ye thanks that I would, so I trust
hereafter my ungratefulness shall not cause you repent your kindness. At which
instant Laurana by occasion entered the gallerie, by means whereof they left off
their speeches to salute her, of whose coming Pollipus was glad, and a while
companied them, in such communication as occasion offered. Violetta all this
while, had well noted Frenetas behauior toward Pollipus, and listened to their
talk which struck a sudden fear into her mind, least her speeches might
move Pollipus to yield to her desire, for that she was very beautiful,
besides that the daughter of a king, that ever after she grew into an extreme
jealousy of her, that Pollipus could never in all the time of his abode there,
be in any place, but she would still attend him, that he wondered at the pages
diligent attendance, which proceeded not from the lawful duty of a servant
(as he supposed) but from the faithful love of a friend. Pollipus having left
Freneta with Laurana in the gallerie, got to his lodging, to meditate of
Frenetas rash motions, and distemperate love, and the manifold inconveniences
that might arise thereby, as well to call his honor in questions, for that it
would be thought it was procured by his persuasions, as also for that it
seemed she was grown to that desperatenes in love, that unless she might
enjoy the thing she desired, it would much endanger her self, and rather then
he would think a thought to violate his vowed loyalty to Violetta, himself
would endure death. For Violetta, (though she were no Kings daughter) yet by
reason of her exceeding beauty she was much spoken of in Thebes, and nothing
inferior to Freneta in gifts of mind, the remembrance of whose perfections,
together with his love, had so much bound him in the inviolable bonds of
true friendship to his first beloved, that for ever after he eschued all
occasions to come in Frenetaes sight, but still kept company with Parismus,
unto whom he unfolded the whole circumstance of that which had passed between
him and Freneta, which when Parismus understood, he told him that she was an
honorable Lady, and that in his opinion, he should do her wrong to reject her
love, which should proceed from a virtuous inclination, using many
persuasions to that effect. Which when Pollipus heard, he said. My Lord, I
cannot so much wrong my dear Violetta, as so soon to yield over my fancy to
love another, and forget her perfections: in whose service I have vowed to
spend the rest of my life. Then good my Lord do not so much injury that
virtuous maiden, who in Thessalie has so much honored you, for I will never
yield to love any but her most worthy self, so long as my life both last.
Parismus then answered friend Pollipus, I would not any way wrong Violetta, nor
your self, if I saw any likelihood that you should ever see her again: and
yet so much I commend your resolution, as that I shall ever extol those
honorable parts that rule your heart, where by I my self have been
preserved, and obtain the height of all felicity, neither do I utter any
word to alter your affection from Violetta, but to make trial of your
virtues, which still continue perfect. And since our abode in this place, may
again turn to our disparagement and hinderance, I will by all means
possible, hasten our departure toward Thessalie, whereby, by good hap, you
may find the party that withholdeth your happy joys, unto whom I will use
all the persuasions I can to purchase your content. And also during our staying
here, I will labor all that I can, to stay the rash increase of Frenetaes
love. Adonius standing and hearing their speeches, and much a do to refrain
from tears, which melted in his tender heart, to see the kindness of these
two friends, and the care they took to find her in Thessalie, who was
continually in their presence. Pollipus ever after shunned all occasions, that
Frenetta most earnestly sought to have some further conference with him, but
when she plainly saw that he nothing regarded her love, but still eschewed her
company, she fell into such heaviness, and set the grief thereof so near her
heart, yt in short time she grew so weak, that she kept her Chamber, not once
uttering to any the cause of her sadness, though her parents earnestly
labored to know the same, which turned their joy into care, and their former
pleasure into he aninesse. Pollipus having knowledge thereof, would never come
at her, until the very day of their departure, and choosing a convenient time
when she was alone, only attended by a damsel, he entered her Chamber: she
no sooner espied him but her poor heart began to leap for joy, expecting some
kindness, but Pollipus taking her by the hands, said; Courteous Lady, I am at
length come to your presence, to satisfy your mind for that which I would have
you to know. Your love to me (that am unworthy thereof) and the little account
I seem to make of the same, has brought you to that weakness you remain
in, which if so it be, I am most heartily sorry: but for that I am now
departing this country, I would now satifie you in any thing I could:
therefore I entreat you to mitigate the extremity of your passions, which I
cannot salve, for that long since, I vowed my service unto a Lady in Thessalie,
unto whom I am bound by many inviolable bonds of passed promises: neither can I
be disloyal to her without impeachment of mine honor, which is the only Jewel
I most esteem: then let me persuade you to abstain from loving him, that
cannot show himself so kind as he would, and you deserve, but banish from your
mind, all good conceit or opinion of me, that must against my will be
ungrateful: and if in any other sort, I may do the thing with hazard of my life
that may content you, I am here ready to accomplish your will. And in my
absence do not accuse me of inhumanity, for I may not nor will not, do any Lady
wrong: upon whose favor, my life, if it were ten thousand times dearer,
depends. Freneta hearing his resolute and uncomfortable words, fell in a
deadly swound, which her maid perceiving, labored to revive her again: in
the mean time, he departed to Parismus, and having solemnly taken their leave
of the King and Queen, who endured their departure with great heaviness, they
hasted to their ships, and soon launced into the maine, and with a prosperous
gale sailed toward Thessalie. Freneta being revived from her trance, and
missing Pollipus (whom she thought had been still by her) fell into an extreme
exclamation of his discourtesie, with that vehemency, that her brethren
hearing her ragings, demanded the cause of her sorrow, which she uttered in
all respects, as has bin before declared. Which rashness in her, they
reproved with such bitter terms, that her care for Pollipus disdain, did
not now so much green her, as their unkindness. That a multitude of griefs
and vexation, so overwhelmed her careful and tender heart, that for ever
after, she continued in perpetual exclamations, against her cruel destenies,
that with the extremity of grief, she became lunaticke and quiet bereft of
sense, and so ended) her life. Which struck such a sorrow to old Antiochus and
his Queens heart, that within short space (as by the first coming of the
knights) they had received their joyful liberty, so by their last departure,
they received the cause of their death: leaving their two sons to rule the
Island, who governed the same in such peaceful quietness, that within short
space, it grew to be as famous as ever it had been in the first beginning of
their fathers reign.

CHAP. XXIII.
How Parismus with prosperous success arrived in Thessalie, and of the
exceeding joy that was made for his return.

WIth prosperous success, Parismus in few days landed on the shores of
Thessaly, which he (for joy he was safely returned with his beloved Laurana)
a thousand times saluted, with glad looks. Laurana likewise felt her heart
possessed with an exceeding delight to behold her native soil, where her
careful Parents lived, unto whom she would bring unmeasurable comfort. Pollipus
he was animated to comfort by an inward persuasion to hear some news of his
Violetta, and Violetta was affected with no less gladness then any of the
rest, in that she was so happily returned with the virtuous knight Pollipus,
and the remembran^e of her parents sight, which she much desired to enjoy, that
their joys on all sides were so exceeding, that there was no person
whatsoever, but had his heart fully replenished with gladness every way. When
they were landed, Parismus determined to send a messenger to the City of
Thebes, with report of their health and happy arrival, which Pollipus destred
to execute: and Arming himself in an Azure armor, beset with stars of
gold, and gallantly mounted with his spear in his rest, he hasted toward
the City, and he rode along the streets, multitudes of people forsook
their houses, and business, to behold him, and noting his gallant proportion,
thereby remembered the want of the valiant Parismus, that their hearts were
affected with a wonderful persuasion, that either it was himself, or some
happy Messenger that brought good tidings of his safety, that by infinite
multitudes they followed after him to the Court, being desirous to know from
whence he was.

Pollipus coming to the Palace, beheld a wonderful alteration there since
his departure, for all were attired in mourning weeds, and every thing seemed
to show a sign of sadness. When Dionisius had knowledge that there was a
knight that had brought a message unto him, he could not judge whence he
might be, for that he was in Armor, and rather took him to be a Herault at
Arms, then a Messenger that brought news of peace.

But dinner being then newly ended he was brought into the great Hall, where
was Oliuia, the Queen, the King and Queen of Hungaria, the Prince of Sparta,
with his young married Queen Clariana, Daughter to the King of Hungaria, the
Lord Remus, who had lately married Isabella: and many other. When Pollipus was
entered, humbling himself upon his knee before the King, he uttered these
speeches.

Most High and Mighty King, I bring you news of the safety of your highness
Daughter Laurana: who a^ this instant, with her espoused Lord, remains in
good health, humbly saluting your Majesty, in all duty by me. They are by this
time on the plains of Pharsalia, addressing themselves toward this noble
City, where within short space, they will arrive.

Dionisius hearing his message, took him by the hand, and embraced him. Knight
(quoth he) thou have brought me such pleasant news that I can hardly believe,
I may be so happy as to live to see them: neither be thou offended at my
incredulity, for my misfortune has been such, as I cannot any way rely upon
the certainty of any thing. With which words the tears stood in his eyes.

Pollipus lifting up his Beuer, said: My Lord, upon mine honor, that which I
report, is most true. Dionisius knowing him, with great joy embraced him: the
Queen, and all the rest, could not sufficiently on the sudden express their
joy, but yielded all kind and honorable welcomes that they could devise to
welcome him withal. Which news was soon bruted through the Court and City,
and the King, and almost all in general, went out presently to meet them. The
Courtiers they rejoiced, the Citizens they caused Bonfires to be made, the
Bellesrung, the Drums and Trumpets sounded: yea, such mirth and reioycings,
began on all sides, as if the people had been newly risen from death, in
respect of the sadness that possessed their hearts, before these happy news
came. Dionisius with great joy, rode to meet his children, being accompanied
by the King of Hungaria, the Prince of Sparta, and many other knights and
gentlemen, belonging to the king of Hungaria, that attended Clariana, and they
had not rode far out of the city but they met them. Where Dionisius lovingly
embraced Parismus and Laurana (who reverently kneeled at his feet) and with
tears, proceeding from the excess of exceeding joy welco^med their return:
when Dionisius uttered these speeches. Welcome my dear Son, your happy
arrival has banished my former hearts sorrow, and as by your departure, and
news of your misfortunes, our heaviness increased, so by your prosperous
arrival our hearts are refreshed, with joy, I see your virtues still
ouermaister adverse misery, and whatsoever is in your custody, is safely
protected from calamity: my gladness for your return, I cannot express, for
yt I feel my self surprised with exceeding delight, When he had ended his
speeches, he took Laurana by the hand and embraced her with exceeding
rejoicing. Each noble personage having saluted Parismus, and welcomed their
return in courteous sort, they entered the city, whether they were welcomed
with such exceeding gladness on all sides, as could possibly be devised and
the true hearts of loving subjects express. The streets, windows, house tops,
and every place were so befraught with a bundance of people, as there was
almost no passage left for them to get the Palace. Violetta, among all the
rest beheld her careful father, standing in his door, weeping to see the
mirth, al else inioyed but himself, who continued in great heaviness for the
loss of his daughter: which sight attainted her heart, with such grief, that
the passage of her Crystal tears, issued with such abundance, yt all the
company wondered thereat, when all else endured great pleasure being come to
the Palace they were on all sides welco^med with unspeakable kindness.
Dionisius caused most costly meat to be provided, for their repast, and in
the mean time caused Parismus to set down by him, and Laurana by her
mother, accompanied by Clariana and Isabella, three of the fairest creatures
that ever eye beheld. When Parismus at the request of the King repeated the
whole manner of their misaduenture, from the beginnig of their shipwreck,
until their return, with such exceeding commendation of the noble vaiour, and
perfect kindness he had found in Pollipus that all admired and applauded his
victories, that he uttered these speeches. Most noble father, by the valor of
my friend Pollipus, have we escaped the great dangers we fell into: therefore
I beseech your highness, esteem of him, as the only preserver of your
childrens lives whose noble wisdom has still preserved us, and his prowes
mightily defended us, without whom, we had never enjoyed this happy hour to
see your honorable presence. Dionisius hearing his speeches rose from his
seat, and embraced Pollipus with great kindness, yielding him many thanks.
Thus repleat with exceeding joy on all sides, they spent the rest of the day,
in kind salutations, and pleasant communication, each friend with other.
Except Pollipus, whose heart longed till he had visited old Andrugia, he found
him sitting in a chair, be wailing his own misfortune, which struck such
exceeding sadness to Pollipus heart, that he could endure no company, nor enjoy
no quiet. Telamor there found his sister, in whose search, he had endured so
many miseries. Barzillus, was honorably welcomed by Dionisius, and richly
rewarded by Parismus, besides all the Treasure that he had taken at the Island
of Rocks. Leda was kindly welcomed by her fellows. Parismus spent his time in
pleasant discourses with the King his Father in law, the King of Hungaria, and
Prince of Sparta. Laurana in company of Clariana, and Isabella, and many other
gallant Ladies, related her happy escape from misfortune. Pollipus only gave
his mind to all sorrow and pensiveness, enduring the absence of Violleta,
with wonderful grief: And seeing that he could hear no news of her abode,
determined the next day without fail to depart in search of her.

CHAP. XXIX.
How Pollippus intended to depart in search of Uioletta, was by her staid: and
how she discovered herself unto him. What joy Parismus and Laurana took for
her safety, and the manifold honors they did her, and how afterward she was
affianced to Pollippus.

EArly the next morning, Pollipus Armed himself, causing his Horse to be
prepared in a readiness, and coming where Dionisius was seated in his
Royalty, accompanied by the noble and Gallant States that were in his Court,
humbled himself upon his knee, and said:

Most mighty King, I cannot render you thanks sufficient, for the least favor
I have received at your hands. Nevertheless, I am now bold to presume into
your presence, to request consent to a matter, that much concerns me: which
peradventure, you will rather judge to proceed from folly, then wisdom. For so
it is, most Noble King, that I have made a vow to travel in search of a
friend. In which travel I am determined to spend the rest of my wearisome
life, without whose presence, my life will be hateful unto me. Then I beseech
your Highness to show me that favor, as I may obtain your free consent to
depart at this instant, for my heart has vowed never to rest in any place,
until I be fully assured of my friends prosperity. Dionisius hearing his
request, was sorry so soon to leave him, and therefore taking him up most
kindly by the hand, he said.

Most worthy Knight, to whom both my self and all mine are much bound, it were
a hard matter I would deny you: but in this let me entreat you to stay some few
days with us, that we may make you some small recompense for your pains, and
not so soon leave us, who are much delighted with your company: and rather let
me perswad you to leave off this resolution, for the dangers incident to
travel are many, and your self have lately sufficiently tried, and if that in
short space you do not hear tidings, according to your content, you shall
have all the furtherance I can give you, to do what seems best to your self.

My Lord (replied Pollipus) my staying in this place cannot pleasure you, but
rather be offensive, for that my sorrows without some good hope of comfort,
will exceed the limits of reason: neither will it (I hope) delight your
Majesty to see my grief, which I can by no means avoid. Therefore I beseech
your Highness, not to intend me any further honor, but let me have your
license to depart that have already sufficiently tasted of your bounty.

Parismus seeing his intention, used all manner of frindly and kind
persuasions to dissawde him from his purpose, but he as earnestly entreated his
consent, for his heart was oppresed with that care, that no other thought could
take place in his Fancies, but very shortly he determined to begin his
travels.

Violetta seeing that now or never was the time to work his and her own
content, resolved to manifest her self, and with her best diligence attended
him all that day, fearing least he should depart secretly, and at night when he
went to his bed, (not with intent to sleep, but to pour forth his usual
lamentations) Violetta likewise was with him, showing a sad countenance to see
his sorrow.

But when she had tenderly coucht her self by his manly side, she could not
devise how to grow into conference with him, being strooken with such a
delightful fear, to discover her self, as she had never felt the like. At
last she said, most miserable knight, I am sure now you give no credit to my
words, because you find not Violetta here, according as I promised you should:
neither have I any comfort to attain the favor at your hands I expected,
because your pensiunesse will not permit me. But might I be so bold as to
crave one request at your hands, which if you please to vouchsafe me, I promise
you, that you shall find my words before spoken true (for that I know where
Violetta is) and promise you again to do more for you with her, then any
living, but her self. Tush boy (quoth Pollipus) do not go about to delude me
with fond speeches, for thou can not perform any thing that can further me
herein. My Lord said she, do but try me once more, and if I fail, then let
me endure the most heavy doom of your everlasting displeasure. Adonius (quoth
he) if it be to pleasure thee any way, I will galdly do it, for the
friendship I have found in thee: then I pray thee as thou love me, and
tendrest the sorrows I endure, do not delay me with thy speeches, for I know
they proceed from kindness, to make me forget my sadness, and not to do me any
benefit in the thing thou speak of, for I shall never be so happy as to be
beloved of her, who I fear me left her fathers house to shun my company. But
notwithstanding the little hope of comfort I conceive by thy means to pleasure
thee before I depart, tell me what it is thou demandest, and if it be in my
power thou shall obtain it. Violetta was ashamed to utter her mind in that
place, but being sure he could not behold her blushing Cheeks, said: the
request that I make is this, that you will give me your faithful promise,
that at such time as it is you hap to meet Violetta, and obtain her good
will, that the first night you will not offer to do any thing that may tend to
her dishonor. Upon mine houour said Pollipus, I will not do any thing
whatsoever disagreeable to her will, for so dear do I esteem her, that I
would rather destroy my self then she should be any way displeased with me.
Then know, worthy knight (quoth she) I am that Violetta you so earnestly
enquire after, I am the party that have so long time procured your discontent,
and I am she whose absence you have so often bewailed, and now I am constrained
to manifest my self unto you desiring you to pardon my hard hartednesse, that
have so long concealed my self, and thereby procured your disquiet. Pollipus
hearing her speeches, could not tell what to say, being half persuaded it was
she, by remembering her countenance, and the behauior she had used in all, their
travels: as also calling to mind her kindness, and now at length her own
speeches, could not resolve what to do, for that his fancy still persuaded him
it was not Violetta. And on the other side, he had a mighty persuasion it might
be she: at last he said. I know not what to conjecture, nor how to behave my
self, nor whether I should call you Adonius, or Violetta, considering how
unlikely it is she should be so kind to me, and how certain I am that Adonius
has done me manifold pleasures. Then sweet Violetta (if you are she) resolve
me of this my doubt, being thereby driven to that hopeful despair, that I
know not whether my fortune be better or worse then it was. Violetta shrinking
a little back, said. Pardon me dear Polipus, for I am your unworthy friend
Violetta, that have in this disguise, made trial of my fortune, and your
friendship. Pollipus then took her most lovingly in his arms, not offering
other then his former promise did permit. Yet he was in a doubt still, and
could not be quiet, until he had used such kind means (yet far from
dishonor) as thereby he found she was a virgin, and no Page and therefore
assured himself it was Violetta: and folding her delicate and tender body in
his manlike arms which he had oftentimes before embraced, but not with such
kindness, banishing all sadness from his sorrowful heart) with sweet and
delightful tontent, he embraced her with that kindness that long parted
Lovers enjoy, when they so pleasantly meet, spending the rest of the night in
pleasing and delightful communication, and remembrances of their former
kindnesses, which augmented their joys to an exceeding height. Oftentimes
Pollipus would have exceeded the limits of his former promise: but she
reserved that favor, for the more honorable delight of their Nuptial Bed,
but with many pleasures, such as true and loyal kindness yeeldes. Thus these
two kind friends spent the time, Violetta accounting her self most happy so
enjoy so constaut a friend, as she had found him by certaineties in their
travel, and he esteemed himself as happy, that he was beloved of Violetta,
that had not refused to hazard her self in many dangers for his sake. At
last, their minds being both at quiet, and satified with blisfull content,
these two faithful lovers fell fast a sleep, Parismus enduring much
heaviness for his friends departure, could scarcely entertain a minutes rest
to his troubled head, therefore he was early up, with intent to persuade
Pollipus (if he could) from undertaking that journey: and presently after these
lovers were a sleep, he entered his Chamber, where contrary to his
premeditated expectation, he found him fast a sleep: and Adonius in most
loving sort, laying one hand under Pollipus head, and the other embracing his
manly breast: seeming in his conceit, the delightfullest sight that ever he
beheld: the supposed page being so beautiful, that had he not known him, he
would have judged Venus her self had been there, to comfort Pollipus with her
sweet embracings. But seeing his dear friend in such quiet and sweet rest, he
withdrew himself, to meditate how to work his friends comfort, and stay his
journey. By which time, the Sun had lightened all the Chamber with his golden
brightness, the clearenes of whose splendour, shining full upon these lovers,
awaked Pollipus, but Violetta still lay sweetly slumbring, and Pollipus
shadowing her with the curtains, arose, and soon found Parismus walking at
his chamber door, who seeing him, said. My dear friend Pollipus, I had
thought to have found you ready armed to depart, according to your resolution
yesterday, but I hope you are rather determined to alter that purpose, and stay
with us, who desire nothing more then your company: and were not Adonius well
known to me I should think you had embraced some divine Goddess in that kind
sort: but notwithstanding, let me entreat you stay some longer time with us,
which was the only cause of my coming unto you at this instant. And I desire
you for all the friendship that has passed betwixt us, bring me so much more
in your debt, by obtaining this favor at your hands. My Lord (quoth,
Pollipus) I must confess I am too sluggish to be found sleeping at this
instant, while my mind should be busied with more weighty matters. Indeed,
according to your saying (my Lord) I think I have either embraced some
goodness, or a more divine creature: for my former resolution to travel is
quite dissolved, and my heart at more quiet then it has bin: for my dear
Violetta has been so kind as to visit me this night, showing my heart that
cause of joy, as for ever while I live, I shall account my self bound to her:
and because your honor has both bin acquaintd with my love, and al my intents,
and have vouchsafed me that favor that I shall never requite, I well show yon
the cause of my gladness. Violetta has disguised her self, and bin with us
in all the time of our travels, and Adonius is now changed to Violetta, and
has discovered her self unto me, which was more strange to me then it may
seem to you. Parismus hearing his speeches, called her favor to remembrance,
and perfectly knew that it was Violetta, wondering that in so long time as she
was in the disguise of Adonius, he could never perceive the same, nor once
suspect it, which affected his heart with exceeding joy: and taking Pollipus by
the hand, they walked together to Laurana, who greatly rejoiced at his happy
news, and presently commanded Leda to carry apparel unto her, and all things
that were necessary, which she presently executed, and at her coming found
Violetta newly awaked, and told her that Laurana had sent her that apparel,
which Violetta was well contented with. Parismus, Pollipus, and Laurana, by
this time were come where she was, who stood with a bulshing countenance like
Venus intrapt in Vnlcans net, but Parismus took her by the hand, and said:
Blush not virtuous damosel, for it rejoices my heart to see you here, could you
be so unkind as in all the time of your travel, never to make your self
known till now? Well, I see you have wisdom in making your choice, and well
have you deserved to be beloved of Pollipus, who I am sure will perform no
less, neither need you any more trial of his love, for that you have been
privy to many infallible proofs thereof. Violetta kneeling uttered these
speeches, I thank your honor, that vouchsafe me this extraordinary favor,
as to visit me, that have showed my self unworthy thereof: but I trust I
need not now stand upon nice terms to this worthy knight, for that I may be
fully assured of his fidelity: neither can I seem strange, having been so
long time acquainted with his love. But if my boldness has not c^used his
misconceyte of me, I here offer my self for ever to be at his disposition:
desiring you (most worthy knight) to pardon whatsoever you have found amiss
in me, or disagreeing of a maidens chaste behavior, and with a favorable
opinion, consure of my rashness, both to try your virtues, as also to disguise
my self, wherein I have done (so near as I could) nothing that might any way
disgrace my chastity, or dishonor my name. Pollipus taking her in his arms,
said: Sweet and kind love, should I be so barbarous, as to misdeeme your
virtues, or bear any other then the most courteous conceit of your kindness,
then I might be accounted the most inhumane creature living, but contrary to
my desert, I account my self so enriched and honored by your love, that for
ever I shall endeavor to be thankful unto you for the same: and beseech you
thus to esteem of me, that it will be more grievous unto me then death, to
be out of your favor. Then I desire you let your heart repose that good trust
in me, that no misery, calmitie, death, nor affliction, shall cause me once,
in wdrd or deed, to be disloyal to your self, that vouchsafe me the heavenly
happiness I desire.

Laurana all this while, diligently beholding Violettaes modest countenance and
bashfulnesse, came unto her, and embraced her in most familiar sort, saying?
Most virtuous damosel, be not discomforted nor abashed at your disguise, for it
cannot be taken otherwise then virtuous: for by the same, you have shown a
great token of wisdom, to make so infallible a trial of the constancy of
your friend, neither trouble your self with any misconceited opinion of your
Chastity, for none can be so discourteous, as to disallow the same. And as for
my self, I am so fully assured of your Uertues, that I shall for ever hate
them, that shall once think otherwise then honorably of you, and hereafter
make account to find me as your most faithful Friend, for at all times I
will esteem you as my Sister, and whatsoever lies in my power to do you
good, shall be ready at your command. Violetta kneeling down, most humbly
thanked her, for her Honorable kindness. Laurana taking her by the hand, led
her down into the great Hall, where she was entirely welcomed by the King and
Queen, and by all the rest of the States, with maruailous loving kindness:
who having knowledge of her, exceedingly commended her Uertues, and being
informed of the truth of all that had passed between her and Pollipus, (by his
own report) grew into such a good liking of her, and so much esteemed her
wifedome, that they accounte^ him the most Fortnate Knight living, to make
choice of so virtuous a Wife.

And presently her Father was sent for, who with great ioyfulnesse welcomed
his Daughter. Within few days, by the appointment of Dionisius, she was most
Solemnly married to Pollipus, with great Royalty, to both their exceeding
contentments, and to the rejoicing of all them that were there present.

Afterward all Thessalie remained in great tranquillity, and these kind
Friends continued still in Dionisius Court many days, until Parismus once
again desired to see his native Country of Bohemia, where within short time
after his departure from Thessaly, he safely arrived, as shall be declared in
the second part of this History, which shall be called by the Name of
Parismenos, wherein shall be she ^ne at large, the strange discourse and
manner of his bringing up by his Nurse, that fled with him from the Tyrant
Andramarts Castle, in the Island of Rocks, with the rehearsal of many strange
adue^tures he achieved, before he came to his parents, Thus courteous Readers,
you see the first fruits of my green labor, rudely put into your courteous
hands: which if you please to grace but with a favorable opinion, I will in
the next History, endeavor to make you some part of amends: But if this shall
not be kindly accepted, you shall for ever discourage me from bestowing any
more idle time, in these or any other such like exercises.

FINIS.
GEentlemen, if a stranger may request a favor, (which I am sure no honest
well-willer to Learning will deny,) then let me entreat you in the behalf of
my friend, (the Author hereof) to affoorde him your kind acceptance of this
his first labor, which I am the more earnestly to crave at your courteous
hands, because I animated him unto the same. For coming one day into his
Chamber, I found (amongst other things) this History of Parismus roughly penned
by him, and carelessly cast by in loose papers, as minding that it should never
have come to the press. But I gathering them together, and reading them, found
the invention so pretty, the matter so delightful, and the Style (although
plain,) yet so pleasing, as (liking it,) requested him to suffer it to come
abroad, assuring him, that it could not but be generally well liked of the
better sort.

Andtherefore since he has through my persuasions performed the same, do not
you (I pray you.) discourage him in his first attempts, but kindly accept his
will meaning intention, which was to please al, and displease none. So shall
you win him, to finish what he has promised, that is, the second part:
which I protest, I will hasten him to do with as much speed as may be. Fare
ye well.

Your Friend. L. P.

THE SECOND PART OF THE MOST FAMOVS DElectable, and pleasant History of
Parismus, the renowned Prince of Bohemia.

THE ADVENTVROVS TRAVELS and noble Chivalry of Parismenos, the KNIGHT OF FAME,
in diverse Countries.

The fourth time Imprinted and amended.

VERITAS VIRESSIT VULNERE
TC

printer's or publisher's device

LONDON, Printed by Thomas Creed, 1615.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, NOBLE, PRVdenc, and virtuous Lady, the Countess of
Essex, the Almighty grant everlasting Honor and Happiness.
ANimated by the view of your manifold virtues, (Right Honorable Lady,) I
have presumed to shrowde this simple work, under the Harbor of your
protection, resting in confidence, your Honor will vouchsafe to accept the
same, although not for the worthiness, yet for the well meaning intent of the
Writer; who in all duty Dedicateth his endeavors, to deserve your Honorable
favor. Trusting your favorable and prudent Censure, will extinguish the
blemish of my over boldness: and your wisdom receive with favor, what is
offered with affection

Pythias Apollo, re^used not to drink in wooden dishes: Alexander the great
and m^ghtie Monarke disdained not to Travel to visit simple Diogenes, in his
Cell. Not the gifts value but the giuers good will, has been always
esteemed. Even so I rest in hopeful assurance, that (of your own Most
Honorable and virtuous inclination to favor Learning) you will daine to take
this small gift, proceeding from my hearty good will. Which I am bold to
present to your protection, thereby in some sort to express my humble duty,
which binds me to give your worthiness a far better present then this, if
my ability were correspondent.

The dutyfull regard I bear to your laudable gyfts, being such, that I am
unable (having no other mean) to express the same: Humbly beseeching your
Honor to accept this gift in place of a better; and my humble and dutiful
meaning, in steed of a better performance: And (according to your virtuous
Bounty) vouchsafe to protect this Talent of my poor Labors, under the title
of your Honorable Patronage. Which shall bind me to invoke the Almighty,
to indue your Noble mind with innumerable virtues, increase your Honors,
enrich you with all blessings, and reward you with eternal happiness.

Your Honors in all duty. Emmanuell Forde.

TO THE COURTEOUS READER.
GENTLEMEN, according to my promise, I have set forth this Second part of
Parismus; which I wish may prove worthy your Favor and kind Estimation, the
Anckors whereon my Hopes depend; and though it deserve not so much, yet let my
good meaning therewith purchase the same. If you find any imperfections, pass
them over with a careless respect; and if ought please your Fancy, let it
ceunteruaile that which is amiss. If neyth^r well, nor amiss, then I pray
rest indifferent: and let your courtesy be greater then my boldness; and your
Favor beyond my desert. My intent was to please, but if not, my labors are
ill bestowed, and my hap the harder: If I may breed any delight to the
well-minded, or purchase any good opinion of the Well-willers to Learning, then
I have the reward I expect.

One peradventure will say, the invention is barren; another, the English is
harsh; a third, all is naught. Yet let me answer in mine own behalf, that
which is lightly disco^mended, is not easily amended; and the work well done,
that pleases all: and that very harsh, that none likes. But I submit my self
to the wise, courteous, and learned: whom I trust will vouchsafe to esteem
favorably of my good intent: that though I am not able to compare with any:
yet I am willing to prove worthy: and have taken some pains to procure their
good opinion, unto which I submit my self. As for Momus mates, that are
contented with nothing, yet desire most; I let them pass as regardles, whom. I
neither care to please or displease: but if my fortune be so adverse, that I
cannot procure their delight I would, then I plead penitencie: protesting I was
in good hope of their favor. Knowing this, that which disagrees with ones
fancy, may delight another.

So that I am in hope this poor Treatise may pass, with the favorable
opinion of some, th^gh not of all yet especially of the courteous: That I st^l
rest in hope. I shall not be frustrated in all my expectation, but reap your
courtous Censure, for my good mea^ng. And so I com^tte you to the Heavens
protection.

Your Friend, E. Ford.

AA


THE SECOND PART OF THE MOST FAMOVS delectable and pleasant History of
Parismus, the renowned Prince of Bohemia, his travels with the valiant Knight
Pollipus, in search of Violletta.
CHAP. I.
How Parismus after Pollippus Marriage, departed from Thessalie. And of a
strange adventure befell them in Bohemia.

AFter that Pollipus had wedded Violetta, (as is declared in the first part
of this History,) and every one in Dionisius Court enjoyed his own hearts
content, Parismus again desired to see his native country of Bohemia, from
whence he had been long time absent: as also to comfort his aged Parents,
who languishded with extreme sorrow, doubting that he was perished.

Parismus now determined to take his journey by land, the rather for that
Lauranacould not brook the Seas, the passage being long and dangerous, that
within few days Parismus (having with Laurana, Pollipus, Violetta, Tellamor,
Barzillus, and two hundredth Knights, being honorably accompanied onward of
their journey, by Dionisius and Oliuia, the King of Hungaria the Prince of
Sparta, and his beloved Clariana, Lord Remus, and Lady Isabella, with thousands
of the citizens of Thebes,) left the bounds of Thessalie, to the exceeding
grief of all, especially to the King and Queen, whose farewelles were expressed
with exceeding sorrow^s, and hearts replenished with sadness, whose care for
their welfare, and prayers for their prosperous success, were uttered with a
bundance of tears. They on the other side, with like heavy coffeehouse,
and sad sighs, left their delightful company, with whom they could
everlastingly have remained, if waighti^ occasions had not withdrawn them. To
recount their travails, and the countries they ouerpast, would be tedious, the
rather for that they were neither crossed by misfortune, nor any way indaungered,
but achieved the tediousness thereof, with prosperous success, and within
few days, they arrived in the wished country of Bohemia, whither Parismus,
welcomed Laurana, with these speeches. Now most dear Lady, you set foot on
the Bohemian s^ile, whither I have long time wished to conduct you, desiring
you to account both it and all therein, as yours to dispose of, and though by
your departure, you left your parents in heaviness, your friends in care, and
your subjects discontented: yet here shall you ^inde parents, whom you shall
raise from heaviness, friends whom you shall comfort, and subjects whose
pensive hearts will be revived with your presence. Then I beseech you, let no
disquiet thought trouble your kind hearts content, but esteem your self both
welcome and beloved in Bohemia, for thousands of my subjects have already
devoted their lives to your command. And dear friends quoth he, as my self I
esteem you, and as my self, esteem your selves welcome hither, for your
kindness has deserved that estimation and recompense, that I am not able to
make. And dear friend Pollipus, my faithful partner in woe, make you account
of all mine as your own, for well have you deserved all kind estimation and
friendship of me, whom you have infinitely bound to you in all league of
affection. The Bohemians soon had knowledge of their arrival, and by infinite
troops came to meet them. Among the rest, Aurestes an ancient noble man,
desired Parismus to vouchsafe him such honor, to grace his poor mansion with
his presence, and to expect of his unworthy entertainment, to refresh, himself
after his tedious travails: whose kind offer Parismus courtiously accepted:
where he and the princess Laurana were so honorably and lovingly entertained,
as that the and the rest that were strangers, exceedingly maruailed there at.
The aged King and Queen, having intelligence that Parismus was arrived, and in
safety, cast off their former habit of sadness and bannished cares which long
had tormented them, and with exceeding joy, unwonted state, and inexplicable
Majesty, went forth to meet him, Royally accompanied with gallant troops of
Estates. Parismus seeing his aged parents, with all reverence humbled himself
to them: who could have spent many hours only embracing him, but seeing
Laurana, they both came unto her, most lovingly welcomming her, expressing the
same with tears, proceeding from the depth of kindness: withal uttering these
words. Most virtuous, kind, and honorable Princesses, our words cannot
express your welcome, nor our deeds show our good will, our joy for your
presence is not to be described, and our entertainemnt too simple to entertain
you, according to our desires. Which said, the aged Queen after a loving
embrace, took her by the hand, and all the Ladies of high estate, saluted her
with most reverent behauiours, The good King knowing Pollipus, embraced and
welcomed him with great kindenes: likewise the Queen welcomed Violetta, and
on every side, all expressed their joy, for their happy arrival. Bonfires were
made in the City, the Bells ^oong in the Country, and triumphs in the Court,
some welcomed them with gifts, some with mirth, some with praises, and all
with joy and exceeding reioicings, which my dulled pen is altogether unskillful
to describe, the King and Queen, exceedingly rejoiced in their Sons virtuous
choice: and in Lauranes presence. Laurana was affected with great delight to
see their kindness, Parismus had his still of content, and altogether greatly
admired Lauranaes beauty, and did their best to welcome and entertain the
whole company that came with Parismus, with all Courtesy: that the Bohemian
Court, which lately had been darkened with the mists of sorrow, was now
beautified with the pleasant assemblies of Knights and Ladies, that repaired
thither to welcome home Parismus, and behold the Princess Laurana, In which
place they continued many days after. But Fortune whose constancy was never
permanent, but dispe^th their content.

Pollipus and Violetta upon a day walked forth for recreation, some half mile
from the Court, into a most pleasant shadie g^ne woo^, which by means of the
coolness and abundance of sweet smelling flowers, wherewith it was adorned,
and by natural slight was so pauised, with the assistance of l^le t^igges and
sprayes, that neither the heat of the Sun, nor vehemency of wind could
molest it, that the place seemed to (...) ease to their delight, where they
lovingly sat down, recreating themselves with great pleasure, and at last fell
both a sleep, in midst of which slumber, a rauen^us wild Bear that hau^ed
those Woods, whom extreme hunger had forced to wander so near the Court,
winded them, and guided by unlucky Fate, came to the place where they lay,
ready to seize upon the tender body of kind Violetta, who at the very
instant (by the Divine providence) awaked and espying the ugly Bear,
suddenly sh^ked. Pollipus amazed with her cry, started up and drew out his
sword, and rescued her from the beasts violence, pursuing him with such vigor
and dexterity, that the Bear being grievously wounded, shund his blows, and
made have to get away from him, but he intending to win honor by his
conquest, regardlesly pursued the Bear, until he was quite out of Violettas
sight. Who likewise fea^ing his harm, and pricked forward with a tender care
of his welfarefollowed after him, but not knowing which way he was gone, took
a quite contrary way, and with eger ^eppes labored to overtake him. He having
with much travel slain the Bear, smo^e off his head, and intending to
present that spoil to his Love came back to the place where he had left her,
and missing her, ^ee could not well tell what to think, being persuaded she
wa^ gone to seek him, wherewith he was ^pt into an extreme perplexity and
doubt: fearing that if he should go to the Court to seek her, she might in the
mean time wander out of the way, and run into danger. Contrarily, he
thought if he should seek her in the Wood, and she be in the Court, his
long tariance might bring her in some fear of his welfare, that in these
extreamities he could not determine of any thing: at last calling her with a
loud voice by name, and not hearing her answer, with all has^e he ran to
the Court, with his spoil upon his Swords point, and running hastily, he
inquired if any saw Violetta return, but she was not there heard off, which
made him cast down the Bears head, and without speaking a word, returned
toward the Wood again. Which strange behavior of his, drove the Courtiers
(but especially Parismus) into a wonderful doubt. Parismus seeing the Bears
head, and hearing some speeches of Violettaes absence, presently mounted a
goodly Steed, and with have rode that way he was directed pollipus went.
Tellamor, Barzillus, and many of the Knights, followed after him, neither of
them knowing wherefore they made such haste.

Parismus having overtaken him, demanded if any mischance had befallen
Violetta? My Lord (quoth. he) as she and I lay slumbering in this Woodde, the
Bear whose head I brought to the Court, was ready to seize upon her, but she
with a shrike awaked me, and I pursued him until I had slain him: and
returning to the place where I left Violetta, she was gone: neither can I
suppose whither, unless she be wandered to seek me, the haste I made was to
come back to seek her. Do so (quoth. Parismus) and my self and these Knights
will search the W^ throughout: So every one took a several way.

Violetta in the mean time, still wandered on without regard whither she
went, her fear persuading her, that still she heard Pollipus blows, and the
Bear going right before her, that with as much speed as she could, she
ran quite out of the Woodde, but yet not setting eye on him; (the night
approaching) she was drawn into an exdeeding fear of his welfare, and her
own danger: For to go back by the Wood she durst not, fearing least she
might again meet the Furious Beast: and to go further she thought it in
vain; for she saw no likelihood he was come out of the Woodde, and there,
what with grief and weariness, she sat down upon a banque, encombred and
overwhelmed with a thousand cares, and giving her minte some respit to ponder
on her miserable estate, for fear of her most dear Knights danger, she
entered into such heavy plaints and lamentations, that even the very woods and
meddowes whereinto she was wandered, seemed to impart her sorrows, and yield
pity to her cries and scorching fighes. At which very instant (I know not by
what unlucky destiny,) Archas the cruel (so called for his cruel tyranny
came to the hearing of her lamentations, and drwing nigh to her, demanded her
cause or sorrow. Sir knight quoth she, I am a stranger, that lately came ^om
Thessalie, with the Prince of this Country, and this day coming into these
woods, with my Lord and husband Pollipus, a mighty Bear encountered us, whom he
pursuing, I have ^ost, and am wandered hither, not knowing wh^h way to retire.
Archas all this while, well noting her exceeding beauty, and sweet delivery of
speech, the gracious moving and disposition of her eyes, which had power to
pierce millions of hearts, felt such an inward effect of transitory confusion
in himself, that he resolved, having so fit opportunity offered him, to try
his wits to win her love, or exercise by yt means, some revenge against
Parismus, whom he mortally hated, uttering these speeches.

Most sweet Lady, my heart is so much tormented to see the sorrow you
needlessly make, for no doubt your Knight is in safety: pleases it you to
accept of my service, my servants shall guard you to the Bohemian Court, where
you shall find him: and my self will search the Wood, to give him knowledge
of your return.

Violetta kindly thanked him for his courtesy, who presently mounted her
behind one of his servants, giving them ^ete warning to convey her to his own
Castle, which was situate in the mountain: himself took her Scarffe, which
he said, he would deliver unto Pollipus, as a token that she was in safety:
wherewith he departed back into the Wood, and tare the same into many pieces,
here scattering one, and there confusedly casting an other, and with all have,
rode an other way to his Castle. All which was effected before any of the
Bohemian Knights were come, by which means, their diligent search was al in
vain: which drove Pollipus to such an extacie of sorrow, yt he was almost mad,
whom Parismus comforted with many persuasions, until Pollipus uttered these
speeches. My loving L. never shall quiet possess this breast, rest give case to
my body, nor sleep refresh my senses, until I have found my beloved, whose
love is my life, whose safety is my welfare, and whose quiet, is my chiefest
content. At which very instant, came Tellamor, bringing the torn scarffe which
Archas had strewed, which when Pollipus beheld, a chill cold dispearst
through all his veins, and his vital breath began to leave his troubled
breast, and all his fences forgot their wonted use. Which when Parismus beheld
he caught him in his arms, saying: Most noble knifiht, where is now your
patience, wherewith you wontedly endured extremities? no doubt for all this,
Violetta is in health, only wandered out of the way, and gotten ^o some house
where we shall hear of her to morrow: then comfort your self and be not thus
overcome with grief: for be you assured, n^ harm has betide her. O my Lord
(quoth he) my virtuous Violetta, my constant friend, the most truest love that
ever wretch inioyed, is perished. What comfort, what quiet, what rest, what
content, what respit, or what ease can I give to my troubled mind, since she
is fallen into decay, she most purest, most sweetest, most kindest, and truest
Lady that ever lived? how can I recover this less? how can I plague my self
sufficiently for my misdeeds? these woods condemn me, her ghost accuses me,
and all the world will hate me: misery wayteth my steps, sorrow pincheth my
heart, grief compels me, and care inforceth me to be thus impatient.
Whilst I stand here, she may be in danger: whilst I am negligent, the wild
beasts may devour her body: then stay me me not, for I am resolved either to
find her, or loose my self: and therewith in a great fury, flung into the
Woodde.

Parismus seeing his sorrow, and this mishap, stood like one in a trance,
not knowing how or which way to remedy the least of these evils, and in that
most sad and heavy estate, returned to the Court with his heavy news, which
turned all their joy into heaviness, especially Laurana, and all in general
that had knowledge of Violettas virtues, made great lamentation for her loss.

CHAP. II.
How Violetta arrived at Archas Castle, and what befell to Pollipus afterward.

ARchas servants with great speed hasted toward their Masters Castle, and
soon arrived there, before whose coming, their Master had caused all things
to be prepared in good order for Violettaes entertainment, who being entered,
the perceived her self to be in a strange place, which drove her into an
extreme fear and enquiring of them why they had not conveyed her to the
Bohemian court, they told her (being instructed before) that they had mistaken
their Masters meaning, and withal, entreated her to pardon them, and also to
be a means to pacify his wrath, whom they were assured would be greatly
offended with them. Which words of theirs altered that fear, and added some
little comfort to her mind.

Presently two Gentlewomen welcomed her with great courtesy, comforting,
persuading, and intising her to remit all care, until Archas return, whom
they assured was so honorable and virtuous a knight, as she needed not any
way doubt of his diligence. There was great store of ^licates provided for her,
which seemed more loathsome then gall to her sight. Long they seemed to stay
for Archas return (who absented himself to color his treachery) but when in
a great while he came not, they entreated her to taste of that meat which was
provided they said for his supper. But she poor soul could not eat one bit,
but all things seemed to be hateful: their sweet Music harsh: their
courteous entertainment, rude and barbarous: and that well adorned place, more
lochsom then a prison: nothing but care and grief could take place in her
unquiet breast. After supper, they brought her to a most pleasant chamber, where
all things were most neatly provided, comforting her with many persuasions,
that Archas was at the Bohemian Court to expect her coming, and by reason of
the nights approach, could not come back that night, but should early in the
morning bring her news, entreating her to betake her self to her rest: which
she did, the rather to be rid from their company, that being alone, she might
enter into consideration of her estate: and being by her self, she began to
reuolue in her mind her miserable condition, Pollipus peril, and Archas
intent: for her self she cared not, if Pollipus were in safety: neither
feared she what Archas intended, if her Knight were in health, that so many
cares concurring together, so many doubts clogged her mind, and such fear
possessed her heart, that her words, burst into a flood of tears, and the warm
blood seemed to issue from every vain of her body, that with their abundance
she bedeawed the Bed where she lay.

When she had wept her fountains dry, she then began to accuse her self of
Folly, that would not stay in the place where he left her: then a certain
persuasion entered her heart, that he was dead, which took such deep root,
that of a long time no other thought would take place, which made her think the
Tapers which gave her Light burnt blue: which likewise added a further settled
resolve in her Fancy, that it was so indeed. In this careful estate, she
lay tumbling and tossing her self, giving no quiet to her mind: no rest to
her Cares: no ease to her pensive heart: no respit to her senses, nor sleep to
her head: but being overcome with sorrow, she continually rather augmented
then diminished the same.

In this sad and heavy estate she spent the Night, not suffering her eyes once
to slumber. In the morning the 2. Gentlewomen came to her again, offering her
all dutiful service, which she kindly accepted, and shortly after came Archas
counterfetting a sad countenance, with his eyes cast down to the earth: whom
when Violetta beheld, a sudden feara infused it self into every part of her
body, and she stood shaking and quaking like one transformed to here the news
he had brought, which she thought to be but bad by his looks: who with a
shameless face, and impudent dissimulation, told her that Pollipus was not
yet returned to the Court, nor heard of, but all supposed him to be dead.

Which dismal words struck such a sudden grief unto her heart, that there
she fell down at his feet in a Trance: but when by their industry she came
to her self again, her amazed countenance, and lamentable groans made the
tears trickle down her cheeks, and seeing her in that dangerous estate,
conveyed her to her bed, whose vital senses were so abated and extinguished,
that for a long time, notwithstanding their uttermost endeavors, she seemed no
otherwise, then as one bereft of sense: and in that lamentable estate she
continued many days.

Pollipus all that night ranged up and down the Woodde, in every corner,
searching each Thicket and vnfreque^ted place, calling Violetta by Name, and
tearing both his Flesh and Apparel, with the Bushes and Brambles, that
encountered his mad steps: Sometimes making haste this way, then returning
back with persuasion that he heard her shreeke behind him, being so fully
possessed with fear and desire to find her, that every Fancy that rose in his
brain, altered his former thoughts: that whereas in other men's affairs he
seemed most patient and provident, by his own he was quite bereft of reason.
In this unquiet sort he spent the most part of the Night, until toward
Morning, what with weariness and care that oppressed his heart, he laid him
down, leaning upon his elbowe, neither uttering word nor tear, but inwardly
stufft with extreme vexation, seeming no other then the form and picture of
discontent. But when he saw Phoebus display his brightness, he again
betook himself to his earnest search, uttering such inward groans, as would
have melted a Rockie heart into liquide tears.

Parismus being early up that Morning, gave commandment to all the Bohemian
Knights to arm themselves, and to Post throughout all Bohemia, in her search,
and to make Proclamations, with great promises of Reward to them that could bring
any news of Violetta; that by time the sun was up, there were a great number
of Knights departed, vowing to search all places to find her, that all the
whole Country was filled with report of her loss.

Parismus, Tellamor, Barzillus, presently rode to the Woodde, to Pollipus,
whom they found in such heavy plight, as it made their manlike hearts to melt
with grief. But Pollipus espying them, would have fled from their sight,
that loved him most dearly, until Parismus ouertooke him, and said. Most
dear Friend, how can you be so unkind, as to shun my company, whose Care is
no less then yours? and who tendereth your Welfare as well as mine own? Have
you forgotten Manhood, Knighthood, and Courtesy? Where is that virtue now
become, that was wont to rule your affections: Good pollipus, for my sake, for
all the Friendship, by all the courtesies, promises, and good will, that ever
past betwixt us, leave off this desperate Folly, and listen to my counsel: If
not for all this, yet for Violettaes sake pity yourselfe, and recall your
former Senses, and let us determine how to recover her that is but strayed out
of the way: Many hundred Knights are already Posted into many places of this
Country, and will coast all Germany throughout, but they will find her; then
do not you increase our further care, by this desperate sorrow, but according
to your woonted Wisdom, wherewith you have counseled me in my afflictions,
let us study how to recover this misery.

Oh my dear Lord (quoth pollipus) my Violetta is dead, at which word, extreme
Heartes-sorrowe and inward griefs, stopped the passage of his speech, and was
restrained with heart-swelling Sighs, which being a little assuaged, he
again said: If I were sure she were not dead, then would I willingly imitate
your direction: Or were I but sure Death had seized upon her tender heart, then
would I never part from this place, though millions of Devils should seek to
drive me hence.

Why (quoth Parismus) How can you think she is dead? When there is no
likelihood, sign, nor mention to be seen thereof? neither her Apparel, nor
any part of her Body torn: or any other circumstance, to persuade us to any
such conceyt? Then why will you suffer any such persuasions to possess your
Fancy? (Quoth pollipus) How then came the Scarffe so torn? It may be the
Wild beasts have secret Dens, whereinto they have drawn her Body, and many
other mischaunces may be befallen her, that she was subject unto, and yet still
be hidden from our knowledge: Neither let that trouble you (quoth Parismus,)
but rest contented, and your care that way shall soon be eased; but depart
with me to the Court, to comfort your self with some Sustenance, and I will
presently give order to have this Woodde so thoroughly searched, that you shall
plainly find she has not miscarryed. Pollipus with his persuasions, though
unwillingly, went back with them, mounting on Tellamors Horse, for that he
was sore traveled and weary of that disquiet Nights trouble.

Thus for a time we will leave Pollipus, returned to the Court with Parismus,
Violetta very sick and weak in Archas Castle, and many of the Bohemian and
Thessalian Knights in her search, to turn my Senses to write of an other
Subject, long time buried in forgetfulness; the chiefest Subject of whereon
this History depends.

CHAP. III.
How Parismenos was brought up in the Island of Rocks in Tartaria. How his Nurse
was slain by a Lion. How he lived many years like a wild Man, and
afterward arrived at Andramarts Castle.

AT such time as Laurana was imprisoned in the Island of Rocks, under the
government of Adamasia, Andramarts sister (as is declared in the first part of
this History) the nurse unto whose custody the young child Parismenos was
committed, fearing his untimely death, which Adamasia threatened, because his
mother would not consent to Andramarts Lust, secretly (to save the Child from
her cruelty) fled by night into a desolate wood, where she carefully educated
him according to the condition of the place, which was with such wild fruit as
the gathered, making many a hard shift to ^a^ch her hunger, and defend the
sweet Babe from Famine, until at length, hearing of Andramarts death, she
determined to return to the Castle, and there present him to his Mother: and
to that intent, forsaking her poor habitation she went as she thought,
thitherward, but most unfortunately, wandered into a desolate and unfrequented
Wilderness; where she had not long stayed, but met a fierce and cruel Lion, who
slew her: which when Parismenos beheld, notwithstanding his infancy, he
labored with his weak resistance to preserve her: but the Lion refusing to
hurt him, withdrue himself to his den, whither Parismenos boldly pursued
him: and being entered therein, the Lion began to wag his tail, and fawn upon
him gently, which made him marvel why he had slain his Nurse, and would not
hurt him: and made him the more bold, that being weary with travel, he
laid himself dow^ to sleep, and when he awooke, being very hungry, he
gathered wild fruit, whereof there was plenty, which was his food, and ^he
clear water his drink. This was his habitation a long time, taking great
pleasure to hunt and chase the wild bea^s, from whose fury he was still
preserved by the Lion. Afterward when he was grown to riper age, in his
sleep he drempt, that his Nurse appeared unto him, willing him to forsake that
unfrequented pla^e, and to seek out Andramarts Castle, where he should find
people, in whose company he should be brought up.

When he awaked, he could not tell what to think of his dream, nor what she
meant by Andramarts Castle, nor which way to go thither, being therewith drawn
into a deep study, but suddenly he espied a young Bear, whose sight made
him quite forget his dream, and taking exceeding delight to chase such Beasts,
he caught up his staff, and followed her, and pursued her so fiercely, that
at length ^e slew her, wherewith he was wandered so far, that getting to the
top of a Mountain, and looking round about him, he espied the Castle, thinking
that was the place his Nurse had told him of in his dream, that he went
thither wards. It chanced one of the Knights that Parismus had left to keep the
Castle, espied him: and being of a sad disposition, seeing Parismenos begin
to withdrawr himself, ran to him, and offered to lay hands on him. But
Parismenos being afraid of his behavior, struck at him with his staff so
fiercely, that had he not quickly avoided his blow, he had beaten ^ut his
brains. The Tartarian being angry, drew his sword, and therewith wounded
Parismenos in the thigh: the smart whereof so enraged him, that notwithstanding
all his resistance he left him for dead.

Afterward entering the Castle, his mind was drown into an exceeding delight,
to behold the goodly buildings and beauty thereof. The Tartarians beholding one
in such strange disguise: (For he was clad in the skins of such beasts as he
had slain, and his hair grown to a great length) much marueled how he came
into that countey: withal, noting his comely personage, and stately
countenance, were suddenly drawn into a great affection toward him, that they
saluted him most kindly, demanding the cause of his arrival in that place,
and of whence he was? who seeing their behauior to be more gentle then the
others, with whom he had encountered before, made answer so well as he could,
that he knew not: which ^lunt answer of his, made them muse. Withal, noting
his attire, they took him either to be a madman, or that he had been Sauagely
brought up: which they were the rather persuaded unto, for that he was very
young. Notwithstanding, they entertained him, and used him most kindly. But his
countenance, calling to remembrance the Noble knight Parismus, whom he so
much resembled, that they were halfe-perswaded he was his Son, that the
Nurse fled withal. One amongst the rest named Tyresus, used him most kindly,
apparelled him decently, and instructed him in all points belonging to
chivalry: teaching him to manage a Horse, and to use Armor, whereunto he was
so apt, and took therein such delight, that in short space he grew to such
perfection, that he excelled his instructor in all warlike behauiours. And was
so generally beloved, that nothing they had or could devise, was too dear for
him.

Many days remained Parismenos amongst the Tartarians, increasing in many
exelle^t qualities, not finding occasions enough amongst them to make trial of
his manhood. Upon, a time certain Pirates returning from Sea, in his hearing,
made report of their battles and skirmishes, and the huge Slaughters they had
made: reporting how Tragically they murdered soine of the Resistants, and how
valiantly some withstood them, and with what travel they endured the fights.
Making particular rehearsal of one Captain amongst the rest, who so valiantly
withstood them, that before they could vanquish him, he had slain above
twenty of them: but in the end, seeing that by reason of their multitude, he
must needs either be taken Prisoner, or die, he rather chose an honorable
death, then to become their captine, and endured the fight, until with
faintness he fell down dead, even as he was advancing his sword to re^ them.
Which report of theirs, kindeled such honorable sparks in Parismenoes breast,
that he extremely thirsted to see those ski^ishes, accounting it dishonorable
for him to spend his days in that obscure place: his thoughts still aiming at
higher matters, and his fantie persuading him, that he should rather spend his
time in Heroycall exercises in kings courts, then in that unfrequented place,
where no pleasing attempts of Martial deeds were exercised: which thoughts
took such effect, that he presently determined to seek adventures abroad: And
coming to Tyrefus (who loved him dearly) he told him his whole intent, asking
his advise therein. Tyresus seeing such a resolved valor in him, told him, that
he was both ready and willing to do my thing that might ag^ to his Fancy,
(...) purchase his content: that if he desired to travel and hazard himself
by Sea, he way ready to go with him: Or if he were determined to seek strange
Adventures by Land, he would likewise travel with him, and forsake no peril
for his sake.

Parismenos hearing his courteous replye, could not choose but embrace him,
yielding him many thanks. Tyresus effected all things with such speed, and so
well ordered his affairs to further his intent, that within few days they
departed into a Ship, well manned and victualled, hoysing up their Sails with
a merry gale, committing themselves to the mercies of the Seas. They sailed many
days without any adventure, which inwardly fretted parismenos, for his mind
longed to perform some exployt. At last they kenned a Sail a far off, and
toward it they stirred amain; and coming nigh the ship, laid her aboard,
which was of Barbaria, well manned with stout Moors: who seeing the Pirates,
and knowing that either they must resolutly fight it out, or become Captives,
valiantly resisted them: between who (...) began a most fierce and cruel
fight, where Parismenos had means enough to exercise his valor, who behaved
himself with such courage, that many Moors that day last their lives by his
Infant blows.

Egtadam Captain of the Moors, being a man of exceeding courage, seeing the
cruel slaughter parismenos made, came to him, and uttered these speeches.
Proud Pyrat, thou shall deerly buy these Moors lives, for I am determined to
bring thy cursed life to an end, that think by Robbery to enrich thy self.
Wherewith he assailed him so fiercely that he wounded him in many places: not
withstanding, such was his valor, that with great force he likewise so
valiantly defended himself, and offending Egradam, that it was doubtful which
of them would have the conquest. In midst of this truell Fight, a mighty
storm began suddenly to arise, and the winds began to blow with violence, that
their Cables burst, and both light of day and Sun was shadowed by thick
Clouds, the Seas began to rage and swell, that they were enforced to give over
their fight, the Thunders roared, and the Lightnings flasht about their ears,
and their ship (...) violence of the surging seas, was so tossed, that there was
none but expected present death. The Northern blast rent their Sails, one way
goes their Helm, an other way swims their Maste, with violence forne from the
ship, and wave upon ma^e rusht in, ready to ouerturn the ship, who now tossing
upon the Seas at liberty, was driven upon a (...) Rock, and split in ^under.
Then began a hydeous cry amongst the soldiers: Some cursing Parismenos the
causer of that Journey, some exclaiming on Tyresus, and some banning their own
destinies. Some whelmed under the gaping water, yield up their ghosts: here
three at once are cast upon the rocks, and again devoured by the waves: there
others sunk in the quicksands, and down falls the Master he adlong: then
might you behold men swimming in their Armor: here and there striving to make
their deaths tedious. Here might you see one seated upon a planck, overthrown
with a wave: there another tumbling with his heels upward. Parismenos (by good
Fortune) was gotten up to the Mass, whose length had some power to endure the
waves, with his swore drawn in his hand. Tyresus he was gotten on to a chest,
wherewith a while he applied himself from drowning, but in the end the raging
waves drenched him deep in their spacious gulfes. Within a while the raging
Seas began to cease^nd war calm, the sun began to shine, and the clouds to
vanish that darkened the skies, and the mast whereon Parismenos satte, began to
s^de along with the calm tide; When he looked about him, and espied all his
follows drowned, and exceeding sorrow over whelmed his heart, especially for
his loving friend Tyresus, that had not the fear he was in revived his senses,
he would have waxt careless of his own life. But the remembrance of his
peril made him recall his better senses to their former use, and to study for
his own safety, to whom the Seas were so merciful, that with a gentle and
calm (...), he was driven to shore: where getting to a S^y bank, he sat hi^
(...) to refresh his wearyed limbs, and po^der his most happy (...)his gaping
Wounds with such l^n as he had about him, who with the falte water smarted
exceedingly.

CHAP. IIII.
How Parismenos being east on shore in Thrace, was taken up by Duke Amasenus,
who named him The Knight of Fame: Of two Combats he sought with Corus and
Argalus.

AS Parismenos was sitting upon the ban^e after his shipwreck, in heavy
estate for the loss of his dear Friend Tyresus, it happened, an ancient Duke,
of Thrace, named Amasenns, that day was come into a forest adjoining to the
sea to hunt, accompanied by a gallant troop of Knights, who sheltring (...)
from the storm under the craggie cliffes, beheld the miserable (...), and
saw Parismenos swim to shore, and so strangely preserved from drowning, unto
whom he came as he was sitting upon a sunnie bancke, and demanded of whence
he was. Parismenos beholding his reverend age, and the troop of Knights that
attended him, rose from the ground, and with great humility bowed his body,
making this answer. I am a miserable man, by cruelty of the seas cast on
this shore, having lost my faithful friend, drenched in the spacious gulfes,
being my self reserved to furthr miseries, my name is hidden from my self,
neither know I certainly in what country I was borne, nor where my Parents
remain, and now am cast into an unknown place, and miserably left to the wide
world, to endure such hard fortune as my unlucky stars have allotted me.

Amasenus hearing his answer, and withal, noting his tall and comely
proportion and beautiful countenance, though by his speech that his senses
were altered with fear of them, tempest, and care for the loss of his
friends, that he thus replied. I perceive fear of drowning has made you
forget both your self, your name, and country, which fear now shake off,
since all the peril is past, and leave to grieve for their loss that are
inrecouerable, and go with me to my Castle, and to such entertainment as the
same yields, you shall be welcome. I most humbly thank you (quoth he) for
this kindness, but whereas you think, that fear has made me forget myself,
you altogether aim amiss, for I have reported of my self nothing but truth.
Then stepped forth Corus (a suspicious, and envious Knight) my Lord (quoth he)
it is some Pirate that lives by spoil of passengers, and has heretofore
done you some mischief, which makes him thus cunningly dissemble

Parismenos hearing his speeches, could not contain himself, but made this
answer. Most discourteous knight, neither thy self, nor any of this country
whatsoever, shall make me disse^bld, or once falsify my word, and were it not
that the strangers of this place, and the reuerance I bear to this courteous
Lord, withholdeth me, I would even presently make thee eat that word, and
turn it back into thy dishonorable throat. Corus being a knight of a proud
courage, was so vexed with that reply, that he entreated Amasenus to give him
leave to revenge those injurious words. Stay (quoth Amasenus,) and leave ^ff
^his discourteous behavior to strangers, here is neither place nor time, for
you see he is wearied with shipwreck, and faint with (...) of blood: thy
pride and discourteous behavior will one day be thy death: had he done me
wrong, yet he has not offended thee. Then he said to Parismenos: Sir Knight,
I pray cease this discontent, and go to my Castle, for so well do I esteem of
you, and so far am I from the least suppose of any such thought, as my self
will undertake his accusation is false. So they departed together, Parismenos
by the way, so well as he could declared his birth, which made Amasenus make
greater estimation of him, for by all tokens he thought he should be sprung of
kingly race, that Amasenus entertained him most honorably and kindly, and
welcomed him in the best sort he could devise, which mad him disdained
amongst many of the knights that attended the Duke, and seeing him so highly
esteemed, began to suspect by that means, that they were but slightly
accounted of by Amasenus, that ever after that, they began to envy him, and
to consult which way to do them a mischief: thinking Corus quarrel already
begun, a fit occasion to further their intent, they urged him to prosecute the
same, who being ready of himself, and the rather by their instigatio^, sent
him this challenge.

Knight (for so I must call thee) thou remembrest what past betwixt us at our
first meeting, which thou think I have forgot, but so far is it from my
thought, as courage is from thee to perform that which thou threatnedst: thy
fear of drowning is now, and thy deep wounds I am sure well cured, therefore
if thou dare maintain the words thou have spoken in my disgrace, send me
word where I shall meet thee, and there we will end the controversy. So
farewell.

As thou will, Corus.


Parismenos having read this brave challenge, smiling thereat, sent this reply.

Corus, by the name of the unknown Knight, I will answer thee, and maintain
my words, wishing thee to be prrswaded, that I so little fear thy vaunts, as
that even now I will come to thee, or when thou will, if not now. But if thou
intendest to auonch this challenge, thou shall find me ready for thee at the
South side of my Lord Amasenus park. And so adue.

The Rnight of Fame.


Corus having received this reply, presently went and armed himself, and came
to the appointed place, where he found the Knight of Fame gallantly mounted,
staying for him, whom he little esteemed, as that he assured himself the
conquest before he begun: for Parismons was young and of tender years, and
nothing comparable to him in growth nor skill, notwithstanding, of such
undaunted resolve, that he would not have refused to cope with him, had he been
another Hercules. Corus seeing him in that readiness, came to him uttering
these speeches: Knight, I like well thy forwardness, and commend thy
resolution, but by that time thou departest hence, thou will repent thy folly.

Parismenos thus answered, If I repent me, the worst will be mine, but if I
aim not amiss, thy folly will be the greatest: for know, that I so lightly
esteem thy speeches, that I account them ridiculous, and this time spent in
prate too tedious. With that Corus went back, and Parismenos retired himself
to take their carrier, which was performed so gallantly, as yt they shiuered
their lances, passing by without any other harm, presently drawing their keen
swords, beginning fight with gallant bravery, sometimes offending and
sometimes defending, which continued so long, until their armor began to
yield to their fierce blows, and the blood to issue out at many places. In
which cruel rage they continued for an hours space, without any disadvantage
on either party, sometimes taking breath, and the^ again redoubled their
blows with fresh courage, that Corus fretting at his enemies valor, and
calling to mind his former speeches, struck so mighty a blow at him, that
with the force thereof, he made him stagger, which turned Parismenos senses
into such a fury, that adua^cing himself in his stirropes, he struck Corus
so full and so valiantly on ye Crest, yt he was astonished therewith: yet
notwithstanding, with quick courage soon recovered his memory again prosecuting
his blows with great fortitude, until that both their armours and steeds
began to be colored with the purple blood that issued from their ^ds: hoth
of them waring saint, yet neither willing to yield. Sometimes the one dryuing
his enemy to retire, and he again returning with new courage. But Parismenos
being the nimbler of body, warded many of Corus blows, and in the end wounded
him so sore, that he began to stagger too and froe, to save himself from his
surie, who still pursued him with such violence, that Corus with faintness sell
on his horse neck: which he espying, was lif^ing his sword to fetch a fresh
blew to end his life, but that he heard one calling him to s^y, and looking
back, saw that it was Amasenus: who missing him, being told that he departed
from the Castle in Armor, followed him to yt place and had all that while
stayed covertly and beheld the combat, and seeing the danger Corus was in,
desired Parismenos to spare his life, who according to his request desisted.
Amasenus then caused the Knights to take up Corus fallen from his horse in a
trance, who receiving fresh air, came to himself again: but when he saw the
Duke present, and his enemy still mounted and in good estate, his heart was
ready to burst with inward grief, which malicious ran^kout filled up all his
senses, that cursing himself and his ill fortune, he y^lded up his fainting
^host. Farewell (quoth Amasenus) the most proud and discourteous Knight that
ever lived in Thrace, thy insolence and malicious discontented envy, has
wrought thine own downe-fall. And most noble Knight (quoth he) to Parismenos,
I both honor your valor, and applaude your ^ie, wherein you have behaved your
self so valiantly, as I shall for ever love you: and since you e^maine victor,
I pray return with m^ to have your wounds cured. Parismenos humbly thanking
himdeparted: and the rest of Amasenus Knights took up Corus body, which
afterward they buried with great solemnity. After Corus death, ye Knights
that envied Parismenos, now began to imagine assuredly, that the Knight would
darken all their glories, and the more account they saw they made of him, the
more their malicious envy increased, that they devised all the means they ^ould
to contriue his death, whatsoever ensued thereon, waiting al opportunites. But
he having his wounds fully cured, forsook his chamber and betook himself
again to his wonted excercises, which was sometimes to manage the sturdie
steed, and sometimes to sport himself (in company of his unknown enemies)
amongst the Ladies and Gentlewomen, who liked his behavior and courtesy so
well, besides his comely proportion, the sweet youth so greatly pleased their
fancies, that they accounted the Thracian Knights rude in respect of him, al
both liking, loving, and commending him, and that so openly, that his enemies
might hear their speeches, which wrought such a violent effect of ra^or, that
no thought could harbour^ their breasts, but tragical devises to work his
downfall. One amongst the rest, near kinsman to Corus, named Argalus, was
forwardest in this exployt, who to fureher his intent with one Themides,
dissembling a friendly countenance, insinuated themselves into his
familiarity, using such kind behavior toward him, and entertaing his rompany
with such courtesy, that he having no insight into their dissembulation)
began to make account of their frienship, and to take delight in their
company, oftentimes imparting his secrets unto them, and without suspicion
making them privy to most of his actions.

Argalus upon a time came to Parismenos, telling him that a squir^ of his had
found a mighty wild Bore, and could bring them to his den, desiring his
company to go with them to hunt him Parismenos hearing that, was as forward as
any of them, and the next morning appointed to meet them in the midst of the
Forest, at the Pooles side. And early the next morning he got up, according to
his appointment, being ready to depart his chamber, some five or six drops
of blood suddenly fell from his nose, with which he started, and staying
felt a sudden drowsy heaviness and throbbing, possess his heart, which
drove him into a deep study what should be the cause of that unwonted
passio^i: at last he began to think with himself, May not these few^ drops of
blood divine some bad success to my enterprise this day? I am herein a strange
Country, amongst such as I know not how to trust, for I see apparently many of
the^ do envy me, which they manifest by their low^ng countenance, and Corus
behavior may be a pattern of their dispositions: therefore I were best not to
go at all. Then again he began to think, Argalus and Themides are my friends,
then what need I fear any mishap? All which doubts would not stay him, but
arming himself, and resolving to endure al mischaunces, he departed toward
the Pole. By the way as he rode, he met a damzell posting toward him with great
speed, wringing her hands, dan making great lamentation. Parismenos marueling
at her sorrow, asked the cause of her co^plant. Sir Knight (quoth she) I was
going to Duke Amasenus court, carrying a present, and a letter from my
mistress, unto a strange knight yt lately arrived there: but by ye way, I met
with two knights in green Armor, who dispoyled me thereof and most
disloyallie offered to abuse me, had (...) not fled. Damzel (quoh he) bring me
if you can where they are, and I will do my best to cause them make you
restitution. Wherewith the damzel turned her horse, and rode bark again. Sir
Knigh (quoth he) they took down this narrow Lane. Parismenos set spures to
his horse, and with great speed to^e that way, he was not farentred, but he
espied ye two knights in green Armor, ready mounted, staying in a pleasant
valley, encompassed round with woods, unto whom he was said: It is the manner
of you Thracians, to offer violence to silly Damzels? Render me those things
you have taken from he, or I protest I will not leave you, until I have
compeld you to do it by force. Unto whom one of them replied, If thy self art
no Thracia^, what do thou here? or what intrest have thou in that Damzel
quarrel, that makes thee so bold to co^troule onr doings? That interest I
have (quoth he) as al knights should have, which is to succor distressed
Damzels: wherewith turned back to take scope for his race, he ran at one of
them, and at the encounter, overthrew him backwards, who by mischance in the
fall brake one of his arms. The other seeing his fellows mischaunce, assailed
Parismenos with his sword drawn: whom Parismenos so ouerlaid with fierce
blows, and wounded so grievously that he fearing his death, and seeing no
other come to his rescue, was ready to yield. Even at yt instant another
knight came, who seeing one of them dead, and ye other in great danger, ran
at Parismenos, with intent unawares to pierce his spear, through his body: But
he hearing the noise of his horse foot behind him, nimbly spurd his horse
forward, by which means the knight lost his course, passing by without doing
any harm. Parismenos looking about him, and espying two enemies more, and
missing the Damzel that had brought him thither, began to misdoubt some
treachery: which thoughts and the remembrance of the drops of blood yt fell from
him that morning, added new courage to his valor, that reaching a furious blow
at ye wounded knight, the sword lighting on a broken place in the armor, rusht
into his body, and ended his life. By which time the too knights lately come,
assailed him both at once, between whom began a most cruel and dangerous
fight, that all the earth was colored with ye blood that issued from their
wounds: and notwithstanding Parismenos was before sore wounded, yet he defended
himself so courageously, that his new come enemies could not endanger him, but
with their own disadvantage, who seeing his valor, and calling to mind Corus
death, forsook knightly chi^ and used al villainous and cowardly fight, the
one sometimes beh^ offering him a thrust, and when he turned to reueng that in^
(...) the other did the like, that he perceived they intended to mur^ (...)
which so enraged that galla^t knight, yt dashing his spurs into (...) ^stie
steeds sides, he rusht with such violence against one of the^, that he bare him
quite out of the saddle, whose foot will hung in his stirrup, and his horse
draged him with violence up and down the field, until the stirrup burst, and he
lay dead and dismounted. The other knight seeing his friends misfortune, would
have fled, but Parismenos struck such a violent blow upon his head, that he
lost his senses, but soon recovering himself again, and thinking it better to
dye by his enemies sword, then to yield to his mercy, turned to Parismenos,
uttering these speeches. Knight if thou art well give over, otherwise know, yt
notwithstanding my former show of fight, it is ye least part of my thought: but
I in^e^d to try it out with thee to the uttermost. quoth he agine, no
disembling Thracian, account not me so base minded to leave such a villain to
breathe any longer, that art not worthy of knighthood, much less to be
esteemed amongst men: was it thy policy by subtiliie to betray my life? If I
be not deceived, I knowethee by thy voice, and thy name is Argalus, my
counterfaited friend. Am I the Boar thou intendest to slaie? No traitor
Thracian, do not think me so simple. but I perceive the treachery, and well
understand thy drifts, nor do thou think to escape my hands. This Knight
indeed was Argalus, who hearing his words, was so ouercom with rage, that
marking where his Armor, was most broken, he gave him such a violent thrust,
that the purple blood followed his keen sword: which wound was more deadly
then all that he had before received, that bending all his forces to revenge
the same, he smote so fiercely and nimbly at Argalus, that in the end with
many grievous wounds, he beat him from his horse, and lighting, pulled off his
helmet and knew him: with that he said, Argalus, what offense have I done thee,
that thou should seek my death? or wherein did I ever merit other then
friendship at thy hands? most unkind dissembler, thou shall receive a fit
reward for thy vila^y, wherewith, ^ling ye smart of the wound he had lately
given him oppress his heart, he thrust his sword into his body, which ended
his life, and sat down weary with travel, and so saint with effectio^ of
blood, that his eyes began to dazzle, and he fell down upon the earth, as one
bereft of sense.

Amasenus all that day missing the Knight of Fame, began to sus^ ^at some
other challenge had caused him to depart so secretly, but ^ing that Argalus and
Themides were in his company, whom he thought loved him dearly, his care was
somewhat diminished, but when it grew toward night, and none of them yet
returned, he then began vehemently to fear the worst, that calling for his
steed, he presently rode forth well accompanied, commanding one to post this
way, and another that way, about the Forest to seek ye Knight of Fame,
himself rode which way his fancy best persuaded him unto, and by chance
(directed by good fortune) he took directly toward the place where the Combat
was fought, and as he passed by the narrow Lane that went down the ^e, he
espied one of the steedes all bestained with blood, wandering without his Rider,
which struck a sudden fear to his heart, that ryding down ye Lane, he espied
ye dead bodies of mangled knights, lie confusedly scattered upon ye earth, with
^astly counte^ances, being ye fearfullest spectacle that ever eye beheld. The
^rst that he beheld was Themides, almost torn to pieces by his own steed,
with his foot still in the stirrope. Next he vewed the other two knights so
grievously mangled and wounded, that the tears with grief gusht from his eyes
in abundance. Next he came to Argalus, whose face was uncovered, whom he soon
knew. And last of all, he come to Parismenos, who lay groue^ng with his face
to ye earth, still grasping his bloody sword in his hand, whom he perceived to
gasp for breath, that in all haste lifting up his Beuer so give him fresh air,
he knew him to be the Knight of Fame, and perceiving some life yet to remain
in him, he unarmed him with his own hands, and gently wrapped him up close, that
his wounds might not take air, causing him to be carried to his Castle. The
rest of the dead knights he likewise caused to be carried back, which was
done with great lamentations, and afterward by his appointment were honorably
buried.

CHAP. IIII.
How the Knights returned without any news of Violetta. Of the sorrow
Pollipus made for her absence, departing in her search. How Violetta having
endured many miseries in Archas Castle, at last escaped from thence in Scorans
disguise,

THe Bohemian knights, by commandment of Parismus, and the Thessalia^
knights, for the affection they (...) to Violetta having Posted through every
part of Bohemia, and made all diligent search, leaving no place ^sought, no
means unattempted, nor labor unperformed to ^e her: Yet notwithstanding all
their faithful diligence, at last returned without any News of her at all:
which (...) Pollipus sorrows afresh, that but even then has entertained a
little quiet, by Parismus persuasions. But when he saw Violetta was by no
means to be heard of, nor any likelihood or comfort left for him ever to see
her again: Neither knowing nor any way supposing what should be become of her,
his heart was so inwardly overcome with troublesome rogitations and doubtful
cares, that he could neither resolve to seek her, nor take any course to ease
his mind: but rested like one utterly given over, to forlorn and careless
misery, daily frequenting those solitary walks where he last her, and
hourly renewing his sorrows, by the sad remembrance of her absence, uttering
such mournful plaintes and lamentations, that the Byrds that haunted those
unfrequented places seemed to mourn and lament with him.

Sometimes accusing himself of negligence, to leave her, to pursue the Bear,
blaming her that would not stay his return: and then again fretting his heart
for accusing her. Sometimes thinking she was dead, and then again, persuading
himself she was alive, then musing why she did not return to him, if she
were alive: that by contrarieties of doubts, he could add no ease to his
cares, nor rest to his heart. At last he determined to search throughout all
Germany and Greece, but he would find her: For he assuredly thought she was
not dead, being thereto induced, for that he could not find any likelihood
thereof, being persuaded by Parismus, that some discourteous Knight had met
with her, and so witheld her return: that within few days (Arming himself
in a green armor, which he made of purpose, bearing this device; A Knight
pursuing a wild Bear) he left the Bohemian Court, making none privy to his
departure but Parismus, who determined not to stay long behind him:) Whom we
will leave onwards of his journey, and speak of Violetta, whom we left weak
in Archas Castle.

As Soon as the 2. Gentlewomen had conuayed her to her Bed, which the
comfortable means they used, she began to be somewhat revived, and calling
her Senses to their woonted uses, began to make such doleful lamentations,
that no heart was able to endure to hear them, without effusion of tears:
oftentimes offering to do her self violence, but that she was hindered by the
2. Gentlewomen: especially one of them named Sorana, was so careful over her,
that she left not so much as a Pin about her, where with she might do her
self harm: but when some three days were past, and the extremity of her
desperate Passion somewhat calmed, she began to desire that Archas would convey
her to the Bohemian Court; if not to find Pollipus, yet to enjoy the
comfortable presence of parismuss and Laurana; but notwithstanding her manifold
entreaties, they used some excuse or other, to frustrate her expectation,
telling her that it was dangerous for her to Travel yet, by reason of her late
sickness, and that since it was certain Pollipus was no more to be enjoyed,
she might stay with them some few days, until she were better able to endure
so long a Journey: For that the Bohemian Court was not so near as she thought.
Which excuses, rather increased her desire, and the more she seemed desirous
to go thither, still the more they defrauded her by excuses many days.

In which time, she being endued with an extraordinary Wisdom, having well
weighed each circumstance of her bringing thither, and their frivolous excuses
to detain her there: and withal, noting their behauiours and speeches,
began to suspect Archas dissimulation: To find out the truth thereof, she
began (contrary to her inward thoughts) to frame a cheerfuller countenance, and
comfortable disposition, there^y to feel their intents, which wrought such
effect, that within a while Archas would often frequent her company, and in
the end proffered Love to her, using her most kindly, carefully, and
tenderly, seeming above all things to regard her quiet and content, whose
speeches she endured quietly, and took in good part (as he thought) that upon
a time, amongst many speeches, taking her by the hand, he said:

Most Beautiful Lady, I have ever since the first view of those excellent
Beauties, been tormented with the Passions of entire Love, so that I could take
no quiet, but in the sweet remembrance of your Perfections, which have bound
my Devotions to your seruire, in such a kind of firm and constant League,
that my only resolution is, to sp^nde my life (if it were a thousand times
dearer to me then it is) to procure your content: Therefore, thus boldly I
presume to reveal my Affections, trusting your Clemency will add some ease
unto my careful heart, by showing some courteous sign of your favorable
acceptance of my humble Suite: and though my merit has no way deserved such
favor, yet let me beseech you to make trial of my loyalty, and you shall
find I will be inferior to none in good will, nor violate my
Protested-loyaltie in any undutiful respect.

I have the boldlyer presumed to detain you here, because with your absence my
life would depart: Then construe not amiss that true love and sincere
Affection, which has caused me to offend in, but no offense at all, if you
vouchfafe not to take it so: Here shall you enjoy your fill of content, in as
ample sort, as any other place can yield: Then I beseech you grant some ease
to my troubled heart, and by your clemency release me of those cares that
possess my Breast, only procured by the piercing dart of your sacred Beauty.
Which words being ended, he offered to have kissed her, but she gently refusing
the same, made this reply.

Sir Knight, my Sorrows will not suffer me to believe your speeches, nor my
late loss, permit me to entertain your Love: For then might you esteem me
light, and so lightly won, as little regard me: but to put you out of
suspense, my resolution is, never to love any, but my dear Pollipus;
wherewith the Cristall tears with a violent passage, fell from her
griefeswolne Eye Balls.

That grief (quothee) is remediless: Therefore banish the sad remembrance
thereof from your heart, and entertain a persuasion of my Constancy, and true
Affection, which everlastingly remain inviolable, without intermission.

How can I (quoth she) in Conscience, and without everlasting stain to wine
Honor, when I have neither performed his Funeral, nor showed any token of
duty to his dead Cerps, who loved me most dearly in his life time. But show
me this favor, as to let me but return to the Court to bewail his death,
and a while enjoy my dear Friends company: and I promise and protest next
pollipus, to love but your self.

Archas hearing her make such an indifferent and reasonable demand, stood like
one amazed, as not knowing what sudden Answer to make her: Thinking that if he
should deny her that Request being so small, she might think his Love to be
but slender; And if he should promise her, and not perform, that might be a
means to breed a further suspicion in her, that all his report to her were
false: So that he stood musing a great while, confounded in his thoughts,
what to devise for a ready Answer.

Nay, study not so for that (quoth Violetta) but answer me another ^e, Which
said she withdrue herself unto her Chamber, where she ^egan to meditate of his
speeches, and how he was astonished, when she ^equested him to convey her to the
Court: Which drove her into ma^y cogitations; When presently one of the
gentlewomen came to her, Whom she used most kindly, and of purpose to feel
her mind, grew into familiar conference with her: And amongst many other
speeches (quoth. she) I pray tell me what Archas has reported unto you,
concerning Pollipus, for he seems unwilling to vtte^ his mind unto m^. He
told me nothing (quoth. she.) Which words came from her with such ^uttering and
change of countenance, that Violetta began to suspect, that Archas had all this
while disse^led with her, and that pollipus, (contrary to his report) was yet
living. And when ^orana came, she likewise felt her mind: of whom she
gathered some probability. And likewise when she next came into Archas company,
she asked him so many Questions, that she found many contra^eries in his
sp^ches, which settled such a perswasiue opinion in her mind, that Archas
e^orte of Pollipus was untrue, that she rested greatly comforted that way, but
yet in great care, cog^ating what he would suppose was become of her: How she
should get out of that place, or give him knowledge of her being there, and
avoid Archas odious Love, which seemed as deadly to her heart, as infectious
Uenome.

Archas still prosecuted his suit with great earnestness, making many
frivolous excuses to withhold her from the Bohemian Court, growing into such
bold^es, that oftentimes when she refused his offered embracings and impudent
behauiors, he would by force kiss her, and fold her in his arms, which
rudeness, he so often used, that she began so extremely to abhor him, that
his sight was odious unto her.

Oftentimes Vloletta did walk into a pleasant Orchard adjoining to the Castle,
as well to recreate her dulled Senses in those pleasant Sh^des, as in
solitariness to recount her m^eries, and ease her careful heart, by inuenting
means how to rid her ^e from that Labyrinth of sorrow, and also to avoid
Archas odious sight, who inwardly ^usted to sat^sfie his inordinate appetit, by
obtaining the fruition of her delicate body, and though he knew pollipus were
living, and heard the mones and sorrowful complaints Violetta m^de, able to
exte^ate any tirannous disposition, yet he persisted in his devilish
resolution, with such impudency, that neither regarding har complaints, nor
the laws of Nature, he still sought all disloyal opportunities to dishonor
her. And on a time, marking when she went into the Orchard, as she was (...),
in midst of her silent cogitations, he come to the place where she sa^e,
(whose heart began to pant with a kind of fear, when she beheld him) and
coming unto her, seating himself closr by her sweet side, he uttered these
speeches.

You know dear Lady, how long I have sued to obtain your love, being thereto
compelled by the extremities of Loves everlasting ^ame, which boyleth in my
troubled Breast, but hitherto you have obdurated your heart against me, and not
vouchsafed to yield any pity to my distress, but contrary to the kind
nature that should abound in you, seem not at all to regard my Passions, which
has added sorrow to my torment. Now sweet Lady, seeing with what devotions I
have attended your pleasure, defer me no longer, but let me obtain that
favor, which with such care I have expected, and you so unkindly withheld:
which would both ease my comfortless heart, and add no small content to the
remediless sorrows you so impatiently endure.

Violetta hearing his speeches, made this reply. Sir, I have long since told
you my resolution, which might be a sufficient answer to any reasonable
crdature: besides, my vows passed to my deer Knight pollipus, have bound me
from yielding my spotless Honor to be stained with the blot of infamy. Then I
pray leave off to prosecute your suit, which you ground upon loves foundation,
being indeed, nothing but the in^tiable desire of filthy concupiscence: the
remembrance whereof, adds new care to my careful heart, and every way
affrighteth me with discontent: and if you so much regard my content, as you
protest, desist to trouble me with your Love, and give me leave to depart
from hence, that I may spend the rest of my days in sorrow, for his loss,
that was more dearer unto me, then all the worlds treasure.

I but Lady (quoth, Archas) calm this discontent with remembrance of an
impossibility in obtaining ought at his hands, and go not (...) t^ consume
those heavenly perfections with sorrow, and seem not (...) then reason
requires, to him that loves you as well as Pollipus (...) did: And now that
occasion has so ^tly offered the sweet opportunity of time and place, let us
spend this time in love, and not in these ^ntentions: these unfrequented paths
add means to further our joys: Here are no eyes to behold us, nor any to
bewray our secrets, but the^lent tr^s and sweet smelling flowers: and that
which is unknown, is in a manner vncommitted: and in requital of your
kindness, I will perform whatsoever you shall command me, were it to run
through thousands of deaths; to procure your content: then sweet love be not so
unkind, but yield some pity to my restles cares, and detain not from me that
pleasant delight, which will extinguish my bitter griefs. When he had ended his
speeches, he stricctly caught her tender body in his arms, imprinting a
compelled kiss upon her tender lips, twining her curled locks about his
gross fingers, and boldly fingring her tender breasts, offering other forced
behavior: whilst she striued to untwine her body of his arms, which when she
had obtained, casting a disdainful countenance upon him (like as Diana cast
upon the woeful Acteon,) with her cheeks as red as scarlet, she uttered these
speeches.

Most discourteous villain, has my lenity enforced thee to offerime this
abuse: or is thy mind so far from piety, as not to desist from prosecuting
thy detested Lust? Know this, that rather then I will yield my honor to be
blemished by thy appetite, I will tear these eyes from forth my head, and end
my woeful life, which thou soughtest to spill. Is this the friendship thou have
protested? Was it thy policy to train me hither to dishonor me? Had thou
left me in the place where I lost my beloved, then had I been happy, if some
wild beast had ended my life. I now perceive thy Protestations are but filthy
actors of thy intended villainy, and all which thou have told me of Pollipus
death, to be most false and untrue: for no doubt, he is yet living, whom thou
seek to dishonor, by spoiling me of that which I reserved for him.
Accursed wretch that I was, to fall into thy odious hands which art void of
Knightly behavior.

Archas hearing himself thus reviled, abandoned shame and pity, violently
pulling her to him: told her, that she should submit her self to his will,
offering by force to attain the fruition of her spotless body. When Violetta
felt her self so handled, she labored by all means to disappoint him of his
will: but in the end, seeling her self too weak, long to withhold his force,
she yielded forth such shrikes, as all the Castle roong with the noise of her
outerye: that Sorana hearing the same, knowing the place where she used, came
thitherwards. Archas beholding her, withdrue himself, and Violetta rose from
the place, tired with resistance, and swollen with inward veration, and disdain
to be so used, casting her countenance down to the earth: To whom Sorana
said, How now Lady, What causes your sorrow? Has Archas offered you violence?
Violetta with tears trickling down her crimzen cheeks, answered: yea, that
villain. Archas would have done me violence, had not you so Fortunately come
to my rescue: But I think the Divine providence, has sent you hither so
happily to preserve me from his devouring lust, whose dishonorable mind is
fraught with all villainies: accursed be the day that first brought me to this
hateful place, to fall into his loathsome power, that contrary to Nature, has
done me this outrage. Sweet Sorana (quoth she) convey me secretly into the
Castle, that there I may in sorrow end my accursed life, rather then again
abide his loathsome sight, which will be as pestilent as deadly Poison to my
heart. Sorana taking her by the arm to support her weak body, led her to her
Chamber. Archas likewise seeing himself so frustrated of his desire, with an
impudent and unshamefast Countenance, went into the Castle, vowing in his
heart never to desist until he had accomplished his desire.

Violetta, being come to her Chamber, related to Sorana the whole manner of
Archas usage, entreating her counsel, which way to avoid his suits, which
she knew he would still prosecute: who uttered her mind in this sort. Lady I
pity your estate, but I am so far from adding release thereto, as I know no
means at all how to comfort you: For Archas disposition I too well know, is
far from any spark of honesty, who has in iike sort behaved himself to me at
my first coming hither, which was in the Prime of my youth: neither give any
credit to his reports: for he has told me that Pollipus is yet living, and
long since I suspected he would use you in this sort, and escape from hence
you cannot: For this Castle is continually guarded, having but one entrance
thereto, whereby none can escape vndescried; therefore I think it best for you
to yield to his love, and then you may live in quiet: otherwise I know your
life will be miserable enough.

Violetta was stricken into a sudden amazement to hear her detested counsel,
thinking to have found some comfort in her speeches: In so much, that with
extremity of Passions, she was ready to give up the ghost. Which Sorana
beholding, reviving her with rubbing her pale cheeks, she said as follows.

If you will follow my advise and counsel, I may peradventure ease you in
some respect; Which is this, That the next time when Archas coms again to
solicit his suit, condescend to his request, conditionally, that he will
come to you in the silent of the Night, so secretly hat none may know thereof,
and that only he satisfy himself with your Love without asking questions,
or entering into any talk, which may renew the remembrance of your former
grief: and when with these conditions you have agreed, my self will supply your
room, and thereby safeguard your Honor, and satisfy him: which may well be
performed, considering that his desire being nothing but Lust, he easily will
be drawn to condescend to your conditions: which once done, let me alone to
execute the rest: for I am so well acqnainted with his fashions, that it shall be
long before he descrie our deceit.

Violetta hearing the circumstance of her Talk, promised to do all things
according to her counsel, if she herself meant faithfully. Which Sorana
assured her of, by many Protestations, and so left her in some comfort, hoping
by this means to be rid from her Impudent Lover.

As Soon as Sorana was departed, she presently goes to Archas, (pricked
forward with as great a sting of foul Lust, as reigned in him) and told him,
that she had talked with Violetta about his suit, which she was persuaded she
would yield unto, but that she was bashful: and by his speeches, rather
hardened, then any way mollified: but (quoth. she) Try her even now, and
whatsoever she binds you unto by condition, that promise you to perform:
and when you know her mind, tell me what she says, and I may peradventure
counsel you what to do for your furtherance: for she is worthy to be beloved,
and kindly used, and in my Judgment, you did amiss, to use her so rudely as
you did in the Orchard; For forced kindness is not worth estimation, but
consent in Love breeds the sweetest delight.

Archas presently put her counsel in practice, and came to Violettaes chamber
(who was then studying how to rid her self from his custody) and very kindly
saluted her, craving pardon for his last offense, excusing himself by many
reasons, and alleging as many persuasions, that she could not in reason deny
his request: his Love being grounded upon the truest foundation of perfect
constancy, of Uowes, Oaths, and Protestations, to dedicate himself, his life,
and all that he had to be at her command. Violetta (casting down her eyes to
the earth, and with a blushing countenance, to think how much it went against her
heart, to use him kindly: asking pardon of Pollipus, in her secret thoughts,
for doing him that unwilling wrong) at last made answer, that she could in
some sort be contented to grant his request, if he would promise to perform
what she should inioine him too, which he vowed and protested to fulfill in
every respect. Then she concluded with him as Sorana had counseled her to do,
which liked him exceedingly well, and quoth she, for a pledge hereof, give me
that ring which you so much esteem, which he gave unto ber, and at his
departure receiusd from her a gentle kiss, which she wished might prove as
deadly poison to his heart, being greatly discontented with her self for
showing him that favor.

Archas presently with a joyful heart went to Sorana: and told her all that
had passed betwixt him and Violetta: which she willed him in any wise to
perform: and seeing she has bound you from talk, what need you care for
speaking, since you may enjoy what otherwise you desire: and she finding you so
willing to condescend to her requests, will be the easiler drawn to yield
you any courtesy. Sorana being parted from him, imediately came to Violetta,
and told her all that he had made her privy unto, and withal said, that for
her sake only she undertook that task, (which was nothing so, but of a most
inordinate desire to beastly lust, which Violetta well noted:) and thus they
spent the day in much idle talk, until evening drawing nigh, she left
Violetta in her chamber, and went unto that sweet bed, which she had neately
dressed for Archas, perfuming her self with many odoriferous waters, devising
all means she could to keep her self unknown from him, being affected with
great desire for his approach. As Soon as the appointed time was come, Archas
secretly conveyed himself in the dark, into Violettas chamber, without
speaking a word, whom when Sorana heard rus^ing upon the rushes, her heart
leapt for joy: and the prepared her self to entertain him in the kindest
sort, who approaching the beds side, softly lifting up the clothes, laid
himself down by her side, who seemed to shrike there at, and with such
cunning behaved her self, that he no whit supposed he embraced his woonthed
Sorana.

Violetta being sure of Archas, with all have attired herself in Soranas
apparel, which so well became her, that had Archas himself seen her, he
would not have discerned her disguise, and taking with her the ring he had
given her, she came to the Gardiants, telling the^ she must go out about a
little business for Archas, and gave them the ring as her warrant to pass by.
The Gardiants marvelled whither she went so late, yet taking her for on other
then Sorana, accepting her warrant, let her depart. Violetta being past the
entrance, began to study which way to talk, but knowing that the time now
yielded no respite to delay, took any way came into her fancy, fittest as
she thought for her escape, and with all have, arming her self with as much
courage as could possible be in a woman, forsaking the mountains, which she
thought dangerous for wild beasts, she traveled all that night, sometimes
running, and sometimes going, as if Archas had bin hard at hand pursuing her,
and by that time Phoebus began to illuminate the earth with his brightness,
she was gotten a great way from Archas Castle, toward Greece, rejoicing at her
happyescape, not caring which way she went, so she might get from him: and
applauding Soranas counsel, which had sorted to that unexpected issue for her
escape.

CHAP. VI.
How Pollipus was taken prisoner by the Giant Brandamor, in the Forest of
Arde. And Parismus daparture with Tellamor and Barzillus, in search of Violetta.

AFter that Pollipus was departed from Parismus, he came to the place where he
left Violetta, and there uttered these speeches. This is that blessed place
where my Love lay last foulded in mine arms, whose presence was the sollace of
my sweet content, whose perfections excelled the rarest gifts of other Ladies,
as far as good does bad, or any virtue his contrary: which way should I take
to recover that inestimable jewel of my delight here lost? or whither should
I travel to find her, considering I know not whether she be dead or alive?

Dead I am persuaded she is not, but by some discourteous knight with held
from returning, or conveyed far hence unto some unknown place, from whence she
cannot send me word, or any way give me knowledge in that estate she remains:
then what rests for me to do, but to search the world throughout to find her,
and either to recover her to my comfort, or spend my life in that pursuit: and
since I undertake a travel, without knowledge which way to take, or whither to
convey my steps, sweet Fortune be so favorable, as to guide me in my
travels, that by thy aid I may come to the place of her abode, and attain the
fruition of her heavenly presence, who by thy appointment has fallen into
these mischances: and I will for ever dedicate my endeavors to thy service, and
continually adore thy name. Which words being ended, he mounted himself on
his steed, and rode the way his fancy first chose, traveling toward the
mountains that incompasse Bohemia, but not finding her, being unacquainted in
those countries, wandered toward Grecia, and travailed without any more hope to
find her, then at the beginning, continuing his travels without intermission,
passing many places without any misaduenture. At last he came to the great
Forest of Ardea, wherein stood the Castle of the mighty Giant Brandamor, the
place being invincible, by reason of the situation and strength, whose
cruelties committed by him and his brother Argaletus, made him much feared, and
his walks eschued of all men.

Which Forest Pollipus was no sooner enterd, but he espied the body of a
goodly Knight, that had lately given up his ghost, lie weltred in his blood,
which when he had well viewed, and perceived to be quite past recovery, he
maruailed what sad adventure had been cause of his death, persuading himself,
that those that had done the same were not far off, that he withdrew himself
into a thicket of bushes, where he could not be discerned, to stay until he
might descrie those that had done that deed.

He had not been long shrouded there, but he saw a damzell and a squire
coming to the dead knight, with great lamentations, bewailing his untimely
death, seeming by their behavior to be quite overcome with extreme misery.

After their lamentations ended, they hasted to take up the dead Knight, to
whom Pollipus came and demanded what Knight that was, and what misaduenture
had brought him to that untimely death. The damzel casting her eyes up to him,
which before were sadly fixed, on the earth, said, Sir Knight, to discduer the
whole circumstance of our mishap, would ask more respit then the time will now
permit: because if we be surprised by our tariance, we are like to be partners
with him in death. This Knight was named Tyrides, son to the noble Duke
Amasenus of Thrace, being brought up in the Court of the renowned King of
Libia: who being with the Princess Venola, the kings only daughter on
hunting, in the midst of their pastime, she was severed from the rest of her
company, and being wet with following the game, alighted in a pleasant valley
to cool her self, and lay down to the flowrie banks of a sweet burbling
brook, where she had not long stayed, but she was surprised by a Giant, who
with rud e behavior brought her a way: wherewith I being amazed, ran back
to this worthy Knight Tyrides, who with me and this Page, pursued him until
we came to this place, where this noble Knight charged him to deliver the Lady
to him, who lay panting with extreme fear of her life, under his guard: but
the Giant presently set upon this Knight, and in long continuance of terrible
fight, slew him, by which time many of her damzels had found us out, whom he
with Venola, notwithstanding their earnest entreaties, conveyed to a Castle not
far hence, whether we secretly followed him, and are now returnec to carry
back this knight, with this heavy news to to the King.

Do not so quoth Pollipus, but bring me to the Castle, and thou shall soon see
I will set her at lebertie, or venture my life. Sir. (quoth she damzel) if I
thought your travel would sort to any good issue, I would conduct you thither,
but the Giant is now within the Castle, and the night ^eere approached,
therefore we will depart with this dead knight, and if you please to go
thither, you may easily find it.

Pollipus seeing her so unwilling, left her, and rode toward the Castle,
which he found fast shut, whereto was one passage by a bridge, over a mighty
huge deepelake, the Castle it self being situated upon a lofty rock, so
well fenced by nature, and strengthened by the art of man, that it was
unconquerable, and not to be subdued by force: and coming to the bridge, he
found the same drawn up, by means whereof, he thought it vain to account of
any thing that night, but contented himself to take the cold earth for his
bed, and the large Forest for his Chamber, where he could take no rest,
being troubled with many thoughts, having likewise some hope to ^ude Violetta
in that place, which added (though it were very unlikely) great courage to his
resolution That viewing the invincible strenght of the Castle, and well
considering how he might disadvantage the Dyant if he could get him to single
fight, in these and such like thoughts he spent most part of the night, until
at last he laid him down, and gave a little slumber to his eyes.

Early in the morning he buckled on his armor, and mounting his steed,
throwded himself under the shadow of an oak, not far f^ the Castle, where
he might easily see who went out and in thereat.

The first that came out that morning, was Argalt, mounted upon a goodly
Courser, and armed in very rich Armor, whom Pollipus thought had been the
Giant that the Damzel had told him of, whom he thus greeted. Traitor, art thou
the Giant of this Castle, which have stolen the Lady Ven^la? Argall hearing
his peremptory demand, made this answer. I have the Lady Venola in my
custody, whom I esteem above all the world, but no traitor as thou termest
me. Yes, (quoth Pollipus) thou art a traitor, and worse then a villain, that
disloyally offerest outrage to resistlesse Ladies, that have not so much
valor, as to show thy self before an armed Knight: but since my destinies
have allotted me to meet thee thus conveniently, I will abate thy pride, and
correct thy tyrann^e, and make thee repent the out rages thou have committed.

Argalt hearing his speeches, was so enraged, that suddenly h^ drew forth his
mighty Fawchion, and as suddenly struck a violent blow therewith at
Pollipus, which by the unexpected approach, being unresisted, glaunced on his
thigh, and pierced the Armor, that the blood appeared.

Pollipus seeing how treacherously he had smitten him, drew his sword and
revenged that blow, beginning a brave and fair combat, which continued for a
good space, until they had given each other many veepe wounds. Argalt
marueling at his enemies valor, being never before so roughly handled, laid
on his blows with mighty force, but Pollipus sometime nimbly avoiding one, and
eunningly warding another, kept himself from any great harm, and in the end
tired Argalt, who seeing that all his strength little auayled to his enemies
disadvantage, and with all feeli^g himself almost wearied, began to abate
his blows, which Pollipus perceiving, gave him so many blows, and withal such
deep wounds, that he was in great danger of his life: and turning his back,
fled toward the Castle, whom Pollipus persuing gave so many wounds, that ^e
began to rore and cry exceedingly, yell^g forth such a hideous noise, that
all the Castle rung therewith.

Brandamor hearing the same, presently hasted to his rescue, and lifting up his
mighty mace, v^wares struck so forcibly therewith upon Pollipus Crest, that it
made him to stagger, withal, saying: Why off^est thou this outrage to my
brother? Pollipus seeing his mighty proportion, being somewhat dazeled with
the blow, retired a little back, and being recovered, made this answer. I
need not tell thee wherefore, for that thy guilty conscience repleat with
vice, can bear witness of thy degenerate cruelty, offered to all that come
within thy power, but especially to the fair Lady Venola, whom thou (or thy
brother) haste brought to this Castle, whom I am come to redeem.

Brandamor hearing his speeches, most cowardly assailed him, being before
almost wearied, and grievously wounded: who notwithstanding resisted him so
valiantly, that Brandamor in short time had received many grievous wounds, yet
staying himself, said. I pity thy estate, and therefore I wish thee to yield
thy self, before I chastise thy boldness any further, for I see thou art
already wounded, and unable to withstand my strength: besides, I scorn to cope
with one already vanquished: then take my offer of mercy, or else I will
soon give that weak body of thine to be devoured of wild beasts. Uaine
boasting monster (quoth Pollipus) know that I disdain thy friendship, and
disclame thy proffer, desiring rather to die by thy accursed hand, then yield
to thy courtesy, therefore do thy worst.

Brandamor hearing this resolute reply, being enraged with collar, struck at
him most violently, but Pollipus avoiding his blow, thrust at him, and wounded
him so deep, that the blood ran down upon his white steed. Argalt seeing
this Knight so valiantly withstand his brother* called forth a great sort of
servants in Armor, who rushing all at once upon him, with their throng beat
him from his horse, and carried him into the Castle, where he was unarmed, and
for that night put into a close prison, having an old woman to dress his
wounds.

Early the next morning, he was brought into the Hall before Brandamor, who
had Maiestically seated himself in a chair, with ^erie red eyes swolue with
rage, uttering these speeches. Presumptuous and ouerdaring Knight, what frenzy
has caused thee to commit this unadvised folly, whereby thou have incenst my
wrath against thee, and brought thy self in danger? Wherein have I wronged
thee, that thou should offer to molest me?

Pollipus disdaining to be so perempterilie examined, made this reply. I li^
not tell my name, because thou know me not, the cause of my coming hither,
is in search of a Lady that I suppose thou unjustly detainest, making thy
infamous name so ignominious by thy outrages, that both heaven and earth will
shortly hate thee. Do thou seek a Lady, (quoth he) come with me, and thou
shall see all the Ladies I have.

Then he brought him into a goodly Hall, hung with ancient clothes of
Tapistrie, out of which he went into a most pleasant Gallerie, furnished with all sorts of most beautiful pictures of excellent workmanship: from thence he
came into a chamber of great largeness, so rarely furnished, as Pollipus
marvelled at the richness thereof: at the end whereof, sat the most
beautiful and fair Lady Venola, with her golden hair hanging about her
shoulders, her rich and costly ornaments all betorne, her crimzen cheeks
sprinkled with old dried tears, and fresh drops flowing from her pure
eyes: heavily leaning her careful head upon a cushion, with her hands hanging
down folded one in another, seemed so sad and heavy a spectacle of a
distressed Lady, as never eye beheld: who feeling Brandamor and Pollipus
coming toward her, lifted up her head from the place where she rested it, and
carelessly let the same fall on the heavy pillowe again. Pollipus seeing her
excceding beauty, and withal, noting her heavy estate, was strooken into a
sudden dump, that he stood like one in a study. Brandamor thinking that was
the Lady he came to redeem said^, Knight, if this be the Lady thou seek
to release, thy labor is in vain: for her, do I esteem more then all the
world: whose presence I so highly honor, that no force shall redeem her from
hence: whom I both love and honor as much as thou and all the Knights, in the
world besides: whose love has caused my languishing torments this long time,
which now I purpose to enjoy, to the extinguishing of my inward vexations: for
her sake have I endured much travel, then do not think, that I will easily or
willingly leave her heavenly company, but will approve and maintain, that I
am worthier of her love then any Knight living: and since I have my desire in
attaining her custody, I will likewise enjoy her love before she part hence.

Venola hearing his proud boasting, so much disdained the^, that she could not
refrain from answering him, but rising from the ground where she sat, she
uttered these speeches.

Impudent mis^reant why presumed thou so much of thy self, that art able ^o
perform nothing (...)? (...) thou my love of so small estimation, as to be
(...) ^y thy (...) speeches? or any way ^o (...) liking to thy (...): No, I
accou^ the b^est (...) in Libia, too good to be thy (...), much less my sense
do so much ^orne thee, tha^ will (...) execute mine own death, then (...) thee
to (...) ^e so much as with a touch: and think thou, because thou (...) be^d
this ^e knight by treachery, there are no other that will seek my (...)? Yes
(...) thou assured, that the violence thou have offered me, by bringing me
hither against my will, one day will turn to be the occasion of thy cruel
death. Thou foul detested v^aine, leave off to utter such bos^ng speeches in
my presence, for nothing can bring more grief to my heart, then thy ill
pleasing sight.

Brandamor hearing her heavenly voice sound forth such bitter ^aunts against
him, was exceedingly ^aged therewith, but dissembling a pleasant countenance,
he departed with Pollipus, whom ofter some speeches past betwixt them, he
commanded to be conveyed to a hamber, from whence ^e could as hardly get, as
from the strongest prison in the world: who seeing that Violetta was not in the
Castle, wished he h^ not attempted to have come there, ut making a virtue of
necessity, he endured such imprisonment as patiently as might be, thinking all
misery nothing, being vnd^gone for Violettas sake. Where we w^ leave him, to
speak of Parismus.

Parismus heart was oppressed with such grief, for the loss of the virtuous
Violetta, and the ab^ence of his dear friend Pollipus, that day nor night he
could neither by sleep, or other recreation, give any ease to his troubled
head, therefore he determined likewise, to endure some travel for their sakes,
that b^ suffered much misery in his behalf: and when Laurana and he were one
night sweetly solacing themselves, each in the others pleasant love, he told
her his full intent, desiring her not te be discontented therewith, but to take
his departure patiently

Laurana hearing his speeches, was so overcome with grief, that a flood of
tears distilled from her precious eyes, and twi^ing her tender arms about his
necks, impressing a sweet kiss upon his lips, she uttered these speeches.
Most noble Lord, are you weary of my company, that you seek to estraunge your
self from me by Travel? do you think I shall be able long to endure your
absence? well knowing how many dangers may hazard your person, and detain your
heavenly presence from my sight? Think you that I can attain an^ quiet,
without the fruition of your heavenly company? or ever suffer steep to seize
upon my eyes while you are absent? No sweet Lord, with your departure, all joy
and delight shall part from me, and never will I suffer any content to harbor
in my breast. Then most dear Love, (which words she uttered, intermingled with
a number of sweet kisses) do not leave me in care, do not withhold my
content, do not take away my sweetest delight, but stay you still with me,
and command your Knights to go in Violettas search, who at the least beck,
will Post through the World to do you service: and hazard not your person in
strange Countries, nor amongst for^aine enemies, which may by some treachery
work your grief: my self will here shroud you from harm my arms shall
enclose you from danger, and my love shall be the For^ you shall conquer. I
will expel the sad remembrance of their loss, with delightful communication:
my self will rock your senses aseep with Music, and my endeavors shall labor
to purchase your content: Then do not seek to leave me comfortless to be
wail your absence, but mak^ abode with me still, and my love shall shelter you
from all peril. Which words being ended, the ouerflowing of her Tears, stopped
the passage o^ her speech, and sobbing forth sighs, she hung about his neck.

Parismus was exceedingly grieved to see her heaviness, that folding her
precious body in his arms, with a strict embracing, he labored by
delightful Familiarities, to expel her sadness: which being somewhat
mittigated, he uttered these speeches.

Why dear Lady, what need you make these complaints, considering you know
nothing is so precious in my sight, nor of so dear estimation with me, as your
sweet love? Or what need you make speech, or take such fear of dangers, when
you see no cause of disquiet? Why are you unwilling that I should take a little
pains for their sakes, that would have have many ways endangered their lives,
and endured extreme misery for your sake? How can I excuse my self of
ingratitude, to that courteous Knight Pollipus? if whilst he passes his time
in sorrowful care. I should live here in ease, not seeming to regard his
misery, that would have shunned no danger to procure my comfort? How will all
the Knights of the Cour esteem of me, but as of an ungrateful person, if I
should so much neglect the duty of a Friend? Then sweet Love, be not you the
cause of my stay, but let me obtain your sweet consent, and expel those
confused cares that trouble your quiet: for be you assured, nothing can be more
grievous unto me, then your discontent: and nothing more pleasing, then your
accord: the dangers accurrant to travel, are by wisdom easily avoided: then
be you assured that I will shun al hazard of mishap, for your sweet sake: and
leave you off to sorrow thus for that which you cannot with equity contradict:
my stay shall not be long, nor my journey far: then be you contented to
vouchsafe your agreement, and you shall thereby satisfy my content: his
speeches being ended, with silence she gave consent, spending some time in
sweet dalliance, and in the end ^ell fast a sleep.

Early in ye morning, Parismus with many sweet kisses, took his leave of
Laurana, who bedeawed her bed with a bundance of fears, for his departure, and
falling into a deep passion of fear, she presently started up, and arraying
her self, came down into the court, where Parismus was ready to take his
horse, and running to him caught hold of him, who maruelling thereat, took her
most lovingly in his arms, who was so far ouergon with grief, that she could
not speak a word: but bestowing many sweet tear-wet kisses on her, he left
her amongst her maids, and departed. With him, were Tellamor and Barzillus,
keeping company together some three days, without adventure at all: at last,
they came to a goodly plain, whereinto a common beaten path conducted them,
until coming in the midst thereof, there stoo^ a brazen pillar, from which,
parted three several ways: there they stayed devising amongst themselves
which of those ways to take: at last, they concluded, that each of them should
take a several way, and solemnly taking theirleaues, with kind farewells,
they betook each other to their good or bad fortunes.

CHAP. VII.
How (Parismus) called the knight of Fame, won the chief honor of the
Tourney, at the Court of the king of Thrace. And having won Phylena, the kings
daughter, was commanded in a vision, to give her to Remulus.

PArismenos (no otherwise known, but by the name of the knight of Fame. under
which name, he did pass till he came to the knowledge of his parents) being as
is before said in another Chapter, co^ueied by Amasenus to his castle, sore
wounded in the battle he had with Argalus and Thenudes, was so carefully tended
by the Dukes Physicians, that in a few days they had brought him to his
perfect remem brances: and within short time after that, to his perfect health,
which greatly rejoiced the good old Duke, who took great felicity in his
company, for the many honorable parts he saw to abound in him. And upon a
time, in the presence of all his Court, demanded the cause of the combat
between him and Argalus, which he requested as well to know the truth thereof
himself, as to satisfy the suspicious minds of many that inwardly maligned
the discontented Knight, unto whom he declared the truth in manner as is before
set down, saying: This my lord is the truth of his misaduenture, whom I never
injured, but always esteemed as my friends. Amasenus was glad that no cause of
discontent could be conceived against him, by any other of his Knights, who
envied him, because his noble gifts darkened their glories: but yet his courteous
and kind behavior in short time expelled that roncor, and they that before
were his enemies, began to make good estimation of him, and his fame began to
spread it self in most parts of Thrace, and all that ever beheld him, grew
into admiration of his strength, accompanied with such beauty, as his youth
yielded: that had they not known the contrary by his prowess, they would
have taken him for some disguised La-Ly. Whilst the knight of Fame, remained
in Amasenus court, the King of Thrace appointed a general triumph, to be
heldfor certain days, the occasion whereof is this.

He had one only daughter, named Phylena, whose beauty was inferior to none:
and her gifts of nature were such, as made her much spoken of in many
countries: insomuch that many knights came as suitors to obtain her love, but
she had secretly betrothed her self to Remulus, one of the knights of her
fathers court, without her parents consent: by means of whose beauty, the
Court of Thrace was full of gallant knights that sought her lone, that the King
was much troubled in mind how to bestow her: and seeing that she did not
fancy one more than another, he appointed a general triumph to be held for
seven days, and whosoever bare away the prize the last day, should marry his
daughter. Intending thereby to end his doubt and care that way: thinking, that
though his daughter had not a rich and Princely husband, yet she should have a
valiant Champion to defend the price of her beauty. Amongst the rest of the
Knights, there was Guido, who had long time sued to obtain her Love, who now
rejoiced at this Decree, hoping by his valor to bear away the Bride. There was
Trudamor of Candie, who thought none equal to him in strength: and therefore
none more forward against the time of the appointed triumph. There was Drio of
Scicil, who had sailed from his own Country thither: who likewise by his
strength at several times slew three Lions, who came with resolution to win
Phylena for his Wife. And many other Knights of high account.

The report of this great Triumph came to to the knowledge of the Knight of
Fame, whose mind was kindled with an earnest desire to go thither, that he
requested Amasenus consent, who being desirous any way to pleasure him, gave
him sufficient Coin to furnish him of all things, fit for such an attempt. Who
caused a most rich Armor of green to be made, shadowed with Trees of gold,
presenting a Forest. In his shield he bare this devise; A naked man leading a
Lion, with this Motto underneath, Ouergone with Discontent: Wherein the expert
Artsman had so cunningly imitated his Fancy, that a man by his Armor and
shield, might easily understand his meaning. The appointed time of Triumph
drawing nigh, Amasenus with a gallant troop of Knights, amongst whom the
Knight of Fame was chief, came to the Thracian Court, whom the King
honorably received.

Amasenus having don homage to che King, pitched his Tent without the
Court-Gates, upon a little hill, hard by the appointed place for Triumph: where
likewise hard by him were the Tents of Guido, Trudamor, Drio, and the three
valiant knights of Candie: Tristramus, Tennulus, and Babulus, in whose
company were a number of valiant knights, that came thither: Some to make
trial of their valor, and some of purpose to win the fair Phylena.
Likewise there were the Tents of the young King of Arragon: who came
accompanied with a number of valiant knights hoping to bear away the Prize,
that all the Plains were filled with Tents. There might you see knights
breaking staves, practicing themselves against the day of Triumph. Here might
you see others recreating themselves in Martial exercises: there might you
hear the Neighing of Horses, clattering of Armor, cracking of staves, and
such companies of Knights assembled, as if the richest prize had been appointed
for reward.

Whilst these things were acting, Phylena was in great care for Remulus, whom
she loved so dearly, that rather then she would part with him, she would
endure any misery whatsoever: who likewise addressed himself to try his
Fortune amongst the test. And the day before the Triumph, Phylena secretly
getting opportunity to speak with him, gave him this assurance of her
constancy.

My dear Love (quoth. she) since my Father has decreed this public Triumph,
for the bestowing of me in Marriage, because amongst so many Knights as have
sought my Love, I have Affianced my self to none of them, but have chosen you
as the chiefest Load-starre of my life and Love: be you yet assured, that
though Fortune may allot me to be another by Conquest, yet none but your self
shall enjoy my Love: and though another may challenge me by right of my
Fathers decree, yet none but your self shall have true interest in me. And
rather then I will yield to like of any Knights love but yours, I will endure
either death, or any other torment shall be inflicted upon me: for you are the
Knight that shall conquer my Love; you have by courtesy woonne my Love, and
you shall wear it. Nor King nor Knight shall rob me of that which I have
given to you: Then be not you discomforted, or any way disquieted, but try
your Fortune amongst the rest, and Fate may happily allot you the Conquest as
well as any other.

Remulus hearing his Ladies constant Resolution, was overcome with exceeding
joy, resolving to adventure as much as any to attain the desired Conquest: and
Solacing himself so long as their stolen time would permit, in her company,
being by necessity compelled, they parted.

The next Morning, the King of Thrace accompanied by a number of Personages of
Estate, brought forth the beautiful and fair Lady Phylena, most richly
adorned with costly Ornaments, wearing upon her head a Crown of gold,
attended by an hundredth Damzells clad in white, and seated her on a Scaffolde,
in the open view of all the Knights there assembled, whose hearts were enamoured
with the sweet attainte of her shining Beauty, and their courages revived with
the hope of so rich and precious a Prize. Amongst the rest, there was the Lord
Remulus, whose heart was oppressed with distrustful care, to see the Lady he
most esteemed, and his secret protested love, set as a Prize, to wring him from
his possession: yet comforted by her faithful promise, he took great
felicity to see that Beauty made famous, which he made account to enjoy.

The Knight of Thrace began the Triumph, and the first that entered the Listes
was Andreas, who was at two Courses unhorsed by Cleanthea, who continued
Conqueror by the overthrow of many Knights, until Bubulus, one of the
three Brethren of Candie, with violence drove him from his horse, and burst one
of his ribs. Bubulus unhorsed many Knights afterward, both of Thrace and
other strange Countries, and in the end, was unhorsed himself by Remulus,
who behaved himself so valiantly in the sight of the Princes, that by the
foil of many knights, he ended that days Triumph, to his exceeding honor,
resting Conqueror until the next Morning. When the Night was ouerpast, the
King conducting Phylena in the like manner he had done the day before, and
seated her again upon the scaffold. When Remulus came into the Lists, bravely
managing his prauncing steed, whom Phylena beheld with a crefull eye, breathing
forth many a deuouted prayer for his good success, who having conquered some
twenty Knights, in the end was foiled by Temulus, and so with a heavy heart
left the Field. Temulus continued Conqueror by the disgrace of many Knights
almost all that day, but in the end, was unhorsed by the King of Arragon.

The King of Arragon ended that days Triumph, and continued chief Conqueror
the next day, and on the fourth day he was unhorsed by Tristramus, and so he
lost the Conquest which he so much destred.

Afterward, Tristramus continued that days Triumph with great bravery, and
the fiste day was unhorsed by Annulus, a knight of Lybia, who unhorsed that day
forty knights, to his exceeding honor.

The Knight of Fame all this while, kept himself out of sight, and was Lodged
at a Uillage, some two miles distant from the Thracian Court, and according to
Amasenus appointment, came toward the lists gallantly mounted all alone, and by
the unexpected manner of his sudden, approach, and by the strange fashion of
his Armor, as Fortune would, was not generally noted: and in that sort he
entered the Lists reuerencing himself toward the Scaffolde whereon the King
was seated, and setting spurs to his Horse, incountred Annulus, (and Fortune
intending at the first to do him some disgrace) mist his course, and Annulus
brake his Staff most bravely, wherewith the whole assembly gave an exceeding
shoute, and the Knight of Fame being enraged with his oversight, charged
another course at Annulus with great violence, and ouerthrewe him, with his
heels upwards: Where at the whole company gave an exceeding shoute again,
every one thinking he had purposely lost his first course; By which means all
were desirous to see him Run again. Which the discontented knight performed
so gallantly, that he unhorsed another knight of Lybia, that thought to
revenge Annulus overthrow.

Guido disdaining thereat, and seeing how the beholders were affected, noted
him more specially: thinking by his spoil to win some special honor, and
with the more bravery to continue the rest of the Triumph, and attain the
Prize, taking a strong Staff, prepared to meet the knight of Fame, who by
that time had dismounted three or four other knights.

The people seeing the valiant Guido come to the Listes, who was well known to
all, thought then surely to see the discontented knights Honor at an end, for
on him and Drio, the chiefest suppose of Conquest depended.

Guido encountered the knight of Fame the first time, without offering or
sustaining disadvantage, which inwardly vexed him to the heart, that charging
him again the second time, notwithstanding all his force, he could not once
move him in his saddle. The discontended knight, likewise feeling the puissance
of his Enemy, was exceedingly enraged, that taking another course, they met
with such fury, that the Earth shook with the force of their encounter, and
their Lances shiuered into a thousand pieces, passing by, without any show or
sign of odds.

The king of Thrace seeing the day so far spent, sent a messenger to entreat
them to leave the further trial of their doubtful Conquest until the next
day, which they both consented unto.

The next Morning these two Champions came again, with desirous minds to be
revenged each of other, and met two courses with such bravery, that the
people with great shoutes applauded their Chinalrie, the knight of Fame choosing
the strongest Staff that he could find, meant now or never to give or take
the foil, and rushing forcibly to encounter Guido, he met him so violently,
that Guidos Horse yielded to the force of their Encounter, and falling down,
burst his leg, the people seeing Guido down, were drawn into a wonderful
amazement, what this Knght should be.

Phylena likewise, as much formented in mind, in her Fancy allotting him the
chiefest Honor: and seeing he was some Knight of a strange Country, fearing
least he obtaining her by Conquest, should carry her far from her Fathers
Court, and so quite from the sight and company of her dear friend Remulus,
that she was drawn into such a sad conceit, that her heart seemed to melt
thereat. Trudamor seeing Guido so foiled, with great bravery entered the
Listes, and encountered the Knight of Fame, who likewise charged him with many
brave courses, that in the end, the Conquest remained in great doubt betwixt
them, still continuing their Encounters with exceeding courage, that Trudamor
with all his strength could not any whit disadvantage the Knight of Fame, nor he
by his force get any odds of Trudamor: that in the end, Trudamor thyrsting
for the honor of the title, and longing to enjoy Phylena for his Bride,
tracing softly to his Races end, went toward the Knight of Fame, who wirh the
like behavior met him, to whom Trudamor said as follows;

Knight, I see we have no advantage against each other by this exercise; Let us
then finish the doubtfulnes of this strife with our swords, which is the
readiest means to make one of us Conqueror. With all my heart (answered he
again) your proffer so well agrees with my Fancy, as I neither can, nor will
deny the same: wherewith they drue their Swords, and charged each other with
furious blows, whose Courage each beholder greatly commended.

The King of Thrace beholding the Noble valor of the Knight of Fame, was
exceedingly well affected toward him: insomuch, that he desired none might
enjoy his Daughter but he; between whom and Trudamor continued a most brave
Combat: till in the end, the Knight of Fame had so grievously Wounded him, and
in so many places, that all the beholdets accounted Trudamor as half
vanquished: and what with effusion of blood, and ouermaistered by the Knight of
Fames strength, his Armor giving way to every blow, was ready to fall from
his Horse: Which the Knight of Fame perceiving, stayed: uttering these words.
Most noble Knight (quoth. he) Nee the danger you are in, therefore I wish you to
yield your self, for it is not your death that I seek: and rather then I
will be guilty thereof, I will yield up the Prey I shall wi^ by your conquest.

Trudamor hearing his speeches, exceedingly admired his curs^ete and being
ready to speak, his senses by weakness began to fail, and he was taken
from his horse to have his gaping wounds stenched. The whole multitude of
beholders noting the singular valor of the Knight of Fame, and how courteously
he had abstained from killing Trudamor, whose life was in his power, were so
well affected toward him, that they shouted and rejoiced exceedingly at his
victory.

The king seeing the day grown to an end came from the scaffolde, and with
great entreaties got the knight of Fame to go with him to the Court, where he
was most honorably entertained, and had his wounds carefully searched by the
Physicians, who found none of them dangerous. Amasenus seeing the knight of
Fame had won the chiefest honor of the triumph for that day, came to the King,
and reported to him how long he had been with him, and the manner of his first
arrival in that country, seeking to increase the kings affection toward
him, by entering into many exceeding commendations of his valor, virtue, and
courtesy: that the king did him all the honor that might be for that night,
intending after the triumph ended, to express his love toward him by all
means he could devise.

Early the next morning, being the last day of the triumph, the king was
sommoned to the field, by the shrill sound of the knight of Fames trumpet, who
was gallantly mounted, attended by an infinite number of people, that came to
glut their eyes with beholding him: there was now no talk but of the Knight of
Fame, his fame had fed the ears of all, in so much, that such a number of
peo ple thronged to see the last days triumph, that the place could not con
taine their multitude. The knight of Thrace marvelled what he should be, and
for that he was unknown, the strange knights somewhat rejoiced, that the
prize should be carried from Thrace. Amongst the rest, Kemulus noting his
exceeding courtesy, and prying more narrowly the^ any of the rest, into his
behavior, rejoiced in his mind that so honorable, valiant, and courteous a
knight should possess his dear Phylena, and above all the knights of the
Court, he was most ready to entertain the knight of Fame, with all courtesy,
and wished that none but he might bear away the chiefest honor of the triumph.

The king having again in most sumptuous and royal sort seated his daughter
upon the scaffold, attended the first encounter that should be given to the
knight of Fame, which was performed by Purrus, a knight of Cicill, with great
bravery, but the second course he measured his length on the earth, as others
had done before him. Next him came a knight of Libia, who had like fortune to
Purrus. Guido being not satisfied with desire of victory, but in putting the
cause of his last overthrow to his horse, not himself, changed his armor and
came into the ^istes again, inte^ding to revenge his spoil: but before he
came, Drio of Cicill had broken two staves with the knight of Fame, and before
he could take the third course, Guido instigated by rage, ran against the
knight of Fame, and intercepted him. Drio disdaining thereat, struck Guido
such a forcible blow on the head, with the trunthion of a staff, that he made
him stagger. Wherewith Guido drew his sword, and assailed Drio with great
fury, between whom began a most brave combat, until the knight of Fame stepped
betwixt them, and parted them, uttering these speeches. Knight quoth he) what
means this outrage? why contend you betwixt your selves, and leave me, with
whom you should principally deal, unassayed? think you I am not of
sufficiency to deal with you both? but that you must thus dishonourably,
seek with private quarrels to disturb our trial? But notwitstanding his
speeches, they began to assail each other again, who so enraged him, that
drawing his sword, he first struck at Guido, and then at Drio, offering to
combat with them both, that the issue of this combat seemed to be most
intricate. Sometimes the knight of Fame assailed Guido, and he resisting, when
Drio lent his blows to both: and the knight of Fame intending to revenge him
on Drio, was again assailed by Guido.

The king perceiving what danger this tripartie fight might breed, commanded
the Champions to be parted, which being done, the Judges gave order, that the
Knight of Fame should continue his course with Drio. This conclusion being
made, the knight of Fame sheathing his sword, went to the races end so fully
incest with rage, that his eyes smarted with vexatio^. Drio likewise was so
fully puffed with fury, that he vowed at that course to end the trial of the
combat: that both of them taking scope enough, to meet with the greater
swiftness, set spurs to their steeds sides, and with exceeding violence, and
shiuering their Lances into a thousand spelles, which sung in the air: before
the steeds met, Drio winding his raines, intending to overthrow his enemy
unawares, the steed unacquainted to such custom, bare his head aloft, and the
knight of Fames steed keeping on his continued course, with great strength
ouerturned both horse and man, that Drio lay almost bruised to death with the
weight of his horse. Guido attending the next trial, had readily couched his
staff, but the knight of Fame being extremely enraged, not well knowing, or
caring what he did (having secret intelligence before given him, that it was
Guido, the knight that he had already vanished) set spurs to his horse, and ran
at hsm with his sword point, that had he not auoyed him, he had pierced the
same quite through his body: who turning himself with his sword drawn,
assailed the knight of Fame, between whom continued a most brave combat a
long space, until Guido by his irresistable blow, was grievously wounded: who
intending to revenge himself, struck a most violent blow, which lighting
cross his helmet, brake his sword: which the knight of Fame seeing, cast down
his own, disdaining to have any odds of weapon, and joining himself close to
Guido, with long striving and maine force, in the end flung him down from his
horse, wherewith the people gave such a shout, that the earth seemed to shake
with the Echo of their voices: by which time, the nights black mantle began
to ouerspread the whole earth, and there appeared no more Combattants against
the knight of Fame, but to his unspeakable honor he remained victor. Then
presently he was in tryumphant manner (according to their custom) with the
noise of Trumpets conducted to the kings Palace: where the king and all the
vanquished knights received him with great honor. Amongst the rest, was the
king of Aragon, a most gallant and brave knight at arms, who greatly desired
to be acquainted with his brave Champion, using him, with the rest of the
knights, with all courtesy and kindness. After many solemn welcomes were
past on every side, and he unarmed, the king speaking to him, uttered these
speeches. Most noble Knight, whose prowess has deserved everlasting
commendations, according to my former decree, and the promised reward to the
conqueror, I yield to your hands my daughter, the only heir of my kingdom.
Then taking Phylena by the hand, he delivered her to him. The knight of Fame
with great reverence kissing her hand, uttered these speeches. Most saccred
Princess, how can I sufficiently rejoice, that am this day extolled to the
highest type of heavenly felicity, by being unworthily preferred to have your
custody. Yet I beseech you vouchsafe me (thouhg a stranger) that bounty, as to
esteem of me, as one that is altogether vowed to your service, and though by
right of conquest I may justly callenge you for my own, yet be you assured, I
will request nothing at your hands but what shall be granted with your free
consent: but I rest yours to command and dispose of, in all humble duty.

Which words being ended, (he that never before kissed Ladies lips) with a
great reverence took of her a sweet kiss: and she with a heavy heart and
mild behavior, yielding her self as his to dispose of, which she was
constrained to do by her fathers promise, and the knights worthy deserts:
though inwardly in her heart she denoted all kind love and affection to
Remulus: on whom being by, she cast many a mild and modest look, inwardly
wishing he were the man might claim her by right of conquest, as well as by
the true affection she bare him.

That night the Knight of Fame was honorably feasted by the King, and
afterward conducted to a most Princely lodging. And being now alone, he began
to meditate of his estate, and to ponder how happily he had escaped
shipwreck, and was preferred to such high dignity, as to marry the daughter
and only heaire of a king: withal he began to call to mind every
particular thing he could remember of his birth and bringing up in the Island
of Rocks, his fancy persuading him, that he was son unto some greater
personage then he yet knew of: withal, well viewing a jewel which he had
kept ever since his nurse was slain, which she gave him in charge to keep
charilie, which thoughts, and withal, a secret instinct of nature, which he
felt in himself aiming at higher matters, settled a persuasion in his thoughts
that he was borne of royal race, and therefore meet to match with a kings
daughtee. And calling to mind the exceeding beauty of Phylena, imprinting in
his fancy a perfect remembrance of her graces, sweet countenance, and mild
behavior, he felt a secret stirring and throbbing at his heart, which
disturbed all his senses, that he was as it were transformed into a kind of
pleasant delight, wherewith he fell into a dead slumber.

In the midst of his sleep, the Goddess Venus, pitying the troubled
thoughts of her denoted subject Phylena, willing to extol the fame of this
knight, appeared unto him a vision, standing by his beds side, with a clear
burning taper in her one hand, and holding a most beautiful Lady in the
other, of such divine perpfections, that heaven nor earth could not in his
fancy frame a more divine essence of purity: the Lady Venus uttering these
words.

Thou Knight of Fame,
Regard the words I speak:
Seek not by force,
Loves constant bands to break.
Phylena fai,
The beautiful heir of Thrace:
Her constant love,
On Remulus does place.
Desire not then,
Her liking to attain,
But from her love,
Thy fantasy refrain,
Thy conquest right,
Give him that has her love:
And from their hearts,
The cares they bide remove.
This Lady bright, thy fancies shall subdue,
Then to her love, be constant just and true:
Frst seek her out, then to her pleasure tend:
To win her love, thy whole affection bend.
Of Royal race thy self art rightly sprung,
Lost by thy friends, when as thou werte but young.
Thy fathers fame, has sild the world with praise,
Thy mothers gifts, her lasting honors raise.
Bend thy desires,
Their comfort to procure,
That for thy loss,
Sad sorrows do endure.
Whilst the Goddess uttered these words, the Knight of Fame diligently beheld
the exceeding beauty of the Lady she held in her hand, and thinking to have
demanded her name she presently vanished: wherewith he awaked.

The remembrance of this Uision, drove him into a confusion multitude of
thoughts: one while persuading himself, it was but a dream and not to be
regarded, and then again assuring himself it was a Uision, like to that which
appeared to him in the Island of Rocks, but chiefly such a secret impression of
the Ladies beauty was fixed in his remembrance, that he quite forsook and
forgot the least thought of Phylena, whose beauty in his fancy, was nothing
comparable to her divine perfections, that calling to mind every particular
note he had seen, the perfect Idea of the Ladies countenance, favor and
beauty, was so deeply imprinted in his heart, that no other thought could
sink in his brain, but that she was the Lady he should honor, that he vowed
to search the world throughout to find her, and come to the knowledge of his
parents. In these cogitations he spent the rest of that night.

Early in the morning, he was honored with all diversities of curiefies, and
most royally feasted of the the King, and by his appointment, should be
affianced to Phylena, within six days. The Knight of Fame remembering the
Uision, being most commonly in company of Phylena, diligently noted, which
might be the knight Phylena loved, and soon perceived that it was Re mulus,
who amongst the knights of Thrace, had sought most means to honor him. Who
little thought the knight of Fame had noted the kindness betwixt him and
Phylena: but he noting all circumstances, perceived that Phylena was deeply
inthralled in the bands of constant love: for though thee were in talk with
him, yet her eye was continually on Remulus, glaunsing so many sweet looks
(intermingled with sighs) toward him, that he thought it a most discourtesie
and inhumaine deed to part them. And once taking occasion when Phylena was in
a deep study, he said, Dear Lady, may I be so bold as break off your sad
study, wherewith you add heaviness to your mind: and expel this careful
disposition, and rather spend your time in mirth and pleasure: I have often
noted your heaviness, which makes me suppose my unworthiness to be the cause
thereof: but seeing my intrest is such, as that I may claim you for my own, I
beseech you do not so much disgrace my travails, as not to vouchsafe me that
kindness belongs to the condition of my conquest, and your fathers decree:
and if you esteem me, because unknown, as yet not to have deserved your love,
impose me any task, and I will undertake it for your sake: and not only
labor to win your love by desert, as by the tryumphe I have attained the
interest of your person. But I perceive yourcares are such, for some other
great occasion, that I am an unwelcome guest to your company, and an other has
already attained your sweet love: which if it be so, sweet Lady hide not
the same from me, but make me privy thereto, for I am not of that rude
disposition, to challenge any thing at your hands, or enforce you to any
thing, but what shall stand with your lik^ng: and though your virtues force you
to yield consent to your fathers decree, yet considering that love is not
won with the swoorde, but with a mutual consent of the heart, I yield my
self to be censured by you, and give my right of trial into your hands, and
the interest I attained by conquest, I surrender to your (...), to be revoked
or stablished.

Ppylena hearing his words, with tears standing in her eyes, made this
reply: Most courteous Knight, howsoever I have settled my fancy heretofore,
that is now countermaunded by my fathers promise, and your interest, that I am
not mine own to dispose of, but must in all humbleness rest at your
disposition. And if any other had my promise of love, yet now I must revoke
that promise, and labor to attend your liking: therefore I wholely commit my
self according to your right of conquest, into your courteous hands.

Dear Lady (quoth he) know this, that I account my self unworthy of that
honor, and am unwilling any way to contradict your will or disturb you quiet:
but knowing that which you vnuertuously conceal, will surrender my estate to
the knight you most sancie: for the honor I have won, shall be my suficient
reward: therefore I beseech you, conceal no part of your mind from me, for I
will not deny to perform any thing you shall command, but will hazaed both
life and honor to satisfy your fancy, and any way procure your content.

Phylena with a blushing countenance, made this short reply: Most noble
knight, Remulus is the knight I have long esteemed: but must now forsake him,
or purchase my parents discontent, and deny you the right of your conquest.
The knight of Fame smiling at the inward conceit of his Uision, made this
answer. And dear Lady, I will yield my interest to Remulus, only to work
your content: for he has worthly deserved to be beloved of you: besides the
honor he has done me (notwithstanding I might be the only man to hinder his
content) shows the abu^dant virtues that rule his heart. He had not scarce
ended those words, but Remulus feeling his ears to glow, thinking all time
tedious out of his La. sight, came into ye gallery, where they were in Private
conference: but seeing them (half repenting his intrusion) would have slept
back: toward whom, the Knight of Fame came, leading the Princess by the
hand, and contrary to Remulus expectation, said, Courteous Knight, your
interest in this Ladly, is greater then mine, for you have her heart, and I but
her hand: which I surrender unto you with all the state I can claim in her by
right of conquest: and so effectually will I deal with the King, to your
liking, that he shall confirm that to you, which I should possess by his
grant. Remulus hearing his speeches, was so revived with joy, that he could
not tell what answer to make him, and Phylenas heart lept within her, being
most glad, fortune had affected that means for her, to enjoy her dear knight
Remulus.

The Knight of Fame, having his thoughts troubled with the remembrance of his
travels in search of his unknown Lady, and willing to leave them to their
secret content, with all courtesy (after many speeches past) departed from
them: who took such felicity in the assurance he had given them of obtaining
the Kings consent, that their joy was without compare, spending their time in
sweet and pleasant communicatio^. Afterward the knigh of Fame grew into great
familiarity with Remulus, and the day for the solemnization of the wedding
being come, he with Phylena, in great pomp, were conducted to the Chapel,
to be affianced together, where the Knight of Fame kneeling down, desired the
King to grant him one request: who swear by his Crown and kingdom, to grant
it him, whatsoever it were. Most no ble king (quoth he) my humble desire is,
that you would without further doubt, ratify that which I shall perform in the
behalf of the Princess Thou shall not be denied quoth the King.

Then the Knight of Fame rising up, took Phylena by the hand, and gave her to
Remulus: the King being astonished thereat, yet remembering his oath, said.
Since by right she is yours, and this being with her liking, I give her freely
to thee Remulus, and withal, adopt thee mine heir, with her after my death.
Remulus kneeling, thankt his Majesty, and presently they were affianced
together, and the rightes and solemnitis of the wedding performed with
admirable pomp, to their joy, and the high honor of the knight of Fame.

CHAP. VIII.
I How Archas discovered Soranaes deceit, and missing Uioletta, slew her. And
how Uioletta lighted on a Hermites Cell, who conducting her toward Bohemia,
died: and of the miseries she endured afterward, until she was entertained
at Panuamus Castle, near the Forest of Arde.

ARchas (as before isdeclared in the fifth Chapter,) having coucht himself by
Sorana, whom he supposed to have bin Violetta, ^out speaking a word, and
having somewhile embraced her in his arms, began his dalliance; Whom Sorana
so cunningly handled, that (notwithstanding his former familiarity) he
perceived nothing but that it was Violetta indeed. At the first she made a
show of a strangeness, but afterward endured whatsoever he proffered, with
who^ he spent that night, giving no respite to sleep, but greedily satisfying
both their desires, vnthe morning approaching: Archas according to his Mistrisse
command, departed, and left his Paramour in his bed: his Fancy persuading
him that she was the most sweetest Lady in the World, which so rejoiced his
heart, that he spent that forenoon in much mirth, but missing Sorana, for that
he had not seen her all that day, he went to her chamber, where being entered,
he saw some of Violettaes Attires and Ornaments confusedly cast about, and all
things in such disorder, that he could not tell what to think. At last, he
enquired of every one for her, but none could tell what was become of her:
until coming to the Gardiants they told him that Sorana went out of the
Castle the last Night, and that she had left with them his ring. Archas seeing
the ring, knowing that he had given it to none but Violetta, was so enraged and
astonished with doubt, that he presently suspected Violetta was escapt: and
coming to the Chamber where she should have been, softly drawing the
Bed-curtaines, found that Sorana had been his bedfellow in steed of Violetta,
who after her Pastime, was fallen a sleep. Archas now perfectly knew that
Violetta was escaped in Soranaes Disguise, and thought that it could not be,
but that she must be consented thereunto, which caused him to fetch his sword,
determined to end her life: but by that time he was returned, she was awaked,
and seeing him coming toward her, with his Sword bent to her Death, being
terrified therewith, she gave such shrikes, as many of the servants hearing
the noise, came running into the chamber, but he being incenst with exceeding
rage for Violettaes loss, and inwardly fretting at his deceyte, with
repentance that he had bestowed his Love on that loathsome creature: Who now
seemed most ugly in-respect of the divine and sweet Lady, he supposed he had
embraced, caught hold on her, and by the hair of the head, dragd her out of
the Bed, into the midst of the Chamber, uttering these words. Most detested
strumpet, could thou not be contented to consent to Violettas escape, but
thou must also betray my love to thy loathsome lust. Was not the favor I daily
showed thee, sufficient to defer thy mind from offering me that abuse?
deceiving my expectation, betraring my life by her escape. I could peradventure
have remitted the one, if thou had not been guilty in both: but never shall
thou rejoice in my Fall, and little Pleasure shall thou reap by thy Nights
work. Wherewith, not suffering her to make him answer, assuredly perswaying
himself she was guilty in both, he thrust his sword quite through her body,
and there in that indecent sort left her, giving many a groan, with the date of
her life. The servants seeing this, covered her body, and afterward buried
it. Archas presently Arming himself, giving special charge to the Gardiants,
to keep diligent Watch, posted that way he thought best in her search.

Violetta by this time was wandered a great way, care hastening her stoppes, and
fear to be again by him surprised, took away the tediousnes of Travel. At
last forsaking the beaten way, she wandrd aside into a most Desert and
vnfrequent place, being so full fraught with Trees and little springs, that
there she thought was the safest harbor, wherein to remain vndescryed: Being
tired with Travel, and possessed with care, she sat down upon a bank side to
refresh her self. She had not long stayed in that place, but thee beheld an
Aged man, whose years made him stoop to the Earthwards, carrying a few dry
sticks under his arm. Violetta thinking, she might repose some confidence in
his virtues, because of his years, drew toward him: Who seeing so beautiful a
Lady, in that unfrequented place vnattended, exceedingly marvelled, to whom she
said. Ah good Father, whose years bears Reverence, will you vouchsafe a
distressed Lady succor, who by extreme miseries compulsion, am wandered to
this unknown place, sore wearied with Travel, and in requital of your
kindness, my prayers shall invoke the Heavens to grant you Felicity, and
my Reward sufficient to content you for your pains. The old man hearing her
speeches, made this answer: Fair Lady, my homely Cell is not worthy to
receive your person, but such as it is, you shall be heartily welcome thereto:
For I desire to live no longer, then to extend my small assistance to such as
are in distress, but especially to such harmles creatures as your self:
Therefore pleases you with kindness to accept what succor my ability will
afford; What counsel my Experience can give you, you shall receive both with
a willing heart. And for that I see your travel (upon what occasion to me as
yet unknown,) has both wearyed you, and this cold Earth whereon you sat, may
endanger your health, give me your hand, and I will yield you what aid my weak
strength will permit, to guide you to my Cell, which is hard by. Do so good
Father (quoth she) and I thank you most heartily: Where I will disclose to you
my unfortunate mishap; That said, shae leand her self upon his aged arm, so
weary with Travel, that she scarce could set her feet upon the grassie earth,
for hurting them. His Cell, it was no other but a hollow Cave, which the poor
Did-man by his own industry, had cut and undermined under the side of a
Rocky-hill. Which was well contrived, having his lodging several from the
rest. And so artificially had he framed his Chimney, that through a hollow
Uawt, he conveyed the smooke, at the foot whereof, ran a most pleasant spring,
where the clear Water striving with the smooth pibbles, made a burbling noise,
where the comfortable beams of golden Phoebus had full force. On the other side
was a sweet spring, where the birds kept continual pleasant recording
Harmony. As Soon as Violetta, was entered this old man's Paradise, he seated
her soft upon a chair, giving her all the courteous entertainment he could,
and presently brought forth such cates as he was provided of: Which was, White
bread, cheese and apples: Her drink being the clear brook Water that ran by
his Cell door; Whereto, because he would amend the taste to her liking, he
mingled Aquauitie. Violetta being hungry, thought his poor provision in that
quiet place, dainty fare, wherewith she stenched her hunger, and in the mean
time, the old man had heat Water and herbs for to bathe her ouertrauelled
feet in, which the kindly accepted, perceiving that it came as willingly from
the old-mans heart, as ever good deed came from any, and therewith bathed her
feet. This done, Violetta desired the old man to seat himself down by her,
(who taking a stool, sat down right against her, fixing his eyes, upon her
Face) whilst she began to speak as follows.

Good Father (quoth. she) the kindness I find in your entertainment, shows
the Uertues that rule your heart, which makes me no whit doubt to commit the
dangerous report of my Tragical misfortune to your secrecy, neither need I
require any stricter assurance, then your promise already past, to extend
your aid to my distress. Therefore thus it is: I was borne in Thessalie, and
there Wedded to the Noble and courteous Knight Pollipus, who came but lately to
Bohemia, with the most noble and famous Prince Parismus, who has brought
hither the Kings daughter of Thessalie, the virtuous Princess Laurana: we had
not stayed long in the Bohemian Court with great joy, but thus our felicity was
crossed, (my Lord and I one day) enticed by the heat of the Sanne to seek some
cool shadow, wandered from the Court into a pleasant Grove, where haunted a
Wilde-beare, whom my loving knight espying, pursued: And I fearing least some
harm might betide him, compelled by desire of his Welfare, thought to have
followed him, but wandered a quite contrary way; and being gotten ^ot of the
Wood, fearing to return back, was by Archas (to me before unknown) by
cunning deceyt conveyed to his Castle: his promise being to have carried me
back to the Bohemian Court. Where when he had remained some two days, he
certified me fal^y (which I afterward perceived) that Pollipus was dead, which
I believing, took it so heavily, that I was often in danger of my life
thereby: but in small time I plainly found his falsehood, and understood his
intent, which was, to detain me in his keeping, to satiate his lust, which
grew to such fury, that surprising me unawares in his Garden, he would have
forced me, had not a Gentlewoman, by my shreeks and cries repaired to the place
where I was, and thereby prevented him. Whom I made privy to all my secrets,
by whose means, late yester night I stole from the Castle: Now good Father
(quoth. she) counsel me how to escape his hands, who I know makes all diligent
search for me; and unless you help me. I am like to fall into his hands
again: Which rather then I will do, I will endure a thousand deaths.

The Old Man had all this while diligently noted every circumstance of her
discourse, making this answer: Lady, I perceive by your speech what miseries
you have undergone by Archas Treachery, whose infamous deeds has made his
name famous, being the chief Governor of these Mountains: indeed extremely
and generally hated, who delights in no virtuous actions, but continually
addicts his mind to villainy and vnknightly deeds, out of whose hands, you are
most happy to have escaped: neither are you in the country of Bohemia (as you
suppose) but far distance from thence: and the best means for you to get
thither, is to change your habit, whither my self so pleases you, will be
your weak, yet trusty guide.

Violettaes heart leapt within her, for joy to hear his speeches, which she
presently put in practice, giving him a Ie well: which he at the next town
exchanged for such homely weeds as they devised to be fittest to shroud her
from being descried. Wherewith having apparelled her sel^, she departed with
the old man, who left his C^ll to the keeping of his son, who was servant to
a wealthy Boore dwelling thereby. The (...) days journey they ouerpassed with
ease, shortning the tediousness of the way, with the old man's discourses: and
at night rested themselves as conusniently as they might, upon the cold earth,
and in this sort they iournied some three days, until their provision began
to decay: and they were without hope of getting any more to supply their want,
for that they were entered into a desolate Wilderness: which they could not
ouerpasse in three or four of their short days journey. Violetta of the
twain, was the best traveler: for the old man by reason of his withered age,
was soon tired, having no such inward conceit to drive him forwards, as she
had procured by a longing desire to see her dear knight Pollipus, that she
wished a thousand times that her guide had been young, and of better strength
to endure their journey. But thus contrary, it sell out the old man's time of
death then approached, who having taken a surffet, with lying on the cold
earth, began to be sickly: and in the end so weak, that he could endure no
further travel: but sitting down upon a banks side, feeling an extreme
faintness to possess his heart, he uttered these speeches: Unfortunate
wretch that I am, that am not able to perform my promise made to you most
courteous Lady: but must here leave you in distress, and without comfort: would
that my Destiny had not suffered me to live until this instant, or yt your good
Fortune had been so favorable to have lighted on a safer guide, that you might
have escaped the desolation, I am mast unhappily like to leave you in: this
unfrequented wilderness, affords no release to your cares: but after my
death, your travels are to be begin a fresh, being without a guide, which may
chance to bring your virtuous perfections into some further danger: only this
comfort remains to my careful dying heart, that your habit may be a mean to
bring you safe from all dangers. This unfrequented place is so full of
uncertain ways, that I know not almost which of them to counsel you to
^ollow: Only this, keep the Sun at his setting right before you, for that
way ^eth the Bohemian Court, and so sweet Lady, I commit you to all good
Fortune: For I see the date of my wretched life is at an end: Wishing all
prosperous success to your Journey, all happy escape out of danger, and your
own sweet hearts content: Desiring you to make no ^ance to provide my
Funeral, but leave me in this place, for little account do I make of my Aged
body. And so again, I wish you all happy fel^ie, with a blessed and joyful
end of your cares: Which words being ended, he gave up the ghost.

Violetta seeing the good Olde-man dead, was overcome with such infinite
multitudes of Cares, that she had much adoo to keep her self from following
him, that she sat there sheadding abundance of tears, and what with the
remembrance of the Desolatenesse of the place, and the dead body of the
Olde-man, which was a fearful Coarse to look upon, her Senses were drawn
into such an amazed terror, that she was half besides her self therewith:
and being aghast with the sight of the Olde-man, hasted with all speed she
could, onward on her journey, but dark Night approaching, her mind was then
rackt with such confused Fears, that sometimes she thought the Olde-mans
Ghoast haunted her, which much apalled her Senses, with a deadly ghastfull
terror: Then she thought she heard some wild Beast behind her, ready to
seize upon her, which made her forsake the chosen place where she meant to have
throwded ^er self, and to seek out an other in her Fancy more safe: So that
in a multitude of such like cares, she ouerpast that tedious Night, uttering
many a sigh for the Mornings cheerful approach: Which being come, she again
betook herself to her solitary travel, inwardly sorrowful for her late
misfortune: but most of all terrified with fear to meet Archas, thinking to
bend her steps toward Bohemia.

But Fortune entending to augment her cares, and lengthen her restless
Trauells, caused her to wander a quite contrary way, and she nothing
misdoubting, but supposing she was in the readiest way, stepped on her steps
some three days without intermission, and at the last she espied an ancient
Castle, whose craggy UUalles were ready to fall down in ruin to the ground,
where she was constrained by reason of extreme hanger, to seek for succor:
and coming to the gate, she saw an Aged old man with a sad countenance,
keeping the entrance; To whom Violetta spoke in this sort. Good aged Sir,
vouchsafe a poor distressed Woman some relief, being wandered far out of my
way, and for want of food, am like to perish.

He lifting up his head, made this Answer: This place affoordeth small
comfort, because every part thereof, is repleate with sorrow: but come in, and
what entertainment it yields, you shall be welcome unto: That said, he shut
the Gafe, and brought her into the Castle, where were a few Servants in
mourning attire: seeming by their habit and sad countenances, to be quite
ouergrowne with discontent: and in a room several by it self, sat a
Beautiful Damzell, with her eyes swollen with grief: to whom the Porter
brought Violetta, and said. Madame Clarina, this distressed Woman craves some
Succor, being wandered far from her way, whom I will leave with you, because
I must return to my charge. Clarina rising up, took Violetta by the hand, and
desired her to sit down by her: to whom she said.

This place by reason of our misfortunes, may rather add care to aungment your
sorrows, then comfort your distress: For the misery that has lately befallen
us, is such, as has expelld all joy from our hearts. And because you shall be
acquainted with the truth of all, I will relate the circumstance of our
Tragedy.

There remains a Giant, not far from this place, called Brandamor, in a
castle of such invincible strength, as it is impossible to be vanquished by
legions of soldiers, who takeeh delight in nothing but cruelty and unlawful
attempts. Who upon a time, chanced to arrive at this Castle, and by evil
fortune, espied me walking abroad, in company of my Parents, my brother
Panuamus, and two of my Fathers servants. And (I know not by what desire
thereto drawn, his mind being apt to any mischief) he viewing me, liked my
beauty, and such a disordinate desire stirred in his breast to obtain the same,
that he shrouded himself in secret, until he espied his fittest opportunity:
and suddenly set upon my Father, offering to take me away by violence: my
Father denying him, until the Giant being enraged, drue his Sword and assailed
him, whom in short time he slew: Which my Mother and I perceiving, fled toward
this Castle, and in the mean time my Brother Panuamus continued Fight against
him a good space, but being unable to cope with so mighty an Enemy, was by
reason of so many grievous Wounds, in the end left by him for dead: Which
done, Brandamor seeing our flight, hasted after us: But before he could come
at us, we attained the Castle, and rescued our selves from his possession. But
when he saw himself disappointed, he made as though he had departed from
hence, and contrary to our thoughts, he hid himself secretly amongst the
Bushes.

My Mother being overcome with extreme sorrow for my Fathers death, neither
regarding doubt nor danger, went back, with hope to recover him, whom
Brandamor surprised, and carried away with him, hoping by her Imprisonment, to
win her consent to yield me into his hands. My brother Panuamus, within a
while, recovered his feese, not knowing of my Mothers misfortune, with great
danger of his life, crawled home: whom I had much adoo to preserve from death,
and now he is departed toward the Forest of Arde, where the Giants Castle
stands, to invent means to set my Mother at liberty, and this night is the
premised time of his return. And thus have you heard the whole circumstance of
our sorrow: Which when she had said, abundance of fears issued from her eyes,
which made Violetta (whose tender heart was ready to relent at every sad
discourse) accompany herlamentaficus with watery eyes: Withal, remembering how
unfortunately shes was still crossed in her desires, which was to attain to
Bohemia, and how contrary to her expectation, she was wandered quite an other
way, and brought both in danger of her life, and to that poor and distressed
estate, her heart was pressed with such inward sorrow, that she could not stay
the passage of her tears already begun: but such a violent flood distilled
from her precious eye balls, that Clariana could not choose but note them: and
Wtall, grew into an earnest desire to know the cause of that extraordinary
Passion: Also, well viewing her Beauty and sw^e countenance, collecting into
her Fancy every circumstance, she began to suppose that Violetta was no such
as her Apparel showed, but of better Birth and bringing up, then that by her
Attire was shown, that desiring to be resolved of those doubts which arose in
her Fancy, she uttered these speeches.

I know not (quoth she) what title to ascribe unto you, for that I am ignorant
of whence and what you are, but if you will commit the repor^ thereof to me, I
promise you both to conceal the same (if any such need be) and also to do my
uttermost to pleasure you any way.

Therefore I desire you to impart the recital thereof to my secrecy, that
knowing your estate, I may know how to use you according to your worthiness.

Violetta being desirous to seek any means for to comfort her self, made
this reply: I most heartily thank you for offering me so large a proffer of your
asistance, which I stand in steed of now, for that my endless travel crave
some ease: for my lucklesse stars have allotted me such adversities, as would
soon cut off the wretched lives of many: but neither death, nor ought else
will be so favorable as to rid me from further calamities, but I am still
plunged into their intricate labyrinth: for know most courteous Lady, that my
self of late was promoted to all felicity, but now am contrarily plunged in
all distress, and that this habit I have only put on, to shroud my self from
many perils, that I was formerly subject unto. For I am an unfortunate Lady as
you are, by extreme misfortune drawn from my dignity, friends and
acquaintance, and forced both by want and weariness to seek refuge in this
place, whereby your kindness I am well refresht: neither will I conceal any
of my misfortunes from your knowledge. Then Violetta repeated the whole truth,
as she had done before to the old man in his Cell, which when Clarina heard,
with tears she did partake her sorrow: and taking her by the hand, desired
her to hold her excused, for not using that behavior toward her, which her
estate deserved, promising with willingness, to further her safe conduct into
Bohemia, which she knew her brother Panuamus at her entreaty would undertake.
In this and such like communication they spent their sad time, until Panuamus
return, who shortly came without hope of redeeming the Lady Madera his mother.

Clarina as soon as he was come, delared to him all that she could of
Violettas estate, and what she was: among the rest, she told him that she was
esposed to a Knight named Pollipus. Panuamus hearing her name Pollipus, called
to remembrance the speeches he had with a knight that he met that day, and
assuredly thought this was the Lady he went in search of. Now the knight he
had met was Tellamor, who entering into communication with him, enquired if he
could tell (...) of a Lady that was unfortunately lost in Bohemia, (relating
the very same circumsta^ce that Clariana told him, Violetta had before declared
unto her) withal, Tellamor demanded if he had not met a knight, bearing this
devise in his shield: A Knight pursuing a Bear. Now it fell so out, that
Panuamus beheld the notable combat that Pollipus fought with Brandamor, and
remembering his devise, knew him to be the same knight Tellamor inquired after,
to whom he declared all that he knew, concerning the battle with Brandamor,
and how treacherously he was surprised and imprisoned.

Tellamor hearing that Pollipus was imprisoned in the Forest of Arde, departed
thither-wardes, and Panuamus came to his Castle, where at his coming, he found
Violetta, in simple array, and hearing his sisters speeches, waying each
circumstance, found that she was the very Lady that the Knight inquired after,
and that the knight that fought so valiantly with Brandamor, and was by him
imprisoned, was her husband.

Panuamus having gathered this intelligence of Violettaes misfortunes, and
remembering the noble valor of Pollipus, was touched with an affectionate
pity of her distress, and what furthered by h^s own inclination and
Clarinas entreaty, resolved to use his uttermost endeavors to work her
comfort: and coming to Violetta, declared the whole circumstance of all that
he had heard of Tellamor, and of Pollipus, in the Castle of Brandamor.

Violetta hearing of a certainty that Pollipus was yet living, and not dead,
as she before that suspected, (for though she perceived the contrary before in
Archas Castle, yet a scruple remaining in her mind thereof) was somewhat
comforted, and in some better hope to come to him again: but calling to mind
the danger he was now in, was exceedingly again overwhelmed with care of his
welfare: and hearing of his imprisonment, determined to endanger her own
liberty to enjoy his company, if other means could not be wrought for his
release. Panuamus seeing her overwhelmed with such a chaos of confused cares,
said as follows. Most virtuous Lady, since Fortune has brought you into
this place, and that you have thus happily heard of your knight Pollipus,
release your self from the bonds of those cares, which disturb your quiet:
for here you shall want nothing that accords to your will: and my self will
do the best I can to set Pollipus at liberty, which whilst I go about, so
pleases you, my sister Clariana shall keep you company, whose griefs are as
great as may be.

Sir (quoth Violetta) might I obtain this favor at your hands, that you
would give the knight you met, knowledge of my being here, then I am sure he
will soon come to me, with whom I would gladly speak, for I know he is one
of the knights of Bohemia.

That will I do (quoth Panuamus) or any thing else you shall command me: and
because I will not be disappointed of meeting him, I will early in the morning
follow him, for that he is gone to the Forest of Arde, where I shall be sure
to find him. E^rly the next Morning, according to his word, he mounted
himself, and departed after Tellamor, leaving Clarina and Violetta together,
using the best persuasions they could to comfort one another.

CHAP. IX.
I How Panuamus met with Tellamor, and how he and Tellamor met Barzillus at
the GoldenTower: and returning altogether to Panuamus Castle, Tellamor was
enamoured of Clarina.

PAnuamus having left Violetta and Clarina together, with all speed hasted to
find Tellamor, and Ryding an unwonted pace, he ouertooke him entering into
the Forest, unto whom he said, Sir Knight, let me be so bold as to ask you
one question? Tellamor hearing his words, and knowing him to be the same
Knight he had met withal before, courteously bad him ask what he pleased Are
you not a Knight of Bomemia (quoth. he?) Tellamor maruelling why he ask^ him that
question, told him that he was indeed belonging to Parismus, Prince of Bohemia.
Then said Panuamus, a Lady that remains not far hence, named Violetta,
has sent me back unto you, and desires to speak with you. Tellamor hearing
his words, was affected with exceeding joy thereat, making this reply. Sir
Knight, in a happy hour did I meet with you; by your means to come to
knowledge of their abode I most desire to find: indeed Violetta is the Lady I
go in search of, and also wife to the Knight you told me of yesterday, who by
your report remains Prisoner in the Forest therefore I will return with you
to visit that Lady, unto whose service my life is who^y Dedicated. This
said, they returned back together, but the Night being approached, and they
without any place to lodge in, thought it as good to travel all Night, as take
up their lodging upon the cold ground: therefore Panuamus undertook to guide
them, ^sting to his own knowledge, and contrary to his expectation, wandered a
quite contrary way: and when Phoebus began to illuminate the Earth with his
golden brighnesse, they were come into a pleasant valley, where they beheld
two Knights continuing a most sterce combat, and drawing near unto them,
Tellamor presently know the one of them to be Barzillus, the occasion of which
combat was thus.

After Barzillus had parted from Parismus and Telamor, taking the middle way,
he wandered many days without any adventure, and at last arrived at a most
goodly Palace, most exceedingly beautified with inumerable Turreis of
exceeding height, that their tops seemed to equal the clouds, of such
curious Workmanshippe as the like has not ben seen, whose glistring reflection
procured by the suns bright beams, dazeled the eyes of the beholders: with
an admirable glittering. In the midst of this stately Palace, stood a gallant
Building in form of a Temple, seeming to the view of such as beheld the same,
to be made of the most purest and burnished gold, on the top whereof stood the
form of a most goodly Lady, with a crown of gold upon her head, whose lively
proportion and form of exceeding beauty, would have detained a most constant
mind, in a wandering delight to behold the same. Barzillus beholding the
exceeding beauty of the Palace, and the stately form of the pictured Lady,
was desirous to know who inhabited there, and to that intent drawing nigh
thereto, at the entrance thereof he beheld a Tent, with those verses written
thereon.

Pass not this Bridge before thou knock,
Least thou to late repent thy pride:
Leave not obtained, thou may go back,
For entrance is to all denide.
A Knight within must know thy name,
Thy boldness else will turn to shame.
Barzillus reading the Superscription, smo^e the Tent with his lunce, when
presently issued out a Knight, in every point ready armed, to whom Barzillus
said, as follows. Knight, I reading the superscription over the entrance into
the Tent, according to the direction thereof, have called thee forth, demanded
thy meaning thereby, and what goodly Palace this is, the like whereof I never
beheld for beauty? Knight (answered he again) this Palace is called the
Golden Tower, belonging to Maximus, the most mighty and famous King of Natolia,
wherein is his only daughter Angelica, for beauty without compare: for wit,
form, and virtuous Ornament, excelling all the Ladies in the world, whose
equal was never heard of, nor can be found within the spacious continent of
the earth. The King has places her in his most rich and gorgeous Palace,
whose walls are of Brass, and framed of such invincible strength, that no
power of man is able so subdue the same: she has to attend her a hundredth
Ladies of great dignity, and a thousand of the most valiant Knights in all the
world. The occasion why he guardeth her person is this: At her birth an old
Inchauntresse prophesied, that her beauty should set Kings a discord, and be
the cause of her fathers death.

A child is borne, whose beauty bright
Shall pass each form of other fair,
As does the Sun in perfect light
Each little Star fixed in the air:
For whom great Kings shall enter strife,
And war shall shed Natoliaus blood,
Whose Ire shall spill Maximus life;
Yet wisdom often has harm withstood.
A mighty Prince her love shall gain,
Though vice do seek to cross their bliss;
He shall her win with restless pain,
And she of sorrow shall not miss.
Much barbrous blood revenge shall spill,
And all of war shall have their fill:
All this shall happen by degree,
Before this child shall wedded be.
And because he will match her according to her dignity, he has likewise
made a vow, that none but the greatest Potentate in the world should be her
husband. Which said, the Knight went into his Tent and brought out a most
galla^t Picture; this (quoth he) is the Ladies form, wherein the Artsman has
showed some pretty skill: but so fac^e is this picture uncomfortable to the
perfect description of her celestial perfections, and as far different in
delicaie, as is black from white, or beauty from deformity, whose view would
change the a^ons of the truest Knight living, from his former constant resolve,
to adore her beauty, and forsake his former vows, only to attend her person,
for so divine are her liniaments, and so rare her perfections, that her fame is
even spread through all the regions of the world. Barzillus hearing him enter
into a new discourse of her beauty, and that in such affectionate sort, having
before in his fancy said enough, began to laugh at him saying:

Knight, me thinks thou dotest, or else art mad, to enter into such
commendation of this Ladies beauty, having peradventure never seen other
fair Lady, or else for that thy self art affectionately devoted to love none
but her: for I have seen a Lady that as far exceeds this picture, as thou
reportest she does all other: (which words Barzillus spoke, only to see
whether his valor and boastings were agreeable) wherewith the Knight that kept
the Tent was so vexed, that he uttered these speeches:

What ill nurtured creature art thou (quoth he) that de^idest the beauty that
is rather to be admired? have thou no more manners then to make so little
estimation of that which all the world adores? thou shall dearly abide this
discourtesie: with that he mounted himself, and charged a Spear at
Barzillus, who answered him with such a courage, that at two courses he
overthrew him from his horse. By which time a number of Knights were upon the
Battlements viewing their combat, and seeing the Knight that kept the Tent
foiled, burst into an exceeding laughter, and so departed.

Barzillus having foiled the Knight, for that the night drew nigh, withdrew
himself from the Golden Tower into a pleasant valley, and there stayed that
night. The Knight that kept the Tent was belonging to the King of Candie, who
came with persuasion to win Angelicas love with his prowess, and with much
ado had obtained leave of the Gardiants to keep the passage, but he not
contented with his foil, intending to revenge his disgrace, followed him into
the valley, where Tellamor found them combatting, as is aforesaid: who knowing
Barzillus, stepping betwixt them, parted the fray. Barzlilus likewise knowing
Tellamor, with great kindness embraced him, and upon his request declared the
cause of their combat. Tellamor then speaking to the knight of the Tent, gave
him this farewell. Knight, return to your charge, for your combat here is at
an end, for business of more importance withdraws this knight, which may
turn to thy good, for likely thou would have perished by his prowess. You
shall have occasion enough to exercise your Arms, against such as would steal
your Lady, which this Knight intends not; therefore return to your Tent, and
defend her beauty there, which none here gainsaieth. Tellamor having ended his
speech, entreated Barzillus to depart with him, which the Knight of Candie
seeing, he returned toward the Golden Tower.

By the way as they were returning toward Panuamus Castle, Tellamor delared to
Barzillus how fortunately he came to knowledge of Violetta, which exceedingly
rejoiced Barzillus heart: but when he understood Pollipus misfortune, he was
contrarily affected with as great desire to set him at liberty: which
communication shortened their journey, and in the end arrived at the Castle.

The news of their approach soon came to Violettas hearing, who knowing both
Tellamor and Barzillus, welcomed their presence with such effusion of tears,
that for a space she could not utter a word; but her flood being somewhat
stinted, saluting them most kindly, she uttered these speeches:

Your presence worthy friends brings great comfort to my heart, after my
tedious toil of misery, what thanks my undeserving heart can yield, I render
you for the pains you have taken for my sake: for I know you undertook this
travel to find me out, that am not worthy to be so well esteemed of you,
much less unable to make you the least part of amends. You may see to what
poor estate I am brought by the treachery of a disloyal Knight, who has
caused my misery, your travel, and Pollipus imprisonment, intill I was
succored by this courteous Lady, whose friendship has succored me from
famishment.

This homely attire I undertook for my quiet passage: but misfortunes still
awayie my miserable steps, which no disguise can prevent: with that her tears
burst into a flood again.

Barzillus being moved with her tears, was ready to participate her grief in
the manner she did; but at last he said. I beseech you comfort your self in
these extremities, and let not such passions of sorrow oppress your heart,
since the worst of your dangers are past: we have all the reward we expect for
our travels, now we have found you, for so much are we bound to that worthy
Knight Pollipus, and the most noble and gracious Prince Parismus, (who is
likewise traveled in your search) that we account our lives well employed to
pleasure them and you.

Violetta hearing that Parismus was traveled in her search, was almost
overcome with passionate affection of his kindness, and remembering what sorrow
Laurana would endure for his absence, with sighs she said: I of all most
unfortunate, to be the cause of that noble knights travel, which many ways
hazard his safety, and breed much disquiet in the Bohemian Court, but
especially to that most virtuous, courteous, and honorable Princess Laurana:
whose sorrow I know will be most exceeding, and all procured by my unlucky
destiny, that am altogether unworthy to be esteemed of them, nor in any degree
to be so highly regarded.

Tellamor likewise grieuing to see her sorrow, comforted her with these words;
Dears Lady, cast off these sad cares, and let no disquiet thought trouble you,
for what is past cannot be recalled, but all is now amended by your recovery,
whose death we all greatly feared. By this time Panuamus had prepared their
dinner, which was served in after the best sort: to which, he and Clarina
welcomed them with great kindness. Clarinas heart being somewhat comforted by
their company, hoping by their means to see the downfall of Brandamor, and
her Mothers release.

When they had well refresht themselves, and heard Violletta relate the whole
circumstance of her misfortunes, they began to devise what course to take to
set Pollipus at liberty, which they found impossible to do by force, because
the strength of the place was invincible: at last, they determined the next
morning to travel, to try if Fortune would any way favor their attempts.
After they had spent some time in these speeches, and every one fully resolved
what to do, Bazillus saw a pair of Chesse standing on a side Table, which he
went unto, and began to place the men in order, which Panuamus espying, came to
him, and said; That if he pleased, he would play a game with him, wherewith
Barzillus was contented.

Clarina seeing them busy at Chesse, took Violetta by the hand, and requested
her to walk into the Garden: Lady (quoth Violetta) so pleases you, this
knight may bear us company. Then taking Tellamor with them, they three walked
into the Garden together, and a while recreated themselves with several
discourses of the virtue of the Herbs and fair Flowers they encountered. And at
last, being weary with Walking, and procured thereto by the heat of the Sun,
they seated themselves together under the shadow of a Myrtle-^ee, upon a rising
bank, bedeckt with many sweet smelling flowers. Tellamor seeing their
sadness, entered into many pleasant Discourses to expel the same (if he
could) out of their minds; but no speeches he did use, could once revive their
cast down countenances. But Violetta, leaning her self upon her elbow, fell
fast a sleep, and left Tellamor only to comfort Clarina, for she heard not
what he said: Which he perceiving, left off his Talk a while, and in short
space after, fell into a deep study, from which he suddenly revived
himself (thinking Clarina has noted the same) and casting his eye upon her, he
saw how busy she was cropping the sweet Flowers, and collecting diverse of
them together, began to frame a Nosegay.

Tellamor seeing her so busy, was unwilling to interrupt her quiet content:
Withal, viewing her sweet beauty and pretty gestute, his mind was Affected
with great pleasure to be hold her, and her careful nipping the Flowers, with
her white hand, exceedingly graced her perfections, that his heart inwardly
panted with a sudden motion of delight: and his Fancy began so much to
commend her sweet behavior, that even then his affections entertained a
secret motion of love. Whilst he viewed her thus precisely, she suddenly
cast her eye upon him, thinking he had been still in his dumps, but perceiving
how steadfastly he beheld her, a sudden blush attainted her, that therewith
the sweet Rostate color glowed in her cheeks: Which he likewise perceiving,
came toward her, and with great Reverence, folding her precious hand in his,
said.

Fair Lady, I am sorry my presence has interrupted your quiet Meditation,
and hindered your delightful exercise. Sir (quoth. she) your presence has done
no harm, my study being but idleness, neither was my labor well bestowed,
therefore you might the better hinder it.

If (q^. he) you make so little account thereof, bestow those Flowers on ^ee,
and I will become your debtor for them: and your study I think was not as you
please to term the same, Idleness: For now I see you are fallen into it
again: Which makes me marvel why you should spend your pleasant days in such
cares and sad cogitations. Sir (quoth. Clarina,) How can I do otherwise, when
my sorrows are past compare?

Sweet Lady (quoth. he:) Would you follow my advise, you should mittigate your
Passions, and bannish that Care which oppresses your heart: For things past
remedy, are not to be lamented, and impossible to be recovered: but I beseech
you pardon my boldness, that presume to enter into speech of your thoghts,
which may (contrary to my knowledge) be procured by many other occasions: more
he would have said, but Violetta awaking, broke off his talk, that letting go
Clarinas sweet hand, which he had held in strict imprisoument, he rose up from
the rosiate bank whereon he sat, feeling a sudden Passion ouerwhelme his
heart, and turning to a Rose-bush, crept off a Rose, which he smelt too, and
maruelling at that sudden dumpe, pondering what might be the cause thereof, he
felt Loves Inclinations to take possession of his Heart, but suddenly reviving
himself from that dumpe, he turned to them again: Who were risen from their
seat, and attended them into the Castle, where Panuamus and Barzillus were,
who even then had ended their pastime, whom afterward they accompanied till
the Nights approach broke up their society.

Early the next Morning, these knights (resolving to follow their former
purpose) Armed themselves, and came down into the Hall, to take their leave of
Clarina and Violetta. Clarinas heart so melted with grief, by remembrance of
her Fathers death, her Mothers imprisonment, and the danger these Knights and
her Brother might incur, that with drawing herself to a Window, she
bedeawed her Cristall cheeks with Cristall tears: Which Tellamor perceiving,
having his devotions vowed to her Service, and having but lately entertained
Love, pitying her laments, and desirous to show his affection to herwardes;
(Whilst Barzillus and Panuamus were in conference with Violetta) he came to
her, and said.

Most virtuous Lady, your sad laments, affect my heart with grief, neither can
I choose but partake your Woe, therefore I beseeth you, tell me what in the
thing you most desire, and which may add any comfort to your heart, and I will
venture both my life and liberty, to purchase the fame to your content?

Courteous Knight (quoth. Clarina) no other cause of Care troubles mae, but my
Fathers death, my Mothers imprisonment, and the danger my Brother and you are
like to incur, by the Treachery of that Giant Brandamor: for your proffered
Friendship I yield you thanks, being all the reward I am able to make you:
Wishing you not to hazard your self for my sake, that am unworthy of such
kindness, and unable to make requtfall for the same.

Yes Lady (quoth. Tellamor) vourhsafe but to enshrine my Willingness in your
^embrance, and give me any command, and but accept me for your Preservative,
and that is the only reward I crave: and you shall see that I will in all
duty endeavor to become more gracious in your sight. For my heart desires
nothing more, then to employ it self in your service. Clarina hearing his
speeches, could not choose but take them kindly, and marking with what
affectionate devotion they came from him, made this answer.

Good Sir, to withholde that small Favor you demand, were discaurtesie:
Therefore because you proffer your friendship so kindly, I give you leave to
assume that Name upon you; Which is far unfit for your dignity: and if
hereafter you perform your words, you shall find me nothing unmindful to
reward you: Which words being ended Tellamor with Reverence, parted with a
sweet kiss from her Corrall colored lips.

CHAP. X.
How Tellamor, Barzillus, and Panuamus, set the Lady Madera at liberty from
Brandamors Castle. How they met with Parismus How the Knight of Fame arrived
there, and preserved Parismus life. and overcame the Giant.

AFter many cerimonious Fare-wels past, they parted, the Ladies to their
Chamber, and the Knights to their journey, toward Brandamors castle, where at
Sunne-set they arrived, and for that night took up their Inn under the covert
of a spreading Oak, devising amongst themselves, by what means they might
archieue their desire. Early the next morning, Argalt issued forth of the
Castle intending as his custom was, to search if any Knights were in the
Forest: (for ever since Venolaes imprisonment, diverse Knights of Lybia tame to
try their Fortune against Brandamor,) whom these three Knights supposed to
have been the Giant himself. And Tellamor being the forwardest, went to^d
him, whom Argalt thus greeted. Knight, of whence art thou? or, Wherefore
come thou on this forbidden ground?

Giant, (quoth. Tellamor) I come to def^e thee that vsurpest such privilege to
examine Passengers, and my intent is, in despite of thee, to keep my standing
on this Ground, which is free for all men. What is thy Quarrel (quoth Argalt,)
I come (quoth. he) to re^eeme a Knight, whom contrary to equity thou detaynest:
and a Lady, whose Lord thou lately fluest, that dwelt in a Castle hereby.
Argalt, hearing his speeches, burst out into a laughter, saying.

Think thou poor knight, to do more then many thy betters could
accomplish: No, Know thou art so farrre from attaining the least of thy
desires, that thy self art like to bear them company: Wherewith Tellamor
ran at him, and in the encounter burst his spear: Whom the Giant valiant y
resisted. Panuamus and Barzillus, regarding to perform no acts of Knightly
Chivalry, to him that was without regard of Humanity, presently both at once
with Tellamor assailed him, and within little space had brought him
conformable to the mercy of their swords. When Argalt saw himself so shrewdly
handled, and his life in that danger, he uttered these speeches.

Ualiant Knights, spare my life, that never yet offended you: and let me
understand wherein I have done you wrong, and I will do my best to make you
restitution. Tyrant (quoth. Panuamus) had thou a thousand lives, all of them
could not make us restitution for any of the least injuries thou have done unto
us, but now thou see thy self in danger, thou treatest for pity; When
otherwise thou entendest nothing but violence: Think thou our minds are so
easily drawn to use mercy toward thee, that have filled the World with thy
tyrannies, and yeeldest no favor to any that come within thy power? No, know
wicked Homicide, that this is the last hour thou shall breathe: Wherewith he
advanced his Sword to have thrust it through him.

Argalt fearing his resolution, cried unto him, to hear him speak, and said
as follows. Worthy Knights (quoth. he) before you finish my days, know whom
you put to death: I am not Brandamor whom you (...) me to be, but his Brother:
my name is Argalt, that never in my life offended you: therefore I beseech you
spare my life, and whatsoever you impose upon me, I will perform to my
uttermost power. Barzillus hearing his speeches, told Panuamus that he might
be a means to save their further Travel, if he would set the the Lady Madera,
and Pollipus at liberty: therefore he thus said. Argalt, We know not how to
trust a man of thy nature and disposition, which think every disloyal
action lawful to further thy devilish driftes, and regardest neither virtue
nor Knighthood, but only thy will: therefore if we should enjoin thee to any
thing, thou would disloyally break thy Oath, and soon forget what thou
vowedst to us to perform: and contrary to honesty, rather betray us to thy
Treachery: but if thou will save thy life, assure us to set at liberty the
Lady Madera, and the worthy Knight Pollipus, and on that condition we will let
thee go free. Argalt being glad of his speeches, vowed and protested with
infinite Protestations, to fulfill their request within three days, upon which
condition, they let him depart.

Algalt being gone, began to consider what promise he had made them, and by
what means he had escaped death, and how courteously upon his Oaths they had
saved his life, and gave credence to his speeches: Which with intended
resolution he purposed to accomplish, and being entered the Castle, coming to
Brandamor (Wounded and faint with bleeding, he declared to him all that had
happened) requesting his conset to accomplish their demand, which he had
bound himself by Oath to perform. Brandamor hearing his Words, fell into a
bitter rage against him, and uttered these speeches. Why Brother (quoth. he)
consider you not what dangers might ensue, if I should accomplish your
request? and withal, do you not remember the Ualour that is in this Knight
Pollipus, which might by his Liberty bring us all in danger: As for the Lady
Madera, I regard not, if I send her hence: For now I esteem her Daughters
beauty, which was the cause I have so long time detained her: Then if you
please, send her unto them, and let them seek the performance of the rest how
they can: For what need you regard your Promise, being out of their danger?
Argalt hearing his speeches, perceiving he could persuade him no way, was
content with that. And withal, being easily drawn slightly to forget his
solemn Oaths to them made, thought that Maderas releasement would satisfy
them, and be more then he needed to perform: Therefore he resolved to send her
to them presently, with a Message, and that Pollipus by no means could be set
at liberty.

And coming to Madera, (who still continued in her her heavy dumps) he told her
that her time of Liberty was come, and that she should (...) no longer
detained in that place. Madera at the first gave little credence to his
speeches, perceiving he meant as he spoke, thought that news very Welcome,
and so let her go out at the Gate, only attended by her two Damzels, desiring
her to tell the Knights that sought her Liberty, that Pollipus could by no
means be released, but that they might speak with him if they would, whom
they should see at a Window, right over the Castle-bridge. Madera was soon
espied of Panuamus, who knowing her, with dutiful reverence saluted her with
his knee on the ground, whilst she with Motherly tears rejoiced to see him.
And being met with Tellamor and Barzillus, she declared to them what Argalt
had said concerning Pollipus; Which when they heard, they were exceedingly
tormented with vexation of the Giants disloyalty: yet notwithstanding, setting
all doubts apart, they determined to try if the Giant meant true, that they
might come to his speech, which was some comfort to them: and though they knew
he would omit no opportunity to betray them, yet they went to the Bridge,
(having a careful respect to their danger:) Where according to Argalts message
they found Pollipus, who knowing them, with great joy Welcomed them with these
speeches.

Dear Friends (quoth. he) you see how I am enclosed by treacherous means,
coming to rescue the fair Lady Venola, Daughter to the King of Lybia: Here
am I well used, therefore I pray tell me the occasion of your arrival in this
place?

Most Noble Knight (quoth. Tellamor) we rejoice at your health: We have also found
the virtuous Lady Violetta, who remains in good health, at yonder Ladies
Castle, having endured many miseries before she came thither. He had not scarce
ended these words, but Barzillus espied Brandamor, with six Knights in his
company, crossing the channel that encompassed the Castle with a Boat, whom
they were sure meant them no good: Thererfore they withdrue themselves from of
the Bridge, the better to withstand him: Which Pollipus perceiving, a thousand
times wished himself amongst them: being ready to tear the hair from his head
with extreme vexation. Brandamor being Landed, presently with his mighty
Mace, set upon them with great violence, who to their uttermost endeavors
resisted him most valiantly: but by reason of the great odds (for all the
knights that were with him Assailing them) they were in short space sore
Wounded, and brought to great distress: Which Panuamus perceiving, left his
Mother, and came to their rescue, who likewise in short time by their cruel
Fight, was grievously Wounded, so that he began with the rest to fainte, and
despair of victory: notwithstanding they had ^ine three of Brandamors knights.

Whilst they continued in this Combat, Parismus by good Fortune (hearing by a
Knight of Venolas imprisonment,) arrived there at the very instant, and espying
their cruel Combat, perceiving the Giant by his huge proportion to be one of
them, and knowing Tellamor by his Armor, he suddenly rusht in amongst them,
reaching so violent a blow at Brandamor, that his Armor on his left Arm
burst, and the blood issued out at the entrance his Sword had made: and
redoubting another blow before Brandamor could lift up his mighty Mace, he
hit him so right upon the Crest, that with the blow, he made the Fire to flash
out of his eyes.

Tellamor and Barzillus presently knew the Prince by the fashion of his
Armor, which again so revived their dismayed Senses, that with great valor
and resolution they renewed the Fight against Brandamors other three Knights,
whilst Parismus dealt most valiantly with the Giant himself: Who felt his
Prowess to be such, as that it was every way able to counteruayle and Cope
with his great and mighty strength.

Pollipus still standing at the Window, saw and beheld when Parismus came, who
(by all likelihood) he thought he knew to the worthy Prince of Bohemia, which
stirred such a resolved courage in his heart, that with maine force he slew the
Iaylors man his keeper, and so raunged from Chamber to Chamber, until he came
to the place where Venola was, being continually attended and Guarded by ten
Knights: Whom Pollipus (nothing regarding his Nakedness, desperately
Assailed with his Bar of iron, continuing so long Fight, and with such
Courage, that he had soon slain the one half of them: and the other being
terrified with his fear, fled from him, and fast boulted and barred the
Door, with such strong devises, that it was impossible for him to get out that
way.

In which time, the cowardly Gardyants made such an horrible outcrye, that both
Argalt, and all that remained in the Castle, presently Armed themselves: And
some of them issued out to Brandamor, and immediately set upon Parismus, and
the rest, thinking by force to make them Prisoners: but contrary to their
thoughts, they withstood them with greater courage, especially Parismus laid
about him with such violence, that many of them lost their lives by his
strokes: But Brandamor still continued such egar pursuit against him, that he
was most grievously Wounded: Which so enraged him, that he drove his Enemy to
his uttermost shifts. Argalt being likewise issued out, with other in his
company, with their multitude, had slain Barzillus, and brought Parismus to
most extreme danger of his life; Who notwithstanding seeing Tellamor fallen
down, and under his enemies mercy, gathering courage a fresh, bestyrred him,
and with his undaunted and ^raue Ualour, saved his life from a greaf number
that assailed him.

In the mean time, Brandamor had respite to take new breath, but seeing now
one of his Knights, and then another drop down dead, by Parismus blows,
coming behind the Prince, most like a cowardly Traitor, he advanced his Mace
to have strooken him: but ere the Giants blow was descended, there came a
Knight rushing his Spear against him, and most violently ouerthrewe him
backwardes: Which done, drawing his Sword, and dismounting himself with great
nimblenesse and (...), set his foot in Brandamors neck, and had not Argalt
prevented him, he had parted his head from his shoulders: and likewise turning
to Argalt, fallowed him with such violent pursuit, and drove at him, with such
swifte and egar blows, that he made him stagger and reele backwards.

Now began the Fight afresh, continuing with such fury, that my unskillful
pen wants ability to describe. Parismus beholding so valiant a Champion
come in his rescue, revived his courage, and although he were most grievously
Wounded, and never before in his life time brought to that extreme danger, yet
his noble courage gathered such a new spirit, that brandishing his sword, and
stepping from Tellamor (who by his succor was well refresht) presently sent
the Ghost of one of Brandamors Servants to Hell, and after him another. In the
mean time, most cruel fight continued between Brandamor and Argalt, against
the new-come Knight, who both at once assailed him, till in the end Argalt
unable to endure any longer, by reason of the grievous wounds he had received,
with hideous groans gave up the ghost: the strange Knight likewise, perceiving
the danger Parismus and the other two Knights were in, and how grievously they
were Wounded, with all his force, and adding courage to his strength, ran
with such violence at Brandamor with the point of his keen sword, that
lighting on a broken place in his Armor, it pierced him into the shoulderbone,
where it stuck so hard, that he was compelled with a snatch to draw out the
same, wherewith Brandamor let fall his mace, and this valiant Knight, with a
careful eye looking back on Parismus, saw him fallen down in a trance,
procured by the exceeding abundance of blood that issued from his wounds, and
Brandamors servants ready to make a final end of his precious life: amongst
whom he rushed with such violence, that he soon made them fly from their
intent to save themselves, insomuch that none of them durst come within
compass of his sword, but betook themselves to flight, some one way, some an
other: in which time Brandamor was gotten unto the bridge, thinking to have
attained the Castle, which this Knight perceiving, hasted after him, and
ouertooke him on the midst thereof, and with his sword gave him four or five
mortal wounds. The Giant perceiving himself so hard bested, and now fearing
his everlasting downfall, ran upon this Knight, and with great force grapled
him in his huge and boystrous arms, who being of an undoubted courage, and
fearing no force, got under the Giant, and with long striving and struggling, at
last overthrew him against the rayles of the bridge, which being ro^ten, and
not able to uphold his weighty carcass, falling with such force, burst, and
he fell down into the channel. That done, this noble knight nimbly catching up
his sword, pursued other of Brandamors servants, who fled into the Castle,
intending to shut them out, but he being wary to prevent such a mischief,
slew the hindermost even as he was entering the gate, that his dead body fell so
right therein, that the other were thereby disapointed, and he by that means
got in, which they perceiving, were so terrified with fear of him, that every
one of them fled, and hid themselves from his sight. In which time Madera and
her two maids, seeing Brandamors overthrow, and all his servants fled, came
to her Son, who of all the three was nearest death, to whom she gave breath
by pulling off his helmet. Her damzels likewise came to Parismus, whose beuer
they lift up, and withal gave him fresh air, afterward pulling off his
helmet, he came to himself again, being fallen into that trance by extreme
heat, want of breath, and effusion of blood, but by the Damzells endeavors was
pretily recovered: and remembering himself, looked earnestly about for the
Knight that came in such prosperous time to his ^scue, and neither seeing him
nor the Giant, he matnelled what was become of him, that raising himself up,
he went with Tellamor toward the Castle gate, where he found that most valiant
Knight breathing himself, whom Parismus embraced in his arms, saying: Most
noble and courageous Knight, whose prowess has redeemed our lives, and
destroyed our enemies, what praises may I give to your victory? with what
thanks may I gratulate your courtesy toward us, that only by your happy
arrival and high Chivalry, have been shielded from the tyranny of that
cruel homicide, and cut him off from executing any more of his treachery? If
ever it may lie in my power, you shall both command me to requi^ your
kindness, and bind me to you in all the vndissoluable bonds o^ true
friendship.

This Knight thus replied: I count my undeserving valor unworthy the least
estimation, much less to deserve such thanks at your hands, who before my
coming had so weakened my enemies, that it was an easy task for me to
accomplish his overthrow: but if it were in my power to perform any such deed
as you ascribe to me, I would most willingly do my best to pleasure you, who
attribute that commendation to me, that by all right belongs to your self. I
thank you most heartily (quoth Parismus) hereafter trusting to be both better
acquainted with you, and of better ability to requite your kindness: by this
time Madera had brought Panuamus to his senses, who was entered the Castle,
being supported by his mothers two Damzels; for of himself he was not able to
stand.

Parismus demanded of Tellamor if he knew him? My Lord (replied Tellamor)
this Knight is son to this ancient Lady, whom came hither with me and the
valiant Barzillus, to redeem her that this day was Prisoner in this Castle,
and by us released, as I will declare to your Honor hereafter. In whose Castle
(situate not far hence) remains Violetta in good estate, and kindly used.
And may it be (quoth Parismus) that Violetta is yet living, and in safety?
what joy will that be to Pollipus if he might come to knowledge thereof, who
no doubt is traveled far hence in her search? Not so my Lord (replied
Tellamor) Pollipus has knowledge of her being there, who is Prisoner within
this Castle, and to day was in good health. Then (quoth Parismus) what further
cause have we of sadness, but only for the death of Barzillus,, whom I was
every way beholding unto: which we must ouerpasse with forced patience, and let
us seek out Pollipus,, who I know will rejoice to meet us here: then turning
to Panuamus, he most lovingly embraced him, the like he did to Madera: and
taking the Knight (whom unknown) by the hand, he desired his company to search
for Pollipus, and the Lady Venola (whose imprisonment was the cause of both
their arriuals there) who willingly went with him: before their departure
making fast the gate, that none could enter or go out.

As they entered into the Hall, there were diverse of the Giants Servants, who
willingly submitted themselves to their mercies. Parismus told them, if they
meant faithfully he would no way offend them; which they assured him by many
protestations. Then (quoth he) one of you direct us to the place where the Lady
Venola remains: but they made answer, We dare not come thither, for there is
with her a Knight that has slain five of our fellows, who likewise will use
us no better, if we come within his reach. Well (quoth Perismus) come, I will
be your warrant.

CHAP. XI.
How Parismus met with Pollipus and the Lady Uenola, and of the joy was made;
but especially for the Knight of Fames arrival.

THen Brandamors servants conducted them to the Chamber door, which was
fastened with so many bars, that it was long before they could undo the same.
Pollipus (as aforesaid) having slain Venolas Gardiants, and seeing that he
could by no means get out, came to Venola, desiring her not to be dismayed to
see his rudeness: for (quoth he) there are diverse Knights in fight with the
Giant, amongst whom is the most valiant Prince of Bohemia, unto whom I would
willingly have gotten down; for I greatly fear his death, being beset with
the Giant and a number of his servants. Sir (quoth Venola) do not think me
one whit dismayed with your presence, but wish you all happy success, and the
overthrow of your enemies: and fortunate had that worthy Prince been if he
had not arrived here, for Brandamor by his treachery no doubt will betray his
life and liberty. Then both together stepping to the window, saw the
combattants, and beheld the danger Parismus was in, and the coming of the
strange Knight to his rescue, and withal, how valiantly he overthrew the
Giant, which when he had seen, he thought in his fancy that he had never
before beheld so valiant and comely a Knight. And also noting the careful
regard he had of Parismus, he exceedingly wondered what he might be, that his
heart was drawn to so great affection toward him, entering into these speeches:

Most fair Princes, did you ever behold a goodlyer, or more valianter Knight
then yonder is, who by his only prowess has overcome such enemies? do you
not behold how carefully and valiantly he has rescued the Prince? which makes
me so much the more marvel what he should be; for never in my life did I
before this see him: such valor, such courtesy and comeliness, did I never
behold in any; with the one, he has left his foes slaughtered; with the
other, preserved the Prince.

Pollipus had no sooner ended his words, and Venola ready to make answer, but
they heard some vnboulting the door, which made him again betake himself to
his bar; but when he beheld Parismus and the rest entering, he ran to him,
embracing him with such kindness as true and loyal friends might proffer: he
did the like to the strange Knight and the rest. Parismus seeing so beautiful
a Lady in his company, so gorgeously attired, and attended by so many Damzels,
thought that was the Princess Venola, whom he most kindly saluted, whose heart
melted into tears of joy for her delivery and their victory: after that, such
courteous greetings past on every side, as would be tedious to describe, but
suppose them to be such as proceeded from the depth of joy. Presently
Parismus, Tellamor, and Panuamus, were unarmed to have their wounds dreft,
which task the Lady Madera undertook, which when she had performed, dinner
was brought up by Brandamors servants, who had all submitted themselves to the
Conquerours.

The strange Knight all this while was providing things necessary, with as
much diligence as might be, that allin general wondered at his courtesy, who
would not unarm himself until he had well ordered matters for their
security, not trusting to the truth of Brandamors servants. And when they were
ready to take their repast, Parismus desired him to unarm himself, and not
longer to conceal what he was from their knowledge. (For Parismus thought him
to be some Knight that knew him. Venola likewise thought him to be some Knight
that sought her love, but both were deceived.) Now this Knight was the Knight
of Fame, the occasion of whose coming thither, shall be declared in the next
Chapter, who being drawn by natural instinct, so much reverenced Parismus,
that he thought he could not sufficiently express his love toward him, and
though he never saw him before, yet such a secret impression of reverence
toward him, was stirred in his heart, that he desired nothing more, then to be
gracious in his sight: and although he had not the least thought that Parismus
was his father, nor he one persuasion that the other might be his son, yet
both of their hearts were stirred with an earnest and devoted expectation of
friendship and neerenesse of acquaintance. And the Knight of Fame noting the
others behavior that Parismus was some great personage, hearing him to desire
him to discover himself, made this answer.

Right noble Knight, at your command I will unarm my self, being a far
borne stranger to this country, neither have I any acquaintance in this place,
but by misaduentures forced to wander through the world, to seek that which I
have not yet found, nor scarce know if I meet withal, being only fortunate to
arrive in this place, to make some, trial of my strength in your defense:
which said, he presently unarmed himself.

Parismus beholding his youth, began (withal the rest) to admire his valor,
accompanied with such young years, that embraced him in his arms, he could
not by that courtesy express his good will toward him. The Knight of Fame
likewise reverently kissing Venolas hand, said. Most noble Lady, my coming to
this place, was to set you at liberty, and also to revenge the death of the
courteous Knight Tyrides, son to the good Duke Amasenus of Thrace, unto whom
I am infinitely bound: that had I thousand lives. I would venture them all in
his behalf that now is dead. And seeing by the danger and valor of these
Knights, you are set at liberty, and released from bondage, be of good comfort,
for the King your Father will soon be here, with thousands of knights to
conduct you safely into Lybia, who at my last being in this Court, was made
great preparation for this expectation.

Venola made this reply: Courteous knight, I yield to you and this Noble
Prince, all humble thanks for your kindness, being all the reward my Maiden
estate can afford: and for the news you bring of my Fathers approache, that
can yield no such quiet to my heart, as your happy victory has done: Which
has expeld those infinite troubles, wherewith I was on every side compassed:
and in stead of care, replenisht my heart with comfort. When these cerimonious
salutions were past, they went to Dinner. Pollipus diligently noted the Knight
of Fame, his countenance, proportion, and gesture, thinking it his Fancy, he
never saw a Knight more like Parismus: that his mind was inwardly styried with
a great destre to know his Name and his birth. After Dinner was ended,
Parismus with Pollipus and Tellamor, grew into conference about Violetta:
Determining the next Morning either to go to the place where she was, or else
to fetch her thither, Venola she continued in conference with the Lady Madera,
entering into many exteeding commendations of the valor of these three
Knights, Parismus Pollipus, and the Knight of Fame: but the Knight of Fame
withdrawing himself into a private place, reuolued his cares in these
cogitations.

How unfortunate am I of all Knights living, to be tormented in such restless
cares as daily torment me, and am subject to so many and innumerable Troubles,
as none but my self could endure: First, my birth and Parents unknown: next,
my troubles in Thrace: and the task imposed me by Venus, to find out the
Lady she showed me in the Uiston: Whom I was in hope had been the fair La^
Venola, but contrary to my expectation, I am still allotted to endure more
miseries in her search.

Tush (quoth. he) may not Venola be the Lady she meant, is she not fair Noble,
and virtuous? May not I be deceived by that vision, and so driven to consume my
time in purchasing my own torment? Do not dreams often fall out false and
vain? Tut, Why do I make these doubts? Venola is fair, yet nothing
comparable to the same I serve: Whose sweet Idea perfectly fixed in my
remembrance. Venola is both noble and beautiful, yet the countenance of my
beloved countermaundeth that noblenes: And that vision cannot prove fallible,
neither can I account it my labor, if I endure a thousand miseries in her
search, so that in the end I may obtain her heavenly sight. How should I come to
any knowledge of her abode? Which way should I dyrect my steps in her Search?
Shall I first seek my Parents, or shall I give over my care for them, and
employ all my endeavors to find her? Such a chaos of confused carres do
oppress my senses, that I know not what to determine, whose counsel to
follow, or what aid to implore. If I knew in what continent of the world she
were harbored, then would I with some comfort direct my steps thitherwards:
and shun no danger though never so doubtful, to purchase her good liking.
Well, I will pacify my self with constrained countenance, and patiently
endure the hardest extremity. In these and such like complaints he spent some
time, and afterward came and accompanied Parismus and the rest, who spent that
night in quiet, resolving upon other matters the next morning.

CHAP. XII.
In this Chapter is declared, the cause why the Knight of Fame departed from
Thrace: and how by the way he arrived in Libia, and from thence came to
Brandamors Castle.

AFter that the knight of Fame had won the chief honor of the triumph, in
the Court of the king of Thrace, and had given away the Kings daughter to
Remulus, with her Fathers consent thereto, and the solemnization of the wedding
past and performed with great royalty, the king calling to mind the valor of
the knight of Fame, and how prodigally he gave Phylena to another, whose beauty
might have satisfied a mighty Potentates liking: and withal, how little he
regarded his heir, by which means afterward, he might have come to the
highest type of dignity, and to the high honor to be King and Queen of so
mighty a nation: wondered what might move him to refuse those offers: sometimes
thinking it proceeded from want of wisdom: then again he supposed, a Knight
endued with such bountiful and rare gifts of prowess, could not choose but
likewise enjoy sufficient wisdom to consider the value of such gifts. And
entering into a further consideration thereof, he began to conjecture that he
was sprung of some great personage which might be the cause thereof, and for
that he was unknown, he thought that to be the very truth. Then again he
called to remembrance what Amasenus had told him, about his coming into that
country, that he was by these thoughts grown into such a desire to be satisfied
therein, that he sent for the Knight of Fame, and in the presence of the Queen,
Amasenus, Remulus, Phylena, and all the assembly, of gallant knights that came
to the triumph, he said as follows. Worthy knight, whom I so much affect,
that if it in my power lie, to do you any more honor then I have heretofore
proffered, I would willingly do it, for you valor deserves everlasting
commendations. I have offered you my Daughter in marriage, and withal intended
to have adopted you my Son and heir, both which you have refused, yielding
your interest in my daughter to Remulus, and therewith left the inheritage I
adjoined to her marriage, which were both worthy of regard, for that such gifts
are seldom given: which makes me send for you, desiring to be satisfied for
your coming in the one, and also to know of whence, and what you are, if I
can without offense to you, obtain the same.

The Knight of Fame made this reply. Most high and mighty King, I will unfold
the truth of all to satisfy your demand: I confess your Majesty did so much
honor me, as my life shall be always ready at your command in quitall of the
same: and your Princely gifts are of such estimation, as I confess my self
far unworthy to possess them: but that they might have been bestowed of the
greatest Potentate in the world, which I neither refused, nor lightly esteemed,
but always regarded, as of precious and inestimable value: not drawn thereto
by any want of consideration of their worthiness, but for the honorable
respect I bear to loyalty. For should I have presumed to have wed your
Princely daughter, I should have done her great injury, and thereby parted the
united hearts of true and loial friends. For pleases your Majesty, at the
first I intended with a joyful heart to have claymed my interest in that sweet
Princess love: but I was commanded the contrary by an undoubted mean, (which
if it so please you, I will in private unfold) as also perceiving the true
friendship betwixt her and that noble knight Remulus, past with consent of both
their hearts: I should have esteemed it either in my self or in any other, an
act of great dishonor and impiety, to part those firmed bands of friendship,
which if I had dissolved might have turned their sweet intent into discontented
misery, neither could I so rudely presume to challenge interest in so sweet a
Ladies love without desert, which is not attained by arms, but by loyalty:
which was the cause that I yielded my interest unto him, that had taken
possession in her gentle heart, before my coming: and for my birth, I know not
my Parents, but the truth of all that is manifest to me, the noble Duke
Amasenus has made you privy unto.

The King hearing his answer, greatly commended his honorable mind, saying:
Thou worthy knight, if there be any means left wherein I may pleasure you,
do but ask, and you shall assuredly obtain whatsoever it be, for which
kind and kingly proffer, the knight of Fame with all humanity gave him
thanks.

Whilst they were in this Communication, there suddenly entered into the Hall,
four Knights in mourning Attire, carrying on their shoulders a Coffin covered
with black, by their countenances pretending the discovery of some tragical
event. The King of Thrace seeing this sad Spectacle, greatly marvelled of
whence they should be, and what heavy News they had brought? And they
being come to the place where the King was, setting down their Hearse, spoke
as follows.

Most High and Mighty King of Thrace; We are Knights belonging to the King
of Lybia: Who kindly greeteth your Majesty by us, requesting you to take no
offense at our rude Message, the occasion whereof is this. It is not unknown,
that the King our Lord has but one only Daughter, named Venola: Who on a day
riding forth on Hunting, being by a Tempest severed from her Train, (being
accompanied by many Knights, amongst whom was Tyrides, a Knight of Thrace,
unto whose custody the King committed her,) and was unawares surprised by the
Giant Brandamor, (that dwells in a Castle in the Forest of Arde,) and by him
by violence carried away: Whom the Noble knight Tyrides pursued, but the Giant
(too mighty a Foe for him to cope withal) slew him, and so conveyed the
Princess into his Castle: Whose corpse we have (according to our Kings
command) brought hither.

Amasenus hearing this sad report, ran unto the dead body of his Son,
breathing forth such Lamentations, that it would have made the very Rocks to
have rent at his sorrows: Whom the king comforted by all possible means he
could, but grief for his Sons untimely death, ouer-whelmed and oppressed his
heart with such Passions of desperate care, that he fell into an extreme
Sickness, which his olde-Age not being able to out-weare) within few days
after ended his life.

Amasenus death (who was generally beloved) turned their mirth into sorrow,
and their Joy into sad preparation for mournful Funerals, for the two dead
Knights: Which was afterward performed in most stately manner. The Knight of
Fame seeing his dearest Friend Amasenus dead, hearing of Venolaes
Imprisonment, resolved in requital of some part of Amasenus his Friendship,
to revenge Tyrides death on the Giant: besides his mind was affected with such
a desire to see the Lady Venola, that giving no respite to delay, he
presently after the right of Amasenus Funerals was performed, made his intent
known to the King, and with all Reverence took his leave of him. Likewise,
diverse that came to the triumph, and still remained in the kings Court, being
grown into great familiarity with the Knight of Fame: and desirous to make
trial of their valor against the Giant, departed likewise toward Lybia, With
the Knights that brought the dead body of Tyrides, amongst whom was the King
of Arragon, named Archilacus, Guydo of Thrace, Trudamor of Candie, Drio of
Scicile, and Tristamus, one of the three brethren, and within three days
arrived in Lybia; Where the King hearing of their intent, and cause of coming,
entertained them most Roially.

The Knight of Fame remained in the Court of the King of Lybia, some two days:
Where his entertainment was most courteous and honorable; Which might have
drawn a resolute determination to have taken delight therein: But he thought
all time, though entertained with all varieties of pleasure, tedious: All
delicate fare and costly banqueting, superfluons: and all company wearisom:
having his cogitations oppressed with care, his mind filled, meditating on his
Ladies sweet Beauty: and his heart thyr^ing for revenge of Tyrides death,
respect no pleasure, nor affecting no delight, but to find some knowledge of
his unkind Mistrisse, making preparation to besiege Brandamor, and thirsting
for honor, secretly departed toward the Forest of Arde, Where he arrived most
fortunately, to preserve his Princely Fathers life, (though to him unknown) as
is declared in the former Chapter.

CHAP. XIII.
(...) How Pollipus and Tellamor departed from Brandamors Castle, to Uioletta
and Clarina: And how as they were again returning back with them, they met
with Brandamor; whom they supposed had been dead: and of the arrival of the
King of Lybia, in the Forest of Arde.

PArismus, the Knight of Fame, and all the rest, being in Brandamors Castle,
began with good aduisement to determine what to do, and at last concluded,
because Parismus and Panuamus were grievously Wounded, and thereby not able to
endure Travel, they should stay and with them the Knight of Fame, to Guarde
Venola: Pollipus and Tellamor, should depart toward Panuamus Castle, who
taking kind Fare-wells of Parismus and the Knight of Fame, betook themselves
to their Journey, toward the place that harbored their chiefest delights.
Pollipus being drawn with an exceeding desire to see his constant Lady
Violetta, from whence he had been long time severed, and to recreate his
Senses, ouer-rulde with care, in the sweet solace of her pleasant company:
The remembrance of which delight, filled his heart with exceeding affectionate
content. Tellamor likewise had taken such a surfeit with beholding Clarinas
sweet Beauty, that no Physic but her beauty could cure the same, neither
could a thousand perils detain him from thence: Which hopeful conceyte,
fed his heart with inward delight, that in these Meditations, entermingled
with pleasant communications, they spent their time until they were come
near to the Castle: Where within short time they arrived; And dismounting
themselves, they came to the Porter: Who knowing Tellamor, admitted their
entrance; Being conducted in by some of the Servants into the Hall, and asking
for the Lady Clarina, the Wayting-mayde told them that she was in the
Garden, accompanied by Violetta, offering to conduct them to the place.

Nay (quoth Tellamor,) fare Damzells, I pray let us go alone: With that
Pollipus and he entered the Garden, and espying where they were seated upon a
green Bancke in communication; And pacing softly toward the place, they
sheltred themselves from their sight, by a Rose-bush that was close by them,
and heard their conferences, which was this: Violetta leaning sadly upon her
Elbowe, her countenance bearing show that a multitude of cares possessed her
heart, and Clarina was seated a little distance off, tearing and dismembring the
sweet Flowers that she had carelessly cropped from their stalks. Violetta
answering to some speech that Clarina had before uttered, said. Yea my
misfortunes have been too extreme, and such as I think no creature ever bid
the like, but my most unhappy self: Which now being ouerpast, would soon be
banished from my remembrance, might I once enjoy the sight of my dear knight
Pollipus, which hope has been the only preserver of my life. Oh (quoth. Clarina)
happy and ten times more then happy, in my infancy are Ladies that are Wedded
to such constant knights: but I fear me, there are too many of the contrary
part: But I wish my Brother, and these two other courteous Knights, such good
success, as to set him at liberty, so that I might behold him, whom you so
highly commend.

Yea, (quoth. Violetta) that would be a happy day to me, but I greatly
misdoubt, that will not suddenly come to pass, and I have been so often crossed
in my desire, that my doubtful heart will not suffer me to entertain the
least conceit of such felicity: Which said, the Tears in abundance fell
from her eyes: Which caused Clarina to do the like, and wept for co^anie.
Pollipus hearing Violettaes speeches, and seeing her Tears, could no longer
withholde himself, but entreated Tellamor to discover himself, and coming
toward them, both of them espying them, at the first marvelled what they
should be, but Violetta knowing Tellamor, thought the other had been Barzillus.
Tellamor coming to Clarina, greeted her ruddie Lips with a sweet kiss,
saying. Most virtuous Lady; We bring you happy News, of the safety and
releasement of your good Friends, and the death of Brandamor.

Violetta well noting the other Knights Shield, had a mighty persuasion,
that by his Devise ^ee should be Pollipus; Withal, marking his Proportion, her
Heart sometimes fainted, and sometimes a pale color appeared: Which straight
was ouerspredde with a Rostate blush, and such perplexities; One while of Joy,
and other while of sorrow, ouer-whelmed her heart, that the ^rinish salt
tears ouer-flowed her Eyes, and she turned back to Wipe them off, thinking
to have concealed the same. In which time Pollipus had unbuckled his Helm, and
discovered himself.

Violetta having Wiped off the deaw of her Salt tears, lifting up her head
espied him; Which sudden joy f^lled up her senses, that she fell into his arms,
not being able to utter a word: whilst he lovingly embraced her, re^ining her
senses, with many sweet kisses. Which done, he said; Welcome my sw^ete
delight: After so many cares, let us now bid ^ue to grief, and forget sad
mischances.

^y dear Knight (quoth Violetta,) my Trauells are now converted to careful
quiet Re^t, and the conclusion of my miseries so sweet, as all the Worlds
joys cannot be compared therewith. Since that I have my dear Love folded
within the circuit of my Embrace, since I enjoy your Company, which I have
long time wanted: since after my griefs, I am possessed with such delightful
felicity; Whose Pleasure may be compared to mine? What delight may equal my
conten^? My care is banished to comfort: Woe with Weal is controld: Pain
conquered by pleasure; Joy united with joy: and Pleasure with delight possess
my heart.

Which Words being ended, she entertained him with such a sweet Labyrinth of
kind Welcomes, that it would have ravished a discontented heart, with
surfeiting content to behold the same: Which ended, Pollipus with great
kindness saluted Clarina, and having not yet satisfied his Fancy with joy of
Violettaes Welcome, Sight, and sweet presence, he led her aside, delighting in
each others company, with inexplicable content.

Which sorted to Tellamors desire: Whose heart was inflamed with Louesburning
fire, that coming to Clarina, with a submisse gesture, took her by the
precious band, saying: Most virtuous Lady, How happy are those that enjoy
such content, as these two lovers embrace; Which makes me estee me my self
unfortunate, that have not yet tasted those delights, but have been tormented
with Lovers restles desire; neither could I ever settle my Fancy to entertain
that divine Deity, until I beheld your Beauty, which has tied my heart in
the strickt bands of Loves observance, which has seized my heart with unwonted
Passions, procured by the entire affections of my earnest devotion to your
perfections, that I humbly sue to your courtesy for pity to my cares,
beseeching you to conceive aright of my meaning, and to moderate my grifes with
the sweet salve of your clemency. I presume thus boldly to commit my passions
to your remembrance, procured by my restless desire, to be acceptable in your
sight. I cannot beast of loyalty, because hitherto you have had no trial of my
truth, nor any cause to commend my desert, because the want of means to be
employed has kept me from performing any such duties: but I protest and
promise as much as any true heart dare affirm, or the constantest friend may
perform: therefore I beseech you sweet Mistress, grant your servant some
favor, wherewith to comfort his poor heart, which has devoted it self
everlastingly to your obedience.

Clarina hearing his speeches, having before grown into some good liking of
them, and having some sparks of infant love kindled in her breast, and being
somewhat willing to yield to loves assault, yet doubting his constancy, made
this answer. Good servant, what further favor do you require, then that which
I have already granted? For such passions as you speak of, I know not what
they are: and withal, I think such sudden love cannot proceed from any firm
foundation: neither could I wish you to make any such protestations or promises
to me, that am neither worthy thereof, nor expect any such, being the
ordinary speeches of light Lovers: with which I pray trouble not my quiet
senses, for it cannot pleasure you, to disturb my cogitation with loves
vanities, when you your self are farthest off from the least respect of
loyalty: therefore as I have vouchsafed you the favor which with modesty I can
afford, I pray r^st contented therewith.

I but dear Mistress (quoth he) love which you term vanity, is of such
power, that it brings the free minds subjects to her obedience, who has
taken such full possession of my heart, that no misery or torment can remove
the same: then I beseech you, impute not me to be one of them that entertain
love of custom, but let your clemency conceive a better opinion of my suit,
which is grounded upon the firmest foundation of perfect loialty: and though I
confess the favor which you have alrearie granted me, is more then I have
deserved, or ever shall be able to requite, yet extend your courtesy so far,
as to consider of my Affection, that it may move your gentle heart to yield
me Love: Foor otherwise I assure you my life without that will be but grievous,
and my sorrows so exceeding, that in the end, you will repent the cruelty
you used: but I trust your Uertues will not contain such rigor, but according
to the courteous Piety that abounds in your gentle heart, you will yield my
humble Request; Which shall both show your pity, and bind me to you in all
bonds of perfect Constancy.

Clarina thus Answered him again. Well Servant, your requests pierce so deep
into my breast, that I promise you this further favor, that according as I ^de
your deserts, I will give credit to your speeches: and in the mean time, take
this comfort, that none shall remgue my good liking from you, until my self
find you false.

Tellamor hearing the sweet content of those Nectar-breathing Words, ended
the rest of his speech vppen her Lips: Which Pollipus nor Violetta had no
time to take notice of, being themselves every way delighted with as sweet
content: And afterward coming all together, they went into the Castle,
(delighting each in others sweet company, especially Clarina, began to
conceive such good liking of her servant Tellamor, that she took no other
felicity, but only in his sight; Where Pollipus declared to Clarina, their
happy victory, and how that it was Maderaes will she should depart with them to
Brandamors Castle: Which she willingly yielded unto, the rather thereby to
enjoy Tellamors company: and so the Night approaching, Pollipus, and his sweet
Violetta betook themselves to their rest: and Tellamor and Clarina to their
several lodgings: Whose hearts wished themselves the like happy content, they
knew the other two should enjoy, i^ their Honor would have permitted them.

Early the next Morning, the departed toward the Forest of Arde, being
accompanied by twenty trusty Servants belonging to Clarina, passing away the
time in many delightful speeches. Two of Clarinas Servants by occasion stayed
behind the rest of their company, and as they were newly entered the Forest,
they espied the Giant Brandamor crossing the way; Which drove them into such
fear, that like men be^traught of their Wits, they fled from him. Brandamor
seeing that, pursued them, until he ouertooke one of them, and slew him, the
other making the more haste, ouertooke his Company, being so affrighted, that
for a good space he could not utter his mind: Which drove them all into an
admiration; Afterward breathing, he said that the Giant Brandamor was alive,
and had slain one of his fellows. Pollipus, hearing his speeches; Wondered
whence they should proceed: for that he and all the rest thought the Giant
had been drowned, wherein they were deceived, for he having received the Fall
by the Kinght of Fame, with much adoo scrambled out of the water, which was not
deep enough to drench his huge body, but giving some credit to the Fellows
speeches, Pollipus and five or six of the servants went back with him, and
presently espied Brandamor, bearing in his hand a strong young plant which he
had plucked up by the root, for his Weapon; Who seeing Pollipus and his company,
knowing him, would have fled: but Pollipus ouertaking him, beset him with
such strickt besiege, that notwithstanding he laid about him with his mighty
staff, he soon brought him to his subjection, causing his Arms to be fast
bound with cords. And in that sort they drove him before them, until they
arrived at his Castle; Whither they were kindly welcomed by Parismus, who
reioiced to see Pollipus and Violetta, so happily met again.

And seeing Brandamor, they all both marvelled how he had escaped death, and
were glad they had him again, to be revenged in more severe manner, for the
outrages he had done them.

The Knight of Fame noting the exceeding joy of Parismus and Pollipus for
Violettaes safety, and of Panuamus with his Mother and Sister Clarina. And
noting Tellamors merry conntenance (procured by a great hope to attain
Clarinaes love) was drawn to a sad remembrance of his own misfortune, that
was enjoined to a Task, to find his Parents, and the Lady to whose service
he was Dedicated: unto whose beauty he was become so enthralled, that his heart
could harbor no conceyt of joy, but only in meditating of her perfections;
Which by absence, bred thousands of cares in his troubled head. And withal,
he noted the Princess Venolaes pensiveness: Whose affections he thought
should best agree with his sadness, that he accompanied her in many
communications.

Word was brought them the Castle was round begyrt with Soldiers: Which the
Knight of Fame hearing, desired that he might go out to Parley with them, to
know whether they were Friends or foes? Which they all gave consent unto: Who
arming himself, went forth gallantly mounted, and found that it was the King
of Lybia, who before having some knowledge of the Knight of Fame, knew him
again by his Armor, maruelling to see him (contrary to his expectation) to
issue out of his Castle.

The Knight of Fame coming toward him, said; Most mighty King, I as one of
the Gardiants of this Castle, (having by the overthrow of the Giant Brandamor)
Conquered the same, yield the same into your hands.

The King hearing his speeches, most lovingly embraced him: saying, Noble
Knight, the report I have heard of your Knightly Prowess, are verified in this
noble Attempt, that have subdued that hateful contemner of honor; Which none
but your self could have so valiantly performed.

Noble King (quoth. he) here is within this Castle the most famous Prince of
Bohemia; Whose hardiness and vaiour before my approach, had so much weaknened
the Tyrants power, that my Task was easy to subdue him. The King hearing
that, Wondered what occasion had drawn Parismus into those parts: Of whom he
had had knowledge in Thessalie.

The King of Lybia, accompanied by Archillachus, with diverse of his knights was
conducting by the Knight of Fame into the Castle, to the exceeding joy of
Venola, who with humble reverence fell prostrate at his feet: he coming to
Parismus, saluted him with great courtesy, who likewise returned him the
salutation, and to the young Archilachus, and after that every one in most kind
and courteous manner saluted each other, spending the rest of the day in such
content as the place yielded.

CHAP. XIIII.
Of Brandemors death, and of the Kings departure back into Lybia. How Uenola
was enamored with the Knight of Fame: How she devised means to stay his
departure with Parismus. How Tellamor dissembled himself sick, to stay in
Clarianas company. And of other accidents that befell the Knight of Fame.

THE next morning Brandamor was brought into the Hall, before the whole
assembly of States, to whom Parismus said; Disturber of peace, the the time of
punishment draws nigh, therefore declare to whom thou art prisoner, for but
one was thy Conqueror, at whose hands thou may receive reward according to
thy desert. Brandamor made this reply. I yield my self thrall to that strange
Knight, by whose valor I was conquered: otherwise, not all the force the King
of Lybia has brought, would have prevailed against me. The Knight of Fame
hearing his words, said. Since thou have yielded thy self to me, I surrender
my interest unto this Princess Venola, who may at her pleasure dispose of thee
as she shall think good. Venola hearing the Knight of Fames words, yielded him
thanks: desiring the King her Father to appoint his punishment, who caused him
that day in the presence of them all, to be drawn in pieces by horses: which
done, the King of Lybia came to Parismus, requesting him before his return
into Bohemia, to soiourne some few days with him, which he kindly accepted,
with whom Pollipus, the Knight of Fame, and Violetta likewise departed:
Panuamus stayed still with his Mother in Brandamors Castle, which by consent of
all was given to him, in recompense of the injuries he had sustained.

Tellamor seeing all things fall out contrary to his liking, could not devise
what m^nes to use to stay behind, to enjoy Clarinas company, without the
which, it was impossible for to enjoy any quiet: and casting in his mind all
devises he thought fittest, at last he fained himself extremely sick, which
he performed so cunningly, that although they had suspected his drifte, yet
they could hardly have espied his policy: by which means Parismus left him
behind, upon his faithful promise to come to him at such time as he was to
depart from Lybia. The King of Lybia with great joy, (having such noble and
valiant knights in his company) where he was most joyfully entertained by his
Nobles, who hearing that Venola was released by the valor of only two
Knights, (which was Parismus and the Knight of Fame) applauded their victory
with great praises, and devised all the means they could to increase their
honorable entertainment. Likewise the Queen used many courtesies toward
them, in requital of their kindness: where were Feastings, Banquetings,
Maskes, and Triumphs, performed by the Knights there assembled, with exceeding
pomp and pleasure: the chiefest honor whereof, redowned to the Knight of
Fame, whereby his Fame is spread into most places of the world. Venola noting
his exceeding valor and beauty, and withal, how much his splendant Fame was
extold in every man's meuth, in recompense of the trauelles he had endured to
set her at liberty, used such extraordinary kindness toward him, as he
might well have perceived to proceed from an universal liking: and beholding
the gifts of nature that abounded in him, she began to be entangled in
Loves bands, offering exceeding kindness to demonstrate the affections to
him, to the intent he should perceive the same: which when she saw took no
such effect as she desired, it rather increased he^ desire, then any way
mittigated the same: that she that had before refused many Kings suits, was
now enthralled by her own choice: and to such a one as made no sh^we or sign
of such devoted kindness as she expected in him. For not many days after,
she used that extraordinary behavior, which many began to note, thinking
the same had been procured by his suit, but hs contrarily was nothing so
affected, but his senses were so benumm^ with contemplating the perfections of
his unknown Mistress, that Venolas kindness (which many would have taken as
high ^nours) were bedewed in vain, which in time thee well perceived,
maruelling that he could not understand her meaning: which agrrauated her
desires, that they grew as a burning flame which so melted her yielding heart,
that nothing could ^cke in her fancy, but how to give him knowledge of her
good will: that by the occurrence of these passions, she began altogether to
delight in solitariness, unless it were in his company. The time of Parismus
departure being come, (which was appointed the next morning) Venola was drawn
into an exceeding fear, least that the knight of Fame would go with him, that
she began to devise what means to use to stay him, which she could by no
means of her self invent, which drove her to her wits end, and in great
heaviness complaining in her Chamber, casting her self upon her bed, she
uttered these complaints. What misery may be compared to the torments I endure,
procured by love which has entangled me in her snares, and settled my liking on
a stranger, that as carelessly regards my good will, as I earnestly affect his
perfections? What extremity is this, that my unlucky destinies have allotted
me, to refuse the offer of many Kings, that have humbly sued for my love, and
to make choice of one that makes least account of my kindness? For it cannot
be, but he perceives my love, which being so, how discourteous is he that in
all this time will not yield me any recompense for the same? Peradventure he
sees nothing in me worth the liking, or else my beauty is not such, as many
flatteringly have persuaded me it is. Am not I a Kings daughter, and he
peradventure borne of mean parentage? and what dignity might he come to by my
love? but all this he regards not, but being rudely brought up, according to
that rudeness, cannot conceive of my liking. But what mean I ^o disgrase the
Knight, whose courte^ makes him beloved of all, whose comeliness makes him
liked of all, and whose vaiour makes him honored of all: who has no doubt,
already placed his affections on some beautiful Lady, and that is the cause of
his strangeness, yea that is the thing that hinders my joys: for without his
love I can attain no quiet, which now I am likewise like to lose by his
departure, which I fear me will be too soon: which words being ended, such
passions overwhelmed her heart, that her eyes burst into ^eares, and there she
lay upon her bed, tumbling with torment of those restless passions.

Whilst she continued her sorrows, in comes Flauia her nurse, who by espying
her cheeks bes^eered with tears, and her sad counteuance, maruelling what
should procure the same, said, My sweet Mistress, how happens it that you
weep thus? Who has done you wrong? Or why do you torment your sweet self
with this sadness? Dear Lady tell me? O Nurse (quoth Venola) my own folly
has procured me this disquiet: and my self being the cause, whom should I
blame but my self? Why Lady (quoth she) what have you done? What is the
matter? Have you done your self any harm? Why should you conceal any thing
from me, that have all your life long loved you as dearly as my own heart? My
sweet daughter hide nothing from me: but tell me why you mar those your
pretty eyes with such sorrow? Why (quoth Venola) what should it avail my to
tell you, when I know you cannot help me: if I should declare it to you, and
by that means come to my fathers knowledge, it would be more grievous to me
then death: then good Flauia, do not seek to know my cause of care, but let
me consume my self in silence, when I have no other means of remedy. Flauia
hearing her words, was the more desirous to know what the matter was, sometimes
weeping, sometimes entreating her to tell to her, and sometimes protesting that
she would rather endure any torment, then reveal the same: that Venola won
with her persuasions, tears, and protestations, and withal desirous of
comfort, imparted her whole mind unto her: desiring her to be both secret and
trusty: and withal, asked her counsel how she might stay him from departing
which the Prince of Bohemia. Lady (quoth Flauia) since you have imparted your
mind to me, I will both secretly keep your counsel, and diligently labor to
stay his journey at this time. I but (quoth Venola) I pray thee do it so, that
he may no way perceive that it was by my procurement. Let me alone for that
(said she) and in the mean time cast you off those cloudy cares, and get you
down amongst the rest of those Ladies, with a merry countenance, and commit
the care to me, which I will effect to your liking.

Venola being somewhat revived with Flauias promise, with a merry heart
forsook her Chamber. Flauia went about her business going into the City with
all haste, where dwelt an ancient Apothecary, a very friend of hers to whom she
durst commit any secret, whom she desired to compound certain of his drugges
together, and to make a somniferous Potion, which would cause him sleep for
four and twenty hours, in such sort, that the party might by no means be
awakened, promising if he could make a confection, to reward him richly. The
Apothecary hearing her words, told her that if she would stay, he would
compound such a drink as should every way work the same effect she desired.
Flauia having attained her desire that way, came to a Goldsmith and bought a
most curious wrought bottell of gold, whereon she caused him to ingraue these
Letters.

My pleasant task does doubts appease,
I banish care and grief unkind:
Things yet unknown, I do reveal,
Unknown he is that shall me find,
A friend unknown has thee this sent,
Be bold and taste incontinent.
And having gotten every thing according to her desire, returns to the Court,
and the time of rest drawing nigh, she wrought such means that she had the
appointment of the knight of Fames lodging, where she laid the bottle (in
which time she had put the somniferous potion) so right in his way, that he
could not choose but find the same, intending that if she failed of her
purpose, yet she would work such means, that she would give it him in the
morning.

The Knight of Fame all that day kept company with Parismus, unto whom his
heart bare an inward love, determining to bring him toward Bohemia, and after
to travel in search of his Parents. Parismus likewise was grown into such
love of his qualities, and ^^ch a hidden desire to pleasure him, was stirred in
his heart toward him, that he used him with such an extraordinary kindness,
as the friendship that past betwixt them, seemed inseperable.

Thus the day being spent, every one betook them to their lodgings: the Knight
of Fame coming to his lodging, walking by and down lighted on the bottle, and
noting the same, took it up and espying the verses, read the contents, which
drove him into many cogitations how the same should come there: at last, among
many other thoughts, he deemed by the contents of the verses, he was the man
that should taste thereof. Then he began to fear lest it might be some
poison laid on purpose to betray his life, but that suspicion was soon
extinguished, the de^e he had to find ease to his doubts, which the contents
of the superscription promised: that tasting a little of the liquor, and
finding the same pleasant, being persuaded that it was conveyed by some divine
operation to procure content, he drank it quite off, and presently went to his
bed: which when Flauia saw, with a joyful heart she went to Venola, and
declared unto her what she had done, and afterward leaving Venola to her
self, she came to an old acquaintance of hers, who at her request wrote a
letter to Parismus in the name of the Knight of Fame: which the next morning
she delivered to him, the contents whereof were these.

Most noble Prince of Bohemia, my full intent was, for the undeserved kindness
I have found in you, to have attended you toward Bohemia, but a contrary
occasion has withdrawn me: therefore I desire your honor, both to pardon me
and make no inquiry after me: for I will as soon as I have ended my business,
repair to show my duty to you in the Bohemian Court: so in all reverence, I
commit your worthiness to all good fortunes.

A poor Knight unknown.


Parismus reading the Letter, marvelled what occasion had withdrawn him, but
being therewith contented, and trusting accordingly to see him in Bohemia, he
made no other speech of him, but taking his leave of the King and Queen,
having in his campany Pollipus, and Violetta, with some 40. Knights of Lybia,
he departed toward Bohemia; Tellamor all this while remained in the Forest of
Arde, in company of his dear M. Clarina, so cunningly handling his business,
that none could perceive but that he was very sick indeed: in which time
Clarina was his Physician, carefully tending him, and using a most
extraordinary diligence, whose company was more pleasant to him then any thing
else: that therewith and other sweet favors he received from her kindenes, he
forgot his sickness, and prosecuted his love which in time of his sickness had
that good issue, that Clarina was no less tied in the bands o^ Love, then he
was. And upon a time, when Clarina was in her chamber unaccompanied by any, he
amongst other kindnesses, uttered these speeches. My sweet M. (quoth he) how
much is your poor servant beholding unto you, that have so tenderly regarded
me, and taken such infinite pains about me, which makes me so much bound unto
you, that my life is, and shall beforeuer dedicated to deserve this kindness:
besides the affection which I bear to your divine excellencies, makes me
presume to prosecute my suit unto you, thereby to bring my self further into
your debt: desiring you to yield pity to my distress, and ease to my
restless passions, procured by your beauty, which if you withhold, soon will
care consume my weary life: neither can my heart attain to any quiet or
content, without your love, which I more esteem then either life or other
thing that Ienioy: therefore sweet M. defer my suit no longer, but now extend
your favor to my distress, and grant me love for my love, whereon my chiefest
felicity depends. Good servant, (quoth Clariana) were I assured of thy
constancy, soon should thou know my mind, but some cross or misfortue will
soon alter they affection, and so thou will leave me in distress: then what
misery may I incur by granting to thy suit? Sweet M. (quoth Tellamor) if
ever Knight were true, then will your poor servant prove trusty: if ever
heart harbored constancy, then be you assured, that constant love possesses
my heart: for so entire are my devotions to remain immooueable, that no
misfortune, calamity, etc. shall cause me falsify my faith, but rather let
all plagues and unfortunate miseries light upon my head. Clarina hearing his
speeches, made this reply. Well dear servant, since I see thy faithfulness
and how diligent thou have been to win my favor, I yield both my love and
my self into thy possession, which hereafter account as thine own to dispose
of: and be thou assured notwithstanding my strangeness, my love has every
way equalled thy affections, and with so free a heart I give my life and love
into thy hands, as willingly as thou desire to have the same. Tellamor having
received this assurance of her loialty, to revive his senses withal,
entertained that comfort, and her sweet presence with great delight, leaving
off his suit, and spending the time in impracings. Many days continued these
true lovers in great pleasure, being grown to that familiarity, that often
times such kind favors past betwixt them, that Clarina overcome up his
entreaties, yielded up her fortres of virginity unto him: oftentimes
frequenting each others company, in that kind sort (...) their (...) pleasure
with great delight, until the news of Parismus return came to their
knowledge, (and Tellamor bound thereto by oath, (...) needs depart) which
struck an extreme saddenesse to both their hearts. But especially Clarina
took the same so heavily, that no persuasion could add comfort to her heart.
The remembrance of whose departure, ouerc^e her with such passions of grief,
that being in her Chamber alone, she uttered many mournful plaints, and
withal such abundance of tears, that a heart of the hardest Adamant, would
have resolved at her lamentations: to ease which grief, she deui^ed how to
enjoy his company if it were possible, to the last hour of his departure, and
by the counsel of one of her Da^zels named Ancilla, she wrought such means
that she enjoyed his company that night.

Tellamor being a Knight of honorable conditions, labored all that he could
to leave her contented, and perform his faithful promise to Parismus: then
before his departure taking his leave o^ Madera and Panuamus, who so well liked
his company, that they were unwilling to leave the same. After which he went to
bed, thinking to take his ^rewell of Clarina, be^imes in the morning, when
none but themselves should be privy thereto: but she poor Lady, being (...)
fettered in the snares of love, having contrived every thing for her security:
when he was in his dead sleep, approached to his bed side, with a clear
burning Taper in her hand where she stood a great while, being unwilling to
interrupt his quiet sleep, reuoluing many thoughts in her troubled head. At
last she could not choose but touch his manly hand, which hung over the beds
side, wherewith she awaked him, who being scarcely out of his dro^e sleep,
espying his beloved standing by his beds side, could not of a sudden conceit
her being there, but at length having revived his senses by rubbing his eyes,
he took her by the hand, and wanne her consent to come into the bed, where
he entertained her with many sweet embracings and pleasant conference: who
took no small delight in his company, after much time (which they thought too
short) spent in kindsse. Clarina demanded when he would return, for (quoth
she) my self is nothing without your presence: neither shall I attain the
least quiet in your absence: therefore I beseech you have regard of my honor
Which I have yielded into your hands, and when you are amongst your Friends in
Bohemia, be not unmindful of poor Clarinaes love: Who has committed her
Life, Honor, and Chastity, into your gentla custody.

Most dear Clarina (quoth Tellamor,) my return shall be as speedy as may be:
For like as you, my self shall never enjoy one minu^es respite of Content,
without your heavenly company: Whereon my chiefest Felicity depends: And as
you have yielded all that I can desire, or you grant, into my unworthy
keeping, I will as carefully labor to preserve the same from all spot of
dishonor, hoping at my return, to enjoy the possession of your Love, as well
by general consent of your Friends, as by your courtesy I have attained their
divine fruition in private. Then I beseech you, Let no disquiet disturb your
peace, let no doubt trouble your Fancy, nor any suspense of Loyalty, take
root to your heart: For sooner shall the Sea become dry Land, the Sun and
Moon loose their clear light, and all things turn to their contrary, before
Tellamor will any way falsify his faith. In these and such like speeches
(entermingled with many delights) they spent that Night, taking their leave
each of other: With many a ceremonious Farewell, and parting with many a heavy
sigh and sad fear, thinking that with each others sight, each others life had
parted. Tellamor, according to his promise, arrived in Lybia, even at the time
of Parismus departure; Whom we will leave onwardes of his journey, toward
Bohemia.

The Knight of Fame having slept his fill, and longer a great deal then he
determined, awaked within two days after Parismus departure: little thinking
the Prince had been gone, but beginning to Arm himself, Flauia coming to
him, said as follows. Worthy Knight (qu^th she) I am glad to see that you
are well; Which until now I doubted. The Knight of Fame woondring at her
speeches, said: Gentlewoman, as yet I have not been sick: then, Why do you
make any question of my health? Indeed Sir (quoth. she) I see now, you have not
been sick, but you have slept very long: for I have been your keeper here
this two days, ever since the Prince of Bohemia departed; Who thought to have
had your company some part of the way, but seeing you a sleep, (from which you
could not be awakened) he imparted his mind to the Lady Venola, Who has
given me special charge to attend you diligently.

Her hearing her speeches: Was amazed in his thoughts to think of them,
entering into many cogitations what should be the cause of his sleepiness;
Which he perceived, was the po^tion which he had tasted, that he was
exceedingly enraged with himself, that he thereby was disappointed of
Parismus company: Whom he esteemed above all the Knights that ever he had met
withal, and making a virtue of necessity, blaming himself, for his
sleepiness, he went down into the company of other Knights, making the best
excuse he could thereof. Flauia in the mean time went to Venola, and told her
all that had happened: and what she had told him of Parismus departure:
Wishing her to de^ what she thought best to satisfy his mind. The Knight of
Fame being desirous to know what message Parismus had left with Venola, meeting
with Flauia, desiring her to certify her Mistress, that he attended her
pleasure, to know what the Prince of Bohemia had told her as concerning him.

Flauia hearing his speeches, brought him into a Gallerie, where she desired
him to stay, and she would go bring him answer presently: So com^ng to
Venola, she told her thereof. Venola then having rid her chamber of all
company, willed her to bring him in; Whom she Welcomed with unwonted
kindness: and taking him by the hand, desired him to sit down by her upon
the Beds side, to whom she said, as follows.

Most courteous Knight, the Prince of Bohemia willed me to certify you, that
he would within four days return to this place, to desire your company in
executing a secret of importance: Desiring me, that I would entreat you to
stay here some few days, and at his return he w^ll require that kindness:
Therefore I pray (quoth she) be my Guest for so long time; For I have received
such benefits by your courtesy, as I would willingly (if it lay in my power)
requ^te the same. I thank your excellency (quoth he) for proffering me such
kindness, acknowledging my self both unworthy thereof, and unable to requite
the same: Being so much the more willing to stay Parismus return, thereby to
show my duty to your request: and seeing you vouch safe me to be your Guest,
having yet deserved no such kindness, pleases you to command or employ me
any way, and I will most willingly undertake any travel or industry
whatsoever to procure your content: Which words he spoke, alth^ugh little
knowing what Passions had possessed her tender her heart: Whom she used so
kindly, and entertained with such loving glaunces, that he began greatly to
commend her courtesy.

And again he marvelled much why she used him with such kindness, as that it
would have pierced the heart of any other Knight but only himself: Whose
affections were settled on his inward devoted Lady: that Venolaes Love was but
bestowed in vain, and she spent her sighs and her good Will in^a
barren-soyle, where she wept in hope of recompense: Which drove her to such
extremity of grief, that she was often in mind, (having by good chance,
gotten him so fitly into her company, and fearing to loose so sweet an
opportunity,) to reveal her Love to him of herself.

But yet that purpose was suddenly altered again by quite con^arie thoughts,
that she sat rackte with so many and so extreme cogitations, that the grief
on the one side, that he could not conceive of her good liking, by so many
evident tokens as she had shown thereof, and her own Passions ouer-whelmed
her heart with such care, that she suddenly burst out into abundance of
tears, and so rose from the Bed, and went to a Window.

The Knight of Fame maruelling what should be the cause of her sadness,
thinking that his company could but disquiet her, departed her chamber: Which
she perceiving, was overcome with such Passion, that she fell down in a
trance, as she were dead. Wherewith Flauia gave such shreekes, that the
Knight of Fame, hearing her outcry, suddenly returned, and finding Venola in
that estate, did the best he could with the ^urse to recover her senses: Which
at last began to turn to their woontes uses.

Venola lifting up her Eyes, and espying the Knight of Fame holding her in his
arms; Wished that for ever she might have continued in that trance: Who
carrying her to the Bed, there laid her down, and Flauia and other Damzells by
that time took her into their custody; Which caused him to depart again:
After whom Venola cast such a greedy look, accompanied with such scalding
sighs, that Flauia feared she would have fallen into the like trance again.
(...) that she was well recovered, and all her Attendants departed, Flauia
said as follows. Why dear Mistress (quoth she) how immodera^ely do you
govern your self, to fall into (...) extremes? I (...) my heart, if I do
not repe^ that ever I ^ke in hand to be an A^tor herein. What have you no more
wisdom, but so fondly to dote on a straggling Knight, that cannot, or at the
least will not understand your meaning, taking a delight to see your torment,
for it is impossible but that he should perceive your love toward him: then
be not so affectionate toward such a one, as neither regards love, nor
knows what belongs to Courtly ciuility. Peace, peace, (quoth Venola) either
fill my ears with the sound of better words, orelse hold thy tongue: or I tell
thee, it is more odions unto me then death, to hear thee so much disgrace the
Prince of courtesy: for in him remain all honorable parts, whose presence is
more dear unto me, then all the proffered services of the knights in the
world: and if thou can comfort me no better then by these speeches, keeps
secret what thou know, and hereafter thou shall know no more of my mind.

For I imparted the same to thee, thinking to have comfort by thy counsel, but
thou contrarily, addest care to my grief. Sweet Mistress (quoth she) I
beseech you do not conceive so hardly of my meaning, for I speak nothing but
with intent to procure your good: and rather will I tear my accursed tongue
from forth of my head, then it shall utter a word to displease you.

Then (quoth. Venola) (...) again counsel me what do too, for thou see how
far I am tied in th^nds of Love to that worthy Knight, that without some hope
of comfort, my (...) w^the exceeding, and more then my poor heart will be able
to i^e. This I think (quoth. Flauia,) is the best to be done, either do it your
self, or let me give him knowledge of your love, and then you shall soon see
whether he will accept thereof or no. Do so then (quoth. Venola) I commit all to
thy discretion.

The Knight of Fame being departed to Venolaes chamber, was as far from
conceiving the cause of her Passion, as he was from the knowledge of all
things, and being walked into a Garden alone by him self. Flauia came to him,
(...) he kindly greeted, asking her how her Mistress did.

Sir Knight (quoth she) in the same case you left her, and yet rather Worse,
the cause of whose disquiet is procured by no disease, but by an extraordinary
(...), which none but one can remedy, Which I would willingly give the party
knowledge of, but that I know not whether he will take the same kindly or
no: Else ^ere he much too blame (q. he) ^or h^ (...) his (...), that would not
pity the distress of so divine a creature. Gentle sir (quoth she) thus it
is. My Lady has ever since the first sight of your person, been greatly
tormented with loves passions, which is the cause of her sickness, which
rests only in your power to salve.

The Knight of Fame hearing her speeches, was so suddenly a^nisht, and
therewith drawn into such cogitations, that he stood a good while like one in
a trance, at last he said, the harder is her hap, and the worse my misfortue,
for I am unworthy of such kindness, and unable to yield her recompense: which
words being spoken, he turned himself from her, being drawn into such a deep
meditation, that he regarded not, nor scarce heard some words Flauia spoke to
him afterward, who thinking that he had of purpose contemned her, departed in
a monstrous rage: and being alone by himself, cogitating upon these events,
perceived that her former kindness had proceeded from the same root of
affection, greatly condemning himself of dulnes, that could not before that
conceive the same: wishing that he had departed with the Prince of Bohemia, for
that his fancy could by no means be drawn to the least good conceit of her
love: for his heart was wholly employed another way.

Then he began to call to remembrance the somniferous potion he had tasted,
by which means he was disappointed of Parismus company, reuoluing every
consideration and circumstance of the same and these Events, was in the end
fully persuaded, that it was purposely done by Venola, or some by her
appointment, to stay him there: which thought was so fully grounded in his
fancy, that he assuredly persuaded himself that was the very truth, and none
else: Which drove him into many studies how to rid himself from thence. At
last he determined to depart in secret, and unknown to any; And with this
resolution, all that day he accompanied the rest of the Knights, thereby to
shun all occasions of hearing any further speech of Venola. Who hearing how
scornefully he received Flauiaes Message, (Which Flauia had told her) entered
into such extreme complaints against her hard fortune: and shed such abundance
of tears, that the Bed whereon she lay, was Watered therewith: In which estate
she continued, tormenting her self with extreme cares.

Early the next morning, the knight without the knowledge of any departed,
clogged with such a chaos of confused cares, as that he wished the date of his
weary life (subject to so many crosses) were expyred, intending never to
return thith^r, whom Flauia soon mist: The news whereof, she conveyed to
the hearing of Venola, Who took the same se heavily, so that many days she
continued as one likelyer to entertain death, then to survive: Which drove her
Parents into an extreme sadness, From whom she still concealed the cause of
her grief. In which estate for a while we will leave her, and the Knight of
Fame, onwards on his Journey, and Clarina in great car^, for the absence of
Tellamor, in the Forest of Arde.

CHAP. XV.
I How the Knight of Fame arrived in Natolia: And by what means he found the
Lady he saw in the Uision: And of the Combat he fought with Collimus.

AFter the Knight of Fame was departed the King of Lybiaes Court, to andyde the
Love of Venola, he traveled many days without any adventure, tired with
extreme care and desire to come to the knowledge of his Parents, and to find
his devoted ^adie, that when the Sun was at the high^t, and by that means
the season very hot, he alighted from his horse in a pleasant valley: Where
sitting under the shadow of a Chestnut-Tree, he entered into this communication
to himself.

What varieties of crosses do still prosecute my steps, that I can in no
place be at quiet, but am still troubled with that which I would not, but
cannot finds the thing I desire? My Byrth-day was the beginning of my sorrows:
Since which time, nothing but Care and ^ration has befallen to my share;
Whereas I see other Knights enjoy their hearts content, etc.

As ^cerning my Parents, they are so hidden from my knowledge, as tha^ my self
Traveling to find them, Peraduanture go rather a great wa^from them, then to
them: For the Island of Rocks, from w^nce I came, and where I was brought up,
is very far distant from this place (...) I think if I would come to their
knowledge, it is my best course to return thither again. Was I not
ouerfoolish to refuse the marriage of Phylena, the kings daughter of Thrace,
upon the vain confidence of a Dream? Upon whose certainty I can no way
build: Which might be procured by some Sorcerie of Remulus, to make me refuse
that high Honor, only to the intent he might install himself therein: and
cause me to doat on the Beauty of a Lady that is no where to be found; For
the whole World contains not such an Essence of perfect beauty, as that
which I beheld* then, What shall I do? or, Which way shall I shape my best
course? shall I give over her search, since Dreams are so uncertain? I but
this was more then a Dream, it was a Uisien: For I beheld the goddess Venus,
Who enjoined me this Task, holding that sweet Lady in her hand: Whose form
so perfectly is printed in my remembrance, that I cannot forget the same: Which
assuredly is living and to be found: And therefore I will never desist until I
have found her, although I should spend the whole race of my life in that
Quest: Which if it were ordained for my endless torment, then how should I
avoid the same? Neither care I what pain to endure, if I may after all my
Trauells find her.

In this sort he spent much time, until he fell in a deep study, leaning his
back to a Tree, he fell fast a sleep. Whilst he was in this sweet sleep,
(by happy fortune) Angelica the fair, that day hadd forsaken the Golden Tower,
(which was not far from the place where the knight of Fame lay) to meet the
king her Father, who with the Queen was coming from the City of Ephesus,
where he kept his Court, to soiourne certain days for his disport in the
Golden Tower, that yielded all kind of delights. Angelica passing along this
pleasant valley, gallantly attended by an unwonted train of Ladies, and guard
of knights, espied the knight of Fame, supposing that he had been dead: to
ease which doubt, she willed one of her knights to see what he was. The
knight coming to him, awaked him, who suddenly starting up, began to lay
hand on his sword, but casting his eye aside, he beheld Angelicaes gallant
Train, and amongst the rest, her self, whose countenance he presently knew
to be the very same Lady he had scene in the Uisi^n: whose beauty and sudden
presence struck such an amazement to his senses, that he stood like one in a
trance. Angelica seeing that he was alive, and not dead as she supposed, past
on her intended Journey, not regarding him. He seeing her departed, thus said
to the Knight. Courteous Sir, I pray let me crave that gallant Ladies name.
Sir, (replied he) her name is Angelica, Daughter to the most mighty King of
Natolia: Who passing this way to meet the King and Queen, (Who are coming
toward the Golden Tower,) and seeing you lying under this Tree, sent me to see
whether you were alive or dead: Which said, he departed.

The Knight of Fame rejoicing that he had seen his long expected Mistress,
was presently rapte into a heavenly conceit of Joy, that he thought himself
as it were transformed into pleasure, such comfort revived his drouping heart
from sad dumpes, with her delectable sight, even then beginning to study how
to come to her speech, to purchase occasion to give her knowledge of his best
duty, finding out so many lettes and impossibilites between him and his
intent, that he began to despair thereof: at last resolved upon nothing,
but determining to do something, he mounted his Steed, and followed that way
Angelica went: purposing to take a more precious view of her perfections, being
hopeless of any other comfort.

He had soon overtaken her Train, not yet resolved by reason of his
strangeness, what to do, or what means to use to speak to her, being
encompassed by such a number of Knights: At last he thus thought with
himself: I that have refused the good will of Kings Daughters, only to find
this beautiful Lady, and in her Search have endured so many mischances: Shall
I now when I see her, be afraid to speak to her^ Or may I not hereafter be
disappoynted of such F^rtunate occasion, as is now offered me? What though
she be Guarded by these Knights, being alone, it can no way breed offense to
them, that I speak to her. With this resolution he passed by the hindermost
of her company, without speaking to them: who greatly marvelled what he should
be^ and coming right against Angelica, who he easily knew from the r^st, by
his former little view of her form in the Uision, he kindly drue ^eere her.
And with a submissiue sign of Reverence first given, he said ^s follows.

Most sacred Lady, pardon my boldness, Which I beseech you do not account
^denesse: I have traveled many a mile, to attain the height of his felicity,
to behold your divine perfections, which makes me conrrary to that dutiful
reverence my heart has vowed, to intrude my self thus rudely into your
presence, being void of other means to demonstrate my depth of devotion:
therefore I humbly once again desire your pardon, that has offended against
my will: desiring you withal, to enter into this opinion of my meaning, that
(notwithstanding what persuasion my rudeness may breed in your heavenly heart)
it is both loyal, honorable and virtuous, and no way intending to presume
above my desert, yet my life shall be always employed to deserve as well as
the best.

Angelica hearing his speeches, sadly noting his countenance, and being of a
most singular w^t, admired his courage, that notwithstanding all her guard, he
durst so boldly presume into her presence, which caused her the better to
regard both his speeches and propor^ion, made this reply. Sir Knight, it may be
you are deceived, for you have not found that which you have so long sought,
which makes me account your speech flatteries, and your boldness folly:
entering into no other conceit of your meaning, for be it either good or bad, I
care not, for the one cannot arm me, nor the other pleasure me: but for your
good will, I take that kindly, though in my fancy you profess more then you
will perform.

Divine Lady (quoth he) vouchafe but to employ me, and then shall you make
trial of my forwardness, which shall be no less then I have promised: for my
speech, nor bold approach into your presence, has not proceeded from want of
respect of your worthynesse, but from a strickt command, long since enjoined me
to become your dutiful servant: therefore I humbly beseech you, judge
favorably of my meaning, for I will rather hereafter consume my heart with
silent care, then by my speech purchase your displeasure, if you command the
contrary. He had not scarce ended those words, but she let fall her glove,
which he seeing, presently alighted and took it up, with reverence kissing the
same, ^ffered it her again.

Knight (quoth she) take it for your labor, wherewith she turned away from
him, for that she esp^ed her Father coming: which caused him, being glad of
that favor, to withdraw himself. One of Angelicas knights named Camillus, to
whose principal custody the King had committed his daughter, above all the
rest noted the Knight of Fames behavior, and disdaining that a stranger should
carry away the glove, which he esteemed a favor sar ^ond his ^esert, himself
having been her servant a long time, yet could never attain any such kindness:
withal, supposing he was some Knight Anglica knew, presently hasted after
him, trusting too much to his own valor, and bluntly bade him render back
the Princess glove. Sir (quoth he) again, the Princess gave it me, and for
her sake I will keep the same. Wherewith Collimus without any more words,
retired back to encounter him: and he did the like, and remembering it was the
best deed of Chivalry he could perform in his Ladies presence, thought with
himself, that if he sat not fast, he would quail his courage: presently,
they met each other, the one with bravery, the other with force, for Collimus
measured his length on the ground.

By this time the King and Queen had met Angelica, and all greetings ouerpast,
their Trains met, which almost filled that pleasant valley: in company of
Maximus, was Camillus, Son to the king of Slauonia, attended by a number of
gallant Knights, who hearing of the exceeding beauty of Angelica, was lately
come into the country as a suter, to whom Maximus said, (beholding the brave
course between the two Knights,) What Knight is yonder, that has ^uerthrowne
his adversary with such agility? A comely Knight he is (quoth Camillus) but it
seems he is a stranger. With that, another Knight of Angelicas attendants,
upon the former quarrel, incountred the knight of Fame, who tasted of his
valor, as his predecessor Collimus had done, after him another, which when
Maximus beheld, he called a Gentleman to him, willing him to request the
strange Knight to come and speak with him, which fell out well for the Knight
of Fames quiet, for had not the King been present, the Knights of Angelicaes
guard had taken such a secret indignation against him, that they by violence
would have sought his death. The messenger Maximus sent, told the Knight of
Fame that the King did request to speak with him. Sir (quoth he) I am ready
at his command: to whom Maximus said, as follows.

Sir Knight, you are it seems to me, a stranger in this place, but
notwithstanding somewhat bold with my knights, both whose quarrel against
you, and your cause of arrival, I desire to know. Most renowned king (quoth
he) I am a stranger in this place, or in any else: in my travels meeting with
this gallant troop, to any of whom I I have as yet given no cause of offense,
which should make them trouble me. Sir (quoth Maximus) they have reapt shame
for their discontent: but I pray let us without offense know your name, and of
whence you are: neither fear to disarme your self: for upon my promise, you
shall have no wrong offered you: which said, the Knight of Fame pulled off his
helmet, making this answer. By name, most noble King, I am called the knight of
Fame, my birth to my self unknown, by no ill intent drawn into this
Country, but only to find out my Parents, which are likewise unknown: my
self subject to misery, by the want of knowledge of my self. Marcellus son
to Maximus, a knight of exceeding courteous and honorable parts, hearing his
speeches, humbling himself upon his knee before his father, said, I humbly
crave your Majesty's favor, to entertain this knight honorably, for that I
have some knowledge of him, which I will declare to your Highness hereafter.

Maximus hearing his Sons speeches, said: Rise up Marcellus, for thy sake,
and for his own too, he shall be welcome: whom do thou use according as shall
seem good, and be agreeable to his honorable deserts. The knight of Fame
hearing his speeches, most humbly thanked him: and Marcellus presently embraced
him, showing many tokens of hearty good will.

Angelica all this while noted every circumstance of this knights ariuall, as
first, how she found him a sleep: and next, of his speeches to her: then, how
valiently he had overthrown three knights: then her brothers speeches: and
lastly, his gallant youth, and comely ^person: which altogether wrought such a
kind of admiration in her, that she began with a curious eye to mark all
his actions: and to affect his company more then she had done any man's:
oftentimes casting a look upon him, she perceived his eye was still upon her:
which made a ruddie blush beautify her cheeks. In which time, the King
entreated him to stay sometime with him, if his important business did not
withdraw him: which offer he willingly and kindly accepted: which fell out
according to his own hearts content.

CHAP. XVI.
How the Knight of Fame was entertained at the Golden Tower, and what speeches
past between Anna and Angelica.

AFter these speeches past, the King, Camillus, the Queen, Angelica, and all
the ^est, departed toward the Golden Tower: and by the way Marcellus began
to declare in hearing of them all, what he had heard of the Knight of Fame: of
his valiant exploits in Thrace, and afterward how in the Forest of Arde he
slew the Giant Brandamor, which he uttered in such ample manner, and with such
commendation, that it made them all admire his noble gifts: especially Angelica
above all the rest, noted every circumstance thereof, with such regard, that
she seemed to take great delight therein. The Knight of Fame hearing thereof,
entertainning his mistress perfections with such pleasure, and admiring her
beauty with such surfeting delight that he rode like one in a trance, having
all his senses bent upon her.

By this time they were commen to the Golden Tower, where was exceeding
preparation made for the King, who speaking to Camillus and the Knight of Fame,
told they were most heartily welcome thither: likewise the Queen welcomed
them with great kindness, especially Marcellus care for the Knight of Fames
entertainment was very great, who caused him to be lodged in a most stately
lodging, where every thing was readily prepared for him in the best manner.
Every one being departed to their several lodgings, the Knight of Fame
meditating on his good fortune, and the kind entertainment he found in that
strange place, waying on the one side, how late he was pluuged in care, and how
suddenly he was possessed with pleasure, how from misery, he was advanced to
the highest degree of his felicity: how he was lately in despair of finding
his devoted, and how prosperously he had now met with her, and had in some
part manifested his affection: how the occasion of his quarrel for his Ladies
Glove, was the cause of his kind entertainment: how fortunately in that
strange plate his deeds were extolde: and how kindly Marcellus used him, whose
acquaintance and friendship might be a means, both of his stay in that place,
and also of obtaining Angelicaes love. Then again considering how strange it
was that he would stay in the very place where his Lady should see him: and
how luckily he had left the Court of the king of Lybia, and thereby he was
rid from Venolas rash love, which might have both endangered his honor and
person: that with the remembrance of all these happy concurrences, his mind
was exceedingly contented, and he seemed to have attained more happy success
then he would have wished: that in that Sunne-path of sweet delight,
accompanied with quiet sleep, he spent that night. Angelica was likewise no
whitte inferior to him in contrariety of passions, but having likewise spent
the day in company of her mother, when the time of rest drew nigh, she soon
gat from out of all company which she thought troublesome, being much
disquieted in her thoughts, feeling a kind alteration to her former liberty of
of mind, being desirous to be alone, she gatte to her Chamber, where was none
but her Damzell Anna, that was her bedfellow, to whom she said: I pray thee
good Anna leave me alone for a while, for my thoughts are possessed with such
disquiet, that I desire by solitariness to ease my passonate heart.

Anna hearing her speeches, maruelling what might be the cause thereof, and
being in all respect dutiful, departed. She was no sooner gone, but Angelica
sitting down upon the rushes, leaving her head upon the beds side, began
to study whence the occasion of that sudden alteration she felt in her self
should proceed: sometimes deeming this, and then that, but still she could
not certainly what to judge thereof: that her mind was drawn to an extreme
torment, which so oppressed her senses, that presently she called Anna again:
who maruelling at her strang^ (...), and (...) at her sadness, kneeling down
by her, uttered these speeches. My dear Mistress, I beseech you conceal not
from me the occasion of your disquiet, to whose secrecy you need not (...) to
commit the ^ame: for I hope you are sufficiently persuaded of my truth, that
do esteem my duty to you more dear then my life, which I would most wi^ingly
spend for your sake: (...) if you will vouchsafe to (...) me any way, or in
what sort so (...), so it please you to command, I will he most willing to use
my uttermost endeauours, as (...) as ever did servant, to purchase your
content. A^ me wretched creature (quoth Angelica) it is not mistrust of thy
secrecy, nor doubt of thy aid, nor ought else that I misdoubt in thee, that
makes me withhold any part of my counsel from thee: for if I would show it
thee, I cannot, for this passion is so newly begun, that I cannot rightly
conjecture what the cause thereof should be, or why my thoughts should be thus
suddenly disquieted: and such assured confidence do I retain in thy fidelity,
that I would conceal no part of my thoughts from thee.

Anna hearing her Mistress speeches, began presently to suspect that she had
en^rtained some good conceit of some of the knights that were arrined that day,
whom she thought to be the young Prince Camillus: which caused her make this
answer. Dear Mistress (quoth she) I believe the approach of some of the
gallant Knights that came with the King, is the cause of your alteration. Why
(quoth Angelica) do thou think their approach should disquiet me? Marry
(quoth Anna) because many Ladies have been suddenly overtaken with love: where
with Angelica blushed, saying. Do thou think my affection so light, to look
of every one I see?

Pardon me dear Madame (quoth she) I do not think so. Well (quoth Angelica)
suppose thou have iumpt upon the right, which of those knights do thou
suppose it is? Will you pardon me (said Anna) if I give my opinion? I will
(said she) I think (quoth Anna) it is the brave Prince Camillus Camillus
(quoth she) it is rather the stranger. Indeed (quoth Anna) that strange Knight
far surmounteth all the knights that ever I beheld, for comeliness, courtesy
and prowess. I am assured said Angelica (breathing forth a sad sigh) thou
spakkest this rather to flatter me, then according to that thou think: for
otherwise why did thou speak of Camillus? Faith Mistress (quoth she) I
named Camillus, not for any thing I see in him comparable with the strange
Kinght, but for that I would thereby know your mind: which now that I
understand, if you would follow my counsel, you should not only like him, but
also love him: for ther^ is no doubt but the cause of his coming hither, was
only for your sake, who in my rash opinion, will prove both constant and
loyal: for his very countenance bewraieth the united essence of true Nobility
and virtue to be placed in him.

O Anna (quoth she) thou woundest we to the heart: before I had (...) a
suspicion of love, but by thy speeches I begin to be inthralled therein. Do
not I pray thee seek to augment that, which is impossible to come to
perfection: which if I should entertain (as I shall I fear me against my
will) thou know how many impossibities do threaten my everlasting torment
thereby: therefore I pray thee do not once name him to me again, for if thou
do, I shall be more intralled to that very name, then to all the humble
suits of the most noblest knight in the world.

Did thou not hear my brother Marcellus report, how prodigally he gave
away the Kings daughter of Thrace? and what pains he took to redeem Venola,
that beautiful Lany, from Andramarts Castle.

I know thou did: but likewise I know thou did not hear what he said to me
to refell these doubts, that he was long since enjoined to my service, and was
the thing he had long time sought to attain.

Did thou not see how I found him a sleep, and yet notwithstanding all the
Knights that guarded me, how resolutely (yet with humility) he approached my
presence? where he told me, that no want of regard had bredde that rudeness,
but fear of missing that fit occasion, considering how straightly I am kept
and pried into by my Fathers decree?

Did thou not see how bravely and valiantly he ouerthrewe three stout Knights
together, that would have taken my glove from him? Do thou not see how
dearly my brother Marcellus loved him, and all in general are well affected
toward him? These I think are occasions sufficient to refell all suspect of
his good intent and meaning.

Quoth Anna, Truly most gracious Madame, I think verily (all things
considered) he has not his equal, neither for valor nor for Virtue, you may
do as you please, whom I will not so much as once speak of hereafter, since
I shall offend you thereby.

Yes, I pray thee speak of him (quoth Angelica) for nothing can please me
better, though I fear me nothing will do me more harm. And well may
thou think me ouer^ond, so soon to be entangled in the bonds of love, with a
stranger, that I neither knew^ of whence, nor what he is: of whom we have said
enough at this time, therefore I pray let us defer any further commendation of
him, until we have made better proof of his worthiness: which said, they
betook themselves to their rest.

Early the next morning the knight of Fame was up, to whom Mercellus was soon
gotten, who took no other delight but only in his company, using him so
kindly, and so honorably, that the knight of Fame marvelled thereat, wondering
whence such kindness should grow: that he likewise began greatly to affect
his company, and being both come into the kings presence, who was accompanied
by Camillus, they spent the forenoone in several discourses: likewise Angelica
spent her time against the Ladies of great account, in such sort as agreed in
their fancy.

Dinner time being come, a most costly and sumptuous feast was prepared:
whereunto Maximus invited all his Nobles, and Camillus and the Knight of Fame
amongst the rest as his chiefest, where they were most honorably entertained,
sumptuously feasted, and kindly welcomed.

Camillus seeing that the Queen and Angelica were wanting, was suddenly fallen
into a sad dumpe, because the Lady of his delight was absent: which the King
noted more specially then all the rest, who supposing that Camillus came as a
Suter to his daughter, had of purpose given order to the Queen, that she
should banquet the Ladies by themselves: which was so done, that neither
Camillus nor any else perceived his drift therein, which made Camillus extreme
angry with himself, that he had not the day before (when he enjoyed both her
sight and full liberty of speech) in some measure given her knowledge of his
love.

The Knight of Fame on the contrary side, governed himself with more
moderation, for he having attained such good success as his heart did wish,
was therewith for the present contented: hoping that fortune that had been so
favorable to him, would not suddenly alter her countenance, but still continue
her aid to his furtherance: whom Maximus likewise diligently noted, having
suspicion that he likewise came for Angelicas love, though he dissembled the
contrary, of which he could perceive no likelihood by his merry countenance,
which caused him only to suspect Camillus and not him.

The Feast being ended with great Royalty, every one after some Courtly
pastime past, betook themselves to what exercise liked them best Camillus
still accompanied the King, showing (for grief of Angelicaes absence, such a
kind of behavior, as though his senses were bewitched with careless
passions) which he noted diligently, thereby breeding in his mind, an
assurance of his suspicion. The Knight of Fame had withdrawn himself into a
Garden, and seeking the solitaryest place he could find, began to recall
the sweet remembrance of Angelicaes Beauty into his mind, whereunto he was
more firmly inthralled then he was before he had seen her, though even then
his Love was firm, having but seen her in a Uision: That he was now not
only contented with that favor she had already shown him, but also devised
and studied how to become more gracious in her sight, and attain some better
hope of her Love: Which as yet he had no likelihood to attain. Whilst he
was in the depth of these cogitations, Marcellus missing him, and seeing him
before enter into the Garden, never left until he had found him out, to whom
he said; Sir Knight, I am somewhat bold to interrupt your quiet Meditations by
my approach, being desirous of your company: Therefore if I may without
intrusion accompany you, I will stay, Otherwise, I would be loath to breed
your disquiet.

Most Noble Marcellus, (qo. the Knight of Fame,) I am not troubled with your
presence, but even think my self most happy to enjoy the same, as far
unworthy such kindness: being a stranger here, think my self so highly
honored by your favor, that I shall account my self for ever bound unto you
for the same: thinking my self more happy thereby then I could have wished,
being before subject to all evil Fortune, account my self exceedingly
fortunate by your kindness and friendship.

I could wish it were in my power (quoth Marcellus,) to deserve so well of you:
Being more willinger then able to pleasure you, for the report of your
honorable gifts, has made me long since desirous of your Acquaintance, that
if you please to stay with me in my Fathers Court, I will endeavor to show my
good. Will toward you: And if you will accept of my plain meaning, without
further trial, I will hereafter prove your faithful Friend. Most courteous
Knight (quoth he) I can yield no other recompense but most hearty thanks for
your great kindness, which has extended it self far beyond my desert, with
so willing a heart accepting your kind proffers, that before I prove
disloyal, I will tear my heart from out my breast. Then (quoth Marcellus) let
us conclude this sudden consent of Good Will, which for my part, shall never
while life does last be dissolved.

Desiring you from hence forwards to make such account of me, that wherein
soever I may in any degree pleasure you, I will as assuredly do my best, as in
my power consists. With that they embraced each other: Betwixt whom, such
Good Will began to grow, as was both constant and indissoluable.

CHAP. XVII.
I How Angelica was imprisoned, and how Maximus rebuked his Son, for
suffering the Knight of Fame to speak to Angelica.

MArcellus having a while Walked with him in the Garden, desired him to
accompany him into the Court, to visit the Ladies, who (quoth he) are this
day Feasting by themselves. The Knight of Fame glad thereof, willingly gave his
consent, being the only thing that contented his mind: and being come into
the Presence, where the Queen was, and having done his Reverence, she most
kindly Welcomed the Knight of Fame, telling Marcellus, that his coming was
to see the young Ladies; Whereat Marcellus smiling, departed into a Gallerie,
where were a multitude of sweet Beauties, exercising themselves at several
pastimes: Some at Chesse, some at cards, and some in pleasant communication:
Whom Marcellus kindly embraced: but the Knight of Fame by reason he was a
stranger, was not so bold; but having his mind dedicated to serve no other
Saint but Angelica, looked for her, whom he espied at the further end of the
Gallery, in a heavy dumpe, leaning on her elbow: Who hearing Marcellus voice,
looked back, and cast her Eye first on the Knight of Fame, on whom she
fastened a steadfast eye a good space: But remembering her self, with an
exceeding blush, she withdrew the same, because she saw his eye settled on her.

Marcellus by this time came toward Angelica, and perceiving her Blushing
countenance, caused him to note how Melancholy she was alone, saying to her:
How now Sister? What sollitarie study is that, which has so withdrawn you
from yonder pleasant Company? My mind (quoth she) is better exercised, by
being sometimes alone, then in their company: But since your Presence has
broken my meditation, I will be content to forsake the same to enjoy your good
company; Which me thinks is very rare.

I thank you good Sister (quoth he) assuring you, that I take it wondrous
kindly, that you will think so well of me; Which hereafter you shall at your
command enjoy: Withal, I desire you for my sake to bid this Knight Welcome,
whom I esteem as dearly as my self. With that Angelica turned toward him,
and he with humble reuererence, kissed her hand, to whom Augelica said: Sir,
by my brothers command I bid you Welcome: The Knight of Fame most humbly thanked
her, being so exceedingly ravished in his mind with joy, that no joy might be
compared to that he endured.

Angelica on the other side, was every way affected with as sweet content, by
that opportunity to take a more precise view of his comeliness, entertaining
the same with such surfeiting delight, that she not only augmented the heat
of her former Affections, but also was now fettered in the indissoluable bonds
of Love.

Marcellus and she continued sometime in conference together, in which time
Angelica cast many sweet looks toward the Knight of Fame, which he well
perceived, by reason his Eye was neuer^ her, which she likewise noted, striving
not to show the like kindness again, but notwithstanding contrary to her
purpose, her hearts inward affection constrained her to behold him, which made
her color go and come exceedingly: oftenti^es breaking off her speeches with
such passionate studies, and sometimes breathing a silent sigh, which Marcellus
noted, but yet seemed not to mark. In the mean time, in comes the Queen, who
calling Marcellus unto her, entered into communication with him, which when
Angelica beheld, her heart began to throh and pant with a kind of delight: the
Knight of Fame likewise was tormented with diversity of passion, being
desirous to speak to Angelica, yet not daring to attempt such boldness in
presence of the Queen, having before heard of Maximus decree. Whilst she was
in this cogitation, Anna seeing her Mistress alone, and the knight she so
dearly loved hard by her, came and used some speehes unto her on him, which he
well noted, at last the Queen departed again, and Marcellus went to sport
amongst the rest of the Ladies, having before noted his Sisters passions, which
he was in some suspicion, was by reason of the knight of Fames being there.

The Knight of Fame seeing the Queen departed, and Marcellus amongst the
Ladies, not rashly attempting such boldness, but with a most submisse and
comely behavior, drue toward Angelica (being surprised with such a fear to
offend) and care what to say, that his heart shook therewith, and humbly
kissing her hand, with a trembling fear, still held the same in his palm,
and said: My divine Lady, pardon my presumption, that ouer-boldly and contrary
to my desert, presume to trouble your sacred ears with my speeches: Which if I
did suppose would be offensive, I would bur^ still in the closet of my troubled
heart, from whence they proceeded: but if I may be so gracious in your sight,
as to gain the sweet opportunity by your favorable license, as to declare the
depth of my devotion, and how and in what sort, and how long since I was
enjoined to become your devoted servant, I shall rest so much more inthralled
to your virtues, as my poor heart shall for ever be unable to yield sufficient
thanks for, which I dare not presume to do without your favorable consent, which
I desire you to grant. Angelica all this while stood as one tranformed into
bashfulnnes, being possessed with delight, yet unwilling to make any show
thereof, which caused an exceeding blush beautify her cheeks, which added
some splendor to perfect beauty it self, which at all times appeared most
lively in her sweet countenance: At last withdrawing her hand, which now began
to sweat, with his strickt em^race, which he was unwilling to let go, yet
fearful to hold without her consent, to who^ she made this answer. Sir, where
no harm is meant, there needs no such entreatance for pardon, for the actual
offense I see none, but if any be intended, it is more then I know, and
therefore without my power to forgive: neither does your speech much please nor
offend me, but if spoken with good meaning, I cannot blame, nor will deny to
hear another time, withal, wishing you not to think me tractable to every
persuasion, but have yielded you that favor, never yet had any at my hands:
which peradventure imboldneth you to use your accustomed manner of flatteries,
whereunto most me^ are addicted, wherein you shall do greatly amiss: for though
I condescend to hear you, yet do not think my mind easily drawn to believe
every protestation. Most virtuous Lady (quoth he) neither do my words proceed
fr^ custom, but my speeches proceed from the debth of my true and humble
heart, that has vowed never to start from the constant verity, which has long
nurced many bitter torments, proceeded by desire to find your virtuous self:
which has bin the cause of my long travel. Then I most humbly beseech you,
esteem of me as one that can breath no longer then he is in your favor. For
sooner shall all things be dissolved, then I fail in duty to your service,
and constancy, to continue devoted to your command; Which if I may be in any
hope to attain, though it be with the extremest hazard that ever Knight
endured, I shall account my self the most happiest man living. Therefore I
beseech you, let no suspected conceyt of my truth, withdraw your virtues from
pitying me: For without the fruition of your sweet favor, it is impossible
for me to live. Beseeching your Excellency likewise, not to suppose my words
to proceed from fained affection, but from a heart that has vowed to be
perpetually Constant, and will never start from truth, whatsoever miseries or
crosses may happen to try my constancy.

Angelica hearing his speeches, Withal, noting with what motions and
alterations his heart was oppressed, by the often change of his countenance: and
withal, being herself every way as much enthralled to Love as himself,
hoping that his heart, if it harbored true Loyalty, would not deem amiss of
her courtesy, (for the Noblest minds are soonest drawn to pity) gave him
this kind reply.

Sir Knight, your earnest speeches has so much prevailed with me, that gladly
I would show you what kindness rests in me, but that I still fear to be
deceived: Therefore if hereafter I see you constant, make no doubt but I will
be as kind as you can wish, and yield you what recompense I can, in requital
of your good Will; Withal wishing you to think that my heart has yielded you
that favor, which yet never any had from me.

Angelica had not ended those words, but in comes Maximus puffing with
vexation, to whom Collimus had declared, that the Knight of Fame was some
disguised counterfeit, that came to seek Angelicas love (whereon his life
depended) and coming to him, seeing him in talk with his daughter, said.
Knight (quoth he) what makes thee thus bold, so far to presume above thy
desert, to intrude thy self into my daughters company, which thou know is
contrary to my decree. Then taking Angelica by the arm, he thrust her from
him, commanding Collimus (who was ready at hand) to commit her to safe custody:
and upon pain of death, not to suffer any, not so much as his Son Marcellus,
to come to her speech: by whose means Collimus had told him the knight of
Fame was brought into her company. Collimus having this charge, which was his
own seeking, immediately conveyed Angelica from their presence: Who
notwithstanding her Fathers presence and displeasure, turned back and gave the
knight of Fame a kind l^ke at her departure: Which he well noted, and therewith
conceived more joy, then he took grief at Maximus unkindness.

By this time Marcellus was come to his Father, who cast such a displeasant
countenance upon him, as that he well perceived he was someway incenst
against him: Wherewith the King in a great rage departed, not speaking a Word to
him. After he was gone, Marcellus coming to the Knight of Fame (whose heart was
nipt with grief) and noting his sad countenance, departed with him down into
the garden: Where being come, Marcellus said as follows: Dear Friend ((quoth.
he) for by other name I will never call you) be not disquieted with my Fathers
displeasure, who gives too much credit to untrue reports: and that causes
him both to be offended with any that speaks to my Sister, and also
suspicious of all that come into his own company, whereby he dishonors his
own name, lives a troublesome life, and also keeps her as it were in Prison,
which I am sure can breed no little the care in breast; Whose hard hap I hap
much pity, and would any way ease, if it lay in my power.

Most honorable Knight (quoth he) I am most heartely sorry, that my
ouer-boldnes has caused your fathers despleasure, and that divine Ladies
disquiet, which is more grievous unto me then death: Which it was my accursed
misfortune to procure, being drawn to that presumption by attractiue beauty:
Wishing that I had some way ended this my accursed life, before my approach in
this place, that thereby I might not have been so unfortunate, as to be a
means of her care, and your disquiet: For that I see the King is displeased
with you. As for that take no care (quoth. Marcellus) nor be so much grieved for
my Sister, for these troubles will be soon calmed: Which to effect, let me
alone. In the mean time, (whatsoever inward thoughts you conceive, yet
smoother your discontent) and show your self cheerful as heretofore you have
been: for I perceive that some of envy has incensed my Father, the truth
whereof I will find out. Marcellus having endured these speeches, left the
Knight of Fame walking in the garden, and presently without any show or sign
of discontent, went into the presence, where ^ee found the King in company of
Camillus, according to his woonted manner doing his reverence, and taking his
usual place. The King maruelling how he durst so boldly presume into his
presence, without reconcilement, thought that either want of duty had
procured the same, or else he did not perceive he was displeased with him: to
ease himself of which doubt, he said as follows.

Marcellus, I had thought your care would have been greater to regard my
good, then any man's else, considering you know the depth of my secrets: as
concerning Angelica, on whose Beauty my life does depend; and not so
negligently and disobediently, not only to suffer that strange Knight to
proffer Love to her, but also be a means to bring him into her sight, and
help him to her speech, wherein you have shown your self undutiful: Which
makes me rather to suspect you, as one ready to seek my life, then careful
to preserve the same.

My Lord and Father (replied Marcellus) I trust your Majesty do conceive no
such thought of me, Which have in no degree deserved the same: Much less ever
in thought disagreed in the least point of duty to your decree; Besides my
Lord, I do assuredly believe you are misinformed of the strange Knights
meaning: Whose intent is honorable, and from the least thought of Love to my
Sister: But there are some in credit with your Highness, who disquiet you too
much with their flatteries, and will rather rejoice to see all things fall out
according to their reports, then be any way sorry to see the same: whose
speeches and false informations, I trust shall not alter your good opinion of
my loyalty: Whose constant love, duty, and obedience, shall continue firm,
when their treacheries shall be revealed, and they found traitors: therefore I
beseech your Highness, both alter your conceived displeasure against me, and
the Knight of Fame, of whom so honorable report has been spread in most places:
For it will be accounted an Act of great discourtesie to use him unkindly.

Maximus hearing his Sons speeches, in accusation of them he most favored,
and in defense of the Knight of Fame, against whom he was heynouslie incenst,
was turned into such choler, that he gave him this rebuke. Dare thou both
enuiously accuse my Friends, and disloyallie plead for my enemy? Henceforth
presume no more into my sight, without my license: for I will rather esteem
thee as a privy enemy, then as my natural son. Which when he had said,
turning aside, Marcellus departed, maruelling who it should be that had
incensed the King against him, being so inwardly grieved in his mind, that he
thought to leave no means unassayed to learn the truth thereof.

Angelica before said, being conveyed by Collimus to fa^e custody, began to
conceive such sorrow for her Fathers displeasure taken aganst the Knight of
Fame: unto whom she began to bear an exceeding Love: Such effect had his
perswasiue speeches wrought in her gentle heart, that she entered into exceeding
sorrows, coniectururing diversely what disquiet that discontent might breed,
by reason of her Fathers jealous suspect already begun: And how the Knight
of Fame might be abused in that strange place, having no Friend to take his
part: Which thought struck a sudden pensiveness to her heart. Contrarily, she
thought that would be a means to try his loyalty, which somewhat would have
eased her heart, so that no other danger would have ensued thereon. At last
having no other means of comfort, (nor Friend to impart her mind unto) she
called Anna unto her, and willed her to learn how the Knight of Fame had
ouerpast her Fathers displeasure: but so discreetly, that none might perceive
the same: Who presently went about the business Angelica had enjoined her.
Thus will we leave them all in diverse cogitations.

CHAP. XVIII.
How the King of Lybia hearing that the Knight of Fame was in Natolia, by
Flauias false accusation, sent messengers to Maximus, to entreat him to put
him to death. And how Maximus threw him into the Lions den.

AFter that the Knight of Fame was departed front Lybia, and Venola had
knowledge thereof by Flauia, she continued many days in great sorrow, but
afterward by tract of time calming her grief, but no whit her affection, by
Flauiaes persuasions, who was privy to all her Actions: Turned her former good
Will that was grounded upon Virtue, to lust, and mad desire: That seeing she
could not by fair means win him to love her, she thought to leave no
means vnafsayed, either by force to compel him thereto, or else in some
measure to be revenged on him for his discourtesie. The mind being always
ready by every persuasion, to yield to work any means for to procure
desired content: even so casting about many devises with Flauia, one day
(finding fit opportunity when the King was in his dumpes) for Venolas
sickness) came unto him, and told him that the cause of his Daughters
sickness, was procured by an exceeding flight she had taken by the
discourteous usage of the Knight of Fame, who for that cause was lately fled
from the Court, which until that day she had concealed from her, neither
should she ever recover her self until she were in some hope to be revenged
of him.

The King willed her to declare the same unto him. Flauia then began as
follows. My Lord, this Knight presuming often into my Mistress presence, by
reason of the kindness she showed him, for working her relase in Brandemors
Castle, (which he well deserved) began oftentimes to make love to her, whom
she answered in good sort, being unwilling to make choice of any, but by your
appointment: but in the end, his suit grew to that importancy, that he would
have no denial, but coming into her Chamber, choosing his fittest opportunity,
when my Mistres was in her bed, and surprising her unawares, offered her
exceeding shame and villainy, but being by her striving and out-crie
disappointed of his full intent, he presently fled away.

The King hearing Flauias speeches, was exceedingly enraged with fury,
commanding his Knights to post every way, to learn where he made his abode.
This news being spread, at last came to a Knight of Natolia, who by occasion
was then in the Lybian Court, who presently came to the King, and told him that
he needed not to make inquiry for the Knight of Fame, for that he was at the
Golden Tower. The King hearing that news, was exceedingly glad thereof,
commanding his Knights to stay their journey, writing a Letter to Maximus to
this effect.

MOst mighty King, I salute you: requesting you to work revenge in my behalf
upon a traitor, who now remains with you, who has dishonored my Daughter:
he is called the Knight of Fame: assuming that name to color his wicked
practices, who no doubt will soon devise some mischief against your perso^n:
let him not escape your hands, but rather send him to me, that I may revenge
that monstrous injury he has done me, by his life: which only shall satisfy
me. Thus remembering my love to you, and desiring your secrecy, I cease.

Your brother of Libia.


Having written this letter, and sealed it with his signet, he presently sent
the same by certain of knights to the Golden Tower, who as effectually
dispatched their journey, as he had given them straight charge, and arriving at
the Golden Tower, delivered the Letter to Maximus, who having read the same,
and well considered the circumstance, which augmented his hatred and suspicion
already begun against the Knight of Fame, presently coming to the place
where he was in talk with Marcellus, he caused him to be apprehended, and
without any other judgment, caused him presentely to be cast into a den of
Lions, to be devoured.

The Knight of Fame was no sooner put into the den, but the Lions made an
exceeding roaring, that those without assuredly judged him devoured, and
himself expected nothing but that terrible and fearful death: but the Lions,
who by nature will not harm those of Royal blood, spared his life, and not so
much as offered to touch him, but were rather terrified with his presence. He
being glad of this happy escape, began to assure himself that he was sprung of
kingly race, which greatly comforted his heart, and added a perswasiue hope to
comfort himself withal, that by that occasion he should attain to Anglicaes
love, if he could work means for his releasement out of that place: most of
all he wondered why Maximus had offered him that outrage. In these and such like
cogitations he spent the rest of the day.

Marcellus seeing the knight whom he most dearly loved destroyed, without
judgment, equity, or cause, was so inwardly enraged, that he was in mind
oftentimes to work himself injury, and seek means of revenge, if he knew who
had been the causer thereof: and not knowing what to do, nor in whose company
to spend his time, he presently thought to go to Angelica, whom he thought
bare some good will to the knight of Fame, with her to bemoane his untimely
death: but coming to the place where she was, he would have entered therein, but
Collimus according to Maximus command, den^ him, and that the more obstinately,
for that he knew none favors the knight of Fame so much as he, wh^ he
mortally hated.

Marcellus being before sufficiently enraged, was now so much more vexed, that
he drew his dagger, and with a violent blow stabbed the same to Collimus
heart: and withal going to Angelica, he found her very sad, little thinking
of these mischances, who seeing him in that rage, which she soon perceived by
his behavior, she came unto him, (having seated himself down in a chair)
and desired to know the cause of his wrath.

O Sister (quoth he) this place is the harbor of cruelty, tyranny, and
dishonor, which in times past has been famous, and a receipt of honor, but
shortly will be hated and shunned, as odious and ominous, and all procured by
the foolish Divining of a wicked Harlot, that has filled my Fathers head with
such fancies, that he forgets himself, his Honor, and Kingly behavior,
and gives credit to none but flatterers and parasites, imprisoning his
children, murdering his friends and seeking the subversion of honor, and
honorable knights. Oh Angelica, what should I say, or to whom should I
complain? he has slain Virtue, he has destroyed Honor, he has murdered
my dear Friend, that kind and courteous knight: he has cast the unknown
(most honorable though unknown) Knight of Fame, into the Lions den: without
judgment, justice, right, or trial. Angelica hearing his words, was ready to
swound with grief, but that fear to discover her love, withheld her: but
being not able to refrain from tears, she withdrew her self aside to
conceal the same, which Marcellus espying caught her in his arms, and said.
Nay dear Sister, do not conceal your grief for his death from me, that love
you so much the better: and if you ever conceived any good liking of him, I
shall honor you for the same: for he was worthy to be beloved of the best
Lady in the world: for in him shined all points and parts of true knighthood
and honor. I cannot (quoth Angelica) deny, but that I liked ^d loved him too:
neither shall I ever do otherwise whilst I live, though he knew not so much:
for whose death, my heart shall never harbor quiet, nor never shall thought of
other love sink into my breast: for him had I vowed to love, and that vow will
I keep inviolable, whilst life does last.

Oh Angelica? (quoth Marcellus) had I known you had loved him so well, I would
have died with him, but I would have saved his life, which was so suddenly
acted and so unexpected, that before I could recover my senses from amazement,
he was past my reach. What cause had my Father think you, to seek his
destruction, but because he saw him in speech with you? Aye me (quoth Angelica)
was I the cause of his death? I will then go to him: with that such grief
oppressed her heart, that she fell down in his arms.

Marcellus called to her Maids, who presently came thronging about her,
maruelling at her sudden sickness: and especially Anna, who was privy to
her thoughts, and hearing Marcellus speeches, made great lamentation. This
news was soon come to the Queens hearing, who presently came running unto
the place, and having by her labor recovered her, entered into these speeches:
Why how now Angelica, what meanest thou to do thy self this wrong? What
mischance or sudden passion has caused this disquiet? Then turning to
Marcellus, Or can you tell Marcellus, (quoth she) for you were by? I know not
(quoth he) but I am sure we have all cause of little joy, when we that are
the Kings children, shall be imprisoned upon the flattering report of every
dissembling Sycophant. Why (quoth she) who has abused you? That did Colimus
(quoth he) and him have I rewarded. Besides, my Lord and Father has destroyed
that honorable strange knight, because I loved him, who never deserved the
least cause of such cruelty, but was always honorably esteemed in every
Kings Court, until it was his ill hap to arrive in this unfortunate place,
to end his life by Tyranny not by Justice. Take heed Marcellus, Scandalize not
your Fathers honor, which may bring you in danger: for that he has done
nothing but right, and with good consideration, for behold that Letter, and
thou shall soon see what a counterfeit that Knight of Fame was.

Marcellus having read this Letter, was at the first suddenly amazed thereat,
but yet notwithstanding, he said: upon my life this accusaticusation is most
false and untrue. Angelica taking the letter and re^ ding the same, was
exceedingly astonished thereat, to whom Marcellus said. Angelica believe it not,
for if you do, you shall too much wrong that honorable Knight, that is too
much abused already, who if he were living, would soon reprove these
accusations: but he good Knight is now dead, and past recalling, whose death
will bring more dishonor to the Natolians, then ever will be recovered. Why
(quoth the Queen) what makes thee Marcellus thus inconsiderate, by taking a
strangers part, to endanger thy own life, which know the Kings humor? Love
(quoth he) to that stranger, makes me bewail his untimely death, whom I
would that I had excused.

The Queen seeing Angelica somewhat well recovered, departed unto Maximus, who
by that time had knowledge of Collimus death, and was meditating how to
chastise Marcellus for that presumption: But the Queen upon her knees
entreated him to pardon him, alleging that Collimus had greatly abused him,
that with much ado the King was pacified.

Marcellus having somewhat comforted Angelica, in a heavy and sad estate,
departed to his chamber, and left her with her Damzell Anna, rather ready to
yield up the Ghoast, then otherwise likely to survive: and night being come,
the refusing meat, went to her bed, not to sleep, but to bewail the Knight of
Fames untimely death.

The knight of Fame all this time remained in the Lions den, carefully
devising which way to get out of that place tyring his senses, but finding no
means of release. One while accusing his hard fortune, and then Maximus for
his cruelty. Sometimes fearing to be famished in that place: and then
comforting himself with persuasions of impossible deliueries. Now dispairing
to be utterly exempt from the sweet sight of Angelica, whose absense and
restraint of liberty (procured as he thought by his boldness) pinched his
heart with extreme fear.

In this sort he continued so long, until he was ready to be starued, and
constrained to eat such unsavory food as was daily cast to the Lions.
Angelica likewise no whit mittigated her grief, but rather augmented the same:
being much comforted by Marcellus, whose mind was not yet satisfied with
sufficient consideration of these mischances, both he and Angelica continued
as it were in a further hope in their fancies of the Knight of Fames safty:
though when they began to comfort themselves with any persuasions, they were
quite past hope. Maximus likewise having considered with what severity he had
used the Knight, and that he had condemned him without any trial of the
accusation that had been used by his Knights, ever since his death, (began to
tell a remorse in his conscience of injustice) but by the settled opinion that
was stirred in his heart by those false Prophesies, he soon shook the same
off.

Camillus all this time, likewise noted what jealous suspicion the King heard
of him, and having heard the report why he kept his daughter so strongly
guarded, and of set purpose withheld her from his sigh^, and noting how
suddenly the Knight of Fame was made away, without any cause of offense given,
he began to fear himself, and b^ (...) means, durst not show any sign of
desire to see Angelica, ^st b^ (...) means he should seek some occasi^ of
quarrel with him, and ^se him like the stanger: within a while departed from
the Golden Tower, ^^^tending notwithstanding, either with force or faite
means, to attain her possession.

CHAP. XIX.
Of the Knight of Fames preservation. How he got out of the den, and departed
the Tower.

THe next day after Camillus departure, which Maximus perceived was with a
discontented mind, the keeper of the Lions den, came to make clean the
same, and used his wonted manner, which was to set open those places that were
clean, into which the Lions would soon enter, and having fast bolted the
doors, and being owner of the Lions, ertred into the den, where the knight
of Fame was, who suddenly caught hold on him, having before secertly shrouded
himself from his sight, and being careful to provide for his own safty,
snatched from his side a hanging Sword: the Keeper knowing him, maruelling to
see him alive, and exceedingly astonished at his sight, held up his hands for
mercy, to whom the Knight of Fame said. My freinde, I seek not thy life, but
mine own safety, being as thou see, preserved by Divine providence by the
Kings cruelty, by him unjustly cast into this place, without any cause of
offense: but wrongfully, as thou may perceive by my preservation: for if my
fact had deserved punishment, no doubt I could not have escaped the cruelty
of these executioners, having endured great danger of famishment. Now my
request unto thee is, that thou would but suffer me to depart from hence,
without descrying me, for I have no reason to trust to Maximus courtesy, and
having already endured this misery by his cruelty: which thou may well
do, without endangering thy self any kind of way, for there is none but does
assuredly think I am dead.

The Keeper hearing his speeches, and withal, seeing how admirably he was
preserved, and also fearing his own death, assured him by many vows and
protestations, not only do that which he had desire^, but also would most
faithfully execute what other thing soever he should command, to his uttermost
power. Will thou then (quoth he) do this for me? Give me the keys, and make
fast the door, so that thou can not go from me, and then call down thy
boy, and send him to Marcellus, to request him to come to thee, but in such
sort, that the boy may not see me, and also to do his message secretly: which
the Keeper told him, he would most willingly perform. Then directing the
Knight of Fame how to lock the door, that he could not escape, he called
down the boy, who presently came to him, whom he commanded to seek out
Marcellus secretly, and to desire him, that he would vouchsafe to come and
speak with him, about a matter of great importance. The boy having received
his message, immediately hasted to execute the same: and most fortunatly met him
in the outer Court, to whom he declared the cause of his coming. Marcellus
maruelling why the Keeper had sent for him, presently began to remember the
knight of Fame, with which his heart began to throb: but hasting down to the
den, the keeper commanded his boy to depart: and humbling himself to
Marcellus, told him that the knight of Fame was still living. Which said, he ran
in unto him (who had shrouded himself from his sight) and told him Marcellus
was come: then presently he came forth, whom Marcellus espying, with great
reioicing, caught him in his arms, and most lovingly embraced him, seeming to
be revived with joy, in respect of the care oppressed his mind before he had
knowledge of his safety. Many courteous greetings past on either side,
Marcellus desired the Keeper not to reveal this secret to any: for if it
should come te my Fathers hearing, it were impossible then to prevent his
rigor: and withal promised him, that if he would let him lodge in his house
but that night, he would reward him most bountifully: and withal promised him
to higher dignity, and to such place of account, as that he would have good
cause to rejoice, that ever the Knight of Fame came within his house. The
Keeper both drawn by his own good inclination, and also by the hope of reward
and preferrement, being but poor, promised his uttermost aid and assistance
to pleasure him, and withal, to perform his full desire, with such security
that none should conceive any suspicion thereof: with that they altogether
departed up into his Lodge, where the knight of Fame refreshed himself with
comfortable meats, being exceeding glad (as he had good cause) of this
success: and ^endring many thanks to Marcellus (who well deserved the same.)
Marcellus being yet somewhat troubled in his mind about the Letter the King of
Lybia had sent, and desirous to be satisfied of the truth therein, taking the
Knight of Fame aside, from the hearing of the keeper, said as follows.

Sir Knight, although I have shown you this favor and friendship, which my
fancy often persuaded me to refnse, yet urged by the good will I bear you,
and for other considerations which I will yet conceal from you, I could not
choose but rejoice at your safety, and work what means I can for your
preservation: yet there remains a grudging in my conscience against you,
until you assure me by your faithful oath, to satisfy me of the truth of my
doubt without fraud: for if that be true which is alleged against you by the
affirmation of a king, you deserve the punishment my Father inflicted upon you,
and rather to be generally hated, then beloved at all. Most honorable Knight
(quoth he) I know my self so clear from all such villainy, as that I swear
and protest by my life, by Heaven, and by all the good that ever I expect,
which I desire to turn to my destruction, it I tell you not the very truth.

Then (quoth Marcellus) the same day that the King my Father caused you to be
thrown into the Lions den, the king of Lybia sent hither certain of his
Knights, with a Letter, wherein he accused you to have most shamefully
dishonored his Daughter Venola, desiring my Father to dispatch you out of the
way: for your life and nothing else might appease his ire: which was the cause
of his cruelty.

My Lord (quoth the knight of Fame) upon mine honor, my former oath, and by
all other truth and fidelity, this accusation is most unjust, false, and
untrue: which if I may by your favor in whose hands my life now rests) have
liberty to approve, I will maintain the contrary, even in the gates of the
king of Lybia, and cause my accusers to confess the contrary: neither did I
ever seek love at that Ladies hands, by whose dishonorable means this false
accusation is raised against me.

Dear friend (quoth. Marcellus) you have said enough, and I rest assuredly
satisfied of your loialty. The knight of Fame was so inwardly vexed with this
accusation that he was half mad with grief, but chiefly, for that he thought
it was come to Angelicas hearing, and might be a means to cause her utterly
to forsake him: which appalled his senses, with extreme vexation, that he
stood like one transformed.

Marcellus perceiving his Discontent, desired him not to be grieved but to
ouerpasse the same, until he had means to prove the con trarie.

My Lord (replied he;) How can I choose but be sorry, when thereby I am
dishonored in every man's opinion; Which I account more dearer then my life?
Besides, with what impatiencie may I show my self before any Knight living,
but rather rid my hated self out of this miserable life, which is the next way
to salve this blemish. But if you will vouchsafe c^ hear the true report of
the miseries I have endured ever since my birth, you would say that I am the
only Map of sorrow, and borne to perpetual calamity. I desire nothing more
(quoth Marcellus;) With that he rehearsed to him all that he could, of his
bringing up in the Island of Rocks, his departure* from thence, and
Shipwreck at Sea: How he was entertained by Duke Amasenus in Thrace, and the
treachery that was intended against him there, by Corus and Argalus; then of
his success in the Kings Court of Thrace, and the occasion why he departed
from thence to the Forest of Arde: and how there he met the Prince of
Bohemia, and released Venola: Then how Venola songht his Love: and how she gave
him (by subtlety) a somniferous Potion, to withhold his departure with
Parismus, which he had purposed: and how afterward perceiuino her intent,
departed from the^e.

Withal, he declared the manner of the Uision that appeared unto him in
Thrace, and how he was thereby enjoined to seek out the fair ^adie that had
appeared unto him, and sue for her Love, which was the cause that he both
refused Phylenas marriage, and Venolaes proffer of kindness: and also he
declared how he first arrived in that Country: and met Angelica, which was the
very same Lady that appeared unto him in the vision; and also told him, that he
was likewise enjoined to seek out his Parents, which the vision told him were
of great birth. This (quoth he) is the true discourse of my forepassed life,
which I never yet manifested to any but your self, whose favor has far
surmounted my desert, into whose hands I commit my self to be disposed of:
desiring you not to conceive amiss of me, for that false accusation being
most untrue.

Marcellus again embracing him in his arms, desired him likewise, not to
think that he did any way conceive the least evil opinion of him, but that
he did esteem of him, as the dearest friend he had in the World, and that he
did both love and honor him as himself, and would never forsake him whilst
he lived, but continue his faithful friend for ever. Having in this sort made
a new league of amity, Marcellus left the Knight of Fame to his private
meditations, promising to return to him very shortly, going directly to
Angelica, whom he found continuing her woonted sadness: For she could by no
means be comforted, but still augmented her Love, by remembering the Knight of
Fames person, to whom she bare such entire affections, that she resolved never
to Love any other Knight, but determined to spend the whole date of her life
in single estate.

Marcellus sudden Approach brake off her silent pensiveness, by his
countenance showing a heart replenisht with joy, which he uttered in this
sort. Angelica (quoth. he) cast off this sad countenance, for I bring you news
of more comfort: for the Knight of Fame is living, and preserved by admirable
means. Oh Brother (quoth she) this news cannot be true, which will nip my
heart with grief to hear of, and be disappointed therein. Sister (quoth. he) it
is so, neither marvel thereat, for his innocence in the fact laid to his
charge, has I think caused the Gods to pity him: besides, thereby you may be
assured, he is borne of royal blood, who is now in the Keepers house in
safety, with whom I have been these two hours: Now cast off these discontents
and clouds of care, for there is no further cause of disquiet for his supposed
death.

Angelica then verily believing his words, said: Good brother tell me how he
does, for whose safety I rejoice? For of all the Knights that ever I beheld,
I never liked nor loved any so well: desiring you withal, to keep my counsel,
(having bewrayed my secrets to none else) and not let him know so much as I
have told you. Then should both you and I do him wrong (quoth. he) for he has
well deserved love, and especially at your hands: to whom by his own report,
he has long ago dedicated himself, and not only of his own inclination, but
of a high command: for the truth of which, he has upon trust of my secrecy,
revealed unto me, which you shall likewise hear: then he discoursed the whole
truth, even as the Knight of Fame had before done: which when she heard, she
said: What a discourteous Lady is that Venola, to seek the overthrow of so
Worthy a Knight? and how may I esteem him, that before he knew me, was so
constant in his Love, without hope of my favor, and refused the proffred love
of two such Ladies for my sake; besides the peril he has endured in my
search: and peradventure is sprung of greater birth then my self. And now also
by my Parents doom was put in that hazard of his life. Good Brother be you
careful^ of his good, and whatsoever you shall counsel me too, I will do: If
my Father should know of his safety, then were there no means for him to escape
death: For such a hard conceit of suspect does possess his mind, that he
hates all those that bear me any show of good Will.

Well (quoth Marcellus) rest you contented, and still continue your louetowards
him, to increase and not diminish the same, who is by destiny alloted to be
your husband: the care of whose welfare let be my charge: for I so much love
and esteem him, both for his own and your sake, that I will leave no means
unassayed, whereby to do you good: which said, he again departed to the
Knight of Fame. By this time the dark night approached, and Marcellus and the
knight of Fame were devising what means to use for his safety, and to procure
the desired content Angelica expected, who before had given herconsent to (...)
ruled by her Brother: that by the assurance he had of her, he put the knight
of Fame in assured comfort of her love, by relating in some sort (the contents
of Angelicas conference before had with him, which affected his heart with
greater joy, the^ ever before he had endured grief: that his escape from death
did not comfort his heart so much as this happy news. At last Marcellus said:
Noble knight you see how strictly my father gardeth Angelica, that there is no
means lef^t to ease your grief or her care by tarrying here: neither can you
without great hazard of your life, remain within the circuit of this Tower:
for that my Father suspecteth every one, yea his own children, whereby we are
tired with those troubles, and would willingly work any means to ease our
selves, and especially Angelica has been mewed up so closely, that she I am
sure would undertake any thing to enjoy her liberty, were it in never so poor
estate, wherein in my opinion is many thousand of sweet contents to be found,
rather then in this troublesome Pomp, which is repleat with infinite cares.

Therefore this is my censure, that you shall this night (as I will direct you)
depart from hence, and go to Saint Austins Chapel, not far hence, and there
stay for me, until to morrow morning, where remains an old religious
Priest, named Iabine, who if you say you come from me, will assuredly give you
entertainment: which when you have done, I will so work with my Sister
Angelica, that he shall condescend by such means as I will work for her
secret escape, to come to you: by which I hope I shall end the doubts that
possess my Fathers mind, rid their Country of the scandal it is likely to
run into: and work both mine own, yours, and Angelicaes content: for so
dearly do I love her, that had I many lives to loose, I would hazard them all
to work her releasement: For were she once married, then should the date of
the foolish Prophecy have an end. The Knight of Fame hearing his speeches,
which only tended to work the content, he above all things in the World
sought, could not well contain himself from expressing immeasurable joy, but
yielding many humble and hearty thanks to Marcellus, both commended his devise,
and also entreated him to go forward with the same.

Then Marcellus called the Keeper, asking his counsel, if he knew any way
whereby the Knight of Fame might getont of the Castle promising him a good
reward: and withal, pulling from his neck a Chain of gold, gave him the
same. The Keeper being enticed with this reward, (Gold having that force, to
make thimgs impossible come to effect) presently told them he had a Devise
that might go for Current, if the Knight would undertake the same. I have my
Lord (quoth he) a Uessell of great largeness, which sometimes sorted for other
uses, which if we could devise to let down into the Lake, he might easily in
that get over unto the other side: Which devise Marcellus and the Knight of
Fame both liked. And about Midnight, when all things were at rest, they put the
same in practice, and by a Rope let the Uessell down: Which swamme most
currantly.

Then fastening a Rope about the Knight of Fames middle, and after that (With
many fair promises and protestations of perpetual Friendship) they had taken
their leaves, the Keeper and Marcellus let him down: Who was so heavy, by
reason of the weight of his own body, and his Armor, that they had much adoo
from letting him fall, and being in the Uessell, was like to sink in the same.
But with much adoo (and great danger of Drowning) by reason of the tottering
and vnsted fastnes of the Uessell, which with every little Weight more on one
side then on the other, was ready to ouerturne, he got on to the Bancke, which
was so steep upwards, that he had much adoo to clime up the saine, but was
oftentimes ready to fall down backwardes into the Lake under him, which was
of an exceeding great and huge depth: but having happily escaped both those
dangers, he departed toward Saint Augustins chapel, according to such
dyrections Marcellus had given him to find the same. Marcellus and the Keeper
drew up the Uessell, and betook themselves to their rest.

The Knight of Fame had not well remembered Marcellus speeches, and therefore
having gone some half mile from the Golden Tower, fearing to wander out of the
way, he took up his lodging under a Cipresse Tree, spending the whole Night in
manifold meditations, of the success of his business: Being oftentimes in
great doubt, and dispairing of never seeing Angelica again, drawn to that
fear by reason of Maximus Jealousy, and the diligent Watch he had set in
every corner of the said Tower, but especially at the entrance: Where none went
out and in, but the Gardiants searched them, that his mind was sometimes
wrackt with despair* and sometimes animated to comfort by the assured trust he
had in Marcellus. The Night being by him in this sort spent, in the Morning
he betook himself again to his Journey, and with ease found out Saint
Austins chapel: and knocking at the chapel door, it was iong before any
came, but at last he beheld old Iabin standing behind him; Who had been
abroad very early, and then returned, whom the Knight of Fame most kindly
saluted. Iabin maruelling to see one in Armor, demanded what he would have?

Right reverend Father (quoth he,) I am sent hither unto you by Marcellus;
Whose request is that you would* for his sake vouchsafe my secret abode with
you until his coming, which will be this day, if other contrary occasion hinder
him not. Iabin noting his comely proportion, and willing to do any thing for
Marcellus sake, brought him into his Cell, adjoining to his chapel, and
welcomed him so kindly as he could.

CHAP. XX.
How Marcellus entending to carry Angelica to Saint Austines Chapel, was
prevented by Camillus. And how the Knight of Fame departed to seek his Parents.

MArcellus early in the Morning, came to Angelica, who still continued pensive,
to whom he declared what had passed betwixt him and the Knight of Fame, and
withal, of the promise he had made him, to bring her to Saint Austins
Chapel: Which when Angelica hearing, she said: Brother, How can this be
effected, when you see so many impossibilities to hinder our intent, that we
shall but spend much labor to little effect, and also rather bring my Fathers
heavy displeasure against us, then reap any comfort? Whose cruelty you see is
such, that he will, if he should find out our drifte, punish us with
severity: Besides, if it should come to that pass: What excuse could you
find to pacify his ire? Therefore I think it best, that we never hazard our
selves, but rather be contented with our quiet estate, least a worse mischaunce
light upon us thereby.

Sister (quoth Marcellus) your counsel is good, but yet hear what I shall
say: The life you lead is but miserable, being kept like a Prisoner; Whereas,
if you could but win this liberty, you should enjoy your fill of hearts
content, and be a means to rid my Father and us all from the doubts we may now
endure. Besides, if you loved that worthy Knight; Whose constancy to you-wards
is without compare, you would for his fake refuse no peril. Why brother (quoth.
she) what need you make any such doubt when I have said sufficient already,
unless you think me to dissemble? For such is my love and good Will, that I
will more willingly undertake any means to attain his company, then he can
desire: not drawn by your persuasion, but of my own voluntary will: which have
made some doubt of this attempt, because I am fearful of your ill, and
careful of your good: but whatsoever you shall counsel me unto, I will
execute. Which said, they began to study and consult how to bring their
business about: but were so confounded in their thoughts, that they thought it
altogether impossible.

Now Maximus being rid of Camillus company, and assured of the Knight of
Fames death, gave his mind to more quiet, then during the time of their being
there he had done: and being weary with care, thought to recreate himself by
some exercise: therefore he appointed the very same day to ride on hunting:
and to that intent he was early up, sending for Angelica to go with the
Queen, even at that instant when she was devising with Marcellus: which
opportunity fell out most conveniently to further their intent, which
Marcellus told her he would determine of.

Angelica immediately went down with the messenger: and with the King and
Queen, Marcellus and diverse others departed out of the tower. Marcellus all
that day kept diligent company with Angelica, until the king being earnest in
pursuit of the game strayed from them: the Queen likewise was absent, and
most of Angelicas gardiants, saving some six, being indeed such as Marcellus
had before made privy to his intent, who had firmly protested to keep his
counsel: which opportunity Marcellus took, and presently conveyed Angelica
toward Saint Austins Chapel: being without ye Park, when they thought
themselves far enough from the King, they were unawares set upon by a company
of strange knights, who offered by force to carry away Angelica.

Marcellus being somewhat astonished thereat, drew his sword, and being before
well provided, withstood them. Angelicas gardyants did the like: that on a
sudden there began a cruel combat betwixt them, until Marcellus was
grievously wounded, one of his company slain, and the rest in as great danger
as might be: but being a knight of exceeding courage, he defended himself most
valiantly. So long continued the fight, that in the mean time, some of the
kings company, having the charge of Angelica, mist her, which he soon
declared to the king, who commanded his knights to post every way by several
troops: himself and the Queen well guarded, took the readiest way out of
the Park: which was the same way Marcellus and Angelica had taken, and
hasting, came to the place where they were, in the hottest of their skyrmish.

The strange knights espying the King, presently fled away, with all
possible speed, whom many of the Natolians pursued so far, until they might
descrie a band of Soldiers: wherewith they returned with all expedition
possible, and certified the King thereof, who presently hasted to the Golden
Tower, with the Queen, Marcellus, and Angelica in his company: and by reason
of the strangers he saw in fight with Marcellus, he had not the least
suspicion of Angelicaes intended flight: and maruailing what that Army should
mean, he sent out spies to view of what force they were, who having done in
all points accordingly, they went and certified him that they were ten
thousand Soldiers, but they could not discern under whose conduct.

Maximus fearing the worst, presently sent letters to the Nobles of his Land,
with all expedition to muster up their forces, and to convey them to the Golden
Tower: and also caused most diligent watch and ward to be kept.

Marcellus being most grievously Wounded, was like wise with all cure tended by
the Kings Physicians, to whom Angelica repaired: and being with him alone, she
said as follows.

What misery awayteth my hard Desteny, that am thus disastredly deteyned from
my wished content? My evil presaging mind, did foretell this misfortune,
which has thus frustrated our desire, and which is more miserable, brought you
to this dangerous estate: but most of all withhold me from the fight of my
beloved, and causes him both to augment his cares, and suspect our loyalty.
What will he think when he sees no performance of that which was promised,
but still stays for our coming, and yet be frustrated? For the knowledge of
our mischance, can by no means come to his hearing. Would to God that I had
ended my accursed life, by the hands of those enemies, rather then to have
suruiued to endure this extreme care. No hard fortune can be compared to that
I endure, no care comparable to my grief.

First, to see you thus grievously Wounded: Next to be disappointed of our
desire: and lastly, to frustrate the Knight of Fame of his expectation. What
shall we now do? How shall we recure this mishap? Or what means is there
left, that may add the least comfort to our hearts in this extremity? In
steed of the content I expected by enjoying his presence, I am returned to my
woonted bondage: and see my Friends almost murdered and environed with foes.
Peace, peace, (quoth. Marcellus) good Angelica, cease these complaints, and in
this extremity, imitate the old Phrase: Make a virtue of necessity, and with
patience give attendance for better success: For now in these perplexities,
there is small hope of present amendment: For that Worthy knight no doubt is of
such Wisdom and prudent government, that he will judge the best of our
estate, and carefully provide for his own safety. With that Angelica burst
forth into abundante of tears, saying. Aye me poor Wretch, I shall never
then see him again. With that she departed, wringing her hands, and making
great lamentation, so that Marcellus seeing her sorrow, was ready to work his
own decay by his vexation.

Now those Bands of Soldiers belonging to Camillus, who presently after his
departure from the Castle of the Golden Tower, enduring many restless
Passions, for the want of Angelicaes presence, with whom he was full greatly
in Love: with all speed mustered up those forces, and brought them by shipping
toward the Tower, with intent to besiege the same, and suddenly to surprise
Maximus unawares, and so to get the possession of Angelica: and coming toward
the Golden Tower with a few in his company, whilst the rest marched after him,
he met Marcellus and Angelica, and knowing them, thought without any more
trouble to take her away, but was disappointed as is declared.

The knight of Fame being with old Iabine, spent much part of the day in
conference with him, maruelling that he heard not from Marcellus: but when it
was dark night, his mind was rackt with exceeding care and vexation, and
being without any hope of his coming, he was as much grieved how to satisfy
Iabine, whom he thought would now suspect him of falsehood: and might suppose
he came not from Marcellus. Therefore he said as follows.

Father, I marvel that I have not heard from Marcellus, according to his
promise, which makes me think that some cross mischance has hindered him,
that may breed in you some misconceit of me, that have in his name come unto
you, which if you do, you shall much injury me: for it was he that sent me
hither, as I could assure you by diverse probable reasons.

Sir knight (quoth he) I pray be not troubled with any thought, for you are
welcome to me, though Marcellus had not sent you, which I make no doubt of, but
so well do I love him, as that whatsoever comes in his name, shall by the
strickt observance I bear to that name, command me any service.

Afterward they went to their repast, with such sparing diet as the Priest
used, and after Supper to bed: where the Knight of Fame could take no rest at
all, but yet lay very quietly, because he was loath to trouble his Host: with
which restraint of liberty of speech, and other passions that oppressed his
senses, he endured that tedious night in great torment, which seemed longer
then many nights would have done, if he might have had liberty to utter his
lamentations, which boiled in his breast like the violence of a mighty flame
pend within a small compass.

Early the next morning, Iabine went forth for to provide food, and left the
knight of Fame alone, who then uttered many complaints, but at last finding
fault with himself for urging that effeminate kind of lamentation, he striving
to ouermaster his passions, which the more he labored to assuage, the more
they increased.

In this s^rt he continued all that day and the next, and many days after,
still being in good hope of Marcellus approach: but when he saw so long time
past, and he could hear no news from him, he began to accuse him of
dicourt^e and di^yaltie, for breaking his promise: and withal, grew into a
settled persuasion, that both he and Angelica had quite forsaken him: which
added grief to grief, and more care and vexation to his mind, not knowing
what to do, nor which way to shape his course: that arming himself one day,
he mounted himself, and wandered in a melancholy study toward the golden
Tower, and by chance met with two of Maximus knights, who were exceedingly
astonished at his sight, taking him to be a ghost: but he drawing nigh to them,
they began to fly, which he perceiving, thought to stay the one of them, to
have some further speech with him, that charging his lance at him, and hitting
him full, ouerthrewe him to the ground: the other being therewith exceedingly
trrified fled. The Knight to Fame alighting, coming to him that he had
overthrown, thus said.

Knight, thou need not to have fled from me, for I intended thee no harm,
but was desirous to know some news of thee, which if thou will tell me, I
will let thee depart: otherwise thou shall never escape my hands. The knight
maruelling to hear him speak, whom he thought had been a ghost, made this
reply. Pardon me good sir, for I took you to be another then I see you are,
but if I may know what you will command me I will do it. (Quoth he) tell me
how fares Marcellus? Sir (quoth he, at this instant helyeth very weak, by
reason of many grievous wounds he received not long since: where he declared
the whole truth of that which had happened by Maximus means, since which time
(quoth he) the King has set such secret watch about the Tower, that none
goes in nor out without his priuitie.

The Knight of Fame having heard his speeches, departed back to Iabine, to
whom he declared the truth of all that he had heard, being very sorry for
Marcellus hurt, and well waying every circumstance of that report, thought that
when Marcellus was gotten with Angelica out of the Park so slightly attended,
it was to come to him: which added some comfort to his heart, being fully
assured thereby, that Angelica had not forsaken him.

By this time the Natolian that escaped from the knight of Fame, was come to
the Golden Tower, and coming before the King, ^elde him that he had met the
Knight of Fame: whereat he began to laugh: but presently came the other, who
justified the same words: alleging that it was the knight of Fame, and that
he had both talked with him, and knew him, affirming the same most constantly.
Maximus woondring thereat, was almost astonished at their wor^s, that he
determined to send all his knights to search for him, and the occasion now most
fitly served: for the Nobles had according to his command, gathered a number
of forces together, which Camillus seeing, being unprovided to withstand such
force, but coming for another intent, immediately returned with his soldiers
toward his country, and Maximus now seeing the coast clear of enemies,
presently sent forth Knights every way to find the Knight of Fame.

Thus news was soon come to Marcellus and Angelicas hearing, which filled
their hearts with exceeding care and fear, least he should be apprehended:
this bredde new sorrows in their troubled thoughts, but principally in
Angelicas, whose lone was grown to such perfection, that it was impossible to
remove the same: that getting to her chamber, she entered into many heavy
complaints, able to have rent the stoniest hearts of the cruellest tyrants: whom
Anna comforted by all means she could devise: to whom Angelica said; Oh Anna
(quoth she) little do thou know the torments my heart does endure, for were
thou so much inthralled as I am, and to so worthy a knight as he is, thou
might then have some insight into my sorrows, but being ignorant therein,
how can thou give me counsel: have I not cause to sorrow; nay rather to
run made with sorrow, to see the danger that worthy Knight is now in, having
so lately escaped a most miserable death, by my Fathers censure (...) without
cause, who not contented there with, nor satisfied in his mind, has now sent
out many Knights to search for him: who (...) they find him, will bring him
back, or by violence destroy him, whose death shall be the end of my life: for
I have vowed, if my Father seek his mine he shall also see my death, for I
will not live one hou^ after him: in which complaints we still continued
without intermission.

It fortuned most happily, that Iabin was gone forth (...) S. Austines
Chapel, and left the knight of Fame in his Cell, meeting with many of the
Natolian knights, who demanded if he saw not such (...) describing well as they
could) the knight of Fame, whom he answered al after one sort that he had not
seen any such: but maruelling at their earnest inquiry, he demanded what that
knight might be: one of them told him, that he was called the Knight of
Fame, who lately arrived in that Country, and was kindly entertained by
Maximus, but especially of Marcellus, and having in some sort offended the
King, was by him afterward thrown into the Lions den, by reason of a letter
the King of Libia sent, wherein he accused him to have dishonored Venola his
only daughter, whom that day was seen and spoken withal. Iabine hearing his
speeches wondered thereat: yet notwithstanding was careful lest the knight of
Fame should be found abroad, whom he now began greatly to esteem, both
that he deemed him to be sprung of royal (...), and also for that Marcellus
made estimation of him, who he thought knew him clear of those accusations, or
else he would not have favored him so much: that with all speed he hasted to
his Cell, where being entered he found the Knight of Fame very sad, and fast
bolting the Chapel door, he came to him, saying. Worthy knight, I am glad
that I have found you here, for were you abroad, there are such a number of
Knights in search of you, that it were impossible to escape them. For me (quoth.
he) I think you are deceived. Yea (quoth. he) if you are called the Knight of
Fame, and lately escaped out of the Lions den. With that his color changed.
Nay (quoth, Iabin) fear not, you shall be here as safe as your heart can wish, for
this place is no way suspected, therefore think your self secure: then Iabin
declared unto him all that had happened, and what he had heard. Whereupon the
Knight of Fame likewise finding him faithful and secret, declared unto him the
whole discourse of his Travels, only leaving out the vision which appeared to
him in Thrace; Asking his counsel what to do, and entering into many sad
discourses, how he was still crossed in his expectation: and withal, told him
that he knew not which way to travel in search of his Parents, which if he
could attain, then he would not doubt but to revenge the injurious wrongs done
him. Sir Knight (quoth. Iahin) I think it best that you travel in search of them,
and that presently: in the mean time these troubles by forgetfulness will be well
ouer-blowne, and then you may have the better opportunity to go forwards with any
intent you shall afterward put in practice: for if you stay here, you may
unfortunately be descryed, or the Kings jealousy is such, that he will leaus
no means unattempted to work your death.

Father (quoth he) your counsel is good, which I will put in practice, not
voluntarily, but forced thereto in regard of mine own preservation: requesting
this one favor at your hands, that you would by some means remember my
humble duty to that honorable knight Marcellus: and tell him that it shall
not be long ere I return: desiring him in the mean time (according to his
former courtesy, which has bin extended farrebeyond my desert) to remain my
friend, and remember me to Angelica. I will (quoth Iabine) fulfill your request
in every respect. But first quoth he) I think most convenient you change your
armor, for that in that you are easily known: and I have one within, that is
every way of as good proof. The Knight of Fame liked his device exceedingly
well, and armed himself in that armor, which was very rich and costly,
gilded all over with gold and Amell, without any devise to be known by: and
in that armor the next night he departed, taking his leave of old Iabine,
with many courtesies, being most unwilling to leave his company: and parting
with a heavy heart, for that he went to undertake a new travel, which might
detain him long from returning to Angelica: and by good fortune, that night
he gat out of the country, and past the search of the Natolians, whom he did
not care to meet withal, but that he would not thereby hinder the speed of
his journey.

CHAP. XXI.
How the Knight of Fame arrived in the county of Bohemia, and redeemed Violetta
from Archas. How Archas was put to death. How the knight of Fame came to the
knowledge of his Parents, and after that, departed again toward Natolia.

AFter that the Knight of Fame was past the bounds of Natolia, he arrived in
an exceeding great plain, where he saw many ready paths, but knew not
which of them to take: at last a sudden thought and remembrannce of Parismus
entered his fancy, which so fully possessed his mind, that the thought and
rembembrance of Parismus entered his fancy, which so fully possessed his mind,
that the thought thereof, would by no means remove, which was so effectually
wrought in him by a natural effect, for there were his Parents, and no where
else, which caused nature it self, to pity his restless Passions, and no
longer to procrastinate his felicity, that he fully and resolutelie
determined to travel thither.

Whither afterward with long travel he attained, having great desire to see
Parismus again, to whom his heart had vowed everlasting friendship. And now
drawing nigh the Court, in the afternoon when the sun had with his scorching
beams made the season hot, he heard a grievous complaint, as it seemed to
his hearing, of some distressed lady, which made him stay to listen which way
that cry came, and by the voice, drawing nigh unto the place, he espied under
the shadow of a heap of Elmes, a knight in Armor, and a Lady at his feet,
who were the same that made that moan. The knight of Fame coming near them,
they both espied him, to the Ladies comfort: but the Knight presently took
up his shield, and addressed himself for his defense.

The Knight of Fame well noting the Ladies countenance, remembered that he had
seen her, but he could not remember where, which caused him the more
willingly to help her: being otherwise of his own virtuous inclination,
ready to succor any distressed Lady: that coming to her, demanded her cause
of sorrow: but she being ready to make him answer, and holding up her hands
to crave his pity, ye other knight setting his sword against her breast,
vowing, that if the spoke one word, he would thrust the same through her body:
which the Knight of Fame seeing, thinking he went about to stay her, with his
sword drawn, rusht violently against him, and overthrew him: but giving him
leave to recover his feet, he said: Traitorous villain, why offerest thou
this Lady such discourtesie, being ashamed she should declare thy treachery:
which mauger thy heart, I will know before we two part: with that he lent him
such a blow, that he made him stagger: the Knight thought himself now in worse
case then ever he had been: but notwithstanding, he resisted the knight of
Fame most courageously for a space, but he being the most gallantest Knight in
the world, soon brought him in great danger of his life: which when the
knight saw and felt, he stayed himself, and said; Knight, before the combat
continue any longer, let me know your name? I will not show thee that favor
(quoth the knight of Fame) but wish thee yield thy self: neither will I show
thee that favor (quoth he) with that he began the combat again, being scarce
able to lift up his sword, by reason of his faintenesse by effusion of blood,
intending to end his life: which the Knight of Fame perceiving, clasped him in
his arms, and with violence wrung his sword out of his hands, and by force
made him yield, having (...) weapon to offend himself nor his adversary.

The Lady seeing her self thus fortunately delivered, coming to the knight
of Fame, desired him to pity her estate, and not to forsake her until she
were come to the Bohemian court. With that, the knight of Fame was exceedingly
glad, saying Lady, I will not forsake you, but see you there in safety, for
thither am I bound. But I pray you (quoth he) let me know your name, for that I
have I am sure seen you about the Forest of Adre? Violetta with that was
drawn into a great admiration what he should be, at last she said: my name
is Violetta, that am ordained to perpetual misery, being indeed by the
treachery of a disloyal knight named Archas, driven to wander thitherwards.

The knight of Fame then immediately remembering her, but being unwilling to
discover himself, questio^ed no more with her, but only asked her what that
knight was: Sir knight (quoth she) I know him not, nor why he has offered me
this outrage. Which said, the knight of Fame forced him to go with them, and so
they departed toward the court, where very soon they arrived. Now it happened,
that Parismus at that very instant was in the court, who espying Violetta
accompanied by two knights, the one of them being grievously wounded and as it
were by his countenaunde, and manner of forced coming, seeming captive to the
other, and not knowing of any misaduenture that had befallen her, wondered
thereat: and coming to her, not well knowing in what sort to salute those
Knights, being ignorant of the cause of their coming, he demanded where she
had bin? My Lord (quoth she) this knight, meaning the knight of Fame, has
preserved me from the dishonor of this most discourteous knight, intended
against me, as I will declare unto you presently. With that Parismus most
kindly embraced the knight of Fame, departing altogether into the presence,
where was the king and Queen, Pollipus, Laurana, and many others. Pollipus
seeing Violetta amongst those strange knights, marvelled thereat, but she
coming before the king upon her knees, desired instice against the wounded
knight: the king told her that she should have justice. Violetta then said, as
follows. Most mighty king, I beseech you regard my complaint: revenge the
monstrous wrong don me by this most wicked and abominable homicide, who has
offered monstrous outrage: for this afternoon, attended by my damozell, I went
forth of the court into the grove adjoining to the garden, to recreate my self
in the cooly shade: where I had not long stayed, but this discurteous Uillaine
surprised me, and caught hold of my damzel, who made great exclamation, fearing
my harm, whom he bound both hand and foot: threatening if she made any noise
to murder her. Which done, he took me by violence, and halling and pulling me
most rudely and discourteously, would have conveyed me I know not whither,
until this valiant Knight by good fortune, hearing my complaints, redeemed me
from his tyranny. The King hearing her speeches, commanded the knight to
discover himsefe, but he being exceedingly ashamed, and loath to be known,
refused the same: but at last, by some of the Bohemian Knighs was unarmed, when
presently Violetta knew him, wherewith she gave an exceeding start, as if she
had been affrighted at his sight. Parismus and Pollipus likewise knew him,
certifying the King, that it was Archas, that had before offered the like
villainy to Violletta, which the King well remembered.

Then he said: Cruel tyrant, what excuse can thou invent to shelter this
villainy: what can thou allege in thy defense, but that thou ought to
suffer the most reproachful death that can be invented; but this censure will I
give of thee, not to favor thee, but to deal justly with that Knight, whose
Prisoner thou art, and therefore, as he by right has conquered thee, so we
will that he shall be thy judge.

The Knight of Fame had all this while diligently viewed Lauranaes beauty, her
countenance, and every part of her behavior, that he took great delight in
viewing her, but hearing the kings speech, he unarmed his head: whom Parismus
soon knew, and most lovingly embraced: likewise Pollipus and Violetta knowing
him, saluted him with many courtesies: when presently Parismus declared unto
his father, that it was the famous knight that was called the Lnight of Fame.

The King hearing that it was he, of whom he had heard so many honorable
reports, rose from his kingly seat, and embraced him most lovingly: and every
one in general, seemed to be most exceedingly delighted with his presence.

Laurana beholding his countenance, felt an exceeding throbbing suddenly
possess her heart: withal, such a violent blushing flasht in her face, that
she wondered whence such sudden motions should proceed, and was constrained to
turn aside, least any should perceive her changing countenance, and withdraue
himself to a Window. This alteration being wrought in her by a natural
instinct, which she was altogether ignorant of.

The Knight of Fame not unmindful to satisfy Violettaes wrong, by some
revenge against Archas, most humbly thankt the King for honoring him so much,
by giving him authority to give his Doom: but (quoth. he) I most humbly entreat
your Highness to pardon me, and desire your Wisdom, to whom he has been
offensive, to use him as you please: For it were great presumption for me in
this strange place to censure of him in your Majesty's presence.

Then the King called Archas, commanding him to declare what moved him to
commit that outrage to Violetta? but he assuring himself of no less then
death, would make no answer: Whereupon the King commanding him to be had to
Prison, appointed that the next day he should loose his head: Which was
accordingly performed: Who might peradventure have been pardoned, but that his
own conscience accused him more then those whom he had offended, and so
according to his own folly which had brought him to commit all those Wicked
acts, even so he was his own Judge: For that his guilty conscience would not
suffer him to ask pardon. After this judgment given, every man's mind was in
quiet, having sufficiently scanned the circumstance of Violettaes misfortune.

The Knight of Fame was Royally entertained, and honorably feasted by the
King of Bohemia, but especially Parismus and Laurana, used him with exceeding
kindness, being for that night driven to part from him without any
conference. But Laurana was so exceedingly troubled with his remembrance, that
she could scarce take any rest at all that Night, for thinking on him, not
knowing what should move her to such unwonted alteration: that in the
morning, when Parismus and she were in some conference about the Knight of
Fame; she said: My Lord, I know not what should move me to think any such
thought, but I am persuaded, that his arrival will bring us either some
unexpected joy or sudden sorrow: For since I first saw him, my heart has
never been quiet: neither can I, though I strive to the contrary, once put his
remembrance out of my mind: Which has so fully possessed my fancy, that I
could take no rest this night.

Myself (quoth. Parismus) have felt the selfsame Passion, not only now, but
also at my first meeting with him in the Forest of Arde: Which makes me
partly of the self same opinion with you, and also desirous to know of whence
he is. In this and such like communication they continued some time, till
Parismus left her, and went to the Knight of Fame, who was already in company
of Pollipus; Whom Parismus most kindly used, and afterward being at a most
Royal Feast, which was prepared only for his more honorable Welcome: After
dinner, being requested by Parismus (who was desirous to know of whence he was)
there being the King and Queen, Parismus, Laurana, Pollipus, and Violetta, and
diverse others, he began to declare the whole discourse of his trauells to
them in this sort. If I should declare my Name and Birth (quoth. he) I know not
how to begin: For that I my self am ignorant thereof: but so much as I can
remember, I will hide no part from you. I was brought up in a country in
Tartaria, called the Island of Rocks, my Parents, for any thing I know, being
poor; or whether they were or no, I know not, but when I was of some
remembrance, either my Mother that brought me up, or rather my Nurse (for she
would not suffer me to call her mother) departed from her habitation, I know
not with what intent: but by the way a Lion flue her, whom I pursued to his
Den: Where being come, I could not return back to my Nurse, by which means
I stayed in that place many years: until on a time, she appe^ed unto me in
a Dream: Warning me to forsake that unfrequented place, and go to the Castle
of Rocks: Which I presently did, then not knowing what a Castle meant: Where,
at the first I was roughly handled, but at last I was kindly used by Tyresus,
who brought me up a long time: With whom I departed to Sea: Where by a mighty
tempest, the ship and all that were in the same were cast away, my self
only was cast on the Shore in Thrace: Where I was succored by the good Duke
Amasenus, in whose Court I was often like to be destroyed, by some of his
Knights that enuyed ^ee: From whence I departed to the Kings Court, hearing of
a general Triumph that was held: the Kings Daughter being appointed the
Conquerours reward: Whom I Wanne, and was determined to have married: from
which I was warned of by a Uision: Which willed me to surrender up my Title in
Phylena, to Remulus, to whom she was before betrothed: Which I did, and also
that I would travel in search of my Parents. Which the Uision told me were
of Kingly race: And withal, gave me another command, that I should love no
Lady, until I had found out that Lady that was shown me in the Uision: this
did greatly trouble me, when presently came news of Tyrides death, son to
Duke Amasenus, who was slain by Brandamor in rescue of Venola, whom he had the
custody of: Upon which occasion I traveled first to Lybia, and from thence to
the Forest of Arde, thinking Venola had been the same Lady appeared to me in
the Uision. Where I met with your Highness, and with you departed to the Court
of the King of Lybia, after Venola was redeemed, as your self rmember, who was
not the Lady I went in search of. Afterward when I had thought to have
departed with you toward this Country, Venola by subtlety, causing me to
take a seepie Potion, frustrated my desire, which she did to stay me with her,
upon a pretense of great Love as she bare me, which one afterward made me
acquainted withal: Which when I heard, being enjoined to place my affections
on another, fearing some mischaunce might arise by her Love, and finding with
out what device they had frustrated me of your company, I departed without
knowledge of any from thence. And at last after long Travel, arrived in
Natolia; Where lying down to rest my self being weary, it happened the Lady
Angelica (the most fairest Lady living, to pass by:) Whom after I had seen, I
perfectly knew to be the Lady that appeared to me in the Uision, having after
such good success, that I was entertained by Maximus the King, at the Golden
Tower, and there grew into great acquaintance with Marcellus. I had not long
remained there, but the King of Lybia (as I suppose, persuaded thereto by
Venolaes means) Wrote a Letter unto Maximus, that he would for his sake
either send me to him, or else be revenged on me by my death: alleging that
I had dishonored his Daughter: Which accusation was most false and untrue.
Hereupon the King without hearing what I could say in mine own defense,
immediately cast me into a den of fierce Lions, who refused to hurt me:
Where I remained many days, having no other Food but such as was cast to
them: from whence afterward I escaped by the Keepers means; Whom I compelled
to send for Marcellus, who rid me out of the Tower, and sent me to an Ancient
friend of his named Iabine, Priest of S. Austines Chapel, promising to come
to me the next day, but was disappoynted thereof by such means as is not yet
come to my knowledge. Upon a day I went abroad from the Chapel, and by
misfortune was espied by some of the Kings Knights; Who certified him, (as I
think) that I was alive; Where upon he again most unjustly sought my life, and
sent out thousands in my search: from whose hands I escaped, intending to
find out my Parents, and so traveled hitherwards. This (quoth he) is the
brief and true rehearsal of my trauells and bringing up, so far as I
know: having nothing whereby to be otherwise known, but a Jewel which my
Nurse gave me great charge to keep; Whose mind I have fulfilled. With that,
he pulld out of his bosom the Jewel, which he continually wore about his
neck: Which Laurana having diligently viewed, perfectly knew to be the same she
had left with Parismenos, in the Island of Rocks: Whom she assuredly (both by
that and many other probabilities) knew to be her son, that suddenly before
them all, she caught him in her arms, and cried; Oh my son Parismenos, thou
art my Son: many times kissing and embracing him. Her strange behavior drove
them all into admiration. When suddenly the place where they were, began to
wax dark, that they could scarce see one another, and they heard a voice,
which they knew not from whence; Which said, Parismus welcome thy son
Parismenos, long time absent from thee: thou need not doubt of it, for none
is so like thee in Heroical qualities; Which said, the darkness presently
vanished.

By this they all assuredly knew that the Knight of Fame was son to Parismus
and Laurana; Who likewise assured himself that he had found his Parents* that
presently he kneeled down: Whom Parismus, the King, the Queen, and Laurana,
most lovingly all at once encompassed with their kind embracings, rejoicing
most exceedingly for joy that he was found, being unable by Words, Welcoms,
Embracings, or otherwise, to express their gladness. Parismus rejoicing that
he had so valiant and virtuous a Son, the King and Queen glad that in their
old Age they saw so virtuous an imposprung forth of their issue to succeed
in the Kingdom. And Laurana with tears of joy expressing her content, in that
she had found her son whom she thought had bin destroyed long ago: that no
heart is able to express the joy that possessed their hearts. Pollipus and
Violetta, they likewise embraced him, being as glad as any of the rest, of his
safety. This news was soon spread through the whole Court, and from thence,
flying fame soon brought the knowledge thereof to the Citizens, who of their
own accord, rung their Bells, made bon-fires, and Triumphs, through the whole
City: Where on all sides, was such exceeding reioycings, as is impossible to
be expressed.

Many days afterward the Knight of Fame, who now shall assume his right and
proper Name Parismenos, continued in the Bohemian Court, honorably
entertained, and highly esteemed of the Bohemian States: Who grue into an
exceeding love toward him, and was kindly beloved of the King and Queen, but
especially of his Parents, who thought themselves most happy and blessed, to
have such a Son: Whose fame was spredde through most places of all the
World, and that every man's ears were filled with the report of his most
honorable deeds.

Now that Parismenos had thus happily attained the knowledge of his Parents,
the want whereof had long time filled his mind with care, no other thought but
of Angelicas Love could take place in his heart, which (though his cause of joy
otherwise was sufficient) filled his senses with sadness, and quite
extinguished those delights, that they seemed to trouble his mind, rather
tedious then comfortable: adding no ease to his cares, which were augmented to
an exceeding height, by reason of Maximus cruelty, which he saw was so much
aggrauated against him, that he knew it a thing impossible for him to attain
the least favor at his hand: Who likewise kept Angelica Guarded so strongly,
and so narrowly pryed into all her actions, that it was impossible any way,
either to come to her speech, or send to her: that with diversity of the
cogitations, his heart was tormented, his countenance darkened, and he spent his
time most commonly in sadness: being seeldome drawn to any mirth: Which was
generally noted of all men, but especially of Laurana, who could never be
quiet but only in his company.

And one a day missing him, she rested not until she had found him out, being
gotten into the most solitariest place in the Garden, leaning himself upon his
Elbow: Who espying her, raised himself from the ground, blushing at her
presence; to whom she said.

Why how now Parismenos, What sadness is that which possesses your mind,
that makes you so e^range your self from company, to delight in
solitariness? is there none so highly in your favor, that they may know the
truth thereof? or is your cause of care such as none can remedy? or not
counsel you for your ease? I am sure there are many would not refuse to use
their endeavors to pleasure you, especially myself would both willingly do my
best to comfort you, and know the cause if it be not too secret.

Parismenos with humble reverence made her this answer: I beseeth you do not
think me so undutiful, nor my cause of care so secret, that I would conceal
the same from you: but were it of much more importance, I would willingly
reveal it to satisfy your mind: which I have omitted, as unwilling to
trouble you therewith, and for no other respect.

Then I pray (quoth. she) let me know, is it not Love? Yes most dear Mother (quoth.
he) it is Love, and to that beautiful Lady Angelica, who bears me the like
affection: but so far am I from enjoying her love, as that it attainteth my
heart with care to think thereof, which is the cause of my sadness: which will
increase, rather then diminish, if I do not shortly travel thither, being now
assured of all other doubts, and having finished my travel in search to find
you out. Therefore I most humbly beseech you to procure my Lord and Fathers
consent to my speedy departure: For without the fruition of her heavenly sight,
my life will be but wearisome. Laurana hearing his speeches, perceived indeed,
that his affection was great, and therefore not to be removed, and well
knowing by her own former experience, that Love was incurable, thee was the
more ready to pity his passions, that she promised to further him in what the
could, being now assured of the cause of his sadness.

CHAP. XXII.
How Parismenos after he came to the knowledge of his Parents, deeparted
toward Natolia. Aow he met with Marcellus: and what afterward befell to him.

WIthin few days after, Parismenos returned back again toward Natolia, but
with much sorrow in (the Bohemian Court for his departure) spending much time
in travel, until he arrived at S. Austins Chapel, having gotten him other
Armor because he would not be known: and knocking at the Chapel door,
presently old Iabine came out, to whom he discovered himself: Who knowing
him, rejoiced exceedingly at his Presence and safety, desiring him to come in,
for that he had News of importance to tell him. Parismenos coming to him for
no other intent, but to hear News from Angelica, willingly went in with him.
And Iabine began as follows. Most noble Knight, I will declare unto you all
that I have learned of the estate of Marcellus, so near as I can. After that
you were departed from hence, the Natolians having continued their diligent
search some three days, and in the end returned to the Court, frustrated of
their desire: Whereby Maximus gave no credit to that report, but soon forgot
the same, remaining in great quiet.

Marcellus by this time had recovered his health, letting pass no time, came
hither, thinking to have found you here, but yet hearing by my report of your
Departure, he seemed to be quite overcome with grief, and declared unto me
all that had happened to you in the Golden Tower, which you had declared unto
me before: and withal, manifested what had happened unto him and Angelica; and
how he was so grievously Wounded: then Iabine declared the same, even as
Marcellus had told him, in the very same manner as is before declared, when
he determined to have conveyed Angelica to S. Austines Chapel, the day his
Father was on Hunting. And (quoth he) Marcellus having told me this, withal
showed me with what sorrow Angelica endured your absence.

Parismenos having heard his words, which yielded him full assurance of
Marcellus friendship, and Angelicas constant Love, was therewith exceedingly
comforted, rehearsing to him, how fortunately he had found his Parents.

Iabin then began to use him with more reverence, and more seruently to affect
his company and good, that at Parismenos request, he went toward the
Golden-Tower, to see if he could by any means speak with Marcellus, which
he willingly at his Request did, and brought news back, that Maximus was
departed with the Queen, Marcellus and Angelica toward the City of Ephesus;
which he learned of such as were Gardiants at the Golden-Tower.

Parismenos hearing that, immediately departed thitherwardes, and entering the
City, rode presently unto the Court, where he met a Knight, Whom he desired
of courtesy to give notice unto Marcellus, that there was a Knight who would
speak with him: Which at his request, he presently went and performed: and
finding Marcellus in the Kings great Hall, he sold him there was a strange
knight at the Court Gate that was destrous to speak with him.

Marcellus maruelling who it should be, immediately went out unto him, being a
Knight of exceeding virtue, that he would not refuse any courtesy, and though
he were Son unto a mighty King, yet he disdained not to fulfill his
request, though he neither knew him, nor the cause of his coming.

Parismenos beholding him, immediately alighted from his Steed, and with a
kind behavior said; Most noble and courteous Prince, I desire to have some
few words in private conference with you, from the Knight of Fame. Marcellus
hearing his Name, the Knight of Fame, desired him to say on: For there were
none then present, but such as he trusted.

My Lord (quoth. Parismenos,) because I know not whither I may discover my self
or no with safety, I am the Knight of Fame, and now altered in name, but not in
good will to you. Marcellus hearing his words, had much adoo to refrain from
embracing him: but yet for that he would not have any note the same, he
abstained: but said; Most noble Knight, nothing could hau^ brought that joy to
my heart, your presence does, being a long time severed from you by Fortunes
vnco^stant mutabilitie, who alters the estate of things, according to her
variable disposition: trusting you have not misdoubted of my good will, though
I came not to S. Austines Chapel according to my promise: Which I was about
to perform, but that my intent was crossed. But seeing you are thus happily
returned, and have as I hope, attained the knowledge of your Parents, in whose
search old Iabine told me you were departed, I desire you repose that assured
confidence in my trustiness, that I will labor to procure your content every
way, to my uttermost power: your safety and return, will bring no little joy
to my Sister Angelica, which is impossible to give her knowledge of: for my
Father has now Guarded her more strictly then ever before: neither is she
here in this Court as the common report goes, but still remains in the
Golden Tower, which I will declare to you hereafter. In the mean time, because
you shall not be descride, I will send my Esquyre with you unto an ancient
Ladies house of good estimation, where you shall be kindly entertained for my
sake, whither I will repair unto you: Where you shall, if so please you stay,
until I can work some means how to bring you, that you may speak with my
Sister Angelica.

Parismenos hearing his courteous speeches, yielded him most hearty thanks:
and so for that Marcellus was fearful of his Fathers suspicion, without any
more speeches, he sent Parismenos with the Squyre unto the Ladies house, whose
name was Madame Panora: who taking Parismenos by the hand, conducted him in,
and used him most kindly.

After dinner was past, Marcellus came thither to him, thanking Panora for
entertaining his friend: then he most lovingly embraced Parismenos (who by
reason of his long travel, and exceeding cares, was so much altered, that had
Marcellus met him in the streets, without any former knowledge that it was
he, he would hardly have known him) who with the like behavior greeted him
again: declaring to him his whole trauelles in search of his Parents.
Marcellns hearing that he was Son unto the most noble Princes Parismus and
Laurana, heirs of the two famous Kingdoms of Thessalie and Bohemia, said.
Most noble Knight, how miserable should Natolia have been esteemed, if it had
been the destruction of so honorable blood, and what cruelty might have been
imputed to my Father, to have given you the sentence of your death? and how
unfortunate had our blood been, in missing to be affianced to so honorable and
Kingly houses? but notwithstanding all this, my Father too much ouerburdened
with conceit, regards no such honor, but rather dishonors his house and
stock with his fearful suspe^, who since your departure from the Maiden
Tower, grew into such furious conceit of Angelica, that every day he was in a
manner her keeper, and in the night he caused her to lodge in his own chamber,
the doors whereof he would lock with his own hands, and keep the keys,
which was procured by the vain surmise of a dream, wherein he drempt that
Angelica should be stolen from him: this miserable life continued not many
days (which well I may term most miserable) being entangled with so many
cares as I know possessed his heart, till at the last he wrought this devise,
thinking under that to ease his cares, and prevent all those mischiefs which
he feared: he gave out speeches many days before he came to the Golden
Tower, that he would depart to this City: and withal, it was reported in
every man's voice, that Angelica should no more be kept in that Tower, but that
she should likewise depart with him, which all the Nobles and Lords of the
land were glad of the knights and Ladies her attendants rejoiced thereat, and
the Fame thereof was soon spread through the hearing of bordering Nations, and
from thence to far countries, my self amongst the rest was exceedingly glad,
especially Angelica most of all rejoiced thereat. Now my Father seeing the joy
that was made thereat, was the more troubled in his senses, that coming to a
damzell of mean birth, yet of much beauty, who in countenance much resembled
Angelica, he won her by (many protestations of great preferment, and with
many threats of great severity, if she would not condescend to follow his
counsel) to do whatsoever he commanded her: her did he cause to come into
his own chamber, and secretly (without the priuity of any but the Queen) to
attire her self in Angelicas richest ornaments, appointing certain Damozells
to attend her, that knew not Angelica: or at least knew her not from Angelica.

As for Angelica, the very same day, when he meant to depart, he committed her
to the custody of four Ennuches: who vowed not to let any come either to the
sight of her, or speech of her, with out he brought his Fathers letter to that
effect, signed with his own hand and signet, remoouing all her former
gardiants, and appoynting new that knew nothing, but that Angelica was
departed with the King, from whose knowledge likewise he had given the
Eunuchs es peciall charge, to keep her being there.

All the Ladies likewise that attended her, came away with him, knowing no
other but that Angelica was in his company, leaving no other to attend her, but
one Damzel, named Anna, which she obtained of my Father, with many instant
entreaties. And having effected every thing according to his fancy, he
departed hitherwards: the Damozell so artificially behauing her self, that
neither my self nor any other perceived but that it was Angelica indeed. And
being arrived in this place, he committed this supposed Angelica to such
strict custody, as before he used, committing her to be kept by those
Damozells that indeed thought it had been Angelica, whom he bound by many
promises, not to suffer any to come to her speech. But I longing to have some
conference with my Sister, whose heart I knew was oppressed with many cares for
your absence, sought means to come to her speech, which I was long without
obtaining: but at last by means of one of the Damozells, whom with many
entreaties I had won, I came to her, and taking her by the hand, I began to
use many speeches to comfort her: and withal, to enter into such conference,
as would have bewrayed all the secrets that ever had passed betwixt me,
Angelica and your self: but the damozel bearing a virtuous mind, and
unwilling (as she afterward told me) to betray my secrets to her priuitie
(which could not proceed but from a marvelous good disposition) suddenly
brake off my speeches, saying.

My Lord, I beseech you be advised to whom you speak, unless you will commit
your secrets to one that you woude not otherwise trust, neither will I presume
(being unworthy thereof) to participate your counselles: for I am not
Angelica, but your poor hand maid Duleia. At which words I was half
astonished, and viewing her indeed, perfectly knew her: which without she had
betrayed her self, I should never have done: withal: my fancy began inwardly
to commend her courtesy, or rather virtue, that refused (though she
condisrended to my fathers will (to betray me) knowing the whole depth of my
secrets: and wondering how mine eyes were blinded, that could before descrie
her, I requested her to tell me the occasion why she supplied Angelicas room,
the truth thereof she declared unto me, in manner as I have now told you:
withal, requesting me upon her knees, not to reveal that which she had
of duty, good will and affection told me: which I promised I would, and
mean faithfully to conceal from all but your self. Now there rests nothing
but how to work means that you may come to Angelica.

Parismenos hearing how stricktly his Lady was guarded, was suddenly stricken
with silent sadness, to think of the impossibilities that hindered his
content, and his mind was so oppressed with care, that he forgot how to study
for his own a uaile.

Marcellus seeing him fallen into that heavy dumpe, revived him from the same
with this comfortable speech: My dear friend abandon this habit of care, and
revive yuor drouping heart with hopeful comfort, for my self will work a
means how you shall have the custody of Angelica, which I will effect very
speedily, if you will stay here but while I can bring the same about.
Parismenos being comforted with his courteous promise, gave him thanks in
these speeches. Most noble Knight, how may I express sufficient thanks to
you, for becoming so kind and faithful a friend to me unworthy? or which way
may I recompense the least of your good deeds, that have in all abundance
tasted of your honorable bounty? for which I render you thanks, as all the
recompense I am able to make: vowing if ever you need my help in any thing,
never to desist to hazard my life for your sake. Fnd since you have of your
own virtuous disposition uoluntarily (neither drawn by entreatie nor hope of
recompense) promised, me your assistance. which only may be the means to
work my everlasting felicity, I beseech you to go forwards therein, that I
may thereby be much more indebted, as well for that, as for infinite other your
Princely couresies: which though they pass unrewarded, yet they shall never
rest vngratified in my dutiful devotions, which by good right are eternally
bound to requite your good will.

Worthy friend (quoth Msrcellus) leave off to use such thanks to me, that
request nothing at your hands but love and friendship, which am unable to
merit any such recompense as you kindly yield: but I pray you be merry yet
in my absence, with this kind old Lady, whilst I put my purpose in
practice, which so soon as I have brought to perfection, I will return, and
not before: till when I take my leave, committing you to your own hearts
desire, which I wish. Which words being ended, with many courteous farewels he
departed the chamber: and coming to Panora, (who before had been his Nurse,
and loved him most dearly) whom he requested in most earnest sort, to use his
friend as kindly as she would use himself, who promised so to do: and
likewise performed it in ever using Parismenos so kindly, that he could not
choose but greatly to extol and commend her courtesy.

Now let my muse return to speak somewhat of Angelica, who after she saw
that she was frustrated of her desire, which was to depart with the King
according as himself had given out speeches, and not to be any longer
inthralled as she had of long time before been, and now perceiving that her
father had both deceived her in that, taken away all her damzels, changed her
guard, and appointed her to be guarded by such jealous slaves, as would never
scarce day nor night suffer her to be out of their sight, thought her self not
only in as bad case as before, but rather in a thousand times worse, being
deprived of many pleasures which she enjoyed: but never esteemed of them,
until now she was restrained, missing the comfortable presence and sweet
conference she was wont to enjoy with Marcellus, and especially fearing never
to see the Knight of Fame again, she wholly gave her mind to sorrow, spending
all her time commonly in tears, and bewailing her sad estate, that had not
Anna in some measure comforted her, she would have overwhelmed her tender
heart with those cares, and have shortened the date of her precious life,
thinking every hour a day, and every day a year, till she were released from
that bondage, in which careful estate she continually remained.

CHAP. XXIII.
How the Knight of Fame carried Angelica from the golden Tower, to Iabins
Chapel.

AS soon as Maximus was come to the Court, he presently got himself to his
chamber: and there began to study how to compass that which he had
undertaken to effect: at last he bethought himself, that if he could devise
any means to get his fathers Signet, he would write a Letter unto the keepers
of the Maiden Tower, in the behalf of Parismenos, that they should admit him
as one of the Gardiants, which presently he contrived in this sort.

THis trusty knight, on whose fidelity I repose my confidence, I have chosen
and appointed to be one of your fellows, and to that effect I have sent him to
you with this letter, signed by my self: whom I require you to admit without
any diniall, and keep this as your warrant to do the same.

Maximus.


When Maximus had wrote this letter, and immitated therein so near as he
could his Fathers hand, which he knew they were not greatly acquainted
withal, he wrought such means that he gate Maximus signet and sealed the
same: which when he had signed, the next morning he went to Parismenos, and
told him what he had done: who liked thereof very well, and (quoth he) if I may
once be admitt^ amongst them, let me alone with the Eunuchs to come to
Angelica, neither will I be denied, since I have this good means: that
presently he armed himself, for that he would not use any, not the least which
oftentimes brings things well begun to an untoward end: and taking his
leave of Marcellus and the Lady Panora, with abundance of hearty thanks, he
departed with a merry heart toward the maiden Tower, hoping now to enjoy the
sweet sight of his beloved, which he never beheld but twice in all the time he
had sought her love. Marcellus he departed back again to the court very
sad, for the absence of Parismenos and Angelica, being likewise much grieved,
that Maximus his father should with hold any of his secrets from him, which did
both disgrace him to such as were strangers, and specially to those Ladies that
were Dulcias attendants, which though he knew well enough, yet that took away
no part of his conceit of unkindness: but most of all he was troubled with
grief to be restrained from Dulcias company, on whom his thoughts had
continually run, ever since he had bin last with her, for her beauty excelled
all the Ladies of the court (Angelica excepted) and of her virtue he had good
conceit, by that which he had found in her good dispositions, when she refused
to thrust her self into the knowledge of the secrets, but rather committed all
that the king had commanded her to his secrets, which if Maximus should know
of, would be as much as her life were worth. These cogitations so much altered
his countenance, that whereas before he was of a pleasant disposition, he now
began to giue-his mind wholely so meancholy sadness, often shunning the
company of those he was wont to delight in, which Maximus noted, especially the
Queen both marvelled and was grieved thereat, and finding him out when he was
in that heavy vain, she earnestly demanded his cause of sadness, to whom he
made this answer. My father, I know not upon what occasion accounts me I
think, rather as one that would betray him, then as his son, that he
refraineth me Angelicas presence, and keeps his counsels from me, to intrude
my self into his counsels, I will not presume: only my desire is, that I may
but be admitted to the fight of my sister Angelica.

Marcellus, (quoth the Queen) I pray thee be contented for a time, for thou
feast thy fathers mind, which will impart his secrets to none, who if he
should know that your sadness were for that cause* would be the more
fearful to impart them to you, which can no way pleasure you, but rather fill
your mind with greater cares, which now is more happy then it would be then:
for Angelica so long as she is in health, what need you be so careful for
her: then good Marcellus rest your self contented, and desire not that which
will rather add more trouble to your head. The Queen having ended these
speeches, departed, and left Marcellus where she found him.

As Soon as the Queen was gone, he began again to ponder these things, not
knowing why his head should be thus troubled: for he knew all that he desired,
and yet his mind was troubled therewith, that at last, with more advised
consideration, he weighed every conceit of his thoughts, and found that
neither his Fathers unkindness, Angelicaes absence, nor his fear of disgrace,
was that that troubled him, but only a good conceyt of Dulcias kindness, which
caused him to enter into a view of her perfections, which his fancy began so
much to commend her, that he thought her worthy to be beloved: and withal,
thought why he might not love her, which very thoghts drew to such insight into
his own Fancies, that he perceived that Love had already taken possession in
his heart: then he began to consider what displeasure it might procure him, if
he should set his fancy on one so far his inferior, and not rather seek
the love of some Kings Daughter, that might add honor to his Title, and not
diminish the same: Which thought was no sooner begun, but it ended, being dashed
by another conceyt, that Dulcia was as beautiful as any, as virtuous any, as
courteous as any: and therefore as worthy to be beloved as any: that if he
should marry with his equal, she might rather marry him for his dignite,
and of a haughty mind to keep her own high dignity still, then for any
true love: and if she were his equal, he should rather be subject to her
Will, then she any way obedient to him: that Dulcia would be a loving, kind,
and duetifull wife, that she would honor him, rather then desire to be his
equal, and that she would refuse no pe^ll, danger, nor hazard for his sake:
that having spent some time in these cogitations, hae resolved to love Dulcia
whatsoever ensued thereon: though he incurred his Parents displeasure, or any
other hazard of his honor whatsoever: and with resolution, he went
immediately unto the place where she was guarded in steed of Angelica, and by
the Damzells means, who, before had done him the like savor, he came to her
chamber, where he found Dulcia all alone very sad, to whom he said. How now
Angelica, what are you sad? can I never come, but that I must always find
you in this mel ancholy disposition? what, are you sorry to be thus pend from a
husband?

My Lord (quoth Dulica) though I am otherwise sad, it does me good to see you
merry. You are deceived Dulcia, I am not merry. My Lord (quoth she) if I
should give credit to your words, they show that you are merry, that call me
Angelica, yet know the contrary. Oh Dulcia (quoth he) neither does words nor
countenance always bewray the inward thoughts: for this which you take to be
mirth in me, is but a forced habit, which I have taken upon me even now: but
knew you the thoughts of my heart, you would say I were sad.

My Lord (quoth she) I beseech you pardon my boldness, which I presumed,
seeing your pleasant disposition, wherein if I was deceived, I hope you will
not be offended with: for indeed oftentimes the heart meditaes of many things
ye mind cannot utter. So does mine Dulcia (quoth he) for I with thee more
good, then I am able to utter; and the cause that my heart is sad, is because
I am not able to do thee so much good, as my heart does with and cannot utter.
I most humbly thank you (quoth Dulcia) acknowledging my self far unworthy
such favor, and unable to deserve such good, which makes me think you still
continue in that forced habit, which makes you utter those speeches. Indeed
well replied Dulcia (quoth he) but as I suddenly took that habit upon me, it
was gone again before I had uttered the words: therefore you may be assured
now, that my words proceed from a true heart, and not from a forced habit. My
Lord (quoth she again) where there is such often change of disposition, there
can be no constant resolution. Yes (quoth he) that which is of purpose taken
to show mirth, is forced: but the natural disposition still continues firm.
Indeed in few (quoth she) but not in all. Then (quoth he) think me one of
those few. My Lord (quoth she) I be seech you pardon me if I do not: for it is
given to all by nature, to be more confide^t then provident. And I answer, I
have received more favor at your hands, in suffering me to be thus familiar
with you, then I am worthy, or ever have deserved: Therefore I crave pardon,
hoping that you shill bear with my rudeness.

Dulcia (quoth he) do not ask pardon when you have not misdone, but believe
my Words, without any question only to proceed from the depth of my true heart;
Which entendeth and wishe^h you no less good then I have v^ered: For I have
found such virtue in you, that I am in^hralled to that virtue, and desire to
be partaker, and possess that beauty; which has made me your affectionate
Friend, and entreat your Love, then that which I desire nothing more. My Lord
(replied Dulcia) my Love and duty is such, that I will not refuse any command
you shall impose upon me.

Dulcia (quoth. he) it is not such Love, as is commanded by duty, nor such
Friendship as arises from fear, but such kind Love as proceeds (betwixt
faithful Friends) from the yielding consent of a true heart, and such a love
as has a further respect then that common duty: for if you knew with what
feruencie I desired your sweet consent to this Love, you would pity my
torments.

My Lord (replied she) I beseech your Honor do not seek to captiuate or
enthrall me in Loves bands, that am free, and am assured your Fancy cannot
like of one far unworthy that high favor you speak of, but suffer me rather
to continue in my peaceful estate, that esteem my self tar from ever
enjoying such Happiness, as to be beloved of my superior, being already so
far bound unto you in all humblenes, that you shall not command me any
thing that agrees with Modesty, but I will perform the same. Speak you from
your heart (q^. Marcellus?) I do my my Lord (quoth she:) Then (said he) I
command you to Love me; and if that be too harsh a Word, I intrease and
desire you, yield me love, for that true love I bear you, being such as is
grounded upon virtue, and without spot or blemish of hishonours stain,
entending nothing that may disagree with your Modesty, but so make you my
equal, my companion, and my dearly espoused Wife: Therefore do but yield to
love me, and thou shall thereby expel many cares from my heart: Which
otherwise will increase, to my everlasting torment.

Oh my Lord (quoth Dulcia) I beseech you account me one that will endeavor in
all duty to deserve that honor you entend me, which I see so many
impossibilities, to hinder, that it quite discourageth me from the least hope
of that felicity. So you will love me, I care not for impossibilities, neither
shall any misery alter my constant resolution. With that he embraced her in
his arms, who gave a silent consent, intermingled with tears, proceeding from
her tender heart: With whom Marcellus stayed some time, spending the time in
many friendly conferences, so that Dulcia was constrained by his entreaties,
and her own yielding heart, to give her consent: both their intents being
grounded upon no other purpose, but that which is virtuous and chaste.

Parismenos being departed from Marcellus, soon arrived at the Maiden Tower,
where he alighted: and coming to the Gardiants that kept the Gate, he
saluted them with a courteous behavior, and told them, that he was sent by
Maximus their King, to be one of the Gardiants: Whom at the first they denied
him, then he delivered his Letter, which they having read, accepted him for one
of their fellows, without any doubt or mistrust.

When he had obtained his desire in this, with such a prosperous beginning,
he began to comfort himself with hope of further good Fortune, continuing all
that Night amongst the rest of the Gardiants, and not once offering any
behavior which might breed suspicion: but behaved himself most carefully,
both in all his words and deeds, as he had good reason: For that they were
very circumspect, and almost by reason of the strict charge the King had given
them, ready to suspect each other. All the next day continued he in that sort,
without any meeting of the Eunuchs: But on the third day he met two of them
together in a place most convenient, and faluted them most kindly: Who
maruelling what he should be, for that he was a stranger, began presently to be
jealous of him: but he perceiving the same, told them, that he had a secret
message unto them from the King: and withal, a letter under his hand and
signet to the Gardiants, which he showed them. But to you (quoth. h^) the King
has sent me with this message, that you shall admit me at all times to
Angelicaes presence: whom you have the custody of, though unknown to any but
your selves: which he told me likewise, he gave you a special charge to
conceal from the rest of the Gardiants, and has upon the trust he has
reposed in me, given me authority with you to have her custody. The Eunuchs
having heard his message, and with all, the Kings privy seal to the Letter,
written in his behalf, could not choose but give credence to the same,
supposing that none was privy to Angelicaes being there but the King, that
they made no doubt but that he was sent by him: but would not trust him, until
they had consulted with the rest of their fellows, unto whom they declared
the truth of all he had told them, who in general they admitted him to their
society.

Parismenos thought himself most happy to have attained this selicitie: Where
likewise he behaved himself most carefully, selling them that he had a
message of secrecy to declare to her from the King, which they made no doubt
of, nor never denied. When he spied his fittest opportunity, which was, when
Angelica was walking alone in a private Garden, being all the liberty she
had, and the Eunuchs were gone to disporte themselves, and had put him alone
in trust with the Key that conducted to her Chamber, he unlocked the door, and
shutting the same again, he came to her Chamber; Where he durst not be so
bold as enter before he had knocked. Anna being alone in the Chamber, hearing
one knock, came to the door: and espying Parismenos in Armor with his sword
gyrt to his side (which he never left off, being in every point armed but his
head) marvelled what he should be: to whom he said. Fair Damzell, marvel not
to see me in Armor, which shall never offend you, but still be employed in
your defense. I have knocked, presuming no further without license: the cause of
my coming is, to deliver a message unto the Lady Angelica from Marcellus. All
this time Anna had diligently beheld him; persuading her self, she had seen
him before, that she made him this answer. Sir Knight, if you come from
Marcellus, you shall be welcome to my Lady, therefore I pray you come in, and
I will conduct you to the place where she is.

Then she brought him down a pair of stairs, into a Garden where Angelica
was: Who sat at the further end thereof, in a most heavy and discomfortabie
sort, seeming to be quite given over to sorrow, leaning herelbowe upon her
Kn^, and her head upon her hand, with her back toward them, and hearing them
coming behind her, with a sudden start raised her self from her seat:
Wherewith her heart panted within her: and Parismenos humbling himself upon
his knee: said, Muse not divine Lady to behold the map of sorrow, created
to endure everlasting misery: the most worthy Knight Marcellus has sent me
hither: Whose favor has caused me to be thus bold, who heartily saluteth
himself to you by me. Angelica all this while diligently behold him, often
changing her countenance, being procured by the diversity of thoughts: for she
supposed it should be the Kn: of Fame, for that he came from Marcellus: but he
was so mightily altered, that she was in doubt thereof.

As Soon as he had ended those few Words, she said: Are not you the Knight
of Fame? I am the same most dear Lady (quoth he:) With that her heart leapt
for joy, and she took him most lovingly by the hand, desiring him to arise,
saying: I am glad to see you again; Which I feared I should never have done.
Then presently procured by joy for his sight, and grief to think of her own
bondage, a flood of Cristall tears issued from her eyes: Which attainted her
heart with extreme grief, that he stood like a man senseless, and confounded
in his thoughts: and such Passions oppressed his heart, that she was scarce able
to uphold her self from falling, which caused the Water with violence drawn
from his manly heart, stand in his eyes: Which never before by any accident
were absent: and seeing her in that woeful estate, could not choose but fold
his arm with a fearful touch about her slender-Waste, to uphold her, whilst
Anna ran for some comfortable-Water to revive her withal: but coming to her
self again, she leant her head in his bosom: Who put his hand betwixt her
precious Temples, to keep it from touching his cold and hard Armor, uttering
these speeches.

Oh how unfortunate am I, that by my disquiet have procured you this disquiet;
but before he could say more, she answered: But were you hence, my grief would
be far greater. It is not your presence has done this, but my own hearts
cares, that are still allotted to be my greatest comfort: but think your self
most Welcome to me, and your presence more delightful then any others
whatsoever. Most virtuous Lady (quoth. he) your kindness is so far beyond my
desert, that I know my self altogether unable to render sufficient thanks,
for which I have been often made acquainted withal, by the Worthy Marcellus,
and now find kindly ratified by your own heavenly voice: Which yield me that
undeserved favor as shall bind me in all dutiful bonds of service to
command. If (quoth. she) I should do otherwise then love you, you might account me
discourteous: Or if I should deny my Words past to Marcellus, (who loves you
so well that he will (I know) conceal nothing from you,) you might account me
untrue: but seeing you have well deserved the one, and are by his means made
privy to the other, I cannot now stand upon new terms of denial, but yield
my self in all honorable sort into your ^stodie. Most sweet Lady (quoth. he)
if I prove not thankful, Heavens grant my good deeds may be rewarded with
ill: If I remain not everlastingly true, let comfort hate my soul, the earth
denounce my body, and terror afflict my conscience: if ever I refuse peril,
hazard of life, torment, or other misery for your sake, let al peril, hazard
of life, torment and misery, be my chiefest comfort: if my love continue not
constant, my faith firm, and my thoughts clear of disloyalty, let those I
love hate me: let all men abborre me: and every creature seek my destruction.
Gentle Knight (quoth she) your words I do constantly believe: therefore be you
assured likewise: of my resolution, which is to rest my self wholely upon your
virtues, with that they parted so pure a maiden kiss betwixt them, being the
first that ever she had given or received, that both their hearts seemed to
tenterchange the others place, and to part from their loving breast with a soft
breathing sigh, more sweet then if all the united perfumes in the world had
been met betwixt their rostate lips. By this time Anna was returned, having
spent her labor in vain, for that Angelica was safe. Then Parismenos taking
her by the arm, led her up into her lodging, which when he had done, Angelica
desired him to declare by what means he had attained that liberty to come to
her. And he said, I am amongst the rest, one of your keepers: for behold I have
the key that alone co^ducteth to your lodging: the Eunuchs have put me in
trust withal, who are now gone about some recreation they have in hand: then
he declared unto her the truth of all, and of Maximus policy, and how he had
caused Dulcia to supply her room at the Court, who was of every degree taken
for her self. Angelica hearing his report, forced a smile from her cheareful
heart, which she had not done many a day before. Desiring him likewise to
declare his trauells after he had escaped out of the Lions den, which he did
in every respect.

When Angelicia heard that he was son to Parismus and Laurana, whose fame
resounded in every place, and that he was sprung of two such kingly houses,
herr heat was filled with exceeding joy: which she expressed by giving him many
kind welcomes: uttering these speeches. My dear knight (quoth she) I rejoice
to hear that you have found your princely parents. But yet I would you had
kept the same from my knowledge as yet, because that you might have had trial
of my good will in your unknown estate, in which you were as dear to me, as
you shall be if you were the highest Monarch in the world. But how happy
should I be, if I might in quiet enjoy your presence, which I know not how you
will effect. Dear Lady (quoth he) there rests nothing but your consent:
which if you douchsafe to grant, then I do not doubt but soon to bring you out
of this place without any hazard of your person. Oh sweet Parismenos, the
thraldom I have long endured, makes me desirous of liberty, that am almost
tired with conceit of my fathers credulity, too much addicted to vain report:
especially replying upon your virtuous disposition, and desirous to be ruled
and governed by your wisdom, whom I have chosen for my only delight: I am
most willing to do whatsoever you shall counsel me too, resting in assured
confidence, that you will no way impair my honor, which I respect more then my
life: but rest at my disposition in seeking any other assurance then my
promise. I beseech you (quoth he) let no evil conceit of me take place in your
heart, but be assured, that so long as I breath, I will not err from your
command, in the least undutiful respect, but rest so fully and wholely
obedient to your behestes, that sooner then I will do or think a thought that
shall disagree to your desire, this breath shall leave my breast, and my vital
spirits give up their latest gasp. After these speeches ended, and Angelicas
mind fully satisfied, they spent some time in familiar conference,
intermingled with many ^nde behauiours, the further confirmation of both their
loves: till at last, Parismenos enforced, in regard of their safeties, departed
to his charge, whither he was come before they were returned: and at their
return finding him there, they made no doubt of him, but took the charge upon
them again, entering into Angelicas chamber, to provide her such things as are
necessary, who because they should not find any alteration, put on her former
manner of sadness, which before pro^eeded from the depth of care, but now the
assumed to avoid suspicion. Parismenos he went down amongst the rest of the
knights that kept the Castle, keeping company sometimes with them, and
sometimes with the Eunuchs, that neither of them knew of his familiarity with
the other, but both accepted him as one of their company, that he had the
guarding of the entrance into the Castle, and also the secret keeping of
Angelica, with the Eunuchs: neither of them both suspecting his intent.

Thus continued he amongst them some three days, in which time be came often
to Angelica, and had conference with her: at last his turn came, that he must
both watch with one of the Eunuchs, and also at the Castle entrance, where
likewise, never but two kept the watch, which fell out according to Parismenos
desire: whose heart was much troubled to effect this business, devising how he
should be rid of his two fellows, the Eunuch, and the other, that kept the
entrance, being unwilling to be esteemed a murderer, his hands being yet never
guilty of blood: At last his desire to get Angelica from thence overcame that
care, and he resolved rather to be their Exectuioner, then be disappointed of
his intent: When the time that he should take his place to Watch was come, and
he and the Eunuch alone, the rest being gone to their Lodging. Parismenos
being in talk with the Eunuch, suddenly mufflled him in his Gown, so close,
that none could hear him cry, and thrust his Sword quite through him, which
he did with such expedition, that his fellows never heard their noise: And
taking the Key from him, took him under his arm, and floong him into a dark
corner of the Tower. When he had done this, he hasted to his other place of
charge: Where when he came, he found his fellow Watchman staying for him, but
fast asleep, with the Keys of the Castle gate lying by him: Whom Parismenos
caught in his arms, and before he could recover his senses, threw him from the
Battlements into the Lake, where he was drowned: Which done, he went back to
Angelicaes Chamber, and opening the door, entered in, and found Angelica in her
bad fast a sleep; Whom was in mind at the first to have awaked her, but
beholding her in so sweet a slumber, the awful regard he bare to her would
not suffer him to be so bold, but still he stood by her a good space, being
desirous to awake her, yet fearful to disturb her quiet rest: at last Anna
awaked, who continually was her Bedfellow. Who seeing Parismenos in the
Chamber, at that unseasonable hour, styrring her self to speak to him,
awaked Angelica, who likewise casting her eye suddenly on him, was somewhat
aghast at his being there, but he kneeling down at her Beds-side, said: Pardon
me I beseech you this boldness: now is the time that you may depart, and
without any let or molestation, For that my self have alone the keeping of the
entrance into this Tower.

Angelica hearing his speeches, told him she would presently be ready: Then
Anna suddenly started out of the Bed, and apparelled her self. And
Parismenos arising withdrew himself. Angelica likewise made such expedition,
that she was ready before Parismenos wished, having attyred her self with
most exceeding rich Ornaments. Then she came forth unto him, and said: Now my
dearest Friend, Let us go when you please: Then he took her by the one Aim,
and Anna by the other, saying: Be of good comfort, and fear not, for I dare
assure you to pass with quiet. After they were out of the thamber he locked the
door again, and took the key with him: and from thence, let her down to the
Tower gate: and being without, fast locked the same again after them. And being
quite without the compass of the Tower, Angelicaes heart seemed to leap
within her for joy, demanding in most kind sort, whither he would convey her,
for (quoth she) if I should be taken again, and come to Maximus presence, my
torment and grief would be more then I am able to express. I have (quoth he,
afriende not far hence, in whose trust I dare repose any secret, whither I
will conduct you with safety: therefore I beseech you be of good comfort.
Many a weary step Angelica had, before she came to her iourneys end:
which at last they attained. When they were come to Saint Austines Chapel,
Parismenos never left knocking until he had awaked Iabin, who maruelling to
hear one knock at that time of the night, so unlooked for, and coming to the
door, demanded before he would open the same, who was there. Parismenos made
answer, good friends Iabin open the door, here is none but friends. With
that Iabin knowing his voice, opened the door and let them in, with all haste
lighting a Taper, then he came to Parismenos and embraced him, yet not knowing
Angelica, but supposing it was she, admyring her exceeding bewty, and with
humble reverence he desired her to accept of his poor Cell: where Angelica
being weary, seated her self upon his bed, being most glad that she was
escaped out of the maiden Tower, where they spent some time in conference about
their escape: when Parismenos at her request, declared the manner how he rid
himself from those that were appointed to watch with them. Whose wisdom
Angelica greatly admyred. After many of these sweet remembrances past
between them, Angelica and Anna fell both fast a sleep, being weary of their
travel: which Parismenos and Iabin seeing, they departed into the Chapel to
confer about their security: where we will leave them, to speak of the
gardiants.

CHAP. XXIIII.
How Maximus had knowledge of Angelicas escape. How Marcellus with Dulcia fled
from the Court at Ephesus. And how Marcellus in Portellus armor came to Saint
Austins Chapel. And how Parismus sent Portellus into Bohemia.

IN the morning the Eunuchs according to their woonted manner, came to the
place where they thought to have found their fellows, but missing them both,
first maruelling thereat, and afterward conceyuing the worst, being apt to
suspicion, knocked at Angelicas chamber door, but none made answer: which
drove them into an exceeding perplexity of fear, then they began altogether to
study what this might mean, and going down they espied their fellow lie dead
before them, whom Parismenos had cast there, yt Angelica might not see him:
which ghastly sight affrighted them with deadly fear: that with an exceeding
outcrie they ran down to the Knights that kept the entrance: who maruelling at
their sorrow, enquired the cause thereof: they declared how they found one of
their fellows flaine and the knight that Maxamus had lately sent was missing.
He (quoth the knights) has the keeping of the entrance: but notwithstanding,
some of them fearing the worst, ran thither, where they found neither him,
nor the other knight that was appointed to watch with him, nor the keys of the
Tower gate. With which news, they returned back to the rest of the fellows,
who by this time came altogether. At which news, one of them said: I see no
such cause of sorrow. With that one of the Eunuchs said: you know not what we
have lost, we are all undone: we shall be hanged, if Maximus hear hereof, we
have lost Angelica, with that the knights burst into a laughter. Oh (quoth the
Eunuch) laugh not at that which will bring us all to sorrow, we have lost
Angelica, whose custody we had, though unknown to you: which the King
commanded us to keep from your knowledge, for that he had given out report,
that she was departed with him, whom I fear me, the strange knight that
lately arrived here, has carried away from us all. The knight hearing his
words, were exceedingly amazed thereat, which they were assured was true, by
the rest of there fellows. Then they went altogether up to Angelicas
Chamber, and breaking open the doors, they found her not, who well perceived
that she was gone away. Then began the Eunuchs to roar and cry out like
mad men, and the Knights ran up and down like men transformed into amazement:
at last, with much a do, they opened the gate, finding the drawbridge letten
down: and some of them having horse within the Tower, posted every way about
the country, making diligent search and enquire after them, and many of them
met with old Iabin, who answered them that he saw none such, whom they all
credited, for that he was a man of religion, which were of most high
estimation with every one of those Countries that they esteemed every word that
past their lips, as true Oracles: by which means Parismenos and Angelica were
as safe in his custody as could be devised. Iabin seeing such a number of
knights abroad, returned with that news to his Cell, which drove Angelica into
some fear and disquiet, but Iabin by his comfortable assurances, expelled the
same from her heart, by telling her, that if all the world were in search of
them, yet they would never suspect that place. The Eunuchs soon got out of
the Tower, and fled for fear of Maximus fury, every man which way he thought
best for his own safety. One of the knights posted with all speed to the
Court, and coming into Maximus presence, declared the whole circumstance of
this tragical event. Which when Maximus heard, he tore his hair, stamped on
the earth, raged and railed most exceedingly, calling all the Nobles and
Knights of his Court together, commanding them in all haste to arm themselves
prefently, and be in readiness to go with him, and to stay for him in the Court
gate: then might you see Noblemen making have, some one way, some another way,
some calling for the rest of their Armor, having the one half on, and the
other out of readiness: some in Harness, ready mounted, buckling on their
Helmets, others at every point armed, calling for their Steedes, some ready
mounting, half armed, halse unarmed: Knights running this way, servants that
way, all styring and making unwonted haste, and every one in a hurly burly. By
this time came Maximus ready mounted, gyrding his spurs into his Steeds side
for haste: who was ready to make speed without spurring, commanding his
Knights to follow him: who hastened after him, not knowing why they made such
speed, the Ladies woondred at this news, some for fear of their husbands
harm, for they thought some enemis were approached which might endanger their
persons, admyring this strange accident: some bemoning the absence of their
lovers: all in a wonderful ecstasy, the Queen she sat weeping for the loss
of her Daughter, which the King had told her of.

Marcellus he only rejoiced, for yt he supposed Parismenos had carried from
thence Angel. Maximus with all have arrived at the maiden Tower, where he heard
the truth of all, and saw the Eunuch that was stain, and withal was certified
in what manner the strange knight came, and how that he brought with him a
Letter signed with his privy signet. When Maximus heard this, he grew
presently into a persuasion that it was the unknown knight had done that
exployt, and carried away Angelica, then he called for the letter which one of
those knights (by ill fortune more careful then the rest, had demanded of
Parismenos, after he had shown the same to the Eunuchs as aforesaid)
delivered unto him, which when Maximus saw, he presently know^ that it was
Marcellus hand, which caused his eyes to swell with tage, that for that the
night was now come, he rested in the Tower, commanding and desiring his
Nobles and Knights to post throughout all the Country to find Angelica,
commanding two of the chiefest of his Noblemen early the next morning to post
to the Court and apprehend Marcellus as a Traitor, for conspiring with a
stranger to betray his life. Thus on a sudden was all the Country spread
over with knights, who left no place of likelihood to harbor them. Only
Iabins Cell they suspected not, which was so near the maiden Tower, and
withal a place of holiness and religion dedicated to Saint Austine, whom they
worshipped: that of all places none of the^ thought of likelihood, that they
should be there: in which quest they continued very earnest all that night, and
the next day.

As Soon as Marcellus saw all the Knights and Nobles departed, and all the
Court in an uproar, now fearing that if Maximus should see the Letter he had
given Parismenos, he would know his hand: when all were in an exceeding
uproar, he came to Dulcia in great have, and told her all that had befallen,
telling her, that he must now for a time leave her: for that he knew his father
would upon sight of the Letter be so much incenst against him, that it were
mere fondness in him to stay and abide his fury: with that Dulcias heart
panted with grief, and her eyes melted into tears, desiring him most humbly
upon her knees, that he would not leave her behind, whose life would be worse
then death without his presence: for my Lord (quoth she) if you will vouchsafe
me this favor, I will never forsake you for fear of any misery, peril, or
torment.

Marcellus took her up with a kind kiss, telling her that he was most
exceedingly glad that she would go with him, being the only thing he most
desired in the world. Then (quoth Dulcia) tell me what I shall do, and I will
do it presently. (Quoth he) whilst I hold the Ladies in a talk, whose wits
are now troubled, disguise your self, and slip out amongst them, and go to
Madam Panoras house, and there stay for me. Dulcia then presently cast off her
uppermost garment, and put on some of the Ladies, such as she next found, and
locking fast her Chamber door, went through amongst the thickest of them: who
seeing her lock the door, took her for one of their fellows that had
brought Angelica to bed: and so let her pass without suspicion.

Dulcia was no sooner down stayres, but she hasted with all speed until she
was without the court gate, and from thence came to Panoras house, where she
was let in by Panora, who^ she told, that Marcellus had sent her thither, and
would himself be there presently. Panora for his sake gave her kind
entertainment. Marcellus seeing all things fall out thus prosperously, and
Dulcia past by, which he noted, he left the Ladies, and presently went to his
chamber, and armed himself in one of the Getulian knights armor, having none
of his own, and went to Panoras house, where he found Dulcia, and caught her in
his arms with a loving embrace: and being all three together, he declared to
Panora all that had happened, both of himself, Angelica and Dulcia, and that the
knight that lodged in her house, was the Knight of Fame. Parismenos withal,
requesting her secrecy and aid, to conceal Dulcia from all knowledge of her
being there, where himself stayed all that night: And the next day spending
his time in much pleasure and kind sort with Dulcia, whom he loved most
exceedingly, but without any blemish or thought of intemperancie.

Early the next morning came the two Nobles from Maximus to arrest Marcellus,
thinking to have found him there, but coming to his chamber, he was not
there, nor in all the Court to be found. Which caused an other tumult for his
absence, yt all had their minds so busied with conceit of meditation why he
should be fled, yt they were all in a second amazement therewith, though none at
all knowing why he was fled, nor knowing what offense he had committed: the
Queen likewise, made heart sorrow for his mi shap. This news being come to
the Ladies that attended Dulcia, instead of Angelica, who thought to carry the
report of this news to Angelica, but enquiring for the key of her chamber,
could not hear of it: for every one made answer they had it not, then
began a corontuersie amongst them, enquiring who it was that came out last,
but the truth thereof they could not learn, that they began to suspect each
other, and that she that had the key had lost the same, and would not be known
thereof: that at last they began to knock first softly, and then hard, but
none made answer, which drove them all into an extreme perplexity, and with
much ado, to rid themselves of that fear, they got upon the door, where at
there coming they could not find Angelica, but found some of her ornaments
cast in the midst of the floor: that then with wringing their hands, tearing
their hair, and renting their ornaments, they made such an outcrie and
exclamation, that all the court rung thereof: which caused the Queen, the
Nobles and almost all the whole court gather to that place, where the Queen
being come, and knowing the cause of their sorrow sat down amongst them,
oppressed with care, and uttered these speeches: Peace, peace, give over this
vain lamentation, for you know not for whom you mourn, it was not Angelica
you had the custody of, therefore cease your laments, and give me leave to
mourn, that have just cause: who am a party of all these woes, that at once
have lost the company of both my dear children, and all procured by Maximus
misdoubt, who left Angelica in the maiden Tower, who is stolen from thence, and
now my son Marcellus with Dulcia is likewise fled. Aye me, what sorrow is
this; whose grief may be compared to mine? was ever any so miserable as I am
made, that at one instant have lost my comfort, my children, my joys and
delight? with that such a passion of grief overwhelmed her heart, that her
speech abruptly bracke off, and more she would have said but could not, that
the ladies took her up, being fallen into a deadly trance, and conveyed her to
her bed.

Thus was the whole Court and City repleate with care, every one uttering
their fancies: the younger for accusting Maximus of cruelty, alleging that he
was cause of those cares: the elder condemning the two young Princes of
lowdnesse and lightness, that would enter into these actions without their
parents consent. And two Noblemen returned again to Maximus with these news,
which added new cares to his troubled head, that Angelicas escape did not so
much grieve him, as that Marcellus, should both be Actor in her escape, and also
would make so base a cho^se of Dulcia, with whom, all were assured he was fled,
neither did all these so much vex him, as that he was disappointed of all
means to revenge these wrongs.

Maximus continued many days in the maiden T^er, calling together all the
knights of the land, commanding them to make all diligent search, and to
appoint some that should stay in every place of the country, and examine every
passenger, for that his mind gave him, Angelica and Marcellus were within
Getulia: This business was so speedily and exactly performed, that it was
impossible for them to escape unknown or vndescried.

Marcellus the next night after all the tumults, having by many persuasions and
entreaties won Dulcia to stay with Panora, and with promise of his speedy
return, armed himself in the Armor he had gotten, and departed from thence,
with intent to go to Saint Austines Chapel, where he was sure he should
hear of Parismenos, and by the way met with many of the Getulian Knights, who
knew him not but by his armor, took him to be a Getulian knight named
Portellus, whose armor Marcellus had put on: this Portellus was a knight of
the kings Court, who not long since was departed into Libia, without the
knowledge of any but Marcellus, who had sent him to view Venolas beauty, and
to learn if he could the original of that accusation was laid against the
knight of Fame, in whose armor Marcellus past without suspicion, being taken
of all for Portellus.

Early the next morning he arrived at S. Austens Chapel, where he would
neither knock nor enter, until he was sure there was none to descrie him.
When Iabin first saw him, his heart was tormented with fear, demanding what
he would have. Fear not Iabin (quoth he) I am your friend Mxrcellus, with that
he entered into the Chapel, whom Iabin would not suffer to go further, until
he had seen his face, which when he beheld, he embraced him most lovingly,
and without speaking a word brought him into his Cell, where was Parismenos,
Angelica and Anna, who all at one ebeholding him, and he them, embraced each
other with exceeding joy, being so glad they had met, that Angelica wept for
joy, Parismenos surfetted with delight, and Marcellus heart was filled with
exceeding content: when these storms of joy were past and somewhat calmed,
Marcellus declared to them all what had happened, and how that Maximus had set
most diligent spies in every corner of the country, and withal, declared the
cause why he was fled, the manner, and with whom, his love to Dulcia how he
had left her with Panora, and how happily he had passed unsuspected in
Portellus Armor, which when they heard, they all applauded, and rejoiced at
his fortunate success: to whom Angelica said with a merry countenance: Dulcia
has lost nothing by assuming my name and habit, but thereby has woonne a
constant knights love, and may hereafter by that means come to be a Queen.
Indeed Marcellus whatsoever others may say, I persuade and assure my self, you
have gotten a virtuous, beautiful, chaste, kind, (...) loving Ladies love,
whose good parts I have often commended in my secret thoughts, but now am glad
that I have so good opportunity to speak of them in your hearing: what though
she be not of kingly race, her virtues are such as may beseem the best Lady
in the world.

Marcellus was glad to hear Angelica so much commend his beloved Dulcia, that
he said: Indeed Sister I have chosen Dulcia, I love her, and will hereafter
be true to her, for her beauty, virtue, and good parts, do please me so much,
yt if I live to enjoy the Getulian crown, she shall be my Queen: withal, I
am glad you have met your knight, of whose company I am sure you are not a
little glad. With that Angelica blushed, and he said: Nay Sister blush not, for
he has better deserved your love, then Dulcia has mine.

In these and such like communications, they spent the rest of that day,
studying and devising what might be their best course to take in these
troublesome affairs.

After that Marcellus had stayed some time with Parismenos and Angelica in
Saint Austins Cappell, he again departed in Portellus armor toward Dulcia,
where he arrived to her exceeding comfort, without suspicion, wishing that he
had been with Angelica that he might have enjoyed both her and their company
together.

After Marcellus was departed, Parismenos and Angelica began to study which
way they might escape Maximus cruelty, being both desirous to go into
Bohemia, but they knew not how to pass without being discovered, for that the
King still continued his diligent search: and besides, if that let (...) not
been, yet the journey was so long and dangerous, that Parismenos was
unwilling to endaunger her person and health thereby, that he was drawn to an
exceeding astonishment what were best to be done: that being unskillful of
themselves what to determine off, they asked old Iabines counsel, who
presently told them, that if they liked his simple fare, and that homely
Cell, where though they were not daintilie served, yet they were quiet, that
he thought it their best course to stay there will until Maximus were out of
hope to ^de them, and had given over his search, or at the least until
Marcellus were returned, whose counsel they both allowed and followed.

Maximus still remained in the Maiden Tower, fretting his heart with vexation
and grief, being put out of all comfort by his Knights that ^ly returned
without any news, that in the end be was tired with grie^e, and fared like
one in a desperate estate: but by the counsel of his Nobles, after much
trouble and long search, he returned to the Court where the Queen was, to
comfort her: who at his coming he found very sick, and in very weak estate,
being procured by the grief she had conceived for her childrens loss.
Maximus seeing her in that dangerous estate, began to comfort her with many
persuasions: but she was so impatient and so full of grief, that she uttered
these speeches. Comfort, my Lord, comes now out of season, when our greefes
are past remedy, which you might have salued when time served: it is your
curiosity and too fond suspect, that has bred these mischaunces, you give
too much credit to that foul enchantresse speeches, which your self desire to
prove true, or else you would never take those cruel courses you have done
with your children. Might you not often have married Angelica according to your
desire, so many Honorable and great personages; what if she be now married,
can that indaunger your life, unless you will be the wilful actor thereof
your self? but by your seuetitie you have done this, which is now impossible
to be ^euoured.

Maximus heart at these speeches began to melt with lenity, and his own
conscience began to condemn himself, that now he repents the severity he
had used, and accused himself of folly, to give such credit to the
enchauntresse speeches, that he protested if he had his children again, he
would not restrain them so much of their liberty, but that he would let them
make choice according to their own fancies: and in this heavy estate we will
leave him: devising what means to work by gentlnesse to call them home again.

Marcellus all this while continued with Dulcia in Lady Panoras house, and now
hearing that Maximus was returned from the maiden Tower, and had given over
search, as hopeles to find either Angelica or him: he determined to convey
Dulcia to Saint Anstin^ Chapel, for that Panoras-House was too near the
Court, and there they might by ill For^ue soon be descryed, that with this
resolution he came to Dulcia, and made her acquainted with his purpose, whom
he knew before would be wholly ruled by him: He did the like to Panora: and
the next night he caused Dulcia somewhat to disguise her self, and meet him
at Saint- Martines Gate, where he would stay for her: For that if he should
carry a Lady behind him thorough the City, he thought he should have been
suspected. Dulcia most wa^lie and carefully executed his business, which ^ell
out so happily and Fortunately, that according to both their desires, and
Marcellus appointment, they met at the Gate. And Marcellus having mounted her
behind him, with a joyful heart road toward the Chapel, where likewise
according to his desire he arrived: Which brought no little joy unto
Parismenos heart, that at the first with many courteous embracings, and
afterward with pleasant conference, they entertained that delightful
content, of enjoying each others presence. Iabines Cell was now so full of
Guests, that it could scarce contain them, that if they had stayed there
longer, it would have been more like a Prison, then a place of content.

It happened the next morning, that Iabine went to make provision for his
Guests, and by the way met with Portellus, who was lately returned from Lybia:
and coming to the Court, and not finding Marcellus, whom he loved most
dearly, he had wandered in a sollitarie, sad, and heavy disposition, up and
down all the last day, and that night: and now espying old Iabin, he came to
him, and knowing him, he said: Iabine, the time has been, when Getulia
exceeded in Roialty, but now all things is turned vpside down. Marcellus was
wont to use your company, but now no man knows where he is: Would I were
but with him, then my cares would be past. Why (quoth Iabin). What might I call
your name, that know me, and are des^reus to (...) Marcellus? My Name (quoth
he) is Portellus. Iabine hearing his Name, well remembered that he had often
heard Marcellus desire that he were with him, said: Portellus, Come along
with me, and I will bring you to one that can tell you where Marcellus is:
With that they departed back to the Chapel, where Iabin entered, and told
Marcellus that Portellus was without: Who hearing his speeches, ra^ unto him,
and embraced, and brought him in: Whom Angelica likewise knew and Welcomed.
Then Parismenos, Marcellus, and Portellus, giving no delay to the necessity of
time and business they had in hand, began to consult what to do; Where every
one gave their several opinions, but could agree upon nothing: At last they
called Iabine to their counsel, whose Wisdom had much auailed them: Who
presently having such a determination in his mind before, counseled them to
send Portellus into Bohemia, with Letters from Parismenos unto his Father, to
request his Aid, and to send a Band of Soldiers, to defend him from Maximus
cruelty.

This counsel was exceedingly well liked of all: especially Portellus was
exceedingly willing to go about that business: that presently furnishing
himself with Horse and Armor, having a Letter to that effect from Parismenos,
and the Jewel which Laurana knew him by, which he desired Portellus to
deliver unto his Mother, as an assured token that he came from him. He hasted
with all speed about his business, and soon arrived in Bohemia, and
delivered the Letter and the Jewel unto Laurana. The news of Portellus
coming was soon known in the Court, and the cause why he came: Which when
the Nobles and Commons heard, Parismus needed not Muster up men: For every one
were desirous to be employed, and came voluntary, and offered their service,
accounting it a dishonor to be refused: and within a short space, there were
gathered together of Nobles, Knights, and Gentlemen, a great number, and to
them Parismus added so many, that there were twenty thousand Horsemen in a
readiness, under the Conduct of Pollipus, who was most desirous of that
honor, and had gotten Violettas consent: Who with all haste marched toward
Getulia. Parismus then gathered together an Army of fifty thousand expert
Souldyers, under his Conduct and Tellamors, Who was but lately arrived at the
Bohemian Court with Clarina.

CHAP. XXII.
How Maximus found out Angelica, with the rest, at Saint Austines Chapel, and
banished Marcellus, imprisoned Angelica, and Dulcia, and cast Parismenos into a
deep Dungeon: condemning him to be burnt, where he was ready to be famisht,
And afterward he escaped out, and met with Pollipus.

WHile these things were acting in Bohemia, Parismenos with Angelica, and
Marcellus, with his sweet Love Dulcia, remained in great safety, and content,
being void of fear to be now descried: seeing they had remained there in
safety in all th^se Troubles, and being pende within a little Room, were
desirous of some Recreation, and in an Evening, when they thought none were
styrring, they went out of the Cell into a sweet Grove, hard adjoining
thereunto: Where they walked up and down, and at last, Parismenos taking
Angelica aside, unto a pleasant Bank, bedeckt with many sweet summer Flowers,
and Marcellus likewise Dulcia, rested themselves not far from them,
recreating themselves with sweet embracings.

Parismenos had no sooner seated himself, but Angelica sat down ^n his left
Knee, clasping her right arm about his neck, with a kind and sweet gesture,
hiding her other in his manly Bosom, which was vnbuttoned, by reason of the
heat: First, making many kisses a Prologue to her speech, she said; My loving
Knight, how happy should we be, if we were in Bohemia, from the suspicion of
my Father? and how great should our pleasure be, if we might enjoy this
happiness without fear: but since we cannot attain that blessedness, and are
hindered from it by many dangers, let us yet rejoice each in others company,
which I account a joy without compare: and a felicity exceeding all
felicities. Most virtuous, kind, and dear Lady (quoth. be) how much fortunate am
I to enjoy such exceeding favor as you vouchsafe me? without the least merit,
that have refused no danger for my sake, that have forsaken your Parents favor
to yield me comfort: and most of all, that are contented, nay rather pleased
with the fearful and solitary estate of my unworthy sake, that have never
been meritorious, and that can never recompense such exceeding kindness.
Parismenos (quoth. she) misery with your company is my pleasure: solitariness
when I enjoy you, is more pleasant then all the delightful pleasure in Kings
Courts: and without I account all pleasure pain, all company tedious, and all
pomp exceeding penury. In these and many other such like speeches, sweet
embracings, and superabu^dant euerflowing of sweet content, they recreated
themselves until old Iabin came to them, and they deparced together to their
Cell.

Now it happened (according to the unfortunate resolution of hard Destiny,
that one of the Eunuchs that before was Angelicaes keeper, being fled from the
Mayden-Tower, after Angelica was missing, for fear of Maximus displeasure,
which he knew well could be no less then death, was hidden in that Woodde,
where he ever since his flight shrouded him, living upon such food as the
place yielded: which was Wild fruit, and (by most evil fortune) lay close in
a heap of thick bushes, and heard Parismenos and Angelicaes speeches, and
knew them, and at their departure secretly followed them unto S. Austines
Chapel: Where after he had seen them enter, with all speed that might be he
hasted toward the City, and in the morning got thither, where at the first
he was admitted to Maximus presence, to whom he declared how that Angelica
was at Saint Austines Chapel, where Iabin was Priest, relating the whole
truth of all that he had seen and heard.

Maximus by his speeches perceived that it was the unknown Knight that was with
her, which very thought kindled new sparks of ire in his breast, which before he
had calmed: that in a monstrous rage he ^ed if ever he caught that unknown
Knight, to be revenged on him with severity. Then presently he assembled all
the Noble Pee^es and Knights together again, commanding them with all speed
to be ready to go with him, not making the cause known to any: Who with all
speed buckled on their Armor, and at his coming down departed with him: Who
hasted with all speed toward S. Aust: Chapel, where he arrived with more
then ordinary speed. Angelica at the very instant of their arrival, was fallen
into a slumber, and dreamed that her Father Maximus had compassed the Chapel
with Armed-men, wherewith her senses were so affrighted, that she suddenly
started up from the place where she lay, and with a sudden shrike leapt to
Parismenos, and caught him in her arms. Parismenos maruelling, and being
amazed at her sudden cry, demanded what she ayled? Which for fear she
could not utter: that he half astonished, ran to his Armor, and armed
himself therewith, clasping his bright Sword in his hand: Which he had no
sooner done, but he heard one knock at the Chappeil-doore, which made him know
that it was not Iabine, and looking out at the Window, he saw thousands of
Getulians in Armor, which so appalled his Senses, that he was ready to fall
do^n dead. Angelica seeing his sudden sadness, likewise stepping up to the
Window, beheld the Soldiers without, that she fell down with grief: Which
Dulcia seeing, she with Anna took her up, and conveyed her into the Cell. Then
Parismenos opened the door, and the Getulian knights offered to enter, but
Parismenos setting himself in the door, with his Sword point bent against
them, told them, that whosoever entered first should die. With that Maximus
asked him what he was? I am (quoth. he) inferior to none, and therefore as good
as any. Art thou Marcellus? (quoth. he) I am not Marcellus, but his friend. Tell
me what thou art (quoth. Maximus) or I vow thou shall die. Maximus (quoth. he) I am
Son to Parismus of Bohemia, my name Parismenos, sometimes called the unknown
Knight. Maximus hearing his speeches, wondered at them, and said: Is not
Angelica with you? Yes (quoth. be) both Angelica and Marcellus are within. Deliver
them (quoth. Maximus) to ^ee, I will (quoth. he) upon condition you will take them
into favor, and remit all former displeasure you have taken against them, and
grant me Angelica in marriage. Otherwise, I stand here to defend them from
all the force of Getulia.

Maximus was so enraged with his speeches, that he answered: What madness does
possess thy mind, that stand upon such terms of resistance, when thou
see thousands of Armed Soldiers to incompasse thy life? think thou with
boasting speeches to avoid my displeasure, and disappoint my revenge? no, were
thou the greatest Potentate in the World, thou could not escape my hands:
With that he commanded his Knights to apprehend him by force; Who presently
began to enter upon him, but he (by reason of the narrowness of the Way)
stood in his own Defense, and flewe the first that came; and after him
another, and behaved himself so courageously, that which of them first entered,
first dyed: and had they all assayed to enter that way, he would have slain
them all.

Marcellus seeing what a mischief this slaughter might breed, and withal,
knowing that it was impossible for them any way to escape, but rather to
increase Maximus to more desire of revenge, stepped between Parismenos and the
Getulians: Who knowing him, would not offer a blow at him, whilst he spoke to
Parismenos, desiring him to be ruled by him: Who likewise considered that in
this extremity it was best to yield, for there was no hope of escape,
therefore he agreed to do according to his direction. Marcellus then upon his
knee, submitted himself to his Father. By this time the Getulians had beaten
down a great part of the Chapel, and rushed violently upon Parismenos: Who
disdained to be forced to yield, before they could overcome him, sent many of
their ghosts to hell, but in the end by their multitude, he was so thronged,
that he could not lift his arms to strike another blow, and so was constrained
to yield, whom Maximus commanded to be first bound.

Angelica seeing this, with weeping eyes humbled her self upon her knee to her
Father, and said; I beseech your Majesty use that Knight honorably, on
whose safety my life depends: More she would have said, but Maximus cut her
off with these speeches; Poor, shameless, and disobedient creature, Pleadest
thou for him, and not rather for pardon for thy own shameless deeds? Hold
thy tongue: for I will not hear thee speak a Word more. With that he
commanded them all to be apprehended, and so he departed with them to the
Court: first imprisoning Parismenos, and Gyuing him withboltes and fetters of
Iron, casting him into a most leathsome, stinking, and dark Dungeon. Angelica
he caused likewise to be discrobed of her Ornaments, and cast into a Prison,
with Anna and Dulcia, until they had more leisure to defermine of them.
Marcellus at the instant entreaties of the Queen and Nobles, he did not
Imprison, but with many rebukes and reproaches banished him his presence: vowing
if that ever he came in his sight, he should loose his head.

To rehearse the several complaints Angelica and Dulcia made, would be
tedious to reccount, and too grievous to recite, for they were such as would
force salt tears from Tyrants eyes, pierce the stony Rocks, and mollify
the hardened-Hearts of the most rude, cruel, barbarous, and inhumane monsters
in the whole World, being hardly used, scantly Dieted, and badly Lodged: That
Maximus often hearing their plaints, pitied their Laments, yet therewith was
rather drawn to more severity, then any way mollified.

Parismenos misery likewise, was nothing inferior to theyrs, or rather ten
times worse, being alone (they having the benefit of each others company: which
is a great comfort in misery) without light, for the Uault or Dungion
whereinto he was thrust, had not so much as a creuice, where through any light
appeared, being large and wide, far from any company, that he could not hear
any creatures voice, having but once a day food, which was Bread and Water, and
of that so little, that it would scarce preserve life: Clagd and ouerloden with
the burdenous weight of Chains and bolts: in which sort he continued many
days, without hope ever to escape from that place: Where you may suppose, his
cares were great, and his comforts small.

Many days being past, Maximus assembled all his Noble Peers, and Estates of
the Country together, to determine what to do with Parismenos, against whom
many Accusations were laid, which tended to the breach of their Laws,
especially that of Angelicaes Rape: Which was amongst them punished with death,
and that so severely, as that none escaped; whom the King in open Audience
condemned to dye the same death that their Laws yielded, which was to (...)
burnt.

Dulcia likewise they condemned to perpetual imprisonment: but for the Kings
children, by the Laws, they were to stand at their Parents disposition.

This News was soon conveyed to Marcellus knowledge, which struck an
exceeding torment to his heart: Which rather then he would endure to see, he
would execute his own death desperately, to save his Friend, that he fared
like a Madde-man, and wheresoever he became, he made those that beheld him
wonder, to see him so altered in gesture, and so suddenly that he quite
forsook the Court, and continually remained in Lady Panoraes house, so
secretly, that none knew what was become of him.

Parismenos having continued many days in the loathsome dungeon, maruelling
that he could hear no news from Angelica, and also that Marcellus had
forgotten to yield him comfort in his greatest extremity, thought that either
they were imprisoned, or else that the King in his Fury, had executed some
cruel revenge upon them. These cares on the one side were sufficient torments,
and his hard imprisonment and cruel usage on the other side, enough to kill
the stoutest heart, that had he not been preserved by admyrable and strange
operation, he could never have endured those calamities. At last he began to
despair of all hopes, and suddenly to recall his Senses, and with more comfort
to study how to release himself: And amongst many thousands of devises which
came into his Fancy, he devised how to entice the Keeper to come into the
Dungeon, which he thus contrived. The next time the Iaylor came to bring him
his usual Diet, he fained himself to be exceedingly sick, and groaned as
though he had gasped for his latest breath. The Iaylor hearing him make such
moan, asked him what he ayled. To whom Parismenos said: Good Iaylor, the
date of my life is now at an end, so that I never look to see the day light
again, being of all men most unfortunate, to end my wretched life in this
place, that might have lived in great dignity in mine own Country: but now
past hope of all comfort: only to thee am I able to do good before I die, I
have good store of Gold and Jewels about me, which I will give unto thee, if
thou will but do thy endeavor to save my life, for that I am yet in hope of
his mercy: and withal, I will declare unto thee, where thou shall have more
Riches then thou will ever be able to spend. All this will I do for thee, if
thou will help me out of this miserable life, to yield me same of thy help,
for that I am fallen, and am not able to rise. Many other persuasions
Parismenos used, which wrought so effectually with the Iaylor, that enticed
with hope of finding Wealth, and past fear of him that was so weak, he
opened the Dungion without any fear or doubt, (being thereto guided by the
Diniue providence) and came to Parismenos; Who no sooner saw him within reach
of his arms, (retaining a most manly courage notwithstanding his Weakness)
gathering all his strength together, caught hold on him and ouerthrewe him,
and getting upon him with swifte crawling, for that he was not able to stand
by reason of his Boltes, and having him under him, never left struggling and
striving with him, until he had strangled him. Then taking the Bunch of Keys
up, he loosened and unlocked all the Bolts that were fastened to his legs,
neck, and other parts of his body: Which when he had done, prostrating
himself upon his Knees, he praised God for that happy success: Then
presently without delay, he stripped off all the Iaylors Apparel, and
apparelled himself therewith, casting his body into the further end of the
Dungion, and so went out, and locked the Dungion door after him.

By this time it began to be dark: Which was a means to further him in his
escape, that in the Iaylors apparel he went into the Court, with the keys at
his gyrdle, and the Iaylors Fanchion, which he continually ware about him, and
met with diverse, passing by them without suspicion, and from thence he got out
at the Court-gates, being of every one taken for the Iaylor.

And being without the Court, he never stayed until he was out of the City,
^nging the Keys into a poole of Water hard without the Cittie-Gates, took
his Journey directly to Saint Austines Chapel, thinking there to find Iabin,
whom the King had mist, for that he was not in the Cell when Maximus had
apprehended Parismenos. Early on the next morning he arrived there, where at
his coming he found an Army of Horsemen, that spread all the fields with their
Troops, and presently he knew them to be Bohemians, some of them espying him,
taking him to be a Spy, carried him before Pollipus, who was their General.

Parismenos being come before Pollipus, was by him stricktly examined, to whom
he said. Wherefore have you brought this army into Getulia? (Why quoth
Pollipus) haste thou not heard how Parismenos is imprisoned by Maximus
wrongfully? and moreover, has judged him to a vile and shameful death, which
he is to suffer six days hence? Parismenos hearing his speeches, marvelled
how he should come to the knowledge of that news, which old Iabin had told
them. With that he said: Parismenos is not in prison, but now is at liberty,
which I came to give you knowledge of, for whom you need not take more care
Uillaine (uqoth Pollipus) what say thou, is Parismenos dead? With that his
color began to go and come, and his heart was exceedingly formented.
Parismenos then discovered himself, whom Pollipus espying, caught him in his
arms with a fervent embrace, the rest of the knights thronging about him with
exceeding joy. This news was soon spredde through the whole camp, who flung
up, some their staves, some their helmets, and every one something, yielding
forth many a shout for joy, then presently commandment (entermingled with
kind entreaty (was given, that none should upon no occasion whatsoever,
discover Parismenos being among them: being assured of the truth of his escape
by his own report.

CHAP. XX VIII.
How Pollipus besieged the City of Ephesus, and of the battle fought with
the Natolians. How Maximus recalled Marcellus from banishment, baniffit Dulcia,
relcaseth Angelica outof prison, sent so aid into Barbary and Lybia.

PArismenos being thus fortunately escaped from out of prison, and met with
Pollipus, gate him Armor whereby he might easily be known from the rest of
the Bohemians, and yet not be known whom he was, and presently without any
delay, he and Pollipus marched with their Troops to the City of Ephesus, and
begryt the same round. Maximus seeing his City begyrt with Soldiers, sent out
a Heralde to know what they were, who brought him word they were Bohemians,
that were come to redeem Parismenos, and to revenge the injuries he had done
him, upon salse reports of the king of Libia. Maximus hearing that, presently
commanded an Army of twice as many Natolians, as there were Bohemians, to
be gathered together, under the conduct of Duke Pridamor, a valiant and
resolute Nobleman, who according to his valor at the first approache, entered
battle with the Bohemians, and by great odds, thought soon to discomfort
them: but the Bohemians, being men of good experience, and expert Soldiers, as
little esteemed ye Natolians, as if they themselves had had the odds.
Parismenos now thought it time to bestirre himself, to work revenge, and to
make proof of his valor, that being gallantly mounted, be couched his spear,
and ran at a Natolian knight and pierced the same quite through his body: which
done, he drew his sword, and met another with so full a blow, that he tumbled
from his horse, and was trodden to death: an other with violence he rusht quite
through the guts, the forth lost his arm. And in this sort he entered into the
thickest of them, spending never a blow in waste: but either a Natolian lost
his life, or some part of his body thereby: that on a sudden, by his valor,
the Bohemians had distanckt the Natolians, and the Horsemen made an exceeding
flaughter amongst them. By this time Parismenos was come to the maine battle,
where he met with Pridamor, mounted upon a whife steed, his caparisons of
beaten Gold, beset with yearle and precious stones, his armor of the richest
workmanship, with a plume of spangeled feathers in his crest, who had ^wed to
satisfy his proud mind with Bohemians blood: at whom Parismenos ran having
gotten a spear, and contrary to his proud expectation, Parismenos forceable
encounter, turned his heels upward, and fell backward ^ouer his horse rump,
almost stified with his furniture: at which ye Bohemians gave an exceeding
great shout to see Parismenos valor. All this time Pollipus was not idle, but
showed such exceeding tokens of his valor, that all that beheld him and
Parismenos, thought there could not be two more valiant knights in the world.
After Tridamor had recovered his horse, he kept his band of soldiers together
more warily, and seeing what slaughter ye Bohemians had made, sounded retrait,
whilst the Bohemians pursued them even unto their Camp, and flew a great
number of them, that all the earth was strewed with their dead bodies. The
Bohemians likewise with joyful hearts returned to their tents, growing into
such admired estimation of Parismenos that they determined not to leave the
least part of his desire unperformed, though they achieved the same with
extreme peril and hazard of their lives.

Maximus and the Queen all this while stood and beheld the battle, maruelling
what two Knights they were that made such ha^cke amongst his Subjects, that he
was exceedingly enraged to see so much of his country blood shed: that
departing down, he assembled all his council together, asking their advice
and aid in this extremitis. Who at the last, won him to condescend to these
conditions, that Marcellus banishment should be repealed, whose absence
appalled the Natolians hearts, that they were rather like men confounded then
otherwise thereby. And that Dulcia should be banished, and sent out of the
City in base attire, with commandment, that upon pain of death none should
succor her. That Angelica should be released from prison, and restored to his
favor. That he should send into Libia, for the kings aid against the
Bohemians, the quarrel being partly his. That he should send his Ambassadors
to the K. of Barbaries to crane his assistance against the Bohemians. Which
Articles Maximus agreeed unto, rather then he would mittigate his ire, and send
back Parismenos in safety, which his Nobles earnestly required. Then was Marc.
banishment repeated, Ange. was taken out of prison: messengers sent into Libia:
Embassad. into Barbary. And Dulcia was presently taken out of prison, disrobed
of her attires, and clad in base and unseemly weeds, and so in an ouer^ng cast
out of the City gates, in most poor and miserable estate.

When she saw her self thus used, and knew that commandment was given, that
none upon pain of death should succor her, she then thought her estate most
miserable, and more wretched then when she was in prison, where yet Marcellus
knew of her being: but now in this poor estate she should be hated of all,
despised, rejected, and for want of food famished: yea and forsaken of
Marcellus. Then she began to study which way to remedy these evils, wherein
she saw nothing but imposibilities: sor she thought if she should be taken by
the Natolia^ soldiers, they would use her as a cast away, and not pity her:
but rather seek her dishonor, when she was without means of revenge: yt to
seek comfort there, she though^ it vain, and dangerous, and so many cares
oppressed her heart, yt she was almost overcome with grief. At last determined to
go to the General of the Bohemian Army, whom she thought would for Pa. sake
show her some pity, which the did the next morning: And being brought before
the General, she kneeled down and said: Most noble General, show pity to
a poor and forsaken woman, that by Fortunes mutability, and Maximus cruelty,
is driven to this poor estate without any desert. My name is Dulcia, sometimes
of good reputation in the Natolian Court, till Marcellus the Kings son
attained my consent to love him, and withal to avoid his fathers cruelty, at
such time as Parismenos had carried Angelica from the Golden Tower, to S.
Austins Chapel: My dear Lord Marcellus, likewise conveyed me into Angelicas
company, where I was taken with her, and so carried to prison. And now Maximus
I know not upon what occasion has banished me the City, and given
commandment that none upon pain of death should succor me: that in this
distressed estate I dare not be found of any of the Natolians, lest they should
(although not of their own will, yet by the Kings command) work my shame,
that Marcellus might forsake me: but am come to you for mercy, beseeching you
of pity, to shelter me with your favor from these wrongs.

Parismenos knowing ^er, came unto her, and took her by the hand, saying that
the King of Natolia should not wrong her in that place. Dulcia beholding his
countenance, presently knew him, and with reverence fell at his feet with
exceeding joy. But he taking her up again, led her with Pollipus to his Tent,
demanding how Angelica did, whom she acquainted with the sorrow that she daily
made for his imprisonment, and fear of his death, and how that when she was
banished, Angelica was taken into favor again: and how that none knew what
was become of Marcellus, wherewith she wept exceedingly: whom Parismenos
comforted by all means he could, himself gathering much comfort from her
speeches, of assurance of Angelicas love. The messenger that went into Libia,
made great have till he had delivered his message, which when the king of Libia
heard, thirsting for revenge of the knight of Fame, as he supposed he had done
for him, and also to revenge some part of the grudge he bare Parismus, ever
since his being in Thessaly and the overthrow he had received at his hands:
which he was in mind to have done, when he had him in the Court, but that it
would have bin too great a blemish to his honor: therefore he now mustred all
his forces together, and by sea conveyed them into Natolia.

Likewise the Ambassadors that went into Barbary, executed their Embassage
with such eloquence, that Moroco the King, collected an Army of a hundred
thousand Moors, and sent them by shipping into Natolia, under the conduct of
his eldest son Sancodelordoro, a most valiant, stout and courageous Prince:
which forces soon landed in Natolia, and pitched their Tents before the City
of Ephesus. Parismenos seeing these new come forces, maruailed of whence they
should be, but soon learned the truth thereof. Maximus likewise had knowledge
brought him of the king of Libias approach, and of Sancodelordoro his landing,
whom he welcomed with exceeding reioycings, and entertained with great
courtesies, feastings and banquettings.

CHAP. XXIX.
How Parismus arrived in Natolia with a band of soldiers, and of his joy for
Parismenos safety. How Maximus appointed Parismenos to be burnt. And the
lamentation Angelica made with Marcellus.

THe King of Libia thirsting after the Knight of Fames life, (whom he now knew
to be son to Parismus) used all the persuasions he could, to instigate
Maximus to revenge: who of his own disposition was ready inogh to such
tyranny: concluding within three days after, to put the same in execution
without remorse. And all the Natolians remained in great tranquillity, by
reason of the aid was brought them, and the multitude of their Army which was
like the sands in number. Parismus was now come into Natolia with his Army,
which was threescore thousand Bohemians, and Thessalians, whose approach
exceedingly rejoiced Parismenos and Pollipus. And having pitched his Tents near
unto the rest of his horsemen, he was met and welcomed by Pollipus, to whom
he said with a heavy countenance: O Pollipus, all the labor we have taken is
in vain to save Parismenos, only we may revenge his death. What injustice and
cruelty is this the heavens impose upon his head, that ever since his birth
has been everlastingly miserable? would God he had remained still in Bohemia,
and never have sought Angelicas love, and that my self with these soldiers
had guarded him, that we might eitheir have died with him, or else have
preserved him from that infamous death he is like to suffer. My Lord (quoth
Pollipus) Parismenos is in safety. How can that he (quot he) when the reports
in every man's mouth, that he must dye a most shameful death, and they have
him in prison. Parismenos then humbled himself upon his knee, whom Parismus
soon knew, and most lovingly embraced him, who certified him of all that had
happened, and that the King of Natolia did think he was still in prison. This
news exceedingly rejoiced Parismus heart, and that whereas before by reason of
his sadness, the whole camp had laid aside mirth, now hearing of his safety,
they reassumed new comfort.

Now the day was come nigh which Parismenos should be burnt, to which intent
Maximus caused a stake to be pitched in the chiefest place of the City, and
that the whole multitude of the Citizens were before the time of execution,
gathered together to see the same, that the house ^oppes, windows, streets,
turrets, and every place were p^stred with their abundance.

Angelica hearing thereof, began to exclaim and cry out most bitterly,
making such lamentations, that the heavens and every deity seemed to pity
her. When the time of execution was come, Marcellus, the king of Libia,
Santodelordoro, te Queen, and many thousand Knights of Natolia, Libia, and
Barbary, were assembled, and seated to see the same. And the Judges gone to the
dungeon to bring forth the prisoner. The Iaylors wife before missing her
husband, had broken up the dungeon door, where she found him dead, and
Parismenos fled, but fearing the kings fury, durst not bewray the same: but
apparrelled herhusband in Parismenos garments, and told the Judges that he was
dead, who taking it to be the right body, caused certain slaves to take up the
same, and in mourning wise brouht it to the place of execution. Angelica now
seeing the time was come, and having word brought her that Parismenos was
already gone with the Judges: fare her golden hair: cast off al her ornaments
from her head, and raged so extremely, that her da^zels could not hold her,
but getting a knife in her hand, she desperately vowed, that whatsoever
offered but to touch her, she would with the same end her life. With that she
ran down her chamber into the Court, from thence into the City, and so to
the place of execution, when the King was giving his judgment according to the
laws.

Her Ladies seeing her desperateness, durst not stay her, but ran after her,
and when she came to the place, she first ran to the fire, intending yt if she
found him there, she would die with him: but suddenly espying the Hearse, and
the Judges standing by the same, she ran thereto, with her Golden hair
hanging down her shoulders, her eyes swollen with griese, her Ornaments all
betorne and tortured, her hands all besmeared with blood, which she had cut
with holding fast the knife, and her face with the same blood all besmeared,
when with her bloody hands she wiped away the tears that hindered her sight, by
their abundant passage. Maximus and the Queen knowing her, ran to her with
exceeding haste, the King of Libia and Santodoloro were amazed hereat, and the
Citizens in an vproare, the Judges also offering to lay hands on her, but she
starting back, bent her knives point to her breast, protesting to gore it in
her heart blood, if they offered to touch her. Maximus likewise and the Queen,
by this time were come unto her, whom she would not suffer to come near her,
but vowed to be her own death: with which they were all amazed, the Ladies
they flood weeping and wringing their hands. At last one of the Judges thus
spoke: Good Angelica be quiet, this Knight is already dead in prison. With
that Angelica with her hand casting aside the hair which covered some part of
her face, holding the fatal knife desperately, and with an amazed countenance,
fixing her eyes upon her Father, said: Merciless and most cruel King, what
Tyranny is this you have showen, to be the unjust executiouer of that most
virtuous Knight, who never deserved such rygor, but only came into this
Country for my sake, whose death shall be the uttermost date of my wretched
life? Heavens grant this wrongful sheadding of innocent blood, may not go
unrevenged. All plagues of Heaven and Earth light upon their cursed heads, that
did this cruel deed. Here lies true loyalty and constant virtue slain.
Here lies valor and knightly honor massacred. Here lies the knight whose
splendour did beautify the glories of all the knights in the world. Here lies
innocent pity falsely accused, by the distoyall king of Libia, whom were he
living, would with his countenance abate thy courage. In him shinde all
prowess, and by his death what hau^ you gainde, but ignominious infamy,
perpetual shame and dishonor. As she was continuing the length of her spee^,
the peoples voices sounded forth the Echo of another dismal cry, for
Marcellus having knowledge of the execution, being in Panotas house, being
half apparelled, caught up his sword, and came running toward the place,
murdering such as hindered his speed: and with his sword made way for his
hasty steps, and lept to Angelica, solding her in his one arm, and holding
his sword luke warm with blood in the other, saying. Oh sister, what joy do I
conceive at your loyalty? now do I see you love Parismenos: be constant dear
sister, and let us both die with him, for he would not have refused a thousand
deaths for our sakes.

Then began the people to cry out: Save the kings children: and such an uproar
and tumult arose, that heaven and earth seemed to shake with the noise. The
Iaylors wife standing by, and seeing the two young Princes ready to sacrifice
themselves, being assured that none but her self knew the truth, and that
it rested only in her to save their lives, especially being touched with
remorse, she suddenly stepped to the two young Princes, and said. Stay, stay,
gentle young Princes, and hear the truth of all. This dead body whom you
suppose to be Parismenos, is the Iaylor, though cladde in his apparel, for
that worthy knight escaped out of the dungeon: if you behold the corpse, you
shall perceive it to be the body of my husband. With that Marcellus started to
the hearse, and casting off the cloth that covered the same, knew that it was
not Parismenos, then casting away his sword, he embraced Angelicas in his
arms: who seeing the truth of all, and that Parismenos was escaped, (with
whom she came of purpose to have dyed) let fall the knife from forth her
hand, and casting down her eyes to the earth, was clothed by the Ladies that
attended her. The king was so amazed with this news, that he stood like one
senseless: the King of Lybia, for shame of Angelicaes speeches, but his eyes
upon the earth with sad countenance, and all the whole assembly of the
beholders were confounded in their senses, and stood as men transformed into
admyration.

Presently in the midst of this amazement, came a knight posting with speed,
his countenance bewraying some tragical report, who uttered these speeches.
Most noble King, whilst you stand here, debating matters of small importance,
the Bohemians have destroyed thousands of your soldiers, who now run up and
down like men aghast, for want of their Captains, that all the fields are
strewed with their dead bodies, the valleys staind with blood, and the dry
ground is drunk therewith, our enemies arms are tired with slaughter, and we
compelled to fly for fear, with speed receive this evil, or else the pride
of Natolia is lost.

Then began a new terror, Maximus, the King of Lybia, Santodelodoro, Pridamor,
and all the Nobles of Natolia, hasted to the Camp, Marcellus ran to get him
Armor: the Queen, Angelica, and all the Ladies, went to a Tower to behold
this Battle, most to see the Bohemians death, but Angelica to behold the
valor of Parismus, who she heard was come to redeem his Son Parismenos, and
in some hope to see him amongst them, her heart inwardly uttering many devoted
Inuocations for the Bohemians Uictorie. Maximus and the rest, by this time were
come to the Gates, where they met with thousands of Soldiers, flying to save
their lives, whom they caused to turn back, and being without the Gates,
they could hardly pass, for the slaughtered carcasses of Moors, Natolians,
and Lybians, that lay dead, and in the Camp they saw such confused
slaughters, and heard such grievous cries, that it amazed their senses to see
the same; Here lay thousands flaine, there lay multitudes gasping for life, and
bathing in their Lukewarm blood: here others lay mangled, with wide
gaping-Woundes, there Horse and Men lay both dead together: the Natolians
flying, the Bohemians pursuing, and glutting their swords in blood. Then
Maximus cheered up his subjects to new courage, then the King of Lybia, began
for to gather together his scattred forces, and Santodelodoro, amongst his
Moors, and those that were before almost vanquished, gathering a new head.
Parismenos having knowledge of Maximus approach, never left until he had met
him. Which when he had obtained, he seemed to stretch his arms, purposing
revenge, and brandishing his Sword, smo^e at him with forcible blows, till he
beat him from his Horse, and being fallen to to the ground, he would have
trodden him to death with his Hors-hooues, hut that Pridamor, seeing the King in
that distress, with thousands of Natolian Knights rescued him, which before
they could attain, they lost many of their lives by Parismenos valiant
Chiualtie. Parismus in the mean time met the King of Lybia, and unhorsed him,
and after him many hundred Knights, so that none came within the compass of
his Sword, but dyed. Pollipus likewise maintained cruel fight against
Santodelodoro, that thousands of the vanquished Moors lost their lives by his
valor. And such slaughters were performed by Parismenos, being the first
Battle that ever he Fought, that both Parismus, and all that saw him,
admired to see the same, who had taken Pridamor Prisoner, and sent him to his
Tent.

The Queen and Angelica all this while beheld the Battle, the one with
fear, the other with joy, the Queen learning of Maximus death, and Angelica
in hope that the valiant Knight in azured Armor beset with Eagles of gold,
that made such slaughter, was Parismenos, which hope was bredde in her by
remembering his comely proportion which this did not much differ. By this time
the night began to approach, that the Bohemians weary of sheadding their
enemies blood, withdrew them to their Tents, appoynting most diligent watch to
be kept throughout the whole Camp. The Natolians and the rest of that party
glad of some respite, retired to their Tents, and numbering their Soldiers,
found the one half of them slain, and many grievously wounded, that they
could scarce butie their dead. Maximus was gone into the City grievously
wounded. The king of Lybia and Santodelodoro stayed in their Tents in the
Field. Angelica was returned to her chamber very sickly, by reason of the
overmuch desperature, vexation and grief she had endured that day, being yet
more comforted in her heart with hope of Parismenos safety, then she had been
many days before. Marcellus was returned to Panoraes house, tormenting
himself with exceeding grief for Dulcias absence, fearing that she was
perished, that he entered into that kind of lamentation, that Panora was
oftentimes in fear he would destroy himself. Dulcia was likewise all this
while in the Camp with Parismenos, in very sorrowful estate, for Marcellus
want. Thus each of these friends werein safety, yet none of them in hope to
see the other again.

CHAP. XXX.
Of two Battles fought with the Natolian Forces: the manner of Maximus cruel
death: and of the friendly league betwixt Parismus and Marcellus.

THe next morning, Maximus, the King of Lybia, and Santodelodoro, with the
States of Natolia, assembled together to determine the doubtful issue of this
war, and at last by a general consent, concluded to parley with their
enemies, and to that intent sent out a Herald to Parismus, who presently
returned answer, that if the King of Natolia would parley with him in the
Field betwixt both the Camps, he would there meet him, and conclude a peace
for one day, which the king of Natolia accepted. When they were met, Maximus
began as follows: Prince of Bohemia, what is it thou crauest at my hands? or
wherefore have thou brought, contrary to the laws of Kings, a band of
soldiers into this country, where thou act not to set foot without my
license? Natolian Tyrant (quoth he) I come to redeem my son, whom thou
have murtheren contrary to law, Justice and equity, whose blood I require at
thy unjust and cruel hands, also to revenge the manifold wrongs thou have
done him, by the disloyal and false accusation of the King of Libia here
present. Parismus (quoth he) I have done nothing to thy son, but according to
the laws of this land, which punishes rape, especially of a Kings daughter,
with death. My son (quoth he) never committed any such act, but carried away
Angelica, with her willing consent, whereby he is unjustly judged: withal, I
demand her of thee, as of right belonging unto him, for that she is his
betrothed wife, whom I will have before I leave Natolia, or see the ruin of
thee and of thy kingdom: therefore yield her into my custody. With that
Santodeloboro stepped forth and said: Think thou Bohemian to command us in
this place, thou art too weak, therefore be gone quickly, or thou shall soon
see so many Moors here, as shall confound thy senses with amazement. Know
(quoth Parismus) that what I have said I will perform, and so little do I
esteem your Forces, that I will yield those prisoners I have without ransom:
the he gave them Pridamor again. Many other speeches past betwixt them,
wherewith in the end Maximus was so enraged, that he swear by heaven and
earth, that he would rather see his own death, his countries wrack, and
Angelicaes destruction, before she should be given to his custody, and so
departed.

Parismenos was exceedingly troubled when he heard Maximus speeches, whom he
knew to be of so cruel a disposition, that he would rather indeed see her
death, then be crossed of his will, that he continued in great care and
continual torment of mind. As Soon as they were parted, Parismus, Pollipus,
and Parismenos, began to consult what to do, every one being desirous of
victory, at last Parismenos said. Most noble Father, if I may presume to give
counsel to you that are of far greater ^sedom, and better experienced in
these ^martial affairs than I am, this is my opinion: Maximus is of yt cruel
disposition, that rather then he will be contradicted, he will see the
destruction of himself and his posterity, that it is not valor, but
wilfulness, that makes him resolute: their foes likewise, are so much
weakened by the last slaughter we made amongst them, that if we can give them
another sudden Onset, they will be utterly dismayed: Besides, the Kings eldest
son Marc, is my dear Friend, on whose faith and fidelity, I durst repose my
life: Who if he could attain the City, would be ready to aid us; Therefore
so pleasath you, let us give the Onset, when they are in their dead sleep,
which will bring such terror and amazement to their hearts, that they will be
like men amazed. Parismus hearing his Words, liked his counsel very well: And
thus he contrived this business, the Band should be divided into three parts:
the one to be under the Conduct of himself, the other under Parismenos, and
the third under Pollipus: Which was so secretly done, that the Getulians had
not the least knowledge thereof.

About midnight, when all things were at silence, and the Getulians void of
suspicion, the Bohemians left their Tants, and Pollipus with his forces gave
the Onset, violently rushing into the Getulians Camp, on that side was next
them. Parismenos went betwixt them and the City. And the Prince of Bohemia
marched about with his forces and invaded them on the back side. The Getulians
being then in their deep sleep, and without the least thought of any such
invasion, were so amazed with this assault, that they ran up and down, some
weaponlesse, and some half armed, and some with their swords only: and the
Bohemians in the midst of them, making an exceeding slaughter.

The King of Libia and Santodelodoro were so eager, that they ran up and down
calling for their Armor, and crying out, courage, courage. And being armed,
they began to courage their amazed soldiers, with many comfortable speeches,
but the Bohemians were so thick amongst them, and had so much disordered them,
that some of them lost their lives as they were putting on their armor: others
were slaughtered, even whilst the sleep were in their eyes: others strooken
dead, as they were lifting their arms to strike the first blow: and some
slain before they could recall their senses from amazement: there might one
hear the dismal groans of murdered souls: there might one perceive slaughter
in her royalty, and revenge fills his thirsty heart with blood: fear stood
trembling in his right hew, terror appeared in the Moors ghastly looks, and
victory on the Bohemians swords. The Prince behind them, slaughtering some
before they could look back. Pollipus before them with his fury, parting the
souls from the bodies. And Parismenos with his bloody Swoorde, cutting off
their passage to the City. The Prince met with Santodelodoro, and made him
flee to save himself from death. Pollipus met with Pridamor, and gave him so
many Wounds, that he durst no longer abide his sight: Parismenos, turned
back the King of Lybiaes steps, hasting to the City, and pursued him with
such eager chase, and gave him so many grievous Wounds, that had he not
withdrewe, and held himself amongst a throng of Lybians, he had died by his
hands. All the Natolia^s were amazed, terrified, discouraged and confounded in
their thoughts, being so cruelly and valiantly assaulted by the Bohemians,
that they began to fly and forsake the Camp, every one shifting to save his
life: there was such a cry, that the noise thereof was heard into the City. The
Citizens, supposing there had bin some mutiny in the Camp, amongst Soldiers,
ran out at the Gates: Which advantage Parismenos soon espied, and got their
possession. Then began the Citizens to cry out, and ran with amazed terror:
the Beacons were set on fire, the bells rung out with a confused noise, and
every sign of amazement was made. This noise soon came to Maximus hearing,
who vexed with a chaos of confused thoughts, caught up a sword, and in a
desperate fury ran into the City, the Knights be took them to their Armor,
the Ladies forsook their Beds, wringing their hands, and making great
lamentations. Angelica affrighted with their cries, apparelled her self, not
knowing what this great tumult should pretend. Marcellus likewise was with the
noise awakened from his sleep, and leaving Panoraes house, with his Sword in
the one hand, and his Doublet in the other, ran out into the open streets, to
see what might be the cause of this uproar. By this time the streets were
filled with Soldiers, and Parismenos was gotten to the Court-gates: Where he
met with Maximus the King, but would not offer to touch him: Who like a
furious, mad, and desperate man, ran amongst the Bohemian Soldiers,
brandishing his sword, and slaughtering such as stood next him, where he met
with Marcellus ranging about, stark mad with grief; Who desired him to
withdraw himself, least he were destroyed by the common-Souldyers: but he
refusing his counsel, and overcome with mad Frenzy, rushed in amongst the
thickest of them, ^out consideration, Wounding some, and slaughtering those
that offered not to touch him (being before commanded by Parismenos not to lay
violent hands on him) but his carlesse surie wrought his own downfall: and
his own folly confirmed the Prophecy that he had long time feared: For most
lamentably in throng of the Bohemian Horsemen, he was trodden to death. By this
time Marcellus was come to the Court, fearing least the Soldiers should enter,
and affreight the Queen and Angelica, Where he found Parismenos, though
unknown, keeping the Entrance, running at him most furis ously; To whom
Parismenos said: Marcellus hold thy hands, here is none but Friends. With
that word he said; Who art thou that know me? I am (quoth. he) a friend to
Marcellus, and wish you withdraw your self into the Court, least you be hurt
amongst my soldiers. Marcellus hearing his speeches, stepped within the
Court-Gates. By this time the Prince of Bohemia and Pollipus had put the
Natolian forces to fleight, and taken Santodelodoro and Pridamor prisoners, the
king of Lybia was fled, the common-Souldyers had ransackt the Camp, and
began to sack the City, until the day began to appear: and the Prince of
Bohemia and Pollipus having attained victory, gave commandment that none
upon pain of death should offer to enter any of the Citizens houses.

The Nobles seeing what slaughter the Bohemians had made, how the Moors and
Lybians were fled, and the City ready to be sacked, came to the Queen, and
certified her the truth of all. Who missing Maximus, carelessly ran into the
City to seek him, renting her garments, and making exceeding moan: and at
last found him trodden to death, and not slaughtered by man's force, but by the
brute Beasts: casting her self carelessly and desperately upon his dead Corpse,
uttering many lamentable speeches, until the Nobles withheld her, from doing
her salfe violence, which she often intended, and taking up the dead kings
corpse, carried him to the Court with great lamentation.

Marcellus camming to Parismus, with a kind behavior, said; Most Noble Prince
of Bohemia, I beseech you stay your incensed wrath, and seek not the Ruin and
Destruction of this City and us: For Maximus being dead, there is none that
will make resistance, but rather entertain you with willing hearts, being
always unwilling to have moved you to seek this Revenge: but that it was not
in us to contradict Maximus will: Who was rather led and ouerruled by rags
then advise: Therefore we yield our selves to your mercy. Parismus being
certified that it was Marcellus whom loved Parismenos, and was always his
dear Friend, said.

Noble Prince, think that I sought no way to iniure you, but to redeem my
Son, and revenge his wrong: Which now the just Heavens have executed in my
behalf: but what restitution can be made me for his less: Whose untimely
death was noted by Maximus cruelty? I seek not your harm, but his recovery:
Therefore be you assured of Peace, and that I will at your request cease all
further strife, upon your Princely promise of security. Marcellus then said, I
have always honored your Name: much more do I affect your presence, desiring
nothing more, then to be well esteemed of you: that now Maximus is dead, and my
self next to succeed in the Kingdom: Whosoever shall offer injury to the
worst Bohemian Soldier, I will hate him whilst I live: Therefore I beseech you
rest in assurance, upon my promise, and vouchsafe such Entertainment as this
Court can yield, too unworthy to give you Welcome. Which words Marcellus
spoke in the hearing and presence of all the Nobles and Peers of his Land: who
likewise (notwithstanding the slaughter the Bohemians had made) willingly
ratified his speeches, with their unconstrained consent.

Parismus then alighted and embraced Marcellus, and Pollipus did the like:
First, appointed what the Soldiers should do: And then went into the Court
with Marcellus.

The Soldiers that were dispearsed to every corner of the City, returned to
the Camp, saving only a sufficient Guarde of Bohemian Knights, that stayed
to Guarde the Prince. Marcellus sent out messengers, to gather together all the
scattered Troops of the Getulian Campd, and gave them great Rewards: those
that were maimed and Wounded, he also caused to be brought to a place, where
they were very diligently looked unto by skillful Physicians. And every one
notwithstanding their former discontentes, were by Marcellus highly satisfied.

CHAP. XXXI.
How Sicheus, son to the Emperor of Constantinople, Remulus king of Thrace,
and others, landed in Natolia. Of Parismenos discovery: How he was elected
Angelicaes husband, by the consent of the Peers. And how Angelica performing
Hymen's rytes, was stolen away by the King of Tunis, from whom she was again
taken by certain Out-lawes.

MArcellus having ordered these affairs, then being with Parismus and
Pollipus, the news was brought, that Remulus the King of Thrace, was landed
with a mighty Band of Thracians: and that Camillus was likewise Landed with a
Band of well armed Soldiers. With whom Sycheus Son to the Emperor of
Constantinople had met, having with him a mighty Band of Grecians.

Marcellus hearing this news, sent out Heralds to know the cause of their
coming: Who returned and certified him, that Camillus came to aid the K: of
Natolia, and that Sycheus and Remulus had brought those forces in the aid of
Parismenos, but being certified of the victory the Bohemians had attained, and
being assured of the Peace was concluded, and of Maximus death, had sent back
their Bands, but themselves with Troops of gallant Knights were coming to
the Court: Marcellus then sent out his Nobles, to give them good entertainment.

Angelica being now at liberty, came down, attended by a gallant train of
beautiful Ladies, her sad countenance bewraying her hearts sorrow, and with a
most comely, and kind submisse gesture, Welcomed Parismus, uttering these
few words. Honorable Prince, regarding the denoted duty wherein I am bound
to your Worthiness, in that you are Parismenos Father, I rejoice to see your
safety, though I have cause enough to sorrow, my self being the chiefest
mean of your disquiet, and by my unlucky Destinies have been the greatest
procurer of these griefs. And since your noble Son Parismenos for my sake,
and my Fathers cruelty, has endured many miseries, and death too by all
likelyhoods, I humbly desire you both, to remit all cause of discontent
conceived against us: and also to vouchsafe me that favor, as if you know of
his abode or safety, you would comfort my heart with that knowledge: for an
excending fear of his death does still trouble my Senses, which if I were
assured of, then would I soon resolve to follow him, for that without him, I
am not, for in him I live, and in his death my life confisteth. With that an
exceeding ouer-flowing of tears stopped the passage of her speech, that for
inward hearts sorrow, she could not utter a word more.

Parismenos being before minded not to discover himself, seeing her tears,
viewing the often change of her countenance, whereby he saw her heart was
exceedingly oppressed with care, now put off his disguise, being drawn wtth joy
for her presence, hoping for ever to enjoy her without contradiction, and
forced by a resistles desire to comfort her, and himself with her. When her
eyes were full of tears, her heart of grief, and all sad to see her sorrow,
he embraced her in his arms. With that Marcellus ran unto him for joy, the
Ladies were glad, and the Nobles were contented with that pleasiing sight:
and within few days cast aside all sorrow for Maximus death, because they had
lived in disquiet during the time of his reign: only the Queen rested still
in heaviness.

Angelica having found her dear Knight, thought to stay no longer in that
public assembly, but departed with Marcellus and Parismenos unto her chamber.
Parismenos and Pollipus accompained the Queen, using many persuasions to
comfort her. Marcellus then being with Angelica and Parismenos, amongst many
other speeches, could not forgette Dulcia, on whom his thoughts were
continually bent, enduring great care for her: for that he could by no means
tell what was become of her, but feared that Maximus cruelty had sought her
untimely death, to whom Parismenos declared both where she was, and how she
came thither. Then Marcellus heart was revived with joy, and both he and
Angelica rested in exceeding great content.

By this time Sycheus, Camillus, and Remulus, were come to the Court, and
Marcellus and Parismenos hearing thereof, went down to welcome them. Amongst
the rest, Parismenos yielded Sycheus many thanks for his kindness. Marcellus
gratulated Camillus friendship. And Parismenos with Remulus renewed their former
familiarity. That by the approach of the estates, and a number of Knights that
attended them, the Getulian Court exceeded in Royalty, and all in general
after Maximus Funeralles were performed, remained in great joy.

The King of Lybia after his discomfiture, hearing the report of these news,
departed toward Lybia. Santodelodoro likewise sent home the remnant of his
dismayed Moors into Barbary, but himself stayed in the Getulian Court.

Many days together this royal assembly stayed in the Getulian Court in
great joy, spending the time in much mirth and honorable exercises.
Parismenos likewise attained the consent of ye whole estates, to marry
Angelica: and Marcellus had caus^d Dulcia in most Stately sort to be fetched
from the Bohemian Camp, and to be honored as his betroathed Queen, and by
that means all of them enjoyed their hearts content, and delighted themselves
with each others sweet presence. The time for the Solemnization of the
wedding being appoyinted, and much sumptuous preparation made against the day:
the Knights making ready their costly Armours and rich furnitures for the
triumph: the Ladies electing choice of rich attires, and Ornaments to adore
their beauties: Skaffolds making to behold the Tylt: and every ones mind
repleat with joy. And in this sort was every one busy to honor these Nuptials.

The Getulians have a custom, which is generally observed amonst them, that
the Brides the day before their marriage, offer Sacrifice in Hymen's Temple,
whom the married folks adore as a God. Which superstitions custom, is in such
use, and of such high regard amongst them, that they account it not lawful for
any to marry, before they have performed those rights, reputing them for
accursed, that neglect the same, and esteeming them inricht with many blessings,
that execute those superstitions, with most devotions. The manner whereof is
this: the Brides are adorned with rich Ornaments, and Crowned with Garlands of
Flowers, and in that sort they go to the Temple, attended by one Damozel, which
carries their incense, which is balls of Frankensence, and Rosewater which
themselves cast into the fire, that burns upon the Alter: Which done, Hymen's
Priest says certain prayers, and uses to bless them with many inuocations,
which likewise done, the Bride continues after that saying many prayers to
Hymen, such as ye Uotaries have framed. Now the time of Angelicas and Dulcias
wedding being come, for that but one could at once do sacrifice, Dulcia was
appointed to Hymen's Temple the first day; and Angelica the next: which
solemnity Dulcia performed with great pomp. And the next day Angelica
attiring her self in the usual sort, was attended to the Temple door by
Sicheus, Parismus, Camillus, Sontodelodoro Remulus, Pollipus, Pridamor, and
many others gallant Knights, and by a gallant train of courtly Damzels. And
entered the Temple only with Anna, whom she most near^ly loved. The door
being fastened by the Priest, the knights returned back to the Court, and the
Ladies departed until the time of her return, which would be within three
hours. The Priest wanting something that belonged to the sacrifice, went into
the house to fetch the same, where he was no sooner entered, but he saw
certain knights, who suddenly laid hands on him. The Priest maruelling at
this outrage, demanded what they were, and therefore they came, to whom one of
them said: We come for Angelica, and her we will have: and therefore speak but
a word more and thou die. With that one of the chiefest of them, demmaunded
2. of his servants to keep him fast. Which done, he alone with one more,
entered the Temple, where he found her staying for the Priest, Angelica seeing
two Knights in Armor enter the Temple, was with that sight suddenly aghast,
fearing some treachery, as indeed it fell out. For one of those knights came to
Angelica, and told her, that she must go with him. Which said: he took her by
the hand to lead her out of the Temple: with that Anna began to shrike and cry
out, but the other knights drawing forth a dagger, swore that if she did offer
to cry he would split his heart. Ang. well understanding, yt this vilanous act
was co^plotted by treachery, thus said. Uillain, what outrage is this thou
offerest, whither will thou convey me, what treason do thou intend? Peace
Lady (quoth he) for I must and will carry you with me: neither make any
resistance, for that which I came for, I will perform. Then he took her by the
arm, and led her with force out of the Temple, into the Priests house, where
she saw the Priest bound. And from out of his house they conveyed her into a
Litter, which was close, that though she made great lamentation, yet she could
not be heard, and causing Anna to mount up behind a knight, they carried them
away with the Priest: which they did so closely and with such expedition, that
they escaped away vndsecried, by reason the Temple stood on the outside of the
City.

Now this Knight that carried away Angelica, was the barbarous King of Tunis,
named Irus, who long time before Parismenos arrival in Getulia, had bin a
suitor to Angelica, but was denied her by Maximus, and departed from thence in a
discontented vain, who having soiourned many days in Getulia, was well
aquainted with their customs, and hearing all that befallen in the Court, and
of Maximus death, had many days awaited this opportunity, well knowing
before that she would come to Hymen's Temple, to offer the acustomed sacrifice:
came at the very instant and surprised them, and having past without suspicion
out of the suburbs of the City, hasted with all speed he could toward his
country. And by the way as he went, they entered at thick wood, where Irus
purposed to rest himself, to determine which way to take, fearing to be
surprised, for that he knew she should be soon mist: he had not stayed there
long, but he was descried by certain Knights that ltued in those woods: the
cause of whose abode in that place shall be declared in the next Chapter: who
hearing many lamentatons that Anna made, set upon Irus whom they thought to be
a personage of great estate, and by the richness of his Armor, which was on
the skirts and sides enamelled and besette with rich stones, all over besette
with bleeding hearts of Azure.

Irus seeing himself thus beset, drew his sword in his defense, with that one
of ye company blew a horn, wherewith there suddenly came out ten in Armor,
with the rest of their fellows, equalling the number that was with Irus,
between whom began a most sincere combat, which continued so long, that there
were some flaine of both parties. Hymen's Priest, in this time secretly stole
away. And Angelica being in the Litter, looked out thereat, beholding that
cruel fight, maruelling what those should be, that had stolen her from the
Temple, and what those should be that sought to rescue her from them, but she
was so exceedingly oppressed with terror, that her vital senses were ready to
yield up her latest breath.

By this time Irus Knights were most of them, slain, and some grievously
wounded, saving Irus, who being a Knight of resolved courage, continued the
combat with great valor against his assailliant, who seemed to be a Knight of
exceeding courage, as he was indeed, and by his strength soon brought Irus
within his mercy: who fearing his death, desired the Knight to hold his hand.
Tell me then what thou art (quoth he?) I will not (quoth he) tell thee my name,
but I am of Tunis, Angelica hearing that word, gave a sudden shrike, wherewith
the Knight looking back, beheld her most exceeding beauty, which was
beautified with her Garland of flowers, that he stood as one amazed thereat,
taking her rather to be a divine, then a mortal creature: that he said. What
Lady is this, that is fearful to hear thy name? It is (quoth he) Angelica:
with that he fell down for faintness, by effusion of blood. The Knight then
stepping to Angelica, said: Lady, you now are mine by conquest: therrfore fear
not his name, and go with me, where you shall not want any thing that you will
desire: with that he took her out of the Litter, and carried her and Anna away
with him, and left Irus amongst his Knights almost wounded to death, but three
of them having escaped that cruel massacre.

CHAP. XXXII.
How Marcellus finding Irus knew him. Of Parismenos sorrow. How he departed
in a disguise from Ephesus. How Parismus departed toward Thessalie. How Irus
and Parismenos met in the desert, and what afterward befell.

Hymen's Priest having escaped, hastted with all speed until he came to the
City: he Citizens seeing him there, running as though he were agaste, whom
they thought had been at the Temple, for that Angelica was supposed to be there
even then, wondered thereat: and many of them ran after him, who being come
toward the court, met the Bridegroom, and all the rest of the states going
toward the Temple, who seeing him in that case, were driven into admiration:
but he casting himself before them, breath not suffering him to utter any
longer speech, cried out, Angelica Angelica, and after that he recovered a
little more breath, he cried again: Angelica is betrayed, stolen away by
treason.

With that Parismenos was so confound in his senses, that he was like one
senseless, and all the rest were dismayed with fear of this doubt, till the
Priest to satisfy them, declared the truth of all that happened, and how that
he had left Angelica in the wood called the desert. Parismenos hearing his
speeches, said. What knight will bring me to that place? with that every one
ran for their steeds, and Parismenos amongst the first, was first mounted,
and with Marcellus posting toward the desert. Parismus, Sicheus, and all the
rest, with enraged fury betook themselves to their steeds, that on a sudden
the whole Country was bespred every way with Knights.

This news likewise came to the Behemian Came, that the horsemen posted every
way, the Ladies ran to the Temple, where missing Angelica, they filied the
hollow Uaultes thereof with their cries, the Courtiers were amazed, the City
in an uproar, and the Queen in great fear.

Parismenos and Marcellus first gate into the desert, where according to the
Priests speeches, with little search they found Irus amongst his few wounded
knights almost dead, whose head they had uncovered to give him breath.
Marcellus soon knew him, and by his Armor which Hymen's Priest had deciphered
so well as he could, he knew that it was he that carried away Angelica.
Parismenos coming to him, being exceedingly enraged, offered to thrust his
sword through him. But Marcellus staying his hand, said. This is Irus the king
of Tunis. With that likewise he said to Irus (who knew Marcellus) King of
Tunis. What dishonor is this thou have done to Angelica? That which I have
done (said he) I repent not, but for that I have lost her.

With that Parismenos said: Where is she, which way went she? then one of the
wounded Knights said, she was rescued from us in this place, and the knights
that have her, departed out of the wood that way. By this time Parismus and
Sicheus was come, and Parismenos and Marcellus, again hasted that way the
knight directed them. By this time all ye desert was beset and searched
throughout with knights, and Marcellus and Parismenos were stayed from ye have
they made, for that they met with thousads of knights that had bin in every
place of those parts of ye country, but could not once hear of her, or of any
knight but of their own company, that Parismenos at Marcellus entreaty
returned back to Parismus and the rest, to know their advice before he went
from them, which Marcellus had a great care of him fort hat he knew his grief
was such, that he would never return until he had found, for whom likewise
they should take as much care for him being absent. Parismus hearing the report
of the knights that had bin every way in her search, could not tell what to
say, or what to think: but first, he desired those that loved Angelica, to
post every way in her search, and speaking to thousands of his knights, he
commanded them to depart presently, both in the furthermost part of Natolia,
and also into the neighboring Countries in her search, which he thoughee was
the best means to find her, for he was sure they could not b^trauelled far
in that short space. Promising to reward him most richly that could find her,
or could hear of her abode: with that the knights departed every way.

Parismenos was exceedingly tormented with grief, and thought himself
negligent to stay there, and not to be in her search: but not knowing which
way to take, his senses were dulled with that grievous conceit. To whom
Parismus said: Be of good comfort Parismenos, for we shall hear of Angelica
again: therefore I pray do not you leave us too, least our care be as great
for your absence: for there are so many knights in her search, that she cannot
by any means be so secretly conveyed hence, nor so speedily, but we shall hear
thereof.

My Lord and Father (quoth he) I beseech you let me make some diligent search
for her, otherwise my mind will not be satisfied: and I beseech you to return
to the Court with these Nobles, and leave me alone in her search, that amongst
the rest, I that have most cause, may according like a friend, do my best to
find her. As for my safety, take you no care, for be you assured, I will
preserve my self from danger, only for her sake, which liberty, if you grant
me by leaving me here alone, it shall be a great deal more pleasing to my
mind, then to be pend in the Court in idleness.

If you promise me (quoth he) faithfully to return again, I will give my
consent, but yet go with us to ye court this night, and to morrow depart. I
will, my Lord (quoth he) return to morrow: for this night I may sooner find
her, then hereafter, for that notwithstanding our search, she may be in this
Desert, which if it be so, they will convey her hence this night. Parismus and
the rest seeing his resolution, and trusting to his promise to return, left
him, and departed back to the Court with Irus, for that the night drewenigh.
Marcellus would have stayed with Parismenos, but that he saw he ^ather
desired to be alone, that he likewise having as heavy heart as any of the rest,
depari^d.

Parismenos being alone by himself, began to study what to do, sometimes
thinking she was within the Desert, where she might be, for that it was of an
exceeding compass, then heremembred, that one of Irus Knights told him that
they left the wood, which bred a contrary persuasion in him, that they were
departed, and gone some whither else, that in a multitude of thoughts not
knowing what to do, and having in these cogitations spent most part of the
night, without the least hope, at last tired with grief, and filled with care,
he alighted from his Steed, whom he fastened to a bush, and sat himself down
under a Tree, as one that had been quite given over to careless despair:
where we will leave him to speak of Angelica.

The Knight that had rescued Angelica from Irus, presently conveyed her to the
thickest of the Desert: in the midst whereof he had a Cave, or rather
Labyrinth, most artificially framed, wherein were diverse rooms, vaultes, and
turnings, not made by nature, but by the Art and Industry of skillful workmen,
and with great cost. In which place in times past, the Giant Malachus kept his
secret abode. Into this place they brought Angelica, and comforting her with
many fair speeches, which were most sharp to her hearing, refusing all
comfort, denying to taste any food which they offered her, and shunning their
company, till at last, the chiefest of them said. Lady, be not thus
impatient, nor use me not so discurteously, as to shun my company, that have
deserved no such hatred, unless it were in doing you good, for I have
released you from the bondage you were in, by means of those that had you in
their custody, that had as it seemed by Damozels complaints, with violence
brought you to that place. For my self, I will use you so honorably as your
heart can wish: neither shall you have any violence offered you, but rest in as
good security as you can desire: for this place harb^reth no tyrants, nor
discurteous creatures, but such as are of virtuous inclination, although by the
cross mischances of hard^ Destenie, we are driven to live in this place. And
not so much by destenie, as by the cruelty of Maximus, king of this country,
to whom never any offense was given by any of us: for know Lady, that my name
is Iconius, sometimes Duke of Sextos: but now bannished by your Father Maximus
from my Dukedom, by the false accusation of Pridamor, and the Kings malice:
Who accused me of Treason and Conspiracy with the King of Tunis: Who long
since attempted by Treason to betray his life, and to attain your Possession:
Wherein the Heavens know how Innocent I was. And not contented with my
banishment, and confiscation of my Goods, he also sought my life, with great
cruelty, promising great Rewards to those that could find me out, or bring
him my head. This is the cause of my desolate Life, Wherein I find greater
quiet then in Courtly-pompe. Therefore I pray you be contented with such
homely entertainment as my poor habitation yields, whither you are as
Welcome as you should be to the place you would desire to be in.

Angelica hearing his speeches, was more grieved then before, for that she
feared, he would in Revenge of her Fathers cruelty, still detain her there,
that with the fear she had taken by these outrages, such a passion oppressed
her heart, that she fell down dead: and Anna seeing the same, cried out most
lamentably, and did her endeavor the best she could to recover her: Which when
they had done, Iconius helped to convey her to one of those Rooms very sick,
and in great danger of her life, being diligently tended by Anna: Who had all
things necessary to comfort her in that extreamitie, where there was no want
of any thing.

Iconius having le^t Angelica with Anna, came amongst the rest of his company,
having been sometimes Knights of estimation, likewise by misery driven to
that Society, having lived in that place many years: Where they were as
secure as in the safest place in the World, where they kept themselves close,
Not once styrring abroad, for that they knew, the whole Court would be in an
uproar for Angelicaes absence: By which means, the diligent search that was
made, was all in vain: For diverse Knights had passed over the Cave, yet could
not discern the same, the Entrances thereto were so secretly contrived:
neither was there any dyrect path to be seen; For Iconius living in continual
fear of his life, was careful thereof.

Parismenos continued all that Night, Sometimes resting himself, and again
sometimes tracing up and down the solitary Desert: Where he met with many
furious Beasts, and heard the notes of many Birds, that fly abroad only in
the Night, uttering many a sad groaning sigh, and many a mournful speech:
Sometimes lamenting his own hard hap, and then her misfortune: not knowing
whether himself or Angelica were more miserable, accounting himself most
unfortunate to be parted from her, but her in much more misery, to be under
the government of strangers.

Again, maruelling what they should be that so had rescued her from Irus, but
most of all, could not imagine to what secret place they had so sud^enly
conveyed her, finding so many causes of care, and so little hope of comfort,
either by hope te find her, or consideration of these sad events, that his
heart was repleate with sear: His head was full of troubled thoughts: his
senses dulled with sorrow, and his Fancy ouerburdened with conceit: his body
Wearyed, and his Eyes swollen with grief: that all the night nor the day
finding no hope of comfort, he wandered toward the Court, like one not caring
what he did, nor whether he went: Letting his Steed carry his head in careless
sort, that he seemed to mourn with his Master: And being come to the Court,
he was kindly used and comforted by his Father, and his Friends. Marcellus and
Remulus, by all the best persuasions they could use, gave no ease to his
restless cares: There was now such an alteration, as if all things had changed
their hue: the Knights that had prepared furniniture, attired to adorn the
Wedding, had put on Mourning attire: the Ladies that before rejoiced, turned
their joy to Weeping, and their pleasure into mourning: forsaking company, and
choosing dark corners to Weep in. The Citizens whose hearts were on the
height of delight, were now grown pensive: and their countenances bewrayed
their griafe.

The great Preparation stood at a careless stay: neither going forwards nor
backwards, and all things in such a confused alteration; as though all things
had been quite given over to alteration: that even the vainer sort of people
that had delight to see shows, were grieved to be frustrated of their desire.

In this sort continued they all many days, being void of all hope, but only
to hear some Welcome news by such Knights as were gone in search of
Angelica: Whose diligence they knew would be great in that behalf.

Many days after, continued Angelica in that Desert place, very daungerously
sick, so that Anna thought she could not by any means escape.

Parismenos likewise continued in the Natolians-Court, until all the Knights
that went in search of Angelica were returned, without returing any News at
all of her: Which drove Parismenos into, new conceits and thoughts what to
do: For his care for her absence, and fear never to see her again, made him
Weary of his life, Weary of all company, and Weary of the Court, which seemed
to him no other then a place of discontent, and the sight of some of their
mirth increased his Woe, that he determined to leave the Court, and spend his
leathed Life in some solitary place: And at last, he thought, in the Desert
where his Love was lost, to loose himself: that very shortly after, Arming
himself in a murrey Armor, he secretly in an Evening goie from the Court,
and hasted with such speed as his Steed could make toward the Desert.

He was no sooner gone, but he was as soon mist at the Court, for whose
absence great sorrow was made. And the next day many of his Knights went in
search of him: From whom he secretly shrouded himself, and saw some of
them: Whom had they seen him, they could not have known him in that
disguised Armor.

Thus many days past in his search, but being still frustrated, they were all
out of comfort, especially Parismus, Pollipus, and Marcellus, were very sad:
but yet in hope of his safety, although they knew not where he were, for they
were assured he absented himself of purpose.

Within short time after, there arrived certain knights that brought Letters
out of Bohemia, unto Parismus: Which certified that his Father the King was
very sick, and not to live long, and therefore desired him to return, Which
caused Parismus to leave the Getulian Court, and gave order to Pollipus, to
march away with the Bohemian Soldiers, being most unwilling to leave his
Son Parismenos behind him: but because he saw there was no remedy to
recure the least of these evils, or recover him, for that he absented himself
voluntarily, and he was peradventure traveled far from that place. Parismus
taking Farewell of the rest of the accompanied, by Sycheus, first having let
Irus depart, and forgiving his offense for his part, he departed, leaving
Marcellus very sadd^for his absence. After his departure, Marcellus sent away
the King of Tunis, upon certain conditions between them concluded. Remulus
sorry for Parismenos and Angelicas misfortune, departed toward Thrace. And
Camillus, and Santodelodoro, to their own Countries.

And within few days after, Marcellus was with great solemnity Wedded to
Dulcia: the Preparations being exceeding, but yet so darkened by the absence
of Parismenos and Angelica, and the rest of the States that had been
assembled, that it seemed like joy and mourning intermingled.

Irus being departed from the Getulian-Courte, glad of his own safety, for
that before he feared his life: but much more sad, for that he was
disappointed of Angelica: By the way as he returned to his Country, being
(vnaccompanyed) he entered the Desert, his mind being drawn yet with desire to
see the place where he lost her: near unto which Parismenos remained: Who
espying Irus, presently knew him, and supposing that he had escaped from the
Getulian-Courte by stealth, thought now to be fully revenged of him, for that
he alone had by his cunning treachery, only crossed his contented happiness,
rowsed himself from his Covert: and pacing toward Irus, who was likewise on
Foot, for that he could not enter the Woodde on Horseback, and drawing his
Sword, without speaking a Word, let drive a forceable blow at him: Which
lighted upon the Well-tempered-steele, yet bruised the flesh upon his Arm:
Irus being therewith enraged, drue out his Sword, between whom began a
most fierce and cruel battle, which continued a good space, until Irus had
received some grieuoas Wounds, and maruelling at his Enemies valor, thus
spoke to him.

Knight (quoth he,) What art thou that offerest me this outrage? I know thee
not, neither have I offended thee. I am (quoth he) Parismenos, the greatest
enemy thou have: and do so mortally hate thee, that I will have thy life
before I part: With that he assailed him most furiously, and gave him so many
mortal Wounds, that with much effusion of blood, he fell down dead.
Parismenos having brought him to this estate, espied another Knight coming out
of the wood, which made him leave Irus, and follow him, and ouertooke him at
the woods side, to whom he said: Knight, Who art thou? The Knight looking
back, seeing his sword bloody, and his Armor battered, seeming to have come
from some cruel skirmish, and disdaining at him to be so peremptorily
examined, answered. What art thou that examinest me in this place?

Parismenos being exceedingly enraged before by the smart of some Wound he had
before received, said. I am one that will know what thou art before I leave
thee: and with that word, struck at him. The Knight likewise drawing his
sword to revenge that blow, but he was far unable to withstand Parismenos,
that he was soon by his unconquered Chivalry most grievously Wounded, and in
some part disarmed: Parismenos striking another forcible blow at him, hit him
right where the Armor was broken, and with violence the Sword pierced his
heart, and he fell down dead, without speaking a word. Which done, Parismenos
pulled off his Helmet, to see if he knew him, but he knew him not.

Sir Iconius hearing the noise of the clashing of their Armor, being then
abroad, drew toward the place where Irus lay, gasping for breath: Whom he
presently knew to be the same Knight from whom he had before rescued
Angelica, and putting off his Helmet, presently knew him to be his dear
friend Irus, for whose sake he was banished. So that taking him up, he
conveyed him to the Cave, with great diligence, laboring to revive him, which
by his Industry he at last attained.

Anna coming to have a sight of this Knights coming in, presently knew him
by his Armor to be the same that had with violence taken both Angelica and her
out of Hymen's Temple, and enquiring of the Knights his name, they answered,
none of them knew him, for none but Iconius knew him. Angelica being now
somewhat better recovered, Anna made known to her what she had seen, but
could not learn the Knights name. Anna (quoth. she) never enquire his name, but
view him well, and thou shall soon find him to be Irus, King of Tunis: For
did thou not hear him say, how that he was of Tunis, when Iconius rescued
me from him? Being much more miserable by his approach: For Iconius and he
are of such familiarity, that whereas before I had almost woonne his consent
to convey me to the Getulian Court, I am now out of all comfort of that, for
Irus will rather seek to convey me into Tunis: So that now I fear me, I
shall never see my beloved Knight Parismenos, but must be subject to his
power, Who I know will according to his barbarous disposition, use me badly:
that I know not Anna, what to do in this extreamitie, but rather then I will
subject my self to his Will, I will sooner be the executioner of mine own
death, and first rippe my accursed heart out of my troubled breast.

Anna then comforted her by many persuasions, putting her in some hope, yet in
the end to attain a happy issue, to all these unfortunate Events. Parismenos
having slain the Knight, returned to the place where he left Irus, but found
him not: Which made him marvel what was become of him, thinking that he was
escaped and fled.

And again, being weary and somewhat Wounded, he got himself to his secret
covert, to rest, where he determined to spend the remnant of his life: Where he
continued many days after; In which time Irus being in the Cave with Iconius,
had recovered his health, and knew Iconius his old Friend, to be the man
that had before endaungered his life, by taking Angelica from him, and leaving
him to Parismenos, for which he had now made him amends, by bringing him to
his Cave that was likely to perish, so that when he came first to the knowledge
of these things he uttered these speeches.

How fortunate, am I good Iconius, to fall into your kind hands, that
otherwise could not have suruiued? I have long since heard of your Banishment
from the Getulian-Courte, and only for my sake: And withal, heard how
strictly Maximus sought your life: Who being come to my knowledge, I sought
diligently to find you out, with intent to have carried you with me into Tunis:
but since I have now so happily found, and have much more cause to love you:
let me entreat you to leave this Desert, and depart with me to Tunis, where I
mean to prefer you to greater Dignity and honor then ever you have had in
Getulia.

I thank you (quoth. Iconius) but I marvel what misaduenture has now brought
you into this Country, and especially into this place, unacquainted, with such
hazard of your life?

Good Friend Iconius (quoth he) I will declare unto you the truth of all. Then
he declared the truth, how he had stolen Angelica out of Hymen's Temple, and
how she was rescued from him in that place. And withal, declared all that he
knew of the estate of Getulia: and of his latest coming from thence: and how
he met with a Knight in that Woodde, that had brought him by his valiant
behavior near his death.

Iconius hearing the report of the variety of his Adventures, made him this
answer. Pardon me Noble Irus, for it was my self that took the Lady
Angelica from you, not knowing who you were, who is within this Cave.

Irns hearing his speeches, caught him in his arms for joy, saying. My dear
Friend Iconius, Was it you that took Angelica from me? How was it, that I
knew you not, nor you me? And how fortunate, and ten thousand times blessed
may I be by your means, if you will but continue my trusty friend, as
heretofore you have been, by letting me only have a sight of Angelica? My Lord
(quoth he again, I have not forgotten, nor yet once diminished my former
friendship, but will commit the custody of Angelica to none but your self:
For none but your self are Worthy of her, or none so Worthy: only if you
please to follow my counsel, do not at the first motion your former suit unto
her, but use her kindly, and rather for a time dissemble the extremity of
your passion: for I perceive she is most deeply inthralled to the Bohemian
Knight Parismenos, that to make any other Love to her at the first, will rather
increase her Affections: but when she is without hope of finding him again,
then time will soon alter her mind, for Women's affections are subject to
variety. Irus then told him, that he did like his counsel exceedingly well:
and withal, yielded him many thanks, for that he had so found his most
true and loyal friendship.

Iconius being parted from Irus, came presently unto Angelica: Whom he used
most kindly. And taking occasion for that he found her weeping, he said:
Fair Angelica, I much marvel why you torment your self with these griefes^,
when you see your self in safety, and out of danger: Have I yet deserved no
better opinion at your hands, that have been so careful for your health and
safety?

I beseech you abandon this your sadness, and entertayne some rest to your
unquiet breast: Which I see is ready to be ouer-whelmed with grief.

Iconius (quoth she,) What heart oppressed with so many cares and vexations as I
have endured, could refrain from grief? What eyes that have beheld such
Cruelty, can abstain from sheadding infinite floods of brinish salt tears?
Or what creature subject* to misery, could contain her Senses within the
bounds of reason? And when all these are happened, and so any occasions of
discontent concurred together, yet in the midst, one mischief greater then
all the rest is befallen to me.

Is not Irus that cruel King of Tunis within this Cave, my great enemy, my
living Foe, that has brought me to this misery: Who is your professed
Friend? To whose council you will rather yield, then any way conrfime your
promise unto me past, to convey me to the Getulian Court. But if you remain
constant, then I have the less cause to fear Irus: but if you condescend to
be ruled by his wicked persuasions, then I know my sorrows will be
everlastingly lengthened. Iconius hearing her speeches, thought it best to
gloss with her, and therefore made her this answer.

Good Lady cast aside all such fear, for Irus shall not so much ouerrule me,
as once to make me falsify my Word: Neither do I think he is of any such
disposition; but if he be I care not: For what I have promised I will
undoubtedly perform: and would have done it before this time, but that your
health would not permit the same.

Many other speeches past between them, till at last Iconius left her, and
going to Irus, told him all the speeches that had passed between him and
Angelica: Who by Iconins counsel dissembled his affection: and though he were
often in Angelicaes company, he made no show of such earnest Love, yet
carelessly made recital of his former devotions: Which he so cunningly
dissembled, that Angelica began to rest in assurance of Iconius fidelity: and
in a persuasion that Irus had also given over his hot Love, and by that means
she began to gather more comfore to her abated spirits; Which by reason of
those great troubles she had past, and her late Sickness, were brought into a
weak operation. And many days after it was, before she had recovered her
health, which Iconius still made his excuse, to the frustrating of her desired
departure.

Parismenos likewise all this time, wandered up and down the Desert, living
poorly upon hard and wild fruit, and lying upon the earth in his armor, that
the hair which then begun to bud, had with a careless grows shadowed some
part of his face, which was grown to a great length, and his complexion so
much altered by care, that he could hardly be known of those that were
familiarlie acquainted with him before. In which time of his continuance in
that place, he had at several times met with Iconius consorts, and slain
them because they refused to yield to him, and denied to declare what they
were, having taken an oath, and made a firm vow with Iconius before, not to
reveal, which they Religiously kept, though in other matters they observed no
civility. At last, Parismenos met with another of their fellows, which he
set upon, and soon brought in hazard of his li^e: but he being of a more
cowardly disposition then the rest, fled, and with much ad^ escaped from
Parismenos. And ^omming to, Iconius, told him what he had seen, and how he
was handled by a strange Knight, or rather a Savage man that hunted the Desert:
then Iconius willed him to declare what Armor he had on. That can I not do
(quoth he) for the same is so ouerworne, old, and battered, that neither the
color nor other device therein can be discerned. Assuredly (quoth Iconius) it
is this knight that has slain so many of our company as we have found dead,
which makes me think, that he is some distressed knight, or banished as my
self is, which makes me pity his case, and could wish he were with us:
which paraduenture might give him some comfort.

Many other speeches they had of him: being yet of no mind to seek him out,
which Iconius determined to do afterward. And thus continued Iconius
consulting with Irus how to win Angelicas favor. Angelica likewise rested
in hope, that Iconius would convey her to the Court: and Parismenos continuing
his sollitary and austere life in the Desert.

CHAP. XXXIII.
How treacherously Irus used Angelica. How he was murdered by Anna. And of
Parismenos arrival at Iconius Cave. How he rescued Anna from a most violent
death: and of other accidents that befell.

Afterward when Angelica had fully recoured her health, Irus thought the
time now most fitlyest served to insinuate himself into her favor, for the
fierce flames of his restrained affections did furiouly boil in his breast: by
Iconius counsel, would he oftentimes frequent her company, but in such sort,
as that he seemed to pity her Passions, and would oftentimes enter into
discourses of great penitencie, for his outrage committed against her: but in
such sort, that he craved her good opinion of his good intent toward her.

This behavior he used so long, that Angelica began to conceive well of
him, and to remitte some part of her conceived displeasure, and also her fear
of his further cruelty: And many times Iconius and all the rest of their
company, being out of the Cave, left Irus alone with Angelica, who behaved
himself in such decent sort, and with such kind behavior toward her, that
Angelica thought he had utterly abandoned his former rude and uncivil
behavior.

Iconius afterward, one day being in talk with Irus, eespyed one of his
associate come in greeuouslie wounded, who declared that he had met with a
strange Knight, from whom he had hardly escaped with his life. Iconius
hearing this his speeches, was much troubled in his mind to know what he
should be, that within some three days after, making Irus privy to his
intent, went out of the Cave, accompanied by all the rest of his fellows to
him, and left Irus alone in the Cave. Who after Iconius departure, seated
himself down in a melancholy study, thinking himself too foolish, to live
so long in the sight of his beloved Angelica, without any hope of her savor,
and also began to persuade himself, that Iconius had some other intent then he
made show of, which might disappoint him of obtaining her custody, and then
began to recall to his secret view her divine perfections, which thought
inflamed his heart with such desire, that the love and earnest affection which
he had by Iconius good counsel restrained, burst out into an exceeding
inflamed lust: that he presently went into the place where Angelica was, who
expected no other preffer of behavior, but that which he had before used,
suffered him to sit down by her, and entered into communication with him as
formerly she had done, but he having his mind meditating how to satifie his
desert, behold her exceeding beauty, with a greedy eye, and devoured the
piercing power of her conquering beauty, with such desire, that it augmented
his affections, and set one fire his new intended purpose, to attain the
conquest of her love, and the possession of her person, that be seized his
hand upon hers, grasping the same sometimes strictly, and then again playing
with her dainty fingers, selling his eyes upon hers, making a sad sigh a
Prologue to his speech, he said.

Most divine Lady, pardon me if I presume beyond the bounds of your favorable
license, to touch your precious hand: or if I enter into speeches that may
disagree with your fancy, or show the integrity of my devotion: but for that
I rely upon your benignity, and have long time by fear to be offensive,
rather endured inward and secret torment, then upon presumption to procure you
any disquiet, have concealed my love, duty, and affection, to your perfections.
Now finding you at leisure, and feeling my own torments increase: humbly
beseech you pity my long continued griefs, and grant me some favor to
revive my heart with comfort: for you know that I have been long time
inthralled to your beauty, and bound to apply my fancy to merit your favor,
which love has ever since continued constant and immovable, and will still so
continue whilst mylife does last. Which love, compelled me to that boldness,
to bring you from the Natolian Court, with intent to carry you into my
Country, and there to make you the Gouernesse and ruler of me and mine.

And now that you have had this trial of my (...), what need you deny me your
favor, considering there is no knight living has attended your liking with
more feruencie.

Angelica hearing his speeches, would have taken her hand from him, but he
still held the same, whilst she answered: I had thought you had forgotten your
former desire, and would not have troubled me with the same: but especially
now when you see I am not to make any change of the choice I have already made.
Therefore I should account it great wisdom in you, to abstain from desiring
that which you have been so often denied, and see so much unlikelihood to
obtain: for would I now yield my self to please your fancy, I should
dishononr my name, my stock, and reap perpetual ignominy and scandale to my
self and you: and besides by my disloyalty, breed everlasting discord and war
betwixt you and the noble Prince of Bohemia, who is of such force and
invincible strength, that he would wast your country, and never give over
until he had wrested me out of your possession: therefore I pray you give
over your suit, which may (it obtained) bring so many adherent miseries and
inconveniences, as you will soon repent you. I beseech you (quoth he) let not
vain suppose of Parismus strength, or Parismus revenge, procreastinate my
desires: for I esteem them as nothing in my Country, being of sufficient
strength to beat a mightier foe back. Therefore sweet Lady grant me your
love, without the which I cannot live: and armed therewith, I shall be of
sufficient strength to refell any foe: therefore deny me not. Which said,
having her hand still in his, he pulled her to him suddenly, and clasping her
in his arms, he by his strength, took from her a sweet kiss: with which she
was so much vexed, that with a sudden start, she sproong from forth his
arms, and fearing to be again so surprised, would have departed out of the
room, which he perceiving, having armed himself with impudency, ran after
and caught her in his arms, and by force brought her back, whilst she
strugled to get from him, but he being too strong for her, held her so fast yt
she could not stir, but with cheeks as red as scarlet, said. If ever you
expect favor at my hands, leave off and do not seek to attain my love by
violence, for if you do, I swear by heaven, I will rather suffer you to tear
my heart in pieces, then yield you any favor: therefore if there be any
virtue, humanity, good nature, or courtisie in you, let me go.

Irus was nothing dissuaded with her speeches, but now that he had begun,
lust and immoderate desire urged him on, that he held her the more strictly:
and by constraint bereft her of many kisses: with that she gave such shrikes,
that the hollow vaults of the Cave rung therewith: and Anna came running in,
before whose coming, he used her so indecently, that she cried out unto Anna
for help, who used her uttermost endeavor to rescue her mistress from forth
his power, and shrouded her from dishonor, which with most violent and
indecent behauior he proffered, and ta last she gat from forth h^ands, wearied
with resistance, and falling down upon her knees, said. Irus be not so
inhumaine as to dispoyle me of my honor, but desire from this shame^esse
impudency, which will make you odious in the sight of heaven. What will my
life do you good, which with that is lost? what pleasure can you reap by this
violence? Or what benifit can it be to you to spill my blood? Seek not my love
in this sort, which will turn that good opinion I had of you to hatred, and if
you will needs have the fruition of my love, let it be in honorable sort, and
not with such unreadiness: with that a flood of brinish tears ran down her
cheekts: whilst he stood over her like a furious Lion over a silliy
harmless. Lamb, ready to devour the same. Even so Irus stood ready to
seize upon her again, his heart painting with striving, and his veins swollen
with desire, no more mollified with her lamentations, then the hardest Adamant
with the fall of soft snow. And casting a most bitter countenance on Anna, who
stood not far off, and only hindered his lust, he sudenly caught his dagger in
his hand, and ran after her to have stabd her, which caused her with an
exceeding outcrie to run out of the room, and he after her. And Angelica
calling after him, stay good Irus, stay: and when he was returned, she as fast
flying from him: And seeing Anna out of the room, he caught hold of her, and
pulled her to him, holding his dagger in his hand whilst she lay trembling at
his feet said; Angelica, my resolution is to obtain thy love, either by force
or fair means: therefore give consent, or I vow I will never desist though
it cost thy life. Angelica hearing his speeches, said. Irus, good Irus, let me
alone, and use me not thus shamfully and indecently, and I will tell thee my
mindo, for were it not for thy usage, and the uncivil rudeness, being never
in my life before so used, thou might peradventure have had a greater
favor with my consent: therefore I pray be not so inhumaine, and thou shall
see I will do more with gentleness, then all thy rudeness can compel me too.
With that he turned himself from her, whilst she rose from the ground, she
was no sooner upon her feet but her senses failed her, and the lively read,
faded out of her crimson cheeks: even whilst Anna cried, help, help, she
sell down in her arms dead: then Irus with Anna, did the best he could to
recover her, beginning to wax mad with grief, for within short space she
began to draw in her sweet breath again, and lifting up her eyes, with a
grievous sigh, she said. Oh Irus, cruel Irus. Then Anna seated her upon the
bed, and she said. Irus, I had not thought you would have used me thus
cruelly, but have shown some sign of virtue in you: And rather then you shall
offer me any more such violence, I promise you that I will depart with you to
Tunis, and I will yield my self to be in honorable sort at your direction.

Angelica (quoth he) give me possession of your love, which is that I desire,
and without that I cannot be satified. Why Irus (quoth she) will nothing
satisfy you but my dishonor? what rage rules your mind, what lust is that
possesses your heart? Is this the honorable mind should be in a King? Good
Irus be not so cruel. I am not cruel, and it is but folly to stand upon
terms of denial. Irus (quoth she) then let me request this one favor, leave
me alone some space to confer with my mind, and I will send her for you ear
it be long. Irus being in some hope to attain his desire, finding her speeches
so gentle, thought that her maid would persuade her rather to yield, then to
hazard his fury, told her he would do that at her request, and so departed.

He was no sooner gone, but Angelica with weeping eyes, wringing her hands and
making exceeding lamentation, entreated Anna to counsel her what to do.
Mistress (quoth she) if you could with fair promises cause him to desist
until more convenient time, or that you could delay him off until Iconius
return, then there were some hope to escape. Oh Anna (quoth she) if he come in
again, it will be impossible, for his fierce and desperate bea^ly rage is
such, therefore if thou love me, do one thing at my request, and I shall
think my self satisfied.

Mistress (quoth thee) whatsoever it be I will do it. Nay but Anna, thou
shall swear, or else I will not trust thee, neither will I reneale it unto
thee. Dear Mistress (quoth she) I swear by Heavens and all happiness, I
will perform the uttermost of your will. Then Angelica taking v^ Irus Dagger,
which he had carelessly left on the floor, gave it her, and said. I account my
honor dearer then my life, and had rather die in this place, then live in
continual shame and reproach hereafter: Therefore Anna, I charge thee thee by
all the duty and love thou bear me, by the honor thou owe to Chastity,
and by the oath thou have made, to sheathe that Poniard in my breast, to rid
me from his tyranny: which if thou refusest to do, my self will without
intermission execute. With that Anna clasped fast the Dagger in her hand, with
her eyes ouerflowing with tears, said.

Mistress, I vow by Heaven I will never execute that deed, neither shall
your self do it: but first give me leave to try if I can persuade Irus from
his purpose: with that taking the Dagger in her hand, she went to seek him,
but he being gone from Angelica, swollen with lust, and panting with striving,
laid himself down upon his bed, meditating on that he had done, and what
further pleasure he should, reap, if she gave her consent, his desire being
somewhat assuaged by his late striving with her, and his Senses overcome with
these meditations, he was fallen a sleep, lying upon his back, his doublet
vnbuttoned and he yet sweating, in which sort Anna found him, and coming to
his beds ^de, seeing him fast a sleeue, having his dagger in her hand, thought
to stick the same to his heart: with that an exceeding trembling affrighted her
heart, and all her body and joints shook for fear: but remembering how
cruelly he had used her Mistress, and what a desperate case he had left her
in, and what outrage he might intend, having given them but little time of
consideration, and withal, that Angelicaes life and her own were likely to
satifie him, and nothing else, but most of all, finding so fit an opportunity
to be for ever rid of him, she lifted up her hands thinking the Heavens
fa^dured her, and allotted thet as a means to preserve Angelicas honor,
praying the Heavens to strengthen her: aiming right in the midst of his
breast, which was vnbuttoned, with both her hands, she smote the dagger so far
into his breast, that the point appeared at his back, with which he gave an
exceeding groan, and starting up whilst she fled, he pursued her, seeing
himself mortally wounded, and followed her even into the room where Angelica
was, by which time his vital senses decayed, and he fell down dead, tumbled
at his gear: with that Angelica gave an exceeding shrike, not knowing what
Anna had done: But viewing him, she perceived the dagger goring his breast, and
Anna told her what she had done. With that Angelica was exceedingly
affrighted, and said. Anna, how shall we now be rid of his hateful carcass?

Sweet Mistress (quoth Anna) be you of good comfort, and let me alone: and
with that arming her self with unwonted boldness, whilst her hnnds shook,
and trembled with fear, she took him by the heels, snd bragged him forth
of the Caves mouth, and tumbled him into a pit hard by, casting a great many
of Leaves and Moss upon him, that his body was quite covered from sight:
which done she returned and told Angelica what she ad done.

Angelica seeing her self thus fortunately rid of Irus, whose fury had
brought her self in danger, said. O Anna what power was it, that animated and
strengthened thee to that boldness? how shall we satisfy Iconius at his
return, who loves Irus so well, that he will soon miss him* and if he
knew what we have done, we shall be in some danger of his fury. Thus do my
misfortunes daily increase, and one misery follows in an an others neck,
to augment my cares.

What think thou is become of Parismenos? do thou not think he takes
my absence grievously? yes I fear me Anna, he is too ready to surfeit with
grief, and thereby may much indaunger his health: and besides, I persuade my
self, he is wandered from the Natalian Court, into far Countries in my
search. If Iconius find how we have used Irus, then will he for ever detain
us here. How often have I been crossed in my Love? being now in worse case then
ever I was, and more unlikely to come to enjoy my Parismenos, then when my
Father imprisoned me so closely in the Maiden Tower? No time yields me any
rest from trouble: No place gives me security: nothing but sorrow is allotted
to my portion: and nothing but endless and perpetual misery awaiteth my
steps.

Dear Mistress (quoth Anna,) I beseech you add comfort to your heart, for I
will undertake to satisfy Iconius, and make a current excuse for Irus absence:
and howsoever it falls out, you shall be no way troubled therewith. In diverse
such speeches they continued until the Night drue nigh, and they expected
Iconius return: Where we will leave her.

Iconius being gone out of the Cave, with intent to find out the strange
Knight, tracing up and down most part of the day, before he could find him:
But at last, passing by the place where he had rescued Angelica from Irus,
Parismenos espied him, having but two knights at that time with him, and came
out unto him. Iconius espying him, coming to him, said: Knight, I have wandered
all this day to seek you, but was frustrated till now: the cause was, for that
my Knights were sometimes slain, and often Wounded by your valor, that makes
me desirous to know the cause of your discontent, being Willing to do you what
pleasure I can, and also to be acquainted with you: therefore I pray you let
me know what you are?

I am (quoth he) a miserable Wretch, ordained to everlasting torment, banished
from joy, exiled from Content, Wretched, and unfortunate: I seek no company,
nor desire acquaintance: I care not for ease, but discontent pleases me best:
This life I lead, not by constrainte, but that none so well agrees with my
fancy: Care keeps me company, and this Desert is fittest for me to dwell in.
Sir (quoth Iconius) it seems some great mischaunce has driven you
voluntarily to take this course, or else the cruelty of Friends has exiled
you their company. Both (quoth. he.) But what are you that seek so much my
acquaintance and knowledge?

I am (quoth he) a man as miserable as your self, subject to as many
misfortunes as your self, and every way filled with discontent: if I should
Name my self, you know me not; having lived many years in this Desert, a
disconsolate and disquiet life, my habitation being but simple; Whither I come
of purpose to bring you, for that your Noble Chivalry makes me honor you;
Where if you love to live in Discontent, that place yields nothing but
sadness, yet with security.

Parismenos having well noted his speeches, began to marvel what he should
be, hearing him say, he had lived many years in that Desert, thought it
good to see his habitation, and therefore said: Sir Knight, although I know
not whether I may with security give credit to your speeches or no, yet if you
will vouchsafe me such kindness, I will accept thereof, and for a time,
contrary to my purpose, take some ease.

Sir (quoth Iconius) you shall upon my faithful promise, rest void of
treachery, and be as secure as my self: These speeches past, they departed
toward the Cave, continuing as they went in some conference; Where they
arrived even at such time as Angelica had ended her speeches: And being entered,
Iconius told Parismenos that was his habitation, whether he was Welcome: Then
stepping into Angelicaes room, he thought to have found Irus there: but seeing
her heaviness, and in what sort both she and Anna by her sat Weeping, he
came unto her with kind behavior, demanding her cause of sorrow? But she
casting down her eyes to the Earth, made no answer. With that he began to
suspect Irus had done her some wrong, and maruelling that he could not see him
with her, nor in the other room, he returned to Anna, and asked her if she
could tell where he was? Who made him answer, that she knew not where he was
now: but that he had been there not long since. With that, casting his eyes
down to the earth in (...) study, he espied the Floor stained and
besprinckled with gore-blood, that therewithal, his heart began to swell. And
looking with a fearful countenance, he asked what blood that was? With that
Angelica cast down her eyes, and Anna blushed, but he being earnest to know,
demanded again, What blood it was? Anna then answered, It is some of Irus
blood spilt by himself. Why (quoth he) did he that deed? Because (quoth she)
Angelica would not give consent to his wicked Lust. Where is he now (said he?)

I know not, answered Anna, neither do I care. With that Iconius perceiving
the tract of blood that went out of the Chamber, followed the same to his bed:
Which he found all bestained therewith: and again, followed the blood to the
Caves mouth, that he was assured that Irus was slain, that in a monstrous
rage, he ran in again to Anna, saying: Irus is murdered, and you have done
the deed.

Anna then, knowing her self guilty, stood as one confounded with fear: but
at last reviving her self from her dumps, she said: If I did murder him, I
did it but to save my own life, and Angelicaes honor. With that he was so
enraged, that he drue his Sword, and in a fury would have slain her, but
that she with speed ran out of the room, and he after her, ready to strike
her dead. Parismenos hearing that noise, and seeing Iconius pursuing the
Damzell, being of a quick conceit, even as the blow was descending, stepped
under the Sword, and caught the blow: Which otherwise had parte^d her life.

Iconius being enraged, struck another at him, until Parismenos drawing his
Sword, said: Hold your hands, and know whom thou strikest, or I will gore
my Sword in thy heart blood. Pardon me good Knight (quoth he) Rage made me
forget my self. What Damozell is that (quoth Parismenos) you would have
slain? It is (quoth he) one that has murdered my dear friend. By this time
some of them had caught Anna, and brought her back; Whom Iconius offered
again to have slain, but that Parismenos having seen her countenance, knew
her: and staying Iconius again, said. Be not so rash without aduisement, to
lay such violent hands on a silly Damozell, and before you execute revenge,
be better advised, and first know the truth of the fact she has committed,
and upon what occasion she was urged thereto.

I will not (quoth Iconius) follow your counsel, but now she having confessed
the deed, I will be severely revenged by her life, and nothing else shall make
me satisfaction for his blood, which she has shead.

Discourteous Knight (quoth. he) art thou void of humanity, or do I wish thee
to do any thing that disagreeth to reason? I swear by Heaven, let but a hair
of her head perish by thy accursed hand, and thy death shall be the ransom:
Here do I stand in her defense, and therefore the prowdest of you all touch
her, and if you dare. With that Iconius said: Do thou requite my friendship
in this sort, to take part with my enemies? or tell me, Do thou know that
Damzell, that thou stand so peremytorily in her defense? I do nothing but
that which every Knight is bound unto: Which is, to defend Ladies wrong:
Neither do I know this Damozell, but will defend her, for that she is a Lady:
until I may know, Whether you offer this outrage against her wrongfully, or by
just desert: Which once tried, do then what thou will with her. Then Iconius
said. Damozel, tell me why thou sluest him? Anna made this answer: He offered
violence to Angelica, and with his poniard attempted to slay her: Who will tell
you the truth of all. With that, they altogether went into the room where
Angelica was.

Parismenos beholding her, had much a do to withholde himself from
bewraying what he was: but yet with constrained forbearance, be stood still,
and heard her declare Irus Wicked behavior, and in what manner she had
wrought revenge against him.

With that Iconius said: Wicked Woman, could thou not have wrought some
other means to disappoint his intent, which I can hardly believe, but that
thou must murder him? Heaven nor Earth shall not throwde thee from my fury:
For being the untimely death of that loving, kind, and courageous King,
neither shall any thing but thy destruction appease my wrath, for the loss of
my dear friend Irus.

Parismenos hearing him name Irus, said: Was it that treacherous and disloyal
villain, Irus, that slave? Damozell thou have well revenged the wrongs he has
done me, upon his own accursed head; and therefore will I be thy defense, and
shield thee from harm. For had I met him my self, I would have done no less
then thou haste: for he was the most dishonorable Knight that ever drew
breath.

But tell me (quoth he) to Iconius, What art thou that offerest such cowardly
violence to resistlesse Ladies, and imprisonest them in such sort, and also
bear so disloyal a mind, as to uphold him in his villainy?

Iconius was so enraged with his Words, that he said: Base Uillaine: Did I
but lately take thee up as a Runaway, and brought thee to my Cell, of pity to
succor thy distressed estate, and do thou thus requite my kindness, to
become my examiner?

Parismenos hearing his speeches, so much disdained them, that he let drive at
him with irefull violent blows, and with such fury, that he drove Iconius
backwards out of the room: and withal, gave him so many Wounds, that had not
some of his Associates stepped to him, he had been slain: When three of them at
once assailed Parismenos, but by his invincible valor, first one of them, and
then another lost their lives: Which Iconius seeing, he would very feign have
stayed to have spoken to him, but his heart being set on revenge, and desirous
to have the Possession of Angelica again, followed his fight with such rigor,
that he had well near slain Iconius.

By this time some of the other came in; Who seeing Iconius in such danger, by
the valor of that one Knight, admired his Chivalry, and stepped to rescue him
from his violence: Which when they had done, Iconius said, Knight, tell me
what thou art, that knowing thy Name, I may know whom it is I resist? My name
(quoth he) is Parismenos. With that Iconius floong away his sword, and said;
Most honorable Knight, I yield my self to your mercy, for that very Name do
I honor, vowing that it is against my Will, that ever I offended you.

Parismenos hearing his words, said. And if thou be my friente (quoth he) I
am sorry, not that I met thee, but that I have hurt thee: Which said, he
entered into the Room where Angelica was, and coming to her, not being able to
use any delay, but forced by desire to comfort her heart, by giving her
knowledge of his safety, pulling off his Helmet, that she might behold his
face, he said. My dear Lady Angelica, behold your poor Friend Parismenos.
Angelica then knowing him with a modest behavior, clasping, her Arms about his
neck, and sealed a number of sweet kisses upon his Lips: Whth done, and
withdrawing her arms again, her Eyes melted into a river of tears, and
afterward said; Welcome my dear Lord Parismenos, ordained yet to be my
bliss. Well have I now prevailed against calamity, for your sight has
banished him my breast: how miserable and dangerous was my Estate once this day:
and how happy, and ten thousand times blessed am I by your presence? If you
do account your self happy by my presence (quoth he) for ever shall you be
happy, for never will I depart from your sight. But ten thousand times more
then happy do I account my self to be so esteemed of you, that have never
deserved such favor, but by my evil Fortunes have brought you into these
calamities. Nay, good Parismenos say not so: for not you, but my unlucky
Destinies have ordained me to some forrow, but in the end have repaide me
doublefolde with sweet content.

In these and such like speeches, did they express their joys, for each
others presence and preservation, till Parismenos buckling on his Helmet
again, went out to see whether Iconius did pretend any treachery against him,
but him he found unarmed, and his knights dressing his Wounds: and seeing
Parismenos still armed (as fearing to disarme himself) he gave him such
assurance of quiet, both by his own ^me vow, and the protestations of all the
rest, that Parismenos rested in some assurance of peace, and Iconius after that
he had his Wounds dressed, came with him into the place where Angelica was,
and said:

Most divine Lady, I beseech you pardon my offense, I confess I loved Irus
well, because he was my dear friend, and finding no such misbehauiour in
him, since I first knew him, I could not believe her report, until I saw you
justify the same, and for amends, I offer my self to be at your disposition:
desiring you to remitte my proffered offense for Irus death: And withal, I
beseech you make no doubt of my good meaning; For that I have bent my whole
endeavors, with truth to be at your command: Neither harbor any further
conceit of violence to be offered you in this place.

Having ended those speeches, he presently caused good meat to be prepared
for them, and they were served in as decent and cleanly sort, as could
possibly be affoorded in that place.

CHAP. XXXIIII.
How Parismenos got shipping for Germany. How they were betrayed by
Theoretus. And how after a stormi^ Tempest, and hard escape from drowning,
they were preserved by a Fisherman of Thessalie.

PArismenos now having again attained Angelicaes possessions, the want whereof
had before long time oppressed and vexed his troubled heart with care, and
having refreshed themselves with the repast Iconius had provided; whilst
Iconius and his Servants went (by Annas direction) to the place where the dead
body of Irus lay, to bury the same, he took Angelica in his arms, solacing
himself in the view of her attractiue Beauty, amongst the rest uttering
these speeches.

My dearest Love, I trust you will pardon my speeches, if they proceed from a
bolder Familiarity then heretofore: For that n^we having obtained your gentle
consent to perpepuall Love, and having dedicated your self as mine to dispose
of, I shall not fear in boldness to call you mine own: and assume such
interest as you have kindly granted. Now these misfortunes are thus
ouer-blowen, though with your misery, which has been my torment, I beseech
you, banish from your mind the remembrance of former sorrow, and repose your
confidence in my fidelity: For since I have enjoyed your presence, nothing
shall make me part from you, no not so much as out of your sight: Neither will
I (until I have conducted you to the place I most desire,) by no misaduenture
be drawn from you, neither is my mind now in quiet, for that notwithstanding
my show of credence, I give no trust to Icon: truth, but will trust him so far
as I trial of his Loyalty, and not otherwise: but tomorrow-morning, so
pleases you: We will leave this place, and betake our selves for some course
of security: for I see that being in this Country, I shall never be in
security, but many will seek to cross my content, although I may repose
assured confidence in your virtuous kindness, which has been extended far
beyond the bounds of my desert: and Marcellus feiendship I know is firm, and
that I might I am sure, repose my Life, with assured confidence on these firm
foundations, yet I fear me, that some misfortune or others will still cross
our content: and again, when we think our selves in most security, turn our
happiness into Adversity: that I know not well what course to undertake that
may agree with your liking, and give me any assurance of quiet.

Angelica perceiving that many cares oppressed his heart, in regard of her
Welfare, and seeing with what affection he tendered her quiet, she made this
answer. My beloved Lord, how unfortunate may I account my self in this, that
my misfortune procures you so much disquiet? I beseech you rest in assured
confidence of my constancy, that shall continue inviolable for ever, being
subject to so many misaduentures, that I have both procured mine own, and
your most miserable torments: being of the mind that you are, that this
Country will never yield us security: Therefore if you can advise me to
take any other course with you, which may give us any assurance of rest, be
assured, that notwithstanding to attempt the same, might incur thousands of
inconveniences, I will most willingly undertake the same, and with more
constancy then you can impose upon me; Therefore I beseech you, counsel me
of any course that shall agree with your fancy, and that, and nothing else shall
please me, for I commit my self wholly to your disposition: And therefore as
you determine of your self, so determine of me, for I account my self no
other then your self. Parismenos made her this answer: Then Lady, I think
it best we forsake this Country quite, and begin to take our journey toward
Bohemia, where I dare assure both you and my self of quiet and rest.

I am (quoth Angelica) wholly to be directed by you, and my desire is no
less then yours, to attain that heavenly place: For I account both parents
friends and country, as nothing, in respect of the love and duty I bear to
you.

After these speeches past, Iconius was returned from burying Irus, whose mind
Parismenos felt in these speeches. Now is the time, that the Princess Angelica
and my self must make trial of your friendship: which is, your consent and
company to a matter of importance, for our departure out of this place.

My Lord (said Iconius, whatsoever it be to pleasure you and the Princess, if
it lie in my power to further the same, I vow and protest to use my uttermost
endeavor therein. Then this it is (quoth he) Angelica and my self are agreed
to leave this country, and not to return to Ephesus, for diverse occasions
that I will hereafter make you acquainted withal: but to travel toward
Bohemia, and afterward give Marcellus knowledge of our safety: therefore I
ask your counsel of the best course to be taken for our furtherance herein.

My Lord (replied Iconius) to undertake the travel by land, would be over
tedious and dangerous, by reason of the long space betwixt this and Germany,
and the many rude and Savage Wildernesses we must pass by: therefore, I think
the best course is, to get shipping, which may land us somewhat nearer the
country, and then our journey by land shall be the less. And to that effect,
I have this to further us: Certain Merchants of I^allie have continual
traffic in this country, with whom we may get passage thither, and being
there, our desire is more easy to be obtained: and the place where those
Italian Sippes do lay at Road, is not far hence, but that with a little
labor we may bring the Princess thither. I like your counsel most
exceedingly well (quoth Parismeno,) but how shall we come to have conferrence
with those Italians.

My Lord (said he) let that be my charge, and so please you, I will depart to
put the same in execution presently, and you in the mean time may remain with
the Princess, and be assured of my fidelity, for heavens grant my overthrow,
if I deal not faithfully: with that he departed, and Parismenos returned to
Angelica, spending the time with her in great content, until Iconius return.

Early the next morning, Iconius returned to the Desert, and certified
Parismenos of that which he had done, which was this: There was then in the
harbor, a ship of Italy, that was ready to depart toward that Country,
under the government of Theoretus, an Italian Merchant, with whom Iconius had
ageed for their passage, not telling him what they were that should go with
him, and withal, promised him to return that forenoone, or not at all.
Parismenos hearing his speeches, was exceedingly glad thereof, and presently
made Angelica acquainted therewith, who most willingly gave her consent: and
presently they departed toward the Haven, being in all but eight persons. And
coming to the ship, they were kindly received of Theoretus the Master. Who
having sped his voyage, and having no other thing to stay for, the wind
serving, hoysed sail, and with a merry gale, they launched into the deep.
Parismenos coming to Theoretus, demanded which was the nearest course for
Germany, for that he was bound thither? Sir (quoth he) if it so please you,
after I have landed in Italy, and dispatched some business I have there
importance, I will be then ready to convey you to the nearest Haven that lies
toward these parts, so that you will content me for my voyage,

My friend (quoth Parismenos) if thou will do me this friendship, I will
content thee to the uttermost of thy demand. Then he returned to the place
where Angelica was, comforting her with assured trust of a happy and speedy
voyage.

Many days they continued on their course with prosperous success, till
Teoretus assured them he was within two days Sailing of Italy, where
accordingly he arrived, where Parismenos and Angelica refreshed themselves,
until Theoretus had ended all his business, and was growing to a composition
with Parismenos. It fortuned that there was then in the place where they
arrived, a Knight of Slauonia, named Arenus, who had secretly beheld Angelicas
beawtie, and was so surprised therewith, that he began to devise what means
to use to possess her, and hearing that they were bound for Germany, and
supposing Parismenos had been her husband, he used the more expedition, his
dsire being grown to that extremity, in the small time of their abode, that
he thought it impossible for him to live without the fruition thereof. And
oftentimes growing into conference with Theoretus, he understood the truth of
all by his report. And Arenus finding some hope to bring him to condescend to
his practice, upon a time he begaune to commune with him, and in the end
concluded with him for a sum of money, to convey them for him into what place
he would. With whom Arenus dealt so couningly and so strictly, that he bound
him by many oaths to perform the same: which he for greediness of the sum
of money, was most resolutely determined to do.

Now the time of departure being come, Theoretus (with a dissembling
countenance coloring his intended villainy) came to Parismenos, and told him
that his business was now ended, and the wind fitly served for their
departure.

Parismenos being glad thereof, and having before agreed with him for the
price of his passage, brought the Princess a^rd with Iconius and the rest,
where they found Arenus, whom Theoretus told, he was one yt was likewise
traveling unto some part of Germany. Parismenos little suspecting their
drift, accepted of his company, and used him kindly. Arenus put on such an
outward show of virtue, and framed himself to such a kind of behavior, that
Parismenos grew into great good liking of him, and into such familiarity that
he told him what he was.

Arenus hearing that he was son to Parismus, then grew into protestations of
reverence and duty that he bare to him, and into many such other like vows of
dutiful regard, that Parismenos related to him the whole sum of his estato,
and what the Lady Angelica was.

And some two days they past in this sort: Parismenos and Angelica with a
joyful heart going toward their misery, and nothing misdoubting Theoretus
treachery, thought themselves sailing toward Germany, when indeed they were a
quite contrary way. When suddenly an exceeding tempest arose, and the winds
began to blow and rage exceeedingly, the rain began to fall in such abundance,
that the ship was ready to be drenched with the same. Which cruel Tempest
continued for the space of two days and two nights, in that most raging and
extreme sort, that there wax none but expected present destruction: then began
Parismenos to curse himself, for leaving the country of Natolia: and
committing himself to the mercy of the seas, of whose fury he had before
tasted. Angelica was in great fear of her life: Theoretus conscience began to
accuse him of villainy: and Arenus to repent his treachery: and whilst they
were in this extremity of fear, the ship where in they were, was by violence
driven upon a Rock, and there split in sunder, that they were all driven to
shift for their lives. Parismenos being amazed with this misfortune, yet had an
especial regard to the Princess, whom he caught in his arms, and with her
gate on to a piece of the ship, yt with the violence of the sea, was parted
from the rest, which was not likely long to support them. And the rest, some
drowned, and some by other admirable means preserved. When presently the
storm began to cease, and the sea suddenly grew calm, It chanced, that a
Fisherman was not far off in harbor, who beheld this shipwreck: and with all
speed, seeing the storm ceased, hasted with his boat thitherwards: and first
came to Parismenos and Angelica, who even then were ready to perish: for
Angelica affrighted with the terror of death, being with fear and weakness
not able to support her self on the piece of the broken ship, was fallen
off, whom Parismenos had held up by her garments, being with every little
motion himself ready to ouerturne, and so to perish together: to whom the
Fisherman approached, and by the divine providence came at that instant to
preserve their harmless lives, and took them both into his Boat, and at
Parismenos request, hasted to save as many as he could possible of the rest.
When presently Parismenos espied Anna tumbling up from under the water, whom by
good fortune he caught hold of, and drew up to him: who by that she had
avoided abundance of water out of her mouth, began to revive: by this time,
the Fisherman had gotten in Iconius and Theoretus, both of them being in great
danger of death, or in a manner dead, but all the rest were quite drenched,
and neither they nor any part of the ship, to be seen: presently the
Fisherman conveyed them to the shore, not far from which place, was his
house, whither likewise, after they had all recovered their senses, he brought
them. Parismenos glad of the fortunate escape, and seeing in what weak estate
the Princess was, desired the old Fisherman and his wise, to do their
uttermost to succor them in that distress: and having a special regard of
Angelica, he with the old woman named Dorella, disrobed her of her wet
ornaments, and the old woman put her on dry Linuen, the best she had, and got
her into a warm bed, which greatly revived her abated senses. Dorella
likewise had the like care of Anna, being of such a good and virtuous
disposition, that of her own pitiful inclination, she would have hazarded
her life to succor them. Iconius by this time was perfectly come to his senses,
but Theoretus still remained in great hazard of death.

CHAP. XXXV.
How Osirus hearing of Parismenos landing in Thessalie, carried him to his
Castle. By what unexpected means Dionisius, Parismus, Oliuia, and Laurana, met
them at a banquet. How they were with pomp conveyed to Thoebe, and afterward
married with great royalty.

ALl things being in as good order as might be, and Theoretus as well
cherished as could be in that place, the night began to approach, when
Parismenos, being in the chamber with Angelica, drying himself by the fire,
uttered these speeches to the Fisherman.

Good Father, what recompense shall I ever be able to make you for this
kindness, by whose means our lives are preserved? but assure your self, that
hence forth I will prove so grateful, that you shall not say, but your Guests
were friendly in rewarding, as you ware kind and liberal in succouring us. And
because you shall not be ignorant to whom you have done this friendship, know
you, that you have saved the liue^ of two young Princes. The old man hearing
his speeches, told him, that all that he had should be at his command. In
these and many other speeches they spent the evening, till Dorella had provided
their supper, and dressed the best meat she had, to comfort Angelica, who was
well revived and cheerful, in whose company, Parismenos, and the Fisherman
and his wife stayed all that night: bebause indeed there was no other bedding:
in which time Parismenos comforted Angelica with many speeches, who was only
glad to see him in safety.

Early the next morning, Theoretus having with much adoo gotten into the room
where Parismenos and Angelica were, and feeling himself past hope of life,
uttered these speeches. Most noble knight, I humbly beseech you, to pardon and
forgive that grievous and hanious offense I have committed against you, and
that most virtuous Lady, by the instigation? and inticement of Arenus, who was
a knight of Slauoaia, with whom I had agreeed for a sum of money, to convey
you to his country, whose intent was to betraie that Lady into his keeping: but
both his wicked intent, and my treason is now by the divine providence
prevented, and my self left to your mercy, beseeching you to pardon my
monstrous misdeede: which when he had said, and they but a small time
considered of his treachery and there admyrable preservation, even when
Parismenos was ready to speak to him, he gave up the ghost and died: which
when they beheld, the old Fisherman presently conveyed him out of the room,
and afterward buried him.

Parismenos then growing into a deep consideration of his estate, and withal,
what he had ouerpast, entered into these speeches. Was ever any man so
unfortunate as I anm, to be to^e with so many miseries, driven from place to
place, and yet can attain no harbor of quiet? Were it my destenie to endure
these torments alone, then could I with more patience ouerpasse them, but all
that ever came in my company, are with me subject to the like misfortune:
Would we were now, again in Natolia, for I am further from the hope of
attaining to Bohemia now, then I was h^en: we are now driven past our
knowledge, into a strange Country, and ^arre from all means of redress.
Could I but find means to send to Bohemia, to give my Noble Father knowledge
of my aboade, then might I be in some better hope of safety.

Angelica seeing his sadness, accompanied his complaints with her weeping
tears, which augmented his heaviness and sorrows to a greater and higher
degree, that he was ready with her to sh^dde some tears, but that his manly
heart would not suffer him.

Dorella being by, and hearing his complaints, wherein he named Parismus (whom
she had heard married the Princess Laurana) to be his Father, could not be
in quiet, until her husband was come in, to whom she declared what she had
heard. The old man hearing that, presently came into the place where
Parismenos was, and said unto him. My Lord, my wife tells me, how that you
named your self Son to Parismus, which makes me bold to ask you whether
she said true or not, whereof I most earnestly desire to be resolved.

Good Father (quoth Parismenos) I am Son to Parismus: but what makes thee
thus desirous to know that? Because (quoth he, I know that Noble Prince, and
would not doubt ere long, but sooone to bring you where he is: and to use my
best endeavors to further you in that behalf. For know most Nable Prince,
that now you are come into the land of Thessalie, where great Dionisius is
King. And moreover I may boldly assure you, that both the famous and worthy
Parismus, with the Princess Laurana, are now in this Country, at the Court,
in the City of Thoebes. The occasion of whose arrival here, wus by reason
that Dionisius became extremely sick, and sent for them: who came thither not
many days since.

Parismenos heart was so revived with his words, that he embraced the old
man with exceeding joy and gladness, being scarce able to contain himself
within the compass of moderate rejoicing, then presently coming to Angelica,
and taking her by the hand, he most earnestly desired her to be of good
comfort, for that their estate was far better, then they before thought it
had been: whose heart was likewise revived in a sudden disposition, to a
comfortable affectation: for whereas before she was (...) with the fear of
drowning, possessed with a wearisome conceit of further travel, driven into a
strange and unknown place, far from her desire, and contrary to her
expectation: and withal, saw Parismenos said and careful heart oppressed with
much grief, which grieved her more then all the rest. But now being in
safety, and in Thessalie, where she should soon meet Parismus and the
Princess Laurana, the thing she most desired, and also seeing all her
sadness turned to joy, and every thing fallen out most prosperously, even
according to her hearts content, she seemed like one newly revived from death
to life. And with Parismenos and the rest of that small company, rejoiced
exceedingly, cas^ing aside all further show of discontent, and spending the
time they had to stay there, in great pleasure, the rather for that Angelica,
Anna, and Iconius, were now in perfect health.

And on a time Parismenos seeing nothing to hinder his determination, demanded
of the Fisherman, how far it was to the City of Thebes. My Lord (quoth he)
it is some tewentie miles. Which is our best way to travel thither (quoth
Parismenos?) my Lord, it were much for that fair Lady to travel thither on
foot, but if you would be ruled by me, you should go to a Noblemans house
within two miles, whose name is Osirus, the only man that the King loves, who
I know will bid you welcome, and furnish you with all things necessary and
agreeable to your estate, being indeed the most kindest Nobleman in the world.
Angelica (quoth Parismenos) of this Noble personage have I heard my Father
Parismus and the noble Pollipus give many commendations, therefore so pleases
you we will go to his house. I am exceedingly well contented (quoth
Angelica.) My Lord (quoth the Fisherman) so pleases you, I will give him
knowledge of your being here. Do so (said Parismenos.) The Fisherman then
presently hasted toward Osirus Castle, and soon arrived there, and baeing
brought before him, declared all that had happened.

Osirus at the first gave no credence to his speeches, therefore he said, My
friend, thou bring me news that I can hardly believe: therefore tell me how
thou know it is Parismenos? He has told me that he is soon to Parismus,
and the Lady that is with him, is Daughter to the King of Natolia. Osirus then
presently commanded his Gentlemen to mount themselves, his Lady likewise named
Vdalla, and her Ladies and Gentle-women were suddenly in a readiness, and all
things necessary in decent manner, to conduct them onwards of their way, with
the most state that might be, was prepared, and in that sort, with exceeding
joy they rode to the poor Cottage that shrouded such Noble personages: Which
the Fisherman soon gave Parismenos knowledge of: Who presently went out to
meet Osirus, and at the entrance of the door he met him, and with a courteous
behavior they saluted each other. Osirus saying: My Lord, because I know you
not, I beseech you pardon me, if I demand Whether you be the Prince or no?

I am (quoth he) the most unfortunate Parismenos, never made happy, till this
hour. Then said Osirus: In all duty I bid you most heartily Welcome into
Thessalie: Which will account it self thrice happy by your Arrival. Vdalla
then came, and Embraced him, showing by her courteous behavior manifest tokens
of joy, for his presence.

Then they three together, went in unto the Princess Angelica, Whom both
Osirus and his Lady, saluted with most reverend behavior, desiring her to
leave that place, and soiourne in their Castle: whither she should be as
Welcome as heart could wish: Whose kindness both she and Parismenos accepted
with many thanks, and in most stately manner departed thitherwards. The Ladies
attending on Vdalla, saluted the Princess with great reverence, growing into
such admiration of her Beauty, the like whereof, they never beheld in any, but
the Princess Laurana.

Parismenos would by no means leave the old Fisherman, and Dorella behind
him, but took them along with him, having a special regard to reward them
kindly, that had preserved his and Angelicaes life. Angelica and Parismenos
soon arrived at Osirus Castle: Where they were so sumptuously and suddenly
entertained, as that they exceedingly admyred the Noblemans bounty: and being
entered the Hall, they beheld many stately descriptions of the famous acts of
the Princes of Greece: and amongst the rest, the whole history of Parismus
wars, with the Persians, so lively portraited, that it would have held them
with great delight to behold the same, and coming into the inner rooms,
beheld them so richly furnished, that they grew into admyration thereof, whither
Osirus and Vdalla Welcomed them with such hearty kindness, that they could
not choose but grow into an admirable conceyt of their honorable, liberal, and
virtuous inclination to true honor.

There was a most costly Banquet, furnished with all sorts of precious
Delicates made ready: Whither they were within short space invited; There they
heard the sound of much sweet Music, and beheld the hearts of the whole
company belonging to Osirus, as it were revived with joy for their presence:
Which filled their senses with an unwonted consent of delight, which by reason
of the former misery they had endured, seemed a Heaven of happiness, and a
Paradise of pleasure.

And in this sort they spent the Day, and at Night were conducted to several
lodgings, Parismenos by Osirus, and diverse Knights, that soiourned in his
Castle, and some that attended him. Angelica by Vdalla, and many other gallant
Ladies and beautiful Damozels, with exceeding stateliness, and courtesy.

And being alone by themselves, saving that Anna was Angelicaes bedfellow,
which room she was not to resign, till Parismenos should take possession of
the same: He on the one side meditated on his happy Fortune to arrive in that
place, and admired Osirus courtesy, and was most of all affected with joy,
that Angelica was so kindly Welcomed to that strange place, being far from
her own Friends and Country, that he did not only rejoice at their
kindness for his own part, but especially for hers: Whose content he
wished, and desired more then his own; And withal, being now in Thessalie, his
heart was so fully possessed with desired content, that he seemed not to lack
any thing he desired, but only to enjoy Angelicaes sweet, divine, and pure
Loves possession: Whith he was likewise in assurance to enjoy within short
space.

Angelica on the other side, spent some part of the Night in communication
with Anna: Which added a delight to her Senses, relating her misfortunas past,
her happy preservation, the Courtesy and gentle good nature she found in
the Fisherman ane his Wife: Which caused her to conceive a persuasion by the
kind and bountiful entertainment she had found in Osirus, that the
Thessalians were people of an exceeding courteous disposition; Whereas many
other People, both poor and Noble, were rude and barbarous, that she might
think her self a thousand times blessed, that she had made choice of so
Honorable a Knight as Parismenos was, and one that was sprung from the Race of
such noble Parents, and such natural, kind, and loving subjects, that her
heart with these cogitations, seemed to be absolutely happy, and her Senses
were filled with such delightful content, that in these heavenly Meditations,
she fell into a quiet and easefull rest.

The next norning Osirus and Vdalla were up, ready to use their best and
uttermost endeavors, to express their liberal good Will? but the Princes kept
their Beds longer then usual: For that on the one side, they had spent much
of the Night in the Meditations aforesaid: and on the other side, having been
so long time oppressed with careful cogitations, their Senses being now at rest,
they slept with great quiet. And at such time as they were awaked, had all
things in such Cerimonious kind, and stately manner ministered unto them, that
they could not choose but admyre the same, being loath to motion their
departure to the Court, least Osirus should think they did not accept of his
kind entertainment.

Whilst all remained in this great delight in Osirus Castle, report had blazed
into the hearing of diverse of the Nobles and knights of the Kings Court, the
Joy and great Feasting was kept by Osirus: Which was made known in such sort,
that they were assured some great Personages were arrived there, but none knew
who they were, that this news was so open in the Court, that it came to
Dyonisius hearing: Who most of all maruelling thereat, and having now fully
recovered his health, determined for his Recreation after his long Sickness,
only with Parismus, and some few of his Knights, to progress secretly to
Osirus Castle, both to recreate himself, to know what those should be he
entertained, and especially, for that he loved Osirus exceedingly well: Which
determination he made Parismus acquainted with, and the next day accordingly
performed the same. (Which was the third day that Parismenos had bine with
Osirus.) And being arrived at the castle even about noone, he and Parismus
entered, whom the Porter well knew, and presently Donisius (not suffering any
of his servants he met, to give Osirus knowledge of his approach) ^ted the
stayres into the great chamber, where even then Parismenos, Angelica, and all
the rest, were seated at a most costly dinner.

Parismus still stayed with the rest of the knights without the door, Osirus
soon espied Dionisius, and suddenly starting from his seat, upon his knee
did his reverence: Vdalla and the rest that knew him did the like. Whilst
Dionisius said: Osirus, you see a bold guest comes without bidding, but it you
had been kind, you would have made me pertaker of your mirth. Parismenos was
so amazed, that a good while he could not tell how to behave himself, but
perceiving that it was the King, he with Angelica drew toward him, and
humbly prostrated themselves before him upon their knees, being unable by
the suddenness of their joy to speak. Dionisius not knowing them, and
maruelling to see them kneel, was half astonished, until Osirus to rid him
from that doubt, said. My Lord this Knight is son to the Noble Prince
Parismus. Before he could say any more, or Dionisius once salute them,
Parismus was entered, who at the first knew Angelica, and by her his son,
whom otherwise he should not have known, he was so much altered, whose
sudden sight, so unexpected, and so far from his thought, and so contrary
to his expectation, and so impossible to his persuasion, made him tansformed
into a kind of admiration, whether it might be possible that it was they, or
that it was some elusion: but Parismenos likewise espying him in such a study,
immediately rose from the ground, and upon his knee did him reverence, and
Parismus embraced him with a most kind, loving and joyful behavior.

Angelica likewise knowing him, bent her devotions with all humble reverence to
show her love and duty, whilst he raised her from the ground, and embraced
her in his tenber arms, being unable to express his joy to see them there.

Dionisius likewise embraced them with great kindness, and Welcomed them
with tears of joy. Oftentimes folding Parismenos in his arms with a loving
behavior, and holding Angelica by the hand, being loath to let the same go,
and unable to express his inward joy, that he, Parismus and all the rest, were
possessed with such content, as would ask a skillfull pen to describe.

Their welcomes, kind embracings, gentle speeches, and other signs of
contented joy, were such as passes my uttermost skill to relate, or decipher.

Dionisius then desired them to seat themselves again at their banquet, and
he and Parismus would bear them company: then they again seated themselves
and himself by Angelicas side, using her so kindly, so lovingly, and so
familiarly, and with such exceeding mirth, pleasantness, and merry
countenance, that Angelicas heart was possessed with joy thereat: Parismus
admired the same, Parismenos rejoiced thereat: And Osirus and Vdalla took
exceeding joy thereat, having not a long time seen him so pleasant.

They would have waited, but he commanded them to sit down and be merry. The
Noble men that came with him, which was Lord Remus, and diverse others, he
commanded to sit down, uttering these speeches. My Noble Children, the great
joy I conceive for your presence is such, that it filles my senses with
exceeding content. and were Oliuia and Laurana here, I would make account this
were the best, most pleasing, most contented, most royal, and delightful day
that ever befell: but since they are absent, let us be merry: Osirus bid us
Welcome, for we are all your Guests. Parismenos and Angelica, Welcome into
Thessalie: Welcome to your Grandfather, and so exceedingly Welcome, as your
hearts can wish. Parismus who would have thought that these had been with
Osirus, what fortunate Destiny has brought them hither? Or how are they so
happily met, to meet us here?

Well, did but Oliuia and Laurana know of their being here, they would not be
absent. He had no sooner ended that word, but Oliuia the Queen, and Laurana
entered the Chamber (the news of his secret departure from the Court, and his
intent being told to them, they followed him to Osirus Castle.) To whom Osirus
said.

My Lord, it rejoices me to see your Highness so merry. Dionisius hearing her
speeches, suddenly started, and seeing her and Laura na, said.

No marvel though I be merry, haning the fair Lady of the Golden Tower by
the hand. With that the whole company rose from the Table, and Parismenos
knowing his mother, reverenced himself before her upon his kn^, whilst she
(knowing him) embraced him most lovingly, not knowing how sudde^ly to rejoice
sufficiently. Angelica not knowing, but supposing that was Laurana, her heart
being only vowed to Parismenos, thought it her duty to reverence his parents
so much as himself: therefore with him she did reverence to the Queen and
Laurana. And after many greetings salutations and welcomes past, Dionisius
again uttered these spooches.

I know that all here present are exceedingly glad for the safety of these
two young Princes, then laying apart all salutations, which cannot suddenly be
expressed, let us once again and this third time, seat our selves to this
banquet, and leave all other ceremonies while afterward, for w^ are determined
to bid them welcome: and they shall know that we love them. But first let us
refresh our stomachs with Osirus costly cheer, and afterward we will desire
to know the occasion and manner of their arrival into the Country, which was
never absolutely happy before this time. Then they all seated themselves again
in great content. Dionisius not suffering Angelica to sit from him, but close
by his side, betwixt them and the Queen, every one expressing exceeding joy
for their unexpected safety and arrival in the Country. After dinner was
welnie ended, which was ouerpast with pleasurable content on all sides, and was
performed by Osirus in great pomp, Parismus desired Parismenos to declare what
misaduenture had befallen him, since his private departure from the Court at
Ephesus: and by what occasion they arrived in the atplace.

Then Parismenos declared the truth of all, how he met with Angelica, of Irus
death, Arenus and Theoretus treason, and of their preservation by the
Fisherman, which greatly delighted them all to hear. Dionisius then said,
which is Iconius? Then Parismus called for Iconius, and he presently came: whom
Dionisius, Parismus and the rest, used most kindly. And the Fisherman and his
wife, were by Dionisius highly rewarded, and afterward promoted to great
dignity.

Some two days they altogether stayed in Osirus Castle, spending the time in
exceeding mirth. And at last, with great Royaliie departed toward the Court at
the City of Thoebes. Where there were infinite numbers of people with joyful
hearts gathered together to welcome them: expressing such joy as is not to be
described. And afterward Parismenos and Angelica, in the presence and
assembly of Marceillus, Remulus, the King of Hungary, the King of Sparta, and
diverse other Noble personages, were with most exceeding Royalty affianced
together. And after Dionisius was dead, Pairsmenos was Crowned King of
Thessalie, and lived all his life time in great quiet and blisful content, with
the fair Angelica: Increasing the honorable fame and dignite of the Kings of
Thessalie: having one only Son and a daughter. Whose fortunes and
adventures, filled the whole world with their Fame.

EINIS.

