THE GROVNDES OF the Longitude: With an Admonition to all those that are
Incredulous and believe not the Truth of the same.

Written by Simon Forman, student in Astronomy and Phisique. 1591.

Nihil Impossible Deo

Nil tam difficile quod non solertia vincat

Veritas filia Temporis.



Imprinted at London by Thomas Dawson. 1591,

TO all true students of Geography and Cosmography: and to all trauailers
as well by land as Sea, for the discovery of strange Places, Ylandes or
Countries: to all students of Astronomy, and to all those that are desirous to
augment their skill and knowledge by the help of the Longitude, and to all
others, well willours of Art and favorers of learning. Simon Forman student
in Astronomy and Phisique, sends greeting in our Lord God everlasting. 1591.

The grounds of the Longitude, with an Admonition to all those that are
incredulous and believe not the truth of the same.
FOrasmuch as there has been diverse Books written heretofore, by diverse
and sundry learned men of the art of Navigations and Cosmografical science,
the invention and help of the Compass: the making and use of the Astralabie,
the practice of the Cross staff, and Ballestile, and diverse other instruments
as well profitable as necessary for those that use and practice the art of
Navigations, sometimes to take the height of the Sun, sometimes to take the
height, Longitude and Latitude of the Stars, to know the height of countries,
and the Latitude of places, Islands, and cities from the Equinoctial, that
thereby they may the better know in what place they be, and how and whether
to direct their voyage and their ship, that thereby they may also attain more
espeedily and safely to the expected and wished place, and come to the haven
they long for. And in as much as the good Mariner wants yet one thing as one
of the chief pillars of his Art, that is, some mean, or way to find as well
the Longitude which they most desire, as the Latitude which they perfectly
have: the which Longitude many men have shot at, and none unto this day could
perfectly find by any instrument, or by any other reason then Ptolomy sets
down, which is by the Ecclipses of the Sun and Moon, which Mariners and
trauailers cannot have at all times to help themselves after they are beaten
and driven with foul weather, or with some uncouth storm or raging Sea
unexpected, or else being in some strange country or place, to know whether
they are gone so far as they would be, where they suppose some unknown
Island or land lies: or where they are short of the same, which is not to be
done by any of the instruments or means aforesaid. But by a more secreete
mean and way as yet unknown unto all the world, except to those to whom my
self here before have showed it upon the request of some which were very
incredulous thereof, and yet remain because themselves as yet do not know the
way of doing it: because they that do know it are sworn by a sacred oath
not to manifest or teach the same to any without leave before had of the Author.

And now because I know on the one side that men are as desirous of the
knowledge hereof as my self have been sometimes of greater matters. And on
the other side, they will still remain incredulous of the truth until they
hear some reason for it, or see the experience thereof: as S. Thomas did of
the resurrection of Christ: which afterward said unto him, come hither Thomas
and see the printe of the nails in my hands, and thrust thy hand into my
side, and be not faithless but believe: So do I say unto all that be
incredulous, and to those that thorough endless travail, and hardiness of
heart and foolish persuasions are persuaded, that there is no true way or means
to find and know the true Longitude of Countries, Cities, and places, and to
all those curious carpers, whose wits are entangled in vanity, that are ever
searching and never find, reatching up unto the stars, and yet cannot
attain to the orb of the Moon, who thinks none like unto themselves, and
because they cannot themselves comprehend the mystery of hidden and unknown
things, none else should do it nor assay it. As who should say, that the
omnipotent God, the great Creator of all things, the giver of all wisdom and
knowledge were tied unto them, that they should have the preferment in things
before others, or that he should bestow his guiftes according to their
direction, and not according to his own will: But as he made not all things at
one time: so he ordained the knowledge of all things not to be found at one
time, nor by one man: for if one man could do every thing, and that his wit
were so apt and prompt that he could find out the knowledge of every thing,
what need had we then to seek diverse men. for diverse causes, as Carpentars to
build houses, Smiths to make iron work, Cobblers to mende shoes, etc.

Therefore, seeing that the great creator of all things disposes his gifts
of knowledge to every man according to his will and the measure of faith, as
says S. Paul, and makes vessels for honor and vessels for dishonor, some for
the chamber, and some for the kitching, and makes some poor, and some rich,
and some wise, and some foolish: and pu^teth down the mighty, and sets up
the humble and meek: making the foolish to confound the wise: and gives to
one man the knowledge of one thing, and to another the knowledge of another
thing: to some the gift of prophecy, to some the gift of healing, to some of
doing of wonders and miracle, to some the interpretation of things, and
finding of hidden mysteries, yet al is the administration of one spirit, and
power of the holy Ghost, as S. Paul says, of his free grace powered out upon
every creature, according to his divine will and fore knowledge.

And if it be so, why marvel you so at me, that I should receive so bountiful
a gift at the hand of God, or by him to be endued with the knowledge hereof.
Am I a monster degenerated from kind, or am I not a creature, made and formed
by his divine will, and borne into the world, and do live to show forth and
speak of his glory and power as well as others.

Do not all the creatures of God manifest his power and glory, each one in his
kind and nature, as the birds of the air the fishes of the Seas, the beasts
and worms that feed on the ground, and the herbs and trees that grow
thereof, does not Rubarbe purge collar, and is not Selledony good for the eyes,
is there not fire in a flint stone, and does not the Sallamander live in the
fire: did not Mercury Tristnegistus, find the Tables wherein was engraven the
7. liberal Sciences, and other secreet Arts in the valley of Hebron after the
flood: and talked he not with the holy Ghost, as it is recorded in his book
Entitled by the name of Pymander. Was not Solomon endued by God with such
excellent wisdom, as none had greater before his time. Did not God show his
wonders by his servant Moses in the land of Egypt, and did not Moses and the
children of Israel pass through the red Seat and was not Pharao and his
hosts drowned. Did not Joshua command the Sun to stand still on Gybeon, and
the Moon on Aalon, until he was avenged on the enemies of the Lord and of
Israel. Did he not give power unto Elias to shut the heavens, so that it rained
not in 3. years and six months. And then he prayed again, and it did rain.

I speak now of the power of the Lord and of his wonders done in the old
world: which also cease not to show wonders unto this day, and to give power
to some to bear his name before the rest.

Marvel not therefore at me, that I should find out the knowledge hereof,
neither think it a thing impossible to be done, for it is not I, but the grace
of God which is in me, as Paul says, for all good gifts and the true
knowledge of things comes from God, according as it is written: And in the
latter days I will power out my spirit upon all flesh, and your young men
shall dream dreams, and your old men shall see visions, and your children
shall tell of things to come. And therefore all though the Lord did hide the
knowledge here of from all the learned men that ever have written unto this
day, as from Ptolomeus, Pithagoras, Plato, Beed, Aristotle, Alkindus, Lergis,
Aomar, Albenoyt Zael, Guido bonatus, Haly, John de sacrobosco, Alfonsus, Amoaz,
Dorotheus, Friar Bacon, Petrus de Medina, Purbaicus, Regiomontanus, Alfraganus,
Strabo, Stadius, Leouitius, and an infinite number more of great and learned
clearkes which have written, as well of Astronomy as Cosmographie, it was not
for want of wisdom or learning in them, or great diligence to search the
secreete mystery of things: neither was it for that there should be borne into
the world a greater clarke then they to find it. But it was decreed so by his
divine power before that when the time thereof was come, it should be found by
him whom he would to show his glory and power even by the simple and least
made account of, to confound the wisdom of the wise and mighty. Even by him
that never thought of such a thing, nor never had endeavored himself there
abouts, nor applied any part of his study to that intent, had not Master
Robert Parker merchant of London, putting the same into his head, and entreated
me to take some pains therein, at whose earnest request I bestowed some part
of my study and endeavor therein. And by the grace and help of God have
brought it to that pass, which any man that is desirous of the knowledge
thereof, may learn the truth thereof at the Authors hands if he repair unto
him, or else if he or they repair to Master Robart Parkes in pudding lane.

Therefore returning to our former discourse, again to speak of the
unbelieving sort, and those that stand so stiffly upon impossibilities, saying
it is impossible to find any true and direct way for the knowledge thereof,
because so many learned men aforesaid could never find it: and some again
make it impossible, because themselves have travailed therein with much study,
counting themselves great and cunning Clerks, having found and proved twenty
ways at the least, and could not happen on the right way as themselves have
reported. And thereupon some have been about to write a book against it, and
of the impossibility and uncertainty thereof: some again are of another
mind, and they say if he have found out the true way thereof, he never found
it by God, but by some sinister means by the Devil, as who should say that
the cunning of the devil, is greater then the knowledge and power of God, or
that God was not able to give the knowledge thereof, except the devil will, or
that he be made pryuie thereof, or that the devil can do any thing without the
permission or sufferance or commandment of God. If you doubt thereof go ask
of Job, and of the book of the Kings: how the devil came before God, etc. and
how God gave him leave and power, and how God made the devil and instrument to
do his will. But these and such like are not evil speakers, but impairers of
the power of God, dishonorers of his person, presumptuous in their own
conceit, enuiors of others, hinderers of the benefit of the commonwealth,
negligent to do good, and as hard of belief as S. Thomas was.

Therefore I say unto them as Christ said unto S. Thomas, Come hither all you
unbelievers, all you that seek and never find, all you cunning Sophisters, all
you students of Astronomy and Cosmographie, all you also that account things
impossible, and all you that will write Books against it and all you that have
so many ways and none true, and you also that seek by subtlety of Arguments
to enter into the secreet knowledge thereof, that thereby you might take away
another man's glory: that seek I say to have the gain and praise of another
man's travail. Come hither also all you that stand upon the judgment of the
learned: and all you also that are desirous to learn and to augment your
knowledge. Come hither also you Masters and Sailers, that entend any long
voyages, here shall you find one of the chief pillars of your Art, here
shall you find a Pilate to direct you in a dangerous passage, being driven with
a storm be it never so long, here shall you find a Load star, that shall
show you where you shall go forth or back, East or West. Yea you shall find
such a practice and knowledge that shall prove, or disprove all your Maps,
Cards, Globes, and Books that here before have been written thereof, and
further it resolves and discovers all the doubts here before had in
Navigations.

And the truth and certainty hereof is so sure, as the Latitude, and as easy
to be done to every wise man.

And for because you shall not think that I make a great preambulation or
circumstanticall discourse thereof, to persuade men without some ground or
reason, I will here set down certain grounds and pillars thereof, the which
if any can absolutely disprove, then may he well say that it is a fallible rule
and not true: the which I know none can disprove except he will deny both
reason and learning. And the grounds are these, viz.

Genesis.
1 God in the beginning created all things in number, weight and measure, in
order, place, and form, and appointed man to have dominion over his creatures,
and to search and seek out the secreet and hidden virtues in them contained,
given unto them by by God their creator, severally, by measure, etc.

Genesis.
2 God created two lights, a greater light to rule the day, as the Sun, and
a less to rule the night, as the Moon and the Stars.

Genesis.
3 God placed the Stars in the firmament of Heaven, to give light upon the
Earth.

Ptolomie. Aristotle. Thom. de sacrob.
4 The first mouer does give a turn once every 24. hours or there abouts,
about the Earth, whereby the Sun, the Moon, and Stars, are carried from
the East unto the West, and so about.

Ptolomie in Almegesto. Arist. in 2. mer. Thom. de sacrob.
5 The Earth is quiet and immovable, and is accounted the Center of the world.

Thom. de sacrob.
6 Do not the Earth and the Waters make one round body.

Ptolomie. Aristotle. Alphonsus.
7 There are two poles, the Arcticke and Antarcticke, the one in the North, the
other in the South, and the Line Equinoctial in the midst.

8 There is a Latitude, which is taken from the Equinoctial to the Pooles,
either to the South or the North,

9 There is no Latitude without his Longitude.

Ptolomic,
10 The Latitude is opposite to the Longitude, in respect that the Latitude is
taken from the South to the North. And the Longitude from the West unto the
East.

11 The Sun does rise and fall in his course, and never continue at one stay.

12 It is Omne oppositum.

13 There is fire in a flint-stone.

14 Diverse places have diverse Latitudes in respect of the South and North. And
diverse Longitudes in respect of East and Weast.

15 A man may see farther on a plain ground, or on a hill, then he can among
trees or in a bottom, and as far by Sea as by Land.

Too Grounds more I have left out, because as they are most true, so they give
too plain evidence, and too much understanding to a subtle wit.

Now if any can disprove absolutely these grounds aforesaid viz. That God in
the beginning, did not create all things as is aforesaid, and set the Sun,
the Moon, and Stars to distinguish times and seasons, or that the Sun, the
Moon and Stars do not give light unto the earth, or that the first moouer
does not turn, or can gain say the stabilitie of the earth, the situation
of the Pole stars, or Equinoctial line, or can deny the Latitude, or say
there is a Latitude without Longitude, or that can say they are not opposite,
or that it is not Omne oppositum, etc. or that there is no fire in
aflint-stone, or that all places have one Latitude and Longitude, etc. or that
a man can see farther generally in a bottom, then on a high hill, etc. Then in
disprouing absolutely these generally, then he may generally disprove our
Art, and finding of our Longitude, and so many of these posisions as he can
absolutely disprove, so many of the pillars of our Art does fail, for these
positions which I have here set down, either they are the opinions of the
Ancient writers, or confirmed by holy Scripture, or are such as daily
experience does confirm or reason wholly allow.

But if these may not be disproued generally and absolutely without caueling:
then it is but a folly for any to stand incontention or denial hereof, for
whosoever shall deny it by words, the experience and deed shall show it to be
true.

Cease therefore, all such as carpe against the truth: and you also that
wonder at the power and gifts of God, and you also that say you have so many
ways, and you also that will write Books against the truth hereof, cease
also you that say it was found by some sinister means: cease also you that
stumble at a straw and fall over a house, and you also that be like unto S.
Thomas in unbelieving, and know you that whatsoever is not possible with man,
is possible with God: and God will reveal the knowledge of hidden things at
times appointed to those whom it please him to the great admiration of the
world: and there is nothing so secreete among men, but it shall be made
manifest.

Tell me, was the knowledge of all Arts and Sciences found out in one day, was
Room builte in a day, or stately Troy overthrown in an hour, has not God
measured the heavens, and wayed the earth in the balance, has he not sounded
the deapth of the sea: and numbered the hairs of our heads, gave he not boldness
and eloquence of speech to Moses and Aron, gave he not wisdom to Solomon,
faithfulness to Abraham, to his twelve Apostles knowledge of tongues, and
power to cast out Devils, and gave he not to his Prophets, Martirs, Virgins,
and Confessers constancy: is not he the only well and fountain of all
goodness and grace, from whom all knowledge springs.

Did not one, find out the Latitude, another the height of the Sun, another
the Astralabie, another the Compass, another the Cross staff, another the
Ballestille, all was not found at one time, nor by one man. Did not another
find the Art of making of Glasses another the making of Guns, and gunne
powder, another the Art of Printing, others the making of globes Celestial and
Terrestrial and innumerable other things very needful and necessary which are
now used.

I demand also whether all Countries, Provinces, and Islands situated in the
seas, were found all at one time or by one man, was not the Canarie Islands
found by a French man called Betanchor, in the year of our Lord God 1405. viz.
Lancelotus, and the Island Fortis ventura. And after this did not Farnandus
Peraria invade the Islands Ferrea, and Gomera. And did not Petrus de Vera,
citizen of the noble city of Xeuicium, and Michael of Moxica subdue the
Islands Grancanaria, and Palma. And Alphonsus Lugo that which is now called
Teneryfen, of latter days. And further was not Hispaniola and Cuba discovered
by Colonus, and diverse other Islands, in the year of Christ 1493. and 1494. And
did not John Dias Solis sail first into the river of Plate in the days of
Ferdinandus king of Spain, etc. What need I speak of China, of Giapan, of
Persia, of Ginnea, and of diverse other places late found out, by running as it
were at adventure: If these countries and Islands were found as is said by
great adventure, there is no doubt now, but many notable trauailers having the
help of so good and profitable a rule as the Longitude, will attempt to sail
and discover yet diverse Islands and Countries unknown to their perpetual
memory and everlasting praise.

Now therefore, you that are men among men, and would be accounted wise on the
one side: and that desire to be instructed in greater knowledge on the other
side, consider with your selves, what God is, what his power conteyneth: what
his gifts are, what his will is. Consider also what time brings to light,
what Art and cunning skill is: and to what industry and travail attaineth:
Lay all maliciousnes aparte, and envy nor infame none, nor condemn them that
travail in any Art or Science for his countries wealth, pursue them not with
evil words that seek to do you good, and to increase, both your wealth and
knowledge. Be not unthankful to God for his gifts: for whatsoever is done to
good, it is the will of God either to suffer it or command it: evil is well
done, where good comes thereof to a multitude, and where God is glorified by
it, praise God highly, that it has pleased him, to give the knowledge hereof
to your Countriman, who means to make you partakers of it, his pains
considered. For I dare to say if the knowledge hereof had been found by the
Spaniardes or by any other Nation, he should be so well rewarded in his
Country for his pains, and so highly honored for the knowledge hereof: that
he should have no need to seek any foreign Prince or Country for
recompense, neither should any other nation be made privy thereof they would
keep it so secreete. Consider hereof all you that shall read this my writing,
for herein is a mystery: and if reward be given accordingly: I shall
hereafter perhaps make declaration, of the principles of another science, as
much desired as this, of some other sorts of men, who labor continually for
the knowledge thereof, and wander in darkness, in a thing more mystical and
of greater importance then this which I have spoken of, and is thought as
impossible too, as ever this was, but yet not so impossible, because of some it
has been done in the old world, and so was never this. And as there has
been heretofore diverse proffers made in the absence and behalf of the Author,
by Master Emery Mulleneux and others, for the truth and trial hereof and
has not been accepted hitherto: because some have thought it either to be
done upon presumption, or on a Brauado, etc. But whatsoever they before have
offered in the premises, I the Author hereof am ready at all times to perform
the same God willing.

Furthermore, if it please God I live in peace, and be once able to maintain
my study without let and interruption: I will God willing rectify the heavens
for the true places of the fixed stars, according to the Sign, Degrees and
Minutes, that they now stand in, upon experience and just observation, and
not upon supposition and calculation after other men's Tables, for we do see,
that all the Tables for the most part, late set out of the fixed stars be
false and very erroneous, and do differ among themselves very much, yea it
seems, that our Ephimerides is false also in many places, as touching the
moving of the Planets, in some, a degree to much, in some, too degrees and more
too little, and also the very motion of the Moon is not direct, which if it
be not farther looked into and amended, will cause great error in time. Many
other things I have to say, which now I omit, but hereafter I will write
hereof more largely by proof of the present time, and not upon supposition. In
the mean time I leave the vewe hereof and consideration to your discretion,
giving praise to God that gave us the understanding and knowledge hereof, to
whom be praise for evermore. Amen.

THe Tables hereto belonging shall follow, and be Printed shortly, with
certain other Books of Astronomy and Astrology, as the Book of the three
sorts of hours, Natural, Artificial and Magical, with all the doubts of
Astronomy, and alterations and significations of the Planets, the moving of
the eight Sphere, and the way to errect a figure both by the Eccliptike line,
as also by the oblique ascension, wherein the mystery of Art lies hid, with
diverse other Books God willing if they may be permitted.

Finis. Per me Simon Forman. 1591.

