DEVOVT CONTEMPLATIONS Expressed In two and Forty Sermons Upon all ye
Quadragesimall Gospells

Written in Spanish by Fr. Chapter de Fonseca

Englished by. I. M. of Magdalen College in Oxford.

LONDON Printed by Adam Islip Anno Domini. 1629.

HVMILITIE
REPENTANC^
Matt. 4.1.
Matt. 26.69.
Luke 7.11.
John 11.1.
Matt. 28.6.
Matt. 17.1.
Mark 6.47.
John 4.5.
Matt. 27.38




TO THE TWO NOBLE KNIGHTS, SIR JOHN STRANGVVAYES, AND SIR LEWIS DIVE; AND
THEIR VIRTUOUS LADIES, THE LADY GRACE STRANGWAYES, AND LADY HOWARD DIVE.

IN Acknowledgement of his own true Love and Respect, DON DIEGO PVEDE-SER
Dedicateth these his INDEAVOVRS.

To the Reader.
COurteous Reader, to seek thy approbation of this Book by any fair and
plausible inductions, were to distrust, if not impair the worth of it. It Is
folly to light a Candle to the Sun, as likewise to praise that, which in it
self is all praise worthy. True Virtue needs no Orator to set her forth; her
own native beauty is so moving, that outward trappings can afoord her small
advantage. If the divine conceits and meditations of Antiquity can work upon
thy Affections, I make no doubt but here is enough to win thee. The whole Book
is nothing but a bunch of flowers collected from out those pleasant Gardens,
which were long since planted by the art and industry of those reverend
Fathers, whom God raised up for Guardians to his Church, during her nonage and
minority. If the sent of these shall please thee, the Translator will
hereafter furnish thee with the Labors of the same Author upon all the Parables.

Some peradventure may dislike it, because it was first composed by a Spaniard;
as if Eliah should have refused his meat, because it was brought him by a
Raven; or that in a curious Fountain, where there are some spouts formed like
the heads of Serpents, others, like those of Doves, the water that issued out
of either were notall one. The ancient Gauls had no sooner tasted the
delicious wines of Italy, but a desire took them to go and conquer the
Country: the like had been wrought upon the Israelites, when some of those,
whom Moses by the appointment of God himself, Number. 13.23
had sent to view the fruitfulness of the land of Canaan, brought them of the
Grapes, Figs, and Pomegranats, which the soil affoorded; if others had not
marred this real demonstration with a vain suspicion of the sons of Anak. But
what, shall not the corn be reaped because there is cockle in the field? Shall
not the rose be plucked because it grows on a Brier? And yet let me tell thee,
to hearten thy adventure against all needless and imaginary fears, The
captive here has her head shorn, and may well be admitted for a true
Israelite. Thou shall not cry out, Mors in olla, Death is in the pot; that
little leaf of Coloquintida which was in it, is taken out, and the children of
the Prophets may taste of the broth without danger.

Others it may be, will condemn it as defective, because such proofs and
passages as are alleged out of the fathers are not quoted in the margent; and
indeed they should not have bin wanting, but that in the Spanish copy, they
were found upon good perusal (whether through the negligence of the Printer,
or some other default) to be so mistake^, that to have set them down, would
have occasioned trouble rather than content: but if ever the Book come to a
second impression, all things shall be added, for the satisfying of thy desires
to the full. Mean while accept of this, and let it be thy Christian joy, That
the lisping Ephramite is heard here to speak as plain as the smooth-tongu'd
Canaanite; and that there is not so great a distance betwixt Jerusalem and
Samaria, as some imagine. And so I leave thee to the blessing of the Highest.

Farewell.
A Table of the several Texts.
1 WHen ye fast, etc. Mat. 6.16. The Proeme to which Sermon is Memento Homo,
quia ^inis es, Remember Man* etc. page 1 2 When Jesus was entered into
Capernaum, etc. Mat. 8.5. page 23 3 Ye have heard how it was said to them of
old, etc. Mat. 5.27. 39 4 When it grew late the ship, etc. Mark. 6.47. 61 5
Then was Jesus led aside of the Spirit, etc. Mat. 4.1. 70 6 When the Sun of
Man shall come, etc. Mat. 25.31. 93 7 When Jesus entered into Jerusalem, etc.
Mat. 21.10. 104 8 The Scribes and Pharisees came unto him, saying, etc. Mat. 12
38. 113 9 Jesus withdrew himself into the Coasts of, etc. Mat. 15.21. 142 10
There was a Feast of the Jews, etc. Ioh. 5.1. 160 11 Jesus took unto him
Peter, and James, and John, etc. Math. 17.1. 180 12 I go my way and ye shall
seek me, John. 8.21. 199 13 The Scribes sat upon Moses Chair, Mat. 23.2. 209
14 Behold we go up to Jerusalem, etc. Mat. 20.18 218 15 There was a certain
rich man, who was clothed, etc. Luke 16.19. 233 16 A certain man planted a
Vineyard. etc. Mat. 21.33. 248 17 A certain man had two Sons, etc. Luke
15.11. 272 18 And Jesus was casting out a Devil, etc. Luke 11.14. 283 19
Phy^itian heal thy self, etc. Luke 4.23. 314 20 If thy Brother shall
trespass against thee, etc. Mat. 18.15. 333 21 Then came unto him from
Jerusalem, etc. Mat. 15.1. 351 22 When he was come into Symons house, etc.
Luke 4.38. 373 23 And Jesus came into a city of Samaria, etc. John. 4.5. 386
24 He went into the Mount of Olives, etc. John. 8.1. 412 25 After these things
Jesus went his way, etc. John. 6.1. 425 26 He found sitting in the Temple,
sellers of sheep, etc. John. 2.14. 447 27 Now when the Feast was half done,
etc. John. 7.14. 461 28 And as Jesus passed by, he saw a man, etc. John. 9.1.
474 29 And Jesus went into a City called Nain, etc. Luke 7.11. 487 30 Now a
certain man was sick, named Lazarus, etc. John. 11.1. 499 31 I am the Light
of the World, etc. John. 8.12. 516 32 Which of you will reprove me of sin,
etc. Ioh. 8.46. 524 33 The chief Priests sent their Officers to, etc. Ioh.
7.32. 539 34 And Jesus walked into Galile, for he, etc. Ioh. 7.1. 549 35 The
Feast of the Dedication was celebrated, etc. Ioh. 10.22. 557 36 A certain
Pharisee requested Jesus, etc. Luke 7.36. 569 37 Then gathered the High Priests
and Pharisees a Council, etc. John. 11.47. 584 38 The high Priests consulted
that they might kill, etc. John. 12.10. 597 39 Peter sat without in the Hall,
etc. Mat. 26.69. 607 40 There were crucified with him two thieves, etc. Mat.
27.38. 615 41 When Jesus knew that his hour was come, etc. John. 13.1. 636 42
And Jesus bearing his cross, went forth, etc. Ioh. 19.17. 638
SERMONS UPON ALL THE QVADRAGESSIMAL GOSPELLS.
THE FIRST SERMON, ON ASHWEDNESDAY.
Memento Homo, quia cinis es.

Remember Man, that thou art but Dust.


THE remembrance of death (says Climachus) is, amongst other remembrances,
True life is to meditate on death.
as bread amongst other meats; howbeit it is more necessary for the soul,
than bread for the body: For a man may live many days without bread, but the
soul cannot do so without the remembrance of death. And it is the general
opinion of all the best and holiest Writers, Perfectissimam vitam esse
continuam mortis meditationem, i. That the most perfect life is a continual
meditation of death. Chrysostom expounding that place of Saint Luke, Qui vult
venire post me, i. He that will follow me, says, That Christ commands us not
to bear upon our backs that heavy burden of the wooden Cross, but that we
should always set our death before our eyes: making that of Saint Paul to be
our Imprese, Quotidie morior, i. I die daily.

In the second of the Kings it is recounted, that the holy King Josias did
cleanse the people from their Altars, their Groves, and high places, where
innumerable Idolatries daily increased: and to amend this ill, he placed there
in their stead, bones, skulls, and the ashes of dead men. Whose judgment
herein was very discreet; For from man's forgetting of his beginning and his
end, arise his Idolatries; and so reviving by those bones the rememberance of
what they were hertofore, and what they shall be hereafter, he did make them
amend that mischief.

In boasting himself to be what he is not.
Very many, nay numberless are those men which adore the nobleness of their
Lineage; and out of a desire that they have to make good their descent and
beginning, they multiply Coats one upon another, hang up Scutchions, blazon
forth their Arms, tell you large histories of their pedigrees and genealogies,
and many times most of them mere lies and fables. Ezechiel did represent these
unto us in those twenty five young men which were besotted and ravished in
beholding the Sun; which by way of exposition signifies the adoring of the
glory of their birth. But leaving these as fools, who glory in the gold that
glisters, the Church teaches thee another lesson, and says unto thee, Memento
homo* Remember man, etc.

God created Adam of the basest matter, of very dirt: but this Dirt being
molded by Gods own hand, and inspiring it with so much wisdom, council, and
prudence, Lib. de Resur. Carn. cap. 9.
Tertullian calls it Cura diuini ingenij, i. The curiousness of Gods wit: but
man growing proud hereupon, and hoping to be a God himself, God doomed him to
death, and wrapped him again in his durtie swaddling clouts, with this
inscription, Puluis es, and in puluerem reuerteris, i. Dust thou art, and to
dust thou shall return.

Adam did not without some mystery cloth himself with green leaves; for (as
Saint Ambrose has noted it) he gave therein, In promising himself to be what
he cannot.
as it were, a sign and token of his vain and foolish hopes. But as the
mother, when the^ee has stung her child's finger, runs with all have to get a
little dirt, and claps it to her little one, which does assuage the swelling,
and give it ease; so those busy Bees of hell daily stinging us, and striking
into our breasts the poison of their pride and arrogancy; the Church with dust
and ashes, with a Cinis es, incinerem reuerteris, i. Dust thou art, and to dust
thou shall return, abates this pride, and tells us of that swelling arrogancy
of ours.

When God revealed to Nebucadnezar, how little a while his Empire was to last,
he showed him a statue of diverse mettalls, the head gold, the breast silver, the
belly brass, the legs iron, the feet clay, and a little stone which
descended from the mountain, lighting on the feet, dashed the statue in pieces.
But in stead of taking this as a forewarning of his end, and to have it still
before his eyes, he made another statue of gold from top to toe, which is held
to be a durable and lasting metal: so that the more God sought to dis-deceiue
him, the more was he deceived with his vain hopes. And this is a resemblance
of that which daily happens unto us: for God aduising us, that our best
building is but dirt, our idle thoughts and vain hopes imagine it to be of
gold. And man's life being so short, that, as Nazianzen said, it is no more than
to go out of one grave to enter into another, out of the womb of our
particular mother, into that of the common mother of us all, which is the
Earth; we flatter our selves with the enjoying of many long years of life. But
the Church being desirous to cut off this error, says, Memento homo, i.
Remember man.

By Ezechiel God threatened his people with a great slaughter, and that they
only should escape that were marked in the forehead with the Hebrew letter Tau,
which is the last in the alphabet: some say that it has the figure of a
cross; and it may be that when Ezechiel did write this he had that figure
before him: and S. Hierome says, That in stead of Tau the Samaritanes did use
the figure of a cross. The Hebrews by this letter understand the end, as
being the last in the ABC. And God was willing that those that bore this mark
in their forehead (that is, should have their end before their eyes) should
live; but that those that lived forgetful of their end, that they should die.
And the Church being desirous that her children should escape this danger,
prints this in their minds, Terra es, Earth thou art, etc.

It is well weighed by Rupertus, that after God had condemned Adam to death, he
bestowed upon his wife the name of Life, Matter cunctarum gentium, i. The mother
of all the living. Scarce had God condemned him to punishment, but he by-and-by
shows that he had forgot it. And therefore did God permit the death of innocent
Abel, to the end that in Abel he might see the death of the body, and in Caine
the death of the soul, for to quicken his memory. From Adam we inherit this
forgetfulness, not remembering to day what we saw but yesterday; and the general
desire of man strives all it can to perpetuate our life, which if it were in
our hands we would never see death. But because the love of life should not rob
us of our memory, and that fearing, as we are mortal, we might covet those
things that are eternal, seeing that walls, towers, marble, and brass molder
away to dust, we may ever have in our memory, Memento homo, Remember man, etc.

Many holy Saints have styled the memory, the stomach of the soul, as
Gregory, Bernard, Theodoret, Austen, Nazianzen, etc. And God commanding
Ezechiel, That he should notify unto his people certain t^^ngs that he had
revealed unto him; and charging him that he should remember himself well of
them, he said, Comede quaecunque ego do tibi, i. Eat whatsoever I give thee.
And in another placehe commanded him that he should eat a Book, wherein were
written Lamentationes and Vae. etc. Being al metaphors of the Prophets having
things in his remembrance. Which is more clearly delivered by Job, Job. 15.
Nunquid sapiens replebit arbore stomachu^ suum? i. Will a wise man fill his
stomach with that heat that shall burn and consume him? Which is to say, will
he charge his memory with matters of pain and torment? The proportion then
holds thus; as the stomach is the storehouse of our corporal food, and keeping
therein our present meat, the body takes from thence it is sustenance, whereby
it maintains it is being and it is life: so the memory is the Magazin of the
soul, and sets before our eyes the obligation wherein we stand, the good
which we lose, and the hurt which we gain. And representing thereunto the
species and shapes of things past, they sometimes work that effect, as they
would have done had they been present themselves; whence is engendered the love
of God, which is that good blood wherewith the soul is nourished. And as from
the disorder and disagreement of the stomach painful diseases do arise, and
diverse infirmities to the body; so from the forgetfulness of our memory rise
those of the soul. Basil. Biblioth^^ca Sanct. Pat^ Tom. 1. Sermon. ^
For without oblivion (says Saint Basil) our salvation cannot be lost, nor our
souls health endangered. And as when the fuel and fire shall fail man's
stomach, which is the oven which boyles and seasons our life, we may give that
of the bodies for lost: so when our memory shall fail us, we may give the
soul for lost. Wherefore it is fit that every man should take this into
consideration, Memento homo, Remember man, etc.

You have heard before that the first attribute of man is oblivion: The second
is baseness and misery.

In Ezechiel the King of Tire said, Deus ego sum, i. I am a God: Ezech. 28.
but he was answered, That he was but a man; that is, base, vile, and
miserable. So David, Vt sciant gentes quoniam homines sunt, Let the Nations
know that they are men, i. base, Psalm. 9.
and vile. And Saint Paul, Nonne homines estis? i. Are ye not men? 1. Cor. 3.
When we see a man swallowed up, sometimes in the miseries of the body,
sometimes of the soul, we say in the conclusion, He is a man: now if in
stead of the gold of the Angels there was found rust, and that so fine cloth
as that, was not without it is moaths, and that incorrupted wood without it is
worm, What will become of those that are but dust, Qui habitant domos luteas,
i. Who dwell in houses of clay: marry they must, as fearful of their own
harm, repeat this lesson, Memento homo, terra es, etc. Remember o man that
thou art earth, etc.

Eccl. 32.11.
Ecclesiasticus does advise thee to rise up betimes, and not to be the last,
but to get thee home without delay, for there thou shall find enough to do;
Praecurre in domum tuam, and age conceptiones tuas. Jeremy counsels thee to
the same, sending thee to this house of dirt and mud. So much good learning is
not to be gotten in the schools; for in this house of clay, God reads unto us;
but in the schools, men.

God did not speak unto Moses till he had drawn his sheep aside into the
Desert; putting his hand twice in his bosom, the one he took out clean, the
other leprous. We have two bosoms to take care of in this life; the one of our
own things, the other of other men's. But the meditation of our own misery
being the more necessary, we must ever have in our mind this Memento, etc.

A man not knowing himself, cannot know God: now for to know himself, the
next way is to go out of himself, and to consider the trace and tracke of
those Alexanders and Caesar's, etc. Vbi sunt Principes gentium, i. Where are the
Princes of the Nations? etc.

Gregory Nazianzen asks the question, Why God having created the soul for
Heaven, did knit it with so straight a knot, to a body of earth, so frail and
so lumpish? And his answer is, That the Angels being ouerthrown by their
pride, he was willing to repair and to help this presumption, in man, a
creature in his superior part, as it were, Angelical, but ha^ing a heavy and
miserable body, which might serve as a button or stay unto him, that if the
nimblenesse of his understanding should puff him up, yet that earth which
clogged his body should humble him and keep him down.

Amongst other stratagems of war, to annoy the enemy with dust, and drive
him thereby to yield, is not the least. Abacuc reports of a King of the
Caldeans, has made a jest of walls, Towers, and Bulwarks, because he could
rear higher of earth, Habacuc. i. v. 10
He shall deride every strong Hold, and shall heap dust and take it. Plutarch
tells us of Sertorius, That his enemies having fortified themselves in a cave
that was inexpugnable; to the mouth thereof he laid great heaps of earth, and
the wind favoring him, he raised so great a dust with his Troops of horse that
they presently yielded. The Church finding many of their sons so rebellious,
that neither misfortunes will reform them, nor stripes keep them in awe,
uses this policy of Dust, coming upon them with a Memento homo, Remember
man, etc.

In that mountainous Country of Biscay, there are some ancient buildings whose
ruins declare them to have been heretofore great and goodly things: here is a
piece of a Tower standing, here a vast Hall, but gone to ruin, there thick
great walls, but demolished; What houses are these? they belong to the
Mendoza's, or the Velasco's. And although these Families have in other places
new Palaces, rich and sumptuous Halls with gilded roofes, windows, galleries,
Courts paued with Jasper, Gardens and Fountains fair and beautiful; yet do
they make more reckoning of those old houses, because they conserve their
memory, and show the antiquity of their descent. The honors of the world,
the Estates, Lordships, Offices, and dignities, are things as it were of
yesterday; but that ancient house which thou must most reckon of, is that thy
ruinous house of dust and clay, which puts theestill ^n mind, Quod terra es,
and in terram conuerteris, i. That earth thou art, and to earth thou shall
return.

There is no man so desperate, nor of that boldness of spirit, but does show a
kind of fear when Death looks him in the face. And therefore death is termed
pale, because it makes the most valiant to change color. Job. 21. v. 32.
Job painting forth such a kind of soule-lesse man, says, Qui^ argue^ coram
(...) eius, i. Who shall be able to control this man, that neither fears the
Law, nor his King, nor his God? The best remedy is, to carry him to the
Sepultures of the dead; Et in c^ngerie mortu^ra^ euigilabit, i. He shall be
brought to the graves, and made to awake; and i^ the looking upon that sad
spectacle will not work him, there is little hope of good to be done upon him.
Now, the Church seeing that true death kills a man, and that that which
represents it gives life, like unto the brazen Serpent, which being beholden
and looked upon, gave life to those which had been wounded by those true
Serpents: it cannot be too often inculcated, Memento, etc.

Those that entered triumphantly into Rome had a thousand occasions given them
to incite them to pride, arrogancy, and vanity; as their great number of
Captives, their Troops of Horse, their Chariots drawn with Elephants or
Lions, and Ladies looking upon them from their windows, and the like. But the
Senate considring the great danger of the Triumpher, ordered one to sit by his
side to whisper this still in his ear, Hominem memento te, i. Remember thy self
to be a man. The Princes of the earth have many motives to make them forget
themselves, not regarding the complaints of the poor and needy; yet, Sapient.
7. v. 5.
Nullus ex regibus aliud habuit natiuitatis initium, i. No King had ever any
other beginning of birth: They are as other men, Terrigenae and filij hominum,
i. The offspring of the earth, and the children of men. And to them also it is
said, Terra es, Earth thou art, etc.

The third attribute given to the name of man is Excellency and Dignity,
Faciamus hominem ad imaginem and similitudinem nostram, i. Let us make man
after our own similitude and likeness. Upon this point see Gregor. Nissenum
de Opific. Hom. cap. 16. Tho. 1. p. q. 97. art. 2. ad. 4. But man did fall from
this height of happiness, and being lost through sin, God seeks to restore
him, by putting him in mind, Puluis es, Dust thou art, etc.

Lastly, I would have you to note, that the word Memento does implie a
continual remembrance, and a deep meditation, that it may stir up fire in
us: according to that of David, In meditatione mea exardescet ignis, Psalm. 39.
v. 3. Meditation like gunpouder.
i. A fire waxed hot in my heart while I was musing. Meditation is like
gunpouder, which in a man's hand is dust and earth, but if you put fire
thereunto it will overthrow Towers, walls, and whole Cities: a light
remembrance, and a short meditation of what thou art, is like that dust which
the wind scatters away; but a quick lively memory, and inflamed
considerations of our own wretched estates, will blow up the towers of our
pride, cast down the walls of our rebellious natures, and ruin these Cities
of clay wherein we dwell. As the Phoenix fannowing a fire with her wings, is
renewed again by her own ashes; so shall thou become a new kind of man by
remembering what thou art. Moses casting ashes into the air, made the
Inchanrers and their Enchantments vanish: the ashes scattered by Daniel put the
King out of doubt, and made it appear unto him, that that was no God which he
adored: Job came forth from his ashes in better estate than he was before* and
as Joseph came out of prison from his ta^t^^'d rags, and had richer robes put
upon him; so you from out these your ashes shall be stripped of the old man, and
put on the new.

Memento hom^, Remember man, etc. Forgetfulness of other things may be good
sometimes, but of thy self, and what thou art, never: this will require a
continual Memento.

This Memento is the father of two good effects: first, it moves man to
repentance, by putting him in mind of his frailty: for being dust and ashes,
how dare he contest with his Creator? Esaias 45.9.
Vae qui contradicit factori suo, testa, etc. Woe to him that gainsaith this,
the pot against the Potter, etc. Thou glass of Venice, thou dish of China, why
contendest thou with him, who as he made thee, can in an instant dash thee in
pieces?

Secondly, it inclines God to mercy, Memento (quaso) quod sicut lutum feceris
me, Job. 10 9.
Consider (o Lord) that thou made me of earth, and as a cheese that is pressed
thou did mold up in me a mass of bones, sinews, and flesh: if thou shall
lay thy heavy hand upon me, what strength is mine, that it should be able to
endure it? if thou shall not take pity of this poor piece of earth, this
crazie vessel of clay, what will become of thy mercy of old, and of all thy
woonted kindness? if that steel and stronger metal of the Angels was
broken by thee, it is no great matter if earth split and break in sunder.

This Memento is so powerful with God, that it works two great effects with
him; the one, that it inclines him to clemency; the other, that it makes him
to bridle his power. First, no father so pitties his children, when he sees
them miserable. Quomodo miseretur paterfiliorum, i. As a father pittieth his
children, says David of an infant that falls into the dirte, and is bemoyled
and bebloodyed, and all because he is weak and ignorant; the like pity does
God take of those that fear him: and presently gives a reason of this his
pity, Recordatus est, quoniam puluis sumus, i. He remembers that we are but
Dust. The like is elsewhere rendered, where it is said, Non accendit iram suam,
recordatus est, quia car^ sumus, Psalm. 78.3^.
i. He kindles not his wrath, because he calls to mind we are but flesh. God
in Deutr. speaking of the judging of his people, faith, he will take pity of
them in regard of their misery and frailty, Vidit quod infirmata sit manus,
i. He saw the weakness of their strength, and considered their poor
abilities: and this did often occasion him to alter the purpose of his
vengeance. That the wind should struggle with the Oak, that resists his rage,
and that he should tear his limbs from him, and rent him himself up by the
roots, it is not much that he should take that course with him for his proud
resistance: but with the Reed or the Rush that submits and humbles itself,
obeying his Empire, and acknowledging his power, his fury falls not upon them,
etc.

Secondly, The acknowledgement of our misery and weakness, it bridles the
omnipotency of God. Job. 14 3.
Job debating this business, cries out, Et dignum due is super huiusmodi? I am
a Flower that is withered within the compass of a few hours; I am a shadow
that at every step changes it self and vanishes away; Et dignu^ ducis super
huiusmodi? Can thou think it an honor unto thee to revenge thy self upon so
silly and miserable a worm as man? Contra felium quod vento rapitur, ostendis
potentiam tuam; and stipulam siccam persequeris? I am but as the leaf of a
Tree, one while the East wind of pride tosses me this way; anotherwhile the
West wind ofdespaire drives me that way; one while the South wind of luxury*
another, the North of rage and anger: Memorare qua mea substantia, Remember
what my substance is. The Lion preyes not upon children and women, nor the
Eagle upon the lesser birds, nor your Irish Greyhounds upon shepherds curs nor
fo^sting hounds: he that wrestles, and he that runs a race, will not stand in
competition with him that is notoriously inferior unto them, because they shall
get no glory by such a victory. That Emperor was much condemned that warred
with Flies, and took great pleasure in the killing of them. Being then that I
am a shadow, a flower of the field, a reed, or rather a thing of nothing, What
honor can thou reap by my ruin? etc.

Puluis es, and in Puluerem reuerteris.
Dust thou art, and to dust thou shall return. The end ever holds a
correspondencie with it is beginning, Nudus egressus sum, and nudus reuertar
illuc, so says Job. The rivers come from the sea, and thither again they
return; so does the Sun from the East, and thither it retyres again. That
Image of gold, silver, brass, and iron, that had it is feet of earth, must in
the end turn to dust. Baruc asks, Baruc. 3.
Vbi sunt Principes gentium? His answer is, Ad inferos descenderunt; the earth
has swallowed them up all. S. Basil commenting upon this place, makes the like
question, and gives the same answer, Nonne omnia puluis? Nonne fabula? Nonne in
paucis ossibus memoria eorum conseruatur? The greatest and famousest of us all
have been and are but dust; and there is no memorial left of them, but a few
rotten and stinking bones. Upon this point see Nazianzen Orat. de Humana
natura: Epictetus in Sententijs; and in Euchiridion. cap. 22. etc.

Dust thou art, etc. The meditation of what we are, subdues in us,
From this Principle I will infer three or four conclusions of great fruit
and consequence: The first, If thou art ashes, Quid superbis terra and cinis,
i. Whereof art thou proud o thou dust and ashes? Of thy beginning? No: Of thy
end? No: Of what then? Our Pride. August. de Verb. Dom. Sermon. 10. Pride what
manner of sin. Psalm. 19.13.
If thou should see thy self seated between the horns of the Moon, De
fundamento cogita humilitatis, Think on the baseness of thy beginning, and
thou shall then see, that pride was not borne for man, nor anger and
pettishnesse appointed for woman's condition; pride cannot suit with dirt, nor
curstness with woman's softness. Ab occultis meis munda me Domine, and ab
alienis parce seruo tuo, i. Lord cleanse me from my secret sins, and spare thy
servant for those that are strange. By alienis S. Hierome understands those of
pride, for it is a stranger, as it were, and another kind of thing, differing
much from man's base and vile condition: and the Hebrew letter says, A
superbijs, parce seruo tuo. Whereupon Saint Chrysostom notes, S. Chrysostom.
Homils* in cap. primu^ Ioannis.
That there is not any sin more alien to man's condition, than pride, or that
carries with it less excuse. Those fools that Genesis painteth forth, going
about to build a Tower that should ouertoppe the Clouds, did in their very
first word, Venite, faciamus lateres, i. Come, let us make us Brickes, bewray
their foolishness: What, go about upon earth to rear a foundation that should
emulate Heaven? God said unto Ezechiel, Take thou a tyle, and portray upon it
the City of Jerusalem, the walls, the ditches, the Towers, the Temple, Ezech.
4.1.
and a great army of men: Strange, yet true we see it is, that the strength of
cities, the power of Armies, is contained in a poor brittle tile-stone. Esaias
16. Pride what kind of sin.
Esaias threatened those of Moab with whips and scourges, because they insulted
and proudly triumphed upon the walls and towers of his City; Loquimini plagas
ijs, qui lata^tur super mun^s cocti lateris, i. Speak punishment to those that
rejoice in walls that are made of brick. What, can earthen walls raise up such
pride in men? Samuel being to anoint Saul, God gave him for a sign that he
would have him Prince over his People, That he should find two men as soon as
he was gone from him, near unto Rachels Sepulcher. God might have given him
some other sign, but he chose rather to give him this, to quell the pride and
haughtiness of this his new honor; as if he should admonish and put thee in
mind, That the ashes of so fair a creature as Rachel should read a lecture
unto thee, what thou must be.

And this is the reason why the Church, though she might use other metaphors to
express the misery and shortness of man's life, as is often mentioned in
Scripture as by a leaf, a flower, a shadow; yet it makes more particular
choice of Dust and Ashes: besides, those be metaphorical, and these litterall;
Earth the basest element.
for nothing more properly appertains unto man than Dust, and therefore the
Scripture terms death a man's returning again to the earth, from whence he
came. Conuertetur in terram suam, proiectus est in terram suam. The flower, the
leaf, have some good in them, though of short continuance, as color, odor,
beauty, virtue, and shade; and albeit not good in themselves, yet they are the
image and representation of good; but Dust and Ashes speak no other good.
Amongst the elements, the Earth is the least noble, and the most weak: the
fire, the water, and the air have spirit and actitude; but the Earth is as it
were a prisoner laden with weightinesse, as with gyues. A certain Poet styles
the Earth Bruta, not only for that it has an unpleasant countenance, as
Deserts, Quicksands, Dens, and Caves; but also for that it is the Inn of
Serpents, Tygres, Panthers, and the like. So that it is neither good to the
taste nor the smell, nor the feeling, nor the hearing, nor the seeing; thou
being therefore Earth, Quid superbis terra and cinis, i. Why art thou proud o
Dust and Ashes?

Our Voluptuousness.
The second conclusion is, If thou art Ashes, Quid vtilitatem saginando corpore?
Why such a deal of care in pampering thy body, which the worms are to devour
tomorrow? Look upon that flesh which thy fathermade so much of, that (now)
rotten and stinking carcass; and this consideration will moderate thy desire
of being over dainty and curious in cherishing thine own. Isaac on the night
of his nuptials, placed his wifes bed in the chamber where his mother died:
Tobias spent all the night with his Spouse in prayer, being mindful of the
harm which the Devil had done to her former husbands; as being advised from
Heaven that he should temper with the remembrance of death, the delights and
pleasures of this short life of ours. The Cammomile, the worse you treat it,
and the more you tread on it the better it thriues, other Plants require
pruning and tending to make them fruitful: but this herb has a quite
contrary condition, that with ill usage it grows the better. It is the
pampered flesh that brings forth thistles and thorns, but the flesh that is
trodden down and humbled, that yields store of fruit.

Our Covetousness.
The third, If thou art Dust, and must tomorrow become Dust, Why such a deal of
coveting of honors and riches? Why such great and stately houses, and so
richly furnished? Our forefathers lived eight hundred years and upwards, and
those seeming but few, they past over this life in poor Cabbins: now we live
but three days, (as it were) and we build houses as if we meant to live for
ever, they are so strong and durable. Esau sold his birthright for a mess of
pottage, but he excused his so doing, for that he saw his death was so near at
hand, En, morior, quid proderunt mihi primogenita? i. Behold, I am ready to
die, what will birthright profit me? Aug. q. super Exodus Cap. 5.
Saint Austen puts a doubt, why the Egyptians did so freely bestow their
jewels, and their gold and silver on the Hebrews? and the resolution is, That
seeing their first begotten were all dead, they made light reckoning of those
things which before they so much esteemed. Abulensis moves a doubt, Why the
Giants of the promised land did not devour the Israelites, being but as
grasshoppers in comparison of their greatness? Whereunto is a twofold answer;
The first, That they came in as strangers, from whom they presumed they could
receive no hurt: The second, That God sent a consuming plague amongst them,
Terra deuorat habitatores suo^, i. The Earth deuoureth her Inhabitants. And
there is no man of what strength or metal soever, that has not Deaths dart
sticking in his sides.

There is a great deal of difference made of honor and wealth, between the
living and the dying man: the rich Miser, that would not give Lazarus a crum,
would undoubtedly when he was a dying, have been contented he should have had
all the meat on his Table. And as Death does mortify andmake the flesh of
Birds and Beasts more tender; so does it soften in men their hard bowels, and
causes pity in their Souls, and is the Key that opens their
close-fistednesse. We read of certain Fools that said, Tomorrow we shall
die; let us therefore laugh and be merry, and enjoy the pleasures of this
world: for these thought there was no other life but this. But Paul, who was
sorry to see this, made no such consequence, but the contrary; Death is near
at hand, let us use this world therefore as we used it not, etc. Two things,
says Seneca, are the sum of our life, Nasci, and Mori, To be borne, and to
die. Gregory Nissen treating of that place of Solomon, Omnia tempus habent,
There is a time for all things, notes, That this wise man ioines our Nasci with
a Mori, as being near neighbors: and many times the time of death preuents
that of our birth, etc.

Age paenetentiam, Repent. There are two things to be considered in Repentance:
1 That it is always good. 2 That it must be decent and discreet.


For the first, It subdues the flesh, and makes it willing to submit it self,
and to become obedient to the spirit: Read Leo. Pap. Ser. 4, de Ieiun. Vide
Cyp. Orat. de Ieiun. and de Tent. Christi. and Tho. 2.2. q. 15. Peccasti?
(says Saint Chrysostom) poenitere. Millies peccasti? millies poenitere, i.
Have thou sinned a thousand times? repent a thousand times. Saint Austen says,
That the Devil being desirous that Man should not repent himself of his
sins, is still whispering him in the ear, Why do thou torment and afflict
thy self? How Repentance is to be^ formed.
It is strange that God should take pleasure to see thy destruction. Bread
suffers martyrdom till it be brought to the board; Silver the same, till it be
wrought into a vessel of Plate; Stone till it be placed in the house for which
it was hewn; the Sacrifice, till it be laid on the Altar; it is no marvel
then that Christians should suffer much, who so much desire to be the Bread,
the Vessels, the Stones, and the Sacrifice for Gods House and his own Table.

The second point is, That our Repentance should be decent and discreet. This
may serve for a few, for there are but few that will exceed. Romans 12.1.
To whom we prescribe Saint Paul's rule, Rationabile obsequium vestrum, Your
service must be weighed in the Balance of reason. A Slave when he is stubborn
and rebellious deserves the whip, but the correction must not be so cruel as
to occasion his death. Ecclesiasticus treating, That it is good to correct a
servant, Eccl. 33.^^.
does put this in for a counterpoise, Verumtamen sine judicio nihil facias
grave, i. Do nothing without discretion: Nay, even toward our Beast,
malicious cruelty is condemned: Nouit justus jumentorum suorum animas, i. A
rightuous man regards the life of his Beast; He will not lay more upon them
than they can bear: Prou. 12.10.
Viscera autem impiorum crudelia, i. But the bowels of the wicked are cruel.

Two things are to be considered in our Repentance: the one, The grieuousnesse
of the fault; for to make light repentance for great sins, is a great
inequality, as Saint Ambrose notes it: And Saint Hierome says, That the
Repentance ought to exceed the fault, or at least equal it. Amb. lib. 2. d^
P^nitent.
Not that humane weakness can make full satisfaction for it is heinous sins;
but that it be performed in some proportion. The council of Agatha declares
the custom that was used in this kind in the Primitive Church: to wit, That
they that were public and scandalous Sinners did present themselves in a kind
of soutage or course Sacke-cloath before the Bishop, accompanied with all the
Clergy, who enjoined him penance according to his offense, banishing him from
the Church for some such time as they thought fit. But in a word, As the Flower
is spoiled for want of water, so is it marred by too much. Our life is a tender
Flower, and stands upon a feeble stalk, Qui quasi flos egreditur and
conteritur; and as it is spoiled with the overmuch verdure of delights and
humane pleasures; so likewise it is quite marred through the sterilitie of
moderate recreation and honest pastimes, Moderate Recreations lawful.
and with the too much drought of torment. Columella in his book of Husbandry
says, That Hay must not be made when the grass is too green, nor too dry. Our
flesh is like grass, and to have it cut in a good s^ason, it must neither have
too much greenenesse of iollitie, nor too much dryness of trouble; for the one
does rot and taint it, and the other does wast and consume it.

Likewise there must be a care had to the season, for the cure: As often
therefore as a man shall find himself wounded by sin, so often must he
apply the plaster of Repentance. And as to defer the cure in a dangerous
sickness breeds great peril; so stands it with the putting off Repentance from
day to day.

There are three differences of Time, Time past, present, and to come; that
which is past is no more; that which is to come is in Gods hands, and that he
should bestow it upon us is his liberality and goodness; the present is but
short, and for ought I know I may presently die. And herein is man's madness
seen: for there is scarce that man to be found, that thinks it now to day a
good time to repent him of his sins, but with the Crow cries Cras, Cras.
Solomon says of a bad paymaster, Tempore redditionis, postulauit tempus, i.
He requires time, when it is time to pay. Pharaoh having given his word to
let Gods people go to day, he did still put it offtill tomorrow: S. Austen
before he was converted, to those inspirations that daily called upon him, his
answer still was tomorrow; til at last tired out with so many delays, he cried
out, How long shall I say tomorrow? God complains of his People by Esaias,
That they did defer from day to day to come unto him.

The Church teaches, that we should not procrastinate our Repentance: and the
Lord says unto us, Nunc conuertimini ad me, i. Now turn you unto me. Will thou know which is the best season? It is to day: for although this day may be
verified of all the days of the year, and of all the years of a man's life,
none is comparable to that of today, as well in respect of God as thy self.

Saint Chrysostom says, That the Lent is the Spring of the Church: wherein
are to be found three fitting similitudes. Chrysostom. Hom. 1. in Genes. Homil. 5.
ad Popul. Bern. Sermon. in Cap. Iei^nij.


The first, As Kings use in the Spring to raise an Army against their enemies,
and to make grave and severe exhortations unto them to encourage them to
victory; so the Church at this time strikes up her Drums, spreds her
colors, and exhorts her faithful soldiers to take Arms against the Devil,
the World, and the Flesh.

The second, As in the Spring those Trees that in the Winter have been as it
were dead, putting on green apparel, give testimony of that life which was
hid and concealed; so a Christian which has been dead all the year long;
striving now to cloth himself anew with the leafes, Aug. Ser. 55. and 69. de
Tempore.
flowers, and fruits of good works, discouers that life which lay wrapped up in
the roots of Faith.

The third, (which is Saint Austens) As the Sun does always communicate his
heat and influences (but they are more temperate and fruitful in the Spring)
so the Son of Righteousness, though he evermore communicates those favors
unto us which are necessary for our salvation; yet at his holy time, appointed
by the Church for the preparing of our souls against the day of Easter, they
may be thought more prosperous and more abundant, etc.

Lent is likewise called the August and Harvest of a Christian. He that in
August prouides himself of Corn, comes not to suffer hunger: but he that
ouerpasseth the Harvest, it is no marvel if he starve for want of bread;
Transit mess^s (says Jeremy) finita est aestas, and nos saluati non sumus, i.
The Harvest passes, the Summer is at an end, and we are not saved.

Necessity likewise drives us thereunto, He that is fallen strives to rise
again; the sick to be whole; the blind to see; he that has lost his way to
return into it again, though it be through bushes and briars; he that
suffers shipwreck to escape, if he can, upon a planke: and last of all, he
that loses a thing of value will endeavor to find it out again, though it
cost him a great deal of pain and trouble: yet all these losses are far
less than those of a sinner. He is fallen into the mire of sin, and finds
no help in the earth to lift him up; he is sick, but no physic of
Hypocrates nor Galen can recover him; he is blind, but yet cannot get his
sight; he has suffered shipwreck, and can take hold of nothing in this sea of
the world to save him; he has lost a jewel of that inestimable value, whose
loss is a loss of losses, and the sum of all misery. Now if to day at this
time we may repair these our grievous losses, it is our fault if we grow
careless and drowsy therein, etc.

Cum jeiunatis, nolite fieri, etc. When ye fast, be not, etc.
Here the Commentators make a stand. The Gospel indeering the poorness of
spirit, and other virtues of Fasting, speaks no word thereof, though it
presuppose it, and prescribes rules how it ought to be done. And the answer
is, The greatness of the privilege of Fasting, whose nobleness is so
ancient, that Christ supposes the same, though he speaks not thereof. There
are some Gentlemen in our State, of that antiquity, that without showing their
Titles or their Privileges, no man will offer to question them. Others there
are, howbeit noble, either through emulation, or that they are not so ancient,
are driven to prove their Gentilitie. Against some virtues, some Emulators
have not stuck to speak; but against Fasting no man ever opened his mouth.
Mahomet himself never denied the nobleness of Fasting, but rather so much
recommended it, that our fastings should be ashamed to stand in competition
with theirs.

And therefore it is said, Cum jeiunatis, When ye fast, etc. And anon after,
Tu autem cum jeiunas, But thou when thou fastest. There are such forcible and
precise arguments upon this point, that it were a superfluous labor to advise
whither it be to be done or no, when as it is advised how it ought to be done.
Hear S. Paul, 1. Cor. 10.31.
Sieve comedatis, sieve bibatis* sieve quid aliud facitis, omnia in gloriam Dei
facite; i. Whither ye eat or drink, or whatsoever ye do, let all be done to
the glory of God. He does not advise you unto it, for that were a kind of
force and constraint; but tells you how it ought to be done. As that it were a
superfluous thing to advise a man that is sore sick, to observe a diet; or one
whose house is on fire, to cast water thereon; or him that pays money, to
take an Acquittance; or him that enters the Church, to kneel when he comes in:
so it were a needelesse thing to command a man to fast, who from the beginning
of the world took a furfet of eating. Niniuie was saved by fasting. Joel
proposes the like means, when he cries unto the people, Conuertimini ad me
in ieiunio, Turn unto me in fasting.

When the Law of Grace was first published through the world, The antiquit of
Fasting.
Fasting was proclaimed, Venit Johannes non manducans nec bibens, i. John came
neither eating nor drinking. He is said not to come eating, for that he did eat
but little: as we say of him that is sick, That he eats nothing, when he
takes no more sustenance than will hold life and soul together. And the first
step of our Saviors penance for our sins, was fasting, in token that our
first hurt came by eating. The first Law that God gave man after that he had
created him, was, That he should not eat of the Tree of knowledge of good and
evil: wherein, tended the one, that man in this so great a happiness should
not forget that he had a Lord and Master; the other had an eye to the repairing
of that his future fault, and that man might understand, that he should in
fasting find a remedy for that hurt which came unto him by eating. And as a
wise Physician, feeling the sick man's pulse, finds out his il disposition, and
perceiving that his sickness grew from that ill ripened fruit, which even to
this day is not yet fully digested; did prescribe this Recipe as a medicine to
cure this our malady: to the end, That as man did eat to sickness, so he
might fast to health; and as Gluttony did banish us from Paradise, so Fasting
might recall us thither again.

Not Fasting the cause of all euill^.
Whence this note may be gathered, That all those evils that are now in the
world, are in recompense of that wrong which was done in Paradise unto Fasting.
So that not only our first Parents smarted for it, but all their posterity
even to this day; so that if any thing help this Surfeit, it must be Fasting.

Take off the casement from your Study window in a windy day, and it will
hurl all your papers abroad: What Is the remedy for this? you must set it up
again, and all will be well. Chrisologus harped upon this conceit in a Sermon of
his upon the prodigal child; where he cries out, Fame pereo, I die by hunger:
Whereupon this presently follows, Surga^ ibo ad patrem meum, I will rise and
go to my father: So that you see that Fasting and Hunger restored him
presently to his former happy estate. So that if our ancient lost liberty
could possibly be repaired, it were no ways better to be recovered than by
Fasting. And if by Fasting, the ship of this our life takes in no water, and
without it is overwhelmed and drowned; let us lay the whole lading of all our
il or good upon our Fasting.

Amb. li. de Hell. and de Ieiunio, cap. 4.
Saint Ambrose proves, That while fasting continued in the world, God did
still better and enrich it with new things: The first day he created the Light;
the second, Heaven; the third, Earth; the fourth, the Sun, Moon, and
Stars; the fifth, the Fishes of the sea, and the Fowls of the air: and
though he gave them his blessing, he did not say unto them, That they should
eat. The sixth, Beasts of the field and Man: and giving them license to eat,
the works of God and the perfections of the world, were ended. Wherein God
gave man as it were a watchword, that eating would be his undoing. And (as
Saint Chrysostom has it) if in that so happy an estate Fasting was so
necessary, What shall it be in this miserable condition of ours. Saint John's
Disciples said unto Christ, Master, why do we and the Pharisees fast, and thy
Disciples not? He answered, While the Bridegroom is present the children are
not to weep, but the time shall come wherein they shall not have him with
them, and then they shall fast and mourn. The presence of our Savior, and the
enjoying of his most sweet company, did bridle their appetites, and keep their
souls in subjection; but in his absence he infers, that this must be done
by Fasting.

Saint Ciril says, That Fasting is a greater Sacrifice than that of Abraham;
for that Sacrifice was to be done upon another body, this upon our own.
Tertullian notes, That God calling to Adam, asked him, Vbi es? Where art thou?
But to Elias, Tertul. Tract. de Ieiunio.
Quid agis, Helias? What do thou, Elias? And he says, That the one was of
anger and threatening, the other of softness and mildness, because he was
empty, and had fasted forty days.

Saint Ambrose attributes innumerable miraculous effects to Fasting;
instancing in Niniuie, in Moses, in Elias, in Daniel, in Hester, in the mothers
of Sampson and Samuel, in Judith, etc. Besides, it gives great light unto
knowledge and wisdom: for Gluttony is an evil disposition for inquiry of
truth; Repleti sunt, qui obscurati sunt terrae, says David, They are full fed,
and blind. For this cause Ceres the Goddess of Abundance, is painted with
Poppy in her hand, because those that are full fed quickly fall asleep.
Nothing so much overthrows Man, as the ouercharging of his stomach with
meat; In multis escis erit infirmitas: Distemperature in diet is that Nurse
which gives milk unto the Physician. David with fasting covered the faults of
his whole life, Operui in jeiunio animam meam: Sola gula (says Saint Bernard)
peccauit, sola jeiunet, and sufficet, only Gluttony offended, let Gluttony
only fast, and it suffices.

Our nature has a twofold consideration, one corporal, another spiritual;
Alterum commune cum Dijs, (says Cicero) alterum cum Brutis, One common with
the Gods, another with the Beasts. There is a twofold thirst, one false, the
other true: there is likewise a twofold desire, one of wantonness, another of
necessity. Our Savior fasted, but when he was oppressed with hunger he did
eat; the like may every good Christian do: and therefore Saint Gregory
says, That a man may deny that to desire, which he may grant to necessity. I
will conclude this point with this short saying, Carnis curam ne feceritis in
desiderijs, Let the cockering of your flesh be no part of your desire.

Be not like the hypocrites, etc.
This little short clause does afford three or four several kinds of senses:
What to be observed in Fasting.
The first, That we must not only do good, but shun evil; and therefore
advises those that fast, not to be like unto those Hypocrites, whom the wind
of Vainglory robbed of all the good they did. It seems that the Church and
the Gospel in this agree: The Church tells us, That we are Dust; the Gospel,
That we should beware of wind, that we be not carried away therewith;
withdraw thy self out of the Street, and from thy door, where the wind
whisketh and blows hard, and retire thy self into thy house, and Fast in thy
private Chamber; let not thy right hand know what thy left does: Do not like
these Hypocrites, publish not thy Fastings, thy Prayers and thy Almsdeeds in
the Streets and open Market place, lest the wind scatter them away, and they
be no more seen or heard of. Saint Gregory says, Greg. Mor. lib. 19. ca. 13.
That Hypocrites die by the hands of those vices which they have overcome: they
fast, and fasting kills them; they give Alms, and their Almsdeeds are their
destruction. Eleazar a most valiant Soldier slew an Elephant which bore upon
his back a Tower of wood, but the Elephant thus slain chanced also to slay
Eleazar: great pity that so valiant a man should die, but more, that he
should die by the hands of the dead. Many Christian Soldiers there are, which
do brave and worthy deeds, overcome great vices, yet die in the end by their
hands.

The second, That your Fastings, and your Good-workes are more from God than
your selves; Non possumus cogitare aliquid ex nobis, Of our selves we cannot
so much as think. Man's poverty is so great, that he cannot come to so much
as a good thought, and therefore may not make merchandise of that wealth which
is none of his own. But God is so free in the works of Virtue, and so
bountiful, that being at all the charge himself, he gives thee all the
gain; only he will that thou give the glory unto him, and take the profit
to thy self. That Workman should do ill, who having built a house with
another man's Purse, should go about to set up his own Arms upon the
Frontispeece. Justinian made a Law, That no master-Workeman should set up his
name within the body of that building which he made out of another cost.
Christ sets thee aworke, and wills thee to Fast, to Pray, to give Alms; but,
Who is at the cost of this so good and great a work? God; thou have all thy
materials from him, the building is his, it is his Purse that pays for all:
give the glo^ie therefore, and the honor thereof unto him; Gloriam meam alteri
non dabo, i. I will not give my glory to another. Content thy self with
Heaven, which is promised unto thee if thou do well, which is a sufficient
reward for any service that thou can do.

Hypocrisy in Fasting.
The third, That Fasting, Praying, giving of Alms, done only for Gods sake, is
of that great price and estimation, that it is ill employed on any other than
God. And for that God weighes all things in his hand as in a balance, and
knows the weight of every good work, and the true value therefore; it grieves
him that thou should do these good things for so vile and base a price, and
is sorry to see thee so poor and foolish a Merchant, that thou will part wirh
that which is as much worth as Heaven to thee, for that which is less than
earth; to wit, only that the World may say, Such a one fasteth; Why do thou
thus crucify thy flesh? Why debar thy belly of food? Why being ready to
die for hunger, do thou not eat? Why lift up thy eyes to Heaven for so poor
a thing as to win applause upon earth. Sterni lutum quasi aurum, says Job:
those works that are done for God, are gold; done for the world, dirt. Job.
41.30.
They lay up this their treasure in the tongues and eyes of men, which is a
chest that has neither lock nor key unto it.

The fourth, That Fasting is a Plaster for our wounds, a Medicine for our
griefs, a Salve for our sins, and a Defense against Gods wrath. But thou
must take heed that thou do not make this Plaster poison; this Medicine
sickness; this Salve a sore; and this Defense, our destruction. For where God
has a Church, there the Devil has a Chapel; and where he throws in seed,
the other will sow tares. Naboth a Subject of King Achab had a Vineyard in
Samaria near unto the Kings Palace; the King had a mind unto it; Naboth will
not part with it: the King grows sad, refuses his meat; Iezabel comes to see
him, makes a jest of it; takes pen in hand, dispatches a Ticket to the
Governors of that City, sealed with the Kings Seal, to proclaim a Fast;
subornes two witnesses to swear, That they heard Naboth blaspheme God and the
King: the innocent Naboth is stoned to death, and his goods confiscated. In
which action there are two things worthy our consideration: The one, That the
circumstance of blaspheming God and the King upon a solemn day of Fast, (as it
is noted by Vatablus) was so grievous, that of force he must be condemned to
die for it, in so great veneration was Fasting in those days. The other, That
it served as a cloak for the taking away of the Vineyard, for the falsifying
of witnesses, and injustice in the Judges. Who should have then seen the
People to fast, would have thought it had been done out of zeal, Gods honor,
and a desire to do him service. But it was merely a trick of the Devils,
which he had plotted with himself. He threw poison upon virtue, seeking to
draw evil out of good. We must therefore beware, least these our good actions
receive hurt, by evil intentions.

Like Hypocrites.
Hypocrisy runs a quite contrary course to these four points before
specified, and crosses the same three or four manner of ways.

First, It feigneth the good which it has not. As the proud Man, Humility; the
Choleric, Patience; the Wanton, Honesty; the Miser, Liberality. This
leger-demaine is that which has more generally spread it self through men's
breasts, being desirous that the body should serve for the soul, as painting
for the face, which being black, makes it seem white. The painted Image of
diverse colors (whereof Wisdom speaks) stirs up in Fools a kind of
pleasure and delight. This stamp, though it be there set upon Idolaters, may
be truly set upon Hypocrites, for the comparison will hold well in both. He
that shall truly and steddily look upon the face of an Hypocrite, shall in him
behold an Image flourished over with sundry colors, but counterfeit and
feigned; as the white of Chastity, the watched of Zeal, the red of Love. But
this is but a dunghill covered over with snow: the Hypocrite shows tears in
his eyes, devotion in his mouth, sorrowfulness in his countenance, and
mortification in his flesh. But he is not the man he seems to be: for the
Painter, though he give the Varnish of the color, he cannot give heat, nor
life; he may give the likeness, but not the truth of a thing: he painteth
snow which is not cold, fire which does not burn, birds which do not fly,
beasts which do not go: he will paint a S. Hierome with a stone, but it
shall never hit him on the breast; he will paint a Saint Francis with a
discipline or whip in his hand, which shall never give him so much as one
stripe or lash on the body: like unto that Statue which Michol put into David's
bed, clad with his clothes, which cosined the King and those that came with
him: Or like unto a dead man, which being beheld afar off, seems to be
alive; or unto Ezechiels Temple, which was fairly painted without, but within
full of abominations. A Painter, or a Statuarie frames a very perfect Image
in the exterior parts, but the Picture does not enter into the substance of the
wood or marble. Nature begins with the inner parts, Wherein differing from
Faith.
it first fashioneth the heart, then it organeth and gives life to the other
parts of the body. Whereas feigned Repentance begins in the outward parts
of the body; but true, in the inward parts of the soul. Our Savior in the
Garden had first great sorrow in his soul, and from thence that sweat of blood
was derived to his body. The Hypocrite has the appearance of a Saint, the
apparel of a Saint, the place of a Saint, the figure of a Saint, and nothing
in him which is not Saint-like: but like those Assisters at Christ's death, that
had put on his clothes: He that shall see a common Hangman with Christ's
seamelesse coat upon his back, will take him to be a second Messiah. When
Jacob saw Joseph's coat dipped in blood, thinking some wild beast had devoured
him, he cried out, Tunica filij mei est, fera pessima deuorauit eum, i. It Is
the garment of my son, some cruel beasts has devoured him. Excellent words
befitting a Garment like to our Sauiors Robes: it is the Robe of a Saint, but
there is no more but the Robe, the rest that Beast Hypocrisy has devoured.
Jeremy treating of the Governors of his people, says, That they labored to
seem Saints, but their wings were full of the blood of the Poor; In alis suis
inuentus est sanguis Pauperum, i. The blood of the Poor was found in his
wings. Hier. 2.34.
Now he understands by those wings, the spreading of those venerable vales or
cowls which the Pharisees used. Again, he alludes unto those wings of the
Eagle, a Bird of a beautiful wing, but when you come near thereunto, you
shall see it bespotted with the blood of those birds which she has preyed
upon. In an Hypocrite, you shall behold a venerable bonnet, a Saint-like look,
a frequenting of Prayer and Sermons with a great deal of seeming devotion; but
their bowels are merciless, festred within them, and besmeered with blood;
Nolumus spoliari, sed superuestiri, We will not be stripped, but ouercloathed.
Saint Paul there treats of that unwillingness wherewith the soul is stripped of
the body. But as to put on a new shirt or doublet you must take off the old
one; so, to apparel our selves for Heaven, we must put off these our earthly
robes. We naturally desire to cast upon our clothes to our back a cloak of
glory; this is the desire of the Hypocrite, upon those outward raiments of
ambition, of covetousness, of wantonness (which he will not strip himself
of) he would have the cloak of his love to God, of hearing Sermons, of
frequenting the Communion, of contemplation, of Prayer, and Mortification. This
is to sell a box of Ratsbane with a little anisseed strow'd on the the top of
it. In a word, As the Devil does transfigure himself into an Angel of light,
being but darkness it self; so the Hypocrite being vice it self, would
transform himself into virtue and holiness. But God has sworn, that he
will pluck their maskes and visards from off their faces, and leave them as
naked as the Crow of other birds feathers, and that this disguise shall be laid
open, and that the beams of his Sun of Justice shall melt away this painting,
as wax melts before the fire, and that every one shall appear at last in
his own likeness.

The second, and that which is most hurtful, Is to make public holiness the
stalking horse to effect the better their secret villainies. This Imposture is
proper unto Heretics, immitating therein the Pharisees, professing great
zeal, and outward sanctimonie in their words and behavior, that they may the
better bring to pass their evil purposes. These men (says Chrysologus) make
war against the Church Mucrone Virtutis, With the sword of Virtue: being
like unto Pirates, who set up the Flagges of their enemies, that they may the
more safely set upon them, and come aboard them unsuspected.

The third is, To take away from good works the good intention of them. They
give alms, but not with intent to relieve the Poor; they hear divine
Service, but not to complie with the Church; they fast, but not to mortify
their flesh, etc.

Nolite fieri sicut hypocritae tristes. Sad, like Hypocrites, etc.
The Author of the imperfect Work has this note upon this word Fieri, That it
forbids thee not to be sad, but to make thy self so. Thomas upon the word
Nolite, that we should not seem sad. The widow that entreated for Absalons
life sought to shed feigned tears, and to look with a sad and heavy
countenance: so do your Hypocrites, they are like your Stage Players; but as
the Scepter and the Crown is not the Actors that represents King David; so
that meagrenesse and leanenesse appertains not to the Hypocrite that represents
the poenitent. Genua mea infirmata sunt a jeiunio, His legs grew weak with
fasting, not with feigning to fast: but the Hypocrite desires to be fat, though
he would make a show of fasting.

Exterminant enim facies suas. They wryth their faces.
Saint Hierome translates it Demoliuntur; Saint Chrysostom, Corrumpunt: and as
a woman uses to martirise and soke her face for to seem fair; so the
Hypocrite to seem poenitent does lay great burdens on his back, only for
vain glory. Saint Bernard calls these the Churches Porters, S. Ber. Ser. S.
Bon. Ventura.
by reason of the great burdens that they bear; Vae, qui trahitis iniquitatem
in funiculis vanitatis, Esaias 5. v. 18.
and quasi vinculum plaustri peccatum; There are those that draw the Chariot of
Iniquity with the cords of Vanity: The weight of sin lies heavy, and the
vanity of Hypocrites seek to make it light and easy. Ric. lib. ^.12. Patri,
cap. 50.
Richardot compares them to Prince Emors vassals, who did all of them
circumcise themselves to please a vain young man, who were so exceeding sorely
pained, that a whole city could not defend it self against a brace of brothers.

Thomas figures forth the Devil unto us by Senacherib, who lays upon us three
burdens.

The first, The grievous yoke which he lays upon his servants necks.

The second, The Rod wherewith he scourges them.

The third, That Scepter and command wherewith he increases his tributes and
intolerable taxes.

All these our Savior Christ overthrew by his coming, ^eauing him more
tormented than ever heretofore; for to him there is no torment comparable to
that, aswhen a man is freed from his torment. And therefore when Christ
commanded him to go out of a man whom he tormented, he told him, Quid mihi and
tibi Jesus Nazarene? Venisti ante tempus torquere nos? Mat. 8. v. 29.
i. What have thou to do with us Jesus of Nazareth? art thou come to torment
us before our time. The thrusting of the Devil out tormented not the man, but
him: it is Gods providence over us, to seek to draw us to serve him truly
without dissimulation; but Hypocrites, Popular applause not to be affected.
Exterminant facies suas, vt appareant hominibus jeiunantes, i. They put their
faces out of fashion, that they may appear unto men to fast; it is a kind of
Enchantment which works upon them, to gain the good opinion of men. Saul
made light esteem of it, that Samuel should honor him before the People,
ballancing this against Gods reprobation of him. Honor is a good thing, which
though God be desirous to have wholly to himself, yet is it not to be
condemned in man, but it has it is restraint and its bridle; the danger is in
making the bridle the spur, and so to jerke out beyond our bounds. To use it
moderately and modestly, and to Gods glory, it is good, and much good may it
do thee; but that thou should live upon the depe^dency of man, and become
the captive of common opinion, and only to esteem of popular applause, etc.
this is utterly unlawful, and merely Pharasaicall. Saint Austen shows That
Hypocrites fish with a golden hook, where ordinarily the profit does not quit
the cost.

Verily I say unto you, they have received their reward.
Petrus Chrisologus notes, That Christ calls that a receiving of a reward,
Chrysostom. Sermon. 7.
which was the loosing of it. That Fasting which is rented forth to the eyes of
man, is not to expectany payment from the hands of God. Thou do either sell
or hire out thy house, thou set up a bill, thou either make sale of it,
or rent'st it out for a thousand ducats to John, it were madness in thee to
pretend to recover the same of Peter, who did neither hire nor buy it of thee.
A woman desires to seem fair, she seems so, and is so esteemed; her
ambition is to please, she has her wish: she has already received the
recompense of her desire, what can she expect more? God calls upon thee to
serve him, thou will not, but wilt serve the world, What can thou then demand
at his hands? Mat. 20. v. 13.
Nonne ex denario conuenisti mecum? toll quod tuum est, i. Did thou not
agree with me for a penny? take what is thy own. You know whose saying it was,
and upon what occasion. The pay which the Hypocrite requires, is, the applause
of the world, he has received that already, and therefore can ask no more.
Where by the way I would have you to note, That if we make God the aim of all
our Works, we thereby bind him so much unto us, that even those which he has
not commanded us, he will receive in good part and reward them. Mary Magdalen
poured forth a precious box of ointment upon our Saviors head. Now, if we
should have ask't of our Savior, whether he took much pleasure in this
service that she did him, he would have answered, No. But now that she had done
it, favoring her good intention, he defended her against those that murmured
thereat, and commending this piece of service, he said, Ad sepeliendum me
fecit, i. She did it to bury me; and caused this her liberality to be
published to the whole World. David had a purpose to have built a temple unto
God, and God accepted of his good will; 1. King. 8.19.
but yet for some reasons, willed him not to do it, Tu non aedificabis mihi
domum, i. Thou shall not build me an House, etc.

They have received their Reward, i. Nothing, because the World it self must
also come to nothing. The World is like a subtle beast, which makes little
reckoning of him that fears him: Or like your In-keeper, who is more mindful
of those guests that pay him not, than those that have truly paid him. The
World esteems more of one poor devout Soul, that tramples all the honors
thereof under his feet, Worldling^ condemned of the World.
and seems to scorn the World; than of those Roman Emperors which did serve
and honor it with the vanity of their triumphs.

Their Reward.
Diverse holy Saints, and grave Philosophers, have uttered such Hyperboles of
the shortness of our life, that without an Hyperbole, That which is to come,
may in a manner be counted as past. Seneca calls it a Point, and less than a
Point. And a Point has scarce any more being or duration, than what
imagination or a thought will give it. A smoke, a shadow, a vapor, and the
like, lasts but a little while; all which, are accommodated to our life: But a
Point indureth much less. And therefore Job says, That the joy of an
Hypocrite is but a Point. And if this be their recompense, Receperunt mercedem
suam.

Many infirmities in women, seem greatness with child, and promise children,
but they prove to be lies and falsehood; Like that birth of the Mountains
which the Poets feigned, were delivered in the end, of a Mouse. He that shall
see an Hypocrite clothed with apparences, with outsides of holiness and
virtue, will think that he carries Heaven in his breast: But it appears in
the end, that it was not a conception, but an infirmity. Heereunto Job
alludeth, when he says, Congregatio Hypocritae, sterilis, The posterity and
succession of an Hypocrite shall be barren; It shall conceive in sorrow and
bring forth wickedness. And as a woman after much pain in her travail,
brings forth a Monster; so the Hypocrite, after he has martyred himself,
shall find no other birth but Hell.

Their Reward.
The Hypocrite has no hope of Heaven.
It is noted, that men much resent the loss of their great and tedious labors.
As he, that having spent thirty years in the Indies in businesses as
painful, as base and vile, and with a great-deale of toil having heaped
together a hundred thousand Ducats, when he is come even to the haven and
ready to land, scapes only with his life upon a poor planke; The Soldier,
which after so many years having wearied out his shoulders with carrying his
musket, when he comes home poor, hungry, and unrewarded, etc. Whence I do
note that even these men have some hope of Heaven; but the Hypocrite, who after
threescore years of martyrdom has tired himself, has no hope of Heaven,
but dies desperate, breathing (...) at his last gasp, Capiat omnia demon.

Christ cursed the fig tree, because he found it without fruit, what would
he have done if he had found it without leaves? That divine Historiographer
treating of the Locusts of Egypt, says, That they left neither fruit nor
leaves on the trees, Nihil omnino virens relictu^ est in lignis, and in herbis
terrae. Jeremy complains, that the sins of his people had made the Earth so
barren, that there remained neither grape in their vineyards, fig on their
fig trees, nor leaves upon their other plants; it is the badge of a bad
Christian when his sins leave neither fruit, bough, nor leaf to show there is
hope of life in him. And therefore the Scripture in proof of this point, does
in many places call an Hypocrite a Sinner.

Tu vero vnge caput tuum, and faciem tuam laua.
But do thou anoint thy head and wash thy face. It was the fashion not only
with the Hebrews, but all the eastern people, to annoint themselves on
feastiuall days, and when any prosperous chance befell them: But it is both
Saint Chrisostomes, and Saint Hieroms note, That Christ does not so much
pretend, that we should annoint the Head, or wash the Face, as that we should
shun the ostentation of our fasting. This Tu vero, But thou, has an emphasis
with it. Thou, that desire to please God with thy fasting; thou, that
weighest what thy works are, being favored and accepted of God; thou, that
do not esteem the applause of the World, put away that sorrow which fasting
brings with it with tokens of joy.

Annoint thy Head.
There cannot any day be more feastiuall and joyful unto thee, than that
wherein thou shall offer unto God the sacrifice of thy flesh.

First, because the weaker and feebler it is, by so much thy Spirit is the
stronger. According to that of Saint Paul, When I am weak, then am I strong.

Secondly, because if at thy repentance, Heaven and the Angels rejoice, it is
not much that thou also should be glad.

Thirdly, because thereby thou ouer-comest thy enemy, and triumphest over him.
Et nemo maestus triumphat. i. No man is sad when he triumphs.

Fourthly, because the joy of the Spirit is great, and makes us to continue in
the service of God. For he that once tastes the sweetness of loving him,
hardly can forget him. Vt in eo crescatis in salutem, si tamen gustatis,
quoniam suauis est Dominus. i. That ye may grow up in him unto salvation,
Psalm. 34.9.
if so be ye taste how sweet the Lord is. And this cheerfulness God will not
have in the Soul only, but in the body also; for it is meant of both. Hilarem
datorem diligit Deus. And the glory of the kings daughter, although Daui^
says, that it ought to be principally within, Gloria filiae regis ab intus,
The glory of the Kings daughter is within; yet is it likewise to be
manifested outwardly: In fimbrijs aureis circumamicta varietate, i. Psalm. 45.13.
Her clothing is of wrought gold, and her raiment of needle work. For God
having created all, he will be served with all. For this God respected Abell
and his offering, and not Caine. And he was not pleased with him only, for
that he had offered up the best of his flock, but for the willingness
wherewith he did it, and cheerfulness of heart and countenance. And this put
Cain quite out of countenance, and made him to hang the head. Who can offer the
chafe of his corn to God with a good face.

Anoint thy head. God will that we show our selves glad and cheerful when we
serve him. Leuit. 10.19.
Aaron was sad for the death of his daughters; and Moses reprehending him
because he had not eaten that day of the Sacrifice, he told him, Quomodo potui
comedere aut placere Deo in Ceremonijs mente lucubri? i. How could I eat or
please God in the Ceremonies, with a mournful mind? And the Text says, That
Moses rested satisfied. Baruc. 3.34.
Baruc says, That the Stars being called by their Creator, answered,
Adsumus, We are here; and they did give their light Cum jucunditate, With
delight: God had no need of their light in Heaven, Lucerna eius est Agnus, His
light is the Lamb; but because God commanded them to afford man light, they
did it cheerfully. If they without hope of reward serve thee with that
alacrity, thou whose hope is from God, Vnge caput tuum, Anoint thy head.

Anoint thy head. The Gospel aduertiseth thee to be merry, the Church, to
mourn; How are these two to be reconciled? I answer, That all thy felicity
consisting in thy sorrow, thou mai'st very well be merry to see thy self sad.
Green wood being put upon the fire, weeps and burns; A deep valley is
clear on the one side, and cloudie on the other. Man's breast is sad in one
part, and joyful in the other: Saint Paul specifies two sorts of sorrow, one
which grows from God, 2. Cor. 7.
the other from the world; that gives life, this, death. Saint John sets down
two sorts of death, one very bad, the other very good: so there are two sorts
of sorrow, Baruc. 2. Leuit. 22.
etc. Baruc says, That the soul that sorroweth for his sins gives glory
unto God. Leuiticus commands, That they should celebrate with great
solemnity the day of expiation; Et affligetis animas vestras, And ye shall
afflict your souls. It seems not to sound well, That men should make a great
Feast with afflicting their souls: but for Gods friend no Feast ought to be
accounted so great, as to offer unto him a sorrowful and contrite heart. For
as there is nothing more sad than sin, so is there nothing so cheereful as to
bewail it.

Ne vidiaris hominibus jeiunans, i. That thou seem not to men to fast. For
herein is a great deal of danger. A Monk told the Abbot Macharius, I fast
(quoth he) in the City in that sort, that it is not possible for a man to fast
more in a Wilderness: Whereunto he replied, For all that, I think there is
less eaten in the wilderness, though there be no eyes, as baits, to feed this
thy vanity. Our Savior did mark out three sorts of Eunuchs; some by nature,
some made so by the world, and some by God: so likewise are there three sorts
of Fasters, some to preserve their Complexion, some for to please the World,
others for Gods sake. Abulensis doubting, Why God permitted not unto his People
those triumphs which other nations did so much glory in? answers, That he
would not suffer them, because they should not favor of them: for the People
said in their heart, though they did not profess it with their mouth, Deuteronomy.
32.27. Psalm. 1^5. v. 1.
Manus nostra excelsa, and non Dominus, fecit haec omnia, i. Our own high hand,
and not the Lord, has done all these things: Whereas they should say, Non
nobis Domine, non nobis, sed nomini tuo da gloriam, i. Not unto us, o Lord, not
unto us, but to thine own name give the glory.

Pater tuus qui videt in abscondito, i. Your Father who sees in secret. On the
one side the Church humbles thee by calling thee Dust; on the other, it raises
thee up, by confessing thy self to be the son of such a father; Pater tuus
qui videt in abscondito: who is of that Majesty, that mortal Man durst not
presume to say he were the son of such a Father, unless he himself had
obliged us to acknowledge him for our Father. Rupert. in Genesis c. 2. and 20.
Rupertus says, That all the Patriarchs of the old Testament had usually in
their mouth this humble confession, Tu Pater noster es, and nos Lutum, Thou art
our Father, and we are Clay; as they that on their part had much whereof to be
ashamed, but on Gods, much to glory in, that he would give the name of Son,
to Dirt; And who by his grace, of Dirt, makes us Gold. And so much concerning
the word Father.

Who sees in secret. He lives hid from thee, but not thou from him: for he
beholds with his eyes thy good services, and has such an especial care of
thy wants, as if his providence were only over thee: and he that took pity of
the beasts of Niniuie, and of Achabs humiliation, will not easily forget a son
whom he so much loves, etc.

Reddet tibi, i. Shall recompense thee. This word Reddet indeareth the
worthiness of Fasting; Fast for Gods sake, and he will pay thee. What greater
worthiness, than to make God thy debtor? Shall he see thee fast for him, and
shall not he reward thee? others run over their debts as if they did not mind
them, and perhaps never mean to pay them; but God, Reddet. And therefore read
in Esaias, Esaias 38.
That certain that had fasted charged him with this debt, Ieiunauimus, and non
aspexisti, humiliauimus animas nostras, and nescisti, We have fasted, and thou
have not regarded us, we have humbled our souls, and thou did not know it.
True fasting.
But he disingaged himself of this debt, saying, I did not tie my self to
these Fasts; you continue in your wickedness as before, and do ye desire
then a reward for your fasting? Sanctificate jeiunium, Sanctify a Fast;
accompany your fasting with Prayer, Almesdeedes, and godliness, etc. Greg. in
Euan. Chrysostom Hom. 1. de Ieiu nio.
For in vain (says Saint Gregory) does the flesh forsake meat, when the
soul does not forgo sin. Saint Chrysostom notes, That Gods pardoning of
the Ninevites, was not only for their fasting, but their newness of life: and
the Text proves as much, Vidit Dominus opera eorum, quia conuersi sunt a vita
sua mala, i. The Lord saw their works, that they turned from their evil life.
And in another place he says, Chrysostom. Hom. 3. ad Popul.
That the honor of Fasting consists more in flying sin, than food; and
that he that fasts, and sins, offers an affront to Fasting. Bernard says,
That if the Palate had only sinned, Ber. Ser. 4. Bas. 1. inter Varias

Hier. in c. 58. Esaias. and Epist. ad Celan. Amb. Ser. 33. tempore.

The vanity of worldly Treasure^.

Hilar. Cant. 5. in Math. Chris. sup. Epist. ad Romans ca. 10.


the Palate should have only fasted; but being that all the Senses sinned, it
is reason they should all fast. Saint Basil, Hierome, and Ambrose treat at
large of this argument.

Nolite thesauriz are vobis thesauros in terra.
Treasure not up treasures to your selves on earth. Because some men may doubt,
why men may not treasure up Treasures upon earth; Saint Hilarie by these
treasures understands humane glory, which he styled before by the name of
Reward, Receperunt mercedem suam, they received their Reward. And it agrees
well with that of Saint Chrysostom, who says, That the desire to treasure up
and grow rich, arises not so much from the daintiness, the delight,
commodity, and other blessings which treasures represent unto us, as
vainglory. Why should a man make him beds of gold, mighty huge cupboords of
massy plate, unnecessary rich wardropes, and Armies (as it were) of servants,
seeing these neither augment his health, nor enlarge his life, nor give him
much the more content? It is a fopperie of pomp (says Seneca) whose joy only
consists in showing it to the world. In a word, this idle foolish pomp,
Senec. Ep. 110.
is a sin which leads many a noble prisoner away with him in triumph;
Angels, Men, Kings, Prelates, High, and Low: and, as Thomas has noted it,
other vices carry away along with them the Devils servants; but this, Gods. S.
Chrysostom calls it, The piracie of noble Persons, and the Mother of Hell, which
she peopleth and inricheth with her children.

Likewise, this treasuring up, may be understood of all manner of humane
goods: For all men do generally agree in a kind of Hypocrisy; to wit, to
seem that which they are not, and to promise that which they do not perform:
great Teasure promises to our immagination great felicity; but the enjoying
thereof discovers more deceites than content. And therefore Christ advises,
Mat. 13.
That the hypocrisy of Riches should not steal away our hearts: he calls it
Fallacia, Deceits, because all Riches are but lies and cosenage. Thomas
expounding that place of Ecclesiasticus, Th. 1.2. Art. 1. ad 2.
Pecuniae obediunt omnia, All things are obedient to Money; says, Omnia
corporalia, All corporal things; for spiritual goods are not taken with
earthly riches. Again, that it is the Idol of Fools, who know no other good,
nor God.

Treasure not up to your selves, etc. In the first place, A man is not here
forbidden to increase his wealth by lawful means: for besides that this is
that general occupation of the men of this world, Christ our Savior condemned
the slothful servant that buried his Talent; and albeit all excess in this
kind is condemned, yet an honest means is not reprehended. Diuitias and
paupertatem ne dederis mihi, i. Give me neither Riches nor poverty, said
Solomon; and peradventure the Lord said Thesauros in the plural number, to
intimate, What should a man do with such great Treasures for so short a life?

In the second, He does not forbid fathers to treasure up for their childeren;
for Saint Paul licenceth them so to do, Filij non debent thesaurizare
parentibus, sed parents filijs, i. Children are not to lay up for the parents,
but parents for the children. And God that ingraued in the breast of married men
a desire of their Posterity, ingraued likewise a desire of their thriuing, and
augmentation of wealth. For it were a woeful case that a man should leave his
children to beg their bread at other men's doors: that which is forbidden, is
a Thesaurizate vobis, a heaping up of Treasure for thy self only. For that
good which God so freely communicates unto thee, Only Coue^^usnesse forbidden.
he does not bestow it on thee for thy self only: as God creating creatures
in the earth, did not create them for the earths sake; so he will not that thou
should treasure up for thy self. The covetous man would have all to
himself, in punishment whereof he enjoys it least; Thesaurisat, and ignorant
cui congregabit ea, i. He storeth up, and knows not for whom he gathers.
The rich man hugged himself when he said, Habes multa bona reposita* in annos
plurimos, i. Thou have much goods laid up for many years; but he lived not to
eat a bit of that abundance. Sic est qui sibi thesaurisat, and non est dives
in Deum, i. So it is with him that lays up for himself, and is not rich in
God. Which agrees well with that of Seneca, Sen. de Remedfort.
That a covetous man is not a man, but the chest and bag that keeps money in it
for other men.

Of giving Alms.
But treasure up to your selves treasure in Heaven, Thesaurizate vobis
thesaurum in Coelo, etc. This language of treasuring in Heaven, though it be
common to all the virtues, yet the Scripture does especially attribute it to
Alms. Our Savior said to the young man, Mat. 29.
Give all that thou have to the Poor, and thou shall find treasure in Heaven.
And in another place, Facite vobis sacculos, qui non veterascunt, thesaurum non
deficientem in coelis, Luc. 12.33.
Make ye Bags which wax not old. And Tobias councelling his son, That he
should give Alms, either much or little, according to his means, adds
withal, Praemium enim bonum thesaurizas tibi in die necessitatis, He lays up
a good reward for himself against the time of need. And it is noted by Saint
Bernard, Faith has two wings, Pra^e^ and Alms, to lift he^ up to Heaven. Tob.
12.
That Fasting flies up to Heaven, with the help of these two wings, Prayer and
Alms; Bona est eleemosina cum jeiunio and oratione, i. Alms ^s good with
Fasting and with Prayer, says Tobias. And Saint Gregory, That it is not
Fasting, to put that into thy purse which thou sparest, from thy mouth; but
that, while thou fastest, the Poor may not starve. And this must be done with
Prayer and thanksgiving to God.

Vbi thesaurus, ibi cor, i. Where our Treasure is, there is our heart. A wise
man not thinking it safe to keep money in his house, for those many perils it
may run, of thieves, fire, borrowing, and spending, puts it into some sure
Bank: to hazard it by sea or land is as bad, if not worse, it is the prey of
Pirates, and a dangerous port; Statio male fida carinis, No trusty harbor for a
ship, said the Poet, A mountain of theeus, a City without defense. That Farmer
is a fool (says Saint Austen) who puts his corn into moist Granaries,
where it may rot, or be devoured and consumed by the Weesell. That which most
imports thee, is, To place thy Treasure upon the Poor, for they are Christ's
own Bank; for whatsoever they receive, our Savior accepts of it, and he
secures it, and returns it with use. What says Chrysologus? If thou were to
be Ciuis perdurabilis, A durable Citizen upon earth, it were wisely done in
thee to treasure up upon earth; but being that thou art to make a speedy
journey for Heaven, Why will thou have abundance of that here, which shall
occasion thy want there?

THE SECOND SERMON, ON THE THVRSEDAY AFTER ASHWEDNESDAY.
MAT. 8. LVC. 7. When he entered into Capernaum.

Cum introisset Capernaum, etc.


IN Capernaum, the Metropolis of Galilee, a city in buildings glorious, in
provision abundant, in revenues rich, in people populous; in a word, Capernaum
implies all that which may express a place of comfort. This City was then in
great glory, but never received more honor than by the presence of Christ,
and the miracles that he wrought there: Mat. 9.
insomuch that Saint Matthew out of this respect calls it his City: and
Nazareth (which was the place where our Savior had been bred up) took it in
such dudgeon, that she sent him that message related by Saint Luke, Quanta
audiuimus facta in Capernaum, fac and haec in Patria tua, i. The great things
which we have heard thou have done in Capernaum, Luc. 4.
do them also in thine own Country. Lord, art thou so liberal toward
strangers, and so short handed toward thine own Countrymen? In Capernaum thou
have healed Peter's mother in law; many that were tormented with Devils,
especially one woman of a talking Devil; him that was sick of a dead Palsy,
whom they let down through the roof of the house; the son of Regulus, and
diverse others; Let us see thee now exercise these thy favors in thine own
country. Rome had a hundred soldiers there in garrison, as it had in other
places of the Empire; the Captain whereof in regard of his office was called
Centurion. This Commander had a servant that was sick, whom he loved very
well. He solicited our Savior for the curing of this his servant, by a third
person, yet discovering therein so much devotion, and faith, that he remained
a chief Master of the faithful in Gods Church.

Saint Chrysostom, and Euthimius seem to differ about this miracle: For the
one says, That the Centurion came and besought him himself. The other, That
he only sent unto Christ to entreat him to do this courtesy for him. But it
being so difficult to believe two miracles, both in Capernaum, both at one and
the same time, in one Master, and in one Servant, let us run along with all the
rest of the Doctors, who are of opinion, It was only one miracle.

Aug. Ser. 6. de verb. domini. and d^ con^ens. Euang. lib. 2. cap. 20. 3. King.
20.
Saint Austen clears this controversy. For the Scripture (says he) is wont
to attribute that unto thee, which thou do by a third person. As when King
Achab went to take possession of Naboths Vineyard, Elias meeting with him, told
him Occidisti in super, and possidisti, i. Thou have killed him, and art
possessed of his Vineyard. The King had not killed him, but the Queen and the
Council. But because he was well contented therewith and consented unto it,
he said unto him; 2. Reg. c. 8.
Occidisti and possidisti. Nathan spoke to David in the same language, Vriam
Etheum occidisti gladio filiorum Amon, i. Thou have slain Vrias the Hittit,
with the sword of the children of Ammon. Not that he himself slew him, but
because he willed his Captain Ioab to do it. The Jews took away our
Saviors life by the hands of the soldiers, and though they would have washed
their hands of it, with a Nobis non licet interficere quenquam, i. It Is not
lawful for us to put any man to death. Yet Saint Peter charge them
therewith. Authorem vero vitae interfecistis, i. Ye have killed the Lord of
Life. And because God was the mediate cause of his death, David tells him; Tu
vero repulisti eum destruxisti and despexisti, i. Thou have broken him off,
destroid him, etc. In a word; As he that is married by a third person, is
married by himself: And as he that speaks by another, speaks by himself,
as Kings do by their Ambassadors; and as he that despises an Ambassador,
despises him that sent him: and as our Savior says, Qui vos audit, me audit,
and qui vos spernit, me spernit, i. He that hears you, hears me, and he
that despises you, despises me. So the Centurion procuring the Ancients of
Capernaum to speak to Christ for him; the Evangelist sets it down, that he
spoke himself.

Vice hard to be removed.
Accessit Centurio, i. There came a Centurion. There are some kind of people,
that have had so ancient possession of ill, that they will hardly be brought
to any good. Tradesmen and Merchants plead prescription for their buying. How
many years since (says Solomon) has it been the custom, that the seller
commends his ware, and the buyer dispraises it, Bonum est, bonum est, dicit
omnis emptor. In Receivers and Proctors, it has been an ancient fashion with
them, to pill and to poll; in Servants, to flatter; in Soldiers, to boast,
rob, and ravish. Assueti latrocinijs, as Egesippus says of them. And as a
Merchant can scarce live in the world without lying, Eges^p. lib. 4. cap. 4.
no more can a Soldier without sinning. In matter of gluttony, they are
Bacchusses: Effundunt se in luxum and epulas, says Tacitus; In matter of
filthy lust Priapusses; In matter of bragging and swaggering, men that would
make a show to outface Hector and Achilles, or Mars himself; such as will
break glass windows, and threaten at every word to kill their poor Host;
but when the enemy comes upon them, more fearful than hares, and betake them
to their heels. The greatest cruelty that ever was committed, was the
scourging and crucifying of Christ, And this the soldiers did; so says S.
John. In a word, that young man that lists himself for a soldier, shakes
hands almost with all kind of virtue. But to leave this Theme, that my discourse
may not seem tedious in the enumeration of their vices; though among soldiers
there are a refuse kind of sort, which Quintus Curtius calls Purgamenta vrbium
suarum, The Off-scum of Commonwealths; yet there are many of them that are
valiant, discreet, Christian, and religious. The Scripture makes mention of
three Centurions; one Joseph, Decurion, a noble gentleman, who was captain of a
Roman company when our Savior suffered: who scorning the power and ill will
of all Jerusalem, went boldly to beg his body of Pilat, Mark 15.
for to give it burial. There was another Centurion called Cornelius, who not
knowing Christ, was so religious, so full of good works, so given to prayer,
and so fearing God, that an Angel was sent unto him to illuminate his
understanding. Of another, S. Matthew makes mention; who when the lights of
Heaven were darkened, yet his sight was so clear, that he saw Christ our
Savior was the Son of God, Mat. 26.
Vere filius Dei erat iste: Besides this Centurion we now speak of, whose
Faith our Savior did admire. Saint Austen celebrates another Captain, which
in the midst of Arms took wonderful care to know the things of God. But that
we may not weary our selves with counting the good ones one by one, heaven it
self having great Squadrons of soldiers; this may suffice to honor this kind
of Calling, not only for it is Faith, but for it is love and charity. Many did
petition our Savior for their sick brethren, children, and friends; but for a
Servant this Centurion only makes suit.

Puer meus jacet in domo Paraliticus.
[My child, or] my servant lies at home sick of the Palsy. The common saying
is, Quot seruos, tot hosts, So many servants, so many enemies. Job
complains, Of Servants. Job. 31. v. 31.
That his servants would have eaten him piecemeale, Who shall give us of his
flesh, that we may be filled. If they then that serve so good a Master be his
enemies, who shall be his friend? Seneca seems to make the word Servant to
signify Indifferency, and that it is in the Masters choice to make him
either his friend or foe.

In this matter there are some rules of prudence, nobility, and Christianity.

The first on the Masters part; who are to treat their servant with much love
and kindness, like a brother, says Ecclesiasticus: Eccl. 33. Eccl. 7.
and in another place indeering it more, Sit tibi quasi anima tua, Let him be
unto thee as thy soul; or as the Greek has it, Sicut tu, As thy self.
Horace calls a man's friend, The one half of his soul: Sicut viscera mea
suscipe, Receive him as my own bowels, says Saint Paul, recommending his
servant Onesimus to Philemon. No man is a servant by nature, and being that God
might have made thee of a master a servant, how ought thou to respect thy
servant being a master? This nobleness of nature showed it self apparently in
this our Centurion; Puer meus jacet, My child lies sick: he calls his servant
Child, a word of love and of kindness, and signifies in the original, a
Son. And Saint Luke does express it with a great deal of tenderness, Erat
illi pretiosus, He was dear unto him. Condemning those masters which use
their servants as they do their shoes, who when they wax old, and are worn
out, cast them out upon the dunghill. Saint Paul calls these, Sine affectione,
Men without compassion, who no sooner shall their servant fall sick, but they
presently bid away with him to the Hospital: and if at the day of judgment God
will lay to our charge, That we did not visit the sick in other men's houses,
What will become of us in that day, when we be charged with casting them out
of our own.

The second, That all servants are not so equal and alike, that they should
deserve either like love or usage. Ecclesiasticus says, That as fodder and the
whip belong to the Ass; so does meat and correction unto a sloathful servant:
But evermore inclining more to lenity than cruelty.

The third, That a Master be not sharp and bitter: for there are many like
unto Spiders, which turn all into poison, good, and bad service; foolish, and
discreet words, are all alike unto them. With some masters (says Macrobius)
snorting and spitting are accounted discourtesies and inciuilitie. M^cr. li. 1.
c. 11. Austen. lib. 1. de december cord.
Saint Austen says, That it is a pride unworthy man's heart, to look to be
served with more respect by thy servant, than thou do serve thy God. If
every one of thy fooleries and misdemeanors God should punish them with the
rod of his wrath, Senec. Epist. 47.
what would become of thee? Seneca writing to Licinius, tells him, That it is a
great deal of wisdom and discretion in a Master, to use his servants well.
Alex. 3. Ped. 11.
And Clemens Alexandrinus, That a Master must not use his servants like beasts:
and that he that does not now and then converse with them, and communicate his
mind unto them, does not deserve to be a master.

The fourth, That he be frank and liberal, and a cheerful rewarder of his
servants labors. For if the light of Nature teaches us, That we should be
good unto our Beasts, a greater Obligation lies upon us toward our Servants.
Plutarch taxes Cato Censorinus (amongst his many other virtues) of this one
inhumane action, That he sold away his Slaves when they were old and unable
to do him service, as Gentlemen turn those Horses that were for their own
Saddle, to a Mill to grind, when they grow old and stiff, and are not able to
travel as they were wont to do. In a word, a Master must consider, That
albeit the servants be the foot, yet the feet are as needful to go, as the
eyes to see. And the advantage that the master has of the servant, is not of
Nature, but fortune; not by his birth, for both have Adam for their father on
earth, and God in Heaven: Both of them say, Pater noster qui es in Coelis;
scientes quoniam illorum and vester Dominus est in Coelis, i. Our Father which
art in heaven; knowing that both their and your Lord is in Heaven. Not in his
body, for the Pope is made of no better dust than the poor Sexton; nor the
King, than the Hangman. Not in regard of the Soul, for the price of their
redemption were both alike: Not of the understanding, for many slaves have that
better than they; as Aesop, Epictetus, and Diogenes: Not of virtue, for many
servants therein exceed their masters.

Duties of Servants.
But let us descend now from the Masters, to the Servants duty, and what rules
belong to them.

The first rule is, Faithfulness, and Love. Solomon says, He that keeps the
Fig Tree shall eat the fruit thereof; Prou. 27.18.
so, he that waits upon his master shall come to honor, Instancing rather in
the Fig Tree, than any other, for it is sweetness and great store of fruit; in
token, that he that shall sow good services, shall reap good profit.

The second, That he do not serve principally for his own proper interest; for
he that serves for profit only, and merely to make gain of his master,
deserves neither cherishment nor favor. A master stands in stead of God; now
we must not principally serve God for the good which he does unto us, but as he
is our God. The Scripture reports of Joseph, That his Master having trusted
him with the government of his house, and all his wealth, he did not deceive
him of a farthing. There are some servants like your Iuy, which suckes out the
sap, and withers the Tree whereunto it leanes, it self remaining fresh and
green. They are those Spunges which soake up their Masters wealth, making
their Masters poor, and themselves rich.

The third, That a Servant be solicitous, careful, and painful; for the
sluggard, Nature abhors and condemns: Vidisti hominem velocem? stabit
coram Rege, (i.) See thou a man diligent in his business? he shall stand
before Kings. Prou. 22. v. vlt.
Diligence is precious in all men, but most in a Servant; Who can endure a
lazy Servant, or a dull Beast? The Ball was anciently the Symbol of a
Servant, according to Cartaneus, Cart. lib. de Deorum imaginibus.
The ball one while goes flying in the air over our heads, another, runs as
low as our feet, but never lies still, but is continually tossed too and fro.
And Aristotle says, That a Servant is Instrumentum viuum, A living Instrument:
and as an Instrument has not his own will, but is directed by the hand of the
Artificer; so a Servant is not to be at his own will to do what himself
lists, but as he is commanded and employed by his Master.

If Masters and Servants would keep these rules, it would be a happiness for
the Master to have such a Servant, and for the Servant to have such a Master.
It has anciently been doubted, Why amongst men so equal by nature, God has
permitted so great inequality as there is between him that serves, and him
that commands? And the reason of this doubt is the more indeered, for that
servitude is a thing so distastful, and held so great an ill, that many have
preferred death before it. Theodoret answers thereunto, Theod. lib. 2. de
Prou.
That Servitude was the curse of Sin, and that the first Servant in the world
was Cham, on whom his father threwt his severe malediction, That he should be a
Servant to his brethren, Because he discovered the nakedness of his father.
Aug. lib. 19. de Ciuit. cap. 15.
S. Austen says in his Books De Ciuit. Dei, That this penalty began from the
malediction of Eve; and that those words, Thou shall be under the power of thy
Husband, employed subjection and servitude. Saint Ambrose in an Epistle which he
writes to Simpliciarius, says, That Serving is sometimes taken for a blessing:
and he proves it out of that which Isaac did to his elder son Esau, He
blessed him, that he might serve his brother; having out of a particular
providence and love made Esau servant to his brother, to the end that his
harshnesse might be governed by his discretion. So that we see, that although
the fortune of a Servant (speaking generally) is very bad; first, because
liberty is a great good: secondly, because to serve a Tyrant is a great evil;
yet he that has the good hap to serve a good Master, is very happy; for such
a Master serves in stead of a Father, a Councellor, a Tutor. And this was this
servants happiness, to have so good a Master as this Centurion, here spoken
of, who says, Puer meus jacet, etc.

In domo Paraliticus, At home sick of the Palsy. Benefit of Affliction.
It is a consideration as profitable, as often repeated, That troubles and
afflictions brings us home to Gods House: They are like those officers that
follow a fugitive son or servant, who bring him back again to his father or
his master. Many means God uses for to bring us home unto him, but by no
means more than by affliction. Hunger drove the Prodigal home to his Father;
Ioa^s burning of his corn made him come to Absalon; 1. Reg. 14*
the untamed Heyfer is brought by the Goade to the Yoke. There is no Collirium
that so opens the eyes of the soul, as misery and trouble. The gall of the
Fish recovered Tobias of his eyesight; the darkness of the Whales belly,
brought Jonas forth to the light; the stroke of an Arrow made Alexander know he
was mortal; Worms made great Antiochus confess he was no God; and the
threatening of Elias wrought repentance in Achab: In a word, Hier. 31.
Vexatio dat intellectum, Castigasti me Domine and eruditus sum, Affliction
causes understanding, thou did correct me o Lord, and I was instructed. O!
how correction opens those eyes which prosperity kept shut? O! how often does
the paining of the body work the saving of the soul? O! how often do
misfortunes, like the rounds in Jacobs ladder, serve to bring our souls up to
Heaven? God dealing with these afflicted souls, as the Gardner does with the
Buckets of his Well, who humbles them by emptying them, that he may afterward
bring them up full. Job. ^. v. 18.
And so is that place of Job to be understood, He wounds, and he heals,
(i.) he heals by wounding; like your cauteries, which cure by hurting. It is
Gods own voice, Ose 6. v. 2.
I will smite, and I will make whole: according to that of Ose, Percutiet, and
curabit, he strikes the body with sickness, and with that wound he heals
the soul.

But here by the way it is to be noted, That there is a great difference
betwixt one sinner and another: for he that is hardened in sin, is made rather
worse than better by correction. And this is that which Esaias bewaileth, where
he cries out, Esaias 1.4.5.
Woe to the sinful Nation, a People laden with Iniquity; Why should ye be
stricken any more, ye will revolt more and more: All the fruit that such kind
of wilful sinners reap from their punishment, is, to add sin unto sin;
like that Slave, who being whipped for swearing, falls into blaspheming. I have
smitten (says Jeremy) your childeren in vain, Ierem. 2. Ier. 6.
they received no correction. And in another place he compares them to
reprobate silver, which being put into the Crisol of affliction to be refined
and purified, remains fouler than before. Others there are that are tender
hearted, and are as sensible of other men's miseries, as if themselves were in
the same case; and just so was it with this discreet Centurion.

Dignus est, vt illi praestes, (i.) He is worthy, for whom thou should do
this. The Elders of the Jews in Capernaum, which were sent by the Centurion
unto Christ, to beseech him to come and heal his servant, acknowledged a power
in our Savior of working miracles, by that often experience they had made
thereof, but they did not acknowledge his Divinity. And therefore they here
notify unto Christ the great merit and deseruingnesse of this Centurion; which
if it had been merely for Gods sake, they might the better have pleaded it.
They allege two reasons to induce him thereunto.

The first, Diligit gentem nostram, He loves our Nation; which he has many
ways manifested by those his good deeds and actions toward us; and this his
love and kindness binds us to solicit his cause, which good will of his
ought likewise to incline you to favor this his suit.

The second, Synagogam aedificauit nobis, He has built us a Synagogue; whereby
he has not only showed his good affection to the Jews, but his
religiousnesse also unto God; Dignus est ergo, vt illi praestes, He therefore
deserves this favor at thy hands. Their reasons are both powerful as well
with man, as with God; Amb. lib. 2. de Off^^.
for Love obliges much. Saint Ambrose says, That Nature did ingraue nothing
so deeply in our hearts, as to love him that loves us. Saint Austen says,
Aug. li de Cath. rudinus. c. 4. Marsil. in Com. Pl. c. 8.
That it is a hard heart that repayes not love with love: agreeing with that of
Marcilius Ficinus, That Love is Tanti pretij, a thing so invaluable, that
nothing can recompense it but Love.

First, From this ground we may gather the foulness of our dis-loue toward
God: Ipse prior dilexit, says Saint John, He loved us first, and if he had not
vouchsafed to love us, man's breast had never had a stock whereon to graft his
love toward him. Having therefore loved us first, and out of his love done us
such great and special favors, it were extraordinary baseness and impiety
in us, not to love him again, he being so willing to accept of our love.
Many there are which stand upon it, as a point of honor, not to bestow their
love upon every one that seeks their love, but only upon those that have
given them some pledges of their love. Now if thou do esteem thy love at
that rate, that thou will not confer it upon him to whom thou do not owe
it, yet ought thou have the honesty to repay thy love to him to whom thou
do owe it; especially being Nature abhors, that they that love should not
be beloved. Moreover, many times thou love those that never loved thee, nay,
even those that have hated thee. Is it much then that thou should love him
that has loved thee, never will leave off to love thee, and cannot but love,
though thou should grow cold? S. Bernard says, That we are wonderfully
beholding unto Christ for the treasures of his love, because thereby he gave us
matter to work upon, to repay this incomparable good of Love, with Love. No
other of Gods favors toward us can we make repayment of in the same coin,
only his love is left unto us to be repaid with love.

2 The second reason is no less powerful, He has built us a Synagogue. For
where some service has preceded, it is as it were a pledge with God of favors
to be received. Howbeit, in matter of giving, we can gain nothing by the
hand. For, Quis prior dedid illi? Chrysostom. Com* ^. Sermon. de Mart. s. Acts, 3.
Saint Chrysostom treating of the miracle which Saint Peter and Saint John did
at the door of the Temple called Beautiful, upon that poor Cripple which
begged an alms for Gods sake; pondereth, how boldly and securely they entered
to ask a favor in Gods House, who had first exercised their charity upon the
Poor, strengthening and preventing those prayers of the poor, with those that
they were to make themselves unto God. To this end is it still in use, that the
poor lies at the door of the Temple, as the same Doctor observes, that the
Faithful entering to ask Mercy of God, for to secure their petition, that
they should first show Mercy. Subuenite oppresso (says Esaias.) Before thou
enterest into my House, Good service never unrewarded with God.
bestow thine alms upon some poor beggar or other; For my stamp is engraven
upon him, he is mine own picture, and therefore see you relieve him. And then
Venite, and arguite me, i. Come, and reason with me: If I shall not then help
thee, challenge me for it. Saint Luke, recounting the resurrection of Dorcas
(otherwise called Tabitha) says, That the poor and the widows came unto
Peter showing him those clothes and shirts which she had given them.
Circumdederunt eum viduae flentes, and ostendentes tunicas, i. Widows
compassed him about, and showed him their coats, etc. One said, she gave me
this coat, another this smock; and God having received so many services
toward the poor, from the hands of this holy Woman, it is fit that she should
find this favor, and that you should not stick much upon it to restore her
her life; and the Text says, That he presently raised her up alive. No less
to this purpose serves that raising again to life of the Widows son, which
nourished the Prophet Elias. Behold, o Lord, Acts. 9.
thou have afflicted a poor Widow, that lodged me and sustained me for thy
sake, and therefore thou art bound to repay her this service. It is one of the
abuses of these times, that in the day of prosperity, thou never think upon
the poor, be he thy neighbor* or a stranger; or if thou dooest, it is but to
quarrel with him, and to murmr against him: thou never give him any thing
but sharp words, but if thy house shall be visited with any misfortune of
fire or otherwise, or with sickness, thou look that he should come upon
his knees to thee and offer thee his service.

The surer motive, his own Love.
These reasons did the Elders of Capernaum allege to our Savior, and might
have alleged greater than these, as his Faith, and his Devotion. But it is
noted by Saint Chrysostom, That they showed themselves fools in alleging the
dignity and worth of this Soldier, and forgetting the pity and humanity of
the Lord of Hosts. Martha and Mary were much more discreet, in pressing him
with his Love. For all other things whatsoever that we can allege on our part,
are to weak to bind him unto us.

Gods bounty toward his Suppliants.
Ego veniam and curabo eum, i. I will come and cure him. 1. They could not have
desired a sweeter or a speedier answer. If a Captain that has been maimed
in the wars, come to one of our Princes here of this World, to demand his
pay, or some recompense for his service; he shall dye a hundred deaths before
they will give him so much as one poor sixpence. But the Prince of Heaven,
we have scarce represented our necessities unto him, but he presently
answers; Ego veniam and curabo eum, i. I will come and cure him. And even
then when he said I will go and heal him, even then was his health restored
unto him: Cantic. 1.2.
so hand in hand goes Gods Power with his Will. Meliora sunt vbera tua vino, i.
Thy breasts are better than wine, said the Spouse to her Beloved. Wherein, we
are to weigh the facility and the easiness wherewith the breast affoords it
milk, and the pains and difficulty wherewith the grapes yield forth their
wine. For we must first gather them, then tread them, then squiese them in the
Press, then pour them from one vessel into another, etc. And therefore is it
said, Thy milk is of more worth, than all the wine in the World; not only for
it is pleasantness and sweetness, but for it is readiness at hand. Esaias
pointing at this readiness in God, says, Ad vocem clamoris, statim
respondebit tibi, i. He will answer out of hand the voice of thy cry. Assure
thy self he is so pitiful, that he will not suffer thee to weep and
mourn. But thou shall scarce have called unto him, when straight thou shall
have an answer. Whereas, to the Princes of this World, thou shall put up a
thousand memorials, and shall have so many more references, order upon order,
and yet no order taken for thee. But the Prince of Heaven, Statim respondebit
tibi, i. He will answer out of hand.

I will come and heal him. He might have recommended this business to Saint
Peter, or Saint John: But that which a Prince can perform in his own person,
he ought not to remit the same to his Ministers, though they should be as
faithful unto him as Peter. For the servant many times carries not that soul
along with him as his Master has: and in case the servant should blurre and
soil his for his own private gain, this does not excuse the Master. A Prince
may well give power in causa propria, i. in his own cause, for a thousand
things to his Minister; but for those particular obligations that concern his
conscience, he cannot, nor ought not. Quodcunque potest facere manus tua
instanter operari, i. Whatsoever thy hand finds to do, Eccl. 9.10.
do it with thy might. The word here to be weighed, is manus tua, not another
man's, but thine own.

2 It causes no small admiration, that a King should call twice upon him for
his son, The poor more respected of God many times than the rich.
and yet he excused himself; and that a Soldier should no sooner send unto
him to come unto his servant, but he straight way answered, Ego veniam and
curabo eum, i. I will come and heal him. We render two reasons of this doubt
made upon this place: The one, That with God, sometimes more honorable is the
name of the poor than of the rich. Psalm. 72.14.
Honorabile nomen eorum coram illo, i. Their name is precious in his sight. And
albeit this honor grew up from the beginning of the World: yet after that, God
made himself poor for to make us rich; poverty is so exalted by him, and in
that high esteem, that men ever since have looked upon it with other eyes than
they did heretofore. Before that God came into the world and was made flesh,
there was not that rich man which did not scorn and contemn the poor. Dives
did less esteem of Lazarus than of his dogs; But God making himself poor,
and wrapping up in rags the treasure and richness of Heaven, the condition
of the poor has ever since been better with God, than that of the rich; and
therefore he rather hastes to relieve the Poor than the rich.

And therefore the Physicians of the body are much condemned, Physicians
taxed, that will not visit the poor.
who being the Appollo's and Aesculapij of their times, disdain to visit the
poor men. And so likewise are the Physicians for the soul, who boast
themselves to be Confessors to great kings and princes, the poor man's soul
being no less precious in Gods sight than those of the rich. Those Masters are
also reproved, Masters likewise, who neglect their Servants, being sick.
who scorn to visit their poor servant in his sickness, alleging (forsooth)
that the chamber or the bed is ready to turn their stomach, and makes them
sick with the loathsomenesse of the sent, when they can well enough endure the
stink of a Stable, or the nastinesse of a dogge-kennell.

Secondly, we are to consider, That Humility carries with it a kind of
omnipotency, because it subdueth the Omnipotent. Of the Sun of the Earth the
Poets write, That wrestling with Hercules, still as he touched the ground he
recovered fresh strength. The humble minded man, who esteems himself to be
but the son of the Earth, and the offspring of Dust and Ashes, by bowing
himself in all lowliness to this his mother, he shall be able to wrestle
with God himself.

Thirdly, This readiness of Christ's toward the Centurion, should stir us up
to compassion, and to take pity of our neighbor. Fulgentius notes, Fulgent.
Epis. ad Eugippiu^.
That there is this difference between him that imployeth his love upon his
Neighbor, and him that bestows it on the goods of the earth, that This is the
poorer, That the richer. Saint Chrysostom declaring that place of Saint Paul,
Love seeks not her own things, says, That the Apostle spoke according to the
Laws and rules of the world, where every one holds that particular wealth he
possesses to be his own; but according to the Laws of God, Love seeks the
things that are her own; for she reckons of that good that befalls another, as
her own. Our Savior treating of pardoning others, said on the Cross, Luc.
23. v. 34. Mat. 27. v. 46*
Father forgive them, for they, etc. but speaking of his own relinquishment,
he said, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me, etc. With more earnestness
craving pardon for those that crucified him; and for this cause calls him for
their sakes Father, as if he should have said, O my good God, I desire thou
would show the bowels of a father toward them; as for mine own life, be
thou a severe God unto me, let me suffer, so as they may live. And this is
Spiritus Sanctorum, The Spirit of the Saints, the nature of those that are Gods
children. Elizeus offered to go to the Palace, for his Hostess, Vis vt
loquar Regi? Will thou that I speak to the King? when he would not go thither
for himself. Thomas, who would not have Clergy men to ouer-busie themselves
in the world; yet he advises them to speak unto Princes and Counselors of
State, in matters of pity, when the poor are oppressed, and have no body to
speak for them, and that they should do it, Not out of coue^ousnesse, but
charity.

Jesus autem ibat cum illis; and cum jam long esset a domo, misit Centurio
amicos, dicens, Noli vexari.
Trouble not thy self. Presently after Christ had given the Elders so fair an
answer, he went along in their company toward the Centurions house; some
went before to advise him of his coming, though the Evangelists do not
mention it; who found himself so hindered by the Majesty and greatness of
our Savior Christ (whom he believed to be God) that he sent some friends of
his that were Gentiles, in all have to our Savior, with this message, Lord
trouble not thy self.

Some man may doubt, Why he should say by these second Messengers, Domine noli
vexari, having entreated by the former to come unto him? I answer, That the
same humility which the Centurion showed afterward, he would have shown
before that he said unto him, Lord, trouble not thy self: For he that would
not have had him take the pains to come, would not have sent unto him, to will
him that he should come; for he believing him to be God, it had been an
uncivil Embassage. But the Elders of the Jews setting a good face on the
matter, and taking the authority upon them, that they were of power to bring
our Savior to the Captains house, showed therein more vanity than faith, for
that they did not believe that our Savior could cure the sick being absent;
and so were the authors of this discourtesie. Besides, they proceeded f^rther
with him in a commanding kind of language; alleging, That the Centurion
deserved this favor at his hands, though he himself acknowledged his own
unworthiness, not only by these his second messengers, but by himself: For I
assure my self, and hold it for certain, That the Centurion in the end spoke
unto Christ our Savior, repeating that lesson himself, which he had
instructed his Ambassadors in, when they said unto him, Domine, noli vexari,
i. Lord trouble not thy self. Saint Ambrose says, That the name of (Lord)
sometimes signifies honor, sometimes power; and that in men these two go
divided, but in God they go jointly together. Here we call him a Lord, that is
so indeed, for that power and command that he has over others; and sometimes
we call him Lord that is no Lord, but do it out of courtesy, only to honor
him the more. Nor is this in the Scripture any strange kind of language.
Rebecka called her Servant, Sir, or Lord; and Marie Magdalen used the same
style to our Savior, John. 20.
taking him at that time for a Gardner. And although this name be due unto our
Savior both manner of ways, and may well challenge this double title, though
some call him only by the first, being desirous to honor and respect him,
John. 4. John 5.
as Regulus; Lord, come down before my son die: and as he that lay at the
Fish-poole, and could not help himself, Lord I have no man, etc. Others, John.
10.
by both; as Saint Thomas, Domine mi, and Deus mi. And the Centurion believing
through Faith, that he was God and Man, on the one part passible and fatigable,
and on the other, impassible, and indefatigable: the one way he styles him
Lord; the other, he entreats him, That he would spare himself that trouble,
Noli vexari, or as the Greek has it, Ne vexeris; which is all one with Ne
fatigeris, Weary not thy self.

Gods Spirit the best Schoolmaster.
Non enim sum dignus vt intres subtectum meum.
I am not worthy thou should come under my roof. Some will ask, Who taught
this Captain so much Divinity in so short a time? (...). Ser. 1. (...).
Pope Leo answers hereunto, That where God is the Master, the Scholar quickly
apprehends what is taught him, Cito dicitur, quod docetur. Saint Gregory
tells us, Greg. Hom. 30. in E^ang.
That the holy Ghost is such an excellent Artisan, that he has no need of
terms, and such and such times of standing, to create Doctors and Masters; as
was to be seen in Saint Paul, and the good Thief. Petrus Chrysologus says,
Chrysostom. Ser. 15.
That the like did succeed with this Soldier; and that of being a Centurion
of the Roman Souldiarie, he became on the sudden a Captain of the Christian
warfare, and began to teach before he knew well how to believe: And that the
greatest Lights of the Church, repeat still that Lesson which he read the
first day of his Faith. In a word, How easy a thing is it with God, to enrich
the poor in an instant with his grace? Facile est in oculis Dei, subito
honestare pauperem, It is an easy thing in the sight of the Lord, suddenly to
make a poor man rich. E^cles. 11.21.


I am not worthy, etc. Before he said, Noli vexari, and now he gives the
reason of it; telling our Savior, That his house is not worthy the
entertaining of so great a Guest. Words of as great faith, as humility: Of
great Faith, by acknowledging this his divine Majesty, under this veil of his
humane nature; Of great Humility, by confessing himself unworthy to receive
into his house so much Virtue and Holiness.

But here is to be noted, That there is a twofold humility; one of the
understanding, another of the will: that of the understanding, whereby a man is
brought to the true knowledge of his own unworthiness; that of the will,
whereunto we readily yield of our own accords. To express this a little more
plainly, There are some men that are humble, who are humbled by their own
will; othersome become humble, being humbled by their fortune. That the
humbled should be humble it is no great virtue; the greater wonder were, that
he should grow proud upon it. But that Honor and Greatness should willingly
humble it self, and of it is own accord, Hoc regium est, This is an heroical
virtue, and beseeming Kings. What a glory was it unto King David, that being
so powerful and so rich a Prince as he was, that he should be more meek and
humble than a child? Si non humiliter sentiebam, etc. What a commendation in
John Baptist, so highly honored both of Heaven and Earth, that he should
confess himself unworthy to unloose the latchet of our Sauiors shoe? What
shall we say of the Son of God, who being equal with his Father, willingly
humbled himself to become his Servant; teaching others this lesson, Learn of
me, for I am meek and humble of heart. What says the Preacher, The greater
thou art, the lowlier be thy carriage. And for this is our Centurion here
commended, being so great a Commander as he was; For I also am a man under
authority, and I say to one, Go, and he goes; and to another, Come, and he
comes. Saint Austen says of him, That by confessing himself unworthy, Aug.
Ser. 6. de Verb. Dom.
he made himself more worthy: for there is no disposition so fit for the
receiving of God, as that which acknowledges and confesses it is own
unworthiness. Amb. Ser. 89.
And Saint Ambrose beating upon the same point, says, That those houses which
seemed too straight and too narrow to receive our Savior Christ, were made
large enough by confessing their unworthiness to receive him. But here does
that place of Saint Paul offer it self, He that shall eat of this Bread, and
drink this Cup unworthily, shall be guilty of the Body and Blood of Christ.
1. Cor. 11.
Now if he that receives Christ unworthily shall be held guilty of his body
and blood; Shall not he much more be condemned, in confessing himself
unworthy to receive him? I answer, That in the Communion there are two manner
of dignities to be considered; one of the person which receives Christ our
Savior; the other of the disposition and preparation wherewith he receives
him. Touching the first dignity, No man can receive Christ worthily; for the
holiest, be he never so holy, is but a creature, and there is an infinite
distance betwixt him and his Creator. But touching that other dignity, of
preparation and disposition, a man may receive him worthily, by doing that
which God commands us to do for the better receiving of him. A Husbandman
can hardly receive his King worthily, in respect of his house, and his person,
by reason of the great disequalitie between them; but in respect of his
preparation, doing that which he is commanded to do on his part, as to see the
house be clean, and every thing in good order; so may he receive him
worthily.

Sed tantum dic verbo, and sanabitur Puer meus.
Only say the word, and my Servant shall be whole. Sir, trouble not your
self, in coming to a House unworthy so great a favor, But half a word from
your mouth will be sufficient to cure my Servant. Yet does he not hereby
signify that his word was necessary, since that without his word, and without
his coming, his will was sufficient: and all this did the Centurions Faith
procure; but he would signify thereby, that it was in his power to do it, and
that very easily; and it is an ordinary phrase amongst us to say, It is but a
word speaking. Saint Chrysostom indeereth the modesty, and courteous carriage
of this Captain, that he bearing that great love to his Servant, that he was
as sencible of this his sickness, and the danger he was in, as if the case
had been his own: He did not desire any indecent thing of our Savior, nor
lash out into passion, transported by his affection; but proceeded therein with
great prudence and sobriety, not only having a care to that which was fitting
for his servant, but with what respect also, and reverence, he was to carry
himself toward our Savior Christ.

The Centurions Faith.
Only say the word, etc. From hence Chrysostom proves, That the Centurion
did believe the Divinity of Christ: For if he had thought him to be but a
Saint, and not a God, he would have said, I pray Sir speak a good word for
me; but he uses not that phrase of speech, but, That himself would command
him to be whole. But it is to be noted, That though all the ancient Saints do
grant, That the Centurion believed that Christ was both God and man; yet
Gregory Nazianzen, Saint Chrysostom, and Saint Austen, do note, That
speaking absolutely of doing a miracle, with empire and command, is not prenda,
that is, a token of God only; for any man may do the like, to whom God shall
give the power. If thou had (says our Savior) but so much faith as a grain
of mustard seed, thou might command mountains to remove, and they shall obey
thee: But to work a miracle, commanding the same to be done by his own proper
power and virtue, that is a token of Gods power only. And that the Centurion
pretended this, it is proved, first, by the great courtesy used by him, Lord,
I am not worthy that thou should come under my roof; which was as manerly
as any man could speak it. Secondly, because a Saint may very well do
miracles, and by commandment too, but so, that he must have this power from
God: but withal, it shall not be lawful for any man to crave them in that
kind; for the power of doing miracles is never so tied to the will of any
Saint, that he may work miracles where and when he will himself. Thirdly, the
comparison used by the Centurion, proves the supreme power to reside in
Christ our Savior.

Nam and ego homo sum, sub potestate constitulus, i. For I also am a man put in
authority, etc. Thou Lord have soldiers, so have I; thou with absolute power,
I with subordinate; these obey me punctually, who am but an Emperors
Vicegerent; what shall those thee, Hier. Mat. 8. Orig. Hom. 15. in diverse.
Chrysostom. Hom. 27.
who art above all the Kings and Emperors of the earth? Saint Hierome and
Origin understand by Gods soldiers, the Angels, (whom the Scripture calls his
Ministers) by whom he works his miracles. Saint Chrysostom understands by
these soldiers, death, life, sickness, and health. Saint Luke says, He
rebuked the Fever: the words are short, but full; but it is clear, that all
the creatures of God whatsoever, are Gods Ministers. For as he has command
over the Angels, death, life, sickness, health, the seas, and the winds;
Quis hic, quia venti and mare obediunt ei? Who is this, that the winds and the
sea obey him? So he commands they should be called his soldiers, because they
execute his will.

From these words, Sub potestate constitutus, this morality may be drawn, No
honor but has it burden.
That every subordinate dignity implies subjection and heaviness: I call it
subordinate, being compared with a greater Monarch, under whose command the
person subordinate lives; which Doctrine is so plain, that it is proved daily
by a thousand experiences: and the power of Christ himself was subordinate to
that of his Father; so says Esaias, Cuius imperium super humerum eius, Esaias. ^.
i. Whose government is upon his shoulder: so that there is not any honor
which has not a burden with it, which many times makes the heart of man to
ache and groan under it.

Miratus est Jesus Fidem Centurionis.
Jesus admired the Centurions Faith. Aug. Epis. 101. ad Exodus
Admiration (as Saint Austen says) proceeds either from the ignorance of the
cause of a thing, or from the singularity of it. In Christ could there neither
be the one nor the other; for he did not only know the faith of the
Centurion, but had also been the author thereof; Quis fecerat ipsam fidem,
(says Saint Austen) nisi ipse qui mirabatur? i. Who had caused that faith, but
he that did admire it? So that it seems, Aug. li. 1. de genesis Cont. Manich. c.
8.
that this admiration is a commendation which our Savior gave of the Cap^aines
faith. For to admire a thing even amongst profane Authors, is an
extraordinary kind of commending it. For Christ had seen by a blessed and
infused knowledge, that faith which was hidden in the heart of the Centurion;
but because he did manifest the same in his presence, admiring it, he
commended it; and therefore it is said, Miratus est, He admired.

Saint Austen on the other side distinguishes Admiration from Commendation.
Some things (says he) are commended, but not admired; others are both
commended and admired. Christ perceiving this his faith, by admiring it did
commend it; not for any interior admiration that was in himself; but to
confirm and establish ours: For all the world might well wonder, to see so
great faith in a Soldier. Suting with that which Saint Austen says in another
place, Aust. li. de genesis cont. Manich. cap. 8.
That Christ had shown some motions and signs of admiration, without
perturbation: being motions and signs of a Master, whereby he read a lecture
unto us, that we should do the like.

Thomas puts upon our Savior, Scientiam experimentalem, Th. 3. p. q. 1^.
an experimental knowledge, and consequently, an experimental admiration. And
albeit by a blessed and infused kind of knowledge he did know all things, and
that his wisdom could not err; yet it is said of him, That he increased in
knowledge, He went onwards in wisdom and in stature. So that his admiring of
the Centurions faith, was not so much his knowing of any wonderful and singular
thing, but an experimental knowledge thereof; as that of the Astrologer, who
knows before hand that there shall be such an eclipse; yet notwithstanding
when it comes he admires it. So that our Savior having this experimental
knowledge, the admiration could not be so great as otherwise it would have
been, had he not foreknowne it.

But some man perhaps will say, I do not see any such rare circumstances in
the Faith and words of the Centurion, as should cause in us any great
admiration; for I do not see him shed tears with Marie Magdalen, nor adore
him with the knee, with Regulus, nor clamor him with importunity, with the
Cananite, etc. I answer, Will ye expect this courtship from a soldier and a
swordman? Let Jeremy and Daniel weep; for a soldier, it suffices that he
make a discreet, short, and full Prayer, stuffed with so much love, hope, and
humility, as the Centurions was. Ioshuah that great Captain, with a Ne
mouearis lengthened out the Sun, with those short words. From a Captain
transported with a holy zeal, will you look for Eloquence? flowers of
Rhetoric? Are tears so soon drawn from a soldiers eyes? tenderness from
his heart? and bowing from his knees? let not these nicities and ceremonious
curiosities prejudice our Centurions plain language, and vnhewne behavior; it
was much to be commended in him, that he could so much. In a delicate Garden,
where Art has showed it is utmost, ye shall meet with Roses, Gillyflowers, and
Fountains of Alabaster and Jasper; but thou will not so much admire this, as
if thou should light on these dainties in a Desert, or in some craggie
Mountain, where the hand of nature shall ouerdoe that of art and Industry.

Non inueni tantam fidem in Israel.
I have not found so great Faith, no not in Israel. Christ turned about to the
company that were desirous to see the miracle, and said, I have not found so
great Faith, no not in Israel; not only among the Gentiles, to whom the
Captain belonged, but to the Jews, who expected a Messiah. This was a great
commendation of the Centurion, Aust. Ser. 74. de Temp.
and a severe reprehention to the Jews, and no small exhortation to those that
were to succeed them. Tantam fidem, So much Faith; Saint Austen renders it, Tam
magnam fidem, So great Faith.

Faith how said to be great.
A man's Faith may be said to be great, or little; First in regard of believed
truths, and so he that believes the more truths, has the more Faith. Secondly
in respect of the difficulty: and so he that believes things of a higher
nature, and which exceed humane capacity, has the greater Faith. Christ told
his Disciples, That they were Modicae fidei, Men of little faith, because they
thought he could better save them waking, Mat. 8.
than sleeping. And those servants of the Archisinagogue, believing our Savior
could have cured the maid while she was yet alive, but that he could not raise
her up being dead, said, Trouble not thy self, the maid is dead. Regulus had
the like belief, Come down before my son be dead. Thirdly, in consideration
of the arguments and reasons for it: for Faith runs a contrary course to
Knowledge: This is the greater and more perfect, the more it is strengthened by
force of argument, and the more known demonstrations are made of it: That, the
lesser and weaker they are. And therefore Christ taxes the Jews, that they
would not believe without miracles, Unless ye see signs and wonders ye will
not believe. Fourthly, because of it is firmness, and it is constancy; for
that Faith which indureth most persecutions, temptations, and contradictions,
is so much the greater. To the Cananitish woman our Savior said, O woman,
great is thy Faith: for being beaten with so many putby's, and disgraces, like
a rock she stood strongly to it, and could not be removed. But for those that
believe at certain times, but in time of temptation yield and give off, of
them our Savior says, That they have but small store of Faith.

In every one of these kinds so great was the Centurions Faith, That our
Savior said of him, Non inueni tantam fidem, I have not found so much Faith,
etc.

First of all, he did believe, That he could heal his Servant, who now lay at
the point of death. Not like the Father, who having his son possessed with a
Devil, spoke doubtingly to our Savior Christ, Si quid potes, adjuva me,
Mark. 9.
If thou can do any thing, help me.

Secondly, he did believe, That he was able to cure him only by his word, or
to speak better, by his Will only. Not like the Archisynagoguian, who desired
him, That he would lay his hand upon his daughter.

Thirdly, he did believe, That he could cure him though he were absent.
Math. 9.
Not like Regulus, who was earnest with him, to make all the have he could unto
his house, before his son were dead. Nor like Martha, who said, Domine, si
fuisses hic frater meus non fuisset mortuus, Lord, if thou had been here my
brother had not died.

Fourthly, he did believe, That our Savior was God and Man. John. 5.
Not like those that said, Homo cum sis, facis teipsum Deum, Thou art a man,
and make thy self a God.

Saint Hierome seems to be of opinion, That this his Faith did not reach so
far as the mystery of the Trinity: but it was much, Hiero. lib. ad^ers.
Lusif.
that such a freshwater Soldier should on the sudden attain to the highest of
that knowledge.

Great likewise was his Faith in regard of the difficulty. What greater
difficulty, than to believe, That that man, on the one side so passible and
subject to pain, was on the other side so powerful and impassible? This was
it that was foolishness to the Gentiles, and a scandal to the Jews.

It was likewise great, in regard of those slender arguments and reasons to
move him thereunto: For he had neither read the Scriptures, nor the Prophecies
that were of him, nor did know Christ, but by the fame and report that went of
him, nor had seen many of his miracles, for Christ had not then done many. As
it is noted by Saint Chrysostom. Chrisost. Hom. 22. Imper^.


It was also great, in regard of it is firmness and constancy, as Origin has
observed; for our Savior proou'd and tried him, as he did Abraham, and as he
did the woman of Canaan, when he said Ego veniam and curabo eum, I will come
and heal him. This was a great proof of his Faith, but he was as firm as
the Rock; so that in every one of these respects his Faith was great.

If any man shall ask, How great (I pray) was this Faith of his? I answer,
Greater than Christ found in the People of Israel, to whom he had preached,
and for whose sake he had wrought so many miracles. Tertullian declares this
greatness of Faith in that manner, that the comparison cutteth not off the
Patriarchs already past, nor the Israelites to come; but extends it self
only to those that were present, whose Faith he had made trial of.

Secondly, for that it ran greater difficulty than that of his Apostles and
Disciples; in regard of those less forcible arguments and reasons to lead him
thereunto; as also in respect of that small pains that had been taken with
him: For Christ sought after his Apostles and Disciples, and took them from
their Trades and occupations, manifesting his glory unto them. According to
that of Saint John, Manifestauit gloriam suam, and crediderunt discipuli eius,
He manifested his glory, and his Disciples believed. But the Centurion was
invited only by his Faith, to acknowledge Christ, and to believe truly in him.

Lastly, his Faith was greater in it is proportion; As our Savior said, That
the mustard-plant was greater for it is proportion, than all the other trees of
the field: so by the way of proportion was the Centurions faith, in regard that
he was a soldier, an vnletter'd man, as also in respect of those few miracles
which he had seen, in comparison of the Jews.

Amen dieo vobis, quod multi ab Orient venient.
The calling of the Gentiles.
Verily I say unto you, many shall come from the East. Here he foretells the
conversion of the Gentiles, and the reprobation of the Jews; many times
forespecified by the Prophets, by fitting metaphors; as going out of dry
Deserts, into Pooles and Rivers of water; from amidst bushes and thorns, into
green fields and pleasing meadows. When the waters of Jordan were driven back,
twelve stones were taken out of the bed of that River, for a memorial of that
so famous a miracle; and twelve other put there in their plae: so that the wet
stones became dry, and the dry wet; which was a type and a figure, that many
sons should be cast down into the dungeon prepared for slaves, and many
Slaves should enjoy the liberty and freedom of children and sons: According
to that of Deuteronomie, The Stranger shall come to be Lord, and the Lord
become his servant, Deuteronomy. 28. v. 43.
Aduena erit sublimior, The Stranger shall be the nobler.

Sicut credidisti fiat tibi, and sanatus est puer ex illa hora.
Be it unto thee as thou have believed. To him that has but so much Faith as a
grain of mustard seed, our Savior has promised so much power, that he shall
be able to remove mountains: Mat. 1^.
Si habueritis tantam fidem sicut granum synapis, etc. instancing in mountains,
for that to change and remove them from place to place, is amongst the number
of those things that are held to be impossible; Qui confidunt in Domino, sicut
Mons Sion non commouebitur, He that trusts in the Lord shall be like Mount
Syon, which cannot be removed. When one man will to another represent an
impossibility, he will say, Thou will as soon be able to remove yonder
Mountain. Now then, if to so small a Faith such great things are promised, to
that the Centurions Faith, which was so great, it was not much, that our
Savior Christ should grant him so small a courtesy, as the recovery of his
sick Servant.

THE THIRD SERMON, ON THE FRIDAY AFTER ASH WEDNESDAY.
MAT. 5. Audistis, quia dictum est Antiquis.

Ye have heard, how it was said to them of Old.


Our Savior Christ treating of the reforming of the Law, Nothing but disorder
in this world.
spoiled and defaced by the false Glosses and lying Comments of the Pharisees,
for so those words seem to infer, Non veni soluere Legem, sed adimplere, (i.)
I came not to dissolve the Law, but to fulfill it: And (as Saint Chrysostom
notes it) promising greater, and more excellent rewards in the Law of Grace,
than the Written Law; it was fit that those Laws should be so much the more
perfect, to the end that the means might be answerable to the end; and the
greater the work, the greater the reward. In this vast Commonwealth of the
world, all is disorder; the Palm is not given to the actiuest, nor the
Victory to the valiantest, nor Honor to the wisest; Vidi seruos in equis, I
have seen slaves on horseback, etc. but in Gods Kingdom, he bears away the
Garland that fights best. But to come a little nearer to the point, After
that he had reformed six important points of the Law, (as it is treated
elsewhere more at large) he comes to the Love of our Enemies, which is such a
seeming monster to man, and carries such a fiery look with it, that it has
much affrighted the world.

Dictum est Antiquis, It was said to them of Old.
The Law was ever to the Delinquent, as painful as strict; and as they that
find themselves curbed by some penalty, seek by all means either to break
it, or ^o comment thereupon, as may make best for their purpose, (a course too
common with Heretics:) So again is this course of theirs crossed by those
names which the Scripture gives unto the Law. Ecclesiasticus calls it
Alligaturam salutis, The Ribond or bend of Salvation, wherewith the blood is
stanched, and the orifice closed and shut up. But he that is thus let blood,
the more foolish he is, is ever the more impatient, complaining, That it wrings
him too hard, and desires to slacken, if not undo it. Solomon in his Prou.
styles it thus, A chain for thy neck. But the impatient man when the collar
fits closer to his neck than he would have it, thrusts in his fingers between,
to stretch it wider and make it more easy; the Felon to get himself fre^,
falls to the filing off his Irons* and the Slave, the ring of Iron that he bears
about his neck. Moses calls it Testimonium, a Testimony. Deuteronomy. says, That the
Book of the Law was appointed to be put in one of the corners of the Arc of
the Testament, Deuteronomy. 32.
That it might remain there as a Court^rol or evidence against thee, and as a
Lieger-booke of Laws and Statutes, whereby to pronounce Sentence against thee.
And as Moses, for the love that he bare unto the People brake those tables, as
he came down the Mountain, wherein was the written Law, by the virtue and
tenure whereof, there should not a man of them have bin left alive that had
committed Idolatry. So the ancient Doctors, straightened by the rigor and
strictness of the Law, did go stretching and enlarging it at their pleasure.
And there fore it is said, They have scattered the Law; or (as another
Translation has it) They have enlarged it. Deuteronomy. 33.
The Law was of fire, In his right hand is a fiery Law; and being burnt with
the flames thereof, they went about to quench it with the water of their
Glosses. The wine of the Law was strong, and therefore they would mix it with
the water of their Comments and their Lies; Thy Wine is mingled with water.
Saint Paul speaks a little plainer, and says, Adulterantes Verbum Dei, Esaias
1.
Adulterating the Word of God; the Greek word is Cauponantes, Giving it a
dash* a kind of Vintners, who by watring the Wine of Gods Word, take away it is
strength and life.

And if Vzza, but for touching the Arc wherein the Law was, were suddenly
death-strucken, What may they then expect, who deface and destroy the Law it
self? Christ in defense of his Doctrine, said, I spoke openly to the World; for
the which he was buffetted and smitten on the face by a base rascal: our Savior
signifying thereby, That he puts into one and the self same balance, the
buffetting of his face, and the abusing of his Doctrine. Where by the way I
would have you consider, That the worst of this fault consists not in the
defacing only of the Law, but in making the Gloss the Text; and of mere
naughtiness, a Law.

God complains by Jeremy, That they did offer their sons and daughters to
Moloch, Hier. 7.
in imitation of Abraham's Sacrifice; the circumstance of committing of so great
a cruelty in his House, and in his Temple, made the case more foul: for this
was to make God the cloak of their abominations, and to baptize their
Idolatry with the name of his service. Sin ever most odious when masked with
Religion
When Pilat was to pronounce Sentence of death against our Savior, he said, I
find nothing in him that deserves it, etc. But then the Jews cried out, We
have a Law, and according to that Law he ought to die; though there could be no
law to take away the life of one that was innocent. Exceeding great was their
wickedness in taking away of his life, but much more in making this their
wickedness a Law. It was a great sin in Saul, to preserve out of
covetousness the Herds and Flocks of Amalec; but a greater fault, to make of
his covetousness, Obedience and Sacrifice. The Heretic foundeth his Heresy
upon the Scripture; the Lawyer his unjust sentence upon the Law. And as a
green glass, the beams of the Sun passing through it, makes all to seem
green; so the Flesh turns to it is own color the Laws of God, and preaches
as a Law from God, That we should hate our enemy. Whence Irenaus infers,
That such Doctors as these are worse than the Devil: for when the Devil
tempted our Savior Christ, he did not allege a false Text, but a true, though
ill interpreted; but these Doctors do quote lies: Prophetae tui prophetabant
mendacium, and populus applaudebat manibus, Thy Prophets preached lies, and the
people applauded them for it.

It was said to them of old. Antiquity has been held the Fountain of all
good things, but more partcularly of Wisdom. And therefore God commanded his
People to take this for their guide and Master, viz. Thou shall not pass the
ancient bounds; inquire of the days of old; Remember the times that were long
agone. And the most ancient were ever held as the treasuries of evidences,
Deuteronomy. 32.33.
and the Rolls of Records. The famousest men of the world have sought out the
antientest for their Instructors; for, In antiquis est sapientia, and multo
tempore, prudentia. And for this cause could Solomon say, Do not ye ask, why
the former times were better; for this is a foolish question: First, because in
respect of wisdom, Eccl. 7.
that is not said in our times, which was not said before; Nothing can be said,
which has not been said already. The Comicke could say, Eccl. 1.
There is no new thing under the Sun: and Solomon, Nor is any man able to
say, This is but now come forth. Secondly, In regard of all other good things:
for it is manifest, that the former times were the better; for there is no wise
man that does not bewail the present. Deuteronomie complains, That the times
were ill and perverse, and the People foolish, and ill given. Saint John, That
wickedness was grown to it is height, In maligno est omne, etc. In a word,
there is not any Ecclesiastical Historian, nor Civil, which does not lament
the wickedness of his Times. 1. Ep. Ioh. ca. 2.
Plautus commending Wit, compares it to Wine, which the older it is, the better
it is. Many Authors are not now reckoned of, which shall grow famous two
hundred years hence: and many Painters get not that commendation they deserve,
and only because they are modern. Michael Angelo hid an Image in certain
ancient buildings; for he knew if it were presently discovered, they would have
praised it for an excellent old piece of times past, till they had seen his
name, which he had set thereunto.

This Doctrine is very plain, making the comparison from the time of every
one of those Laws, Natural, Written, and that of Grace; wherein they were
best in their beginnings. But if the comparison be general for all times
whatsoever; howbeit in the order natural the former were the better, because
all things grow old, and wax worse and worse, as is to be seen in Plants,
Beasts, and Men: yet in the order supernatural, those times are the better,
which Saint Paul calls the latter: For although God did many great favors in
those former Ages, yet all of them put together did not come near to the
Incarnation and death of Christ, and those his blessed Sacraments. And
therefore Esaias said, Ne memineritis priorum, and antiqua, ne intuamini, (i.)
Do not so much admire those things that were done in former times; for they
are all as it were clouded and obscured by these that we now presently enjoy.
And this is proved now at this day by the perfection of the Law; for
antiquity did admit the Law of a man's righting of himself, when he was
wronged; of loving his friend, and hating his enemy: but this is now
controlled and reformed.

Diliges amicum tuum. Thou shall love thy friend.
This is a part of that commandment, That we should love our neighbor; and
may seem to be taken out of the nineteenth of Leuiticus, where it is said,
Thou shall love thy friend: Whence Lyra presumes they drew that contrary
argument of hating their enemy. This former part seems to be superfluous;
First, because Nature left not any thing so deeply engraven in man's heart, as
to love him that loves us: And therefore a needless commandment to impose
those things upon us, whereunto we have a natural appetite. What need we will a
man to love himself, or a father to affect his children? And it being a
natural inclination in us, to love those that love us, why should this be
given us in charge? Diliges amicum tuum.

Secondly, every man naturally loves himself. Nemo vnquam carnem suam odio
habuit. And therefore God does not command that I should love my self. And my
friend is my second self; Aug. Epist. 14.4. Cons. c. 6.
or (as Saint Austen has it) Dimidium animae meae, i. The half of my Soul.
And therefore it was no necessary command, Diliges amicum tuum.

Thirdly, those things that are most precious, and most rare, which have most
reasons for amabilitie, as Profit, Honor, Delight, and Honesty, it is not
needful that we should be willed to love them. And as Laertius relates it
from Socrates, The World has not any thing more precious and more lovely than
a Friend. Besides, our Savior says, Where our Treasure is, there is our
Heart. And our Friend being so rich and precious a Treasure, he must of force
steal away our Heart from us, and therefore superfluous is that speech,
Diliges amicum tuum.

Fourthly, the essence of friendship consists in reciprocal love, as it is
determined by Thomas, Th. 1.2. q. 6. Art. 5. Dam. li. 2.3. paral. c. 105.
and Damascene. And therefore love is painted with two keys, in token that it
did open and shut to two hearts. And therefore superfluous, Diliges amicum tuum.

Heereunto I answer, That man's heart being left to it is own natural
inclination, it will doubtless render love for love. But since that the Devil
did root out that good Seed and sowed Tares therein, we see, that in the most
natural and strictest obligations, sometimes there grows dis-loue. As in
brother against brother, father against son, son against father, and in the
wife against her husband, etc. What thing more natural, than to give our heart
unto God, for those general benefits of Creator, Redeemer, and Conseruer; and
for many other particulars, which cannot be summed up? And yet the Devil does
blot them out of our hearts, and sowes in stead thereof so many ingratitudes,
as Heaven stands astonished thereat. Though therefore it be a natural thing to
love our friend, Nam and Ethnici hoc faciunt, i. For even the Heathens do
this, Yet the Devil sows a kind of hatred in our hearts, so abhorrible to
nature, that feigned friendship, comes to be doubled malice. And the world is
so far gone in this case, that it is now held as strange, as happy, that one
friend should truly love another. Hence is it, that the Scripture makes so
many inuectiues against false friends. Eccl. 6.8. Prou. 16.29.
Ecclesiasticus says, There is a friend for his own occasion, and will not
abide in the day of thy trouble. Solomon says, Vir iniquus tentat amicum suum,
i. A violent man enticeth his neighbor. In that chapter of false and true
friendship, so many things are there spoken touching false friends, as very
well prove, that commandment was not superfluous, Diliges amicum tuum. And
that which Chrysostom says, does much favor this doctrine; for that one of
the reasons why God commanded man to love his enemy, was to afford matter of
love to the Will, for friends are so rare and so few, that it would remain
idle and vain, if we should not love our enemies.

Odio habebis inimicum tuum.
Thou shall hate thy enemy. Irenaeus, Saint Basil, Saint Ambrose, Saint
Chrysostom, Ire^. li. 4. c. 27. Bas. Hom. in Psalm. 14. Amb. Ser. 5. in Psalm.
118. Chrysostom. Hom. 16 Hier. epist. ad H^^^t.
Epiphanius, and Hilary, hold, That this Law was permissiue, like the libell of
Divorce, Ad duritiam cordis vestri, i. For the hardness of your heart. So that
a less evil is permitted for the avoiding of a greater. And therefore Saint
Austen says, That God never permitted that we should hate our enemy, but his
sin; As thou do hate the shadow of a fig tree, or the wall-nut, and yet
regardest an image that is made of the wood thereof: Tertul. li. de Patient.
Epiph. Her. 33. Hill. Can. 4. in Mat. Aug. li. 19. Contr. Fa^s. c. 24. Aug. S^r.
59. de Temp. to. 10.
or as thou take the ring of a fire-pan by that part which is cold, and
fliest from that which is hot and will burn thy hands. In like sort thou must
love thy enemy, as he is the image of God, and hate him as he is a sinner.
And in another place the same Doctor says, That God put it in the singular
number, Odio habebis inimicum tuum, i. Thou shall hate thy enemy; signifying
thereby, that we should hate the Devil, but not our brother. And that we
err in this our hate: for it is no wisdom in us, to hate our enemy who does
us so much good, but the Devil who does us so much harm.

First then, I say, That this Law is not of God; for God is Love, 1. John^ 1.
as Saint John says; and Love cannot make a Law of dis-Loue.

Secondly, it is not pleasing unto God; for the Scripture being so full of
those good things, that he did for his enemies, only to stir up man's heart,
to divine Love; he would not command us to hate them. Saint Paul says, Heb.
12.
That the blood of Christ speaks better things, than that of Abell. For this
cries for vengeance, that for pardon and forgiveness. The blood of a dead man
is wont to discover the murderer, his wounds bleeding afresh; one while it
naturally calls for revenge; another, it boyles and breaks forth into flames
at the very presence of the murderer; another, while the vital spirits which
the murderer left in the wounds, return to their natural place, and with
great force gush forth afresh. But be it as it may be, I am sure the blood
of Christ speaks better things than that of Abell; for this discovers the
murderer; and that, in the presence of those that crucified him, prayed unto
God to forgive them, as not knowing what they did.

Thirdly, that it was contrary to Gods intention. In Exodus, he commanded,
that he that should meet with an Ox of his enemies that was like to perish, or
an Ass that was haltered and entangled, he should help both the one, and the
other. Now he that wills us to be thus friendly to a beast, what would he we
should do to the owner thereof? Nunquid Deo est cura de bobus, Has God care
of Oxen? In Deuteronomy. God commanded, Deuteronomy. 2.3. Cle. Alex. lib. 2. Strom.
that they should not hate the Idumean nor the Aegiptian; who (according to
Clemens Alexandrinus) were their notorious enemies. In the Prou. it is said,
When thy enemy falls, rejoice not at his overthrow: For God may exchange
fortunes, and his tears may come to thy eyes, and thy joy to his heart. And
Eccl. tells us, He that seeks vengeance shall find vengeance. Prou. 24. Eccl.
28. Psalm. 7. Tob. 4.
And those that have been possessed with the Spirit of God, have much indeared
this Theme, as David, Job, Tobias, and diverse others.

Fourthly, it is against the law of Nature: I ask thee, if thine enemy should
be appointed to be thy judge, thou having offended the Law, would thou not
hold it an unreasonable thing? and will thou then be judge of thine own
wrongs? God is only a competent judge In causis proprijs, i. In his own
matters. The rest, is force and violence. 2. Reg. 21.5.
The Gibeonites held themselves wronged by Saul, complained grievously thereof
unto David: David demanded of them, Quid faciam vobis, i. What shall I do unto
you? They replied, Non est nobis super argento and auro quaestio, i. Our
question is not about Silver and Gold. What is it then (said he) that you
would have? Virum qui attriuit nos, and oppressit inique, ita deleredebemus, vt
neque vnus quidem residuus ^it de stirpe eius in cunctis finibus Israel, i. The
man that consumed us, him would we so destroy, that not one should be left of
his stock in all the borders of Israel. Revenge beelongs only to God.
That there might not so much as a cat or a dog be left alive of the house
of Saul. But where revenge is so full of rage, and runs mad as it were, it is
good to take the sword out of their hand, and that no man may have authority
to revenge his own wrongs, be the cause never so just and holy. 3. Reg. 18.
Elias slew four hundred Prophets, it was Gods cause: but God did not give him
leave to kill Iesabel, who had done himself such wrong. Saint Peter sentenced
Ananias and Saphira, but not Herod, who imprisoned him, and condemned him to
death. David did not take vengeance of Shimei, for fear he should have
exceeded therein, as also for that it was causa propria, his own cause. The
Law of Nature tells us, Quod tibi nonuis, alteri ne feceris, Do not that to
another, which thou would not have done to thy self. Tobias notified the
same to his son, Quod ab alio oderis, fieri tibi vide ne tu aliquando facias.
Eccl. ^1.
And Ecclesiasticus, Learn from thy self what is fit for thy neighbor. Our
Savior Christ has set us down the same rule by Saint Matthew, and by Saint
Luke: Innumerable Philosophers have repeated the like Lesson. Man* 7.
Laertius reports of Aristotle, That giving an alms to one that had done him
many injuries, told him, Nature, not thy naughtiness, makes me to pity thee.
There was amongst the Romans a Marcus Marcellus, that pleaded in the Senate for
his Accusers; A Tiberius Gracchus, a mortal enemy of the Scipio's, who during
that their emnitie, defended them in the public Theater: A Marcus Bibulus,
who having two of his sons slain by the Gabiani, and Cleopatra sending the
murderers unto him, returned them back again without doing them any harm; In
Athens a Plato, Plut. li. de Vtilab inimi. capienda.

Senec. lib. 1. de Clem.

Basil. Hom. ad Adolesc.

Chrysostom. Hom. 80. in Mat.


whom his scholar Xenocrates accusing of diverse scandalous things, said, It is
not possible, That him whom I love should not love me again. A Phocion, who
dying unjustly by poison, and being asked when he had the cup i^ his hand,
What service he would command them to his son? answered, That he should never
think more of this cup, but study to forget it. Many the like are related by
Plutarch, Seneca, Saint Basil, and Saint Chrysostom.

Lastly, This being no Law of God, neither as he is the Author of Grace, nor as
the Author of Nature, it must needs be of the Devil, as Origin infers. For
he seeing that God had engraven in man's heart the law of love, standing (out of
his pride) in competition with God, he engraued dis-loue, and left it so
imprinted in the hearts of many, that albeit for these many Ages, God has
hammered both Angels and Saints upon this Anuile, he could never bring them to
softness.

The occasion that might move those ancient Doctors to this Law, was, either
for that God had commanded Saul, that he should destroy Amalec; or the
vengeance that he took of Pharaoh and his People; or that of Leuiticus, Pursue
your enemies, and they shall fall before you: as if to enter into a just war,
by order from God, might allow a man to do the like to his brother out of his
own will and pleasure: Or, for that it is commanded in Leuiticus, Thou shall
love thy friend as thy self: Or, as Nicholaus de Lyra has notedit, That they
draw this consequence from Aristotle, Arist. 1. Top. cap. 8.
Si amicis been faciendum est; consequens est, vt inimicis sit malefaciendum:
If we must do good to our friends, then consequently we must do ill to our
enemies.

Thou shall hate thy enemy. Whence it is to be noted, That that Law which gave
them license to hate their enemy, does not give them leave to kill him: though
the Devil many times likes better of a mortal hatred, and a desire of
revenge, than the death of a man. For Hatred is that Loadstone which draws
other sins along with it; but the killing of a man does usually bring
repentance with it, for the many disasters that attend it. Judas till he had
driven his bargain for the betraying of his Master, had delivered up his heart
to the Devil; but that was no sooner performed, but he repented himself of
what he had done. Saint Chrysostom calls hatred Homicidium voluntarium. Some
seem to sin merely out of nature, (for custom is another nature) and these
that thus sin, sin without a will or desire of sinning; but he that hates,
must of force sin with all his heart.

Ego autem dico vobis, Diligite inimicos vestros.
But I say unto you, Love your enemies. Cries. Sermon. 65
Petrus Chrysologus treating of the profoundnesse of the Scripture, says, That
though a volume should be written upon every word, it were not able to
contain all the mysteries belonging thereunto. What shall we say then to this
word Ego, whose extent and birth is so great, that none can qualify it but
God* None knows the Father but the Son, nor the Son, but the Father; he alone
can tell what it is. The son for to repair the affront and infamy of his
death, said to his Father, Clarifica me Pater, Father glorify me: And Saint
Ambrose has noted it; Ambr. 4. de fid. cap. 6.
That the original word there says, Opinion and Credit, rather than Glory;
as if he should have said, I have gotten thee (o Father) among men an opinion
of being the true God, requite me therefore in gracing me to be thy Son, for
only thou can do me this honor. The mouths of men and Angels shall talk
of his praise, but are notable to express the greatness of this attribute,
Ego. The immensiue greatness of the sea is to be seen in this, that so many
Rivers and Fountains issuing out of it, they do not only not empty it, and
draw it dry, but do not so much as lessen it or diminish it one jot. Ego,
ever since the beginning of the world, has been the Theme of the Angels,
Prophets, Evangelists, and the Saints, but could never come to the depth of it.
Damasus did shut up in seven verses forty four names belonging to this word,
Ego.

From hence we will first of all draw the authority of the Lawgiver. If the
authority of Kings and Emperors be so great, that their subjects at their
command adventure upon many foolish and desperate actions; How much greater is
that of God? Fulgosus in his Book de Rebus memorabilibus, reports, Fulg. li.
1. cap. 1.
That a Prince of Syria indeering to Henry Count of Campania (who was come
thither upon an Embassage) the obedience of his soldiers; calling to one who
was Sentinel to a Tower, that he should speedily come unto him, presently leapt
down from off the battlements. If a Scipio's, Si ego iussero (If I shall
command you) could prevail so much with his men, What shall Gods Ego do? who
melts the Mountains like wax, (The Mountains did melt away like wax,
Psalm. 58.
before the face of the Lord) takes away the breath of Princes, and commands
the sea and the winds, and they obey: Quis est hic, quia venti and mare
obediunt ei? Who is ihis, Mat. 8.
that the winds and the sea obey him? who with an Ego sum draws honey out of
stones, and oil out of the hard rock.

But I say unto you. I, that am the Master of the world, who came to reform
the Law, and to unfold the dark places of Scripture; I, that am Via Veritatis
and Vitae, The way of Truth and Life; I, that desire more your good than your
selves: For I know how much it imports you to love your enemies; and that he
that blotteth this love out of your hearts, robs you of a wonderful rich
treasure. I am the Lord that teaches profitable things, and gouerns thee in
the way: Esaias 48.
it is I (I say) that say unto you, Love your enemies.

Abraham did forget the bowels of a Father, Genesis 1^.
Quia Maiestatem praecipientis considerauit, Because he considered the Majesty
of him that commanded.

Christ our Savior does counterpone his authority to that of the Law-giuers
of this Law, Dictum est antiquis, Is was said to them of Old. You have believed
lying Law-giuers, who prescribe it unto you as a Law, Thou shall hate thy
enemy. But give you credit unto me, for I am a true Law giver? It is a hard
case, that truth should be in less esteem than lying* Heaven, than Earth; the
true God, than false Gods. But though they lie never so much at thee to hate
thine enemy, I shall never leave beating it into your breasts, That you love
your enemy. Laban when he pursued Jacob came very eagerly upon him at the
first, with a Valet manus mea reddere malum pro malo, Genesis 31. and ibi. Pet.
Comest^r.
I am able to return evil for evil; but his courage was quickly cooled, with
a Cave, ne quidquam durius loquaris contra Jacob* ^eware thou speak not hardly
against Jacob; For the God of Jacobs father had charged him to the contrary.
Where it is to be noted out of the Text, That Laban did not say, My God, but,
The God of his father. Whence I make this conclusion, That if he that does not
take me for his God (for Laban was, you know, an Idolater) shall obey my
command, and not be his own caruer in his revenge, What ought a Christian to
do? S, Chrysostom seems to be much grieved, that in matter of injuries and
revenging of wrongs, the World, the Flesh, and the Devil should do more with
us than God, to whom only vengeance belongs. What will not the Purse do
with some? with other-some, the entreaty of a great Person? David's soldiers
fingers itcht, and would feign have set upon Saul, when they had him cub'd up
in the cave: but Confregit illos sermonibus, He detained them, and wan them
with good words, to let him alone; which they did not so much for Gods sake, as
for David's.

But I say unto you. Many presume so much on themselves, that they will not
stick to suffer martyrdom, if occasion should be offered, and have sometime
even sought after it: But that poor little valor which they experiment in
themselves in matter of suffering and pardoning of injuries, may bewray this
their error unto them. For, as Saint Gregory says, He that shall faint in
suffering an injury, Quid faceret in dolor poenarum? What will he do in the
midst of torment? can he suffer the straining of the Rack, or the rage of
fire, that cannot endure a hard word, Simon. Met. Tom. 1. de S. Niceph.
or brook a slight injury? Simon Metaphrastes reports of Sapricius, That he
would not pardon Nicephorus his enemy, no, though he had oftentimes asked him
forgiveness on his knees. He was not long after apprehended in Antiochia for a
Christian, he was condemned, and carried forth to be martyred; and in the way
Nicephorus returns again to entreat his pardon, but could not obtain it.
Being brought to the place of martyrdom, he fainted and flew back, causing
therewith so great a sorrow in Nicephorus, that he cried out aloud, I am a
Christian* and will die in his place.

But I say unto you. S. Ambr. expounding that place of S. Paul, Datus est mihi
etc. A Goad was given me in the flesh, understands by this prick, the
persecutions of his enemies; Carnis meae, that is, of mine own Kindred and
Country. And Caietane adds, That this prick was so necessary for the
Apostles salvation, that without it he had been damned. When Saul understood
that David had given him his life, said, I know now assuredly, that thou shall
reign over Israel. And very well does that man deserve a Crown, not only
here on earth, but in heaven, who spares his enemies life.

But I say unto you. Anciently Lex Talionis was in use with the Jews and the
Gentiles; Oculum pro oculo, dentem pro dente, An eye for an eye, and a tooth
for a tooth: Arist. Ethic. Aulus ca. 1. Alex. li. 6. c. 10.
And this to many seemed a natural and just Law; as you may read in Aristotle,
Aulus Gellius, Alexander, and others. Julius reports, That the first of the
House of the Cornelij that was burned after his death, was Scilla, fearing the
punishment of this same Lex Talionis, for that he had before pulled his enemy
Marius out of his grave. But our Savior Christ crossing this Law, says, This
was the Law of Old, An Eye for an Eye, and a Tooth for a Tooth; but I say unto
you, That he that shall strike you on the one cheek, to him shall you turn
the other. Saint Austen expounding this place, observes these two things:
Aust. li. de Ser. in mon. ca. 34.
the one, That we are to answer an injury with two sufferings, or a double kind
of sufferance; and that is, to turn the other cheek. The other, That to him
that shall strike us on the one cheek, we are to show him a good countenance,
not giving him half a face, or ill face; and this is to turn the other
cheek. And Nazianzen adds, That if a man had ten cheeks, he should turn
them all unto him.

But I say unto you. Nothing does more grieve a Father, than to see discord
amongst his children, Inimicitiae fratrum parentibus gra^issimae. Plut. de
pietat. great fra.
David when news was brought him, That Absalon had killed all the Kings sons,
he grieved exceedingly. Now if earthly fathers, who are but fathers in Law,
have so great a feeling thereof, What shall God then? Ego autem, I, who feel
your hurtes; I, who love every one of you, as if you were all but one; I, who
prefer your wrongs before mine own, and will sooner revenge them, if you
love me; I say unto you, D^ligite inimicos vestros, Love your enemies.

And that this senciblenesse may be the better perceived, two differences are
to be noted.

The one, That earthly fathers do ordinarily love their children disequally,
Reasons why there should be no difference among Christians.
one better than another, I know not why nor wherefore; but God loves all
alike, and makes as much of one as another. Philon asks the question, Why
the precepts of the Decalogue speak to every one in particular, as if they
spoke only to him alone Thou shall not swear, Thou shall not steal, etc. and
his answer is, That every particular person by himself is as dear unto God,
as all mankind put together: And he proves it by this, That he faith unto
every one, I am thy God; being the God of all.

The second, That earthly fathers love themselves better than their children;
but God loves his children better than himself; his punishments are likewise
less severe, as we may see in Adam, and in Caine. Again, in the Law of
Matrimony, to marry with an unbelieving wife does not dissolve that bond, if
she consent not thereunto; Non dimittat illam, Let him not put her away, it is
S. Paul's; but if she afterward become an Adulteress, he might be divorced
from her, and she be condemned to be stoned to death. Item, in that precept,
Thou shall not swear; a lawful oath is not prohibited, for composing of
differences betwixt neighbor and neighbor: and if in matter of profit one man
shall exact upon another, and will not forgive a mite, let him assure himself
that God will loose nothing of his right; For three transgressions I will
turn, Amos 2. v. ^.
(says Amos) and for four I will not turn. Those three, were Idolatry,
Fornication, and Matrimony; in degrees forbidden, offenses belonging unto God:
The fourth were, the wrongs and injuries done unto our neighbor; and he says,
That he will pardon the one, but not the other. And therefore our Savior
Christ being desirous to cut off all sedition and discord betwixt his beloved
children, he says, Ego autem dico vobis, diligite inimicos vestros, etc. But I
say unto you, Love your Enemies.

But I say unto you. Many light occasions end great enmities.

First, Time, which wears them out, and makes them to be quite forgotten.

Secondly, New aliances, by marrying the one with the other.

Thirdly, The great hurt that comes thereby. Two enemies at last perceive, that
thereby they diminish both their estates and honors; and in the end fall into
this consideration, That if they bite one another, they shall be devoured one
of another: and as it is in the Proverb, El vencido, y el vencidor perdido,
The conquered i^ crushed, and the conqueror undone. In those differences
betwixt Esau and Jacob, their mother said, Cur vtroque orbab^r filio in vna
die, Why should I be deprived of both my sons in one day. Ge^. 27.


Fourthly the profit that follows thereupon. Plutarch has a whole Tract De
vtilitate ab inimicis capienda: and there is not any man, from the beginning of
the world to this day, that has received any hurt from his enemy, but from
himself, as Saint Chrysostom proves at large.

Fifthly, Vmpires, to whom for their honesties and authorities such businesses
are often referred. And if these humane respects shall sway with thee, Why not
God much more? whose authority, whose power, whose love, whose benefits have
bound thee fast unto him in so many linkes and chains of duty.

And if God be not powerful with thee, How dare thou presume to ask him
daily forgiveness of thy sins, when thou will not pardon thy enemy? Say
thou were without sin, but alas, they are more than the hairs of thy head;
say thou were exempted from punishment, or from Gods favor; but in the one
thou art miserable, and without the other thou can not breath: And therefore
seeing of necessity thou must hourly fly unto him for succor, and for his
favor, How can thou look him in the face? how speak thy self unto him, or
any one for thee? Eccle. 28.
Quis exorauit pro delictis eius? Who entreats for his offenses? Thou will
not have God for thy second, how can thou then hope to have a second with
God? For that servant which owed his king ten thousand Talents, many of his
servants in mere pity interceded for him at the first; but after the debt
was forgiven him, and that he was ready to tear out his fellows throat for
a Piece of three pence, or the like trifling sum; those very men that
entreated for him, complained of his cruel dealing, Quis exorauit pro delictis
eius, Who entreated for his offenses? Besides, give me leave to ask thee this
question, For all the il that thou wishest to thine enemy, thou never praiest
unto God, that he should wish him ill.

But I say unto you. This word Vobis, Unto you, carries also an emphasis with
it, opposite to that emphasis of Ego. Thou that art nothing, against him that is
every thing: thou that vanishest like a shadow, against him that is, was, and
shall be: thou that art weak, against him that is all power and Majesty: thou
that art ignorant, against him that is infinitely wise.

Diligite inimicos vestros. Love your enemies.
To love our Enemies is against nature
This is the greatest temptation, and the strongest encounter that our flesh is
put unto. Saint Augustine, making a repetition of all the Commandments, none
is harder to be kept, than that of loving our Enemy, and brideling in the
appetite of revenge, against him that shall persecute, defame us, and stain
our good name, Quis enim cum inuenerit inimicum, dimittet eum in via bona, Who,
when he finds his Enemy, will let him go away in safety? So said Saul: What
a matter will it be then, to love him, to cherish him, and to do him courtesies?
Redime me a calumnijs hominum, vt custodiam mendata tua, (i.) Keep me from the
slanders of men that I may keep thy Commandments. Whereby it seems, that
David having set before him all the commandments of God, the slanders of his
enemies did so cow his resolution, that he said; O Lord if thou do not
redeem me from this rod, I shall hardly be able to serve thee as I would.

Job, being in all his afflictions a rock of constancy and patience, when
slanders were thrown upon him, he was driven quite beside his byas. Quae est
fortitud^ mea, vt sustineam? Nunquid bonum tibi videtur, si calumnieris, and
opprimas me, Job 6.11.
and concilium impiorum adiuves? What is my strength, that I should hope, etc.
Ananias was a holy man, and known so to be throughout all Judea; yet when
Christ our Savior willed him to receive Saul into his house, he made a stop,
Acts 9.
and blessing himself, said, Lord, do not thou know that he is a Devil,
and an enemy to all that call upon thy name? Have thou forgot the ill he has
done in Jerusalem? Jeremy 6.53.
Jeremy says, That the sword of the enemy strikes a terror in us, Gladius
inimici pauor in circuitu. Wisdom, That the voice of an enemy is unpleasing
and harsh, Sap. 18.
Inconueniens inimicorum vox. The eyes are light and quick in their looking,
but when they come to look upon their enemy, every lidde weighes an hundred
weight. And if in Nature we see such great emnitie amongst things of a
contrary disposition, as well with, as without life, as in cold and heat,
moist and dry, heavy and light, white and black, the Sheep and the Wolf,
the Hare and the Greyhound, the Cock and the Elephant, and the like; why
should we make it so strange, that our flesh and blood should not rise at an
enemy that hates us.

Saint Basil discovering the reason of this difficulty, says, Basil. Sermon. de
ira.
That there are in our Soul two Potentiae, or Faculties.

The one Concupissibilis, and that desires all that is good.

The other, Irascibilis, and that seeks to shun all that is ill.

This he compares to a Sheepheards Curre, The causes why we cannot love our
enemies.
that barketh at those he abhors, thinking thereby to fray them away. The
said Doctor says further, That it seems somewhat hard, that God having
created man Creaturam irascibilem, A Creature subject to anger, he should
enjoin him not to be angry; nay, which is more, to love him that shall offend
him. But as the Sheepeheard must keep in his Dog, that he set not upon all
that he abhors; so Reason must bridle this irascible part in man, that it
break not out against his enemy. But so violent are the motions of the flesh,
that the very Saints of God, if his hand had not forcibly held them back, had
run in this their fury headlong into Hell. Psalm 92.
Paulo minus (says David, upon the same occasion) habitasset in inferno anima
mea, A little more (says David) and my soul had dwelt in hell. Again, The
love to our enemy must increase by the hate to our selves; and those injuries
that thou receiuest from his hand, must be unto thee motives to love him; and
from that wound that he gives thee, grows thy cure: As Saint Ambrose says of
that of our Savior Christ, Amb. Ser. 3. in Psalm. 118.
Vulnus inflictum erat, and fluebat vnguentum, A wound was given, and the
ointment issued out. And this you will think a hard lesson, That a man must
learn to have himself: The difficulty is plain; but as heavy weights
become light, when they are counterpoysed by greater; so that heaviness which
Nature suffers in loving her enemy, is made light and easy by the
counterpoyse of Grace.

First, we are to confess, That this performance is not to be measured by any
natural force or power of ours; for it were great pride to presume, That man
could naturally deserve so great a reward as is prepared for us, our
righteousness being no better than a stained cloth, God not crowning the merits
of our Nature, Exodus 31.
but those his gifts of Grace that he conferreth upon us. Saint Austen says,
That God wrote the Law with his own hand, in token, that our power of
fulfilling it depends in the favor of his hand. The shaft that flies so
nimbly through the air, it is not it is own lightness that causes it is
swiftness, but the arm that draws and delivers it. If thou shall allege,
That God has not his favor so ready at hand, thou do wrong God, who is
always so ready at hand, that thou can blame no bodiebut thy self.

Secondly, It is so easy and so sweet, by those favors that God affoordeth,
that a man may very well say, Iugum meum suaue est, and onus meum leave, My
yoke is pleasing, and my burden light. Si dicebam motus est pes meus, (says
David) misericordia tua adiuuabat, When I said my foot is moved, thy mercy
helped me: He had scarce said, Lord favor me, but his mercy presently
followed him. Nunquid adhaeret tibi seeds iniquitatis, qui fingis laborem in
praecepto? Art thou a tyrannical Prince, that by making hard Laws thou
should pick quarrels with thy Subjects, and so oppress and undo them?
No, Thou art pittyfull, frank, and liberal; for what thou command, thou
accompaniest with a thousand sweet blessings.

On the other side again, we doubt, how the old Law, being so heavy a
burden, and our Savior Christ adding thereunto a new load upon the neck of
that load, it may be said Iugum meum suaue est? I answer, That there are two
kinds of easing of a burden, either by lessening the weight, or by adding
greater strength: For a poor weak beast, four Arroba's [a certain measure
in Spain, of some six ga^lons] will be too great a load; but for a stronger,
twelve Arroba's will be but a light weight: And that to the poor beast the
burden may seem the lighter, the better way is to make him fat, and to put
him in heart, than wholly to quit him of his lading. To him that had been
eight and thirty years benumbed, our Savior said, Toll grauatum tuum, Take
up thy bed; a sickness of so long continuance could not but be a great burden
unto him, and that lay heavily upon him; but God giving him strength to endure
it, it seemed light: God evermore measures our burdens by his Spirit.

Diligite, benefacite, orate, Love, do good, pray.
Here are three Beneficia set against three Damna: To wit, Of our Thoughts, our
Words, and our Works: And in the first place Love is put. Some will not
perhaps like so well of it, That he must submit himself so far, as to do
good unto his enemy, and to pray for him. But it ought not to seem over
burdensome to any: for it stands not with reason, that Grace should be less
powerful than Sin, in those, whose thoughts, words, and works tend to what
is good. Saint Basil compares those that receive a wrong, to the echo, which
returns you word for word, in the very same Language and tone as you your
self shall speak unto it. But herein lies the difference; that in theeccho,
though the voice may go increasing, yet the wrong does not: But in those that
think themselves wronged, that still grows more or less, as occasion is
offered upon reply of words. Your Books of Duel have their echo; the lie
must be returned with a box on the ear; a box on the ear will require a
bastonadoing; a bastonadoing the unsheathing of the Sword; and the Sword death.
God likewise has his echo; for a cursing, he returns a courtesy:
Maledicimur, and b^^efacimus, (i.) We are cursed, and yet do good: for hate,
love; for an ill, a good turn. God does not desire of thee, That thou
should do more for his sake, than thou do for the Devils: Which me
thinks is a very fair and mannerly kind of proceeding, and such as thou
can not except against. If thou can find in thy heart to go see a
Comedy, meethinkes thou should not refuse to go hear a Sermon: If thou
can give Liueries to thy Pages, it were not much for thee to cloth him that
is naked: If thou give twenty Crowns when thou have good luck at play, to
the standers by, it is no great matter for thee (God having blessed thee with
wealth) to bestow four upon an Hospital: If thou can be content to spend
two or three hours in idle and light conversation, it is a small matter for
thee to converse by Prayer half an hour with God; it is a thing of nothing.
Chrysostom. ser. 12.
Petrus Chrysologus pursues this Conceit a little further, to whom I shall
refer you.

Benefacite his qui oderunt vos, orate pro persequentibus vos. Do good to them
that hate you, Pray for them that hurt you.
The offended that seeks means for his satisfaction, shows he has a mind
to he made friends; and God being willing to be friends with thee, has
invented the means of Fasting, Prayer, and Alms; but more particularly
recommends here unto thee a Benefacite, and an Orate, a Good turn, and a
Prayer. Nature teaches thee to repel violence with violence, power by power,
and the sword by the sword, with a Vim vi repellere licet: But Grace teaches
us another Lesson, Benefacite his (says she) qui oderunt vos, orate, etc. Do
good to them that hate you, and pray, etc. Ill is hardly overcome with il;
hatred, with malice; or bad, with worse dealing; but with goodness, and with
love, with a Vince in bono malum, Overcome evil with good. Plutarch reports,
That the Wind and the Sun did lay a wager, which of the two should first
strip a man of his clothes; for this challenge the field was appointed: the
Wind stoutly bestirres himself, and furiously sets upon his hat, cloak,
jerken, and breeches, but he wrapping them close about him, with the help of
his hands and teeth he kept himself vnstripped by the Wind, who could do no
good upon him; so he gives off. Then comes me forth the Sun, who came so hot
upon him, that the man within a very litttle while was feign to fling off all,
and to strippe himself naked. The very self same heat and courage did the
Sun of Righteousness use, in that last eclipse of his life, when from the
Cross he did so heat and inflame the hearts of them that were present, that
they did tear and rent their clothes, Et Velum Templum scissum est. And as
the barrennest ground is made fruitful by the Husbandmans industry; so
goodness overcomes evil. Fortis vt mors dilectio, i. Love is strong as
Death: The stoutest, the valiantest, and the desperatest man alive, Seneca lib.
3. de be^ef.
cannot resist Death, no more can he Love. Omnis natura bestiarum, domita est a
natura, The nature of beasts is tamed by Nature. Against that harm which the
Philistines received by Mice, the Princes made Mice of Gold; let thy enemy be
as troublesome to thee as they, mold him into Gold, and he will never hurt thee
more. S. Chrysostom considers the truth of this in Saul, C^rys. hom. 3. de
Saul and David.
who bearing a deuelish hatred against David; yet by David's twice pardoning him
his life, made him as tractable as wax; and he captiuated by this his
kindness, brake out into this acknowledgement, Iustior me est, He is iuster
than I; for I returned thee il for good, A mild proceeding prevails upon the
fiercest Persons.
and thou me good for ill. S. Chrysostom concludes this History with a
strange endeering; That David's drawing tears out of Saul's hard heart, did
cause him more to wonder, than did Moses and Aaron, when he struck the Rock,
and the waters gushed forth. We want not examples of this Doctrine, even in
those things that are invisible: The toughest Impostumes are made tender by
Unctions. Pliny says, That the roughest sea is made calm with oil. In the
Province of Namurca they burn stone in stead of wood, and that fire will be
quenched with Oil. Against the Impostume of hatred, the raging sea of an
angry breast, and the flames of a furious enemy, there is no better remedy
than Mildness; Sermo mollis frangit iram, A soft answer mitigates wrath.

Orate pro persequentibus vos.
Pray for them that persecute you. This Prayer may be grounded upon two reasons

The one, That the hurt is so great to him that does the wrong, that he that is
wronged ought to take pity and compassion of him: and being it is Damnum
animae, The hurt of the soul, which the offended cannot repair of himself,
he must pray unto God for him, That he would be pleased to repair it. Philon
treating of the death of Abel says, that Cain killed himself, and non alterum,
and not another; and that Abel was not dead, but alive, because he killed but the
body, which was none of his, and left him his soul, which was his. And of
Caine, That his body remained alive, which was none of his, and his soul
slain, which was his* and therefore Clamat sanguis Abel, The blood of Abel
cries, etc.

The other, That there are some such desperate enemies, that are made rather
worse than better by benefits; being like therein unto Paper, which the more
you supple it with Oil, the stiffer it grows; or like unto sand, which the
more it is wet, the harder it waxes; or like unto an anuile, which is not
stirred with the stroke of the hammer; or like unto Judas, who coming from the
washing of our Sauiors feet, went forth afterward with a greater desire for to
sell and betray him: whereas being in this desperate case, he should rather
have had recourse unto God. Prayer therefore is proposed unto us, as the
greatest charm and powerfullest exorcisme against the obstinacy and rebellion
of an enemy. For upon such occasions as these, Prayer is wont to work
miracles. Saint Stephen prayed for those that stoned him to death; which wrought
so powerful an effect, that Saint Austen says, That the Church is beholding
in some sort, to this his Prayer, for the conversion of Saint Paul. And Saint
Luke, That the Heavens were opened hereupon unto him, and he saw Christ
standing in glory at the right hand of his Father. And it is worth the noting,
That the ordinary Language of the Scripture is, That our Savior Christ is
said to sit at the right hand of God the Father: but now here in this place the
word Stantem, Standing, is used, as if Christ had stood up of purpose to see so
rare and strange an accident, and claue the Heavens in sunder, offering him all
the good they did contain; or that he did seem to offer him his Seat (as it
were) as to a child of God; vt sitis filij patris vestri, That ye may be the
children of your Father. And this grace and favor which God shows unto those
that pray for their enemies, was peradventure a motive to our Savior Christ,
to make that pitiful moan upon the Cross, bewayling the Jews cruel
p^oceeding against him, The example of our savior to move us unto it.
and praying that his death might not be laid to their charge; Pater ignosce
illis, Father forgive them. He might have hoped, that these his charitable
prayers would have opened the Gates of Heaven, for the Son of Glory to enter
in: But in stead thereof the Sun was darkened, and a black mantle (as it
were, in mourning) spread over all the earth, whilst he himself uttered these
words of discomfort, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? The doors of
Heaven are shut against me, and my God has forsaken me. But the mystery is,
That Heaven was shut against him, that it might be opened unto you; and even
then was it opened to the Thief, and to many that returned from Mount
Caluarie, percutientes pectora sua, i. Smiting their breasts; as also to that
Centurion that said, Vere filius Dei erat iste, This was truly the Son of God.

There may be rendered another reason of this our Saviors praying upon the
Cross: Which is this, That for to obtain favors from Gods hand, there is no
means comparable to that of praying for our enemies. In me loquebantur, qui
sedebant in Porta, Psalm. 69.12 13.
in me psallebant, qui bibebant vinum: ego autem orationem meam ad te Domine
tempus beneplaciti Deus. David speaking there as a figure of Christ, says,
That his enemies sat like judges in the Gates of the City, entertaining
themselves with stories of his life, and that they went from Tavern to Tauern,
and from one house to another, singing Songs in dirision of him, descanting and
playing upon him; but I, turning toward God, prayed heartily for them, as
knowing there was not any time fitter than that, for the obtaining of my
request, Tempus beneplaciti, An acceptable time, etc. The like he says in the
180 Psalm, Pro eo, vt me diligerent, detrahebant mihi; They repaid my love with
hate, my good actions with injuries: Ego autem orabam; But I quitted their
wrongs with my prayers. Saint Chrysostom says, Sermon. de Proditor. Judah.
That God commanding me to pray for my enemy, attends therein more mine, than
his good; for the prayer that I make for my enemy that has done me wrongs,
heaps coals upon his head, but is a plenarie indulgence for all those that I
have done against my God: nor shall any thing at the day of judgment plead
harder for us. Now in another place he says, Chris. Hom. li. 4. in Genesis
That the pleasure that God does take in the good that we do unto our enemies,
is not because they deserve it, but because we should not fall into so great a
sin as is hatred and malice. Imperf Hom. 4. in Mat. Hom. 27. ad populu^.
Two prayers (says the same Father) we must never be unprovided of; one for
our enemy, another for our own soul: For if thou shall pray for thy enemy,
though thou beggest nothing for thy self, yet shall thou obtain of God what
thine own heart desires* Saint Ambrose says, That David in taking care for
the saving of Absalons life, Ambr. in Apo^. David.
Seruate mihi puerum Absalon, Preserve me the young man Absalon, did assure
himself of the victory, and that Ioab and his soldiers would cry out, Kill
the Traitor, run him through, etc. O what a rich, though secret and hidden
Mine, is the pardoning of our enemy. And hereupon hang two things: The one,
how unpleasing a Petition it would be in Gods ears, and how harsh it would
sound, that we call unto him for vengeance upon our enemy; desiring, that
Ioabs dart may strike him through the heart. The other is Saint Austens, who
says, That he that of God shall entreat evil against evil, does himself
that which is evil: and it comes by this means to be a double evil; two
evils (I say) spring from thence, The one, that he does ill; the other, That
he prays ill. So that when he that is wronged shall pray unto God to destroy
this ill man; God may very well make him this answer, Which of the two do
thou mean? for in seeking to kill another, thou first killest thy self:
Quando dicis, Deus, occide malum; respondebit, Quem vestrum? When thou shall
say, Lord, kill the wicked one; he shall answer, Which of you?

Vt scitis filij Patris vestri.
That ye may be the children of your Father. By loving, by doing good, by
praying and pardoning thy enemies, ye shall show your selves to be the sons of
God. But the reuengefull, the cruel, and the mercilesseman, is rather a
monster than any child of Gods. God is Love, and as Thomas proves it out of
Dyonisius, it is Gods essential name. Therefore he that would be the son of
Love, and yet is a hater of his brother, he is a monster, and no son. To
those children that are like unto their parents, we use to say, Gods blessing
be with ye, and make ye like unto your parents in goodness, as in favor. Our
Savior called the Pharisees Filios Diaboli, The childeren of the Devil,
because they followed his humors and desire; Ille autem homicida erat ab
initio, And he was a murderer from the beginning. If you will therefore be
Gods children, ye must be like unto God. Seneca tells, That he did good to
him that did him ill; and cries out withal, What shall I do? What? Why that
which God did and does for thee, who began to do good to thee, when thou did
not know what good was, nor how to esteem it; and now thou do know it, and
that he still continues good unto thee, yet thou continuest unthankful unto
him by not acknowledging his goodness.

That ye may be the children of your Father. Saint John says, That God gave us
power to be sons of God. This filiation we first receive in Baptism, and
is afterward confirmed in us, when God shall find this inscription engraven in
our hearts, To be a child, and to exercise the duties of a child, not all one.
Diligite, benefacite, orate, vt sitis filij patris vestri, i. Love, Do good,
and Pray, that ye may be the children of your Father. I tell thee it is one
thing to be filius, a son; another, exercere filiationem, i. to perform the
office of a son. A child has understanding before he is ten years old, but
he does not put it in practice. But by pardoning, thou shall show by thy
works, that thou art of those children of God, whom at thy baptism he
endowed with Grace. All men desire to be like unto their King; Diodorus
Siculus, reports of the Aethiopians, that if the King were lame, Diodor. de
Fabulis, Antiquis. c. 4.
disfigured, or blinck-ey'd, they would all strive to be as like him as they
could. Our Savior Christ prayed for his enemies on the Cross; why should ye
not imitate him, Vt sitis filij, i. that ye may be his children, etc. The
Cross (says Nazianzene) is that bright pillar of fire in the wilderness,
which lights us along in the night of this life, that it may teach us the way,
Pro inuidijs meis orationes fundere, i. to pour out a prayer against my own
Envy.

That ye may be the children, etc. Saint Paul has it, Quod si filij, and
haeredes per Deum, i. If children, then also heirs. What? heirs to so great a
blessing, and will ye loose it for an enemy? It will joy him much to see you
suffer so much harm. There is nothing grieves a man more, than to see his
labors lost, especially having endured great and long toil. We daily see the
truth of this in the soldier, on the one side his body broken, and his cloths
torn and ragged; on the other ready to famish for want of food. In Virgils
hall, some women are feigned to draw water in siues; a fruitless labor. In
the parable of the Sower our Savior was very sorry to see three of the four
parts of seed to be lost and cast away. Ezech. 24.12.
Ezechiel paints out his people in the emblem of a pot, which was so foully
furred within that it was impossible to make it clean. Multo labor sudatum
est, and non exibit de ea nimia rubigo, neque per ignem, i. Much labor has
been bestowed, and yet the scum of it is not gone out, no, not by the fire.
Jeremy pictures Babylon sick, and that many Physicians going about to cure
her, though they did apply unto her many costly medicines, all their labor was
in vain, Curauimus Babilonem, and non est sanata. Multiply thy services toward
God, treasure up spiritual riches, use all diligence for to keep a clean
Conscience; apply as medicines for to cure thy Soul, Tears, Fastings,
Prayers, Alms, yet if thou do not forgive and pardon thy enemy, thou do
nothing. The Scripture speaks of Esau, that he could find no place for
repentance, no though he did seek it with Tears, (purposely citing Tears,
that we might consider how powerful they are) and the reason was, for that he
had a purpose to be revenged on his Brother: Veniet dies luctus patris mei, i.
My Father will dye ere long, and then I will be revenged of him.

That ye may be the children. That ye may show of what House you came, and
what a noble Father you had. Gods omnipotency seen most in his Mercy.
Qui omne^ potentiam suam parcendo maxim and miserando manifestat Deus iudex,
fortis, and patiens, i. Who manifests his omnipotency most of all by
sparing, and showing Pity. Hear what Hugo de santo Victore tells you, Nobile
vind^ctae genus, ignoscere victis, i. It Is a noble revenge to forgive the
vanquished. In the genealogy of Christ, Hugo Vict. l. 6 de anima.
only David is called King; and only for his generous mind in pardoning the
wrongs that his Enemies did him. When he gave Saul his life, 3. Reg. 24.
Nunc scio vere (said he) quod regnaturus sis, i. Now know I truly, that thou
shall reign. For such a greatness of mind could not be repayed with less
than a Crown. Scitote quoniam mirificauit Dominus sanctum suum, i. Know that
the Lord has magnified his holy one. The Hebrew letter has it, Elegit sibi
dominus misericordem, i. The Lord has chosen to himself the merciful man.
The practice of Mercy brings with it the greatest glory.
No man will offer to take my Crown from me, because God has given it me,
for showing mercy to mine Enemies. David composed his 56. Psalm. upon that
Accident which happened unto Saul at the mouth of the cave. And the title
thereunto is, Ne disperdas insignia David; or, aureolam David, Do not blot out
the Arms of David, nor take his Crown from off his head. His soldiers
importuned him to take away his life from him; telling him, that God had
delivered him into his hands. By which noble action of his (says Saint
Chrysostom) he got himself more glory than when he overcame the Philistine:
For there he got himself but the glory of a valiant and venturous soldier;
but here, ^f a most holy, just, and merciful man; there, he read only a
lecture of Fortitude; here, of meekness, which of all other is the chiefest
virtue; there, the dames of Jerusalem did solemnise his victory; here, the
Angels of Heaven; there, God showed him a great favor in delivering him from
the sword of his Enemy; here, he did God as acceptable a piece of service, for
that it was the rarer of the two. And this was it, that made God say of him;
Inueni virum secundum cor meum, i. I have found a man according to my own
heart. That great Prince Moses, 1. Reg. 11.
was so hot and chollericke, that in his anger he killed an Aegiptian that
misused an Hebrew. Clemens Alexandrinus says, That he dispatched him at one
blow. The day following, another Aegiptian standing in fear of him, said unto
him, Nunc occidere me vis, i. Will thou now kill me? But being afterward
trained up in the school of God, never any man endured so many wrongs, of his
friends, his enemies, and his brethren, as he did. Who has thus changed thee?
Potentissimus faciem illius commutauit, i. The most m^ghtie had altered his
face. And being thus molded, God said unto him, Ego te constituam Deum
Pharaonis, i. I will make thee as a God to Pharaoh. Against such hardness,
power, and tyranny, it is fit thou should be a God, and that to represent
my person, thou do put on my condition. The Devil coniectured by many
signs and tokens, that Christ at his birth was God: As by Angels, Sheapheards,
Kings, and Prophesies: But tothis, his poverty, his suffering cold, his
shedding of tears, the thatch of the house, the cobwebs in the room where he
lay, and the hay in the cratch, left him more perplexed than before. Afterward
he was more amassed, when he saw him fast forty days, whereupon he set
himself to tempt him, saying Si filius Dei es, i. Christ patience more
staggered the Devil than all his miracles.
If thou be the son of God, etc. Then he had greater staggerings, when he
saw his so many, so strange, and fearful miracles, even to the forcing of the
Devil himself to acknowledge him to be the son of God. And this did
confound him more than all that went before. But when he saw, he pardoned so
many injuries that were daily done unto him, he then began to shake and
tremble, as if he had been touched with quicksiluer. He beheld Judas his
selling of him, his kiss of false peace, his calling of him friend, and under
that name betraying him; he saw the night of his imprisonment in Cayphas his
house, and the injuries that they did him; persuading himself that no other
but God, could pocket up such wrongs.

The World calls the reuengfull man valiant; but the bloody minded man, the
Scripture styles weak, effeminate, and womanish. When Ioab killed those noble
p^ire of brothers Abner and Amasa, having dyed his belt and shoes with the
blood of Abner; David said, Non defiiciet de domo Ioab fluxum seminis
sustinens, 2. Reg. 3.29.
and tenens fusum, and cade^s gladio, i. Let there not fail from the House of
Ioab one that has an issue, or is a Leaper, or that leans on a staff, or
falls by the sword. God did punish this weakness and cowardly act of Ioab,
with the weakness and cowardice of all his posterity.

Lastly, Being the Son of God, thou may be sure he will be mindful of
thee, take care of thee, and love thee. Esaias brings in the Church, complaining,
That God had forgotten her, Dominus oblitus est mei, The Lord has forgotten
me. But he answers, Nunquid obliuisci potest mulier* infantis operis sui? i.
Can a woman forget the children of her womb? But say she should, Ego (says
he) non obliuiscar tui, ecce in manibus meis descripsi te, (i.) I will not yet
forget thee; behold, I have engraven thee in my Palms. God cannot forget his
children, if they will but acknowledge him to be their father; and they can in
nothing be more like unto him, than in being merciful, as he is merciful.

Estote ergo perfecti, sicut Pater vester perfectus est
Be ye therefore perfect, even as your Father is perfect. He reduces this
perfection to the love of our enemy; for to a man's friend, the very Heathens
do this. Saint Austen and Saint Chrysostom say, it is Omnis virtutis Corona
and vertex, The height and glory of all virtue. Where he denies not the
reward to him that shall love his friend for Gods sake; but to him that shall
love like a Gentile, or a Publican, not for Gods love, but either out of a
natural propension in himself, or for his own pleasure, or commodity and
profit; and he that does not love his enemy, shows plainly, that he loves
not his friend for his love to God, but for his love to himself: for if he
should love him for Gods love, he would no less love his enemy, being that
he is as well the Image of God, as his friend. So that he that loves his friend,
and not his enemy, ought not to expect a reward for loving of his friend: but
he that does not only love his friend, but his enemy also, he shall be sure
of a double reward, Introduxit me Rex in cellam vinariam, ordinauit in me
charitatem, (i.) The King brought me into the Banqueting house, Cant. 2. v. 4.
and his banner over me, was Love. Origin notes, That that which the Soul
desires of her Husband, is not to love, or to hate; for this being a natural
perfection, it is not possible it should fail: the will is neither idle, nor
in vain, for it must of force wish either well or ill. Our love how it is to
be ordered and disposed.
All the kindness that she desires of her husband, is, his ordering of his
love; for in disorder intolerable errors arise. Of all the Predicaments, God
is the highest, and he ought to be the principal mark of our well ordered
affection: Dilexi, quoniam audiuit Deus vocem orationis meae, (i.) I loved,
because the Lord heard the voice of my prayer: Loved? Whom have thou loved? A
prudent will, which places it is felicity in the observance of the Law; we
must not ask of it, Whom it loves? This is a question to be asked of a
Reprobate, or Castaway. In a word, He that man ought chiefly to love, is God;
and next, man, for the love of God, be he friend, or be he foe. And because
when it does not reach and extend it self to our enemy, it cannot be said to
be perfect love; it is said, Estote perfecti sicut Pater vester, Be ye perfect
as your Father. The reason is, Because in the rest of the actions of virtue,
humane respects may come athwart us; one may fast, because abstinence imports
his health; another give Alms, because he affects vainglory; a third, not
seek to be revenged, for fear of those inconveniences that follow after it; a
fourth be chaste, for the avoiding of shame, etc. But to love a man's enemy,
that must only proceed from our love to God, it must needs be done only for
Gods sake, and God only can requite it.

Secondly, he reduces this perfection to the love of our enemy, because it is
a sure pledge for Heaven. When Elias and Baals Priests were both of them to
offer Sacrifice in trial of the true God, it was conditioned, That that God
that should send down fire from Heaven upon the Alter, should be held to be
the true God. Baals Priests ball'd upon him, but all would not do: but Elias,
when he had set up his Alter with the wood upon it, the beasts about it, and
had poured water thereupon, to the filling up of the Trench, he had no sooner
poured forrh his Prayer, but such great store of fire descended from Heaven,
that it burnt the flesh, the wood, the stones, and likewise wasted and consumed
the water. That it should burn the beasts, the wood, and the stones, it was no
such wonder; but that it should take hold on it is contrary, which is water, it
was a manifest sign, that it was the fire of Heaven. That your love should
cleave to your own flesh and blood, it is not much; The perfection of our love
how to be discovered.
that it should take hold of the wood and stone, that likewise is no great
wonder; but that it should work on it is contrary, on one that desires to make
an end of thee, and to consume thee, this is love indeed, this is charity,
this is the fire of Heaven.

Thirdly, The love to our enemy does more discover the perfection of our love;
because it is without any hope of temporal reward. Elisaeus filled the widows
empty cruses with Oil; and thou must replenish with thy love and good works,
those empty breasts that have nothing in them to deserve it. For where there is
some deseruingnesse, and reason of merit, the Gentile and the Publican do the
like.

Fourthly, It argues more perfection; for that the love of our enemy is that
gloss which sets before our eyes our own faults and offenses. When Shimei
reproched David to his face, and gave him such opprobrious language, that his
Captains and Commanders that were then about him were impatient of it, and
would have killed him; David withstood it, and would not suffer them to take
away his life; and the reason was, because it put him in mind of his own
sins; and he that looks well upon his own, takes no great notice of another
man's. And this made him to say, Peccatum meum contra me est semper, Our Enemies
are but Gods Instruments, who by them does punish us for our sins.
My sin wars more against me than mine enemy. Again, though thy enemy
do persecute thee without a cause, it is not without cause, that thou do
thus suffer; for (as Tertullian has it) Nullus unjust patitur, No man suffers
wrongfully: So that thou must not look so much upon him that iniures thee, as
upon thine own sins, for the which God permits them to iniure thee. It is
Ieremies; Who ever said, Let it be done, though the Lord command it not? Let
us search our own ways: Take but thy life into examination, and thou will
find, that thy sins deserve a thousand times more. David would by no means
consent, that his People should revenge those disgraceful words which Shimei
spoke unto him; and What was the reason? Only for that he was Gods Instrument.
S. Austen, upon the 31 Psalm, pondering those words of Job, Dominus dedit,
Dominus abstulit, The Lord has given, and the Lord has taken; notes, That he
did not say, Dominus dedit, Diabolus abstulit, The Lord gave, and the Devil
took away: For those whips and scourges which God sends, though they be
inflicted upon us by the hands of the Devil, yet are we to account them to
come from God.

Out of the whole drift of this Chapter, I will infer one clear and manifest
consequence, which is this, If to hate our enemy be so much condemned both of
Heaven and Earth, those excesses and exorbitances which fall out upon this
occasion (be it in respect of the time and place, or of the person, or the act
it self, or our deep disaffection) they are all of them here condemned.

Two kind of faults God does extremely hate and abhor:

The one, Of those who have no measure or moderation in their revenge; saying
with the Idumaeans, Exinanite, exinanite vsque ad fundamentum in ea, Raze, raze
them to the very foundation: They would not have one stone left upon another
in Jerusalem; wishing that they might say, Etiam periere ruinae, The very
ruins are also perished. Whereby it seems, that man's cruelty would stand in
competition with Gods clemency. And that as God is not willing that any man
should set a tax and size upon his mercy; so these men will have no man to
put a rate upon their revenge. Saint Peter asked our Savior Christ, How many
times he should forgive his brother? Will seven serve? (says he.) Our Savior
answered, I say not seven times, but seventy times seven times. Whence
Tertullian has noted, That he had an eye therein to man's excess in revenge.
Lamech slew Caine and the young man that waited upon him; and the women going
about to be revenged of him for the death of the young man, he said unto them,
Hearken o ye wives of Lamech, Let it not once enter into your thoughts to take
revenge on my life: for though the vengeance which God appointed for the
killing of Caine had a limitation; yet the revenge of my death shall be without
tax, and without measure; Setuplum vltio dabitur de Cain, de Lamech autem
septuagies septies, Cain shall be revenged seven times, but Lamech seventy
times seven times. Wherein he sets down a finite number for an infinite. In a
word, Lamech in this word Septuagies septies, shows, That the revenge that
should be taken thereof should be without term, without limitation; wherein
he seems to make man's cruelty to contest with Gods mercy.

Hatred should not be immortal.
The other is, Of those that hate their enemies so to the death, that though
they themselves die, yet they will not let their hatred die with them, but
leave it in their last Will and Testament to their heirs, to take revenge of
their wrongs, and to prosecute their enemies unto death: Being herein like unto
Dido, who throwing out her curses and maledictions on Aeneas, and desiring the
Tygres and other wild beasts to revenge her wrong, breathed her last with this
invocation, They that live in hardness of heart are justly suffered to dye in it.
Hoc precor, hanc vocem extrema^ cum sanguine fundo, i. This is my prayer, I
wish no other good, and this I pour forth with my latest blood.

Whence I would have you to note, That this hardness of man's heart at his
death, is in punishment of his hardness of heart in his life. Hac anima
aduersione (says Saint Austen) punitur peccator, i. This is a sinners
punishment. And in another place, Cor durum male habebit in nouissimo, It shall
go ill with a hard heart in the latter day. And Jeremy treating of those that
persecuted him, Reddes eis Domine vicem iusti, and dabis eis scutum cordis,
Thou shall pay them in their own coin, thou shall use them as they used their
enemies; thou shall give them a heart like a shield of Brass, it shall be hard
in their life time, and hard at their death. No prayers could mollify them,
nor shall their entreatie move thee: for only the merciful shall only find
mercy.

Now for the reforming of both these excesses, Saint Paul says, Sol non
occidat super iracundiam vestram, Ephesians. 4.
Let not the Sun go down before your wrath go out, Let not the one set
before the other be settled. Saint Chrysostom renders two reasons of this
saying, Sol non occidat, etc.

The one, That the Sun does favor and serve you with his light, and with his
influences, cherishing your health and your life, and does not return home at
night brawling and complaining, that he has bestowed this his love and service
upon an ungrateful and unthankful person. There is no creature but will grumble
and repine to serve such a one; Ingemescit, It sighs and groans, etc. (says
Saint Paul) but the Sun does not grudge at his serving of you.

The second, That the night is of it self sad, melancholy, and in a
disposition to troublesome thoughts and immaginations. Now then, that your
fantasy may not present you with an army of fearful cogitations, and the
dismal representations of revenge, before that the night comes on, quiet that
raging sea within thy breast, by throwing Oil upon it; become soft and gentle
by clensing thy heart of all rancour and malice. If the beams of the Sun
cannot pierce through a thick cloud, they will hardly make their way through
the pitchie darkness of the night, being that they are naturally then in
their augmentation. When the cheerfulness of the day, employment in
businesses, and the company and comfort of our friends cannot remove the
clouds of our anger, the night will hardly scatter them, who is the mother of
painful thoughts. For, as the infirmities of the body increase by the
absence of the Sun; so in like sort do the diseases of the soul. I know not
whither Ioshuah were touched or no with this Spirit, when he willed the Sun
to stand still, when he was in the pursuit of his enemies.

It seems unto some, That it is a very hard matter, and more than flesh and
blood can bear, to pardon fresh injuries, the blood boiling then in our breast:
But this is answered by that example of our Savior Christ, who when his wounds
did pour forth blood on every side, yet his tongue cryde out, Ignosce illis,
quia nesciunt quid faciunt, Forgive them, for they know not what they do.
Where I would have you to note, that the word faciunt is of the present Tense.
When they were boring his feet with nails, Saint Austen to this purpose says,
Is petebat veniam, Aug. Tractat. 31. in Joan.
a quibus adhuc accipiebat iniuriam, He craved pardon for those of whom even
then he suffered wrong: For he did not so much weigh, that he died by them, as
that he died for them. Cum esset in sanguine suo (says Ezechiel) dixit, Viue,
i. When he was in his own blood, he said, Live. And Saint Bernard, That he
offered up his life, Non interpellant^bus, sed repellentibus, non inuocantibus,
sed prouocantibus, Not for those that inuoked him, but provoked him.

The replies of the Flesh are infinite, and without number. Some say, The
excuses of the flesh aga^st this loving of our enemies, and their confutation.
Whilst we live in the world we must follow the fashions of the world, and
live according to it is Laws: and that if a man put up one injury, he shall
have a thousand put upon him. I answer hereunto, That it is a fouler fault to
seek out reasons to defend and maintain sin, than to commit it. And if thou
shall tell me, thou desire to be revenged because thou art weak, and can
not bridle thy anger; I shall the rather pity thee, and shall withal
council and advise thee to ask pardon of God, for this thy weakness and
infirmity. But that thou should defend thy offense with reasons and force of
argument, it is not a thing to be immagined: but more against reason it is, to
reason against God. Let us now leave the Gospel and the sacred Scriptures, and
let us bring this business within the sphere of reason: I say then, That it
is the Language of him that knows not what reason is, as if it were possible
there could be any reason against God. The Clown rests so well contented with
his poor Cottage, that he will not change it for the Kings Palace: And the
worldly man likes so well of the laws and fashions of the world, that he
sticks not to prefer them before those of God.

Others stand upon their honor, alleging, How can a man live in the world,
without the upholding of his honor and repution? I answer, It is not to be
found in the Scripture, That Christ does council any man to suffer in his
honor for him, or to loose his reputation; Marry, Matthew 16.
he has promised a reward unto him that for his sake should lay down his
life, or leave his goods, forsaking all to follow him: but to him that should
loose his honor, or his reputation, he never made the like promise. For, to
obey and serve him, is all the honor that man ought to stand upon; Matthew 19.
Hoc est, omnis, etc. Gods service the greatest soueraignety. S. Ambrose says,
Amb. lib. 2 in Luc.
That God would be borne of a married Virgin, out of a care that he had to the
Virgins credit; yet therefore is it not meet, that a man should procure his
own honor by doing dishonor to another. Luke 6.
Cum maledixerint vobis homines, and dixerint omne malum aduersum vos
mentientes propter me, When men shall curse you, and speak all evil against
you. The World will say, Thou art a base fellow if thou put up a wrong, and do
not revenge it to the full: But the World lies; for a man cannot do himself a
greater honor, than to pardon an injury. The World will say, Thou have no
worth in thee, and that thou do degenerate from thy noble Ancestors. But
therein the world likewise lies; for there is nothing more noble, than to
forgive and forget a wrong.

Others will say, I forgive my enemy with all my heart, but I will never speak
to him. I answer, This is a metaphisicall case, that thou will give him thy
heart, and deny him thy tongue. Me-thinkes that Fountain that is fair
within, should not be foul without: Shall God give thee a heart to wish well,
and wilt not thou find a tongue to speak well? And words too, without a heart,
are not worth God-a-mercie: Si salutaueritis fratres vestros tantum, If ye
shall only salute your brethren, it is neither any great thing, nor yet
thankes-worthie; but to say thou will give him thy heart, and not so much as a
word, thou do give him neither the one nor the other.

To be first in forgiving is the greatest honor.
Others say, Let him come and speak to me first; for as I am the more wronged,
so I take my self to be the better man; and therefore I will not offer my self
unto him, but let him come to me, if he will, else I will never be friends
with him. I answer, That by thy yielding first unto him, thou will win by the
elder hand, and get thy self the more credit. Abraham (thou know) gave Lot
leave to choose first, and being his Kinseman and his inferior both in years
and otherwise, did not reckon of his right, nor his reputation, that he might
not make a rent and breach of love and amity between them, Ne quaeso sit
jurgium inter me and te, Let there be no strife betwixt thee and me, etc.

Others say, Mee-thinkes it is a hard case, that God should wish me to love
and do well unto him that loves not me, and would rejoice in any il that
should happen unto me. I answer, That I am not bound to desire of God, that he
would fulfill the desires of my enemy: for if he direct them to my hurt, and
to my ruin, I am not bound to ask of God any ill to my self. When a Bell is
drawn up to the top of some Tower, or a Stone to some high Steeple, it is the
natural and common course of those that see it carried up, to desire no
mischance may befall it: But if any should be so maliciously foolish, as to say
in his heart, O that I might now see it fall: the Stone might very well
reply, Let not thy desires prosper. The like may he say, who goes mounting up
to some height of goodness, to his envious enemy, Let not thy ill wishes
thrive against me.

Last of all, To him that shall think that this is too hard a Precept, I
answer, That there is this difference between those that are the Saints of
God, The true child of God thinks it no hard precept to love hi^ enemies.
and those that are not; that these strive to get Heaven at too cheap a rate,
and stand a hucking, to see if they can get thither with a little cost: But
those that are Gods children seek all occasions for to buy it at any price, be
it never so high, nay, though it should cost them their life. Quotidiam morior
propter vestram gloriam, I die daily for your glory, 1. Cor. 18.
says Saint Paul. Whereupon Saint Chrysostom gives this note, That the
Apostle was even sorry, that he had no more but one life to lay down for his
God, and for the welfare of his brethren in the Lord: And that therefore he had
scarce escaped one danger, but that he was desirous to enter into another.

THE FOVRTH SERMON, ON THE SATVRDAY AFTER ASHWEDNESDAY.
MARC. 6. MAT. 14. Cum sero esset factum, erat Nauis in medio Maris.

When it grew late, the Ship was in the midst of the Sea.


THe Evangelist recounteth here unto us a fearful Tempest, The disciples
weakness of Faith.
which the Disciples endured one night in the midst of the sea; the winds
being stiff and terrible, the waves furiously raging, the clouds thick and
dark, the ship small and shrewdly beaten, and hardly able to withstand the
swelling of this proud sea, this storm continuing in it is strength and vigor
till the fourth watch in the morning. And though these were many and very
forcible reasons to make them to be afraid; yet unto these was added a new
cause of fear, to wit, That our Savior appearing unto them walking upon the
waters, they thought it was a Phantasma, some Spirit in a seeming assumed
shape, whither Angel, or Devil, they could not devise with themselves. And
the common received opinion is, That the^e Visions had their several
apparitions, as it appears in Saint Luke, and the Acts of the Apostles. They
pitifully cried out, for fear of being drowned in the Deep, not
considering, that he who had filled their bellies in the wilderness, could
trample the waves under his feet, and preserve their bodies from sinking. Our
Savior made show at the first, of walking a far off from them, as he did
afterward with those that he went along with to Emaus; but in the end he spoke
unto them, and made himself known unto them. Then Peter thereupon rushed
presently into the Sea, and beginning to sink, he stretched out his hand unto
him, and reprehended him for having so little Faith. At last they entered into
the ship, and they were no sooner come in, but the winds went away, the sea
grew calm, and the tempest ceased. The Mariners, and the rest that were aboard
this Bark, acknowledged our Savior to be the Son of God. They disembarked
in Genezareth, the fame of whose coming was soon spread abroad; they brought
forth their sick unto him, and our Savior Christ restored them to their
health.

Cum sero esset factum. When it grew late, etc.
Saint John says, That the Feast being ended, our Savior went up to the Mount
to pray, Ascendit solus orare, He went up alone. Saint Mark, and Saint Matthew,
That he forced his Disciples to go on shippe-boord. Nor does this admit any
contradiction; for before that he withdrew himself to pray, he might very well
will them to make them ready to go to sea: And happily they might stay
waiting for him till it were toward the evening, and seeing he did not come,
yet (according as he had commanded them) embarked themselves.

Of this his forcing them to go aboard, the Doctors give diverse reasons.

The first is taken out of Saint John. Our Savior knew that the People had a
purpose to make him King; which danger he seeking to avoid, he withdrew
himself aside to pray, being all alone; notifying to his Disciples, That they
should in the mean while provide to go to sea.

The second, That our Savior thereby might take occasion to work this
wonderful miracle: for if the Disciples had not embarked themselves, neither
had our Savior walked upon the sea, nor Peter adventured himself upon the
waves, nor his Disciples endured such a terrible storm, nor had there been
such clear notice taken of his soueraignepower.

The third is Saint Chrysostomes; who says, That when they were to go to sea,
our Savior would that they should carry along with them the remainder of such
broken pieces of bread, and of the fishes that were left, to the end that they
might think upon the forepassed miracle. Wherein they were so dull sighted,
that Saint Mark says, Non enim intellexerunt de panibus, They understood
nothing about the Loaves. And therefore those whom Fulness and Prosperity
had thus blinded, God through troubles and afflictions cleereth their eyesight.

The Society of Women, though devout, is dangerous.
The fourth is Theophilacts; insinuating this for an especial reason, That our
Savior Christ seeing his Disciples in conversation with some devout women
which were present at the Feast, he willed them presently to embarke;
conceiving, that they would be far more safe in the sea amidst the waves,
than in the company of women, though never so devout, never so holy. And the
ground of this truth may be gathered from the Disciples unwillingness to put
forth to sea: but our Savior like a good Horseman, that claps his spurs
close to the sides of his Ginnet, when he refuses to make his carreere, Coegit
illos, He compelled them.

The fifth, For that the Ship is a Type and figure of government, of honor,
and of dignity: And God will have his friends to be forced to ascend to those
high places. And therefore it is said, Coegit illos vt ascenderent, He
compelled them to ascend.

The last is Saint Hieromes; who alleges, That the content being so great
which the Disciples took in the presence of their Master, it was a clear
case, that it would very much grieve them to depart from him, and to be
forced to forgo his company. For he that has once a truetast of God, will
hardly be withdrawn from him. A Dog, be he beaten never so much, he will
not leave his Masters house, and all for the love that he bears him, and the
pleasure and delight that he takes in his presence. And this was it that made
Job, when he was most beaten with his afflictions, to utter with a great deal
of patience this humble language, Etiam, si occiderit, in illum sperabo, i.
Though he kill me, yet will I trust in him. What shall they then do, that
have sat at the same board with their God, and eat of his meat? Shall not
they the fuller they are fed, be still the more hungry? yes doubtless. For as
Ecclesiasticus says; Qui edunt me, Eccl. 24.
adhuc esurient, i. They which eat me, shall yet hunger.

Et erat nauis in medio Maris.
And the Ship was in the midst of the Sea. It seems somewhat strange, that
our Savior Christ, enforcing his Disciples to enter into the Sea, and they
having punctually obeyed his command, that he should punish them with such a
dangerous and fearful tempest. That Gods justice shoul overtake Jonas in the
ship, that the Mariners should be as it were the Sergeants, the Whale the
prison, the Sea the executioner, it was not much, for that he sought to fly
from Gods obeydience, and showed himself unwilling to perform the service
that was enjoined him: But that the Disciples, who left the Land, entered into
the Sea, and consecrated their desires to their Saviors Will; that these men
should see themselves in danger of drowning and ready to perish, is more than
much. And this difficulty is indeered the more, because it is said, That no
ill shall happen unto him, who shall keep his commandments. Eccl. 1.
Qui custodit praeceptum, non experietur quidquam mali. But o Lord, if thou
afflictest with torments, those that love and obey thee; What will thou do
unto those that are renegates, and blasphemers, etc? This doubt requires those
reasons, which our Savior had for the miraculous allaying of this tempest.

The first is Saint Chrysostomes, The Disciples (says he) might have dwelt
upon that former miracle of the loaves of bread, and the fishes, and on that
fullness and saturitie wherewith such a multitude of guests were satisfied and
contented, carrying great store thereof away with them in their bosoms, and
their pockets. They might likewise have argued from thence, the Omnipotency and
Divinity of our Savior Christ, Et non intellexerunt de panibus: But they
remained blind: God therefore does so order the business, That those eyes,
whom Good could not open, Ill should: And that the danger of the tempest
should advise those, whom feasting and fullness of bread could not persuade.

The second, Let no man look in Gods house to eat of his bread for nothing.
God perhaps will bid thee sit down and eat, and say unto thee, In die bonorum
fruere bonis, i. In the day of wrath, be of good comfort: But withal, Eccl.
7.16.
thou must look to pay thy shot, For God will presently make trial in the
furnace of tribulation, whether his bread be well bestowed or no. There is no
Saint in Heaven which has not been put to this proof. And Ecclesiastical
persons of all other, have a preciser obligation lying upon them, who are the
honor of Gods house, who eat more especially at his Table, who gather up the
remainders of the feast, inioying the fruits of the earth in great abundance,
and in more plentiful measure than other men. And it is no great marvel that
they that possess much, should be possessed with much fear.

The third, It is the ordinary language of the Saints of God, to call this
world a Sea, and this our life a sailing therein. This Origin proves, and
Hylarius, and Clemens Alexandrinus: and the proportions are many. Saint Austen
cites two, the one, That as the water of the Sea is generally bitter, and it
is a wonder if ever it become fresh and sweet: So our life is so full of gall
and worme-wood, that there is scarce to be found in it any the least smack of
content or sweetness: Suting well with that other saying of this sacred
Doctor, That the greatest joy which we enjoy in this life, is not joy, but a
kind of lightning and easing of sorrow. The other (which is likewise noted by
Saint Basil, and Clemens Alexandrinus) That as in the Sea, Basil. Hom. 7. in
^^am. Clem. lib. 1. (...). A^a^ 14.
the greater Fishes devour the lesser Fry, by a kind of tyrannical violence;
so the powerful men of this world oppress the poorer sort, and swallow them
up. According to that of Habacuc: Facies homines, sicut pisces maris, i. Thou
make men as the fishes of the Sea.

Gregory Nazianzen puts two other proportions. The one, That as he who
saileth in the Sea, Nazianz. tract de vita (...) ne^^bus and O^at. Sap. 14.
leads a life very near unto death, having but a poor plancke betwixt him and
it, Exiguo enim ligno, credunt homines animas suas, i. For men trust a small
piece of wood with their lives; So he that walks in the dangerous ways of
this world, may say with David, Vno tantum gradu ego, and mors diuidimur, i. 1.
Reg. 20.
There Is but one degree betwixt me and death. The other, that those, who take
pleasure in going to Sea, come to make the waves thereof their winding sheet:
So those, that are wedded to the world, receive their death at the worlds
hands. The deceits of the world, are like those of the Sea. And for this cause
perhaps the Scripture gives the S^a the name of Heart; Psalm. 46.2.
Transferentur montes in cor maris, i. The mountains shall be translated into
the Heart of the Sea: And sometimes, Psalm. 104.25.
of Hands, Mare magnum, and spatiosum manibus, i. The Sea has wide and
spacious Hands; Sometimes of Eyes and Feet, Mare vidit and fugit, i. the sea
saw it and fled; Psalm. 114.3.
Sometimes of Tongue, Desolabit Dominus linguam maris, i. the Lord shall
destroy the tongue of the sea. Esaias. 11..15. Job. 7.12.
And last of all, Job paints it forth like a most fierce beast shut up in an
iron grate, or strong prison; Number quid mare ego sum quia circumdedisti me in
isto carcere? i. Am I a sea that thou should keep me continually in hold?

From hence follows another proportion or conueniencie, which is a very
clear one. For as the way of the Sea is full of dangers, of Pirates, of
Shelfes, and of Rocks; and as it is not possible, that man's wisdom and
experience can prevail against them; even so is it with the world. The way by
Land is of less difficulty: Every man knows how to make his necessary
provision; as a horse, a man, a cloake-bagge, and a good purse. And suppose
some of these should fail us, we may furnish our selves afresh at the first
good place we come at. And if we pass over mountains, where there is
suspicion of thieves, we may perceive the peril and prevent it; but for those
that go by Sea, the like provision and prevention cannot be made, especially
if fortune do not favor us. Est via, qui videter homini recta nouissima autem
eius ducunt ad mortem, i. There is a way which seems right to a man, Prou. 16.
but the end of it leads to death. A ship shall go sailing with the wind in
the Poope of it, with a great deal of content and delight, and on the sudden
it shall be split in pieces, and no memorial remain thereof. The like
success befalls men in this world, every step that they tread. And
therefore Saint Austen says, That it is as great a miracle for a man to walk
upon the waves of the World without sinking, as it was for Saint Peter to walk
upon the waves of the Sea. Many other conueniencies there are, which I omit to
mention; this World being in conclusion a Sea, our life a sailing therein, and
every particular man a ship. Sicut naues poma portantes, etc. and therefore
subject to storms. Job. 1^*


Et nauis erat in medio maris. And the Ship was in the midst of the Sea.
This Ship was a figure of the Church, which God permits to be persecuted,
For his own sake; For the Churches; and For those that look thereupon.


For his own sake; For should it have no enemies to persecute it, and hotly to
assail her, Gods omnipotency would not show it is glorious splendour to the
world. The force of fire is seen when the water cannot quench it; of light,
when darkness cannot obscure it; of sweet odours, when the filthiest sents
cannot overcome their fragrancie; of power, when the whole strength of the
world, nay the Devil and Hell it self cannot prevail against it. And this
succeeds unto God in the persecution of his Church: for the enemies thereof
have been maimed and put to flight, Gods Arm remaining still strong and sound.
Pharaoh came bravely on with his Chariots and Horsemen; boasting as he went,
Persequor, and comprehendam illos, euaginabo gladium meum, interficiet eos
manus mea, I will pursue them, and overtake them, I will vnsheath my Sword, and
my hand shall slay them: But God beckned upon the waves, and they swallowed up
alive both him and all his Host. And the Text says, That the Hebrews saw the
powerful hand of God charging upon them, having planted there in that sea the
ensign of his power. Tertullian says of Job, That God made him a triumphant
Chariot of the spoils of Hell, and that he dragged thereat along in the dirt,
his enemies ensigns, to the greater dishonor of the Devil. The like does God
do in the Church, with Jews, Moors, and Heretics, himself remaining still
firm against all their furious violences, like a rock in the midst of the sea.
Some rocks are to be seen even where the Seas are deepest; which it seems
God placed there of purpose, The Church why likened to a Rock.
in scorn and contempt of that ouerswelling pride and furious raging of the
sea: For though they have been lashed and beaten by them from the beginning of
the world to this present day, they could never move, much less remove them,
because they have sure rooting in the bottom of the Sea. And this is a Type of
the Church, which God has placed in the midst of this Sea of the World, for
to make a mock of as many as are her enemies.

But some one will say, How can the Church be called a Rock, being figured
here by this little Ship, which the waves thus toss up and down in the air? I
answer, That Ezechiel in his twenty seventh Chapter, speaks of Tyrus in the
metaphor of an Isle, My beauty is perfect, and my abode is in the midst of the
Sea. And presently changing that metaphor, he terms it a Galley; which is all
one, as if he should have said, That with Gods help a Galley may be an Isle,
and without God an Isle may be a Galley. So likewise the Church, albeit it be a
Ship in the midst of the tempestuous waves of the Sea, yet by the assistance
of his holy Spirit it may be a perdurable Rock. And (as Saint Austen has
noted it) the Executioners have often wanted strength and inventions to
torment, but there never wanted courage in the Martyrs for to suffer, by the
divine power and favor of God. Howsoever therefore the waves shall beat
against this Bark, they may want force to ouerturne her, but she will never
want sides to make resistance.

For the Churches sake; because it makes for her good, The greatest persecution
of the Church, is to want persecution.
and for her greater increase. This is expressed in that Parable, Nisi granum
frumenti, Except a grain of Corn, etc. And in that other, Ego sum vitis vera,
and vos palmites, I am the true Vine, ye are the Branches. The happiness of
Corn consists in this, in that it is sown, and in that it dies; That of the
Vine, in that it is pruned, and has it is boughs and branches cut off: Many
wild Trees of unsavory Fruits, by the art of graffing are reduced to a
pleasant relish. Of Saffron Pliny says, That the more it is trodden on, the
better it springs: The grain of Mustard, the more it is bruised and broken,
the greater strength it discovers: And the Church, the more it is persecuted,
the more it prospers. And as Mariners are wont to say, that at sea the worst
storm is a calm; so we may say of the Church, that it is greatest persecution
is to have no persecution at all. Esaias sets it down for a threatening, That God
will leave off to prune and dress his Vine any more, Dimittam eam, Leo. papa.
ser. 1. de pet. and Paul. Basil. Esaias. 5. Cries. Psalm. 71.
and non putabitur, nec fodietur. For when a Vine is pruned, for one branch it
puts forth ten: And the Church, by one Martyr being cut off, gives a
plentiful increase of two hundred converted Christians. Pope Leo, Saint Basil,
and Saint Chrysostom prosecute this Doctrine more at large, in the unfolding
of the aforesaid Parables.

Lastly, for their sakes that look thereupon, and behold at full the
persecutions of the Church. For as to the righteous, the prosperity of the
sinner is a stumbling block of offense; Hic labor est ante me: So to the
sinner, the persecution of the just causes great scandal. Both these are
undoubted truths, both hard to be understood, but harder far to be
persuaded. But God afflicts with persecutions the thing which he most loves,
which is his Church; and prospers those her enemies, which hate her, to the
end, that men might thereby learn and understand, that neither those evils
which the Church suffers, are true evils; nor those blessings which the other
enjoy, true blessings. And this is proved out of Saint Augustine in his Book
De Ciuit. Dei; Aug. lib. 1. de Ciuit. cap. 8. Seneca lib. quare bonis viris.
cap. 5.
and out of Seneca in that his Book, Quare bonis viris. So that the wicked,
though that he enjoy a great deal of prosperity, we are not to esteem it
as a blessing; nor for that the righteous suffer much adversity, are we to
account it a curse unto them: But ought rather to apprehend, that persecution
is for their good, in regard that our Savior Christ gives it us as a reward
for our great service. Et omnis qui reliquerit patrem, matrem, etc. centuplum
accipiet cum persecutionibus, i. And every one that shall have left father or
mother etc. Shall receive a hundredth fold, with Persecutions. Saint Mark, and
Saint Cyprian, both affirm, that persecution puts us in a kind of
possession of that glory which we hope for hereafter, at least it gives us an
assurance thereof. And this is made good by this comparison. The Good, the
Scripture styles by the name of Wheat; and the Wicked are termed Chafe. Now,
it is the Fan of persecution, that does sever the Wheat from the Chafe.

Vidit eos laborantes in remigando.
He saw them toyled in rowing. There are two things which steal away Gods
eyes, Gods Eyes how to be drawn unto us.
and filch them (if I may use that phrase) from forth his head. The one is, an
humble and prompt obedience: The other, the trouble and torment which we suffer
for his sake. Touching the first, notable is that place of Abraham, whose
obedience did so draw Gods eyes unto him, that that place where he was resolved
to perform the Sacrifice, remained with this name, Dominus videbit, The Lord
will see. Touching the second, There is not any hunger nor humane misery,
whereon Gods mercy has not his eye fixed, nay, I may boldly say, fast nailed
thereunto. To Moses God spoke out of a Bush; O thou great God of heaven and
earth, a bush is no fitting chair for thy glory, or thy Majesty; Who made
thee thus to alter thy Throne? Vidi afflictionem Populi mei in Aegypto, I have
seen the affliction of my People in Egypt. Another Translation has it,
Videndo vidi, In se^ing I have seen; and the repetition goes on in this
descant, Qui tangit vos, tangit pupillam oculi mei, He touches the apple of
Gods eye, that touches the Just. And in another place, Et clamorem eius
audiui, And I have heard his cry: For our misery touches not only Gods eye,
but his ear also. Tertullian reports in his Apologetico, That the Gentiles
did murmr against the Christians, that they would not recommend the safety
and welfare of their kings to those their Gods, Jupiter and Mercury. But
Nazianzen answers thereunto, That they did not allow of this their council,
to recommend their safety unto Gods whose hands and feet were of Iead; but
unto that God who swiftly flies to heal them of their infirmities, and carries
health in his wings, Et sanitas in pennis eius.

Vidit eos laborantes in remigando, He saw them laboring at the Oar. In
another Tempest, no less fearful than the former, Saint Luke ^aith, That our
Savior Christ fell asleep, leaning his head on one of the boords of the Ship,
in stead of a pillow. And here Saint Matthew says, That he beheld how his
Disciples wrestled with the waves, seeking to overcome their rage and their
fury. The one Tempest God permitted, the other he sends. Of Pharaoh it is
said by the Prophet, Ego excitaui eum, I raised him up to be the instrument for
the afflicting of my People, that I might afterward grind him to powder. And
by Esayas he says, That with his whistle he called the Flies from beyond the
Seas. In all sorts of Tempests therefore the Just may think themselves safe,
because God is continually at hand to help them: According to that of David,
Cum ipso sum in tribulatione, I am with thee in tribulation; And of Esaias, Esaias.
43.
When thou passest through the waters I will be with thee, and when thou
walk in the fire thou shall not be burnt. And of Ezechiell; Ero sicut
Tunica prope corpus ipsorum, i. I will be as a coat about their body. Saint
Gregory says, That God appeared unto Job, De turbine, i. Out of the
whirlewind. For having permitted a whirle-winde of troubles to come upon him,
it would not have suited so well that he should have spoke unto him from that
throne of Glory, whence he spoke unto him when he was in his perfect health
and prosperity. The three children being in the Fiery Furnace, the Son of
God appeared amidst those flames, and the tyrant saw one, Sap. 10.
Similem filio Dei, i. Like the son of God. Of Joseph it is said,
Descenditque cum illo in foueam, and in vinculis non derelinquit eum, i. He
wont down with him into the pit, and left him not in his bonds. God
accompanied him in his yrons and his gives. Psalm. 28.
Dominus diluuium inhabitare facit. Saint Jerome translates it, Dominus
diluuium inhabitans. When God sent the Flood, he put himself also in the
midst of the waters. 1. Reg. 27.
Redemisti tibi ex Aegipto gentem, and Deum eius, i. Thou have redeemed a
nation to thy self, even out of Aegipt, and withal, their God. Upon which
place Vatablus has noted, That God did redeem himself, being captiuated as
well as his people. And he could not like of his own liberty, as long as he
saw that they were kept in slavery. In Aegiptum descendit populus meu^, Esaias
52.
and Asur ^ine causa calumniatus est eum; and nunc quid mihi est hic? My people
is gone down into Aegipt; Assure has afflicted them without a cause; and now
what do I here? My people captive, and I at liberty? Quid mihi est hic? My
people trodden under feet, and I enjoy the smoke of incence and sacrifice? Quid
mihi est hic, i. What do I here?

Erat enim ventus contrarius.
For the Wind was aganst them. All the misfortunes of navigations, the
Evangelist reduces to the Wind. And following the Metaphore, That this World
is a Sea, and our life a sailing therein; all that does hinder the prosperity
and happiness thereof, is Wind. Whilst the use of reason stood fair and
clear with man, he put the prow of his desires into the Haven of Salvation:
for all do naturally desire an estate that is full of happiness, and free
from evil; and that which makes their voyage unhappy and unfortunate, is
Wind. Saint John says, That all things in this world, are either pleasures,
covetousness, or honors: And if we shall sum up all the pleasures, riches,
and honors, that have been enjoyed in the world even to this very hour, we
shall find that they are all but Wind. Solomon made an Annatomie of all humane
felicity, and in conclusion shows it is all but vanity, Vanitas vanitatum,
and omnia vanitas. Zachary saw a figure of four Empires, the famousest that
ever were in the world; the Assirians, Persians, Medes, and Graecians; and
asking of the Angel, Qui sunt isti, Domine mi? He told him, isti sunt quatuor
Venti, Those are the four Winds. The most prosperous Scepters, and the most
dreadful Crowns are no better than air: And it were well if they were no
worse, and did not cross that good fortune which we desire in the navigations
of this our life; Hoc opus, hic labor.

Circa quartam vigiliam noctis.
Abac^^. 2.
About the fourth watch. What, so late? Gods help come it when it will come,
comes never too late; Veniens, veniet, and non tardabit. And God would that
this truth should remain so notorious and manifest to the world, that he does
not only call it a Vision, ex plana visum, which carries it is evidence along
with it; but he commands the Prophet to write it down with strange
circumstances. The first is very clear, and has not the least shadow of
darkness in it. The second circumstance, that this saying should be graven
Upon Box, for so the Septuagint read it; which kind of wood (according unto
Esaias) conserueth what is written therein to the worlds end. The third, That it
should be written in capital letters which may be read afar off. The
fourth, The assurance and certainty thereof, implied in the repetition,
Veniens, veniet, and non tardabit, Coming, he will come, vide cap. de
reser^cum sero esset.
and will not tarry. Saint Bernard argues hereupon, Quomodo non tardabit, si
moram fecerit? How can he but linger, if he use delay? I answer, Gods help may
happily come too late, in regard of our desire, but can never come too late in
regard of our necessity. And this his slownesse in succouring us, may seem
painful, if we shall measure it according to the impatiencie of our desire;
but profitable unto us, if we will but think upon the reward which is laid up
for those that suffer hoping.

Romans 5.
Saint Paul in the chain which he recommendeth to the Romans, whose links are
Tribulation, Patience, Trial, Hope, Charity (which Saint Austen does so much
celebrate in his book De Doct. Christiana) says, Gloriamur in
tribulationibus, scientes quoniam tribulatio patientiam operatur; patientia,
probationem; probatio, vero spem, We rejoice in tribulation; knowing that
tribulation brings forth patience; patience, experience; and experience,
hope. We draw glory out of our tribulations; for he that is in tribulation,
does not only suffer, but in suffering works; which working causes in us an
eternal weight of glory. Cor. 17. The excellency of Patience
From Patience arises another link, which is Probation, or Trial; whither it
be for that the Patient does prove how much he is able to suffer, being
favored by Heaven, and helped from above; or whither it be, that he should be
proved as was Job, to see whither he would stick surely to his tackling. For
Patience is a more assured testimony of our trial, than Fasting, Prayer,
Alms, or the like: for these are often subject unto falsehood. Again, from
this Trial, arises Hope; for he that is wonderful patient, cannot but have
a wonderful good Hope. This was it that made God say to Abraham, Nunc cognoui
quod timeas Deum, Now I know that thou fear God. And S. Paul says of
himself, That he did hope beyond hope; that is, that he did even then still
hope, when all reason of hope did fail him. Besides, God is wont to permit
that our tribulation should be great, to the end that our Patience might be
made great, our Trial great, and our Hope great: and then does he come in and
help us, when he has made sufficient proof of our faith: to the trial
whereof God puts us a thousand manner of ways. The People of Israel passed
through the bed of Jordan, those waters sliding gently along toward the dead
sea, and those other drouen back, so that they passed through it as through
the dry land. And yet this might perhaps seem unto God but a slender trial
of their Faith; First, Because a great number joining in company together,
they take more courage unto them in the undergoing of any danger; for common
calamities are evermore the less felt. Secondly, In regard of the Arkes being
there, whereof those waters might seem to be afraid, and so fly back for
fear, Iordanis conuersus est retrorsum. Thirdly, For that there were so many
innocent little children amongst them, whom God (they might suppose) would not
suffer to be drowned, considering they had not yet offended him, as not
knowing good from evil. And therefore he commanded that twelve of them, upon
whom the lots should fall, should go back and take out twelve great stones
out of the bed of Jordan, to make a Pyramid or Alter to remain as a memorial
of that miracle: whereunto they all of them readily offered themselves with a
great deal of alacrity; and this was a great trial of their Faith: But it
would have been greater, if God had commanded them to set their backs and
shoulders against the waves, keeping them there, and deferring his succor till
the thread of their hope were broken in twain, and they ready to perish.

This deferring is usually the vigill of Gods greater mercies. Greg. hom. ^0.
in Euang.
Saint Gregory declares to this purpose that place of Esaias, Ad punctum in
modico dereliquisse, and in miserationibus magnis congregaui te, He deferred
his help to the last push, but the greater the delay was, the greater was his
mercy; As we see, Gods deferring of his Justice is oftentimes the occasion of
the seuerer punishment. Christ. hom. 55. in Math.
Saint Chrysostom says, That Christ's so long deferring to alay this storm,
was to teach us, that we are not at the first flaw of a Tempest, to call for
present fair weather; but rather to cry out with David, Non me derelinquas
vsquequaque, Let not thy not relieuing of me be eternal, Forsake me not o
Lord for ever; but let thy succor come when it shall seem best unto thee: not
my, but thy will be done.

God likewise refuses sometimes to afford his help, He delights to see his
children wrestling with affliction.

Seneca lib. quare viris cap. 2.


out of the pleasure that he takes to see the Righteous row against the
stream, and to tugge and wrestle with all the might they can, against the
troubles and afflictions of this world. Seneca touching (though as a Heathen)
upon this strain, says, That there is not in all the earth a spectacle more
worthy Gods beholding, than to see a stout man wrestling against adverse
fortune. Saint Chrysostom dwelles much upon the great care which God took in
notifying to the Devil, that he should not touch Job in his life; Veruntamen
animam illius serua, But yet preserve his life. Not that Job should have
received any hurt by the loss of his life, but because God would not loose the
pleasure of seeing this stout combat fought out betwixt him and his enemy. Si
de medio tuleris Theatrum non plaudet amplius. And as your Heathen Emperors
took great delight in seeing a Christian enter the Listes with a wild Beast;
so the King of Heaven takes much pleasure in seeing one of his Saints maintain
fight against those fierce Beasts of Hell.

Et putauerunt Phantasma esse.
And they took him for an apparition. Here is one fear upon another, and
therefore it was not much they should cry out. The wind and the waves had
sorely affrighted them, and that which was to be the remedy of their danger,
made them to apphrehend a new danger, fearing now more their succor than their
hurt: being herein like unto many, who fear their good, but not their evil;
the Glutton does not fear drunkenness, Men fear not the sin, but the
suffering for sin.
and that fullness which lessens his health, and puts his life in danger; but
fears those syrrops and purgations which he is to take for his recovery. The
bad Christian fears not the fault he has committed, which is the greatest
evil; but fears to do penance for the same, which is for his greatest
good. The Atheist fears not death, nor the grave, but says, We have made a
covenant with Death and Hell; yet he fears poverty and hunger, and the enemy
that threatens him; but not God, who can swallow him up quick in the flames of
Hell fire: He fears an earthly Judge that may put him to torment; but not that
Judge of Heaven, that can condemn to endless pains which are never to have
end.

THE FIFTH SERMON, UPON THE FIRST SUNDAY IN LENT; TOUCHING OUR SAVIOVRS
TEMPTATION.
MAT. 4. LVC. 4. MARC. 1. Ductus est Jesus ab Spiritu in Desertum.

And Jesus was led by the Spirit into the Wilderness.


The description of Christ's Combat with the Devil.
THis famous Combat betwixt two of the stoutest and valiantest Captains that
ever tryde their valor in a single Duel, will very well deserve the looking on,
and require our diligent attention, taking up as well our eyes as our ears.
This battle then that is here described by the Evangelist, is the notablest
and the strangest that ever was in former, or ever shall be seen in future
Ages. The Combattants are two great Princes, whose power all the world
acknowledges, and whose wisdom admits no comparison; the one, the Prince of
Light; the other, the Prince of Darkness: The field wherein they fought, was
a Wilderness, where they had nothing to sustain themselves withal but
stones: Their Weapons, Wit, and Words; the faculties of the Understanding, and
the use of the Tongue. The Devils end was, to repair a double loss, or
twofold overthrow at our Savior Christ's hands: The one, That he could never
catch him in any the least fault, nor find him tripping in any one action that
ever he did. And this was it that did mad him to the heart, and mightily
incense his rage, that amongst all mankind, there never yet being any, though
never so famous, never so just, that had escaped his clutches without receiving
some foil or other; as Adam, Noah, Abraham, David, and the like good and holy
men: that now a man, in the eye of the World of no better than a mean and
ordinary rank, (for such a one was our Savior held to be) should escape his
fingers, and should show himself to be the only Phoenix of the world. The
other, that he did not yet perfectly know by that evidence of his humane
nature, and by those great suspicions which he might have of his divine
essence, by calling to mind those menaces that were threatened against him in
Paradise, I will put enmity betwixt the woman and thee, betwixt thy seed and
her seed; he shall bruise thy head, etc. And he began to think with himself,
What will become of me if this be the Bug-beare foretold by the Prophets?
Questionless if this be the man, I shall hardly escape a broken pate.

Our Saviors end was not any desire of his own proper worth and merit, nor
any vainglory to show his valor; for it could be no great glory to boast
of, Our Sauiors main end in fighting with the Devil, was to sanctify our
temptations.
nor no such wonderful conquest, that the Son and Heir apparent of Heaven
should subdue the Devil. But his end was thereby to sanctify our temptations,
as he had done all the rest of our miseries, by taking them upon himself,
because they should recover a new being, and a new honor: And that those
temptations which heretofore did serve as steep Rocks to throw us down into
Hell, should serve as Ladders to bring us to Heaven. Theodores says, That as
Physicians make Treacle out of Serpents* so our Savior Christ drew an Antidote
and wholesome Medicine from the Devil and his deceits and subtleties: so that
now, Temptation has lost his name and strength, and of Gally-slaues we are
made Freemen by Jesus Christ.

Secondly, Our Savior Christ did pretend by this fight, To free the world from
fear.

A description of the Devil.


to rid the world of that great fear wherein it lived. Whereby we may suppose
the fearful power of the Devil throughout the face of the whole earth. Job in
his 41. Chap. makes a dreadful description of the Devil, in the metaphor of
a Whale, or (as some would have it) of a Sea Dragon; a Fish of that exceeding
greatness, that when he discouers himself in the waters, he seems to be
some little Island, or some pretty big Hill; Corpus eius, scuta fusilia; his
body is covered over with such strong scales, as if they were bars of
Brass, and ribs of Steel, and so close locked and ioynted together, that the
subtillest air cannot get in between the knitting of the joints; Stornutatio
eius, splendour ignis, The breath of his nostrills is like unto lightning; his
eyes as flashes of fire; from his mouth come forth flames, as out of a Furnace;
from his nose issues a thick smoke; his breath kindles coals, and sets them
on fire; there are no weapons either offensive or defensive, that can withstand
his force; Reputa^it quasi palus, ferrum and as quasi lignum putridum, Iron to
him is as strawes, and swords of steel as rotten sticks. A man of arms may
threaten him with a Mace of Iron; a Gunner shoot his Bullets at him; an Archer,
his Arrows; a Slinger, his Stones; and the Pikeman, his Lance; all which he
so little cares for, that he makes but a jest of it. In a word, when he comes
to make an end of this large description which he makes of the Devil, he
concludes that chapter with this Epiphonema, Non est potest^s quae comparetur
ei, The power of the world is not able to compare with him. Saint Gregory upon
the fourth Chapter of Job notes, That the Scripture gives the Devil three kind
of names or attributes; Behemoth, or Elephant; Leuiathan, which some will have
to be the Whale; and Auis Rapinae, a Bird of Rapine, that lives only upon
prey; Nunquid illudes ei, quasi aui? In which three names he did comprehend
the power of all the Beasts of the field, of all the Fishes of the sea, and of
all the Birds of the air. The power of these three sorts of creatures extends
it self to these three elements, the Water, the Earth, and the Air: and they
being all deposited in the Devil, whose habitation is the Fire, he comes to
have dominion over all the elements. In other places of the Scripture he is
called a Dragon, a Leopard, a Bear, a Lion: but these comparisons come short
of the other. And therefore some Doctors expounding this word Behemoth, say,
That it signifies Multitudinem Bestiarum, a multitude of Beasts; because it
includes in it the force and poison of all other sorts of Beasts whatsoever.
Saint Paul calls him a Prince of power, the Ruler and Governor of this world:
For as the state and power of a Prince is far beyond that of his Subjects and
Vassals; so is the Devil in all other things Aduersus Principes and Potestates,
and Mundi rectores, Against the Princes and Powers, and Governors of the earth.
The Greek word is Cosmocratoras, a word of that fullness, that diverse Fathers
have diversely interpreted it: Tertullian, The possessions of the world; Hilarie
and Saint Hierome, The Mighty of the world, The Lords of the world. Esaias calls
him a Bar or a Bol^, because the strength of a Prison consists in good Bars
and Bolts, and strong Locks: Visitauit Dominus super serpentem vectem, The
Lord will visit that creeping Bar. Theodocion translates it Robustum, The
strong Bar: Simmachus, Vectem concludentem, sieve claudentem, The enclosing
Bar, or the Bar that shuts up; For he does shut up many in his prison,
and keeps them in miserable servitude. Saint John in his Apocalypse bewaileth
the Earth and the Sea, because the Devil comes forth enraged fiercely against
them; showing great sorrow, that God had given them such small means to be
revenged of him, being a Beast so powerful, so cruel, so tyrannous, and so
bent against them, that man was turned coward, and become fearful. But since
our Savior Christ overcame him, and has bound him fast in fetters and chains
of iron, he bids us be of good courage, and that we should stand no more in
fear of him; Fear not (says our Savior) I have overcome the World.

Many of Gods People when they entered first into the sea showed themselves
fearful and cowardly; but after that the powerful hand of God had
overwhelmed the Egyptians, and had thrown them up dead on the other side of the
sea, the weakest women among them, and those men that were most faint hearted,
with songs of joy, and with Timbrels, did set forth the glory of this
victory, and did make a mock of the power of Pharaoh; They praised the hand
of the Vanquisher, who opened the mouths of the dumb, and made the tongues of
Infants eloquent. So likewise did the world live cowed before, by the power of
Satan; but after that the powerful hand of Christ our Savior, left in the
Wilderness the print of that wound which he had given him on the head, the
meanest and most cowardly Christian may now make a jest both of him and Hell.
One of the Sages of Greece said, That better was an Army of Sheep that had a
Lion to their captain, than an Army of Lions that had a Sheep to their
Commander. And therefore albeit we are but weak and silly Sheep, yet have
we a Lion to our Captain, who has overcome our enemies, The Lion of the Tribe
of Judah has overcome. When Ioshua^ overcame th^se five Kings of the Ammorites
near unto Gibeon, he would have the Princes of the People to put their feet
upon their necks; that seeming unto him to be a powerful means to put them
in heart, and to serve to encourage the rest of his soldiers not to fear them,
for that God should bring down their enemies, and put them under their feet.
This valiant Captain did also subdue Zeba and Salmana, and commanded his
son, that he should vnsheath his sword and run them through; The maine
thing in a General, is to f^ee his soldiers from fear.
which he did of purpose to make him gather courage unto him, and to cast off
all fear. Nor can there greater worth be desired in a Captain, than to know
how to free his soldiers from fear. When David had smote off Goliath his head,
those of Israel were as bold as Lions, and the Philistines were as fearful as
Hares. In the time ^f Solomon, the Scripture says, That Israel did live in
that peace, and so deuoyd of fear, as no men more, Every one under his own
Vine, and under his own Fig tree; 3. Reg. 4.
not that all of them had their Vines and Figge-trees, but because they might
sleep quietly and securely (as the Poets feign of Tytirus and Melibaeus)
under the shade of the broad spredding Beech, singing this Song of joy, Deus
nobis haec otia fecit. All which was a figure of the peace and ^ecuritie which
the Church was to enjoy by the conquest of this our Captain: (for by war we
come to the enjoying of peace) and as by his death he did conquer our death; so
likewise (says Saint Gregory) it was fit, that the conquering of his
temptation should be the subduing of ours. The Prophet treating how cowardly
the Devil would remain after this victory, says, Thou have made him food
for the People of Aethiopia. The Negro's of Zapa and Mandinga have piece-meale
devoured him, and eaten him up, as it were by morcells. For the world has not
a more fearful and cowardly Nation than that of the Negro's, The Negro's of
all nations the most cowardly, and why.
either by reason of their small store of blood, or for that, that little they
have is very cold, and therefore has the less actiuenesse in it. The Romans
would never consent that any Negro should be listed for a soldier. The
unknown Author understands by the Aethyopians, those Crows, which of all
other Fowls that feed upon flesh, are the most fearful: which is to be
seen in this, that delighting so much as they do, to pick out the eyes of
other creatures, they dare not adventure to pluck them out until they be
dead. Of a coward the Spanish Proverb says, A Moro muerto gran Lancada, Give
a dead Moore a great blow with a Lance: Which is spoken by way of reproach of
notorious cowards, when they will offer to run a man through when he is dead
already. In Rome there was great opposition betwixt two famous Orators, Tully
and Metellus; the one was stout and full of courage, and the other cowardly and
timorous: Now when Metellus Master dyed, he set over his Tombe-stone a Crow;
Whereat Tully jeasting, said, That he now had paid his Master at his death,
for that which he had taught him in his life. And therefore the Prophet
saying, That the Devil should be the food of the Negro's, or of Crows; was to
signify thereby, that he was not able to put fear into the fearefullest and
most cowardly persons.

Thirdly, Our Savior Christ did pretend in this action of his, to give us a
great testimony of his love. All his actions proclaim love; To exemplify his
own love.
but this of his being tempted, has one circumstance of love, that I know not
well what can be more: For having given us both Heaven and earth, and all that
therein is, and which is more, his only begotten Son, with whom he gave us
all that good which we could wish or have; Quomodo cum illo omnia non nobis
donauit? yet did he always reserve his honor unto himself; I am the Lord,
and I will not give my glory to another. And as Pharaoh conferred on Joseph
all his authority and power, but not his Crown and Scepter, In this thing
only I will be before thee: So God being most liberal unto us, in bestowing
all his riches and graces upon us; yet was he ever covetous of his honor. But
by yielding that the Devil should tempt him, it seems that he did put it in
hazard, at least to it is trial: For, to be tempted, is to be incited and
provoked to sin, whose malice and wickedness has that opposition and
emnitie with God, which if our Savior (as it was impossible) should have
consented unto, he should have lost the name of the eternal Son of God, and
have caused him to become his enemy for ever.

Besides, there is no stroke that strikes so home to a Noble breast, as to be
overcome by his enemy. Saul, that he might not die by the hands of a
Philistine, spoke to his Sword Bearer to kill him: And his Sword Bearer not
daring to kill him, he killed himself. Cato Vticensis did the like, that he
might not become a Slave to Caesar, as Plutarch reports it. The like did
Cleopatra, being but a woman. What presumption then is it, that a Creature
which had been cast out of Heaven, for a base, in famous, and disloyal
Traitor, should pretend to conquer the Son of Heaven?

Again, To the Just (says Saint Chrysostom) there is but one Good, and one
Evil necessary: The Good, is God; the Evil, the offending of God. Job did
not show so much sorrow for the loss of his children, his houses, his flocks,
and his substance, as he did when his wife said unto him, Curse God and die;
but that was as a dagger to his heart. Shall I be angry and offended with my
God? No, though he should kill me, yet will I love him: For I have no other
Good but my God, he is all my hope, and all my comfort. What then might our
Savior think of the Devil? How much should it grieve him to hear him say,
Fall down and worship me.

Lastly, He was willing to be tempted, for that temptation being a thing that
we must all of us necessarily endure, That we may have an example to follow.
no, none of the best of us all can avoid, we may know how to behave our selves
therein, by following the example of this our noble Captain; Vt cuius munimur
auxilio, erudiamur exemplo, as Pope Leo has it. Vt mediator esset, non solum
per auditorium, verum etiam per exemplum, as Saint Austen has it. Our life is
a daily warrefare, and a continual temptation, (not only profitable, but
necessary:) and to those worldlings that live (to their seeming) in peace,
Wisdom says, Not knowing War, they call so many evils, Peace: These are
they that suffer a more bloody and desperate war than any other. Job says,
Man's life is but a Warrefare upon earth. Saint Gregory calls it the Guard of
our virtues; For then are we inwardly best preserved, when outwardly we are by
Gods dispensation tollerably tempted. And amongst many other reasons which are
brought for the proof hereof, there is one very powerful; to wit, That we
shall have therein the especial favor and protection of our good God; so that
he giving us strength to endure, we may account it a great happiness unto us.

Custodit Domin^ animas Sanctoru^ suoru^, God has an exceeding great care of
the souls of his Saints; Psalm. 96.
And having God on our side, who can hurt us? Nonne tu vallasti eum per
circuitum? Job 1.
Et vniuersam substantiam eius? The Devil said unto God, talking with him
about Job, Lord, thou do not only guard his soul, but his life, h^^ honor,
and his goods, as if thou had put him into a strong place of defense, under
lock and key. Gods protection a safeguard.
Saint Gregory says, That God so gardeth the house of the Righteous, that he
will not leave so much as a chinke open for the Devil to enter thereinto: And
therefore Solomon styles it an inexpugnable Tower. When the Sodomites assaulted
Lots house, the Angels were not contented with shutting of the door, but did
strike the assailants with blindness. When Noah entered into the Arc, God shut
the port, and carried away the key with him. Clausit eum Dominus de foris. The
seventy Interpreters make this construction of it, that he did so, that
neither the waters nor the winds might annoy it. In dilun^o aquarum multarum,
ad eum non approximabunt. For God had kalked up the ports, and every little
chinck or creuise belonging thereunto. Saint Bernard, expounding those words of
the ninety one Psalm ( Dicet Domino, susceptor meus es tu, and refugium meum,
Deus meus, sperabo in eum., i. I will say unto the Lord, Thou art my etc.)
asks the question, Why God, being the God of all, David in that place calls
him twice his God? I answer, That he is the God of all, in regard of his
Creation and Redemption, and other his general benefits toward man; God in a
particular manner the God of the faithful.
but in Temptation, he is the God of every individual person, as if he did
not busy himself, nor think upon any other thing, than the favoring of the
Just, and the assisting of him upon those occasions. Saint Gregory, declaring
those words of Christ, Not a hair of your head shall perish, says, That a
hair does not pain us when it is cut away from us, but the cutting of the
flesh does: If that then shall be kept from perishing, by Gods protection and
providence over us, which does not pain us; how much more will he take heed,
that that shall not perish, which may put us to pain?

Last of all, There is not any thing so notorious, and so approved, as the
general good that is gotten by Temptation. From thence grow those brave
Spirits, those valiant Soldiers, and those courageous Captains, which wage
war against the Devil and Hell, keeping him out at the staffes end, and
putting him to the worst. As on the contrary, from Idleness come Cowards,
whiteliuerd Soldiers, Faint-hearted, Soule-lesse, and Lazy people. As long as
there were any frontyre-townes in Spain, for the enemies to make their
inrodes, it had many brave and famous Soldiers, as the Cides, and the
Bernardos. But now there are none but Carpet-Knights, all men of bombast, Why
God in his providence ordained a continual war betwixt Man and the Devil.
made of nothing but softness and delicacie, their Armor is turned into gay
clothes; and their stiff Lances, into starcht bottle bands and beards. They
all did then smell of Gunpoulder, but now stincke of Amber, Siuet, and other
Indian Gummes. Athanasius asks the question, Why the providence of God did
ordain this continual war between the Devils and Men? And the answer is,
That thereby, the valor of Gods Soldiers might be known. Saint Ambros
says, That the Devil works his own destruction by his daily tempting of
Men, for by seeking to weaken their Bodies, he strengthens their Souls. And
that Job, when he sat upon the dung-hil with his pot-sheard in his hand to
scrape off his scabbes, made all Hell afraid, and to stand amassed at his
patience.

Ductus est Jesus a Spiritu in desertum vt tentaretur.
He was led by the Spirit into the Desert, that he might be tempted. The
holy Ghost was a guide to all our Saviors Actions: He was Dux and Comes (as
Saint Cyprian says) or as Esaias has it, Spiritus sanctus, ductor eius fuit, i.
The holy Spirit was his Leader. But in none of our Actions makes the Scripture
any mention that the holy Ghost leads us unto, but only to Temptation. And
this is expressed with words that carry a kind of force with them, though
voluntary and sweet. Expulit, agebatur, ductus est, He drew him not, he was
chased, he was led. And the mystery thereof is, that no man ought to presume,
considering his weakness, so much upon his own security and confidence,
that he should enter into Temptation, unless the holy Ghost take him up as it
were by the hair of the head, and set him into it. And the truth of this
doctrine is delivered unto us by Victor Antiochenus, Temporal victories gotten
by fighting, Sprituall by flying.
Saint John, Chrysostom, Gregorius Nissenus, Euthimius, and many other Saints
of God. In corporal war, it is greater courage to fight, than to fly; but
in the spiritual warfare, the assurance of the Victory consists in flying.
And God would rather have us to be cowards through fear, than courageous
through presumption; and therefore he first promises us his Protection, that
is, his Aid, and his Favor. Deus refugium and virtus, adiutor in
opportunitatibus, and in tribulatione, i. God is a helper in due season, and in
tribulation. He first says, he will be our refuge, and afterward our
helper. Fly therefore from danger, and have recourse unto God, and being
sheltred under the shadow of his wings, and vpheld by the strength of his Arm,
thou needst not fear any harm that Hell can do unto thee. So that God is not
bound to favor thee in those temptations which thou do thrust thy self
into, but in those that thou seek to shun. Saint Austen, aduising I know not
whom, that they should not talk and converse with Women so familiarly as they
did; they excused themselves unto him, telling him, that they only did so,
that they might meet with some Temptations wherewith to encounter. But this
glorious Doctor plainly told them; Herein, you seek nothing but dangers, and
stumbling blocks to cause you to fall. And as it is fit to take from before
the eyes of the frantic, all those images and pictures which may move passion
in him, for that they will be an occasion to make him madder than ever he was
before; so, ought a sinner to avoid all the vanities of this World. Psalm. 54.
Ecce elongaui fugiens, and mansi in solitudine. Saint Bernard has well
observed, that for his better ease and quiet, this holy King, did not only
leave his own City, but fled far from it. And he that shall fly from the
occasions of sinning, performs no small matter. But he that shall fly a
far off from them, will find it to be most for his ease. Temptation, as it
is the Devils act, is ill; and God does not will it positiuely, but
permissiuely he does; so says Saint Chrysostom: Aduising us, that we should
not seek after them, but if they chance to set upon us, then are we to stand
to it, and valiantly to fight it out. This our Savior Christ would insinuate
to his Disciples, in the garden, when he said unto them; Watch and pray that
ye enter not into Temptation. Mat. 28.
For a man to sleep, when he is in danger, and not to fly unto God for
succor, is to seek after Temptation. Saint Austen, Saint Cyprian, Saint
Gregory, and Saint Chrysostom, say, That this is the meaning of that prayer
which (...) daily make, And lead us not into Temptation. Which carries with it
a double sense. The one, Lead us not (o Lord) into Temptation, for our
weakness and frailty is exceeding great. So does Petrus Chrisologus expound
it. But because it is not a fitting language for a Soldier to desire of his
Captain, that he should not send him forth to fight; that other sense is
more plain, Suffer us not (o Lord) to fall into Temptation. Though we ought
to suffer for Christ's sake, we should not yet seek it.
But if thou will permit that we must be tempted, yet consent not (o Lord)
that we be overcome. And this sense, Saint Austen seems to approve in that
his sermon, de Monte. But in what sense soever you take it, it is very true,
that no man ought rashly to run himself into danger; And Saint Cyprian says,
That no man should presume to offer his throat to be cut by a tyrants knife,
out of a desire that he has to suffer for our Saviors sake, but that he
weight his time and tarry till they take him and put him upon the rack.
Lactantius Firmianus says, That he that unnecessarily ventures upon danger,
ought not to be styled valiant, nor indeed is, but ought rather to be
accounted rash and inconsiderate: For he that is truly valiant, is neither
rash in daring, nor imprudent in fearing, nor weak in suffering; as Saint
Austen has well noted. When the waves and winds of Temptation, blow, and beat
hard against man's breast, and seeming to ouerwhelme him, he remains firm as
a Rock, this is true fortitude indeed. In David's Tower (which is a Type of the
Church) all the weapons of war were defensive, as Shields, and Targets, and
Morrions; Mill clypei pendent ex ea. And it is further added, That these were
the Arms and weapons of the strong and valiant men.

Some will say, That there is no work of virtue which is not subject to
temptation. Who did ever begin to walk in the way of perfection, who did not
meet with a thousand fantasies? Diabolus enim semper per primordia boni
pulsat, and tentat rudimenta virtutum, says Chrysologus; it being therefore
needful that we should fly from temptation, shall it not be likewise
necessary, that we fly from perfection. Hereunto Thomas answers, That to
follow perfection is a work of the holy Ghost, who is the Author thereof; and
having him for our second, to bring us into the Field, we need not to fear.
They that in the Primitive Church did people the Deserts and solitary places,
did no doubt perceive that they should be set upon and tempted: But because
their end was not to play bo-peepe with the Devil, and to go about to mock
him, but to serve their God, and to enjoy his favor, they did not care a fig
for all his temptations. In a word, The temptations that we are to fly from,
are those which of their own nature dispose us unto sin; as unlawful games,
offensive conuersations, ill company, dancing, masking, and idle Enterludes:
for he that touches Pitch shall be defiled therewith. Saint Paul writing to
the Hebrews, Heb. 12.
gives us this good advice, Deponentes omne pondus, and circumstans nos
peccatum, Laying every weight aside, and the sin that stands about us. Where
the word Circumstans is much to be weighed: for there are many things, which
albeit they be not sin, yet are they very near unto sin. And (as Saint
Austen says) as Gods mercy does round and guard the gates about the house of
the Righteous, Circumuolitabat a long misericordia tua: So likewise the malice
of the Devil does round our souls, and spreddeth his nets round about us to
entrap us: and therefore we must continually fix our eye upon Christ Jesus our
only Savior; Aspicientes in authorem fidei: that when the Devil shall come
to tempt us, he shall find himself so stripped of all occasions to cause us to
sin, that he shall be forced to betake himself to stones, as he did
against our Savior.

Vt tentaretur a Diabolo.
That he might be tempted of the Devil. It has been treated of already, Our
Savior could not be tempted either by the World or the Flesh.
That the temptation of the World and the Flesh could not take hold on Christ,
in regard of that inward repugnance, and intrinsicall opposition which he had
with weakness and ignorance. And therefore it is commonly said, that the one
is incident to the weak; the other proper unto fools. Of Thales Milesius they
asked many questions, and to all he gave convenient and fitting answers; as,
What is the most ancient? God: What the fairest thing that he created? The
world: What the lightest? Thought: What the strongest? Necessity: What the
easiest, and yet the hardest? The knowledge of a man's self: What the
foolishest? The heart of a man that is given to the world. There being
therefore deposited in our Saviors breast all the treasures of Gods wisdom,
he could not be tempted by the World, and less by the Flesh. And I verily
believe, that though it was impossible for him to be tempted; yet if it had
been possible, he would not have consented to these temptations, to the end
that he might advise us, that when the Devil should set upon us with these
weapons, we may give our selves almost for lost. Funiculus triplex difficile
rumpitur, A threefold cord is not easily broken. That a twine thread, or a
single slender wand is soon broken; but a threefold cord, or a bundle of
sticks, had need of a strong arm to crack them in twain. The ordinary use
of fighting is, one against one: And the Proverb says, Neque Hercules contra
duos, Not Hercules against two. But when this Squadron of the world, the flesh,
and the Devil shall come against you, it shall be extreme rashness to stay
wiating for him. When Sodom was set on fire, the Angel said to Lot, Save thy
self in the Mountain: he replied, Not so my Lord, There is a city here near
to fly unto; Nunquid non modica est? Is it not a little one? o let me escape
thither, and my soul shall live: As if he should have said, I know that in
great Cities there is no hope of life and safety; for if we could in them be
safe, the Scripture would not so often inculcate in our ears, Fugite de medio
Babilonis.

Cum jeiunasset quadraginta diebus, and quadraginta noctibus, postea esurijt.
When he had fasted forty days and forty nights, he was afterward hungry.
Saint Luke says, That all this while our Savior had eaten nothing, Et nihil
manducauit in diebus illis; Cannonizing by this act the sanctitiy of Fasting.
S. Austen goes about to parallel this our Saviors fasting with that of Moses,
Our Saviors Fast how differing from that of Moses and Elias.
who fasted twice forty days; and with that of Elias, who fasted once in the
same manner; signifying thereby, that the Gospel was not contrary to the Law,
nor the Prophecies foretold by those holy Prophets. But there was this
diffrence betwixt theirs, and that of our Sauiors fasting; that Moses and Elias
were not a hunger'd neither in, nor after their fasting; but Christ postea
esurijt, he had no sooner ended his fasting, but hunger seized on his bowels:
And the reason thereof was (as Maximu^ renders it) that God to show his
greatness and his power, did inwardly sustain and feed them; but our Savior
Christ having in him on the one side the power of God, and on the other side
the nature of man, When he had fasted forty days and forty nights, he was
afterward an hungry.

From those forty days that Desert took his name, being called Quarentana.
It is a rough and rugged Mountain, some four miles from Jordan, where our
Savior was baptized, and two from Ierico. And because it was such a wild and
solitary place, Saint Mark adds, Eratque cum bestijs, in token there was no
better company there. And they that make description of the Holy Land, report,
That there are bred therein many black and fearful Vipers.

When he had fasted forty days. That voice from Jordan, This is my beloved
Son, made the Devil the eagerer to set upon him, Why our Savior would be
hungerie.
and to challenge him the Field. But Saint Chrysostom says, that this our
Saviors fasting kept him still aloof off from him, and made him so cowardly,
that he was afraid to venture upon him: and therefore did our Savior of
purpose submit himself unto hunger, that the Devil might thereby be
encouraged to come on the more boldly. Thomas notes it, That Fasting is such a
weapon, that the Devil dares not to come within the reach of it; for it makes
Men to be like unto Angels: And ever since that Lucifer fell from Heaven, he
has lived still in fear of his own shadow. Leo the Pope says, That there are
a certain sort of terrible Devils, against whom no coniurations nor
exorcismes can prevail, or do any good; only they cannot withstand the force
of Fasting. And of these our Savior Christ says, This kind of Devil is not
cast out, but by Prayer and Fasting. Saint Basil says, That our Savior Christ
would not consent, that the Flesh which he had taken of our nature upon him,
should be tempted, till he had armed it with fasting: Not that he could
incur any danger, but only to teach us how to stand upon our guard.
Athanasius says, That the Devil has suborned many in this life, to make show
of being zealous of your welfare, and that they should go about to persuade
you, that you do your self wrong in fasting, and that it makes you look
lean, and yellow, and spoils your complexion. And as in Paradise, he
persuaded our Mother, by the Serpents insinuation, to eat of the forbidden
Fruit; so now by his factors does he persuade many to feasting, but none to
fasting. Notable to this purpose, is that History of the Prophet whom God
sent to Bethel against King Jeroboam, giving him in charge, that he should
neither eat nor drink in that place. He boldly delivered his message, but
durst not receive of the King, that entertainment which he offered him; but as
he returned homeward, a false Prorphet came forth, and meeting him on the way,
said unto him, I pray ye depart not hence without seeing of your friends, and
receiving such poor cheer as we can make you. He told him that he had order
from God not to do it. Then said the false Prophet, I have had a revelation to
thecontrarie. Inconclusion the true Prophet being deceived by the false
Prophet, did eat. But in his journey home a Lion met him, and killed him. God
aduising him that had deceived him, of this sad Accident.

Whence I infer, That if it were a fault in the true Prophet to eat, by
giving too light credit to the false Prophet; the offense will be no less in
you, Motives to induce us to Fasting.
by giving too easy belief to Satan's Agent, who advises thee, that thou
should not fast.

Secondly, if he that being deceived, did eat, does deserve the punishment
of death, what shall he deserve, that did deceive him? And therefore God did
notify to the false Prophet the death of the true Prophet, to the end that the
inequality of the sin, might persuade him, what kind of punishment he did
deserve.

Thirdly, the true Prophet paid the price of his sin, with the loss of his
life; but by repentance he saved his Soul. And one assured token thereof was,
that the Lion stood by him and guarded his Body, till they had given it
burial. But the false Prophet, had much more to answer for, and a greater
reckoning to make. For if a light sin, were so severely punished; how much
more a greater? This Doctrine does much concern your cheu'rel-conscience
Physicians, who upon every light occasion give licenses for not fasting; and
those cockering Mothers, who will not suffer their daughters to fast, fearing
it would spoil their color, and mar their complexion; whereas in very
deed, nothing does make the countenance so freshand so clear as fasting does;
as those Histories of Judith, and those Babilonian children sufficiently prove,
whose fasting made their faces as fair, as if they had been so many Angels.

Forty days and forty nights. To what end (will some say) serves so much
fasting? We are not able to imitate this act of our Saviors. I answer, we
are to fast for two respects. The one, That many of our Saviors miracles ought
rather to be admired, than imitated. The other, that by this his fasting, he
laid thereby a greater obligation upon us to serve him; and that we may by
those poor fasts that we keep, show thereby, that we much both approve and
esteem that long fast of his.

He was afterward hungry. Theodoret says, That when the Devil came to know
that Christ began to grow hungry, he did then certainly assure himself of
victory. Philon discoursing on the life of Moses, That for a man to suffer
hunger and thirst, it is very great torment, and not to be endured, Grave est
Domine, sitis and fames. In the Desert God withheld the giving of Manna for
some few days from his People; and the Text says, That he did it for to prove
them. And it is a great trial of our virtue, to suffer hunger for Gods cause;
it is such a storm as is able to put a man besides his wits. When Joseph
dreamed of those seven years of dearth, specified by those seven lean Kyne,
Theodoret has noted, That he then foresaw, that the hunger of his brethren
would force them to fall down and worship him whom before they so much scorned
and abhorred. The Devil now thought himself cocke-sure, and thought to make
his entry at this little hole, and to get within him. Ecclesiasticus says,
That sin is like the dropping of rain, which by little and little sokes
through the wall, till at last both it, and the house whereon it stands, fall
suddenly to the ground. God commanded Ezechiel, That he should take a
tyle-stone, and paint thereon the holy City of Jerusalem, Ezech. 4. v. 1.
drawing round about it a great Army, Sum tibi laterem, etc. The like does
the Devil; he desires no more of thee but a Tyle-stone, or the like toy, and
out of that he will make Towers and walls, and bulwarks, and armies of
soldiers to besiege thee.

Accessit Tentator, The Tempter drew near.
This word Tempter (as Rupertus has noted it) contains in it these two
things:

The one, The Devils malice.

The other, His craft and subtletie.

Touching the first, he has no other occupation save doing of ill, and working
of mischief. The Devils trade only to do Evil.
The unknown Author expounding those words of David, They meditated deceit all
the day long, says, That these are those Devils which spend all the whole day
in plotting of mischief, and in working deceit, as if this were given them to
task, and were hired so to do. There is no day-labourer, be he never so
hard a Workman, but toward high noone does rest himself a little: but the
Devil, His diligence in following it.
Dolos, tota die meditabatur. It is said in the Revelation, That certain
Locusts came out of a bottomless Pit, and that they had a King over them,
which is the Angel of the bottomless Pit, whose name in the Hebrew Tongue is
Abaddon; in the Greek, Apollyon, and in the Latin, Exterminans. Here is like
to like, such soldiers, such a Captain. Your Locusts never do good, but hurt,
and this is the Devils office; and therefore is he termed Exterminans. David
calls him by the name of Dragon, who with his very breath does taint the air,
and kills therewith the Birds that fly to and fro therein: Exterminauit eum
aper de silua, The Boar of the Mountain destroys the Lords Vineyard; he
overthrows Monasteries; through sloth and idleness soliciting Religious men
to be negligent in coming to Church, careless in preaching, and loose in
their life. In the marriage bed he sows tares, treacheries, and lightness.
With wordly men he persuadeth, That he is no body that is not rich; and
therefore, be it by hook or by crook, by right, or by wrong, he would have
thee get to be wealthy. In a word, he is generally set upon mischief; and
therefore has he the name of Tempter. But it is to be noted, that he does
then most hurt, when he is most provoked. Petrus Chrysologus says, Est quidem
Diabolus per se nequam, fit tamen nequior, prouocatus. Like unto your Dog,
who barks out of custom, but if you throw stones at him he will bark the
more: or like unto the Bull in the Place, who being houted at, and galled,
grows thereby more mad, and more fierce: or like unto the Boar when he is
wounded with the Spear; or the Bear, who enraged, sets more furiously upon
the Hunter that pursues him, and throws his Darts at him. There was a voice
already thundered out against him from Heaven, in the river of Jordan. Our
Saviors fasting was as stones thrown against a barking Curre; his being in
the Desert was no fit place for him to work his will, considering those good
meditations wherein our Savior was then occupied: And therefore seeing
himself thus crossed, he would labor to make his advantage, and try what he
could do by the help of these other stones, as he had then a purpose to
employ them.

Touching the second, to wit, His craft and his subtletie, notable is that
place of Saint Paul, We are not to wrestle with flesh and blood, but with the
snare of the Deill: The Apostle does not say, against his force and his power,
Ephesians. 6.12.
though that be great; but against his craft and his subtletie, against his
tricks and devices, and against his plots and stratagems. Tertullian renders
it, Machinationes; Saint Hierome, Adinuentiones; and the Revelation,
Altitudines Sathanae, The depth and profunditie of his policies and deep
reaches. Saint Chrysostom expounding that phrase of Principes tenebrarum, The
Princes of darkness, says, That they are not Noctis tenebrae, sed maliciae;
the darkness of malice being greater than that of the night. Spiritualia
nequitiae, cui nomina mill, mill nocendi arts, (i.) Spiritual wickednesses,
Virgil. E^e.
which have a thousand names, and a thousand ways to hurt, as the Poet has
it. A certain Monk asked the Devil, How he was called? He told him, Mill
modis artifex vocor, I am called a cunning Workman. And therefore the
Scripture styles him Serpent, and a winding Snake, that rolls up himself as it
were in a circle. Visitabit Dominus super Serpentem tortuosum, says Esaias.
Eductus est coluber tortuosus, (says Job:) There is no Labyrinth so intricate,
and so full of doublings and turnings, as is he. It is much doubt which of the
two is most requisite in a Captain, Virtus, an Dolus? Courage, or Craft? In the
Devil, if his power be incomparable, his subtletie is much more. Some of the
ancient Saints have put it to question, Why the Devil did appear unto our
Mother Eve in the form of a Serpent? Saint Chrysostom says, Why the Devil
appeared to Eve in the form of a Serpent.
That God did give him the liberty to make free choice of any one of the
beasts of the Field, which soever he had most mind unto; and, that he made
choice of the Serpent, as of the wisest and subtillest, as the sacred Text
delivers unto us. Saint Augustine, That it was not in his election to choose
any other; to the end that the deceit and subtletie of the Serpent might stir
up a kind of jealousy and wariness in our Mother: For craft and cunning have
ever done more hurt than open force. The Wolf is then most to be feared when
he puts himself into Sheep clothing, or a Lion in a Foxes skin; (which is
the condition of your Heretics.) David speaking of those which follow the
Devils party, says, Parts Vulpium erunt. The Spouse calls them little
Foxes, Vulpes paruulas, qui demoliuntur Vineas, Alluding in them, to the
Devils.

Upon this craft and subtletie of the Devil, Saint Gregory and S. Ciril
ground this conceit, That the Devil is not like your foolish Physicians, who
with one receipt cure diverse diseases; but against every virtue, good
inclination, and motions of the Spirit, he has such sundry temptations, and
so fit for every man's humor, that if the tempted will but cast his eyes
toward them, it is a thousand to one that he is not taken with them. God asked
of Job, Answer me, By what way the heat is parted upon earth? Gregory
unfolds this question, Job 38.24. He has a Hook for every humor.
By those coals which the Devil scat^ereth abroad amongst the People of this
world; as those of covetousness, revenge, and wantonness. Every one carries
a cole in his bosom that burns and consumes him; In via hac qua amb^labam
absconderunt laqueum mihi, When I thought my self safest, walked securely, and
followed my pleasures and delights without suspicion of danger, then was the
net laid for me, etc.

But for all the Devils cunning shifts, and for all his sleights and
subtleties, he can never so wholly disguise himself, but that he will always
leave one cloven foot uncovered, whereby (which is no small comfort unto us) we
may come to know him. Job speaking of the Devil, in that metaphore of the
Leuiathan; amongst many other properties above specified, he mentions this
one, Lucebit post cum semita; He leaves behind him a white path in the sea,
like unto that froth which a great Ship causes, when she has a stiff gale of
wind in the poop of her. Whereby he signifies unto us, That the Devil which
way soever he goes, leaves some sign behind him. At the feet of Saint Michael
they paint the Devil, with the fair body of an Angel, but with the foul
tail of a Dragon. For albeit at the first sight he transfigure himself into
an Angel of Light, yet in the end he will discover himself to be the Prince
of Darkness. The Devil has been seen to preach in the habit of a
religious Friar, very devoutly, appearing as an Angel of Light, persuading
the People to repentance, and communicating great comfort unto them; but in the
end, all his Sermons have ended in melancholy passions. For the Devils
Revelations run a contrary course to Gods* for these, although they somewhat
trouble us at the beginning, yet they end evermore in peace and comfort: but
those of the Devil, though they begin in joy, yet they end in sorrow.

Si filius Dei es, dic vt lapides isti panes fiant.
If thou be the Son of God, command that these stones be made bread. The
first passage of this temptation, was the Devils seeming-pittie and compassion
of the great hunger that our Savior suffered. I was present at thy Baptism,
and at that applause which Heaven did then give thee; but now I see how weak
and wanne thou art grown through thy too much fasting, which makes me to
doubt that thou art not the Son of God. The Devil is a great prouoker to
Gluttony; The Devil a great prouoker to Gluttony, and why.
he does solicit the pampering of the flesh, he proposes the gripings of the
stomach, and the aching of the head, through too much fasting: but all at the
souls cost. Inimico non credas in aternum, (i.) Believe not thy enemy at all:
Which phrase of speech is principally to be understood of the Devil; for he
never offers thee his service but to thy hurt. Saint Gregory makes this note,
That the Devil taking from Job his children, his houses, his herds of
cattle, and his flocks of Sheep, and in a word, all the good things that he
had; yet he left him his wife, but only that she might do the Devil
service, Calide cuncta diripuit, Eccle. 11.33.
calidius adjutricem reser^auit, It was his cunning to take away all; but it
was a greater p^^ce of cunning to leave him his Help. The Devil did not do
this out of forgetfulness, nor carelessness, nor out of any desire that he
had to leave Job any comfort at all, for he did not wish him so much good, but
that he hoped she would be a means to move him to impatiencie, and to drive
him to despair. True it is, that all his favors tend to make the way easy
(but at your cost) to bring us to Hell. He offered our Savior bread of
stones; but on condition, that he himself must take the pains to mold it.
Attend tibi a pestifero, fabric^^ enim malum, Beware of a wicked man, for, etc.

Si filius es Dei, dic, etc.
If thou be the Son of God. If thou art the Son of God, command as a God.
Thy Dicere is Facere; Dic vt sedeant, etc. Some grave Doctors are of opinion
that this was the sin of Moses, when he drew water from out the Rock, and
not his want of Faith, as some other would enforce: For, Infide and ^enitate
sanctum fecit illum: but his attributing of this miracle to himself, which was
only Gods doing. A^dite rebels, Nunquid p^terimus de petra educere v^bis
aquam? Hear ye rebellious, Can we dr^w water for you out of the Rock? Can
Aaron and I, etc. This incredulous people said, Nunquid poterit D^us parare
mensam in deserto* i. Can God prepare a Table in the Desert? But Moses speaks
in his own and his brothers name, Nunquid poterimus, Can we, etc.

Command that these stones. Thy Father calls thee Son, and yet reduces thee
to that misery, that to keep thy self from staruing, he drives thee to that
necessity, that thou must of force he compelled to make these stones bread.
This difference is there betwixt the Sinner and the Righteous, That the Devil
persuades the Sinner, that he may make bread of stones* and Judas, that he
may make money of Christ: But the Righteous will rather die for hunger, being
well assured, that God even in this his hunger is able to sustain him.

Command that these stones. The Devil tempts him with stones, with such things
wherein are scarce to be found any sign of danger: For he always holds the
victory to be so much the more glorious, by how much the lesser is the
occasion whereby he winnes it. Lot flies out of Sodom in the company of his
daughters, and having escaped that fearful fire, the Devil tempts the father
by his daughters; whose raging lust, neither the fearful example of their
mother, whom their eyes had so lately seen turned into a Pillar of Salt, nor
the Laws of Reason, nor of Nature, could once bridle or restrain. But you
will say they were women; and what will not a woman do to satisfy her
longing? but that Lot should consent to so unlawful an act, being a man, nay;
and so just a man as the Scripture commends him to be, it seems somewhat
strange. Alas, (good old man) his daughters had made him drunk; and being so
weary and heavy hearted as he was, to see the lamentable destruction of
Sodom, it was not much that he should drink, being importuned thereunto; and
they that could not find any water when he called for it, could make a shift
to fetch him wine. In all that forty years peregrination of the children of
Israel, Why God allowed the Israelites no Wine, till they came into the land
of Promise.
we do not read that ever God gave them wine: Twice did he give them water out
of the rock, and twelve Fountains in Helim; he gave them likewise Manna and
Quails: but not a drop of wine that they saw till they came to the Land of
Promise. And surely this was thus ordered by the Council of Heaven; for if
having but water they mutined so often, what would they have done, had they had
wine? When Abraham did thrust the bondwoman out of doors, he furnished her
with bread and water: and Procopius says, That he would not give her any wine;
for Agar signifies Suen^a-fiestas, A Feast-dreamer: And this holy Father would
not by giving her wine, increase the occasion, seeing she dreamed thereon when
she drank but water. But to return to our purpose; Lots daughters tempted
their father, there being in the cave wherein he was, no other either possible
or imaginable occasion. To him that is desperately minded, though ye put away
from him and remove out of his reach all manne^ of halters and cords, for
fear he should hang himself therewith; yet if he be set upon it, he will make
shift with a garter, a hat-band, a girdle, or some one thing or other, to work
his own destruction.

If thou be the Son of God. It was a bold dis-respect of Satan's, and a
presumptuous part in him, that he should make any the least doubt, that Christ
was the Son of God; but far greater impudency, that he should dare in
tempting him, to tell him, All the world shall be thine, if thou will but fall
down and worship me. King Ahabs Captain came to the foot of the Mountain
where Elias then remained, and said unto him, Come down thou Servant of God,
for the King has sent me for thee. If I am (said the Prophet) the Servant of
God, let fire come down from Heaven, and burn up thee, and those that are come
along with thee; for thou oughtst not to speak with that little respect as
thou do, to Gods Servant. What irreuerence is it then in the Devil, to doubt
whither he were the Son of God, or no? I answer, That he showed therein a
great deal of irreuerence, but very little fear. The more you savor of God,
the more impudently will he press you: Ecce Sathanas expetiuit vt cribaret
vos, sicut triticum, Behold, Satan has desired to sift you even as wheat. The
word Vos, You, carries a great emphasis with it; And he compares them to wheat,
for the Birds abide in the fields, and the Grapes are out in the Vines; but
your wheat is housed and laid up safe under lock and key: For you are they
that I make my treasure, and will as charily look unto you. There are a great
sort of people that walk now at this present hour up and down the streets,
some in one place, and some in another, of whom the Devil makes no reckoning
at all, he will deal hereafter with them at better leisure: but for one of
Gods Saints, that is guarded, protected, and defended by God, and is fenced
about as a Rose amongst Thorns; for this, he will turn and return, and use a
thousand shifts to get it. Nunquid auis discolor hareditas mea mihi? Venite
properate omnes bestiae, congregamini ad deuorandum, As Birds do fly about a
wall that is painted with diverse colors; so do the Nations in persecuting the
People that are consecrated to my service, and those that I favor. In
conclusion, Saint Hilarie says, In sanctificatis maxim diaboli tentamenta
grassantur, (i.) The Devils temptations are ever rifest among the Godly. And
therefore David said, Custodi me Domine, quia sanctus sum, Keep me o Lord,
because I am holy, etc.

If thou be the Son of God. It is no new thing with the Devil, to help
himself by setting your self against your self; it is one of the best
weapons, that he has against you, and your self has no greater enemy than
your self. Keep me o Lord (says David) out of the hand of the sinner. Saint
Bernard gives this gloss upon it, Lord, I am he, and therefore custodi me a
meipso. If in thy Religion thou do not guard thy self from thy self; if in
the Desert thou die by thine own hands, Ad quid venisti? Wherefore did thou
come?

If thou be the Son of God, command that these stones. If thou be the
Son of God, it comes to thee by inheritance to work miracles upon stones.
Jacob had a stone for his pillow, and there thy father showed him Heaven; and
set up a ladder, by which the Angels ascended and descended. To the Children
of Israel he did by stones a thousand favors, extracting from them Water,
Oil, and Honey, Eduxit mel de petra, olcumque desaxo durissimo. And therefore
it is not much that thou should of these stones make bread. Wherein can
thou more manifest thy self to be the Son of God, than in saving thine own
life, and in supplying thine own wants? But this is that language which the
Jews used to our Savior at the foot of the Cross; If he be King of Israel,
let him unloose those nails that have fastened him to the Cross, and let him
free himself from the power of Rome, and then the world shall acknowledge him
to be the same himself professes. As also of that bad thief, Save thy self
and us. These thought (it should seem) That to be King of the Jews, and the
Son of God, consisted in the saving of himself and them.

Sifilius Dei es. Petrus Chrysologus is of opinion, That the Devil here played
the fool egregiously; Cupis, o Demon tentare, sed nescis, Thou desire to
tempt, but but know not how. Four thousand years and upwards had thou
exercised thy old trade, and yet thou now seem to know less every day than
other. Is it possible, that thou should be such an Ass, as to offer stones
to one that was now grown weak and ready to faint through too much fasting?
Saint Jerome harpt upon this string: Either he was God, (says he) or he was
not God. If he were God, it was rashness in him to tempt him; if he were not
God, he could not make bread of stones. But herein the Devil showed more
malice than wit; His malice oftentimes outruns his wit.
questionless he did upon this occasion, as much as either he could, or knew.
For others (as Saint Austen has noted it) he tempts according to the
measure of their strength, because God will not let out the rope to give him
any larger scope; but toward our Savior Christ, he showed the utmost of his
power and malice. And though he did not greatly care, whether he did eat or
not eat, but had only a purpose to perplex and trouble our Savior, and to put
him out of his holy Meditations, he did offer only that unto him, which was
precisely necessary for the preservation of man's life; and which a wise man
ought to accept of, if he were not mad or foolish. How much more should a
man that is hunger-staru'd, attempt any thing rather than famish for lack of
food. Judas will rather make money of Christ than starve. The mother sell her
daughter, the father kill his children, the wife forsake, if not dishonor the
bed of her husband. And therefore the Devil was not herein so very a fool as
some would make him.

Scriptum est, non in solo pane viuit homo.
It Is written, man lives not by bread alone. Our Savior Christ would not do
this miracle at the Devils entreaty; For his miracula, were beneficia, His
miracles were benefits, they did always tend to good, but this did not. For
though he should have turned all the stones in the Wilderness into Bread, the
Devil would have been as very a Devil as he was before. Saint Austen says,
That our Savior made Wine of Water, but not Bread of Stones; because from the
former miracle followed the Faith of his Disciples, Et crediderunt in eum,
Discipuli eius: But no good could come of this. He restored to Malchus, the
ear which Saint Peter had cut off; but before Herod, would not so much as open
his mouth. Saint Paul cured the father of Publius of a hot burning Fever, and
many other that were sick; but to his beloved Disciple Timothy, being very
ill, he said unto him, Vtere modico vino propter stomachu^ and freque^tes tuas
infirmitates, i. Use a little wine for thy stomachs sake, and for thy other
infirmities. S. Gregory dwelling on this place says, O blessed Apostle, thou
healest an Infidel with miracles, as a Saint, but curest thy disciple with
receipts, as a Physician. But he answers this, thus, That Timothy had no
need of miracles for the good of his soul. When I consider with my self,
that God does not now do so many miracles in his Church as he was wont, it
makes me much to rejoice. Miracles why ordained and not now in use.
For miracles being ordained for the confirmation of our Faith, since God does
no longer work by them, it seems that our Faith has now taken too deep
rooting to be removed. And though sin do much abound, and men are much
subject unto vice, yet ought it to be a great comfort to the faithful, that
God does not use miracles any more for the strengthening of the Gospel.

Man lives not by Bread alone. Irenaeus has noted, that the Devil in stead
of sifting into our Savior to know truly what he was, remained more blind,
and more astonished than before. For he, demanding of our Savior Christ,
whether he were God, or no? Our Savior acknowledged himself to be a man,
saying, Non in solo pane, viuit homo, Man shall not live by bread alone.

Gods friendship to be preferred before the greatest plenty.
Not by Bread alone, etc. S. Chrysostom treating touching the care and
provision that ought to be had of things necessary for this life, says, That
it is not so convenient a means to seek after the abundance of things, as to
have God to our friend; wherein he recommendeth unto us the wonderful care of
Gods divine providence for our good, howbeit by the world, ill understood, and
worse executed. Whereas indeed we should consider with our selves, That the
end of our sweates and our labors, being to enjoy some sweetness and content
in this life, they enjoy it most, and most safely, who enjoy least of the
pleasures of this life. For they that abound in Riches, The more wealth the
more woe.
abound in Cares, and Wealth is the mother of Woe. The Princes of this world,
and your great powerful men, have more gold than gylding in their beds, but
yet they have no golden sleeps; their brains have too much Quicke-siluer in
them to settle to any rest. They have their fat Capons and their dainty
Pheasants set before them in vessels of silver, but they have leaden stomachs,
and have no appetite to eat. Whereas your husbandman sleeps between furrow
and furrow, and that soundly, having a clod of earth for his pillow, and falls
as hungerly to a Pilchard, and a cloue of Garlic, as if he had all the
choice dishes in the world: For, Non in solo pane viuit homo. The Childeren of
Israel being thirty years in the Wilderness, God drew water for them out
of the Rock, and it seemed sweeter unto them than Honey, that is, De petra
melle saturauit eos. It is a great comfort to a man, to have a God that is able
to make us to be better contented with hunger, than with all the dainties and
curious fare that the world or sea can afford. Esaias pondring with himself,
How richly and how happily a man does live under the shadow of Gods wing, and
his divine protection, says, It is above all Glory. The Prophet there
treats of those great favors which God showed to his People; As that Pillar
which served them in the night as a Torch, and was as a Tent pitched about them
in the day time; that privilege which he gave them, that neither the gravel
nor the sand should wear out their shoes, nor time, nor the bushes in the
Deserts wast their clothes: making this in the end (as it were) a burden of
his Song, Super omnem gloriam protectio. Great were all those glories which
that People did enjoy; but above all, was Gods blessed protection toward them.
The rich and mighty men of this world enjoy much in this life; but I had
rather o Lord, be poor Sub tegmine alarm tuarum, Under the covering of thy
wings; For Non in solo pane viuit homo, Man lives not by, etc.

Sed in omni verbo quod procedit de ore Dei.
But by every word which proceeds from out the mouth of God. Our Savior
Christ took this authority out of the eigth Chapter of Deutronomie. Those
dainties wherewith God enriched the air, the sea, and the earth, maintain and
sustain man, and for this end God has created them; but more especially is
he maintained and sustained by the Word of God; Verbo Domini Coeli firmati
sunt, and spiritu oris eius omnis virtus eorum. From the beginning of the world
the Heavens were moved with a most swift motion, and their influences and
virtues are so effectual and so fresh, as if they had come but to day (as it
were) out of Gods hands: nor is it to be feared, that Heaven shall wax old,
or fall to decay, because Gods word does uphold it. Is it much then, or seems
it so strange a thing, that the same word should sustain man without bread? For
to put life into man, no more was required than Gods breath, Spirauit in faciem
eius spiraculum vitae: Therefore this, and less than this, will preserve his
life. Yet do I not pretend by this, to persuade any man that we should still
have recourse to miracles; though in cases of necessity, where there is no
other help or hope to be looked for, it is lawful to expect and desire them,
and a kind of glorifying of God: Demand a sign of the Lord thy God, whither in
the deep below, or in the height above; It was the saying of Esaias to King
Ahab. But in ordinary necessities we are to have recourse to our labors, and
the sweat of our own brows, not expecting Manna to descend from Heaven, and
to have Quails put into our mouths: The Scripture every where condemning the
sloathfull man, which folds one hand within another; Manus in manu, says
Solomon, aduising the Sluggard to go and learn of the Ant, Vade piger ad
formicam: setting this Lesson always before our eyes, That God is never
offended with us for providing clothes to our back, and meat for our bellies.

But by every word. With hunger thou may fill thy self, with nakedness
thou may cloth thy self, and even with poverty thou may grow rich, That
is, In omni verbo, By putting thy necessities into Gods hands: Lay it to his
account, to relieve thee; for by every word of his mouth thou shall remain
satisfied, and have more than enough; howbeit to the world and to nature, the
means seem disagreeable and contrary to that succor which thou desire.
God makes the Devils practices the preservatives of his Servants.
The blind man that was borne blind he enlightened by dirt, being a fitter
means in man's judgment, to mar, than mend the sight. Those afflictions which
the Devil used as means for to destroy and undo Job, God used as means to
enrich him, and make him more happy than before. The selling of Joseph, the
envy of his brethren, were those rounds that made him mount to that height
whereunto he came, Sicut tenebrae eius, ita and lumen eius: With thee, o Lord,
the darkness is as noone day; thou can as well illuminate with darkness
as with light. All the Land of Egypt was covered over with darkness, as with
a mantle, Factae sunt tenebrae horribiles in vniuersa terra Aegypti: but where
the children of Israel dwelt, there was light, not only because God can free
those places where his people were, from that thick darkness that oppressed the
Egyptians; but also for that he can make when he lists, that very darkness
serve as a light unto them; Forsitan tenebrae conculcabunt me, and non
illuminatio mea in dilicijs meis, It were madness in me o Lord, to think that
in the following of my pleasures I can hide my self out of thy sight; for
though I should hide my self in the thickest and most palpable darkness that
can be immagined, thou will make of them bright beams of light, which shall
discover me unto thee; Nox illuminatio mea, in dilicijs meis: The Hebrew has
it, Circum me; I shall be seen as easily in the night, as at noone day. In
Genesis, Jacob says, Lauabit in vino stolam suam, He shall wash my garment in
wine: It was his Prophecy on Judas his fourth son, who was a Type and figure
of our Savior Christ. But passing from the Type to the truth, he says, That
coming into the world, he shall wash the Church, and those that are the
Faithful, with his blood, Lauabit in vino stolam suam. And if any one shall
ask me, How the Stole can remain white, being washed in blood, or in wine?
Diodorus and Genadius, in Catena Lypomani, answer, That Gods power can do
this, working contrary effects to common reason: As from death to draw life;
from tribulation, comfort; and from shame, glory. In tribulatione dilatasti
mihi (says David) and gloriamur in tribulatione: So may a garment or linen
robe be white, that is washed in the wine of his blood. Qui dat niuem, sicu^
lanam, and nebulam, sicut cinerem spargit; God can warm a man with snow, as
with wool, and make cold be unto us as a clothing. From that fire of the
Babilonian furnace, whereinto Nebucadnezar commanded the three children to be
cast, Sidrac, Misac, and Abednego, there issued forth a fresh wind, and a
cooling breath, Quasi ventum, ror^ flantem. God (says Chrysostom) can take
from fire it is burning, which is his proper effect, and make it to give light,
and to refresh his children, as with a dew.

Mitte te deorsum, scriptum est enim Angelis suis, etc.
Cast thy self down, For it is written, He will give his Angels charge over
thee. The Devil having now brought our Savior to the top of the Pinnacle of
the Temple, being confident to get the conquest of him, making use of that
place of Scripture: first, wishing him to throw himself down, and to rely
upon Gods preserving of him; for it is written, Angelis suis Deus, etc. Saint
Hierome, Saint Ambrose, Saint Bernard, and Saint Gregory say, That the Devil
never desires to see any man climb on high, unless it be for his greater
destruction: For as he fell down like a thunderbolt, so does he desire to have
all men else to fall as he did, and that their sins may throw them headlong
down to Hell. Which is one especial effect of his pride; according to that of
David, Dejecisti eos, dum eleuarentur; (or extollerentur, as Saint Austen
reads it.) Thou did cast them down, while they were lifted up. Est aliquid
humilitatis, etc. There is somewhat in humility, which in a wonderful manner
lifts up the heart; and there is somewhat in pride, which casts it down.
It is a miracle, that Pride and Humility should ever meet. Saint Bernard
says, That at the foot of the Cross the Devil did repeat the same lesson
again, Si Rex Israel est, descendat de Cruce, If thou be King of Israel, come
down from the Cross; As though he had forgot the shame that Christ had put
him to before.

Cast thy self. Thou can do nothing without thy self, against thy self:
thou must put to thy helping hand; Non s^luabit te, sine te, nec perdet te,
sine te. Whence it is to be noted, That he not only pretends the holiest
that is, should cast himself headlong from the Tower of Good-workes, but he
that is seated on the Pinnacle of the Temple, and in the highest dignity in the
Church. It is a lamentable case, that the Prelate, the Priest, and the
Preacher, should be put to this peril. Quis medebitur Incantatori, a Serpente
percusso? Who shall heal the Inchanter that is wounded by the Serpent?

He has given his Angels charge over thee. The main drift of the devil, is, to
flatter and sooth us up, that he may facilitate our fall; to sing sweetly unto
us, to inchant us like the Siren: Ossa eius sicut fistula aeris. Job says,
That his bones (by which he understands his strength) are Flutes, not of Reed,
like those of Mida's, but of Brass, which sound more sweetly. With these he
vpholds his Empire, and sowes the World with Heresies, Moorismes, and
Paganismes; and Hell, with damned Souls. They are Pipes that make strange
consonancies with our inclinations, and work more powerful effects, than
those tongues that are tipped with the eloquencies of all the Tullies,
Demostheneses, and Quintilians in the world* Which is but an argument of the
weakness of their hands, when all their strength lies in their Tongues. Your
weakest influences (say your Astrologers) insist upon the Tongue. Woman (who is
the emblem of weakness) has her greatest force and strength in her tongue:
Your Ruffians, and such as are swaggering fellows, have more tongue than hands;
but they that are truly valiant, have more hand than tongue, they know not what
the tongue means. The Roman Soldiers drew a Hand for their Device. In the
Scripture the Hand signifies Fortitude, Manus eius adhuc extenta est, so says
Esaias of God. The Devil therefore being all Tongue, it follows, that he must
necessarily be a very weak creature. Saint Peter calls him a Lion, not
because he deuoureth, but because he roares: So that all our victory consists
in freeing our selves from his tongue. Job 40.
And it may be Job alluded hereunto, when he speaks of the Devil in the
metaphor of a Whale, Will thou bind his tongue with a cord? For the Devil
having all his strength in his tongue, see how that fish when the harping Irons
has caught hold on him, struggles on the sand, and beats himself upon the
beach, but all in vain, to get loose, and at last swells and bursts with anger;
so is it with the Devil, when we have tied a knot upon his tongue.

His Angels. To those whom God loves, and such as are his children, Saint
Cyprian says, That God has given order to his Angels, to guard and protect
them; if a tyle should fall toward them, to strike it aside; if stumble, to
take hold on them that they should not fall: How then could a person so holy,
so beloved of God, be afraid? God did his People a great favor in giving them
an Angel to be their Guide. Precedet te Angelus meus, sending an Angel to
Daniel to feed him; to Tobias, to accompany him in his journey; to Samaria,
when Zenacharib so straightly besieged it, one Angel slaying so many thousands
of brave valiant Soldiers. But greater is that favor which he promises here
to the Just, Angelis suis Deus mandauit de te. The Lions guarded Daniel in
Babylon; the Whale, Jonas; the Arc of Bulrushes, Moses: In omnibus vijs tuis,
In all thy ways, be it in the air, in the earth, or in the sea, Gods Angels
will so guard thee, that thou shall not dash thy foot against a stone. Many
Emperors and Kings have scattered Gold on the ground, through which they have
gone; many have been drawn in their Chariots by Lions and Elephants; but
far more precious are the hands of Angels; and he that has them to help
him, need not to touch theground with his feet.

Scriptum est enim, Angelis suis. The Devil was ever a false interpreter of
the Scripture*
The first victory that the Devil got in the world, was by interpreting in a
sinister sense, those words of God which he had delivered to our first Parents:
and this course does he continue here with our Savior; and the same does his
followers the Heretics observe to this day. Saint Peter calls them, unlearned,
and wavering, and says of them, That they deprave and pervert the Scripture,
to their own ruin and destruction. Saint Cyril handles this point very
elegantly, in one of his Epistles: And Origin says, That as the children of
Corah did put strange fire upon the Alter; so your Heretics by altering the
Scripture, put strange fire to the Alter of Truth. Saint Chrysostom, That they
immitate the Devil, by citing Scripture falsely, as the Devil did in this
temptation, seeking (as it were) by a clear and manifest truth, to persuade
our Savior to entertain a notorious lie, and to admit of a monstrous folly;
securing him, that his person should be protected by Angels, from any ensuing
harm, if he would but throw himself down from the Pinnacle of the Temple. I
term it folly; for, as Man, he had no reason to do any such rash and
inconsiderate action; and, as God, he had no need to play the Tumbler, and to
fly in the air.

Haec omnia tibi dabo.
All these things will I give thee. Saint Ambrose says, That in these three
temptations the Devil had laid three ginnes, wherewith he uses to entrap man
in those three Ages of his, to wit, his childhood, his manhood, and his elder
age. The disorder of children consists in eating; they are ordinarily craving,
The Devil has 3. Ginns to entrap man, sutableto his three Ages.
still crying out for more meat, little young Gluttons, and such syllie fools,
as to have an Apple, they will part with a piece of Gold. That of our
youthfuller years, when we begin to write man, is to run headlong into all
desperate and indiscreet actions. For the liuelihood of youth, has ever
hitherto been impatient, humerous, and braine-sicke. That of old age, is all
covetousness, storing up for a dear year, and filling his Wallets then
fullest, when his iourny is shortest; resembling herein those rivers, which the
nearer they come to the Sea, which is their end, so much the more water they
suck and draw unto them. Some may think that the Devil played the fool, in
offering all to him that despised all. For Christ contemned the wealth and
glory of this World. Ambition such a temptation as few are able to withstand.
For to offer bread to the Hungerie, honor to the Ambitious, and riches to the
Covetous, the Devil might have had some good ground to work upon; But that he
should offer al to him that scorned all he could offer, this was great
weakness in him: yet (dearly beloved) do not you reckon this so slight a
temptation, and so poor an onset, as you would make it. For all Hell has not
a more powerful piece of Ordnance to batter our breasts withal, than this, it
is the only murdring piece that he has, and what man is able to resist it?
Quis est hic, and la^danimus eum, Show me the man, that I may commend him. Thou
shall not find one amongst the Princes of the people, nor amongst the Ministers
of Kings, nor amongst the seats of Justice, nor amidst the honesty of
Married-folkes, nor the modesty of Maidens, no, nor in the Monasteries of your
Nuns, nor the Cells of your Hermits in the Wilderness. In old time, all the
States of the the world, were in competition about the electing of an Emperor
among the Gods. The Priests, chose Appollo for his Wisdom; the Soldiers,
Mars for his Valor; the Merchants, Mercury, for his negociating; the
Physicians, Aesculapius, for the eminency of his Cures. But when it was
brought to that pass that they must settle upon some one to be Emperor, by a
joint consent they all made choice of Jupiter, because he was the God that
came down into the World in a shower of Gold.

All these things will I give thee. The Devil, does not here offer that which
he is able to give: But is rather so poor, That of all those Kingdoms,
whereof he makes so large a profer, he has not so much as one poor spike-hole
in a wall. The richness of a Prince is to be seen in his Wardrobe and
Richness of his provision: There comes in before him a hundred Mules,
Sumpter-Clothes on their backs, imbrodered with silk, silver, and gold, with
their goriets of massie-plate, etc. Job painting forth the Devils Wardrobe,
says, Ante faciem (...) praecedat egestas, (i.) Want shall go before his
face. All his Wardrobe, is covered over with poverty and want; all his
treasures, are dissembled wares, counterfeit stuff. Lift up his
Sumpter-clothes, open his Trunckes, and you shall find nothing but stones, and
apples, making show of the one to our Savior, of the other to Eve. So that he
is so poor, that he has not so much as one farthing of all those immense
treasures which he offers; But he offers that which he would give, if he
were (as he is not) Lord of all the World. Such was the perplexity and
anxietie of mind, that he had, to know who was Christ our Savior, that if
all the Kingdoms of the earth had been his, he would give them all to see
him humbled at his feet. He offers thee but little, because he makes little
reckoning of thee; for thou art so base minded, that thou will sell thy self
unto him at an easy rate.

But how could the Devil hope, with these only seeming and apparent goods to
work so great a Conquest on so valiant a Breast? I answer, That it is the
Devils policy, to bait our Wills and Affections with the apprehension of
imaginary goods, rather than with the inioying of true and real goods indeed.
Nay, the glories of the World, once inioy'd, causes a kind of surfeit and
loathing, which is often an occasion of our growing out of love with them.
(...), vanitatum, and omnia vanitas. Where the wise man did not term all
things vain, Imaginary things work more upon man than real. Why.
as that the trees should not yield us their fruits, the earth her food and
riches, or that the Sun should not shine. But because we setting our whole
delight upon them, we make them prove vain unto us. A clock is accounted a
vain thing when it strikes not true, but miscounts it is hours. The harmony
of this World is like a clock, if a man employ it wholly in his pleasures, it
makes him become vain. But Solomon spoke not a word of these things, till he
had made trial of them. When the Prodigal went out of his Fathers house,
Paradises of delights were presented unto him, but when he was gone far from
him, all was hunger, nakedness, and misery. This punishment inflicted upon
him, made him open his eyes and see his error. Amnon, enamoured of Th^m^r, was
ready to dye for her love, it seeming unto him, that his life did consist in
the inioying of her; nay he counted it his heaven: But he had no sooner had
his pleasure of her, but he kicked her out of doors, and could not endure the
sight of her. The possessing of riches, is not of it self either good or bad;
only the good use of them, makes them good, the bad, bad. And therefore being
desired by us, Saint Paul styles them, temptation, and Satan's snare, Qui
volunt diuites fieri, in^idunt in tentationem, and in laqueum Diaboli, (i.)
They that will be rich fall into Temptation: and into the snare of the Devil.
So that your imaginary goods, work more upon us, and with more advantage,
than those which we enjoy and possess. And the reason is, for that the Devil
does represent more glory to the imagination, in such an office, such a
dignity, such riches, such beauty, and such delights, than is true, Facinatio
enim nugacitatis obscurat bona, and inconstantia concupiscentiae, transuertit
sensum. His cunning witchcraft does pervert the understanding, and makes us
take Ill, for Good. This is that which our Savior Christ called, Crapulam and
ebrietatem saeculi, A kind of drunkenness, wherewith the men of this World are
overtaken, Et inconstantiam concupiscentiae. And the Greek text uses the word
Funda; For as that goes always round, so does concupiscence, every moment
altering our desires. There are some kind of pictures, which if you look one
way upon them seem fair and beautiful, if another way, foul and ougly, and
full of horror. Such does the Devil set before thee; Thou must have therefore
an eye to the one as to the other, look as well what is to come, as what is
present before thee, least the Devil chance to deceive thee.

Si cadens adoraueris me.
If thou will fall down and worship me. How earnest, Two kinds of temptation.
and how importunate is the Devil? Saint Gregory says, That there are two
kinds of temptation; one sudden, as that of Lucifer, who as soon as he saw the
Sun of Grace begin to rise, presently opposed himself against him, sweeping
away with him a third part of the Stars, as you may read in the Revelation. And
as that of David in the case of Bershabe: and as that of Peter, when he was
suddenly set upon by the Maid in Caiphas house. The other taking more leisure,
as that of Judas, whom the Devil went by little and little importuning by his
suggestions; as an enemy that ouercomes by lengthening out the war; or as a
Physician cures a disease, by prescribing a long and tedious diet; or as a
Moath imperceptibly mars the cloth; The Devil always as busy as a fly in
harvest.
and the Worm destroys the wood. The Hebrews call the Devil Beelzebub, which
is as much to say as Deus Muscarum, The God of Flies. Now the World has not a
more busy or troublesome creature than your Flies and Gnats in Autumn, and in
the time of Harvest: nor Man a more busy enemy than the Devil, in the
Autumn and Harvest of our Souls, when we should labor most for Heaven, and
provide for a dear year. Your Fly amongst the Egyptians was a symbol of
importuning; and therefore it is said by way of a^age, The wickedness of the
Fly. There are sins, which like the Cow we chew the cud upon, we ruminate
upon them, and our thoughts are never off from them. Job did point out unto us
these two kinds of temptations; the one, in the stone, that being rent from the
top of an high hill, falls suddenly down, carrying away before it all that
stands in it is way, it being impossible to prevent conveniently the danger
thereof; Lapis transfertur de loco suo. The other, in the water, which being
so soft as it is, yet by little and little hollowes the hardest stone; Homine^
ergo similiter perdes, tota die impugnans tribulauit me. Only Importunity is
the shrewdest temptation. Sampson yielded unto Dalila, tired out with her
re-iterated importunings: And there are a thousand Sampsons in these days,
which do not yield themselves so much to sin by the battery of temptation,
as by importunate treaties.

Si cadens adoraueris me.
If falling down thou worship me. This was a strange kind of impudency in the
Devil: but he no sooner saw his mask taken away, and that our Savior had
discovered him and his tricks, but he hid his head for shame.

Vade retro, Sathana.
Go behind me, Satan. Saint Hierome says, That with this very word, our
Savior Christ tumbled him headlong down to the bottomless pit of Hell;
whereinto he entered howling, and making such a hideous noise and lamentable
out-crie, that he struck a great fear into all those infernal Spirits; The
strong one was bound, and trodden in pieces with the foot of the Lord. Beda
has almost the very same words. This imprisonment of his was enlarged
afterward by Christ's death: according to that of the Apocalypse, He bound him
for a thousand years. In a word, He was so ashamed, and so out of countenance
with this answer of our Saviors, that for many days he did not so much as once
offer to peep out of Hell. Where Pride is, Prou. 11.
there will be Reproach, so says Solomon. That place of Deutronomie, whence
our Savior took this authority, does not say, Adorabis, Thou shall adore, but
Time^is, Thou shall fear; as if the truest way to worship God, were to fear
him. The Scripture attributes two names unto Christ; the one of Spouse; the
other of Lord: True Love never without fear.
in the one he shows his love; in the other, the fear which is due unto him:
in the one, the security wherewith we may come unto him, and offer him our
Petitions; in the other, the respect and reverence which we owe to so great a
Majesty. They are things that are so cimented and ioynted together, that he
affectionatly loves, who humbly fears. But I fear I have bn too long, and
therefore I will here make an end.

THE SIXTH SERMON, UPON THE MONDAY AFTER THE FIRST SUNDAY IN LENT.
MAT. 25. Cum venerit Filius Hominis.

When the Son of Man shall come.


I Have treated of this Theme at large, in five several Chapters upon the
Parables: The coming of Christ to Judgment.
But the Sea is never emptied by those waters which the Rivers take from it;
nor those divine Mysteries lessened by those many Books that are written
thereof; especially by a Sea of judgment, where your shallow wits are usually
drowned.

Concerning this Article, which is so notorious, there is not a Prophet, an
Evangelist, a Sybil, nor any of the holy Fathers, which do not make confession
thereof; yea, the very Angels said unto the Disciples, This Jesus who was
taken from you, shall So come; where this particle [Sic] So, does not so much
exprimere modum, as similitudinem, not the true manner of his coming, but
after what likeness he shall come. Now does he sit at the right hand of his
Father, and shall possess that Throne till that he shall come to judge the
world, and make his enemies his footstool. According to that of David, Sit at
my right hand Until I make thy enemies thy footstool; a sentence which was
repeated afterward by S. Paul, to the Hebrews. Not that the sitting at the
right hand of his father shall ever have any end, (for as Saint Chrysostom and
Gregory Nazianzen has noted it, the word Until does not point at any set
time) but the mutation of the place which our Savior Christ is to make for
that term of time that the Judgment shall last, himself coming thither in
person to set all things in order; Act. ^.
Vsque in diem restitutionis omnium, so says Saint Luke: And by reason of the
notoriousnesse thereof, the Evangelist does not say, that he shall come, but
supposes (as it were) his present coming, with a Cum venerit, etc.

The Son of Man. Iudiciarie power, or this Potestas judiciaria (as the
Schoolmen call it) is proper to all the Trinity, but is here attributed to
the Son, as Wisdom is likewise attributed unto him, which is the soul of
the Judge. So that the Son (as he is God) is the eternal Judge, and the Lord
universal, to whom the Father has communicated this dominion by an eternal
generation. Generando non largiendo, says Saint Ambrose. But as he is man, the
blessed Trinity gave him this power in tempore, by uniting him to our nature;
He gave him power to do judgment: And Saint John gives the reason thereof,
Because he is the Son of Man; it being held fit that Man should be saved by
Man; Gods mercy gaining thereby glory; and Man's meannesse, authority. And
therefore it was thought fit, that Man should be judged by Man; Gods justice
remaining thereby justified; and Man's Cause secured: For, What greater
security can man have, than that he should be Man's Judge, who gave his life
for Man, shedding his blood on the Cross for Man's salvation? So does Saint
Austen expound that place alleged by Saint John, Dedit ei judicium facere,
quia filius hominis est.

On the one side here is matter of hope and comfort; on the other, of fear and
trembling: No small comfort that Christ shall be our Judge.
Who will not hope for pity from a man, and such a man that is my brother, my
advocate, my friend, who to make me rich, had made himself poor? etc. But who
can hope for any comfort from that man that was judged, sentenced, and
condemned unjustly by man unto death? Who can hope for any good from that man
whose love man repaid with dis-loue, and whose life, with death? These Yrons
are too hard for the stomach of man to digest, it had need of some Ostriches
help. I will not destroy Ephraim, because I am God, and not Man: God is wont
to requite bad with good, discourtesies with benefits; and his love commonly
increases when man's diminishes, but man's breast is somewhat streighter laced.
Again, no small terror.
In a word, This his being Man is a matter of fear, and by how much the more
was Man's obligation, by so much the more shall the son of man's vengeance be:
For the precious blood of our Savior Jesus Christ, and his cruel, yet blessed
wounds, are the Sanctuary of our hopes, especially to those that trust in him,
and lay hold on him by Faith: but for the unthankful sinner, they shall be
matter of cowardice, and of terror; and to our Savior Christ minister
occasion of greater punishment, and a more rigorous revenge. Esaias introduces
the Angels questioning our Savior at his entrance into Heaven, Quare rubrum est
vestimentum tuum sicut calcantium in torculari? Why are thy garments, o Lord,
like unto those that tread the Wine Press? You say well; for I have trodden,
like the grapes, my enemies under foot, and my garments are sprinkled and
stained with their blood. O Lord, this bloody spoil would well have beseemed
thee on earth; But what do thou make with it here in Heaven? Dies vltionis
in cord meo; The day will come when I shall be revenged at full of those ill
requited benefits which I bestowed on my People; and all that patience which I
then s^ewed, shall be turned into wrath and endless anger. Saint Chrysostom
interpreting that place of Saint Matthew, Sanguis eius super nos, Let his blood
be upon us and our children; says thus, The time shall come, that the blood
that might have given you life, shall occasion your death; it shall be unto you
worse than that Fire of Babylon, which the King intended for death, though in
the end it turned to life: The blood of Christ was intended for life, but it
shall end in death. Hosea says, V^ eis, cum recesser^ ab eis: Another
Translation has it, Caro mea ab eis. When the Son of man's mercy was come to
that height, as man's thought could not set it higher; to wit, That God in man's
favor should take man's flesh upon him; woe unto those men who were unmindful
of so great a blessing: for this extraordinary courtesy of his being so
unthankfully entertained, and so ill requited, shall be their condemnation, for
whose salvation it was intended. Cornua eius sicut Rinocerotis, says
Deutronomie: The Unicorn is the mildest and the patientest beast that is, and
it is long ere he will be provoked to anger; but if he once grow hot and
angry, there is no creature more fierce and furious than he is: Ex tarditate,
ferocior, as Pierius uses it, by way of adage.

Saint Austen collecteth hence another conuenience: Every judgment (says he)
requires two especial and important things:

The one, That the Judge fear not the face of the Mighty.

The other, That he hide not his face from him that is brought before him. Two
properties of a Judge.


For the first, The Scripture has it every where, Regard not the countenance
of the Mighty. For the second, Job pondering the perdition of a certain
Province, says, That the Judges thereof would not suffer themselves to be
seen; Job. 9. v. 24.
The earth is given into the hands of the Wicked; he covers the faces of the
Judges. And therefore God will not be seen by the damned; for by their very
seeing him, they should be freed from their punishment: and therefore in this
respect it was fit that Christ should come to judge the world as Man.

In Maiestate sua, In his Majesty. The Interlinearie has it, In Diuinitate;
Saint Chrysostom, In Gloria; Saint Luke, In Maiestate sua, in Patris, and
sanctorum Angelorum. Luke 9. v. 26.
Where it is noted by Saint Ambrose, That his Majesty was greater than that of
his father; Quia Patri inferior, videri non poterat: For in what place soever
the Father should be, it could not be presumed that he should be less than
his Son; but of his Son it might perhaps have bin presumed otherwise: into
which error Arrius did afterward fall.

In Maiestate sua, etc. Our words here want weight, and our weak apprehension,
matter and form worthy so great a Majesty. In a Prince, a Lord, and in a
Judge, is necessarily required a kind of presence and authority beyond other
ordinary men. Esaias reports of his People, That seeing a man of a goodly
presence, and well clad, they said unto him, Thou have raiment, be our Prince.
Nor is this only necessary, but that his greatness and his Majesty be
every way answerable to the largeness of his Commission and Jurisdiction. And
therefore our Savior Christ being then to show himself a King of Kings, and a
Lord of Lords, and an universal Judge over all persons, and over all causes
since the first beginning of the world, to the end thereof, his Majesty must
needs be incomparable.

First, In respect of his person, The majesty of Christ at his coming to
judgment.
whose splendour and brightness shall eclipse and darken all the lights of the
World. At this his coming, his glory at the first (I mean of his soul) was
reserved and hid, so that therein they might not see the fearfulness of their
punishment: but in his coming to Judgment the light of his body shall be so
shining, and so extremely bright, that the Sun in comparison of it shall
seem as a candle. Saint Ambrose calls the Sun, the Grace of Nature, the
Joy of the World, the Prince of the Planets, the bright Lantern of the World,
the Fountain of Life, the Image of God, whom for it is beauty so many Nations
adored as a God: But in that day, the Sun, and the Moon it is Vicegerent, whom
they call the Queen of Heaven, shall be like unto those lights of the
Sheepheards, which are hardly to be discerned afar off. Saint John made in
his Apocalypse a description of this Majesty and beauty; he saw the Heaven
opened, and that a Horseman came forth, riding on a white Horse; from his eyes
flamed forth two Torches of fire; from his mouth issued a two edged Sword; in
his hand he had a Rod of Iron; on his head many Crowns; and on his thigh a
Letter, which being read spoke thus, The King of Kings, and Lord of Lords:
Great Armies of Horsemen did attend him, all on white Horses. This is a figure
and Type of our Savior Christ's coming to Judgment. The white horse is his
most holy and unspotted Humanity. Those flaming Torches of his eyes betoken,
That all things both great and small shall be laid open to his sight, there
shall not be any sin so secret, nor any fault so buried under ground, which
shall not appear at that general Trial; that being then to be verified of
every Sinner, which God said to David touching his murder and adultery; Thou
have done it secretly, but I will do it in the sight of the Sun. The two
edged Sword signifies the finenesse and sharpness of the Judges proceeding,
and that he is able to cut in sunder the marrow and bones of a Sinner; and like
a Razor meet with the least hair of evil that shall show it self. His Rod of
Iron shows the firmness and constancy of his Judgment, which shall not,
like those white Wands which the Judges bare before, be wrested this way and
that way at pleasure. Those many Diadems on his head, intimate those Crowns
that he shall clap on the heads of the Righteous, and those that have done
well. That glorious Letter of Rex Regum, because he shall there show himself to
be King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, many Kings of the earth shall have their
knees smitten like Balthazars, and their hearts throb within them, when they
stand before his presence expecting their fearful doom. Lastly, he shall
come accompanied with many Horsemen on white Horses, to show unto us, that he
shall be waited on by all the Court of Heaven. Solomon says, Tria sunt quae
been gradiuntur, quartum quod foeliciter incedit; Three creatures have a goodly
kind of gate, the Sheep, the Lion, and the Cock; but a King, whom none can
resist, carries more state with him than them all. Saint Gregory typifieth
this proverb to our Savior Christ, who did gallantly bear himself in four
of his most famous mysteries.

First, In that of his Redemption, represented in the sheep which is made
ready for the Sacrifice.

Secondly, In his Resurrection, figured in the Lion, Vicit Leo de Tribu Judah.
Whereunto Saint Paul does attribute our justification, Resurrexit propter
justificationem nostram.

Thirdly, In his preaching of the Gospel, fitly expressed in the Cock, who
with his crowing and clapping of his wings, awakeneth those that are asleep in
sin.

But his coming to judgment, which is deciphered unto us in his being a
King, does far exceed all the rest: For many were not bettered by his Death,
nor his Resurrection, nor his Doctrine, (though these were most precious
Treasures proffered to Mankind) because that Age wherein Christ came was an Age
of contradiction; but in this his coming to judgment that prophecy of
Zachary shall be fulfilled, Zach. 14.
And there shall be one Lord over all the earth, and his name shall be one.
Till then, this King shall go by little and little, ouercomming and subduing
his enemies; but when he shall come in his glory, then shall we see a most
stately triumph, and a quiet and peaceable possession: and that Stone which
Daniel saw loosed and vnfastned from the Mountain, shall then cease to pound
and beat into powder all the Empires and Seigniories of the earth; Thou shall
break them like a Potters Vessel. In a word, in this world, while we live
here, God is not absolutely ob^yed, nor served by us as he should be, no, not
of the Just themselves, and those that are the Elect children of God. So does
Saint Austen declare that place of the Canticles, Exui me tunica mea, quomodo
indu^ illa? Laui pedes meos, quomodo inquinabo illos? I have put off my coat,
How shall I put it on? I have washed my feet, How shall I defile them? How is
this to be borne withal, how is this to be suffered (says this sacred Doctor)
that the Spouse should use this liberty with her best Beloved? Whereunto he
answers, That the Just do not deny unto God his entrance into the house of
their Souls; but the Spouse does there discover the resistance which the Soul
makes in the behalf of the Senses, at that time when as God calls her unto
him. But in the day of Judgment the Soul shall be no more misled by the
Senses, but shall perfectly become subject to the will of God; so that the
Son of God shall appear then in greater power and Majesty than ever he did
before. But for to treat of the Majesty of the Father, the greatest and
deepest thoughts of Man is but as a Thimble, they are not able to conceive,
much less to contain the least part thereof. Daniel says, seeking to
express the greatness of his glory, and the mightiness of his power, Mill
millia ministrabant ei, and decies centena millium assist^^ant ei; The Pages
that attend his person must be numbered by thousands, and the Courtiers that
assist in his presence, by ten thousands of thousands: Arithmeticke wants
figures to set down these numberless numbers. Esaias saw him in a Throne of
Majesty and of glory, Plena erat domus Maiestate eius; but his feet and his
head covered with the wings of Seraphins: Giving us thereby to understand, That
these our corporal eyes may have a glimpse of the Majesty of his Throne, but
not of his person.

Lastly, That Majesty of his Court, which consists of so many Angelical
Hierarchies, What tongue! what tongue can paint out that unto thee, which is
beyond the proportion of thought? One Angel alone has struck with the fear
of death the valiantest and the holiest men that ever were; what would they
then do when they are a joint and united Body? Saint Chrysostom says, That
greater is the power of one Angel, than of all the men in the world, if all
their force and strength were molten together, and molded into one entire
mass. At Christ's birth, certain Squadrons of Angels came round about him,
saluting him with that heavenly Song of, Gloria in excelsis: but now they shall
come trouping all together, and some shall more particularly bewail with great
bitterness, those miseries that shall befall the World, and those that lived
therein; according to that of Esaias, The Angels of Peace shall weep bitterly.
Esaias 33.


The Evangelist does not here in this place understand the evil Angels, though
they shall come likewise upon this Theater, as well to be judged themselves, [
Nescitis quia Angelos judicabimus] as to serve as Atturneys for to open the
Sinners crimes and offenses, and as Hangmen, to execute the Judges Sentence. In
this life God oftentimes makes the good Angels to be the Executioners of his
wrath, as in Sodom, and in the first borne of Egypt, in overthrowing the
Chariots of Pharaoh, in Zenacharib, Heliodorus, and Herod; but his ordinary
kind of punishment is by evil Angels, Immissiones per Angelos malos; by which
he understands those fearful Plagues of Egypt, as Flies, Frogs,
Grasshoppers, Waspes, Homets, thick Clouds, Darkness that might be felt,
their Flocks and Herds of Cattle killed with Hail stones, Visions, idle
Dreams, and Fantasies, and the like, [ Sad shapes appeared unto them, and
Monsters did affright them;] whereby they that were living looked as if they had
been dead, Animae deficiebant traductione; These did the Devil carry away
bound hand and foot, to be cast into utter darkness: And when God shall set
these Catchpoles to arrest the Wicked, What will become of them? What will they
do?

With this Majesty and greatness shall that supreme Judge come, Upon the
Seat of his Majesty; whither it be a Throne of Clouds, Eccle. 24. Exodus 1^.
Psalm. 70. Psalm. 98.
according to that of Ecclesiasticus, Thronus eius in columna Nubis; and that
of Exodus, Veniam in caligine Nubis; or whither it be a Throne of Cherubins,
according to that of David, Qui seeds super Cherubim; or whither of the Just,
(as Origin would have it;) sure I am, that he shall come with that grave and
austere countenance, and with that awful and fearful look, that Malachy
might very well say, Who shall endure to look upon him?

Congregabuntur ante eum omnes Gentes.
All Nations shall be gathered before him. It is as true, as it is fearful,
That all men shall meet together in one, All shall appear in judgment.
all that did enjoy the light of this world; for so many Kindreds, nay,
thousands of Ages, whither they perished in the element of Fire, and so turned
to ashes; or whither they were devoured by the Fowls of the air, or the
Beasts of the field; or whither they became the food of fishes in the Sea; or
whither that their bodies remain in their graves; or whither like rubbish they
lie buried under ruinous buildings; or howsoever they have passed through
diverse and sundry transmutations; yet notwithstanding in the end all shall
come and present themselves upon this public Stage; all those Nations that
are so differing in their manners and behavior, in their Idiomes and their
Languages, in their Rights and Ceremonies, in their Laws and their Customs,
whither remaining in the maine Continent, or in the Islands environed with the
Sea: And what wonder can be greater, or what sight so strange, as to see all
the men in the world to appear body and soul, before his divine Majesty, at
the voice of an Angel, when he shall trumpet forth this short summons unto
them, Surgite mortui, etc. But two other wonders more fearful than this (I
fear me) will be seen: The one, That all men's hearts shall be opened, and
every man both inwardly and outwardly shall appear so plain and so clear to
our sight, that there shall not be any thought, though never so closely hid,
nor any fault, though never so deeply buried, that shall not be made open and
manifest: According to that of Saint Paul to the Corinthians, Omnes manifestari
oportet ante Tribunal Christi, 2. Cor. 5.10.
We must all be manifested before the Judgment Seat of Christ. Whereupon
Saint Theodoret weighing the word Manifestari, which in the original is the
same with Perlucidos esse, Transparent, and clear as Crystal; wherein those
black spots and ^oule stains that are in our Souls, will appear the more
ugly and loathsome, o! How strange a spectacle will this be? How sole and
singular in the world? o! what a great fear will it strike into us, not only
in regard of the innumerable number of such various and uncouth things, things
heretofore never presumed, or once thought upon; but also in respect of the
heart of man, which being so inscrutable a thing, and for so many years of
man's life, past searching out, and not to be discovered and set forth in it is
true life and colors; that this heart, I say, of Man shall in an instant be
laid so open, that all maskes shall be vnpin'd, all disguises taken off, whose
hollownesse and hypocrisy shall now appear to God and the World. Immagine
that God should show this miracle in open Court, and that the hearts of all
should lie open to the eyes of all, (as he did discover to Ezechiel every
form of creeping things, Ezech. ^.
and abominable Beasts, and all the Idols of the House of Israel portrayed
upon the wall of the Temple) How ashamed will the very best of Gods children
be of their actions, but much more the wicked, to see their sins laid open
to others view, and their own confusion? Nor shall these our sins be
conspicuous only to others, but every offender shall see and plainly
perceive his own particular sins: For there is no man that fully knows his
own sins while he liue^ here in this world. And so does Saint Basil
interpret that place of the Psalmist, Arguam te, and statuam contra te faciem
tuam; Every man shall then behold himself as in a glass. In a word, This day
will be the summing up of all those o^^ former days, wherein, as in a
beadroll, we shall read all the loose actions of our life, all our idle words,
all our evil works, all our lewd thoughts, or whatsoever else of ill that our
hearts have conceived, or our hands wrought. So does a grave Author expound
that place of David, Dies formabuntur, and nemo in eis, In that day shall all
days be formed and perfected, for then shall they be clearly known. Et nemo
in eis; This is a short and cutted kind of speech, (idest) There shall not be
any thing in all the world which shall not be known in that day.

The other wonder shall be, That all this business shall be dispatched in a
moment; In ictu oculi, says Saint Paul, In the twinkling of an eye. The
Greek Text in stead of a moment, renders it Atomo, which is the least thing in
nature: Concluding this point with that saying of Theophilact, Haec est res
omnium mirabilissima, This is the greatest wonder of all.

Statuet Oues a dextris eius, and Haedos a sinistris.
He shall place the Sheep at his right hand, and the Goats at the left. Daily
experience teaches us, That what is good for one, is naught for another; that
which helps the Liver, hurts the Spleen; one and the self same Purge
recouers one, and casts down another; the Light refreshes the sound Eye, and
offends the sore; Wisdom says, That those Rods which wrought amendment in
the Children of Israel, hardened the hearts of the Egyptians; the one procured
life, the other, death; darkness to the one was light, and light to the other,
darkness. When Ioshuah pursued the Ammorites, God poured down Hailestones,
Lightning, and Thunder; to Gods enemies they were so many Arrows to kill them;
to his friends, so many Torches to light them. In the light of thy Arrows,
Abac. 3.
says Abacuc. Death to the Wicked is bitter, to the Good, sweet; Judgment to
the Goats is sad and heavy, but to the Sheep, glad and joyful; to the one a
beginning of their torment, to the other, of their glory. And therefore it is
here said, He shall place the Sheep at his right hand.

From this beginning, arises the Iust's earnest desiring of this our Saviors
coming, and the Wicked's seeking to shun it. Which is made good by Saint
Austen, upon that place of Haggie, He shall come, being wished for of all
Nations: And his reason is, because our Savior Christ being desired, it is fit
that he should be known; and for want of this knowledge, it seems unto him,
that this place does not so much suit with his first, as his latter coming.
Saint Paul writing to his Disciple Timothy, says, That the Just do long for
this judgment; 2. Tim. 4. Romans 2.
His qui diligunt aduentum eius; Agreeing with that of Saint Paul to the
Romans, That the Just pass over this life in sighs and tribulations, expecting
that latter day, when their bodies shall be free from corruption, and from
death. Saint John introduces in his Apocalypse the souls of the Just, crying
out, Vsque quo Domine, sanctus, and verax? Non judicas, and vindicas sanguinem
nostrum, de his qui habitant in terra? Apoc. 6.
How long, Lord, holy and true, etc. Saint Austen and Saint Ambrose both say,
That they do not here crave vengeance on their enemies, but that by his
coming to judgment, the Kingdom of Sin may have an end. Which is the same
with that which we daily beg in those words of our Paternoster, Thy Kingdom
come. And Saint John in his last Chapter says, The Spirit and the Spouse, say
Come, Come Lord, come quickly, make no long tarrying.

That the Sinner should hate this his coming, is so notorious a truth, that
many when things go cross with them, would violently lay hands on themselves,
and rid themselves out of this miserable world, if it were not for fear of
this Judgment. And this was the reason why Saint Paul in saying, It is
decreed, that all men shall die once; presently adds, After death, Judgment:
Other wise there would be many, as well discreet, as desperate persons, that
would cry out, Let us die, and make an end of our selves at once; for a
speedy death is better than a long torment. This is that that keeps these
fools in awe, and quells the vain confidence of man in general.

Tunc dicet Rex his, qui a dextris eius erunt, vsque esuriui, etc.
Then shall the King say to them on his right hand, I was hungry, etc. He
begins with the rewarding of the Good; for even in that day of justice, he will
that his mercy go before, as well for that it is Gods own proper work, as
also for that it is the fruit of his blood and death.

Venite Benedicti Patris mei, [Come ye blessed of my Father,] (a most sweet
word in so fearful a season) possidete Regnum, Come ye, and take possession
of an eternal Kingdom.

Quia esuriui, I was hungry, etc. Some man may doubt, Why Christ at the day of
judgment, being to examine all whatsoever actions of virtue, does here only
make mention of mercy? I answer, For that Charity is that Seal and Mark
which differenceth the Children of God from those of the Devil, the good
Fis^es from the bad, and the Wheat from the Chafe; Ecce, ego judico inter
Pecus and Pecus, Ezech. 36. Romans 13.
so says Ezechiel: and in sum, it is the sum of the Law, as Saint Paul
writes to the Romans.

Secondly, He makes mention only of the works of mercy, for to expel that
error wherein many live in this life; to wit, That this business of
Almsdeeds is not given us as a Precept whereby to bind us, but by way of
council and advice, whereby to admonish us. And this is a great sign and token
of this truth, for that there is scarce any man that accuses himself for the
not giving of an Alms: But withal, it is a foul shame for us to think that
God should condemn so many to eternal fire, for their not showing pity to
the Poor, if it were no more but a bare council and advice. Gregory
Nazianzen, in an Oration which he makes of the care that ought to be had of
the Poor; proves out of this place, That to relieve the poor and the needy,
is not Negotium voluntarium, sed necessarium, not a voluntary, but a
necessary business. And Saint Augustine and Thomas are of opinion, That we
are bound to relieve the necessities of our neighbor, be it with food, or
apparel, or council, or our assistance, according to the measure of their
necessity, and our ability, governing our selves therein according to the
rules of wisdom.

Hence it follows, that the sin of cruelty carries with it a kind of
desperation. For (as Saint Augustine says) he must be condemned to eternal
fire, who has not clothed the naked, who has not fed the hungry; he that
strips another man of his clothes, and he that ^natcheth a morcell of meat
from the mouth of the hungry: and what shall become of him in the end,
Iudicium sine misericordi^ his, qui non faciunt misericordiam, Let not him
(says Saint James) look for mercy in the world to come, James. 2.
that shows not mercy in this life. One of the reasons, why Hamon, King
Assuerus his great Fauourit, found no pity in Queen Esters, nor the Kings
breast, though he besought it on his knees, and with tears in his eyes, was,
for that he had plotted such a merciless tyranny, as to destroy all the Jews
both men, women, and children, at one blow; and therefore deserved no favor.
Nathan p^opounding to David that Parable of him, That having many Sheep of his
own, had robbed his Neighbor of his only Sheep, having no more besides in
all the world; was so incensed against this so great an injury, that he held
him for the present unworthy of pardon; As the Lord lives, he is the child of
death. In a word, the Word of God cannot fail. And Amos in his fourth and
sixth Chapter, threatens those powerful cruel ones with most severe
punishments. And Solomon says, That the hard heart shall have many a shrewd
pang when he lies on his death bed.

This Doctrine has in it is favor three powerful reasons.

The first, In the secular state; for the elder brother is bound to maintain
his younger brothers, and upon this condition is he made the heir of his
house; otherwise he should be condemned for unkind and cruel. God (says Saint
Basil) made the rich man the elder brother, that he might relieve his younger
brother, the Poor. And Malachie says, That the hungry, the naked, and the
maimed man, on whom the rich man bends his brow, is his brother; that they have
one and the same God to their Father, and one and the same Church to their
Mother.

The second, Our Savior Christ is not contented that thou should make
account that thou give thy brother an alms, but thy self: And he does
reveal this truth, and notify it unto thee, to the end that thou should not
despise the Poor; Haec requies mea, reficite lassum, hoc est meum refrigerium.
How is it possible (o Lord) that the succouring of the Poor should be thy ease
and thy refreshing? Because I (says our Savior) am that poor Man; and happy
is he, who under the rags of the Poor, divides the riches of God.

The third, That this charity toward the Poor gives us an assurance of
Heaven: Charity affoords great confidence to all that practice it, Tob. 4.
and will not suffer their soul to go into darkness. Besides, David calls
that man happy, whose sins are covered; Beatus vir, cuius tecta sunt
peccata. And Solomon, and Saint Peter affirm, That Charity couers a multitude
of sins, Vniuersa peccata operit Charitas.

Discedite in ignem eternum.
Go into everlasting fire. This is a most cruel punishment, A difference of
punishment according to the difference of Sins.
in regard of the despair of any future comfort. Micheas treating of a
punishment that God was to inflict upon his People, says, I will make a
wailing like the Dragons, and mourning as the daughters of the Owl; Quia
desperata est plaga eius, For her wound is incurable. O, with what tears, o,
with what hideous shreekes ought man to bewail the desperate torments of
Judgment, and of Hell? This punishment all the damned shall equally suffer;
nor there is not the immagination of any thing that can so much affright and
dismay us. But in those other punishments, some shall suffer more than
other-some, their shame, confusion, and their hellish torments, being
answerable to the nature of their offenses.

The first sort that shall suffer the seuerest punishment, shall be the Jews;
who in crucifying our Savior Christ, committed the greatest sin, and the
heinousest offense that ever was committed in the World* Who, when at the day
of judgment they shall see and perceive whom they so impudently abused,
shamefully mocked, cruelly scourged, scornefully crowned, rigorously handled,
spit upon, buffeted, and crucified, and all undeservedly; being one that wished
them all good, hugged them under his wing, as the hen clocketh her chickens,
wept over them, and mourned for them; they shall remain so thunder-strucken,
so astonished, so daunted, and so dead with fear, and the horror of their
punishment, that they shall cry unto the mountains, and call unto the hills,
with a Cadite super nos, Fall upon us. This lamentable and wretched condition
of theirs, Zachar. 12.
Zachary points at, in these words, Et aspicient ad me, quem confixerunt,
They shall look upon me whom they have pierced. And Saint John; Videbunt, in
quem crucifixerunt, They shall see whom they have crucified. And in the
Apocalips, Videbit eum omnis oculus, Every eye shall see him; But especially
they, Qui eum pup^gerunt, That goard him. O what a cruel taking must they be
in, who are guilty to themselves in that day, how cruelly they used the Savior
of the World?

The second sort, are those cast-awayes, that have made a covenant with Hell,
whilst they lived here on Earth: Of whom Esaias says, Percussimus foedus cum
morte, Esaias. 28.
and cum inferno fecimus pactum (i.) Those desperate thieves that have made a
league with the Gallows. And those unworthy Communicants, of whom Saint
Paul, That they eat and drink their own condemnation; Iudicium sibi manducat
and bibit. Of these, the said Esaias asks, Which of you can dwell with the
devouring Fire? Aut quis habitabit cum ardoribus sempiternis? Are ye of that
metal, that ye can suffer eternal fire, who are not able to endure
temporal heat? Let the most desperate amongst you, he that imagines he is able
to endure any torment, put but his finger awhile into the flame but of a
candle, and he will soon tell me another tale.

The third sort, are those that profess a perpetual and everlasting hatred to
Virtue and Goodness, follow tyranny with delight, and take a pleasure in
sinning, thinking there is no life to that which is vicious: According to that
of Esaias, He that departs from evil, makes himself a prey; It is death to
them, to do otherwise. And as Hosea has it, Sanguis, sanguinem tetigit,
Against these, God shall come armed with a corslet of Justice, and with robes
of Vengeance, and with a cloak of Zeal, and like a swift torrent, he shall
sweep away these reeds and bulrushes, etc.

The fourth sort, are those who deny God eyes to see the infinite sum and
mass of those things that pass amongst men. First, because in themselves they
are material; and God is a pure Spirit, and incorporeall, and therefore they
dream he has no eyes to see our actions. Secondly, because humane actions
are oftentimes so nastie and so loathsome, that God will not vouchsafe to
stoop so low, Psalm. 93.
as to look upon them. Et dixerunt, non videbit Dominus nec intelligit Deus
Jacob. Against these men, says David, Intelligite insipientes in populo. The
Hebrew styles them, Bestiales: Hear o ye brute beasts, harken o you beasts,
and be wise. Et stulti aliquando sapite, O ye fools when will ye understand?
Qui plantauit aurem, non audiet? aut qui finxit oculum, non considerat? God
gave man ears, eyes, understanding, and reason, and shall all these faculties
be wanting to him? All the perfection of these effects are most eminent in the
primary cause. And therefore, if God gave man his hearing, his sight, and his
understanding, much more must he enjoy them, who was the Author and only
giver of them. Qui corripit gentes, non arguet? Qui docet hominem scientiam,
(i.) He that corrects the Nations shall he not reprove? He that teaches man
knowledge, etc.

The fifth sort, are those, who acknowledging in God his Providence, and his
Justice; yet will not be persuaded, that it can be so severe in that day. So
says the Psalmist; Secundum multitudinem irae suae non quaeret: And the cause
is presently rendered, Diuisi sunt ab ira, vultus eius. Sophonia, painting out
certain men unto us drowned in their vices, says, Defixos in faecibus eius,
They are drowned in the dregs of their sins. And by and by gives a reason
for it; Dicunt enim in cordibus suis, non faciet Dominus been, non faciet
Dominus male. On the one side, they make this reckoning with themselves, That
God is good, liberal, merciful, and that he will not do us much harm: and
that on the other side, as he is just, he will not do us much good. In this
sin live they, who hearing from the Prophets and the Preachers of Gods Word,
the horrors and terrors of that day, say in their heart; In multos dies, and in
longa tempora hic Prophetat; as Ezechiel relates it unto us; Manda, remanda,
expecta, reexpecta, As Esaias complains. What need these Prophets beat their
brains and keep such a stir about the day of Judgment? etc. And this fault, is
by so much the greater, Ezech. 12.
by how much God does so often inculcate and reiterate in holy Scripture, the
terrible^es of that day. For there is not that Prophet which does not multiply
his meditations, and does not indeere the horror of that day; using many
fearful comparisons, for to strike a dread and terror unto us, in the woeful
expression of them. All which, Esaias shuts up in these few words, In nouissimis
diebus, intelligetis ea. Peradventure you that now hear me tell you this, do
not persuade your selves that this is true, nor believe what I speak unto you;
but in the end (unless God give you the grace to be of another mind) ye will
too late, and yet too soon to your own grief, acknowledge and confess your
error.

The last sort are those, who being puffed up with their prosperity, do
disesteeme and despise those that wrestle with adversity, and groan under the
burden of their miseries; thinking with themselves, That those blessings which
God has bestowed upon them in this world, shall continue with them in that
other. The Wicked live, and are comforted with Riches, says Job; but in Hell
(the Poor being in Paradise, and they in torment) they shall be forced to cry
out and say of the Poor and Hungry, and the Naked, These are they whom we
sometimes scorned. To whom Solomon makes this reply, Parata sunt derisoribus,
judicia eius: Prou. 19.
They shall be brought upon that perdurable and eternal Stage of laughter and
scorn, set up by the Devils of Hell, never to be pulled down; who shall
represent themselves unto these mocke-games now, that were once mockers and
deriders of their poor brethren, in that formidable and ghastly manner, as
shall make their hair stand an end, whilst they shall hear (to aggrauate
their griefs) that severe Sentence, and that irreuocable Doom, pronounced from
the infinite Majesty of an austere and angry Judge, Go ye into everlasting
fire, etc. From which the Lord, etc.

THE SEVENTH SERMON, UPON THE TVESDAY AFTER THE FIRST SUNDAY IN LENT.
MAT. 21. Cum introisset Jesus Hierosolymam, commota est vniuersa Ciuitas.

When Jesus entered into Jerusalem, the whole City was troubled.


THe Story of this Gospel is set down at large in those two Chapters,
Justification a greater work than Creation.
In Tomo miraculorum, which was a fit place to treat thereof. For Origin says,
That this was a greater miracle than Christ's turning of Water into Wine, at the
Wedding in Canaan. And Saint Hierome, That it was greater than any other of our
Saviors miracles; Inter Signa omnia, quae fecit, hoc videtur mirabilius: And
the reason is, For that in Lazarus that was dead, and in the Man that was
blind, he met with no contradiction or repugnancie: but for to move so many,
nay, so innumerable wills as those of Jerusalem, and that they should be drawn
to receive him as their King and Messiah, whom the Clergy and Nobility did so
much hate and abhor, carries with it a plain and manifest resistance. And,
as Saint Augustine says, That to justify a Soul, is more than to create
Heaven and Earth, in regard of the opposition which the will of Man may make
thereunto; so, for our Savior to move those that were alive in that most
populous City, was more than to raise the dead.

And for confirmation of this Doctrine, let us suppose that the earth is of
that stabilitie and firmness, that to move it is a Blazon or Cognizance only
belonging unto God. Ecclesiasticus says, Terra autem in eternum stat. And
Athanasi^s giving the reason thereof, says, That God did knit and fasten it in
the midst of the world with such strong chains, that it remained altogether
immoouable, as being the Center to all the rest which God had created. Qui
fundasti terram super stabilitatem suam: The Greek reads it Securitatem, or
Infallibilitatem. And therefore many Philosophers were of opinion, That all the
power of the Gods were not able to move it from it is place. But because
nothing is impossible unto God and his omnipotent power, the Scripture almost
in every place says, That the Heaven, the earth, and that which is under the
earth, and all the firmness and strong foundation thereof, are moved, and
shake and tremble at the twinkling of his eyes. If then to move the Earth
(which is a dead thing, and which cannot make resistance, nor contradiction)
be only the Blazon and Cognizance of God; What a thing then is it, to move
this living Earth, which enioyes it is own liberty, and may out of it is
stubbornenesse say unto God, I will not. But admit it should say, I will, the
miracle is no less, but rather a manifest token of Gods divine power and
omnipotency.

It is likewise to be noted, That all the entrances which our Savior Christ
made, were with a great deal of noise and clamor. In that first which he made
in the world, Haggie prophesied, Hag. 1.
That he should turn the Heaven and the Earth topsi-turuie. And God did
perform it, using as his Instrument therein, the Emperor Octauianus Augustus.
In that which he made into Egypt, he did trouble all that Kingdom, by
throwing their Idols down to the ground, as it was prophesied by Esayas,
Commouebuntur simulachra Aegypti: So does Procopius declare it, Eusebius,
Athanasius, and Saint Austen: But say, That in these his entrances there was a
general motion, yet was there not a general obedience. But here Commota est
vniuersa Ciuitas: The Greek says, Velut terrae motu concussa fuit. As if it
had suffered an universal earthquake; there was neither old man, nor woman, nor
child, etc.

This is a great encarecimiento, or endeering of the matter.

First, Because our Savior preaching about the Cities and Towns of that
Kingdom, the Evangelists deliver unto us, That all the Inhabitants that were
in those parts, left their houses and their villages empty and forsaken, and
only for to follow him. S. Mark, he says, Et conueniebant ad eum vndique, vt
iam non posset manifest introire in Ciuitatem, sed in Desertis locis esset.
And Saint Luke, That they troad one another under foot, and crushed the breath
out of their bodies, and only to press to hear him; Ita vt se mutuo
suffocarent. But it is to be supposed, that many likewise staid at home; but in
this his entrance into Jerusalem, God would have this lot to light upon all,
and therefore it is said, Vniuersa Ciuitas, The whole City.

Se^ondly, In regard of the infinite number of Inhabitants that were in that
City; which (as Pliny reports) was in those days the famousest in all the
East: And, in a manner, all those that have writ thereof make mention of four
millions of persons. Josephus relates, That the President of Syria being
desirous to render an account unto Nero, of the greatness of that
Commonwealth, did desire of the high Priests, that they would give him a true
note of the number of those Lambs which they sacrificed one Sabbath, which were
afterward eaten by several companies and Households, some consisting of ten,
some of 15, and some, 20 souls; and they found, The greatness of the Jewish
Sacrifices.
that they did sacrifice at every one of those their solemn Sabboths, two
hundred fifty six thousand and five hundred Lambs; which, according to the
rate of fifteen persons in a company, amount to four millions and five
hundred thousand. But withal, it is to be noted, that neither the Sick nor
the children were present thereat. But here, Vniuersa Ciuitas, The whole City
came, some out of passion, and some out of affection.

Thirdly, For that our Savior Christ was already condemned to death by the
Chapter house of the Clergy, who had called a Convocation, to send out
Sergeants and Soldiers for the apprehending of him, and had published
Proclamations of rewards to those that should bring him bound unto them: that
then, and at such a time the whole City should receive him with Songs and
acclamations of King, Messiah, and God (being a proscribed man, and doomed to
death) Haec mutatio dextrae excelsi, This was an alteration which could not
proceed but from the most High.

Commota est vniuersa Ciuitas.
The whole City was moved. Jerusalem had been long settled in it is vices,
Visitabo super viros defixos in sordibus suis, Moab requieuit in faecibus suis,
I will search Jerusalem with candles, and punish the men that are settled on
their lees, etc. And as the wise Physicians stir and trouble the humors,
cause loathings and gripings in the stomach; so our Savior Christ in the
breast of every one causes a squeamishness of the stomach by moving and
stirring those foul dregs of sin wherewith they were corrupted. Et commota
est vniuersa Ciuitas. Hierem. 4.
Many old diseases are wont to be cured with some sudden passion, as of
sorrow, or fear, or by some great and violent vomit; for every one of these
accidents make a pause in the humors, and detain the spirits: An Ague has
been seen to be put out of his course, and quite taken away by the sudden
drawing of a sword upon the Patient: and a Palsy driven away with the sight of
a man's enemy. And Horace tells us, That a covetous Miser was recovered of a
great Lethargy, by the Physicians feigning that his heirs were carrying away
his bags of money, and the Chests wherein his Treasure lay. In like manner,
in the infirmities of the Soul, one turbation, one disquieting, one breaking
up of those Chests wherein our sins are massed up, may be the recovery of
our perdition. This made David to say of his Soul, Sana contritiones eius,
quia commota est, O Lord, my Soul is troubled within me, when I consider the
foulness of my sins; it is sad and melancholy for the very grief thereof;
it is much disquieted: And therefore (o Lord) Sana contritiones eius, afford
me thy helping hand, for it is now high time to cure me of my sore.

Quis est hic? Who is this?
Gods majesty not to be described.
This was a question of the envious and appassionated Pharisees: Howbeit it
seems to Origin, That it should proceed from some good honest people, etc.
Howsoever, it was a question, whereunto no man could fully answer: put
Theology, the sacred Scripture, the Doctors, the Saints, the Counsels, the
Arts, the Sciences, and all the Hierarchies of Angels, put them all (I say)
together, and put this question unto them, and after that they have said all
they can say, all will be too little to satisfy this demand of Quis est hic?
Who is this? One of Jobs friends treating of the Majesty and greatness of
God, and how incomprehensible a thing it was, says, Forsitan vestigia Dei
comprehendes? Et vsque ad perfectum omnipotentem reperies? Job. 11.
Can thou by searching find out Gods footsteps? Can thou find out the
Almighty unto perfection? By the tracke of his footsteps, he understands
these inferior things that are guided and governed by his providence; And by
perfection, which is the head of all, the highness of his Wisdom. In a word,
In all, God is altogether inuestigable; in regard of his height, the Heavens
come short of him, Excelsior Coelo est; see then if thou can reach unto him.
Which consideration made Saint Austen to say, That God is not only present in
earth, which is his footstool, and in Heaven, which is his Throne; but in
those which are to be immagined elsewhere. How then can thou reach unto him,
being more deep than Hell, longer than the Earth, and broader than the Sea?
God tharefore being on the one side so embowelled in and beneath the Earth;
and on the other, so wholely out of the same, (as Saint Hilarie proves it,
Intus and extra super omnia, and internus in omnia;) How can he fully know
all, that is in Heaven, in Hell, in the bowels of the Earth, or in the bottom
of the Sea? Many perhaps cannot give a full answer to this; but the Pharisees,
had they not been blinded with envy, might have contented themselves with
that of Moses, For he has written of me; or of Ezechiel, who did prophecy of
him, That he was the King and Shepherd of Israel; or of John Baptist, who
pointed him out unto them as it were with the finger; or of his Works and
Miracles, For they bear witness of me; of the Father, John. 5.
who proclaimed him in Jordan to be his Son; of the Devils of Hell, who with
open voice acknowledged him to be the Son of God; of the little children, who
cried out, Hosanna to the Son of David, blessed is he that comes in the
name of the Lord.

Quis est hic? Who is this? Whether better a public life or a private.
Diverse and sundry times Christ had entered into Jerusalem, and they had never
asked this question before: but now the triumph and the Majesty of this King
awakens the tongues of these envious People, who now begin to ask, Quis est
hic? It has been an ancient question doubted of, of old, Which is the better
life, that of a public, or a private person* Seneca in an Epistle of his,
seems to favor the former; Miserable (says he) is that man's fortune who
has no enemy to envy him. And Persius says, That it is a great glory to
have men point with the finger, and to say, There goes the Kings Favorite. But
Job, he seems to like better of the latter, O, Job 10.18.19.
that I had given up the ghost, and no eye had seen me: would I had been as
though I had not been: and that I had been carried from the womb to the
grave. Wishing himself to have been of that short continuance in the world,
that no man might have known whither he had died or lived. And Horace, Neque
vixit male, qui natus moriensque fefellit, His life let none bemone, who lived
and di'd unknown. Both lives have so much to be said on either side, that the
question remains yet unresolved. But admit that a public life be the more
desired, yet it is not the safest; for always the more honor, the more danger.

Who is this? Your great Persons, and those that prosper in the world, carry
wheresoever they go, such a noise with them, that they give occasion to the
People to ask, Quis est hic? John Baptist when he thundered out in the
Desert, (clad in Camells hair) That the Kingdom of God was at hand; judging
him to be some celestial Monster, they sent out to enquire of him, with a Tu
quis es? Who art thou? The Angels seeing our Savior Christ ascend unto Heaven
with such a deal of Majesty and glory as was never seen before; began to
ask, Quis es iste qui venit de Edom? Who is he that comes from Edom? And
Esaias speaking of a great Tyrants coming down to Hell, says, Hell was
troubled at thy coming. In a word, it is true in nature, That the lofty
Cedars, and the highest and tallest Pine Trees make the greatest noise when
they are shaken with the wind; and the greatest Rivers the greatest roaring:
And therefore it is no marvel they should ask, Who is this? When a Merchant
shall go apparelled and attended like a Knight, or some great Lord, and his
wife and daughters like a great Lady and her children; Who will not ask, Quis
est hic? I knew his Grandfather, etc. And for that the Pharisees were envious,
they did speak reprochfully of our Savior, every foot vpbraiding him, That
he was a Carpenter, and the son of a Carpenter; and seeing him now enter
Jerusalem like a King, they demanded in scorn, Quis est hic?

Hic est Jesus Propheta a Nazareth Galileae.
Deuteronomy. 18.
This is Jesus. By name a Savior, and by office a Prophet; Alluding to that
promise made in Deutronomie, I will raise up a Prophet of thine own Nation:
Being a plain Prophecy of our Savior Christ, as appears in the third of
the Acts; His Country, Nazareth, where he was bred, they not knowing that he
was borne in Bethlem. Now these wise men of this World asking with this scorn,
Who is this? and the foolish ones answering with that discretion, This is
Jesus, etc. agrees well with those thanks which our Savior gave unto his
father, Because thou have hid these things from the Wise, and have revealed
them to Babes. It is Gods fashion, to overcome a Pharaoh with Flies; and by a
silly woman, to confound the Learned, who said, In Beelzebub the Prince of
Devils he casts out Devils: by a blind man, the Judges of Jerusalem; by a
low Zacheus, a tall Giant. The order of Grace is different from that of Nature:
God, as a natural Author, Media per summa gubernat, Gouernes the mean things
by the highest, says Dionysius. First, he communicates his virtue and his
power to the supreme causes; and by them, to the meaner and the lowest. The
Sun shines first upon the Mountains, and then shows it self in the
Valleys, etc. But Grace oftentimes does first illuminate the lowest Bottoms,
and shines oftener in them, than on the Mountains: it called the Sheepeheards
before it called the Kings; it appeared unto the Ignorant before the Wise; and
showed it self to Balaams Ass, before his Master took notice of it. And
therefore Ecclesiasticus says, That the Soul of a Just man attaineth to more
truth, than those Watch-Towers that are reared on the highest Walls;
understanding thereby your greatest Clerks. A just and upright man will now
and then afford you better council than many wise men; howbeit in matters of
difficulty, and deep points of knowledge, and of Faith, we must always have
recourse to the Wise.

Caepit eijcere omnes ementes and vendentes.
He began to cast out all the Buyers and the Sellers. Zachary prophesying of
this entrance, says, Ecce, Rex tuus veniet tibi mansuetus, Behold, thy King
shall come unto thee, meek. How can these two suit together, Mansuetus, and
Triumphator, gentle, and yet a Conqueror? Tears in his eyes, and yet so
angry, that he never showed himself more? I have given some reasons hereof in
another place; those that now offer themselves are these:

The first, That Mercy and Justice are the two Poles of Gods government: By
those tears in his eyes, Mer^^e and Justice the two Poles of Gods government.
and by those words of lamentation from his mouth, and by moving the hearts of
that hard hearted City, our Savior gave notable proofs of his mercy. But
finding this insufficient to make himself known amongst them, his Justice
then did display it is power, by whipping those Merchants, and in them, the
Priests who had a share in their gains: Giving us thereby to understand, That
he that will not be brought to know God by his soft hand, and those sweet
favors of his Mercy, shall be made to know him by the whips and scourges of
his Justice. God prospers thy house, thou do not acknowledge it for a
blessing; he sends thee to an Hospital laden with diseases, that thy misery
may teach thee to know him: He gives thee health, thou art not thankful unto
him for it; he casts thee down on thy bed, and then thou give him thanks,
not ceasing night and day to call upon him, and to praise and bless his hol^
name. Ps^al. 32.
And therefore it is truly said, The Lord shall be known while he works
judgment. Our Sauioue (like a good Physician) tries us first by his mild and
gentle medicines, but they do no good; he therefore turns over a new leaf,
and applies those unto us that are more sharp and tart, whereby we come to
know as well his wisdom as his love.

The second, He began to cast out the Buyers and the Sellers; Because no man
should presume, that the glorious acclamations of a King, and of a Messiah,
should endure to permit in his Temple such a foul and unseemly buying and
selling: they had no sooner proclaimed him King, but he took the whip into his
hand, to scourge them for their offenses. In a Prince, in a Judge, and in a
Preacher, flatteries and fair words are wont to abate the edge of the Sword
of Justice; wherefore to show, That true praise ought the more to oblige a King
to vnsheath his Sword, he betook him to his Whip. That acclamation and
applause of the little children, our Savior accounted it as perfect and good;
[ Ex ore Infantium and Lactantiu^ perfecisti laude^ propter Inimicos tuos.]
Yet, for that a Prince, a Judge, or a Preacher, should not be carried away
with the praises of men; our Savior, though applauded in the highest manner
that the thought of man could immagine, Coepit eijcere Ementes and vendentes,
etc. Reges eos in virga ferrea, says David: In the name of the eternal
Father, thou shall (my Son) be their Ruler and their Judge, thou shall bear
in thy hand a Rod of iron, which shall not be bowed as are those other limber
wands of your earthly Judges: theirs are like fishing rods, which when the fish
bite not, continue strait and right, but if they nibble never so little at the
bait, presently bow and bend. Esaias called the Preachers of his time, Dumb
Dogs, not able to bark: And he presently renders the reason of this their
dumbness, They knew no end of their belly. To ear, and to talk, none can
do these two well and handsomely together; and because these Dogs have such
an hungry appetite, that they never give over eating, because nothing can fill
their belly, they are dumb, and cannot bark, they know not how to open their
mouths.

The third is of Saint Chrysostom and Theophilact; who say, Gods punishment
different from those of Earthly Princes.
That it was a kind of prophecy or foretelling, that these legal Offerings
and Sacrifices were almost now at an end. When Kings and Princes express their
hatred to any great Person in Court, it is a prognostication of that man's fall;
The wrath of a King is the messenger of death. Our Savior Christ, the Prince
of the Church, had twice whipped out those that had provided Beasts for the
Sacrifices of his temple; which was an undoubted token of their short
continuance, it being a great sign of death, that one, and such a one, should
come twice in this manner to visit them with the Rod. This conceit is much
strengthened by the words of our Savior Christ, Esaias 56.
(^oretold by the Prophet Esaias) The time shall come wherein my House shall be
called a House of Prayer, and not a Den of Thieves, nor a common Market of
buying and selling. So that he took these Whips into his hands as a means to
work amendment in his Ministers, and to sweep and make his House clean. The
Judges of the earth (says Saint Hierome) do punish a Delinquent, ad
ruinampunc; but God, adcust gationem; the one, to his utter undoing; the other,
for his amendment: And therefore he used no other weapons to chastise them
withal, but Rods and Whips, which work our smart, but not our death; they
pain us* but they do not kill us. Tertullian is startled, and stands much
amassed at that punishment which Saint Peter inflicted upon Ananias and Saphyra,
and says, That to bereave them so suddenly of their life, and to strike them
in an instant dead at his foot, was the punish^ent of a man, and of one that
had not long exercised, nor did well know what did belong on the office of a
Bishop. But our Savior Christ being come into the world to give men life, it
would not have suited with his goodness to give them death.

The fourth reason (which all do touch upon) was, The disrespect and
irreuerence which was shown to this his Temple; a sin which God does hardly
pardon: And therefore it was said unto Jeremy, Pray not therefore for this
People. And he presently gives the reason why, It has committed many outrages
in my House. Saint James advises, That the Sick should call unto the Priests,
to get them to pray unto God for him; but for him that should commit wickedness
in his Temple, God wills the Prophet Jeremy, that he should not so much as
pray for them. And Saint Paul says, That those who shall violate the Temple of
God, God shall destroy them.

Great is the respect which God requires to be had to his Temple.

First, In regard of his especial and particular presence there. Saint Austen
says, That David did pray be fore the Arc, Quia ibi sacratior and
commendatior praesentia Domini erat. For evermore God manifests himself more
in his Temple than any where else; that place being like Moses his Bush, or
Jacobs ladder; being therefore so much the more holy, by how much the more he
does there manifest himself, etc.

Secondly, He shows himself there more exorable, and more propitious to our
prayers: According to that request of Solomon in the dedication of the temple,
That his ears may be there opened. And it was fit it should be so, as Saint
Basil has noted it; for that, Prayer is a most noble act, and therefore as it
requires a most noble place, so likewise the greater favor appertains unto
it.

Thirdly, For that Christ is there present in his blessed Sacraments. And
therefore (as Saint Chrysostom has observed it) there must needs be there a
great company of celestial Spirits; for where the King is, there is the
Court.

Fourthly, For to stir up our devotion, by joining with the congregation of
the Faithful. And a learned man says, That the Temples and Houses of God did
put a new heart and new affections into men's breasts. What then shall become of
those who refuse these public places of praying and praising of God, and make
it a Den of Thieves, working all impiety and wickedness in these sacred
Assemblies?

The last reason of our Saviors being so angry, was, To see the covetousness
that was in his Ministers. Nothing mooues Gods patience more than the
covetousness of Priests, especially when they shall make a benefit to their
purse from the blood of the Alter. Notable is that place of Balaam, when he
went to curse the People of Israel, the Ass which carried him thither was
willing to show him his error, God opening his mouth, and making his tongue to
speak. And Saint Austen stricken into amasement at the rareness thereof,
confesses, Tha^ he knows not what greater wonder than this could possibly be
immagined, tha^ that the Prophet should not be affrighted, hearing an Ass to
open his mouth and reprove him. And he renders two reasons for it: The one,
That Sorceries and Witcheries were so common in those days; for there was not
any nation that had not it is Magicians and Sorcerers, as Trismegistus in
Egypt; Z^r^astes in Persia; Orpheus in Greece; besides many Sybels in diverse
other countries. The other, That he was blinded with that good round sum of
money which he was to receive out of hand* [ Habentes pretium diuinationis in
manibus] king Balack's Messengers had so greased his fists with good gold, that
he minded not that so great a miracle as the talking of his Beast. And this is
a thing worthy the noting, That Saint Hierome and Saint Austen do not only
make him a Prophet, but a holy Prophet, and that his covetousness had thus
misseled him. And as Saint Peter says, Through covetousness shall they with
feigned words make merchandise of you, whose judgment lingreth not, and whose
damnation slumbreth not; which have forsaken the right way, and are gone
astray, following the way of Balaam the son of Bozor, who loved the ways of
unrighteousness, but was rebuked for his iniquity, the dumb Ass forbidding
him his madness, by speaking unto him in a man's voice.

He began to cast out all the Buyers. That one man should be able to do more
than a whole Squadron, seems somewhat strange: but that none of those whom he
whipped should dare to give him so much as a word, is much more strange.

The first reason, says Saint Hierome, (which is also repeated by Thomas) was,
That the Majesty of the Deity shined in his face. Whither or no, that in our
Savior Christ that Majesty were ordinary, or whither he had then put it on,
for that it is a common custom with God, in those disrespects done to his
temple, to discover his greatness the more. And so when he punished
Heltodorus, who would have robbed the Treasury of the Temple, (wherein were
deposited those moneys which belonged unto Widows and Orphans) the Text
says, Spiritus omnipotentis Dei magnam fecit suae ostentionis euidentiam, The
Lord of Spirits, and the Prince of all power caused a great apparition, so that
all that presumed to come in with him were astonished at the power of God, and
fainted, and were sore afraid. A Lion when he waxes angry sparkeleth fire
forth of his eyes, and with his roaring makes all the beasts of the Forest
afraid, and to fly from his anger. The Lion of the Tribe of Judah was angry,
his eyes flamed forth fire; O culi eius tanquam flamma ignis, says the
Apocalypse. And Saint Hierome, That the beams of his wrath brake forth, and
that he roared out with a loud voice, What make these Thieves here in my
House, etc. Who is able to withstand him? Who can resist his rage? Seneca in
the Tragedy of Hercules, represents him there in that mad and furious manner,
that making toward his son, the very sight of him struck him dead.
Whereunto suteth that which the Prophet Abacuc says of God, Aspexit and
dissoluit Gentes, He beheld and cloue asunder the Nations. Abac. 3. Job. 25.
This force and power of Gods eye forced Job to say, Potestas and terror apud
Deum est, Dominion and fear are with him.

The second is, Vice ever afraid of Virtue.
That great cowardice which the face of Virtue casts on that of Vice; the
Armies of Enemies, the sight of Devils are not more fearful to behold. There
shall not in that final day of Judgment be any torment equal to that which
the Damned shall feel when they shall see the face of our Savior Christ, whom
they scorned, scoffed, and reviled. Joseph's brethren were astonished when they
heard hi^ say, Ego sum Joseph, I am your brother Joseph, Genesis 45.
whom ye persecuted and sold into Egypt, etc. To those eyes which have
always lived in darkness, the light is most painful unto them. And of the
damned in Hell Job says, Si subito aparuerit aurora, arbitrantur vmbram
mortis, Job 24.
The morning is to them even as the shadow of death. For this cause some
Doctors for their greater punishment will have the Damned that are in Hells
Dungeon, lie with their faces upward, looking toward Heaven. And Seneca in the
Tragedy of Hercules says, That when he dragged Cerberus out of that dark
place, as soon as he saw the light he drew himself back with that force,
that he had almost thrown that Conqueror to the ground. And in that rape of
Proserpina by Pluto, it is feigned, That when his Coach Horses came to see the
light, they striued with all their might and maine to return back again to
Hell. In like manner, those glittering beams of light which brake forth from
the eyes of our Savior Christ, did dazzle those of these Money Changers, and
made them to rest as men amassed.

Josephus reports, That there were three Sects amongst the Jews, the Essei,
the Iebusei, and the Saducei; and besides these, they had certain Scribes
which were their Sages, or the wisest men amongst them: The Greeks called them
Philosophers; the Chaldaeans, Magi; the Latins, Doctors. And of these there
were some in every Tribe, and in every Sect, and in every State, as it
passes now amongst us.

Epiphanius says, That they had two Offices.

The one, To expound the Law, and to preach it to the People, who came every
Sabbath to their Synagogues, as appears in the Acts. And as Josephus and
Philon has it, Acts. 9.
They were called Lectores, Readers, because they read unto them; and Scribes,
because they expounded the Scriptures. And Esdras terms them Scribes and
Readers: And Saint Luke relates, That Paul and Barnabas coming to Antiochia,
and entering into the Synagogue, a Scribe read the Law, and Saint Paul preached
unto the People. Acts 13.


The second Office was, To be Judges, He shall be delivered to the Princes, and
to the Scribes, and they shall condemn him to death, so says Saint Matthew.
And those that presented the Adulteress to our Savior Christ, were the
antientest of all the rest of the Sects; for it appears in Leuiticus, That
they began with that Law that commanded them not to drink wine, nor any thing
that might distemper them; That ye may have knowledge to discern betwixt that
which is holy and profane, and may teach the Children of Israel. They did use
likewise Philacteries, and other Hypocrisies: The Austeritie and Hypocrisy of
the Scribes.
And therefore our Savior did no less reprehend them, than he did the
Pharisees for their fringes, they would prick themselves with thorns, and their
feet were commonly besmeered with blood; they had the Law written in their
forehead, and in other parts of their apparel: Alluding to that commanded by
God in Deutronomie, Deuteronomy. 6.
Thou shall bind my Precept in thy hand. Josephus recounteth, That Alexandra
mother to Hircanus the High Priest, and to Aristob^lus, did greatly favor
them: and because after his mothers death he denied them this favor, he was
hated of the People. In a word, In divine worship, and in public prayer, they
were most respected; not because they were more holy, but because they did
strive to seem so: wherewith they did cloak their avarice and their cruelty;
and joining with the Merchants in their gains, they had equal part with them
also in their punishment: wherewith being offended, they afterward said, By
what power do thou these things? But they may be well enough answered with
that of Saint Chrysostom, Ye will not hear; but though ye be silent, the
little children shall speak forth his praise; and should they hold their
peace, the very Stones in the Street should voice him to be the King, and
Messiah.

THE EIGHTH SERMON, UPON THE WEDNESDAY AFTER THE FIRST SUNDAY IN LENT.
MAT. 12.38. Accesserunt ad Iesum Scribae and Pharisaei, dicentes, Magister,
volumus a te signum videre.

The Scribes and Pharisees came unto him, saying, Master, we would see a sign
from thee.


A After that famous miracle of him that was possessed with a Devil, as also
of the Deaf, Blind, and Dumb, The wicked behavior of the Pharisees toward
Christ.
and that our Savior Christ had with powerful reasons proved, That for such
a work as that, was necessarily required a supernatural virtue; the Scribes
and Pharisees came unto him, who were the grauest persons of that Commonwealth,
saying, Master, your person with those of our Religion is in great esteem; and
the wonders and miracles that thou have wrought amongst us, has won thee a
great deal of credit and reputation: but looking well into them, we have
found this one fault in them, that all of them are wrought upon ordinary and
common things; as in giving eyes to the Blind, a tongue to the Dumb,
dispossessing a Devil; miracles done as well by others as thy self, as our
own Prophets bear witness: and seeing thou have got thee a greater name than
they, we would feign see thee do greater miracles than they; as to stop the
Sun in his course, like Ioshuah; to rain down Manna from Heaven, like Moses;
to raise whirle-winds, cloth the air with clouds, rattle forth thunder, and
dart rays of lightning, as God did when he came to give the Law: In a word,
Master, we would have thee to show us a miracle from Heaven. Our Savior
Christ, who to a syllable knew how to spell this their damnable and deuilish
intention, said unto them, O ye accursed and adulterous generation, Seek ye
after signs in Heaven for to discredit those that are done on earth? Account
ye these as nothing? Are they illusions and impostures with ye? I tell you,
ye shall have no sign given ye but that of Jonas; the men of Niniuie shall
rise up in judgment against ye, and condemn ye for a stiff necked
generation, because they repented at the preaching of Jonas, and behold, a
greater than Jonas is here, and ye hear him not, nor are your stony hearts
made malleable with the hammer of his words and works. The Queen of the South
came from the uttermost parts of the earth to hear the wisdom of Solomon;
and behold, a greater than Solomon is here, and ye hear him not. Our Savior
Christ with this answer bung'd up the mouths of the Scribes and Pharisees;
whilst one of them that was subtiller than the rest, seeking to accuse him of
arrogancy, pulling him by the sleeue, told him, Behold, thy mother and thy
brethren stand without, desiring to speak with thee* As if he would have said,
What a deal of pride is this for a Carpenter, and the Ki^seman of a company
of poor Fishermen? But our Savior Christ proouing, That true Kindred was
contracted rather by the Spirit, than the Flesh, told them, My mother and my
brethren are those that do the will of my Father.

Generatio praua and adultera signum quaerit, etc.
A wicked and adulterous Generation seeks a sign. Though patience in our
Savior Christ were a thing so natural unto him, yet may it well be wondered
at, that to so many injurious both works and words, he made so mild an
answer. That Fire should burn, that Snow should cool, that what is heavy
should tend downward, and what is light ascend upward; that the Sun should
give light, that Heaven should glad the heart of man, that a Fountain should
flow, it is not much: But that the Sun, rising for and to all, should deny
his light to him that desires it; the Heaven, it is cheerfulness and
influences; the Fountain, water to the thirsty; and that our Savior Christ,
the chiefest of Jerusalem coming unto him, and with a great deal of respect
craving a sign and miracle of him, that he should make fools of them, and rid
them away for such, it is somewhat strange, and will require a Quaere, why and
wherefore he did it.

And this difficulty is made the greater, for that it is an incomparable piece
of service, to crave and beg any thing of God. The Scripture styles Prayer, A
sweet perfume: And the Church calls it, Scalam petitionum, The Ladder whereby
our Prayers ascend unto God: And he that petitions God as he ought, the more
he asks, the more God holds him his friend. And King Ahaz, who would not
require any miracle, the Prophet Esaias offering him Heaven, Earth, and Hell,
condemned him of ill manners, accusing him to have dealt therein very
discourteously with God. How comes it then to pass, that the most religious
and grauest kind of People that were in Jerusalem, coming to crave a miracle,
our Savior should give them this strange answer, A wicked and adulterous
generation seeks a sign, and no sign shall be given it, etc.

Reasons why our Savior thus answered the Pharisees.

The benefits in having Christ our master.


The first reason is, for that they scornefully called him Master, when as they
held him to be an Imposter, and one that was possessed with a Devil. One of
the greatest favors that ever God showed to his Church, was in giving our
Savior Christ to be it is Master; and the greatness of this good, he
particularly (amongst many other) discovered unto us in two effects:

The one, in dispelling the darkness of our ignorance; For as the light of
this material Sun, does enrich and beautify the day, bannishing from us the
pitchie darkness of the night, to the end, that these our corporal eyes may
behold the beauty of the World; so the light of that spiritual Sun, does
enrich and beautify the day of the new Law, driving from us the darkness of
the old Law: And therefore those times of the old Testament, were called by the
name of Night, Nox praecessit, (i.) The Night is p^st, etc.

The other, for that all Masters whatsoever in the World besides, do not
effectually persuade and move the Will of man; But this Master of ours, does
penetrate with his words, the very innermost parts of the Soul, and the secret
corners of the Heart; He mooues it, and persuades it by mild, yet powerful
means. Esaias, making a promise on Gods behalf to his people, this Doctor
touched both these effects, Dabit tibi Deus panem a^ctum, and aquam breuem,
(i.) God will give thee a little water and a little bread, but much learning,
Esaias 30.
for thou shall behold thy Master with thine eyes, Erun^ oculi tui videntes
praec^p^^rum. And with thy ears shall thou hear his voice, Et aures tuae
audient post ter^a monentis. Who shall be still admonishing and persuading
thee, Haec est via, ambulate in ea, This is the way, walk in it. A little
water and a little bread, but much light of learning; for toward those whom
God best loves, he carries a hard and straight hand, in those good things
which concern the body, but shows himself very frank and liberal in those
blessings that belong to the Soul. And one dram of Wisdom, is better than
many quintals of Gold. God did applaud Salomons petition, because making slight
account of riches, of lordships, and of revenging himself upon his enemies, he
did beg Wisdom at his hands: and therefore possessed with this divine
Spirit, he said afterward; Sap. 8.
Wis^dome is better than the most precious Riches, and whatsoever is to be
desired, is not comparable to it. Saint Jerome notes, that the Prophet says,
Thou shall see this thy Master with thy eyes, in regard of those just and right
actions, which he shall always set before thine eyes: And, that thou shall
hear him with thy ears, in regard, that as thou art a sinner, he shall be
still calling thee to repentance, preaching and crying out unto thee to return
back from thy evil ways, showing thee, that This is the way, walk in it. It
is a metaphore borrowed from a Trauailour that has lost his way amongst woods
and rocks, where he is ready at every step to break his neck; and therefore
like a good sheapheard, greeuing to see him thus wilfully to run on to his
destruction, he calls out aloud unto him, telling him, This is the way. In
like manner, the World being as it were lost, and blinded in the true
knowledge of God and his son Christ Jesus, setting before us the way of the
Gospel, he cries out unto us, that we might not go astray; Haec est via,
This is the way. This was a great, and extraordinary favor, and the Prophet
Joel gives the parallel thereof to the Church; Joel 2.
Filij Syon exaltate, and latamini in Domino D^o vestro, quia dedit vobis
Doct^rem iustitiae, (1.) Exalt ye sons of Sion, and rejoice in the Lord your
God, who has given you a Teacher of Righteousness. The Greek has it Escas
iustitiae, That God has given ye a Master that shall be unto you, as the
very meat and nourishment of Righteousness, to feed and preserve your
souls; and will restore unto you the years that the Locusts has eaten, the
canker-worme, and the catterpillar, and the palmer-worme, etc. And if in
Commonwealths, to have Masters, and wise and learned Teachers, be of so
inestimable a price, that Aristotle asking the reason, why they had no set
stipend or reward, as many other Offices and States had? answers it thus,
Because there could be no reward answerable to their desert. What then might
this Master merit of the World, being so singular and learned a Teacher, in
whom were deposited all the treaseres of the Wisdom of God? In regard of
this happiness, our Savior Christ said, Beati oculi qu^ vident quae vos
vide^is. The Scribes therefore and the Pharisees, coming unto him, and in a
flattering and scorneful manner calling him Master, it is no ma^^aile that the
mildness of this Lamb, should be turned into the fury of a Lion, and that
he said unto them, Generatio mala, etc.

Saint Chrysostom says, That they went about to flatter him, as they had done
at other times, when they spoke unto him by the same name; As when they said,
Magister, Mat. 22. Luke 18. Luke 20.
licet censum dare Caesari? Magister, quod est mandatum magnum in Lege?
Magister, quid faciendo, vitam aeternam possidebo? Master, is it lawful to
give tribute unto Caesar? Master, which is the great Commandment in the Law?
Master, What shall I do to inherit eternal life? And that our Savior being
offended, that they should flatter him with their mouths, whom they abhorred in
their hearts (being like unto those lewd women, who the lighter they are, the
fuller of flattery) he grew somewhat hot and angry with them.

But I conceive the fault of these Scribes and Pharisees was more foul than
so: For flattery usually carries with it a desire to please, and is full of
courtesy, which these kind of People never expressed toward our Savior. And
this my suspicion is the more augmented by that miracle of that blind man, whom
the Scribes (as supreme Judges) so strictly examined; asking him so often, Who
is he that has healed thee? To whom he answered, My Masters, I have told ye
already, Why are ye so importunate with me? Are ye purposed peradventure to
be his Disciples? This made my Gentlemen very angry; insomuch that they
said, Tu Discipulus illius sis, We wish thee no worse plague, than that thou
may be his Disciple. So that holding this a kind of curse and malediction,
and yet to style him with the name of Master, must be a stuff that is made of
a courser thread than Flattery. Scorning, a Vice peculiar to the Jews.
Besides, mocking and scorning was a proper and peculiar vice annexed to the
Jews. And Saint Chrysostom does not term it only flattery, but adulation,
and irrision; Verba (inquit) sunt plena adulatione and irrision^. And that Text
of Saint Luke favors this opinion, Alij tentantes eum, signum de coelo
quaerebant, Others tempting him, required a sign from heaven. Where this word
Tentantes implies much more. And the Author of the imperfect Work says, That
these Scribes and Pharisees used double dealing herein, desiring nothing more,
than by this their soothing with him, to discredit our Savior Christ;
alleging, That those miracles were not so sure and certain, as to enforce
belief, or to merit their undoubted credence: And that they being (as it were)
the Suns of that Commonwealth, whom the people did credit and respect next
under God, they did labor to win themselves credit in his presence, by
disgracing those miracles which our Savior had wrought. But our Savior having
recourse to the honor of his Father, and his own reputation, could not hold*
being so justly incensed against them, but must needs break out into these
terms with them, A wicked generation, etc. God complained by his Prophets,
That the sins of his people had quite altered his natural condition, Let
Samaria perish (says Osee) because she has provoked her God. Ose 14.
And anon after he says the same, of Ephraim; Gods heart being so mild, so
gentle, so loving, and so full of compassion, Lament. 3.
the sins of Samaria and of Ephraim had provoked it to bitterness. Jeremy in
his Lamentations complains, Repleuit me amaritudinibus, and inebriauit me
absynthio, He has filled me with bitterness, he has made me drunken with
Wormwood. Ezechiel styles the people, Domus exasperans, A House which does
exasperate Gods nature, Acts 1.
being so noble, so free, so pitiful. Of Judas Saint Luke says, Suspensus
crepuit medius, He burst asunder in the midst, and all his bowels gushed out.
And this was not without some great mystery, That his vital spirit should not
go out at his throat, being straightened with the halter, nor through his
mouth, for that therewith (though treacherously) he had kissed his Savior; but
out of the very heart and bowels of him, for there it was that his hatred
lay. And though in other outward things there may be feigning and dissembling;
the heart cannot love and hate at once. And therefore being so many monstrous
mis-shapes in the rest of the parts of man's body, as two heads, two hands, two
feet, and the like; yet did Nature never consent that there should be two
hearts; only it is used as an emblem to express a traitor, who loves with
the one, Eccle. 2.
and hates with the other. Woe to them that are of a double heart, says
Solomon. Simeon and Leui had double hearts when they dealt so deceitfully with
the Prince of Sichem: And because we might not think that their father had a
hand in it, and that they did it by his advice; at the hour of his death he
called them Instruments of cruelty. Ezechiel calls them Foxes, who devour the
grapes of the Vine, and hide themselves under the leaves thereof; [Quafi Vulpes
in Deserto, Prophetae tui.] Chrysologus, That they wage war against Virtue,
with Virtue; against Fasting, with Fasting; against Prayer, with Prayer;
against Mercy, with Mercy; and against Miracles, by craving other Miracles.
And if it were abominable before God, that a man should put on woman's
apparel, and a woman, man's, (as it is in Deutronomie) much worse will it seem
in his sight, that the evil man should put on the disguise of him that is
good, and that Vice should put on Virtue's clothes. In Ecclesiasticus God
threatens the Hypocrites, Eccle. 2.
That he will pull off their maskes and disguises in the midst of all the
People; Attend ne reuelet Deus absconsa tua, and in medio Synagogae elidat te.
Our Savior had a fair occasion offered unto him for to discredit and disgrace
them, and therefore plucking their maskes from off their faces, he said, A
wicked and adulterous Generation seeks a sign, etc.

We would s^e a sign from thee. The second reason is, The insenciblenesse of
this people, that amongst so many and such strange miracles, they should (as if
all the rest were worth nothing) require other newer and greater miracles.
Potest ne quisquam (says Saint Chrysostom) adeo stolidus inueniri? The
hardness of a sinful Heart.
Can any man be found so foolish? Nor is that particle Tunc (which is referred
to a sum of miracles, which sum can hardly be reduced to a sum) of the
least consideration in this place: Tunc, Then, when they should have kneeled
down before him to have kissed his feet, and acknowledged how much they were
bound unto him; Tunc, Then, when they should have seemed to be astonished and
wonder-strucken at his miracles; Tunc, Then, when they were to have been
convinced, and like Paul to have fallen into a trance; Then do they obstinatly
persevere in their malice. This holy doctor says, that Jonas was a type and
figure of this so profound a sleep. The tempest drives the sea before it,
seeming for fear to run away from the fury of those fierce and terrible
winds; and yet Jonas sleeps: The waves cover the Clouds, and discover the
bottomless Gulfes, striking a terror both in the Mariners and the passengers,
and yet Jonas sleeps: the sails and tackling are all to-be rent and torn,
the helm broken and lost, and none left to govern the Ship, and yet Jonas
sleeps; the maine-mast is split in sunder, a planke is sprung, the Pylots and
the Mariners multiply their prayers to their false Gods, which are painted in
the prow of their ship, Viridesque Deos, quibus aequora curae; and yet Jonas
sleeps; nay, he routs and snoarts in security, and is not sencible of the
great danger he is in. The like effect did Christ's coming work with his
people: There was a general hurrie both in Heaven and Earth, such an
Inquietudo and turbation as was prophesied by the Prophet Haggie, Behold, Hagi.
^.
yet again I will move the Heaven and the Earth. And this people having with
tears and with sighs desired, that they might be so happy as to see their
Savior, is now fast asleep. The Dead live, the Deaf hear, the Blind see, the
Lame go, the stones of the Temple are torn in sunder, the Graves open, the
Sun is eclipsed, and the Moon darkened, and this great Ship of the World is
tossed to and fro, with the fury of the winds, and yet this people sleeps;
and would to God they were but asleep: for he that sleeps, every little
noise will awaken him; but these men having the eyes of their body open, are
as blind as any Beetle in those of their soul. They are in condition like unto
those Devils of whom Job speaks, Cor eius indurabitur quasi lapis, and
extinguetur quasi malleatoris incus: He compares their heart to a stone, and
thinking this too short a comparison, (for that the hardest stone is cut and
hewne with the Cheesill and Hammer) he compares it to a Smiths Anuile, which
the more it is beaten upon, the harder it grows. And Saint Gregory has
observed, That on the Anuile all other mettalls are made soft, are wrought to
be pliable, and are reduced to diverse forms and shapes; but the Anuile it
self continues still harder and harder. In the said chapter Job says, That
the body of Leuiathan was joined and knit together, and that the metal of
his scales was like strong Shields, surely fastened together: Alluding (as it
should seem) to that which Jeremy speaks of his Children, Dabis eis scutum
cordis, etc. Thou shall give them, o Lord, a heart like a shield of Brass,
which shall rebound back upon thine own bosom, those shafts that thou shall
shoot against them: for those favors and those blessings which thou bestowest
upon them, make their hearts the harder; and they are so blinded through their
sins, that their hearts are become as hard as a Target of iron, to the end
that the inspirations of thy holy Spirit may not pierce them through. And if
they that are hard deserve to be hardly dealt withal, it is not amiss, that
our Savior should say unto them, Generatio mala and adultera signum quaerit, A
wicked and adulterous generation seeks after a sign* etc.

The third reason discouers it self in this word Volumus. What, Will they
prefer their own proper will in the presence of God; being, the sum of
his Doctrine is, Qui vult venire post me, abneget semetipsum, He that will
follow me, must deny himself? Saint Augustine treats at large, in his
books De Ciuitate Dei, That the materials of Babylon were, their own proper
will. And if these men had not been too much wedded to their own will,
Jerusalem had flourished more than all the Cities of the world besides. The
greatest affront that former or future Ages have seen, or shall see, was that
which the Jews offered to our Savior Jesus Christ, judging him more worthy
the Gallows, than Barabas: All which, p^oceeded from their own proper will.
Whom will ye that I should let loose unto you? It was Pilats proposition unto
them: and when it was left to their own proper will, (says Saint Bernard) and
that it was left to their choice, and that the power was now in their hands, In
proprium desaeuit authorem, They rage against him that made them. Once when our
Savior Christ made petition to his Father in the name of that inferior
portion, Father, if it be possible, let this Cup depart; Mat. 26.
(as being jealous of his own proper will, he presently had recourse to his
Fathers will) Yet not as I will, John 6.
but as thou will. And in another place, I came down from heaven, not to do
my own will, but the will of him that sent me. O sweet Jesus! Thy will
conforming it self to the will of thy Father, Why should thou be afraid?
It was to teach thee, That if our Savior Christ stood in fear of his own
will, Not more pernicious to himself.
(it being impossible for him to will more than what stood with his Fathers
will) thou, that do not conform thy self according to the will of God, it
is not much, that thou should be afraid thereof. Seneca says in one of his
Epistles, That the seuerest Rod that we can desire, is, to desire of God, that
he will fulfill our will, and our seeking after that good, from which we ought to
fly. Hence it comes to pass, That our own will is the Leven of our own
hurt; as also of Gods wrath and displeasure toward us. And Thomas renders the
reason thereof; for, Voluntas in homine est Regina potentiarum h^manarum, Man's
Will is the Queen of humane faculties: To whose charge is committed the
treating and obtaining of our desired ends; and is so absolute a Sovereign,
that although the Understanding be in it self so noble, as nothing more; it
speaks unto it by memorialls, and representing thereunto the reason of that
which she propounds unto it, in the end she comes to follow her own liking.
And forasmuch as Divine Will is that universal Empress, against whom none
ought to display their Banner; she finds her self especially offended, and
counts it a kind of high treason, that humane Will should rebel against her,
there being no other Will neither in heaven, nor in earth, more than the Will of
God: And this Lesson we are taught in our Pater noster, Thy Kingdom come; thy
Will be done in earth, as it is in heaven. The earth is thy Kingdom, as well
as the heaven; and therefore, thy Will be done in earth, as it is in heaven.
Now the Scribes and Pharisees growing into competition with the Will of God,
saying Volumus; it is no marvel, that our Savior should say unto them,
Generatio mala and adultera, etc. Gregory Nissen says, That as we are all
wounded in Paradise, by our Father Adam* by that sore poison of Disobedience,
and by the sword of our own Self-will; so are we all healed by our obedience
to the Will of God, which is the grave and sepulcher (as Climachus has it) of
our proper Will; and this we daily crave in these words, Thy Will be done. And
Petrus Chrysologus does bewail the wretched estate of this World, for it is
fullness of Self-love.

We would see a sign from thee. What? Were not those miracles sufficient which
our Savior had done already? They might have satisfied the Understanding, but
they could not satisfy the Will. S. John was the Light, John 5.
and many were cheered with it, [ Exultauerunt in luce eius;] but the Will
stood not affected thereunto. And Deutronomie says, Deuteronomy. 21. Nothing more
profitable to Man, than the obeying of Gods Will.
That God wrought great signs and wonders in Egypt, but the Children of
Israel had not a heart to understand them, Et non dedit vobis cor intelligens.
Which is all one with that which David delivers in somewhat darker words, V^x
Domini intercidentis flammam ignis. For God is wont in the fire, to divide the
light from the flame, giving light to the Understanding, but not fire to the
Will. That therefore now a days in the Church there should be so many Sermons,
so many Preachers, so much Light, and so little Fruit thereof; the reason of it
is, That the Understanding is informed, but the Will is not conformed; the
former being contented, but the latter not convinced. The Devil did endeavor,
that our Savior Christ should do a miracle sine fructu, to no good in the
World, when he lay at him to turn the stones into bread; which might have
amassed his Understanding, but not have abated his Will. And the Scribes and
Pharisees, like the Sons of such a Father, taking this their Self-will from
their Sire, place therein their chiefest foelicitie. Gregory Nissen says,
That when that lascivious Lady took hold of Joseph's cloak, and kept it still
in her hands, and would not let it go* a man would have thought, that he
might have escaped from her to his less cost: But the Devil, who had put that
Will into her, had likewise put to his helping hand, in making her take hold on
his cloak: And against two Devils, one incarnate, and another spiritual, What
can a holy young man do less, than leave his cloak behind him?

From whence I infer a conclusion of no small consequence, That one of the
greatest things that God had to do in the World, was to affectionate our Will.
All the actions of our Saviors life and death had two intents: The one, To
redeem us from the servitude and slavery of the Devil: The other, To infuse
love into our hearts; I came to set fire on the earth, and what remains but
that it burn? With this double charge of his, which cost him no less than his
life, and the shedding of his most precious blood, he left a free entrance for
us to get into Heaven. And if any man shall ask me, Which was the greater cost
of the two? I answer, That our Savior found greater difficulty in
affectionating us for Heaven, than in purchasing Heaven for us, or in
conquering the Devil and Hell: For one only drop of his blood was sufficient
to do this; but for to affectionate our will, all his blood in his body would
scarce suffice. And therefore Saint Cyprian says, That he was willing to
suffer so much, though he might, and that in rigor, have satisfied with so
little. For, though a little might have served the turn, for to work our
redemption; yet a little was not enough for to inflame our hearts with the fire
of his love. This sense may suit with that saying of Saint Paul, so diversely
commented, Gaudeo in passionibus meis, and adimpleo quae desunt passionum
Christi in carne mea. Coloss. 1.
I rejoice in my sufferings for you, and fulfill the rest of the afflictions of
Christ, in my Flesh. Why should the Apostle say so? For what can be wanting to
those passions of Christ, which were so abundant and all sufficient? Marry,
That we might make true benefit thereof, and that he might infuse this
affection into our hearts, the Apostle says, I desire to be dissolved, and to
be with Christ.

Volumus a te signum videre, (i.) We would have a sign from thee, Saint Luke
adds, Hypocrites great favorers of Miracles.
De coelo, from Heaven; alij tentantes, signum de coelo quaerebant. It is the
condition and nature of Hypocrites to be friends and favorers of Miracles,
which make a great noise in the world, but do little or no good at all. They
are Admirationis magis, quam pietatis; things rather of admiration than piety.
An Hypocrite, will outwardly cloth himself with the Camels hair of a John
Baptist, with the mortification of a Saint Jerome, and with Penitence it self;
but because in the inward man, Charity is wanting unto him, his bowels have no
compassion* but are full of extortion and cruelty. And therefore Saint Paul
gives this caveat unto us, and it is a good one, Nemo vos seducat, volens in
humilitate, and religione Angelorum, Let no man deceive you with feigned
humility, nor a dissembled devotion, revealing unto ye, that they have had
the vision of Angels, and that they appeared thus and thus unto them; for, if
to remove mountains from one place to another without Charity, be but a
beating of the Air, quasi aerem verberans, or like the sound of bells, which
suddenly vanishes; so likewise these their visions (without charity) shall be
but vain and idle. Of Antechrist, the Apocalips says, That he shall cause
fire to come down from Heaven; and Saint Efrem, that he shall remove Islands
and mountains, and that he shall walk upon the waves of the Sea, as on dry
Land, and that he shall fly in the Air and take no harm; And Rabanus, That
he shall make the fields to brin^ forth flowers in the heart of Winter as if
it were in the midst of May; That he shall discover the bottomless beds of
the Sea; that he shall raise up the dead, and put Nature quite out of her
course. But all these shall be false and lying Prodigies* which shall be
directed to a kind of vain and deceitful admiration. In prodigus, and signis
mendacibus (as Saint Paul has it.) So in like manner, the Hypocrite lies,
with his countenance, his eyes, his feet, his hands, his mouth, and his
apparel. Vendi^ fumum (says Chrysologus) and emit applausum, He sells
smoke, and bu^es the applause and acclamation of men. Our Savior Christ was
those waters of Shiloa, which did run silently along, and did quench the
thirst of those that were ready to die through drought. Which was meant of our
Savior, as Epiphanius has it in his exposition upon that place of Esaias, Esaias
8.
Pro eo quod abiecit populus iste aquas Siloe, quae currunt cum silentio,
Because this people has refused the waters of Shiloh, that run softly; now
therefore, etc. He was that tree of Life, whose very leafes did afford health
to all those that were under the shadow thereof. And peradventure these
Pharisees did require signs from Heaven, because by that benefit which the
people did receive by his miracles here on earth, he carried all the world
after him.

We would have a sign from heaven. What, after so many miracles? These
Pharisees are the stamp and figure of certain Consciences, which have a
continual conflict within themselves; or, to speak more properly, they are a
Chancerie consisting of Judges, guilty persons, and Pleaders, Inuicem se
accusantium, and defendentium, (as Saint Paul tells us) Accusing and excusing
one another: Romans 2
Reason is the Judge, Self-will is the guilty person, and the Pleader is that
Worm which accuses and gnaweth their conscience. And when the guilty person
sees that the Pleader accuses him, and that the Judge condemns him, though
miracles do abound, yet he appealeth to some other miracle; like unto a bad
debtour, who when his time of payment is come, craves a longer day. One finds
himself at Death's door, and sees that he is like to die, and that in all
likelihood he is to go to Hell, for that his ill gotten wealth condemns him;
he weeps, cries out, makes grievous lamentation, purposes, promises, and
resolves to amend his life, and to make restitution: God hears him, gives him
life and health; and when he sees that he is sound and well, and that his
Pleader presses him to make restitution, he appeals to another miracle.
Another finds, that he has slipped a thousand times, upon this or that
occasion; he knows his own weakness, and that he cannot look, but he must
lust; and purposing without any ill intention in the world, to entertain
honest conversation with this and that woman, returns too day like the Swine,
again to his mire; and too morrow appeals to another miracle. Saint Austen
reports in his Confessions, That he had a great conflict within himself; his
Will had a purpose to leave these human delights and pastimes; and when the day
of his purpose and promise was come, this Pleader puts him in mind of it, but
he appeals to another day. This then was a great part of this peoples fault,
that they did complain, That God did not deal so kindly with them as he was
wont, We have not seen our signs, there is now no Prophet. The greatest of
all the Prophets that ever were, or shall be, came amongst them, and did more
miracles than all of them put together; and when they should have confessed
themselves to have been convicted with so many miracles, they appeal to
another miracle. The Pharisee which invited our Savior, took him to be no
Prophet, because he did not diue into the depth of that loathsome and sinful
breast of Marie Magdalen: If (thought he) he were a Prophet, he could not
choose but know what kind of woman this was. But finding afterward, that he
knew Magdalens heart, and that his own did not believe he was a Prophet, he
appealed to another miracle.

We would see a sign, etc. To what end serve miracles from Heaven, if thou
have not eyes to behold those that are done on earth? It were better for thee,
to crave eyes of God, than miracles. Agar being ready to die for thirst in
the Desert, she had water just before her; but she was so blinded with
passion, and her stomach did so swell against her mistress, that she did not
see it: And God opened her eyes. Saint Chrysostom compares the Pharisees to a
sandy ground, which though it suck in never so much water, yet it still
remains hard and dry. And albeit God had showred down such store of miracles
upon them, yet all was as nothing, because they were not disposed to take
notice of them, nor to make that good use of them as they ought to have done.
He that goes on his way, musing on this or the other thing; though many pass
along by him, yet in this his melancholy humor, his thoughts being otherwise
taken up, he neither minds nor sees any thing. Philon compares them to
Statua's, because they see things as though they saw them not. The nature of
Christ's Miracles.
Two qualities or especial properties had those miracles of our Savior
Christ, by which every man might have known them. The first, That they all
tended to the profit and benefit of man; Tunc apperientur oculi caecorum, Then
shall the eyes of the blind be opened, said Esaias. Caeci vident, Claudi
ambulant, Leprosi mundantur, The Blind see, the Lame walk, and the Lepers are
cleansed, says Saint Matthew. Virtus de illo exibat, and sanabat omnes, Virtue
went out of him, and healed all, says Saint Luke. And in our Creed we
confess, Propter nos, and propter nostram salutem, descendit de Coelis, For
us, and for our salvation, he descended from Heaven. So that those miracles
which he was to show here upon earth, is a condition and quality so
notorious of those which were prophesied and foretold of the Messiah, that to
have them to come from Heaven, was a thing unknown to the learned Doctors of
those times. Thou sendest thy servant on an errand, and say unto him, In such
a walk thou shall meet with a man clad in green, wearing a hat with a feather
in it of such and such colors, etc. Now if he should so far mistake
himself, as to go to one that were clothed all in black, and deliver thy
message unto him, would thou not hold him to be a fool? Saint Austen in his
Exposition upon those words of the seuentieseuenth Psalm, The difference
betwixt Christ's miracles, and the Devils.
Immissiones per Angelos malos, says, That commonly those signs which direct
themselves to ill, are of the Devil, as those which he did in destroying Jobs
Substance, [ Ignis de Coelo cecidit;] as also those which shall be wrought by
Antechrist. But God always directs his miracles to our good.

Those of Christ aim at our Good.
But here by the way it is to be noted, That with the Ill, Ill can do much, and
Good, little. Theodoret in those his Questions upon Genesis, says, That when
Pharaoh perceived, that God began his Plagues with such poor things as Flies,
he lost a great part of that fear which he had before: but that if he had
begun where he left, (which was the death of all the first born) his heart would
have tre^bled in his breast. The Philistines took Arms against the
Israelites, thinking with themselves, That God had spent the greatest part of
his power in Egypt. In a word, with the Ill, ill is most powerful. And, for
all the miracles of our Savior Christ were directed unto good, Man's
wantounesse in matter of Religion.
Saint Ambrose says, Luuriabantur i^ Christo; Nothing would please their
palate, but dainty morcells, like little children who are cockered up under
their mothers wing: or like Gluttons, who when their bellies are full, and
cloyed with ordinary dishes, seek after nicer and choicer fare, to provoke
their appetite. The Scribes and Pharisees in like manner having taken a surfeit
of those miracles which our Savior wrought upon earth, would needs out of
daintiness desire miracles from Heaven: which, if they would have been
bettered by them, he would not have stuck with them, to have let them had them
either from Heaven or Hell; but he knew it was to no purpose.

And therefore God, one while as the Author of Nature, another while as the
Author of Grace, does evermore abhor all excess, except in cases of
necessity. And he that created all things, In pondere, numero, and mensura, In
weigh^, number, and measure, cannot but abhor all superfluous and
unprofitable things. And this may serve for an instruction to us, to part with
the superfluities of our House: Quod superest date pauperibus, Give the
remainder of that which is left to the poor. King Achaz ^id ill, for that he
would not ask a sign; and the Pharisees did worse, in demanding one from
Heaven; the one offended in the less, the other, in the more; the one was too
backward, the other, too forward. For God having descended down from Heaven
in his own person, they could not, than this, desire a greater miracle. But
they were the sons of those fathers, who enjoying the bread of Angels, were
quickly weary of it, and longed for Quails; insomuch that God was forced to
take away their lives from them, because he knew not how to satisfy their
longings.

The second quality and property of our Saviors miracles was, They are done
imparitiuely and with a kind of empire and command.
That he did them with Empire and command; and joining this his Empire with his
doctrine, they did clearly prove, that he was God, as it is noted by Thomas.
Saint Chrysostom brings in here a comparison which makes much to the purpose
that we have in hand: Thou entrest (says he) into a Palace, thou know not
the Prince or Lord thereof; thou espiest one, before whom all the rest stand
bare, and rising up from their seats, obey whatsoever he commands: Now when
thou see this, thou can not be so simple, but thou must needs know that
this is their king and chief commander. In the Jews it was not much, that
they should doubt whither our Savior Christ were Lord of heaven and earth, or
no; but when they saw that the Winds did obey him, the Waves, the Dead, the
Living, Heaven, and Earth, and that he did command all creatures with that
supreme power and Empire, they might then very well have fallen into this
reckoning, as to say, This is the Lord of all. The Centurions, though they had
no learning, yet did they light upon this truth, Vere Filius Dei erat iste,
This was truly the Son of God. The one of them led thereunto, when he saw in
what a strange manner the whole world was troubled: The other, when in good
manners, with a Domine, Noli vexari, Lord, Trouble not thy self, he seemed
loath to give our Savior that trouble; saying unto him, I am but a poor
Captain, an ordinary Commander, and yet when I lay my commandment upon my
servants, they obey me; much more reason then is it, that sickness should be
subject to thy Empire, etc. And if the invisible things of God are manifested
by the visible, [ Sempiterna quoque virtus and diuinitas] and that they which
may know him by them, will not glorify him in them, they shall remain
inexcusable. This was the Scribes and Pharisees case, who saw so many miracles
with their own eyes, etc.

Volumus a te signum de Coelo videre, We would see a sign from Heaven. Why
miracles should be desired.
Here likewise is their vain curiosity to be condemned: Some would have
miracles, vt credant; some, vt videant; one, to strengthen his belief;
another, to please his eye. In both Laws, the Old, and the New, we find that
God did evermore with his friends show those his signs and tokens, In rebus
naturalibus, In things that were natural; as in his sending down fire from
Heaven upon Abels Sacrifice, showing thereby how well he accepted of it; in his
promise to Noah, That there should not be a second Flood; Arcum meum ponam in
Nubibus, I will put my Bow in the Clouds: To Abraham, when he past his word
unto him, That his posterity should possess the promised Land. In the old
Testament we read of many signs and tokens: King Ahaz might have made his
choice of miracles, More frequent in the time of Grace than under the Law.
Mark 8.
either from Heaven, Earth, or Hell. But in the Law of Grace they were more in
number, and greater in quality. But hese Pharisees coming unto him, Saint
Mark tells us, That our Savior Christ sighed deeply in his Spirit, and said,
Why does this ge^neration seek a sign etc. They do^ not deserve it, neither
shall it be given unto them; for they do not desire it for any love to our
Savior, or thereby to be brought to serve him, but for to entertain
themselves. A royal Merchant will vnpacke all his wares, and open whatsoever he
has in his shop, to him that comes to buy; but to him that shall come only out
of curiosity, he will send him away packing, Luke 23.
and not trouble himself with him. Herod did expect Videre signum aliquod ab
eo fieri, To see some sign wrought by him. And though our Savior might have
freed himself by any one miracle whatsoever, from a thousand calumnies and
affronts; yet would he not bestow so much as a few words upon him, for he knew
it would have been but a casting of Pearls amongst Swine. 1. Kings 6.
The Philistines did much desire to know, whither or no the God of Israel were
the Author of their miseries; and by the advice and council of their
Soothsayers, they made a new Cart, and taking two milch Kyne, on whom there had
never come any yoke, tying the Kyne to the Cart, and setting the Arc of the
Testament thereupon, they said, If they go fore-right, up by the way of it is
own coast, to Bethshemish, it is he that did us this great evil; but if not,
and that they shall turn back their heads at the lowing of their Calfes, we
shall know then that it was not his hand that smote us, but it was a chance
that happened unto us. The Governors of the Philistines followed after them,
they beheld with their own eyes all the signs and tokens that they could
desire; they were astonished thereat, yet for all this did they not forsake
their Dagon; for they desired those signs more to see, than to believe. Saint
Paul preaching in Athens, of our Sauiors Death and Resurrection; those that
were the best Disputants in their Schools, and the curiousest Scholars
amongst them, came unto him and told him, We much desire to hear and know
this new Doctrine which thou preachest: Acts 17.
And it is noted in the Text, That Ad nihil aliud vacabant, nisi aut dicere,
aut audire aliquid noui, That they gave themselves to nothing else, but either
to tell or to hear some news; desiring (as it should seem) to hear and know
them, but not to believe them. Of this stamp are those who only come to
Sermons for curiosity; Curious hearers reproved.
some gaping for sharp and witty conceits; others, for elegancie of words;
others, for the flower and cream (as it were) of the Scripture phrase, and
it is pretty allusions and allegories; this is that which their ears itch
after; nothing will down with them but quelques-choses, made dishes, and
pleasing sauces for the Palate, refusing that wholesome food of Gods Word, and
those substantial morcells of sound Doctrine, which should feed their souls
to everlasting life. A veritate quidem auditum auertent. Saint Austen makes a
comparison of a golden Key which opens ill, and of one of wood which opens
well: Now to him that has no other pretension but to open, it were mere
folly in him, to seek after the golden one, when that of wood will do it
better. And in another place, says this sacred Doctor, That as Pharaoh
commanded the male children of Gods People to be killed, but spared the
females, that he might thereby weaken them, and bring them under; so those
Preachers which bestow all their pains in the neat dressing of words, Sermons
should be seasoned more with Salt, than Sugar.
ornaments of wit, and fluentnesse of style, (not regarding strong arguments,
and sound reasons) do weaken the force of the truth, and bring their Doctrine
at last into contempt. Salt in a Preacher is more necessary than Sugar; that
which shall season our Souls, rather than that which shall sweeten our Palates;
that which shall strike home to our hearts, than that which shall only tickle
our ears. And in another place, where he that treats only ofcuriositie in
Doctrine, he auowes him to be in danger of loosing the Faith; because
Curiosity is the Mother of Heresy. And likewise in another place he says,
That that the curious man is like the scripulous man; and that the Accessorie
is the Principal, and the Principal the Accessorie; Curiosus ea requiret,
quae nihil ad se pertinet, They afflict themselves with that which imports
them least. And if those that are scrupulous and full of doubts are condemned
for fools, of force it must follow, that those that are curious inquirers must
wear the same Liuerie. Auerte oculos tuos a me, qui ipsi me auolar^ fecerunt;
Cant. 6.
If thou shall go about to behold God with a curious eye, God will fly away
from thee, and thou shall loose the sight of him. Another Translation has it,
Superuire fecerunt. When men stand staring on the Sun, the Sun then grows
proud, and shows his power, blinding those eyes that press too near upon
him: And the most of the greatest heresies and errors that have grown and
sprung up in the Church, have proceeded from man's too subtle search into Gods
secrets. This prying of ours dazeleth the eyes of our understanding, as it had
here blinded the judgment of the Scribes and Pharisees.

Volumus signum de Coelo videre, We would see a sign from heaven. These
Scribes and Pharisees are like unto those, who condemning Gods providence,
think with themselves, That God has not ordained convenient means to bring
them to Heaven; and therefore go about to ordain new Laws. Iustificata est
Sapientia a fi^ijs suis, Wisdom is iusti^ied by her children: Our Savior
Christ renders it Condemnata, Condemned; The ignorance of the childeren
condemns the wisdom of the father. There are some people in the world so
querulous and complaining, that they will not stick to tax God, for having
given them such an inclination, such an estate, such a wife, such parents; and
say in their thoughts, o, if God had given me another nature, other nobleness
of birth, other more prosperous fortune, How sure should I have made my
salvation? O, if God would have been but pleased to have showed me some one
miracle, or other; This is but a requiring of new signs, and a condemning of
those which they have received from the wisdom of God. Now the wisdom of
God supposes Faith; and Faith, Belief; [ Oportet discentem credere, He that
learneth must believe.] So that a heavenly wisdom supposes a Faith from
heaven. This is that light, wherewith in the beginning of the world God did
dispell the darkness of the Deep; this is that North-Starre, which
discovers unto those that sail in the sea of this world, the Haven of their
happiness; this is that Pillar, which to the children of Light, appeared
light; to those of Darkness, dark: it is that light which must show you that
clear Sun, the Son of God, which is light it self; in comparison of whose
glorious light, the light of miracles is but like the glimpse of a candle.

Volumus a te signum videre, We would have a sign from thee. This word a te,
From thee, does manifest their intention; which was, To revive the blasphemy
which they had vented before; [ In Beelzebub Principe Daemoniorum, The Nature of
Envy.
eijcit Daemonia, In Bulzebub the Prince of Devils, he casts out Devils.] We
desire to see a miracle done by thine own proper power, performed without the
help of another, whereof we have been jealous, in those thy miracles shown
upon the Blind, the Deaf, and the Dumb. We presume, that of thy self thou
can do little; but by the Prince of Devils, much. This was a diminishing of
our Sauiors power, which is the nature of Envy, flying, like the Eele, from
the clear water, and seeking after that which is troubled, and muddie. It was
the fault of their forefathers, to lessen Gods power, Quoniam percussit petram,
and fluxerunt aquae, nunquid poterit Deus parare mensam in Deserto? Is it not
all one for him, to take water out of the Rock, and to give us bread? In this,
his power shall be seen. We are like Martha's Chickens, we desire meat, and
they give us water. But o ye fools, do not ye know, that the stone being
stricken, sends forth fire, and not water? And he that can give you water out
of a stone, is able to afford you bread out of the Air: But Envy will draw
Branne from the finest Flower. In a word, They were fully resolved not to
believe in Christ, and yet they went seeking occasions to excuse their
hardness of heart. They sought signs from heaven, which (as Saint Hierome
has well observed) were more subject to calumny, and easier to be cauelled
at; and yet on the other side they did seek to diminish his power, and
therefore they say, We would have from thee, etc.

Of all that has been formerly said, I shall infer this conclusion, and
refer it to your Christian consideration; which is, That you would seek after
God with simplicity and singleness of heart; In simplicitate cordis quaerite
illum, (says Wisdom) and then shall thou always find him propitious and
favorable unto thee. P^al. 33.
Et facies vestrae non confundentur; but a false heart shall evermore remain
confounded and ashamed. Bersheba coming to crave a favor of her son
Solomon, she sought to prevent him, with a Non confundas faciem meam, Put me
not to the blush. 3. Kings 2.
In the Scribes and Pharisees God speaks unto those sinful Christians who
immitate them in their works; and as the thunders and lightnings of a great
Tempest, smiting and wounding the tops of Mountains, of Palaces, and of the
tallest Cedars; Chrysologus says, That they abate and correct the courages of
the most desperate and prophanest persons: so, when our Savior Christ did
thunder out these his threatenings against the Pharisees, he sought thereby to
reclaim his own Flock, to bring them within the Fold, and to save those
Sheep which are ready to run astray, that they may not be utterly lost.

Generatio mala and adultera ^ignum quaerit.
A wicked and adulterous generation seeks a sign. Christ never showed
himself more fierce and angry, than now; never behaved himself more stoutly,
or showed more courage, than at this present. Presenting thereby unto us, that
upon just occasions, the mildness of a Prince, and the meekness of a
Prelate, may lawfully let the bed of his Patience (like that of the River) rise
and swell, even to the ouerflowing of the banks. He that knows not sometimes
how to reprehend, and that sharply too, shall not only neglect his own
duty, but shall wrong others in suffering them to run on in their wickedness
without reproof. That father knows ill how to govern, who, when his children
shall commit any gross faults, shall, like old Ely, show himself too mild,
and out of a foolish pirtie, scarce control them for it. That Preacher, knows
not what belongs to his calling, who when sin grows once to an height, and
men wax shameless in committing evil, that does not raise his hands and
voice as high as Heaven, and lay Gods fearful judgments before them. That
Prince, who suffers his subjects to be ouerbold and saucy with him, gives
them a tacit kind of liberty, to loose all respect and fear toward him.
Quiescite ab homine, cuim Spiritus, Esaias 2.
in naribus est, Cease you from the man whose breath is in his nosthrils, for
wherein is he to be esteemed? This is as it were the Epiphonema of all that
Chapter of Esaias; Where, having Prophesied many greatnesses of the Messiah, he
advises the Jews, That they deceive not themselves with the frailty of his
person; for, though he shall come in the form of a servant, yet he shall be
the true God. And therefore he concludes that Chapter with this saying:
Quiescite ergo ab homine, cuius Spiritus in naribus est. Consider therefore
(dearly beloved) that I admonish you, and require you, that when these
prophesies shall be fulfilled, and go on in their accomplishment, you take
heed how you be offended with that man, whose life consists in the breath of
his nosthrills; it being in that respect with our Savior, as with all other
living creatures, howbeit in regard of his Divinity, He is high and mighty.
In this sense, we may also add, that the nosthrills are the symbol of anger.
And in the Spanish tongue, it is a usual phrase to say, Subirse el humo a las
narizes, That the smoke went out at his nosthrils. And therefore it is said,
Take heed of that man that has his breath in his nosthrills. Whereby it is
signified, That if he should once grow angry with us, he would quickly make
an end of us. There was never yet any Prophet in the World so holy, nor so
soft-spirited, but that sometime or other he did break forth into anger. Esaias,
called the Governors of his people, The Princes of Sodom; Saint John Baptist,
styles them Vipers; Saint Chrysostom, Esaias 1.
the Empress Eudoxia, Herodias. And our Savior Christ, these Scribes, Mat 3.
Generatio mala and adultera, A wicked and adulterous generation, etc.

Generatio mala and adultera. An evil generation. Ill, Acts 7.
for the ill and inueterated custom of their Vices. Saint Stephen, Vos semper
Spiritui sancto, resistitis; sicut patres vestri, ita and vos, Ye always
resist the high God, even as your fathers, so ye. David, Psalm. 78.
Generatio praua, atque exasperans. Moses, Generatio enim peruersa est, and
infideles filij, An unthankful, hard-hearted, and disloyal generation. Vae
semini nequam filijs sceleratis, Woe to the wicked seed. Ezechiel, Generatio
tua de terra Canaan, Esaias 1. Ezech. 16.
pater tuus Amorrheus, and matter tua Cethea, Thy offspring is from the land of
Canaan, thy Father was an Amorite, thy Mother a Hittite. All these places do
blazon forth the ill race of that people. For, albeit the herencie of Vice and
of Virtue, be not constringitiue, and that there is no such necessity in it,
Virtue is not Hereditarie.
nor always follows the order of Nature; (for we see a Dwarf, begot by a
Giant; a Hare of a Lion:) nor likewise in the state of Grace; for of a holy
Father, sometimes issues an ungracious Son, as Esau, of Isaac; and Absalon of
David; yet notwithstanding, if a man be descended of a bad race, it is a
miracle if he prove good. Arbor mala, non potest bonos fructus facere, An
evil tree cannot bring forth good fruit. The Spanish Proverb says, Bien
aya, quien a los suyos parece, Gods blessing be with him, he is so like his
parents; he sucked his goodness with his milk, he inherited his Fathers
virtues. Transgressorem ex vtero vocaui te, (says Esaias) Thou have been a
transgressor from the Womb. Alenhornar, se hazen los panes tuertos, The loaves
went away from their first setting into the Oven. All this is included in these
words, Generatio mala, An evil generation.

Adultera. He does not note them in this world for children that had been
begotten in adultery (for this had been their parents fault and not theirs.)
And Aristotle says, Ab his, quae a natura insunt, nec laudamur, nec
vituperamur, (i.) Whatsoever is naturally in us, redounds neither to our praise
nor dispraise. Both the ill, and the well born do confess, Ipse fecit nos, and
non ipsi nos, It is God that has made us, and not we our selves. For if it had
been in our choice to choose our own fathers, Psalm. 99.
we would have been all gentlemen.

Two things, did our Savior here pretend to notify unto us.

1 The one, that they had degnerated from the virtue of their forefathers; and
for this reason, David calls them strange chldren; Psalm. 49. Psalm. 143.
Filij alieni menti ti sunt mihi, filij alieni inueter ati sunt. And in another
place, Libera me de manu filiorum alienorum, Deliver me out of the hands of
strange children. Mat. 3.
They did boast that they had Abraham to their father, Nos patrem habemus
Abraham. But Christ gives them the lie, and tells them, Vos ex patre Diabolo
estis; For the works, the thoughts, and the desires, are not of Abraham, but
the Devil.

2 The other, because they had married now the second time with Untruth, and
made a match with false gods, having divorced from them the truth of the true
and everliving God. And for the better declaration of this Doctrine, it is to
be noted,

First, That the understanding and the truth, have a kind of marriage between
them; Quae sibi sponsam mihi assumere sapientiam, I desired to marry her, such
love had I unto her beauty. And one that Comments upon these words, says, That
from the Understanding, and Truth, well vnstorstood, there does grow a greater
unity, than there does arise from between the matter and the form.

Secondly, That between the Soul, and God, by the means of the Truth of
Faith, Os^. 2.
there is another kind of spiritual marriage made, whereof Ose says,
Desponsabo te mihi in fide, I will marry thee unto me for ever, yea I will
marry thee unto me in righteousness, and in judgment, and in mercy, and in
compassion. I will even marry thee (as if this were that wedding-ring, that
made all sure) unto me in Faithfulness. Ezech. 16. Ier. 3. Esaias. ^7.
And this knot is knit so fast, that Saint Paul could say, He that cleaves
unto God, is one spirit with him. And for that the people of the Jews, had
fallen some while into Heresy, another, into Idolatry, falsely expounding the
Law, and forsaking the Fath of God, to follow a Calfe, and Idols: whereof God
taxes them every foot in the Scriptures, stiling them adulterers, harlots
children, workers of fornication; so here he now says, Generatio adultera.

Mala and adultera. Evil and adulterous.
First, he says Mala, and then Adultera, Tearming them in the first place Ill,
in the second, Adulterous. For the ordinary way to loose faith, is an evil
life. But as the vomitting up of our meat, turns sometime to our good: so is
it now and then in the ridding of our stomach of Virtue. And in this sense,
Saint Ambrose said, Profuit mihi Domine quod peccaui, It was well for me o
Lord, that I sinned. For repentance may restore Grace, in a higher degree. But
if this weakness, shall take such violent hold upon us, that we shall fall
once to vomiting of blood, it will go hard with us, if not cost us our lives.
In like manner a sinner perseuering in his sins, comes at last to loose his
Faith. And this is one of the seuerest punishments of Gods Justice; Whereof
Jeremy said, Peruenit gladius vsque ad animam. Sin undermines the Soul by
degrees.
Whence Saint Jerome gathers, that then the sword pierces to the Soul, when
there is no sign of life left in it. In your buildings, the first danger does
not consist in their sudden falling to ground, but they go mouldring away by
little and little, and decay by degrees: So likewise in this our Spiritual
building, the first danger is not the loss of our Faith; nor our first
demolishing, our falling into Heresies: but before we come to that, we go by
little and little, first lessening, then loosing our virtues, and heaping sin
upon sin, till at last, Mole ruit sua, all comes tumbling down to our utter
destruction. Saint Paul does much commend and earnestly recommend unto us a
good conscience; 1. Tim. 1.
Quam quidem repellentes, naufragauerunt a fide, Faith grounded upon an evil
conscience, is like a house that is built upon the sand, which when the waters
rise, and the winds blow, Heb. 13.
is suddenly thrown down and carried away. Optimum est, gratia stabilire cor,
It is an excellent thing, that the heart be established with grace; that when
ye shall be set upon with diverse and sundry strange Doctrines, ye may stand
immoouable, and not be shaken with every vain blast of wind.

Signum non dabitur eis, nisi signum Ionae.
Christ's resurrection the greatest Miracle.
A sign shall not be given them, but that of Ionus. Now Jonas his sign was
the death and resurrection of our Savior: which Austen calls, Signum signorum,
and miraculum miraculorum, The sign of signs, and miracle of miracles. And
he that will not benefit himself by that, What other miracle or sign can he
expect shall do him good? It is much greater than any other upon earth, by how
much the harder it is for one to come out of the heart of the earth, and to be
restored to life after he is once dead; a greater miracle by far, than that
of Jonas his being spewed out of the Whales belly. And the said Saint
proves, that our Savior Christ is God and man; man, because he entered dead
into the bowels of the earth; and God, because he came forth from thence
alive. So that our Savior came to grant them much more than they desired: For
if they desired miracles from Heaven, at our Saviors death there appeared
fearful ones unto them. Athanasius says, That the Sun was darkened, in
token that all those great and noble acts which God had done, were eclipsed and
darkened in this one of our Redemption. Theophilact says, That our Savior
after his Resurrection wrought no more miracles; for that to die and rise
again by his own proper power, was the utmost both of his power and miracles.
Iudaei signum petunt, 1. Cor. 1.
etc. The Jews require a sign, the Graecians seek after wisdom; but I
preach unto you the greatest Sign, and the greatest Wisdom in the world, to
wit, Christ crucified. Eusebius Emisenus dwells much upon Jacobs wrestling
with the Angel, In which conflict Jacob remaining Victor, craves a blessing
of the Conquered. And this is mystically meant of our Savior, who representing
himself in the shape of an Angel, showed himself upon the Cross, tortured,
torn, and overcome; yet grew thereby more powerful and more free hearted for
to bless the world.

No sign shall be given them. It is not without a mystery, that our Savior
says, No sign shall be given. For that sign of his death and resurrection,
he knew would profit them so little, that it was needless to give them any at
all. Christ treating of his blood, says by Saint Luke, Which for you, Luke 22.
Math. 26.
and for many shall be poured out. And by Saint Matthew, Which shall be poured
out for all. But many shall not take the benefit of this effusion of his blood:
Some did wash their stoles in the blood of the Lamb: others said, Sanguis eius
super nos, (id est) Let his blood be upon us; accusing themselves herein, to
be guilty of the shedding of his blood. And amongst the Faithful there are
many, of whom Saint Paul says, Reus erit corporis and sanguinis Domini; who
receiving it unworthily, 1. Cor. 1^.
shall remain guilty of this so precious a Treasure. And in another place,
That they shall incur great punishment, which do defile this blood, Et
sanguinem testamenti pollutum duxerit.

Signum non dabitur ei, nisi signum Ionae, No sign shall be given them but that
of Jonas. For the miracle of Christ's death and resurrection was not to be
denied to any. Saint Thomas protested, That he would not believe, unless he
might see the prints of our Saviors wounds; which being so strange a
capitulation, and to outward seeming, so discourteous a proceeding, our Savior
Christ yielded unto his request, and made toward him, and made show thereof
unto him; for the signs of our Saviors death and Cross were never yet denied
to any. Esaias. 13.
Esaias says, And in that day, the root of Ishai, which shall stand up for a
sign unto the People, the Nations shall seek unto it, and his rest shall be
glorious. The Septuagint, and Saint Hierome, read, Et qui stat, The root of
Iesse; that is to say, Ille qui stat in signum populorum, congregabit profugos
Israel and dispersos Judah, colligit a quatuor plagi^ terra, He shall set up a
sign to the Nations, and assemble the dispersed of Israel, and gather the
scattered of Judah from all the four corners of the world. He borrowes the
metaphore from a military Ensign, and says, That Christ our Savior that
suffered on the Cross, and died for our sins, and rose again for our
salvation, shall gather together those that are dispersed through the four
corners of the earth. Which is all one with that of Saint John, who said, That
he was not only to die for his People, Sed vt Filios Dei qui dispersi erant,
congregaret in vnum, But that he might gather together into one, the children
of God that were dispersed: Into one, that is, into one Church by Faith.

Signum non dabitur, nisi signum Ionae. God did not grant unto them that which
they desired; God does not always grant our desires, and why.
for God will not be propitious in yielding to our desires, when they are to
turn to our own hurt. Moses desired, that he might see his face, but God told
him, Faciem meam, videre non poteris. He will not give, what thou will demand,
one while because it may cost thee thy life; another while, because God shall
no sooner turn his back, but like the children of Israel, thou will presently
fall adoring the golden Calfe. Saint Paul, did desire freedom from his fetters
and those torments which he endured: But he was told, Thou know not what
thou ask; for, Virtus, in infirmitate perficitur. In a word, God does deny
us many things in his Mercy, which he will grant unto us in his Anger, as the
imperfect Author notes it.

In cord terrae, tribus diebus, and tribus noctibus.
In the Heart of the Earth, three days and three nights. Beda, and Euthimius,
understand by the Heart of the earth, the Sepulcher, or Grave of our Savior
Christ. And many of our Commentators, make this exposition; though others
misinterpreting it, infer from thence, that our Savior Christ did not
descend to the lower-most parts of the earth (contrary to that of Saint Paul)
denying that Article of our Faith, Descendit ad inferos. Now, in that he
ascended, what is it (says the same Apostle) but that he had also descended
first into the lowest parts of the Earth? Ephesians. 4.9.
yet those two interpretations may be very well accorded, forasmuch, as that
the Body remained in the grave, and the Soul descended Vsque ad inferos. And
for the better proof hereof, it is to be noted, that it is not spoken of any
other that dyed, save only of our Savior, that he was in the Heart of the
Earth. Besides, it is an usual phrase amongst the Hebrews, to call the Heart
the middle part, borowing that metaphore from all other living creatures, who
have their heart placed in the midst of the body.

Tribus ditbus, and tribus noctibus, Three days, and three nights. Our Savior
Christ was buried about the sixth watch, in the Evening; and rose again upon
Sunday morning. According to which account he remaineed only two nights in
the grave. Saint Austen, S. Jerome, Beda, and Theophilact, say, That by the
figure Sy^ecdoche they are to be taken for three nights and three days, taking
the part for the whole. But peradventure the plainer exposition will be this,
that we should understand by three days and three nights, three natural
days, consisting of twenty fou^e hours apiece: it being an ordinary phrase
amongst the Jews, to confound the day and the night, making them all one; as
it appears in Genesis, Genesis 7. Exodus 24. Deuteronomy. 9. 1. Reg. 30. ^. Reg. 19.
Exodus, Deutronomie, and in the book of the Kings. For in very deed, our
Savior Christ did not continue in the grave three nights, but abode there some
part of three natural days.

Viri Niniuitae surgent in Iudicio.
The Men of Niniuie shall rise up in judgment. Some interpret this threatening
to be an effect of justice; others, of mercy: of justice, by charging this
people with the repentance of Niniuie. No man will spare his enemy, if he can
catch him upon the hip: The Groom of the Stable that shall play the Rogue and
the Thief with thee, thou will call him to a reckoning even for his
Curry-combe and his Apron, and afterward turn him out of doors: But of a
good Servant, and one that has been faithful unto thee, thou will take no
account at all, his honesty shall excuse him. O ye false Hypocrites, ye
Scribes and Pharisees, Why would ye call vengeance upon your selves, by
saying, Let all the blood of the Righteous come upon us; This will make ye pay
at last, that which perhaps ye did not think ye did owe. To a Sinner, Omnia
cooperantur in malum, All things turn to the worst; And therefore all
creatures shall rise up against these wicked and stiff necked Jews. The
Heavens shall he call from above, and the earth, to judge his People. The
Scripture it self shall bring in evidence against them, for their ingratitude.
The Ox knows his Owner; To him that shall not acknowledge Christ and his
Church, the Ass shall bear witness against him: [ Et Asinus pr^sepe domini
sui.] To him that shall despise the inspirations of Heaven, the Kyte shall
accuse him; C^gnouit miluus tempus suum. To him that shall be careless of his
eternal good, he shall be tit in the teeth with the Ant, Vade piger ad
formicam. To him that is disobedient, the History of Jonas shall be alleged
against him: but as the Whale swallowed Jonas, but sent him forth again without
any harm done unto him; so our Savior Christ was swallowed up by the Earth,
but not to his hurt: and both it and all the Elements acknowledged him to be
their Lord and Master; which was more than the Pharisees would do.

To Saint Chrysostom, this threatening seems to be an effect of mercy. For,
by proposing unto them the example of Niniuie, he desires to draw them to
repentance. It was another kind of threatening that God used toward his people,
for worshipping the golden Calfe; Let me go, that I may destroy them, and blot
out their name. Theodoret is of opinion, That this was Gods great mercy
toward them: For by that threatening, he set before Moses the wickedness of
the people; and did thereby advise him, that he should make intercession for
them, that he might not punish them in his wrath. After that general deluge
and inundation of waters which drowned the whole world, God did set a bow in
heaven, and it may be he might have took it in his hand, for to threaten the
Earth; But Saint Ambrose has noted, That to the end that the World should take
it as a token of Gods mercy toward them, he made the points or ends of it to
touch the earth, that the World might thereby be assured, Genesis 9.
That Gods Justice would not shoot any more Arrows down from heaven.
Tertullian treating upon that place of the Apocalips, Repent, or else I will
come against thee shortly, Apoc. 2.
and will remove thy Candlestick out of his place, except thou amend; he
says, That so great is the goodness of God, that though he might with a
great deal of reason deny us his mercy, he does not only not deny it us, but
he threatens us, and also entreats for us, to the end that we may accept of
this his mercy: for no father can be immagined to be half so pitiful as he
is. Saint Austen cries out, O Lord, what am I, that thou should command me
to love thee? What am I, that thou should be offended with me? And, Why
do thou threaten me with great miseries, if I do not love thee? I am much
bound unto thee for the one, but more for the other: In loving thee, I see how
much I get by it; in threatening me, I see how much reckoning thou make of
me. S. Ephrem discoursing of those of Niniuie, says, That God had mercy of
them, and that he forgave them their sins, Et mendax potius haberi, quam
crudelis t^dit, He would rather be held a liar, than accounted ^ruell. How the
Ninevites shall rise up in judgment against us.


The men of Niniuie shall rise up in judgment. Some Divines grant, That the
Ninevites in that general judgment shall be Judges over many that shall be
condemned by a judgment of comparison; so, a Niniuite shall condemn a
Pharisee. He did credit a stranger, one that was spewed out of a whales mouth;
one that had never wrought any miracles, nor had any prophecies in his favor:
but thou (proud Pharisee) did not believe thy natural Lord, whom his
Doctrine, his miracles, heaven, and earth, had declared to be thy Messiah, and
thy God. This Niniuite fasted, put on sack cloth and ashes; but thou did not
lay aside thy delicacies and thy dainties. He made the Beasts of his house to
fast; but thou did not so much as will thy Servants to abstain. A Moore
shall condemn (in a comparatiue kind of judgment) a bad Christian: This Moore
entered into his Mesquitae with a great deal of respect and reverence, humbling
himself on his knee to a thing of nothing; but thou prophanest my Temples, and
blasphemest me to my face. In a word, If the fruits of repentance weigh down
the balance of eternal punishment, Why should we prefer temporal pleasures
before eternal happiness? but because those Judges are in that day to sit,
Sedebitis super Seeds duodecim; and the Accusers to stand face to face to the
Accused, the sense thereof in this place shall not be ill understood, if we
shall say, That they shall condemn them by accusing them: for we likewise
commonly say, That the Accuser condemns him that is guilty, when by his
testimony he does convince him.

The greatness of Niniue.
Viri Niniuitae. This City of Niniuie, Eusebius calls it, Eusebim; Herodotus,
Ninus, for that it was bult by Ninus husband to Simiramis, styled by another
name, Assure. It was a City, not only the greatest in all the Kingdom of the
Assyrians, but in the whole world. Moses gives it the name of great City, De
terra inquit illa exiuit Assure, and aedificauit Niniuem, haec est Ciuitas
magna: It Is greatness appears no less by that relation which the Prophet
makes of it, Genesis 10.
Itinere trium dierum; for the circuit of this City was a three days journey;
and that there were in it only of babes and sucklings, above a hundred and
twenty thousand souls. The Histories make mention, That the walls thereof were
a hundred foot broad, and were fenced with a hundred and twenty strong Towers:
Sardanapalus was the last, and thirty eigth King of that Monarchy, it having
continued a thousand three hundred and seventy seven years.

Jonas from whence descended.
Jonas (according to some Hebrews) was the son of the woman of Sarepta, whom
the Prophet Elias raised up to life: his fathers name was Amithay, of the Tribe
of Asser. But more probable is that of Saint Hierome and Saint Austen, That he
was of the Tribe of Zabulon, his Country Geth, or Pher, the court of one of
those Kings whom Ioshuah subdued and slew. Josh. 11.


God commanded him to go and preach at Niniuie; for out of his especial
providence he had always a care to provide a Light not only for the Jews, but
also for the Gentiles. And therefore Athanasius says, That the Law of Moses
was a general School for all the world; and that the Prophets wrought their
Revelations for all the Nations under the cope of Heaven; and that to this end,
they went themselves abroad in person, and likewise sent their Books into
diverse Kingdoms and Monarchies, as it appears by Esaias, Jeremy, Ezechiel,
Daniel, Amos, Sidrac, Misac, and Abednego: out of whose Prophecies, those
Philosophers that were Gentiles stole many sentences: namely those complainers
on Gods providence are condemned, who cry out in hell, The Sun of
understanding rose not unto us. Theophilact says, That God, being the Master
of the Gentiles, after that he had by the light of the Gospel enlightened the
world by his Son and his Apostles, and Disciples; he proved thereby, that he
was one and the self same God both of the Old and the New Testament.

Quia ascendit malitia eius coram me.
For the malice thereof is come up before me. That which thou art to preach
unto them, is, That their sins have mightily moved my patience. This is the
office of a Prophet. To Esaias God said, Declare unto my People their iniquities.
Esaias 1. Hier. 1.
To Jeremy, Behold, I have put my words into thy mouth, that thou may pluck
up, destroy, etc. To Ezechiel, They whom I send thee to, are stiff necked, and
hard hearted. In a word, God did notify this Obligation to all the Prophets;
whereby all they are condemned, who place their end altogether in curiosities:
This is to go about to seek out for those that are thirsty, precious waters,
and wines cooled with snow, and put into copper flaggons; Cold water for a
thirsty Soul (as Solomon says. Prou. 25.
) This is, to quench a fire that consumes a whole City, with bottles of
Rosewater; it is a going about to open the door of our breasts with a Key of
Gold, when one of Iron (according to that of Saint Austen) is more necessary:
It is as if a Soldier should go forth to war with his head curiously combed
and curled, with his Ierken perfumed, and other effoeminate gallantries. Like
unto these is that Prophet or Preacher, who with glorious words, flaunting
phrases, idle curiosities, and smooth-filed eloquences, shall go to fight the
Lords quarrel, against the worlds sinful Monsters.

That those of Niniuie were great and mighty sinners, it is proved out of
this word Malitia, which does embrace all kind of sins; and much more
enforced by that word Ascendit; for in the Scripture it is still taken for a
great excess. De cadaueribus ascendit faetor, The stink shall come up out of
their bodies, Esaias 34. 2. Kings 19.
Esaias says it. Superbia tua (says the book of Kings) ascendit in aures meas,
Come up into my ears. And here he mentions all kind of wickedness and
abomination; and this word Coram me, Before me, confirms as much: For when a
sin does increase to that height, that it ouertops the heavens, and that it
comes to the sight of God, it is then so intolerable, that it is not to be
endured.

Surrexit Iomas, vt fugeret.
Jonas rose up, that he might fly away. Rabbi Rinchi (an Hebrew Doctor) says,
That Fugere does here infer, an acceleration, or making of have; intimating,
that Jonas made have in going to the Haven at Tharsis, to take his journie
toward Niniuie: as also, that the Prophet to whom God speaks, Reasons moving
Jonas to fly.
is so great with child, as it were, and so full of that which God commands
him, that if he should withhold the revelation which God has put into him,
he would burst with keeping it in. That may be said of him, which Job speaks
of himself, My belly is like the wine which works and has no vent; and
like the new bottles that burst; Therefore will I speak, that I may take
breath, etc. Ose complains, and did sorrow exceedingly, that he had held his
peace; Woe is me, that having seen the King and Lord of Hosts, I should hold
my peace, because I was a man of polluted lips.

Jonas rose up that he might fly. More plain is that opinion of Saint
Hierome, Nazianzen, Theodoret, Theophilact, and Methodius the Martyr, That
Jonas was not so hasty as here before we have made him; but that he pretended
nothing less, but sought by all means possible, how he might avoid this
journey, and closely conueis his body (as it were) from this command of God,
by shaping his course another way. Whither it were of dislike, that God should
pass over his favors to the Gentiles, and that his own Country should
remain disgraced and ruined; and albeit he happily knew this was to come to
pass hereafter: yet he would not willingly have seen it so to succeed in his
time: or whither it were in point of honor in his own person, thinking (if
not foreknowing) that God being so merciful, that he would pardon the
Ninevites upon their first tears, he should then suffer in his reputation, and
should be taken for a braine-sicke fool, and that he had exceeded his
Commission, and so be mocked and laughed at for his labor.

So that in the end he was fully resolved not to undergo the Embassage that
was enjoined him; and therefore embarking himself, he thought he might then
go whither he wolud through the world. This is Saint Hieromes opinion, which
the Chaldees Paraphrase do likewise favor. Surrexit vt fugeret ad Mare,
antequam prophetaret in nomine Domini, He rose up that he might fly unto the
sea, before he should prophecy in the name of the Lord.

Some man will doubt and say, How could so gross an ignorance sink into the
Prophets breast, as to think to fly ou^ of Gods reach? Confessing with David
that large extent of his power, Whither shall I go from thy Spirit? and
whither shall I fly from thy face? if I climb up into Heaven, thou art there;
if I go into Hell, thou art likewise there. I answer, That he had no such
kind of conceit in the world, nor any so foul a thought once entered into his
immagination: But that which he presumed upon, was, That in the land of the
Gentiles, God would not reveal himself, nor communicate the Spirit of
Prophecy to his Prophets; and therefore he was minded to alter his former
condition of life, and turn Merchant: For Tharsis was so famous a Port, in
regard of the great concourse of Trading that was there, that those your great
and huge merchants ships, made only for burden, were called in the Scripture,
by an Antonomasia, or pronomination, Ier. 10. Ezech. 27. ^. Kings 11. 2. Chron.
9. Esaias 50.
The Ships of Tharshish; whereof Jeremy makes mention, Ezechiel, the third
third book of the Kings, and the second of Chronicles. The Spirit of Prophecy
(it seemed) had not then captiuated his will: The Lord God has opened mine
ear, and I was not rebellious, neither turned I back: But might he then if he
would? So does this Ego non contradico seem to infer. Saint Paul says to
those of Corinth, That the Spirit of Prophecy is subject to the Prophets. And
as Amasias said to the Prophet Amos, Amos 7.12.
Get thee to the Land of Judah, o thou Seer, go, fly thou thither, and there
eat thy bread, and prophecy there: but prophecy no more at Betheb, for it is
the Kings Chapel, and it is the Kings Court. Jonas therefore seeing, The
Devils tyranny over his followers.
that a Prophet was not accepted of in his own Country, would needs turn
Merchant.

He got him into a Ship of the Phoenicians, to fly into Tharshish from the
presence of the Lord; Et dedit illis naulum, And he paid the fare thereof, and
went down into it. For the Devil is not contented that a sinner should do
him service only, but that he should give him money also into the bargain;
which is a strange kind of tyranny.

The Ship had scarce been a while under sail, when as a fearful Tempest
arose, which put those that were in the Ship into extreme peril of their
life. And albeit your Pilots, your Mariners, and Shippe-boyes, that are beaten
and accustomed to these kind of chances, usually loose all fear both of winds
and waves, nay also of God himself; yet now, such was the tempestuousnesse of
the weather, and the raging of the Sea, that they called upon those their gods
which were painted in their Ship; Timuerunt nautae, The Mariners fear
increased, judging this Storm the strangest as ever they saw, accounting it as
a miracle.

First of all, Because there was no preceding sign of it; for those that are
experienced Seafaring men, are not only skilled in knowing those signs of a
storm that are near at hand, but those that are afar off; as by the
irruptions of the air, which breaking forth from the concauities and hollow
vaults of the Deep, trouble the waters; the colluctation and wrestling of the
winds, the croking of Ravens, the bellowing of Beasts, the playing of
Porpeecies, which do whisper in their ears the storm that is to come upon
them. But this Tempest here came so violently upon them on the sudden, that
there was no foregoing sign to foreshew it.

Secondly, Because (as Rabbi Solomon has noted it, an Hebrew Doctor, from whom
Theodoret and Theophilact had it) there were many ships that had gone out of
Tharshish, which they might kenne not far from them, that had very fair and
clear weather, and sailed away smoothly, having (as they say) a Ladies
passage, so calm was the Sea, and so gentle and temperate their gale of wind.
Whereupon they did discreetly argue amongst themselves, that there was some
great and notorious sinner in their Ship, against whom the winds and the waves
(by Gods especial appointment) made such cruel war. He that goes to sea,
goes in danger, Qui nauigant mare, etc. Euripides was of opinion, That they
could not be truly said to be either dead or alive; not dead, because they
live; not alive, because there was only a poor planke betwixt their death and
their life. And the Sinner haleth his halter after him, and if God did not
defend him, the Sea would not endure him. The Slave that flies from his Master,
all the servants of the house make hue and cry after him; they follow him,
crying, Stop him, stop him: and if that will not serve the turn, his Master
sends Horsemen after him, who pursue him, and apprehend him. All the whole
house of Heaven make hue and cry after Jonas, Angels, Saints, Friends, holy
inspirations, make pursuit after him, as they use to do after other rebellious
sinners: But that will not serve the turn; whereupon he sends these his Horsemen
after him, the winds, the waves, the ship-boyes, and mariners; they take him
and cast him into the dungeon of the Whales belly.

Miserunt vasa, They cast forth their Vessels, etc. This word Vasa is taken for
the wares, the weapons, the Masts, the sails, and other instruments belonging
to a Ship; Vasa Domus, Vasa Bellica, Vasa Nauis, and the like. In that Tempest
which Saint Luke mentions in the Acts of the Apostles, wherein Saint Paul
suffered so many days, he says, Acts 17.
That the very cords and tacklings in the ship were cast over board, Armamenta
Nauis proiecerunt: So now, whither it were to lighten the Ship, or to appease
the anger of their Gods, whom they thought were to be appeased with gifts, or
that they were subject to these passions of choler and covetousness, etc. And
as now the Faithful have recourse in their shipwracks to prayers and promises;
so was it now with these Infidels, and not to this alone, but to the offering
up of Jewels of great price and value.

Jonas was got him down into the bottom of the Ship; whither he had withdrawn
himself thither out of his sorrow, or to avoid the noise of their shreeks and
outcries, or for fear of the thunder and lightning, or not to behold the
fury and rage of the waves and the winds, I cannot tell you: but because fear
and heaviness commonly causes sleep, Jonas was fallen now so sound asleep,
that neither his own proper peril, nor the lamentable clamours of others,
could ^wake him.

Quid tu sopore deprimeris; Surge and inuoca Deum tuum.
What meanest thou, o Sleeper, awake and call upon thy God. They that came down
^o the Pumpe, lighted upon Jonas, and awaking him, said unto him by way of
admiration, Is it possible that a man should sleep in the midst of such a
terrible Tempest? The cries and lamentations of all seek to appease the fury
of the winds, and do thou sleep? The Sea-Gods are afraid, and the Fishes
retire themselves into their holes in the deep, and do thou sleep? Arise
for shame, and call upon thy God, since others call upon theirs. Whither it
were that they did presume that Jonas was some Saint, (which they might gather
from his modesty, and his Prophet-like attire) or whither they had heard of
the great wonders done by his God; (for many were the things that were spoken
of him among the Gentiles, which were marvelous in their eyes) I leave it to
the construction of the Discreet.

Mittamu^ sorts, Let us cast lots. They whispered amongst themselves, That
sure there was some notable villain, some wicked person, among the passengers,
for whose sake the gods had showed themselves so angry against this their
ship, and those that went in her; for one evil man that is vpheld and
maintained in his lewd courses, and is favored and protected by those with
whom he lives and conuerses, is able to destroy a City, and to corrupt a
whole Commonaltie, if he be not corrected and punished in time. Ezech. ^0.
According to that of Ezechiel, Corrue^^ fulcientes Aegyptum, They also that
maintain Egypt shall fall, and the pride of her power shall come down.
Every one then said to his companion, Let us cast Lots, Et sciamus quare hoc
malum sit nobis, That we may know for whose cause this evil is upon us; or (as
the Hebrew has it) In cuius nam hoc malum nobis, Let us know who is in the
fault why we do all thus suffer. They therefore cast lots, not once alone, but
again and again; for the Lot falling still upon one, it was an especial
effect of Gods providence, and a great token, that he would discover him tha^
was faulty.

It therefore falling still upon Jonas, the Mariners and the rest that were in
the ship, laid hands on him, and (as Saint Hierome has noted it) made him this
short, but discreet interrogation, What is thy occupation, and whence come
tho^* Which is thy Country, and of what People art thou? Touching his Office,
his voyage, and his Country, the Prophet of his own accord, without being
(...) to the torment, confessed all unto them: he told them he was an Hebrew,
and that he sought to fly from the God of Israel, who had made the Sea and the
(...) Land; and that this was the cause of this their furious tempest, and
fierce storm. Then said they unto him, What shall we do unto thee, that the
sea may be calm unto us? (for the sea wrought, and was troublous.)

Mittite me in mare, Take me and cast me into the sea, so shall the sea be calm
unto you: for I know, Why Jonas would be cast into the Sea.
that for my sake this great tempest is upon you. This was no desperation in
Jonas, nor any desire to hasten his own death; but that he might not pers^^^
any longer in offending his God, whereof he was now sorry, and earnestly
repe^^ted him of the error he had committed. If I live (thought he with
himselfe^ shall fall tomorrow into the like folly again. And therefore let no
man pre^sume that it shall be better with him tomorrow, Long life an
enlargement of Sin.
than it was yesterday, or the other day before: and though a man may purpose
amendment to himself, (...) desire it, yet is it no wisdom to presume
thereupon. Hence it arises, that (...) multiplication of years does but
multiply our greater condemnation.

Remigabant viri, etc. The men rowed to bring the Ship to land. They sough^
(...) save the life of Jonas with the danger of their own lives; and despising
(...) own proper peril, they took care of another man's good; which is the
(...) most that a godly man can do. The seventy Interpreters indeere it (...)
thing more, saying, Vi^^ facieba^t, They did (as it were) offer violence to the
(...) and so, rowing and praying, remigando and ^rando, they said, O Lord, if
this man be so odious in thine eyes, thou may strike him dead with a sudden
plague, or with a blast of thy breath: and if thou art not willing that he
should not now die, do not punish us for him, save not him, to kill us. Ne
pereamus in anima viri istius, Let not us perish for this man's life. But the
more they strove in rowing and in praying, the waves began to swell the more,
and the winds grew stiffer and stiffer; Mare intumescebat super eos, The sea
wrought exceeding high, and was troublous against them. Thereupon, they made a
devout prayer unto God, entreating him that he would not impute unto them the
death of that Prophet: O Lord, (said they) thou have made our arms the
instruments of thy Justice; and whereas it is thy pleasure, that we should
throw him into the Sea, thou might, if thou would, have given him some
other kind of death: This judgment which we execute upon him, we have done it
out of his own confession, and by the casting of Lots; but if perchance we
have herein erred, In casting a man away, no delay too long.
by taking away the life of the Innocent, permit not his blood to be upon our
heads, since thou may so easily (if thou will) manifest his innocence. Well
might our Savior Christ condemn the Pharisees, by these poor Mariners and
Ship-boyes, since they did demurre so much, and cast so many doubts with
themselves, concerning the offense of a Fugitive, that had already confessed
himself faulty: Whereas these Scribes and Pharisees did rashly and
inconsiderately sentence him to death, whom the Heaven and the Earth had
pronounced and published to be innocent; crying out with a full mouth, Sanguis
eius super nos.

Tulerunt Ionam, So they took up Jonas, etc. Saint Hierome does much weigh the
courtesy and respect wherewith they took up Jonas, Quasi cum obsequio and
honor portantes, Bearing him as it were with a great deal of obsequiousness
and honor, upon their shoulders, because he had made so humble a confession,
by acknowlegement of his fault, and for that, that he had thus voluntarily
offered himself up unto death: They did reverence him as a Saint, and lifting
up that weight in their arms, which the sea could not bear, they had scarce
thrown him ouerboord, but the sea ceased from her raging, resting satisfied
with this Sacrifice, and giving it as a sure sign and token unto them, that it
did not pretend this it is fury, to any but Jonas. The Mariners after they had
cast him into the Sea, sought (as an ancient Doctor says) to take him up
again, and to save his life; but then the waves began to rise and rage afresh,
insomuch that they were forced to let him alone: it being a wonder, to see
Seafaring men, who are generally pitiless, to take such pity and compassion
of him.

Stetit Mare, The sea grew calm on the sudden, and the weather grew ^aire and
clear: and as the tempest came suddenly upon them, without any preuening
dispositions; so did this calm and fair weather at sea come upon them in an
instant, before ever they were aware of it; which was a notable proof and
argument unto them, that this Tempest was miraculous.

Gods providence had before hand provided a Whale ready to receive Jonas; and
when as he thought he should have been swallowed up in the Deep, and that the
waters should enter into his soul, crying out in his meditations, Pelagus
^peruit me, vestes terr^ concluserunt me, The ^^ouds compassed me about, all
thy surges and all thy waves passed over me, etc. Then did the Whale open his
mouth, then when in his affliction he cried unto the Lord: I am cast away out
of thy sight, the waters compassed me about unto the soul, the depth closed
me round about, and the weeds were wrapped about my head; then, even then did
the Whale open his mouth, and swallowing him up whole into his belly, defended
him from the jaws of death. Jonas being herein like unto a delinquent whom the
Jailer takes into his custody, Job. 7.
to secure his person. Job says, That God has girt in the sea on the one side
with mountains and valleys, Circumdedit illud terminis suis; and on the other
side with sand, Posuit arenam terminum Maris. And as Jonas was shut up in the
Whales belly, as in a prison; so was the Whale enclosed in that prison of the
Sea. Nunquid Mare ego sum, aut Caete? Am I a Sea, or a Whale fish, that thou
keep me in ward? Now if God had both before and behind, on this side, and
that side, pitched so many nets for Jonas, he could ver^e hardly escape him,
his flying could not save him; but in this Whales maw, contrary to all the
laws of Nature, God maintains and preserues his life. If the stomach of a
Whale will digest an anchor of Iron, (as Tertullian tells us) it must then of
force consume Jonas; and if instead of air, he draws in water, he must
necessarily be choked. But he that delivered Daniel from the hungry mouths of
Lions, and those three children from the flames of the fiery Furnace; it is not
much, that he should conserve Jonas in the deepest and darkest dungeon that
ever living man was clapped up in. The wonder was, that though himself were
prisoner, yet he had left unto him so free an understanding, that he was able
to make so elegant an oration to God, out of so foul a Pulpit.

The Prophet did dwell upon this great miracle which God had used toward him,
and did recover so much strength and confidence, that he stuck not to say,
Rursus videbo templum sanctum tuum, Yet will I look again toward thy holy
temple, I live in good hope, not only to see my self freed out of this
loathsome Jail, but to humble my self on my knee in thy holy Temple, giving
thee thanks for the great mercy and favor which thou have showed toward me:
For the present I will make this sluttish corner my Oratorie, assuring my
self, that from thence my prayers shall be acceptable unto thee; who, like
some great Prince or Monarch of the world, is respected in any place whatsoever
of thy jurisdiction: so that there is no doubt, that any thy poorest vassal
whatsoever, may be heard by thee. The Children of Babylon were heard from the
Furnace; Daniel from the Lions Den; Job from the Dunghill; David from amiddest
the Thorns and Bushes: And so I make no question but I shall be, from the
bowels of this Beast, In omni loco dominationis eius, benedic anima mea
Domino, O my soul, bless the Lord in every place of his power.

These three days Jonas spent in prayer, at the end whereof, God commanded the
Whale to cast out Jonas upon the Coast of Niniuy. In all adversities our
practice must be Prayer.
And the Whale obaying his Empire, crossed the Seas many Leagues, and there threw
the Prophet forth upon dry Land, though full of froathie slime, and unctuous
stuff, free from the horror of that deep and darkesome dungeon. From hence
did the Gentiles faigne those their fabulous tales of Hercules being swallowed
up by another Whale; of Arion, playing on his harp, riding on the back of a
Dolphine. For, (as it is noted by Clemens Alexandrinus, and Saint Basil) the
Heathen Philosophers did steal these truths from us; founding thereupon their
falsehoods: And giving credit to their lies, they did not believe our truths.
Many of the Ninevites, coming down to the shoare-side, were stricken with
admiration, to see such a monstrous, strange, prodigious man; and the fame
thereof flying to the City, before they were affrighted with the sad news that
he brought, they stood astonished at the strangeness of the case; which
questionless was a great cause; that they did afterward harken unto him, and
give creditto what he said. In the end, taking this for his Theme; Adhuc
quadraginta dies, and Niniue s^^uertetur; ^et forty days, and Niniuie shall
be overthrown. Not threatening only the ruin of the City, but also of the
Towers, Walls, Palaces, Citizens, Children, Women, and Old men, even to the
very beasts of the field; so great was the fear that entered into all their
breasts, that without any further Miracles, laying their belief upon the
Prophet, they presently gave beginning to that their great repentance, which
was the strangest that ever was yet heard of.

The King laid aside his purple roabes, and his rich and costly clothes, the
throan of his Greatness and Majesty, and covered himself with sacke-cloth,
and ^ate in ashes, causing his clothes of State to be pulled down, his walls
of his palace to be left naked of their hangings of cloth of Gold, and other
pieces of Arras, being no less curious than glorious. For Sardanapalus, was
one of the loosest, and most licentious men, that he had not his like in all
the World. The like did all the great Officers of his Palace, the Princes, and
Wealthyest men of his City, as also all the fair and beautiful Ladies. And
there was a Proclamation presently made through all Niniuie, (by the Council
of the King, and his Nobles) with express charge, That neither man, nor beast,
bullock, nor sheep, should taste any thing, neither feed, nor drink water; but
that man and beast should put on sackcloth, and cry mightily unto God. To the
end, that the bellowing of their bulls, the bleating of their sheep and goats,
the howling of their dogs, the tears of their children, the sighs and
lamentations of their mothers, might move Heaven to take pity of them. And
above all, they did cry out most grievously for their sins. For albeit, they
are offenses toward God, yet are they miseries unto man; and as, quatenus
peccata, so far forth as they are sins, they provoke and stir up Gods
Justice against us; So, quatenus, they are miseriae, as they are miseries unto
us, they incline and move our good God to take mercy and compassion of us.
The same reason which wrought God to destroy the World, the same likewise
moved him never to destroy it more. Cogitatio hominis prona est ad malum, Man's
thoughts are pro^e unto evil. One while he considers it, as an offense unto
God; another while, as a misery incident to man. The word Zagar, signifies
Vociferatio, A crying out aloude, The Ninevites repentance.
as when a City is set on fire, and in danger to be burnt. Some perhaps may
conceive that this was too strict a command, to inioyne this punishment upon
dumb beasts, and poor little infants, that had not yet offended. But first of
all, they did therein pretend to incline Gods mercy toward them. Secondly, to
move the more repentance, by a common sorrow. Thirdly, as at the funerals of
Princes, and Generals, not only the principal and meaner persons mourn in
blackes, but their horses wear the like livery of sorrow, their drums beat
hoarse, covered with black Cypres, their ancients are trailed along on the
ground, their swords and their lances with their points the contrary way; Genesis
6. Genesis 8.
in token that both the horses, the drums, the ancients, and the arms, have
lost their Master: so likewise did the case stand with the City of Niniuie,
etc.

Jonas put Niniuie to such a strict penance, and sorrow for their sins, that
it did appease the wrath of God toward them. The Prophet presumed it should be
destroyed; and therefore Jonas went out of the City, and sat on the East side
thereof, and there made him a booth, and sat under it in the shadow, till he
might see what should be done in the City. Thinking perhaps with himself,
that God would not now make an end of the City all at once, but that he would
destroy a great part thereof; as he did in the adoration of the golden Calfe,
when as pardoning the people, he slew a great number of them. Now God had
prepared a Gourd for Jonas, and made it to come up over him, that it might be
a shadow over his head, and deliver him from his grief. Other Authors, give it
other names. But the strangeness of it was, that it grew up all in a day. The
Prophet was exceeding glad to see himself so well sheltred by this Gourd, from
the heat of the Sun, which did shrewdly scortch him; Laborauerat enim, It
vexed him very sore: So that before it went very ill with him; and his joy
was so much the more increased, for that he saw God had such a care to cherish
and make much of him; Sure (thought he) he makes no small account of me, that
uses me thus kindly. But God shortly after prepared a worm, which smote the
Gourd that it withered; Et percussit Sol super caput Iona, and astuabat, The
Sun beat upon the head of Jonas, and he fainted. Who could have the patience
to endure this? Was it the Sun, or was it fire, that should thus provoke him to
cry out, Melius est mihi mori, quam viuere, It is better for me to die than to
live. But God reprehended Jonas for this desperate speech of his; Putas ne been
irasceris Iona? How n^w Jonas, What Is the matter with thee? Do thou well to
be angry for the Gourd? Do thou find thy self grieved, that I have made
this Gourd to wither, which came up in a night, and perished in a night; and
will thou not suffer me to be sencible of the destruction of this so great a
City, wherein there are sixescore thousand persons which cannot discern
betwixt the right hand and the left? Does it touch thee, that thou art not
esteemed in thine own Country? And will thou not pity Niniuie, whom thou
have drawn by thy preaching unto them, to repentance? Niniuie yielded unto
thee at the first words of thy voice; but Judah still stands out obstinately in
her malice against my calling upon her. And therefore at the day of judgment,
the men of Niniuie shall condemn them for a stiff necked generation, and a
hard hearted People; seeing they without any miracles were converted, and
turned unto me at the preaching of one poor ^^nas, Et ecce plus quam Jonas
hic, And behold a greater than Jonas here. Jerusalem seeing so many miracles,
perseuereth in her incredulity; and therefore Niniuie shall stand, and
Jerusalem shall be destroyed. At the day of judgment thou shall stand
confounded and ashamed, that a barbarous, ignorant, and unbelieving Nation
(which is a great disgrace to a man of honor) that one that is so far
inferior to thee, should come to be so far preferred before thee: As those
Cities where most of our Saviors great works were done, were vpbraided by
him, because they repented not; pronouncing a woe to Chorazin, and a woe to
Bethsaida: Math. 11.
For if (says he) the great works which were done in you, had been done in
Tyrus and Sydon, they had repented long agone in Sacke-cloath and Ashes.

Regina Austri.
The Queen of the South shall rise in judgment, etc. Some man may say, The
history of Niniuie was sole, and without example in the world; it (...) not
it is fellow. For which cause, he sets down another example of the Queen of the
South, of whom there is mention made in the third of the Kings, and in the
second of Chronicles. 1. Kings 10. 2. Chron. 9.
The Queen of the South came from Morol, (an Isl^^^ of Aethyopia, as Origin,
Saint Hierome, Saint Austen, Anselmus, and Josephus, says) and only to hear
the wisdom of Solomon; Et ecce, (...) quam Solomon hic, And behold a greater
here than Solomon. It was much, that the barbarous people of Niniuie should
believe Jonas, who sought after them, and not they after him: But much more is
it, that an Aethyopian Queen should seek after ^ King, to her so great
trouble and cost. Ecce plus quam Solomon hic. When the Preacher is of that
great power and authority, that he both says and does; the little fruit that
they reap thereby, is evermore attributed to the hardness of the hearer. And
that he might teach this People this lesson, he says, Ecce, plus quam Solomon
hic, Behold, a greater than Solomon is here. He was greater than Jonas; for if
he were obeyed by the Ninevites, our Savior had obeisance done him by all the
Elements: if Jonas had a grace in his delivery, and spoke with a spirit, it
was our Savior that gave it him: if Jonas did inlighten a City, our Savior
did illuminate the whole world: if Jonas did preach blood; threatenings, and
death, our Savior did publish our salvation, life, and hope of Heaven. He was
better than Solomon; for his wisdom was humane and earthly; but that of our
Savior, divine and heavenly: Solomon never wrought any miracles; but those of
our Savior were without number. In a word, between the Queen of the South
and the Pharisees, between our Savior and Solomon, there is a great
antithesis and contrariety: The Queen was a Barbarian, and ignorant; they,
Doctors, and learned in the Laws; she, wonderful desirous to hear a man;
they, loath to hear a God; she offered to Solomon great gifts; they to our
Savior vinegar and gall; she did so wonder at Salomons wisdom, that she
said, Fame had belied him, and that Report came too short of his praise; but
they made so slight account of our Saviors words and works, that they require
new miracles at his hands: but this their cauelling with him, shall occasion
their condemnation. To conclude, The principal things that Niniuie shall charge
them with, are two.

The first, The speediness of their repentance, and the have that they made to
turn unto God: For (as Saint Chrysostom has noted it) in three days Jonas
effected that in Niniuie, Jonas effected more in three days then our Savior
did in thirty years. Repentance, not to be deferred.
which our Savior could not bring to pass in thirty years and upward. Saint
Ambrose, That they who defer their repentance till the hour of their death,
ought not to be denied the Sacraments, if they desire them; but I dare not be
so bold (says the said Father) to warrant them their salvation. Rahab had
scarce put the Spies out of her window, but that she presently hung out that
colored string, the token that was given her for the safeguard of her life.
Philon takes into consideration, that exceeding great have which the Egyptians
made to rid their Country of the children of Israel; they held it no
wisdom, to defer their departure one minute of an hour longer, (if they
could so soon have freed themselves from them) considering in what great
danger they were of loosing their lives. Much less discretion is it, to defer
the repentance of our sins from day to day, considering how daily we are in
peril of perishing in Hell.

The second, The greatness, sharpness, and rigor of their Repentance, not
only in the men, but in the women, children, and cattle: They thought with
themselves, That forty days of sorrow were too little, and too few for so many
years of sinning; and therefore they did strive all that they could, that the
extremity of their punishment might make amends for that long time wherein they
had offended. Lanabo per singulas noctes lectum meum, i. I will every night
wash my Couch with my tears. Chrysostom. says, Culpa^ fuisse vnius noctis,
lachrimas multorum, That it was but one nights sin, but many nights tears.
Amplius laua me, O Lord, wash me yet a little more, that I may be clean. Now
was he cleansed; but ill assured of this his cleanness, etc. For the washing
out of the stains and spots of our sins, one la^^r, one rinsing, one bucking
is not sufficient, no, though we have never so much soap and ashes to scour
them clean, and bear out our hearts upon the block of our senseless souls:
it must (o Lord) be the water of that immense and mighty sea of thy Mercy;
that, and nothing but that, can do it. And therefore, Have mercy upon me, o
God, according to thy great mercy.

THE NINTH SERMON, UPON THE THVRSEDAY AFTER THE FIRST SUNDAY IN LENT.
MAT. 5. MARC. 7. Secessit Jesus in parts Tyri and Sydonis.

Jesus withdrew himself into the coasts of Tire and Sydon.


THis History has been handled by me heretofore: The sum whereof is, That
our Savior Christ withdrawing himself to the parts of Tyrus and Sydon, The
woman of Canaans Faith.
he did a work of mercy, that was full of strange circumstances. A woman
came forth to meet him, descended of that accursed Cha^, desiring his help for
a daughter of hers that was possessed with a Devil: And howbeit our Savior
had taken the pains to come five and twenty leagues for to heal that soul,
(as one that well knew the price and worth thereof) yet he gave her so many
shrewd disgraces and put-by's, that would have dismayed the stoutest spirit
alive, and have cooled the courage of him that had been most confident of his
strength. But this woman did not flag a whit for all this, nor would be so
beaten off; but one while making use of the intercession of the Apostles;
another while confessing herself to be no better than a Dog, and begging
like a Dog, not the bread it self, which was for the children, but the
crummes that fell from the (...), which never yet was denied unto Dogs: she
perseuered in her petition, laying such a strong and forcible battery to the
pity and mercy of Christ, that it being in it self invincible, yet it
yielded to a woman's importunity. Encouraging us thereby, and putting us in
good hope, that nothing shall be denied unto us, How Christ called, the hope of
the Gentiles.
if we shall earnestly call upon God, and persevere in the pursuit of our humble
petitions: And there is good cause of comfort for us, Quoniam confirmata est
super nos misericordia eius, His mercy is confirmed unto us, as well as his
grace; whose effect is infallible, and most certain. And as a continual
fever that is once confirmed and settled upon us, is an assured messenger of
death; so the mercy of God being once confirmed unto us, it is not possible
that it should ever fail us.

Egressus Jesus, secessit.
Some do apply this word to the Son of Gods coming forth into the World;
Some, to the strength and virtue which our humane nature recovered by this his
coming. Which is all one with that of Saint Austen; if God had not been Man,
Man had not been free. The Scripture calls Christ our Savior, The desire
and hope of the Gentiles. And to him that shall doubt, How the Gentiles, not
having knowledge of the Son of God, nor of his coming, Ob.
could be called their hope, and their desire?

First of all, I answer; That amongst the Gentiles God had some friends, Sol.
as the Sybils, and many which believed in him; In the land of Hus, he had Job.
And if it shall be objected, That so small a number of the Gentiles, Ob.
were not sufficient to give a name and being of this their hope and desire?

I must answer secondly, That all creatures did naturally desire, Sol.
and long for him, as the dry ground does gape for water; Psalm. 142.
or as the captive does desire his liberty, Sicut terra sine aqua tibi.

Thirdly, Saint Austen answers, That the desired, ought first to be known.
But it is the fashion of the Prophets, to take Futuru^, pro praeterito, The
future, for the preterperfect Tence.

And here it is to be noted, That with Tyrus and Sydon, that happened unto him
in particular, which succeeded unto him in the world in general. He was long
before offended with this Country as it appears in Joel; Quid mihi, Joel. 3.
and vobis Tyrus and Sydon? What have I to do with you, o Tire and Sydon. In
Ezechiel, Ezech. 27.
Tu ergo fili hominis assume lamentum super Tyrum, Now therefore o son of
Man, take up a lamentation for Tire. In Esaias Onus Tyri, vlulate naues maris,
The burden of Tire, Esaias. 23.
^owle ye ships of the Sea. How then did God make peace with the World by his
Son? Gratificauit nos in dilecto filio suo. And he offered the like
kindness unto Tyrus and Sydon. Memor ero Rahab Babilonis: Ecce alienigeni, and
Tyrus hic fuerunt illic, etc. I will think upon Rahab, and Babylon, the
Morians, Psalm. 87.
and them of Tire, etc.

Secessit in parts Tyri, and Sydonis, He went into the Coasts of Tire and
Sydon. He taxes this his people of their unthankfulness toward him; For he,
that does not only not acknowledge a good turn, but requites it with il, shuts
the gates of Heaven against his own Soul. And therefore, Signum non dabiter
ei^. Rupertus has observed, That the first fault that was committed in the
World, was Ingratitude; For God having created Adam in a perfect age, and sound
in his judgment, having, for his recreation given him Paradise, and for his
authority, the Seigniorie of the World; yet did he not give him thanks for
these his so great and many favors toward him; whereupon the Devil, (being
a slye and subtle Merchant) took occasion to tempt him, persuading himself,
That he who had showed himself ungrateful, would with a little labor be
easily brought to be disobedient. This Doctor does soundly and thoroughly ponder
these words, Serpens erat callidior, The serpent was more subtle. Like a
crafty Huntsman, he waited but for a time, that Adam by his unthankfulness
should fall into the toil, whence afterward he should not so easily get out.
Saint Ambrose says, That Noah, all that while that he was building the Arc,
did not any thing, though never so little, without some especial order from
God; but as soon as he was gone out of the Arc, without further expecting
advise from Heaven, he did prepare and make ready his sacrifice. For, that a
Soul should show it self thankful to it is God, it is not necessary, that it
should stay waighting and looking for revelations; but rather hasten to
express it as soon as it can, and to use all prevention of being put in mind
of it. And therefore in approbation of Noah's forwardness, the Text says,
Odoratus est Dominus odorem suauitatis, The Lord smelled a savor of rest. Genesis
8.
And showed himself so well pleased and appeased therewith that he said in his
heart, he would thencefoorth curse the ground no more for man's cause.

There is another circumstance, touching Ingratitude, which is very
considerable, and deserves our attention, which is this, That albeit God is
wont sometimes to dissemble other faults, and lets them run on many years
before he will punish them, yet the sins of unthankfulness, he will not suffer
them to escape unpunished, no no^ so much as to grant them the forbearance of a
few hours. God says in Leuiticus; Qui maledixerit Deo suo, portab^t peccatum
suum, Whosoever shall curse his God, Leuit. 24*
or speak ill of him, shall bear his sin; no farther chastisement being
there set down for him. But he that shall blaspheme the name of the Lord,
Morte morietur, shall be put to death: that is the Law. The second
(questionless) is a lesser sin than the former; And yet God dissembles the
former, and will by no means endure the second. And the reason thereof
(rendered by Thomas) is, That those names, and attributes of God, do shut up as
it were, and comprehend in them those benefits which he so liberally bestows
upon us; and for that the blasphemer shows himself so ungrateful unto God,
he cannot hope for any pardon of his punishment. Our Savior Christ then
seeing, that Judea did draw poison out of treacle, and unthankfulness and
hardness of heart, from the many favors and mercies that he had showed
toward them, Secessit in parts Tyri and Sydonis, Went into the Coasts of Tire
and Sydon etc.

Ecce mulier Chananea.
The force of Prayer.
Many, and great matters are spoken of the force and power of Prayer. Grievous
is that saying of God unto Ieromie; Noli orare pro populo isto, neque assumes
pro eis laudem and orationem, Hier. 7.
and non obsistas mihi, Thou shall not pray for this people, neither lift up
cry or prayer for them, neither entreat me, least I should hear thee, and so
divert mine anger. See thou not what they do, etc? Seek not therefore to
hinder me in executing my vengeance against them. None (says Job) is able to
resist the wrath of God. But God advises us, how powerful a thing Prayer is
for the appeasing of it, Io^ 9.
by seeking to prevent the Prophet, by putting in this caveat, Non obsistas
mihi, Resist me not. Grievous is that saying of God, unto Moses, Desine, vt
irascatur furor meus, Stand not betwixt me and home, that I may destroy this
people. O Lord, who can hold thy hand, when thou art willing to strike? Who,
force thee against thy will, to be quiet? yes, The Prayer of such a friend as
Moses, Orabat autem Moses ad Dominum Deum suum. Being one, whom God so much
respected. And as the love of a friend does tie the hands of some angry Lord,
and keep him from striking; so Prayers binds Gods hands when he is angry with
us, not suffering him to draw his sword. This was no small comfort to David,
which made him to sing the song of Thanksgiving, Benedictus Deus, qui non
amouit orationem meam, and misericordiam suam a me, Blessed be God, who has
not removed either my prayer, or his own mercy from me. Saint Austen says,
That as long as God shall not take from out our mouths and our hearts our
praying unto him, so long we may be well assured that he will not remove his
mercy from us, for he never denies those that faithfully call upon him

But a matter of great consideration is that which we have here in hand, Ecce
mulier Cananea, Behold a Canaanitish woman, etc. What? a woman that is an
Idolatresse, can she be of that power that she should overcome God by
prayer? When a weak arm cuts a man off by the wast at a blow, or hewes a bar
of iron in sunder, this act is not attributed so much to the force of his arm,
as the goodness of his sword; so, this days noble act is not to be
attributed to a Pagan woman, (who was descended of that accursed Cham) but to
the power of Prayer. To those three divine persons, Prayers are not permitted:
for, as Thomas notes it, Prayer is to be directed to a superior power: And if
the Son of God did pray, it was according to his humanity, having recourse
(as Saint Ambrose says) to those two obligations of Priest and Advocate: And
if (Saint Paul says) that the holy Ghost does pray, Postulat pro nobis
gemitibus in enarrabilibus, He makes request for us with groans that are
unspeakable: It was, that he might teach us how to pray, as Saint Augustine
expounds it. The Devils, and those that are damned, are not capable of
prayer: Albeit the covetous rich man did desire a drop of water of Abraham to
cool his tongue, and the Devils entreated Christ, Luke 16.
that he would give them leave to enter into the Swine. For to pray unto God,
is to turn unto God, and with a sorrowful soul, and a contrite heart, humbly
and earnestly to call upon him, craving pardon for our sins. Prayer therefore
only belongs unto men, as well the Just, as the Sinner; and that the Prayer of
the Just should prevail with God, which begges and entreats of his divine
Majesty, That he will bear with us this year, and the next, and so from time
to time (as is proved by that Parable of the Fig tree, which the Lord of the
Soil caused to be hewne down, because it bare no fruit) it is not much: But
that the prayer of a Canaanitish woman should make God to yield unto her, is
more than much. The name of woman, in it is true and natural element, notifieth
a thousand imperfections: O pessima, and Mulier, says Euripides, signifying
thereby, That there is no mischief which she is not a Midwife unto; the very
name of a Canaanitish woman does blab out sin in her, hatred toward God, and a
measure full of misery. Now if a subject so weak and so imperfect, grew by
Prayer to be so powerful; What will not Prayer be able to do? Solomon asks
the question, Mulierem fortem quis inueniet? Who shall meet with a valiant
woman, that is full of metal and courage? I answer, That naturally such a one
is Rara auis in terris, a very Phoenix, a white Crow, and a black Swan; but
by the force of Prayer you shall thrice meet with such a one: in Tyrus and
Sydon God says no; and yet in the end, the Canaanitish woman's Yea goes further
than our Saviors Nay; making God, as it were, to lay down the Bucklers, and
to yield unto her. And to him that shall say, That this was a spiritual
wrestling, never giving over our Savior, but still pressing and importuning
him more and more; and that a woman will be sometimes so earnest and so
violent, that she may as well weary out God, as she does Man, to make him
yield ere she have done with him: To this, a Doctor of our times very well
answers, by proposing another question; to wit, Whither Jacobs wrestling with
God were with the force of his arms, or with the arms of Prayer? Origin tells
us, That it was a spiritual struggling of tears and prayers; and Jacob having
got the better, God said unto him, Thou shall no more be called Jacob, but
Israel, because thou have had power with God. The like may be said by our
Savior to this Canaanitish woman.

Ecce mulier Cananea, Behold a woman, etc. Ecce, in holy Scripture commonly
signifies some great matter of admiration. And this case of the Canaanitish
woman is admirable, for two rare circumstances contained in it.

The one, For that strange change and alteration in her; in regard, that of a
Canaanite in Occupatione, she became a Canaanite in Oratione, that is, a
Negotiator in Heaven: for Cananea (according to Saint Hierome) is the same with
Negotiatrix. Of a good huswife, that girdeth her loins with strength, and
strengthens her arms, Solomon says, Cingulum tradidit Cananeo; the Vulger
has it, Negotiatori, Prou. 31. Luke 19.
To the Merchant, or one that negotiates businesses; and Heaven is stored with
such kind of People: Negociamini dum venio, Occupy till I come. And so great
was the have which this Canaanite made for the increasing of her Talent, and in
mannaging of her business, that the Church sets her before us for an example,
and for an excellent and happy Negotiant with God himself. As Abraham was put
for a pattern of Faith; Isaac, of Obedience; Joseph, of Chastity; Job, of
Patience; Marie Magdalen, of Repentance; so this Canaanitish woman is proposed
unto us as an example of well negotiating with God, showing us the ready way
for a quick dispatch.

The other, That a woman that was a Gentile should come out of Tyrus and Sydon,
Virtue never more eminent, than when it shines among the Vicious.
to be a School to the Faithful; as if a Moore should come from his Moorisme,
to be a Christian, which is a rare thing, and seldom seen: that such a one
should have issued out of Jerusalem, that was well grounded in the Scripture
and Religion, it was not much; but from Tyrus and Sydon it was not a thing to
be expected. To be of the household of Faith among the Gentiles, a Catholic
among Heretics, a Christian among Moors, a Saint amongst the Wicked, was eue^
yet accounted strange and wonderful. Saint Gregory observes this of Job,
living in the Land of Hus among the Barbarians; Socius fuit Draconum, Frater
Stru^hionum, He was a companion of Dragons, and a brother to Ostriches, that
is, he lived amongst the Ungodly. And Saint Peter says of Lot, That he being
righteous, 2. Pet. ^.
and dwelling among the Sodomites, in seeing the uncleanly conversation of the
Wicked, and hearing of their abominable sins, vexed his righteous soul from
day to day with their unlawful deeds; which is a great cross and affliction to
the Godly. Saint John says of the Bishop of Pergamus, Scio vbi habitas, vbi
se^es est Sathanae, and tenes nomen meum, All thy actions are not
praise-worthie; but this is greatly to be commended in thee, that amongst
Devils, where Satan has his Throne, thou keep the faith, and confessest
my name. Saint Paul, of the Philippians, That In medio nationis prauae. The
Spouse, of his Beloved, That, Sicut Lilium inter spinas, without receiving any
harm. In a word, to enjoy perfect health in the midst of a great plague, is
a great matter; but much greater is it, that out of a Pesthouse one should come
forth to give help unto others; that from amidst Heretics a Master should be
brought to teach Catholics; and that out of Tyrus and Sydon should step forth
a Canaanitish woman to instruct the Church. And this is that which this word
Ecce aims at.

A finibus illis egressa, Come from out those Borders.
First, Christ; and then she: and though Christ had the longer and harder
journey of it, and she the shorter and easier; yet you see she was willing to
put the best foot forward, and to take some pains her self in the business:
she did not as many do now adays, sit still and do nothing, laying the whole
burden of the justification upon our Savior Christ. Supra dorsum meum (says
he, complaining by the Prophet) fabricauerunt peccatores, prolongauerunt
iniquitatem sua^, They threw all the whole burden of their sins upon my
shoulders, taking no care themselves to work out their salvation. Beloved,
this is not the way; it is not enough, that ye have your calling and vocation
from God, but you must make sure this your vocation unto you by good works,
Satagite per bona opera certam facere vocationem vestram; It is not enough,
that Christ has redeemed you, but you must seek on your part to secure your
redemption. In this sense said Paul, Adimpleo quae desunt passionum Christi in
carne mea: Not that any thing can be wanting to the passion of Christ, on his
part, but on thine. Feign would thou go to Heaven, but thou art loath to
take any pains to get thither; thou would be carried up in a soft and easy
chair, but art loath to stretch thy legs. And for this cause the Scripture
styles the life of man, a Warfare, a Wrestling, a Race, a Combat, a Reward, a
Crown; things that are not achieved without labor, trouble, service, sweats,
and some deserving in our selves. Vbi non sunt Boues, praesepe vacuum est,
Where there are no Oxen, the Cratch is empty; where no pains, no profit.
Herculei auri celebrant labores, says Boethius, The Chronicles of Hercules were
his Labors. And Plautus, Pars est fortuna laborum.

Come out of those Borders. We are not only to leave sin, but also to remove
from us all occasion of sinning. God said unto Abraham, Eijce ancillam; Agar
(...) his Slave o^ Bondwoman, Genesis 25.
she was that Leven which had sowred the sweet ^^ace of his house: God might as
well have commanded him to correct and punish her for her insolent behavior;
but because he would have the occasion of any farther falling out taken away,
he lays this command upon him, Eijce ancillam, and filium eius. Ismael, o
Lord, (might Abraham have said) is but a child, All occasions of sin must be
avoided.
and in regard of his tender age disciplinable and corrigible, he can as yet do
but little harm. But this would not serve his turn, there was no remedy but
he must be sent packing too, that all occasion may be taken away of his
mothers returning back to see him. Salua te in Monte, ne stes, etc. Get thee
out of the City, Genesis 19.
and escape into the Mountain, lest thou be destroyed. It was the Angels
advice unto Lot, lest so circumuicinant and near neighboring occasion might
prove dangerous unto him: Quantum distat Ortus ab Occidente, long fecit a
nobis iniquitates nostras, Look how wide the East is from the West, so far
has he set our sins from us. Psalm. 103.
In the Captivity of Babylon, the Children of Israel hid in a very deep
pit, the holy Fire, as a man would hide Treasure, hoping hereafter they might
come again to the fetching of it out: but when this their Captivity was
ended, when they came to seek for it, they found in stead thereof, a
coagulated and crudded kind of water, as when it is frozen; but when the beams
of the Sun began to touch upon it, it turned again to fire. So they that
cover the fire of their affection with the ashes of absence, with a hope to
return to revive that heat; howbeit it be more cold and more frozen than
water, yet with the Sun of their presence, and the heat of occasion, those
coals of love begin to kindle anew, and to break forth into their woonted
flames. Saint Augustine reports of Alipius, That having resolved with himself,
never to look upon your Fencers Prizes, upon a time, through the earnest
importunity of his friends he was drawn along to the Theater where those
bloody sports were performed; protesting that he would keep his eyes all the
while shut, and not so much as once open them: yet it so fell out, that upon a
sudden great shout of the People, he looked abroad to see what the matter was;
Whereupon he became another man, and altered his former purpose; so that his
hatred to this sport, was turned into a love and liking of it. Ecclesiasticus
says, That as a clear Fountain is to the thirsty, and as the shade to him
that is scortched with heat, such is occasion, to a man that is accustomed to
ill. In filia non auertente se, firma custodiam, Give her for lost, if thou
quit not the occasion.

Clamabat, Miserere mei, She cried, Have mercy upon me.
Vocal Prayer is sometimes profitable, and sometimes necessary; profitable,
because it stirs up our inward devotion, And is (as Saint Augustine has
observed) that blast which blows and kindles the fire that is within us.
Those that are more perfect than others, spend much time in meditation and
contemplation of the Spirit: but those that are less perfect, because their
inward heat quickly fails them, they must have recourse to the breath of
vocal Prayer, and call out aloud, with this Canaanitish woman; for the Heart
and the Lips are an acceptable Sacrifice unto God. Ex voluntate mea confitebor
ei; Saint Paul calls it, The fruit of the Lips; Heb. 13. Ose. 14.
Osee, A Sacrifice, Vituli Labiorum, The calfes of our Lips.

Miserere mei, Fili David.
Have mercy upon me, thou Son of David. Saint Augustine says, That
whatsoever may be lawfully desired, What we are to demand in prayer, and how
may be lawfully required of God: And being there be three sorts of things;
some so good, that it is impossible the use of them should be bad, as Grace,
Virtue, Glory, and the necessary sustenance of the body, which we daily beg
of God: others so ill, that they can never be good, as Sin and Wickedness:
and others indifferent, which of themselves are neither good nor evil, as
Riches, and other the like temporal Goods. The first, we may always, and at
all times beg of God without any condition or limitation: the second never:
the third must evermore have this reservation; If it be, o Lord, for thy
service, or thy honor and glory, etc. Now this Canaanitish woman craving
mercy for her self and her daughter, it being so holy and pious a petition,
she might absolutely prefer the same to our Savior.

Merits utterly cried down.
Have mercy upon me, thou Son of David. Saint Basil pondereth the elegancie
of this prayer, so wholly stripped from any proper presumption in it self, and
so clothed throughout from top to toe, with the mercy of God. There is not
any greater poverty (says Saint Bernard) than that of our own merits; nor
any falser riches than that of our own presumption. And he preuailes most with
God, who presumes least of himself; for the mercies of God are not occasioned
from our deseruings, but from his own infinite goodness, as Leo the Pope sets
it down unto you more at large. Gods mercy is so infinite and so immense, that
there is no comparison betwixt our merits and it; so short is our
righteousness of his goodness. Saint Chrysostom says, That mercy must be
like a free Port that opens unto the sea, and affoords frank passage upon all
occasions, or whither soever we are bound, without paying so much for
importation, or so much for exportation, etc.

O Son of David. Although our Savior were of the Seed of Abraham, as well as
of the House of David; yet with this People, more prevailed this appellatiue of
David; for that the promise which God had made to this King was fresher in
remembrance, more especial, and more honorable, as Saint Chrysostom and
Euthimius upon this very place have noted it unto us: So that both the nobler,
and the learneder sort among them, besides the People in general, did not
only hold it as an Article of their Faith, but for a great glory unto them,
that their Messiah was to descend from the loins of David, John 7. Mat. 2.
Scriptum est; Quia de semine David venit Christus. And our Savior asking of
the Pharisees, Whose son their Messiah should be? they did all agree in
this, That he should come from the Stock of David.

Now whither it were, that this Cananitish woman by giving him this attribute,
thought with her self, That he had some obligation to favor the Gentiles,
(for the first Troops that David had, were of fugitive Slaves and Forreiners,
which came to his aid, [ Et factus est eorum Princeps] or whither the power
that she saw he had in casting out Devils, wrought thus upon her; or whither
the much honor that he had always shown to women; or all of these together,
were motives of her pretension, I cannot tell you; but sure I am, that she did
believe, That our Savior Christ came into the world for to save sinners, and
for the general good of all Mankind, for the Jew, and for the Gentile, and
that the Devils were subject unto him; (differing therein from the Pharisees,
who made him Belzebubs Factor) and that there was no disease so incurable which
this heavenly Physician was not able to cure; and that he had past his word to
the greatest Sinners, That if they should call upon God for mercy, and believe
in his son Christ Jesus, whom he had sent into the world, he would free them
from forth the depth of their miseries.

Non respondit ei verbum.
He answered not a word. Origin, and almost all the rest of the Saints, Why God
many times shows himself deaf and dumb to our requests.
judge this silence of our Sruiour to be very strange, in regard ofthe
strangeness of the circumstances. First of all, Because that Fountain (says
Origin) which was always wont to inuit and call us to drink, does now deny
water to the Thirsty; the Physician that came to cure the Sick, refuse to
help his Patient; that Wisdom which cried out in the Market place with a
loud voice, Venite ad me, that it should now remain dumb, Who may not stand
amassed at it? O Lord, thou do not only accept of Prayer, but do like of
the bare desire to do it; not only of the lips, but of our willingness to
move them. Et voluntate labiorum illius, non fraudasti eum, says David. And
Wisdom, Optaui, and datus est mihi sensus, When I prayed, understanding was
given me; and when I called, Wisd. 7.
the Spirit of Wisdom came unto me.

Secondly, That those prayers and cries which come not from the heart, should
notbe heard, it is not much. Aufer a me tumultum carminum tuorum, says Amos,
Amos. 5.
Take thou away from me the multitude of thy Songs; for I will not hear the
melody of thy Viols; And all because they were not from the heart. And in
another place, Populus hic labijs me honorat, cord autem long est, They
honor me (says Esaias) with their lips, but their heart is far from me. But
this Cananitish woman did by her voice express her hearts grief: and most
true it is, That parents many times loving their children better than
themselves, are more sencible of their sorows than of their own.

Thirdly, it being so pious a business, as the freeing of her daughter from
the torment of the Devil; and being sent besides, of God into the world, Vt
dissoluat opera Diaboli; the Apostles as well pitying the daughters misery,
as the mothers sorrow, besought our Savior in her behalf, saying, Dimitte
illam.

Fourthly, There must be some great matter in it, some extraordinary reason,
why Christ should be now more dumb, than at other times: But of that we have
spoken elsewhere. Clamaui per diem, and non exaudies, and nocte, and non etc.
(they are the words of the son of God to his eternal Father) What, o Lord,
(says he) shall I call upon thee night and day, and will thou not hear me?
Thy silence can be no scandal unto me, because I know the secrets of thy
heart; and thy love toward me; Marry unto others, it may give great offense.

In the former Chapter of this Story, we have given some reasons of this
silence. Of those which have since offered themselves, let the first be that
of S. Chrysostom: If our Savior Christ (says he) should have made present
answer to the Canaanitish woman, her patience, her perseverance, her prudence,
her courage, and her faith, would not have been so much seen, nor manifested
to the World. So that our Savior was not dumb out of any scorn or contempt
toward her, but because in the crysoll of these his put-byes, and disdaines,
he might discover the treasure of her Virtues. And for this cause did Christ
heap so many disgraces upon her, one on the neck of another: one while, not
seeming to take any notice of her griefs; another while stiling the Jews,
children, and her self a dog. Wherewith this poor woman, was so far from
being offended or taking any exception at it, that humbly casting her self
down at his feet, she did worship and adore him, allowing all that he said to
be true, and that these disgraces were worthily thrown upon her, confessing
her self to be no better than a dog, yet notwithstanding she comes upon him
again with an Etiam Domine, Yet the crumbs o Lord, etc. That with kind words
and fair promises, and other gracious favors, God should encourage his
soldiers, put strength and boldness into them, and win their love and
affection, it is not much; but that with disdaines and disgraces, they should
receive augmentation, and increase, (like Anteus, who the oftener he was by
Hercules thrown to the ground, the abler and stronger he grew) it is more
than much. He that is in Love, has his affection rather inflamed than abated
by disdaines: And this Canaanitish woman was fallen so far in love with our
Savior, that his neglecting of her could not quench the heat of her affection.
In a word, because to fight against the disfavors of God, is one of the
greatest proofs that a Soul can make of her prowess; that this woman's valor
might be the more seen, Non respondit ei verbum, He answered not a word, etc.

The second is of Saint Gregory: Many times (says he) God does defer this or
that favor which we beg at his hands, Psalm. 7.
and for no other cause, but that he would have us to persevere in Prayer. God
is so well pleased, that we should pray and sue unto him, that with him, he
is Magis importunus, qui importunat minus, Most troublesome, that is least
troublesome. Saint Austen says, that out of the pleasure and delight that he
takes therein, God will have us to entreat him even for those things, which
are already decreed upon in his divine Council. And as his providence gives
us the fruits of the Earth, by the means of travel and tillage; so he gives
us many good things, and many rich blessings, by the means of prayer. Abraham's
posterity rested very secure, in regard of the promise which God had made
unto them; Genesis 22. Genesis 28.
And yet for all this, would he have Isaacs prayers to be the means, that
Rebecca of barren, should become fruitful. There was great certainty, 3.
Kings ^8.
that God would send rain after that great drought, for to comfort the
children of Israel, yet would he have the prayer of Elias to be the means to
procure it. The health of Tobias and Sarah his wife stood upon sure terms of
safety, Tob. 3.
yet was he advised by Raphaell to pray, that the Devil might not have the
power to take his life from him, as he had done from the rest of her husbands.
This made Thomas to be of opinion, that our predestination is propped up and
strengthened with the prayers of the Saints. And Saint Chrysostom affirms;
That as the hands of a man are naturally, not only instruments of all things
else, but of the very instruments themselves; so is Prayer in that which is
spiritual. Saint Jerome and Saint Basil, make mention of a certain Heretic,
who said, Seeing God knows what I stand in need of, why should I seek to
trouble and importune him? Whereunto their answer is, That with God we are not
to make our selves, Relatores necessitatis nostrae, sed reos, Not reporters,
but petitioners. And as there is a great inequality betwixt Relatorem,
Importunity in prayer pleasing to God.
and Reum; so is there likewise in their importunity. Saint Augustine is of
opinion, That he who is not importunate, shows he has no great mind to that
thing he sues for; and that God will not grant him his request, because he
seems to set so light by it.

The third is this, God does not only from thy prayers receive pleasure,
Difference betwixt the maker of the image and the worshipper.
but honor. Martial treating of Idolaters, says, That there is this
difference betwixt the Artificer that makes the Idol, and him that prays unto
it and adores it; that the Artificer only makes the Image; but that he that
prays unto it, and adores it, makes (as much as in him lies) a God of it; for
by praying thereto, and adoring it, he does openly protest and manifestly
declare it is Divinity, and for his part, does willingly acknowledge all
reverence and worship due to the same. Qui fingit sacros, auro, vel marmore
vultus,
Non facit ille Deos, qui rogat, ille facit.
To Gold, or Stone, a sacred look who faines,
Makes them not Gods; who pray's, that praise obtaines.
Which kind of language is likewise used in Scripture. The Children of Israel
cried out, Fac nobis Deos qui nos precedant, Make us Gods to go before us* but
of Aaron it is said, That he made them a Calfe; it was Aaron that made the
Calfe, Exodus 32.
but they, that made the Calfe a God. Thou entrest into a Siluer-Smiths Shop,
thou see him at work, thou ask him, What he is a doing? he tells thee,
He is making the God Cupid; He speaks amiss, and does not say well in it;
for it is he that bows before him, prays unto him, and adores him, that makes
him a God: for thou for thy part make him neither worse nor better than an
Idol; it is he that sues unto him, he that falls down and worships him,
equalling him in his service with God, that makes him a God. Of such Gods, God
says by David, They that make them are like unto them, and so are all such as
put their trust in them. So that to beg or ask any thing of God, is to honor
and praise him, Psalm. 115.
making public protestation, and open acknowledgement of his divine power.
Dignus est Agnus accipere dignitat^m, Apoc. 5.
Worthy is the Lamb that was killed (Saint John pointing at our Savior) to
rec^iue power, and riches, and wisdom, and strength, and glory, and praise;
To whom all the creatures that are in Heaven, and on the Earth, and in the Sea,
and all that is in them, shall sing praise, and honor, and glory, and power,
to him that sits upon the Throne, and unto the Lamb for evermore. God, (and
so our Savior Christ) wheresoever he is, has still his divinity with him:
Thou do not deny it; but God is not contented with this, but he will have
thee on thy part to give it him, by calling upon him, craving his helping hand,
and by acknowledging him to be thy God. According to that prophecy of Esaias,
Ipsum Gentes deprecabunt^r, The Earth shall be full of the knowledge of the
Lord, and the N^^ions shall seek unto him. Esaias 11. Dan. ^.
Daniel chose rather to be cast into the Lions Den, than to leave off his
praying unto God. Darius would needs make himself a God for thirty days,
and gave command, That none should dare to make any supplication to any other
but himself: It was a rash and unadvised action in him to seek to make
himself a God; but it was no ill course in him, that he made this trouble of
hearing their petitions, the means to remedy what he found was amiss; for by
hearing his Peoples complaints, he knew the better how to help them. And
therefore God complaining of his People, That they did not come and sue unto
him, nor make their moan unto him, he brands them in the forehead to their
foul shame, with a Non me inuocasti, Thou have not called upon me.

The fourth is S. Austens; who says, That God sometime denies, sometimes
grants our requests; one while more slow, another, more speedy, in yielding to
our petitions. The Devil craved his leave to tempt Job, and he presently gave
way to it. Saint Paul did beg of him, that he might be freed from that evil
Angel which tormented him, and his suit was denied; yet the Devils dispatch
was nothing so good as Saint Paul's: to the one it was quick, but to his
farther shame and confusion: to the other more slow, but to his greater grace
and glory. The Spouse treating of her Beloved, says, I sought him, but I
could not find him; I called him, Cant. 5.6.
but he answered me not. Richardus de Sancto Victore says, That God does not
presently reply to our Prayers, nor on the sudden grant our requests, to the
end that he might make us the better answer, and send us away with the better
dispatch. It is a note of Saint Basils, That Salomons wisdom stayed so little
a while with him, because God had so soon granted his request. And therefore
it is commonly said, Que presto se alcanca se pierde, Soon got, soon lost.

The fifth is of Victor Antiochenus. Our Savior Christ (says he) threw so
many disgraces upon this woman of Tyrus and Sydon, and yet gave her strength
withal to continue so courageous and constant all the while, to the end that
if the Jews should either grow envious or jealous of the favor that our
Savior showed unto her, by taking exception at his Fiat tibi sicut vis, Be it
unto thee as thou would have it; and at that his extraordinary commending of
her, when he tells her, I have not found such great Faith, no not in Israel:
he might very well excuse himself unto them, by showing unto them, that this
was violentiae magis, quam voluntatis, rather a violent, than a voluntary
action, and that whither he would or no, he was in a manner forced and
compelled to do as he did: For it is not unknown unto you, how scornful I
showed my self unto her, how many disgraces I put upon her; yet all would not
do, but she is more importunate upon me than before, so that her Faith did
enforce me to yield. He that is truly in love, auoyds the occasions that may
be offensive to his Love: Nor can that love be too much indeered, which our
Savior bare unto the Jews, which made him so loath to offend them: but never
was there any woman so jealous of her husband, as the Jews were of the
Gentiles, as also of our Saviors conuersing with them.

The sixth, That one of the noblest and most heroical acts of our Faith, is,
That a man should love his Maker, call to God for mercy and forgiveness of his
sins, desire victory over his temptations, and sue and beg, and that
earnestly, not a year or two, but ten years together; and God all this while
not returning him any answer, that he should for all this still persevere in
these his constant courses of Prayer, is a thing, I know not whither more to be
commended, than admired. Job. 30.20.
Clamo, and non exaudis me; sto, and non respicis me, says Job, I cry unto
thee, and thou do^st not hear me, neither regardest me when I stand up; I cry
by Prayer, I stand up by perseverance. Vatablus translates it, Sto, and nihil
me curas, I stand up, and th^^ take no notice of it. Moses did desire of God,
That he would do him the favor to let him see his face: that he should talk
with God, and God speak again to him; this would not content him, he must see
him, forsooth, else all the rest was as nothing: In what case would he then
have been, had he neither seen nor heard of him? Of Baal the divine
Historian delivers, 3. Kings 18.
There was neither voice to be heard, nor one to answer, nor any that regarded.
He was a false god; but that our God should be deaf at our cries, etc.

The seventh, That a mother should breed up her daughter so ill, that she
should fall into the Devils hands, Male a Daemonio vexatur [the Greek,
Daemonizatur] it is not much, that Christ should not make her any answer; for
although no man can live free from the battery of Hell, yet a mother that
shall thrust her daughter into it, must hold her self an unfortunate woman:
For it is necessary that scandalls should come; yet Christ did mourn for those
through whose means they were occasioned.

The last, God does defer the favors thou beggest of him, to the end thou
may esteem the better of them when they come; for we lightly esteem of
those things that cost us but little labor. Elisha could have healed Naaman
the King of Syria's Favorite, either by his word only, or by laying his hands
upon his leprosy, or by willing him to wash himself but once in Jordan; but
he would have him to wash himself therein seven times, because he should not
disesteeme of it. Speciosa mesericordia Dei quasi nubes in tempore siccitatis,
O! how fair a thing is mercy in the time of anguish and trouble? Eccle. 35.
It is like a Cloud of rain in the time of a drought. For these, and other the
aforesaid reasons, our Savior Christ would not give ear to this humble
petition of this poor Canaanitish woman.

Dimitte came, quia clamat post nos.
Dispatch her, for she cries after us. These were good Favorites, Soft
persons the fittest about Princes.
worthy to be about the person of Christ their King: your Courtyers have not
commonly such tender bowels; but these had compassion of other men's miseries
and necessities, they take part in the petitions of the poor, they plead the
cause of the afflicted, they solicit their suit, and entreat hard for them.
The Propitiatory stood upon the Arc of the Law, and on either side, it had
two Cherubimes covering the Mercy seat with their wings, and their faces one
toward another, Exodus 2^.
beholding one another in that manner, that their eyes were never off each
other. Saint Augustine will have it, That God does hereby advise the
Transgressors of his Law, that they should appeal from his rigor to his
mercy, which was the nearest cut a sinner could make; Mercy, a sure motive
for mercy. Cant. 2.4.
and that the best means to come to this his Mercy seat, was, to look upon
our neighbor, and never to have our eyes from off his wants and necessities.
The Spouse did boast her self of those favors which her Beloved did unto her,
Introduxit me Rex in cellam vinariam, etc. He brought me into the Wine sellar,
and Love was his banner over me; his left hand is under my head, and his right
hand does embrace me, etc. And her companions that kept her company made
answer, Exultabimu^ and latabimur in te memores vberum tuor^m, We have
rejoiced, and will be glad, etc. We take much joy in this thy priuacie and
inwardnesse with him, because we know that it will make much for our good.
Thou alone (says Saint Bernard) shall enter into the Wine sellar; but thou
alone shall not be rich and happy therein, thou must share these thy blessings
with thy neighbors, friends, and allies, and all must taste of the milk of thy
breasts: for the breasts were not made so much for those that have them, as for
those harmless creatures that must suck and draw from them. This love and
charity showed the Apostles, when they did solicit this woman's dispatch, and
said to our Savior, Dimitte illam, Send her away.

Non sum missus nisi ad Oues, quae perierunt domus Israel.
I am not sent but to the lost Sheep of the House of Israel. Principally,
personally, and by especial precept, was our Savior sent to the People of
Israel; which was testified by Saint Paul, The Word of God was to be spoken
first to you: And this was the reason why he called them Children; and the
Gentiles, Dogs. But by his Apostles he came to preach and do miracles for the
whole world: so does Saint Ambrose, Cyril Alexandrinus, Saint Hierome, and
learned Bid declare it. Saint Augustine says, That he employed his presence
only upon the Jews, in regard of Abraham^ Faith, and for the promise sake
which God had made of the Messiah; so that though he came to the borders of
Tyrus and Sydon, it was more for to hide himself out of the way, than any
thing else; and that though he wrought this miracle there, it was not much
material, being wrested from him by importunity; as one, who to still a
bauling Curre, throws him a morcell of bread to stop his mouth; or, to speak
it in better terms, as one, from whom by chance a crumme had fallen from forth
his fingers.

Non sum missus nisi ad Oues, etc. Amongst many other offices which our Savior
Christ had, one was that of a Shepherd, who was to gather together his
scattered Sheep, and to bring them all into one Fold. Et suscitabo super eos
Pastorem meum, Ezech. 34.
qui pascat eos, so says Ezechiel, I will set up a Shepherd over them, and
he shall feed them. 2. Pet.
Saint Peter calls him Principem pastorum; and he proves himself to be a
Shepherd, by his going forth to seek after this lost Sheep. And if we mean
to have our habitation in Heaven, and to be of the same Fold with the Saints,
we must first be this Sheepheards Sheep upon earth, before we can come to be
his Saints in Heaven. For albeit the Just bear the name of Sheep, as is noted
by Saint Hierome, Saint Augustine, Saint Gregory, and Saint Cyprian; yet all
that have this name shall not come to Heaven; for many, of Sheep shall become
Wolfes.

First, The proportion of our Savior Christ's giving to his, the name of Sheep
and of Lambs, consists first of all in their innocence and simplicity;
whereof the Sheep and the Lamb are the true symbol and hieroglyphicke; as it
is proved by Saint Gregory and Saint Cyprian in the place before alleged.
Quid per Oues nisi ^nnocentia designatur? What but innocence is pointed at by
Sheep? says Saint Gregory. Oues nominat, vt innocentia Christiana Ouibus
aequetur, He calls the^ Sheep, to show, that Christian innocence should equal
that of theirs, says Saint Cyprian. When the Angel with that his naked Sword
in his hand went making that fearful slaughter amongst the Israelites, David
humbly kneeling on his knees makes his mones unto God, and says, Isti qui Oues
sunt, quidfecerunt? What have these poor Sheep done, 2. Kings 24.
these innocent Lambs? it is I that have sinned, smite me, and not them: Let
thy hand, I pray, be against me and my fathers House; but spare these thy
Sheep, who syllie harmless Creatures have no way offended thee.

Secondly, This proportion consists in that wonderful obedience which the
Sheep carry to the Sheepeheard, who with a word or a whistle bridleth their
appetites, and keeps them within their bounds, not offering to stray into
strange Pastures. This is that which David said, His ear was obedient to me:
And our Savior Christ, My Sheep hear my voice.

Thirdly, In that, those that are lost and gone astray, show their discomfort,
by bleating and following from hill to hill, from pasture to pasture, path to
path, the steps of his Shepherd, lifting up his head, and bending his ear on
the one side, and listening whither he can hear the sound of his voice, and
many times he will lean one ear to the ground, the better to help his
attention. Saint Ambrose says, That one of the greatest pledges that a Sinner
can desire of his Predestination, is, to be like unto the lost Sheep, to show
himself sad and heavy, when he misseth his Shepherd that should protect
him, and look well unto him; to make his moan, send out sighs and sobs like
so many blea^ings, to follow the tracke of his footsteps, to listen to his
whistle, to hearken to his voice, and to give ear unto his call: for that
sinner that shall do so, it is an evident token that he was borne for Heaven.

Fourthly, There is nothing in a Sheep, whatsoever it be, but is good and
profitable; (as the flesh, the blood, the milk, the wool, and the fell) but
nothing that is hurtful: besides, it is a most fruitful creature, Oues
fatosae abundantes in faetibus suis, Our Sheep bring forth thousands and ten
thousands in our streets. The just man is likewise full of goodness, and full
of profit, in his words, and in his works, in his thoughts, in his wealth, in
his poverty, in his health, and in his sickness: but nothing in him that is
hurtf^ll. Saint Paul reckoning the conditions and properties of Charity,
repeateth first the good that it does, Patiens est, benigna est, etc. Love
suffers long, it is bountiful, etc. And anon after, he enumerateth the
evils which it does not, Non aemulatur, etc. Love enuieth not, 1. Cor. 2^.
Love does not boast it self, it is not puffed up, it does no uncomely thing,
it seeks not her own things, it is not provoked to anger, it thinks no
evil, it rejoices not in iniquity, etc.

Fifthly, It Is patience and gentleness when they sheere him and rob him of
his Fleece, turning him this way or that way, when they bind his legs, or
otherwise use him hardly, and put him to pain, he scarce offers to bleat or
open his mouth; he goes as willingly to the Butchers block, as to his green
pastures; and when the Butcher puts his knife to his throat, he beholds him
with a gentle and lovely look. In a word, Esaias endeering the infinite patience
of our Savior Christ, could not find any comparison fitter for him, than that
of the Sheep and the Lamb, Sicut Ouis ad occisionem ductus est, sicut Agnus
coram tondente, se obmutuit, He went like a Sheep to the slaughter, and like a
Lamb before the shearer, he opened not his mouth. This then is the nature and
quality of the mystical Sheep of the Church, Caeduntur gladijs, etc. They are
smitten with swords, yet neither murmr nor complain.

Sixthly, Saint Basil and Saint Ambrose both affirm, That the Sheep ordinarily
do eat and chew the cud, but then most of all (by a natural instinct) when
Winter draws on, and then he feeds a great deal faster, and with more
eagerness, as divining, that through the inclemencie of the Heavens, and the
bitterness of the cold, he shall not find feeding sufficient for him. And this
is a lesson for us, to teach us what we are to do: The Sheep of Christ's flock
usually are to seek for their feeding in the pastures of Virtue, either by
ruminating, meditating, or contemplating; but when they see death approaching
near upon them, they must fall more speedily and more earnestly to their meat;
for when the Winter of death shall come upon them, they will not find whereon
to feed. And therefore work righteousness before thou die; like unto the Ant,
who prouides in the Summer against the rigor of the Winter: Quoniam non est
apud inferos, inuenire cibum, In hell there is no meat to be got for any money:
and the hunger in Hell is so strange, that the Damned feed upon their own
tongues.

For these his Sheep God came into the world, Quantum ad efficaciam, though he
came also for all the whole world in general: Quantum ad sufficientium,
effectually for His; but sufficiently forall. And it is a fearful thing to
think on, which is noted by Saint Bernard; to wit, That he that shall not be a
sheep in this life, Psalm. 49.
shall after death be damned to Hell; Sicut Oues in inferno positi sunt, They
lie in Hell like sheep, and death gnaweth upon them. As here we take the
fleece from off our Sheep, and leave them naked and poor; so there the Wolf
shall be fleeced of his riches, and of all the pleasures and comforts that he
took in this world, and be left not only naked, but full likewise of pain and
torment; Mors depascet eos, Death shall gnaw upon them, and dying to life, they
shall live to death.

Venit and adorauit eum; dicens, Domine adiuua me.
Came and worshipped him; saying, Lord help me. As there are some kind of
fires which recover more force by throwing water upon them; so the heart of
this woman did recover more courage by this our Sauiors disgrace, in not
vouchsafing her an answer, thinking thereby to quench the heat of her zeal:
And falling down prostrate before him, and adoring him as God, said unto him,
Lord, am I thy Sheep, or not thy Sheep? came thou for me, or not for me? I
dare not be so bold to dispute that with thee; yet give me leave, considering
the wretchedness of my case, to call unto thee for help, and to beat at the
doors of thine ears, with a Domine adjuva me; with a Help me good Lord. Here
are those hot, impatient, violent, and fiery dispositions condemned, for whom
those two lovely Twins, Hope and Patience, were never borne: with whom,
every little delaying of their desires, and deferring of their hopes, drives
them to the depth of desperation, and is as a thousand deaths unto them. They
are like unto your hired Horses, who come so hungry to their Inn, that they
will not stay the plucking off of their bridle, though thereby they should the
better come at their meat. Osee compares them to a young Heyfer that has been
used to tread out corn, who is no sooner taken from the cart, or the Plough,
before her yoke is taken off would feign run to the threshing floor, Ephraim
vitula est, docta^ diligere trituram; So affected to her feeding, that she has
not the patience to put a mean between her treading and her eating.

Non est bonum sumere panem Filiorum, and mittere Canibus.
It is not good to take the Childrens Bread, and give it to Dogs.
This was so cruel a blow, that any body else would hardly have endured it;
But God always proportions his favors and disfavors, according to the
measure of our capacity: To thee, he gives riches, because he distrusts thy
weakness; to another, poverty, because he knows his strength. Fidelis
Deus, qui non patietur vos tentare, 1. Cor. 11.
vltra id quod potestis. God is so good a God, that he will not suffer ye to
be tempted above your power. And this reason alone ought to make men rest
contented with that state and condition of life, whereinto God has put them.
Christ you see, carries himself scornefully to this woman, yet (poor soul)
she patiently suffers and indures all: Whether or no, for that it is an
ordinary thing with God, to be then most kind, when he seems to be most
cursed. How did he deal with Abraham touching his son Isaac? He makes him
draw his sword, set an edge upon it, and lift up his arm to strike, but when
he was ready to give the blow, he holds his hand, and bestows a blessing
upon him, for this his great faith and obedience.

Non est bonum, sumere panem filiorum.
It is not good to take the childrens bread. What? shall I give the childrens
bread unto dogs? It is not fitting. My Miracles and my Doctrine were meant to
the children (for so was Israel called) Filius meus primogenitus Israel. It was
provided, and principally promised unto them, Exodus 4.
upon a pact or covenant which God had made with Abraham. In a well ordered
house, the dogs are not allowed to eat the childrens bread, worser scraps will
serve their turn; it is enough that they have that which is necessary to
nourish their body. Oculi omnium, in te sperant Domine, The eyes of all things
wait upon thee, o Lord; Psalm. 145.
and thou give them their meat in due season, such as is fitting for them.
But the choice bread of his Law, and of his presence, this is reserved for his
own house and family, those that are his children, and his own people. Of
whom Saint Paul says, Credita sunt illis eloquia Dei. And David; Non fecit
taliter omni nationi; Psalm. 147.
He has not dealt so with any nation besides. Your Turks, the Moors, and
the Negros, in a scorn and contempt of them, we call them dogs. And we
inherit this name from the Moors, who when they were Lords of Spain, bestowed
that nickname on us. The Scripture gives this name of base minded men. 2.
Kings 3. 2. Kings 16.
Nunquid caput canis ego sum? Am I a dogs head? It was Abuers saying to
Ishbosheth. As if he should have said, shall I be so base as to pocket such a
wrong. Again, 4. Kings 8.
Shall I take off this dogs head that curses my King? It was Abishays speech
of Shimei; as making no more reckoning of him than of a dog. Again, Is thy
servant a dog, that I should be so deuoyd of all pity and humanity? It was
Hazaells answer to Elisha, when he told him of the evil that he should do
unto the children of Israel. Philip. 3.
And Saint Paul advises the Philippians to beware of dogs; alluding to
Heretics. And the Jews gave this attribute of dog to the Gentiles.

Etiam Domine, nam and callite.
Yes Lord, for even the Whelps. Here this Canaanitish woman, taking her Cu,
The least of Gods favors no way to be valued.
caught him at his word. She had him now, and (as Saint Chrysostom notes)
held herself now as good as already dispatched, and that her suit was at an
end. Inferring hereupon; o Lord, I account my self a most happy woman, that I
may be admitted into thy house, though it be but in the nature of a dog. First,
because that dogs being faithful and loving, affectionate thereby their
Masters unto them. And none shall be more loving and loyal unto you than I,
who shall still wait upon you, be never from your heels, and follow you unto
death. And secondly; for that to dogs, were never yet denied the crumbs that
fell from their Masters table. I would not (poor unworthy creature, Discretion
a maine motive in our petitions to God.
as Theophilact makes her speak) desire any of those thy greater miracles,
which thou keep for thine own children, the least that thou have will
content me, be it but as a crum in comparison of the whole loaf. O how humbly
and discreetly did this Canaanitish woman go to work. How mean, and yet how
great a courtesy did she beg of our Savior? For in Gods house, the least
crumme of his bread, is sufficient to make us happy for ever, and never more to
suffer hunger; as the least drop of his blood, is able to cleanse thousands of
souls from their sins. Elegi abiectus esse in d^mo Dei mei, I had rather be
a doore-keeper in the house of my God, etc. Another letter has it, Ad limen
Dei mei, At the threashold of my God. Psalm. 84.
I had rather be a beggar, and crave an Alms at the grouncell, or lowest
greese in Gods house, than to triumph, and live in pomp in the palaces of
Princes. Moses would rather have his scrip, with a morsel of bread and cheese
in the service of God, than to be a prince of Egypt. It is a common proverb;
Que vale mas migaia de Rey, ^ue satico de cauallero; A crumme in a Kings Court,
is more to be esteemed than a shiue of bread in a Gentleman's Hall. The
children of Israel were well enough contented with Pharaohs servitude, as long
as he allowed them straw for their brick. What little allowance would content
them then in Gods house? The covetous rich Mizer in the Gospel beein^ in Hell,
begged but one drop of water, Mitte Lazarum vt intingat extremum digiti sui,
Send Lazarus unto me, that he may but dip his finger, etc. He was discreet
in his desire, for one only drop of water from Heaven will quench the flames
of that vast burning lake of Hell. Abraham being but a particular man, God was
willing to make him famous in the world; and for this end he added to his name
but one only letter, Genesis 17.
Non vltra vocaberis Abram, sed Abraham, Thy name shall be no more called
Abram, but Abraham. This no nada, this thing as it were of nothing, which God
bestowed upon him, was enough to make him prosper and thrive in the world, and
to be the stock and root of such an illustrious Lineage, as the world had never
since the like.

O mulier, magna est Fides tua; fiat tibi sicut vis.
O woman, great is thy Faith. Our Savior might as well have said, Thy
humility, thy perseverance, thy wisdom, thy patience, the acknowledgement of
thine own misery, and thy confessing thy self to be but a Dog. But I
acknowledge thee (says Saint Augustine) to be so worthy a woman, that I much
wonder at thy worth; and the more I think on it, the more I rest astonished:
Thou did knock, call, and beg; well therefore did thou deserve, that the
doors of thy Saviors bowels and tender compassion should be opened unto
thee. They are, and he answers to thy suit, Fiat tibi sicut vis, Be it unto
thee as th^^ would have it, not limitting thee to a what, or a how, but as
thou will thy self. Thou desire, that I should free thy daughter from the
torment of the Devil, do thou free thy daughter, I leave it to thee to do
it, I assign over my power and authority unto thee. O my good Lord; how calm
art thou now grown, how mild, how gentle to this poor silly woman? she has
got the masterie of me, she has quite overcome me, I was not able to beat
her off, she came within me and forced me to yield, and what will threatenings
or brauings avail me, Gods w^ath many times more violent than lasting.
being thus vanquished? The Heaven is wont to show it self fearful and
terrible at the beginning of some great tempest, throwing out thunder and
lightning, hideous to behold, but at last it ends in a mild shower, that makes
the fields fertile, and inricheth the earth. Fulgura, in pluuiam fecit, He
turns the lightning and thunder into rain. Psalm. 135.
The horror of that dismal Deluge, ended in a beautiful Rainebow. Saint
Austen says, That God deals sometimes so with sinners. Mortificat, and
viuificat, deducit ad infernum, and reducit, He mortifieth, and he quickneth,
he deduceth us to Hell, and reduces us from Hell. Joseph was in a great rage
with his brethren at the first, and seemed to be inexorale, noting them to be
Spies and Thieves, but this was but dissembled displeasure, and more violent
than lasting: And as water being repressed and restrained in it is course does
more impetuously rise and swell; so his great pity that he had of them, and
the love that he bare unto them, burst forth at last into tears, and being
not able any longer to conceal himself from them, he tells them as well as
his snobbing and sobbing would interruptingly give him leave, Ego sum frater
vester, I am your brother, etc. So our Savior Christ, did dissemble himself
in this b^sinesse, turning her off so often as he did, till being not able to
hold out any longer, he said unto her, O mulier, magnae est fides tua, fiat
tibi sicut vis? O wo^^^ great is thy Faith, be it unto thee as etc. Nunquid
obliuiscitur misereri Deus, aut conti^^bit in ira misericordias suas? He will
sometimes withhold his mercies, as if he had quite forgotten them: it is an
effect of his providence, now and then to defend them; but this still tends
to our greater good.

Be it unto thee as thou would have it. Our Savior was somewhat slow in
dispatching this woman, but it was to better her dispatch. O thou Canaanite,
thou may think thy self well dispatched with these crummes, now all is
remitted to thine own good liking; Fiat tibi sicut vis, there is thy
discharge: And though thou have staid long for it, yet that is not to be
accounted long, which comes at last: he negotiates not ill, who ends his
negotiation before he depart from the presence of his King, obtaining not only
his suit, but withal, a dispatch. Earthly Princes forward to grant, but slow
to give.
The Kings and Princes of the earth will give thee bread when thou have no
teeth to eat it; a bed, when thy bones cannot rest in it, they are so bruised
and broken; and when they have granted thee thy desire, thou shall not have
that dispatch. Saul made an open Proclamation, That he that should kill Goliath,
that gyant-l^ke Philistine, should marry his daughter; the right was in David,
but this favor was affoorded him out of season, and not in it is due time; for
she was married to another that never drew his sword in the quarrel. David
finding himself herewith agrieued, and complaining, that he was not well dealt
withal, he received answer, That his reward was sure enough, and therefore he
needed not to doubt of it; but that his business might be dispatched, he must
first kill a hundred Philistines: so that his promised reward cost him the
killing of one, and his dispatch, the killing of a hundred. The world is the
same now as it was then; the dispatch costs more than the thing we pretend is
worth. I see many Images of devotion in the Court, as our Lady of Pilgrims,
our Lady of Pains, and our Lady of good Success; but I know not why, or
wherefore, there being more need a great deal, to erect and set up a Lady of
good Dispatch.

Seneca says, That those that are Pretenders, Delays much practiced by Man.
will more patiently endure the cutting off of the thread of their pretension,
than to have their hopes drawn out from day to day. Saint Ambrose upon that
place of Saint Luke, Statim Gallus cantauit, Presently the Cock crew; notes
three Statims, or three Presently's; Presently the Cock crew; Presently Peter
wept; and, Presently God forgave him. But your Ministers of Justice, as also in
Court, do now a days delay a man, as a Physician does a Cure, that he may be
honored the more, and paid the better. Twenty years did Jacob serve his
father in Law Laban, fourteen for his wives, and six for their dowry; and
being so due a debt as it was, he went so long deferring the payment thereof,
that if God had not taken his part, he might have returned home (for ought I
know) with the staff that he brought with him. Mutasti mercedem meam december
vicibu^, Thou have deceived me, and changed my wages ten times: There is no
honesty in such kind of dealing; there are too many of these now a days; but
God amend them: And so I commend you to God.

THE TENTH SERMON, UPON THE FRIDAY AFTER THE FIRST SUNDAY IN LENT.
IOANNIS. 5.1. Erat dies Festus Iudaeorum, and erat Jerusalem probatica
piscina.

There was a Feast of the Jews, and there is at Jerusalem by the place of the
Sheep, a Poole.


God the only supporter of weaker Man. Eccle. 2.
AMongst those many other Fish-pooles which belonged to Jerusalem, (besides
those which Solomon had made for his own particular use and pleasure, Extruxi
mihi Piscinas aquarum, I made Cisternes of water, etc.) this of all the rest
was the most famous. Josephus calls it, Stagnum Salomonis, because it was built
by this King, near unto the Temple, for the service of sacred things: it was a
Poole that was walled round about, whereunto your herds and flocks of cattle
could not come; and some say, That this was the place where the Priests hid the
holy Fire which Nehemias afterward found to be converted into a thick water.
It was walled round about, and had five several open porches full of diseased
people, some of one infirmity, and some of another.

This Hospital joined to the back of the Temple, to show, that the poor have
no other prop in this life to uphold them, save Gods back; this must be their
strength, hereunto must they lean: it is our Saviors shoulders that must not
only bear us up, but our infirmities, by taking them upon himself.

In Saint Chrysostomes time, the Hospitals were set apart from the Temples, for
fear of receiving infection from those contagious diseases: For the poor did
lie like so many Dogs, at the doors of Gods house. A Thief, that he may the
better enter that house where there are many dogs, holds it his best course,
to stop their mouths with something or other: We are all Thieves, and that we
may enter peaceably into Gods House, there is no better means, than to give
something to the poor, which like so many Dogs lie at the gate. Twice in the
Old Testament has God commanded, That no man should petition him with empty
hands; [ Non apparebis in conspectu meo vacuus. Exodus 23, and 34
] And Saint Chrysostom expounding this place, says, He enters empty handed,
who coming to crave something of God, does not first bestow an Alms upon the
poor; according to that rule of our Savior Christ, What ye shall do to one
of these little ones, etc. Citing likewise for confirmation of this Doctrine,
that place of Ecclesiasticus, Ante Orationem, prepara animam tuam, Before thou
prayest, prepare thy self, etc. Eccle. 18.
When thou have enough, remember the time of hunger; and when thou art rich,
think upon poverty and need. To show pity to the poor, Alms, the
preparation of the soul to Prayer. Genesis 32.
he terms it Animae preparationem, A preparing of the soul: And it is not
much, that God should take pleasure therein, seeing men are so well pleased
therewith. I will appease him with gifts, says Jacob, when he went forth to
meet his brother Esau. And Ester coming before Assuerus to beg a boon at his
hand, it is said, That one of her maids of Honor bare up her arm, and the
other, her train. This is a Type of Prayer, accompanied with Fasting and
Almsdeeds; which two, are able to negotiate any thing with God: and where
there is such an Ester, there is not any Assuerus (though never so great) who
will not bow the Scepter of his mercy toward her. Ecclesiasticus says, Give
an alms to the poor, and it shall entreat for thee, and prevail.

There is in Jerusalem by the place of the Sheep, a Poole. Public temples to
be frequented.
God did honor his Temple with this Poole, where there was a perpetual
provision for health; and it was a providence full of conueniencie, that God
should confer his favors where his name is praised, and that Man should
receive them there where he praises him. Te decet Hymnus Deus in Syon, tibi
reddetur votum in Jerusalem, In Syon, o Lord, they sing Hymns unto thee; in
Jerusalem they make their vows; Open in these places the hands of thy bounty,
Et replebimur in bonis domus tuae, And we shall be filled with the good things
of thy house. Amongst other favors which God promised to his house, this was
one, In loco isto dabopacem, ^n that place I will grant thee peace. The name of
Peace intimates all manner of good things whatsoever; here art thou to beg,
and here to receive the granting of thy petitions. And for this cause God calls
his house the house of Prayer, which is ordained to beg those things of God
which we stand in need of, and to praise him for what he gives, and we receive.

The Court is the Worlds Epitome, an abreuiation, or short abridgement of this
greater Universe; for that it has in it whatsoever is dispersed throughout the
face of the earth. And this Poole is a figure of the Court: First of all, in
this Poole there are a great many of sick and diseased persons, and those of
very foul and filthy diseases, blind, wasted in their bodies, benumbed,
withered, lame, and maimed. Iacere* To lie, in Scripture is spoken of those
that are dead, (as it appears in Exodus, in the Book of Tobias, Exodus 12.
Tob. 2.
and so of those that lie at the point of death) as likewise of Lazarus, when
he lay at Dives his gate. So says Saint John in this place, Multitudo
languentium iaceba^, i. There lay a great multitude of sick men. In the Court
there are a great many that lie sick of diverse and sundry diseases of the
Soul; an Apoplexy seiseth upon all the senses of the body; one pretension or
other possesses the senses of the body, and the faculties of the Soul, and
upon all whatsoever belongs unto man; as his honor, his wealth, his
conscience, and truth, etc. This man came to the Poole benumbed, and at the end
of thirty eight years was more benumbed than at first; and if our Savior
Christ had not helped him, it is probable he would have perished. Many come to
the Court, to recover themselves of an infirmity that follows them, called
Poverty; and after many years travel, and pains taking, they prove poorer
than before, and often die of that disease: whereas if they had bin contented
with their former mean estate, they might perhaps not have died so soon. And
although they get the Office they pretend, yet do they never come to be rich,
because their profits do not equal their charges. Seneca says, That if these
men would have taken council of those who have tried this poole some few
years, they would alter their mind. If he that applies himself to the service
of Venus in his youth, would but follow the advice of him who lies in his bed
laden with the Pox, and has not a bone in all his body that wishes him well,
Vota mutasset, He would have changed his vows. If he that desires to become
a Courtier, will but hearken to him, who being chap-fallen and toothlesse, and
having spent all his life time in the service of the Court, goes away at last
unrewarded, if not ill requited; Vota mutasset, He would have altered his
course. Besides, the diseases in Court are so foul and so incurable, that it
is a miracle, to see one of a thousand of them to be made whole: who, when the
wind of Ambition and Pretension fit fair and prosperous upon him, will change
his Counselors robe, retire himself from businesses of the world, put on an
Hermits Weed, and in some solitary Cell betake himself wholly to his
devotion? Who, being the Favorite of a King, will not rather loose his life,
than leave the Court? Who that is sick (like him of the Dropsy) of that
insatiable infirmity of Covetousness, will, in his treasuring up of Riches,
say at length, Now I have enough*

Secondly, In this Fish-poole all did live in hope, Expectantium aquae motum,
Weighting for the moving of the water; Led along with this hope, they suffered
much misery, but other good had they none. By Osee God said to Israel, Dies
multos expectabis me, I will cause thee, vt sperando, desperes, That thy hopes
end in despair. The greatest torment that the Jews suffer in this life, is,
That all the types and figures of their hopes being past, (let them look as
long as they will for a Messiah) in revenge of their unbelief, their
understandings are so blinded, that they still remain condemned to wait upon
this idle hope.

By God Esaias bewaileth and lamenteth that country which had placed her hopes in
the multitude of her ships that she put forth to sea, The life of a Courtier,
is wholly upon hopes.
[ In vasis papyri super ^quas] persuading themselves, that their oars, their
sails, and their Vessels (which were no better than boats of paper, in Gods
hands, which sinkes as soon as the water sokes through them) should bring them
news of comfort. And uttering forth this his sorrow for them, he adds, Ite
Angeli veloces ad gentem dilacerat^^, He would have his Angels to betake them
to their wings, to go comfort this people; he sends them ad Gentem
expectantem, a people that lived all upon hope. Run over the houses of all
your Courtiers, and ask every particular man o^ them, How he lives* and he
will tell you, That he lives upon hopes. The Pretender hopes, that he may see
the water of the Fish-poole, that thereby some good fortune may befall him: The
Thief, he likewise would have the waters move, that he might make a purchase
to relieve his poverty; your young women, some happy encounter, etc. Those
that have some to help them, make ^ quick dispatch of it; but he that has
no body to stand his friend, must stay weighting some thirty eight years,
and then too in the end must have the help of some miracle to heal him of his
sickness.

Thirdly, In this Fish-poole they all weighted diligently, and were wonderful
careful and vigilant, when the water should move, and then did they rush in
speedily, lest some other should prevent them and step in before them. In the
Court your Pretenders stand attending with a great deal of care, when Offices
are to be bestowed, and other provisions granted forth, shouldring and shoouing
one another, that others may not get the start of them, and clap in betwixt
them and home. Seneca compares the Courtiers to Butchers Curres, who in the
shambles stand looking with a watchful eye for some offalls of the intrailes
that shall be thrown down amongst them, for the which they fall together by
the ears; but one having the mor^ell, and the other going whining away, etc.

Fourthly, He that was sped first in the Fish-poole, and had his pretension,
left the rest sad and envying his good fortune. So likewise in Court, he that
obtaines his pretension, causes such a sadness in the rest, that for many
months after, all is cries and complaints, lamenting and finding fault with
the inequality of the times, and how strangely things are carried, Hand (as
they say) over head. He that pretends a Captains place, the government of a
Garrison Town, or the keeping of a Fort, frets and fumes, when he knows he
has done the State good service in the Wars, to see a Carpet Knight, that
can better use a Violl than a Sword, lead a measure with a Lady than a Band of
men, be preferred, and himself put by. So is it with your good Scholars, when
they see Dunces carry away their preferments from them: And so with the like,
etc.

Fifthly, One Angel only moved the waters of the Fish-poole; but those waters
of the Court, many Angels, or, to speak more properly, many Devils must move
them; and when one favors, four disfavor them: one mooues here, but many
there trouble the waters; and to make so many men's wills to tremble, is a
grievous torment. Abimileck the bastard son of Gideon, Judges 9.
desirous to tyrannise the government of Israel, alleged this reason to those
of Sichem, Which seems better unto you, That the seventy sons of Gideon
should rule over you, or one only? And, which is the easier of the two, to
submit a man's will to seventy wills, or to one will only? King Achish out of
this respect thrusts David out of his Court; For mine own part (said he) I
like thee well enough, Sed Satrapis non placis, (i.) But thou art not pleasing
to the Princes. In Court, a man must crowch and creep to many: Happy is that
man that negotiates with God, there is but one care to be taken, one only good
will to be got. According to that of Tertullian, Vnum negotium mihi est, neque
aliud curo. Gregory N^zianzen adds, That God being Vnus and solus, One, and
only one, to show his sole command over us; so did he also assume many names
to himself, to give us thereby to understand, that he was willing to afford
us many favors. Whereas the Devil takes a contrary course; for he invented
many gods to command in the world, but not any to do them good.

Sixthly, In the Fish-poole men had their healths given them for nothing, so
that it cost not the sick one farthing: dealing with the Patient, as Heaven
does with the Penitent; who when he desires to embarke himself for that place,
gives him his passage in the Ship of Repentance, free, and gratis, Gratis
venundati estis, and sine argento redimemin^, Ye were sold freely, and ye
shall be redeemed without money. He is a kind Master of a Ship, who shall give
a man his fare for nothing: Our Savior Christ would ask no more of this sick
man, than his desire and willingness to be whole; [ Vis sanus ^iers?] but in
the Court, before thou come to the Fiat of thy pretension, thou have eaten
out thy cloak, and it is wonder, if the courtesy quit the cost.

Seventhly, The Angel that came to the Fi^h-poole (as all the Commentators
upon this place have it) was one and the same, no accepter of persons, but left
every one to his own diligence and industry; and he that could soonest get
into the water, he was the man that was cured. Had he been an Angel of court,
(as he was of Heaven) he must have been advised some hours before his
coming, of the business, and peradventure he would have taken gifts and
rewards not only of those that were to have their estate bettered by him, but
of al other the Pretenders. And it were no ill council, that there should be
but one only in Court, that should heal us in this case, and not to have them
so often changed; for those which are put out remain fat and full, and those
that newly come in, weak and hunger-staru'd. And as those Flies that are
already full do less afflict the wounds of the Poor; so, etc. Baruch tells
us, That the Jews that were in Babylon sent great store of money to those that
were in Jerusalem, that they should pray unto God for the life of
Nabucadonazzar and Balthazar his son: And though this may seem rather a trick
of Court, than otherwise, and to savor of flattery; yet that which makes for
our porpose, is, That they did desire the life of those Tirants, for fear lest
God should send them worse in their stead. The like was spoken by a woman, to
Dyonisius the Tyrant, whose death was generally desired of all.

Angelus autem Domini descendebat de Caelo.
But the Angel of the Lord came down from Heaven. The Angel did descend at
certain times, and with only touching the Water, he did enrich it with so
powerful a virtue, that no infirmity was incurable for it. This water does
much express that health which the Saints enjoy in Heaven: that drop of water
which the rich man desired, does much express its comfort and happiness, for
that the tip of the least finger dipped therein, was powerful enough to quench
those everlasting flames. It was much, that the water touched by the Angel
should free all infirmities, and take away all the tormenting pains upon
earth; but how much (I pray) if this Angel were God? For the common received
opinion is, (which is followed by Saint Austen) That God representing himself
in the Old Testament in the form of an Angel, or an Angel appearing in the
person of God, Genesis 12. Genesis 15. Genesis 18.
says, Ego Deus, nomen meum Jehovah, I am God, my name is Jehovah. And he said
unto Jacob, Cur quaeris nomen meum, quod est mirabile? Why inquirest thou aft^^
my name, which is is Wonderful? And in very deed, hardly could an Angel by
his own proper virtue and power, leave the waters of the Fish-poole so rich,
not being able to do or undo any thing in nature, nor suddenly either to take
away or add accidents to any thing. And Saint Ambrose says, That this Angel
did represent the Holy Ghost, to whom are attributed the effects of
Sanctification.

But suppose that it were not God himsel^e, nor any Minister representing his
person, Gods respect in comforting the destressed.
but one of those Angels which serve as Messengers to his Majesty; this case
is worth our consideration, if we will but look upon that which Go^ does, and
the love which he shows to a poor sick man, without help, negl^cted, and
forgotten: he sends a Prince of his Palace to heal him, and to set hi^ free
from any disease whatsoever. God styles the Angel, his Face, and his
Countenance, [ Praecedet te facies me^, My Face shall go before him;] the rest
of the creatures he calls Vestigi^ Pedum suorum, The prints of his feet: And
amongst these Vestigia, those that are benumbed in their limbs, those that are
sick of the Palsy, and those that are Iame, seem, sitting in their chaires,
and unable to go, to be the very dregs and off-scumme of the earth; now that
God should command his Angels, that they should take upon them the care of the
Poor, and such silly worms and poor snakes as they be, is a great
indeering of his love toward them: which made Saint Paul to say, Omnes sunt
administratorij Spiritus, They are all ministering Spirits. To those of the
Spirit it might very well be; Heb. 2.
but that God should minister help to filthy, loathsome, and miserable flesh,
God could not endure to do such kindnesses, unless he had an especial love
unto them. The Scripture scarce any where makes mention of the righteous man
that is afflicted here upon earth, but, that an Angel comes from Heaven to
comfort him: And for this, may suffice that general Proclamation, Quod vni ex
minimis meis fecistis, etc. What ye have done to the least of mine, etc. This
truth is made good unto us by many Histories; as that of Agar, Daniel, Tobias,
Elias, and Joseph: Nay, to God himself an Angel came to comfort him, when he
was so full of sorrow and heaviness in the Garden. And this was it that moved
the Apostle to say, Gloriamur in tribulationibus, We glory in tribulations:
For there is no Loadstone that draws the iron more unto it, than Tribulation
does the Regalos and comforts of Heaven: And as the flame^worketh most upon
that wood which is trodden down with the feet; so the glory of God works
most upon that heart which is most oppressed, etc.

Mouebatur aqua, The water was moved.
Saint Ambrose observes, That the moving of the water did serve to advise the
coming of the Angel: for little would his coming have imported them, if the
noise thereof had not given them notice of it; for hidden treasure, and
concealed wisdom, are neither useful nor profitable. And of this miraculous
motion there may be rendered some natural reason; for that we see that your
Lakes and your Pooles are more unquiet, and naturally make more noise, when
there is much rain toward. Other literal and moral reasons are set down
elsewhere upon this place.

Sanabatur vnus, One was healed.
A Fish-poole, Porches, Angels, Water, Motion; What a do is here? Some men may
think, that this is too large a circuit for so small a building. I answer, Ob.
Sol.
That with God it is as hard to heal one, as many; and he that can cure one
man, Gods mercy not so plentiful in the time of the Law, as since.
who is a little world of himself, can with as much ease give remedy to the
greater. But those were barren years, and Gods mercy was yet in Heaven; [
Misericordia Domini in Coelo, says Dauid] and as before a great rain some few
drops begin first to fall; so now at the stooping of the Heavens, at the
breaking forth and showring upon the earth the great mercies of God, it is no
marvel, that some small drops should precede. In barren years bread is given
us by ounces; but if the harvest be fruitful, whole loaves lie in every
corner of the house. Before that God had enriched the earth with his presence,
all those former years were barren, Grace and Health were given us by drammes;
but that year came at last which crowned all the rest, that blessed year of
his Majesty's divine bounty, Benedices coronae anni benignitatis tuae; then
was Grace to the soul, and health to the body given us, by Arrob's and by
Quintalls; Quia virtus de illo exibat and sanabat omnes. Whilst the night
lasts, though it be clear, and the Moon shine bright, yet the light is
short; but when the day is come, and the beams of the Sun appear, they
beautify the whole world with their light. All that time was night, Nox
praecessit, etc.

Secondly, The shadow still comes short of the substance. The Poole a figure of
Baptism.
The Fish-poole was a figure of Baptism; it cured one to day, and another
tomorrow; but Baptism healed one, two, nay three thousand sometimes in one
day, etc.

Qui prior descendebat.
He that first went down. God would hereby teach us what a thing Diligence was
for the obtaining of the gifts of Grace; for albeit God does of his own
goodness and free gift confer his Graces upon us, without any merits or
deseruings of our own (for else were it not Grace) yet does he not bestow his
blessings on those who are not willing to embrace them, which will not seek
after them, and strive for to win the Garland, as those do that run in a
race: and as he that makes most speed gains the Crown; so in the Fish-poole,
he that made most have got his health.

He that first went down. Vidisti hominem velocem stauit coram Reges, Kings
never reward lazy servants. The like course God takes; his greatest favors he
throws upon those his servants who set not their feet on the ground; for those
that serve him in Heaven, he will have them to be Spirits, and Flames of ^ire [
Qui faci^ Angelos suos Spiritus, Psalm. 10.24. Esaias 60.
and Ministros suos Flammam ignis:] but those that serve him here upon earth,
he calls them Clouds, Qui sunt isti, qui sicut nubes volant?

He that first went down, etc. This seems an unequal Law, for that the
disposition of the Sick was not equal: God dispenceth his favors as he
pleases.
for how could he that was benumbed and lame of his feet, prevent the diligence
of that man that had the use of his legs? and he that was consumed and wasted
with weakness, him that was sick of a slighter disease? And those thirty
eight years of this poor sick man, argue the great odds that others had of
him. Nor do I know how this inequality may be salued, unless that the
diligence of other folks toward those that are thus grievously afflicted, put
to their helping hand, and seek to balance them (by their diligence) with
those that have less impediment: and therefore wanting those good means, this
poor man told our Savior, Hominem non habeo, I have not a man.

Some men will say, That God is the giver of temporal blessings, of health,
wealth, honor, and what not; and that he does no wrong in giving or taking
them away as he shall think fit: Suting with that which he said to the
Labourer in the Vineyard, Amice, non facio tibi iniuriam; An non licet mihi
facere quod volo? Friend, I offer thee no wrong; May I not do with mine own
what I will? So that he might, you see, give this man a disposition to regaine
his health, and he might likewise not give it him. Saint Paul says, Vnus
accipit brauium, One received the prize. In those your Races which were used
amongst your Graecians and your Romans, many hoped to bear away the Garland;
but this hope did belie all of them save one: But in that Race which we run
for Heaven, Omnes qui recte currunt comprehendunt, All that run well, do
gain; it is Saint Augustines. And Saint Chrysostom declaring that place of
Esaias ( Omnes sitientes, venite ad Aquas, All ye^ that thirst, come unto the
Waters) says, That he animates all the world to come and drink their fill,
never fearing that that Fountain of Grace can ever be drawn dry.

Et erat homo triginta and octo annos habens in infirmitate.
The man had been diseased thirty eight years. He declares the long
continuance of his disease, to make the greatness of the miracle to appear
the more: as he said of Lazarus, Luke 8.
when he had now been four days dead, Iam faetet, He does already stink:
and of the woman that had an Issue of blood twelve years long, which had spent
all her substance upon Physicians, and could not be healed of any: and that
other, which had a Spirit of infirmity eighteen years, and was bowed
together, and could not lift up her self in any wise: Luke 13.
Whom some interpret to be the Devil, by those words of our Savior, This
daughter of Abraham, whom Satan has bound.

Eight and thirty years of sickness would require eight and thirty years
of meditation: And first of all, let us consider, what a sad and miserable life
this poor man led. Animus gaudens floridam vitam facit, spiritus tristis
exsiccat ossa, A merry life makes a cheerful countenance* but that which is
sad and mournful withers the flesh; and not only consumes the outward
beauty, but also rotteth the bones. Another Letter has it, Animus gaudens
benefacit medicina, Prou. 17.
A joyful heart causes good health; but a sorrowful mind dries the bones: A
joccond mind disposes the body as physic; nor is there any physic for man
comparable to that of Joy. According to that which the Wise man says in
another place, Nihil aliud sub Coelo, quam laetari and benefacere, To make a
cheerful countenance, there is nothing under Heaven like to a ioyefull heart;
Prou. 15.
but by the sorrow of the heart the mind is heavy, In moerore animi deijcitur
spiritus; another Letter gives it, Frangitur: a man is broken thereby, and
grownd in pieces as corn under a millstone. Ecclesiasticus renders the reason
of it, painting forth the condition of a heavy and sorrowful soul; Sicut in
percursura tritici permanebit stercus, etc. As when one sifteth, the
filthiness remains in the sieue; so the filth of a man remains in his
thought: Eccl. 27.
For as the woman that winnoweth the corn, leaves nothing in the sieue but the
chafe; (which is as it were farinae stercus, The dung of the meal) so, if you
will but sift the thought of a sorrowful man, (which is as it were the sieue)
and thoroughly winnow his good and evil dispositions, the good ones quickly
run from him, and the bad remain behind. But what joy can a man take that
lies bed-ridden eight and thirty years? Sorrow, a sharp sword. 3. Kings 19.
A great grief (though but short) will kill the strongest man alive, [ Multos
enim occidit tristitia, Sorrow has killed many] and though it does not give
them present death, it gives them a heart to desire it. Elias found himself so
out of heart when he sat him down under the Juniper tree in the Wilderness,
(flying from the fury of Iesabel, who sought after his life) that he desired
in this his melancholy mood, that he might die. What despair then may not
that sorrow drive a wretched poor soul into, whose grief is as long, as
great, and as great as it is long? Seneca tells us, Melius est semel scindi,
quam semper premi, Better is a short, than a lingering death. Job passed over
many a sorrowful day, and many a mournful night, Dies vacuos, and noctes
laboriosas, Companilesse, and comfortless; and his wife thinking it the lesser
ill, to die out of hand, than to live in such perpetual torment; said unto
him, pitying his grievous pain, Benedic Deo, and morere; Play the Renegado
once, curse God to his face, that thou may oblige him thereby to take away
thy life. But say that Jobs affliction was great, it was not of 38 years
standing, as this poor man's was.

Eight and thirty years. Here we are to consider, That this sick man was at
least fifty years old: and we may make this conjecture, That he lay in a
little carre, with his bed under him, together with such rags and clouts as
were for his necessary use. Whence it follows, that God had laid this long
sickness of thirty eight years upon him for his sins, as Saint
Chrysostom, Irenaeus, and many other Saints infer, upon that command which
God laid upon him, Noli amplius peccare, See thou sin no more. It seems,
that he had committed these sins when he was but twelve years old; for many
times [ Praeuenit malicia peccatum] it so falls out, that our wickedness
outstrips our age, and that we run into great sins, before we come to
great years; young Youths being herein like unto Cakes that are baked upon
coals, which are burnt before they come to their baking. Ose. 7.
According to that of Osee, Factus es Ephraim, subcineritius panis qui non
reuersatur, (i.) Ephraim is as a Cake on the hearth, not turned. And this ought
to be a warning-piece to those that are old and ancient sinners, and have not
yet been questioned for their lewd lives, nor never felt the lash of Gods
wrath. They that keep Lions, use to whip their young whelps, that they may
make the greater Lions to fear, and live in awe of them: Fewer are the faults,
but more the stripes which the Poor feel; a bad sign for the Rich, that do
run riot. Aristotle says, That punishments were invented for the deterring
of men from evil. Saint Chrysostom, That the mark which God set upon Cain,
was not so much for his particular defense, as for a forewarning to others: and
therefore God granted him so long a life, that his example might add terror
to posterity. Some punishments are quickly past over, and therefore do not
so much good; and others are very profitable, by reason of their length and
continuance. Job says, That God had as it were nailed his shafts on his sides,
they stuck so close to his ribs. Esaias and Malachie take their comparison from
the Siluersmith, who sits long at his work, Et sedebit constans, etc. Now God
by these his long afflictions punishes him whom he loves, to the end that the
sinner may take warning thereby, and learn to fear the Lord; Non videbit
interitum, cu^ viderit Sapientes morientes, (i.) He shall not see destruction,
when he shall see that Wisemen die.

Eight and thirty years. According to the common course which God takes of
punishing sin in this life, Why God sometimes prolongs our pains here in
this life.
this of thirty eight years seems somewhat too rigorous a correction. Upon
this doubt diverse reasons are rendered, and one more principal than the rest,
is, That this prolongation was not because God wished him ill, or loved him the
less; but because there is not any Medicine that preserues a man more from the
plague of vice and of sin, than a long sickness. Prisons and Fetters (says
Vlpianus) were not so much invented for the punishing of disorders, as the
restraining of them: being as a great logge of wood to an untamed and unruly
Hey far, a strap to the fleet Hound, or a bridle to a Horse. Job calls the
Gout, a pair of Stocks, Posuisti in trunco pedem meum, Thou put my feet
in the Stocks, and look narrowly to all my paths, and make the print
thereof in the heels of my feet. And he styles his dunghill, his prison,
Nunquid Caete ego sum, aut Mare, quia circumdedisti me in isto carcere? Am I a
Sea, or a Whale-fish, that thou keep me in ward? Our Savior Christ healing
a woman that bowed her body so downward to the earth, that she could not
look up to heaven; said, Hanc filia^ Abrahae quam, etc. Ought not this
daughter of Abraham whom Satan has bound eighteen years, be loosed from
this bond? Solomon compares a Physician to a Iaylor; for when God commits a
delinquent to his couch, causing him there to remain prisoner, having
fettered, as it were, his feet to his sheets; the Physician looks unto him,
and has a care that he stir not from thence till God releaseth him of his
sickness. Thus did he deal with this poor man* who lay thirty eight
years, as it were, by the heels, unable to wagge either han^ or foot, so
strangely was he benumbed in all his limbs. Some man will say, (...) have a
shrewd burning Fever; but this is a more common, than proper phrase o^ speech.
And the Evangelist corrects it thus, Socrus autem Petri tenebatur mag^^
febribus. She had not the Fever, but the Fever had her. Infrenabo te, ne
inter^^* With the bridle of Sickness he will hold thee back, that thou may
not headlong r^n down the Rock that leads to utter destruction both of body
and soul. Homer feignes, That the Goddess Pallas, for the love which she bare
to Achilles, kept him back, when he would have encountered with Agamemnon King
of the Greeks. David gave thanks to Abigal, because he being resolved to
destroy Nabal and all his house, she had withheld him from it; Qu^a prohibuisti
me, etc. So may we likewise give thanks unto sickness, because it detaines
us and turns us aside from the forbidden paths of humane pleasures: so that
these thirty eight years are so far from the rigor of Justice, that it is
rather an act of mercy and pity.

But if we consider these thirty eight years in reason of Justice, it will
not seem rigorous to any: He is not to be accoun^ed an austere and severe
Judge, who does keep a Delinquent long in prison; if when he is in prison he
return to a relapse in his delicts: What hope can a Judge have, that such a
one should prove good being set at liberty? or of a thief that shall fall a
stealing while he is in prison? Now this man that had neither hand nor foot to
help himself, lying benumbed in his little cart, bore before him the cause of
his grief, by falling into those faults which he had formerly committed. And
this is inferred out of these our Saviors words unto him, Iam noli amplius
peccare, Now see thou sin no more. Ob.
But if any man ask me, How can that man sin that is bound hand and foot? I
answer, Sol.
That for all this, his desires and thoughts are not fettered. Iniquitatem
medi^atus est in cubili suo, astitit omni viae non bonae, He that applies
himself to evil thoughts, and has a desire unto them, there is not that
wickedness whereof he would not reap the fruits thereof. From whence I cannot
but note out these two things unto thee:

The one, That the sins of our thoughts and imaginations are of all other the
easiest to be done. How many Knives would a Cutler make in a day, if he could
finish them without a Forge, an Anuile, or a Hammer? Questionless, ^erie many.
The like reason is to be rendered of the errors of our thoughts.

The other, That they are the harder to be seen or helped: To be seen, for
that they are so secret, Ab occultis meis munda me, Cleanse me, o Lord, from my
secret sins. To be helped; for as he that is still kept hungry and thirsty,
has neither his thirst nor his hunger satisfied, but increases more and more
upon him; so ^e that never enioyes those humane delights, never has the hunger
and thirst of his desires satisfied.

So that this poor sick man perseuering in his sin, it is not much that God
should persevere in his punishments: for our shorter sins, Gods chastisements
^re also short, In momento indignationis auerte faciem meam parumper, Esaias 54.
Eccle. 23.
(i.) For a moment, in mine anger, I hid my face from thee for a little season.
But for our longer, longer; Vir multum jurans, a domo eius non recedet plaga,
(i.) The Plague shall never depart ^^o^ the house of him that swears much:
whence it comes to pass, that so many are ^arr'd, and so few amended: Which
is all one with that of Jeremy, Dissipati, ne^ue compuncti. These are the
Devils Martyrs, who suffer not only without a reward, (as Saint Paul says, Si
peccantes suffertis, quid vobis est gratiae?) but treasure up new torments unto
themselves.

But some one will ask, How comes it to pass, that this man being a sinner,
Ob.
which waited at the Fish-poole, our Savior should for his sake leave other
just and good men, and make choice to come unto him?

First, (as I have told you already) because Sickness preserves the soul
from ^inne, and that it is a token of Gods mercy and goodness toward us.
Sol. A patient suffering acceptable unto God, and profitable to our selves.


Secondly, Because this poor wretch did hope to be healed, his thoughts and
^is hopes laying hold upon Gods favor toward him, with a strong and assured
^^^iance: and this was that which this sick man did purposely seek after.

Euthimius does much endeere his sufferance and his perseverance, never
despairing, but assuring himself, that Heaven would yet at last be propitious
and favorable unto him: and though year after year, nay, for so many years
together, he found no good, (many contradictions offering themselves unto him)
yet his hopes did never fail him. His sins were rather accessorie and
accidental, than of any proposed malice, or in despite (as we say) of God;
and such kind of faults as these, God sooner pardons and far more easily
forgiueth. The Scripture sometimes proposes unto us Peccadores remitados,
Notorious sinners, to whose account you cannot add one sin more than they
have charged themselves withal: Who have purposely departed from God: Of these
Job says, Quasi de industria recesserunt a me. Esaias, Pepigimus faedus cum
m^rte, We have made a covenant with Death. Malachie, Vanus est qui seruit Deo,
He is vain that serves God. These are desperate resolutions.

2. Kings 6.
Others there are who sin by accident. In the History of the Kings it is said
of David, That he arose up from his chair, to walk upon the Tarrasse of his
Palace, and that his eye lighted by chance upon Bersheba, who was bathing her
self in her garden: this was a business which fell out casually, and (as we
say) by hap-hazard, though his plotting how to have his pleasure of her was a
thing premeditated; but his seeing and his coveting of her was, as it were,
accidentally, and by chance. Whereas the desire that David had to serve God,
was ever purposed and determined by him [ Iuraui and statui custodire iudicia
justiciae tuae. 1. Kings 14.
] So that his offending of his God was not wilful, but of weakness and by mere
haphazard. Saul made a Proclamation, That no man should eat till he had gotten
the victory over the Philistines; but the soldiers were so hungry with
sighting and fasting, that their minds ran on nothing else save the stanching
of their hunger; Et comedit populus cum sanguine, The people took Sheep, and
Oxen, and Calves, and slew them on the ground, and did eat them, with the
blood, (which was contrary to Gods commandment) not considering, that this
their eating at this time, and upon such an occasion, was peccatum per
accidens, an accidental sin. In a word, one of the surest pledges of our
predestination, is, to make our serving of God the Principal, and our
offending him, the Accessorie.

Hunc cum vidisset Dominus.
God pittieth when none else will.
When the Lord had seen him. This his seeing of him was not by chance, nor is
it so to be construed of Christ; but to show that he was man, he did many
things as it were by chance: And therefore when he saw this man's misery, and
knew how long he had layne thus, and how he was forsaken of all the world, and
that there was no body to help him, then, etc.

A weeping Eye causes a bleeding heart.
It is a great matter (I can assure you) for a man to cast his eyes upon the
wretched estate of the Poor; for from the eyes compassion, grows the hearts
tenderness; the one is no sooner touched, but the other melts. Noli auertere
faciem tuam ab vllo paupere, Turn not away thy face from the Poor. Tobias
told his son, That if he should not turn his eye aside from the Poor, God
would never turn away his face from him. The sores of the Poor (says Saint
Chrysostom) being beheld by us, teach, advise, and move us. When Pilate
presented our Savior Christ to the Jews, wounded from head to foot, and all
his body on a goa^^ blood, he said unto them, Ecce homo, Behold the man; but
they shutting their eyes* and turning their faces away from him, cried out,
Away with him, away with him: whereas if they had earnestly beheld him, and
viewed him well from top to toe, their hearts, had they been of stone, (as they
were little better) they would have grown soft and tender with it. The reason
why so little remedy now a days is given to humane misery, is, because the
Princes and Potentates of the earth do not see them. Though God had sent down
one of his Angels, yet this diseased man continued uncured thirty eight
years, and if God had not come himself to help him, he might have died of
that sickness. When our necessities show themselves, they speak, though we
be silent: What need Lazarus to beg, as long as his sores had so many tongues
and mouths to sue for him? Domine vidisti, ne sileas, responde pro me, Why
should thou look, o Lord, that I should speak unto thee? do thou not see
in what a woeful case I am? In matter of provisions or conferring of pensions,
albeit that the persons that pretend say not a word for themselves, yet their
merits and good deseruings will sufficiently recommend their cause, and plead
hard for them: which if it were otherwise, it were better to be a cogging
lying knave, than a religious and modest Courtier; for he shall speed the
better of the two. Two pretend one and the self same place; the one sues,
extolls his services, and lies; the other says nothing, but looks that his
merits and good services should speak for him: In Babylon, which is a
confusion of Tongues, it shall be given to the loudest talker; but in a wise
and well governed Commonwealth, to him that shall hold his peace.

When the Lord had seen him. It is usual with Physicians and Surgeons, when
they go about to cure loathsome sores, Leaprosies, Scurfes, Cankers, and the
like, to put their Patients to a great deal of pain: Eusebius and Gregory
Nazianzen affirm, That our Savior Christ did far exceed all other
Physicians.

First, Because he cured an infinite sort of sick folks of all manner of
diseases.

Secondly, Because our Saviors bowels of compassion were tenderness, mercy,
and pity it self.

Cum iam multum tempus haberet.
When he had been there a long time. It is a great happiness for a man, when
he shall suffer so long, that God himself shall come unto him and say, It is
enough. The pains here upon earth are happy pains unto us, for that they end
^n this, that God makes an end of them at last, and says unto thee, No more, it
^s enough. But that of Hell is a heavy torment, for that he that is condemned
must abide in prison, donec reddat nouissimum quadrantem, Till he pay the
uttermost ^arthing: and because he has not wherewithal to pay one only Mite,
he must ^e forced to lie there for ever, and to endure eternal torment,
without any hope of redemption. There are likewise punishments in this life,
which are but introductions, as it were, to those of Hell: there are some
likewise that are Martyrs Diaboli, The Devils Martyrs, who suffer for his
sake; and because they did desti^ate themselves rather to him than unto God,
God has predestined them to Hell. But here in this place, thirty eight
years seeming a great many unto God, moved with pity, he says to this sick
man, Vis sanus fieri? etc. Will thou be made whole? etc.

Vis sanus fieri? Will thou be made whole?
Saint Cyril says, That one of the greatest pledges of Gods mercy, is, To
pre^ent the prayers of the Afflicted, giving them ease of their griefs before
they ^ske his help: resembling that Fountain which calls and inuites the
thirsty to ^rinke [ Erit Fons patens domui Jacob;] like unto the Pepin tree,
which bowing down his boughs, offers it is fruit unto us when it is ripe;
Sicut malum inter ligna syluarum, sic amicus meus, etc. So that on Heavens
part, our desires shall not be frustrated, nor our hopes deluded.

Saint Augustine says, That there is a great deal of difference between
V^^le, and velle fortiter and integre, Willing a thing, and willing it stoutly
and entirely. The Sluggard (says Solomon) will, and will not, turning himself
too and fro upon his bed, as a door upon his hinge: now the door, though it
move a little, yet i^ still keeps it is place. And in another place, the same
Saint Austen says, That he had made trial in himself of two contrary wills;
one which led him on to Vice; another, to Virtue: as one that is forced to
rise, and yet would feign lie a bed; Virtue crying out to him on the one side,
Surge, qui dormis, Arise thou that sleep; and vice on the other, Ne surgas
sed dormias, Arise not but sleep; for it is a sweet and a pleasing thing, to
sleep. Illud placebat and vincebat, hoc libebat and vinciebat: faring with such
as with those that are in love, whose torments bid them leave off, bu^ the
content they take therein, makes them fast fettered in Loves prison. Certain
men asked of Thomas of Aquine, How we might go to Heaven? His answer unto
them was, Patience the best Physike in all extremities.
By desiring to go thither: but aduising withal, That this our desire must be
a true and fervent desire. That Physician who knows thy diseases
grieuousnesse, and thy impatiencie, will not stick to say unto thee, Sir, if
you have a mind to be well, you must have a mind to be patient, you must not by
your fretting fret your sore, and make it worse. Quis est homo qui vult vitam?
Diligit dies habere bonos? Who is he that would not live long? Who, that would
not see good days? Many, rather than they will be tied to those conditions
which David in the next words following sets before them, Prohibe linguam tuam
a malo, and labi^ tu^ ne l^quantur dolum; diuerte a malo, and fac bonum;
inquire pacem, and persequere eam, etc. Keep thy tongue from evil, and thy
lips from speaking guile; turn from Iniquity, and do that which is good;
enquire after Peace, and follow it: Many, that they may not pass through these
balls of fire, had rather continue still sick, than endure any the least
pain, to be cured.

Old Sickenesses, and ancient Customs, are a second kind of nature: and
therefore our Savior Christ, Cum cognouisset quod multum tempus haberet, When
he kn^^ that he had been long sick, would now linger the time no longer. Your
Moorish Slave, after he has endured many years of servitude, is so far from
desiring his liberrie, that he scarce thinks upon it; the Ox used to the
yoke, willingly submits himself unto it; an old Soldier will never go
without his Arms; and therefore Tullie calls them, Militum Membra, A Soldiers
Limbs; for through use, they are no more troublesome to him than a leg or an
arm, for continual travel hardneth the hoof: Et superatur omnis fortuna
ferendo; so said the Poet* In a word, Custom makes things little less
familiar unto us, than Nature. (...) treating of those which have been
accustomed to sin from their youth, says* That they leave not their vices
till they leave to live, [ Ossa eius replebuntur vicijs adolescentiae suae. Job
20.
and cum eo in pul^ere dormient, His bones are full of the sins of (...)
Youth, and it shall lie down with him in the dust:] And presently rendering the
reason thereof, he further says, That Custom made wickedness seem sweet
(...) his mouth, and that he hid it under his tongue, like a Pastilla de boca;
that he favored it, and would not forsake it, but kept it close in his mouth.
So that h^^ that has once enured himself to taste much ill, it is not much
that he should n^^ desire his health. Balaams Ass complained of his masters
ill usage; and (acco^ding to Saint Augustine) it was a severe reprehension for
the Prophet: but Bala^^ was not any whit amassed to hear his beast speak,
because his thoughts were carried away with covetousness; this is Saint
Augustines opinion: but Lyra, he says, That it was through his accustomation
to Witcheries and Sorceries, Monstrosis assuefactus ad vocem Asinae non
expauit: For Custom makes things that are monstrous, familiar unto us. Every
where we indeere Jobs sufferings, because they came upon him on such a sudden
an and unequal fashion: I was in wealth (says the Text) but he brought me to
naught; he has taken me by the cheek and beaten me; he cutteth my reins,
Job 16. and 17.
and pours my gall on the ground, he has broken me with one breaking upon
another, and runs upon me like a Giant: mine eye is dim for grief, and my
strength like a shadow; my days are past, mine enterprises broken, and the
thoughts of my heart have changed the night for the day, and the light has
approached for darkness; the grave must be my house, and I must make my bed in
the dark; I must say to Corruption, Thou art my father, and to the Worm, Thou
art my mother and my sister, etc. These afflictions were as harsh to Job,
being not used and beaten to them, as Vice, through Custom, is pleasing to
the Wicked. Voluptabar (says Austen) in caeno Babilonis, tanqua^ in cinamonijs
and vnguentis pretiosis, Babylons dirt was as Amber, and the stench of her
streets as precious Ointments unto me. And after that he had in his Meditations
endeered the evils of this present life, he bewailes the wretched condition of
those that are bewitched with the love of this life; who thereby following
their pleasures, come to loose a thousand lives. Homer in his Odysses paints
forth the deceits of Circes, and that Ulysses escaped them by being advised
thereof by Mercury. The herb Moly, whose root is black, and the Flower
white (the symbol of the knowledge of our selves) and those Sirens (of whom
Esaias makes mention) under the names of Zim and Ohim, of Ostriches and Satyrs
that shall dance there; Esaias 13.
both which are figures of the delights of this world, whereunto many are so
wedded, that the Prophet could term them, Men settled on their Lees.

Will thou be made whole. Man's will^ concurs not with Grace in our vprising
from sin.
He first asks him (being as yet unspoken unto) whither he were willing to be
healed, or no? O, what a noble proceeding was this in our Savior, that he
would first ask our good will! All other humane goods God gives and takes away
as he sees fit, without asking our consent; but he is willing to ask here of
this sick man, his good will, for that there is nothing so much ours, as that.
Fili praebe mihi cor tuum, My son give me thy heart: always considering this
with himself, that for our condemnation, our own will is Causa positiua, the
positive cause thereof; [Perditio tua ex te Israel] but for our justification,
it is causa sine qua non, we cannot be saved without it. And to this purpose
tend those remarkable words of Saint Augustine, Qui creauit te sine te, non
saluabit te sine te, He that made thee without thee, will not save thee without
thee: So that our will, though it be not the principal cause of our good, yet
is it the chiefest cause of our ill. Two Moors that are Slaves, the one
desires his liberty, the other, his captivity; the will of the latter is the
positive cause of his hurt, and the will of the former does him no good,
unless his Redeemer ransom him.

Hominem non habeo, I have not a man.
This (as Caietan has noted) was a fair and mannerly answer. For so natural
^s the desire of life, that it is a wonder to see any man wax weary thereof,
though ^e find himself never so vnhealthie. We read of those our ancient
fathers, that ^ome of them lived nine hundred years; but we read not of any
of them that ^hought them too many or too much. Pharaoh asking Jacob, how old
he was, he told him, That the whole time of his pilgrimage was an hundred and
thirty years; that few and evil had the days of his life been; and that
he had not attained to the years of the life of his fathers, in the days of
their pilgrimages. Elias fled from death, when he saw how near Iezabels hand
was to take his life from him, howsoever under the Juniper tree he seemed much
to desire it. Upon Paradise God had put a strange guard, not only a blade of a
sword, shaken, to keep the way of the Tree of Life; but many Cherubins also,
that were like so many flames of fire. What, o Lord, do thou mean by this
so powerful a guard for so cowardly and fearful a creature as man? O sir, in
Paradise there is a Tree that bears the fruit of Life, and out of the desire
that man has to live, he will press upon the swords point, and rush through
fire and water to get in: And though a less guard might happily serve turn in
regard of man; yet will it not suffice to keep the Devil out; and if he should
chance to rob this tree of her fruit, he would carry the whole world after
him, out of the great love and affection that they have unto Life. Saint
Augustine greatly endeering this love, says, That it were a great happiness
for man, if he bore but that love to life eternal, as he does to this that is
temporal; and that he would but labor as much to obtain that, as he seeks
to conserve this. But this poor wretched man indeeres it much more, who at the
end of thirty eight years, having led a life that was worse than death,
should yet desire to live longer.

God favors whom the world forsakes.
I have not a man. This is the reason why God sets his eye upon thee, and
begins to look toward thee; for the only means to make God to favor us, is,
when he sees the World has forgot us. The cause why so many suitors thrive no
better, is, because they seek more after the favor of men, than of God: Where
Nature casts us off, there Grace takes us up; when the World abandoneth us,
then God embraces us. The Ravens young ones are forsaken by her, and God
feeds them. In the Indies there are no Physicians, yet are there wholesome
Herbs wherewith they cure their diseases. In like manner, where the World
affoordeth few favors, there Gods providence supplies us with many.
Chrysostom says, Non habes hominem, sed Deum, Thou have not man, but thou
have Go^ to thy friend. The Egyptian whom the Amalekites left behind them,
because he was sick of a Fever, and could not follow them; David finding him
as he followed the chase, took him up and cherished him. Saint Gregory
notes, That it is the fashion of the World, to forsake those that will not
follow after it: whereas God runs a contrary course; for he cherishes and
favors those whom the World forsakes. Saint Austen ponders much upon
Joseph's two years being in prison, expecting the favor of Pharaohs servant,
to whom he had recommended his suit; so that as long as he depended upon man,
he was suspended by God: but when his hopes were that way utterly lost, and was
now able to say* Hominem non habeo, I have not a man, God did work his
enlargement. Joseph sai^^ to the Cup Bearer, Memento mei, Remember me; and he
did not so much as onc^ think of him in two years after: The Thief said to
Christ upon the Cross Memento mei, Remember me, and he was admitted into
Paradise the very sam^ day. Domine, ante te omne desiderium meum, O Lord, my
desires, my groans and my sighs are for and to thee, Psalm. 34. Dan. 3.
and my trust is in thee only, that thou will no^ see me unrewarded. Daniel
being shut up in the Lions Den, and the door sea^led with the Kings own Seal;
when he could find no favor amongst men, Go^ presently extended his favor
toward him. The like favor did he show to tho^^ Children that were in the
fiery Furnace; Exodus 2.
and to Moses in that Arc of Rush^^ floating upon the waters. Seneca
comforting Marcia concerning her sons death, amongst other reasons he alleges
this, Comfort your self in this, that you live in a Commonwealth, wherein you
are thus far happy, that you have no sons to pretend for. Here we may well
bring in Pilats, Ecce homo. Though thou (sweet Jesus) had not a man to favor
thee, yet thou foundst a man that gave his blood, and his life for them. Ecce
homo; Lo, thou wast the man, that show'dst such great kindness, to those that
used thee so unkindly. Thou (poor Soul) have not an Angel to move the
Fish-poole for thee; Ecce homo, behold the man, who makes more have to help
thee than an Angel.

Hominem non habeo. Why do thou complain, that thou have not a man to help
thee? Why do thou not rather complain that thou do rely and trust upon
man? He does like himself in deceiving thee; but thou do not like thy self
in presuming upon him. Many complain of the world, and the deceits thereof; but
do not complain of the foolish confidence which themselves put in this false
world. I complain of Fortune, that she is mine enemy, but not of my self,
who sue to so fickle a Dame, and so earnestly importune her. Night, is the
emblem of the world, and of a false friend. In the day, all communicate and
converse together, but at night, they take their leave and get them gone. In
prosperity, all the whole world will fawn upon thee, and keep thee company;
but in adversity no man will look upon thee, but will shun thee, and turn
his face from thee. If thou will experiment, what power thou have with the
world, and how much thou can prevail with it, necessity will instruct thee.
That friend which shall always lie unto thee, in whom thou never find
truth, it is thine own folly that deceiues thee, if thou trust him, it is not
he. And therefore he that now and then treats truth, is the more dangerous of
the two. In Deutronomie, God commands, Deuteronomy. 13.
That if there arise amongst his people a Prophet, or a Dreamer of dreams, and
give thee a sign or wonder, and the sign and the wonder which he has told
thee come to pass, that Prophet, or Dreamer of dreams shall be slain. But
he does not command, that he shall be slain if it do not come to pass. For
he that always lies, does no hurt at all; The world has been a notorious
liar these five thousand years, and more; and therefore I do not see, what
reason thou have to think, that it will now keep it is word better with thee
than it has with others heretofore.

Hominem non habeo, I have not a man. This is not only a complaint of the
poor, but of powerful persons, and those that are rich, who because they
have not the happiness to have a man to stick close unto them, that may
direct and counsel them, pass over this their life in distraction, and
perdition, and in the end loose both life and soul. Homo, homini Deus, homo
homini lupus, Man is a God to man, Man is a wolf to man. Expressing in the
one, a prudent and virtuous man, one that is stayed and well settled: In the
other, one that is light, inconstant, and false-hearted.

Commonwealths use likewise to complain; as also those that are jealous of
their goods, that they cannot meet with a man whom they may trust. Theodoret
says, That he offers a great, and a mighty wrong unto Gods providence, who
complains hereof. For that Commonwelth that prouides it self of feet,
should not leave it self without a head: and stooping so low as man's breast,
for those more painful and base occupations, as the Scauinger, the Cobbler,
and the hangman; they should likewise have a care of placing fit men in places
of a higher nature, that are to order businesses of State, and to cleanse a
Kingdom of those filthy dunghils and sinkes of sin which annoy a
Commonwealth.

This hurt (I mean when base and unworthy persons govern a State) arises
from those two grounds; The one, The making choice of such men who by good and
evil means (making no great difference of either) seek for preferrement, and
out of their ambition, would rather die than loose it. And when he is thus
preposterously preferred and put in place of authority, he plays Rex,
putting in one, and putting out another, and so as he may raise himself to
honor, cares not whom he disgraces and treads under foot, though they be ten
times better men, and worthier than himself. Moses by Gods appointment made
choice of seventy Elders of Israel to assist him in the government of the
People; and they being one day to meet at a certain hour before the
Tabernacle, to the end that God in the presence of all the people might put his
Spirit of prophecy upon them, there remained two behind among the Host, to
wit, Eldad and Medad; and because God is not confined to any set place, the
Spirit likewise rested upon them, and they prophesied in the Host. Ioshuah
thought this was a disreputation to Moses, that these two should prophecy
without especial order from him, insomuch that he persuaded him that he
should forbid them to prophecy any more. This is a true picture of the course
and fashion of this present World, which will by no means admit of any
Ministers of State, but such as they themselves shall nominate, or (as if they
were creatures of their making) shall wholly depend upon them. But the Spirit
of God made answer unto Ioshuah by the mouth of Moses, Quid aemularis pro me?
Enuiest thou for my sake? and adds anon after, Would to God all the Lords
people were Prophets, and that the Lord would put his Spirit upon them. So that
men are never wanting for to govern a Commonwealth, but eyes of charity and
discretion, to distinguish of those that are fit, and to make a good and
judicious choice.

Toll grabatum tuum and ambula.
Take up thy bed and walk. Our Savior here commands him, That he should shake
off his former idleness and sloathfulnesse. Hora surgendi: My son (says
Ecclesiasticus) have thou slept long in sin, Eccle. 21.
awake and rouse up thy self, and do so no more, but pray for thy foresinnes,
that they may be forgiven thee. The second thing to be noted, is, That our
Savior said unto him, Arise, take up thy bed and walk: one maine reason
whereof was, That it might appear that new strength was put into him, being
grown able on the sudden to bear his bed upon his back. The other, That none
might presume that it was the Angel that had wrought this cure upon him.
Thirdly, To take all cauelling from the envious, for the disauowing of this
miracle; and that the World might praise and publish the same: Vt miraculum
videretur (says Saint Augustine) and nemo sim^latum opinaretur. For this cause
he willed those baskets of broken bread and meat to be kept, when he fed so
many thousands with so little provision. And him that he healed of his
Leaprosie, that he should go and present himself to the Priests: Taking the
like course with diverse others, holding them as necessary diligences for the
auerring of these his miracles, considering what a captio^^ and incredulous
kind of people he was to deal withal.

Et statim factus est sanus homo ille.
And presently the man was made whole. It is an easy thing with God, to enrich
him that is poor in an instant. Upon one only Dixit in the creation, presently
followed a Facta sunt. Creauit omnia simul, He created all things at once
(says Wisdom;) so in the reparation of this poor man* it is said, Statim
sanus factus est homo ille, He was presently made whole. He said unto Martha,
Resurget frater tuus, Thy brother shall rise again; Whereunto she answered, I
know that he shall rise again in the resurrection at the last day. Christ
might take this ill, as a wrong done unto the love which he bare to Lazarus,
That she should think him so neglectfull of his friend, as to let his favor
toward him be so long in coming. Saint Chrysostom says, That your bad
Physicians are the Butchers of a Commonwealth; and your good, the Botchers of
man's life, who patch and mend it, making this fleshie clothing of ours, and
this our rotten carcass, to hold out as long as it can. But God, who is his
Arts-master, and a wondrous nimble Workman, made this sick man so perfectly
whole, and so instantly strong, that he was able to take his bed upon his
back and walk. And if by this he showed, that he did now fully enjoy health
of body; in his going streightway to the Temple, he made good proof of his
Souls health. Which is no more than what S. Austen does infer upon those words
which our Savior afterward said unto him, Now sin no more, etc.

Saint Augustine upon this our Saviors healing of this man alone, says, Ob.
That herein he seemed somewhat too sparing and too niggardly to those other
that had need of his help.

Whereunto I answer first of all, That for those things which our Savior Christ
did, or did not, the wit of man cannot be a competent Judge. Sol.


Secondly, That this was a mere act of his mercy, and not to be questioned.
Besides, health perhaps to the rest might have proved hurtful unto them, though
not to their bodies, yet to their souls.

Thirdly, Tertullian says, That the operation of the Fish-poole being now to
cease and loose i^'s virtue, That our Savior by curing him who was the longest
and the most sick amongst them, gave thereby an induction and entrance to all
that were sick, to come and repair to him for help: As if he should have
said, He that desires to be made whole, from hence forward let him go no more
to the Fish-poole, nor stay there expecting the Angels coming; for when he
comes he heals but one at once; but come you all unto me, and I shall heal you
al.

Toll grabatum, Take up thy bed. This would seem to be too heavy a burden
for him: A man would have thought that it had been enough for him to have
been punished with thirty eight years keeping of his bed, without being put
now at last to bear it on his back. But if God can give such great strength
to so weak a man, that the burden of his bedding seems no weightier than a
straw; the heuier it is, the lighter it is, especially if God shall put but the
least help of his little finger thereunto, Da quod jubes, and jube quod vis,
Give what thou command, and command what thou please.

Secondly, Christ here sets before us a model and pattern of true repentance;
A pattern for Repentance.
before, with a Iacebat, He lay all forlorn; now, with a Surge, he walks sound
and upright: before, he was torpens and stupefactu^, benumbed and stupefied;
now he was in his ambulare, walk: before, his bed did bear him; and now he
bears his bed, Toll grabatum tuum. This was to signify, That he was to run a
contrary course to that he did before, and to tread out the prints of his
forepassed sinful life: So that (according to Chrysologus) that which
heretofore was a witness of his ^nfirmitie, shall henceforth be a testimony
of his health. Vniuersum eius stratum ^ersasti in infirmitate eius, Thou
turnedst his bed topsituruie, first this way, then that way, till thou had
made it more easy for him. Thou changest (says Gene^rard) his weakness into
strength, and his sickness into health; it was before, a ^ick bed, now a sound
one; before, a bed of sorrow, now of joy; before, a bed of sin, now of tears.

This Miracle was the Fermentum and Leven of the death of our Savior Christ;
for, picking a quarrel with him upon this occasion, they resolved to kill him,
and this their intention daily increased, as often as they called to mind this
action of his. And therefore he afterward said unto them (as Saint John
reports it in his seventh Chapter) Vnum opus feci, John 7.
and omnes admiramini sane, I have done one work, and ye all marvel; I
heal a poor sick man on the Sabbath day, and ye all bless your selves, as
though I had a Devil in me. This word Miramini is here taken in the worser
sense; so Saint Chrysostom notes it: For doing this so good a deed you take
me to be a transgressour of the Law; but I shall prove unto you, that your
accusation is unjust: Moses dedit vobis Circumcisionem, non quia ex Moses,
sed ex patribus, etc. Moses gave you Circumcision, not because it is of Moses,
but of the Fathers; John 7.
and ye on the Sabbath day circumcise a man: Moses gave it ye, but he was not
the primarie and principal author thereof; for before the Law of Moses was,
was Circumcision. The Israelites had it ex patribus, of their forefathers; but
because it ceased in the Desert, he did afterward restore it to it is former
use and virtue. The precept of the Sabbath was proper to the Law of Moses, he
was the first that did institute it, till then it was not so strictly observed.
Now you your selves do circumcise on the Sabbath day, (observing the precept
of your ancient Fathers) and yet for all this ye break not the Law of Moses.
If then a Ceremony be lawful which is directed to the health of the Soul;
Why shall not that be lawful amongst you which cures both soul and body?
Ye are angry with me, and seek to kill me, because I have made a man every
whit whole upon the Sabbath day, Quia totum hominem feci, etc.

Qui me sanum fecit.
He that made me whole, said unto me, Take up thy bed and walk. The Jews
being mightily incensed against our Savior for that which he had done, it
being the Sabbath day, and a great feast with them; asked the poor man in an
hot and angry fashion, Who it was that bid him take up his bed and walk? he
told them, Qui me sanum fecit, That it was Jesus, that had made him whole: A
disease of thirty eight years old, which neither Nature, Art, nor my good
fortune could rid away from me, did yield and render up it self in an instant
to the empire of him that healed me; That his long lost strength and health,
after so long an absence, returned presently back again at the sound of his
voice, and comforting those his rotten bones, and causing his cankered and
withered flesh to wax young again, had banished all aches and whatsoever other
diseases from his body; shall not I then obey him whom Sickness and Health
do thus obey? It seems this poor man had played the thief, and stole this
reason from David, Nonne Deo subiecta erit anima mea, quoniam ab ipso salutare
meum* It is reason good, that I should subject my self to God, because from
his hand comes my salvation. Qui me sanum fecit, He that has done me such a
happiness and such a blessing as none others can do the like, but God, why
should I not obey him as God?

Ecce, sanus factus es.
Behold, thou art made whole, etc. This man Christ afterward met withal in
the Temple, Things above the reach of reason hand to be believed.
and said unto him, Ecce, sanus factus es, Behold, thou art made whole. This
word Ecce includes in it a thousand things: The first is, The greatness of
this his favor toward him; for there are some things so transcendent and
beyond the reach of our reason, that they who enjoy them do scarce believe
them, they are so astonished and amassed at them. When the Angel freed Peter
out of Herod's prison, and had led him along by the hand, till he had brought
him out of the City, the Text says, Existimabat se visum videre, He thought
it had been some dream, or had seen some vision or strange apparition; and
it was a great while after ere he was come to himself, so wonder-strucken was
he with this his strange deliverance. Secondly, This particle Ecce, expresses
the greatness of this poor man's obligation; as if it should bid him look and
behold how much he was beholding unto God, who had freed him from so desperate
a disease. Cum enim augentur dona, rations etiam crescunt donorum, (the saying
is Saint Gregory's) The greater kindnesses, the greater obligations. This
therefore being so great a one, thou can not choose but think upon this
benefit, and continually bear it in mind. Homo cum in honor esset, non
intellexit, Man when he was in honor understood it not, [the Hebrew has it,
Non pernoctauit] he did not consider well on the matter, he did not thoroughly
weigh it, by meditating night and day on so great a good. Thirdly, This same
Ecce serves him as a warning-piece, to put him in mind, that he is sound, but
not secure; for if thou do not look well unto thy self, and stand strongly
upon thy guard, thou may fall from that health wherein now thou stand, and
be worse than thou were before.

Ne deterius tibi contingat.
Least a worse thing happen unto thee. What can be worse than thirty eight
years of sickness? Yes, Hell is worse. S. Gregory says, That God is woo^t
to commense the chastisement of heinous and long continued sins, in this
li^^, and continues them in that other; so that they are, as it were, an
entrance into Hell, as it happened to Herod, who slew those innocent Babes; to
Antiochus, and others: These seem to lie as yet but in soke, and in a
preparation (as I may so term it) to those perpetual torments. To others,
Hell comes de golpe, it snatches them away on a sudden ere ever they be aware
of it. Ducunt in bonis dies suos, and in puncto ad inferos descendunt, They
lead a merry life, they pass away their days in pleasure, and in an instant
they go down into Hell. And to these men it is so much the more grievous and
painful, by how much the less they have been acquainted with the miseries of
a wretched life.

Least a worse thing, etc. Nor are the evils of this life evil, The Evils of
this life are but seeming evils.
nor the good things good. Saint Chrysostom says, That God gives us the good
things of this life, to the end that in them we may see a shadow, as it were
of Heaven: The evil, That we may by them see the tracke of the cruel rigor
of those hellish torments. Saint Paul treating of those evils that befall the
Righteous, says, Quasi morientes, quasi tristes, quasi, etc. As dying, as
chastned, as sorrowing, 2. Cor. 6.
as poor, as having nothing: He there reckons up a bead-roll of many seeming
ills, but not evils in deed; for their dying was to them living, their
sorrowing, rejoicing; their poverty, riches; and their having nothing, a
possessing of all things, etc. Quasi flagellum. It is said of our Savior
Christ, That he made a kind of whip, as it were, of those little cords
wherewith the Sellers in the Temple bound up their fardles. For in respect of
Hell-whips, the whips of this life are not whips, but quasi flagella, as it
were whips. The Scripture christneth humane troubles with the name of Waters,
Emitte manum tuam, and libera me de aquis multis: Aquae multae non potuerunt
extinguere charitatem. The proportions of this word Aqua, are two:

The one, That the troubles of the Godly do pass away like waters.

That though the waters be now and then troubled, they afterward grow clear
again.

But Hell is styled with the name of Stagnum, a standing Poole, [Missi sunt in
Stagnum ignis] because it is a punishment that always stands at one stay, and
is still the same, etc. The heart of the Godly finds this ease, that it lives in
hope of recovery; and the evils of the Righteous are never so many, but that
they have some shadow of good. Adam did supply his nakedness with Fig
leaves. Death, which is the greatest ill to man's life, dulleth the sense, which
is a kind of good; but Hell gives no hope of ease, no show of comfort. From
which God of his mercy keep us, etc.

THE ELEVENTH SERMON, UPON THE SATVRDAY AFTER THE FIRST SUNDAY IN LENT: AND
UPON THE SECOND SUNDAY IN LENT.
MAT. 17. MARC. 9. LVC. 9. Assumpsit Jesus, Petrum, and Iacobum, and Iohannem.

Jesus took unto him Peter, and James, and John.


Our Mother Church solemnizing once a year the Mysteries of our Savior
Christ; This life's happiness a Rose enui^oned with Thorns.
this, it solemniseth twice, one day after another; giving us thereby a savor
of that glory which is represented in this Mystery, on these two accustomed
festival days. Here in this world they are ended the very self same day
they are celebrated; and the ending of that days pleasure, is the beginning of
our next days labor. But in that other world (says Esaias) Erit mensis, ex
mense; and Sabathum, ex Sabatho, Esaias 66.
From month to month, and from Sabbath to Sabbath, shall all Flesh come to
worship before me. Amongst your Jews, the first day of your months and your
Sabboths were very solemn things. And Esaias taking the month for the first
day, says, In that glory which we look for, one month shall overtake
another, and there shall be Sabbath upon Sabbath. He might have said (without
using any kind of figure) a perpetual Feast, a perpetual Sabbath, and a
perpetual Rest. Man's happiness in this life, is like to a Rose that is beset
round about with Thorns, which to day costs us dear to get, and tomorrow is
withered away: But that supreme happiness shall not only be eternal and
perdurable, but without any the least prickle of sin to offend our tender
Souls.

He took unto him Peter, etc. First of all, Damascene says, That our Savior
did not carry all his Apostles with him up to the Mount; for it was not fit
that Judas should enjoy so great a blessing, in whom that prophecy of Esaias was
fulfilled, In terra sanctorum inique gessit, and non videbit gloriam Dei. He
who in so holy a company committed such a vile treacherous act, as to betray
and sell his Master, for the love of a little money, did not deserve to enjoy
the glory of Tabor. So that to the end Judas might not complain, That Christ
had discarded him, and quite shut him out from this blessing; this holy Saint
says, That those other good and holy men were for his sake debard of that
good: whence we may gather, what hurt many an honest man receives by keeping a
lewd knave company. But because it might have seemed a scandalous piece of
business, to have left Judas all alone by himself, the rest remained with
him; Judas his company being no less dangerous to the College of Jesus his
Disciples, than it was tedious and wearisome to our Savior himself. Insomuch
that when Judas was gone out of the house where Christ supt with his Disciples,
(which he did presently upon the receiving of the sop) he said, Nunc
glorificatus est Filius hominis, Now is the Son of man glorified. When Christ
multiplied his miracles, John 1^. John 7.
Saint John says, Non erat Spiritus datus, quia Christus nondu^ erat
glorificatus, The holy Ghost was not yet given, because that Jesus was not yet
glorified. Why Christ, being near unto his death, should hold himself to be
glorified, and in the working of miracles not to be glorified? For the decision
of that point, I shall refer you unto Saint Augustine. You see here how the
wind was come about, Judas was no sooner gone out, but he says, he is
glorified; but before, knowing who should betray him, he told Peter, Vos mundi
estis, sed non omnes, (i.) Ye are clean, but not all. The Cockle was taken
away, and the Wheat now pure and clean; and our Savior took it for a great
glory unto him, to see himself thus wholly rid of his company.

Secondly, Gregory Nazianzen says, That he took those three along with him,
because he always loved them best. Showing thereby, The public to be
preferred before the p^iuate.
that Princes may lawfully have their Priuadoes, and Favorites, to whom they
may give more grace and countenance, than to others; but withal, that they
ought to be such, as should be disinterressed, and not desire any more for
themselves than their Princes grace, leaving the rest of his favors to be
communicated to others, as well as themselves. Saint Jude once asked of our
Savior Christ, How comes it to pass, that thou should manifest thy self
unto us, and not unto the World? He thought, that the Sun should inlighten
all. But because he did first bestow his light on the mountain tops, it was
fit, that the grace, which they received, they should gratis confer upon
others, Like good Stewards. The Evangelist calls Saint Peter fool, because he
would have all for himself, and those that were there with him. And if Elias,
and Moses, were admitted to mount Tabor, it was, because they were lovers of
the common good. Moses once disired of God, that he would let him see his face;
but God told him, he could not see his face and live. It seems, that here
Moses showed himself to be but a coward; What, to enjoy a poor life for the
present, would thou forgo so great a happiness? But it was not the love of
his own life; but the love that he bare to his people, who would have had a
great miss of him. Whereof there was afterward very good proof, when God
said unto him, Let me make an end of this people at once, and I will make thee
a mightier and a better Nation. Whereunto he answered, I am so far from
giving way to this, That I shall beseech thee either to pardon them, or to blot
me out of the Book of life; for I had rather not live, than live without them.
Do thou offer to lay down thy life for thy people? And will thou not loose
it to see God face to face? The one, was a particular, the other a common good.

Thirdly, He took only three along with him; manifesting thereby, that he
was as sparing of his Glory in this life, as he was liberal of his Cross.
Tertullian says, That he took those three with him, not so much to make them
partakers of this his Glory, as to bear witness thereof. And therefore
carried three, because they are a full and sufficient testimony. And this was
a great comfort to those that were left behind; not that they did dismerit the
like favor; but that there was a necessity in it, that some should abide with
Judas. For, if he should have been left alone, he would have took it for a
great disgrace. But those other, did not therefore merit less, by being left
behind; For if the favor, t^wards those that went up, seemed to be the
greater, yet the deserts of those that were left, were not inferrior to those
that were admitted. For afterward some of those suffered for the Glory, which
they had seen, and most of these for the Glory they had not seen.

To this purpose there are two Stories in the Scripture, one of Eldad and
Medad; Number. 11.
which (according to the Scholasticall History) were halfe-brothers to Moses;
and being nominated amongst the seventy for the government of the people,
came not at all to the Tabernacle where God did communicate part of Moses his
spirit to the rest: But though they stayed behind in their Tents, yet did they
not loose this blessing, but did prophecy as well as the rest. The other is of
David, who pursuing those that had burned Ziklag, two hundred soldiers were
left behind with the baggage; but when they had got the victory, the spoils
were equally divided, as well between those that had ventured their lives in
the battle, as those that guarded the stuff. As his part is that goes down
to the battle, 1. Kings 30.
so shall his part be that tarrieth by the stuff.

Fourthly, Only three; Because amongst few, all kind of observance and virtue
is better conserved. Howbeit the Church does daily pray, that the number of the
Just may be increased. Which the greater it is, the more gracious it is, and
more comely in Gods sight. But as it is commonly taken, the greater the number,
the greater the harm. In the beginning of the world, when there were few
people, the harm was not much. But then the number of men increasing,
Prosperity always envied.
sin so increased in the world, that God repented himself that he^ had made
it. He was sorry in his heart, that he had made both it, and man. That being
verified of them, Genesis 6.
which Esaias said unto God; Thou have multiplied the Nations, but not their Joy.
The Church beginning to flourish, What followed? there were many Foxes, that
did it much mischief. As the wheat increases, so increases the tares. So,
that much prosperity (in Senecas opinion) sometimes produces much poverty.
Augustine in his book De Ciuit. Dei, proves this truth, out of the Roman
Histories; Romes own greatness, being it is own ruin. Suis Roma viribus
ruit. No sword could cut her throat, but her own.

Lastly, Only three; A number ( Aristotle following the opinion of Pythagoras)
which contains in it a university of things. And for that it is so full of
mystery, suffices, That it is consecrated to the most sacred and blessed
Trinity.

To him that shall ask me, Ob.
why Christ carried not his mother with him to mount Tabor, as well as he did to
mount Caluerie? I answer, That all that, Sol.
which he suffered in mount Caluerie, was in respect of his mother, in so much
that this her son complained, that God had forsaken him. But that Glory,
which he inioyed in mount Tabor, he had that from his father; So that the
seeing thereof, did nothing at all belong to his mother.

Some man may doubt, why these three descending from the Mount, Ob.
should advise the rest, of the favor which they inioyed, Sol.
being they had an interdiction to the contrary from our Savior, Nemini
dixeritis visionem, Tell no man, what you have seen. I answer, That the
interdiction was not for the disciples, but for the people only.

But some one may reply; Ob.
Why Envy did not possess their hearts that stayed behind; and Pride puff up
theirs that went up to the Mount? Earthly things more envied than Spiritual.
Especially such a bloody quarrel being like to have grown amongst them,
who should be greatest in that their hoped for Kingdom? They being all
incensed against James and John, for desiring to be in nearest place to our
Savior. I answer; Sol.
That this their striving who should be greatest, and this their chaires of
Ambition, suppose a most base opinion of the Kingdom of our Savior Christ:
for that they imagined it (as before has been proved) to be terrestrial and
temporal. And touching these goods of the earth, not only secular Kings and
Princes, are ready to go together by the ears for them; but also your
Ecclesiastical persons, those that are the holiest and honestest Churchmen,
labor to defend them with all their might and maine. For they fall so short of
those other, that are heavenly, that they being divided amongst so many, they
all think, they have too little. Pallium breue est, vtrumque operire non
potest, The cloak is short, and cannot cover twain. And for that the glory
of Tabor, was meant of that other life, and for that it did discover those that
had been dead for so many years before, and for that it left every one so
well satisfied, and made them to acknowledge it as an immense and infinite
blessing; it could not be unto them a matter of Pride, or Envy: Whence it
comes to pass, that in spiritual goods, these vices are not found. Thou thy
self obseruest, that such a neighbor of thine prays devoutly, bestows his
alms liberally, fasts often, repents heartily, and performs all other
Christian duties willingly, and thou bear him no envy at all: but if thou
see he is richer than thy self, thriues better in the world, or is more
esteemed amongst men than thy self, his prosperity is thy torment. Those that
were the Spouses companions did never envy her happiness, Viderunt eum filiae
Syon, etc. The Daughters of Syon saw her, and proclaimed her blessed. These
were goods of the Soul, wherein if there were any envy at all, it was in
regard of that estimation which follows the body. Thou will happily envy the
virtuous, in seeing him rewarded for his virtue, but not envy virtue.

Et duxit illos in Montem excelsum.
And he brought them into a high Mountain. The dignity of Mount Tabor.
Tabor was a very famous Mountain, as well for those riches which God had
placed in it, of sports for hunting, Trees, Fountains, and pleasant Walks, as
also for those rare accidents which had been seen and known to have happened
there: There was that encounter of Melchisadec with Abraham, when he returned
so glad and cheereful, upon that victory which he had gotten against those
five Kings. And being there was no other way to pass from Galile to Jerusalem,
but by the skirts of this mountain, Jeroboam having set up two Idols, one in
Dan, and another in Bethel, for to divert those Tribes from going up to the
Temple to adore God, fearing lest they might pass over to Rehoboam, he had
placed Watch-towers on this mountain. Ose 5.
Suting with that of the Prophet Osee, O ye Priests, hear this, Judgment is
toward ye, because ye have been a snare upon Mizpah, and a net spread upon
Tabor: The Priests and Princes catching the poor people in their snares, as
the Fowlers do the birds, in these two high Mountains. In a word, This
Mountain is famous for very many things, but for none more than that it was
honored by our Savior with his presence, and enriched with his glory. And
for this cause Saint Bernard calls it Montem Spei, The Mountain of our hopes:
For he that leads a godly life here upon earth, may well hope to receive a
glorified life in Heaven.

Et transfiguratus est ante eos.
And he was transfigured before them. Let us here expound four truths which
are acknowledged by the whole body of Divinity.

The one, That our Savior Christ liung amongst us, was not only seen of us,
himself seeing and knowing all things, but was happiness it self.

The other, That he was so from the very instant of his conception.

The third, That being happy in Soul, he must likewise be so in his body.

The fourth, That the glory of his Soul remained after that he had left his
body.

Touching the proof of the first Truth, notable is that place of Saint John,
No man has seen God at any time; John 1.
that only begotten Son which is in the bosom of the Father, he has
declared him: The Gloss has it, Who is nearest to his father, not only in
respect of his love toward him, but by the bond of nature, and for the union
or one-nesse that is between them, whereby the Father and the Son are one. God
revealed him and showed him unto us; whereas before, he was under the shadows
of the Law, so that the quickenesse of the sight of our mind was not able to
perceive him: for whosoever sees him, sees the Father also. The Evangelist
pretends here to prove, that only our Savior Christ is the author of Grace
and of Truth, and that neither Moses, nor any of the Patriarks could see God as
he was himself, which is Truth it self by essence; but as he is the Son:
and therefore he only can be the author thereof. Men may see God in his
creatures, Job 36. Romans 1.
and know many of his perfections: And in this sense Job said, All men see him
and behold him afar off. Saint Gregory and Saint Paul implie as much, For
the invisible things of him, that is, his eternal power and Godhead, are seen
by the creation of the world, considered in his works. Men may likewise see
him in some image or figure, sometimes of a man, sometimes of an Angel,
sometimes of Fire, representing himself in those forms; sometimes by the eyes
of the Soul, and sometimes those of the Body. So Esaias saw him, I saw the Lord
sitting upon an high Throne. And Jacob, I saw the Lord face to face. Thirdly,
God may be seen by Faith, Esaias 6. Genesis 29. 1. Cor. 13.
as the Faithful now see him, Now, we see through a glass darkely. Fourthly,
in his humanity, Afterward he was seen upon earth, (says Buruch) and dwelt
among men. Fifthly, in himself, and in his essence, not in his creatures, not
in his image, not in his humanity, but in himself, Sicuti est, As he is.
This sight is so far above all the rest, that it makes men happy, as also
the Angels. Moreover, John 3.
Saint John says, That with a clear sight (at least comprehensible) no man
ever yet saw God, but by the Son. And being, that God is our happiness, when
he is clearly seen, it follows, that our Savior Christ is happy. The
self same argument our Savior used to Nicodemus, No man ascended to Heaven,
but he which descended from Heaven, the Son of Man, who is in Heaven. Ye will
not give credit to these earthly things, how will ye credit those then that
are heavenly: And condemning this their incredulity, he says, No man ascended
up into Heaven. There is not any man that can make true report of the things
that are there, because no man has ascended thither to see them: only I, who
lived in Heaven, and descended down from Heaven, am able to tell ye the things
that are in Heaven. Our being in Heaven then being all one with the seeing of
God, and the seeing of God being our happiness, it follows that our Savior
Christ is happy.

The second Truth, That he was so from that very time that he first took our
nature upon him; Saint Augustine collects it out of the sixty fifth Psalm,
Blessed is the Man whom thou chusest and receiuest unto thee, he shall dwell in
thy Court, and shall be satisfied with the pleasure of thy house, etc. The same
Eusebius Caesariensis infers upon the twenty second Psalm, Thou art he
that took me out of my mothers womb; or (as the Chaldee letter has it)
Leuaui me in robore tuo, I got up to be joined equal with God. Which
testimonies of Scripture are confirmed by all your Scholasticall Doctors.

The third Truth, That our Savior Christ must needs be happy both in soul and
in body. Johannes Damascenus proves it out of that strict union of the
Divinity, which Death it self cannot undo. Saint Augustine affirms, That
the glory of the soul is naturally conveyed to the body, as the light of a
candle to a pain of glass.

The fourth Truth, That our Savior Christ was transfigured by giving license to
the glory of his soul, that it should transfer it self to the body: not
that glory which he was able to give it, but that which his Disciples eyes
were able to endure; as it is noted by Saint Chrysostom treating on this point.

Et transfiguratus est.
And he was transfigured. We have elsewhere set down the causes of our
Saviors transfiguration; but none so often repeated by the Saints and Doctors,
as his discovering thereby the hidden treasures of his glory, as the reward
that calls unto us, and stays for us, haling as it were our thoughts and hopes
after it. Such is the condition of man, that commonly he makes interest and
private gain, the North-starre of his labors and endeauours; this he thinks
on, dreams of, and adores. But as to the Worldling the worlds wealth is his
North-starre; so the North-starre of the Son of God, is the glory of God.
Now our Savior Christ discovers unto us a streake or a line, as it were, of
that happiness, which though it does not fully express unto us what God is,
yet it remooueth from us all those difficulties which might divert us from his
service. And therefore Saint Ambrose says, Ne quis frangatur, etc. He allureth
our mind with this so soueraign a good, that the troubles of this life may not
disquiet it, nor drive it to despair. So furious are the tempests of this Sea,
so raging the waves and tossings too and fro of this life, that if God did not
temper the distasts thereof with the hope of another life, our life were but a
Hell. Saint Bernard says, That the end which our Savior had in transfiguring
himself, was, that we might settle our thoughts and our hopes on that glory
whereunto he inuiteth us; for that, man's happiness wholly consists in
enjoying the presence of God. Saint Basil expounding that place of Saint
Matthew, Estote perfecti, etc. Be ye perfect even as your Father is perfect;
says, That the plainest way to enjoy God, is, to think so continually on him,
that our Souls should be translated, as it were, into himself; we playing
therein the Painters, who for to take a picture perfectly, never have their eye
from off the original. Saint Cyprian says, That there is not any thing that
does so much glad the eyes of God, as our thinking on the reward which is set
before us. Many Saints turmoyled with a thousand miseries, did evermore live
merrily, by being only cheered up with these good thoughts and hopes. Solomon
tells us, A reward is as a stone pleasant in the eyes of them that have it: Nor
is there any precious stone that so gladdeth his possessour, Prou. 17.
as hope cheereth the Righteous. Gregory Nissen calls Affliction, the Flower
of Glory; Fructuum, qui sperantur flos, As he that is to eat of the fruit,
takes pleasure in the flower, for that neighboring hope which is near at
hand; so, the Righteous through hope rejoice in Affliction. Our Savior
therefore being desirous that we should live in hope, unfolded part of that
Glory which he retained in his Soul, that placing our eyes and hearts
thereupon, all troubles whatsoever, though never so great, might seem little
in regard of our hoped-for reward.

Hence it follows, how ill they proceed, and what a desperate and indirect
course they take, to whom God having deputed the Earth for their hopes, and
Heaven for their bliss, pervert this his order, by making the Earth their
Heaven. It is an ordinary phrase of speech in Scripture, to call our life, a
Warrefare; now soldiers that are wise and valiant, reuerse their pleasures
till the battle is ended and the victory obtained. De torrente in via bibit,
propterea exaltauit caput, He drank of the torrent by the way, therefore has
he lift up his head. Saint Chrysostom expounds this verse of our Savior,
Qui non acquieuit in diebus carnis sua, Who rested not in the days of his
flesh, until he had overcome Death and Hell. Saint Ambrose declaring that place
of the Apostle, Non est nobis colluctatio, etc. We fight (says he) with the
Princes of Darkness, for celestial goods, for they loosing them by our
occasion, they are unwilling that we should enjoy them. And because Reward is
that which gives the Soldier both heart and hands, the last Sunday, we
proposed the War; this; the Reward. The Devil offered our Savior the glory
of the World; but our Savior offers us the glory of God: the hopes of this
are better than the enjoying of that. Saint Bernard says, That the time of
this life is the vigil of that feast which we hope for in glory: whence he
infers these two things:

The one; That it were folly in us, to make the Vigile, the Feast. Which is all
one with that of S. Austen; Summa peruersitas est, vti fruendis, and frui
vtendis. It is no good chop, considering the vnequalnesse of the terms. God
gave us the Earth, that we might use it; Heaven, that we might enjoy it. And it
is a beastly kind of ignorance, to make the Earth Heaven.

The other; That the Feast being so great, the fast of the Vigile, ought not
to seem so long unto us. Saint Paul, making a counter position ofthat, which
may be suffered here; and that which may be hoped for there: after that he
had said, that the one was light and momentary; the other weighty, and
perdurable, he added, Supra modum in sublimitate. It is a highness above all
highness; the altitude thereof alone cannot be taken: Nor can the tongue of
man indeare it so much, but it must fall short thereof. This made Saint Gregory
to say, Qua lingua, etc. What tongue, or what understanding is able to utter
the great and wonderful joys of that celestial City?

The pleasures of this life are altogether Vanity.
Saint Gregory, opening that place of Jeremy, Patres nostri etc. Our fathers
eat^ sour grapes, and our teeth were set on edge; He st^les the pleasures of
this life to be sour grapes, and fruits that are not yet come to their true
ripeness, which are good for nothing else but to set our teeth on edge. Philon
calls them, F^ri^ Coeli. For pleasures, are not for the earth; he that inioyes
them, steals them from Heaven. And as he that steals, inioyes what he has
so got, with a great deal of fear and jealousy; so may we be said to enjoy
these humane feasts and pastimes. That sacrifice of Abraham's, was held the most
acceptable, that ever any man in the old Testament offered unto God. For, in
sacrificing his son Isaac, he did sacrifice all the joy and content of this
his life. For Isaac by interpretation signifies laughter. Risum fecit mihi
Dominus. The like may be considered in his casting Agar out of his house,
which signifies a stranger. Resolving with himself (being but as a stranger
in this world) not to joy in the contents of this life. Jeremy, whose
ordinary occupation, was weeping, said, Ier. 17.
Diem hominis non desideraui, That is, the day of prosperity, and of pleasure
have I not desired. And Saint Bernard has this note upon it; That he might
have said, That he did neither desire it, nor enjoy it. David grew weary of
his passe-times and pleasures. Renuit consolari anima mea. If any thing can
afford me comfort, it is the meditation of everlasting joy. Base is that
mind, that lives merry and contented with the inioying of the goods of this
life. Base are the thoughts of that Prince, who keeping himself close in a
Sheapheards cottage, shall deem himself happy in that poor estate, not so
much as once thinking on that crown, which he ought to hope for. Saint Austen
declaring that place of Saint James, Fratres sufferentiam Job audistis, and
finem Domini vidistis, Ye have heard Brethren of Job's suffering, and ye have
seen the end of the Lord. God sets before us, as patterns of patience, the
life of Job, and the death of Christ; where it is to be observed, that he does
not set before us the end of Job; because God giving him a larger increase of
wealth, of children, and other contents in this life, his end was not by him to
be desired. But that of our Savior was most painful unto him. And therefore
it is said, Learn of Job to suffer in this life, and of our Savior in his
death. Leaving our hopes to rely upon that other life.

Et transfiguratus est.
And he was transfigured. It was likewise fit, that our Savior should be
transfigured for the confirmation of our Faith. For, if these our humane eyes
did see in Christ our Savior, only the course cassocke of our baseness, and
the scorn and contempt of his own person, as Esaias paints it forth, Who will
believe the gold of his Divinity? Saint Augustine in his books De Ciuitate
Deipunc; says, Esaias 53.2.
That all the transformations of those gods which the Gentiles did celebrate in
Birds, Bulls, Stones, Trees, Fountains, Fires, and grains of Gold, were
directed to this end, that the World should believe, that under the form of
mortal men, and this our own proper matter, lay hid some power supernatural.
Who would believe that Christ was God, if he had not given some glimpse of his
Riches? Who would have relied upon his protection? Without some particular
revelation, who would have dreamt of his omnipotency? In a subject so weak,
who would surmise it? Imagine an Angel in the shape and figure of an Ant; none
will believe that this was an Angel, unless he should at some time or other
discover some part of his brightness.

It was also fitting that Christ should discover unto us some of those his
hidden treasures, to the end that those that were his, might be persuaded that
they might safely sleep under the shadow of his wings. Moses being employed
in that business of Egypt, O Lord (says he) whom shall I say has sent me?
Exodus 3. Exodus 9.
Ego sum qu^ sum, I am that I am: And anon after, Ego sum Deus Abraham, and
Deus Isaac, and Deus Jacob, I am the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the
God of Jacob; Tell Pharaoh, that I am that I am; He that cannot, not be; That I
am he that have prospered and protected Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob. Which was
not only a making of himself known what he was, but were likewise pledges to
his people, that they should lay their confidence, liberty, lives, and their
persons upon him: I am that I am by my essence; I am he that always was, and
ever shall be; it is I that have power over every thing, and beg nothing of
any man. The Princes of the earth, because they are to day, tomorrow, and are
no more, they cannot give us any assurance of our hopes; and because they have
no pledges of their own, but what they borrow from others, their favors cannot
be secured unto us: For (as Saint Augustine says) Remota jactantia, quid sunt
homines, nisi homines? When Princes will show themselves in their pomp and
state, they borrow here, and they borrow there; they are no body, unless they
be accompanied with the great Lords of the Kingdom, unless they be attended
on by a Guard of Halberdiers, unless they be rich and gloriously apparelled,
and bravely mounted. In a word, these are external transfigurations, and of
such things as are more others than our own; but that of our Savior Christ
was of his own proper goods, without being beholding to any.

Et resplenduit facies eius sicut Sol.
A twofold Light, the one temperal, the other spiritual.
And his face did shine like the Sun. In the beginning of the world God did
handsell his Word with the Light; for before, darkness had ouerspread the
face of this confused Chaos, Tenebrae erant super faciem, etc. And as he that
diueth into the bottom of the sea for Pearl, as he goes spurtling the oil
out of his mouth, goes, as it were, thereby ingendering light; so God by
venting this word out of his mouth, fiat Lux, created the Light, discovering
thereby the essence and nature of things. Some have not stickt to say, that the
Light gave the red color to the Rubie, the Green to the Emerald, and the Sky
color to the Iacinth, etc. And though this be not so, yet so it is, that
without this Light these colors could not have been distinguished, nor could
we have enjoyed that humane beauty and beautiful splendour which now we do.
In the Sphere of the Spirit God made another Light, which was Christ our
Savior, [ Ego sum Lux mundi] this Light does as far exceed the former, as
the Spirit does the Body. David makes mention of these two Lights, in that
Psalm of his, Coeli enarrant, etc. The Heavens declare thy, etc. Of that of
the Sun he says, Tanquam Sponsus procedens de thalamo suo, This is the
Bridegroom of Nature, and comes forth of his Chamber clothed all in Gold; Bur
that Spiritual Light is more fair, and more beautiful by far: Lex Domini
immaculata, id est, immaculatior, etc. The Law of the Lord is pure, that is,
purer, etc. The beams of the Sun never yet had the power to pierce so far as
to inlighten the Soul; but those of the Sun of Righteousness does both
inlighten it and convert it. He that took the day from the night, and the
light from darkness, made light to break forth from out the darkness of
our hearts, to the end that Gods favorable countenance shining upon us through
his Son, we may come to the fuller knowledge of him.

For this Light did ont only eclipse and darken that of the Sun, as that of
many Torches does a poor sorry Candle; nor only enrich the air with the
beams of his brightness, nor only made a Heaven of this Mountain, by
gilding the stemmes, the bark, the boughs, and leaves of the trees, as also
the stones thereof, with it is glorious rays; but it did likewise illumine the
souls of the Disciples, who from that very instant, by the evidence of such
divine demonstrations, remained convinced, and ever after acknowledged him to
be both God and Man: For albeit God cannot be seen by the eyes of the Flesh,
yet such signs and tokens may be seen of God, that we may very well say, that
God himself is seen.

Physiognomie is a Science, which by the signs and marks of the face, does
prognosticate the inclination and propension of the Soul. One that was skilled
in that Art, looking steadily on the face of Socrates, told his Scholars, That
he had the marks of a man that was ill given. Whereunto he answered, That he
said true in regard of the Stars; but withal, that Sapiens dominabitur
Astris. Look upon Christ our Savior, and you shall see first of all, that he
has a great inclination to our good, and that he made especial manifestation
thereof in Mount Tabor; for as the angry look of a King is the Messenger of
Death, so the cheerfulness of his countenance declares clemency and life.
The roaring of a Lion makes the Beasts of the Forest afraid; Prou. 16. Prou.
19.
and the indignation of a King makes his Vassalls to quake and tremble: but
his favor is like the dew upon the grass. Saint Ambrose says, That our
Savior Christ's appearing here like Sun and Snow, were true pledges of the
great desire that he has of our good: for there is not any thing that does
make the earth so fruitful, as the Sun with his heat, and the Snow with it is
moisture.

Saint Hierome in that Epistle of his to Palmachius, against the errors of
Johannes Hierosolimitanus, says, That not only his face did shine, but all
his whole body. Saint Austen, Quod caro illuminata, per vestimenta radiabat:
For it was not fit (as Lyra has it) that his garment should shine, and not his
hands.

His face shined like the Sun. Who would have thought, The richest minds are
usually where the poorest means.
that behind so poor a veil there should be found such great treasure? But
it passes so likewise in this world, that he that seems most poor, is
oftentimes most rich; and he that seems most rich, is most poor. The
greatness of Rome Saint John painteth forth in the form of a woman clothed in
Purple, bedecked with precious stones, and in her hand a sprig of Gold; but
that which did not appear to the eyes, was all abomination, filthiness, and
beastliness. The Altars of Egypt were every one of them a Treasure-house of
Pearls, precious Stones, Gold, Jewels, and Silks; but in every one of these
their Altars they had a Toad or a Serpent. The Mezquita or Turkish Temple that
honors the bones or Relics of Mahomet, is stored with that infinite
riches, that you would take him to be some great God, whereas indeed he is but
un cancarron de un puerco, but the withered leg of a Hog, a base borne fellow,
and of no worth in the world. The Idols of the Gentiles, though never so much
gilded over with Gold, are no better than stocks and stones. One said in the
Apocalypse, I am rich, and stand in need of nothing: But it was answered him
from Heaven, Thou art poor, and much to be pitied. These are ordinarily the
stampes of your powerful persons and great Princes of this world, that seeming
to be as bright as the Sun in their bodies, are as black as a cole in their
souls. But those that are the Saints of God, carrying a besmeered countenance,
and a patcht garment, bear in their souls the Sun, Sicut Tabernacula Cedar,
sicut pellis Salomonis, Rich within, though poor without.

Et ecce, aparuerunt Moses and Elias.
And behold, Moses and Elias appeared. On Moses his part there is a strong
reason. Amongst the Assei, it was a received opinion, (which those now follow,
whom we call Atheists) That the Souls did die together with the bodies: And
it seems that Cicero did favor the same, when he said in his Amicitia, Sicut
in morte nihil est boni, sic certe nihil est mali, As there is no good, so
there is no hurt in death. That covetous rich man in the Gospel was surely of
this opinion in his life time; but being put out of this his error, in that
other life, he presently desired Abraham to send one in all have from the dead,
to preach unto his kindred, that they might forsake this their error: but he
received this short answer, Habent Moysen and Prophetas, They have Moses and
the Prophets. Where there is Scripture, there is no need of miracles: And Saint
Peter says, That Prophecy has more assurance in it than the evidence of
miracles. This is a truth hard to be understood.

First, Because a miracle (as Saint Hierome says) is, as it were, the
Apostolical Seal; and the Apostles did confirm their Faith by miracles: and
those miracles that were prophesied of our Savior Christ heretofore, did
declare him to be the Son of God. Saint Augustine treating at large upon this
place, says, That Prophecies and Miracles have one and the self same
certitude, because they proceed from one and the self same God: but that
Prophecy is the stronger and more forcible of the two; for a Miracle may be
found fault withal, as the Pharisees did with that Miracle of him that was
possessed with a Devil, telling our Savior, In Beelzebub the Prince of Devils
thou do cast out Devils. And that same Pythonisse, made the Devil to
appear in the form of Samuel: But Abraham tells Dives, They have Moses and
the Prophets. And no man can tax the Scripture, or challenge it of any fault.

Saint Chrysostom asks the question, Why he did not fetch some of the Damned
out of Hell?

First of all, he answers thereunto, That we have many pictures of Hell in
this life; but of Heaven, very few: For although that the World be, as it were,
the Entresuelo, or middle room of these two extremes, Heaven, and Hell; yet
more are the fumes and vapors that ascend up from beneath, than those gustos,
and contents which descend from above. There were a sort of Heretics that
denied there was a Hell; it seeming unto them, that the life of a Sinner was a
Hell of it self, and that it stood not with Gods mercy, that there should be
two Hels; alleging that of Nahum, Godiudgeth not one and the same thing twice.

Secondly, God to many of his friends discovered the torments of Hell, and many
of his enemies have been visibly snatched away thither. And those Aetna's of
fire which are in the world, though happily engendered by particular causes,
are, as it were, symboles, representing unto us that eternal fire.

God labors to conceal, both his rewards and punishments.
Thirdly, It is an usual fashion with God, to discover the reward, and to
conceal the chastisement, for that man would be ashamed that others should
see him punished. God did shut the port of Noah's Arc without, and hung the key
at his own girdle, because he should not have any desire to see that
lamentable deluge, and general destruction of mankind. He charged Lots wife,
that she should not so much as look toward Sodom, that she might not behold
those flames which did voice out Gods vengeance. At the end of the world, at
that dreadful day of judgment, when God shall show himself most angry, the
Sun and the Moon shall be darkened, because God will have his chastisements
inflicted in the dark.

Hope more Preuailent with man than Fear.
Fourthly, Hope does work more generous effects in our breasts, than Fear. It
cannot be denied, but that Fear has very powerful effects: Herod for fear
of loosing his Kingdom, made that butcherly slaughter of so many innocent
Babes, not sparing his own children. For fear of loosing his City, the King
of Moab was his own sons hangman, quitting him of his life upon the wall.
For fear of dying by the cruel hands of hunger, many mothers have eaten the
birth of their own bowels. For fear least they should be made captives, and
led in triumph by their enemies, many valiant men have made an end of
themselves. And for that Fear does not only extend it self to an absent
good, as well as Hope, but likewise to a present; and for that to loose the
present good which a man possesses, causes a greater sorrow, than to loose
the good which we do but hope for; it seems, that Fear is more powerful
than Hope.

Yet notwithstanding all this, Antiquity has given the Palm to Hope; and the
reasons on that side are very clear.

The first, If Fear come to effect great things, it is by the help and favor
of Hope; for there cannot be any fear, without hope of escaping the ill or the
danger that is feared. Him whom the fear of some great hurt apprehends,
makes choice to kill himself, that he may escape that harm.

The second, Thomas and Aristotle both affirm, That Delight is the author of
noble deeds and difficult enterprises. Whence the Philosopher infers, That
that thing cannot long continue, which we do not take delight in. Delight
then being the child of Hope; and Sorrow, the son of Fear, Fear is less
noble than Hope.

The third, Love and Hope carry us along as Prisoners, in their triumph, yet
as free, using us like noble persons. And as they lead us along, so are we
willing to go with them: But Fear carries us away Captives, haling us by the
hair of the head, tugging and pulling us as a Sergeant does a poor Rogue, who
goes with an ill will along with him, making all the resistance that he can.
And for that Heaven consists wholly of noble persons, and that the condition of
God is so noble, and the reward which he proposes, so honorable, we should do
him great wrong, to suffer our selves to be drawn by force to so
superexcellent a good; howbeit, with those that have hung back, our Savior
Christ has used the threatenings and fears of Death, of Judgment, and of
Hell: And his Prophets and Preachers are therein to follow his example. Those
that are his children he still desires to lead them in the triumph of Hope:
And for this cause Zachary calls them the prisoners of Hope, Turn ye to the
strong Hold, ye prisoners of Hope.

Saint Ambrose says, That he made choice of Elias and Moses, to show, Zach. 9.
That in Gods House the Poor is as much respected as the Rich. Moses in his
younger years was a Prince of Egypt; afterward, the chief Commander and
Leader of Gods People: Elias was always poor, and half hunger-starued,
clothed with Goats hair; yet both these did enjoy the glory of Tabor. The
like judgment may be made of Elizeus and David, of Lazarus, and of Abraham,
and of diverse others.

Saint Luke adds, Visi sunt in Maiestate, They were seen in State: For great
was the Majesty wherewith Elias and Moses appeared. And Tertullian says, That
they appeared glorious [ In claritatis praerogati^a;] So that those new
Disciples, Peter, James, and John, might, by seeing these his ancient followers
so happy, be thereby the better encouraged, and hope to enjoy the like
happiness. Origin and Epiphanius are of the same opinion.

Saint Hierome, against Iouinianus; and Tertullian, in his book De Iejunio,
say, That Elias and Moses did fast forty days, as well as our Savior Christ
in the Wilderness; and that therefore they seemed as glorious as himself.
Whence they infer, That he that will be transfigured with Christ, must fast
with Christ.

Loquebantur de excessu. They spoke of his departure.
Touching that death which our Savior Christ was to suffer in Jerusalem,
there could not be any conversation more conformable to that estate and
condition of his. For, being that our Savior was to merit the glory of the
body by his death, he could not so much rejoice in any thing, as in the
braveness of that noble and renowned Action, and the worthiness thereof. In
Gods house, good services are much more esteemed, than recompense or reward:
And more reckoning is made of deserving honor, than inioying it. When those
his Disciples desired such and such seats of honor, our Savior said unto
them; Potestis bibere calicem, etc. In my Kingdom, more honorable is the
Cup that I drink of, than the chair that ye would sit in. In our Saviors
Ascension, when he came to Heauen-gates, the Angels began to wonder at his
bloody garments. Esaias 63.
Quis est iste, qui venit de Edom, tinctis vestibus de Bosra? In a place so
free from sorrow and torment, such a deal of blood, and wounds? But that
which made their admiration the more, was, that he should make this his Gala,
the only gallant clothes, that he could put on. Formosus, in stola sua. And for
that this his blood, had been the means of his taking possession of this
glory, both for himself, and for us; he could not cloth himself richer, nor
do himself more honor, than to wear this bloody roabe, that had been dyed
in the winepresse of his Passion. Saint Austen says, That the Providence of
God had so disposed it, that the marks of the Martyrs torments should not be
blotted out in Heaven. For albeit that happy estate does repair all manner of
maimes, take away all deformities, and clear all the spots, and blemishes of
our body; and though they shall appear much more glorious than the Sun; yet
notwithstanding, those stigmata, and marks of their martyrdom, shall add an
accidental glory unto them, as those colors that are gained in war,
beautifies his Coat who wears them in his scutchion.

The Greeks read, Loquebantur de gloria, quam completurus erat, They spoke of
the glory which he was to fulfill. Our Savior Christ being upon the Cross,
the Sun was darkened ( Tenebrae factae sunt super vniuersam terram) in token,
that when Jesus Christ was crucified for our sins, there was no need of
seeing the Sun any more, nor any more Heaven, or glory to be desired. In
mount Tabor, Christ did not discover all his glory to the eyes of Faith, and
therefore it was necessary, that the Heavens should be opened, that a cloud
should come down, and a voice be heard from his Father, saying, Hic est filius
meus dilectus, This is my beloved son. Saint Chrysostom expounding that
place of Saint John, says, Vidimus gloriam eius, quasi vnigeniti a patre.
Signifying, That this is to be understood of that glory, which our Savior
Christ discovered on the Cross; and that there he showed, whose son he was
etc. Saint Paul seems somewhat to allude thereunto, when he said, God forbid
(says he) that I should be so foolish as to glory in any thing, save the
glory of the Cross. And the Spouse, His Cross, and his Ensigns, are to me
as a bundle of Myrrh, I will bear it between my breasts, as my delight, and my
treasure.

Christ glorrious in his passion three manner of ways.
Three manner of ways may it be taken, that this Excess of our Savior
Christ, is Glory.

The first, That his passion, and death, and the rest of those Excesses, which
he did for our salvation, (for all these may be termed Excesses) Christ did
take them to be a glory unto him. Adam sinning, he seemed to make little
account of God, and his creatures, which in him was a great Excess. But God
did remedy this Excess with other infinite Excesses. Saint Bernard observes,
That our Savior Christ would not enjoy the Balm which the three Mary's
brought to anoint him after he was dead, but did reserve it for his living
body: For in Christ, we are to consider two bodies: the one Natural; the
other Mystical* which is the Church: And as he left the first nailed and
fastened to the Cross for the second; so he left this Balsamum, for the
anointing and curing of it: Which was a great Excess. David called him a
Worm, a Scoff, a Taunt, and the Reproach of the People; for that whilst he
lived in the world, he took upon him all the affronts and contempts that man
could cast upon him. And because there is not any love comparable to that of
our Savior Christ, nor all the loves in the world put together, can make up
such a perfect love; as also for that there was not any affront like unto his,
nor all the affronts of the world could equal the affronts that were offered
unto him; that on the one side he should love so much; on the other, suffer so
much, this was a great Excess. Nazianzen seeing us swallowed up in this sea of
miseries, uses a kind of Alchimie, by joining his greatness with our
littleness; his powerfulness, with our weakness; his fairness, with our
foulness; his beauty, with our deformity; his riches, with our poverty;
the gold of his Divinity, with the dirt of our Flesh: And as the greater
draws the lesser after it; so our baseness did ascend to an height of honor.
And this was a great Excess; but far greater, to esteem this Excess as a
Glory: whence the Saints of God have learned to style Tribulation, and the
Cross, Glory.

Secondly, This Excess may be termed Glory, because it was the most glorious
action that God ever did: For what could be greater, than to see Death subdued,
Life restored, the Empire of sin overthrown, the Prince thereof dispossessed
of his Throne, Justice satisfied, the World redeemed, and Darkness made Light?

Thirdly, It may be said to be Glory, because that by this his death a
thousand Glories are to follow thereupon: Propter qoud and Deus exaltauit
illum, etc. Phil. 2. Christ^ passion the fountain of our Glory.
Wherefore God has highly exalted him, and given him a name above every name;
that at the name of Jesus should every knee bow, both of things in heaven, and
things in earth, and things under the earth: And this was the reward of his
obedience and of his death. And the reason thereof was, that the World seeing
it self captiuated by so singular a benefit, men should make little reckoning
either of their goods or their lives, for this his exceeding love toward them,
but desire in all that they can, to show themselves thankful. And therefore
Esaias cries out, O, Esaias 64.
that thou would break the Heavens and come down, and that the Mountains
might melt at thy presence, etc. What a great change and alteration would
thou see in the world? thou would see Mountains (that is, hearts that are
puffed up with pride) humbled and laid level with the ground: Thou would see
Waters, that is, breasts that are cold and frozen, boil with the fire of Zeal,
and wholly employ themselves in thy service. And in his sixtieth Chapter, Esaias
60.
treating of the profits and benefits which we shall receive by Christ's
coming, he says, For brass will I bring gold, and for iron will I bring
silver, and for wood, brass, and for stones, iron; I will also make thy
government, peace, and thine exactours, righteousness; Violence shall no more
be heard of in thy Land, neither desolation nor destruction within thy Borders;
but thou shall call Salvation, thy Walls; and praise, thy Gates. The Lord shall
be thine everlasting Light, and thy God, thy Glory.

Bonum est nos hic esse, etc.
It is better being here, than in Jerusalem; let us therefore make here three
Tabernacles, etc. Saint Gregory calls Honor, Tempestatem intellectus, (i.)
The understandings Storm, or Tempest, in regard of the danger it drives man
into, and the easiness wherewith in that course he runs on to his
destruction. Genesis 2^.
Si dederit mihi Dominus panem ad vescendum, etc. It was Jacobs speech unto
God, after that he had done that great favor of showing a Ladder upon earth,
whose top reached up to Heaven; you know the Story: but the vow that he vowed
unto God was this, If God will be with me, and will keep me in this journey
that I go, and will give me bread to eat, and clothes to put on, then shall
the Lord be my God, and I shall never forget this his kindness toward me.
More love (a man would have thought) he might have shown toward God, if he had
promised to serve, though he had given him neither bread to eat, nor clothes
to put on. But Saint Chrysostom says, That he seeing in this vision of his,
the prosperity that God was willing to throw upon him, did acknowledge the
thankful remembrance of this his promised and hoped for happiness: For
Prosperity is evermore the comparison of Oblivion. Saint Bernard expounding
that place of David, Man being in honor, Psalm. 49.
has no understanding, says, That the prosperity wherein God placed man,
robbed him of his understanding, and made him like unto the Beasts, that
perish. And here now does Saint Peter loose his memory. Nor is this a thing so
much to be wondered at; for if there be such riches here upon earth, that they
rob a man of his understanding, and alienate him from himself; if the son
that is borne of a mother who has suffered great pains in the bringing of him
forth, Iam non meminit praessurae, has forgotten his mothers throws, and
thinks not on the womb that bore him; if the great love of this world, and
the prosperity thereof, can make us so far to forget our selves; it is no
strange thing, that we should be far more transported and carried away with
heavenly things. David following the pursuit of his pleasures, amidst all the
delights of this life, he cries out, Only thy glory can fill me, that only
can satisfy me. Remigius unfolds this verse, of the glory of the
Transfiguration; and it may be that this Kingly Prophet did see it by the light
of Prophecy. And if so fortunate a King as he was, did forget all those other
goods that he enjoyed, and says, That he desires no other good, nor no other
fullness; What marvel is it, that a poor Fisherman should be forgetful of
good or ill? And as he that is full fed likes nothing but what is the cause of
this his fullness, reckoning all other meats sour, though they be never so
sweet; so he that shall once come to taste of that good, will say, No man bien,
Romans 8.
I desire no other good but this. What says Saint Paul, Sed and no^, etc. But
we also which have the first fruits of the Spirit, even we do sigh in our
selves, waiting for the adoption, even the redemption of our body, etc. Though
Paul enjoyed the first fruits of the Spirit, and extraordinary regalos and
favors; yet he groaned and traveled in pain for Heaven. What, says Saint
Chrysostom, Is thy soul become a Heaven, and do thou yet groan for
Heaven? Do not thou marvel that I groan, 2. Cor. 12.
having seen that in Heaven which I have seen; Quonia^ raptus fui^^ Paradisum:
I see the good which the world wants; and the ill which the Prodigal
endured; he did groan and sigh in the Pigge-stie, when he called to mind his
fathers goodly houses. Saint Hierome treating of the raptures of his Spirit,
says, That he found himself many times among Quires of Angels; he says,
That he lived a whole week without any sense of bodily necessity: nor was it
much, he enjoying the conversation of Angels, and the fellowship of God,
Diuinae visionis intuitu: but when I came again to my self, I did bewail the
good that I had lost. But that Peter may not groan with Saint Paul, nor weep
with Saint Hierome; knowing how the world went here beneath, said, Let us not
leave that place which we may have cause to weep for, when we are once gone
from it: For, what good is there upon earth, be it never so good, which has
not some ill with it is good? Obtain (if thou can) of God, that he will but
once give thee leave to taste of the goods of Heaven, and thou will soon forget
whatsoever is on earth. The reason why these frail and transitory goods are
so much desired, and sought after with so great thirst and covetousness, is,
because those eternal goods which call continually unto us, stand in so far
a distance from our hearts and our thoughts: for if thou should but taste one
drop of the water of that celestial Fountain, or but one crumme of that
divine Table, thou would say with a full and resolute purpose, No mas mundo,
Let the world go, I will no more of it. The Hound when he neither sees nor
sents his Game, goes slow and soft, diuerting himself here and there, as if
he had no life in him; but he no sooner spies the Hare, but he flies with the
wind. Robbed of the content of Heaven, I said, All, whatsoever is in the earth
is a Lie. Psalm. 106.
Peter was robbed of himself, and therefore he desired to stay still there. The
first that tasted Wine, though he were so grave a man as Noah, it made him
commit a great excess, insomuch that it gave occasion to his own son to
mock him. And how should not the first that tasted of the glory which our
Savior Christ had manifested in Tabor, (though so grave a one as Peter) be so
drunken therewith, that he should utter so great an excess? But whatsoever was
taken from himself, he did add it all (whatsoever it were, more or less) to
the glory of Christ.

Non enim sciebat, quid diceret.
For he knew not what he said. Erras Petre, (says Saint Hierome) Peter, Saint
Pe^ers error in his admiration of Mount Tabor
thou art in a mighty error: First, In judging that for a happiness that was
so short and transitory; there being no felicity but in things that are
permanent. Immagine all possible happiness, measure it with the duration of
Ages, and with that time which in the end must end; and when it is ended, thou will hold it an unhappiness and infelicitie. Peter, thou desire to enjoy
glory here in this world, which is to end toomorrow: And for that the glory
which thou desire, is not to last so long as the world, nay scarce an hour
in this world, thou art in a mighty error, Peter. Saint Luke says, That to
the hungry belly the remembrance of his forepassed fullness shall be a torment
unto him; and to the sorrowful, his former laughters and contentments shall but
the more augment his grief, etc.

Secondly; Peter did err, in preferring a particular, before a public good;
Public Good, ever to be preferred before the private.
especially, being a Prelat and Pastor of the Church. The hand and the foot,
renouncing their proper right, offer themselves to encounter with any danger,
for to defend the head, and save the life. Amongst the Elements, the Water, the
Earth, and the Air, forsake their Center for to assist common necessity. A
good Citisen must be wanting to his own house and person, for to further the
common good. Saint Austen says, That Prelates must make profession of a double
obligation: One, of Sheapheards, for their sheep; another, of Christians, for
themselves. For the first, they must have recourse to the necessity of their
subjects, with a great deal of care and vigilancie. For the second, they are
to exercise themselves in all kind of virtue, and holiness. But many of them,
practice the contrary. They are Christians for others, willing them to exercise
themselves in virtue and holiness; and Pastors for themselves, caring too much
for their own pleasures, and profit. The King of Sodom said unto Abraham,
Give me the persons, take the goods to thy self. He regarded more the
freedom and liberty of his subjects, than the ransoming of his treasures. And
howbeit he was a bad man, yet he showed himself a good sheapheard. David
cried out unto God, Lord keep my soul, and deliver Israel out of all his
troubles. He joined his own, and the common cause together, that God might be
the better pleased therewith, and the sooner grant his request.

Thirdly, Peter erred in his too too cold commendation of this Glory, for the
which a greater praise had been insufficient. To commend coldly that which is
excellent, shows a weak judgment.
Thou desire a Painter to show thee a picture; He takes out one; thou
desire a better, he takes out another, that contents thee not: At last he
shows thee the best that he has; Thou coldly commendst it, and say, it is a
pretty good piece, so, so: He grows weary of thee, and takes it away from
thee. God made in the world diverse pictures, every one of them being good
apart; and all of them put together, exceeding good. Thou say, o Lord, these
do not satisfy my desire; I would see the best piece that ever past through
thy hands. He carries thee up to mount Tabor, he there shows thee his
masterpiece, his Glory? Peter gives it only this cold commendation, Master
it is good. Peter thou errest, says the Evangelist; For he knew not what he
said.

Fourthly, Peter did err, in debasing so much that glory, which had no need
at all of any Tabernacles, or houses to defend them from the Sun, etc. For,
as he did not think then upon eating, so he might have had as little mind of
sleeping. Saint Ambrose defines Happiness, to be, Omnia bona, in omni bono.
He need not desire a Sun to give him light, because he inioyeth another
Sun, that never sets; and another Moon, which never is in it is wane, or
increase. Thou shall have no more Sun, to shine by day (says Esaias) neither
shall the lightness of the Moon shine unto thee. Esaias 60.
Thy Sun shall never go down, neither shall thy Moon be hid. For the Lord
shall be thine everlasting light, and the days of thy sorrow shall be ended.
But here, our felicity, is in the wane, and our happiness suffers an eclipse.
Neither is our light clear, says Saint Bernard, nor our ref^ction full, nor
our mansion safe: Clouds, obscure it is light; hunger, marres it is fullness;
and alterations, it is firmness, and security. Gregory Nissen says, That,
Necessity brought in Rule and Dominion. For that there should be a Lord and
Ruler, there is a necessity in it; And that there should be a greater Lord,
there is a greater necessity in it. For Man, had need of the creatures, and
God made him Lord over them. If a man could run as fast as a horse, he were
not Lord over the horse; if he had the claws, and strength of a lion, he were
not Lord over the lion; But in Heaven, there is not any the least sign of
necessity: for there both the Sun, the Moon, the Creatures, Fountains,
Plants, Fruits, Flowers, and Houses are all superfluous. So that Peter when he
talked of building Tabernacles, he knew not what he said.

Adhuc eo loquente, ecce nubes lucida.
Blind Clouds were for the Law, bright for the Gospel.
And as he yet spoke, behold a bright Cloud. Scarce had Peter ended his speech,
when a bright shining cloud, like a glorious Curtain, ouerspred them all.
Thomas says, That in this cloud the holy Ghost descended down, as he did in
that Baptism, in the form of a Dove. Theophilact, That in the old Testament
God appeared in dark clouds, which struck terror, and amasement; but now he
comes in a bright cloud, because he came to teach, and to give light. The holy
Ghost, is the Author of the light of our souls. Wisdom calls him, Spiritum
intelligentiae, The spirit of understanding; And the Church daily begges of
him, that he will lighten our darkness, and illuminate our senses. Accend^
lumen sensibus.

From the cloud, there went out a voice, like unto thunder, which said, This is
my beloved Son, hear him. And Saint Chrysostom has noted it, That Moses,
and Elias disappeared, and were not to be seen; to the end that the Disciples
might understand, that this voice was only directed to our Savior Christ.
Howbeit, having seen before in his face that treasure of glory, and Peter
having acknowledged him to be the Son of the everliving God, in the name of
the whole College and Society of the Apostles; it could not be presumed
otherwise.

The voice being past, the cloud vanished, and the Disciples remained as dead
men. Our Savior Christ quit them of their fear, and coming again to
themselves, like those that are awakened from a heavy sleep, they saw none
but only Jesus in the garden. They were fallen all asleep, and they slept so
soundly, that our Savior Christ could hardly wake them. Here likewise they
failed; for they awaked with an earnest desire to enjoy that glory which they
had seen, but they did not see it any more. First, because those eyes that
shut themselves to labor, do not deserve to see such glory; Secondly, because
upon earth, (though it be from Heaven) no good can continue long. Thomas says,
That the body of our Savior Christ did enjoy this glory, as it were by
transition, or a passing by; And that those glories, which are enjoyed here on
earth, are short and momentarie, they are no better than grass and hay, which
are soon cut down and withered, they are Winter Sun-shinesand Summer-Floods,
soon gone. Man's days are like the grass, and as the flower of the field, so
shall he flourish. But that the glory of God should stand upon these ticklish
terms, I cannot well tell what to say to it; nor do I know which is the
greater miracle of the two, either that the glory of the Earth should
continue, or that of Heaven have an end. But the truth is, those goods do not
last long with us, which Heaven it self communicates unto us. Saint Bernard
says, That those pensions which God bestows on his friends, are very good,
but very short. Saint Austen; That it is a sweet, but a short good, that God
gives us in this World. Hugo de Sancto Victore, That Gods Regalos, or Regales
delitiae, have two discountings, or diminutions of debt in this life: The one,
that they are not full; the other, that they are not long, for a cloud
presently comes and ouershadowes them. Saint Bernard treating of the
cherishments and comforts of the Spouse, under the name of kisses, says, Heu
rara hora, and parua mora; One while he says, that he suffered his thoughts to
be carried away with the sweetness of these dainty delights, conceiving it to
be a great happiness; but then he says again, O, si durasset. Those that
travel abroad, reserve all their content they take therein, for their Country;
so that their joy shall not only be full, but permanent, They shall be drunk with
the plentifulnes, etc. Of Nebridius, a friend of his, Saint Augustine says
(And he applies his mouth to that Fountain from whence he drew all his
happiness;) Pro jucunditate sua sine fine, foelix; Happy, for the pleasure of
it without end.

Ipsum audite, Hear him.
Here the World did receive so great a good, Christ appointed to be our Teacher
but when.
that the Father did give us his Son, to be our Master and Lawgiver. So that
it lies upon him to teach us, and upon us to obey him. Tertullian says, That
the presence of Moses and Elias, made much for that present purpose, but more
now their absence; for that it gave us thereby to understand, That this
supreme Master and Lawgiuer did far outstrip the office of Moses, and the
zeal which Elias had of the Law [ Quasi jam off^cio, and honor perfunctis.]
For in this best beloved son of God, Jesus Christ, two things are to be
seen; the one, as he was a Lawgiuer, the advantage that he had of the Law; the
other, That Moses was now put to silence, and that we were only to hearken to
our Savior Christ.

At his Baptism that very self same voice was heard, This is my beloved
son; but we find not there an Ipsum audite, Hear him. Not notifying him then
to the World for a Master; so that it seems that this was reserved for our
Savior Christ, against he had past over the rigor of Fasting and Penance:
signifying, That God places not him in the office of a Preacher, who has not
run through these strict courses. Psalm 91.
Been patientes erunt, vt annuntient, Christ had no need to do penance, but
thou have great need to do so, Locus est communis.

Descendentibus illis, etc. And when they came down from the Mount, he charged
them to say nothing to any man. He enjoined them silence: First, (says Saint
Hierome) Ne incredibile videretur, lest the greatness and strangeness thereof
should make men to think it to be an old wives tale. And if Christ said to
Nicodemus, If when I tell ye earthly things ye believe not, how will ye be
brought to believe those high and heavenly mysteries of the Kingdom of God?
Here occasion may be taken to tax those, who coming from beyond the seas,
are all in their Hyperboles, abusing others ears with their loud lies, but
giving the lie most to their own souls.

Secondly, He enjoined them silence, for that the favors and regalos which
thou shall receive from God in private, thou art not to bring them upon the
stage in public, or to proclaim them (as we say) at the Cross. Leave this
care to God, for he will bring them to light in their due time, when they shall
make for thy honor, and his glory. Elias was very careful, that no man
should know of his departure; nay, he sought to hide it from Elisha, saying
unto him in Gilgall, Sede hic, etc. Tarry here, I pray thee, for the Lord has
sent me to Bethel: But Elisha said, As the Lord lives, and as thy soul
lives, I will not leave thee. And he was scarce come to Bethell, 4. Kings 2.
but the childeren of the Prophets that were at Bethell came out to Elisha, and
said unto him, Know thou that the Lord will take thy master from thine head
this day? Noui, silete, Yea, I know it, (said he) hold ye your peace. Elias
afterward departed for Ierico, entreating Elisha that he would tarry behind,
promising him, that he would presently return unto him, but he could not
persuade Elisha unto it. They were scarce come to Ierico, but the sons of the
Prophets acquainted him with the like news; to whom he answered as before,
Noui, silete. In the end, going for Jordan, Elisha still followed him, and
fifty of the sons of the Prophets: so that the more Elias sought to conceal
this business, the more God made it known, by revealing it (as Tostatus has
observed) to the sons of the Prophets. And Elias desiring that they should not
see this his Chariot of fire, and his Triumph, one only God made many witnesses
of his glory.

Neminem viderunt, nisi solum Iesum.
Only in Christ Jesus are our hopes secured. Men will accompany you whilst
the glory of your prosperity lasts; but that being ended, you shall find
no man that will stick unto you; Woe unto him that is alone, for if he fall,
he shall have none to help him up: Prosperity finds always Friends,
adversity none.
And this is truly verified of those who trust on the world, or have any
confidence in man. Weigh and consider with thy self, what a number of friends
Jerusalem had in it is prosperity, how ready to seru^ her, and to court her
love; but when Jerusalem began to fall, and when she had most need of her
friends, Jeremy complains, She had not so much as one friend to be her
comforter. The God of all comfort uphold us with his everlasting love, that we
may not perish in this wrold, nor in the world to come.

THE TWELFTH SERMON, UPON THE MONDAY AFTER THE SECOND SUNDAY IN LENT.
JOHN 8.21. Ego vado, and quaeretis me.

I go my way, and ye shall seek me.


THe Scribes and Pharisees were offended at the favor which, Without Faith in
Christ, no remission of sin. John 8.7.
in affront of their authority, our Savior had shown to the Adulteress,
saying, Let him that is among you without sin, cast the first stone at her.
They had made some threatening offers (as men that thought themselves much
wronged by him) to take away his life; but because his hour was not yet come,
no man laid hands on him. Whereupon our Savior said unto them, Ego vado, Why
seek ye thus after my life, I go my way, I am he, whom willingly, and of
mine own accord offer my self unto death; your arms were not strong enough
to hold me, if it were in my desire to make resistance: but when I am dead ye
shall seek me. For the Jews used continually to call for their Messiah, and
did earnestly long after him, expecting then his coming, when as he was
already come: and for that this hope of theirs was hopeless, he says unto
them, Ye shall die in your sins, your death shall differ much from mine, for
I shall go one way, and you another; Whither I go, ye cannot come. Your
inferior Ministers did presume, That our Savior out of a desperate humor
would needs live among the Gentiles, as he that goes to Morocco to turn
Moore; the Pharisees, they thought that he would go destroy himself; What
means this man to say, Whither I go, ye cannot come? Will he kill himself?
Unto which unmannerly speech our Savior replied, Ye are from beneath, I am
from above; ye are of this world, I am not of this world; I have told ye
already, That except ye believe that I am he, ye shall die in your sins,
not only in that of incredulity, but in all those other which ye shall
commit: for without faith in him, who I am, there is no remission of sins*
etc.

John 16. Mat. 2.
I go my way, and ye shall seek me. This phrase of speech our Savior Christ
did often use, to show, That he died merely out of his own proper will and
pleasure. O Lord (said Abraham) I shall be very willing to die without leaving
any children behind me, seeing that thou will have it so. Eusebius Emisenus to
this purpose expounds those words which our Savior uttered on the Cross to
his father, In manus tuas, Domine, commendo Spiritum meum, Into thy hands, o
Lord, I commend my Spirit: Now Commendare is all one with Ponere; I put not, o
Lord, my soul into the hands of death, nor into those of my enemies; for
neither their whips, nor their thorns, nor their nayl^, nor their spear, were
able to take my life from me, if I had not bin willing to surrender it up into
thy hands. Seneca says, That a benefit consists not so much in the thing that
is given, as the good will wherewith it is given. And therefore when the gift is
small, the greatness of it must be measured according to the goodness of the
will. The death of our Savior Christ was the greatest benefit that ever the
world enjoyed, but the willingness wherewith he laid down his life for us was
far greater, Maiorem Charitatem, etc. Greater love has no man, than this,
that a man lays down his life for his friend.

But hear now the wofullest, the heauiest, and most lamentable case that can
possibly fall within the compass of thy imagination; to wit, That the death of
his Son, which God promised to the world as a Sea of mercies, as a Heaven of
hopes, as a ransom of our slavery, and as a reparation of all our miseries,
he should now give it as a threatening to this wretched and unfortunate Nation:
and how taking his leave of his Disciples, in that Sermon of his last Supper,
with tender tears trickling down his eyes, and with a great many other kind
demonstrations of his love, he should make such large promises unto them after
his death; one of the chiefest whereof was, Let not your heart be troubled; for
although I go from you, Christ's going from us, the greatest Curse.
yet shall I still remain with you; Lo, I am with you till the end of the
world: yet he should say now to the Pharisees, Ego vado, and quaeretis me, I
depart away from you, never to see you more. O, what a cruel blow was this! O,
what a sad departure is this! how comfortless, and how hard to be endured? If
from him that is dangerously sick the Physician shall go his way, who is able
to cure him; if from the Thirsty the Fountain shall fly from his lips, what
is able to quench his thirst; if from the Blind, the light; from the child, his
father; from the wife, her husband; from the soldier, his captain; and from
the scholar, his master shall be taken away; of whom shall they seek help?
Turn not away thy face, Job 14.13.
neither decline from thy servant. Job held Hell less fearful than Gods
displeasure; O, that thou would hide me (says he) in the grave, that thou
would keep me secret until thy wrath be past. But David held it the
greater harm of the two, that God should hide his face from him, Though thou
be angry with me, yet turn not thy face from me. The same Job says, Why
do thou hide thy face, this is to use me as an enemy. Jacob wrestling with
God, although he saw he was displeased, Genesis 32.
yet he would not let him go till he had blessed him. O Lord, I will endure
thine anger, but not thine absence. By way of Hyperbole S. Paul said to those
of Ephesus, Ye were without Christ, and without God in this world: Weighing
therein very well with himself, what the world is, and what God is.

What then, shall this his departure be eternal? It goes hard with us, when
God shall threaten his going away, and we shall not have the heart to entreat
him to stay. Jeremy lamenting his misfortunes, one while in the name of his
people, that were carried away captives into Babylon; another while in his own
proper person, as one that lay fast fettered in yrons, making a relation of his
sorrows goes adding grief unto grief; He did put me in a dark Dungeon, he
did shut me up as in a grave amongst the Dead, He has enclosed my ways with
hewn stone; he has shut his windows against me, he has not left me a
loope-hole to look out; he has clapped gyues and shackles on my feet; I put up
a Petition unto him, And he would not hearken unto my prayer. Yet
notwithstanding all this, do you but ask the Prophet, Whither God had then a
purpose to destroy him? and he will tell you, That it was the least of his
thought: No, these were the stripes of a father, that loves his child better
than he loves himself; who beats him, but with tears in his own eyes. If God
then be so good and loving a father unto us, that he falls a weeping when he
gives us but a few jerkes, and those with a gentle hand; How can he desire our
eternal punishment? The Lord will not utterly cast us off. That God should for
ever take his leave of thee, the fault must be in thee, not in God; Can God
take away his kindness for ever? How can he shut the gates of his house
against thee, who is still knocking at the doors of thy house? Non in
perpetuum triturabis triturans, says Esaias, If God do thresh thee as with a
flaile, it is not because he takes delight to bruise thee with his threshing
of thee, but that he may sever the corn from the chafe, etc. This our
Saviors threatening is full of mercy, full of love; for he would never have
said so often to the Jews, Ego vado, if he had not desired that they should
have said again unto him, Do not thou go from us. If it be our Saviors
delight, to be amongst the children of men, how can he take pleasure in
departing eternally from us.

Et quaeretis me, (i.) And ye shall seek me. This second threatening is more
fearful than the former; Ye shall seek me, but ye shall not find me. In
the pursuit of any kind of good whatsoever, hard is that man's hap, who seeks
and finds not; who calls, and receives no answer; who sues and obtains not; who
lives in hope, but sees no end of his hopes. Our Savior Christ looked for a
Fig on the Fig tree, and because he found none there, Math. 21.
his displeasure was such, that he laid a severe curse upon it. Amongst those
many fears of the general judgment, Saint John in his Apocalypse says, Man
shall seek after death, Kindness neglected, turns to hatred.
and shall not find it, though those find it too, that never seek after it.
This is a great unhappiness; but when the business is betwixt God and us, it
is a far more miserable misfortune, to seek him, and not to find him: not
only because they sometimes find him, who seek not after him, [ Inuentus sum
a non quaerentibus me, I am found of those that seek me not;] but also because
any other good whatsotuer, a man may hate and abhor as a thing that is ill;
Vae, qui dicitis bonum, m^lum, Woe be to you that call good, evil; he that
despaires of life, desires death, and counts it as a good. But who can hate
God, who does naturally desire our happiness? But this misery ye draw upon
your selves, who by abhorring me, and persecuting me (says Saint Augustine) as
an enemy of God, are driven to seek unto God, calling hourly upon him for
your Messiah, with great anguish of heart, and with tears in your eyes: but
because ye have refused that happiness which offered it self unto you, and
entered within your gates, but was rejected; groping the walls like blind men at
noone day, ye look after a new occasion of happiness: but by how much the
more ye shall desire a new Messiah, by so much the more shall ye persecute
me, and those which shall preach my Name throughout the world. And by how much
the more ye shall persecute me, so much the longer shall your error remain
with ye, and ye shall continue in this your wilful stubbornenesse, till ye
die in your sins.

Hence I infer, how dangerous a thing an error is, especially in point of
our salvation; how dangerous, an ill performed Confession, yet by us reputed
for good; how dangerous, a secure, but unsound conscience; how dangerous for a
man to err in his account in the beginning; how dangerous, highly to offend
God, and yet think that therein we do him good service. A Moore kills a
Christian, and he thinks that he has pleased God very well in so doing: A
Schismaticke throws down Images, breaks glass windows, and defaces all
carved faces, and thinks that he shows therein a great deal of zealous
respect and reverence unto God: The Jew hates the name of Christ, and
persecuteth him that takes it in his mouth; And he thinks that he does an
acceptable thing in Gods sight. O, what a fearful affronting of his error
will it be to the Moore, how shamefully will he see himself cosined, when he
shall behold his Mahomet burning in Hell flames? To the Jew, to see Christ our
Savior come with the Majesty and glory of God, to judge the taunts and
scoffs, and other cruelties which they used toward him? To the Heretics, to
see the Saints whom they have burned, to sit as Assistants at their
condemnation? Then will they cry out when it will be too late, Erau^mus in via
veritatis, We have erred in the way of truth. And if a man shall then see, that
he has lost fifty years of good works, of Prayers, Alms, Fastings,
wherewith he thought to gain and merit Heaven; O, how lamentable will that
loss appear, when he shall find that by them he has treasured up more
wrath against the day of vengeance, more sorrow and more torment in Hell?

Quaeretis me, Ye shall seek me. In the former Chapter he added, Non
inu^nietis, Ye shall not find me. Jeremy has the same; and the reasons
thereof are two:

The first, Because he that seeks sloathfully and carelessely, sildome or
never finds. From the time that our Savior Christ was borne, he condemned
this their sloathfulnesse. The Kings came from the East to seek him; but the
Pharisees would not step a foot out of doors to look after him, not having
the light of one single Star, but of a thousand Prophecies. In lapide luteo
lapidatu^ est piger, stercore bonum lapidatus est piger: The Greek letter
makes the sense more plain; for in stead of Lapidatus, it reads Comparatus. A
sloathfull man is compared to a durtie stone, or to the dung of an Ox;
understanding by these two, any kind of loathsome filthiness whatsoever, which
the hand of man will avoid to touch, which if it do touch, it is besmeered and
fouled therewith. The sloathfull man is no less odious; for he that shall give
himself over unto sloth, shall be bemired in his wealth or in his honor, and
shall have cause all the days of his life to weep and complain.

Signs whereby to know whether we seek God truly. James 4.5.
Two signs the Scripture sets down of him that seeks God truly:

The one, That he seeks as earnestly to serve him, as others desire to offend
him. The Spirit that dwells in you, lusts to envy. The Spirit is here
taken in the better sense, as appears by the Greek Translation, as also by
that which follows, But he gives more grace. He says then, That the holy
Ghost does put envy into our breasts, binding every Soul to labor for his
salvation with envy. Saint Paul says, Spiritus sanctus postulat pro nobis
gemitibus inenarrabilibus; That is, He makes us to desire it with groans. A
godly kind of Envy.
So likewise, he makes us to desire our salvation with envy; that we should
have the envy of the worldly minded man, and the care of the Thief, when he
goes about his thefts and his robberies. The beastly Epicure hotly pursues his
filthy pleasures; the reuengeful man, his revenge. Demosthenes did envy a
Smith that was his neighbor, for that he rose up so early to so base and foul
an Occupation. The Thief watches all night to take a purse upon the highway;
the Wanton waits nights and days at his mistresses window; the reuengefull man
will not slumber nor sleep: with the like care art thou to seek after God.

The other sign, If when thou seek God thou meetest not with rest and
quietness, it is a sign that thou have not yet found him. As the Needle rests
in the North, so our Soul rests in God; Fecisti ^os Domine ad te, and
inquietum est cor nostrum, donec veniamus ad ^e, We cannot have our perfect
rest and quiet in this life; but he that does enjoy the same, he has it from
God, it comes from him. But when our heart is troubled, suffering continual
perturbations, like the Needle in the Compass, till it be turned toward the
North; it is no good sign, that we have found God as we should.

The second reason of thy not finding God, is, because thou do not seek him
when he is to be found. Esaias preaching before Manasses, said, Seek ye the
Lord while he may be found, call ye upon him while he is near: Esaias 55.
but this perverse King, as the Hebrews report it, did calumniate this his
doctrine; alleging, That it was a great error in him, to say, that God could
not at any time be found, being that Moses had said, What Nation is there so
great, Deuteronomy. 4.7.
that has their Gods so nigh unto them, as the Lord our God is in all things
that we call upon him for? But the truth is, That as there is a time for all
things, [ Omnia tempus habent] so is there a time likewise to find God, and a
time not to find him: the time that we live here upon Earth, is no ill time
for to find him. For though in the Ages of man there is one time better than
another, none is so desperate and hopeless but that he may be found therein;
and of all the whole life of man it may be verified, Omnis qui quaerit,
inuenit, Every one finds that seeks.

At the point of death it is no good time to seek him; not that he that shall
then truly seek after him shall not find him; but because it is a hard matter
at that very instant to perform true repentance, as we have elsewhere
declared. And therefore the Scripture so often cries out unto us, That yet
while it is day we should hearken unto him, lest the night of death should
suddenly overtake us. What says Eccl. Ante mortem confiteri, i. Confess
before thou die. S. Austen expounds this place of confession of our sins. And
because no man should hope to do it in the time of his sickness, when pains
and diverse other accidents divert the Soul; Eccles. adds, Viuus and sanus,
etc. Confession of sin when to be made.
Confess thy self whilst thou art healthie and sound, not when thou art
half dead; and therein shall thou do two notable things:

The one, Thou shall praise God.

The other, Thou shall glory in his mercies.

After death, is a desperate time; for then the door is shut to Confession, to
Repentance, to Intercessions, and to pardon: A mortuo, quasi nihil perijt
confessio, Saint Augustine reads it, Quasi non sit; the Greek letter, Tanquam
a non existente. When a man's life ends, there is an end of all remedies: And
therefore Solomon said, That a living Dog was better than a dead Lion: And
Jeremy, Eccle. 9. Ier. 13.
Give glory to the Lord your God, before he cause darkness, and before your
feet stumble upon the dark mountains; and while ye look for light, ye
turn it into the shadow of death, and make it gross darkness.

A third reason why we do not find God, is, because we do not persevere in
seeking him: And therefore it is said, Ye shall seek me, and shall not find
me. S Austen says, That the Jews did seek after God three manner of ways:

One, By hoping after another Messiah.

Another, By persecuting him both in his life and in his death: For that
piercing of his body with a Spear, did plainly prove now that he was dead,
what hatred they bore to him while he was alive.

The third, when they being besieged by Titus and Vespasian, calling to mind,
that he had foretold them, there should not be one stone left upon another in
Jerusalem, many of them returned to our Savior Christ, and sought after him;
but with a very poor and weak purpose: They did inherit this evil condition
of their forefathers, and grandfathers of old, who did never seek God, but
when he scourged them soundly for their sins: And when that storm was past,
and their peace made, they fell afresh to their former rebellions. There are
few men so past grace, which do not sometimes sigh for Heaven. But the
mischief of it is, that these our sighs are quickly ouerblowne, they do not
last with us. In the darkest night, there are some lightnings which break
through the clouds and clear the air; but in the end the darkness
prevails. In your duskiest and cloudiest days, the Sun is wont to rush
through the foggiest and thickest clouds; but new clouds arising, the Sun
retires himself and pulls in his head. Saul by spurts did dart forth many
beams of light, acknowledging that David had done him many real courtesies,
and that he had repayed him evil for good, and had a purpose with himself
upon fits to favor him, and to honor him; But the foggy clouds and mystie
vapors of Envy increasing more and more upon him, these light flashes were
turned into darkness. Balaam, when King Balack sent unto him to curse Gods
people, had very good purposes and desires for a while within him; He
consulted with God in that business, and knowing that it was his will, that he
should not go, dispatched those his messengers. And the King sending others
unto him, he told them, That he would not go to that end, if he would give him
his house full of gold. Doubtless, these were good intensions, had he
continued still in the same mind. But the clouds of covetousness did ouercast
this light of his understanding with so gross a darkness, that neither the
Angel which stood before him with a naked sword in the way, nor his beast which
spoke unto him, and turned aside, could keep him back.

In peccato vestro moriemini.
Ye shall dye in your sin. There are great indeerings in the holy Scripture,
of the grieuousnesse of sin, and the hurt that comes thereby. Anselmus says,
That he had rather fry without sin in the flames of Hell, than with sin, enjoy
Heaven. He might well say so, in regard of Hell. For although Saint Austen
says, That one drop of the water of Paradise shall be sufficient to quench the
flames of Hell, The foulnes of Sin.
yet shall it not be able to wash away the foulness of sin. Helias desired
of God, that he might dye under the Juniper tree; and yet he would not be rid
of his life by Iezabell, in regard of the sin that tyrannical Queen should
have committed: so that even in his mortal enemy, so great an ill seemed
intolerable unto him.

In Scripture, sin is a cipher of all possible infelicitie and misfortune
tha^ can befall a man. Saint Paul says, That God made his Son sin. Him who
knew no sin, he made sin for us. For discharging upon him the tempest of
his wrath, he made him of all other men the most miserable. Nouissimum vir^rum.
Jacob would not let Benjamin go down with his brethren to Egypt ( Joseph
desiring to have it so) though Reuben had offered two of his own sons as
pledges for his safe return, Genesis 43.
and to the end that the good old man should have the best security he could
give him; Reuben said, If he return not, Ero peccati reus; I will be content
to be condemned to all possible miseries whatsoever. The like Bersabe was
willing to say, when she thought the reign of her son Solomon should be
troubled. Shall I and my son Solomon be counted Offenders? Shall we be the
outcasts of the world, and be laid open to the utmost of misery? The reason
of all this harm, is, For that all possible ill, that can be imagined, is
reduced unto sin, as to it is Center. Make a muster of all the enemies of Man,
as Death, the Devil, the World, and the Flesh; and not any one of them, nay
not all of them together have any the least power to hurt us without sin. And
therefore in our Lords prayer, silencing all other our enemies, only we beg of
God, that he would free us from sin. But deliver us from evil. Which,
howbeit some do understand it to be spoken of the Devil, yet (as Saint Austen
says) he can but bark, he cannot bite. Only sin is able to do both.

To this so great a hurt, may be added another that is far greater.
Obstinacy in sin, never to be cured.
Which is obstinacy in sin. Job painting out this evil, says, That the
sinner takes pleasure therein, and that it seems sweet unto him, it is as
pellets of Sugar to him under his tongue; He first delights in the company of
sin, then he marries himself unto her, and at last, leaves her not till
death them depart. Parcet illi, and non derelinquet. The seventy read it, Non
parcet illi, and non derelinquet, he will excuse no occasion, no diligence, no
trouble. His desire thereof is insatiable. There is no kind of sin (be it of
Sloth, or Revenge, or Covetousness) that is continually beating upon our
actions. But our thoughts are evermore hammering of wickedness, like the
Smith, that gives a hundred blows upon his Anuill, and two upon his iron; or
like the Barbar, that makes more snips in the air, than on the hair.

The Pharisees did crucify our Savior Christ but once, Sin, desirous to do
more than it is able.
in the very deed and act of his death; but in their desires, and in their
thoughts, they had crucified him a thousand times.

But that we may give the obstinacy of this people, it is full qualification,
we must make a brief recapitulation of those means, which God used for to
mollify their hardness.

First of all; he took it to his charge to cure it with his Doctrine, his
Miracles, and the Prophecies of their Prophets. Well, this would do no good
with them, and many dyed in this their obstinacy. Next, he comes amongst them
in his own person, taking upon him the name and office of a Physician,
Purgationem peccatorum faciens, Making a purge for sin. He was willing to
have ministered Physic to the Jews, and with the sweet and comfortable syrrop
of his Word, to have eased them of their griefs, and to have cured all the
infirmities of their bodies; as the sick of the Palsy for eight and thirty
years together, the Blind that were borne blind, and such as were possessed
with Devils, and the like; Being willing also to have cleansed their souls
from all kind of uncleanness: But at last he was feign to give them over,
their diseases were grown so desperate, remitting them ad hospitalium
incurabilium, as men without hope of recovery. For, as in the body, there are
some sickenesses so mortal, that though the sick be capable of health, yet
the malignity of the humor, makes the Physician to despair thereof: So
likewise in the soul, there are some diseases so mortal, that through the
great malignity of them, and the sharpness of the humor, the heavenly
Physician is out of heart of helping them, and quite discouraged from doing any
good upon them. And therefore says, Ye shall dye in your sin. Jeremy
makes mention, that certain Angels coming by Gods appointment to cure
Babylon, after that they had applied many medicines unto her, they said, We
would have healed Babylon, but she is not healed, Esaias 51.
let us therefore forsake her, and every one go his way from her. Lo, the Lord
of Angels himself, and of all the Hosts of Heaven, comes unto them, offers to
cure them, by applying the Medicines of his Word and his Miracles; but they
refuse to be helped, and so he leaves them amongst the Catalogue of the
Incurable.

Secondly, The prayer which Christ made for them upon the Cross, was a strange
means; and though he then converted a Thief, yet could he not convert a
Pharisee. Saint Stephen made the like prayer, Lay not this sin, o Lord, unto
their charge, Let not the sin ofthis people be a sin unto death. In a word,
the blood of our Savior Christ softneth the hardness of stones, but
mollifieth not the hearts of the Jews.

Thirdly, an occasion once lost, as it is seldom or never recovered, so is it
ordinarily bewailed. Horace says of Virtue, That he that inioyes it, esteems
it not; but having lost it, enuies it. Of Herod, Josephus reports, That he
caused his wife to be put to death upon a false accusation, and she was scarce
cold, but that he pined away for her. Alexander killed Clitus, and wept over
him when he had done. Athens exiled Socrates, and afterward repenting
themselves thereof, they erected his Statua, and banished his Accusers.
Abimelec banished Isaac out of his Country, and afterward went to seek for
him, etc. Humane and divine Histories are full of this truth: only in the
breasts of the Pharisees this remorse and pity could find no place: but having
lost in Christ our Savior, the happiest occasion that ever the world inioyed;
yet such and so great was this their wilful obstinacy, that they were so
far from weeping or bewailing either his or their own loss, that if they
could catch him now again alive, they would crucify him anew.

Great obstinacies, great stiffenesse and stubbornenesse does the Scripture
mention; The hardheartednesse of the Jews without a parallel. 3. Kings. 16
as that of the Giants, which built the Tower of Babell; that of Pharaoh, whom
so many several plagues could not vnharden; that of Saul, Jeroboam, Antiochus,
and Herod Ascalonita; that of Elah and of Zimri, who went into the palace of
the Kings house, and burnt the Kings house over him with fire, and died. But
none was like unto that of this people, for their hardness of heart has now
continued above 1600 years.

Above all these harms, there is one that is yet greater than the rest, which
is this present threatening, Ye shall die in your sin. Of all disasters that
may befall us, this is not only greater, but the sum of all the rest. How
many businesses offer themselves unto men in this life, though they be of
Empires and Monarchies, which will be but as it were accessorie unto them, and
not much trouble them, whither they succeed well or ill? But this is so precise
a one, and so necessary, that he that loses it, loses all; and not only all
present good, but the future hope of ever recovering it again. Saint Paul
writing to those of Corinth, comes upon them with an Obsecro, vt vestrum
negotium agatis, i. I beseech you mind your own business; your own
business, by an Antonomasia; for all the rest are aliena, others. Seneca in an
Epistle that he writes to Lucilius, says, That a man spends part of his
life in doing ill, and the greater part in unprofitable things; and all his
life, in not looking well what he does: As, he that prays without attention;
he that reads with a diuerted mind: if he would have spoke like a Christian, he
might have put them in mind of many, who spend all their life, or the greatest
part thereof, by placing their thoughts upon their end. At this mark did David
aim in many of his prayers. Psalm. 49.5.
Cassiodorus thus expounds that place of the forty ninth Psalm, The
iniquity of my heels shall compass me about. The head is Principium
hominis, the very life and first beginning of man; and the heel is taken for
the end and final dissolution of man: And he says, That his greatest care was
the continual remembrance of his end. He repeateth the like in many other of
his Psalms, Exurge Domine, ne repellas in finem, Arise Lord, put us not off to
the end. Vsque quo Domine obliuisceris me? How long will thou forget me, to the
end? Lord let me know my end: I ever, o Lord, had an eye to the peril and
danger of my end. Take me not away in the midst of my days; for that is not
a fit time for a man's end. In a word, true happiness or unhappiness consists
in it is arrival at it is Haven; for it little imports, to have escaped this
or that storm, unless we come to land safely. It is not sufficient for a man
to have spent a great deal of money in a Law suit, unless he have sentence
on his side. It is the evening that commends the day, and our end that
crowns our actions, etc.

In peccato vestro moriemini.
Ye shall die in your sin. We are not ignorant, that God revealed to many of
his Saints their predestination, as to Marie Magdalen, and his Apostles; but to
none their reprobation, lest the infallibility ofthis revelation should thrust
them into desperation. And these words, Ye shall die in your sin, Ob.
seems to be a plain prophecy, that this people were to die in their
sin. I answer, Sol.
That this cannot be a revelation, for two reasons:

The one, Because the Pharisees did not believe; and in not giving credit to
our Savior Christ in the truth that he uttered for their good, it is likely
they would not believe those that he delivered for their hurt.

The other, For that our Savior Christ repeating the very self same
proposition, made it conditional, Unless ye believe, ye shall die in your
sin; which was as it were a declaration of the former.

In a word, Two were those things which our Savior Christ pretended:

One, That they might believe, and not die in their sin.

The other, That they who now treated with him should die in their sin: Gods
prescience not the cause of man's Reprobation.
but so, that Christ our Savior should not be the cause of their damnation,
but their own incredulity. For that which is spoken of before it come to
pass, it is therefore spoken of, because it shall come to pass; but it shall not
therefore come to pass, because it is spoken of: For the Divine prescience or
foreknowledge, though it advise that which shall come to pass, yet it imposes
not any necessity that it shall come to pass. Saint Peter therefore did not
deny Christ, because our Savior told him, that he should deny him. So that
divine knowledge not deceiving it self in that which it prophecieth, imposes
no such necessity that it should succeed, nor is it to be said to be the cause
thereof. Eccl. 15.11.12.
Say not thou it is through the Lord that I fell away; for thou ought not to
do the things that he hates. Say not thou, He has caused me to err; for he
has no need of the sinful man: so that he there proves, that God is not the
author of our sins, nor are our ignorances to be attributed unto him. The
Greek instead of Abest, there reads Defeci; as inferring, That God is not the
cause that I have failed in that which I ought to have done; for God abhorring
sin, I ought not to commit it. Saint Augustine reads, Ne dicas propter Deum
recessi, etc. Say not, I went back because of the Lord, he supplanted me;
for God has no need of wicked men. Suting with that of Saint James, Let no man
when he is tempted, say he is tempted of God, etc. And yet it is said by
Ezechiel, Ego decepi Prophetam, I have deceived the Prophet. And by Saint Paul,
Tradidit Deus illos in reprobum sensum, Romans 1.
God has delivered them up to a reprobate sense. It is not to be said, That
God does it, but permits it: As a captain, who absenting himself from his
Army, depriving them of his favor, permits them to be overcome. Saint
Augustine tells us, That when the Scripture says, That man is deceived by
God, or his heart hardened; God is the cause of the poena, but not of the culpa:
of the punishment, but not of the sin. Insipientia enim hominis violat vias
eius, (i.) The folly of a man is that which peruerts his ways. In one place
the Scripture says, Deus Mortem non fecit, God made not Death; In another,
Wis. 1.
That Death and Life come from God: implying, That God is not the Author of
Death, but that he permits it in him that deserves it. That Judge that
condemns a thief unto death, this death is not to be imputed to the judge,
but to the thefts of the Thief. God desires not any man's fall, or his death;
for as God is happy without the just, so is he also without the wicked. The
book of Wisdom treating, That God did not make death, nor delights in the
destruction of the living; renders two reasons thereof:

The one, That he having created all things that they might have their being,
he takes no pleasure that they should not be: For what Artificer takes pleasure
to see the works of his hands perish?

The other, Sanabiles fecit Nationes orbis Terrarum; The Greek reads Sal^tares
fecit Generationes orbis Terrarum, All things that God created, he created
with health and soundness, and in a good and perfect state. Et non est in
illis medicamentum exterminij; The Greek word which answers to Medicamentum,
may be taken in a good or an evil sense, either for Physic, or for Poison:
And here it is taken in the worser sense, and implies thus much, That God did
not create the Poison of perdition for the generations of Mankind, (inferred in
this word Exterminij) nor did God create perdition in the rest of the
creatures. The Interlinearie here understands Sin, which banisheth and
excludes man from God, whereby he is undone, and reduced to nothing. From which
final destruction God deliver us, etc.

THE THIRTEENTH SERMON, UPON THE TVESDAY AFTER THE SECOND SUNDAY IN LENT.
MAT. 23. Super Cathedram Moysi sederunt Scribae.

The Scribes sat upon Moses Chair.


THe chair of Moses was descredited by the evil life of the Scribes and
Pharisees, who occupied the same. Christ's Doctrine effectual, by whomsoever it
be uttered.
Our Savior Christ here treats of giving such and so great authority to his
Doctrine, that though it should be delivered by the coldest mouth in the world,
yet should not that hinder it is bringing forth of fruit. And to this purpose he
proposes three opinions, which are no less certain, than important:

The one, That a Doctor, though unholy in his own person, may sit and bear
rule in Cathedra sanctitatis, in Moses chair, and seat of holiness.

The other, That the vicious life of the Teacher does not derogate from the
dignity and authority of his Doctrine, nor rob the Hearer of his profit.

The third, That though a man's Doctrine be never so divine, yet if his life be
not good, it is the Teacher, and not the Hearer that takes hurt thereby.

Super Cathedram Moysi sederunt Principes, etc.
Euthimius says, That this Cathedra or Chair, was the Pulpit where the
Scribes and Pharisees did preach the Law; as it is related by Esdras, in his
second Book, and eigth Chapter. Saint Hierome and Bid understand thereby the
doctrine of Moses; for that it was usual with him that did teach, to sit in a
Chair. And albeit it appears both in Saint Luke, and the Acts of the
Apostles, That they did preach unto the people standing on their feet; Luke 4.
Acts. 13.
yet in your Schools your Doctors do always read sitting. It is called Moses
his Chair, not only because the Law did descend from the Mount, but because
(as some Hebrews have it) he was the first legal Priest, and exercised that
office before his brother Aaron. Abenezra styles him, Sacerdos Sacerdotum, a
Priest of Priests, for that he consecrated his brother Aaron, and received the
offerings of the twelve Princes in the Tabernacle. David likewise gives him the
same name; Moses and Aaron among his Priests. Philon says, That he was a King,
a Lawgiuer, a Prophet, and a Priest. Gregory Nazianzen, Saint Augustine, and
Saint Hierome jumpe together in that point. From Moses, God had preserved the
Catholic doctrine in the Prophets and other his Saints, til Simeons time, in
whose days the Synagogue had it is end. The Scribes and Pharisees were a kind of
people that had the command of that Kingdom. The Scribes did flourish in
knowledge, so is it reported by Epiphanius. Their obligation was two fold:

The one, To propose the Law unto the people, and to expound the hard places of
Scripture; and for this reason they were called Lectores, Readers.

The other, To be Judges and Deciders of causes (as it appears by the
Chronicles) betwixt Citisen and Citisen. The Pharisees did flourish in
Religion, and were called Pharisees, of Phares, which signifies, a separation;
for that they lived apart from the ordinary and common course of life, and did
sever themselves from other people, in a more especial kind of observance.
Saint Hierome does set down the first rising of these manner of men, Christ's
doctrine effectual by whomsoever it be uttered.
in whom the appearances of sanctity, and outward demonstrations of holiness
of life, were very great and shew-glorious above the rest, and whose
penitences (as Josephus and Epiphanius report them) were very sharp, and
very public; but far greater was their hypocrisy, their ambition, their
avarice, and vainglory. And therefore our Savior Christ does here deal so
curstly with them, and uses them with that soreness and bitterness of
words, that all this Chapter is nothing else but a severe reprehension of the
Scribes and Pharisees. And for that it is an ordinary thing with the common
people, to set his doctrine at naught, who leads a naughty life, [ Cuius enim
vita despicitur, necesse est vt predicatio contemnatur, Whose life is despised,
his preaching must of necessity be contemned] our Savior Christ in defense of
the Catholic Doctrine, said, Super, etc. Upon the Chair of Moses, etc.

It was the error of some, That a mortal and deadly sin depriueth the Pope
of his Popedom: but this was condemned by the Constantine, Florentine, and
Tridentine Councels; for neither does the Doctrine thereby receive any harm,
nor the Sea loose it is Jurisdiction and authority. Which is no more than is
delivered by Saint Augustine, in expounding that place of the forty fourth
Psalm, In stead of thy Fathers thou shall have Children. Beda, and Anacletus
the Pope, both say, That to our Faith, is not only hypothecated and engaged
the authority of Priest and Bishop; but that of our Savior Christ, that of
the Apostles, and that of the seventy two Disciples. But suppose that all
these Ministers should have sinned, yet the authority of our Savior Christ
remains safe and sure. What matters it whither the Minister be bad, where the
Lord is so good? How much more then in the Church ought we not (as Tertullian
says) to qualify Faith by the persons, but the persons by Faith. This
Doctrine Judas made good, by doing miracles, by preaching the Gospel, and by
condemning him that did not receive it, as if he had rejected Christ himself.
Cayphas does likewise prove this point, who, as he was High Priest, did
determine that Decree which had already been ordained in Heaven. The like
president we have in the Prophet Balaam, who though he went of purpose to curse
Gods people, yet was forced whither he would or no, to bless them. And the
Scribes and Pharisees being asked, Where our Savior should be borne; answered,
In Bethlem of Iudaea. Those Bishops whom Saint John reprehendeth and threatens
in the Revelation, Apoc. 3.
yet for all this does he not remove from them the name of Angels; Dignitas
enim Officij non amiti^tur per indignitatem personae, The office ought not to
be thought the worse of, for the unworthiness of him that supplies that place.
Per me Reges regnant; They representing Gods person, as their Ministers do
their persons.

There is nothing so surely grounded in holy Scripture, as the perpetuity of
the Church. And this is one reason, amongst many other, why the Church is
called Heaven. And as no strange impressions approach Heaven, and as those
waters of the Flood, which did rise so many cubits above the tops of the
highest Mountains, could never come to touch Heaven; so, Math. 16. Luke 21.
Ioh. 14.16, 17. 1. Tim. 3. 1. John 2.
neither the persecutions of strangers, nor the sins of his Ministers, shall
ever overthrow the firm foundation of the Church, or the truth thereof. Si
dereliquerint filij eius legem meam, If the children of the Church shall
forsake my Law, my hand shall be heavy upon them, and I shall bring many
miseries upon them: Miserecordiam autem meam non dispergam, But my mercy and
my truth shall still remain safe and sound; that shall I establish for ever:
The Lord has made a faithful Oath unto David, Psalm. 132.11.
and he shall not shrink from it.

From whence I infer two things:

The one, That Moses his Chair lost nothing of it is respect, through the
Scribes and Pharisees vices, as Saint Cyprian has observed; nor likewise Saint
Peter's Chair, by the less laudable life of those Bishops which succeeded him,
(which is the maine drift and principal intent of this Gospel:) For (as Saint
Augustine has noted it) our Savior did not seem to look so much toward the
Sun setting, as toward the Sun rising; to wit, toward the Cathedra or Chair
of the Jews, as toward the Pontificium of the Christians; wherein there was
to be Bishops, whose lives, although they should not always happen to be holy,
nor their works and actions so good as they ought to be, yet their Doctrine
and their Preaching should still be warrantable. Some, seeing some Bishops
less holy than they should be, have multiplied Inuectiues, Satyrs, and
impudent and unseemly Pasquills upon them; not considering, that works that
want their weight and goodness, do not condemn the Doctrine of Faith, nor
weigh down the balance against the Chair of the Church. And that our Savior
himself did prevent this inconvenience, by saying, Super Cathedram Moysi, Upon
the Chair of Moses. Of such great force and virtue is the Doctrine of this
Chair, that it did not much stand upon settling the same upon base and mean
subjects: for the same was placed in the mouths of rude and ignorant
Fishermen, to the end that none should attribute the victory to their own
natural gifts, though never so good. So sometimes he puts this Chair into the
hands of sinful men, because thereby men may see, that the virtue is in the
Sword, which is the Word of God, and not in the arm, that is but flesh.

Quaecunque dixerint vobis, facite.
Whatsoever they shall say unto you, do. Saint Peter treating of the respect
and obedience which we owe to our Superiors, says, 1. Peter 2.
Servants be subject to your Masters with all fear, not only to the good and
courteous, but also to the froward. If then to such cross carnal masters we
do owe so much respect and obedience, What shall we bear to those that are
our Spiritual Lords? Saint Paul says, Let every Soul be subject to the
higher Powers: For whosoever resists the Power, Romans 13.
resists the Ordinance of God; for there is no power but of God: And
therefore to contradict our Superior, is to contradict God himself. And it
was high time for the Apostle to broach this opinion; for the world sent forth
Nero's, Claudia's, and Caligula's, and other Tyrants, which did deserve the
name of fierce and cruel Beasts: But the wickedness and perdition of Princes
must not make those to lose their respect toward them, which are borne to
obey; which point Saint Cyprian presses home to the purpose.

Whatsoever they shall say unto you, do. Some man may doubt, How is it
possible for him that lives ill, to do otherwise than teach ill; nay, rather
it may seem a kind of miracle, that his life being bad, his preaching should
be good; especially having our Saviors warrant for the same, Math. 16.
How can ye being evil, speak good things? And this difficulty is increased
by that which our Savior said before, Take heed of the leaven of the
Pharisees: Understanding by the Leaven, the doctrine which they taught. We
find in the Gospel, That they raised up many false witnesses against the Law.
Saint Matthew reports, That they taught, It was lawful to swear by the
Temple, but not by the Gold of the Temple; and by the Alter, but not by the
Offering, etc. I answer, That the name of Cathedra, or of Moses Chair,
comprehends and includes in it two things:

The one, Jurisdiction, for to command and chastise.

The other, Authority, for to teach and instruct.

In a Prelate likewise two other things are to be considered:

First, H^s Life.

Secondly, His Doctrine.

As it was an especial effect of his divine providence, That the virtue of the
Sacraments should not be annexed and wedged to the goodness of the Minister,
for that many might thereby lose the fruit of receiving them aright; so
likewise the goodness of the Doctrine is not tied to the Prelates goodness;
Esaias 59.21.
I will make this my Covenant with them, (says the Lord) My Spirit that is upon
thee, and my words which I have put in thy mouth, shall not depart out of thy
mouth, nor out of the mouth of thy Seed (says the Lord) from henceforth even
for ever. S. Augustine in his book De Doctrina Christiana, and in that which
he wrote against Faustum Manicheum, says, Cathedra Moysi, etc. The Chair of
Moses, wherein they sat and bare rule, did enforce them to teach well though
they lived ill; besides, Moses in his Chair did not allow of any strange
Doctrine.

And in case such a one shall read himself, and vent in the Chair the froth
of his own wit, God is so far from commanding this man to be obeyed, that he
coniureth both the Old and New Testament against him. Ierem. 23.9.
Jeremy speaks thus to the Prophets, Mine heart breaks within me because
of the Prophets, (those false Prophets which deceive the People) all my bones
shake; I am like a drunken man, and like a man whom Wine has overcome, for the
presence of the Lord, and for his holy words. The Priest and the Prophet shake
hands, and join both together in the perdition of my sheep, and applaud
themselves in these their errors; but they shall have no great cause to brag and
boast thereof, for I will give them Hemlocke to eat, and Gall to drink. The
Prophets of Jerusalem have defiled the Land, and have been the only Authors
of all those mischiefs that are now afoot in the World. The Priest and the
Prophet are defiled, and have strengthened the hands of the Wicked. Ierem. 13.
These Prophets then, o Lord, being that we may not imitate their works,
Shall we give credit to their words? They do not teach us that which God
reuealeth unto them, but the inventions of their own brain, and the foolish
imaginations of their own hearts. Ezech. 13.
All the whole thirteenth Chapter of Ezechiel is full of these complaints and
threatenings. And in the twenty third Chapter he repeateth that which was
spoken by Ieremias, Hear not the words of those that see vanity, and divine
lies. And in the thirteenth Chapter of De^tronomie, Deuteronomy. 13.
If thine own brother shall persuade thee to serve strange gods, hearken not
unto him, etc. In the New Testament there are many clear and plain places to
this purpose: As in Math. 7. Romans 16. Tim. 1. and 3. Titus 3. and Thessalonians
3. And Saint John in his Canonical Epistle, If any man shall declare any other
Gospel, (...) him be accursed. In a word, The Doctrine which appertains to
the Truth, God commands us to serve and obey the same; and all the rest, to
shun and avoid it. Chrysostom expounding those words, All things whatsoever
they shall say unto you, do; says, All those things that are not repugnant to
the Law of God. And the phrase of Scripture is, Children obey your Parents in
all things; and Servants obey your carnal Masters in all things: which is to be
understood, in all those things wherein they ought to obey them.

There is sometimes in your Prelates a kind of sickness like unto that of
Job, who when all the rest of his body was full of sores and botches, yet his
lips remained whole and sound; Only my lips are left about my teeth. Job 19.
And because the lips of the Priest are the depositorie of the wisdom of God,
[according to that of Malachie, The Priests lips preserve knowledge: and
Ezechiel, Malach. 2. Ezech. 44.23.
That God has charged his Priests, That they shall teach his people the
difference between the holy and profane, and cause them to discern between
the unclean and the clean; and that he will give them light to decide such
controversies as shall come before them] we may very well give credit to that
which they shall say. Quaecunque dixerint vobis, facite; shun therefore their
works, but obey their words.

Saint Augustine draws in the example of the Vine environed with Bushes and
Thorns; willing thee to gather the Grapes, and let the Briars alone. Saint
Chrysostom introduces diverse other examples: Out of the Mines take the gold,
and throw away the dross; From your Standards, the Roses that smell sweet, and
put by the prickles that may offend thee; From your sour Herbs, your sweet
Honey; from your durtie Shells, your oriental Pearl; and from your fruits
take away the husks and the parings. Upon one and the same Tree there may be
two sorts of Fruits; the one wholesome, the other mortal; eat the good, and
hate the bad. Sampson sucked Honey out of the jaw of a Beast, and let the bone
alone. Saint Chrysostom, Si male vixerint, etc. If they live ill, that is
theirs; if they teach well, that is ours: Take therefore that which is thine, and
leave that which is another alone to himself. In every Teacher there is a
life, and a doctrine; the life is his, the doctrine thine: choose thou that
which is thine, and cease thou to examine what is his. Si separaberis pretiosum
a vili, quasi Os meum eris, If thou separate the precious from the vile, thou
shall be as my Mouth. Precious meat in a foul plate, is the Doctrine of Heaven
in an ill life. Saint Augustine points out unto us three kind of Ministers
Pastor, mercenarius, latro, foue, tolera, fuge. The Shepherd, the Hireling,
and the Thief; all enter into the Sheepefold; but the Sheepeheard and the
Hireling teach good Doctrine; the Thief, bad: Fly from the Thief; bear with
the Hireling; but love the true Shepherd.

Whatsoever they shall say unto you, do. Three sorts of Ministers.
If God command that we respect and obey the Sheepheards for their good words,
though their actions be naught; he that shall contemn his Pastor who is holy
both in his life and doctrine, What favor can he hope for? One of those
favors which God promised to his people, was, To give them Governors that
should be Peace it self, and Justice itself. Ponam visitationem tuam pacem,
and pr^^positos tuos justiciam. He styles Judges, Masters, and Governors, with
the name of Visitation; and says, That they shall be his peace, and his
justice; speaking it in abstracto, which carries more force with it, than if
it had been uttered in concreto. For admit that a Prelat be a Lion, and that
(as Ecclesiasticus says) Euertit domesticos eius, and that he begin to rome
and rage about the house, there is not any whip comparable to his Justice. For
albeit Charity (says Saint Gregory) makes him sweet and lovely; yet his
zeal to justice must make him to be sharp and severe. Many of these Prelates
has the Church formerly enjoyed, and enjoys now at this present; as well in
supreme Bishops, as inferior Ministers, whereby this prophecy is fulfilled.

Secundum opera eorum, nolite facere.
1. Kings. 2.
According to their works do not. Samuel did obey Ely the Priest, but did not
imitate his remissness and sluggishnesse: Daniel did reverence Nebucadnezar,
but adored not his Statua. It is a miserable case, that a man should be able
to teach others, and not himself. There is not any one fault threatened more in
Scripture, Romans 2.
than this, Qui praedicaris in Lege, etc. And think thou this, o thou man
that iudgest them that do such things, and do the same, that thou shall
escape the judgment of God? Thou shall be like the Sieue, which gives Corn to
others, and keeps the Chafe to it is self: Like the Candle, that lightens
others, and is itself in darkness: And like unto that Carpenter, who making
the Arc, saved others, and was himself drowned in the waters of the Flood.
Saint Augustine says, That the lips and the heart of him that lives ill, and
preaches well, are at great defiance one with another; for the heart belyes
what the mouth persuades. When the Angel threatened Moses with death, and made
show as if he meant to kill him; Rupertus and Lyra are both of opinion, That
it was for the neglect and carelessness which he had committed in circumcising
one of his children, in such a season, when as the Law did oblige him
thereunto: And the fault was much more in Moses, than in any other ordinary
man, for that as a Lawgiver, he was to have published this very Law. But more
to the matter is that reason which Saint Augustine renders; which is, That the
Angels threatening of him was, for that he being to persuade the Hebrews to
go out of Egypt, and to take their wives and childeren along with them, they
might have presumed, that he had one thing in his mouth, and another in his
heart, and that his works did not correspond with his words. Experience
teaches us, That many things which humane eloquence cannot persuade, example
does effect: for the way by words is about, and very tedious; but that of
example, short, and quickly rid. The earth will not follow the motion of the
heavens, though ye preach unto it never so much; but the Sheep will soon
learn to follow the example of his Shepherd. The Prophets are full of the
complaints and threatenings which God pours forth against the bad example of
Pastors: As in Osee the fifth, Ose. 5. Men are sooner led by precedents, than
precepts. Esaias 56. Ezech. 34.1.
O ye Priests, hear this, and hearken ye, o house of Israel, and give ye
ear, ^ house of the King; for judgment is toward ye, because ye have been
a snare on Mizpah, and a net spread upon Taborpunc; And in the ninth Chapter he
repeateth the same Lesson again. Esaias in his fifty sixth Chapter, calls them,
Blind Sentinells, and dumb Dogs. Ezechiel bewailes them, Vae Pastoribus
Israel, etc. Woe be unto the Sheepeheards of Israel, that feed themselves;
Should not the Sheepheards feed the flocks? Ye eat the fat, and ye cloth ye
with the wool; ye kill them that are fed, but ye feed not the Sheep: The
weak ye have not strengthened, the sick have ye not healed, neither have ye
bound up the broken, etc. The whole Chapter runs along in this strain,
whereunto I refer thee. Cannot they be content to drink of the clear water
of the Fountain, but that they must make it unwholesome for their flock, foyling
it with their durtie feet: For, What is bad life, and good doctrine, but a
foul foot in clear water? Saint Gregory declares this place concerning such
Prelates; Who having drunk themselves of the pure and clear Fountain of
Truth, trouble the same by their evil works and bad example, giving occasion
thereby to these their silly Sheep, not to follow their doctrine, but to
imitate their life. Touching this Theme, there is a whole Chapter in the
second part of our Book De Amore.

Do not as they do. This, for his Disciples was a most necessary lesson, but
for the Pharisees, a most severe reprehension. And a late Doctor has observed,
That they being the most part Leuits and Priests, he silenced the Priesthood,
in token of the respect and reverence that is due thereunto. Whereby such are
condemned, who too lightly give credit to the faults of the Clergy, and
entertain themselves therewith; being that God himself gives them this
caveat, Nolite tangere Christos meos, Touch not mine Anointed. Wherein he does
not lay an Interdiction on their violent hands only, or on their blasphemous
tongues, either before their face, or behind their backs; but likewise on
their jealousies and suspicions, and on their rash censures, and on the
pleasure which some take in the slips and falls of Priests: which is a great
sign of Reprobation. According to that of Ecclesiasticus, They shall perish by
the snare, that rejoice in the fall of the Righteous.

Do not as they do. The Covetous are here chiefly taxed; they will give you
council, but Mercede Balaam effusi sunt, King Balacks Ambassadors bringing
money in their hands, shall buy their prophecies of them. Our Savior
complained of them, That they devoured widows houses. And Saint Paul alluding
hereunto, says, God is my witness, how I desire you all in the bowels of
Christ. He says not, In my bowels, but, In the bowels of Jesus Christ. Quis
ibit nobis? Who shall go for us? It was Gods question, but he could find few
that would follow him: but if to gainethe world, and to get wealth, he shall
but ask the question, Quis ibit? he shall have infinite numbers to troop
after him. But asking, Quis ibit nobis? Who shall go for us? he shall scarce
have one to go along with him. Every year a great number of Preachers offer
themselves to this enterprise, but they do not understand whither, or to what
end they go: As Saint Augustine signifies unto us in his Confessions. Esaias
complained, That his lips were foul. He might better (to my seeming) have
complained of his eyes, than his lips, because he had seen God with them: For
to murmr, eyes are more necessary than lips; but to preach, lips are more
necessary than eyes. If he that studies would but consider with himself, why
God has given him wit, ability, and learning; he would then peradventure
acknowledge, how unworthy he is of so high a Calling, as to sit in Moses
Chair, or to go up into the Pulpit. Cicero says, That the Orators motive is,
Amoris ardor, A desire to be beloved and esteemed. So it goes now, but not so
well; for the love which a Preacher is to pretend, and the credit which he is
to hunt after, is the love of God, and the seeking after his glory. Dicam
semper magnificetur Dominus, I will always say, The Lord be magnified; That
shall be my continual Motto, all the rest is little loialty, and manifest
treason.

Affigant onera grauia, and importabilia.
They fasten heavy burdens, and impossible to be borne. Those Traditions and
Glosses which the Scribes and Pharisees introduced, Origin and Theophilact are
of opinion, that they did multiply them in favor of their covetousness;
strengthening the same with an opinion of their simulated sanctity. Saint
Chrysostom says, That the Ceremonies and Precepts of the old Law were too
heavy a load to bear. Agreeing with that of the Acts, Nec patres nostri, nec
nos far potuimus. The Pharisees did notify them with great indeerings, but
did not touch them with the finger; being like unto the Viole, which makes that
sound which it self is not sencible of. They did bear the Precepts of the Law
about them in certain scroles of parchment, fastening them to their heads and
their arms. Deuteronomy. 6.
Materially understanding that place of Deutronomie, Thou shall bind them for a
sign upon thy hand, and they shall be as frontlets between thine eyes, [so
much signifies the word Philacterie, which is all one with Conseruatoria.] In
the borders of their garments they had their fringes, and upon the fringes of
the borders they did put a ribond of blew silk, as may be collected out of the
fifteenth Chap. of Numbers, Number. 15.38.
as also out of Deuteronomy. That they might the better remember all the commandments
of the Lord, and do them, and be holy unto their God, not seeking after their
own hearts, nor after their own eyes, after the which they went a whoring.
And Saint Hierome adds further, That they did put sharp thorns to these
their fringes, that they might prick them and draw blood from them, that
thereby they might express their greater penitencie, being in secret exceeding
vicious and wanton.

In a word; Princes and Prelates, ought not to lay such burdens on their
subjects shoulders, as should break their backs (like those Taske-Masters and
Overseers of the children of Israel in the labor and tale of their brickes.)
For it is a vice, and grievous sin in your Princes, and their public
Ministers, not to be compassionate of the poor, nor to pity their pains,
thinking all too little they do, pressing and oppressing them daily more and
more, with intolerable Taxes, and insupportable payments. The Book of Judith,
recounting the death of Manasses, husband to Judith, says, That he died in the
Barley harvest; for as he was diligent over them that bound sheaues in the
field, Judith. 8.2.
the heat came upon his head, and he fell upon his bed, and died in the City
of Bethulia. It is a thing worthy the noting, that there is a memorial of such
an indisposition as this, as if it had bin some great and extraordinary
matter: But I conceive, that he made this so particular mention of it, that he
might give us thereby to understand, Que la codicia rompe el sa^o, That too much
cramming of the bag makes it to break; and that if Manasses had taken pity
of his Reapers in a time of such extremity of heat, he had not died. For the
carelessness of your great Princes, in not duly considering, and not measuring
according unto prudence, the strength and ability of their subjects, is no
small occasion of those many mischiefs which have followed thereupon. Genesis
33.13.
Jacob said to his brother Esau, I will drive softly, according to the pace of
the Cattle which is before me, and as the children be able to endure; for
they are not able to go such great journies as my Lord; who sees that the
childeren are tender, and the (...) and kine with young under mine hand, and if
they should ouerdriue them one day, all the Flock would die. Hercules showed a
noble spirit, when seeing Atlas groan under the heavy weight of Heaven, in
pity of him, put to his own shoulder to ease him of his load. Never do
those Princes long enjoy their Crown, who impose heavy Taxes on their
Subjects; not only because they make their Vassals to pay more than they are
able to pay, but for that their Ministers extortions and vexations, wring the
blood out of their very hearts, and the tears out of their eyes, which
ascending Heaven, turn to lightnings and thunderbolts Super deducentem eas,
upon him that causes them.

Qui se exaltat, humiliabitur, and qui se humiliat, exaltabitur.
He that exalts himself, shall be humbled, and he that humbles himself
shall be exalted. Our Savior here treats, how much humility imports a
Christian* and that this is the only door whereby we are to enter into
Heaven. Saint Augustine tells thee, That thou must tread the same tread that
our Savior troad, and that there is no way to walk to Paradise, but that
wherein he himself walked: And the first step that leads to this path, is
Humility; the second stride is likewise Humility; and the third and last must
also be Humility. And if thou shall ask me a thousand times over and over,
Which is the way that leads to Bliss? my answer must be, Humility. Hear
what Pope Leo says, Tota disciplina Christiana, etc. The whole course of
Christian discipline consists in true humility, which our Savior Jesus
Christ made choice of in his mothers womb, and afterward taught the same to
others: From the very bowels of his mother, of all other virtues he made
choice of this. And in the discourse of his life, he declared this to be his
only daughter and heir. One reason, amongst many other, which he might have
alleged, is, That in this life, where all is storm and tempest, torment,
war, and temptation, in a word, where nothing is secure and certain,
Humility (amongst these so many perils and dangers, which are like so many
rocks and shelfes) will bring thee safe through the sea of this world, to the
Haven of happiness. In a cruel storm at sea, the lowest place in the ship is
the safest. Elias, in that furious whirlewind, in that terrible earthquake, and
that fearful fire, wrapped himself up like a bottom of yarne, and lay close
to the earth. David in that his persecution by Saul, says, I was humbled, and
he delivered me. Job in that general destruction of all his goods, when those
bad tidings were brought unto him, he arose and rent his garments, Job. 1.
and shaued his head, and fell down upon the ground and worshipped; and said,
Naked came I out of my mothers womb, and naked shall I return thither; the
Lord has given, and the Lord has taken it away, blessed be the name of the
Lord. The tempest afterward increasing upon him, as byles, botches, leaprosie,
worms, and a wife; he got him to a dunghill, with a piece of a potsheard in his
hand, making choice of the humblest, but safest place. Give us grace, o Lord,
to imitate this his humility, that thou may bless us in this world, and in
the world to come, etc.

THE FOVRTEENTH SERMON, UPON THE WEDNESDAY AFTER THE SECOND SUNDAY IN LENT.
MAT. 20.18. Ecce, ascendimus Jerusalem.

Behold, we go up to Jerusalem.


With what discourses we ought to beguile the wearines of our pilgrimage.
Our Savior Christ walking to Jerusalem, where he was to give us life, and to
lose his own, he went discoursing of his death, of the persons that should
occasion it, and of those circumstances which were to accompany it. For a
traveler does busy his thoughts in nothing more, than in that which he is to
do when he comes to his journeys end. Pharaoh persecuting the children of
Israel, did eagerly pursue them, and casting with himself, what course he
should take with them when he once ouertooke them; I will take away (says he)
the riches that they have robbed us of, and divide the spoil, so shall my soul
be revenged of them, and my anger rest satisfied. Those holy women which went
to the Sepulcher to anoint our Savior Christ, said amongst themselves as they
walked along, Who shall roll us away the stone from the door of the Sepulcher.

This is not only a business well beseeming us upon the way, but discovers
likewise the pleasure and content that the Traveler takes therein. Commonly,
traveling is tedious and wearisome unto us, which that it may the better be
passed over, he that undertakes a journey, imployeth his thoughts upon such
things as may delight him most, and by that means beguiles the wearisomenesse
of the way. Besides, they that love a thing well, and have their minds set upon
it, usually take pleasure in talking thereof, (says Plutarch) refreshing
thereby the remembrance of those things that are best beloved by them.
Epipha(...) says, That our Saviors so much talking of his death, was thereby
to engage himself therein the more: for by making all those that were there
present with him, witnesses of his words, That he should now die; it stood upon
his honor, his credit, and his truth; there was now no stepping back, but
with extream^ loss of his reputation. But he being thoroughly resolved to die,
makes here unto us a more especial and particular description of his death,
Behold, we go vp^^ Jerusalem; this shall be the last time that ever I shall
go up to Jerusalem: no^ many go along with me, but ere long I shall be left
all alone. The Son o^ man shall be delivered unto the chief Priests, and
unto the Scribes, and the^ shall deliver him to the Gentiles, to mock, and to
scourge him, to beat and buffet him about the cheeks, to revile him to his
teeth, and to spit in his face, being relinquished and forsaken of all men;
For it is written, I will smite their Sheapeheard, and the sheep shall be
scattered. The persons that shall take my life from me, shall be the Princes
of the Priests, and the Roman power: the circumstances; scoffs, scorns,
scourges, etc. But after this so foul a storm, I shall recover a very
cheerful Haven, and rest in safety. Mark. 14.27.
The third day will I rise again.

Behold we go up to Jerusalem. Saint Mark says, Jesus went before, Mark
10.32.
and they were amassed, and as they followed they feared. Where we are to
consider, That he, that goes to receive Death, shows great content, great
courage, and great valor. But those, that go to receive Life, great cowardice,
great sorrow, and great fear. Whence it came to pass, that our Savior Christ
went apace before, and that his Disciples followed slowly after.

He went before them. The pleasures he took therein, clapped wings to his feet.
Some may ask; How can this his joy, Ob.
suit with the sorrow which he suffered in the garden? But this joy, was very
fitting and convenient for him; to the end, Sol.
that they who hereafter should see him sad, might think, that the wind of
this his sorrow, blew it self out of another corner; the contentment of his
death continuing still on foot. Epiphanius says, That this our Saviors
sorrow, grew from the desire that he had to dye. For, if he should always
have expressed this his willingness that he had to dye; the Devil, fearful of
his own hurt, would have sought to have diuerted it. And as Pilats wife was
drawn to solicit his life, so would he likewise have solicited all Jerusalem
to save him, had he so well known then as he did afterward, that Christ's
death would have bin so aduantagious to mankind. He was willing likewise to
provoke thereby, his and our adversary, and to put him more eagerly upon the
business: persuading himself, that this his sorrow proceeded out of fear.
Most men (says Epiphanius) fear to dye; only our Sauiors fear was, not to
dye. Christ, by his fear of life, sought to secure his death. Howbeit, we must
withal acknowledge, that he did truly both grieve, and fear.

And as they followed they feared. Natural in all to seek life, and shun
death.
That our nature should suffer cowardice and fear, seeing death near at hand,
as we have seen the experiment of it in the greatest Saints that are in
Heaven, as in Elias, Job, and Saint Paul; so not to fear death, is the
privilege and favor of Grace. To fear it, is the condition of nature, which
does naturally desire the conservation of it is being, and the preservation of
it is life. Nor is it much, that Nature should discover in man this weakness
and cowardice; when as being united to the Godhead in our Savior Christ, he
did beg and entreat, according to this his inferior part, to wit his
humanity, If it be possible let this cup pass from me. Whereupon Leo the Pope
says, Ipsa vox non exa^diti, magna est expositio sacramenti. The mystery, that
Christ should beg, and not be heard, is, That our Nature would not willingly
purchase any good thing, at so dear a rate, as the price of it is life and
being. Nolumus spoliari, sed superuestiri, We would not be stripped, but
ouer-clothed. And albeit the Disciples had so many lectures of death read unto
them, yet could they not remove the fear of death from them. And if humane
nature wrought upon our Savior Christ, according to that inferior portion of
his, though so well incountered with his content and readiness to dye; it is
not much, that his Disciples should lagger behind, and show themselves so lazy
and cowardly as they did.

Filius hominis tradetur principibus sacerdotum, etc.
The son of Man shall be delivered to the chief Priests, etc. The reasons,
why our Savior made such a particular piece, and exact draught, of his death,
of his torments, and his crucifixion, are very many, whereof some have been
formerly related, and those that now offer themselves, are as follows.

It ought not to be considered, but with all seriousness.
The first, Our Savior proceeded therein very leasurely, and with a great deal
of deliberation; for this so sad a story, that it may be of profit unto us, is
not to be posted over in have, nor to be looked on all at once, but by
peecemeale, and a leasurely gazing thereupon. For there is not a wheale nor a
stripe in that divine Body, but may very well take up our thoughts in the
contemplation of them, for many hours together; especially in such an age as
this, wherein nothing is blotted more out of our remembrance, than Christ
crucified. The Devil sought to work this wickedness in the hearts of the
Jews, Eradamus e^m de terra viuentium, Let us raze him out of the Land of the
living; Let there be no memorial of him in the World, let him be blotted out
of our hearts by our vices. And he has got so much ground upon us, that even
we that are Preachers of his word, dare scarce treat upon the occasions of
this his passion; For one fool or other will not stick in one corner or other
to murmr out this his malicious censure, That we show more passion in our
preaching, than in preaching his passion. But the truth is, that when in a
battle the Standard goes to the ground, the Soldiers likewise fall with it;
And that there is no matter, no subject, so sovereign, nor so divine, where
good wits have flourished and displayed the Ancient of their powerful
Eloquence, than in the passion of our Savior. Saint Paul never took any other
Theme, than Praed^camus Chrstum crucifixum, We preach Christ crucified. But
we must chew it, and digest* it well, it is not to be swallowed down whole, for
then it will do us no good. Lactantius Firmianus treating of the Lamb which
God commanded to be eaten, in Exodus, which was a figure of that Lamb which
was crucified on the Cross, says, That albeit he commanded, that they should
eat it in have, in regard of the have which the Jews and the Gentiles should
make in his judgment, and in his death; yet notwithstanding, he willed them to
have a care, that they should not break so much as a bone of his body; And
being it was to be divided amongst many, they must of force be driven to cut
it in pieces, and to eat it very leisurely, beholding and charily considering
the joints and ligaments of the least bones. We must therefore leisurely and
considerately meditate on that History, which being well and truly weighed,
is the general remedy to all our sores and diseases. It is that true
Fishpoole which heals all our infirmities: It makes the Covetous man,
liberal, in seeing the God of love stripped naked for our sakes, of all that he
has. The Glutton, Christ's gall and vinigar, makes temperate, and teaches him
to fast. The Chollerick man, our Saviors patience, makes mild and gentle. The
Reuengefull man, his sufferings, makes him to pray for his enemies. The Pro^^
man, his humility, makes him to be as lowly as the worm that lies under our
feet. Humiliauit semetipsum vsque ad mortem crucis, He humbled himself to
(...) death of the Cross. If thy Crown puff thee up with pride; behold, in
rebu^^ thereof, the Prince of Heaven, with a Crown of thorns upon his head.
If thy great troops, and trains of followers, which like so many Bees swarm
ab^^^ thee; behold, the King of Heaven and Earth, between two Thieves. If thy
beauty; behold the greatest that God ever created, slabbered and bespalled with
the loathsome spittle and filthy driuell of the Jews. If the authority of a
Judge, behold the universal Judge, who in a few hours is posted over to so
many Tribunalls, and without any lawful trial, and nothing justly to be laid
against him, dies notwithstanding by the sentence of Pilate. If the praise and
applause of men, behold his scorns and his reproaches, Opprobrium hominum, and
abiectio plebis. If disasters, infirmities, or any other pain or torment
whatsoever do grieve and afflict thee; What torment can be grievous in
comparison of that torment of his? Cantabiles mihi erant iustificationes tuae
in loco peregrinationis meae. Saint Ambrose understands by Iustificationes,
those torments of our Savior Christ, and says, That when David was banished
and persecuted, he sung of them as he went up and down in this his exile, to
comfort himself, and to bear his banishment and persecution the better,
calling that to mind which he was to suffer for him. Fasciculus Myrrhae
dilectus meus, inter vbera mea commorabitur, My Beloved is a bundle of Myrrh,
he shall lodge betwixt my breasts. That thy bitter Cup (o Lord) which thou
did drink of, has driven out all bitterness and soreness from forth my
breast: I made me a bundle of Myrrh of thy torments, which serve as a sweet and
fragrant Nosegay to refresh and comfort my heart. The Passion of Christ (as it
is in the Apocalypse) is the book of Life. All the books of all the Libraries
in the world; all the Schools and Universities put together, never taught that
which this book teaches. Saint Augustine says, Lignum morientis, Cathedra
fuit Magistri docentis. There was never any School in the world like to that
of the Cross, nor any Master like unto Christ, that hung thereupon. Saint Paul
cries out, O foolish Galathians, who has bewitched you, that ye should not
obey the truth, to whom Jesus Christ before was described, in your sight,
Galat. 3.
and among you crucified? He had set before the Galathians Christ upon the
Cross, presenting himself unto them so naturally, and so to the life, as if
they had seen the very original it self, as it stood all begoared with
blood in Mount Caluarie: And that unless they were mad men, bewitched, or
stark fools, they could not but be taken and captiuated therewith, nor for
their lives refuse to love him and believe in him. If Saint Paul made him so
rich and so glorious by his eloquence, What a precious piece must it needs be,
when Christ himself, by suffering in those his delicate limbs, did limne it
forth unto us at his death; his thorns, his nails, his wan visage, his bored
hands and feet, and his wounded side, uttering more Rhethoricke in that last
Act and Scaene of his life, than all the eloquence of Paul, or the pens of
the whole World since, were ever able to express.

The second, Saint Chrysostom says, That our Savior sought to oblige them
unto him, by giving them such a particular account, that he was to suffer and
to die out of his especial love toward them, as also all Mankind; and that
this therefore ought not to give them occasion to withdraw their respect from
him, or that he should thereby lose any one jot of his reputation among them.
Mori, hominis est* sed velle mori, Dei, i. To die, is of man; but to be willing
to die, of God: And because herein I pretend your good, I ought to lose nothing
with you, by losing my life. One of the greatest indeerements of his love was,
That he did esteem it as a reward of all his endured troubles and torments,
that he should not lose his worth with us. This made him to say, Happy is that
man who shall not think less worthy of me than I deserve. Tertullian
controlled an Heretic that denied the divinity of our Savior Christ; the
cobwebs of the cratch, the poverty of his life, and the accursednes of his
death, being no way able to take hold upon him. Those very things (says he)
that blind thee, ought to convince thee, and to affectionate thee unto him; for
none but God could do thus much for thee. And it is a lamentable case, that
those good things that he did for thee, that thou might believe in him and
love him, should be motives unto thee for to offend him. God having commanded
that Jerusalem should be re-edified after their first freedom from Babylon,
there were some grave men grounded in Iudaisme, who misinterpreting (as Saint
Hierome has noted it) the prophecy of Ezechiel; Ezech. 11.3.
said, Haec est lebes, nos autem carnes, This City is the caldron, and we be
the Flesh: For God to command us to rebuild this City, is as if he should will
us to make a Caldron wherein to boil our selves. Of his love they made a
loathing, and interpreted his favor to be an injury. God took this their
unthankfulness so ill, that he quitted them the second time both of their
country and their liberty. It is you that have made Jerusalem a Caldron of
the prophets; I will bring you out of the midst thereof, and deliver you into
the hands of strangers, ye shall fall by the sword; and this City (as ye
falsely suppose) shall not be your Caldron, neither shall ye be the flesh in
the midst thereof. The same reason is repeated by the Prophet Ose, I gave ye
wine, wheat, oil, gold, and silver; but ye spent it in the service of the
Idol Baal, therefore will I take from ye my wine, my wheat, etc.

Filius hominis tradetur, The Son of man shall be delivered.
The death of our Savior Christ may be considered two manner of ways:

Either as a History.

Or, as it is Gospel.

As a History, it is so sad and so lamentable, as that it cannot but cause
great pity and compassion. The relation which Pilate made to the Emperor of
Rome, is sufficient of it self to melt stones into tears; which was as
follows:

In this Kingdom there was a wonderful strange man, his behavior and beauty
beyond all other in the world; his discretion and wisdom celestial; his
gravity and soberness of carriage, beyond all comparison; his words mystical,
the grace wherewith he delivered them struck his enemies with astonishment;
never any man saw him laugh; weep, they have; his works sauoured of more than
man; he never did any man harm, but much good has he done to many* he healed
by hundreds such as had been sick of incurable diseases; he did cast out
Devils; he raised the Dead; and his miracles being numberless, they were
done all for others good; he did not work any miracle wherein was to be seen
the least vanity or boasting in the world. The Jews out of envy laid hold on
him, and with a kind of hypocrisy and outward humility, rather seeming, than
being Saints, trampled him under foot, and marred his cause. I whipped him for to
appease their fury, and the people being about to mutine, I condemned him to
the death of the Cross. A little before he breathed his last, he desired of
God, that he would forgive those his enemies which had nailed him to the
Cross. At his death there were many prodigious signs both in heaven and
earth; the Sun was darkened, and the graves were opened, and the Dead arose*
After he was dead, a foolish Jew thrust a Spear into his side, showing the
hatred in his death which the Jews bare unto him in his life. What Tragedy
can be more mournful, or what imaginary disaster can appear more
lamentable?

As it is Gospel, you shall see in this his death innumerabie truths: First of
all, let not the asperousnesse and hardness to the way of happiness
discourage any man; for having such a good guide as our Savior Jesus Christ, it
shall (though (...) be never so hard to hit) be made plain and easy unto us:
Howbeit it be elsewhere said, The way to heaven is straight and inaccessable,
Heb. 12.
because there are few that tread in that tracke. Yet now the case is altered,
and Saint Paul calls thus unto us, Accedamus ad eum, qui imitiauit nobis viam;
It will cost us some sweat and some labor, yet not so much as may dishearten
us, and it shall be a wholesome sweat, and a safe and sure labor. Jacob saw
God holding the Ladder which reached to Heaven, whereunto he set his helping
hand, the better to secure it, to the end that every man (as Philon has noted
it) might without fear climb up to the top of it. S. Hierome goes a little
further, and says, That he did not thereby only promise safety, but help;
for God did stretch out his hand from above, and did reach it forth unto those
that were willing to get up: According to that of David, Emitte manum tuam de
alto, (i.) Send out thy hand from above. 2. Mac. 11.
Lysias when he had gathered about fourscore thousand Foot, with all the
Horsemen he had, he came against the Jews, thinking to make Jerusalem an
habitation of the Gentiles: and because of his great number of Footmen, his
thousands of Horsemen, and his fourscore Elephants, the Captains and Soldiers
of Gods people were quite out of heart, making prayers with weeping and tears
before the Lord, That he would send a good Angel to deliver Israel. And as
they were besides Jerusalem, there appeared before them upon horseback, a man
in white clothing, shaking his harness of gold. Then they praised the
merciful God all together, and took heart, insomuch that they were ready not
only to fight with men, but with the most cruel beasts, and to break down
walls of iron. Marching then forward in battle array, having an helper from
heaven* running upon their enemies like Lions, they slew eleven thousand
footmen, and sixteen hundred Horsemen, and put all the other to flight.
Another Horseman was he that Saint John saw upon a white Horse, bearing this
for his Motto, Vincens vt vinceret. Which takes from us all fears of
atchieuing the victory for Heaven.

Secondly, it assures us, That he that offers us so much, can deny us
nothing; he could not well give us more, nor would he give us less than that
which he has already so liberally bestowed upon us. Yet this gift may receive
increase (as Saint Bernard has noted it) according to the manner of it. For in
all things whatsoever, are to be considered, the thing What, and the thing How,
or Why; the Accident, and the Substance; and sometimes Gods Attributes do
shine more in the Accident, than in the Substance. Whence I infer, That he
that gave so much with so much love, and sees that it is all cast away, and
that his love is so ill requited, it is not much if he be much offended with
us. Ergo in vacuum laborani, etc. In vain then have I labored, and to no
purpose have I spent my strength. Whom will it not grieve to the heart, when he
has taken a great deal of pains, and been at a great deal of charge, to see
them both lost? Who ever took half that pains for us, as did our Savior
Christ? who was ever at that great cost with us as he has been? Multo sudore
sudatum est, and non exiuit de eo rubigo.

The son of man shall be delivered. It is a usual phrase in Scripture, to
call Man, Our Savior why called the son of man.
the son of Man. Adam, was neither the son of Man nor Woman, yet is he
listed in the number of the children of Men. Tertullian says, That our Savior
took his appellatiue upon him, to show, that he was now true Man. Saint
Austen, That by this name, he was willing to distinguish the humane nature,
from the divine; and to revive the remembrance of that surpassing benefit of
his becoming Man. Epiphanius and Theodoret, That Daniel, when he styled him
the son of Man, by this his so calling of him, proved thereby, Dan. 7.
that he was the person prophesied of in that prophecy. Gregory Nazianzen,
That he was called the son of Man, for that he was descended of Adam. And
if he, may be most of all called son, who does most of all honor his
Father; none, was more Adams son than he. Last of all, our Savior treating
here of his torments, and of his Cross, which were to come upon him, as Man,
it well suteth with this his present condition to take this name upon him of
the son of Man.

The son of Man shall be delivered. When Christ our Savior treats of his
torments, Psalm. 22.16.
he uses the third Person; Tradetur, and tradent, He shall be delivered, and
they shall deliver him* etc. But when the Prophets did prophecy of him, they
spoke in the first Person: Psalm. 73.74. Zac. 13.6.
Foderunt manus meas, and pedes meos, They have dug my hands, and my feet.
Fui flagellatus tota die, I was scourged all the day long. Faciem meam non
auerti ab increpantibus and conspuentibus in me, I turned not away my face from
those that rebuked me, and spat upon me. His plagatus sum in dom^ eorum, qui
diligebant me, With these was I wounded in the house of my friends. So that if
you shall but ask Christ, who it is that suffers these things? he will
answer, That it is the son of Man. And if ye ask the Prophets, they will
say, That it is the son of God. And peradventure this is the mystery of it,
That albeit our Savior Christ is the party that suffered (as the Prophets
prophecy of him;) yet he suffered as a Fiador, or Surety. But so great was the
love which he bare to Man, who was the Debtor, that putting these torments,
which we were liable unto, to his own account, yet the discharge of this debt
goes in the name of the Debtor. And as the treasure of his merits, is for the
good of Man; so his torments, and his sufferings, are to be attributed wholly
to Man, who was the person, that by the ordinary course of Law did owe this
debt, and was in all reason bound to pay it.

The son of Man shall be delivered. It is here to be considered how often
our Savior makes repetition of this word Tradetur. Peradventure, because it
was one of his greatest griefs, that his friend should betray him; The man of
Peace in whom I hoped, says David. Thomas says, That it is one of the
noblest actions in the world for a man to love his friend; because to abhor
him, is one of the foulest things that man can commit. Magnificauit super me
supplantationem, Psalm. 49.1.
He gloried in his supplanting me. What greater grief can befall a friend,
than to be supplanted by a friend? The metaphor is taken from those that run,
when as the one trips up the others heels. Saint Jerome reads it, Leuauit
contra me caltaneum, He lifted up the heel against me. Our Savior Christ
flying to death with the wings of Love, Judas setting his leg of Treason
before him to throw him down, his Love found it self thereby offended, and
being thus wronged by a friend, his Love had no need of such spurs to drive
him on to his death. But say it should, it was not fit for a friend to put them
on. He of all other, should not have led him along thereunto, falsifying his
love by a feigned kiss, and kindly saluting him, with an Aue Rabbi, Hail
Master. To whom our Savior mildely again replied, Amice, ad quid venisti?
Friend, wherefore came thou? What needst thou to have taken so much pains,
thou might have saved thy self this labor, being it was mine own desire to
make my self a prisoner? yet it does much trouble me, that my friend should
deal so unkindly with me.

Tradetur principibus sacerdotum.
He shall be delivered to the chief Priests. A little before, the Apostles
were at difference amongst themselves who should be the greatest in that their
hoped for Kingdom, there being two commings of the Messiah foretold by the
Prophets.

1 The one, prosperous, full ofMaiestie and Greatness. 2 The other, poor,
humble, and despised.
Now, because the Understanding does commonly follow the affection of the Will,
they did verily believe, that this his coming should be in state and
Majesty, crowning himself King in Israel, taking all dominion and rule from
the Emperor of Rome, from Herod, Pilat, and other inferior Ministers; and the
Priesthood from the Pharisees, who held it so unworthily. This conceit and hope
of theirs is proved and confirmed by that which the Disciples said on their
way to Emaus; Luke 24.
But we trusted that it had been he that should have delivered Israel: Not
understanding as then, what was the deliverance that Jesus Christ had purchased
for them, but looking after some worldly prosperity. But much more plainly
out of that place of the Acts, Lord, will thou at this time restore the
Kingdom of Israel? In a word, They did fully persuade themselves, Act. 1.6.
that all the world should be subject to his Crown; comforting their hopes
with that prophecy of King David's, His Dominion shall be also from one Sea to
the other, and from the Flood, unto the worlds end. Psalm. 7^.8.
And for that he might turn the wheel of this their vain hope another way,
he says, To the chief Priests, whose seats you think to enjoy, shall I be
delivered up, and being presently put over to the Roman power, I shall by them
be whipped, mocked, buffe^ed, crucified, etc.

Ipsi vero nihil horum intellexerunt.
But they understood none of these things. This seemed unto them to be so
foul a fact, and so heinous a wickedness, that it could not sink into their
thoughts, that to such great Innocence, such great Injustice and Cruelty
should be offered. But malice was grown now to that height, that man's
imagination must come short of it. Seneca says, That it is a very poor
excuse, to say, Who would have thought it? For there is not that wickedness,
which is not now in the World. And seeing that the malice thereof, has gone so
far, as to take away the life of the God of Heaven, there is not that ill,
which we ought not to fear. We are to fear the Sea, even then, when it
promises fairest weather. This speech of our Saviors might likewise seem
unto them to be some Parable; for that which the Will affects not, the
Understanding does not half well apprehend it. He said unto the Jews, Oportet
exa^tari ^ilium hominis, The son of man must be lifted up. And they presently
took hold of it. The Angels told Lot, that Sodom should be consumed with fire
and brimstone from Heaven; and he aduising his sons in law thereof, He seemed
unto them as one that mocked. Precept must be upon precept, line upon line;
here a little, and there a little. Genesis 19.14. Esa. 28.10.
Often do the Prophets repeat, Haec mandat Dominus, Expecta Dominum, sustine
Dominum, modicum adhuc modicum, and ego visitab^ sanguinem etc. abscondere
modicum, Thus says the Lord, Wa^te for the Lord yet a little while, and a
little while, and I will visit the Blood, etc. They that ^eard Esaias, mocked at
him in their feasts and banquets, saying, We know before hand what the Prophet
will preach unto us. And this is the fashion of Worldlings, to scoff at those,
whom God sends unto them for their good.

Tunc accessit matter filiorum Zebed^i, etc.
Then came unto him the mother of the sons of Zebedee, etc. 3. Reg. 6.
Adonias took an unseasonable time, having offended S^l^m^n with those
mutinies which he had occasioned to make himself King; and even then when he
ought to have stood in fear of his displeasure, he vndaduisedly craves of him,
to give him his fathers Shunamite to wife: This seemed to Solomon so foolish
and so shameless a petition, that he caused his life to be taken from him.

Accessit matter, The mother came.
Parents commonly desire to leave their children more rich and wealthy, than
holy and religious: A mother would wish her daughter, rather beauty than
virtue; a good dowry, than good endowments. Saint Augustine says of himself,
That he had a father that took more care to make him a Courtier of the earth,
than of Heaven; and desired more, that the world should celebrate him for a
wise and discreet man, than to be accounted one of Christ's followers. Saint
Chrysostom says, That of our children we make little reckoning, but of the
wealth that we are to leave them, exceeding much: Being like unto that sick
man, who not thinking of the danger wherein he is, cuts him out new clothes,
and entertaineth new servants. A Gentleman will take more care of his Horse,
and a great Lord of his estate, than of his children: For his Horse, the one
will look out a good rider, and such a one as shall see him well fed and dressed;
The other, a very good Steward for his lands: but for their children, which is
their best riches, and greatest inheritance, they are careless in their choice
of a good Tutor or Governor. In his Book De Vita Monastica, the said Doctor
cites the example of Job, who did not care so much that his children should be
rich, well esteemed, and respected in the world, as that they should be holy
and religious; He rose up early in the morning, Job 1.5.
and offered burnt Offerings according to the number of the^ all; For Job
thought, It may be my sons have sinned and blasphemed God in their hearts: Thus
did Job every day. Saint Augustine reports of his mother, That she gave
great store of alms, and that she went twice a day to the Church, and that
kneeling down upon her knees, she poured forth many tears from her eyes; not
begging gold nor silver of God, but that he would be pleased to convert her
son, and bring him to the true Faith.

The receipt of a courtesy is the ingag^ng of our liberty.
The mother came. These her sons thought themselves now cocke-sure; for they
knew that our Savior Christ had some obligation to their mother, for those
kindnesses which she had done him, and for those good helps which he had
received from her in his wants and necessities; deeming it as a thing of
nothing, and as a suit already granted, That he would give them the chiefest
places of government in that their hoped for Kingdom. Whence I infer, that to a
governor it is a shrewd pledge ofhis salvation, to receive a courtesy; for that
he is thereby, as it were, bought and bound to make requital. And as in him
that buys, (...) is not the goodness or badnesse of such a commodity, but
the money, that (...) most stood upon: and as in gaming, men respect not so
much the persons they play with, as the money they play for; so this business
of providing for our children* is a kind of buying to profit, and a greedy
gaining by play. The King of Sodom said unto Abraham, Genesis 14.23.
Give me the persons, and take the goods to thy self: (...) Abraham would not
take so much as a thread or shooe-latchet of all that was his, and that for two
very good reasons:

The one, That an Infidel might not hereafter boast and make his brag, saying*
I have made Abraham rich, it was I that made him a man.

The other, That he might not have a tie upon him, and so buy out his liberty*
For gifts (as Nazianzen says) are a kind of purchase of a man's freehold.
(...) give for mere love cannot be condemned, because it is a thing which God
hi^^selfe does; to whom the Kings and Princes of the earth should come as near
as they can: But to give to receive again, is a clapping of gyues and fetters
on the receiver. And the poorer sort of men being commonly the worthiest,
because they have not wherewithal to give, they likewise come not to get any
thing. Theodoret pondereth the reasons why Isaac was inclined to confer the
blessing on Esau.

First, Because he was his first borne, to whom of right it belonged.

Secondly, For that he had ever been loving and obedient unto him.

Thirdly, Because he was well behaved, and had good natural parts in him.

Fourthly and lastly he adds this, as a more powerful and forcible reason
than all the rest; That being (as he was) a great Hunter, he brought home so
many Regalos and dainty morcells for to please his fathers palate, which
wrought more upon aged Isaac, than his being his son. And if gifts are such
strong Giants, that they captiuate the Saints of God, Munera (creed mihi)
excacant homines que Deosque. What are we to expect from sinners? Saint Bernard
complains, That in his time this moth had entered not only upon the
distribution of secular honors, but also upon Ecclesiastical preferments. He
earnestly exhorts Pope Eugenius, That he place such Bishops in the Church,
who out of widows dowries, and the patrimony of the crucified God, should
not enrich their Kindred, who take more pleasure in the pampering of a young
Mule, spread over with a fair foot-cloath, than to clap caparisons on an old
Horse, whose mouth is presumed to be shut; preferring their loose Kindred, and
such as have jadish tricks, before devout and irreprehensible persons. A
Prelat shall bestow a hundred Ducats pension upon a poor Student, and he will
be bound a re^ar el diuino officio, to pray over all the good prayers that be,
for him; but he shall bestow a twenty or thirty thousand Ducats on his
Kinseman, and he shall scarce rezar el rosario, turn over his beads for him.

Dic vt sedeant by duo filij mei.
Grant that these my two sons may sit, etc. Now the mother entreats with the
love and affection of a mother, so it seems to Saint Ambrose and Saint
Hilarie; and as it is to be collected out of Saint Mark; and from that, You
know not what you ask: As also by that, Can you drink of my Cup? Whither they
were thrones in Heaven, (as Saint Chrysostom would have it) or on earth, which
though never so prosperous, they could imagine at most to be but temporal; I
will not stand to dispute it: if of heaven, few understand it; if of earth;
they would make this their pilgrimage a permanent habitation. And if they held
Peter to be a fool, because he would have had Tabernacles built on Mount
Tabor* What shall we say to these that would have perpetual seats of honor?
All the Courts of the earth are but portches and gatehouses to those Palaces
ofheauen, where the lackey and the scullion, as well, etc.

Nescitis quid petatis, Ye know not what ye ask.
They did first of all imagine, That from the death of Christ, his Crown and
Empire was to take it is beginning. Now to desire seats of honor of one that
was scourged, spit upon, strip^ naked, and crucified, and to seek that his
blood should be the price of the^^ honor, was mere fooli^^nesse. When the
people would have made a King of our Sau^our Christ, he ^^ed from them to the
mountain, taking it as an affront, th^^ they should offer to clap an earthly
Crown vp-his h^ad. So does Thomas expound that place of Saint Paul, Who for
the joy that was set before him, endured the Cross, and despised the shame.
When a Kings Crown was proposed unto him by the World, he made choice of the
Cross, holding that affront the less of the two. What then might he think,
when treating of his death, they should crave chaires of honor, making less
reckoning of his blood, than of their own advancement? For three
transgressions of Israel, (says Amos) and for four, Amos. 2.6.
I will not turn to it, because they sold the Righteous for silver, and the
Poor for shoes: That is, made more reckoning of the mucke of the world, than
men's lives. Galatinus, Adrianus Finus, and Rabbi Samuel, transfer this fault
upon those Pharisees which sold our Savior, to secure their wealth and their
honors; The Romans will come and take both our Kingdom and our Nation from
us. Wherein these his Disciples seemed to suit with them; for the Pharisees
treated of our Saviors death, that they might not loose their Chaires; and his
Disciples, that they might get them.

Ye know not, etc. Why would they not have Peter share with them in their
favor and their honor? In Mount Tabor he was mindful of James and John; but
James and John did not once think upon Peter. The reason whereof is, for that
the glory of heaven is easily parted and divided with others: And because God
will that all should be saved, man is likewise willing to yield thereunto. But
for the glory of the earth, there is scarce that man that will admit a
copartner. And if Christ our Savior had granted them their request, they would
presently have contested, which should have sat on his right hand. For in
these worldly aduancements and honors, brother will be against brother, and
seek to cut each others throat. Jacob and Esau strove who should be borne
first, and get away the blessing from the other.

Potestis bibere calicem? Can ye drink of the Cup, etc.
Ambition always blind in that which it pursues.
Ambition (like the Elephant) out of a desire to command, will not stick to
bear Castles and Towers on his back, till it be ready to break with the
weight of it is burden. Why should Peter covet honor, if like a Tower it must
lie heavily upon him? King Antiochus had three hundred Elephants in his Army,
and every one bare a Tower of wood upon his back, and in them thirty persons
^ piece. The ambitious man (like Atlas) will make no bones to bear up heaven
with his shoulders, though it make him to groan never so hard, and that in the
end he must come tumbling down with it to the ground. Many pretend that which
makes much for their hurt, presuming that they deserve what they desire. In
matter of presumption, there is not that man that will know or acknowledge any
advantage. Many men complain of the badnesse of the Times, of the hardness of
their fortune, of the small favor that they find, as also of their want of
health; but few or none, of their want of sufficiency, or their lack (...)
understanding. Seneca says, That Understanding is no^ a thing that can (...)
bought or borrowed: Nay more, That if it were to be sold at an open outcry*
and in the public market place, there would not a Chapman be found (...)
deal for it: For the poorest Understanding that is, will presume to be able
(...) give council to Seneca; and to Pl^to. Absalon wooing the peoples
affec^^on breaks out in Court into this insinuating, 2. Sam. 15.4.
but traitorous phrase of speech, (...) that I were made Judge in the L^^d,
that every man tha^ has any matter (...) might come to (...), that I might do
him Justice. Traitor as thou art, thou go abo^^ to take away thy fathers
Kingdom and his life from him, and yet the plea (...) thou pretendest, is,
forsooth, to do every man right and justice.

Possumus.
Saint Bernard sets down three sorts of Ambition:

The one, Modest and bashful; which uses it is diligences, but withal, such
as are lawful and honest: For it is a lawful thing to pretend honor, though
not to pretend it, be the greater virtue.

The other, Arrogant and insolent, looking for kneeling and adoration.

The third, Mad and furious, that will down with all that stands in it is way;
and hale Honor by the locks, and with his poinyard in his hand seek to force
her.

Saint Cyprian in an Epistle of his, preaches the self same doctrine. Of
these three sorts of Ambition, the first is the most tolerable, and the least
scandalous: The third is cruel: The second, which in Court is the most common,
is most base and vile; howbeit (according to Saint Bernard) it is Vicium
magnatum, A vice that follows your greatest and grauest Councillors, and your
principal Prelates, not your meaner and ordinary persons. It is a secret
Poison which pier^eth to the heart of this mystical body of the Church: For
this name Esaias gives to the Clergy, The whole Head is sick, and the whole
Heart is faint. Esaias ^.5.
And since that the Devil took that state upon him, as to say to our Savior,
Kneel down and worship me; he has taken such courage to himself, that there
is not any enterprise, be it never so difficult, which he dares not to
undertake. Saint ^yprian tells us, In sinu Sacerdotum Ambitio dormit, sub^vmbra
recubat, in secreto alami sese fraudulenter occultat, Ambition sleeps in the
bosom of the Priests, it lies ^^rking even amongst the holiest of them. And
those (as Saint Ambrose says) whom Covetousness could not make to yield, nor
the Flesh overcome; the ^astest, the freest handed, the bountifullest in their
almsdeeds, Ambition has ^ade to lie flat at her foot. In a word, Rarus est,
quem non prosternat ambitio.

Whence it is to be noted, Ambition* knows neither reason, nor religion.
That they being honorable and grave persons whom Ambition leads along in
triumph, she makes them base and vile: For she bings these men to shame, and
through their too much esteem of honor, come t^ be the less esteemed. Adeo
mundus hominibus charus est, vt sibi viluerint, The ^^^ld is so dear to men,
that they are base in their own eyes. Saint Augustine says, That the Devil
offered our Savior all the Kingdoms of the world, if he would bu^ fall down
and worship him. The ambitious man will sow himself, as it we, to the ground,
and suffer himself to be trampled and trod on, and that not for a weld, but
for the basest things that the world affoordeth. This mother and her ^w sons
did adore our Savior Christ for imaginary honors, and not for any res^ect to
the person adored, (for much more was due unto him) but for circumsta^es so
shameful and so vile, that they well deserved a Nescitis. When Nebuc^dnezar
gave command, That all should fall flat to the ground, and worship his ^mage,
Saint Chrysostom says, That their prostrating of themselves upon the ^eart
was excused, for that the adoration of their bodies, was the falling of their
^ouls; not only because they did adore a piece of wood, which was not God; ^ut
^^cause they did adore their private interest and favor. So in this case that
we hsue now in hand, the mother and her sons adored not Christ as he was
Christ, but for the good they hoped from Christ: and this adoration of the
bo^ie, d^d discover the baseness of their souls thoughts.

Bes^des all these mischiefs which accompany Ambition, it turns it to be ^s
owners torment: It is the Cross (as Saint Bernard says) that martyrs him,
^^bit^^ ambitiosorum Crux. Saint Ambrose, Omnes t^r ques, omnibus places*
Absalon was hanged by the hairs of his head, in token that his own ambitious
humor was his own hangman. Saint Augustine says, Ventus honoris, ruina
vniuersi, The wind of honor is the worlds ruin. This puff of wind blew
Lucifer out of heaven; it destroyed Paradise; ^ore up our innocence by the
roots; it pretended to build Towers above the Clouds. In the Scripture it
wrought strange cruelties; Abimileck puffed up with this wind, beheaded the
seventy brethren of Gede^; Ioram, the six sons of that good and holy King
Iehosophat, to settle the Crown the surer on his head. The Chronicles make
mention, That to this King there came Letters from Elias, [Allatae sunt autem
ei litera ab Elia Propheta, There came a writing to him from Elia the Prophet]
who in his fathers time was taken up in a Chariot of fire; which were left
written behind him by a prophetical Spirit, before that he departed hence, as
Caietan does enforce it. Howsoever, I am sure that they did notify unto him a
most grievous and severe chastisement. Jason brother to the High Priest Onias,
took away his Priesthood from him by offering King Antiochus a great sum of
money. In the ninth Chapter of the first Book of Macabees, strange things are
reported of the impostures of Alcimus, till that he died suddenly, and was
smitten cum tormento magno. The twelfth Chapter recounteth the cruelties which
Triphon multiplied one in the neck of another, to set the Crown of Asia on
his own head, by killing Jonathan and his sons.

Calicem quidem meum bibetis.
Ye shall indeed drink of my Cup. He did mark them out the way to Heaven and
the price which it was to cost them. Heaven not purchased without violence.
Saint Bernard; Haec est via vitae, via ci^ tatis, via regni, via gloriae. And
upon the Canticles he pondereth two places.

In the one, the Spouse inuites her Beloved to a dainty soft bed; Lectus (...)
floridus, domus nostra Cedrina, Our Bed is green, and our house of Cedar.

In the other, He inuites his Spouse to the field. Ego flos Campi. Correctin^
thereby the longings of his Spouse. As if he should have said unto her, The
life, is not to be spent in pleasures and delights, but in sweats and labors.
An^ expounding that place of Saint Luke, Have me o Lord, in mind, when thou
come (...) to thy Kingdom; Euntem vidit, and sui memorem esse rogauit. He
was tide to (...) Cross, and yet you see how soon he got to Heaven. And no
marvel, for, (...) carriage to Heaven, was the Cross. He that has a
familiar in his pocket, (...) fly in two hours from henceto Rome. And so in a
short time did this go^ Thief fly unto Heaven, by being himself fastened to
the Cross, and his (...) to Christ. Saint Chrysostom says, That Grace
follows the footsteps of (...); If there be no Day, there is no Night; if no
Winter, no Summer; (...) Battle, no Victory; if no Service, no Reward; if no
Cup, no Chair; i^ Trouble, no Glory.

Non est meum dare vobis.
It is not in me to give you. The World makes these provisions, but I ca^^
Saint Ambrose says, Dominus Coeli etc. The Lord of Heaven and Earth was (...)
Blush, and was ashamed to deny the fellowship of his Throne, to a mother, that
(...) it for her children. Man's presumption.
Christ, who is able to do all, says, he cannot do it, (...) Man, who is
able to do nothing at all, presumes he can do all. God canno co^^mit sin;
nor can God be an Accepter of persons. God makes himself (...) who can do
nothing; and thou make thy self God, and think thou (...) any thing:
Whereas indeed, thou art more weakness, than power; di^^bility than ability.
It is proper to God (says Aristotle) to do what he will; to Man, to do what
he can: But now the World is turned topsituruie; God does what he can; and
Man, what he will. Saint Bernard in an Epist. of his, complains of the
Ecclesiastical provisions which were made in his time; They leapt (satih he)
from the Ferula to the Crosyers staff; being gladder to see themselves freed
from the Rod, than of the Honors that were thrown upon them. Seneca called
that, The golden Age, wherein Dignities were conferred on those that deserved
them; condemning the Age wherein he lived, to be the Iron Age. But I say,
That this present Age which we now enjoy, is the happiest that ever our Church
had: For, in those former times, those that were the learnedest and the holiest
men, fled into the Deserts, and hid themselves in Caves, that they might not
be persecuted with Honors: For they had no sooner notice of a holy man;
(albeit he lived coopt up in a corner) but that they forced him thence,
clapping a Miter on his head, and other dignities: And there are very strange
Histories of this truth. But to all those that live now in these times, I can
give them these glad tidings, That they may enjoy their quiet, and sit
peaceably at home in their private lodgings, resting safe and secure, that this
trouble shall not come to their doors; for now a days, only favor, or other
byrespects of the flesh, have provided a remedy for this evil.

Non est meum dare vobis.
It lies not in me to give you. Christ would rather seem to lessen somewhat of
his power, than to lessen any thing of his love. And therefore he does not say,
I will not do it; for that would have been too foul and churlish a word in
the mouth of so mild a Prince* and he should thereby have done wrong to his own
will, who desires that all might have such seats as they did sue to sit in.
Saint Ambrose unfolds our Saviors meaning, Bonus Dominus maluit dissimulare
de jure, quam de charitate deponere, He had rather they should question his
right, than his love. The self same Doctor says, That he made choice rather
of Judas than any other, though to man it might seem, that he therein wronged
his wisdom; for the World might from thence take occasion to say, That he did
not know how to distinguish of men, being that he had made choice of such an
Apostle. But this was done out of his especial providence, (says Saint
Ambrose) in favor of his love: For he being in our opinion, to run the
hazard of his wisdom or his love, he had rather of the two suffer in his
wisdom; for no man could otherwise presume of him, but that he loved Judas.
The History of Jonas proves this point, who refused to go to Niniuie; it
seeming unto him, that both God and himself should (as Nazianzen says) be
discredited in the world. But he willed him the second time, That he should go
to Niniuie, and that he should preach unto them, Yet forty days, and Niniuie
shall be overthrown. Jonah. 3.4.
At last he was carried thither perforce, whither he would or no: And the
reason why God carried this business thus, was, That if afterward he should
not destroy this City, he might happily hazard the opinion of his power, but
not of his love. The like is repeated by Saint Chrysostom.

Jonas did likewise refuse to go to Niniuie, that he might not at last be
found a Liar; esteeming more the opinion of his truth, than of his love. Hence
arises in the Prelates and the Princes, this word Nolumus, We will not have it
so; which savors of too much harshnesse and tyranny. Sic volo, sic jubeo, sit
pro ratione voluntas, Their will is a Law unto them. But he that shall make
more reckoning of the opinion of his willingness, and of his love, than of his
power, and his wisdom, will say, Non possum, I cannot, it is not in my power
to do it: It grieves me to the very heart, and I blush for shame, that I am
not able to perform your desire. Which is a great comfort for him that is a
suitor, when he shall understand, that his Petition is not denied out of
disaffection, but disabilitie. When Naboth was to be sentenced to death, the
Judges did proclaim a Fast: And Abulensis says, That it was a common custom
amongst the Judges in those days, whenever they did pronounce the sentence
of death against an Offender; to the end, to give the World to understand, That
that man's death did torment and grieve their Soul. For, to condemn a man to
death with a merry and cheerful countenance, is more befitting Beasts, than
Men. When our Savior Christ entered Jerusalem in Triumph, the ruin of that
famous City representing it self unto him, he shed tears of sorrow. Does it
grieve thee, o Lord, that it must be destroyed? Destroy it not then. I cannot
do so; for that will not stand with my Justice. O Lord, do not weep then. I
cannot choose. And why, good Lord? Because it will not stand with my Mercy.
And that Judge, who ever he be, if he have any pity in the world in him,
cannot for his heart blood, when he sentenceth a Malefactor to some grievous
punishment, or terrible torment, but have some meltingnesse in his eyes, and
some sorrow in his heart. God so pierce our hearts with pity and compassion
toward our poor afflicted brethren, that having a fellow-feeling of their
miseries, we may find favor at his hands, who is the Father of Pity, and
only Fountain of all Mercy.

THE FIFTEENTH SERMON, UPON THE THVRSEDAY AFTER THE SECOND SUNDAY IN LENT.
LVC. 16. Homo quidam erat Dives, and induebatur Purpura and Bysso.

There was a certain rich man who was clothed in Purple and fine Linen.


AMongst those Parables which our Savior preached, The scope of the Parable.
some were full of pity and love; others of fears and terrors: some for
noble breasts; others for base and hard hearts: some had set up for their mark,
the encouraging of our hopes; others, the increasing of our fears: some
serving for comfort to the Godly; and some for example to the Wicked. That
which we are to treat of to day, has all these comforts for the Poor which
live in hunger and in want, pined and consumed with misery: And threatenings
for the Rich, who say unto their riches and their pleasures, I am wholly yours.

There was a certain rich man, etc. The first thing that he was charged
withal, Riches may be possessed, but not desired.
is, That he was rich: Not because rich men are damned because they are rich;
but because he is damned who places his happiness in them, and makes them the
only aim of his desires. And hence it comes to pass, that desired riches
usually prove more hurtful than those that are possessed: for these sometimes
do not occupy the heart; but those that are desired and coueted by us, do
wholly possess it, and lead it which way they list. And therefore David
advises us not to set our hearts upon them. He that longs and desires to
be rich, even to imaginary riches, resigneth up his heart. Saint Paul did not
condemn rich men, but those that did desire to be rich. The Devil sets a
thousand ginnes and snares about those that have set their desires upon riches.
What greater snare than that pit-fall which was prepared as a punishment for
Tantalus, who standing up to the chinne in water, could yet never come to
quench his thirst. Non est satiatus venture eius, His belly was not satisfied,
says Job; Job 20.
The Hebrew. Non nouit pacem, he knew not peace. He that says, Peace, says a
quiet and peaceable possession of that which he possesses, and yet cannot
enjoy it. He that suffers perpetual hunger, when he has the world at will,
what greater snare, than in this his great plenty to be extreme poor? Magnas
inter opes in^ps; (it is Horaces) and, An ordinary thirst [extrema pauperiate
deterior est] is worse than extreme poverty, so says ^yon: And the reason of
it is clear. The poor man (says Solomon) eats to the contentation of his
mind, and remains satisfied therewith; but the belly of the Rich is still
empty, and can never be filled. What greater snare, than to deny a morcell of
bread to the hungry, pity being so proper and natural to the breast and
bowels of man? But this he too usually does, that desires to be rich; for he
that goes always in chase, in propriam satietatem, to glut his own belly,
will hardly relieve another man's hunger. What greater snare, than for a rich
man to walk ouerlading and bruising his body with the weight of gold, of all
other mettalls the most massy, and to no profit in the world, Esaias. 30.6.
unless it be to bring him the sooner to his grave. Esaias says, That he saw a
Lion, a Lioness, a Viper, and a fiery flying Serpent coming against those
that shall bear their riches upon the shoulders of the Colts, and their
treasures upon the bunches of the Cammells, to a strange Country, where it
shall do them no good. By the Lion and Lioness, the Viper, and the fiery flying
Serpent, the Prophet understands those Devils whom David styles Aspes and
Basiliskes, Lions, and Dragons, and by those Colts and Cammells, rich men laden
with treasures, whose Carriers are the Devils, who drive them along till they
bring them to Hell, with their backs galled, and their bodies bruised, bearing
this Motto in their forehead, Lassati sumus via iniquitatis, We are wearied in
the way of Iniquity. Origin has observed, That those rich men whom God wished
well to in the Old Testament, he bestowed living riches upon them, as flocks of
Sheep, herds of Cattle, Bread, Wine, and Oil, which are the principal
flowers and best fruits of the earth. And the Patriarchs did desire these
prosperities and blessings for their children. Jacob pouring out his blessings
upon Joseph, said, Genesis 49.25.
God bless thee with blessings of the breast and of the womb; let thy Ewes
eane, and bring forth Lambs by paires, etc. But gold and silver, which are
dead riches, were not Gods blessing.

Vestiebatur purpura and bysso, He was clothed in Purple and fine Linen.
Three principles do condemn the excess of apparel.

The one, For a man to place too much pleasure and happiness therein; as if he
had been borne for no other end, but to wear rich and gay clothes.

The other, To ordain them to a bad end. Saint Augustine says, That we
should not so much intend the use of pompous and glorious apparel, as the end
for which we use them, Non vsus, sed libido in culpa est. The loose Wanton
adornes himself with Silks, with Diamonds, and brooches of gold; the Priest
he adornes himself with a rich Stole, with a Cope curiously embroydred; the
one, to enamour poor silly Souls; the other, to offer Sacrifice decently
before his God: The one offends; the other pleases; because, Non vsus, sed
libido in culpa est. He that has traveled abroad, and been long from home in
foreign Countries, claps good clothes on his back, thinking that those will
add more credit to his person, than is answerable to his fortunes; Non vsus,
sed libido i^ culpa est, It is not our lack, but our lust which must be
blamed. A married wife tricks up herself, and dresses her self neat, the
better to please her husband and her family; for a wife is the beauty, the
joy, and life of a house. The Whore she pranks up her self too, but only to
allure loose beholders. Solomon commending a manly mettled woman, says, That
she clothed her self with Purple and with Silk. The Apocalypse condemning
that Whore of Babylon who held a cup of poison in her hand, says, That it was
covered with gold: In the one was Virtue; in the other, Vice; and therefore not
our need, but our niceness is in fault. Many for to complie with the
authority of their dignities and places of honor, have outwardly worn rich
and costly clothes, but inward next to their skins, shirts of hair; as
Theodosius, Nepotianus, and others. For, as that which enters in at the mouth
does not defile the soul; so, outward clothes do not hurt the inward man; Sed
libido in causa est.

The third Principle is out of Saint Augustine, Homo circumferens mortalitatem,
circumfert testimonium peccati sui, Man, that bears mortality about him, does
likewise bear about him a testimony of his sin. God clothing man with the
skins of dead beasts, gave us thereby to understand, That these our clothes
serve as so many witnesses of man's sin and mortality; as the casting of the
black cloak upon the shoulders of some great Bashaw, shows, that he has
offended the grand Seigniour, and that his death is at hand. The Spanish Nation
hears ill abroad, for the often change of fashions in their clothes, running
daily out of one into another; it is a vice that they are much taxed for. And
therefore, If the Spanish, God help the English.
one painting forth the particular fashions of apparel belonging to all
Nations whatsoever, when he comes to portray forth a Spaniard, he sets him
upon a shopboord, with a piece of stuff before him, and a pair of sheeres in
his hand, to the end that he might cut out his clothes into what kind of
fashion his fancy should best affect: Expressing therein, that he was so
fantastical, so various, and so mutable, that every day he would have a new
invention. And to this purpose suits that Hierogliphycke of Augustinus Celius;
It being brought to the gods knowledge, That the Moon wandered up and down
naked over hills and dales; they sent Mercury unto her, to cut her out a
garment, and to make it up for her: But he could never come to take any true
measure of her, by reason of her ordinary creasings and wanings, not knowing
what course in the world to take, unless he should every day make her a new
gown. In a word, this rich man's robe was Prides ensign, Luxuries nest, and
Deaths Mantle.

Heretofore, Purple and fine Linen, Silks, and Veluets, were only clothing
for Kings, and such as were eminent persons in Court, and were daily in his
Majesty's eye, waiting and attending his person. But now, every one will in
his wear and fashion, seem to be that which he is not: The Clerk will go as
the Squire; the Squire as the Knight; the Knight as the Lord; the Lord as a
Grande; a Grande as a King; and a King as God. The Proverb, That it is not the
Cowle that makes the Monk, is verified of all Estates: But as the richness of
the garnishing adds not any finenesse to the Sword; (the comparison is
Seneca's) so, a man's clothes do not better his being, nor add any worth to
him that wears them; but though he be not bettered in his being, yet he is so
much bettered in his seeming, that a man had need of some particular
revelation, to know which is which, and to whom we owe a respect and reverence.
To a Coward (who like Hercules, had lapt himself in a Lions skin) Diogenes
said, If thou did but see how ill this wear does become thee, thou would
blush for shame. You shall have a finical Tailor fling away his money (and
peradventure is worth half so much more) upon a Silken suit, (as if honor did
consist in Silk) and if you find fault with him for this his vanity, his
answer will be unto you, My neighbor Fulano goes thus and thus, and I scorn
but to go as well clad as he; my purse and my credit is as good as his; when,
God knows, he comes far short of him in both: and this vanity has undone
many a man. Pharaoh and his People marched through the bottom of the sea, and
the occasion of this his so bold adventure, was, That he had seen the
Israelites go that way before him. O ye foolish Egyptians, Had ye God for
your Captain? Had ye the Rod of Moses to divide the waters, and to make them
stand like walls on either side? The like may I say to this Tailor, Have thou
as good means as thy neighbor? Esa^ going forth to meet Jacob, Genesis 33.
who came from Mesopotamia, after a few brotherly embracements, and other kind
complements of their love each to other; Esau entreated his brother, that he
would go along with him and bear him company: But Jacob made this discreet
answer unto him; Sir, I beseech you to excuse me, I must needs wait upon my
children and my flocks; and if to do you service, I should bring them out of
the way they are in, they would all perish. When the vanity of one that is
more powerful and wealthier than thy self, shall inuit thee to follow his
humor, and call unto thee, to go side by side with him; thou will, if thou
be wise, make use of Jacobs excuse; telling him, If I shall run this
course, I shall ruin both my children and my estate. Seneca writing to
L^cilius, tells him, If thou conform thy self to what Nature will be well
contented withal, thou shall be rich; but if what Vanity will egg thee unto,
thou shall be poor. Clemens Alexandrinus has a particular Discourse upon this
Argument, and that so large and so full, that it seems he had been in all
the houses of the City where he dwelt, and had diligently observed what had
past in every one of them. To what end (says he) serves a Bed with pillars
of silver, and pommels of gold, if thou sleep as well (if not better) in one
of Wood? To what end serve Curtains of silk interwouen with gold, and Quilts
curiously embroydered, if those of woollen keep thee warmer? To what end a Cup
of Crystal, if one of Glass will as well serve the turn? For to dig into the
earth, thou will not make thee a Spade or Mattocke of silver, because that were
a superfluous and needless thing: As needless and superfluous a thing is it,
to have a Bed of Yuorie, Ebonie, etc. But, which is worse than all the rest,
Saint Chrysostom says, That for to feed our vanities, we never want means
nor moneys; but to pay our debts, or to bestow an Alms, or to relieve a friend
in necessity, there is no money to be found. One of the greatest charges, and
most without excuse, which God will charge your rich and powerful men withal,
is, God has given thee all this thy present prosperity which thou enioyest,
thy Lands, thy Rents, thy Lordships, thy Tenants, thy Gold, thy Silver, etc.
And that God (who has thus blessed and prospered thee in the World) standing
poor, naked, and hunger-starued at thy door, thou have fair Liueries for
servants, rich furniture for thy horses, silver Garrotes or Wrests to pack up
and fasten thy Sumpter upon thy strong backed Mules, costly Banquets for thy
friends; but not so much as a rag or a crum to bestow upon him who has thus
enriched thee with all these: Inexcusabilis es, o Homo, Neither thou nor all
the World knows how to make answer to this objection. Saint Hierome makes the
like complaint, discoursing of those Ladies whose Coaches may rather be said to
be of gold, than gilded; whose necks are laden with chains of Pearl, and
their fingers with Diamonds; and that they should live thus in their jollitie
and plenty, and Christ die at their doors for hunger, it is such a charge,
that when it comes to be laid home unto them, it will admit no excuse.

Epulabatur quotidie splendide.
He fared diliciously every day. Many of Gods Saints have made Feasts and
Banquets for their Kinsfolks and friends, as Abraham, Tobie, Job, and others;
but these their Feasts were modest and moderate, they were great, but not
often. And neither can or will any man make daily Feasts, unless it be such a
one as makes his belly his God, and thinks that he was borne for no other
end, but to pamper up the flesh, and to make much of himself. Every vice
whatsoever, is as a link to a chain, which draws many other after it: but
that of Gluttony, of all other is the most tyrannous and the most violent.

First of all, It draws dishonestie after it, as heretofore has been
proved. Saint Paul does so wedge and glue these two vices together, as if they
were but one and the self same thing; Non in conuiuijs and impudicit^^s. And
in another place he says, That eating provoke the body, and that the body
desires and lusts after eating.

Secondly, It spoils and marres the tongue, as Saint Gregory proves it.
There are two things (says Solomon) that are able to, nay, do overthrow the
World; a Slave sitting in the Kings Throne, that is one of them; the other, a
Fool, whose belly is glutted with meat, and whose head is full of wine. And
if too much eating and drinking make the most discreet and best advised man to
lose the reyns of reason; what will it work upon a fool?

Thirdly, It does darken the Understanding, as Saint Chrysostom has noted it,
alleging the example of Esau, who after he had eaten and drunken his fill, made
light reckoning of the selling of his birthrigh. The fogges and vapors of the
earth, cloud Heaven; those of the stomach, Reason. What greater blindness
(says Lucian) than that of the Taste, extending it self no further than four
fingers breadth in the palate; Earth, Sea, and Air, are not sufficient to
satisfy the same? Aristotle reports of Philogonus, That he desired of the
gods, That they would give him such a neck as the Craines have, that the taste
and relish of his meat might continue the longer in it is going down.

Fourthly, It shortens man's life; Propter ^rapulam, multi abierunt, Eccles.
37.30.
By surfeit have many perished. Et plures gula, quam gladio periere, And more by
sauce have dyed than by the sword. This is the maine cause of your Apoplexies,
and of your speedy and sudden Deaths. Clemens Alexandrinus relates, That,
Purpurea mors, was a Proverb of sudden death, because those that were clothed
in Purple, were commonly Gluttons. But for violent deaths, what experience more
notorious? Let Ammon, David's eldest son speak this; and Elah King of
Israel, slain by the hands of Zambri; Clytus, Alex^^ders chiefest favorite;
Menadab, King of Syria; Assuerus; Haman, his Minion; and one of the Herod's.
Saint Basyll says, That the vice of eating well, is more desperate, than that
of living ill. Many loose Wantons come to be reformed, but Gluttons never.
Only Death (says he) ends that disease. This rich man, Saint Luke says,
That he dyed amidst his continual banquettings; having no Medium between his
eating, and his dying.

Saint Chrysostom, lays this to this rich man's charge, That he did not
believe the immortality of the Soul; nor the eternal happinesses, and
miseries of that other life. And a great argument for the proof thereof, is,
That he was so hasty with Abraham, That he would send one from the dead, to
preach this Doctrine to his Kinsfolk, and friends. And Abraham answering, That
they had Moses, and the Prophets; He replied, Non pater Abraham, Not so father
Abraham; I my self heard the testimony of Moses, and the Sermons of those
other Prophets, but for all this I could never be persuaded, that Hell was
provided for me, and Heaven prepared for Lazarus. My Kinsmen, are like to be
of the same mind, as I was; and the like will succeed unto them, as has
befalne me, and therefore I pray thee let one be sent unto them from the
dead, that may put them out of this their error, etc.

Erat autem mendicus, nomine Lazarus, vlceribus plenus.
There was a beggar, named Lazarus, who wus full of Sores. He painteth forth
this poor man, and his wretched and miserable condition, counterposing it to
those worldly felicities, wherewith this rich man did abound. The ones
poverty, Riches unequally dispensed; Why?
to the others riches; the ones sickness, to the others health; the ones
hunger, to the others fullness; the ones nakedness, to the others costly
clothes; the ones leanenesse, to the others fatness; the ones sorrow, to the
others joy; the ones inioying of no pleasure in this life, to the others
general content that he took in all the delights and pleasures of this World.
Transierunt in affectum cordis. Another letter has it, In picturas cordium.
Whatsoever his heart did desire, it was pictured as it were before him. Does a
rich man desire a handsome woman? Money paints her forth unto him; does he
desire revenge? Money will draw it out for him; does he desire banquets,
music, and good clothes? Money does all this, and limm's them out unto him,
as in a fair and curious Table.

Looking upon the inequality of humane chances, in matter of good, and bad
fortune; so much happiness in some, so ill bestowed upon them; and so much
misery in other some, which they did not so well deserve; there have bin some
fools which have not stick't blasphemously to say, Does God know well what he
does? Ecce, ipsi peccatores, in saeculo, obtinuerunt diuitias; See, what an
unequal course God runs; The wickedst men, are commonly the most wealthy. But
the truth of it is, That this is a mystery of Gods providence, though secret,
and hid. He made the rich men his sons and heirs here upon Earth, to the
end that the younger brethren might have here their secure sustenance: And he
made the poor, heirs of Heaven, that the rich might have there, their ^ecure
happiness. So that the rich by releeuing the poor, and the poor by praying
for the rich, they might both, by Gods favor, have equal portions in Heaven.
Saint Paul says, That God made some rich, and some poor, that the abundance
of the rich, might supply the wants of the poor; and the abundance of the
poor, supply the wants of the rich. And so their lot might be alike. It
succeeding with them, as it did in that miracle of the Manna; He that gathered
much, had no more than he that gathered little; For whatsoever he gathered over
and above, unless he did repart the same unto others, it stunke, and did rot
and putrify. 2. Cor. 8.14.
Vt vestra abundantia, etc. I will render it you in the Apostles own words,
That your abundance may supply their lack, and that also their abundance may
be for your lack, that there may be equality. As it is written, He that
gathers much, has nothing over, and he that gathers little, had not the
less. Saint Matthew says, That it is easier for a Camel to pass through the
eye of a needle; than for a rich man to enter into the Kingdom of Heaven. Some
understand this Camel, to be a Dromedary, some a Cable. But to him that shall
ask me; how can a Camel, or a Cable, go through the eye of a needle? I shall
answer him thus, That a Camel being burnt, and beaten to poulder; and a
Cable untwisted and in wound, may enter thread after thread, into a needles
eye. In like manner* a rich man, that puts his trust in his riches, it is hard
for him to go to Heaven, or to get into the eye of this needle. Tob. 4.
But he may so lessen himself, by giving of alms to the poor, that he may
etc. Fiducia magna eleemosina omnibus fatientibus (...). This so Excellent an
artifice, seems to those that apprehend it not, a great disorder. And as he
that turns often about, thinks that the world goes round with him: so he that
has a giddie head, takes Gods providence to be disorder. But, if there be any
inequality, it is on the poor man's part, because God has made them such
great Lords in heaven, that the rich had need to get themselves out of their
hands by Almesdeeds. Daniel, to Nebucadnezar, Break off thy iniquities by
giving Alms: Alluding to that of the Proverb, The ransom of a man's life are
his riches. Saint Chrysostom says, Dan. 4.27. Prou. 13.8.
That God did not create the Rich for to relieve the Poor; but the Poor, that
the Rich might not be barren of good works. And Saint Austen, That Mercy
stands before Hell gates, seeking to divert condemnation from the Rich.

Full of Sores. Life without health, no life*
In this Counterposition he begins first with the sickness of the Poor: For
as health next to life is the greatest good; so, a long, a grievous, and a
painful sickness is the greatest ill. Ecclesiasticus says, That a poor
man that is sound and lusty, is better than a rich man that is sick and
feeble. Health is of a greater price than either gold or silver, and there is
no treasure to be compared to a body that is strong and healthie. And
indeering this truth, he says, That death is a less evil than a bitter
life; and the grave, than a long and grievous sickness. So that in
conclusion, he prefers health before life. But if to these sores of Lazarus,
we shall add hunger, nakedness, and weakness, and all these in so high a
degree, that he was not able to lift up his Crutches to drive away the Dogs
which did lick away, together with the matter and filth of his Sores, his
very life from him; a man can hardly comprehend a greater misery.

Insuper, and Canes lingebant.
And the Dogs licked, etc. The greatest misery that Lazarus endured, was the
cruelty of this rich man, and of all his whole house; for even the yerie Dogs
in the house of a cruel man, are also cruel. This does this word Insuper
infer: Here are so many miseries heaped one upon another, that they can hardly
be reduced to a sum.

And the Dogs licked, etc. The very Dogs did suck and lick out the life of
him* And this cruelty may be considered two manner of ways:

The one, That this rich man affronted poor Lazarus, speaking unto his
servants in a commanding manner, What does this poor Rogue make here, send him
packing, that I may see him no more; and I charge you, that you give him not so
much as a Cup of cold water, lest, like a Fowlers Whistle, Riches usually
accompanied with pride and cruelty.
he may serve as a Call, to inuit all the Beggars in the country to come
tomorrow to my house, hoping that they shall speed no worse than he has done.
They perform their masters command, and when they had so done, they come in
and tell him, Sir, we have dismissed him, and willed him to be gone; but the
poor man is very importunate, and loath to stir. Is he so, (quoth he) marry
then will I tell you what you shall do; turn out these Dogs upon him, and
they will set him hence with a vengeance. This construction Saint Augustine
makes in a Sermon of his; and withal, leaves us this note for our better
learning; Quod in lingua majorem se^tit ardorem, quia per eam contempsit
Pauperem, That he felt therefore the greater heat in his tongue, because with
it he had the Poor in derision, and made it the Whip to lash them.

The other, That this rich man made as though he were deaf and would not hear
on that ear, when the Poor cried o^t unto him, though his miserable condition
and hunger-starued carka^se (though he poor soul had held his peace) spoke in
a loud voice unto him, to bestow something upon him, Those crummes (good
Master) that are come from your table; those scraps (for Gods sake) that are
left, etc. Of these two interpretations you may take which you please; but I am
sure, neither of both but is a sin, and that a great one too. In which sin
of this uncharitable Chuffe, we are to consider three very woeful
circumstances.

The first, That it is a sin that is generally hated and abhorred. For all
other sins have some Patrons to protect them, some abettors to defend them,
or some favorers to excuse them, if not in heaven, yet at least here on earth;
but against this unmerciful and hard hearted sin, God, Heaven, Earth,
Angels, and Men, have so open and wide an ear, and conceive so ill of it,
that they think none deserves Hell better. And therefore it is said, Iudicium
sine misericordia, his qui non faciunt misericordiam, Judgment without mercy,
to those that show no mercy. When he falls, Job 20.27.
no man will take pity of him: Reuelabunt Coeli iniquitatem ei^^, and Terra
consurget aduersius eum, The Heaven shall declare his wickedness, and the
Earth shall rise up against him. All the World will cry out against an
unmerciful minded man; as on the contrary, they will praise and applaud him
that is of a pitiful and tender disposition: Enarrabit Eleemosynas suas omnis
Ecclesia Sanctorum, The whole Congregation shall talk of his praise, and the
Generations that are to come shall speak good things of him. Whereas the
other, his name shall perish from off the earth, but his torments in hell shall
endure for ever. Saint Austen is of opinion, That there is not any sin more
injurious to Nature, than this. You shall have a rich man keep in his house a
Lion, a Bear, five or six cast of Falcons, to all which, he alots daily a
liberal allowance: the poor man comes unto him, makes his moan, and in a
pitiful and humble fashion says unto him, Sir, I beseech you (for Gods sake)
bestow one single penny, or a piece of bread on a poor weak creature, that
is not able to work for his living: Yet will not the rich man give him that
which he gives unto his Beasts; o, what an inhumane thing is this, and how
harsh to every good man's nature.

The second circumstance is this, That God does with such difficulty remit
this sin, that if any be irremissable, it is this: not only for it is
cruelty, so contrary to the bowels of Gods compassion; but also, for that
taxing his providence, he makes such light reckoning of the miseries of the
Poor, that he weighes them by ounces, and measures them out by inches: nay,
he proceeds further, by adding grief unto grief, and affliction to
affliction; and judging those jerks of Gods divine Justice to be too gentle, he
lays a heavier hand and greater load upon him. Zach. 1.15.
This is that, that made Zachary to cry out, Magna ira irascor, etc. I am
greatly incensed against your richer sort of men; for I was angry but a
little, and they helped forward the affliction. I send the Poor a sore for the
chastisement of his sins, that thereby I may bring him to heaven; and these
would flea him alive. Amos 4.1.
The Prophet Amos thunders out a terrible threatening against them, in the
metaphor of fat Kyne; Audite haec vaccae pingues, qui confringitis, etc. Hear
this Word ye Kyne of Bashan, that are in the Mountains of Samaria, which
oppress the Poor, and destroy the Needy, thou have not left one bone of them
unbroken; but I swear by my Holiness, That I will be revenged of thee. Lo,
the days shall come upon you, that I will take you away with Thorns, and your
Posterity with Fish-hookes, and y^^ shall go out at the breaches, every Cow
forward, and ye shall cast your selves out of the Palace. Thus he calls the
Princes and Governors, which being overwhelmed with the great abundance of Gods
benefits, forgot God and his poor Members; and therefore he calls them by
the name of beasts, and not of men. No less fearful is that menacing of
Micah, Mich. 3.1.
Hear, o ye Heads of Jacob, and ye Princes of the house of Israel, who
pluck off the skin of the Poor, and the flesh from off their bones; who also
eat the flesh of my people, and fley off the skin from them, and break their
bones and chop them in pieces as for the pot, and as flesh within the Caldron.
They shall cry unto me (says the Lord) in the time of their trouble, but I
will not hear them; I will even hide my face from them at that time, because
they have done wickedly in their works. O, that men should be so unnatural as
to ^lay the skin from the flesh, and then presently to tear the flesh from
the bone. God puts a poor man into poverty, but he does not ^lay him nor kill
him; but the rich man* does thus, tormenting him anew, whom God has already
punished enough; Because they have smitten those whom I have smitten, and have
added new wounds to those that I have already inflicted upon them.

The third circumstance is taken out of Job; where he treats of another rich
man like unto this of whom we now speak of. Non remansit de cibo eius, Job. 20.
propterea nihil permanebit de bonis eius, There shall none of his meat be
left, and there shall be no memorial of his goods. When he shall be filled
with his abundance he shall be in pain, and the hand of all the Wicked shall
assail him; he shall be about to fill his belly, but God shall send upon him
his fierce wrath, and shall cause to rain upon him, even upon his meat: He
shall fly from the Iron Weapons, and the Bow of Steel shall strike him
through; the Arrow is drawn out, and comes forth of the body, and shines
out of his gall, so fear comes upon him. All darkness shall be hid in his
secret places, the fire that is not blown shall devour him, and that which
remains in his Tabernacle shall be destroyed. The Heaven shall declare his
wickedness, and the Earth shall rise up against him; the increase of his house
shall go away, it shall flow away in the day of his wrath. This is his portion
from God, and the heritage that he shall have of God: For he that was so
unmerciful, that he would not afford the crummes that fell from his Table to
the Poor, shall be so far from enjoying the least good (though it be but a drop
of water) that God will rather cause him to vomit up those good things which he
has eaten in this life. He has devoured substance, Job. 20.1^.
and he shall vomit it; for God shall draw it out of his belly. He shall
vomit it forth with a great deal of pain; if he shall call for drink, the
Devils shall say unto him, Spew up that which thou have drunk; if for meat,
Vomit up that which thou have eaten: He shall suck the gall of Aspes, and the
Vipers tongue shall slay him: He shall not see the rivers, nor the Floods and
Streams of Honey and Butter: He shall restore the labor, and devour no
more, even according to his substance shall be his exchange, and he shall enjoy
i^ no more: For he has undone many, he has forsaken the Poor, and has
spoiled houses which he builded not; surely he shall find no quietness in his
body, neither shall he reserve of that which he desired.

Factum est autem vt moreretur mendicus.
But it came to pass that the Beggar died. First, Lazarus dies; Why desperate
Sinners are often suffered* to live long.
for God evermore makes more have to dry up the tears of the Just, than the
plaints of the Sinner: Ad vesperum demorabitur flet^^, etc. Their tears shall
continue to the evening, etc. Amongst many reasons which the Saints do render,
Why Gods Justice comes commonly with a leaden foot; that of Saint Gregory is
an excellent one, which is, That so great is the wretchedness which waits upon
a Reprobate, that it is not much, that God should permit him to enjoy some few
years more of his miserable and unhappy happiness. A pitiful Judge is
wont sometime to defer the Delinquents sentence of death; but when careless
of his doom, he sees him game, eat, and sleep; he says, Let him alone, and
let him make himself as merry as he can, for this world will not last long
with him; for his destruction is at hand, and the stroke of death hangs over
his head, and when it comes it will come suddenly upon him. Many great sinners
live to be very old men before they die; and the reason of it is, for that God
(who is a God of patience) suffers them to live here the longer, for that after
their death a bitter portion remains for them.

Et portaretur ab Angelis, And he was carried of Angels.
Every torment is so much the more cruel, by how much the more it suffers
in the extremes that are opposite thereunto. Job pondering that of Hell,
says, That those that are there tormented, pass from snow to fire, Ab aquis
niuium, ad nimium colorem. The like succeeds in content, which is so much the
greater, by how much we go from a greater sorrow to a greater joy. Such then
was the condition of Lazarus, passing from the paws of Dogs, to the hands of
Angels; from the Portch of a Tyrant, to the bosom of Abraham; from the
greatest misery, to the greatest happiness that they who were even the most
blessed did then enjoy. The Dogs (in Scripture) is the symbol or hierogliphick
of a most filthy, 3. Kings. 8.
vile, and base thing. Abner said unto Ishbosheth, Am I a Dog, that thou thus
despisest me? The Poet gives him this beastly Epithet, Obsaenoque Cane. Math.
7.
And Saint Matthew, by way of scorn, Non licet sanctum dare Canibus. But the
Angels are the noblest of all other creatures, and the purest; for God molded
them with his own hands. So that Lazarus went from the vilest and the basest,
to the cleanest and the noblest hands. Saint Chrysostom reports of the Roman
Triumphants, That some entered Rome in Chariots drawn with pyde Horses; others
with Elephants; others with Lions; and others with Swannes: but the Chariot of
Apollo was drawn by swift and nimble footed Gynnets. There was a Tyrant that
had his Chariot drawn with those Kings that he had conquered. But Lazarus his
Chariot did far exceed all these, for this was drawn by the hands of Angels.
Sabellicus says, That when Tullyes banishment was reuersed, they bore him
throughout all Italy upon their shoulders, Totius Italiae humeris e^ectus est.
David says, That Gods Chariot is drawn with Cherubines, [ Ascendit super
Cherubim, and volauit:] God then lending Lazarus this his Chariot, it is no
marvel if in a trice he flew up into the bosom of Abraham. S^lomon when he
was proclaimed King, rode on his Fathers Mule; Mordech^i for his more honor
was mounted on Assuerus his own Horse: but Lazarus (to surpass these) went in
triumph to heaven in Gods own Chariot. This must needs breed a great confusion
and amasement in this rich man; that the Angels should carry him being dead,
into heaven; on whom he would not vouchsafe to look, nor bestow a morcell of
bread being alive.

And he was carried of Angels. One Angel was enough to overthrow a mountain;
one only suffices to move these celestial Orbs; but it is Saint
Chrysostomes note, That, Every one was glad to put a helping hand to so
worthy a burden ^ this; As many earnestly thrust themselves forward, to bear
a foot, a leg, or an arm of some great Monarch.

In ^inum Abrahae, Into the bosom of Abraham.
Some understand by this his bosom, the nearest place about Abraham. As in
that of the Evangelist, All the Apostles supt with our Savior Christ; but
Saint John only, leaned his head in his bosom. And in that other, Vnigenitu^,
qui est in sinu patris, etc. The only begotten, who is in the bosom of the
Father. As also that, A dextris, At his right hand. So likewise, Many shall lie
down with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob. And the Church sings, Martinus, Abrahae
sinu, laetus excipitur.

Mortu^s est autem Dives, and sepultus est.
But the rich man died, and was buried. The Greek makes there a full point;
and then presently goes on, In inferno autem cum esse^ in tormentis, But when
he was in hell in torment. But of Lazarus it is not said, That they buried him;
whither it were for that he had no burial at all, or for that being so poor
and miserable a creature, Earth made no mention of him, as Heaven did not of
the rich man; But we read of the rich man, Sepultus est, He was buried.
Hitherto did reach the jurisdiction of his riches, and the peculiar of his
prosperity; great Ceremonies, watchful attendance about his Corpse, many
Mourners, Doles to the Poor, Tombs of Alabaster, Vaults paued with Marble,
Lamentations, odoriferous Ointments, precious Embalmings, Funeral Orations,
and solemn Banquets: In all this, I confess, the rich man has a great
advantage of him that is poor. But in this outward pomp lies all the rich
man's happiness; and when he has entered the doors of darkness, and is shut
up in his grave, like the Hedge-hogge, he leaves his Apples behind him, and
nothing remains with him but the prickles of a wounded conscience, his
howlings, his lamentations, weeping, gnashing of teeth, and whatsoever other
torments Hell can afford. Diuitiarum jactantia, quid contulit nobis? The
ostentation and glory of riches, what good does it bring unto us? O, would to
God that I had bin some poor Shepherd! O, how too late have I fallen into an
account of mine own hurt! O World, would to God I had never known thee.

He died, and was buried. There is no felicity so great, Nothing permanent in
this life.
that can divert the evil of Death: let the rich man live the years of
Nestor, the ages of Methusalem; in the end he must descend into the grave. The
cleerest Heaven must have it is Cloud, and the brightest day must have it is
night; the Sun, though never so shining, must have it is setting; the Sea,
though never so calm, must have it is storm. If the good things of this life
were perpetual, they that are in love with them might pretend some excuse; but
being that worldly pleasure is a Wheel that is always moving, a River that
is always running, a Mill that is always going, and grinding us to dust; How
can thou settle thy self sure thereupon? The highest places are the least
secure; the Moon when she is at the full, foretells a waine; and the Sun when
it is at the height, admits a declination; the house, the higher it is built,
the more subject it is to falling: And the Nest (says Abdias) that is nearest
to the Stars, God does soonest throw it down.

The rich man died. He tells not how he lived, but how he died; for death is
the echo of man's life, and he having led so cruel and so merciless a life,
As a man's life is, so is his death.
what good could he hope for at his death? Quoniam non est in morte, qui memor
sit tui, laboraui in gemitu meo, etc. The first part, Reason proves unto us:
The second, Weeping and howling. In my life time I ask God forgiveness for my
sins: For the man that is unmindful of this in his life, God does not think
on him at his death. Many call upon God at the hour of their death, and it
makes a man's hair to stand an end, to see a man careless in so dangerous a
passage, and only because Death is the echo of our life. Others will call upon
Jesus, but as that crucified Thief, that dyed without devotion: For that heart
which is hard in his life, is likewise hard in his death.

Cum esset in tormentis. When he was in torment, etc.
Here is an indefinite term, put for a universal. For albeit every one of
the damned do suffer the full measure and weight of his sins; and (acording
to Saint Austen, and Saint Gregory) suffer most in that particular, wherein
they most offended; And that therefore the rich man did suffer more in his
tongue, than any other member of his body: yet notwithstanding, there is not
any one that is d^mned, which does not generally suffer in all his whole body,
and in every part of his soul. For, as Heaven is a happiness, that imbraceth
all happiness; so Hell, is a misery that includes all miseries. There was
never yet any tyrant in the world, in whose prisons and dungeons all torments
were inflicted at once. But in that of Hell, there is not any torment, which is
not felt at one and the same instant. The body, that shall generally suffer:
And for this, fire, and cold, will suffice; which are general torments. The
soul shall likewise generally suffer sorrow and pain, not only because the
fire shall burn it, which though corporal, yet shall it is flames have an
operative virtue and working upon the soul; but because all hope being lost of
any kind of joy whatsoever, there shall therein be deposited all the reasons
that may be, of sorrow and of misery. Likewise there shall be particular
torments for the senses of the body, and for the faculties of the soul; the
eyes shall enjoy so much light as shall serve to see fearful Visions, (so
says Cirillus Alexandrinus) and on the other side, they shall suffer such
thick and palpable darkness, that they shall imagine them to be the ghastly
shadows of death. Saint Chrysostom says, That they shall see the huge and
infinite numbers of the Damned, taking notice of all those that conuersed with
them in their life time, as fathers, grandfathers, brothers, and friends. And
if the variety and multitude that are in a deep dungeon, if the rattling of
their chains, the clattring of their shackles, their hunger, their nakedness,
the noise, coil, and confusion which they make, cause a horror in as many as
both see and hear it; what a terror then will it be, to see the miserable
torments, and to hear the fearful shri^kes and pitiful outcries of those
that are damned to the bottomless pit of hell? The ears will suffer with
their howlings, their lamentations, their blasphemies, their cursings, their
ragings, their dispairings; besides the untunable and harsh music of the
Devils, roaring and yellowing like so many mad Bulls, that with the dinne and
hideousness of the noise, Heaven and Earth might have seemed to come together,
and the whole frame and machine of the Orbs to have cracked and fallen in
sunder. The smell, the taste, the touch, the will, the understanding, and the
memory, both irrascible and concupiscible, shall not be employed upon any
thing (as Saint Augustine has noted it) from whence they shall not receive
most grievous pain and torment. But of all other torments, that of their
desperation will be the greatest, because there will be no wading through this
Lake that burns with fire and brimstone, nor no end at all to these their
endless miseries. That ten thousand, nay, a hundred thousand years
continuance in hell shall not suffice to satisfy for their sins, that the
fountain of mercy should be shut up for ever, not affoording them so much as
one drop of cold water to cool the tongue; that God will not admit for the
offenses of three days, the satisfaction of seventy times seven thousands of
years. This is that Magnum Chaos inter vos and nos; This is that great Chaos,
that huge Gulf which is set between you and us; it is Chaos impertransibile,
that impassable Gulf, wherein to fall it is easy, but to get out impossible.

Many of the Saints upon this consideration deeply weighing these things with
themselves, have made great exclamations; as S. Chrysostom, Petrus Crysologus,
and others. If we believe (say they) that this imprisonment is perdurable, t^is
fire is eternal, and that these torments are endless; How comes it to pass
that we eat, live, and sleep as we do? O, the madness of those men who seek
fit and handsome dwellings for three days, and omit to think of those
eternal habitations which continue world without end! O, the sottishness of
those which covet such short and transitory contentments! O, the blindness of
those, who for a moment of pleasure will adventure an eternity of pain! Is it
much that these holy Saints should exclaim? Is it much that they should weep
tears of blood, who believe that this rich man does fry in perpetual flames,
because he was pittiles and void of mercy? seeing on the one side so many
Lazaruses, naked, full of sores, and driven, if not beaten away from our doors;
whose beds are the hard benches and open porches of the Rich; whose meat are
the scraps and offalls, and oftentimes only the bare crummes of the rich man's
board; whose drink are the waters of those Rivers and Fountains where the
Beasts do drink; whose wardrobe are rags; whose cattle, vermin; whose store,
misery; whose tables are their knees; and whose cups are their hands: And on
the other side, so many Gluttons, who feeding like beasts, vomit forth that
they eat, at their tables where they sit; [ Mensae repletae sunt vomitu] being
as empty of pity, as they are full of wine: [ Optimo vino delibuti non
compatiebantur super contritionem Ioseph] who dying (like Oxen in a stall) fat
and full fed, it is no marvel if (as Esaias says) they make Hells sides to
stretch and crack again, Propter hoc dilatauit infernus Os suum.

I would feign ask some one of those which hear me this day, My friend, tell
me, I pray thee, think thou, or have thou any hope, that thou art the only
man in this world that shall live here for ever? Do thou believe that Death
shall one day come to the threshold of thy door, and call for thee, and that
thou must hereafter give a strict account of thy works, words, and thoughts,
before the tribunal seat of God? If thou do, tell me then again, Whither
thou had rather desire the felicity of Lazarus in that other life, or the
eternal torments of this rich man? Art thou persuaded, that thou can wear
out two thousand years in a bed of fire? But if the very thought thereof
cause fear and horror in thee, and makes every bone and joint in thy body to
shake and tremble, Why do thou not seek to fly from so great a danger?
Fly (says Saint Austen) yet now even to day, whilst thou have time.

Pater Abraham, rogo vt mittas Lazarum, aut vnum ex mortuis.
Father Abraham, I pray thee send Lazarus, or one from the Dead, etc. Why the
rich man's petition was repelled.
Origin says, That this rich man did desire, That either Lazarus, or some one
from the Dead, might be sent to preach this point: thinking with himself,
That Abraham might happily send him unto himself, as to one that by this time
very well knew his own error; and that so by this means he might have some
pause or breathing time from these his torments. Whither this was so, or no, it
may by some be doubted; but this is a clear case, That the maine motive that
moved him thereunto, was, the desire that he had that his brethren and
kinsfolk might be drawn unto repentance, and thereby come to be saved, and
escape those intolerable torments which he endured. Saint Chrysostom says,
That Abraham did not yield to the rich man's petition, because he was not
absolute Lord of that place: But that our Savior Christ supplied that defect,
and carried himself like a most merciful and kind loving Lord, to the end
that that stiff necked Nation might not allege in their excuse, That he had
not sent them a Preacher from that other life, to advise them what passed
there. But our Savior (for whom this business was reserved) did not raise up
Lazarus the Poor, but Lazarus the Rich, who upon occasion preached great and
notable things unto them, concerning the life to come. And he likewise raised
up the son of the widow of Naim, that he might also do the like. But those
that will not believe the Prophets (it is our Saviors own saying) will less
believe the Dead.

Quia crucior in hac flamma, Because I am tormented in this flame.
Gods chastisements are like Lightning, which kill one, but fright many; and
the vengeance which God takes of one sinner, is an occasion given to the Just,
to wash their hands in his blood. According to that of David, Cum viderit
vindictam, manus suas lauabit in sanguine peccatoris. And Saint Gregory
expounds it thus, That the Just does wash his hands in the blood of a Sinner,
when by another man's punishment he learnes to amend his own life. There is
nothing does more terrify a Theefes heart, than the gallows and rope
wherewith his fellow was hanged: Funes peccatorum circumplexi sunt me, and
Legem tuam non sum oblitus; when I saw another strangled, To what purpose they
serve
those cords which choked him sat likewise close to my neck; but giving thee
thanks, o Lord, that thou had kept me from coming to so bad an end, I did
resolve with my self, that I would not forget thy Law. And therefore God would
have us to lay up in an everlasting remembrance, as it were, his seuerest and
sharpest punishments. Desiderium Impij m^nimentum est pessimorum; so says
Solomon. To this end the Scripture recounteth, that the earth swallowed up
Korah, Dathan, and Abiram, and the rest of those rebellious schismatics,
wrapping them in flames and smoke; and the Censers remaining in the midst of
the fire, Moses commanded that they should be taken out, and broad plates made
of them for a covering of the Alter, Vt haberent postea filij Israel, quibus
commonerentur, Number. 16.
That they might serve as a memorial and warning to the children of Israel:
As false weights do, that are nailed up in the Market place; grounds that are
ploughed with salt, and the heads of malefactors in the highway. Because the
people of God had entangled themselves with the Moabites, there perished of
them twenty four thousand; but God commanded that the Princes should be
hanged against the Sun. Saint Augustine says, That this was done for an
admonishment to the people; The Seventy read, Ostende eos Domine, contra
Solemn; That God and all the world may see them, and that they may remain as a
perpetual example to posterity. The History of the Machabees reports unto
us, 2. Mac. 15.30.
That Nicanor uttered a most beastly blasphemy, saying, That his power was as
great as that of God; but the divine justice punishing this his insolency, his
head was set up on the highest tower in the city, and his right hand, which he
had held up so proudly, they nailed it against the door of the Temple, and
caused his tongue to be cut in little pieces, and to be cast unto the Fowls.
Pharaohs and his Peoples death, Wis. 19.5.
the book of Wisdom says, That it was convenient that the people of Israel
should see it and consider it; Vt ostenderet quemadmodum inimici eorum
exterminabantur, That the people might try a marvelous passage, and that
these might find a strange death. Theodoret brings a comparison of him that
makes an Anotomie, or dissection upon a dead body, for the instruction of
those that are living. And Zachary paints out unto us a Talent of lead: And
this was a woman that sat in the midst of the Ephah, whose name or title was,
Impiety, or Wickedness; which (he says) was carried unto Babylon, Vt
poneretur super vasem suum, To be established and set up there in her own
place; that being set up aloft upon a Pillar, she might continue there for a
perdurable example. Aulus Gellius in his Noctibus Atticis, says, That Princes
have three ends in their punishments:

The one, The amendment of the fault: And to this end Pilat commanded our
Savior Christ to be whipped; Corripiam eum, etc.

The other, The authority of the offended; for if disrespect should not be
punished, it would breed contempt.

The third, For the terror and example of others; for, Iusticia aliena est
disciplina propria, Other men's punishment is our instruction; And that man is a
fool, whom other men's harms cannot make to beware. When the Lion was sick,
all the beasts of the field went to visit him, only the Fox stayed behind,
and would not go unto him: and being asked the reason, he answered, I find the
tracke of many going in, but of none coming out; and I am not so desperate as
to cast my self wilfully away, when as I may sleep in a whole skin. The
footsteps of the Angels that fell, may advise us of our pride; the ashes of
Sodom tell us of our filthiness; the Gallows of Judas forewarne us of our
avarice; and the hell of this rich man restrain us from our cruelties. When
God punished the Jews, he scattered them far and near over the face of the
whole earth, that they might strike a fear into all other Nations. A corporal
medicine fits not all sores; but corporal punishment meets with all faults.

Fili, recordare quia recepisti bona in vita tua.
Son, remember that thou in thy life receiuedst good things. There is a
viciss^tude and change to be seen in all things. Death called a change.
This is a dangerous trucke, a fearful exchange, which makes humane
happiness not only to be suspected, but also abhorred. Job calls Death, a
Change; [ Expecto donec veniat immutatio mea, I stay waiting for my Change.]
And as your Sheep which in Syria breed fine wool, passing along to Seuill,
suffer a change, and are apparelled with a rougher and courser sort of wool;
so these your pampered persons of this world, and those that fare daintily and
deliciously every day, shall change the soft wool of tender sheep, into the
harsh hairs of goats and camels. Nature in all things has ordered a kind of
alternatiue change, or interchangeable mutation; as is to be seen in nights
and in days, in Summer and in Winter. The like does succeed in the order of
Grace; there cannot be two Hells, neither shall there be two Glories. A
Philosopher asking one, Which of these two he had rather be, either Craesus,
(who was one of the richest, but most vicious men in the world) or Socrates?
(who was one of the poorest, but most virtuous men in the world) His answer
was, That in his life he would be a Croesus, but in his death, a Socrates. So,
if it had been put to this rich man's choice, I do think he could have wished
in his heart, to have been in his life Dives, and in his death Lazarus. Balaam
showed the like desire, Moriatur anima mea morte Iustorum, Let my soul die the
death of the Righteous. But they desire an impossibility; for Death is a kind
of trucke or exchange: Fili, recepisti bona in vita tua, Lazarus similiter
mala; Son, remember that thou in thy life time receiuedst thy pleasures, and
likewise Lazarus pains; now therefore is he comforted, and thou art tormented.
But I will no longer torment your patieence. God of his infinite goodness, etc.

THE SIXTEENTH SERMON, UPON THE FRIDAY AFTER THE SECOND SUNDAY IN LENT.
MAT. 21. MARC. 12. LVC. 20. Homo quidam plantauit Vineam.

A certain man planted a Vineyard.


THis is a Law Suit or Trial between God and his People; wherein, The drift
of the story.
according to the tenor of the Process, his people are condemned as
ungrateful, cruel, disrespectiue, forgetful of their duty, and thrust out
of all that they had, as unworthy of that good which they possessed. This
Story much resembles the Statua of Nebucadnezar, Dan. 2.
whose head was of gold, whose breast was of silver, whose body of brass,
whose legs of iron, and whose feet of clay. For God having begun first unto
them with many great kindnesses, extraordinary favors, and undeserved
courtesies, he goes descending and declining from them, till they fall into the
greatest disgrace and disfauor that any soul can receive from the hands of God.

Fear, the only thing to keep safe the Vineyard. Esaias. 5.4.
A certain man planted a Vineyard. He planted so perfect a Vineyard, that it
might truly be said, What could I have done more unto my Vineyard? And this is
a strange indeering on Gods part, That he should make choice of this
Vine-stocke from amongst all the rest of the Countries and Nations of the
World. When the most High had divided the Nations, and when he had separated
the sons of Adam. Esaias calls it, Esaias. 5.7. Ier. 22.
Germen dilectabile, His pleasant Plant. Jeremy, Vineam electam, his elect and
choice Vine. Saint Hierome, Vineam Sorec, which is a Vine-plant, whose grapes
(according to some) had no stones in them. And he compassed it with an hedge:
whereby some Commentators understand, the Angels protecting of it; others, Gods
garding of it himself; others, the fear of punishment; For, Fear keeps the
Vineyard safe. And this Gods own Inheritance may run a twofolde danger:

First, In regard of the Devils malice; and against this, God opposes
himself, by making a hedge about it, and by drawing a line, beyond which the
Devil cannot pass.

Secondly, In regard of our liberty; against which he has placed the Fear
of the Law, and the severity of Gods chastisements: For, it is Fear that
keepe^ the Vineyard safe. If there be any thing that puts a bridle to these our
unlawful longings, it is this Fear; as has been already proved in that our
former discourse, treating of the rich man's being in Hell.

God has so severely punished some sins, that in man's seeming he might be
thought to have gone a little too far, and to have exceeded therein; as in
that of Ananias and Saphira, and many others, which (as Tertullian has very
well observed) were as so many Proclamations pasted up on the principal posts
of the City, to advise the people what his divine Justice meant to do
hereafter in the like kind of delicts. And to this end God would that those his
primary executions of his Justice should remain as a perpetual memorial to
posterity: As that of the Angels, against our pride; that of Sodom, against
our lawless lusts; that of Caine, against our envy; that of Zenacharib,
against our arrogancy; that fire of Gods wrath which consumed those that
called for Quails, against our Gluttony; that of the Israelites early rising
up to gather Manna, against our sloathfulnesse; that punishment occasioned by
the golden Calfe, against our Idolatry: So that It is Fear that keeps the
Vineyard safe. This is that hedge wherewith it is compassed; this, that strong
wall of defense; and this, the surest observance of the Law. It is said in
Deutronomie, Si custodieris Praecepta mea, ipsa custodient te, If thou shall
keep my Commandments, they shall keep thee. And in Ecclesiasticus, Si
seruaueris, seruabunt te. Judith 5.21.
Achior chief Captain to the sons of Ammon, notified this truth to
Holofernes; If this people have kept the Laws and commandments of their God,
let my Lord pass by, lest their Lord defend them, and their God be for them,
and we become a reproach to all the World: For assure your self, as long as
they shall serve him, he will serve as a Wall unto them.

Where it is to be noted, That as in a Wall there must not be any breach, God
accepts not a peece-meale obedience.
because thereby Cities commonly come to be lost; so likewise must there not
be any breach in the observance of the Law: for the transgression of one
Commandment will serve to condemn thee, as well as of the whole Decalogue;
and the failing in one virtue is the failing in all. Cant. 7.2.
Thy belly is as an heap of Wheat compassed about with Lillies: The dangers
are numberless that threaten this heap of wheat in the threshing floor;
Creditors, Thieves, Beasts, Birds, and Pismires: But far more in number are
those dangers that threaten our Soul; those virtues which are to stand round
about her, must guard and defend her; Circundate Syon, and complectimini eam.

Et Sepe circumdedit eam.
And he compassed it about with a hedge. The fear of the Lord a strong defense.
He had no sooner planted his Vineyard, but he compassed it about with an
Hedge: To show unto us, That when a man has once settled himself, his house,
his wife, his children, and his family, he ought presently to compass it in
with a Wall; which Wall must be, the Fear of God, and the keeping of his Laws.
It must be like Salomons bed, Cant. 3.7.
which had threescore strong men round about it, of the valiant men of Israel,
such as could handle the Sword, and were expert in war; every one having his
sword upon his thigh, for the Fear by night, Propter timores nocturnos.
Admonishing us to keep good watch and ward; so many, and so secret are those
perils that attend us, that without the protection of God and his Angels, we
shall hardly be able to defend our selves. Saint Paul says of himself, Gratia
Dei, sum id quod sum, By the grace of God I am that I am. Whereunto Saint
Augustine has added, Gratia Dei, non sum id quod non sum, By the grace of God
I am not that which I am not. By the grace of God, thy house and thy lands may
continue to thee and thy posterity to the worlds end; and by the grace of God,
thy eyes may abstain from that which is evil. Totus mundus in maligno positus
est, All the world is set upon mischief; The world is a continual war, a
long enlarged temptation. And Saint Ambrose calls it Piraterium, A Sea fraught
with Pirates: For (as Saint Augustine says) therein there is nothing safe. In
Paradise, the forbidden Fruit, nor the Tree of Life were not secure; and
therefore God placed a Cherubin before the gate, to guard it the surer. Solomon
had not his bedchamber safe, though it were guarded with so many strong men:
How shall it be with that house then that is without walls or any defense at
all? Vbi non est saepes, diripietur possessio, (says Ecclesiasticus) A
Vineyard that is without a Mount, give it for lost.

Edificauit Turrim.
He built a Tower in it. This Tower Origin and Saint Hierome understand to be
the Temple of Jerusalem, which was built in a high place. Irenaeus would have
it to be the same City whereof Esaias said, Venite, ascendamus ad montem Domini.
Saint Ambrose and Saint Hilarie, The height of the Law. Others, that place
where the fruits of the Vineyard were to be kept, Abundantia in Turribus tuis.
Other Schoolmen and Doctors take it to be the Churches Beacon or Watchtower:
Others, to be our Faith, whose sight extends it self to earth, heaven, and
hell. There is nothing that imports the World more, than the eyes of this
Tower. Some seeking out the principal cause of the Worlds perdition, say,
Covetousness is the root thereof; Radix omnium malorum cupiditas. Others,
Ignorance; alleging that of the Philosopher, Omnis peccans, est Ignorans. But
the truth is, it is the want of Faith.

Et fodit in ea Torcular.
What is understood by the winepresse
He dug a Pit for the Winepresse. By this pit of the Winepresse, Origin and
Saint Hierome understand, the Sacrifice of our Saviors body and blood: Saint
Hilarie, The Cross of Christ: Saint Gregory, The chastisement of Jerusalem.
The Owner of this Vineyard had made it so perfect and so absolute, that the
Renters thereof lived in a manner idle, and had little or nothing more to do,
than to keep it clean from Thorns, and to gather and enjoy the Fruits
thereof: wherein this Master of a family showed the great care he had of his
house, treating therein touching man's good, and the slight account that man
made of this his happiness and felicity. The cost which Christ was at with
his Vineyard.
When God created the World, he took not upon him the name of an Husbandman;
nor did he take any pains in the creating of it, for he but said the word, and
it was done, Ipse dixit, and facta sunt. But this Vineyard of the Church, it
cost him the pains of planting it, of compassing it in with a hedge, of
digging a pit for the Winepresse, of building a Tower in it, besides the life
of many of his servants, as also of him, Quem acquisiuit sanguine suo. This was
a new Noah, with whom that former old Noah was not to be compared: For that,
giving an end to a young world, though grown old in sin, destroyed the people,
but not their wickedness; but this did utterly overthrow the Kingdom of
sin, drowning it in the flood of his blood, and gave the first beginning to
the life of Grace.

The firmness of the Church
Whence follows the firmness and perpetuity of the Church; for, being
founded upon so sure a Foundation, who can overthrow it? Supra dorsum meum
fabricauerunt peccatores, [Another letter has it, Arauerunt aratores] The
Ploughers ploughed furrows on my back. Alluding to that which was then in use
for signing out the situation and circuit of some City. Romulus took that
course when he founded Rome.

-- Vrbem signauit aratro: -- So says the Poet. Whom Saint Augustine also
cites. But this City, which has on the one side Heaven for it is prop, and on
the other, the shoulders of our Savior Christ; What firmness and prosperity
must it enjoy? And only because Christ does cherish and water it, not only
with his own most precious blood, but with that of so many Martyrs. Plutarch
reports, That those of Eliopolis drank no wine, being persuaded, that wine
was the blood of those Giants which made war against Heaven, of whose bodies
being buried in the earth, sprang your Vines. And therefore when Alexander
drank much wine, Antocides would say unto him, I pray Sir consider that ye
drink the blood of the earth. These are all lies, yet may very well suit with
this our truth; for we are to understand, That the Vines of the Faithful
sprang and grew up from the blood of that Giant, of whom David said, Exultauit
vt Gygas adcurrendam viam. For that Moral, That the sprinkling of the blood of
those two Lovers should give color and ripenes to the Fruit, is a mere fable;
but that the blood of our Savior Christ should so season these wild Vines, as
to make them to bring forth abundance of fruit, is a known truth. Whence it
is to be noted, that whither it be that these Vines do represent the faithful;
or whither or no, because the wine thereof is turned into the blood of our
Savior Christ, the Devil bears so great a hatred to the sprigs and branches
of the Vine, that there is not any thing that your Witches abhor and stand
more in fear of. As you may read in Petrus Gregorius, in his Books De
Republica. Plutarch says, That your Vinestockes being watered with wine, dry
and wither away: But the Vines of the Faithful being besprinkled with the wine
of the blood of Christ, grow up and fructify the better. Vinum germinans
Virgins; it ingendreth noble thoughts. The Poet inuites Aeneas, and calls unto
him in this sweet kind of language, Sat sanguine Diuum: But more nobleness
does a Christian enjoy in that Sat sanguine Christi. Seneca says, That the
nobleness of blood eleuateth our thoughts. And God says by the mouth of Hose,
That if the Israelites shall return unto him, that they shall flourish as the
Vine, Ose 14.8.
and the sent thereof shall be as the wine of Lebanon.

With the firmness of the Church suits that fable of Atlas, who vpheld heaven
with his shoulders; but when Hercules saw he began to groan under so great a
burden, he came in to help him: yet for all this was not Heaven safe,
underpropped by his shoulders. But the Edifice of the Church, bore up by our
Savior Christ, shall continue for ever. Erumpet radix eius, vt Libani
stabilietur. An Interpreter upon this place of Osee, says, It shall stand as
firm as the Root of Mount Lebanon, which shall take such a deep rooting, that
all the Devils in hell shall not prevail against it.

Locauit Agricolis.
He let it out to husbandmen. God is the only true Lord of this Vineyard, All
that we enjoy in this Life is an others wealth, and we have but the use of it.
the rest are but Farmers and Renters. Philon proves, That all of us in this
life enjoy but another bodies wealth; and that we have the use thereof, but
not the propriety. Saint Chrysostom, That (says he) is mine, which no man
can take from me; and in this sense, neither is my life, nor my wealth, nor my
health, mine own, etc. Our life (says Cicero) God has only lent it us,
without appointing any set place of payment, which he may demand of us at what
time it pleases him. And so in the rest, we daily find the like experience.
Your Emperors (says Horace) we call, Rerum terrenarum Dominos, Lords of the
earth. But this is but man's flattery; for they have not the true dominion of
these earthly things, but only the use of them. And hence was it that our
Savior Christ did infer, Si in alieno infideles fuistis, quod vestrum est,
Quis credet vobis? If ye were unfaithful in that wealth, honor, health, and
beauty, which are another goods, Who will rely upon the love of your good
will, which is your own? Saint Paul teaches us this Lesson, Qui gaudent,
tanquam non gaudentes; qui flent, tanquam non flentes; Those that rejoice, let
them rejoice as though they did not rejoice; and those that weep, let them
weep as though they did not weep. For, on strange occasions, and such as
belong to other men, we ought not to be overtaken with too much either grief
or joy. Thou go to see the Kings or Queens Almoneda, or either of their
Iewell-houses: do not thou joy much therein, for those riches are none of
thine, and thou must of force presently forgo them: And therefore Philon
says, That the goods of this life are another, not ours, and that we do but
only rent them ad voluntatem Domini, At the will and pleasure of the Lord.
Touching the disasters of this world, Epictetus says, Do not say, I have lost
such a thing; for it is an improper kind of language; but rather say, I have
returned it back again: and from this ignorance grows our melancholy.
Seneca tells us, That he that will not be content that God should be sole Lord
of all, is unjust. He that thinks himself wronged, when a man asks him that
which he has lent him, is a covetous wretch. He that esteeming a present good,
is forgetful of a former received courtesy, is an ungrateful wretch. And he
that returning back those goods into his masters hands, which he had committed
to his keeping, shall not think himself rid of a great care, and more secure
than before, is a foolish wretch. In the creation of all the rest of the
things, Genesis uses the name of God alone by it self; but when man comes to
be made, it puts this adiunct of Dominus Deus, the Lord God; because man should
not imagine that there was any other Lord that should be able to bring them
into the Land of Promise, save the Lord God. And therefore God says, I will
go before ye, and I will lead ye the way; That they might not attribute
this enterprise to their own valor.

Locauit Agricolis. God rented out this his Vineyard, looking to receive some
fruit thereof. As in Paradise there was not that Tree that was barren^ [ Ex
omni ligno quod est in Paradiso comede, Genesis 2.16.
Thou shall freely eat of every tree of the Garden.] So, in the Paradise of the
Church no Tree ought to be without it is Fruit. David compares the Just, Psalm.
1.
to a Tree that is planted by the River side, Quod fructum suum dabit in
tempore suo, That will bring forth it is fruit in due season; that is, always:
Like unto that of the Apocalypse, Apoc. 22.
which gave fruit every month. In Deutronomie God commanded, That they should
plant no woods nor groves: not that the Spirit of God meant thereby, that all
Forests and Parkes should be condemned, wherein Kings and Princes were to take
their pleasure; but that in the Church there should not be any unprofitable
Trees, and without fruit.

Why God rented ^ut his Vineyard to the ungrateful
He let it out to Husbandmen. The Lord knowing that these Renters would prove
unthankful, why did he let out his Vineyard unto them? Why did he likewise
cast three parts of his seed into those grounds which were not to afford him
any Fruit? And why did that Father give that his prodigal Son his portion, to
spend and consume it in riotousnesse and wantonness? Why (says Phylon) should
God suffer his rain to fall into the sea, for to bring forth Fountains in
those Deserts whereas yet the foot of man did never tread? Why, co^ferre riches
on those who were to maintain quarrels and brawles therewith? And why let out
his Vineyard to him who should shut him out of his own Inheritance, keep
possession against him, and take his life from him?

First of all, Because Seneca says, That for a Prince to confer a favor,
which to his seeming is well bestowed, and to lose it afterward through the
ingratitude of the receiver, is a token of a generous mind: For to this peril
are they put, and all whosoever run this hazard, who do any courtesies in
this life. For a forgetful and unthankful man does commonly show himself
unmindful of the good which he receives: But for a Prince to do a favor
where he knows it shall be lost, and that his kindness is but cast away, this
is Kingly magnificence, and a generous kind of nobleness. And of this kind are
commonly Gods favors, who although we show our selves unthankful, and do not
acknowledge these his favors, yet he daily throws them upon us, that he may
thereby manifest both his greatness and his goodness.

Secondly, Phylon says, That he does prosper the Unthankful, to draw them
thereby to his service.

First, Because there are no gyues nor fetters that tie a man so fast, as
benefits, or make him more a prisoner; Qui beneficia inuenit, compedes inuenit.
This is that which Ose says, In funiculis Adam traham eos: The Hebrew has it,
Ose. 11.4.
In funiculis hominum, I led them with cords of a man, even with bonds of love.
Bulls are made tame, and yield themselves to a five twisted cord; Horses are
made gentle with bridles and with chains; and men's hearts are won with
benefits; Qui coronat te in misericordia, and in miserationibus. God has
compassed thee in with so many mercies, and has bound thee so fast unto him,
in the bonds of his loving kindness, that thou know not which way to get
from him. Joseph being obliged to his master by the many favors that he had
received from him, said, Genesis 39.9.
Quomodo possum? How can I then do this great wickedness? How is it possible
that I should show my self such a Villain to him, who knows not what he
has in the house with me, but has committed all that he has to me; neither
has he kept any thing from me but only thee, because thou art his wife.

Secondly, Because there is no other means comparable unto this, That a Prince
should deliver up all the world to such a man's service, and that he should
extend his liberality to an unknown and unthankful people: And to this end
he affoords his enemies water, and the fruits of the earth, and other temporal
blessings, that thereby they might take occasion to serve him. And if he bestow
so many favors upon an ungrateful people, and if he have care of the beasts
of the forest, what kindnesses will he show unto them that shall truly serve
him.

Locauit Agricolis. He let it out to Husbandmen.
To husbandmen, that know what belong to this business; For, Ignorant and
sluggish Prelates the destruction of Gods Vineyard.
of no people in the world, does Gods vineyard suffer so much harm, as of
ignorant Prelates, that do not know how to prune, and to dress it. And
sloathfulnesse of all other, is most hurtful in this kind. For thereupon, it
grows presently full of Briers, Thistles, and Thorns; and the hedges go to
decay, the mounds are broken down, and the wild Bores, the Foxes, and the
Dogs enter into it. carelessness likewise is very hurtful thereunto; for by
that means, all that go by (as David says) pluck of her Grapes. Thou
broughtest a vine out of Egypt, Psalm. 80.
thou did cast out the Heathen, and planted it. Thou made room for it; and
when it had taken root, it filled the land. The hills were covered with the
shadow of it, and the boughs thereof were like the goodly Cedar trees. She
stretches out her branches unto the Sea, and her boughs unto the River. Why
have thou then broken down her hedge, that all they which go by pluck off
her Grapes? The ignorance of the Priest, the ruin of the People.
the wild Boar out of the wood does root it up, and the wild Beasts of the
field devour it. Behold, and visit this vine, o Lord, and the place of the
vineyard, that thine own right hand has planted; and the branches that thou
made strong for thy self. It is burnt with fire, and cut down, etc. But
these, and such other faults, may be mended; but ignorance, can never be
repaired. If the Renter know not how and when he ought to prune the vine, to
loosen the earth about the roots, and to plant it, etc. it will quickly go to
ruin. It is a great unhappiness, that for to make thy shoes, thou will
inquire out the best shoemaker; And for to govern a Commonwealth, which is
Ars artium, The Art of Arts; thou shall think a Cobbler fit enough to do it.
Gods Vineyard must not be turned into a garden.
There are many reasons, why a Prince should make Noblemen, and Gentlemen,
Presidents, and Prelates. But to weigh down this, there is another great
counter-poise. For being bred up daintily from their cradle, some of them make
gardens of this Vineyard; others houses of pleasure. Naboth made choice rather
to dye, than to part with his Vineyard to the King; because he would not see it
turned to a garden; for to that end only did he desire it. Shall my
inheritance (said he) with the fruit whereof my house is maintained, be turned
into a garden, for a tyrant to sport himself therein? God would take it very
heavily, to see the Vineyard, which he bought with his blood, to be, by some
gentleman-like Prelate, turned into a green Court: especially, having laid
such a grievous curse on those Husbandmen, that shall not look well unto it,
as Regiones vestras alieni deuorant, etc.

He let it out to Husbandmen. Locare, is a word of Espousall, or Marriage; and
it suits well with that Love and Zeal, which a Prelat ought to have to the
Vine, his Spouse. To this marriage, the interest of Wealth, the respect of
Honor, nor the pleasures of this Life, must not move him; but the good only
of the Vine, and the desire he has to take pains therein, till, like salt in
water himself shall wast away and consume. He that enters upon Gods patrimony,
must enter thereupon with a far different end to that, which he does, who
enters upon that of the King; for this (commonly) makes his own private
benefit the mark whereat he aims: But the Prelat, must make another man's
profit, the pin which he must hit. The Minister of a King, takes a lesser
charge first upon him, that it may serve as a step to greater preferment: But a
Prelat must not marry himself to the Church upon hope to meet with a better
benefice the next day after. Spospon^ enim vos vni viro, Virginem castam
exhibere Christo. Many Prelates seem unto me to be like unto those seven
husbands, which were espoused to one woman, who in that other life was wife to
none of them all. So (putting the case the other way) let me ask you, (as
those other did our Savior) when seven Churches shall be married to one
Prelat, which of those shall be said to be his wife in that other Life.

He planted a Vineyard, and let it out to Husbandmen. Saint Bernard says, Vi^^
sapienti, Every man's soul is a vineyard to him self, and he must dress it
sua vita vinea est, and sua Conscientia. To a wise man, his own life, and
conscience, is a Vineyard. So that, not only the Church is called a Vine, but
every man's particular Soul, may also be immagined to be a stock of this
Vine. And that for three principal conueniences.

The hasard whereunto the Vineyard of the soul is exposed.
First, In regard of the great ha^arads which the Vine runs, as frosts,
hail, worms, want of water, carelessness of him that keeps the Vineyard,
thieves, dogs, boares, foxes, and enemies, such as H^lofernes commanded to
take away the waters from those of Bethulia. But far greater perils than
these does ma^s Soul pass through; as those frosts, that nip it through
default of Charity; those haile-stones of our sins, which beat it down to
the Earth, that it can hardly rise again; those Devils, which like the
children of Esau, and governors of the people of Moab, cry, Exinanite,
exinanite, persequimini, and comprehendite eam. And the carelessness that is
had in pruning it. Saint Bernard says, That the natural Vine will ask but
once pruning; but the metaphorical Vine, a thousand prunings; because every
foot, new buds, and new sprigs of vices begin to sprout up in it; being subject
(as Saint Paul says) periculis in mari, periculis in terra, to perils by sea,
and perils by land, etc.

Secondly, There is not any Plant, whose Fruit does more lively represent the
essence of our nature. The Flower of the Vine represents unto us our childhood;
the beauty thereof, it is peaceablenesse, it is prettiness, it is wittiness,
it is pleasingnesse, it is innocence: The sharpness and soreness thereof
being green, our youths hardness, harshnesse, tartness, and
unseasonableness. The Grape it self grown to perfection, the sweet,
sauourie, discreet, and ripe years of our life, whereof that wine is made
which glads the heart of man, and washes away care. In the Raysons, which by
the heat of the Sun proouing both sauorie and wholesome, serve for physic,
is our old age represented unto us; which ought to be the Antidote of youth. It
is that discourse which does advice us, that we ought not to despair of our
tart and distastefull youthfulness; for the green and sour Grape comes not
only to be a ripe one, but turns also to be a Rayson; and your young wild
Lads come not only to be stayed and well gouernd men, but prove likewise grave,
wise, and ancient old Senators in the commonwealth. Themistocles was such a
young lewd fellow, that his father did disinherite him, and his mother for
very grief hung her self; yet it was his fortune afterward to come to be a
most valiant Captain, and to prove a most prudent Governor. The like happened
to Alcibiades, and to Apolemon, (so says Valerius Maximus) and to Julius
Caesar (as Fulgosius reports it unto us.) Aristotle (according unto Aelian)
in his younger years played away all his Patrimony; he followed the wars;
he found that that course did not fit well with him, he turns Apothecarie,
frequents the Schools, and proves in the end the Prince of Philosophers.

Thirdly, All sorts of Trees, be they barren or fruitful, The vine has no
bounds, no more has the will of man.
they have their natural height and breadth, either more or less, according to
their several kinds; your Pines and your Cedars are the tallest of all
others; your Wallnuts round like a Cup, and more spredding at the top: In a
word, every one has his convenient stature and proportion. But the Vine has
no determinate either height or breadth; if you let it alone, it will traile
upon the ground, and so the fruit thereof rot upon the earth; if you let it
lean unto a pole, it will run up to the top thereof; if to an Elm, it will
creep up to the highest boughs; if to a wall, it will run and shoot it
self along, till it has claspt it in it is arms, and quite ouerspred it. And
this is the very Image and true stamp of man; for, all living beasts and
other creatures whatsoever, having their terms and bounds of augmentation,
which they may not pass and exceed; Man, through his free will, favored and
assisted by Grace, does enjoy so great an excellency, that he can by the
help thereof leave behind him the highest Mountains, reaching by
participation, to Gods own Being and abiding. And though he cannot shoot up
thus high of himself, (being no better than a silly Worm of the earth) yet
being raised up by Grace, he may climb up to this happiness, The spouse
compared to the vine. Cant. 8.5.
and flourish for ever in that eternal and glorious Paradise of Heaven. The
Holy Ghost has compared the Spouse to a Wall, and her breasts, to the branches
of the Vine, which go clasping and compassing the same about. And in another
place the Angels ask, Who is this that comes up out of the Wilderness,
leaning upon her Well-beloved? Ye need not wonder so much at it, for it is the
Vine, which desereth to be joined in perpetual love with Christ; and having so
good a prop, it cannot but reach to the highest part of Heaven. In a word, Thou
may, o Lord, mold man like a piece of wax; if thou will, thou can make a
Devil of him, as thou did of Judas; and if thou will, thou can make an
Angel of him, as thou did of John Baptist: Thou can make a just man mount
above the Clouds, and to sore up to the highest part of Heaven; And on the
contrary, thou can maxe a sinner to sink down as low as the deepest
dungeon in Hell.

Peregre profectus est.
Gods absence from us, is nothing else but his conniuing at our sins.
And he went into a strange Country. When the Scripture says, That God
sleeps, or is afar off, it is (according to Saint Basil) a reciprocal
kind of Language. Nor are we thereby to understand, that God either sleeps,
or is far off, For he is never far from any of us; but it is thou that art
far off, and it is thou that sleep, when thou do depart from such a
City, or when going to sea, thou leauest the land; it being thou that leauest
the land, and not the land thee; for that remains still immooueable. Just so
stands the case between God and thee; but is befitting his authority, to
behold things as if they were afar off; for in the notifying of his presence,
the World in one day would be turned quite topsi-turuie. This made him say unto
Moses, It is not fit that I should lead forth this People, and be their
Captain and Commander; for their impudencies would oblige me to make an end of
them at once. For such is the wickedness of this World, that it is as unable,
as unfitting to abide his presence: And therefore absenting himself, he says,
Peregre profectus est. He does bear with our iniquities, he does patiently
expect our amendment, he does dissemble his displeasure, and does make as if
he did not see what we did. From whence grow these two inconveniences:

From Gods conniuence grows our presum^tion, and his severity.

Gods wrath the longer deferred, the fiercer.


The one, Our boldness and presumption; It will be long ere my Lord will come.
And this false presumption makes a naughty servant careless and negligent;
Because I held my peace and said nothing, and for that I seemed not to see
them, the wicked have forgot that there is a God.

The other, The rigor and severity of the punishment wherewith God does
recompense this his slackenesse and long tarrying. Saint Gregory compares the
wrath of God to a Bow, which the more it is bent, the stronger it shoots it is
Shaft. He may unbend it for a time, butthat is but to make the draught the
stronger, when he takes it again into his hand. Excitatus est tanquam dormiens
Dominus, tanquam potens crapulatus a Vino, and percussit inimicos in
posteriora. He compares him here to a sleeping man, and one that has drank
hard; who if he be valiant, and a stout man in deed, if his enemies make a
May Game of him in his sleep, and offer to abuse him, they were as good awake
a sleeping Lion; for he no sooner opens his eyes, but he presently takes notice
of their ill dealing toward him; and when he has once rowsed up himself,
vents his choler, and executes his vengeance.

He went to travel. Hence grew the mischief of these Renters; for they
thought with themselves, That their Lord being gone into a far Country, ^
would be long before he would return to require these his Fruits. So that al
ou^ hurt proceeds from our presuming, that we shall live so long, that we may
laugh and be merry as long as our youth lasts, and afterward have time
enough to repent at leisure. The Sinner he complains of the shortness of his
life, Nos nati fere statim desiuimus esse, We are no sooner borne, but we are
cut down and gone. The righteous man complains, That his pilgrimage here
upon Earth is too long; He^ mihi, quia incolatus meus prolongatus est. But the
truth is, That thou make thy life short, by being forgetful of the end for
which it was given thee. God gave it thee to gain Heaven, and thou mispendest
it in worldly businesses; so that though life be little, the loss is much. If
thou be borne to be rich, honorable, and much made of, thou would think
the years of thy life to be but a few, in regard of the great desire that
thou have to enjoy those thy earthly blessings: But if thou be borne for
Heaven, Who will say that he wants time (though he live but a few years) to
prepare himself for that journey. From the Cradle many young innocent Babes
have been borne up to Heaven, and yet their years are never a whit the less,
but the more. And some, the more years they have, the more is their hurt: For,
that day (says S. Gregory) thou must reckon amongst those of thy life, which
thou foundest did make for thy Souleshealth.

He went to travel. Not to forget his Vine, for that was always before his
eyes; Trust is ever the surest tie.
but for to show the great trust and confidence that he had in these his
Farmers and Renters, and to oblige them thereby the more unto him: For that
lord that trusts little, ties a man the less. When God had delivered over
Paradise unto Adam, and quietly seated him in the peaceable possession of it,
it is said, That he forthwith vanished and went his way. He that is Master of
an estate, has not his eye continually upon his servants, for that would
favor more of a tyrant than a master. That husband that always stays at
home, and never goes out of his house, is extreme wearisome to his wife; but
if he begin once to mistrust her, peradventure she will not stick to give him
just canse so to do. That Prelat which is always gagging and pricking the
sides of his subjects, is an intolerable burden: And David himself
complains thereof, saying, Imposuisti hominem super Capita nostra. Luke. 19.
Math. ^5.
Saint Luke and Saint Matthew cite two Parables, of Masters that did recommend
to their servants the charge of their house and of their wealth; and say, That
presently thereupon they absented themselves, and went into far and remote
Countries.

El que fia mucho, obliga mucho; He that trusts much, obliges much. Joseph
held himself so much bound unto his master, in that he trusted him with all
that he had; that he said, being tempted by his Mistress, Quomodo possum
peccare contra Dominum meum, How can I prove such a villain to my Master, as
to wrong him in his Love, who has loved me so well? Saint Paul writes to
Timothy, 1. Tim. 2.7.
That he thought himself exceedingly bound to the service of our Savior Jesus
Christ, that he had ordained him a Preacher, and an Apostle, and a Teacher of
the Gentiles, in Faith and verity; and that he had trusted him with the
ministry and defense of his Church, being that he had persecuted and
blasphemed him heretofore. Young Tobias said unto the Angel Raphael, Albeit I
should spend all my life in thy service, yet should I not satisfy that
obligation which I have to serve thee. These are the respects of noble breasts;
and he that shall think upon these things truly, may consider with himself,
how much greater benefits and favors he has received from Gods hands.

He went into a far Country. He got him away to Heaven, where (for the love
which he bears to his Vine) he thinks himself a stranger. The Disciples
which went to Emaus said unto him, Tusolus peregrinus in Jerusalem? Art thou
only a stranger in Jerusalem? Wherein they spoke truer than they were aware of*
calling him by the name of Stranger, when as he was now glorified: For, as
long as he lived here upon earth, he was contented for our sakes to be a
stranger in heaven. And though he himself were in heaven, yet his Spouse was
on earth. O Lord, where then art thou? Where I would be; there where my Spouse
is. Vbi thesaurus, ibi cor, Where a man's treasure is, there also is his heart.
Nazianzen calls us, The Riches of God* And this (says he) we are to esteem as
a singular favor, Quia nos pro diuitijs suis habet, That he will vouchsafe us
so much honor as to account us his Riches. And we are not only his Riches, but
his Delight and Recreation: Et delitiae meae esse cum filijs hominum, I made it
my pleasure, to remain among the children of men: Though my head were rounded
with Stars, and circled about with a Crown of infinite Glory; yet did I
humble my thoughts as low as Man. And here are we to ponder on the particle Et:
And if Kings have a care of their Parkes, and make great reckoning of their
Gardens and houses of pleasure, for that they are their entertainment and
recreation; How much more ought God to esteem of his Vine, holding it to be
his Riches, his Pleasure, and Delight?

Cum autem tempus Fructum appropinquaret, misit Seruos vt acciperent Fructus.
When the time of the Vintage was at hand, he sent his Servants to the
husbandmen, to receive the fruits thereof. Here you see, how he did wait til
the season that this his Vineyard was fit to yield him Fruit, and that the time
of the Vintage drew near: Not before; for it were mere tyranny, to demand
that which is not yet due unto thee. Nor after; for so a Lord may run the
hazard of loosing his Fruits, unless his Farmer be the honester man. Every
Plant has it is due time and season to yield it is Fruit; and albeit our season
be the whole term of our life, yet there are some seasons so precise, that
not to give Fruit therein, is held to be a wonderful bad sign. Deuteronomy. 2^.
God commanded his People, That when they came to enjoy the Land of Promise,
they should offer unto him of the first of all the fruit of the earth. This was
a strict and precise occasion in them, and in us, as often as we begin to enjoy
Gods favors and blessings toward us. And this conceit is comprehended in this
very Parable which is here delivered unto us.

Every man may claim the fruit of his own labors.
To receive the Fruits thereof. And here first of all it is to be noted, That
in this he did not do them any wrong in the World. What wrong does that man
do to a Vineyard, that has planted and pruned it, if he at the time of it is
Fr^^t require Grapes? What wrong does the Pope to the Cardinal, the Bishop,
and the Chanon; or the King, to his Minister; or the General, to his Friar, to
crave of them, That they shall complie with their Obligations; especially if
the Superior comply as he ought with his? Who planted this Vineyard? Who
hedged it about? Who made a Winepresse therein? Who built a Tower to it? The
husbandmen? No, it was God: Is it much then, that he should look for the
Fruits thereof?

Secondly, God herein did them a great and singular favor: For Saint Paul
says, God requires nothing at our hands, but what is for our own good.
That these Fruits are Love, Joy, Peace, Long suffering, Gentleness,
Goodness, Faith, Meekness, and Temperance. And being these are the Fruits
that we should bring forth, yet he is pleased to call them his Fruits; for in
all our actions he principally desires our good and our profit: God being
equally honored in punishing the Bad, Job. 35 7.
as in rewarding the Good. If thou be righteous, what give thou unto him, or
what receives he at thine hand? What addest thou to his glory? (says Job and
Thomas) for if he desires our praises, our thanksgiuings, and our services, he
does not so much pretend therein his own glory, as our good; for he is
fullness of Glory it self. But by praising and serving of him, we acknowledge
him to be our God, and therein submit our selves to his divine will, whereby we
come to receive a great reward. Saint Augustine says, That when we make vows
and promises unto God, he commands us strictly to perform them, not because
that he has any need that we should fulfill them, but because in f^lfilling of
them, we shall reap the fruit of them; and the more we give unto God, the more
still we have. Benignus exactor est, and non ^genus; non v^ crescat ex
redditis, sed vt crescere faciat redditores: Nam quod eis redditur, reddente
additur; He is a loving, not a needy exactor* not to increase his own rent^,
but to increase ours; not to raise them, but us* For what we render unto him,
he renders it back to us with advantage.

To receive the Fruits thereof. The grief of it was, That he sonding his
Servants at the time of it is Fruit, they could scarce find a bunch in all the
Vineyard, they were not able to gleane any thing out of it. Non est botrus ad
commedendum, says Micheas, My Soul desired the first ripe Fruits; but, Micah.
7.1.
there is no cluster to eat; Perijt sanctus de terra, The good man is perished
out of the earth, and there is none righteous among men. In a place that is
generally infected, you shall scarce find a sound man; so likewise in this Vine,
be it in the Law Natural, in the Law Written, or in the Law of Grace, you
shall hardly meet with good Fruit. For to meet with a good and righteous man,
you must look and look again: first, search this, and then that other
Stock; and when you have done all ye can do, in stead of sweet grapes, you
shall gather those that are sour; and in stead of wine, have the gall of
Dragons, and the poison of Aspes.

But some perhaps will say, Ob.
That the husbandmen were not able to afford their Lord any Fruits thereof,
for that they were rented too high, God is no racking Landlord.
the ground was out of heart, and that they had been too much grated upon.
Many Princes, I confess, do so wring their Subjects with such intolerable
Taxes and payments, and such strange and unwonted Impositions, that they
destroy and make wast the Lands of their Kingdoms: The like may be said of
many landlords toward their Tenants. But hereunto I answer, Sol.
That God is quite contrary to these; for making over the possession of
Paradise unto Adam, so rich and plentiful of all sorts of Fruits and Trees,
he reserved no more than one only Tree to himself: He will give unto thee
the whole sheafes of Corn, contenting himself only with those few Ears
which are shattered and left behind in the Stubble: He will suffer thee to
gather all the grapes, and to make a full Vintage, so that thou will but let
him gleane the refuse bunches, which will but spoil thy Wine. Of him that has
two Coats, the Evangelist requires one; but Christ will be content to take one
of ten; [ Quod superest, He requ^^es of us but a little.
date Pa^peribus] he craves no more but the overplus, and that which thou may
very well spare. In the old Law, for an acknowledgement of those his
innumerable favors toward his people, he demanded only two Turtles of the
Poor, and one lamb of the Rich. In his house, he will not that Incense be
offered unto him for nothing. Amongst other of Gods complaints against us, this
is one, if not the greatest, That he contenting himself with so little, and
giving thee the inioying of so much, thou do never think of reserving this
little for God. Thou will give large allowance to thy Dogs and thy Hawks, but
wilt grutch thy Servant his meat: Thou will pamper thy Horses with prouender;
but it goes to thy heart to part with a piece of bread to the Poor. Out of
which hard heartedness of thine, those sicknesses, hunger-staruings,
beggeries, and barrenness which thou suffer, are justified upon thee, and
deservedly inflicted.

Mi^it Seruos suos, vt acciperent Fructus.
He sent his Servants. These Servants were the Prophets, who were always
busied in requiring this Fruit, and did die in this their demand. In their
places succeeded the Apostles: After them, the Prelates and Preachers of his
Church. And though he had given them the name of Huntsmen and of Fishers, [
Mittam Piscatores multos] here he calls them Secatores, Cutters or Reapers;
Misit Seruos suos vt acciperent Fructus. By Ezechiel he calls them watchmen or
Sentinells, Ezech. 33.6, 7.
Animam de manu speculatoris requiram, I have made thee a Watchman to the House
of Israel, therefore thou shall hear the Word from my mouth, and admonish
them from me. But if the Watchman see the Sword come, and blow not the Trumpet,
and the People be not warned; if the Sword come and take any man from among
them, he is taken away for his iniquity, but his blood will I require at the
Watchmans hands. This is a hard office; for if thou do not seek to save
him, God will require him of thee: And if thou do take pains, and go
about to gather in his rents, the Renters will kill thee.

Alios ceciderunt, alios lapidauerunt, alios occiderunt.
Ministers in this world must expect nothing but hard measure.
They beat one, stoned another, and killed a third. This is the recompense of
our Savior Christ's Ministers; for as his Kingdom is not of this world, so
neither are his Ministers, nor his rewards. He said unto Pilat, If I were of
this world, Ministri mei vtique decertarent, My Ministers would contend for me.
From the difference of this his Kingdom, he inferred that of his Ministers.
The Ministers of this world may plead an excuse for the non-payment of their
Masters Rent; for the Vineyard which they enjoy is not Christ's, neither did he
rent it out unto them, nor are the Fruits Christ's which they reap thereof: It
is a Vineyard that they got by their own proper industry, so that they fall
to eating of it up, and to take away the Fruit of it, without paying any rent
or pension out of it. For albeit all kind of goods upon earth belong unto God,
and are due unto him; yet it seems unto them, that they are only due to
their own diligence; and stick not to say in their heart, It is our own
hand^e work, God had no finger in it.

Some they beat. By Saint Matthew, Christ charged the Pharisees with the blood
of the Righteous; from Abel, to Zacharies time, those who were slain betwixt
the Temple and the Alter, joining their blood with that of the Prophets: to the
end that their condemnation should grow up to it is fullness.

Gods mercy is ever in competition with man's malice.
He sent again and again, the second and the third time; and besides, that
herein he showed us his singular clemency and goodness, he advises us
withal, That when one medicine will work no good upon the Sick, he will
apply many others. Seneca tells us, That if the earth will not yield us any
fruit the first year, we must fall a ploughing the second and the third, and
so many years together. In one year the defaults of many years are repaired
and amended; but here Gods mercy goes a little further, as Saint Chrysostom
has noted it; for not having any hope to stop their malice, yet he stops not
his mercy: and being th^^ the disease was incurable, yet would he try and
make experiment, whither his Medicine could work upon it and overcome it; here
joined together as it were in competition, Man's malice, with Gods meecie. And
although great was the obstinacy of their malice, yet in the end Mercy was
master of the field. Saint Hilarie brings in the example of a Father that had a
frantic Son; who although he would throw the Trenchers and Candlestickes at
his head, yet for all that did he not leave to do his best to cure him.
Worthy are those words of Saint Augustine, Tibi laus, tibi gloria, Fons
misericordiarum; ego fiebam miserior, tu propinquior, To thee be praise, to
thee be glory, thou Fountain of Mercies; the worser I was, the nearer wast
thou unto me.

Nouissime, misit filium suum.
Last of all, he sent his son. He thought it no wisdom in him, to send any
more of his Servants, for that had been echar la soga tras el caldero, to
throw the helm after the hatchet. And aduising with himself what he were
best to do, after that he had thought upon a Quid faciam? he presently
follows with a Nouissime misit filium suum, Last of all he sent his son.

First of all, This Quid faciam? What shall I do? argues a kind of
perplexity, like unto that before the Flood, the World being not more wicked,
than he was sorry that he had created it; Being touched inwardly with a
hearty sorrow, he said, What shall I do? So now, being more grieved at the
perdition of the husbandmen, than the ill usage and slaughter of his Servants,
he said, Quid faciam? What course shall I take with these men?

Secondly, He intimates a strange kind of sorrow arising from this perplexity,
If I am Lord, where is my fear? If I be a father, where is my honor? In the
end, he resolved with Gaifas, Let my Son die. He indeered as much as he
could, the force of his love, sending him to save these Murderers from death;
but this could not appease their malice. To slay his Prophets, was more than a
great malice; but to take away the life of his only Son and heir, was
excessive. Saint Hierome says, There was no weight, no number, no measure, in
the ones clemency, nor in the others malice. This was a Consummatum est, a
fullness of his me^cie, and a fullness of their malice.

Verebuntur filium meum.
They will reverence my Son. Saint Luke adds a Forte thereunto: God in his
punishing of man, desires more his blushing than his bleeding.
And the Greek Original, a Forsitan: Howbeit it may go for an Affirmative,
as well as Vtique. Forsitan petisses ab eo, and ipse dedisset tibi aquam, etc.
And so again, Si crederitis Moysi, crederetis forsitan and mihi, If ye had
believed Moses, ye would likewise have believed me. And so it sorts well with
that Text both of Saint Matthew and Saint Mark, who absolutely say, Verebuntur
filium meum, They will reverence my Son. In neither of these is a May be, or
a Forsitan; and only to signify the great reverence which was due unto him.
Where by the way Saint Chrysostom has noted this unto us, That God (for all
these their outrages) did desire no furthe^ satisfaction from them, than to see
them abasht and ashamed ofthis their ingratitude and cruelty. Benigno Domino
sufficiebat sola vindicta pudoris; misit enim confundere, non punire: It was
their blushing, not their bleeding, that he desired; he wished their shame, and
not their confusion. Parum supplicij satis est patri, pro ^^lio; God is so kind
and loving a Father, that he thinks a little punishment enough for his
Children. Saint Bernard says, That the whole life of our Savior Christ, from
the Cratch to the Cross, was to keep us from sinning, out of mere shame; and
that his maine drift ever was, to leave us confounded and ashamed of our
selves, that our sins and wickedness should force God against his will to
punish us: For he takes no delight in the death of a Sinner. Ec^l^. 41.17.
Ecclesiasticu^ makes a large memorial of those things which ought to make a
man blush and be ashamed of himself. Be ashamed of whoredom before a father
and mother; be ashamed of lies before the Prince and men of authority; of
sin, before the Judge and Ruler; of offense, before the Congreation and
People; of unrighteousness, before a companion and friend; and of theft,
before the place where thou dwell, and before the truth of God and his
Covenant; and to lean with thine elbows upon the bread; or to be reproved for
giving or taking; and of silence to them that salute thee; and to look upon an
harlot, and to turn away thy face from thy Kinseman; or to take away a portion
or gift; or to be evil minded toward another man's wife; or to solicit any
man's maid; or to stand by her bed; or to reproach thy friends with words; or to
vpbraid when thou give any thing; or to report a matter that thou have heard;
or to reveal secret words: Thus may thou well be shamefaced, and shall find
favor with all men. This Erubescite must be the burden of the Song, to every
one of these Versicles. It is a foul and a shameful thing, to do any of
these things in the presence of grave persons, to whom we owe a respect. Much
more foul in the presence of God, who stands at thy elbow in all thy actions.
But foulest of all, to commit these things in the presence of the Son of God,
whom his Father sent to be thy Master, thy Tutor, and nailed him to the
Cross for thy sins, that thou might be ashamed to commit the like again,
considering the great torment that he suffered for thee. Some devout picture or
Image does sometimes restrain a desperate sinner from committing some foul
offense; What would it work then with him, had God himself stood there
present before him?

It may be they will reverence my Son. Say that we take this Fort^ or
Forsit^^ in the same sense as the words themselves sound; it is a point worthy
our con^ideration, That the innumerable sum of those infinite favors which
God did to his Vineyard, should end in a Peradventure, and stand upon
hap-hazard. A man may think it somewhat strange, That God should come to any
place upon uncertainties: but God is so good a God, that he does not so much
proportion his blessings by the measure of his Wisdom, as his Love; not that
he does not certainly know what we will be, but because he would feign have us
to be what we should be. Gods Love cease not for man's wickedness.
For if he should reward us according to those our actions, which he in his
prescience and eternal essence foresees will come to pass; Who of us should
be left alive, or who of us should be borne? Only the Innocent (says
Theodoret) should then be favored. And therefore rather than it should be so,
he was willing to put it upon the venture, how or what we might prove
hereafter. He knew before hand, that Lucifer should fall; that Adam should
sin; that Saul should turn disobedient; and that Judas should sell him and
betray him: yet did he not forbear for all this to throw his favors upon
them. S. Ambrose asks the question, Why Christ would make choice of Judas,
when as he knew before hand that he would betray him? And his answer thereunto
is, That it was to justify his love, and to show the great desire that he had
that all should be saved, yea, even Judas himself: And therefore (knowing his
covetous disposition) he made him his Purse-bearer, that he might shut the
door to his excuses, and that he might not have just cause to say, That he was
in want, and lackt money, and so was forced out of mere necessity, to betray
and sell his Master, which otherwise he would never have done: but the
delivering over the Purse unto him, took away that objection. Well then, What
can this Traitor say for himself? That Christ did not countenance him as he
did the rest, or that he made light reckoning of him? Neither will this hold
water; for he had made him an Apostle, he was listed in the roll with the
rest, he wrought miracles as well as his Fellows, and received many other
favors from his Masters hands. The same reason may serve as well for the
Jews, as Judas: For our Savior knew that they should put him to death; yet for
all this would not he cease to show his love unto them.

Hic est haeres; venite, occidamus eum, and nostra erit haereditas.
This is the heir; come, let us kill him, and let us take his Inheritance.
They did not say, This is the son; but the Heir: discovering therein the
dropsy of their covetousness; for greediness of the Fruits they killed his
Servants, and for greediness of the Inheritance, they killed the Heir.
Covetousness is the root of all evil; Pride is the seed of all sins, and
Covetousness the root which maintains them: The Seed is that beginning which
gives them their being; the Root, that which sustaines and nourishes them in
their verdure. From the Tree you may easily lop the boughs, but hardly remove
the roots: First, Because they are so deep that we cannot well come at them:
And secondly, Because they are covered and buried under ground. When
Covetousness takes deep rooting in the heart of man, it is covered over with
the cloak of Sanctity and of Virtue, they are hard to be dug out. From
this Vice two great huts do arise:

The one, That it is the Leaven of all our ill. Salust says, Nothing worse
than a covetous man
That it destroys the Virtues and the Arts, and in their places brings in
Infidelities and Treasons, standing at open defiance both with God and Man.
Ecclesiasticus says, That there is nothing worse than a covetous man; for such
a one would even sell his Soul for love of money. The Princes of Judah (says
Osee) were like them that removed the bound. Saint Hierome and Lyra note, That
the Prophet borrowed this Metaphor from the Husbandmen, who enlarge the bounds
of their Inheritance, growing by little and little on that which is another
man's. Ose 5.10. No vice more severely punished than Covetousness.
And that the Governors of the two Tribes did rejoice in the servitude and
captivity of the other ten, for to enlarge their own Lands and Territories,
and to augment their jurisdiction. To rejoice in the enlarging of their own,
was not much amiss; but to take pleasure in another man's misery, is so great
a sin, that God threatens severely to punish it. I will pour forth (says
he) mine indignation upon them like water. In other his chastisements, he uses
the word stillare: now that which is distilled comes away in little drops, and
with a great deal of leisure; but here he says, Effundam iram meam, Like a
storm, that comes so suddenly upon him that he cannot escape it. The Prophet
Amos says, That amongst many other sins which the Sons of Ammon had
committed, one was a very desperate one, Amos 1.13.
For three transgressions of the Children of Ammon, and for four, I will not
turn to it; Because they have ripped up the women with child, of Giliad, that
they might enlarge their borders. For bordering upon those of Gilead, they slew
their women that were great with child, that they might inherit their
possessions; ad dilatandum terminum suum: As Queen Iesabel caused Naboth to
be put to death, 3. Reg. 20.
that she might have his Vineyard. In a word, In that very hour when
Covetousness killed the Son of God, What punishment, were it never so
cruel, might not such an offense justly fear?

The second hurt is, That it is a vice of all other the hardest to be
remedied. No vice so hard to be reformed as Covetousness
Phylon calls it, Wickednesses Fort, where all sins are protected and
defended. Saint Chrysostom says, That Gold turns men into Beasts, nay, into
beastly and abominable Devils. Whereby he signified, That it was an
vnreclaimable sin. Saint Ambrose, That the covetous man rejoices to see the
Widow weep, and the Orphan to cry, which is a foul sin. Saint Bernard
paints out the Chariot of Covetousness to be drawn by cruel, fierce, and
desperate both Coachman and Horses. Judas his own heart opens this truth; in
regard that all the diligences, all the favors that our Savior Christ did
him, (in washing his feet with water, and it may be with the tears that
trickled from his eyes; his permitting him to dip his finger in the same dish
with him, and to bestow his best morcells upon him) were not of power to
mollify and soften this stony heart of his.

Come, let us kill him. Very fitly is Sin called a breake-necke, or a
downfall; not only in regard of that height from whence the Sinner falls, and
the deepenesse of the pit whereinto he is to descend; but because of his
retchlesnesse and his carelessness, by falling headlong from one sin into
another, til he come to the bottom of all villainy and wickedness. And this
is the reason why the Scripture makes so much reckoning of the first sin we
commit. The first sin that Saul committed, was the pity that he showed to
Amaleck: And though in it self it were not so grievous a sin, yet he
perseuered afterward in envying and persecuting David; 1. Kings. 22.
he committed great cruelties in Nob, as a Moore could not do more; he slew
fourscore and five Priests that wore a Linen Ephod: And because his faults
were so heinous, the Scripture mentions not any one save that of his pity
toward Amaleck; because that was the first round in the Ladder, Psalm. 1.
by which he fell afterward down into Hell. Beatus vir qui non abijt, Blessed
is the man that has not walked in the council of the Ungodly, (...) stood in
the way of Sinners, and has not sat in the seat of the Scornful.

There are three happinesses that a man is said to enjoy:

The one, Not to fall into the pit of Sin.

The other, If he do fall, not to continue long therein.

The third, That if he do persevere in sin, that he be not bewitched
therewith, nor make it his Seat. For Sin (according to Saint Austen)
produces Custom, and Custom, a necessity of sinning.

Thus does God punish one sin with another, a lesser sin with a greater;
which is the greatest and seuerest rigor which the Tribunal of Gods Justice
inflicteth. Gods course in punishing of sin, is to revenge the lesser with
the greater.
Seneca tells us, The prime and principal punishment of a Sinner, is his
sinning; for then, God falls presently a punishing sin upon sin. The
Scripture reckoning up all the sins of Herod, as his tyrannies, cruelties,
his swinish nature, and his incestuous life; it adds, super haec omnia, (as
though all the rest in comparison of this were as nothing) That he had
beheaded Saint John Baptist, because he preached Truth unto him. And this was
the greatest vengeance that God could take of his former sins. With Vria's
murder, God revenged David's adultrie: And Nathans reproouing him was the
appeasing of Gods wrath against him. For if God should not have used this his
mercy toward him, what would have become of David? Saint Ambrose expounding
those words which Christ uttered unto Peter, Thou shall deny me thrice; says,
That this placing of these three denialls, was not only a foretelling of them,
but of setting likewise a bound and limit unto them, to the end that he should
not deny his Master any more than three times. God revenged his first denial,
by his second, being forced to forswear, That he knew him not; and his second,
by the third, aggravating the same with so many protestations and Anathema's.
But if Christ had not looked back upon him, and taken pity of him, what
would have become of poor Peter? But upon the sins of the Pharisees our
Savior did not put any tax or limitation, That all the blood of the Just
might light upon their heads; For they were a reprobate kind of people. The
lives of the Prophets he revenged by the death of his Son and heir: He
revenged the evil works which they had done, in that the Light being brought
into the World, they shut up themselves in Darkness. And with this suteth
that of Esaias, Thou have made their own iniquities the instruments, and as it
were the hands to dash them in pieces. Thou have made them subject to their
sins, they can do no more than what sin shall command them to do: If it
bid them kill, they shall kill* if steal* they shall steal. In a word, Sin
is their Lord, and they are Sins ^laues. And therefore the Scripture terms
those that are great Sinners, Vendidos, Men that are sold over unto sin.
Esaias puts this name upon A^bab, I am sold to sin: and those who denied God,
his Law, or their Country, and did take part with those their enemies that
were Infidells; 1. Mac. 1.
the first book of the Macabees registreth them for Slaves that had sold
themselves over unto sin. The like says Saint Paul of those who remain
captives to the Devil, and that follow after his will; 2. Tim. 2.
A quo captiui tenemur ad ipsius voluntatem. Out of whose snare we must come
to amendment, and not suffer our selves to be taken of him at his will.

And the Inheritance shall be ours. The Sinner summing up his wickedness,
Sinners are usually taken in their own Snares.
thinks he has made a just and good account: So, Pharaoh pursuing Gods
People, made this sure reckoning with himself; Persequar, I will follow them,
take them, and spoil them, and my Soul shall have it is desire upon them. So
did it fare with these Farmers, they had cast up their reckoning, and made full
account that the Inheritance should be theirs: They had destroyed his People,
his Temple, his Vineyard, his Syon, his Prophecies, his Miracles, his
Priesthood, his Arc, his Authority, and his Glory; What could they well do
more, to make themselves Lords of all? But, Conuertetur dolor eius in caput
eius; They shall be overtaken in their own wickedness, and this mischief
shall light upon their own heads.

Et ejecerunt eum extra Vineam.
And they cast him out of the Vineyard. Why the blood of Christ was not shed in
the Vineyard. Esaias 65.5
They cast him out of the Vineyard and slew him. Saint Chrysostom says, That
they cast him out of the Vineyard, that his blood might not defile it: Using
him herein like a Leaper; which was no more than was prophesied by Esaias, Stand
apart, come not near me, for I am holier ^han thou. The Jews were so dainty,
that when Judas repented him of what he had done, and returned them their money
again, they would none of it; Math. 27.6.
It is not lawful for us to put this money into the Treasury, because it is
the price of blood. And they did not only express their hypocrisy in this
particular; but they would not likewise enter into the Praetorium, or
Common Council house, That they might not be defiled with his company. And
here in this place, They cast him out of the Vineyard; but the Divine
providence, which did with a more especial hand guide that action, did so
order the business, that the blood of our Savior Jesus Christ should be shed
out of the Vineyard, because it should not hinder the destruction and
desolation that was to come upon that wretched and accursed City. For, if
Jerusalem should have been besprinkled with the blood of this Lamb, the Angel
would have past by it, and the Roman power should not have bin able to have
ruined it and laid it level with the ground.

They cast him likewise out of the Vineyard, for to enrich the Land of the
Gentiles; his blood, which spoke better things than that of Abel, being shed in
their ^auour, and for their good. The glorious Doctor Saint Ambrose says, That
the ^ield which Caine drew out Abel into, was bad and barren ground; it being
Gods pleasure that that place should be unfruitful, wherein that blood should
be shed that was to cry for vengeance. But for the blood of our most blessed
Savior and Redeemer, Jesus Christ; howbeit it fell among stories, yet because
it spoke ^etter words than that of Abel, as also for that from the Cross he
poured down ^is benediction upon it, they lost their barrenness. Saint
Augustine says, That as in the Garden he sweated blood, making that ground
fruitful therewith, that Martyrs might bud and spring out of it; so in Mount
Caluarie he also shed his blood, to the end that the Land of the Gentiles
taking this divine Balsamum into their Souls, and letting it soke into their
hearts, they might bring forth great and plentiful Fruits, even Fruits in
abundance.

Quid faciet Dominus Vineae.
What will the Lord of this Vineyard do? Tell me, ye that are learned in the
Laws, Ezech. 28.
What course think ye he will take with these Husbandmen? Ezec^^^l in his
twenty eigth Chapter sets out the King of Tire with all possible glory* and
greatness; adorning him with Wisdom, Beauty, Riches, precious stones,
Pearls, and brooches of Gold, brought from beyond the seas. But if many were
these his blessings and favors which God had bestowed upon him; the greater by
far were those his sins which he committed against him in his ingratitude,
disloyalty, ^yrannie, dishonestie, wantonness, filthiness, etc. And
therefore when God shall come to take an account of us, What will the Lord of
the Vinyard do then? Ezech. 16.
And in the sixteenth Chapter he paints out unto us a poor little Infant, that
was cast out, as it were, into the Streets, and no eye pitied her: This poor
soul the King as he passed by, took her out of the extremity of misery,
bred her up, made much of her, inricht her, covered her with Silk, g^^ded her
about with fine Linen, clothed her with broydered works, decked her with
ornaments, put bracelets upon her hands, a chain about her neck, and a
beautiful Crown upon her head, etc. and when he had bestowed all these things
upon her, and that she was come of age to be his Spouse, (which the King of all
other things desired most) she left his house, ran away from him, set up for
her self in a by-corner of the City, playing the Harlot, multiplying her
Treasons, lightnesses, and loosnes of life; purchasing her self Lovers with
her Silver, not remembering the days of her youth, when she was naked and bare,
and forsaken of all the world, save this good King that took compassion on
her. Now when God shall come to take an account of her concerning those
courtesies which she had received, What will the Lord of the Vineyard do then?
The favors which God aff^^ded his People, Who can recount them? He sent them
Prophets, Miracles, (...) Victories; they did sigh for his coming, importuning
Heaven with the^^ groans; The Light shined unto them, but they loved
Darkness; their Mess^^ came, and they killed him.

God labors every way the conversion of a sinner.
What will the Lord of the Vineyard do? He did direct this question to the
repairing of their perdition, for as yet they were in the state of salvation:
And (...) they would but have been ashamed of that which they had done, and
repented them of their sins, he would have run with open arms to have
received them into grace. Plutarch says, That Love takes any occasion, be it
never (...) light, to do good unto him whom he loves; it has no need of
baits and snares, himself bears those baits about him, wherewith he is taken;
for Gods love never takes his leave of a Sinner. Our Lord and Savior Jesus
Christ remained dead in Mount Caluarie, yet for all that did he not forsake us,
but he returns (...) hundred times and more, Ierem. 6.8.
entreating and calling unto us; Be thou instructed, o Jerusalem, lest my Soul
depart from thee; lest I make thee desolate, as a land that (...) inhabiteth.
In that general inundation, he repented him of what he had (...) and promised
never to do so no more; Genesis 9.15.
Nequaquam vltra, There shall be no (...) waters of a flood to destroy all
flesh.

What will the Lord of the Vineyard do? He asks the question, What he (...)
do? and takes council with himself; signifying thereby unto us, That great
chastisements require great consideration. The Prophet Esaias threatening Edom,
says, He will measure it out with a Line, that he may bring it to naught. Esaias
34.
No man does measure a Building to destroy it; the Rule and the Square were
ordained for to build. I answer, Amongst your Artificers here upon earth, it
passes so as thou say; but he that was that only Artizan of Heaven, dwelt
longer upon the destroying of Niniuie, than he would have done in building of
it. Cogitauit Dominus dissipare murum filiae Syon, tetendit funiculum; The Lord
has determined to destroy the wall of the Daughter of Syon, he stretched out a
Line, he has not withdrawn his hand from destroying. The Lord had a
determination to destroy the city of Jerusalem; but first he took a measure
thereof (as we say) by line and by leisure. Rupertus has noted it, that he
was seventy years about taking this measure.

Lastly he asks the question, What shall the Lord of the Vineyard do? because
to destroy and to kill, is to be used where no other means will serve the
turn. God omits no means to bring us to himself. Deuteronomy. 20.10.
After that they had ill entreated his Servants, stoned some, and slain
other-some, and last of all his heir; yet (even after all this) does he seek
to make peace with them. In the twentieth of Deutronomie God has commanded,
That when thou come near unto a city to fight against it, before thou
shall set upon the same, thou shall offer it peace. Abishai besieging Abel, 2.
Kings. 20.
a woman cried out there within, Know thou not that they spoke in the old
time, saying, They should first ask peace of Abel? and hence it is said, Qui
interogant, interogent in Abel. Why do thou not first demand Sheba of us,
and we shall deliver Sheba up into thy hands? Quare pracipitas hereditatem
Domini? Why will thou destroy the Lords Inheritance? Chrysostom says, That
Gods sending of Jonas to preach, Yet forty days, and Niniuie shall be
destroyed; was no other but a profering of peace unto them.

What shall the Lord of the Vineyard do? All these, and other larger proffers,
God uses to make to Christendom in general, and to every one of the
Faithful in particular. He has planted a Church, he has watered it with his
own blood, and that of the Apostles and Martyrs; he has ploughed and tilled
it, and sown it with the seed of his Doctrine; he has affoorded thee strange
favors, as riches, discretion, beauty, the dainties of the Earth, of the
Air, and of the Sea; and all these have thou made as weapons to offend him,
Quid faciet Dominus Vinia?

It is no marvel, that many Christians are worse now in part, Many Christians
now worse enemies to Christ, than were the Pharisees.
than the Pharisees were then; for in the breasts of the Pharisees there was no
faith nor no knowledge of Christ, which occasioned their sins against Christ:
but the Christians believing in him, and adoring him, do not stick to offend
him. The Pharisees would not receive Christ our Savior and Redeemer, because
then they must have laid aside their covetousness, their ambition, their
hypocrisy, and dissimulation; but they being so proud a People, would not
admit of so humble a God. A poor King, and rich Vassals, do not suit well
together; but to believe in him, and yet not to regard him, this is a foul
fault among Christians. Samaria being subject to the Assyrians, God sent a
fearful scourge amongst them, Lions, which every where slew them and tore
them in pieces. The King desiring to repair this loss, sent Priests among
them, to instruct them in the Law of that Land, and to persuade them to the
fear of God, and to teach them the manner of the God of the Country; but the
Text says, They feared the Lord, 4. Kings. 17.33
but served their Idols withal; They offered their Understanding to God, but
their Will unto Idols. The like kind of course a great part of Christendom
takes; they acknowledge a God, but adore Vice, and their Faith they think
shall serve them for a safe Conduct, that God may not destroy them in his
wrath. Being herein like unto your Marshalls men, who only therefore serve
the Marshall, that they may live the looser, and sin with more safety.

Two mischiefs seem to threaten such kind of Christians: The one, That this
their Faith may turn to their greater condemnation. The other, That they may
run the hazard of loosing it.
By Balaams advice, the King of Moab sent many fair and beautiful women to
Gods People, to the end to draw on their love the more; but charging them
withal, that they should not in any hand yield to their longings and their
lustings, unless they would first worship those Idols which they themselves
adored. And it so fell out (Affection ouer-ruling Religion) that many of the
Faithful by this means fell away, and did link themselves in marriage with
them, making little or no scruple of the condition whereunto they were tied.
We may very well give great thanks to our Vices, and unto God, who has so
ordered the business for us, that though our Vices bring with them unlawful
pleasures and delights, yet they do not bring Idols with them; which if they
did, I fear me that many would echaran la soga, tras el Caldero, Hurl the
rope after the kettle, or (as we say by way of Proverb) Fling the helm after
the hatchet.

Aiunt illi, Malos male perdet.
They say unto him, He shall destroy those wicked ones. Him, in Scripture, we
call ill, who does ill. Si ergo vos, cum sitis mali, nostis bona dare filijs
vestris, etc. We daily pray unto God to deliver us from evil, yet stick not
daily to commit evil; Hazarding thereby both body and soul. Mala est, vita
mala; sed m^r^ peccatorum, pessima, An ill life, is bad; but a bad death,
worse. God, does Been perde^^ iustum; When his il, works for his good. As in
Jobs case, His goods were lost, but his soul was saved. But the perdition of
this people was general, both in their goods, their honors, their wives,
their children, their Temple, their lives, and their souls. In a word, God
would, that this people (like Lots wife) should serve for a general warning to
the whole World, by notifying their punishment to all nations. Deus ostendit
mihi super inimicos meos. Now, Ostendere, in holy Scripture, imports a
Publication, Quantas ostendisti mihi tribulationes multas, and mala^, What
great tribulations have thou showed me, many and evil.

Gods punishments of two sorts. Psalm. 6.1. Ierem. 10.24.
He will destroy those wicked ones. David craves of God, That he will not
correct him in his fury, neither chasten him in his displeasure. Ne in furore
Domine. God punishes all, but not in his fury. Jeremy craves a Corripe, but it
is in judicio, non in furore, Correct us (o Lord) and yet in thy judgment, not
in thy fury. This Prophet sets down two sorts of punishments.

The one, of an Almond tree budding. Quid tu vides Jeremiah? What (...) thou
Jeremy? Virgam vigilantem ego video, (says he) I see a rod of an Almond tree.

The other, of a pot seething, Quid tu vides, etc. What see thou? Ollam
succ^^^sam ego video, says he, I see a seething pot.

In the rod, he represented unto us a light kind of punishment; with a rod, we
use to beat out the dust, and if you strike therewith but two or three strong
blow^ well laid on, you will presently break it. And this kind of punishment,
is eue^ more directed to amendment of life, and to serve as a warning unto us.
Ionath^^ eyes, were opened with that honey which he had on the top of his wand.

But in that of the pot seething, he represents unto us a most sharp and
severe punishment.

He shall destroy those wicked ones. Man is so wedded to self-love, Self love
the overthrow of man.
that when it shall encounter with the counsel of God, it will go about to
condemn it. Of five hundred offenders that lie in prison, you shall scarce
find one that will not complain, that he suffers unjustly; and that the
Judges sentence proceeded either out of malice or injustice: And for these,
there is no better course to be taken with them, than to halter them, as they
do Mules, when they begin to play iadish tricks. As well conditioned as David
was, Nathan the Prophet was feign to hamper him in this manner, that he might
thereby be taught to know his own error. The like order does our Savior Christ
take with this froward people; And albeit, they were so crafty and so wary,
that when he propounded any questions unto them, they were wonderful careful
what answer to make him, suspecting this was but a trap set for them;
insomuch, that when our Savior ask't them, Whether the Baptism of John
Baptist, were from Heaven, or from Earth? They answered, We know not. But
notwithstanding all this, Prou. 21.30.
forasmuch as there is no wisdom, no prudence, nor no counsel against the
Lord; and that the wisdom of the Earth, is but foolishness to that of
Heaven: they fell into the snare, pronouncing this sentence against themselves,
Malos, male perdet, He will cruelly destroy those wicked men.

It was not much, that the children should wax blind, being near the
splendor of his divine Wisdom; when as their father the Devil, who was the
fountain of Malice, was stricken blind therewith. Job, that pattern of
Patience, says, He that made him, will make his own sword to approach unto
him. Job. 40.
Some Books have it, Applica^it gladium eius ei. He caused the Devil to cut
his throat, with his own knife. He took up sin, as a sword, against God,
and against Man: but the Wisdom of God so guided the blow, that he sheathed
his sword in his own bowels. He brought in Death, and Death was his death. He
bit Eve by the heel; but this biting, was the brusing of his head. Of Golias
sword, David said, Non est similis in terra, There was not the like again to
be had. Not that there was not such another to be found in the Philistimes
armories, but because it found out the trick to cut off his Masters head. So
the Pharisees own sentence was the sword, that cut their throats.
Nebuchadnezar, asking of his Southsayers the signification of his dream, They
told him, None can do that, but God. Now when Daniell shall interpret it, he
must (by your own confession) be either a God, or one of Gods inward friends.
Malos, male perd^t, He will destroy those wicked ones, your own mouth
condemns you. Saint Chrysostom, and Eutimius say, That they were all of this
opinion. But anon after finding themselves bitten, they foyst in an Absit. But
our Savior citing for his purpose that saying of the Psalmist, Lapidem quem
reprobauerunt, etc. The stone which they refused, etc. Psalm. 118.21.
Their mouths were bungd up, and their Absit would not now serve their turn.
And therefore he says unto them, Auferetur a vobis Regnum Dei, The Kingdom of
God shall be taken from you, etc.

Auferetur a vobis regnum Dei.
The Kingdom of God shall be taken from you. The translation of Gods kingdom
from the Jews to the Gentiles.
The prophecies of the translation from the Jews, to the Gentiles, as they are
many, so are they most manifest. As in that of Esaias, Quia posuisti ciuitatem in
tumulum. Where he treats of this alteration, and of the destruction of
Jerusalem. Of Osee, The children of Israel shall remain many days without a
King. Of Jeremy, I have forsaken my house, Esaias. 5. Osee, 3.4. Jeremy. 12.7.
Math. 23.38.
I have left my heritage. Of Malachy, My affection is not toward you. Matthew
sums up all these prophecies in one. Your habitation shall be left unto you
desolate. Pope Leo has observed, that our Savior Christ being not able to
bear the heavy burden of the Cross, the Jews fearing he would not dye till
they had fastened him thereunto, hired a Gentile, called Simon Cirenaeus, to
help him awhile in the bearing of it. Only thereby to show, that the fruit of
the Cross, was to come unto the Gentiles. Or to explain it fuller, his
submitting himself to the Cross amidst these cruel Jews, was not a thing
done by chance, but a kind of prophecy, That the Gentiles should take
possession of the key of Heaven.

The Kingdom of God shall be taken from you. Here first of all, he advises
Kings, Princes, and Rulers, that they look well unto their ways, and stand in
fear of this change. For God is wont to transfer Kingdoms, States, and
Seigniories from one nation to another, Eccl. 10.
for their sins sake. Because of unrighteous dealing, and wrongs, and riches
gotten by deceit, the Kingdom is translated from one people to another. A King
suffers his subjects to be ouerladen with Taxes, when they are not able to
bear them: Give that Kingdom for lost. The wicked shall be cut off from the
Earth, Prou. 2.22. D^^. 6.
and the transgressors shall be rooted out of it. Daniel pronounces as much,
God changes times and ages, he translateth kingdoms, and establishes them.
The most high bears rule over the kingdom of men, and gives it to
whomsoever he will. And those that walk in pride, he is able to abase. And in
the fourth chapter, Dan. 4.
He sets up a mean man in their steed. The examples of this in Gods people
are more in number than the stars of Heaven. We see the house of Jeroboam
destroyed and utterly rooted out by the hands of Baasha; That of Baasha, by
Zambri; and that of Ahab, by Iehu. In the land of promise, God took away one
and thirty Kingdoms, 3. Reg. 14.15. 3. King. 16. 4. King. 9.
from those Kings, and bestowed them on his own people. Alios laborauerunt,
and vos in laborem eorum introistis, Others took the pains, and ye reap't
the profit. But he did defer the possession of these for some few years,
because the sins of the Amorites were not yet come unto their height.
Salmanazer, carried away ten of the Tribes captive to the land of the Medes;
Nebuchadnezzar destroyed the City and Temple of Jerusalem; and leading the
people away captive unto Babylon, he left the land wast and desolate: as it
appears in the Lamentations of Jeremy, Haereditas nostra, versa est ad
alienos, Our inheritance, is turned over unto strangers. The Monarchy of the
Assirians and Babilonians, was transferred to the Medes and Persians; that of
the Persians, to the Grecians and Macedonians; and that of the Macedonians, to
the Romans; as was prophesied by Daniel, in that prodigious Statua which
Nebuchadnezzar saw in his dream. The Empire of Constantinople, was translated
to the Ottoman Family. In a word, numberless are those Kingdoms, which have
suffered their alterations, and translations. Their sins, being the only
cause of this their change.

Secondly, He advises those of the middle sort, on whom God has bestowed
wealth, God substracts his Blessings, when we prove ungrateful.
houses, honors, and health, wherewithal conveniently to pass this life of
theirs, That they prove not ungrateful unto God: For he knows as well how to
take away from them, as to give to them, all these his good blessings, and to
bring them by means never dreamt of, to the Hospital, and to shameful
poverty and dishonor. According to that saying uttered by God himself, 1.
Reg. 2.
They that despise me, shall be despised. As also by the mouth of Osee. This
People does not acknowledge that I give them Wine, Wheat, and Oil; and
therefore I shall make them to acknowledge it, by taking these things from
them, leaving them poor, hungry, and miserable.

Thirdly, He advises the Faithful, to procure to preserve the goods of
Grace, and the right and hope which they have in the Kingdom of Heaven; lest
God should translate the same to a Nation that should bring forth better fruit,
leaving them in the darkness of errors and heresies, without Priests,
without Sacraments, without Scriptures, without God; and passing these his good
graces over to a People that have not known his Law. For though God chops and
changes Kingdoms, yet he never takes away his Riches and his blessings. Tene
quod habes, ^e alius accipiat Coronam tuam, Hold fast that thou have, lest
another come and take thy Crown from thee; It is Saint John's, in his
Apocalypse. God removed Adam out of Paradise, God will raise seed out of
stones, and make barren places to bring forth fruit.

Et dabitur Genti facienti fructum.
And it shall be given to a Nation that shall bring forth fruit. The Princes of
the earth takes away the wealth of one of his Ministers, and gives it to
another; puts away a bad servant, and takes in a worse; remooues a full fed
Fly, and claps a lean Carrion in his room. Ioshuah took ten stones out of
Jordan, and put other ten in the places of them: This is a figure of the Worlds
Reformation. Offices are every day chopped and changed; twelve pibble Stones are
rolled out of the Court, and twelve others are tumbled in, in their stead. But
God is of another kind of temper, he makes choice of a people that shall bring
forth Fruit: He takes the Kingdom from Saul, and gives it unto David, I will
give it to one that is better than thy self. He took away the Priesthood from
Shebna, (who grew fat therein, Esaias. 22.
like a Capon in a Coope) and gave it to Eliakim, Who was as it were a father
of the Inhabitants of Jerusalem. The sons of Ely died, and Samuel succeeded in
the Priesthood. Suscitabo mihi Sacerdotem fidelem, I will raise unto me a
faithful Priest. God raise us up all to newness of life, 1. Kings. 2.
and let not our unthankfulness cause him to thrust us out of this vineyard
which he has planted for us; but that we may return him some fruits thereof,
that he may be glorified here by us on Earth; and we receive from him a Crown
of eternal glory in Heaven.

THE SEVENTEENTH SERMON, UPON THE SATVRDAY AFTER THE SECOND SUNDAY IN LENT.
LVC. 15. Homo quidam habuit duos filios.

A certain man had two Sons, etc.


The distrubution of the matter.
AMongst the rest of the Parables, this Parable is treated of; and is divided
into four parts:

The first relates the resolution of an idle young fellow desirous to see the
world, and to have his fathers leave to travel.

The second, His unadvised actions, lewd courses, lavish expenses, and the
miseries that befell him thereupon.

The third, The consideration of his own wretched estate, his returning home to
his fathers house all tottered and torn, weak, and hungerstarued.

The fourth, His fathers kind reception of him, and the joy that he took in
this his lost son.

This follows very fitly that former Parable of the Vineyard:

That being full of fear; this, of hope:

That, of the rigor of justice; this, of the regalos of mercy.

That checkes a sinner in his sins; this spurs him on to repentance.

And these are those two Poles whereon the whole government of God depends.

This world is nothing but a mixture of good and evil
A certain man had two sons. In these two sons are represented unto us the
just, and the sinful man. For, this life is a Net which holds all sorts of
fishes; it is an heap of Corn, where the Chafe is mixed with the Wheat; it
is a flock of Sheep and Goats; a body consisting of contrary humors; a ground
of good seed, and of tares: All are the sons of God by creation, but not by
adoption. Fathers may have sons alike in favor, but not in conditions: Adam,
to his Abel had a Caine; Noah, to his Shem had a Cham; Abraham, to his Isaac
had an Ismael; Isaac, to his Jacob had an Esau; David, to his Solomon had an
Absalon; and Solomon himself had a Rehoboam: So have most men that have many
children; and God himself has some cross, froward, and perverse children.

Adolescentior ex illis.
The younger of them. The Saints and Doctors do multiply the motives of this
his longing to be gadding abroad. But the malne Motive was, that he was young,
and desirous of liberty. He that names the word, Youth, names ignorance, small
experience, infinite longings, a sudden quickness in entertaining them, and a
foolish rashness in inioying them. Through a foolish longing, Adam and Eve
lost the greatest Empire that ever was acknowledged by the World, in less than
six hours; being presently turned out of Gods blessing (as they say) into the
warm Sun; and out of a Paradise, into a place of misery. They were young,
and there is not that Vice (as Saint Austen says) which will not seek to
lodge it self in youths bosom. They were youngmen, which Ezechiell saw with
their backs turned to the Sancta sanctorum, entertaining themselves with the
fragrant sweet sent of flowers. They were yongmen, which in the Book of
Wisdom, plant in all have a Vineyard of Vices. Vtamur Creatura, tanquam in
inuentute, celeritur. They were yongmen, which lost Rehoboam his kingdom. He
was a yongman (says Salomo^) whom the married wife in her husbands absence
invited to her house, and to her bed, being led along by her, Prou. ^.
as an Ox that goes to the slaughter, or as a Fool to the stocks for
correction. He was a youngman, that would take upon him to guide the horses
and chariot of the Sun. Yongmen are those, whom misfortunes daily make an end
off in the prime and ^lower of their youthful years. In regard of whose
manifold dangers, David did desire of God, That he would not take him away in
the days of his youth. His son Solomon, was many days together much vexed
with the rawnesse and ignorance of his heir, that was to succeed him; as
divining of the disasters, which were to ensue so prosperous a reign, Eccl. 2
18.
I hated all my labor wherein I had travailed under the Sun, which I shall
leave to the man that shall be after me; And who knows, whether he shall be
wise or foolish?

The second motive was, The wicked love not to be checked in their proceedings.
That he might be far out of sight from his fathers presence, which he
thought too great an eyesore, having a desire to be free from the respect and
reverence which was due unto him, from his instructions, admonitions,
inquiries, and chidings. This was the end, why he was willing to travel, and
the beginning of his ruin. The just man, has ever God before his eyes. As the
eyes of a maiden unto the hands of her Mistress, Psalm. 123.
even so our eyes wait upon the Lord our God. The sinner would not, that Gods
eyes should see him, nor his eyes see God, that he might sin the more freely:
and therefore he says to himself, Tush God has forgotten; he hides away
his face, and he will never see it. Psalm. 10.12. Job 22.13.14.
How should God know, can he judge through the darkness? The Clouds hide him
that ^e cannot see, and he walks through the circle of Heaven. In a word,
this young man did seek to shake off from his shoulders all those obligations,
which the presence of his father might lay upon him. But it seems to Saint
Austen, that the cause of his perdition, was Pride, his not acknowledging of
subjection, nor superiority. This was the sin of Lucifer in Heaven, and of
Adam in Paradise. Initium superbiae hominis apostatare a Deo. This doctrine of
Saint Austens, has a great deal of reason on it is side, as is observed by
Thomas: For all other vices make a man go departing from God by degrees,
wheeling about as it were, and fetching a compass; but Pride standing out
stiff against God, and seeking as it were to out face him, falls presently to
an absolute neglect of his divine Majesty. But it fares with him as with the
Sun in those parts when it sets, it sinkes on the sudden, and it is instantly
night: So when the Proud man falls, he falls suddenly, and a present darkness
ouerspreds his soul, being thrown headlong down into the bottomless pit
of Hell, where the black mantle of eternal darkness shall be cast over him.

The third motive (according to Petrus Crysologus) was covetousness of money:
This (says he) drove him out of his fathers doors, banished him from his
Country, blotted his fame, and blemished his honor, left him naked and poor,
and made him submit himself to the basest service in the world. And this
conceit has in its favor a very forcible reason; for the liberty of Youth,
though it would run on to it is own destruction, yet without money it is
lame, it wants both it is hands and it is feet; and this defect does detain him,
as a wooden clog does a mad Bullock. But when Youth shall be left to it is own
swinge, and be still supplied and fed with moneys, which are the instruments
of mischief in il governed years; Who can restrain it, or what hand (though
never so strong) hold it in?

But to omit these and many other motives elsewhere delivered by us; Clemens
Alexandrinus says, That one of the greatest affronts that Man can do unto God,
is, for to forgo the comfort and liberty of his own house, to follow the
World, the Flesh, and the Devil. Saint Augustine says, That it is a woeful
thing, that all that should seem honey to a man, which is offered him by the
Devil; and all that gall, which is proffered him by God. It is a more natural
thing in the Creature, to obey their Creator, than to follow their own proper
inclination. The natural place of the water was to cover the earth, [ Et aqua
erant super faciem abissi] but God commanding them to retire themselves, they
did instantly obey his voice. The liberty which the Angels enjoy, is more
perfect than that of man; yet cannot they divert their will from the will of
God. What says Solomon? My son, receive my council, and hearken to the
instruction that I shall give thee; Put thy feet in Gods Stocks, clap his
collar of iron about thy neck, let his linkes bind thy legs; for the more he
shall lade thee with yrons, with gyu^s, and with fetters, the more free shall
thou live, and more at liberty.

Diuisit illis substantiam, He divided unto them his substance.
Too much liberty the bane of youth.
Here the Doctors and other learned Divines make a doubt, How so wise and
discreet a father could be brought to favor such an unadvised longing, such a
rash and inconsiderate course? A man would have thought, that he should rather
have crossed, controlled, and hindered this his idle and giddie resolution. But
to impart his substance to a young man that had no government of himself, and
was so apt to undo himself, it seems somewhat strange. Plat^ says, That a
young man ought to be harder tied, and faster bound than a Beast; because for
the most part he is more wild, more unruly, and vntamable. And the Laws, where
Parents are wanting, tie Tutors and Guardians to have a great care in
preventing those perils that are incident to Youth. A child set at liberty
makes his mother ashamed; Prou. 29.15. Eccl. 30.^0.
it is Salomons. And Ecclesiasticus says, Laugh not with thy son, le^t thou be
sorry with him, and lest thou gnash thy teeth in the end. Give him no liberty
in his youth, and wink not at his folly: Bow down his neck while he is
young, and beat him on the sides whilst he is a child, lest he wax stubborn,
and be disobedient unto thee, and so bring sorrow to thine heart, etc. Men ought
to be very circumspect in giving too much license and liberty to young
Gentlemen whilst they are in the heat and fury of their youth, and that their
wanton blood boyleth in their veins. It is no wisdom in parents, to give away
their wealth from themselves, Eccl. 33.20.
and to stand afterward to their childrens courtesy. Give not away thy
substance to another, lest it repent thee; no, not to thine own children: For
better it is that thy children should pray unto thee, than that thou should
look up to the hands of thy children. To this doubt, satisfaction has
formerly been given by us in a Discourse of ours upon this same Parable: but
that which now offers it self a fresh unto us, is That albeit the Father saw,
that his liberty, his monys, and his absence, would be his Sons undoing; yet
he likewise saw his amendment, his repentance, and what a future warning this
would be unto him. And so he chose rather to see him recovered after he was
lost, than violently to detain him, and to force him to keep home against his
will; which would bring forth no better fruits than lowering and grumbling.
Saint Augustine says, That it seemed a lesser evil to God, to redress some
evils, than not to permit any evil at all; Melius judicauit de malis
benefacere, quam mala nulla esse permittere. God would not have thee to sin,
neither can he be the Author of thy sins: but if men should not commit
sins, Gods Attributes would lose much of their splendour. Saint Paul speaking
of himself, says, That God had forgiven him, though he had been a persecuter
and blasphemer of his holy Name, etc. And why did he do this? Vt ostenderet
omnem patientiam and gratiam; My sins (says he) were the occasion that God
pardoned me, and his pardoning of me was the cause of the Worlds taking notice
of his long suffering, and his great goodness. This may serve for a very good
instruction to those that are great Princes, and Governors of Commonwealths,
and may teach them how to punish, and how to bear with their subjects; and it
belongs no less to the name of a good Governor, to tolerate with prudence,
than to punish with courage. And Solomon gives thee this caveat, Eccl. 7.1^.
Noli esse multum justus, Et not thou just, overmuch.

Congregatis omnibus.
When he had gathered all together. What a strange course was this that this
young man ran?

First of all, he leuelled all accounts with his father, shutting the door
after him to all hope of receiving so much as one farthing more than his
portion: If he had left some stock behind him, that might have help him at a
pinch, if he should chance to miscarrie in this his journey, (for he was not
sure that he should still hold Fortune fast by the wing) he had done well and
wisely; but he made a clean riddance of all, as well mooueables, as
immooueables: Et congregatis omnibus, etc.

Secondly, What a foolish part was it in him, to leave so good a Father, and so
sweet and pleasant a Country, being both such natural ties of love to Man's
breast. The love of a Father is so much indeered in Scripture, that great curses
and maledictions are thundered out against unloving and unkind childeren. And
the love of a man's Country is such a thing, (says Saint Augustine) that God
made choice to try of what metal Abraham was made, by such a new and strange
kind of torment, as to turn him out of his Country; Egredere de Terra tua,
and de Cognatione tua, Go from thy Land, and from thy Kindred. Saint
Chrysostom says, That even those Monks which left the world for their love
to God, and to do him service, did notwithstanding show themselves very
sencible of their absence from their native soil, and their fathers house. But
those sorrows and lamentations which the Children of Israel made when they
were on their way to Babylon, indeere it beyond measure; If I forget thee, o
Jerusalem, Psalm. 137.
let my right hand forget her cunning; If I do not remember thee, let my
tongue cleave to the roof of my mouth; yea, if I prefer not Jerusalem in my
mirth, etc.

But much more fearful is the resolution of this young man, in the thing that
is signified thereby: To wit, That a Sinner shall so exactly sum up all his
reckonings with God, that he shall not have any hope at all left him, neither
in his life nor his death, of one only dram of mercy. There are some
Sinners that give their wealth to the World, but not all; some give God their
lips, but not their hearts; some, their memory, but not their will; some,
their will, but not their understanding; some are dishonest, and yet
Almesgiuers; some covetous, and yet devout, like those Assyrians which lived in
Samaria, who acknowledged God and his Law, yet worshipped Idols. But to give
all away, as the Prodigal did, is a desperate course.

Besides, It is a miserable case, that this Prodigal should not be sencible
of leaving so good a Father as God, of renouncing so rich an Inheritance as
Heaven, and of being banished for ever from so sweet and pleasant an
habitation. But he is so blind, that he loves darkness, and abhorres the
light; which is a case so lamentable, that it made Jeremy to cry out,
Obstupescite Coeli, Be amazed (...) Heavens.

Profectus est in Regionem longinquam
He took his journey into a far Country. No man can fly from God, per
distantiam loci, be the place never so far off; no distance can bring us out
of his reach. If I ascend up unto Heaven, thou art there; if descend into Hell,
thou art there also. And certainly if there were any one place free from his
presence, all the Prodigals of the world would make that their Rendezuous, and
live there. Jonas flying from God, left the earth, and entered into the sea,
where there were so many Sergeants waiting to arrest him, who took hold of
him, and threw him into prison, that dark dungeon of the Whales belly. So
that there is not any thing (says Anselmus) in the Concaue of Heaven, which
can escape the eye of Heaven; no, though a man should fly from East to West,
and from the South unto the North. So this Prodigal, flying from his Fathers
house, fell upon a poor Farm, and flying from Fullness, lighted upon Hunger;
and these were Gods executioners appointed to punish his folly.

To forget God, is to go into a far cuntry.
Into a far Country. He came to the City of Oblivion, whose Inhabitants are
without number. Saint Augustine says, Regio longinqua obliuio Dei est, This
far Country is the forgetting of God, and he that in this kind is far from
him, is in no kind at all. Fame had presently blown it over all the Country,
that a young Gallant was newly come to town, liberal, rich, and generous:
Presently (as it is the custom of those that are in great Cities, as if some
wonder had been to be seen) they come as thick unto him as Bees come to
honey. The third day after his coming thither, he walks the streets,
attended on by a company of brave Poets, Musitions, Iesters, Gamesters, and
Unthrifts; they carry him to a Dicing house, anon after to a Whore house, (for
these two are never far asunder) where he enters into conversation with women,
whom the Holy Ghost styles Multiuolas, for the multitude of their longings, or
for their many and diverse minds in desiring many things, wishing one while
this; another, that: Who being (as Saint Bernard says) more insatiable than
Hell, are evermore a crying, (like the daughters of the Horse-leech) Affer,
Prou. 3.
affer, Bring, bring. He was willing on the one side to show himself frank
and free; but on the other, the thirst of these Horse-leeches was greater than
his Purse was able to satisfy. At last his money was all spent and gone, and
impawning his apparel piece after piece, he was in the end left bare and
naked.

Eratfames valida in Terra, and ipse caepit egere.
Now, when he had spent all, there arose a great Dearth throughout that La^d,
and he began to be in necessity. It so fell out, that it was a hard year,
whereupon he began to suffer hunger, poverty, and extreme want. There was no
such necessity that this should have proved so hard a year unto him* for, a
provident man would have provided for a dear year; well, for want of that, he
sees himself now in want. Whilst Sampson had his strength about him, he was
courted by Dalida, and she made much love unto him; but when she found that
his force failed him, she began to vex him and to mock at him: Judge. 1.^^
and when she had her purpose she cared not a pin for him. Whilst David was
quiet in his Kingdom, Shimei durst never revile him; but he no sooner saw him
fly from Jerusalem half naked, and with one shoe off (as they say) and
another on, but that this his rancor brake forth, which durst never show it
self before: And making post have, he hies him out of the City after him, and
there before all the people, venting the gall of his long conceived malice, he
falls a railing most bitterly against him. I am poor and wretched: (Mark I
pray, Psalm. 38.
what follows) My Lovers and my Neighbors did stand looking upon my trouble,
and my Kinsemen stood afar off. Many stood looking on him, but none would
come in to help him. Those friends which before made great reckoning of Job,
when they saw him sitting on the Dunghill, they began to scorn and despise him.
Those Princes that were confederate with Jerusalem, forsook her in her
affliction, and left her all alone. Philon reports, That the Samaritans
whilst the Jews were in prosperity stuck very close unto them, and
esteemed of them as of their friends and Kinsemen. Art thou greater than our
Father Jacob? said the Samaritane woman; calling Jacob Father, as long as the
Jews power and prosperity lasted; but no sooner down the wind, but they wind
their necks out of the collar, acknowledging neither friendship nor kindred.
Of those Fishes which they call Vigiliales, your Naturalists do report, That
when the Stars are clear, and shine bright, they come and skip and play
above water, seeming therein to applaud their beauty, and to sooth and flatter
them; but when they are dim and dark, they likewise hide their heads and get
them gone. Of your Batts or Reare-mice (as some call them) Fables report, That
when the Birds came to demand tribute of them, showing them their breasts, they
said they were Beasts; And when the Beasts came to them, and craved the like,
showing their wings* they pleaded they were Birds. In a word, Quicke-siluer,
which is such a professed friend unto Gold, flies from it in the Crysole. All
fly from the Crysole of poverty, they will not endure to come to the melting
pot, that is too hot a trial for them. Martial said of Homer, That if he
brought nothing along with him but the Muses, he should have Tom Drums
entertainment, and be shut out of doors. Your Whore, if you have no money in
your purse will bid you be gone; No penie (says the Proverb) no Paternoster.
The Prodigal now sees himself naked and hungry, and what shift to make he
knows not; for, after a fullness comes a Famine, and after bravery, beggerie,
especially when men will wilfully cast themselves into it when they need not.
For he (God be thanked) was well, had he had the grace to know when he was well.
And therefore says Malachie, Malach. 2.
If ye will not hear nor consider it in your heart, to give glory to my name,
I will corrupt your Seed, and cast dung upon your faces; I will make ye also
to be despised and vile before all the people.

Adhaesit vni Ciuium.
He went and ^laue to a Citisen of that Country, etc. He was now driven to
seek out a Master, and forced to serve, out of pure hunger: It was his hap to
light upon a cruel Snudge, a hard hearted Tyrant, who sent him to a Farm
house that he had in the Country, to keep Swine; where he feign would, but
could not fill his belly with that feeding which was flung out to the Pigges.
This was a very miserable change: But God many times deals thus with his
untoward Children, that they may see the difference that is betwixt Master and
Master, House and House, Fare and Fare. God did deliver Rehoboam King of
Jerusalem, from the hands of Shi^hacke King of Egypt; 3. Reg. 14.
but suffered him to be his Tributarie, that he might make trial of the
difference, that was from subjection to subjection. God said to his People, I
will that ye go down into Egypt, that ye may see what it is to serve me, and
what Pharaoh* Petrus Chrysostom. tells thee, That in thy Fathers house thou inioiest
a sweet kind of life, a free servitude, a joyful fear, a rich poverty, a safe
possession, a quiet conscience, and a holy fullness; As for labor and pains
taking (if there be any) that is put to thy Fathers account. But this thy
felicity goes further than so: Solomon throughout all the third Chapter of his
Proverbs, Prou. 3.
goes promising blessings to a wise and obedient Son; threatening many evils
to come upon that child that shall be cross and untoward to his Parents. As a
long and prosperous life has favor both with God and Men, health, fullness,
Barnes filled with abundance, Presses that shall burst with new Wine; summing
there up all possible and imaginable felicity. But otherwise goes it with
those that are perverse and disobedient: Chrysologus sets them forth in the
Prodigal, and reduces them all to his turning Swineheard.

Our Savior Christ styles Sinners with the name of Swine: And this name does
more particularly appertain to those that are sensual persons. The
proportions are many.

First of all, Any other Creature whatsoever is made tame and gentle, but the
swine not; in any other there is taken some pleasure or affection, but in the
Swine not; any other will acknowledge the hand that feeds him, but the Swine
never; it is the stamp of an obstinate, harsh, unsavory, and desperate sinner.

Secondly, In touching a Hogs either bristles or skin, he presently falls a
grunting, as Geminianus has noted it. A Horse will suffer you to curry his
coat, and to kembe down his mayn; there are many other beasts that will give a
man leave to handle and stroke them; but the Hog is no sooner touched but he
whines, and the reason is, because there is nothing either of profit or
pleasure in him, save his flesh: so that when you offer to lay hand on him, he
presently conceiues that you mean to kill him. This is the picture of a Sinner
that has a guilty conscience, who being scarce touched, not with the whole
hand, but the least and lightest finger of Gods justice, presently apprehends
he is but a dead man.

Thirdly, Your Swine, especially your wild Bores, are of that strange
quickness of sent, that if the Huntsman mean to shoot at him, he must take
the wind of him, or else he will wind him out and be gone. Now on the
contrary, they are not sencible of the ill savor of a Dunghill, nor the
stench of mud and mire, but rather take delight to lie wallowing therein,
esteeming it as a great recreation and refreshing unto them. This is the figure
of a filthy foul Sinner, who will fly a thousand leagues from the perils
and dangers of his body, but take pleasure and pastime in those muckhills and
durtie puddles which defile the Soul. And these kind of creatures your
Worldlings call their love, their joy, their comfort and delight. But Gods
Dictionary terms them, the loathsome sweetnesses and perbreaking pleasures
ofSwine.

Fourthly, In point of stinking nastinesse, and all kind of beastly
filthiness, a Swine is such a filthy thing, that a slouenly fellow we
commonly call him Puerco, a very Swine.

He would feign have filled his belly with the husks that the Swine eat, but
no man gave them him. There are many Pictures and Tables in Scripture, in the
Saints, (...) in the Doctors, of the foulness and misery of a Man without
God. Saint Gregory compares him to a World without a Sun, covered with
thick Clouds; to a body without a soul, which though it be never so fair,
yet is it fearful to behold. Esaias, to a City that is sacked, burned, and
thrown down to the ground; Esaias. 38.
to a Swallows young one forsaken of her Damme [ Like a Swallow so did I
chatter;] To that rotten and corrupt piece of Linen which was profitable for
nothing, Ier. 13. Lament. 4. The wicked whereunto compared.
and by Gods own appointment commanded to be hid in Perath in the cliffe of a
Rock. The Lamentations, To the Nobles of Syon that remained Captives in
Babylon; who being before purer than Snow, whiter than Milk, and more ruddie
in body than the red precious Stones, or more fair and beautiful than the
polished Sapphire, are now become blacker than the cole. Saint Augustine, To a
house that has not been inhabited for many years, which is full of Todes,
Snakes, Spiders, and other vile and venomous Vermin; to Adam, that was thrust
out of Paradise, and afterward clothed with the skins of dead beasts. But
none of them all express it more to the life, than this slouenly, filthy,
loathsome, hunger-starued, weak, tawnie, stinking young man, whose body was
grown over with hair, as a tree with moss; whose face was scort^ht with the
Sun, and through blackenesse had lost it is beauty; whose poor Rags that
he had to his back, were all totterd and torn with creeping through the
bushes of the Mountain, here hanging one piece, and there another. Himself
beheld himself in that puddled water where the Swine drank, and did not know
himself: And no marvel, seeing his Father that created him did not know him,
he was so changed and altered from that he was. All these are Types and
shadows of a man without God: And I call them shadows, for in truth neither
these, nor many other the like indeerings can express them to the full.

One of the greatest martyrdomes that a man can suffer in this world, is, No
misery so great, but sin will reduce us unto it.
To serve a base Moore, that shall employ him in beating of hemp, in grinding
in a Mill, in making Broomes, in rubbing Horses heels, and digging up roots of
Thistles, whereof he must be content to make his meals. But none of these is
so base an office as the keeping of a Hog-stie; and God brought this Prodigal
to this misery, to the end that the remembran^e of his former happiness might
amase and confound him. According to that of Jeremy, Ierem. 17
All that forsake thee shall be confounded. And of David, Qui elongant se a te,
peribunt. All such Prodigals as these shall remain confounded and abashed, and
shall utterly perish, continuing in their sins. Yet there is in sin (if a
man may so term it) some kind of good, in regard that those miseries which it
brings with it, does awaken and rouse a man from sleep. And as the Cough of
the lungs is eased with a clap on the back, so is the sinners heart, when Sin
hammers upon it.

He came to himself. Saint Ambrose says, That sin does not only separate
the sinner from God, but also from himself. Chrysologus, daintily touches
upon the same string, Cum recessit a patre (says he) recessit a se, etc. When
he departed from his father, he departed from himself; Leaving to be man, he
came to be a beast; And that he might come to his father, he comes first to
himself. There are some transformations, Psalm. 32.
that none can make, but Sin, and Grace. David, treating of the pardon of his
sins, says. Blessed is he, whose unrighteousness is forgiven, and whose
sin is covered. Blessed is the man, unto whom the Lord imputes no sin.
Praising God in that Psalm, for having restored his understanding unto him. So
S. Jerome expounds it. And albeit all sins do rob a man of his
understanding, (...) does alienate and estrange a sinner from himself; yet
dishonesty does this more than all the rest. Solomon, treating of the tyranny
of a Whore, says, That she is like a Thief, which lies in wait in the way,
to set upon careless men, and kill them ere they are aware. Et quos incautos
viderit, interficit. A thief dares not set upon him that goes well
accompanied, or that has his pistolls at his Saddlebow, and is well provided
for him. The Devil sets upon us with the inticements of the flesh; against
these allurements, we must arm our selves with prayer, fasting, and
mortification. But the careless man which lies open, and offers himself every
moment to al occasions of sinning, that man he either robs, or kills, if not
both; and leaves him so wholly besides himself, that he shall see the loss
of his substance, of his honor, and of his health, with loathsome diseases;
that he shall see himself despised, murmured at, pried into, and made the
common byword of the City wherein he dwells, and shall not be sencible of the
harm that hangs over his head. And therefore Saint Paul preaches unto us,
Mortify your members which are upon the Earth, fornication, uncleanness,
etc. For which the wrath of God comes upon the children of unbelief. Another
letter reads of Disobedience, For Dishonestie (as Thomas has observed) does in
such sort harden and obdurate the soul, that it will neither hear
admonitions, nor obey any counsel. And therefore (says Osee) They will not
give their minds to turn unto their God; Ose. 5.4.
for the spirit of fornication is in the midst of them.

Surgam, and ibo ad Patrem meum.
I will rise, and go to my father. He resolved with himself to rise, For the
posture of a sinner, The posture of a sinner is to lie groueling.
is jacere, To lie down. The just shall rise, but the sinner shall lie
groueling on the ground. Non resurgent impij in iudicio, The wicked shall not
rise in judgment. It is true that all men shall rise, but the wicked non
stabunt in iudicio, they shall not be able to stand to it, when they come to
their trial, but shall hang the head. Petrus Chrysologus, paraphrasing those
words of the Centurion, Puer meus iacet; says that our Savior did controlle
this his speech, and that he said not well in saying, Puer meus, My boy lies
sick. Whereunto he shapeth this answer for him, Meus est, quia iacet, si tuus
esset, non iaceret, He is mine, because he lies; were he thine, he should not
lie as he does. There are many places of Scripture that prove and make good
these two phrases of speech. And this very place confirms unto us, that sin
is called a lying, or a falling; and righteousness a rising, or a standing.

I will rise and go to my Father. Two Motives, might put him upon this
determination.

The one, His hunger, and the extreme want wherein he was. For albeit, it be a
common saying, Que la pobreza, no es vileza; That it is no shame to be poor.
Yet hunger is so sharp set, and of that strength and force, that it will
break through stone-walls; it not only shakes off sloathfulnesse, but
adventures upon all difficulties, be they never so desperate. Valerius Maximus
said, That her Laws, were cruel Laws: because they prohibit nothing. And if
hunger put spurs to her heels, for to commit such great cruelties, as to force
Mothers to (...) their own children, she will use sharper rowells to atchiue
things that are lawful and honest. As to spur on this Prodigal, to return
home to his fathers house. And necessity does not only open man's eyes, but
also mooues Gods bowels to compassion of his wretched case. Da nobis auxilium
de tribulatione, Afford us o Lord, that favor, which rises from tribulation.
And I say, which rises, because his eye is ever waighting on those that are in
affliction.

The other, His calling to mind of his former felicity. The remembrance of
fore-passed felicity, a great means to bring vsto Repentance.
Saint Austen weighs with himself, how much it imports a man, to have
been bred up in Virtue in the tender years of his youth: for living
afterward amidst the thorns and briars of sin, it pricks him up to a
remembrance of that quietness of conscience, which he inioyed before he
became sinn's slave. And when God preserues a sinner in his sin, and
forbeares to punish him according to his ill deseruings, it ought to be a
great motive unto him, to make him to leave it. It is a case worthy great
admiration, that in that so general a destruction which the Babilonians made
in Jerusalem, burning their houses, pillaging their goods, and taking their
lives from them, yet they should leave those captiuated Cittisens, those
instruments, wherewith they were wont to serve their God in his Temple. Saint
Jerome, and Saint Basil are of opinion, That this was an especial providence,
and dispensation of God, that in this their banishment, they should conserve
the memory of their fore-passed mirth and melody; that being provoked thereby
to greater sorrow, they might bewail their sins, and recover some hope of
their restoration. And the recordation of our lost good, is not only a great
help to make man to return again unto himself, but also to move God to take
compassion of him. Thou find thy self so ouerburthened with the weight of
thy sins, that thou art in a manner quite dejected with them; but for all this,
be not put out of heart, but call to mind, that God was thy Father, and the
Captain and Leader of thee forth in thy youth, and thy first Love and
delight. And therefore, Amodo voca me, Henceforth call upon him. And no doubt
but in doing so, Gods bowels of compassion will show themselves tender unto
thee.

I will go to my Father, and say, I have sinned against Heaven, etc. He
resolves to crave help of him whom he had offended; like unto your
Magot-a-pyes, Confession in Gods Court, the only way to Absolution.
who being pursued by the Hawke, fly for succor to the Faukener, seeking
shelter from him. So Samuel advised the people, when they had offended God, Vos
fecistis malum grande, Ye have committed a great evil, yet nevertheless
depart not from the Lord. If God be angry with thee, make him propitious to
thee, not by flying from him, but by flying to him.

Peccaui in Caelum.
He says, That he had sinned against Heaven. More for that it was a witness
against him, than for any harm that he had received from thence. For in your
earthly Tribunals, with indearing our faults, we oftentimes increase our
punishments; but in that of heaven, the more the delinquent condemns himself,
the more he does lessen his punishment. The reason is, for that sin may be
considered two manner of ways.

Either, as it is an offense against an infinite Goodness. Sin is an
offenceto God and a wound to our own Souls.


Or, as it is a wound, and misery to our Soul.

As it is an offense, it calls for justice, and incenseth Gods wrath against us.

As it is a wound, it moves him to mercy and to clemency. And as the
greatest misery causes the greatest compassion; the more a Sinner does
aggrauat his sin, the more he does extenuate Gods anger, and works the more
pity in him. Psalm. 25.10.
David harpt upon this string; For thy Names sake, o Lord, be merciful unto my
sin, for it is great; Lord, thy Mercy is above all thy Works; that the world
should know thee by this name, is the greatest Attribute that thou take
delight in: for thy Names sake therefore let me beseech thee, that thou will
have mercy on my misery, for it is exceeding great.

Make me one of thy hired Servants. Gilbertus the Abbot says, That these were
very humble and submissiue thoughts, as he was a Son, but somewhat too
affronting for so free and liberal a Father: say his deseruings were never so
poor, never so mean, such weak hopes, and such a base opinion could not but
be a great injury to so good and gracious a Father. Gregory Nazianzen says
of him, Others cannot receive more willingly, than he gives cheerfully. To the
Covetous and to the Needy, there is not any content comparable to that of
receiving; yet greater is the contentment which God takes in giving. He
revealed to Abraham his purposed punishment upon Sodom, and only because he
should beg and entreat for their pardon: and this Patriarch was sooner weary
in suing, than God in granting. And if God did demand his Son of him, it was
not with an intent to have him sacrifice him, (for he diuerted that Sacrifice)
but to take occasion thereby to give him a type of the offering up of his own
Son: giving a shadow of desert to that which came not within the compass of
desert. What says the Abbot Guaricus? He that gave his son for the redeeming
of Prodigalls, What can he deny unto them. Gods bounty often causes our
neglect.
God is so liberal (says Tertullian) that he loses thereby much of his
credit with us: for, the World gains a great opinion, when with a great deal
of leisure, and a great deal of difficulty, it slowly proceeds in doing good;
but God, he loses this respect through his too much facility and frankenesse
in his doing of his courtesies. The Gentiles (says this learned Doctor)
judging of Faith by outward appearances, could not be persuaded that such
facile and mean things in outward show, could inwardly cause such supernatural
effects, and such divine Graces, as in that blessed Sacrament of Baptism.

When he was yet a great way off, etc. The Prodigal desired that his Father
would intertaine him into his service as an hired servant; and he had no
sooner sight of him, but he ran with open arms to receive him, and was so
ouerioyed to see him, and made him that cheer, that the Prodigal knew not how
now to unfold his former conceived words. Saint John in form of a City saw
that celestial Jerusalem; and says, That it had twelve gates, and in each of
them an Angel; which did typifie two things unto us:

The one, That the gates were open.

The Angels rejoice at our coming unto Heaven.
The other, That the Angels showed the content they took in expecting our
coming to Heaven. When thou do not like of a guest, thou will get thee from
the door; but if thou love him, thou will have thither to receive him. But
this his father did more; for he no sooner spied his son afar off, but he
hasted out of his house to embrace him, and presently puts him into a new suit
of clothes, that others might not see how totterd and torn he was returned
home. But God went a step further than all this, for he repaires to him to the
Pigges-stie to put good thoughts into his head. Love uses to make
extraordinary haste in relieuing the wants of those persons whom we love. And
forasmuch as God loves more than all the Fathers besides in the world, he
made greater have than any other Father could. Inclinauit C^elos and descendit,
He bowed the Heavens and came down; That he might not detain himself in
descending, he made the heavens to stoop. Solomon says of Wisdom, That none
shall prevent her diligence and care; Though he rise never so early to seek
her, a man shall always find her sitting at his door. Assidentem enim illam
foribus tuis inuenies. So it is with God, he is still ready at hand to help
us, we no sooner seek him, but he is found. Lord, for thy mercy sake,
prevent us still with thy loving kindness, and by bringing us to a true
acknowledgement of our sins, lead us the way to life everlasting.

THE EIGHTEENTH SERMON, UPON THE THIRD SUNDAY IN LENT.
LVC. II. Erat Jesus eijciens Daemonium.

And Jesus was casting out a Devil, etc.


IN this Gospel is contained that famous Miracle of one that was possessed
with a Devil, being deaf, blind, and dumb. As also the applause of the
People, the calumny and slander of those Pharisees, who did attribute it to
the power of Beelzebub. Our Saviors defending himself with strong and forcible
reasons. The good old woman who blessed the womb that bore our Savior, and
the Paps that gave him suck. Whose name was Marcella: With whom the fruit of
this Miracle ends.

Erat Jesus eijciens Daemonium.
To unweave the Devils Webs, and undo his Nets, God alo^e must untie the
Devils knots*
is a work so sole and proper to Gods omnipotency, that if the Devils malice
had not entangled the World therewith, Gods goodness had not come to unknit
it. And this I hold to be sound Divinity.

First, Because it is the opinion of the most ancient and grauest Doctors.

Secondly, For those places of Scripture it has in it is favor. As that of
Esaias, Is it a small thing, that thou should be my Servant to raise up the
Tribes of Jacob, Esaias 49.
and to restore the desolations of Israel? But Saint John does express this
more plainly; Christ came into the world to this end, that he might destroy the
works of the Devil, Now Dissoluere is properly, to undo a deceit that is
wrought; Dissolve colligationes impietatis, Cancel those Obligations, Bonds,
Schedules, and Acknowledgments, which thou have unjustly drawn thy Creditours
to set their hands thereunto. Omnem Cautionem fals^m (says Symmachus)
disrumpe: The Septuagint read it, Omnem Scripturam iniquam: Saint Hierome,
Chirographa. And to the end that the drift of this Language may be the better
understood; it is to be noted, That a man when he sins, sells himself to the
Devil; making this sale good under his own hand writing. The Devil, he
buys; and the Man, he sells; and the Damned confess as much in Hell; We have
driven a bargain with Death, and have made a covenant with Hell. And if the
Devil had proceeded herein fairly and honestly, and according to Law and
Justice, this knot would hardly have been unknit: but for that he is a Father
of falsehood, of deceit, and of cosinage, there are three great annullities to
be found in this his Contract.

First, An enormious and excessive loss; buying that Soul for little or
nothing, which cost an infintte price; Gratis venundati estis.

Secondly, A notorious cosinage; in that he promised that which he was not
able to perform; Sicut Dij.

Thirdly, Man's being under years; it being a ruled Case, That any such sale,
without the consent of the Guardian, is of no validity in Law: And that too,
must be for the benefit of the Ward.

Fourthly, That he that inhabits another man's house, if he use the same amiss,
the Law takes order that he be turned out of it. Now, the Devil inhabiting
this house of man, makes a dunghill thereof, and besides, pays no rent for it:
to the Body, Fastings are payable; to the Soul, Prayers; to the Goods, Alms:
and these debts, are so many darts in the Devils sides.

It did belong therefore to our Savior Christ, as being our elder brother, and
the Guardian of our Souls, to disanull this sale. Saint Paul says, That
whatsoever act Adam had done, as the chief head and principal root of
Mankind, our Savior Christ had now cancelled the same upon the Cross, Coloss.
2.14.
Putting out the hand writing of Ordinances that was against us; which was
contrary unto us, he even took it out of the way, and fastened it upon the
Cross. And for as much as every man through his manifold sins sells
himself over and over to the Devil, not once, but many times; it was fitting
that our Savior Christ should as often blot and cancel this bill, and make it
to be of none effect. And here says our Evangelist, Erat Jesus eijciens
Daemonium, Jesus was casting forth a Devil. This word Erat implying the
difficulty of getting him out, as also the long time of his continuance there.

Erat Jesus eijciens Daemonium.
Diuersreasons, why Christ paused upon the casting out of this Devil.
Christ did not presently cast out this Devil, but stayed and paused a while
upon the matter; showing thereby, that it was not so easy a thing to be done
as some thought it to be, but rather full of difficulty. What, can there be
any difficulty for God to do? Is it possible that any thing should seem hard
unto him? The Saints of God, and learned Doctors of the Church, render some
reasons thereof on our part, some on the Devils, and some on our Savior
Christ's.

On our part, God having free and absolute power over our Will, Who is able to
oppugn his omnipotency? On our part.
When Lucifer, and his followers played the Rebels in Heaven, it seeming to God
too base an Office to punish them by his own person, he commanded Saint
Michaell the Arch-Angell, that he should throw them thence like thunderbolts.
These Devils, being thus tumbled down headlong from that so high a Tower,
they sought out another stronger hold wherein to defend themselves, which was
Man; and making themselves masters of this Fort, they made fast the Windows,
and the Doors, shutting close the Eyes, Ears, and Mouth of Man. God himself
in our person, labored to put them out. But Man, abusing that liberty which
God has left unto him, and resigning it up into the Devils hands, is the
only cause that they maintain and defend this Fort against God. Gregory
Nazianzen says, That we play the Traitors, and conspire against God, against
his Cross, and against his Blood, by selling our selves daily anew unto the
Devil. Our Savior Christ had paid the ransom for all our sins upon the
Cross, tearing that our handwriting and obligation in pieces, which we had
made over to the Devil. But we, as if we repented our selves thereof, make him
a new bond, and bind our selves anew unto him; Which is a great baseness in
Man. Will thou receive an Apostata, a Traitor, a Fugitive, and one that is
condemned for ever to the Galleys? There is no Inn half so vile, or so bad as
thy Soul. For, if this harbor a thief, or a murderer, or a robber on the
highway-side, it is upon hope of profit: But thou do not only give him
entertainment, but also spendest thy purse upon him, and do protect and
abett him against God. So that God has a great deal more to do with poor
silly Man, being but as a worm of the earth, than with the greatest Devil in
Hell.

There is also another reason on our part; To wit, The so often repeating of
our sins over and over, their ancient standing, and their spreading (like a
Cancker) still farther and farther upon our souls; Insomuch, that it will find
God work, and cannot choose but cost him much labor. And the sores of our sins
may be in that desperate case, that he is not able to cure them by ordinary
means, but must use therein some great and strange Miracle. Thou put forth
to Sea, thou saylest in the same ship with another passenger, thy friend and
acquaintance, ye Cabin togegether, eat together, and sleep together,
continuing in this loving league of friendship, some six months or more. Thou
boordest thy self with thy neighbor, live under the same roof with him
some thirty years and upwards, and all this while ye continue very good
friends. Sure it must be a very great occasion that must part ye twain, and
either cool, or blot out this your so long grounded affection. But, if besides
this tie of friendship, thou take extraordinary contentment in it, there is no
gaine-saying of it. Such a one, thou art wont to say; she is my Life, my Soul,
my dear Heart, deerer unto me than mine own eyes. Though thou have lived
thus and thus many years, and so much to thy content and delight in
conversation and friendship with the Devil, and though I must confess, it is a
hard matter to come off handsomely from him, yet God has wrought thy freedom,
but at a great price, and has brought thee off clear but with much pain. But
let me tell thee withal, that when thy demoniated soul, shall place all it is
whole pleasure and delight in the Devils company, make him her best beloved,
and hug him in her arms, and spread out the lappet of her garment for him; then
shall it be in my Letanie, Lord have mercy upon thee. For when sin grows to
that height, it is almost out of reach, to do any good upon it. Pope Clement
says of Simon Magus, that he could not be cu^ed, Quia voluntary agr^tabat,
Because he was willing to be sick. And that his soul had made such an
inseparable knot with the Devil, Que quien le apartara, le matara, That he
that should pull him from him, must pull away life and soul together. Saint
Mark tells us, That his Disciples being not able to dispossess a young man of
the Devil, they brought him to our Savior Christ. And he demanding of them
that brought him unto him, how long he had been tormented with him; They
answered, From his childhood. Our Savior healed him; But I remember the Text
says, Factus est sicut mortuus, ita vt multi dicerent, quia iam mortuus est,
He was as one dead, in so much that many said, He is dead. This young man was
so wedded to the Devil, that many could not pull him from him; and being taken
from the Devil, he was as a dead man. He had kept him company so long, that
the Devil was to him, as his life. And this is the mark of such persons as
give themselves over to the pleasures of this World: For living without them
but three days in the Holy-weeke, they think themselves dead.

Reasons on the Devils part.
On the Devils part, there are likewise many forcible reasons.

First of all, This foul Fiend leaves a Soul so blind, so deaf, and so
dumb, that he does not feel the hurt of so infamous a dwelling. And therefore
the Church uses to pray against the Spirit of Fornication. Seneca calls a
woman, The Sepulcher of Vice; and there is no dumb man so dumb, nor no blind
man so blind, as he that lies dead in the Grave; nor no less blind and dumb,
as he that is buried in the fond affection of a woman: Melior est iniquitas
viri, quam benefaciens mulier. Thy enemy will do thee less harm than thy
Mistress: The worst that he can do, is to kill thee and take away thy life;
but she will take from thee thy goods, thy life, and thy soul. David giving
thanks unto God for freeing him from his former troubles, Psalm. 126.
said, Dirupisti Domine vincula mea, Thou have broken, o Lord, my bonds in
sunder. What bonds were those? Ecclesiasticus answers, Vincula sunt manus
illis, The embracements of a woman. And in another place he says, Eruisti
animam meam ex inferno inferiori, Thou have brought my soul out of the
lowermost Hell. Psalm. 86.
It seems that he styles this lowermost Hell, his Adultery: and that this
should be the sense of it, there is great reason for it; for that is the
lowermost Hell from whence God (speaking according to our understanding) can
draw a man out with greatest difficulty. For though God could with a great
deal of ease have taken Judas out of the Hell of the Damned, yet he could nor
but by some extraordinary means, feteh him from the Hell of his treason. Job
jumping upon this conceit, draws his comparison from the hard labor of a
woman in travel; Obstetricante manu eius, eductus est coluber tortuosus.
Wherein we are to consider the diligences which a Midwife uses, when that
which is to be borne, comes athwart, and crosses nature in it is common course:
but what a do would there be, if this birth should prove to be a Snake or a
Serpent?

Secondly, The difficulty lies not so much in the Devils strength, as in his
subtlety. Genesis 3.
Erat Serpens calidior omnibus animalibus terrae. He does not say he was
stronger, but subtiler: For, to hunt in thick and bushie Mountains, we had
need of more tricks and devices, than if we did hunt in an open and champian
Country: We must have good store of weapons, ginnes, nets, and Ferrets, which
may creep in without any noise. Ipse liberauit me de laqueo venancium. The
Apocalypse paints out the Devil in the form of a Locust, Apoc. 9.
but armed, having the face of a man, the hairs of a woman, and the mouth of a
Lion. He compares him to a Locust, because he deuoures and destroys all: His
means, he makes, Man's deceiving, Woman's enticing, and the Lions cruelty.

Thirdly, The difficulty likewise consists in the Devils pertinacie and
obstinacy, who never cease to plie and importune thee: And if at any time
thou make thy peace with God, the Devil will not suffer it to last long; and
converting it but into a truce for a time, he returns back again to this
clean (as thou think) swept house of thine: but the broom, through some
default or other, has not swept away all the filth and the dirt. The Devil
will leave thee for a time, but like a fit of an Ague he will return again
unto thee. That Fever is not perfectly cured that comes again the third day;
nor that house clean, where the dirt sticks in the floor. He that only
ouercomes, and not kills his enemy, cannot rest secure, especially where there
is an impossibility of peace. The Devil being overcome, grows more fierce
than before; What will he do then if he take thee unprovided? That Soldier
which whilst the war lasts leaves off his Arms, and carelessely walks up
and down; such occasions may offer themselves unto him, that he may too late
repent him of his folly. That valiant Captain Ehud, mentioned in the book of
Judges, feigned that he had something to impart to King Eglon in private; and
they withdrawing themselves into a Summer Parlor where they sat all alone,
(there being wars between them at that time) putting forth his left hand,
and taking a dagger from his right thigh, he thrust it into his belly, and the
haft entering in after the blade, it was buried in the fat that was about it.
Whereas this King, had he done well, he should not (considerng there was war
between them) have gone disarmed. What says Saint Paul unto thee, Accipite
Armaturam Fidei. Those weapons of Faith, Ephesians. 6.
together with it is Armor, are of more enchantment against Hell, than those
which the Fables feign to be wrought by Vulcan. That which imports a
Christian, is never to go without them, because he is in a continual warfare.

On Christ's part there is also some difficulty, Reasons on Christ's part. Job
40.20.
because this Victory must be performed with triumph. Job discoursing of the
Devil, in that metaphor of the great Leuiathan; God said unto him, Can thou
draw out Leuiathan with a hook, and with a line which thou shall cast down
unto his tongue? Can thou cast a hook into his nose, can thou pierce his
jaws with an Angle? etc. Thou will say, thou can, but I hardly believe it.
To conquer the Devil thou will think it no great matter, and that the
victory is not so glorious as it makes show for. Be it so: but to fetter and
manacle him in that manner that little children may play with him without any
danger, this is something to the purpose. Vniuersa arma eius aufer in quibus
confidebat: This is a taking away of his sword, and bea^ing him with the
scabberd; than the which, nothing can be a greater scorn unto him. The Roman
Emperors, for the better celebration of their victories with Triumphs, did
much grieve in the deaths of those whom they had conquered. Marcellus sorrowed
for the death of Archimides; Caesar, for that of Cleopatra, because it seemed
to be an eclipse to the glory of their triumphs. But it was fitting that our
Savior Christ should be partaker of this glory, and enjoy so glorious a
Triumph; Expolians Principatus and potestates traduxit confidenter; Palam
triumphans illos in semetipso.

Et illud erat mutum, And that was dumb.
Saint Luke makes him dumb; Saint Matthew, blind: Luc. 11. Mat. 12.
And from his dumbness those that comment thereupon infer his deafness.
Saint Chrysostom, Tertullian, and Saint Hierome say, That the Hebrew word
Cophos signifies Dumb and deaf; and our Interpreter translates it in the
seventh of Mark, Surdum and mutum. To Tytus Bostrensis, Lyra, and Euthimius,
it seems that he was not deaf, for that his dumbness not being natural,
the Devil might make him dumb, but not deaf, leaving him his hearing for his
greater torment.

And that was dumb. He being both blind, and deaf, Saint Luke makes mention,
that he was only dumb. Which he purposely did (as Saint Austen has observed)
to sign out unto us the greatest ill that could befall him. For, as long as a
sinner has a tongue, he need not to despair. Job being become as it were a
Sieue upon the dunghill, could yet make this boast, Derelicta sunt tantummodo
labia circa dentes meos, Only my lips are left about my teeth. This only was
enough to bring the Prodigal again to prosperity: When he had spent all, yet
his tongue was left free unto him, to say, I will go unto my Father. And this
is sufficient, for to repair thy losses. Your dumb men being desirous to
speak, multiply signs and gestures, esteeming their dumbness their greatest
unhappiness. A Christian being asked, Hear thou Sermons, give thou alms,
loosest thou those that are in bonds, clothest thou the naked, etc. He
answered, Yes. But do thou confess thy sins? To that he said, No. This,
of all other miseries is the greatest. O Lord (says he) it were a great shame
unto me, that I should reveal that to Man, which I would (if I could) conceal
from God. But Ecclesiastic^^ answers hereunto, That there is a shame, that
brings sin with it; And there is a shame, which brings Grace and Glory.
The Thief, he confesses his offense, he is ashamed thereat, and curses the
father that begot him. The repentant sinner, he likewise confesses his faults,
and is ashamed that he should so offend his Creator; but withal, remains
comforted with the hope of his Grace and of his Glory. Without confession no
true comfort.
And no doubt, where there is a true confession of our sins, experience
teaches us, that God there dwells and abides in us. For otherwise it were
not possible that a sinner should be at quiet in his conscience. And therefore
the Counsel of Trent says, that shame of our sins were a great confounding
unto us, if it were not quickened and heartned up with the comfort of Grace.
Osee makes a comparison of an untoward daughter, yet somewhat shamefac't
withal, who couers her being with child, with the name of oppilations and
obstructions; but being put hard unto it, and thoroughly examined by her Mother,
she confesses the truth, that there may be some course taken to salve her
credit; swearing and forswearing before, that there was no such matter, and
cursing her self to the pit of Hell: but the day comes at last, wherein the
treading of her shoe awry, is discovered to those of the house, and without
doors, Osee. 13. The Devils craft is to shut up our mouths from Confession.
so her credit is cracked ever after as long as she lives. The iniquity of
Ephraim is bound up, his sin is hid. The sorrows of a traveling woman shall
come upon him. What a deal of confusion and shame shall he be free from, that
shall confess his fault? Saint Chrysostom says, That God places shame, in
sin; and comfort, in confession. Whereas the Devil, in sin, places
presumption; and and in confession, shame. Plutarch says, That as a moderate
shame, is a guard to innocence, a wall to honesty, and a general ornament to
all the Virtues; so too much shame on the other side, is a spoil and ruin to
them all. Saint Austen says, That it is a foulness and weakness of our
understanding, that thou should be ashamed to confess that to one particular
man in private, which peradventure thou have committed in the company of many,
and in the presence of a multitude. Amongst other imprecations which Job has
against himself, this is one, Si abscondi peccatum, etc. If I have concealed,
or kept secret my sin. When the Devil opened Adams mouth to eat the Apple,
he did likewise shut it up from the confessing of his fault. Pope Gregory
says, That when God did ask Adam, Vbi es, Where art thou? he then pretended,
had he willingly and readily confessed his fault, not only to have pardoned him
his offense, but to have restored likewise all that good which he had lost,
both to himself, and his posterity. Saint Austen is of the same opinion. And
Saint Bernard says, That he did not hurt himself more by his disobedience,
than by seeking to excuse his sin. For this his transgression, had he dealt
fairly and plainly with God, might perhaps have been repaired. And Tostatus
sticks not to affirm, Genesis 39.
That if he had forthwith accused himself, he had freed all his succession:
For albeit he afterward repented him of what he had done, Wis. 10.1.
and that God had forgiven him his sin ( Eduxit illum a delicto suo, For he
brought him out of his offense, as we read in the first of Wisdom) yet did
he neither restore unto him his original innocence, nor that Paradise
wherein he had placed him. Your School Divines bring many strong Arguments
against this opinion; but the authority of such grave and holy fathers as we
have here aledged, may serve to make it probable.

And that was dumb. God gave Man a tongue, that therewith he might praise his
Creator; Lingua mea meditatur justiciam tota die, laudem tuam, My tongue does
meditate on thy righteousness and praise all the day long. Now the Devil he
is so great an enemy to those praises and thankesgiuings which we offer unto
God, that he studies to make that tongue dumb which therein shall employ it
self. David touching but his Harp, forced that Devil to take his heels,
that tormented Saul. And albeit Caietan says, That this evil Spirit was but
an excess of melancholy, and that David's music did diminish it for the
time, and gave him ease; yet experience teaches us, that the sweetness of
music does as well increase sorrow, as stir up joy. And therefore we may
take this for a most certain and undoubted truth, That David's Harp did serve
as an Instrument wherewith to praise God, by singing Hymns and Psalms unto
him; Confitebor tibi in cythera Deus, I will praise thee upon the Harp, o
Lord. This Harp of David's is to the Devil as unpleasing to his ear, as
Christ's Cross is to his eye; he cannot endure the sound of the one, nor the
sight of the other.

And that was dumb. Man's Tongue is not only bound to praise God, Dumb
ministers the Devils best agents. Ose. 4.8.
but likewise to benefit our Neighbor; one while by preaching in public;
another while by aduising in secret. In this kind of sin your Confessors are
faulty, who (as Osee says of them) eat up the sins of my people, and lift
up their minds in their iniquity: making good those words that immediately
follow; Like People, like Priest. So likewise are your Preachers who sow
Cushions under Princes elbowes, and for fear of offending, refuse to reprehend
sin: And these Esaias calls Dumb Dogs. The Dog barks at some, bites at other
some, and heales others with his tongue, being in it self very medicinable.
Diogenes reproved all his Citisens, laying before them their particular
faults; he reprehended the Poets, for that they railed in their Verses against
other men's il manners, and yet never amended their own misdemeanors:
Musitions, that being able to tune so well their Instruments, they could never
as yet tune their Souls aright: Iudiciarie Astrologers, that divining of other
men's misfortunes, they could never divine of their own: Lewd livers, that
having so many good words in their mouths, they should do such bad deeds:
Covetous Misers, that blaspheming money in public, they adored it in private:
Gluttons, that desiring health of God, they did daily overthrow their bodies by
ouer-eating and ouerdrinking themselves till they fell a vomiting as they sat
at board: Of those that can be content to fare well themselves, and not bring
good tidings to their brethren: The leaprous men in the fourth of the Kings
could find fault therewith, 4. Kings 7.9.
when they said one to another, We do not well; this day is a day of good
tidings, and we hold our peace.

And that was dumb. It is strange, That the Devil getting so much as he daily
does by man's speech, should labor to make him dumb; more harm growing to man
by the former than the latter.

First, It is to be proved, That of a hundred that were possessed with
Devils, you shall find but one only that was dumb; they are all of them
exceeding great talkers, flatterers, and liars: And that they might prate the
more, they talk in diverse tongues, not only in that which is their own
natural Language, but also in Latin, in Greek, etc. Saint Ambrose has noted
it, That the Devils downfall took it is beginning from his talking; Dicebat
enim in cord suo, ascendam in Caelum, For he said in his heart, I will ascend
up into Heaven: And our destruction began with the conversation that he had
with Eve. Julian the Apostata makes a jest of it, That a Serpent should
speak: Which Saint Ciril chose rather to prove by the testimonies of
Philosophers and Poets, than by Scripture, because this blasphemous wretch gave
more credit to them, than to the Word of God. Homer says, That Ulysses his
Horse spoke unto him, forewarning him of his death. Porphyrius says, that
Caucasus spoke; and that Pythagoras passing by, it saluted him with a Salve
Pythagora. Phylostratus says, That Apollonius coming to the Gymnosophistae,
an Elm (under whose shade being weary he sat him down) spoke unto him, and
told him, That he was very welcome. And Siginius reports of Jupiters Bull,
That he spoke like a man. If the Devil then can speak by Horses, by Bulls, by
Trees, and the like, he may as well speak by a Serpent; And why not by that
Serpent more than any other, that was to be the instrument to overthrow all
Mankind?

Secondly, Out of many places of holy Scripture, observations of the Saints of
God, and out of the opinions of many learned Doctors, Philosophers, and Poets,
in favor of this point, two manifest truths are proved to arise from hence, and
have their first beginnings.

The one, That an evil tongue is the leaven of all our ill.

The other, That a good tongue is the sum of all our good.

The first, Experience at every turn teaches it unto us. Whose are those
blasphemies against God and his holy Saints, but of a sacrilegious tongue?
Whose those inconsiderate injuries, but of a rash and unadvised tongue? Whose
those infamies and detractions, but of a backbiting tongue? Whose, those
dishonest words and lascivious Songs, but of a filthy tongue? Whose, those
sowings of discord amongst brethren, those dissoluings of marriages, those
blottings of men's good names, those soylings of your Clergies Coat, your
Priests Surplices, your Bishops Rotchets, your Widows decent dressing, your
Maidens modest attire, but of a durtie slabbering tongue? Saint Hierome says,
That the Devil left Jobs lips untouched, hoping that with them he would have
cursed God, as he promised to himself before hand; Stretch out thy hand and
touch but his bones and his flesh, Job. 2.5.
and then see if he will not blaspheme thee to thy face. Saint Ambrose says,
Plagam suam silentio vicit, He subdued his pain by silence. And the self same
father says, That if Eve had not spoken with the Serpent, or if she had but
eaten the Apple, and had said nothing thereof to Adam* we had not come to that
so great misery and misfortune whereinto we fell. The Devil did not desire to
make Eve so much a Glutton, as a Pratler: her talking with Adam did undo us
all. S. James qualifies both these tongues.

The one he terms a fire, that burns and consumes all that comes in it is way;
and to be the only maine cause of all mischief.

Of the other he says, That man is perfect that offends not in his tongue. In
our Book De Amore, we have a whole Chapter touching this ill, and this good.
But how is it possible, that the Devil should seek to favor the ill, and
disfauor the good? Saint Augustine answers this in one word; This man having
been heretofore a great talker, the Devil made him dumb, lest by confessing
his faults, he might repair those losses which he had run into by
ouerlashing with his tongue.

Dumb, deaf, blind, and possessed with a Devil. This massacre which the
Devil wrought upon the body of this man, represents that cruel massacre
which he daily executes upon men's souls: For though he takes pleasure in the
possession of a man's body, yet his maine pretense is to prejudice the soul,
and like a Worm in wood, to eat out the very heart and pith thereof. Imagine
a Horse prepared for the Kings own riding, beautiful, and richly betrapt; let
thy thought represent such a one unto thee, and a Rogue that has never a shoo
to his foot, nor a rag to his tail, mounted thereupon, and proudly bestriding
him; Imagine a bed like that of Salomons, or that of the Spouse, clean, neat,
and strewed with Flowers, and an Oyle-man, a Collyer, or a Scullion put into
it; so is it with the Soul possessed by the Devil.

It is a common doubt, yet fit for this Story, Why God permits that the
Devil should do so much mischief to man? We know that this the Devils rage
toward man, began ever since that God purposed to make his Son, man; and
holding himself affronted, that he was not an Angel, he vowed and swore the
death of man. And therefore it is said of him, He was a Murderer from the
beginning: And this made our Savior to say unto the Pharisees, Ye are of your
Father the Devil, for that ye seek to fulfill his will, Who putting Christ
to death, did accomplish that which the Devil had sworn. And hence arises
that hatred and emnitie which he bears to man in general, and the harm
which he either does or seeks to do him; thinking with himself (as
Tertullian notes it) that the greater hurt he does unto man, the greater
stones he throws against God. But suppose, That without the will of God he
cannot do us any harm, Why God permits him to be so mischievous. 2. Mac. 3.
Why does he permit, that this his living Temple, consecrated with his holy
oil, being the habitation of his delight, should be made a Hogs-stie for
Devils? When Heliodorus profaning the holy Temple of Jerusalem, entered
thereinto, there met him an armed Knight in harness of gold, sitting upon a
fierce Horse richly barbed, who smote at Heliodorus with his fore-feet throwing
him down to the ground. This was no sooner done, but there presently appeared
two young men, notable in strength, excellent in beauty, and comely in
apparel, which stood by him on either side and scourged him continually, and
gave him many sore stripes till he was ready to give up the ghost: and all the
People praised the Lord, that he had honored his own place with so great and
strange a miracle. But Heliodorus escaped in the end with life, at the
intercession of Onias the High Priest: And the King asking Heliodorus
afterward, Who were meet to be sent yet once again to Jerusalem? he said, If
thou have any enemy or traitor, send him thither, and thou shall receive him
well scourged, if he escape with his life: for in that place, no doubt there is
an especial power of God. But a more sweet and pleasing temple unto God than
Jerusalem, is the body and soul of man; Templum Dei, etc. The Temple of God
is holy, which Temple ye be. He made a promise to Jerusalem, that no
uncircumcised person should put his foot within it, much less do any harm
unto it. How then does God consent, that the devils should lodge so long in
man, and should trample and tread him under foot, and torment him in that
extreme manner as they do?

Saint Chrysostom in his books De Prouidentia, does multiply reasons
heerevpon: and in his second part he sets down six; the chiefest whereof I
take to be, The fear and terror which God pretends to put man in with the
sight of one possessed with a Devil. There are many men in the world, whom God
must bring unto him by ill; for good will do no good upon them. Saint
Augustine expounding that verse of David, Descendant in infernum viuentes, Let
them go down alive into the Pit; adds, Ne descendant morientes, Let them not
go down dead. Old wives say, That we must go Saint James his way, either in
our life or our death. But more truly may it be said of Hell, That to the end
we may not go into it at our death, we must enter into it in our life: not
like Dathan and Abiram, who went down quick into it, but with the
consideration and earnest thinking of him that is possessed with a Devil. For
if in this life, when as yet the final sentence is not given, the Devil does
use a Sinner thus hardly; What will he do unto him when God shall seal his
Warrant for Hell, and pronounce condemnation againsthim? Origin notes it, That
there was not any kind of pain in the world, wherewith the Devil did not
torment Job; afflicting him with the fires of Saint Anthony, the sores of
Lazarus, the Collicke, the Gout, the Canker, etc. Effudit viscera eius. Galen
says, It is impossible that many Infirmities should meet together in one and
the self same part of the body: But in Job, in every part of his body the
Devil had put pain upon pain, and sore upon sore. Now if on him such rigor
was shown, who was appointed to be the pattern of Patience; What cruel
torments shall be executed on him that is to be made the example of Gods divine
justice.

The second reason is, That in the infancy of the Church, it was fitting that
there should be some chastisements that should carry a sound and a noise with
them; to the end that (as Dionysius has noted it) the Wicked might be
terrified therewith. In the Old Testament God took this course, Vae tibi
cimbalo alarm. Esaias speaks this of Egypt, he terms it a Bell with wings;
for the severe and many strokes which the bell with wings shall beat it
withal. It is an excellent Symbol of Fame, because as it flies, it sends
forth a shrill sound. Appian the historian calls the Emperor Tiberius, The
Cimball of the world, because his fame did ring and sound through all the
nations of the Earth. After many other plagues, God threatened the Egyptians
with a murren or pestilence; and anon after renders the reason of it, That his
name might be declared throughout all the world. And as when the great Bell
tolls in Arragon, the whole Kingdom is stricken into fear and amasement, (for
that clapper never wags but upon some strange and extraordinary occasion) so
the whole world was stricken into a great fear of those rods and scourges
wherewith the Egyptians were so sorely beaten. Josh. 2.9.11.
Rahab said unto the Spies which entered into Ierico, Our hearts did faint, and
there remained no more courage in any, because of you; For I know that the Lord
has given you the Land, and that the fear of you is fallen upon us. And the
Princes of the Philistines could say unto their People, Be ye not rebellious
and stiff necked, lest it happen unto you as it did unto Egypt. It remained
for a Proverb to after Ages, The Plagues of Egypt light upon thee. To this
end God permitted in the primitive Church many demoniated persons; some, for
forsaking the Faith; some, for abusing the Sacraments; others, for blasphemies,
and the like: Himineus and Alexander were delivered over unto Satan, 1. Tim.
1.20.
that they might learn, not to blaspheme; others, for incest; others, for
pride: so (according to Epiphan. and S. Hier.) Nebucadnezar was by the Devil
turned into a beast: others, for their envy, [ Spiritus Domini mali vigebat
Saul.] But that the Devil should make a man deaf, blind, and dumb, this of
all other is the seuearest punishment: This is, To deliver men o^^r to a
reprobate sense, that they may do those things which are not fitting for them.
Thomas says, That God suffers this (yet not being the Author of so great an
ill) by remoouing for a time his especial favor, and leaving the
Understanding to walk a while in darkness. The Sun is the universal cause
of the light; but if a man will shut up his doors and his windows close, it
is his own fault If he abide in darkness. God is the universal cause of
the spiritual light of our Souls; but if any one shall despise this Light, he
uses to leave him in the dark. And hence was it, that these three
inconveniences did befall this man, to wit, Deafness, Blindness, and
Dumbness, which was one of the greatest rigours of his Justice. Esaias says, I
saw the Lord sitting upon a high Throne; Esaias 6.
like a Judge that sits in state, the house full of smoke, and the Seraphins of
fire, publish his fury, and the sent of their sins which had gone up into
his nosthrils. Those two Seraphins that covered Gods face, are a representation
of his wrath; Though when the time of punishing is come, God uses to open his
eyes: but now the Seraphins cover his eyes, in token that he would strike this
man with blindness. And therefore it is said, That the foundation of the
Temple did shake. Then anon after followed the punishment; Excaeca cor populi
huius, and aures eius aggraua. Other Interpreters use the Imperative, uttering
this sentence in a commanding kind of voice; Excaecetur cor populi huius, etc.
Let the heart of this people be made blind, and their ears dull.

Cum ejecisset Daemonium, locutus est mutus.
When the Devil was gone out, the Dumb spoke. The Devil was first to be
driven out, before the Dumb could speak. First, The door or the window is to
be opened, that the light may come in: First, you must turn the cock of the
Conduit, or pluck out the stopple, before the water can gush out. The penitent
man must first cast the Devil out of his bosom, before he can make any good
Confession: First, the Preacher must cast him out of his heart, before he can
preach any sound Doctrine. What confession can a Sinner make, while the Devil
dwells in his soul? What sorrow or feeling can he have of his former faults?
What purpose of amendment for the future? What acknowledgement of the
heinousness of his crimes? What shame, or what fear of offending? Anciently
men did confess themselves only unto God, to whom every secret of the heart
was so open, that man's thought and intention was sufficient; with the penitent,
his condemning himself by his own mouth. Yet notwithstanding, Ezechias said, I
will recount all my years in the bitterness of my soul. And David, Anni mei
sicut araneae meditabuntur; With that care and melancholy wherewith the
spiders weaue their webs, drawing every thread out of their own bowels, so
will I meditate on the years of my life, drawing out threads of sorrow and
repentance for every fault that I shall commit, from the bottom of my heart.
If thou can be content to employ all thy senses for the good of thy body,
and not do the like for thy soul, thou do therein wrong thy soul, heaven,
and God. Thou weepest and wailest for the loss of these earthly goods, but
shedst not a tear for the loss of those rich treasures of heaven. Two things
are enjoined the penitent: Two things required in every true Penitent.
The one, a full and entire Confession. The other, a strict examination of
their own conscience.


And that so strict as may befit so great and weighty a business as is the
salvation of the Soul; and then may the Dumb speak, and the Preacher preach.
For if the Devil be still pulling him by the sleeue, what good crop can he
render unto God, of his Hearers? What light can he give to his Auditorie, who
is himself possessed by the Prince of Darkness* Open thou my lips, o Lord, and
I shall set forth thy praise; do thou pardon me my sins, and I shall sincerely
preach thy Word. The Scribes and Pharisees, who were teachers, but not doers of
the Law, Jeremy calls them false Scribes, What they wrought with their pen, they
blotted out with their works. The like kind of fault that party commits,
who sings Psalms unto God in the Quire, and yet has the Devil in his breast:
And then, how different must this man's thoughts be from his words? He can
hardly say, Confitebor tibi Domine in toto cord meo, I will confess unto the
Lord with my whole heart, as long as he has given himself over unto Satan.

The Dumb spoke. This man prostrating himself at our Saviors feet, might
very well say, Bless the Lord, o my Soul, and all that is in me praise his
holy Name: The Lord loses them that are bound; the Lord inlightneth the
Blind: Praise the Lord, o my Soul, I will praise the Lord in my whole life. A
Sinner that truly repents himself, The justifying of Souls a greater act of
mercy, than the creating of Angels.
and that sees himself freed from the Devil, and from Hell, is never
satisfied with giving thanks unto God, and in praising his holy Name, as often
as he considers the great mercy which God has showed toward him. Saint
Augustine says, That although the creating of Angels, and the justifying of
Souls, do equally argue Gods great power; yet the second is an act of far
greater mercy.

He casts out Devils through Beelzebub the chief of the Devils. Origin,
Saint Augustine, and Saint Ambrose say, That the Devils have their studies and
their cares apart: This is their first Tenent; Some (say they) treat of
Avarice; some, of Luxury; others, of Ambition; others, of Revenge; some
perturbe men's minds, occasioning great sorrow; others, excess of foolish joy
and mirth.

Secondly, They hold, That in every one of these several vices there is a
superior Devil, which has command over many that are inferior unto him; And
he that is the Chiefetaine of one of these Legions, is not obedient to any
Saint whatsoever, except him that excells in humility, whose lowliness of
mind may be able to encounter with his pride of heart. S. Mark relates, That
our Savior delivering one over that was possessed of a Devil, to his
Disciples, to the end that they should make him whole; howbeit they had
boasted, That Devils also were subject unto them; yet they could not do it.
Afterward asking Jesus the cause of their not curing him, he answered, Such
kind of Devils as these, are not cast out but with Prayer and fasting. This
Devil should seem to be a Prince of some Legion, and none could do any good
upon him, save such Saints of God as were wonderful meek and humble, and with
Fastings did beat down the body of sin, and by frequent and fervent prayer,
prostrate their Souls.

Thirdly, Many of these devils do possess diverse parts of the body which
correspond with that vice which they are subject to: And as the soldier, who
sealing a wall or a fort, sticks his dagger or his Pike in some part of the
wall where he means to get up; so the Devil seeks to pitch his standard
there where he may advance it with most ease, and most to his honor and
glory. Alfegor that dishonest Devil, domineeres most in the Loins, (as it is
noted by Saint Gregory in his Exposition of that place upon Job, Job. 3.
Virtus eius in lumbis eius, His strength lies in his loins.) Pluto the Prince
of Covetousness reigns most in the hands: Our Savior Christ healed a hand
that was withered; Luke 16.
signifying thereby, That it was a covetous hand, and yielded not the fruit of
good works. Beelzebub, who is the Prince of Pride, rules principally in the
head. This Beelzebub, by interpretation, is the Prince of Flies; whither it
were or no, that they gave him this name in regard of those many Flies which
his Sacrifices did breed; or whither it were because the Acharonitae did
presume that he had freed them from certain filthy and loathsome Flies; or
for that the Flies are always buzzing about the head and face; or because the
Devil and these Flies are much alike in their evil disposition, [According to
that of Solomon, Muscu morientes, perdunt suauitatem ^^guenti, Dead Flies do
mar the sweetness of the Ointment;] or for that the Fly is the Emblem of a
proud Devil; Ipse est Rex super omnes filios superbiae. This Devil is a proud
daring Devil: proud in his Motto, Similis ero Altissimo, I will be like to
the most High: and proud in that his proffer, To have the King of Kings our
Savior Christ to do him homage; H^c omnia tibi dabo, si cadens adoraueris me,
All these things will I give thee, if thou will fall down and worship me. Or
whither he were so called for that other attribute of his, to wit, his
daringnesse and his audaciousnesse; Nihil audacius musca, Nothing bolder than a
Fly: And for this cause (says Homer) did the Lacedaemonians bear Flies for
their Device in their Shields; which is confirmed by Pierius. The Devil
occupies the North, I will set in the sides of the North. From the North
comes all evil; Ierem. 1. Esaias 14.
Your Flies they do the like. Pliny says, That your Bees are forced to
forsake their hiues, and to fly out of your Northern parts, for the trouble
that the Flies there give them. The Devil is importunate, impudent, never
cease, never grows weary with tempting us: And no less vexatiue and
troublesome are your Flies. Saint Gregory calls these our sensual
imaginations, Flies. Pierius reports, That to the importunate man they gave
the name of Fly; And there is no such busy body as the Devil. Lastly, Your
Flies do abound most in the Dog days; and the greater is the heat of our
sensualities, the greater store of Devils it hatcheth. Of Marie Magdalen Saint
Luke says, That our Savior Christ cast out of her seven Devils.

And howbeit there were other great Gods amongst the Gentiles, (according to
Vatablus his report) as one Balberid; that is, Dominus Fideus, that presideth
in all kind of dealing and contractations in Innes and Victualling houses; and
was so rich an Idol, by reason of the great Alms and devotions which your
Traders and dealers in the world did offer unto him, that by the help thereof,
Abimelech killing seventy of his brethren, carried away the Kingdom of
Israel. There was likewise one Belfegor, who did command in Chief in
Gluttony; and was a very poor Idol, in regard that they who were devoted
unto him, spent all that they could rape and wring, in bellie-cheere and
gourmandizing. Notwithstanding all these, Beelzebub, whom they likewise called
the God of Acharon, was more famous than all the rest of that rabble. And the
Prophets for to divert the People from the adoration of these Idols, did
impose infamous names upon them, as Beelzebub God of the Flies.

And the People wondered. Acknowledging, That they had never seen so prodigious
a miracle in Israel [ Nunquam apparuit sic in Israel;] Insomuch that some of
them whispered amongst themselves, That he was the Son of God; Mat. 9. Mat.
12.
Nunquid ^ic est Filius Dei? others did desire signs from Heaven; others said,
In Beelzebub, etc. Saint Hierome says, That this was that Devil which
deceived Eve; as also he that tempted our Savior Jesus Christ. But here is to
be seen a greater miracle than this, That Christ giving sight to this one
blind man, should leave so many others more blind than he: Which made Esaias cry
out, Obstupescite, Esaias 29.
and admira^ini, Stay your selves, and wonder, they are blind, and make you
blind. It were able to strike a man into amasement, to see that a poor silly
old woman should see the light of Heaven, and the blind likewise that is borne
blind; and that the Scribes and Pharisees should continue so blind as they do.
The heart that is hardened is like unto the Anuile, which the more you beat upon
it, the harder it waxes: Or like unto sand, which the more the waters wash it,
the closer it settles, and grows the tougher. 1. Reg. 2.5.
Of Nabals heart, the Scripture says, Mortuum est cor eius, and factum est
quasi lapis, That his heart dyed within him, and that he was like a stone.
Saint Bernard gives us five marks, by which we may know the hardness of a
man's heart.

The first, Neque compunctione scinditur, It is not touched with compunction, It
has no feeling of it is hurt, and perdition. Our Savior healing one that was
possessed with a Devil, Suspiciens Caelum, ingemuit, Casting his eyes up to
Heaven, he wep't and lamented; mourning for him, that mourned not for himself.
Alexander would have killed himself, for having killed his friend Clitus*
L^^cretia stabbed her self, when she saw she had lost her honesty. But the
sinner, is not sencible of far greater losses than these.

The second, Nec pietate mollitur. It is not mollified with Gods Pity and
Mercy toward it. The clemency which he shows toward it, ought to reduce
it to repentance; Romans 2.
But it despises (as Saint Paul says) the riches of his goodness, and
longanimitie. And these are riches, that are treasured up to their owners
condemnation. God treasures up Mercy for thee, and thou treasurest up Wrath
against the day of Vengeance. All which shall turn to thine own hurt.

The third, Nec mouetur precibus. It is not moved with prayers and entreaties.
Tota die (says Esaias) etc. Esaias. 65.2. Romans 10.
I have spread out mine hand all the day long to a rebellious people. The self
same words, are repeated again by Saint Paul. To beg with hands lifted up,
is a ceremony which men use with God; and God says, that he uses the like
with men, as if he were Man, and Man God.

The fourth, Flagellis induratur. Like that of Pharaoh; The more he is
punished, the more his heart is hardened. According to that of Job, Cor eius
indurabitur quasi lapis, and stringetur quasi malleatoris incus. His heart
shall be hardened as a stone, or as the anuile, that is hammered on by the
Smith. Whereunto, suteth that of Jeremy, Indurauerunt facies suas super Petram,
They have made their faces harder than a stone.

The fifth, Inhumanum, propter res humanas. Inhumane to it self for humane
commodities, Who like Narcissus, being in love with their own beauty, will
rather dye, than forsake so vain a shadow. Of these men, it may be said, We
have made a league with Death, and a covenant with Hell. The appointed time
shall overtake these men, or some disperat sickness shall cease upon them.
Thou shall preach to one of these obstinat sinners, That he confess himself,
and make his peace with God, by acknowledging his sins, by being heartily
sorry for the same, and by craving pardon and forgiveness of God: But his
answer will be, What, Shall men think that I do it out of fear? No, I am no
such coward, etc. All these conditions are summed up in those which our Savior
uttered of the evil judge. Nec Deum timeo, nec homines Vereor, I fear neither
God nor Man.

Others tempted him, seeking a sign from Heaven. From this variety of
opinions, Saint Austen infers the little reckoning that we are to make as
well of men's judgments, No scourge to that of the Tongue.
as their injuries. For mine own part, leaving Saint Austen herein to your
good likings, Let not mine own conscience condemn me before God; all the
rest I account as nothing. What says Esaias? Nolite timere opprobrium hominum,
Fear not the affronts and calumnies of men. And Christ gives you a very good
reason for it; If the master of the family were called by the name of
Belzeebu^, what name will they give to those of his house? Gregory Nazianzen,
treating of certain Heretics, who made the divine persons disequall; says,
In bona^ partem hoc accipe Sancta Trinitas, nec tu stultorum linguas prorsus
effugisti, O blessed Trinity, receive my words with that good intention which
I deliver them, thou have not escaped clear from the tongues of fools. It
ought therefore to be a great comfort unto thee, that those fools should
mutter against thee, that spoke ill of God. The Athenians, sentenced one
Iupido, a base fellow, to be put to death in Phocions company, who was a
famous man: and Iupido, weeping, as he went along to execution; Phocion said
unto him, Why do thou weep? Think thou it a small happiness, that thou
must dye in my company? The like words does Nazianzen use to those that are
injured by the tongues of fools; Think thou it a small happiness, that thou
should suffer therein with God? Saint Chrysostom says, That an evil
tongue, is worse than a dog: for he only tears a man's clothes and his
flesh; but an ill tongue, men's honors, lives, and souls. Saint Bernard says,
That it is worse than that piercing of our Saviors side with the spear, For
that spear did but wound the dead body of our Savior Christ; but this sting
of the tongue, our Savior being alive; the one therein, being less cruel
than the other. David says; That an ill tongue differs but little from Hell.
From the depth of Hels womb, and from a foul tongue, good Lord deliver us.
Where you see he makes it a piece of his Letanie. Many do murmr by
intimating a secret; This is only committed to thy breast, whence it never
ought to go out. They do not consider who commit a secret to a man, that
therein they inioyne him, not to keep it: It is a great foolerie to think,
that another will keep that secret, which thou thy self could not conceal.
And as great a folly is it that thou should hold him unfaithful, who
reuealeth thy secret, and take thy self to be loyal, when as thou wast
unfaithful to thy self. Thou do not keep that secret, which God and his
Law commands thee; and thou holdst him disloyal, that breaks but the Laws of
the World. Thou defamest thy neighbor by revealing his defects to thy friend,
and yet would feign make show that thou art very tender of his honor.

But Jesus knew their thoughts, and said, Every Kingdom divided against it
self, shall be desolate. Matthew, recounting another Miracle of a dumb Devil;
Mat. 9.
the Scribes and the Pharisees said, In principe daemonioru^, etc. Our Savior
at that time did dissemble their blasphemy, hoping (as S. Chrysostom says)
that the splendour of that Miracle, should by little and little overcome them.
But perceiving in this Miracle, that they perseuered in their malice, and that
his silence gave occasion unto them, to increase their suspicion, he made a
short and cutted Sermon unto them. For, there are occasions wherein a man ought
to be silent, and wherein he ought to speak. And so those two places in the
Proverbs, which seem quite contrary, are well reconciled. Answer not a
fool, according to his foolishness, least thou also be like him; And again,
Prou. 26.4.5.
Answer a fool according to his foolishness, least he be wise in his own
conceit. To reply sometimes to the fooleries of a fool, is to be a fool. And
not to reply unto him, is to give him occasion to take himself to be wiser
than he is. These two places Saint Cyprian quoteth in that his Tract which he
made against Demerianus, Who grew so shameless and so impudent, in commending
Paganism, and condemning Christianity, that after a long silence, he brake
out and said, Vltra tacere non oportet, I may no longer hold my peace. The like
course did our Savior here take with the Scribes and Pharisees. And for the
better conuincing of them, he made answer to their inward thoughts, which is a
property only belonging to God. Not, because they did not blaspheme him with
their mouths; for the word, Dixerunt, proves that sufficiently; but because,
they did either blaspheme him between their teeth, (as Saint Chrysostom will
have it) or because some did utter this blasphemy with their mouth, and other
some with their heart.

The Devils though at discord amongst themselves do yet unite their forces
against Man.
Every Kingdom divided in it self. Although the Devils are at a continual
discord amongst themselves, yet against Man they evermore join their forces
together; according to that of Esaias, Et discurrent daemonia Onocentaurus, and
Bilosus, and clamauit alter ad alterum. Make a squadron of Devils, and of your
Birds of rapine, and you shall find that they will combine themselves together
for our hurt. Aristotle has observed, that your tamer sorts of fowls, as
Pigeons, Geese, Cranes, and Thrushes, go together in flocks, and keep
company and friendship one with another; But your Birds of Rapine, as your
Eagles, Kytes, Vultures, and the like, go still alone by themselves: So the
Devils, never keep company amongst themselves, but against Man they lincke
and combine themselves. Job compares them, Job. 41.
to strong shields that are sure scaled, being set so close one to another that
no wind can come between them, nor any the least air pierce through them.
One is joined to another. They stick so together, that they cannot be sundred.
This is a stamp of that strict union which is betwixt the Devil and his
Members. For the reprobate (according to Saint Gregory) set themselves against
Man. Saint Luke says of the Faithful of the Primitive Church, They were all
of one mind, and of one heart: For though every one in particular was the Son
of his Father, and the son of his Mother, yet Charity made them all sons
of one Soul, and one Heart. And as the children of God link themselves
together in love; so the Devils, and the wicked ones, join together in malice.

And here by the way, we may in the Church, take one case into our
consideration, which is a great dishonor to Christianity, and a great glory
unto Hell, to wit, That the Devils being such enemies amongst themselves,
should yet confederate themselves for our hurt; And that Christians, tied by so
many great and glorious titles to be loving friends each to other, should
every foot disagree, not only in point of their own private profit, but in
causes appertaining to God. That King with King, and Prince with Prince, should
wage war about the partition of their Kingdoms, it is not much; But that
Prelate with Prelate, Divine with Divine, and Preacher with Preacher, should
be at difference, this is somewhat strange. Vnde bella, and lites in vobis?
(Says Saint James) Form whence are wars, Iam. 4 1.
and contentions amongst you? is it not only from your own lusts, that fight
in your members? But Satan that sower of discord, does also solicit and
incite thereunto even the holiest and best sort of people. Ecce Satanas
expeti^it vos, vt cribraret sicut triticum, Lo Satan seeks to sift ye, as one
would sift and winnow Wheat. The grains of Wheat continue close together as
long as they are in the garner, but when they come to be sifted, they are
sundred and separated one from another. According to that of Job, Feruescere
faciet quasi ollam profundum maris. He will divide the Sea in sunder with
dissentions, with the same rage and fury, as oil boyleth under a great fire.

The word Satan, what it implies.
If Satan be divided against himself, how shall his Kingdom stand? Satan, is
a common name, which signifies many Devils. For, if it were a proper name, as
that of Belzeebub, it could not have so conveniently been said, In se diuisus
est. This word implies any adversary whatsoever; As it appears by many
places of Scripture. Non est Satan, neque occursus mal^s, said David. And our
Savior Christ, Vade post me Satan, Satan get thee behind me. But by a kind
of excellency, Mat. 1 ^.
it is more particularly appropriated unto the Devil, because he is the
greatest adversary we have.

But if Satan be divided in him self, how shall his Kingdom stand? This
seems to be no good consequence; being that a superior Devil, may cast out
an inferior. I answer, That our Savior Christ does not deny this: nay, many
of the Sinagogue, by coniurations, and unlawful exorcismes, being the Devils
ministers, did cast forth other Devils. But if this were every foot put in
practice, and that many superior Devil, or their ministers, should infest and
hinder one another; of force there must grow dissension among them, division
must needs follow upon it; and upon this division, the dissolution of their
Kingdom, as Athanasius, has noted it. But our Savior Christ did cast out
innumerable Devils, to their great grief and torment, Crying and saying, Why
art thou come to torment us before our time? Where Saint Luke says, In digito
Dei eijcio daemonia, In the finger of God I cast out Devils. Saint Austen reads
it, Si in Belzeebub, etc. If I cast out Devils by the power of Belzeebub, then
is his Empire divided, and cannot stand. But his Kingdom not being to be at an
end, till that God comes into the World, as is made apparent by many
prophecies, Peruenit in vos regnum Dei, The Kingdom of God does come unto you.

When a strong man armed, keeps his palace, the things that he possesses
are in peace. Seneca extends this name of Tyrant to a King that lawfully
possesses a Kingdom, but is now in his hands, who by force, or subtlety,
usurps that which is none of his own; or in his, who gouerns that which is
his own, but with tyranny and cruelty. Saint Austen looking narrowly into
those the primarie beginnings of the Kingdoms and Empires of the World, calls
them, Magna latrocinia, Great and famous robberies. When Rome was Queen of the
World, Titus Liuius says, That all the spoils of other nations, were there
deposited. Alexander reprehending a Pyrat, for robbing at Sea with two poor
ships; He told him, Thou robbest the whole world; and do thou find fault
with me for those petty thefts that I commit? And even thus do things pass
at this day, in your great commonwealths. They whip a young thief for stealing
but ten Royals, and let a greater escape scot-free. What think you (if they
were well examined) of a Treasurer, of a Judge, of an Admiral, and the like
great officers of a State, are not these great Thieves? And yet for greatness
sake, we adore them. Your mice are pretty little Thieves, who in a Larder lie
nibbling at a Pastie; Thou put in a Cat to kill them, or to fear them
away; the cat falls upon the Pie, and at times eats it all up. Which I pray
you is the greater Thief of the two?

The greatest Tyrant and Thief that ever was in the World, is the Devil. No
Thief nor Tyrant to the Devil.
Not only for having made himself so much Lord and Master of the World,
whereunto he had no right, by stiling himself Prince and Lord thereof; but
also for his exercising therein such strange and tyrannous cruelties, as he
daily does. Our Savior Christ called him Thief. He that comes not in at the
right door, is a Thief and a Robber. Esaias terms him a Tyrant. But I cannot
let it pass without admiration, that our Savior should say, That he should
possess all these things peaceably; being that no Thief, nor Tyrant, can long
enjoy that which he holds by violence.

First of all, Great is the fear which he must live in, Tyrants are ever their
own torturest.
whether it be out of his own guilty conscience (that continual tormenter of
the Soul) or in regard of those perils and dangers wherein his life stands.
Helyes in wait for other men's lives, and there are thousands that lie in wait
to take away his. It is an ancient Proverb amongst us, Que los tyranos, nunca
^legauam a viejos, That Tyrants never lived to be old men. Phalaris was one of
the greatest that ever the World had, who said, That Man would never have been
borne, If he had but known beforehand those miseries whereunto he is borne;
Nor a Tyrant desire to bear rule, knew he but the troubles and misfortunes,
that attend commands; whereof, one is Fear: For, though he be feared of all
men, yet greater is his, than their fear. Caine was the first Tyrant that ever
was in the World, and did live in that terrible fear, that the wagging of a
leaf would startle him, and make him turn coward. This his fear, made him to
say, Whosoever finds me, will slay me. Macrobius, painting forth the pains
and torments of Hell, says, That your Tyrants have a great rock hanging over
their heads, which is evermore threatening to fall upon them. This picture in
that other life, does well answer to that which they suffer in this. Aelian
compares them to hogs, who are no sooner touched, but they grunt, fearing their
lives shall be taken from them. Nor is the devil himself less afraid than
they, ever since that God said, Ipse conteret caput ^^um, He shall bruise thy
head. There was never yet that man borne into the world, that was a Saint, or
whom the prophecies did prefigure for a Saint, but that the Devil was still
afraid that he would crack his skull, or (to use the Scripture phrase) would
bruise his head.

Secondly, For the better avoiding of fear, a Tyrant out of fear commits many
cruelties. Herod out of this fear, slew so many innocent Babes. Pharaoh out of
this fear, would have all the male children of the Hebrews put to death.
Athalia, out of this fear, destroyed all the stock Royal that she could come
by. For all (says Seneca) that are either powerful, or popular, or next of
blood to the Crown, whether they be friends or enemies, are alike suspected of
him that is a Tyrant. And Job remembers the reason of this jealousy, He takes
away the lives of the valiant because he is afraid they will cut his throat.
There was never yet any Saint of God, to whom the Devil, out of this fear,
was not cruel. He incensed Caine* against Abell; Ismael, against Isaac; Esau
against Jacob; and his own natural Brethren, against Joseph. But when our
Savior Christ came into the World, what a roaring, and what a hidious
bellowing did the Devil make? And as the Hieronshaw (when the fawlkoner lets
his hawke fly from fist, which must get up above him and take away his life)
falls a shrieking, and makes a most pitiful and fearful noise; so the Devil
made most lamentable moan when our Savior Christ appeared to the World, Crying
out, Why art thou come to trouble us before the time.

The Devil then, suffering so many affrights and fears, and multiplying so
many cruelties as he daily does; what peace or quietness can he enjoy, that
our Savior should say of him, In pace sunt omnia, quae possidet? All that he
possessech is in peace. Three reasons may be rendered for it.

Reasons by which the devil assures himself of peaceably possessing his
spoils.
The one, in regard of his pride; who was so presumptuous as to say, I will
ascend etc. He that did hope to enjoy a seat in Heaven; it is not much that he
should look to enjoy peace on earth. For though fear disquiet him, yet pride
assures him, flattering himself, that he shall ascend the throne of the
Highest without any disturbance.

The other, in regard of the misery of those whom he tyrannizeth over.
Reducing them to that fear, that they dare notonce quack, or offer to stir
against him, to such a wretched an estate has he brought them. And therefore
it is no marvel that he should make no doubt of keeping sure possession of
this dumb, deaf, and blind man.

The third, in regard that man has made a base ad dishonorable peace with the
Devil, yielding himself to be his slave, and by resting well contented with
this his servitude. Plutarch reports of Appius Claudius, that Rome being
about to make peace with King Pirrhus, causing himself to be led to the Senate*
for that he was blind. He no sooner came into the Senat-house, but he said unto
them, My Lords, and ye the rest of the noble Senators of Rome, I am informed,
that you are concluding a peace with Pirrhus, that ancient enemy of your blood,
and this renowned commonwealth: I should take it for a great favor from the
Gods, that as I am blind, so I were deaf likewise, that my ears might not
hear so great an infamy and reproach to Rome. The Moors take a cowardly
Spaniard captive, they carry him to Te^uan, from thence to Manuecos, from
thence to some poor Farm, using him more like a dog than a man, he makes
peace with his Master, and turns Moore: Just so does it succeed betwixt Man
and the Devil; He leads him from one sin into another, from a lesser to a
greater misery; His usage is such, that he makes his peace with him, and in
the end turns Devil. This is the Sheep making peace with the Wolf, the
Chickins with the Kyte, the Mouse with the Cat, and the Hare with the
Greyhound, etc. Not to complain of this so great a misery, is to be dumb,
and blind. Os habent, etc. A mouth they have and speak not, eyes and see not,
neither do they cry with their throat. Caietan renders it, Non mussitabunt,
They will not so much as mutter at it.

He that is not with me, is against me. As if he should say, if I shall free
this man out of the Devils clutches, the Devil will not help me in it. For
this is one of the greatest injuries and distasts, which the Devil can
receive, in regard of that great competition which the Devil has therein with
God. And one of the greatest wrongs that God can receive, is, That the Devil
should win a Soul from his service, which he has purchased at so great a
price as his most precious blood. And one of the things that the devil takes
most offense at, is, that God should cast him out of that soul, which he has
so long possessed by his subtlety and his tyranny. Ob.
Some Doctors do doubt why God should punish the Serpent, being he was not in
the fault. And the answer thereunto, is, That he deserved to be punished, for
becoming Satan's instrument. Sol.
Which may serve for a fearful warning unto Bawds, and the like dishonest
Solicitors, who woo other folks affections to commit unlawful Actions, as
elsewhere we have delivered.

He that is not with me, is against me. In such a professed war as this, none
may be Neutralls. Many can play with both hands; Ill must betide all neutralls
betwixt God and Satan.
but here no daubing will serve the turn. Alciate styles such Neutralls by
the name of Bats, neither good Mice nor good Birds. And oftentimes they have
the worst of it: for if the other two make peace, they are hated on both sides.
In the wars of Italy, those of Sona stood a la mira, at the gaze, taking part
with neither party, but looking for their advantage where the blow would
light. But they that waged war thus between themselves, joined afterward
together, that they might the better set upon them, and ^ake revenge of this
their Neutralitie and double dealing. Solon made a Law, That whosoever, when
the commonwealth should be at civil wars within it self, should show himself
a Neutrall, should loose both life and goods. And the reason thereof might be
grounded upon this, That one of them must needs be the juster side, and then
it were a ^oule fault not to adhere thereunto. In Kingdoms that are at odds,
there are wont to be double spies, and these have their signs and
counter-signes, which they often change and alter as occasion serves. But in
this difference between God and the Devil, it is not possible to do so. For
the Devil has for his sign, the Character of that beast which is spoken of
in the Apocalips; And God (...) for his sign, Signum Dei (...), Apoc. 3.
The sign of the living God. But God is not contented only with this, but
that by word of mouth thou declare whose thou art. Saint Ambrose expounding
that place of the Canticles, Pone me vt signaculum supra cor ^uum, Set me as a
seal upon thy heart, says, That God will have this sign set upon thy
forehead, upon thine arm, and upon thy heart; upon thy forehead, by confessing
him; upon thine arm, by serving him; and upon thy heart, by loving him: So
that, Quinon est mecum, contra me est; he that gathers not, scatters; he
that builds not up, pulls down; and he that planteth not, rooteth up what
is planted.

If I by the finger of God cast out Devils, doubtless the Kingdom of God is
come unto you. Saint Matthew has it, If in the Spirit of God I cast out, etc.
Making the finger of God to be Gods Spirit. In which opinion agrees S.
Hierome, S. Chrysostom, S. Ambrose, Gregory Nazianzen, and Athanasius. And if
any man shall ask me, What is then to be understood by the Spirit of God? S.
Gregory, S. Ambrose, and S. Austen answer, The Holy Ghost. And rendering the
reason thereof, they say, That the repartition of gifts is by the fingers, and
the Holy Ghost is that person in the Trinity, which does distribute these gifts
both to men and Angels. Athanasius and S. Hierome give another reason; The Son,
in the Scripture is called the Arm of God, as also the Hand of God; and as the
arm and the hand proceed from the body, and the finger from both, so the
Son of God proceeds from the Father, and the Holy Ghost from them both.

Euthimius says, That the finger of God and the spirit of God signify Gods
power. The Magi of Pharaoh not being able to make those Gnats which troubled
the Egyptians, or (as Rabbi Solomon and some latter Writers will have it)
those Lice which were sent to plague them; said, Digitus Dei est hic, This is
the finger of God; that is, the virtue and power of God: whereby his power is
pointed at as it were with the finger. Of this opinion is Tertullian: and
further adds, That God calls his finger, his power; for that the least part
in God, which is his finger, expresses Gods omnipotency. And that he might
not wrong this his greatness, in this action of his, of casting Devils out of
men's bodies, he uses this phrase, If I by the finger of God, etc.

The casting out of Devils not always a sign of the coming of Gods
Kingdom. Acts 19.14.
Saint Chrysostom doubts of this consequence; Si in digito Dei eijcio Daemonia,
perueniet in vos regnum Dei, If I cast out Devils by the finger of God, the
Kingdom of God shall come unto you. Before that God did incarnate his Son,
there were some Exorcists amongst the Jews, which in Gods name, and by his
virtue and power did cast out Devils. And in the 19 of the Acts it is said,
That there were certain sons of Scena a Jew (the Priest) which did this. And
Josephus makes mention of one Eleazar, who before Vespasian and his whole Army
did cast out many Devils. And of Solomon it is said, That he left some
exorcismes behind him, in which the name of God was called upon, when as yet
the Kingdom of God was not come. By which S. Jerome understands the coming of
our Savior Christ, in his Exposition of that place of S. Luke, Regnum Dei
intra vos est. Hereunto I answer, That one of the tokens of the time of our
Savior Christ, was, his casting out of Devils; as well as those other, That the
Blind should see, the Deaf hear, the Dead arise, etc.

But because this Prophecy is not so fully expressed in the Scripture as the
rest are, it is sufficient, that our Savior Christ wrought this miracle
amongst the rest, in confirmation that he was that promised Christ and Messiah,
as also that he was the Son of God. Whence it follows, The Kingdom of God
is come unto you.

When a strong man armed keeps his Palace. Saint Matthew and Saint (...) make
this sentence somewhat cleerer. How shall any one enter into the house of the
strong man, unless he first bind the strong man? And presently Saint Luke
gives the reason of it, When a strong man armed keeps his Palace, etc. Our
Savior Christ compares this strong man to Beelzebub. And so S. Chaysostome and
S. Augustine style him.

First, because his power is absolutely great; as we say, a great Mountain, or
a strong Tower. Job indeeres this his power in diverse and sundry places.

Secondly, In regard of our weakness the Devil is said to be strong, as well
in his offensive, as his defensive arms.

Humane goods, whereon men commonly place their hearts, Saint Ba^il compares
them to an highway Robber, who hides himself in some bush or thicket, that
before the Traveler be aware of him, he may the better set upon him. So the
Devil comes masked and disguised with an appearance of earthly blessings, and
baiting our tastes therewith, he plays upon us. And therefore it is said in
Wisdom, That God created these goods for a snare to catch fools. Wisd. 14.
If the Devil should tempt us, and go plainly to work with us, discovering his
foulness unto us, Who would look after him, or have any thing to do with
him? But because those evils which work upon the Soul are not seen, and
those of the body do much afright us; we stand more in fear of the Devil,
than of sinning, suffering our selves basely to be subdued by our own proper
affections. Saint Bernard says, That three enemies do continually assault us,
but that none of them without our consent can do us any harm. So that the
greatest enemy which each man has, is himself; and for to work his own
ruin, he need no other help but himself. All hells power were too weak, if
thou did not put the weapons of thy consent into his hands; thou thy self
give him the cords wherewith to bind thee, and the sword wherewith to cut
thine own throat. His own iniquities shall take the Wicked, and he shall be
holden with the cords of his own sin. Prou. 5.22.


Armed with these weapons, Why Satan is styled the Prince of the world.
he becomes Master of the house of our soul (as it seems to Saint Hierome,)
or of the world (as Irenaeus expounds it.) And therefore Saint John calls him
the Prince of the world. So that it was necessary that our Savior Christ
should come, and should manacle him, and take these his weapons from him,
wherein he so much trusted.

And that we way the better understand how this imprisonment past; First of
all, it is to be noted, That God never consents to the Devils tempting of a
good man, beyond his power of resistance and subduing of him. God is faithful,
1. Cor. 10.
which will not suffer ye to be tempted above that ye be able; for if he
should have liberty without limitation, there should not be that holy man whom
(like Job) he would not bring to the dunghill.

Secondly, By our Savior Christ's coming into the world, the power of this
tyrant was much lessened; not that his prison is less strict and hard than
before, but because God communicating his grace to the Faithful, makes them
more strong and valiant in their resistance.

Thirdly, Since his tempting of our Savior, his hands are bound, and his force
and power has failed him (as Hilarie and Irenaeus has observed) for when he
saw himself so shamefully overcome, he turned coward, and grew so fearful, as
well by the virtue of his divinity, as the force of his command, Vade retro
Satana; that he never after durst attempt to tempt our Savior Christ in any
visible form, nor do either him or those that follow him, that hurt which he
willingly would. And as in the Garden, saying but only Ego sum, I am ^ee, he
made the Roman soldiers so afraid, that they flew back and fell to the ground;
so by saying Vade retro Satana, Go behind me Satan, he made the Devils so
afraid and put such cowardice into them, that trembling and crying out, they
made have to forsake those bodies they possessed. Saint Jerome says, That our
Savior Christ speaks here of this imprisonment, How can any one enter into
the strong man's, etc.

Fourthly, By our Savior Christ's death, did the Devil seek to shake off this
his fear and cowardice, by mustring up all the rest of his forces; God so
permitting it, that the Victory might be the more glorious and the more
famous. This is that which our Savior Christ said unto the Pharisees, as
ministers of Hell, This is your very hour, and the power of darkness. But
after this he remained in straighter imprisonment than before, Luke. 22.53.
As you may read in the Apocalips. I saw an Angel come down from Heaven,
having the key of the bottomelesse-pit and a great chain in his hand; Apoc. 20.
And he took the Dragon, that old Serpent, which is the Devil and Satan, and
he bound him a thousand years. And cast him into the bottomelesse-pit, and
sealed the door upon him, that he should deceive the people no more, til the
thousand years were fulfilled, for after that he must be loosed for a little
season. By these thousand years, the Saints do understand that space or term
of time which is to be before the coming of Antechrist; and those effects,
which did succeed after the death of our Savior Christ, prove, that till then
his imprisonment was to be more straight, and that the Angel did not only tie
a chain to his feet, but also put a barnacle about his rongue, and a ring in
his nosthrils, that not only the strongest men should escape his snares, but
those that were little children, and tender infants.

Luke. 8.
When the unclean spirit is gone out of a man, he walks through dry places,
seeking rest, and when he finds none, he says, etc. Euthimius has observed,
That our Savior Christ's casting out of the Devils, the Evangelists call it, a
going or coming forth. Exibant ab eo daemonia, clamantia per loca in aquosa,
The Devils went out crying in watrie places. S. Matthew uses the word, Arida,
Dry places. The Greek word, signifies both these. Origin by these places,
understands Hell. But since those Devils, which entered into the swine of
Gennezaret, did desire of our Savior Christ, that he would give them that
mansion, it is not to be believed, that when they go out of men's bodies they
would for their pleasure make choice of the bottomless pit; The Devil finds
no rest but where he may do mischief.
Saint Jerome declares the same in the word, Solitudines. And your Exorcists
do conjure them, to get them to the mountains and the woods; pretending to
excuse the hurt which they do, remaining among the concourse or press of
people. The Angel which accompanied young Tobias, imprisoned the Devil called
Asmodeus, who had killed Saras seven husbands, in the deserts of Egypt. And
further says, That the devil could not there find any rest; because he should
not there meet with any people to deceive them. Not that the devil can have
any rest; but in doing mischief he feels the less torment. Cheering himself
(like the envious man) with other men's miseries. I will return (says he)
unto mine house whence I came out. Not that he can freely return thither when
he lists, but because he strives and endeavors to do it: And for that his
experience teaches him, that he there suffers least pain.

He takes to him seven other spirits, worse than himself. He lights upon a
house, whence all Virtue is banished; Well fitted for such a guest, and seven
more such companions as himself.

There are three sorts of persons possessed with Devils.

Three sorts of persons possessed with Devils.
One sort of them, are spiritually possessed, by reason of their mortal and
deadly sins; For he that commiteth sin, makes himself the servant of
sin, and willingly puts himself into the power of the devil.

Others are corporally possessed, as the Energumeni, and such as are Lunatick^
And Saint Austen reports, that many young children being baptized, suffer
this torment. And Cassianus says, That many Saints of God have suffered the
like, God so permitting it, that they might be refined and purified, as gold
in the crisole.

The third, consists of both those kinds.

Now, which of these three do you take to be the worst? Saint Crysostome, and
Gregory Nazianzen do affirm, That the party that is spiritually possessed,
is in the worst and most dangerous estate: And the reasons are as strong, as
they are clear. Which indeed are most clear.

The first is, That the devil can do us little harm, unless we fall into
sin. For without the help of sin the devil cannot destroy both soul and
body. For though the devil do put it into the fire, it is our own heart
that must forge the work. Saint Paul does defy all the creatures both of
Heaven, Earth, and Hell. And why? For I am persuaded (says he) that neither
Death, nor Life, nor Angels, Romans 8.38.
nor Principalities, nor Powers, nor things Present, nor things to Come, nor
Height, nor Depth, nor any other creature, shall be able to separate us from
the Love of God, which is in Jesus Christ, yet he durst not defy sin. For
that alone is more powerful to do us hurt than all other creatures put
together. No creature so hurtful to man as sin.
Saint Chrysostom asks the question, Why the devil persuaded Joseph's
brethren to put him first into a pit, and then afterward to sell him? And he
answers, that it was the envy and hatred which they bare unto him for his
dreams sake. And that other weapons, the devil needed none. And in that
Parable of the Tares, where the devil sowed his Tares amongst the Wheat, A
lesser ill to be possessed in body than in soul.
it is said, That although he had not sown them, yet the good seed would have
been lost through the carelessness and negligence of the husbandmen, For
negligence in things so necessary is a greater devil, than that of Hell. In
this sense Saint Gregory Nazianzen said of Arrius, Satius illi esset a
daemonio vexari, It had bin better for him to have been tormented by a Devil.

The second is, For that the goods of the body, are not comparable to those of
the soul, Tange cuncta quae possidet, Touch all that he has, Said the Devil
to God, when he talked with him concerning Job. In a word touching the goods of
the soul, the least thereof is of more worth than all the world. And the goods
not being able to be compared one with another, neither can their ill. Nay,
rather to loose these goods of the body, turns oftentimes to our greater
gain. Perieramus, nisi perijssemus, We had perished, if we had not perished,
It was the saying of a Philosopher in a storm, when the throwing of his goods
ouerboord, was the saving of his life. But that Soul that shall cast his
sins ouerboord, and drown them in the bottom of the Sea, that they may
never be able to rise up in judgment against him; is a happiness beyond all
happiness, and not to be exchanged for the whole Empire of the World. What
booteth it a man, to gain all the world, and to loose his own soul?
Therefore it is a less ill, to be possessed in Body than in Soul. For sin
only is that true evil, which depriueth us of true good.

Likewise, He that is spiritually possessed, is in worse case than he that has
a devil in soul and body: And of this truth there are two evident reasons.

The one, that to have a Devil in the body, is no small occasion whereby the
Soul is saved. Saint Paul said of the incestuous person, Let him be delivered
unto Satan, for the destruction of the Flesh, 1. Cor. 5.5. 1. Tim. ^.20.
that the Spirit may be saved in the day of the Lord Jesus. Whither it were by
way of excommunication, (as it seems good unto Thomas) the Devils tormenting
him, following his excommunication, (as Caietan will have it) or whither he did
deliver him over to the Devil, as to Gods Executioner, without excommunicating
him, (as Saint Hierome is of opinion) or whither the Apostles had license to
do all or any of these at their pleasure; sure I am, that Saint Ambrose says,
That the delivering over of these Sinners unto the Devil, was a putting of
them into some pain or grief of body by the hands of the Devil, as he
tormented Job, to the end that they might be drawn to repentance for their
sins. And this agrees with that of Saint Chrysostom, That Saint Paul did
deliver the incestuous man over to the Devil, tanquam pedagogo aperiens ei
poenitentiae ianuam, As to a Schoolmaster, opening to him the door of
Repentance. Saint Hierome says, Tanquam Quaestionario, as to an Informer or
Baylife: But they differ in this, That when the Informers accuse, and the
Baylifes attach, it is commonly for others good; but when the Devil accuses
or lays hold of a man, it is for hurt. Saint Ambrose says, That when the
Devil had got leave to tempt Job, he got it for to work his destruction.
Will thou take the Devil with a hook like a Fish, or with a string like a
Bird? Yes, thou shall lay that poison for him as a bait, wherewith he thought
to destroy thee. Wherein is to be seen the wisdom and omnipotency of God,
in that he turns these tricks and subtilties of the Devil against Man, to
Man's benefit; who being willing to swallow him up at a bit, choakes himself,
and does rather benefit than hurt him. Wherein is plainly to be seen, the
good hap which this dumb man had in suffering in his body; for if his hurt
had layne only in his soul, they would never have brought him to our Savior
Christ, and it might have so fallen out, that he might have remained for ever
in this his misery: so that the torment of his body, was the occasion whereby
he remained sound both in body and in soul; as commonly those did whom our
Savior cured.

The second reason is, That there is no Christian can be supposed to be so
wicked, that it being put to his choice to choose one of these two, either to be
dumb, deaf, and blind, or to be one of those blasphemous Jews, who said, In
Beelzebub eijcit Daemonia, In Beelzebub he casts out Devils? would not
rather make choice of this man's misfortune, than of the Jews hardness of
heart.

He brings seven Diuils worse than himself. When this foul Fiend enters into
a man, he makes way for a great many more of his fellows. For the Devil being
rather the Souls Bawd, than it is Bridegroom, he bears no love thereunto; but
God, because she is his true Spouse, is tender of her, and will not suffer the
least wind of sin to blow upon her, but will look lovingly and carefully
unto her. But of this we have treated heretofore.

And it came to pass while he spoke, a certain woman amidst the multitude,
lifting up her voice, etc. Our Savior Christ's Sermon did not make the least
gap in the hard hearts of the Scribes and Pharisees, but it wrought such great
admiration in the breast of a certain woman called Marcella, that lifting up
her voice amidst the Doctors, and praising our Savior Christ, she cried out
aloud, Blessed is the womb that bare thee, and the paps that gave thee suck.
These Pharisees condemns thee for one that has made a covenant with Beelzebub;
but I say, that from the very instant of thy conception thou wast a holy man,
and that therefore blessed was the womb that bare thee, etc. and that the
leaprosie of original sin did not work upon thee, as it did upon all the
rest of Mankind. And that those paps which thou suckedst being likewise
blessed, they could not give milk to a Sinner. And because thy conception and
thy birth were both holy, Gods blessing be with that mother which conceived
and brought forth such a son. Saint Augustine says, That it was not only
Marcella that uttered these praises of our Savior, but that many others also
being taken with the strangeness of this miracle, fell into an extraordinary
commendation of him. But if the Gospel make mention of one only, it may be
understood, that Marcella was the first that sung in that tune, and that many
others followed on, and bore a part therein. And this suits well with that of
Saint Luke, They glorified him, saying, A great Prophet is risen up amongst us:
One while confessing him to be God, another while, the Messiah.

Of this applause and commendation of our Savior, we have two forcible
reasons,

The one, That general good which Christ did here upon earth, and more
particularly that which he did to this poor miserable man: For, to do good,
but especially to the Poor, is a powerful motive of praise. Confitebor Domino
nimisin ore meo, in medio multoru^ laudabo eum, qui astitit a dextris pauperis,
I will acknowledge God with a loud voice; in the midst of many will I praise
him who stood at the right hand of the Poor: This does that phrase (as Saint
Augustine has noted it) infer, of Nimis in ore meo: not between the teeth,
nor in some by-corner, but in medio Multorum, in the midst of the
Congregation. And therefore says Eccles. Splendidum in panibus benedicent
labia multorum: He that succoureth the poor, he that slaketh hunger, all the
World shall ring of his praise, and thousands of blessings shall be thrown
upon him. All Nations of the earth did evermore celebrate and honor those that
were public benefactors to the Commonwealth; and the Citisens thereof, by
erecting Statues unto them, that there might remain an eternal memory and
immortal fame of their noble actions: As Pliny reports of Athens; Plutarch,
of Lacedemonia; and many Historiographers, of Rome. Leo the tenth did bring
down the price of salt; for the which Rome thought themselves so much bound
unto him, that they did set up his Statue in the Capitol, with a motto that
spoke thus, Optimi liberalissimique Pontificis memoriae. But your Kings and
Princes now a days, do make such a common practice of pilling and polling the
Commonwealth, that to see any good come from them, may be held as great a
miracle as that we have now in hand. Ephraim is an Heifar used to delight in
threshing. Now to thresh, Ose. 10 11. To th^esh, in Scripture, is to rule with
tyranny. Isa. 25.10.
is taken oftentimes in Scripture, to rule with tyranny and oppression. Arise,
o thou daughter of Syon, and fall a threshing. For in this mountain shall the
hand of the Lord rest, and Moab shall be threshed under him, even as straw is
threshed in Madmenah. The proportion of the comparison holds in this, That as
your heifers do tread the corn underneath their feet, till it be troad all out
of the ear; so your Princes trample upon their Subjects, till they have drawn
from them the greater part of their goods: and if here and there an ear escape
him, and go away whole, he may cry, Godamercie good luck; Princeps
postulat, and Iudex in reddendo est. The Prince, he will have some strange
tax or new imposition laid upon the Subject; your reverend Judges they will
invent a way to do it, and say, There is good law for it; and ever after it
shall be a President, or a ruled Case. And whence does this arise? Marry from
this, That the one is a thorn in the Subjects sides, and the other are
brambles. And for this cause, in that Fable of the Trees, none did desire to be
King, save the Bramble. And this is the reason why Princes are soothed up by
their Flatterers, and Cushion-sowing Courtiers under Kings elbows; but these
Earewigs, howsoever their Prince may affect them, I am sure they are neither
esteemed nor applauded by the People. And if these Flatterers grow fat and
full, the Commons have poor commons, and are poor and hungerstarued. But
because this King of Heaven did good unto his People, he was praised and
commended by them. So says Saint Matthew, The Multitudes wondered; and seeing
the Dumb to speak, the Blind to see, the Lame to walk, they magnified the
God of Israel.

The other, The force of our Savior Christ's words. Ecclesiasticus says, That
the words of a wise man are like so many nails that strike the soul through,
and wedge it fast. If a wise man's words have that force, what efficacy shall
Gods words carry with them?

Esaias 45.15.
A certain woman lifting up her voice, etc. Esaias called our Savior Christ,
The hidden God, Vere tu es Deus absconditus; Hidden in the Heavens. And for
this cause some do derive the name of Coelum, a Coelando. Job he says, Nubes
latibulum eius. He was likewise hidden in his mothers womb; Que^ coeli capere
non poterant, tuo gremio contulisti. Who would think that this immensitie
which the Heavens could not contain, should be shut up in so straight a
room? He hid himself also under his humanity, insomuch that the Devils
eyes, being so sharp sighted, and able to discern things afar off, could
not know him, when his Divinity was hidden under those pains and torments
which he endured. Esaias says, Quasi absconditus vultus eius, It was hidden
from the Worlds knowledge; Quis cognouit sensum Domini? Who knew the meaning of
the Lord? The greatest Clerks in Jerusalem said, In Beelzebub eijcit Daemonia,
Through Beelzebub he casts out Devils. And if any man shall press me with
that place of Saint Paul, That he was manifested and made known to the World;
I answer, That he did hide himself, but the Father did manifest him in the
Cratch; he hid himself in the manger, but his swathing clothes driueled on
by the Ox and the Ass, and the reares that trickled down his cheeks, did
discover him to be Man; the Kings sought to conceal him, but the Sheepheards
did reveal him in the Temple; his mother, bearing him as a Sinner in her
belly, who was to redeem the World, did hide and cover him, but Simeon and
Anna the Prophetess did proclaim him to the world; his kneeling down in
Jordan before he was baptized, did hide his worth; but the opening of Heaven,
and the voice of the Father did declare him to be his Son; and the Holy Ghost
descending down upon his head in the form of a Dove, did manifest his
Majesty. Upon the Cross, the Nails, the Gall, the Vinegar, his wounds, his
stripes, his shame, and his being forsaken of his Father, did hide his glory;
but the Centurion, the Thief, his Executioners, the Sun, Moon, Stones, and
Sepulchers rendering up their Dead, did manifest his power. And here the Scribes
and Pharisees calling him the Minister of Beelzebub, seek to hide him; but
Marcella and her companions with a loud voice, make him to be known what he
was.

A certain woman, etc. In the weakness of this woman God did discover the
greatness of his power. God is wont by weak means to confound the Mighty.
Of Judith it is said, That a woman of the Jews did confound the pride of
Nebucadnezar: And here it is said, That a Jewish woman gave the lie to all the
power and wisdom of Jerusalem; striking the Scribes and Pharisees dumb,
confounding their understanding, and making them ashamed. For Marcella ^eeing
them thus convinced by the reasons of our Savior Christ, she lifted up her
voice aloud, in token of victory, and to show that our Savior had the better
of them. King Balthazar in the midst of all his mirth and jollitie, was with
a hand that he espied upon the wall, stricken as dead as a door nail. Pharaoh
with a blast of Gods mouth was drowned in the Deep; Flauit Spiritus eius, etc.
These were strange things, but much more strange was it, That a poor silly
old woman should with two or three words confute the wisdom of Jerusalem, and
put them to such a nonplus that they had not a word to say.

Blessed is the womb that bare thee. She reckons it here as a great blessing
to the Virgin Marie, that she was the mother of such a Son; which is an epitome
of all her praises and excellencies. The Evangelist say no more, because all
that may be said of her, is contained in this one word, Mother. And because
some blasphemous persons had taken this name from her, in the general Ephesine
Council, celebrated in the time of Pope Celestine and Theodosius the Emperor,
whereat were present two hundred Bishops; it was concluded, That the most
blessed Virgin should be called Theotocos, that is, The mother of God; for that
our Savior was both Gods Son and hers, having his filiation from them both.
The same was likewise defined in the Calcedonian Council, under Leo the
twelfth. So that the same Holy Ghost which assisted these Counsels, had
prompted also this woman's tongue. Saint Bernard says, That this great name
Theotocos is the greatest this divine lady has, or can have. And because the
name of Mother of God, may seem to detract something from the sole omnipotency
of God, from his goodness, from his wisdom, and all other his excellent and
singular attributes; left men might sin in ouerpraising her, and giving too
much unto her in that kind, Epiphanius says, It was fit that Heaven should put
a task and a tie upon this our tongue, least it should lash out too far. And
therefore her Son when he was upon the Cross, and took his last farewell of
his mother, he said unto her, Woman, behold thy son, giving her that name,
rather than of Mother, least some superstitious people might attribute the
Divine nature unto her, and so rob God of his honor.

And the breasts which thou have sucked. She praises her womb and her breasts.
Christ's conception in the heart, is presently discovered.
There are two things entertain a sweet correspondencie; a woman's conception
in her womb, and the manifestation thereof in her breasts. Just so does it
succeed with the Soul, in it is conception of God, and the breast of the just
man, who thereupon does manifest the guest that lodges there. Between the
Vine and the Wine there is that good correspondencie, that the flowers of the
Grape participating of it is sweetness, sends forth a most pleasant odor. So
likewise when the flowers of Christ begin to bud in the Soul, the breast of
Man does streightway thereupon breath forth a most sweet and redolent odor.

Beatus venture, Blessed is the womb.
This was Man's first Heaven; the first place wherein God bestowed this his
greatest happiness and blessing upon Man. It is a happiness to Man, when his
Understanding sees God, and when his Will loves him, taking pleasure therein as
in his chiefest good. Now, the first eyes that saw God, and the first will that
loved God, and placed his joy and delight therein, was that of our Savior
Christ; and Mary's womb being the receptacle of this happiness, it came to
be man's first Heaven. The first Adam was earthly, because formed of earth; the
second, heavenly, because formed of Heaven. Before this time he had no set
habitation, For he dwelt not in any house from the day that he brought the
Children of Israel out of Egypt, etc. His glory was represented in
Tabernacles and Tents, poor Palaces, ywisse, for God: Solomon did better it
with his Temple, which Fabric was the worlds wonder; but not so worthy God,
that our eyes could see him; well might our will be good. But this most blessed
Virgin had fitted and prepared so rich a temple for him in her womb, that God
himself came down to dwell there. Some seem to doubt, or rather wonder, why God
should so long defer his coming in the flesh. He stayed so long, that the
Holy Ghost might prepare and dress up this Temple of the Virgins Womb, Vt
dignum filij tui habitaculum offici mereretur, spiritu sancto cooperante,
praeparasti, Thou did trim up, o Lord, the body and soul of this blessed
Virgin, and did furnish her with thy cheese Graces, that she might be made
a fit and worthy palace for thy Son.

Blessed is the Womb. This commending of the Son, was a great honor to the
Mother. The common current is, That children do battle much upon their parents
worth. And therefore they do so usually blazon forth the noble actions of
their Ancestors. And by how much the more ancient they are, the more glorious
is their coat of Arms. True it is, that fathers do sometimes participate of
the glory of their sons; according to that of Ecclesiasticus, He that
teaches his son, Eccle. 30.3.
greeueth the enemy, and before his friends he shall rejoice of him. Of mean
men, they many times come to be famous and renowned throughout the World. Homer
relates of Hylacius, that the valor of his sons did give him (amongst the
Cretenses) the name of God. And when the Senate of Rome did crown any of their
Citisens, their fathers were innobled thereby. And Joseph, having incurred the
hatred and displeasure of his brethren, because he dreamt that the Sun, the
Moon, and the twelve stars did adore him, the sacred Text says, That the
father, Rem tacitus considerabat, did lay it up in his heart; as one that did
imagine, that from the prosperity of the son, there might some honor
redound to the father. Cornelius Tacitus relates in his Annals, that the
Emperor Tiberius being importuned by many, that amongst other his surnames,
he would assume some one of his Mothers, for his greater honor; made answer,
That the Mother was not to honor the Emperor, but the Emperor the Mother.

Christ's pedigree the noblest, and of longest continuance.
But this their glory is so short, that looking back whence they came, they
can make it scarce reach so far, as their great Grandfathers. But the glory
of our Savior Jesus Christ, our Redeemer, did reach as far as unto King
David, and could draw his Pedigree from the Patriarch Abraham. Whom, that he
might honor them the more, he styles himself in the Gospel to be their
son, Filij David, filij Abraham: where it is to be noted, that after so many
ages, so many changes and alterations both of the times and the people, of
Kings, Judges, and Captains, in the end, there being an interuention of two
and forty generations, the glory of Christ attained to the hundred
Grandfather. And by calling himself the son of David and of Abraham, he
revived their remembrance, and made them thereby more famous. And if in so
large a distance of time, it wrought so noble an effect, treading so near upon
the tract of these latter times, that there was no wall now between the Mother
and the Son, her blessed Womb, and his most happy Birth; what a glory must
it be unto her, and what a happiness unto us? Emisenus treating in a Sermon of
his, touching the assumption of our Lady, and with what honor she was
received into Heaven, says, Those great rivers of glory which the Son had
gained both in Heaven and in Earth, returned back again that day, employing
their best and speediest course in the honoring of his Mother. Saint Ambrose
styles her the form of God; Either because she was the form or mold through
which God did thus transform himself, by taking our humane shape upon him; or
else, because the graces of God, though not in so great a measure, were
translated or transferred over unto her. A mould made of earth, is not bettered
by the metal which it receives, though it be never so good gold: But by the
gold of Christ's Divinity, the V^gines Womb was much the better and the purer
by it. And therefore it is said, Beata, quae credidisti, Blessed art thou that
did believe; For all etc. the types and figures and promises of God, remained
more complete and perfect in thee, than in any other creature.

Quin imo, beati qui audiunt Verbum Dei, and custodiunt illud.
But he said, yea, rather blessed are they that hear the Word of God, and
keep it. These words may carry with them a threefold sense:

The one, That the word Quin imo may be aduersatiua, implying a kind of
repugnancie or contradiction; and that correcting, as it were, what Marcella
said, he does mend and better her speech. Do thou (says he) term my
mother blessed? Thou art deceived; for she is not blessed for that she bare
me, but because she heard my word. And this sense is taken out of two places
of Saint Augustine.

The one, in his tenth tract upon Saint John; where he says, Matter quam
appellas foelicem, non inde foelix, quia in ea verbum caro factum est, sed quia
Verba Dei custodit; That mother of mine whom thou call blessed, was not
therefore blessed, because in her, the Word was made Flesh, but because she
laid up the word of God in her heart.

The other, in his thirty eight Epistle, which he writes to a Gentleman called
Letus; who being newly converted, was shrewdly laid at by his mother
(persuading him all that she possibly could, that he should not proceed in this
his determination:) And proouing unto him, That in this cause he ought to deny
and hate that mother that had brought him forth according to the flesh, and to
follow the Church, by which he was regenerated and borne anew according to the
Spirit. Amongst many other weighty reasons to move him thereunto, he urges
this amongst the rest; Thy King and thy Emperor Christ (says he) had a
mother, and such a mother as never man had the like: and being one day busy in
preaching, (which was Heavens business) they told him, That his mother and his
brethren were without at the door, expecting that he should come forth unto
them. But he stretching out his hand to his Disciples, said, Quae matter? Et qui
fratres mei? Who is my mother, and who my brethren? My mother and my brethren
are they who do the will of my Father; as for any other Kindred or blood I
acknowledge none. Summing up (says Saint Augustine) in this number, etiam
ipsam Virginem Mariam, even the Virgin Marie her self. For the name of Mother
is terrestrial, temporal, and transitory; but that kindred which is
contracted by hearing Gods Word, is celestial and everlasting. If this doubt
had had it is occasion thus, or that the case stood so, that this good and holy
woman Marcella had not known and acknowledged our Savior Jesus Christ to be
God, nor the blessed Virgin to be his mother, this ^ence had then been very
plain, and no scruple to be made of it: for the dignity of mother should not
have come to a lesser degree of grace, than that which the Virgin inioyed.

The second sense or meaning is, That this particle Quin imo is comparatiua,
The Virgin not blessed for bearing Christ but believing in him.
comparatively spoken, or by way of comparison. Thou call my mother blessed,
for that she is my mother; thou say well: but more blessed is she in that
she hears my Word. This sense is likewise taken out of Saint Augustine, Libro
de sancta Virginitatepunc; Where he says, Beatior suit Maria concipiendo
^ente, quam ventre, Marie was happier in the conception of her mind, than of
her womb. And anon after, Foelicius gestauit cord, quam car^e, She bore him
more happily in the Spirit, than the Flesh. This opinion is followed by Saint
Cyprian, Iustine Martyr, and generally by all the modern Doctors; and this of
all other is the plainest, and that which does best open o^r Savior Christ's
intention and purpose.

First, Because the Greek word, which answers to Quin imo, is neither a
Negative, nor an Affirmative.

Secondly, because this happiness being granted unto those who saw and beheld
our Savior Christ with their eyes; it is not to be supposed, that it should be
denied to his Mother that had brought him forth, and bred him up. Besides, the
Virgin said of her self, All nations shall call me blessed, Not only for that
abundance of grace which God had bestowed upon her, but also for that he had
enriched her with so many great privileges, whereof the dignity of a Mother
was not the least. Saint Austen indeering the greatness thereof says, That
the heart could not conceive it, nor the tongue express it: And Anselmus, That
next to the greatness of the Son, there was not any greatness either in
Heaven or in Earth, which was any way comparable to that of the Mother: And S.
Bernard, That by how much the more was her vicinitie with the word; by so much
the more was her excellency in Heaven. Whence some Schoolmen infer, that
this dignity does exceed al those other treasures of grace which were to be
found in the Virgin. Iustine says of Olimpia, that howbeit she might boast
herself much of the Kingdom of Troy, from whence she was descended, and from
other kingdoms which she might claim from her father, her brother, and her
husband, who was Philip King of Macedon; yet could she glory in no one thing
more, than that she was Mother to Alexander the Great, who was Emperor of the
world. How much more strongly does this reason hold in the most blessed Virgin?

To be the wife or daughter of a King a greater honor, than to be his Mother.
Yet notwithstanding all this, nothing comparable is the dignity of a Mother to
that of a daughter or a wife. And if it had bin left to this our most blessed
Virgins choice, whether she had rather have been the Mother of God, or his
Spouse and best Beloved, she would questionless have rather chosen to have
been his Beloved. And the same is employed by those several employments of
Martha and Mary. As the Virgin was a Mother, she did Marthas office, affoording
her bre^^s to our Savior Christ, wrapping him up in his swaddling clouts,
breeding him and attending upon him: But as she was a Daughter and a Spouse,
she did Mary's duty, having her ear still eyed to his mouth, and diligently
listening to those heavenly words that proceeded from thence. And there arising
a quarrel betwix^ these two sisters, which of them loved our Savior best; our
Savior soon decided the controversy, when he said, Mary has chosen the better
part. And this is made clear in the example of the Queen Mother, and the
Prince that is heir to his Fathers Kingdom. The Queen no doubt has a great
part in the King and Kingdom; But the Prince more, who must one day command
all. King S^lomon honored his Mother much, and as soon as he had taken
possession of the Kingdom, he offered his service unto her, and that he and
all that he had was at her command, but in conclusion he left that to his
son Rehoboam. Of his (...) will (says Saint James) begot he us with the word
of truth, that we should be at the (...) fruits of his creatures. Vt Simus
initium, One Commentator has it, Vt principa^um habeamus, that we may have
principality. The Greek, That we may be the Majorasgos, The elder sons
and heirs of his Kingdom. In the Stocks and Linages of men, there are
innumerable differences of more, and of less; of higher, and lower: But that
which does advance and advantage us most, is the hearing of Gods word.

The glorious Doctor Saint Austen say^h* That which passes amongst Na^^ons,
passes likewise amongst Men. God preferred the Jews before all other Nations,
Non fecit taliter ^^ni nationi, etc. He had not dealt so with any other Nation,
etc. Nor had they that odds and advantage of others, in regard only of those
great and many wonders that he had wrought for them, but because he had
revealed his heart and bosom unto them. The finenesse of friendship, and the
pure alloy thereof, does not consist in this, that my purse is open unto thee,
and that thou share with me in my wealth and riches, but that there is not that
secret in my heart, which I do not communicate unto thee. I have termed ye my
friends, for whatsouer was delivered unto me of my Father, the same have I made
known unto you. The Apostle Saint Paul asks the question, What advantage the
Jew had of the Gentiles? And what Circumcision did benefit them more than
others? And his answer is, A great deal; First, because God has more
particularly revealed himself unto them, etc. Many wore the favors which God
had done them; but the greatest that ever he did them, was the revealing of his
Word unto them, the imparting of his secrets unto them, and trusting them
therewithal. And so it passes likewise betwixt man and man, where there is
true love and friendship indeed. It is said in the third of Saint John, He that
has the Bride, John 3.29.
is the Bridegroom; but the friend of the Bridegroom reioyce^h greatly
because of the Bridegroomes voice. The Evangelist here treats of Saint John
Baptist, and says, That to the Husband of the Church, which is our Savior
Jesus Christ, the Spouse merely belongs; but for the office of a friend, such
a one as was Saint John Baptist, it appertained unto him, to assist this loving
Couple, and to keep the Bridegroom and the Bride company, and to hearken
unto them with a great deal of contentment and pleasure. Si Verbum Dei, (says
Saint Augustine) etc. If the Word of God which is preached in the Church, thou
shall receive it with fullness of Faith, and trunesse of devotion; that Word
shall become whatsoever thou will have it to be: It shall be unto thee like
Manna, which fitted it self to all men's ta^tes, there being not that palate
and appetite which it did not please and affect, according to it is own relish.

The third sense and meaning, which is no less literal than the former,
presupposes two things:

The one, That this woman was stricken into a double amazement or astonishment.

First, Of the strangeness of the miracle.

Secondly, Of the incredulity and obstinacy of the Pharisees.

The other, That these words are more directed to the praise and commendation
of the Son, than the Mother. And therefore when as here Marcella lifted up
her voice and said, Blessed was that mother that brought thee forth, and the
paps that gave thee suck; her maine and principal intent was, the
commendation of her son, and inclusiuely an honoring likewise of the mother.
But our Savior Christ was willing thereupon to show and make known to the
World, how unequal an estimation this is, which we make of these kind of goods;
for, to cast out Devils, and the doing besides of strange and wonderful
miracles, worldly men, and those that look only on the outside of things*
prefer them usually before the justification of their souls. And this woman
crying out, occasioned by the greatness and strangeness of this miracle,
Blessed be the womb that bare thee, and the breasts that thou did suck: He
presently adds thereupon, Nay rather blessed are they which hear the Word of
God and keep it. If thou do so much admire and wonder to see Devils
thrown out of men's bodies, thou will marvel much more, to see them cast out
of their souls. And being that my Word is so powerful, as to free souls from
this servitude and tyranny; more happy ought ye to hold me, for those
famous and renowned miracles which by my Word I work in your souls, than for
those which by my works I do upon your bodies. Thou therefore who preseruest
both body and soul, bring us to everlasting life.

THE NINETEENTH SERMON, UPON THE MONDAY AFTER THE THIRD SUNDAY IN LENT.
LVC. 4.23. Medice, cura teipsum; Quanta audiuimus in Capernaum facta?

Physician, heal thy self, etc.


Nothing more fierce, than the fury of the people.
THe Argument of this piece of Scripture, is a Plesto or Suit in law between
our Savior Christ and the Townsmen of Nazareth, where our Savior Christ had
been bred up. A woeful case, not only because it was with an Incorporation,
but with an ignorant company of Townsmen, that were envious, and apt to
mutine, A tribus timuit cor meum, (says Ecclesiasticus) There be three things
that mine heart fears; Eccle. 26.5.
Treason in a City; the Tumultuous assembly of the People; and False
accusation. Homer said of Pallas the Goddess of War and Discord, That she
delighted much in three things:

The Owl.

The Dragon.

And, the common People.

The Owl is the emblem of Ignorance.

The Dragon, of Envy.

The common People, of Fury.

These three Beasts did conspire against our Savior Christ; laying to his
charge, That he contemned his own Country, because he had not wrought such
miracles there, as he had in Capernaum.

Entering one day into the Synagogue, and sitting him down in the Chair, he
opened the book of the Prophets, and the Law; where he lighted upon that
place of Esaias, Esaias 61.7.
The Spirit of the Lord God is upon me, therefore has the Lord anointed me.
And expounding that place of himself, he said, Vtique dicetis, Luke. 4.
etc. Ye will surely say unto me this Proverb, Physician, ^eale thy self:
Whatsoever we have heard done in Capernaum, do it here likewise in thine own
Country. That Physician does amiss, who is forgetful of his own house, and
does famous Cures in other men's houses. We have heard that thou have done great
miracles and strange wonders in Capernaum; Fac and hic in patria tua, Let us
see if thou can do the like in thine own. And this is the Charge, the
Complaint, and the Accusation which they make against him.

Quanta audiuimus facta in Capernaum?
The occasion of this Complaint, were needless jealousies. Generally, the
whole Nation of the Jews were jealous of their own profit, and envious of
other men's prosperity. Esaias calls them Zelantes Populos, A jealous People. Esaias
26.
And the Nazarites did the rather pick this quarrel with our Savior, by
reason of the neighboring occasion that was given them.

Capernaum was a most fair and beautiful City, as well in regard of the
goods of Fortune, as of the nature of the Seat; it was situated near unto the
Sea, upon the river of Jordan, in that most fertile and pleasant soil of the
Province of Galilee; her buildings were stately and sumptuous, excellent was
the commodiousnesse and conueniencie of it is situation, for Havens, for
Shipping, for Traffic, and for it is number of rich and wealthy Citisens: but
was made much more glorious by many other particulars, some whereof we shall
repeat unto you.

First, It pleased our Savior Christ to make choice of this place for his
habitation; The glory of Capernaum.
whence it came to pass, that they called it his Country, and his City.

Secondly, Because he there first began to preach the Gospel; fulfilling
therein (says Saint Matthew) that Prophecy of Esaias, The darkness shall not
be according to the affliction that it had when at the first he touched lightly
the land of Zebulon, and the land of Nepthalie; nor afterward, Esaias 9.12.
when he was more grievous by the way of the sea beyond Jordan in Galilee, of
the Gentiles; The people that walked in darkness have seen a great light;
they that dwelt in the land of the shadow of death, upon them has the light
shined.

Thirdly, For those many miracles which he wrought therein; as that of him that
was sick of the Palsy, and let down from the house top; that of the dumb
man that was possessed with a Devil; that of the Centurions Servant; that of
the woman, who touching the hemme of his garment was cured of her bloody
Flux, which she had been sick of so many years before. Here did he raise
up the daughter of the Archisynagoguian; and here did he give sight unto the
Blind; besides many other, unmentioned by the Evangelists.

Fourthly, After his Resurrection he threw a thousand favors upon that
Country. A few paces from that City he appeared to Peter, Thomas, John 21.
and Nathaniel, who had fisht all night and caught nothing; willing them to
cast the Net out upon the right side of the Ship. And, as Brocardus reports
it, upon a stone of that river he left the print of the soles of his feet three
several times. With these his favors he had stirred up such enuies and
jealousies in those of his own Country, that they said unto him, Physician,
heal thy self. But our Savior Christ directed all these to the Nazarites
good, to the end that these their jealousies might master their incredulity
and rebellion, and put spurs to their desires. A father has two sons, one
much made of, the other neglected and disgraced; this kind usage makes the
better beloved of the two, obstinate, churlish, and unquiet: And because that
jealousies and envy may break this his hardness of nature, and mollify this
his stubborn condition, he calls this slouenly, tattered, and despised child
of his, and says unto him, Thou art my son and my beloved. This fair kind
of course did God first take with the Jews. For his love to them did he plague
Egypt, divide the sea, drown Pharaoh, rob the Egyptians of their Jewels,
suffered not their garments to grow old, nor their shoes on their feet to
wear out, fed them with bread from Heaven, gave them water out of the rock, a
Pillar serving them by night for a Torch, by day for a Tent: In conclusion,
these his over great favors and courtesies toward them, made them so hard
hearted and so unthankful, that they provoked God by a Calfe, giving thereunto
the glory of their deliverance out of Egypt. This their adoring of a Beast
was a strange kind of beastliness. God hereupon called this ragged child unto
him, and threw his love upon the Gentiles, who lived before in disfavor and
disgrace; and said unto the Gentile, Thou art my son. You see him now cast
off, Deuteronomy. 31.
that was yesterday a Favorite, and carries that thom in his bosom, which
does continually prick him: And therefore it is said, I will give them a
Spirit that shall sting them; a worm that shall still lie gnawing at the very
heart of them. Yesterday God had his house and his habitation among the Jews,
his name was called upon by them; but now you see them cast off, trodden under
foot, trampled on, hated, abhorred, infamous, without honor, without a City,
without a Temple, without Prophets. The calling of the Gentiles, the miracles
that are wrought amongst them, the many favors that are affoorded them, are so
many nayls driven through their souls, and with tears guttring down their
cheeks, they now cry out with Jeremy, Our Inheritance is turned unto
strangers. Saint Ambrose says, That God did do this of purpose, that through
an emulation of zeal, the Jews might be converted unto Christ. Which is all
one with that of Saint Paul, Romans 11.
Through their fall, salvation comes unto the Gentiles, to provoke them to
follow them. In a word, To be thrust out of favor, and to have another come in
grace in his room, cannot but be a great torment and affliction to the party
disgraced.

Quanta audiuimus? What great things have we heard?
It Is natural in all men to love their Country.
The reasons which they may allege for themselves are these:

First of all, Amongst those good seeds which God has sown in our breast, one
is, The love of our Country: Many have preferred it before the love of
friends, kindred, parents, nay, before themselves, their estates, and lives.
Thomas says, That next unto God we ought not to bear so much love to
anything, as to our Country: he proves it to be an heroical virtue, to enjoy
that name, for the which we respect God, to wit, Pity. And they that deny
this love unto their Country, we hold them to be men deuoyd of pity,
barbarous, and cruel. Saint Augustine in his Books De Ciuitate Dei, Thomas,
and Valerius Maximus, quote many examples of men most famous in their love to
their Country: As of one Codrus, whose enemies having received answer from the
Oracle, That if Codrus should be slain in the battle, they should lose the
victory; entered in disguise, of purpose to be killed. Of Curtius, who for
Romes safety desperately leaped into that deep pit. Of Sylla's Host in
Praeneste, who taking that city by force of Arms, and making Proclamation,
That all the Citisens should be put to the sword, save his host; said, I will
not receive my life from him that is the destroyer of my Country. Of one
Thrasibulus, whom the Athenians went forth to receive with so many Crowns as
they were Citisens. Numberless are those examples which we find in profane
stories. And in those that are sacred we meet with that one of David, and that
other of Judith, who adventured their lives for their Country. In a word,
Nature (as Saint Hierome says) planted this love with that deep rooting in
our breasts, that Lucian said, That the smoke of our own Chimnies was far
better than the fire of other men's. And Plutarch affirms, That every man
commends the air of his own Country. Hierocles styles this love, a new God,
and our first and greatest father. Silius Italicus introduces a father
notifying to his son, That not any fouler sin did descend unto Hell, than a
man's opposing himself against his own Country.

This love being so due a debt, and so deserving our pity, it causes no
small admiration, that Christ our Savior should grow so cold toward his own
Country, and multiply such a company of miracles upon other the Cities of
Judea and Israel, and perform so few in Nazareth, where he was bred.

Secondly, This difficulty is increased by the Nazarites just request;
alleging, That since he had preached in his own City such a new and strange
kind of Doctrine, there was a great deal of reason that he should confirm the
same by miracles: For, put case that this had not been his own native
Country, yet was it a general debt, which he had paid to other Cities.

Thirdly, because in expounding that place of Esaias, Esaias 61.1.
The Spirit of the Lord is upon me, because he has anointed me, that I should
preach the Gospel to the poor, he said, That that prophecy was fulfilled in
himself, being that anointed Messiah there spoken of: Which being so, it was
fit that he should prove it by those signs and miracles which were
prophesied of the Messiah.

Fourthly, Marc. 6.5.
This difficulty is indeered by that which the Evangelist S. Mark reports
of our Savior Christ; to wit, That he could do no great works in Nazareth:
As if his virtue and power had been hindered and debarred of doing them;
insomuch that it made our Savior Christ to marvel much at it.

Fifthly, If the sins of Nazareth did thus bind his hands, more were those of
Capernaum, which he compared to Sodom; Luc. 10.
For if the miracles had been done in Tyrus and Sydon which have been done in
you, they had a great while a go repented, sitting in Sackcloth and Ashes.
Therefare it shall be easier for Tyrus and Sydon at the Judgment, than for
you. Greater were those of Bethsaida and Chorazin; Vae tibi Bethsayda, vae tibi
Chorazin etc. And greater were those of Jerusalem; Math. 11.
whereof Ezechiel said, Samaria dimidium peccatorum tuorum non peccauit,
vicisti eas sceleribus tuis.

Sixthly, He had done other greater honors to Nazareth; there he was incarnated
in the womb of the Virgin Marie, which of all other miracles was the greatest.
He took his name from Nazareth, as it appears by that his title upon the
Cross; by that which the Devils roared forth; and by that which our Savior
himself said to Saint Paul, I am Jesus of Nazareth, Ego sum Jesus Nazarenus,
etc. And therefore having given the more, it was not much he should give the
less.

Seventhly, Miracles were that milk which the Jews were bred up with, and had
been anciently accustomed unto, Judea signa petunt, etc. The Jews demand a
sign. Esaias importuned King Achab, That he would ask signs from Heaven,
Earth, or Hell; Pete tibi signum a Domino, etc. Moses and Gideon desired
signs, and therefore his children should have been bettered thereby, and more
especially those of his own Country. After that Joseph had furnished Egypt
with corn, he set open Granaries to the neighboring Provinces.

Lastly, It was prophesied of the Messiah, That he should be no accepter of
persons: He was Lord of al, and to al (in all reason) he should show himself
equal and indifferent: so that it seems to carry a great show of sorrow and
resentment with it, which those of Nazareth objected unto him; We have heard
what thou have done in Capernaum, do it here likewise in thine own Country.

But for the better understanding of that which our Savior Christ did answer to
this complaint and accusation of theirs;

First of all, we must suppose, That our Savior Christ showed himself with
his most blessed Mother, in four occasions: For albeit it be a holy thing for
the children to honor their parents; yet this honor is to be done them when
Gods cause interposeth not it self, who is the universal Father of us all.
But when there shall be an encounter of our liking and love toward two several
fathers, he that created me, and he that begot me; we are to have recourse
unto our heavenly Father, in regard of whom, all the other fathers in the world
are but Stepfathers. In this sense Saint Gregory does expound that place of
Saint Luke, Luke 14.
He that forsakes not father and mother to follow me, is not worthy of me.
Which is to be understood in such things which appertain to our spiritual
salvation; as it is noted by the said Doctor, and Clemens Alexandrinus.

Christ's works of two sorts.
Secondly, Saint Austen notes, That in our Savior Christ two kind of works may
be considered:

The one, Of a pure Man.

The other, Of a Redeemer and heavenly Master.

In the first, he was subject to his mother, and his father Joseph: so says S.
Luke, Et erat subditus illis.

In the second, he was to have recourse unto his heavenly Father; And therefore
he said, Nesciabitis, quod in his quae patris mei sunt, oportet me esse? He was
at the Wedding by his mothers appointment; but when he came to the working of
the miracle, he said, Quid mihi and tibi Mulier? Woman, what have I to do with
thee? And when they advised him whilst he was preaching, That his mother and
his Kinsefolkes were waiting there for him; he answered, Quae est M^ter mea,
etc.

Thirdly, We have two Countries:

Earth the one.

Heaven the other.

In that, our Bodies were borne.

In this, our Souls.

Now, when the desires of the Earth encounter with those of Heaven, our
recourse must be to Heaven: following therein the advice of David, Audi Fili^,
and vide, obliuiscere populum tuum, and domus patris tui, Hear o Daughter, and
see, forget thy own people, and the house of thy father. Our Saviors natural
Country was Heaven; but here on earth, Nazareth. Now this Country did not
desire miracles for to increase their belief, but for other respects, which
we will declare hereafter: And therefore Christ would not work any miracles
amongst them.

Why our Savior would work no miracles in Capernaum.
And assuming those reasons which Christ might allege for himself:

The first is proved by that Proverb which our Savior cited, No Prophet is
accepted in his own Country. Or as Saint Matthew and Saint Mark have it There
is no Prophet that is honored in his own Country, nay rather does not suffer
dishonor.

And this is made good both by divine and humane learning; and there are more
instances thereof, than there are sands in the sea. Moses being but a child,
his parents put him into the river, leaving him to his venture, to sink or
swim. Exposito autem illo; which the Syriacke reads, Cumque fuisset expositus a
populo suo. When he came to be a man, one of his own Nation put him in danger
of his life, Act. 7. Exodus 2.
Pharaoh sending after him to have him apprehended. Afterward, being Captain
and Commander of the People, they did often mutiny, Number 23.
and not only did murmr in secret against him, but with open throat did
publicly blaspheme. Exodus 15. Number. 14.
Aaron and Marie that were so near allied unto him, used him like a Turk or a
Moore, because he had married an Aethyopian woman. Dathan and Abiram vpbraided
him to his face, asking him, Number. 16.
Whither he meant tyrannously to usurp the Government? Joseph was so honored
by the Egyptians, that they accounted him as a second King; Vno tantum regni
solio te praecedam. His brethren put him down into a pit, and sold him for a
Slave. David was beloved and honored of the people, and of all the whole land
besides; but his father in law, 1. Kings 19.
and his own son sought to take away his life and kingdom from him. Esaias 65.
Esaias was spit at by the people, and ill entreated by them. Jeremy was mocked,
scoffed at, Hier. 20.
and di^esteemed; and at last they set him in a pair of Stocks. Pashur the
High Priest smote Jeremiah the Prophet, and put him in the Stocks which were
in the high gate of Benjamin, that was by the house of the Lord: And (as
Tertullian reports it) was lastly stoned to death. At the Prophet Elisha, the
boys did hoot in the streets, crying out Bald-pate, bald pate. Elias, 3. Reg.
ca. vlt. Micah. 2.
was persecuted by King Ahab and his Queen. Michah, was continually clapped up
in prison, Et alij ludibria and verbera experti, etc.

In humane Stories we read, that Hannibal was banished from Carthage after he
had triumphed over so many Roman Emperors. Lycurgus, was pelted out of
Lacedemonia with stones, the Oracles having as it were celebrated him for a
god. Solon, was thrust out of Athens after he had given them such wholesome
Laws. Themistocles, after he had innobled his Commonwealth with sundry
honorable services, was forced to fly to the Persians, where King Xerxes
received him with a great deal of honor. Books are so full of these
examples, that it were an endless labor to relate them. That glorious Doctor
Saint Jerome gives it as an advice, That he who desires to be famous, must
forsake his own Country. He that goes to Flanders, or to the Indies, after
he comes home is the better respected. Clement the Pope reports, That in the
Primitive Church the people would flock to the Sermon of a stranger. The fourth
Carthaginian Council made a Decree, that it the Bishops did pass through any
Towns that were not within their own Jurisdiction, that the Governors of those
places should inuit them to bestow a Sermon on them. In a word, The first in
whose nose Lazarus stunke, was Martha. For there is no Prophet that is esteemed
in his own Country.

Some man may chance to ask me, upon what this monstrousness in nature is
grounded? Saint Ambrose, Saint Jerome, and Saint Chrysostom are all of
opinion, Luke 4.
That Envy is the leaven of this ill, as it was of all other evils in the
World. Saint Chrysostom asks the question, what hurt a Prophet does, that
Envy should thus bite him with her venomous teeth? And I answer, Because she
does not envy the bad, but the good. Caine (says Saint Jude) did therefore
kill his brother because his works were good.

Thomas says, That Envy is a sorrowing or repining at another man's good; The
nature of (...).
for that it is presumed, that it does lessen and diminish their own honor. For
the hurt which a man may do to himself and others, our wishes against that man
proceeds not so much of Envy as of Zeal. And so is it noted by S. Gregory. A
Tyrant goes forth with the Vare of an Alcalde de corte; it greeues me, and I
am heartily sorry for the harm that he does to the Commonwealth, and his own
conscience. Saint Augustine proves, That it is charity to desire the hurt of
a man's body, for the good of his soul. According to that of David, Imple
facies eorum ignominia, and confundentur, Fill their faces with shame, and they
will be confounded. Neither is that sorrow which I receive for mine enemies
good fortune, to be termed so much envy, as enmity. Saint Augustine says,
That every equal, enuies his equal, because he has got the start of him, and
is crept before him. And this is the most usual and ordinary kind of envy,
as it is delivered by Aristotle in his Rhethorickes. The Inferior enuieth the
Superior, because he is not equal unto him; the Superior, the Inferior, lest
he should come to equal him.

The principal harms of this vice are three:

The first, It p^ts great incredultie into the breast of him that enuies the
fel^citie of the Envied. And this it easily effects: for, whatsoever is first
soured by the Will, is ever ill received by the Understanding.

The second, If the prosperity be very notorious indeed, it torments the
very heart of the Envious, for that it is an eclipsing and obscuring of his
reputation and honor.

The third, When the Envious can no other way do him hurt, he endeavors to
take away the life of him that is envied; as Caine did Abels, and as Saul would
have done the like by David. And for that those of Nazareth did behold our
Savior Christ, when at most, to be their equal; and seeing that he
dispeopled Towns, and peopled dispeopled Deserts, they did so much envy this
his glory, that first of all they did not believe in him: secondly, they
sought to discredit him; and not being able otherwise to hurt him, they went
about to break his neck.

Some one perhaps will ask me, What advantage the Natural has of the
Stranger, for to set such an edge on our envy? I answer, That too much
familiarity causes contempt, and this our Saviors conuersing with them, was
the cause of their neglecting of him. To be Towne-borne children, to be bred up
from the cradle to the School, and from the School, to boys sports and
pastimes, is a great enemy to the future co^ceiuing of a worthy opinion of
that Prophet, Judge, or Governor. And therefore it is well observed by Saint
Jerome, They do not weigh his present worth, but have an eye to his former
infancy. They that are nearest Neighbors to a good Corrector or Inquisitor,
are farthest off from conceiving a good opinion of him. Plutarch says, That
the spots in the Moon arise from the vapors of the earth, for that the earth
is nearer to this than any other of the Planets. And, as it is in the
Proverbs, Laruin vezinzad, siempre mancha; None soil and spot our name worse,
than those that are our nearest neighbors, especially being ill conditioned.

Admiration waits not, but on things that are rare.
Besides, Common things never cause admiration: according to that of Saint
Augustine, touching the justification of our souls. For though this be a
greater miracle than the casting of Devils out of our bodies, yet we make no
such wonder of it. And in another place he says, That the motion of the
Heavens, the influences of the Planets, the course of the Stars, the Waters,
Winds, and Tempests, are marvelous miracles; for albeit that they keep on in
their course by the order of nature, yet, that nature should conserve this
order for so many Ages, it is a very great miracle: yet we make no such
wonder of it. And because our Country, and all that good which it contains (
es pan casero de cada dis) is every day bred with us, we make no such wonder
of it, it is not dainty unto us; and because it is common, we account not of it.

Again, there is this difference betwixt secular and Ecclesiastical Princes;
That in them we love the succession of blood, and much esteem of this line all
descent in nature; and for this cause we covet a natural King, and abhor the
election of a Crown or Scepter. But in these other, we covet strangers, and
abhor our own blood, it seeming unto us, That Wisdom and Prudence is
treasured up in some more hidden and secret place: making use of that saying of
Job, Sapientia de occultis.

The second reason why our Savior did not do those miracles the Nazarites
desired, was, To teach both Prince and Prelate not to have an eye to flesh and
blood, but to worth and desert. Judas his Bishopric being void, two worthy
persons were in competition for it, Matthias and Joseph, who being our Saviors
Kinseman, had the syrname of Just: but the lot fell upon Matthias, because no
man should presume to think, that flesh and blood should strike the stroke
with God. Math. 4.
The Jews had the descendencie of Abraham for their refuge and defense, but
Saint John Baptist did advise them, That the boasting of their pedigree would
be no safe Sanctuary for them to fly from Gods anger. For the affection to
flesh and blood must not make a Prince to swerve from the way of justice, like
those Kyne that carried the Arc to Beth shemesh. That there is a Melchisedech
that neither acknowledges father nor mother, nor any genealogy, it is a great
privilege of divine both favor and power. Ismael pretended the birthright by
the flesh; Isaac, by the Spirit: but when God came to sentence this business,
he said, Eijce ancillam and filiumeius, Put them both out of house and home,
mother and son. The mother was in no fault; but God would not that the son
should gather heart by his mothers presence. By the same Plea did Abimeleck the
son of Gideon pretend the Kingdom; Os vestrum and caro vestra sum, Iud. 9.
I am your bone and your flesh. In the Palaces of your earthly Princes this
point is much stood upon; but the Prince of Heaven could not be drawn out of
this respect to do any miracles in Nazareth.

The third reason was, To chal^enge any thing from God as due, is the way to go
without it.
because the Nazarites seemed to claim these things of our Savior, as it were
by right, and as their due; when as God does confer these his heavenly
blessings upon us, merely of grace: we can challenge nothing, it is his
bounty that we must be beholding unto. Saint Ambrose says, That our Savior
Christ cured strangers, and not those of Nazareth that were his Countrymen,
Because this medicine was of grace, not of place; not tied to their Nation, but
his inclination. Divine blessings are conferred by creation, not transferred by
propagation: it is like unto your shoures in May, which go scudding and
coasting along, leaving (as Amos says) one field wet, and another dry: and
this is a kind of fortune or lot that falls upon one that least thinks of it;
and this Language of Lot is often used in Scripture. Those of Capernaum, Psalm.
30. Wisd. 1. Coloss. 1. Ephesians. 1
those of Bethsaida, those of Chorazin, and those of Jerusalem, were happily
greater sinners than they; but God did not remove from them neither his
Miracles nor his Doctrine. But no farther reason hereof is to be required, than
Gods own will, who may do with his own what he thinks good.

The fourth reason for confirmation of what is past, may be the Nazarites
curiosity; Why more here, than there? Or why more to that man, than to me?
And other innumerable demands which the Flesh is wont to propose. It is a kind
of rashness, not to submit our understanding to Gods divine providence: this
is a smoke that blinds the eyes of Reason, it is a buzzing about the
celestial flame, like the Butter-flie that flutters about the light of a
candle, who, quaerendo lucem, inuenit lathum, seeking after light, scortches
her wings, and procures her death. The general cause (ask thou never so many
questions) is the will of God; this is causa causarum, the cause of causes. Why
were more miracles wrought in Capernaum, than in Nazareth? Voluntas Dei est,
(says Saluianus) Why? God would have it so. Now, to ask of God a reason of
his will, is, as if a slave should ask the same of his Master, a Subject of his
Sovereign, or the Clay of the Potter; Esaias 4^.
Vae qui contradicit fictori suo testa de samijs, Woe be unto him that strives
with his Maker, etc. And woe be unto those that will seek to know more than
God, and that shall demand a reason of his actions. Shall the Clay say to the
Potter, What do thou do? or, Why do thou make me thus? Woe be unto him
that shall say unto his father, What have thou begotten? or to his mother, What
have thou brought forth? The best understanding of man in things appertaining
unto God, is not to understand; and the truest knowledge, not to know. Thou
condemnest that stranger, who makes a foolish judgment of the Laws of that
Country which he does not truly understand; and dare thou be so rash, as to
censure the Decrees of Heaven? Job 11.7.
Can thou by searching find out vestigia Dei, the steps of God? Weigh well,
I pray ye, the word Vestigia, and if too much curiosity in natural causes, is
counted a great fault, and that the soundest Phylosophie is that, which
inquiring after the first causes, has recourse unto God; What are we then to
do in those things that are supernatural and divine? Theodoret doubts, Why
Moses saying, That Tygris and Euphrates spring from Paradise; so many other
Authors should avouch, That their wellhead is in the mountains of Armenia*
Whereunto I answer, That for as much as some Rivers are hid underneath the
earth, and begin to rise and show themselves some leagues farther off; so
Tigris and Euphrates, having their springing from Paradise, are buried in the
earth, and afterward break out again into diverse parts; God so ordaining it,
That he might cut off man's superfluous curiosity. For there might have been
some so curious, that following the rising of these Rivers, would have
pretended to have made a discovery of Paradise. But God did shut up the
passage to this their humane curiosity, lest they should have gone on in the
pursuit of this their intent, either through want of provision in those sandy
and desert places, or through the inaccessablenesse of those mountains that
interposed themselves; or through the barbarousnesse and cruelty of the people
bordering there abouts.

Math. 13. Morc. 6. Incrudelity, a maine stop to Christ's, Miracles.
The fifth reason is set down by Saint Matthew, and Saint Mark; He wrought not
many miracles there, by reason of their incredulity: Not that he hated his
own Country, which he had so much honored with his Conception, (says the
Interlinearie) but for Nazareths incredulity. And this is made apparent by
that Fac and hic in Patria tua: In other places they talk much of thy many and
great miracles, but this City will not believe there is any such thing: and
yet thou have here the same power thou had there; Therefore, Fac and hic in
patria tu^, Medice, cura teipsum. How can we believe, that thou do such
famous Cures in other Countries, when as thou suffer thine own Countrymen
and thine own Kinsefolke to be sick? The like argument was used by the
Scribes and Pharisees at the foot of the Cross, This man saved others, and
cannot save himself; How should we believe, that by his power he freed so
many, being he cannot free himself? Let him come down from the Cross, and
save himself, and then we will believe he is the Son of God.

Our Savior Christ proved this their incredulity by two examples:

The one, Of Elias, who when the Country was much oppressed with Famine, God
sent him to a woman of Sydonia, to the end that she should sustain him. And
this poor Widow woman having in all her house nothing more in the world but a
little meal, only with one words speaking of the Prophets mouth, spent a
great part thereof in making a Cake for him, baking it on the embers; repairing
Elias his present necessity with the hazard of her own life and her sons:
and having so much reason as she had on her side, to doubt of the Prophets
promise, That she should neither want meal nor oil till it should rain in
Israel. For Elias not being able to succor himself, she might very well
suspect with her self, How he should be able to relieve others. This was a
great and wonderful excellency of Faith; it is much celebrated by S. Ambrose
and Saint Chrysostom; and our Savior Christ counterponeth it to the
incredulity of Nazareth.

The second example is of Naaman the Syrian, who believed that she-slaue of
Israel, who told him, There was a Prophet in Samaria that could cure him of his
Leaprosie: and craving leave of the King, because he was Captain general of
all his men of War, he came to the Land of Israel to seek out Elisha,
bringing great gifts and rich presents along with him: and washing himself in
Jordan seven times, (though at first he believed, that with his word only he
was able to cure him) he left with his disease, the error of his Idolatry. In
a word, he well deserved that the Prophet should heal him; but those Leapers
of his own Country did not deserve the like favor, for their incredulity.
And other Cities receiving the benefit of his miracles, these that were his
own Natives missed of them. The word Audiuimus does condemn them: For this
alone was sufficient for their Faith, Fides ex auditu, Faith comes by hearing;
and the Gentiles had no other testimonies.

Besides, Nazareth was made partaker of many powerful testimonies; as that
testimony of S. John, of that voice from the Father; of the coming down of
the Holy Ghost in the likeness of a Dove; as also those Testimonies of the
Scripture, which were seen to be fulfilled in him; besides the testimony of
his Doctrine, For he taught them as one having authority, and not as the
Scribes. Math. 7.29.
And the testimony of his life, that was so blameless, that (as Thomas says)
it did qualify his Doctrine. So that his life was a greater testimony than
his Doctrine; and his Doctrine, than his Miracles: And he that will not
believe the more, will hardly believe the less.

The sixth, In not showing any miracles amongst them, he showed therein the
more love to his Country: God sometimes never more our friend, than when he
denies us our requests.
For if these his miracles would have done Nazareth any good, this their
accusation might have seemed somewhat just; but being that they would have
turned to their hurt, and being that this their envy toward him, would from
a great good have drawn greater hurt, and from a great favor, greater
ingratitude, and more incredulity; the less he did, the more was his love.
This did our Savior utter by Saint John, If I had not done those works which
none after ever did, they should have no sin. Mat. 26.
And by Saint Matthew our Savior said the like of Judas, It had been good for
him that he had never been borne. And Saint Peter says of him that was
converted, ^. Pet. 2.
That for to put his hand to the Plough, and afterward to look back, it had
been better for him, that he had never begun to walk in the way of
godliness. S. Augustine says, That God grants us many things when he is
angry with us, which when he is friends with us he denies us. So that he
showed himself a greater friend to the Nazarites, by denying them those
miracles which they desired, than if he had granted their request; because they
would have served but for their farther condemnation. The Servant that knows
his Masters will, and does it not, Luke 12.
shall be beaten with many stripes; Vap^labit multis, says S. Luke: but he
that knows it not, and therefore does it not, Vapulab^t paucis, This man's
punishment shall be small in comparison of the others. Saint Chrysostom
says, That a bad Christian is like a treacherous Soldier, who being honored
and well paid by his King, turns Traitor, and ioynes with his enemy. And
Guaricus the Abbot says, That to carry a man's self in the Church like a
Christian, and to talk like a Christian, but to live like a Gentile, is, to
march under Christ's banner, and to take part with Antechrist And for these kind
of men God has stored up treasures of his wrath.

The seventh reason was, The Nazarits foolishness, in desiring miracles
without any profit unto them at all.

Five sorts of persons required miracles, but got them not.

1 The Devil, in that his temptation, Dic vt lapides isti panes fiant. 2 The
Pharisees, Alij tentantes signum de Coelo quaerebant. 3 King Herod, Quis est
iste de quo ego talia audio? 4 The rich Miser, Pater Abraham, mitte vnum ex
mortuis, etc. 5 The Nazarites, Fac and hic in patria tua.
Miracles never wrought, but where Good was likely to ensue
Whatsoever Miracles he had bestowed on these, they had been all cast away. In
ancient times God wrought some miracles, where his Omnipotency seemed most to
appear: As in making the Sun stand still; and in dividing the Sea in twain.
Others, wherein his Justice seemed most to appear; as in the Flood, the
burning of Sodom, and the swallowing up of Dathan and Abiram, etc. But when he
came into the World, in all his miracles his Mercy seemed most to appear. For
he wrought not any one miracle but was for man's benefit, respecting more others
good than his own fame. And in Capernaum, where he wrought so many miracles,
Saint Basil and Saint Hillarie both affirm, that out of that City he chose
many of his Apostles and Disciples. Being no more than what is declared in
that verse of David, Principes Zabulon, and Principes Nepthtalim; to whose
Tribes Capernaum did appertain: as appears out of that place of Saint
Matthew, Leaving Nazareth he went and dwelt in Capernaum, which is near the
Sea, M^th. 4.
in the borders of Zabulon and Nephtalim, That it might be fulfilled which was
spoken by Esayas the Prophet, saying, The land of Zabulon and the land of
Nep^htalim, by the way of the Sea beyond Jordan, Galile of the Gentiles, etc.
Many more besides were converted in Capernaum: And he that promised Abraham to
pardon Sodom, if he could find but ten just men therein; and he that left the
ninety nine sheep, to follow that one that was lost, and when he had found it,
took it up and kissed it, and laid it on his neck; and he that swept his house
clean, to look his lost groat; and he that suffered the tares to grow till
reaping time was come, that he might not hurt the wheat; it was not much, that
he should do miracles in Capernaum, where the Centurion and his Servant were
converted, as also he that was sick of the Palsy, besides the chief Ruler
of the Synagogue, and his whole house.

Whence it is to be noted, That what the Devil could not effect with our
Savior Christ, (to wit, That he should do miracles to a needless and
unprofitable end) the Nazarites went about to bring to pass, showing
themselves therein his true children. So that our Savior might very well say
that unto them, which he said to the Pharisees, It is the nature of the Devils
sons, to fulfill the desires of such a Father. God commanded Abraham, That he
should sacrifice his son; and the Devil being desirous to equal God,
commanded the Gentiles to sacrifice their sons; They did sacrifice their
sons and daughters to Devils. (...) that wicked King of Israel, applying
himself to the desires of the Devil, the Scripture gives this touch, That he
did sacrifice his son to Moloch, Insuper and filium suum consecrauit,
transferens per ignem, secundum Idola gentium.

The eighth reason is, That faintness and weakness, that lukewarmenesse, or
rather coldness, wherewith the Nazarites did desire these miracles from
Christ. And these their poor diligences, may sufficiently be proved by this,
That they never went out of their own City, nor left their houses, for to
hear our Savior, or to see his miracles, as those of Judea and Jerusalem did
by troops, and others that flockt unto him from the utmost borders of Tyrus and
Sydon. Neither did they send any embassage or message unto him, entreating him
to come unto them; nor so much as bring any sick body unto him to be cured.
Whereas Capernaum did dispeople it self, to go forth to hear his Word. The
Centurion came forth likewise to seek him, beseeching him humbly on his knee,
That he would be pleased to make his Servant whole. Others did until their
house, to let down him unto him that was sick of the Palsy, etc. The
comparison of one that follows a suit in Law of his own, which imports him
much; and of him that follows another man's cause, which concerns him little:
the diligences of the one, and the carelessness of the other, are true emblems
of the different conditions of Christians. Some follow the business of their
salvation earnestly and industriously; other-some negligently, The several
conditions of Christians, in seeking their Salvation.
making a mere jeasting matter of it, and a thing of nothing. Herod desired to
see our Savior Christ, but he would not step a foot out of doors to look
after him: Whereas the Queen of Sheba came from the utmost parts of the earth,
to seek after the wisdom of Solomon, only upon a bare report. But the
Nazarits would not wagge a jot, to go see our Savior Christ, having so short
a journey as they had to make: And behold, a greater than Solomon here. Quid,
de nocte? (says the Prophet) What, by night? The morning comes, and the
night; if ye seek, seek. He borrows this Metaphor from one that stands
Sentinel, who hears the word that is given afar off, Ha de la vella, Que
hora es? Ho, you of the Watch, What hour is it? And he presently makes answer,
Quien da vozes sin para que? Who is be that calls without a cause? I say, That
the morning comes, and the night; or rather, That the night succeeds the day,
and the day the night. Who knows not this* If thou will farther inform thy
self, come where I am. Those that dwelt in the mountain of Seir, being
persecuted by the Chaldaeans, sent to know of Esaias, When that persecution
should cease? This is that Custos, Quid de nocte? Sentinel, What see thou by
night? It vexed the Prophet, and made him grow weary of them, that sitting
lazing on their tails at home in their houses, they should send to know his
mind. Onus d^ma ad me clamat de Seir, To Jerusalem did the Idumaeans cry out
unto me: Si quaeritis, quaerite; Being in that great danger as thou art, do
thou stand off, do thou hang tail, and wilt not make a little more have to
come unto thy Savior? If there were nothing more, this were enough to condemn
Nazareth.

The ninth; It might happily be, That Nazareth did desire miracles, for the
honor and glory that might thereby redound unto her; as that it might be
noysed abroad in the world, That a Citisen of theirs, a Towne-borne child of
their own, had done these and these famous miracles, such and such singular
wonders; and that she was to be esteemed as Lady and Mistress of this so
rare and rich a Treasure; and that our Savior being borne there, he was bound
(as they thought) to keep house there, and to make Nazareth the only seat of
his ordinary residence. The love of honor amongst Citisens, is so sauorie and
so sweet a thing, that Cicero in many places sticks not to say, That there is
not any thing that Nature does more covet: and that men are not so much to
esteem the^^ lives for the present, as that fame which is to live in their
posterity. Celebremus nomen nostrum, said those of the Tower of Babell, That
we may get us a nam^. And to this end are directed your Scutchions, your
Arms, your Coats, your Tombs, your Sepulchers, and stately monuments. And if
such a poor City as Peleas, remained so famous by the birth of Alexander; if
Ithaca, by Ulysses being born there; it was not much, That Nazareth should
boast her self, and think it a great glory and honor unto her, to have the
Son of God to be he^ Citisen.

The Nazarites likewise might very well desire miracles for temporal ends, as
well for the City in general, as themselves in particular. As those of
I^^escas desire, That the Virgin de la Charidad should do famous miracles, to
the end that some might grow rich by entertaining of guests; others, by selling
of fruits; others, by their service and attendance, etc. And so was it with
these of Nazareth; but they took their mark amiss, in seeking to shut up such
great glory in so narrow and little a corner of the world, as that was,
confining him to a Fac and hic in patria tua; When Peter would in Mount Tabor
have had Christ's glory coopt up in so straight and small a compass, coming
upon him with a Si vis, faciamus hic tria Tabernacula, and If thou will, let us
make three Tabernacles. Two Evangelists say, Luke 9. Mark. 9.
That he knew not what he said. And Origin adds, That it was impulsu Diaboli,
by the Devils persuasion. The like may be said of Nazareths request, Fac and
hic in patria tua. Christ's glory was to show it self abroad to all the whole
world, and to shine to al Nations; and will thou Nazareth make a Monopoly of
it, and take it all into thine own hands?

The tenth and last, Because Miracles are neither necessary, nor of themselves
alone sufficient for our salvation.

Not necessary, because many have been, and daily are converted without them;
as S. Matthew, the good Thief, and they of Niniuie.

Miracles not necessary to Salvation, nor sufficient.
Not sufficient, considering that so many and such strange miracles could not
convert a Pharaoh, a Judas, or a Simon Magus, etc. Many do repeat in the church
that Lesson of the Jews, Signa nostra non vidimus. God does not now work
miracles in his own Country, nor in our Church, his own Spouse and best
beloved. Those former times were much more happy, and far more enriched, not
only with his miracles, but also with those of his Servants: Peter did heal
with his shadow; Stephen saw the Heavens opened; Philip in Samaria did cure by
hundreds. There is no Arithmeticke that can sum up the full number of those
wonders that they wrought. And now it seems that the fountain of his grace
is drawn dry: But the truth is, That forasmuch as the Church then was in her
infancy, and as it were but new crept out of the shell, there was a necessity
of the working of them; but after that the Church was well grown up* and began
to grow stronger and stronger in the Faith, there was no such great need of
them. Saint Bernard says, That the widow of Sarepta had now no such great
need to be relieved with Oil and Meal. O (says one) if I could but once see
a miracle, if an Angel should but speak to me, if a dead man should arise and
speak unto me, etc. What should I not then do? But the truth of it is, That
he that will not believe the Scriptures, will not believe an Angel that comes
from Heaven, nor one that shall arise from the dead. Though God never yet was,
no^ ever will be wanting to those that put their trust in him, by affoording
them sufficient means for their salvation.

Nemo Propheta acceptus in patria sua.
It is an ancient complaint, That Prophets live vnhonoured in their own
Country. Now (sweet Jesus) because thy Country does not honor thee, wilt not
thou accomplish their desire? In all that whole discourse of thy life, thou
did fly from honor; When they sought to make thee King, thou did shun
and avoid it; From that Inscription on the Cross, thou did wry the neck and
turn thy head aside from that glorious Title of, Jesus of Nazareth, King of
the Jews; Thou did ever declare Humility, to be thy Daughter and Heir;
Discite a me, quia mitis sum, and humilis cord, Learn of me, for I am meek
and humble. Thou wast that Butte, against which the dishonours of the World did
shoot their shaftes. Opprobrium hominum, and abiectio plebis, the reproach of
men and the outcast of the people. Hereunto I answer, That our Savior Christ
did direct all his miracles to this end, that thereby they might be brought to
believe that he was the Son of God, and the promised Messiah; as it appears
out of the tenth of Saint John, Vt cognoscatis and credatis, quia pater in me
est, etc. That ye may know and believe, that the Father is in me, etc. And in
the eleventh, Vt credant, quia tu me misisti, That they may believe, because
thou have sent me. And being thus received by us, The desire of honor (...)
always to condemned.
to be the Son of God, it turned to our salvation, and the Fathers glory.
And as that famous Physician who desires to be known, for the recovery of
those that are sick, and for the conservation of the Commonwealth; and as that
wise and learned Doctor who desires that his grave and good Instructions might
be harkned unto, not for his own glory, but for the benefit of those that
hear him; is not to be held an ambitious or vaineglorious fellow, but a very
honest man, and worthy much commendation: Even so stood the Case with our
Savior Christ. And Saint Gregory does prove this Doctrine by Saint Paul's
own act; 2. Cor. 11.
Who writing to the Corinthians, speaks much in his own commendation, not so
much out of an hope-glorious humor, to broach his own praise, but to bring
others therereby to believe the Truth. For it is an ordinary thing with the
World, not to esteem of the Doctrine where the person is disesteemed.

But I tell ye of a very truth, many widows were in Israel in the days of
Elias, etc. God, in the dis^ensing of his favors, respects no persons.
He alleges these two examples, of the Widow, and of Naaman, for to take
away all suspicion of partiality. If thou shall object that God was partial
toward women; we answer, That he did likewise favor Naaman. If toward
great and noble persons, he did also sustain the poor widow of Sarepta; If
toward the common and baser sort of people, He likewise cured Naaman that was
a great Courtier; If the richer, he provided also for the poor; If toward the
poor, he likewise cured Naaman that was rich* If toward young folks, such
as was Naaman, he had also a care of the widow, who was an old woman; If
toward old folks, Naaman was young, etc. In veritate Comperi, quia non est
acceptor personarum Deus, etc. Of a truth I have found, that God is no accepter
of persons, etc.

Then all that were in the Synagogue were filled with wrath. Whether it were our
Saviors zeal, in declaring himself to be the Messiah out of the authority
of the Prophet? Or whether it were for his comparing them to those of Tire and
Sydon? Or for that he had equalled himself with Elias and Elisha, which were
the two bright Suns of that commonwealth? Or that by the examples of Naman the
Syrian, and the widow of Sarepta, he did signify unto them, that the grace of
the Jews was to be passed over to the Gentiles? Or, for that he had taxed them
of their incredulity and unthankfulness? Or whether their hearts through
Envy did swell and rise against him? Whether any one, or all of these together
wrought upon them? Sure I am, Repleti sunt ira, The men of Nazareth are grown
wondrous angry.

This place points out two things unto us.

The one, The good requital Truth finds upon Earth. When they should have
held themselves happy in inioying so sovereign a good, and when they should
have been proud of having so heavenly a Cittisen, and have humbled themselves
on their knees before him, and adored him; then, even then, they grew hot and
angry with him: and transported with this rage, they would have broken his
neck by throwing him down from a steep rock; fulfilling th^^ saying of
Solomon, Prou. 15.12.
A scorner loves not him that rebukes him, neither will he go unto the wise.
Amos 5.10.
Agreeing with that of Amos, They have hated him that rebuked in the gate, and
they abhorred him that speaks uprightly.

Another cause of this their cruel determination, for to throw him down from
the rock, was as well their Envy as their Anger. Envy she said, Do not you see
how this Carpenter boasts himself? Nonne hic est faber, and filius fabri? and
sorores eius, apud nos sunt? Anger she said, Cast him down headlong from the
Pulpit, or pluck him out of Moses Chair, for a blaspheamer, by head and
ears; Envy a dangerous beast.
for that he goes about to make himself our Messiah, and our King. A brace of
fierce beasts, I assure you; Envy first opened the door to all those evils
that are in the world: By the Devils envy death entered into the world; and by
death, a troop of miseries. For although the Devil were the Author thereof,
yet did Envy put spurs to his heels. The Trojan Horse was not that which did
so much harm to Troy, as that Grecian who invented this stratagem. Only this
one good, Envy brings with it, That it proves it is owners Hangman. And for
this reason Saint Augustine compares the Envious to the Vipers, who gnaw out
the bowels of those that bred them. And Saint Chrysostom, That it is a lesser
evil to have a Serpent in our bosom, than Envy; for that was a curable hurt,
but that of Envy is not so. Ovid in his Metamorphosis paints forth Enuies
house, and the qualities belonging to her person. Her house is seated in a very
low bottom, whereunto the beams of the Sun never come, no light, no air,
no wind: for the envious man has not any thing on earth, wherein to take
comfort; being therein like unto those that are condemned to the pit of hell. The
qualities appertaining to her person, is sadness of countenance, heaviness of the
eyes, bitterness of heart, venimousnesse of tongue, and veins without blood;
she loves solitude, shunnes the light, knows no law, nor does no right, she
weeps when others laugh: In a word, she is Pestis mundi, porta mortis, the
plague of the world, the door of Death, the murderer of Virtue, the pit of
Ignorance, and the hell of the Soul.

Anger, a sin no less hurtful than Envy.
And Anger is no less fierce a beast, than Envy: Of whom Ecclesiasticus says,
That as Mildness resideth in the bosom of the Wise, so Anger abides in the
breast of the Fool. Who but a Fool (says Plutarch) can suffer a cole to lie
in his bosom? Let not the Sun go down upon your wrath, neither give place
unto the Devil. He that goes to bed in anger, inuites the Devil to be his
bedfellow, There is not any vice that gives him so free an entrance, nor puts
him into a more general possession of our souls: for there is not that
mischief which is not hammered and wrought in the forge of an angry man's
breast. Prou. 17.3.
A stone is heavy, and the sand weighty, but a fools wrath is heavier than
them both. Seneca says, That as humane industry does tame the fiercest
beasts, as the Lion, the Tygre, and the Elephant, so ought it to tame Anger.

Now to say, Which of these two furies is the fiercest? is not so easy a thing
to be decided: For, if Envy be kindled upon light occasions, as that little
short Song which the Dames of Jerusalem sung in David's commendation; if it be
so large sighted, that our neighbors fields of Corn, and his flocks of
Sheep seem better and bigger than our own; Joseph's party colored Coat
seeming better to his brethren, than those Sheepeheards mantles wherewith
themselves were clad: if it be the vice of little children, Parvulum occidi
inuidia; What shall we say then to the impetuousnesse of Anger, and the
violence of Wrath? Or who is able to withstand it is rage? Anger is cruel, and
wrath is raging, Prou. 27.4.
says Solomon; but he concludes with this short come-off, Who can stand before
Envy? Who will oppose himself to the violent and swift torrent of a River
that sweepes all before it? Such a thing is Anger, for the time it lasts: but
that will slack again of it self, as your Spring-tydes fall back again
into their own beds. But Envy will not so soon shift her foot, she will abide
by it, and never give over. And Saint Cyprian renders the reason of it, Quia
non habet terminum; it is not to be limited, but like a Worm or a Canker, by
little and little rotteth and consumes the bones; Solomon calls it, Putredo
ossium. But Anger is a thunderbolt that strikes a man dead on the sudden; so
says Seneca. And if Saint Augustine term Envy, a plague; and if another
great Philosopher call it Monstrum monstrorum, the Monster of monsters, and the
most venomous Vipar upon earth: Saint Chrysostom here on the other side says,
That the Devil being in man's bosom, is less hurtful than Anger. Much has
been spoken of Envy, and much of Anger; and that ill cannot be said of the
one, which may not be affirmed of the other. So that this proposed doubt (Which
is the worst Beast of the two?) may remain for a problem; which let others
resolve, for I cannot. But (which makes fit for our purpose) being both such
fierce Beasts as we have delivered unto you, they did both conspire against our
Savior Christ, leading him here to the edge of a hill whereon their City was
built, to cast him down headlong: and afterward never leaft persecuting him
til they had nailed him to the Cross.

And they cast him out of the Synagogue. etc. Aristotle says, That Man
governing himself according to the Laws and rules of Reason, is of all other
Creatures the most perfect, or to speak more properly, the King of all other
living Creatures: but if he shut his eyes, and will not see reason, he is more
fierce and cruel than all of them put together. The reason is, because other
creatures never pass beyond the bounds of their fierceness and cruelty,
receive they never so much wrong; Incursus suos, transire non queunt: Which (as
Seneca says) is for want of discourse. But man, who has Understanding for his
weapon, is able to invent such strange cruelties that may exceed the
fierceness of the fiercest beasts. Nor is this any great indeering of the
business; for both Bid and Ambrose say upon this place, That the Nazarites were
worse than the Devil: the devil lead our Savior Christ up to the top of the
pinnacle of the Temple; those of Nazareth, to the edge of the hill on the side
or skirt whereof their city was built. The Devil did only persuade him to
cast himself down from thence; but the Nazarites would have done this by
force. These (says Ambrose) were the Devils Disciples, but far worse than
their Master. Saint Paul says, That there are some men that invent new
mischiefs, Inuentores malorum. And the devil being the universal Inuenter of
all our ill, the Sinner that inuents new mischiefs does outreach the Devil,
and goes beyond him. And questionless, in not passing the bounds of Gods
divine will and Empire, the Devil is more moderate than Man: For the Devil
asked leave of God for to tempt Job; but Man will not be so respectfull as to
ask his leave, but will not stick to kill thousands of men without license.

The Nazarits base demeanor toward Christ
Bonauenture says, That they thrust him out of the City for a blasphemer, for
proclaiming himself to be the Messiah. It is commanded in Leuiticus, That the
Blasphemer should be carried forth of the City, and be stoned to death. And
therefore our Savior Christ, extra portam passus est, suffered without the
gate; Ieuit. 4. Act. 7*
and Saint Stephen was stoned without the City. And our Savior had no sooner
said in the presence of Caiphas, Amodo, etc. Henceforth shall ye see the Son
of Man coming in the clouds of Heaven, but the Jews presently cried out,
Blasphemauit, He has blasphemed. So likewise our Savior expounding that
prophecy of Esaias, the Nazarites might also take occasion to say, Blasphemauit.
And this their offering to throw him down from the edge of the hill, does no
way contradict their stoning of him; for they might have done that after they
had thrust him down: dealing by him, as Saint Hierome reports Saint James
(whom they call our Saviors brother) was dealt withal; they first threw him
down from the Rock, and afterward cut off his head.

To cast him headlong down, etc. Methinkes it seems somewhat strange unto
me, That our Savior should come down from Heaven to Nazareth, for to give life
unto men, and that Nazareth should seek to tumble him down, thereby to work
his death: That with the loss of his own life, and the price of his most
precious blood, he should redeem them from death; and that they in this
unthankful and uncivil manner should go about to take away his life. O,
ungrateful People! God was not willing to bestow any miracles on them, who
would not entertain so great a miracle. God uses to requite the thanks of
one favor, with conferring another greater than the former. So does Saint
Bernard expound that place of the Canticles, He made his left hand my pillow,
and I doubt not but he will hug and embrace me with his right hand. For I shall
show my self so thankful for the one, that my Spouse will vouchsafe to
afford me the other. But those courtesies which Nazareth had received, they so
ill requited, that even to the hour of his death none did our Savior Christ
greater injury. Our Savior never any where so ill treated, as in Nazareth.
Nay, in some sort this their wrong was greater than that which Jerusalem did
him; for this City treating of the death of our Savior, did observe some
form of Judgment, and only the Ministers of Justice had their hands in it:
but Nazareth in a most furious manner, like the common people when they are in
a mutiny, hasted up to the edge of the hill, to throw him down headlong,
contrary to all Law and Justice. In Jerusalem there were some that did not
consent unto his death; but in Nazareth, all of them conspired against him:
Omnes in Synagoga repleti suntira, All that were in the Synagogue were filled
with anger; and that on the Sabbath day, when it was not lawful for them to
gather sticks and make a fire, etc.

How Christ is said to have passed thorough them.
But he passed through the midst of them, and went his way. The common
received opinion is, That he made himself invisible to them, and so got from
them, leaving their will and determination deluded. Saint Ambrose and Be^^ say,
That he turned their hearts* Cor Regis in manu Domini, and quo voluerit, etc.
The heart of the King is in the hand of the Lord, and he turns it, etc. Like
unto those Officers of the Scribes and Pharisees who went forth to apprehend
him, who altering their purpose, returned saying, Nu^quid sic loquutus, etc.
Did ever any man speak thus? He might likewise take from them their force and
their strength, that they might not be able to put forth a hand to hurt him;
and leaving them like so many blocks, might pass through the midst of them,
as being the Lord both of their souls and bodies. And as he once left the
Jews with their stones frozen in their hands, so now leaving the Nazarits
astonished, Per medium illorum ibat.

This Ibat does enforce a perseverance and continuation, in token that God will
leave his best beloved country, and that city which was most graced and
favored by him, if it be so graceless as to prove ungrateful. When God
carried Ezechiel in spirit to the Temple, discovering great abominations unto
him, and said unto him, These things my People commit, Vt procul recedam a
Sanctuario meo, They give me occasion thereby to forsake them, and to get me
far enough from them. So has he departed from Israel, from Asia, Africa,
and many other parts of Europ, forsaking so many cities and temples so much
heretofore favored by him, and so much made of. Nazareth signifies a Flower, a
Crown, or a Garland; and the Nazarites were once the only Flowers in Gods
Garden, that is, in his Church; they were religious persons that were
consecrated to his service, and therefore Nazareth is by them more particularly
called Christ's own Country, for that therein he had been often spiritually
conceived. But because of the Nazarits, Ierem. does lament, Thatthey being more
white than milk, were become as black as a cole* by reason of their
unthankfulness. Therefore in Colleges and religious places, with whom God
communicates his favors in a more large and ample manner, they ought of all
other to show themselves most grateful: for the more a man receives, and the
more he professes, the more he ought to do. Cum enim crescunt dona, rations
etiam crescunt donorum Dei, so says Saint Gregory.

But he passed through the midst of them, and went his way. We ought to p^ay
against sudden death. Sap. 4.
Howbeit death to the Just is not sudden, nor can be said to take him hence
unawares [ Though the Righteous be prevented with death, yet shall he be in
rest,] The Church notwithstanding does not use this prayer in vain, A
subitanea and improuisa morte, libera nos Domine, From sudden death good Lord
deliver us. Saint Augustine in his last sickness prayed over the penitential
Psalms, and shedding many tears, said, That though a man were never so just
and righteous, yet was he not to die without penitence. Saint Chrysostom
tells us, That when Fear at the hour of death does set upon the Soul,
burning as it were with fire, all the goods of this life, she enforces her
with a deep and profound consideration, to meditate on those of that other life
which is to come. And although a man's sins be never so light, yet then they
seem so great and so heavy, that they oppress the heart. And as a piece of
timber whilst it is in the water, any the weakest arm is able to move it,
but being brought to the shore has need of greater strength; so sin whilst
it floateth on the waters of this life, seems light unto us, but being
brought to the brinke of death, it is very weighty, and it will require a
great deal of leisure, consideration, and grace, to land it well and
handsomely, and to rid our hands of it. Of this good, sudden death depriueth
us: And although it is apparent in Scripture, That God does sometimes permit
the Just to die a sudden death, as Origin, Saint Gregory, and Athanasius
Bishop of Nice affirms; as in Jobs children, on whom the house fell when they
were making merry* and in those who died with the fall of the Tower of Siloah;
who according to our Saviors testimony, were no such notorious sinners, yet
commonly this is sent by God as a punishment for their sins. Mors peccarorum,
pessima, (i.) esse debet, An evil death was made for an evil man. And
Theodoret expounding what David meant by this word Pessima, says, That in the
propriety of the Greek tongue, it is a kind of death, like unto that of
Zenacheribs Soldiers, who died suddenly. And Job treating of him that
tyranniseth over the world, says, Auferetur Spirit^^ oris sui. Cajetan renders
it, Recedet in Spiritu oris sui, He shall die before he be sick, without any
pain, in the midst of his mirth, when he is sound and lusty. Their life
being a continual pleasure, at their death they scarce feel any pain,
because it is in puncto, in an instant. Sophonias requires of them, That they
will think on that day before it come, Esaias 30.
wherein God will scatter them like the dust. Esaias threatening his People
because they had put their trust in the succors of Egypt, says, This
iniquity shall be unto you as a breach that salleth, or a swelling in an high
wall, whose breaking comes suddenly in a moment; and the breaking thereof
shall be like the breaking of a Potters pot, and in the breaking thereof there
shall not be found a sheard to take fire out of the hearth, or to take water
out of the pit. And the word Requisita mentioned by the Prophet, intimates a
strong wall that is undermined, and rusheth down on the sudden. How much their
security is the more, so much the more is their danger, because it takes the
soldiers unawares. But if this so strong a wall should chance to fall upon a
Pitche^ of earth, it is a clear case, that it would dash it into so many
fitters and several little pieces, that there would not a sheard thereof be
left for to take up so much as an handful of water, or to fetch a little fire
from our next Neighbors house. This effect does sudden death work, it is a
desperate destruction to a sinner: And therefore Christ (though without sin)
seeks to shun it, that he might teach thee that art a Sinner, to avoid it.

Secondly, our Savior sought to shun this violent death, because his death was
reserved for the Cross, as well because it was a kind of long and lingering
death, as also for diverse other conueniencies, which we have delivered
elsewhere.

God often defers his punishments, that our sins may grow to maturity.
Passing through the midst of them, he went his way. Our Savior Christ might
have struck them with blindness, if he would, as the Angel did those of
Sodom; or have thrown them down headlong from the Cliffe: but because they
complained, That he wrought no miracles among them, as he had in other places,
he was willing now at his departure from them, to show them one of his greatest
miracles, by taking their strength from them, hindering the force of their
arms, and leaving them much astonished and dismayed. Though now and then God
does defer his punishments, for that the sins of the Wicked are not yet
come to their full growth; yet we see that he spared not his Angels, nor those
whom he afterward drowned in the Flood, nor those of Sodom, nor of others
less sinful than they, nor his own children of Israel, of all that huge
number (being more in number than the sands of the sea) not suffering above two
to enter into the land of Promise; how is it possible that he should endure
the petulancy of this peremptory people, these grumbling Nazarites, who in
such a rude and uncivil fashion, in such an imperious and commanding voice,
should presume to say unto him, taking the matter in such deep dudgeon, Fac
and hic in Patria tua. But as when the Roman Cohorts came to take our Savior
Christ, they fell backward on the ground at his Ego sum, I am he; which was a
fearful Miracle; for no cannon upon earth, nor any thunderbolt from Heaven,
could have wrought so powerful an effect: so now passing through the midst of
them with a grave and settled pace, leaving them troubled, angry, and amassed,
he proved thereby unto them, That he was the Lord and giver both of life and
death, etc.

THE TWENTIETH SERMON, UPON THE TVESDAY AFTER THE THIRD SUNDAY IN LENT.
MAT. 18. Si peccauerit in te frater tuus.

If thy brother shall trespass against thee, etc.


Our Savior Christ instructing him that had offended his brother, what he ought
to do; gives him this admonition, Offenses how and when to be forgiven, and
reproved.
Go unto thy brother and reconcile thy self unto him, and if thou have
offended him, ask him forgiveness. Notifying to the party offended, that he
should pardon him that offended, if he did entreat it at his hands: but if he
shall not crave pardon, he instructs Peter, and in him all the Faithful,
What the offended and wronged person ought to do. If thy brother trespass
against thee, go and tell him his fault between thee and him, etc. and if he
hear thee, thou have won a brother: but if he will not vouchsafe to hear
thee, proceed to a second admonition before two or three witnesses: and if he
will not hear them, tell it unto the Church: and if he shall show himself so
obstinate that he will not obey the Church, let him be unto thee as a heathen
man and a Publican. So that our Savior Christ's desire is, That the party
wronged should pardon the party wronging, and reprove him for it: for if it
be ill not to pardon, it is as ill not to reprove.

For to entreat of a matter so dark and intricate, In treating of divine
matters, we ought always to crave the assistan^e of God.
that the Vnderstanidng were to take it is birth from the ordinary execution of
the Law, there were not any thing less to be understood: for there is not any
Law less practiced, nor any Decree in Court less observed. I desire that God
would do me that favor that he did Solomon. God give me a tongue to speak
according to my mind, the pen of a ready Writer, cleerenesse of the case which
I am to deliver, true distinction, grace, knowledge, or (as Bonauenture styles
it) resolutionem in declarando; Wisd. 7.15.
and to judge worthily of the things that are given me. For, so many are the
difficulties, the questions, and the arguments, as well against the substance
of this Law, as against the manner of complying with it, that there will be
necessarily required great favor and assistance from Heaven, for to make any
settled and full resolution amongst so many sundry and diverse distractions. But
in conclusion, it is the best and the safest council, to adhere to that which
is the surest, and not to make any reckoning of that course which is now a
days held in the World: not of that which is in use, but that which ought to
be used; not so much the practice of the Law, as of Religion. For if the
abuses of the world, and traditions of men, were to tonti^ue in force by
pleading of custom, and by that means made justifiable, they would give the
checkmate, and stand in competitio^ with the laws of God. Colloss. 4.6.
S. Paul says, writing to the Colossians, Let your speech be gracious always,
and poudred with salt, that ye may know how to answer every man. And S.
Ambrose expounding this place, says, That the Apostle begs grace of God, that
he might know how to speak with discretion, when time, place, and occasion
shall oblige him thereunto: As also, when (upon the same terms) to hold his
peace. And this is that which I now desire of God.

If thy brother shall trespass against thee. Here sin is put down in the
condition of this obligation. Sin a monster, and why.
For it is a kind of monstrousness which we never, or seldom ought to see.
We stiling that a monster which comes forth into the world against the Laws
of Nature. And in this sense, sin may be said to be a monster, because it is
against the Laws of God. Ecclesiasticus says, That God did not will any man to
sin, nor did allow him any time wherein to sin, but allotted him a life, and
place wherein to serve him, and a time to return unto him and to repent as often
as he should offend his divine Majesty; but to sin, he never gave him the
least leave in the world, Dedit ei locum poenitentia, He gave him a place for
repentance, says the Apostle Saint Paul; so likewise says Job. And therefore
God having made the Heaven and the Earth, and all that therein is, he did not
then presently make Hell; For, if Man had not sinned there had bin no need of
it. For where no faults are committed, a prison is needless. The Prophet Esaias
was very earnest with God, Esaias 64.
that he would come down upon Earth, Oh, that thou would break the Heavens
and come down, and that the M^^^taines might melt at thy presence, etc. He
alludeth to that History of Mount Sinay, where God descended to give the Law
unto his people with thundering, lightening, and fire; wherewith he struck
such a fear and terror into them, that the people had great reverence to the
Law; And therefore this holy Prophet says, What would they do if thou
should once again come amongst them? A facie tua, montes fluerent; The
proudest of them all would let fall their plumes, and humble themselves at thy
feet, which are here represented in the word Montes, or mountains. And those
souls which are now frozen and as cold as ice (figured in the word Aquae, or
waters) would gather heat and be set on fire. With this desire did the son of
God descend from the bosom of his father; but he bringing that humility with
him, that was able to make the highest mountains to stoop, and to bring down
the proudest heart; and fire, for to burn and dry up many waters; yet men's
breasts waxed colder and colder, and their souls were more and more swollen with
pride.

The Glorious Apostle Saint Paul writing to the Romans, That God made his Son
our propitiation; Whom God has set forth to be a reconciliation through
faith in his blood, to declare his righteousness by the forgiveness of the
sins that are passed, etc. He did exercise upon his son the seuerest
Justice that ever was, or shall be seen again; for the remission of precedent
sins. To the end, that Man considering how dear our former wickedness and
forepassed sins cost our Savior; Man should be so afraid of offending, that
he should never return to sin any more.

Some may happily ask me the question, Why the death and passion of our
Savior being so powerful and effectual a remedy against all kind of vices
whatsoever, yet sin still reigns so much in the World, as never more.
Whereunto I answer, That upon the Cross, our Savior Christ gave sentence
against all whatsoever, both present, past, and those that were to come. And
deprived the Prince of the World of that Seigniorie which he possessed, so that
all of them were to suffer death and to have an end. But they did appeal from
this sentence of death, to the Tribunal of our passions; And for that they are
such interressed and such blind Judges, they have set these our Vices again at
liberty, giving them license to work us as much, if not more harm than they
did before. So that Gods sending of his son into the World, and his suffering
death for our sins, did not generally banish all vice, but did serve rather
to some for their greater condemnation.

If thy brother shall trespass (In te) against thee. Saint Augustine
expounds this In te, to be contra te; and in this sense it ought to be taken:
for it is the express letter of the former Texts, as also of those that
follow, and generally agreed upon by all the Doctors: The Interlinearie has
it, Si te contumelia affecerit. Saint Peter anon after asks our Savior, How
often shall my brother sin against me, and I shall forgive him? Whereupon
Theophilact taking hold of this word Contra me, notes, That if his brother
should sin against God, he could hardly forgive him. Saint Luke delivers the
same much more plainly and clearly, If thy brother have trespassed against
thee, rebuke him; if he repent, forgive him: If he offend thee seven times a
day, and seven times a day shall turn unto thee, forgive him. Hugo Cardinalis
has observed, That if the word In te be the ablative case, then it is the same
with Coram te: but if it be the accusative, then it is all one with Contra te;
and the Greek does admit of no Ablatiues. In Leuiticus God had said long
before, Thou shall not hate thy brother in thy heart, but reprove him. And
upon a second admonition, Take unto thee two witnesses, and tell it to the
Church. Manle do concur and run along with this sense, no difficulty in the
world interposing it self.

The second sense, which Saint Augustine also treats of in the same place,
is, If he shall trespass against thee, that is, before thee. This opinion
Thomas follows, and the greater and better part of the Schoolmen; howbeit
there are great arguments and strong reasons to the contrary; and many grave
Authors, to whom this sense does not seem so plain, as to ground thereupon
any divine precept. But leaving this to the Schools, the precept of brotherly
correction concurreth with any whatsoever heinous ^in, or grievous trespass,
whither it be

Against thy self; Brotherly corr^ction has place every where.


Against thy neighbor; or,

Against God.

For to prove this truth, diverse Authors follow these two paths:

The one, That although our Savior Christ in this his first instance, speak of
that sin or trespass which is committed against my self; yet by a
necessary kind of consequence he infers likewise any sin that is
committed against my Neighbor, and against God.

Against my neighbor, because I ought to love him as my self, and to be as
sensible of his hurt as of mine own.

Against God, Because I am bound to pr^ferre his glory before mine own good:
And if I being wronged, God will (...) I not only pardon him, but that I also
complie with the precept of brotherly correction; how much more will he tie me,
that I should deal ^indly in ^his kind with my brother, he having not sinned
against me.

The second part is, That this sinning or trespassing, whither it be against my
Neighbor, or against God, Thomas says, That I knowing it, it is done against
me; because by scandalizing and proooking of me, it does hurt and offend me.
And Hadrianus the Lawyer says, That he that sins against God, sins against
any whatsoever faithful believer, and leaves him injured and offended. For he
that wrongs the Father in the Sons presence, wrongeth also the Son; and he
that wrongeth the Master in the presence of the Servant, wrongeth likewise the
Servant: besides, Love, which makes things common, makes others injuries ours.
And if God take those injuries which are done to thee, to be done to himself,
(as he said to Saint Paul, Why do thou persecute me? And by Zachari^, He
that touches you, touches the apple of mine eye) it is not much, that thou
should reckon those wrongs that are done to God, to be done unto thy self.
The zeal of thy house, and of thy honor and authority, seeing how the enemies
of thy word slight and contemn it, consumes my flesh, and dries my bones. The
like love must make us sencible of the sins of our neighbor, for that they are
members of this mystical body of the Church. Who is sick (says Saint Paul)
and I am (...) grieved? Either forgive them this offense, or blot me out of the
Book of Life, said Moses, having a fellow feeling of his brethrens faults as
had they been his own: and therefore begs of God, that he would either
forgive them, or blot him our of the book of Life.

Again, Another man's sin proves to be my hurt; for Gods Justice punishes
the Righteous with the Sinful. For the the sin of Achan there died in Ay,
three thousand soldiers: for the sins of the sons of Ely Gods people were
overthrown by the Philistines, Ios. 7. 1. Kings 4. 2. Kings 12. 2. King^ 24.
Jonas 1. Math. 8.
and the Arc of the Testament taken captive: for David's sin in numbering the
People, seventy thousand of his subi^cts perished by the Pestilence: By Jonas
his disobedience, they that went i^ the same bottom with him were shrewdly
endangered: the Apostles ran the like hazard by Judas.

Moreover, Sin is sometimes wont to make the earth barren, and to shut up
the windows of Heaven, that they may not send down any rain to water the
dry and thirsty places of the Land: and so Sin being a general hurt to all,
it is generally done against all.

If thybrother shall trespass against thee, etc. The very name of a brother
is a reason for this Precept: for it was condemned in the Leuite and the
Priest, That they passed by, saying their prayers to themselves, but took no
pity of that poor man that lay almost for dead upon the way, wounded by
Thieves. Contrary to that lesson of Ecclesiasticus, He gave every man a
commandment concerning his Neighbor; Eccle. 17.
and a Turk or a Moore may as well be our neighbor as another: And if that
housekeeper be condemned that has not a care of the Cat or Dog that lives
within his doors, (for all this did S. Paul understand when he said, He that
prouides not for those of his family is worse than an Infidel,) How much more
then will God that thou be careful of thy brothers health, wh^ has one and
the same Father with thee in Heaven, and to whom ye both da^^^ say, Our
Father, etc. And who has one and the same mother with thee, to w^^, the Earth,
in whose womb ye were both engendered, and borne anew by Baptism. A^os 1.11.
For three transgressions of Edom, (says the Lord) and for four I will (...)
turn to it, because he did pursue his brother with the sword, and did cast
off all (...), etc. Edom was the Metropolis of Idumea, and her sins being
come to the number of seven, (which in Scripture expresses a kind of
infidelity God faith, I will not turn to it. But suppose they were fewer, yet
some of them it should seem were very foul ones; and amongst the rest, this
of their unsheathing of their sword against their brother. The Idumaeans were
descended of Esau, as the Jews were of Jacob. And in the conquest of the Land
of Promise God commanded his People, That they should not do that hurt to the
Idumaean, as they had done to the rest of the Nations; Quia Frater tuus est,
He is thy brother, and thou ougtest to procure his good as thou would thine
own. This benefit, by the Idumaeans was repayed to Gods People with a thousand
injuries, when the Philistines and those of Tire overcame the Israelites; as
you may read in the second of the Chronicles and the second: For the Idumaeans
did buy many Jews with intent to make them their slaves. Likewise when Gods
People had necessary occasion (asking leave of the Edomites) to pass through
their Country in peace, they withstood them with their swords in their hands.
In a word, the enmity which Esaias bare to Jacob for his mess of pottage, and
the blessing that he had stolen from him, neither he nor his posterity could
ever yet digest it; though he and his House had received many, and those very
good courtesies at the others hands. And therefore it is not much, that God
should condemn an enmity so ancient, and so inueterated a hatred, especially
of one brother against another.

Tell him his fault between thee and him alone, etc. And this is the divine
Law, Charity is to be practiced toward all Men. Gal. 6.1.
as it appears by the Epistle o^ Saint Paul to the Galathians, If a man be
fallen by occasion into any fault, ye which are spiritual, restore such a one
with the spirit of meekness, considering thy self, least thou also be
tempted. Bear ye one another burden, and so fulfill the Law of Christ. And
in that of his to Timothy; and in that of S. James, James 5.
If any of you have erred from the truth and some man has converted him, Let
him know, That he which has converted the Sinner from going astray out of his
way* shall save a soul from death, and shall hide a mult^tude of sins.
Leuit. 19.17.
And in Leuiticus it is set down as a Precept belonging to the Law of Nature,
Thou shall not hate thy brother in thy heart, but thou shall plainly rebuke thy
Neighbor, and suffer him not to sin. Eccle. 17.
God has given every man a charge concerning h^s Neighbor, (^s we said
before.) Saint Paul draws his comparison from the members of the body, which
by the Law of Nature are bound reciprocally to succor one another in case of
necessity. And Augustine takes his from the thorn, which paining the foot,
carries after it the eyes, ears, and hands, all the members of the body
naturally inclining to the repairing of that hurt.

Another natural reason which your holy Fathers, learned Doctors, and great
Philosophers render, is, That he that can (if he will) hinder or put by a hurt
that is ready to fall upon his brother, and does it not, is condemned to be
himself the hurter and harmer of him. Thy poor neighbor is ready to starve
and perish through hunger, thou being able to relieve, do not do it; he
dies, thou art his Deaths-man, thou art the murderer of this thy brother. Si
non panisti, ^ccidisti, says Saint Ambrose; Thy brother is sinking and ready
to be drowned; thou may save him by reaching out thy hand unto him* thou
deniest him thy help, it is thou that drownest him. Thy Neighbors house is on
fire, it is in thy power to quench it; thou will not do it, it is thou that
have burnt his house.

Tell but a Blasphemer, a Drunkard, or any other lewd liver, of his faults,
though never so fairly, never so mild and gently, he will begin to swagger
with you, and ask you, Who made you sir a Justice of Peace? meddle with that
which you have to do withal, you take more pains than you have thanks for
your labor. But hereunto thou or any man else that is thus charitably minded,
may make them this answer, I have complied with mine obligation; I am a
Christian, and am bound i^ charity and brotherhood, to tell you friendly my
mind, and I can be but sorry, that my council cannot prevail with you: this
I am tied unto by the Law of God and of Nature. And this position wants no
proofs.

The necessary circumstances of this precept are many:

The first is, That the sin which is to be corrected and reproved by us, be
certain, and well known unto us: and this is proved out of this word, Si
p^^cauerit, If he shall trespass, etc. as it is well observed by Thomas. We
must not find fault upon a bare suspicion or presumption, but must have a good
ground for our reproof, He that would reprove an other, must first correct
himself.
and go upon an assured knowledge. To go about to pull out a sound tooth, and
with a sharp in^trument to open the gummes, it cannot choose but be a great
torment unto him that without just cause is thus cut and lanced. No less
grievous and paineful is it to hunt after wickedness in the house of the Just;
Prou. 24.28.
or (as Solomon says) to be a witness against thy Neighbor without a cause.
Many men are like unto your Ferrets or your Bloud-hounds, they go nosing and
hunting after faults in other men's grounds; and as Job says in another place,
When there is peace, they are jealous of treason. Of which kind of men Saint
Auste^ says, That prying into other men's faults, they do not look into their
own. And therefore thou ought not to be so busy in reprehending what is
amiss in thy brother, as inquisitiue in correcting thine own errors. And
therefore Saint Bernard gives us this Item, Tam diu quisque sua peccata
ignorant, quam diu al^^na explorat, See how long a man is searching into other
men's sins, so long is he ignorant of his own. This is the condition of ill
natured men, and such as complain of the times, and of Fortune. The less
fortunate things go with us, the more suspicious we be, says Tacitus: And
this is a Fate that follows base and abject minds; and therefore the Vulgar
never put a bridle upon their jealousies. In a word, this is a hard course that
they take, Jealousy a true Symptom of baseness.
and in all sorts of men blame-worthie, but most in those that have most power:
for albeit by their place and office they have freer liberty to inquire; yet
when their wits are thus a wooll-gathering, they shamefully use to err,
qualifying evil for good, and good for evil. And if men's judgments grounded
upon good probabilities and fair apparances, prove many times false, and
therefore have this caveat given us by Christ, Nolite s^cundum faciem iudicare,
Judge not according to the face; suspicions will hardly fall out to be true.
There are some things so notoriously bad, that it were foolishnes to think them
to be good; othersome, whom the intention makes to be good or bad, but are not
so in themselves. The Good take these in good part, leaving the true judgment
thereof unto God, (as Saint Augustine has noted) and the Bad, in bad part.
Mala men's, malus animus, A good Soul has good thoughts; but a bad Soul, bad
imaginations; idle suspicions and needless jealousies wait upon them. Saint
Augustine and Saint Hierome are both of opinion, That he that suspects ill of
others, cannot possibly live well himself. David desired of God, That he would
judge him, According to the judgment of those that love thy Name, and take all
things in good part. Iam. 4.
And Saint James whispers in thine ear, W^^ art thou that iudgest another man?
He treats there of those that judge the secret intentions of the heart, none
but God having such jurisdiction over it. If thy brother fall (says he) his
sin is not laid to thy charge; and if he rise again, it is not put to thy
reckoning; he that now stands, may fall, and he that is fallen may rise
again. That man from whom we expect least, may be a Saint, and that man from
whom we expect most, may be a Sinner; for neither is our love certain, nor our
fear secured. In Leuiticus God has commanded, That none should serve in his
Sanctuary, or press to offer the bread of his God, having either too long or
too short a nose, or a nose that stood awrie. Where that nose is taken to be
somewhat of the longest, which goes nosing and senting after other men's lives
and actions: and that of the shortest, which quickly takes snuff, and frets
and fumes at the wagging of a Feather: and that to be crooked; which wrests
things indifferent, and to the worser part. And therefore God said by
Ezechiel, That he would cut off the noses and ears of his People, Ezech. 23.
and lay his indignation upon them, and deal cruelly with them.

The second circumstance is, That the sin which we find fault withal, be
grievous: for though light sins (as Origin has noted it) deserve correction,
yet we have not so precise an obligation for the reproouing of them, as those
that are more heinous. In this circumstance suit your grave doctors and your
summists: and Saint Augustine proves the same out of the words of the Text,
Lucratus es fratrem tuum, Thou have won thy brother. Now that is not said to
be won again, which has not been lost before; we do not give a brother
for lost for light sins, and such as ordinarily accompany our humane
frailty; but when his sins are so notorious, that the Church does proceed
against them with Excommunications and grievous censures. And if men will
hardly bear with small faults in their brethren, God forbid but that they
should have an eye to those that are of a higher nature. Likewise, he that
will correct another man, must be free himself from that sin which he
reprooueth in another. Pro^. 20.9.
Who can say (says Solomon) I have made my heart clean, I am free from my sin?
Who (says Saint Augustine) can so far forth commend himself in this life,
which is a continual temptation, that he carries a clean heart? Saint Paul
advises thee, Gal. 6.
when thou take thy brother to task, and go about to correct him, That
thou consult and consider with thy self, least thou thy self stand on the
like terms, and art liable to the same reproof.

The third circumstance is, Old sores must not be rubbed up.
When we see our brother does still persevere and continue in this his sin.
For, for a sin already past, and for the which there has been a precedent
sorrow and amendment, correction is no further needful; for it being dismissed
Gods Court, and being blotted out of the book of his remembrance, man ought not
to enter a new Action against it. If he will not vouchsafe to hear thee, that
is, obey thee, (for Audire and Obedire is all one; In auditu auris, obediuit
mihi) you may do as in Christian charity you see cause, always carrying a
discreet hand in the business. But if he shall forthwith hearken unto thee,
and obey thy instructions, thou must then forbear to inflict any further
punishment or correction upon him, than his own contrition and submissiue
obedience. Saint Augustine tells us, That the end of correction is, to put a
bridle to our sins, [ In hamo and fraeno maxillas eorum constringe, Put a
bridle in their mouth, and a hook in their nosthrils] and as to the Horse that
carries himself well and handsomely with one bridle, it is needless to clap
two; so that Sinner that will be ruled and governed with the bridle of the
fear of God, it is superfluous and more than needs, to check him with the curb
of correction.

The fourth circumstance is, When we have some probable hope of doing good
upon our brother. The Physician is not bound to cure that Patient of whom there
is no hope of recovery; much less if he fear greater hurt will follow
thereupon. And this fear or jealousy may be occasioned two manner of ways.

Either in regard of the hardness of heart, or obstinate condition of the
party that is to be corrected:

Or in regard of the foolis^nesse of the party correcting.

For that it is a business that will require a great deal of discretion: and
that amongst all other difficulties belonging to government, there is not any
poyn^ that is half so hard as this.

First of all, For a stubborn heart and an obstinate breast, correction is no
convenient means; the means must be regular, and make some good end the aim
they shoot at. Now those means from which I can hope for nothing but hurt,
ought not to oblige me to undergo so thanklesse an office; Contest not with
that man on whom thou shall but cast away thy labor. A Father takes pains and
lives poorly, and only to make his son a Gentlemen; He gathers together a
great deal of wealth, but knows not for whom: Did he but know that his son
would prove a Devil, he would sooner fire all he had, than leave it to such
a son. If the Goldsmith did but know before hand, that his refining of silver
would turn all to dross, Some grow the worse for being reproved. Prou. 25.20
he would rather break his bellows and crisols in 1000 pieces, than once offer
to set himself about such an unprofitable piece of business. Now there are many
men which are made worse by correction, Acetum in nitro, q^i cantat carmina,
cord pessimo, There are some kind of persons, on whom to bestow reprehension,
is to pour Vinegre upon Nitre; to be like unto him that sings Songs to an
heavy heart. It is lost labor to correct a Scorner, and such a one as makes
but a sport and Maygame of sin. Among many other of Pythagor^^ his Emblemes,
one says, Ignem gladi^ ne laeseris, Do not reprehend a choleric Fool. When
David sent those his ten soldiers to Nabal, to entreat him to send him some
provision; though he returned a harsh and churlish answer, Abig^l being a
discreet woman, said not one word to him till his anger was ouerpast. Jeremy
brings in the comparison of a wild Ass, which is so wilful a beast, and so
violent and headstrong in the time of her lust, that if any shall seek to stop
or hinder her in this her course, she will kick and fling at him, and break
his bones in pieces. I^r. 2.
Thou art like a swift Dromedarie that runs by hi^ ways; and as a wild Ass
used to the Wilderness, that snuffeth up the wind by occasion at her pleasure,
Who can turn her back? All they that seek her will not weary themselves,
but will find her in her month. There are some Sinners of that knotty
disposition, and so wedded to their own will, that if you shall but cross
their humor, you will hardly escape without a stab. Si contuderis stultum in
pila, non a^feretur ab eo stultitia ^ius, Though thou should bray a Fool in
a Mort^r, among wheat brayed with a pestle yet will not his foolishness depart
from him.

Secondly, The little discretion of his that corrects, does disoblige him
from that duty. Ye that are spiritual, says Saint Paul, restore such a one
with the spirit of meekness. Gal 6.
This is not a business befitting carnal men. For albeit one weak man is
most affected with another man's weakness; and one that is sick, more
sencible of another man's sickness; yet I am sure, That the good, bewailes the
misery of the bad, and that the evil man is always cruel. Correct him in
the spirit of meekness. With that tenderness, as a man would put a tent into
a wound, or make clean a Venice-glasse; for our nature is more apt for a soft
than a rough hand. Eliah, standing in the mouth of the cave where he hid
himself, flying from Iezabel^ ^urie, grew somewhat chollericke and angry,
that God should suffer his Ministers to be so much wronged: And God appearing
unto him, though his zeal for the Lord God of Hosts was great, yet because it
had not its drammes of discretion to qualify the eagrenesse thereof, a mighty
strong wind rent the mountains and brake the rocks before the Lord; after
the wind came an earthquake; and after the earthquake, came a fire; and
after the fire, came a still and soft voice. And it is added in the Text, that
the Lord was not in the wind, nor in the earthquake, nor in the fire, but in
that still and soft voice. Reprehension must be guided by discretion.
Signifying thereby, that he had the weapons of the winds, of earthquakes,
and of fire, for to shake, overthrow, and burn down to the ground the
tallest and strongest towers and walls of his enemies; but withal, that he
was of a sweet nature, and that his vengeance was mild and gentle. There are
some corrections that tear up the trees by the roots, like a whirle-winde;
that shake and terrify the Conscience, like an earthquake; and that burn and
consume our honors to dust. But God is not in them. He that will correct
another (says Saint Paul) must consider what manner of Man himself is. And
that, as his brother has sinned to day, so he may sin to morrow. To day,
thou find thy brother guilty, and to morrow it may so fall out, that he
may come to be thy Judge. It is fit (says Petrus Crysologus) that there
should be correction, to serve as a bridle to those that are headstrong; but
withal, That as a loose rain does no good, so too hard a hand may do hurt.
Lucian says, That our heart is a white, or mark whereat shafts be shot:
Whereof some are delivered with that force and strength of the arm, that
passing quite through, they do it much hurt; others again with so slack a
string, and that weakness, that falling short of the mark, they do no good
at all. We must draw them therefore with that cunning, and with so dainty a
delivery, that we may stick just in the white, and hit the right mark. That
Arque, obsecra, increpa, of S. Paul, argues a quick and nimble delivery. And
that of Ovid, Precibusque minis regaliter addit, is somewhat too Lordly and
Commanding a style. What says Ecclesiasticus? If thou blow the spark it
shall burn, if thou spit upon it, it shall be quenched; Eccle. 28.12.
and both these come out of the mouth. A kind word is as soon given as a
cursed, and costs us but one and the same labor, as coming out of one and the
same mouth. But as a hasty brawling kindles fire, and an hasty fighting
sheddeth blood* so on the other side mildness does quench malice, and deads
those coals of choler which are ready to break forth into flames of fury
and madness. Sermo mollis (says Solomon) frangit iram, A soft answer puts
away wrath, Prou. 15.
but grievous words stir up anger. What says Job? His friends had given him
a reprehension as foolish as it was sharp and bitter. Whereunto he answered,
How shall the mouth that is distasted, eat that which is not seasoned with
salt? Or what appetite will a sick and weak stomach have to an egg, or a
chicken that is not boiled with salt? Yet far more unsavory than either of
these is an indiscreet reproof, and words out of season. The Seventy
translate it, Who can eat bread without salt, or suffer imprudent correction?
And as distaste in our meats may arise from too much or too little salt; so
correction may have so little salt in it, that it may make the Sick to dislike
it, and refuse io eat it; and on the other side, it may have so much, that he
will not be able to swallow it. What good can he do, who in his correction
does discover the passion and hatred of one that is offended, the
imperiousness of a proud spirit, the taunting checkes of a railing tongue, and
the intemperate joy of an envious heart? In a word, No creature must be touched
with a gentler hand, than man, says Seneca.

The fifth circumstance is, That he that has a sullyed conscience of his own,
ought not to be the broom to sweep another man's, so says S. Ambrose, Saint
Hierome, Saint Chrysostom, and Thomas. Therefore, o man, art thou inexcusable
(says Saint Paul) for in that thou iudgest another, thou condemnest thy self.
It is a woeful case, that thou being a Judge, should be found guilty. This
the Devil does only, whom God styles his brothers Accuser. Thy lips are like
Lillies distilling Myrrh: Myrrh is bitter, but preserues from corruption; and
the Spouse says, praising the lips of her Beloved, Although thy words (says
she) are bitter, yet I see that they make for the saving of my life, and the
preserving of me from death: In a word, they drop from white lips that are
whiter than the Lilly. Saint Augustine says, That a secret Sinner may
reprove a public offendour; but the cause being principally Gods, and he
that reprooues him, his Minister, it must of force be some hindrance unto him,
with a leaprous hand to cure another man's leaprous^e; or fearing lest God might
say unto him, Why do thou take my Law in thy mouth? etc.

Go and tell him his fault between thee and him alone. Thou must not look
that he should come unto thee of his own accord, for no man will willingly
come to be corrected; nor must thou send one to call him unto thee; for being
not thy Subject, thou should show little civility in it: nor would I have
thee to write unto him; for Paper being but a dead instrument, it may persuade
but little, and perhaps run the danger of losing. But I would have thee to go
to him in person, as the Physi^ion to the Sick, and wait a fit time and
opportunity: for, albeit thy coming unto him may carry with it some
inconvenience; yet thou may chance to see the gate set wide open unto thee,
and to afford thee free entrance, and so give occasion unto thee to gain a
Brother. Our Savior says of himself, That ^e went to win those whom he
knew wished not well unto him: And therefore he likewise says unto thee, No
^eue^ge must be sought.
Vade, Go; for he that seeks after his enemy, and speaks kindly unto him,
shows that there is no impostume of malice remaining in his heart. Our Savior
spoke unto him that gave him the buff^t on the f^ce, not having (as Saint
Chrysostom has noted it) opened his mouth before, though he had many and
sundry occasions given him so to do; to the end that the standers by might
understand by his mild answer, that he did not bear that injury in his
bosom, to be revenged of him hereafter. He that swallows an injury,
pocketting it up for a time, putting on the face of dissimulation, till he see
his opportunity, as Absalon did with Ammon, and as Ioab did with Amasa; Prou.
19.28.
it is a manifest token that they meditated revenge: The mouth of the Wicked
swalloweth up iniquity. The Crocadile without a tongue, is the Hierogliphycke
of inexorable enmity. Quien calla, piedras opan^a, says the Spaniard, He
that says nothing, is providing a stone to fling at thee. Which Proverb suits
more properly with a particular injury done to a man's own person: but as for
those other sins that are committed against our Neighbor, or against God, I
am no more bound to seek out the sin, or him that has trespassed in that
kind, than I am bound to seek out a poor beggar to give him an Alms, being
no Prelat or Magistrate, on whom this obligation is more strictly laid.

Go and tell him his fault. This being Preceptum affirmatiuum, an affirmative
Precept, it does not always bind a man to the performance thereof, but in it is
due time and place. The Chyrurgeon does not open an impostume till it come to
it is ripeness; nor the Fisher strike at the Fish, till he has swallowed the
bai^, and offers to be gone. God stood waiting our first parents leisure, till
they beheld their own nakedness, and saw in what poor case they were; and
afterward fell to reproouing of them. Saint Augustine says, It is charity in
a man to forbear to reprehend, if he have not a fit time to do it. Even in
your Pulpit-reprehensions, a wise and discreet Preacher ought to observe his
times and his seasons, that those pearls may not be lost by being laid out to
the fury of beasts. Because I know your manifold transgressions, Amos 5.12.
(says Amos) and your mighty sins, as your afflicting the Just, your taking
of bribes, and your oppressing the Poor in the gate, etc. Therefore the
Prudent shall keep silence in that time, for it is an evil time. It Is in
vain to correct a man in the heat and height of sin.
It was never counted wisdom in any man, to draw his sword against a fool or
a mad man, though he come toward him with a naked weapon in his hand. Saint
Gregory in his Pastoral does highly extol the wisdom and discretion of
Abigal, who forbore, while Nabal had digested his wine: applying her self to
that rule of Ecclesiasticus, Control not thy neighbor when he is in his cups;
1. Kings 25.
but let him alone till he come to be his own man. You will not water your
horse when he is hot, nor offer a Bull meat when he is bitten and baited, nor
put forth to sea when you see a storm over your head. God stood looking a good
while, to see whither Da^ids affection would yet slacken toward Beersheba,
that when the heat of his lust was ouerpast, he might tell him his own. Eccl.
8.
Kindle not the coals of sinners when thou rebukest them, lest thou be burnt in
the fiery flames of their sins: For if a man should tell them of their faults
while their choler is up, you shall but kindle the coals the more, and work
both their and your own destruction. The Spies that were sent into the Land of
Promise, did raise up such a fear fall fire amongst the Israelites, that
without any more ado, they would presently return back again into Egypt,
and with a full and open mouth cursing one while Moses, and another while
Aaron; those two brothers laid themselu^s flat on the ground, suffering these
Arrows of the mutined Vulgar to fly over their heads. In a word, Men are to
observe fit times and seasons: Eccle. 20.19.
A wise Sentence loses it is grace, when it comes out of a Fools mouth; for
he speaks not in due season.

And because this time and season is ver^e doubtful, Caietan advises thee,
That if thou shall forbear to correct thy brother, it seeming unto thee, that
the unseasonableness thereof does quit thee of this obligation; do thou
endeavor to make this preparation in thy mind, and when thou shall see a fit
time, take it, and tell him of his fault: for then this precept ties thee to
reprove him, and then use thy best discretion to work him to a sense of his
sin, that thou may save a soul.

^etweene thee and him alone. Thou must intimate his sin unto him in secret,
Reprehension must be private.
it mu^t be a private reprehension, having a care of his credit and reputation:
for God would have a Soul so to be won, that the body may receive no harm
thereby. A good name is to be chosen above great riches, Prou. 22. Eccle. 41.12.
for that shall continue with thee above a thousand treasures of gold. A m^ns
life ends tomorrow, but a good name indureth for ever. Saint A^gustine calls
him cruel, that is careless of his credit, and neglects a good report, but
more cruelty is it, to hurt another man's good name. In a word, The cure of
some Sickness is so much the more commended, with how much the less
detriment it is done: And therefore, Corripe inter te and ipsum solum, With a
great deal of secrecy bury thy brothers sin in thy bosom. And as the
Grave will not give thee up his Dead, though thou s^ouldest beg it on thy
knees, (for therein the Grave is inexorable, and not to be entreated) so thou
must not disinterre and open the secret of thy brother, nor reveal the same to
any man whosoever, though he should importune thee thereto with tears, and beg
it of thee on his knees. Fidens, quod non te disrumpet, He has that trust and
confidence in thee, that thou will not play the Viper; then do not thou break
open thy mothers bowels, but keep that close which is committed to thy
secrecy. Tell thy friend of his fault, for peradventure he did not perceive
^is own error, or happily others might have raised some false report of him:
so that it may be a sin proceeding sometimes from another man's malice, and
sometimes from his own ignorance. There are some tongues so slipperie, that
sometimes they utter that they would not. A Fool is ready to burst till he
have unfolded a secret; it is a crooked pin in his throat, he must out with it
before ever he can be at quiet. Ecclesiasticus fetches a comparison from the
woman that is in labor of that she goes withal, who is in great pain till
she be brought a bed, and delivered of her birth: As also from the Dog who
has an Arrow sticking in his thigh, and is never quiet till he have shaken it
out. And such a kind of man as this, is incapable of correcting; for having
first published his brothers faults in the open Street, with what face can he
come unto him to give him a brotherly admonition. Joseph being minded to open
himself to his brethren, and to make known unto them, Genesis 45.
how unbrotherly they had dealt with him when they sold him into Egypt* he
commanded every one to go forth, insomuch that there was not a man besides
themselves, that tarried in the room where they were. God corrected Cain when
he found him alone by himself. Genesis 4. Number. 12.
So when he was angry with Aaron and Mirian, and resolved roundly to chide
them, he called them aside, sharply rebuking Aaron, and soundly punishing
Mirian. Saint Augustine says, Tha^ open sin deserves open punishment, and
that public faults must have public correction: but secret sins, secret
admonition, unless they be very hurtful to Church or Commonwealth, as
matters of heresy, or Treason against the King and State; and then it is fit
to acquaint the Clergy with the one, and the Council with the othet.

If he will not hearken unto thee when thou have him alone, tell him thereof the
second time before one or two.
This condition taken in the first sense de iniuria propria, touching an
injury done to mine own person, is very facile and easy: for having first
taken him aside, and privately acquainted him with the wrong he has done me; if
this fair proceeding will not prevail with him, I may then lawfully tell him
his own before one or two witnesses, that they may see (as Euthymius says)
that I complie with my duty, and with that which God has commanded me to do.

In the second sense, touching the sinning against our Neighbor and against
God, this seems to some somewhat too hard a course; for the sin being
secret, the party reprehended before two witnesses, may reply and say unto
me, That I lie, that there is no such matter, that I defame him and call his
name in question, and complaining of me to the Justice, he may prove the
defamation upon me, but I not prove the delict upon him. Saint Hierome says,
That these two witnesses ought likewise to be his reproouers, and to put to
their helping hand to raise him that is fallen: who cannot be Correctors of
him, the sin not appearing, in regard it is secret. Saint Augustine likewise
says, That he that corrects a man must take one or two witnesses unto him,
that the correction may be the more effectual, and the more substantial. For,
By the mouth of two or three every word is confirmed, (so says the Law) Id
est, in testimonio vel sermon, by the testimony or speech; using the figure
Metonimia, when the cause is put for the effect.

For this inconvenience sake, some say, That before I correct my brother the
second time, I should make one or two witnesses acquainted with his fault, that
they may join with me in the correcting of him, and to the end that the
correction may be the grauer and the more effectual. And to him that shall
reply, How can I reveal that sin which in it self is secret? They answer,
That it is a less ill, that two or three should know of it, and that by them
he should rather suffer loss in his fame, than in his soul.

Against these two witnesses we have the authority of Saint Augustine, who
wills, That if any religious person shall commit any notorious sin, or
other scandalous action to his calling, thou shall first teprooue him for it in
secret, and if then he shall not amend his fault, to reveal the same to his
Bishop or Superior. And he sets it down as a ruled Case, That it were rather
cruelty than charity, not to open the wound of the Soul. And his reason is,
Ne deterius putrescat in cord, Lest it grow worse and worse, ranckling and
festring in the heart; as it is in the hiding of a wound in the body from the
eye of the Surgeon. Nor let them think that you do this out of malice or ill
will, for you offend more in suffering your brother to perish by your silence,
than by revealing his fault for his good. T^is opinion of Saint Augustine made
Thomas to confess, That after the first admonition, I may reveal to the
Prelat the delict of my brother, as to a father: for in very deed, your
Prelates have in this kind far greater authority. So that such or such a
sin being to be revealed, supposing two preceding witnesses, may be revealed
to the Prelat, as to a Judge; but no witnesses preceding, only by admonition,
as to a father.

Against this Truth there is a great argument grounded out of the said Saint
Augustine, In his rebus, etc. In those things wherein the sacred Scripture sets
down no certainty, the custom of Gods people, or the d^crees of our
Ancestors are to be held for Law. And the custom and use of our Ancestors
is, That these delicts should be revealed to the Superiors; one while, by
denunciation; another while, by accusation, without any preceding admonition:
so is it ordered in their Edicts, without exception of any kind of faul^s
whatsoever. I answer, Your Edicts are so far forth to be understood and
approved, as that they shall not any way thwart or infringe the Law of the
Gospel, in that which appertains to admonitions and witnesses: and that
therefore your superiors have not put these things in their Edicts, for that
they are to be presupposed.

And if he will not vouchsafe to hear thee, tell it unto the Church; or make it
known to his Prelat, for so does Saint Chrysostom and Saint Hierome expound
it. Nor does our Savior Christ here treat of the secular Judge, nor secular
Laws, but those that are Ecclesiastical. And therefore he says, Dic
Ecclesiae, Tell it to the Church; for the power of Excommunication did belong
unto the Synagogues, as appears by Saint Mark and Saint John. Mark. 1.
For the casting of the blind man out of the Synagogue, was the same as
Excommunication is now amongst the Christians. But first of all, two witnesses
are required, to the end that shame may work the Delinquent to amendment of
his fault: but if this medicine shall not cure this his malady, then sharper
corrasiues are to be applied to this Sore, Vt qui non potuit pudore, saluetur
opprobrijs, That him whom shame could not recall, reproach should; so says Saint
Hierome.

If he hear not the Church, let him be unto thee as a Heathen and a Publican.
Gods favor toward his Church.
Such Sovereign authority has the Church by the presence of Christ, and such
is it is firmness, that it being as an immoouable Pillar of Truth, The gates
of Hell shall not prevail against it; And of such continuance Christ's favor
toward it, that he seals this assurance with an E^ce, etc. Behold, Mat. 18.
I am with you till the end of the world; And such the especial providence of
the blessed Spirit toward it, that he that shall despise it, his case is to
be accounted desperate. These two Truths the Church by long and many
experiences has made good unto us.

The one, That he that honors and respects the Church, receives very great
and singular favors from Heaven; He that shall glorify me, (and in me my
Spouse and Ministers of my Word) I will glorify him. And of these the
Histories are full, both Divine and Humane: Of David, of Josias, of Alexander
Magnus, Theodosius, and Charlemaigne; who triumphed over powerful enemies, for
that they had respected the authority and dignity of the Church, preferring
still the same before the honor of their own Crowns.

The other, That they who have despised and contemned it, have ever been held
base and vile. They that contemn me, (and in me my Spouse and my Ministers)
shall be esteemed base and ignoble: As amongst the Hebrews it was to be
seen in a Saul, an Ozias, and a Manasses: Among the Romans, in a Pompeius
Magnus, who profaned the sacred Temple of Jerusalem, yet durst not come to
touch it is Treasure; so Cicero affirms, etc. Thomas has observed, That God
ever showed himself more merciful in revenging his own wrongs, than those
that were done to the Ministers of his Church. The People of Israel worshipped
a Calfe, and proceeded so far in wronging the Majesty of God, that they
sticked not to say, Exodus 32.
This is that God which with a mighty hand and outstretched arm freed us from
the Captivity of Egypt. God punished this their iniquity with the death of
some of the principal offenders. Dathan and Abiram rebelled against Moses,
Number. 16.
and the earth swallowed them up alive.

Sit tibi tanquam Ethnicus and Publicanus.
If he shall not be obedient to the Church, but shall despise the sentence of
his Superiors, When the Salve can do no good, the Saw must.
Let him be unto thee as a Heathen man and a Publican. In Leuiticus God
commanded, That they should not offer unto him any Sacrifice of honey; but he
required the first fruits thereof: he will at first have honey, that is, mild
admonitions, gentle persuasions, and friendly advice; but if these will not
serve the turn, he vnsheaths his sword, and cuts thee off from the Church
pronouncing this sentence against thee, Let him be to thee as a Heathen and a
Publican. He does here point out two sorts of People, which Gods people did
shun and avoid.

The one, Him that was a stranger to his Law.

The other, Him that was a public offender therein: both which he wishes us
to fly from.

From the one, That they may do us no hurt; For, a little leaven will sour
the whole lump.

From the other, That being thereby ashamed of their sins, they may repent
and amend.

Wherein he seems to moderate the rigor of the Old Testament: for in
Deutronomie he commands, Deuteronomy. 17. The Gospel more mild than the Law.
That he that will not hear the High Priest, that man shall die the death; and
that son that shall not be obedient to his father, shall be stoned to death.
But God now showing himself more mild and gentle, is contented that we should
only shun the company of such as are disobedient, being no better than
cankered and rotten Members, which may chance to infect and putrify those
other sound parts of the body. And albeit the excommunicating of those that
converse with them (which course the Church now takes) may seem somewhat of
the seuerest, for that it comprehends not only the nocent, but the innocent,
as well the not offending, as the offending; yet said the Samaritan woman, The
Jews do not use to keep company with Samaritanes: And they accused our
Savior Christ, for that he did eat with Publicans and Sinners; and because he
did but talk with a Samaritan, they called him, by way of scorn, a Samaritan.

These latter conditions of denunciating my brother to the Church, and of using
him like an Heretic or a Moore, have seemed to the World to be somewhat too
hard teaching; and baptizeth the Denunciator by the name of Delator, or privy
Accuser, or an Informer or Promoter. And even in those Communities and
Commonwealths which have renounced the Laws of the world, it has been held a
point of honor and of nobleness, not to enter or stand forth by accusing or
denunciating in causis alienis: For he that shall do so, is accounted but a
base minded fellow; and one that has no worth or goodness in him: and he had
need have an extraordinary assistance of Gods spirit, that shall take this
task upon him, when Zeal and Honor cannot agree upon the point, one swaying
this way, and another that: which distraction is made the more, the more great
and powerful the persons be that ought to be thus corrected.

First, I answer, That one and the self same thing may be said to be sour
and sweet, after a diverse respect. Saint Matthew says, That the way to Hell is
broad and large. The Damned, they say it is a hard way, Ambulanimus vias
difficiles, etc. To correct and to be corrected shall be easy to the Spirit,
but hard to the Flesh. And put case it be sour, yet the ajudas de Costa, those
good supplies which the Just shall enjoy in this present life, and the hope of
reward in the future, will make it sweet.

Secondly, I answer, That Fear and Cowardice propose sometimes difficulties
where there are none; All fear and cowardice must be laid aside in the
correcting of our Brethren.
and he that is afraid that he sh^l not draw water from his brothers breast and
eyes, How shall he hope to draw water out of a rock or a stone? There is a
great deal of controversy and much adoo touching that sin of Moses, for which
God denied him entrance into the holy Land: S. Paul says, That it was
incredulity. The opinion of the Hebrews is, That this his sin was, his not
speaking to the Rock. God spoke unto these two brothers, and said, Loquimini
ad Petram; which Moses struck once or twice with his Rod, etc. Now if two
words would have been sufficient for to draw water out of a rock, Is it much
that Man should draw it out of the heart (though it were made of stone) and
convey it, as by a Conduit, to the eyes? Solomon says, That many do excuse
themselves of fulfilling Gods commandments, alleging their want of strength
and ability; That it stands not with their health, to fast on half holidays,
nor to eat Fish in Lent, or on Frydayes [ Vires non suppetunt.] Hereunto I make
a twofold answer:

The one, Deus est Inspector cordis, It is God that tries the heart and
reins, he knows whither thou have streng^h or no: thou can not cozen him
with a false Dye, thou may cozen thy Physician with a lie, but thou can not
cozen God.

The other, Ipse intelligit; God knows well enough, That thou can not do
any good thing without his help, for he must assist thee with his grace in
this life, and with glory in the life to come, And will reward every man
according to his works. Leo the Pope says, That he that thinks with
himself, that it is a hard thing to be corrected* must have recourse to Gods
mercy, and to entreat his favor that he will free him from this his evil
custom, and so to humble him, that correction may seem sweet unto him.

Lastly, Albeit at first the party reproved will show himself harsh and
sour unto thee, yet upon better consideration he will con thee thanks, and
like better of thy plain dealing with him, than if thou had soothed up his
sins; He that reprooues a man shall afterward find more grace than he that
deceiues him with a flattring tongue. To S. Austen, the corrections and
admonitions of his mother were unsavory; but afterward he confessed, That he
was much more beholding to her for having reduced him to the right way, than
for bringing him forth into the world. Who is it that makes me glad, (says
Saint Paul) but he that is made hea^ie by me. The Scripture is full of rewards
and of threatenings, both in the favor and disfavor of the Corrector and the
Corrected. Of him that corrects Crysostome says, If thou should give
innumerable riches to the Poor, thou shall not work that good thereby, as
thou shall by saving a soul; for there is no price comparable with that of the
Soul: Fructus justi, lignum vitae, By living well himself, and by gaining his
brothers Soul. Saint Augustine says, That every Christian should desire that
all should be saved; and he that contemns correction, does in part deny this
desire. And the Apostle Saint James, That he that shall convert his brother,
and remove him from his error, shall save his soul from death: In which
words are comprised as well his own, as another soul. Thomas says,
Correction is eleemosina spiritualis, a spiritual kind of alms; and of so
much more price than any other alms, by how much the soul is of more price
than the body, and by how much the goods of Grace are to be preferred before
those of fortune and of Nature. He that succors the Poor, when he gives
most, he can but lay down his corporal life for him; but he that raises up
him that is fallen, bestows a spiritual life on him, and performs the office
of an Apostle. So that to correct and ^o be corrected, brings with it so much
interest, and so much gain, that every man may account it for a great
happiness.

The incorrigible man is so threatened in the sacred Scripture, that the very
fear thereof is able to quell his spirits, Prou. 29.
and to make him turn Coward. A man that hardneth his neck when he is
rebuked, shall suddenly be destroyed, so says Solomon: The Hebrew phrase is,
Vir correctionum, he that lives so ill, that a man had need to carry always
in his hand a rod of correction for him; and instead of amending his faults,
daily adds sin unto sin, whereby he is overtaken with sudden death, which
in a Sinner is of all other evils the greatest. Other lesser threatenings are
set down by Solomon, Poverty and shame shall be to him that forsakes
discipline: and now here he says, Sudden destruction shall come upon him. So
long may he persevere in the hardness of his heart, that Gods justice may
overtake him, and shorten his days by sudden death. The truth of this is
apparent in Pharaoh, to whom so many fair warnings and admonitions served but
to make the heap of his sins the higher, till at last, with those heaps of
waters he was overwhelmed suddenly in the sea. It is written in the Book of
Wisdom, That those cruel and many stripes which were bestowed upon the
Egyptians, could not draw so much as one tear from their eyes, nor procure
the liberty of Gods People of hard-hearted Pharaoh: He that refuse^h
correction shall be o^ertake^ with su^^en destruction.
But when they saw the death of their firstborn, then they howled and wept, and
Pharaoh himself was moved and made pittious moan, and gave present order for
their departure. But here (I pray you) observe with me a fearful kind of
obstinacy; for they had scarce dried their tears, scarce had they covered the
graves of their Dead, when lo, those that had entreated for their departure, as
fearing they should all die the death, Omnes mori^mur, for so says the Text,
falling into a rash and unadvised consideration, followed after them, as if
they had been a company of Fugitives, forgetting the former torments which
they had endured. And a wise man rendering the reason of this so foolish a
resolution, says, This their hardness of heart carried them (...) it were
perforce to this so disastro^^ an end; to the end that those whom the plagues
which God had sent among them (as so many admonitions and so many warnings) had
not made an end of, sudden death might destroy, and supply the defect of that
punishment. O, that Sinners would be so wise as to enter into discourse with
themselves. The Adulterer, whom God has freed from a thousand notorious
dangers of his life and credit; though his brethren have not checked him, yet
has his own conscience corrected him with greater severity, and far more
sharply; as also the sudden death of other his fellow Adulterers. A sudden
stab takes him out of the world, Vt quae deerant tormentis suppleret punitio,
That punishment may supply what is wanting to his torments. Another in some
bad fashion hazards his honor, God miraculously preserues him more than once
or twice, that he may take warning thereby, and reclaim him self: he mixes a
thousand bitter galls with his sweet delights, he affrights him with sudden
assaults, this does no good on him: he strikes him with a Lethargy that
depriues him of his senses, and thus through his own wilfulnes and
hardheartednes, he is haled violently as it were by the hair of the head, to
this so miserable an end; Vt quae de^rant tormentis suppleret puniti^.

In favor of the reward which the Corrected shall receive, A patient ear
shall reap great profit. Prou. 15.
Solomon proposes many grave sentences to that purpose; The ear that
hearkneth to the correction of life, shall lodge among the wise, not only in
earth, but in-heauen; for, Quicquiescit arguenti, gloriabitur. Amongst other
pledges, that a Soul may assure it self that God wishes it well, is, the
sending of a Legate unto him to advise him of his faults. Si corripuerit me
iustus in miserecordia, hoc ipsum sentiam, (it is Saint Bernards) I will
receive him as sent from God. Labia ^ua distillantia myrrham primam: Cant. 4.
Myrrh is bitter, (as before has been said) but preserves from corruption;
so are the words of my Beloved, they are bitter, but are directed to the saving
of my life, and to preserve me from death. Saint Augustine draws a comparison
from him that is frantic, and one that is sick of a Lethargy; the one falls
into folly, the other into a profound sleep: he that binds the one, and
wakes the other, is troublesome to them both; but being both recovered, they
both give him thanks.

Thou have gained thy brother. This is the end; and (as Aristotle says) Finis
est fundamentum omnium actionum nostrarum, The end is the foundation of all our
actions, and the gaining of a lost brother is the end and scope of these our
diligences. Where I would have you to note, That he that does a wrong, does
ever receive more hurt than he that has the wrong; Qui alterum ladit, plus
sibi nocet, He that hurts another, does most hurt to himself; for the hurt
that the wronged receives, is outwardly, and in body; but the hurt of him
that wrongeth is inwardly, and in soul. And therefore Saint Paul says, Ye
that sin against your brother, sin against Christ; he that despises these
things, despises not man, but God. And our Savior Christ, He that shall call
his brother Fool, is worthy of Hell fire: So that the wronged cannot receive
the third part of the harm of the party wronging. Plato is of opinion, That
he that does an injury to another, does the greatest to himself; and cannot
(if he would) study to do himself a worse mischief. David was much wronged
by Absolon, (for what greater offense could a son commit, than to rise up in
rebellion against his own father?) but he considering with himself, That his
son had done himself the greater hurt, called out unto the men of War, and
said unto them, Seruate mihi puerum Absalon, Spare my son Absalon, and see you
do not slay him. And therefore our Savior Christ teaches us this Lesson, If
thy brother receive the greater hurt of the two by the wrong and injury that
he does thee, do not go about to be revenged of him, but rather take pity
and compassion of him; as thou would be grieved for him, who thinking to give
thee a wound, should put a stoccado upon himself, and die in the place.
Reprove therefore thy brother, and if he shall hearken unto thee, Lucratus es
fratrem tuum.

Thou have gained thy brother. God has a great desire, that thou should win
thy brother to thee, and gain his soul. To this purpose he put that Parable of
the Sheepeheard that went forth to seek his lost Sheep; of the woman that
swept every corner in her house over and over, to look her lost groat: Which
are but expressions of that great care which God takes in seeking after a
Sinner, and the desire that he has to reduce him to his obedience. To the like
end did he propose that other Parable of the prodigal Child; whose argument
ends in the great joy wherewith his father welcomed him home, after he had
given him for lost. And here in this place he wi^ls every one of us by one
means or other, The best service we can do to God, is to reclaim a sinner
from his sin.
to win our brother: first, to deal with him by fair means; if that will not
serve the turn, then by foul, making his fault known to the Prelates of the
Church. So that it seems, that God when he cannot work us for Heaven by
fair and gentle persuasions, by love and entreaties, then will he use blows
and stripes, and beats us thither before him, making us to feel the weight of
his heavy hand. Has not God commanded thee, That if thou meet with an Ox
that is fallen, thou should not pass forward on thy way till thou have help
him up? 1. Cor. 9.
And yet (says Saint Paul) Nun est Deo cura de Bobus? What does God care for
Oxen? Yet if he will that thou relieve a silly Ox, how much more will he,
that thou take pity of a Sinner that is fallen? Saint Chrysostom treating at
large, How that Servant was condemned by his Master, that kept his Talent wrapped
up in a Napkin, not putting it out to some good use or other; says, That there
was sufficient cause enough to condemn him, that he would not venture his
Talent for his Masters profit, and the good of his brethren. God so enrich us
with his grace, that we may use our Talent well, that when our Master Christ
Jesus shall come and call us to account, we may not be found unprofitable
servants; which God grant for his mercies sake.

THE XXI. SERMON, UPON THE WEDNESDAY AFTER THE THIRD SUNDAY IN LENT.
MAT. 15. Tunc accesserunt ad eum ab Hyerosolimis Scribae and Pharisaei.

Then came unto him from Jerusalem, the Scribes and Pharisees.


THis Gospel is an Embassage which the Scribes and Pharisees performed coming
from Jerusalem to Gennezaret, Euuie, the guide that brought the Pharisees to
our Savior.
a Country of Galilee where at that time our Savior resided. But so foolish
an Embassage, from a Nation so grave, and from a commonweal^h so flourishing as
that was (as Saint Hierome has noted it) was never delivered by any but
themselves. The Carthusian says, That these Pharisees were of Zanedrin, that
supreme Council which succeeded those seventy Elders chosen by God, for to
assist his Servant Moses in the government of his People. And Theophilact
says, That the Pharisees were despised throughout all the Cities of that
Kingdom* but that those of Jerusalem were counted the grauest amongst them,
more respected than the rest, and of all other the proudest and most insolent.
Who seeing some of our Saviors Disciples, To eat with unwasht hands, they made
a journey of purpose unto him. The occasion which added wings to their feet,
and the determination which they had in their breasts, was not that which they
here published, but the many miracles which our Savior wrought in the Land of
Galilee: for there was not that sick body, if he could but come to touch his
garmenr, but that he was presently made whole. And this (as Saint Chrysostom
has well observed) was the cause of their coming unto him. Tunc accesserunt,
Then, and not till then did they stir: his fame was now spread abroad, and
when it had reached to Jerusalem, it grew so great, that it struck the Scribes
and Pharisees into such astonishment, and stirred up such envy in them, that
desiring to lessen our Saviors honor, cut the wings of his fame a little
shorter, and disgrace and discredit him in his person, they took hold of such
a foolish and frivolous occasion, as the like was never heard of; As his
Disciples washing, or not washing their hands; picking a quarrel with him: and
to color the matter the better, they pleaded Custom.

They came unto Jesus.
It is a very strange thing in my understanding, That the Scribes and
Pharisees making so little reckoning of that which did import them so much,
they should now make such a do about that which did import them so little. The
rarest and greatest accident that the World ever saw, was Christ's coming into
the World. The Jews did earnestly desire it, and beg it so instantly at Gods
hands, that it was the very mark and white whereat the sighs and prayers of
the Saints did aim and shoot at. And when the fame of this his coming was
blown abroad, trumpetted far and near by the Kings of the East, the Sybels,
and Prophets, the diligences of Herod, and the death of those innocent Babes;
the supreme Council sent some of their Levites to John Baptist, To demand of
him, What art thou? For they standing much upon their authority and greatness,
they would not stir one foot out of doors themselves: but here now they
come in person from Jerusalem to Galilee, upon so slight an occasion as the
washing or not washing of the hands, making much adoo about a matter of
nothing. In ordinary businesses we will trust our servants, sending one this
way, and another that way; but in things that more nearly concern us, we will
take the pains to go about it our selves. But Envy and Love are wont
sometimes to change hands, making Mountains Mole-hils, and Mole-hils
Mountains; little, much, and much little.

In point of Love, we have a plain example thereof in Jacob, whom Leahs
fruitfulness more importing him than Rachaels beauty, (for Christ came from
Jacob by Leah, and not by Rachael) yet Jacob served fourteen years for
Rachael, an^ was well contented with it; whereas for Leah he would have thought
half a year too long a time. And such again might have been his love, that
Leahs bleerenesse of the eyes, might have seemed more pleasing unto him than
the fair looks of Rachael: Ojos ay (as it is in the Proverb) que de lagan^as
se enam^ran, It is as a man's mind or fancy takes him.

In point of Envy, many more are the examples, for the Envious taking pleasure
in the hurt of the Envied, that he may do him a little ill, suffers much
himself, and neglecting his own proper good, which concerns him much, he
desires much another man's hurt, which concerns him little. And much to this
purpose makes that comparison of the Cow which is bitten by a gad-bree or
dume-flie, specified by the Prophet Osce, Ephraim is become a wanton Heifar:
Another Translation has it, Like a Cow that is stung. A Fly makes a Cow to
run up and down as if she were mad, and makes her either headlong to break
her neck down the Cliffes, or to bemyre her self in some Bog where she is
stifled. It is a strange thing, that so little a creature should thus trouble
and disquiet so great a Beast. But this, and more than this does Envy work
upon light occasions. Joseph's Dream and his colored Coat wrought much upon
his Father and brethren, though grave and wise persons. That little short Song,
Sa^^ has slain his thousand, and David his ten thousand, did so disquiet
Saul, that it thrust a thousand jealousies into his head, and much troubled him
for a long time after. Saint Gregory says, That the envious man does suffer
two Hells; one in this life, and another in that other life: and in some sort,
this is the greater Hell of the two; for good being here a torment unto him,
he lives less tormented in Hell in that other life, where there is nothing but
ill. Hence Antonio de Padua drew a discreet conceit, That Go^ (...) not do the
Envious a favor in affoording him Heaven; for he receiving ^o much torment
from so short and transitory goods as those of this life, he would live much
more tormented in Heaven, where there is so much good, without any the least
show or sign of ill.

Why do thy Disciples not wash their hands? Here we are to consider, who it is
that makes this criminal Accusation; then, against whom it is made: painted,
but rotten Sepulchers, whited, but stinking Dunghills; against him that was
blameless in his life, and in his Doctrine divine and heavenly. The Apocalypse
paints out a woman rounded and circled in on every side with Light, the Sun
being her Mantle, the Stars her Crown, the Moon her Chapines; and a Dragon
waiting to devour the son which she was to bring forth. Nor is there any
thing (says Chrysologus) whereon Envy dares not to venture; Coelum tentat,
Terras vrit, Reges vrget, Populos vastat, It tempts Heaven, torments Earth,
presses Princes, and oppresses the People. In a word, Envy is grown so bold
and so insolent, that it dares to set upon God, not contenting her self, that
men should be only Homicides, Fratricides, Patricides; but also Deicides,
seeking to quit God of his life.

Why do thy Disciples transgress the tradition of the Elders, That they wash
not their hands, when they eat? They said before to the Disciples, Your Master
eats with Publicans and Sinners: And here in this place, to their Master, Thy
Disciples wash not their hands. Such whisperers, and mutterers as these,
Informers as great a plague in a common weal as the flies of Aeg^pt.
are like unto those flies which go buzzing still about men's ears, and where
they light and rest themselves, they usually leave behind them worms and
maggots; And therefore, whereas David says, Et in cathedra pestilentiae non
sedit, And has not set in the chair of Pestilence. The Hebrew has the word
Susurronis, In the Talebearer or Informers Chair. Because your flies of Egypt
are a kind of plague (...) pestilence. If Moses had not destroyed them, they
had destroyed the Egyptians. One little spark is enough to burn a whole
house; and one malicious tongue, to undo a whole City. Therefore shall God
destroy thee and pluck thee from out thy Tabernacle, and thy root from out
the land of the living. Psalm. 52.5.
It is the prophecy of King David against Doeg* the Edomite, who did whisper
in King Saul's ear the relief which Abimelech the Priest had given him of the
Shewbread, and of his giving him Goliath his sword; wherewith he kindled such
coals of wrath in the Kings breast, that he slew seventy Priests of them when
they were in their sacred robes, together with their wives and children: He
likewise overthrew their houses. And therefore the Prophet says, So shall God
destroy thee for ever, he shall take thee and pluck thee out of thy Tabernacle,
and root thee out of the land of the Living, So that there shall not be any
relickes of thy lineage left alive. A frogge is the Hierogliphick of a
whisperer, or flattering sycophant, and of a Court tale-carryer; his eyes are
ready to start out of his head, to pry into other men's faults; he leads his
life in mire and mud, and the filthy puddles of sin; he is tailelesse like
an Ape, discovering still his own shame, and yet is still mocking and gybing
at other men's defects. The writer of the Revelation, says, That he saw
issuing out of the Dragons mouth (by which he means Antichrist) eight foul
fiends, like unto frogs. Apoc. 16.
This similitude he took from the effects; for that they are troublesome
creatures, importunate, still balling and croaking out their malice, and living
in the mudde, they no sooner stir but they trouble the water that is clear,
still, and quiet. And this is the picture or representation of a Whisperer, who
is ever troublesome, importunate, and a great babbler, and living in the mudd^^
^his vices, troubles the peace and quiet of the Commonwealth. The Naturalists
do much indeere the poison of a certain Fish called Torpedo, or the
Crampe-fish; of whom they report, That he does benumme the arm of the Fisher,
the venom where of passing from the Hook to the Line, and from the Line to
the Cane, makes his hand to shake and tremble, that he is forced to let fall
his Angle-rod. They likewise say of him, That he darts his poison from the sea,
on those that walk by the shore side: but your Whisperers and Tale-tellers
diffuse their poison a great deal further; it is a woeful and wretched case,
that any ears should be found to receive such poison. Solomon says, A mouth
that speaks lewd things I do hate; reading therein a Lecture to the Princes
of the earth, That they should hate and abhor such Earewigs. Pliny says,
That there is so great an antipathie and contrariety between the Ash tree and
the Serpent, that the Serpent will sooner pass through hot burning coals, than
by the leafes or boughs of this Tree. And for a token that Princes should
abhor these venomous Serpents, these Court-whisperers, they were wont to
wear Crowns of wreathed Ash. David puts it amongst those pledges of Heaven,
Psalm. 1^.3
He that does no evil to his Neighbor, nor takes up a reproach against him.

Why do not thy Disciples wash their hands, etc. Amongst other innumerable
differences of the just man and the Sinner, four fit well for our present
purpose.

(1.)
The first is, That the just has no eyes save to look upon his own sins;
and the Sinner has not any save only to pry into other men's faults. The
Egyptians had an eye, and that a strict one too, over the Children of Israel;
but so had not the Israelites over the Egyptians: And the Book of Wisdom
rendering the reason thereof, says, Only upon them there fell a heavy night,
but thy Saints had a very great light. David's eyesight served him to see the
Sheep that (...) stolen from his subject, but had never an eye to look out to
behold his own robbing of another man both of his wife and his life. Our
Savior Christ said of the Pharisees, That they could spy a moat in another
man's eyes, but not see the beam that was in their own. David, though he were
in grace and favor with God, yet did his sins so trouble him, that he thought
no man was so great a Sinner as himself: Which made him to cry out, Peccatum
meum contrame est; and anon after to come upon his knees unto God, Psalm. ^1.1.
with, Have mercy upon me, ^ God, according to thy loving kindness, and
according to the multitude of thy mercies blot out my transgressions. Here he
embarkes all the mercies of God, he makes a stop and stay of them, he arrests
them, that they may not go from him, having so great need of them as he had.
So must thou, and I, and all of us, desire and beg the like at Gods hand; and
to think with our selves, that no man's sins in the world are more or greater
than ours.

The second is grounded upon a certain kind of language and phrase of
Scripture, The godly look carefully to their ways.
which says, That he that fears God will look well unto his ways, have an
eye to his actions, and thoroughly examine his own conscience: Qui timet Deum,
conuertetur ad corsuum; but he that does not fear God, minds none of all
these. And of this mind is Petrus Chrysologus, treating of the Prodigal, Abij^
in Regionem longinquam, He went into a far Country: This journey of his
(says he) was farther off in point of his understanding, than of place; for
there is no Region more remote than that which remooues us from God, and makes
a Sinner to go on in the wickedness of his ways. Saint Paul does earnestly
advise us, What is ^ent by (...) of Time
that we should redeem the time, Because the days are evil, that is, so
short, that they vanish in an instant. Jacob styled a hundred thirty eight
years of his life, Malos annos, Evil years, for that they (...) full of
trouble and vexation. A man that is much employed, and full of business, his
ordinary phrase is, No tengo bora mia, I am not mine own man, no not for an
hour; I am so taken up with business, that I am made as it were a slave and
drudge unto them. Solomon called those, Evil days, which were spent in
searching into other men's lives, in reading Histories, and other worldly
actions which do little or nothing at all concern us. The Apostle would have
us to redeem them; Redeem those thou have sold and misspent; for many were
with me. Thy Angels did guard me. And amongst those many that had not an eye
unto their ways, I had always a care to look unto my steps.

The third is, That the Sinner looks upon the just, The godly make use of the
Sinner for their own good, so does not he of them Prou. 25.
as on the Attorney that accuses him, the Executioner that torments him, and
the Cross that grieves and afflicts him; The Sinner does behold the Just with
attention, and seakes to take his life from him, because in looking upon him he
beholds his own condemnation. The Elephant troubles that water which
represents his own foulness unto him: And the Ape breaks that glass wherein
he sees his own ill-favored face. A righteous man falling down before the
Wicked, is like a troubled Well, and a corrupt Spring. But the just man looks
upon a Sinner, as upon a wand that beats the dust out of him; as Gods Hangman,
or the Instrument to execute his will. So King David looked upon Shimei when he
cursed him; so Gods People upon Pharaoh and Nebucadnezar; so the Prophet, on
the Lion which took his life from him on the way. Saint Augustine compares the
Sinner to a Millstone and a Winepresse; the one cleanses the Oil, the other
purges the Wine. But it is not so with the Wicked, for they are like dust that
are scattered before the face of the wind: The Hebrew renders it, Like a
Measure that leuels out a thing to it is just breadth and length, and defends it
from colds and heats. Saint Augustine expounding that place of Genesis, Major
seruiet Minori, That Esau who was the elder brother, should serve Jacob that
was the younger; asks the question, Wherein Esau did serve him, being that he
was always an enemy unto him? And his answer is, That he did serve him even
in his forsaking of him and his persecuting of him.

The fourth and last difference is, The wicked like the fly will be allwaies
sucking as ^he botch.
That there being many things worthy commendation, and of much virtue and
goodness, in the Just; the Sinner will neither have an eye to see them, nor a
tongue to praise them; but to find out the least moat or atome of ill, he is
Eagle-eyed. And like unto the Vulture, ouerflying the pleasant fields, and
passing by the sweet smelling pastures, pitches upon the blade bone of an Ass,
or the carcass of some stinking Carrion: or like unto the Fly, who having the
whole body, and that a fair one too, to light upon, makes choice to fall upon
no other place but some tumor, or swelling. Those that did accompany the
Spouse, envying her prosperity, Cant. 1.
did murmr and gybe at her, saying, That for a Queen she was somewhat of
the blackest. Whereunto she answered, That indeed she was black, yet fair
withal. Aaron and his sister Mirian murmured against Moses, Because he had
taken an Aethyopian to wife: Is it not a fine thing, (said they) that a
Governor of so many Souls, a Ruler and Commander over Gods People, should
marry with a Blackamoore? The Rule which we are to observe, is matter of
Virtue; let us fix our eyes upon other folks virtues, and turn them aside
from those good gifts which are in our selves, Aemulamini charissimata meliora;
but in matter of vice we must do the contrary, etc.

Why do not thy Disciples wash their hands? The seeing of one do amiss, is
many times the condemning of all: And this Leaprosie cleaues closest to the
Vulgar. Saint Augustine says, That the state Ecclesiastical has more
particularly a great unhappiness in this with the Common people: for though
such a woman be an Adultresse, yet for all this, other husbands do not think
a jot the worse of their own wives: And though such a man's son be a Thief,
they do not therefore hate their own children. But if a Minister do amiss,
or a Churchman commit such or such a sin, they presently cry out against the
whole Body of the Clergy; and what is but light in others, is heinous in them.

Why do ye also transgress, etc. Sweet Jesus, They having thrown so many
injuries upon thee, and those in the highest nature [ In Beelzebub the Prince
of devils, etc. a Glutton, a Samaritane, and the like reproach full tearmes] how
comes it to pass, that thou did then answer them so mildely, and now upon so
light an occasion as this, thou growest so angry with them? I answer, The
occasions are many.

Patience once wounded, turns to deadly rage.
First of all, They had so ouerlayed him with injuries, and so wronged his
patience, that it seems he desired but some good occasion to tell them their
own, and what kind of people they were; Quis dabit mihi Spinam and veprem
exoptanti? O, that I could but alter my nature, or change my condition; O, that
I could of a Rose become a Thorn. Moses his Rod was turned into a Serpent, and
such a Serpent, that it devoured those other Serpents of the Inchanters of
Egypt; whereby God did then seem to say, King Pharaoh has made him a Dragon,
thinking to devour my People alive; Ad te o Draco magne, But I will turn my
self into a Dragon, and will swallow down whole both him and all his People.

Envy has more of the Devils venom in it, than any other vice.
Secondly, Howsoever light this occasion may seem to be, there lay a great
deal of malice hidden under it, and a great deal of envy. Other vices have
much of the Devils venom in them, but none of them so much as Envy. There was
a great deal of envy covered under those words, when the little childeren
cried to Elisha, Baldpate, bald pate; whereupon the Bears came down amongst
them from the mountains, and tore forty two of them in pieces. This
punishment may seem to exceed their offense; but the name of Baldpate did
include much malice. For it being a fashion amongst the Prophets, to wear
long hair like Nazari^es, they in dirision call the Prophet, Baldpate. And
Iustine Martyr farther discovers this their malice, and says, That some of
the Jews were of opinion, That the Devil had dashed Elias in pieces on the top
of some high mountain; and that these childrens meaning was, when they cried,
Come up thou Baldpate, that the Devil would do the like by him. This their
malice was likewise helped on by their Parents, who read this Lecture to their
Children. And fit it was that Bears should be their Executioners; for a Bear
being at his birth an unshapen lump of flesh, the Dam thereof by licking of it
brings it is eyes, mouth, and nose into a form. In like manner, the parents of
these children had shaped them according to their own mind, and informed them
what they should say. In a word, These Scribes and Pharisees finding fault with
the Disciples not washing of their hands, taxes maliciously the uncleanness
of their hearts; and from that little sanctity that they would enforce upon
his Disciples, they would feign infer, That their Master had but little
holiness in him; Wherein they showed the great malice they bare unto him.

Besides, There are some things which in Noblemen and Gentlemen are but toys
and trifles to speak of, which in those that profess a state of more
perfection, are grievous crimes. A young Gallant rounds the streets at night,
courts his Mistress at her window, entertaines her ears with music, and
this in him is not held any disgrace at all; but a grave Churchman, an old
Deane, or a Chanon does the like, this in him is a foul fault, and esteemed to
be a heinous sin. David was a man of great strength; Sampson stronger than
he; cut off David's hair, and you abate not one jot of his strength; but cut
off Sampsons, and he grows as weak as water, and ye may do what ye will with
him, because his strength was in his hair.

Thirdly, Saint Hierome says in an Epistle of his to Demetriades, It Is base in
any, to seek his own credit, by the discredit of another.
That nothing does more discover the baseness of man's mind, and the
unworthiness of his disposition, as to seek to credit himself by
discrediting of others, and to pretend estimation not by the good in himself,
but the ill in others; and comparing themselves with men of mean deserts,
seek to shine through others darkness. Esaias likens the heart of an ill
natured man, to a troublesome and tempestuous sea, which seeking to cleanse it
self, Esaias 57.
casts all it is filth upon those shores which are next to it. The proud
Pharisee kneeling before the Alter, boasted himself saying, I am not as other
men; these men are thieves, I am not so; these men are covetous, I am not so,
etc. In your balances, the one cannot come up unless the other come down;
the Moon gives not her light till the Sun hides his head. Luke 18,
In a word, It is the manner of some men to rise by other men's falling, and to
grace themselves by disgracing others. Pharaohs Magi could increase evils;
Moses caused Frogs, and they caused Frogs; Moses, Flies, and they Flies: but
they could not lessen nor stop evils; bid them take away those plagues, they
could not do it. So there are some men, all whose worth and power consists in
adding evils to evils, but not in taking them away. But God runs a
contrary course, he always does good, but never does that is il: Sicut malum
inter ligna syluarum, Some delight in nothing but doing evil.
He is a Pippen among Thorns, he inuites us with his Fruit; they scratch and
tear our flesh. And albeit the washing of the hands was a very light fault,
yet one little and another little comes in the end to make a mickle. His
Disciples do not wash their hands, they do not fast with John Baptist, their
master keeps company with Publicans and sinners, he observes not their Fasts,
he has made a compact with Belzeebub, Non est a Deo, He is not of God. See
what a malicious conclusion they make of these premises.

Fourthly, It is a hateful thing to God, That a man should commend Vice, and
condemn Virtue; He that iustifies the Wicked, and condemns the lust, The
wicked are wholly given to condemn Virtue and commend Vice. Esaias 5.20.23.
both are an abomination to the Lord. Esaias repeateth the same lesson in the
fifth Chapter of his Prophecy, Woe unto them that speak good of evil, and
evil of good; that justify the wicked, and take away the righteousness of
the righteous from him. And for the better qualifying of the greatness and
heinousness of this fault, in one place the Scripture calls it abominable; and
in another, bewailes it with a Vae, or Woe; which (as Saint Gregory has noted
it) is commonly athreatning of a perdurable punishment. And therefore Esaias
farther adds, As the flame of fire deuoureth the stubble, and as the chafe
is consumed of the flame, so their root shall be as rottenness, and their bud
shall rise up like dust.

Fifthly, Our Savior returns the point of this weapon upon their own bosoms,
by coming upon them with a Quare and vos, conuincing (as Saint Hierome says)
this their slander, with a truth. He that would reprove an other, must* first
redress himself.
The like befell him in the case of the Adultresse, when the Pharisees asked
him, If they should stone her or no to death, according as the Law commanded:
whereunto he answered, Let him that is without sin cast the first stone; it
is but a slouer^ly trick to go about with foul hands to make another body
clean. Aristotle faith, That the eyes have no color, (nature so holding it
fit) to the end they might the better receive and discern all other colors.
In like manner, he that will reprehend other men's faults must himself be
blameless. David's sin was known to all the world, yet he made confession
thereof only unto God, Against thee only have I sinned, etc. because God
only had the power to punish him. For he only (says Saint Augustine) does
justly punish, in whom there is not any thing to be found that deserves
punishment; The punishment of sin belongs only unto God.
and that man is fit to reprehend another, in whom nothing is to be found
worthy reprehension. Those of Israel sallyed twice out against those of
Benjamin, desiring justice at Gods hands of that cruel sin which they had
committed, but were both times overcome. Saint Gregory says, That they went
forth against them to revenge Gods honor, and the wrong that was done to their
Neighbor; but God did not give them the victory, because they had an Idol
amongst them which they adored. Now he that will punish another man's sins,
must first purge himself of his own sins.

The representing of man's own sins to himself, is a great Tapaboca, or
stopgame, to play upon other men's faults. To that Sinner who uses to cast his
sins like a wallet over his shoulder, God says, Statuam contra te faciem tuam,
I will make thee to see that which thou do not see, and I will bring those
sins which thou have thrown behind thy back, before thy face, to the end
that being ashamed of thine own doings, thou may not find fault with other
men's actions. Esaias. 6.5.
Woe is me, I am undone (says Esaias) because I am a man of polluted lips. The
Prophet had seen God in a Throne of great and wonderful Majesty, and he
would have published and proclaimed the same to all the World, but he says
That he durst not presume to do it, because his lips were polluted. The Chaldae
word is, Grauis ore, My lips are of too heavy a dullness for such high
Mysteries. The seventy Interpreters render it, Vae mihi, doleo compunctus, My
sins stop my mouth, when I consider mine own life, I dare not question
another man's. The Pharisee censured Marie Magdalen to be a Sinner, and our
Savior Christ to be no Prophet; but our Savior set^ing before him a
reconuention of many grievous sins, he left him amassed and ashamed. God took
away the poor innocent babe which David had by Beersheba, pretending therein
(according to Theodoret) to bury this his sin under ground, because he
being appointed by God to punish Adultrers and Murdrers, they might not tit
him in the teeth and say unto him, Romans 3.5.
And why do you the like? Saint Paul asks the question, Is God then unjust?
And he answers thereunto, God forbid, else, How shall God judge the world? If
thou should ask a Philosopher, Whither it were possible for God to sin?
He would answer, It is not possible, because he is Causa prima, and norma
vniuersalis, The prime cause, and universal rule. But Saint Paul's answer is,
That it is not possible that God should sin, because he could not then
conveniently govern the world. For he can hardly reform sin in another man,
who had need to reform what is amiss in himself. Three Kings did conspire
against the king of Moab, 4. Kings 3.
they besieged his City, and he seeing himself in a desperate taking, took
his eldest son that should have reigned in his stead, and offered him for a
burnt offering upon the wall. Cajetan says, That this Sacrifice was not done
to the God of Israel, as some have imagined, but to those Idols which that
King did worship; and that after this so cruel an act, there insued so great a
plague in the Israelites Camp, that they were forced to raise the siege. Facta
est indignatio magna in Israel. The Hebrew has it, Ira magna: The Vulgar
renders it, Israel was sore grieved, and departed from him, and returned to
their Country; but the wrath of God entered into their Army, for that they had
sacrificed their sons and daughters to Devils, according to that of David,
Sacrificauerunt filios and filias suas daemonio. By whose example the King of
Moab learned to offer this kind of sacrifice; and God was highly offended with
them for it, and therefore would not suffer such as had played the Idolaters in
sacrificing their children, to take away the Kingdo^s of other Idolaters, who
perhaps were less faulty than themselves. Alexander layingit to a Pirates
charge, that with two ships he had robbed at sea; he returned him this
answer, Thou rob'st all the World, and no man says any thing unto thee; and
I, who to pick out a poor living, put forth to sea but with two poor little
barks, must have theft and pyracie laid to my charge. The like answer did a
Bishop make to Pope Gregory the second, when he kept his Sea at Auignon, Who
giving him a shrewd check, for that he did not reside in his Bishopric; he
told him, It is now full three score and ten years that the Popes Sea has
been kept out of Rome, and your Holiness now reprehends me for living but
three days from my Bishopric. To this purpose suits that answer which Vriah
gave to King David. 2. Reg. 11.
This valiant Captain took up his lodging, and laid himself down to sleep
in the porch of the Kings palace: And the King asking him, why he did not go
home to enjoy the ease and pleasure of his own bed? He made him this answer,
The Ark of God dwells in Tents, and my Lord Ioab General of your Army, and
the servants of my lord abide in the open fields; shall I then being but an
ordinary soldier, go into my house to eat, and drink, and lie with my
wife? By thy life, and by the life of thy soul, I will not do this thing.
This was a severe reprehension in Vriah, to his sovereign. For if a subject
shall out of such honest respects refrain from going home to his own house;
much more ought the King to have abstained from lying with another man's wife.
Nor is that History of Judas much amiss, who being Governor of the people,
and finding Thamar great with child, would needs execute that law against her,
of adulterous women; But Thamar proved, That he that was to judge others,
should not himself be a delinquent.

Now we come to the last reason of this our Saviors sharp and quick answer
unto them. There were two Truths prophesied of our Savior Christ:

The one, his Meekness and Gentleness. And of this, Christ as he was meek
in reproouing, so he was stout in revenging.
there are many prophecies.

The other, The stoutnesse and courage wherewith he was to revenge the wrongs
and injuries done to the poor. Saluos faciet filios pauperum and humiliabit
calumniatorem, He shall save the children of the poor, and shall humble the
slanderer. Saint Austen, Justin Martyr, and many others, understand this to be
spoken literally of Christ. For Calumniatorem, the Greek reads Sycophantam.
And so do they call your Promooters and Informers. Whether it were, because in
Athens they had a Law, that none should bring figs to that City to sell; Or
whether it was forbidden in Greece, that any should enter to gather figs in
another man's orchard; (Whence he that informed thereof, came to be called a
Sycophant) Or upon that witty conceit of Aesops, who, when a certain servant
had eaten some figs* and laid the fault upon one of his fellows, gave order,
that both of them should drink lukewarm water, and the eater of them, having
vomited up the figs* they called him Sycophant. Our Savior then shall save the
poor, and humble the slanderer. He shall smite the earth with the rod of his
mouth, and with the breath of his lips shall he slay the wicked. Esaias. 11.
Iraeneus expounds this place to be spoken of Gods protecting and defending
of the poor. He is their tower of defense in the day of trouble, their hope in
distress, and their shield of comfort in their tribulation. And that God does
revenge with greater severity, the wrongs that are done to his friends, than
those that are offered to himself, is a favor so usually with him, and so
generally known, that I need not to insist thereupon. One while, because he
thinks himself much beholding unto them, that they will resign up their own
right, and leave the cause of their wrongs to him; and that they will put their
hope, and their trust in him. Sub vmbra alarm tuarum sperabo, donec transeat
iniquitas, i. Calamitas. Defend me o Lord, whilst this storm passes over my
head. Another while, that he may show more love to his friends than to
himself. In the old Law, he gave great proofs of this Truth; and in the new,
he gave far greater testimonies thereof. Esaias draws a comparison from the
Lion, who having his prey between his claws, a company of Sheapeheards come
crying after him, making a great noise and clamor, but he makes no great
reckoning of it. And is all one with that saying of our Savior, Non rapiet
quisquam de manu mea, No man shall snatch them out of my hand. Abimelech took
Abraham's wife from him, and God at midnight appearing unto him, in the midst of
his mirth and lust, he spoke unto him in a fearful voice, E^ morieris, Thou
art but a dead king. The like befell Pharaoh. Procopias says, That God did
declare as much when he appeared in the fiery bush. They did whippe his people
with the rods of briars, and did burn them up, by enforcing them to find straw
for to heat the ouens wherein they were to bake their brickes; and God says,
De^t. 30.
It is I that am whipped, it is I that am burned in the fire. Moses treating of
this protection of God, takes his comparison from the Eagle, whose care and
vigilancie in breeding up of his young ones, Gods protecting of his children in
the old Law, differing from that in the new.
is exceeding great: but in the end, shows himself very cruel to that young
of his, whose eyes he exposes to the beams of the Sun. All this love and
care, ran along with the written Law. But in that of Grace, giving us greater
pledges of his love, he draws his comparison from the Hen, whose love and care
exceedes all other indeerings whatsoever. Mat. 25.
She scorneth and contemns her own life for the safeguard of her chicken;
she fasts, that they may feed; she is content to be lean, that they may be
fat; and now and then dies that they may live. Saint Austen has observed, that
because the Devil spoke unto Christ, That he would make those stones bread
for to relieve his own hunger; he refused to do it. But if it had bin to
relieve thine, or mine, he would have done it. As he turned the water into wine
at the wedding, not for himself but for others. And at that meal in the
mountain, where he multiplied the loaves and the fishes, whereof himself did
not eat a bit.

Why do ye also transgress the Commandment of God. He wounds them with their
own weapon, and retorts the force of this their argument upon themselves, and
sends them away ashamed. He drives them to a demur, and puts them to ponder
upon this Vos custodias, Of the Law, These suns that were to lighten this
commonwealth; For a man to commit that which himself should punish, i^ as
strange as shameful. Eccl. 20.
these North-starres, by which the people were to sail through the sea of this
world. Concupiscentia spadonis euag^nauit i^uencam. Eunuchs were appointed for
the guarding and keeping of women, as the use is now in Constantinople: But,
that a gelded man through lust should defile a maid, being bound to preserve
her honor: That he that should cloth the naked, should strip them bare: That
he that should keep the Laws of the Commonwealth, should be the first that
should break them; is as strange, as shameful. Phi^^^^ thrust Zambri and a
daughter of the Prince of Midian through with his spear, and pinning them to
the ground, did an acceptable sacrifice to God. Za^bri was of the Tribe of
Simeon, who in the company of his brother Le^ie, had taken that cruel revenge
of the Prince of Sichem, for the rauishing of Dinah, that they left not a man
living, nor a house standing. Now his grandfather having used so great rigor
in punishing of such a dishonestie, he of all other should not have committed
this sin. For this reason the Angel used the like rigor with Moses, whither
it were because he had not circumcised his children, or whither it were because
he took his wife along with him in that his journey, or whither it were that he
had manifested the cowardice and fear that he had of Pharaoh; the Angel made
semblance that he would kill him: for he that is a Lawgiuer, a Captain, and
a Governor, is bound to much more.

And why do you also, etc. Here is a Why for a Why, they have as good as they
bring.

And here two considerations offer themselves unto us:

The one, That he that shall do a wrong, shall be paid in his own coin;
that very day that a man shall do an injury by taking away the good name of
his brother, he puts a tax upon his own reputation, seals the same, makes it
his own Act, and is bound to make repayment thereof: And this is a Quare and
vos, Why do ye also, etc. This is to throw stones against Heaven, God pays
every man in his own coin.
or to ^pit against the wind. David cut off Goliath his head with his own sword
after that he had reviled Gods people; Jacob with Esau's own clothes, stole
away the blessing from him, by putting on his hands and his neck the skin of
a Kid: with this deceit he grieved both his father and his brother, but he was
paid at length in his own coin: Joseph's brethren sell him, they dip his Coat
in the blood of a Kid; so the same trick that he had put upon another, was
afterward put upon himself: Vzziah would needs play the Priest, and when he
was putting on that sane lamina, 2. Chro. 26.
or Frontlet which the Highpriests did use in their pontificiall Ceremonies,
behold, he was leaprous in his forehead: see how he was paid in his own coin,
he had no sooner put it on his forehead, but he was punished in his forehead.
King Ahab did bring home the grapes of Naboths Vineyard in Baskets; he is paid
in his own coin, for the heads of his sons were likewise delivered up in
baskets. A servant of Alexander Seuerus sold lying fauour^, words that were
but smoke; but see how he was paid in his own coin, he was stifled to death
with smoke; fumo pereat, qui fumo^ vendit. It is noted by Saint Gregory, That
the great rich man's greatest sins lay in his tongue, and therefore he suffered
more pain and torment in his tongue, than in any other part of his body.
Saint Paul* Before he was converted, busied himself wholly in chains, gyues,
fetters, and imprisonments; he went purposely to Damascus, with a full
resolution not to leave one man alive; but he suffered afterward in that
wherein he had sinned, and was paid home in his own coin: for, as it
appears in the Acts of the Apostles, he himself had been imprisoned
sixteen several times, and as one that had been set up as a sea mark, to
bid others beware of running the same course as he had done, he advises, Ne
quis circum^eniat in negotio fratrem suum* q^oniam vindex est Dominus de his
omnibus.

The second consideration is, That the wrong which thou shall do unto another,
shall not only be repaid thee in the same coin, but with use upon use, thou
shall pay double the principal; Redditurum fanor^ noris, says Hesiod: And Job,
If any blot has cleaned to my hands, let me sow, and let anotherreape, yea,
let my plants be rooted out. And again, If mine heart has been deceived by a
woman, Job. 31.
or if I have laid ^ait at the door of my neighbor, Let my wife grind unto
another man, and let other men bow down upon her. It is misery enough to be
paid home in his own coin, and men for the most part when they have returned
wrong for wrong, rest reasonably well contented therewith; but with God, I must
let thee know, that the case is far otherwise; for it is usual with him, to
reueng wrongs seuenfold. The Prophet said to David, 2. Reg. 12.
Because thou have taken the wife of Vriah to be thy wife, I will take thy
wives before thine eyes, and give them unto thy Neighbor, and he shall lie
with thy wives in the sight of this Sun; thou tookest one wife from thy
Neighbor, and thy Neighbor shall take many from thee. This was that which
David charged Saul withal, when he marched over the mountains with his
People, persecuting him to the death, The King of Israel is come out to seek
a flea, as one would hunt a Partridge in the Mountains: 1. Reg 26.
Why should the King my Lord be at so much pains and cost to take away my life
from me, it is as if thou should go about to kill a flea, or take a
Partridge. A great Lord goes a hawking with twenty Horse, and as many
Spaniels, and I know not how many cast of Hawks, he returns home at night
with one poor partridge in his poutch, which is scarce, worth two Royals, the
charge thereof coming to two hundred, and the tiring out of his body, to two
thousand. Now if he should employ all this in hunting after a Flea, far
greater were his folly. All the hurt you can do me, is no more than the
killing of a Flea; but the harm that you receive thereby is exceeding great,
as well in regard of the wasting of your Treasure, as in the toiling and trying
out of your person.

Ye also transgress the Commandments of God by your Traditions. The zeal of
good is good; True zeal carries with it both lightning and thunder.
but when men are zealous of the less, and neglectfull of the more, it is not
zeal, but passion. When your lightning does not accompany your thunder, all
is wind: there are some zealous Professors that are all thunder and no
lightning; they make a great noise with their words, the wind whereof grows
high, but the light of their good works does not shine to the World. The
Pharisees were a kind of Alharaquientos, men that would make a great deal of
do and pudder about nothing; they keep a strange kind of coil about the
washing and not washing of the hands, a thing scarce worth the talking of;
despising in the mean while the keeping or not keeping of Gods Commandments.
A Stacke of straw is on fire, and a Princes Palace full of infinite riches is
all on a flame; thou runnest to save the stacke of straw, not caring what
becomes of the Palace. Art thou more careful of straw than of gold? The like
(says Saint Gregory) happens in men's vices; Pilate took a great deal of
care that Christ's death might not be laid to his charge, and washing his hands,
as if he had no hand in the business, sticks not to say, I am innocent, etc.
but made no reckoning of delivering him over to the will and pleasure of the
people. The Jews held it to be a heinous sin, to enter into the Praetorium
or Judgment Hall, Lest they should be defiled; but they accounted it no sin
at all, to nail our Savior Christ to the Cross, when they cryde, Sanguis
eius super nos; they held it a grievous sin, that the bodies of those that
were crucified, out of the observance to their Sabbath, should hang upon the
Cross; but accounted it no sin at all, to thrust a Spear into our Saviors
side after that he was dead, showing in his death the love they bare him in his
life: they take no offense, that Christ calls them Hypocrites, false Prophets,
and Transgressors of the Commandments of God; but when he tells them,
Hypocrisy strains at a gnat, and swallows a Camel.
That which enters in at the mouth, defiles not the Man, this is that they are
angry at, and this is Tragarse el Camelo, y desalar el mosquito, To swallow a
Camel, and strain at a Gnat, to see a moat in another man's eye, and not the
beam that is in his own: Like unto that Whale which swallowed up Ionus at a
bit, his body and clothes all at once, and deuoures Pilchers one by one; and
this was the Pharisees fault. Origin observes, That the washing of the hands
was now turned to superstition, for therein they placed a great part of their
fouls salvation. Who can choose but laugh at these men's ignorance and
blindness, that they should swallow and digest many other foul faults, and
should here be so nice and dainty, as to quarrel with our Savior about his
Disciples washing or not washing of their hands?

Your Traditions; (says our Savior) because for covetousness of gain they
had introduced many; and amongst the rest, this of the frequent and often
washing of the hands, Non manducant panem (says Saint Mark) nisi crebr^
lauerint manus, They eat no bread till they have often washed their hands*
Theophilact reads it Cubitaliter, up to the elbowes. At our Saviors own
Table* and at other places where now and then they were invited, they ever
behaved themselves in* a decent and civil manner, as Petrus Chrysologus notes
it unto you; but they made little reckoning of this superstition, and of many
others which the Pharasaicall avarice had brought in; as to deny sustenance to
our Parents to swear by the Temple, but not by the gold of, etc. for, by
making the gold more sacred, they presumed men would fear to filch any of it
away* The Priests did purposely multiply Laws; for where there are many Laws,
there are many transgressions, and where there are many transgressions, there
are many gainful commings in. God complains by the mouth of Esaias, Exactores
spoliauerunt populum meum, Esaias ^.
The Extortioners beat my people to pieces, and grind the faces of the Poor.
Vatablus renders it, Racemando spoliant; for by plucking off now a bunch, and
then a bunch, they leave not in all the Vineyard a Grape that is scarce worth
the gleaning. Nicetas by these Exactors and Extortioners understands the
Priests; and says, That as your covetous Misers, after they have cutdowne
their Corn and made it into great cocks, and carried home their harvest, fall
a raking and a gleaning over and over again, contrary to the Leuiticall Law;
so these men having devoured the greater part of the Richer sort, they fall a
raking of the poor, and take from them that little that they have, by
ordaining most unjust Laws. The Sons of Ely the Scripture calls, the Sons
of Belial; and farther says, That they did not know what did belong to the
Priests Office, Nescientes Dominum, neque Officium Sacerdotum. Which Vatablus
renders thus, Nescientes Domi^^^, ius fecerunt contra populum, Not knowing the
Lord as they ought to have done, they made a Law against the people, in favor
of their own covetousness ^ for they being to receive the Offerings of the
flesh sod, to the end that they might not powder it up, and keep it to
themselves, they brought in a new custom, That they should give it them raw,
that they might either put it into past, salt it, sell it, or otherwise do
what they list with it.

The World was always and will be still the same; Many laws in a Commonwealth
bring gain to some, but loss to most.
that which we see the Scribes and Pharisees did then, the like course do
they now take (which govern the Commonwealth) with your Vintners, your
Victuallers, your Butchers, your Fruiterers, your Hearbe-wiues* and a world of
other Trades, imposing many Laws upon them, not so much for that they import
the good government of the Commonwealth, as for the private benefit and
maintenance of your Clerks of the Market, your Alguazils, Attorneys,
Promoters, and all the rest of that rabble, which live upon these fees of Hell:
And the knauerie hereof is to be seen in this, that when these Officers meet
with false weights, or water mixed with wine, and the like, it is a wonder if
they prohibit them to come any more to the Market, or to banish them the
Country; but rather clapping a mulct upon them, they continue them, and keep
them still a foot, as an Inheritance that brings them in profit, or as a Farm
that affoords a set rent to their purses. You shall have a Vintner brought a
dozen times one after another into the court, and as often fined, and yet be
suffered still to sell wine; ^ee the Officers well, and ye shall fell at what
rates and with what weights you will: In a word, No man breaks in his trading,
but he that cannot content these Exacto^s. (...) says, Covetousness the only
God, that commands the world.
That Covetousness is the only God that commands the World; and one while it
incounters with a brother; another, with a father; and now and then with God,
and is the only Tyrant that does most domineere over our souls. Saint Paul
cured a certain maid having a Spirit of Divination, which gate her masters
much vantage by divining* Acts 16.16.
but now when her Masters saw that the hope of their gain was gone; they
caught hold of Paul, and bringing him, before the Magistrate they complained of
him, That he troubled the City. For Covetousness is such a Devil, that the
Devil himself cannot (though he would) cast it out of doors, where it
concerns a man's particular intere^^. And when the Devil shall afford a man
apparel for his back, meat for his mouth, and money in his purse, if God
should cast this Devil out, the party possessed would complain for the loss
of his company. In Andaluzia, out of mere covetousness they suffer their
she-slaues every year to be got with child, that she may bring them a Turk
or a Moore, (as others keep Mares for breeders) that when they grow up, and
are able to work for their living, they may bring them in daily gains, like
horses that are hired out; albeit they lead therein a course of life contrary
to all both humane and divine Laws. But they suffer this Devil to dwell in
their house for covetousness sake: but that this Devil shou^^ dwell in
Priests, Sine miserabili gemitu (says Saint Bernard) dicendum non est, It is a
most miserable and lamentable thing.

For your Traditions, etc. Sometimes the cause of a sin is greater than the
sin it self: To break the Law, is ill; but for to maintain their
Traditions, worse, for this is a contempt of the law, and of him that
established the same. Euerie-foot the Prophets repeat, Haec dicit Dominus, Thus
says the Lord* it seeming unto them, That there can be no contradicting of
this Proclamation, no reason given against it. For, to acknowledge God to be
infinitely wise, and to allege reasons withal against that which he
commands, is to make him ignorant. In Leuiticus God said, Leuit. 16.
Stand in awe of entering within my Sanctuary; notifying thereby unto us, That
there should dwell in our souls such a reverend opinion of Gods Majesty and
omnipotency, that whatsoever was not God, we should account as nothing
compared therewith. Amongst other his Robes and ornaments belonging to his
place and Calling, the high Priest had his Rationale Iudicij, and his (...)
auream; it was raiment of silk set with twelve stones, wherein were graven the
names of the twelve Tribes; and in the midst thereof certain letters which
spoke thus, Vrim and Thummim, Illumination and Perfection; which our
Interpreter expounds to be, Doctrine and Truth; in token that the Doctrine of
the Law, which is the perfection of our understanding, ought to be graven in
the Priests breast, and communicated to the People. That same Zona aurea, or
golden girdle, was that same Lamina or plate of gold, which being fastened to
his Mitre, did serve as a frontlet to the Priests forehead: whereon was written
Sanctum Domino; signifying thereby, That that which the Priest ought more
especially to have before his eyes, is the holiness and pureness of our Lord
God* To this end was directed that terrible thunder and lightning on the Mount,
which struck the people into such a fear, that they cried out, Non loquatur
nobis Domin^^, Let not the Lord speak unto us; fearing least they should be
strooken down to the ground in a swoone. Why, o Lord, did thou appear in so
terrible and fearful a manner? That they might have a respect to the Majesty
of God, and stand in fear of his power, that they might the better incline
their hearts to keep his Laws.

The Sibarites, came to the Oracle of Delphos, to know how long their
commonwealth should continue. Plato discoursing of a Commonwealth in general,
in his Books de Republica has put three signs or tokens of their duration
and continuance.

The one, That their Princes should not lie.

The other, That the bad should not be more than the good.

The third, That the goings out, should not be more than the commings in. For,
That the Princes should be Liars, the good few, and their expenses excessive,
are in all Commonweales sad vigiles of their end. But the Oracle made answer,
That that Commonwealth should so long last and continue, whilst Man was not
more esteemed amongst them than God. Whereupon they were persuaded, that their
Commonwealth should endure for ever: It not being able to sink into their
heads, that so great a monstrousness as this should once succeed in their
State. But it af^erwards happened, that a delinquent fled for succor to the
image of Pallas, and the Governor willing his guard to lay hold on him, and to
take him from thence, he shifted himself from the Goddess, and clung close to
the Statua of the Kings father, so that none of the Officers durst offer to
touch him; and so that Kingdom was overthrown. So this despising of Gods
commandments, and the preferring of their own Traditions, was the dissolution
of the Jewish Synagogue.

For, besides Apostolical and Ecclesiastical Traditions, Traditions, how far
forth to be regarded
which carry so great authority in the Church, treating generally of such
Traditions, which are certain ancient Customs inherited from our
forefathers; there are certain other Traditions in the World annexed to
particular States, which in their own nature are things indifferent. As your
courtesies and complements amongst Courtyers; The giving of the right hand; And
your Titles of Worship, Lordship, Excellency, and the like. Such a great Lord
calls for drink, his servant brings it, and delivers it him upon his knee. Thou
sneezest, he that is next unto thee puts of his hat, not that that does hinder
thy farther sneezing, but because it is a Tradition, and a received custom so
to do. Others, are reduced to Sanctity and Holiness. A Clergy man goes in a
grave habit: A Friar, in a patch't frocke; Thou respects him for this and
hold him the holier man, not that he is so, but because it is Tradition. The
Dominicans, reckon less of those religious orders, that wear a hood of cloth;
the Augustines, of those that wear one of Linsey-woolsie: not because it
mattereth much, but because it is Tradition. But to put as much observance in
these Traditions, as in the Laws of God, is a despising of God. Irritum
fecisti mandatum Dei, Variety of traditions.
Thou make the Commandment of God of no effect. Of these Saint Austen
says, That every one should keep that custom, that he finds shall make for
the peace and quiet of the Church, as also of those we converse withal. As
much as in you lies, having peace with all men. Others there are, wherein the
opinion of the world can do more than the faith of God. Your great Lords will
impawne their estate to maintain a Tilting or a Tournying, or in making a
Mask for to do their Mistress service; They will be liberal and bountiful
to a common Buffoon, or Iester, but will scarce give a royal to the poor. And
this is Tradition. Julian the Apostata made a Proclamation, that no Christian
should enjoy your Military ornaments; and many took this for such an affront,
that they who before would have fried at the Stake for God, did deny him for
worldly respects, and for the preserving of their honor. Gentlemen, not
measuring their expenses by their means, it so falls out, that oftentimes they
want a royal to buy bread to put in their mouths, yet their vanity so far
ouerswaies them, that they will not be without a coach, a lackey, a page, an
old beldame, and a squire. They take up commodities at dear rates, they run in
debt, never think of paying it, and in the end are utterly undone; this also
is Tradition. Your Captains and Soldiers stand much upon the Laws of your
Duel, and highly adore them; which being well examined, are the greatest and
absurdest fooleries man can imagine? The Lie, must have the bastonadoe; the
bastonado, drawing of blood; and drawing of blood, death, etc. One shall strike
thee with a cudgel, that shall break thy shoulder blade; And the Soldier
will say, He had good hap that he did not lame him with a cane. And this is
Tradition. Your hucking Merchants, your cunning Tradesmen, and generally all
that buy and sell, use to cog and lie: It is not good, it is not good, says
every buyer, And this too is Tradition. Your Catch-poles, pole their prisoners;
Tradition the Churches perdition.
your Registers, register falsehoods; And this is Tradition. Saint Cyprian
says, That the Churches perdition has been, that Christians are not
contented with sinning through weakness, through ignorance, or through
malice, but through opinion; whence it comes to pass, that they seek not
excuses for their sins, but authority to maintain them, thereby the better
to perpetuate them. They that are condemned through error, are easily cured;
but when they have opinion in their favor, and a general consent, and are
authorized by custom, they are such current money that none refuses it, nor
seeks to remedy the same. Insanientium multitudo (says Seneca) fit sanitatis
protectio, The madness of many, does privilege madness. This passes in
these foresaid Traditions. And so are they received of all, etc. They said unto
Micheas, All the Prophets with one general consent* prophecy good unto the
King. But how do they deliver this message well, if God do reveal it to be
ill? It is Tradition. But the Law of God, ought to be the rule whereby we are
to level our actions, and the court wherein we are to give account of our
doings. Tertullian says, That our Savior Christ, Chist not called Custom, but
Truth.
was not called Custom, but Truth. Ego sum via, verit^^, and vita, I am the
way, the truth, and the life. And Custom must be qualified by Verity, and
not by Antiquity.

For God has commanded, saying, Honor thy Father and Mother, and he that
does the contrary let him dye; But ye say, Though he honor not his Father or
his Mother, he shall be free: Thus have ye made the commandments of God of no
authority by your Traditions. In this honoring of our Father and Mother, he
likewise includes their maintenance, and that we should not see them want.
But ye say, That he that shall take from Father and Mother and give it to the
Temple, does comply with the Law. Munus quodcunque ex me obtuler^ De^, tibi
proderit; It will profit thee, but it is better to give it unto God. Origin
says, That this error did arise from another that was more ancient. For when
men were not willing to pay a debt, they did offer it to the Temple, and did
notify the same to the Creditor. Corban, id est, donum est, I have given it to
the Temple, and therefore thou art not to require it at my hands. This was a
ravening kind of covetousness. God would have bread set upon his altar, to the
end that he that was in necessity might be relieved; Our offerings are no honor
to God, when they harm another.
which was David's case when he was hungry and in want, and God took it well.
But how can he take it well at thy hands, that thou should take away the
bread from thy hunger-starued Father, or from a poor needy soul, to offer it
on the Altar? Athanasius reports another effect of covetousness far more
brutish and abominable, who when he fled from Alexandria where he was Bishop,
for fear of the Manichees and the Arrians, they exercised so many cruelties
upon the Catholics, that treating them in a most inhuman and cruel manner,
they condemned it to be a sin to succor the poor, and the streets being
full of wretched and miserable people, no man durst look upon them, nor offer
to relieve them, least they should be accounted sinners.

This people does honor me with their lips, but their heart is far from me.
There are a certain sort of Sinners that are boasting Sinners; Two sorts of
sinners, the one shamle^ly bold.
one will boast himself so far to be thy friend, that there is not the sin
that he will not do to do thee service; that he will slash this man, and
slay that man, and swear any thing that thou will have him, though never so
false: finding fault with such a one, That he is notworthie to be esteemed a
friend, because thou can not trust him with the murdering of such a man, the
taking of such a purse, the robbing of such a house, nor with thy whoredoms
nor adulteries, and the like. The Gentiles in the Primitive Church did murmr
against the Christians, saying, That they were an unprofitable, impertinent,
miserable, and nigardly kind of people; and the reason of it was, for that they
would not eat with them till they vomited up their meat as they sat at board,
nor drink with them till they were overtaken with wine. Tertullian makes an
Apology in their defense, and says, That Christians, should not only be
Christians but also to seem to be that which they are. S. Augustine confesses
in his Confessions, That the World in his time was grown so shameless and so
impudent, that it was held a shame not to be shameless. To be a Sinner is bad,
but to boast of sin ten times worse.

Another sort of Sinners there are, which seem to be Saints; The other
seemingly hol^. 1. Tim. 1.
Habentes speciem pietatis, (says Saint Paul) Having a show of godliness:
Like unto these Pharisees, who seeking outwardly to make great appearances and
shows of sanctity, as rough and course clothing, pale and wan faces, smokie
countenances, public prayers, humbling themselves on their knees in the
Streets, their Fastings, their open giving of Alms, their Philacteries, which
were certain skins of parchment wherein the Commandments were written at
large ( Dilatant philacteria sua) the skirts of their garments stuck inward
with sharp needles to let them blood, Mat. ^ 3.
and the often washing of their hands up to the very elbowes; yet
notwithstanding all this, their conscience was a very Dung-mixen, they were
fair without, but foul within. Saint Chrysostom compares them to a Sword
that has a rich scabberd, but a leaden blade, Erue animam, and videbis
pulchritudinem. Luke. 11.
Here is a goodly fair show, a beautiful appearance of sanctity and
holiness; but unlace these men's breasts, and look into their souls and
consciences, and then shall you see them in their true colors. Your great
Merchants have many suits of goodly hangings, rich Clothes of State, fair
Canopies, and costly Bedsteads; but they have their Brokers to sell them:
besides, they have great store of dainty delicate housholdstuffe, and other
fine curiosities, as Rings, Jewels, and chains, all choice ware; but they are
none of their own, and therefore cannot be said to be rich. In like sort, the
Pharisees were the Merchants and Brokers of this sanctity and holiness, they
carried it about with them for to sell and to make their best profit of it; and
for that the people were much affectioned to this outward asperousnesse and
strict-seeming course of life, they held them for Saints descended from Heaven.
In Leuiticus God commanded, That there should be no Linseywoolsey, no weauing
of Woollen and Linen together, because the one being so course, and the other
so fine, it might be so curiously intermixed, and so cunningly carried in the
workmanship, that it might prove a cosening and cheating kind of commodity.
Josh. 9.
The Gibeonites deceived Ioshuah with another invention like unto this; they
clad themselves in old clothes, put old clouted shoes upon their feet, laid
old sackes upon their Asses backs, full of dry and moldie bread, brought
along with them old Leather bottles, with here a patch, and there a patch, as
if they had had some great long journey of it, and had come from some remote
region, they themselves reporting that they dwelt a far off, when as indeed
they were near Neighbors; with which sleight of theirs, Ioshuah giving credit
unto them, was cosined. This deceit is to^ often (I fear me) put in practice; a
bare foot, a patcht frocke, a wan cheek, a lowly look, a wrying of the head, a
lifting up of the eyes and hands, a knee-submission, a beating of the breast,
and a weak whining voice, spinning out a Yes verily, and every other word
they deliver, to it is full length; sell us this simulated sanctity and
counterfeited holiness, for that of Heaven, being merely an earthly
invention, and an hypocritical trick, Osee 7.
of purpose to deceive: it is (as Osee says of Ephraim) as a Cake on the
hearth not turned, which is scortcht and burnt on the outside, but raw and
dough-baked within. It is the inner part that God loves, it is the heart and
soul of man that he likes best of; as for the outward carriage of the body, a
thief or a villain can put himself into his true postures, and feign and
dissemble the business as well as the best of them all.

Yet withal let me tell you, That God does require of a Christian the
semblance of a Christian, and that as he is a Christian, so he seem to be a
Christian: for albeit the Root gives life unto the Tree, yet if it have neither
leaves nor boughs, it is but an unseemly sight. Modestia vestra nota sit
omnibus hominibus, Philip 4.
(says Saint Paul) Let your patient mind (for so the Vulgar render it) be
known to all men; for if it be wholly hidden in the soul, it will hardly be
perceived. Saint Augustine expounding that place of Saint Matthew, Beware of
false Prophets, which come unto you in Sheep clothing, but inwardly are
ravening Wolves; says, It were fit that because the Wolf puts on the Sheep
skin, that the Sheep should lay aside his own skin, and clap on that of
the Wolf. There were two Alters belonging to the Temple; the one without,
which was of stone, whereon the beasts were offered; the other within, which was
of gold, whereon Incense was offered. God was served in them both; but in
conclusion, the inward Alter was so far preferred before the outward, that
Philon says, That one poor crumme of Incense offered from a tender heart, and
a merciful soul, was of more worth than all the sacrifices that were offered
without; Regard ye me not because I am black, Ca^t. 1.5.
for the Sun has looked upon me. Saint Bernard says, That the Spouses
despising of this outward beauty, did arise from that great esteem wherein
she held the inward brightness and resplendour of the soul, which is a fire
which consumes and burns up the beauty of the body. David calls the Church
one while the Kings daughter, another while the Kings Bride; but he paints her
richliest forth unto us in her soul. The Kings daughter is all glorious
within: not despising also the beauty of the body; Clothed in a Vesture of
gold wrought all with needleworke, and set forth with diverse and sundry
colors very beautiful to behold. The Bridegroom advises his Spouse, That
she should wear her colors in her heart; and as if that were not sufficient
enough, he wills her to wear them on her arm. Our Savior Christ in his
praying and other occasions, 1. Cor. 14.
used these exterior acts. Saint Paul says, I will pray with the Spirit, but I
will pray with the understanding also: There is the use of your tongue set
down, If I pray with my tongue, the Spirit also prays.

So that God will have the exercise of soul and body both together.

First, Because God being Creator of both, it is fit that he should be served
by both.

Secondly, For man's satisfaction* For in regard that Man cannot see man's Faith,
nor that pity and compassion that he bears in his bowels, it is requisite
that he should manifest the same by some outward signs; for he can hardly show
himself religious toward God; who is irreligeous toward Man. And therefore it
is said, With the heart we believe unto Righteousness, but with the mouth we
confess to Salvation.

Occasion is offered to receive the Sacraments, or a necessity of giving a
testimony of our Faith; here every Christian is bound to manifest the same by
outward signs.

Thirdly, The sanctity and holiness of the Soul does give force and virtue
to that of the body, and that of the body does confirm and augment that of
the Soul; the heart gives vigor and virtue to devout eyes, to hands lifted
up, and to knees humbly kneeling on the ground. And these outward ceremonies
do strengthen, increase, and inflame the Spirit and inward devotion. Saint
Augustine says, That God has no need of these ceremonies for the better
manifestation of our mind, but that Man has need thereof for to kindle and
stir up more zeal and fervor in himself, being that by them the hearts
affection is the more set on fire. And Saint Cyprian, That by humbling our
selves upon our knees in the sight of God, we are not to endeavor to please
and serve him only with the thoughts and meditation of the soul, but also
with the disposition of the body, and the voice of the tongue. David drawing
near to his end, a little before he died did much indeere this Doctrine to his
son S^lomon, 3. Kings. 2.
Have a care that thou keep the commandments of thy Lord thy God, and all the
ceremonies belonging thereunto, as it is written in the Law of Moses; that thou
may prosper in all that thou do, and in every thing whereunto thou
turnest thee.

But their heart is far off from me. The whole man, take him all together, Of
the whole Man, God most desires the heart, why.
may make sweet music in Gods ears, (like unto an Organ, which by different
Keys makes different sounds) but God delights most in the music of the heart,
for the lips, the feet, and the hands being capable of suffering violence, the
heart is not subject thereunto.

The cleanness of the heart ought to perform the exercise of all the virtues,
but Fastings, Prayers, and Almesdeeds coming forth of a soul heart, like
waters flowing from a foul conduit, corrupt those wholesome waters;
Abhominatio est mihi, says God by Esaias, This is to put new patches into an old
garment, and new wine into old stinking Vessels. Saint Augustines says, That
that which God principally forbids in the Decalogue, are the desires of the
heart; whereunto the Schoolmen ad the exterior act, though there is no
wickedness like to the inward wickedness: and if the outward be more punished,
it is because of it is more hurt through it is ill example. The works of Virtue
are not all equal, yet al of them have one ground and foundation, which is the
love and fear of God. Abraham was charitable, David humble, Eliah zealous,
Moses mild, Job patient, Martha solicitous, and Marie devout; God must be paid
in all these several coins. Let every man look unto the cleanness of his
own soul* and let him exercise himself in that which he is able; crying out
with the Psalmist, To thee will I confess in the uprightness of my heart.

It was a great goodness of Gods mercy toward us, to place our felicity and
our good in a thing so proper unto us, that no man is able therein to hinder
us. If he had enjoined us Fasting, we might have complained of our weakness;
if Almesdeeds, we might have complained of our poverty, and so have excused
our selves; but for the keeping clean of our heart, and for to love and fear
our God, as none can (...) us thereof, so none ought to outstrip us therein.
For the expenses of the Sanctuary, neither might the Rich offer more, nor the
Poor less; and this was a type and figure of the spiritual offering of our
^oules, wherein we are all equal and alike: and that not without the great
providence of Heaven, to the end that no man might have cause to allege an
excuse. Have thou traveled abroad to plant Gods Religion amongst Infidels? No:
Have thou kept thy body under by disciplining thy self? No: Eatest thou flesh
in Lent? Yes. For th^se things every one may allege many excuses, but for the
foulness of the heart, there is no excuse. We read in the Legend, That the
Devil met with Machari^s, and told him, I have the odds of thee in a thousand
things; thou fastest, and I never eat; thou watchest, and I never sleep; thou
sometimes take pains, and I am never idle: yet thou have one great advantage
of me, to wit, thou have a clean heart, and mine is full of rancor and malice,
etc.

To pray with the tongue only, no^ pleasing to God.
This people honors me with their lips, but their heart is far from me. This
is an excellent Lesson for those that pray and sing in the Quire; that prayer
which is only with the tongue, God makes little reckoning of it. Saint Cyprian
says, That the Church does admonish the People* that at the time of divine
Service they should have their hearts in Heaven, Sursum corda: And although
their answer be, Habemus ad Dominum; yet many do repeat it by rote, like
Parats, without any kind of attention at all. Thou desire of God, That he
would hear thee, when thou art so far off from thy self, that thou do
not hear thy self, and would have him to be mindful of thee, when (God
knows) thou do not mind thy self. It is a woeful thing, that men should
say Service as if they did not say it, and that they should pray as if they did
not pray, and that they should sing as if they did not sing. The Lateran
Council says, Studiosecelebrent, and deuote quantum Deu^ dederit: And they
willed it so to be done, In virtute sanctae obedientiae. Saint Paul, Be
fulfilled with the Spirit, speaking unto your selves in Psalms and Hymns,
Ephesians. 5.
and spiritual Songs, singing and making melody to the Lord in your hearts.
Whereupon Saint Hierome says, Audiant hi quibus psallen^i in ecclesia officium
est, Let your singing men give ear to that which they sing in the Church. And
Gratian puts it in the Decretals: And the Gloss says, Non clemens, sed amans,
clamat in a^re Dei, It is not the loudness of the voice, but the louingnesse
of the heart that rings in Gods ear. In a word, The power of Prayer must come
from the Soul. Saint Gregory says, That Abels Sacrifice was so well accepted
of God, because he had first offered the same in his heart; and that it was
not so much esteemed for that it was of the best of his flocks, but for the
devotion wherewith he offered it up: And Cains, out of a contrary respect so
slightly regarded.

But in vain they worship me, teaching for Doctrine men's Precepts. By these
Precepts of men, he understands those which are contrary to the Laws of
God, as it is well noted by Irenaeus. And in those days there were very many
among them, as Thomas, Saint Hierome, and Epiphanius has observed. Saint Paul
says as much, Improoue, rebuke, exhort, for the time will come when they will
not suffer wholesome Doctrine, but having their ears itching, shall after
their own lusts get them a heap of Teachers, and shall turn their ears from
the truth, and shall be given unto Fables. Where Faith is endangered, there
must we not use a soft and smooth hand. Now the Pharisees following Jewish
Fables, and applying themselves to the precepts of men, did turn away from the
truth, they placed their holiness in outward ceremonies, they received the
offerings of stolen things; God abhorring nothing more. The Saduces did deny
the immortality of the soul, the resurrection of the dead, final judgment,
reward, and punishment. The Galileans denied obedience to any save to God. The
Herodians did believe, that there was no other Messiah but Herod. The Esseni,
that men ought not to sacrifice in the Temple, nor swear upon necessity, nor
have propriety of goods. To all these our Savior says, They worship me in
vain. They do but loose their labor in honoring me and in serving me.

That which goes into the mouth defiles not the man, etc. To the clean all
things are clean.
There is no meat in it is own nature, that hurts the soul. Saint Paul
says, To the clean, all things are clean; but to the unclean, nothing is
clean. For, the sin is not in the meat, but in the use thereof, and when we
ought to abstain. God saw all that he had made, Genesis 1.31.
and l^^ it was very good. The forbidden tree was good, but it was Adams
disobedience that made it bad: Every creature of God is good (says Saint Paul)
and nothing ought to beeref^sed, if it be received with thanks giving. 1. Tim.
4.4.
But the forge wherein this is ill forged, is the heart.

Out of the heart come evil thoughts. The heart in Scripture, What is
understood by the Heart. Romans 1. Mat. 16. Deuteronomy. 4. Mat. 22.
is sometimes taken for the Understanding, Their foolish heart was full of
darkness. Sometimes for the Will, Where is their treasure, there is their
heart also. Sometimes for the Memory, Let not my words depart out of thy
heart all the days of thy life. And sometimes for the soul, Thou shall love
the Lord thy God with all thy heart. From a good soul, come good thoughts and
good works; and from an evil soul, evil thoughts and evil works. As this
fountain is, so are the waters that flow from thence, either troubled, or
clear. And as to repair a sickness, we must have recourse to it is cause; so
all your Saints adresse themselves to the soul. David desired of God, that he
would give him a new heart, fearing that the heart that now he had, would never
leave it is woonted tricks, but run according to it is old byas. Create in me
a clean heart, o God* and renew a right spirit within me. Psalm. ^1.
And if that may not be done, then he desires an Amplius laua me. Wash me till
my spots be taken away, and that I be whiter than the snow. Fiat cormeum
immaculatum in iustificationibus tuis etc. At the door of Paradise, God placed
one, or many Cherubims. For Cherubin, is there in the plural, being set there
to cow Man, and to keep him back. So many Cherubims were not set there for
Man only, but for the Devil, who had taken of the fruit of the tree of Life,
and delivered it unto Man. But the Devil is far more greedy of the heart of
Man, than of the tree of Life. And therefore we are to desire of God, that he
will be pleased to set a guard upon it.

From the heart, comes Murders, Adulteries, Fornications, Thefts, false
Testimonies, and Slanders. Here is a powerful hellish squadron which assaults
the heart. Saint Paul makes a larger muster of all these soldiers, These are
the known works of the flesh, dishonesties, filthiness, uncleanness,
fornications, adulteries, witchcrafts, The Heart has many enem es all within
it self.
sorceries, enmities, contentions, emulations, angers, debates, dissentions,
enuies, drunkenness, and murder. There are no countries, regions, nor cities,
(says Saint Chrysostom) that contain such a company of enemies, and all of
them conspiring against a poor miserable heart. What, so many ravening wolfes,
against one silly sheep? so many greyhounds let slip, against one cowardly
hare? so many kites, against one single chicken? so many eagles, against one
poor pigeon? so many vultures, so many harpies, so many fowls of rapine? and
still the more, the more hard the prey is to be got; What then shall that
heart do, which has not wherewithal to defend it self. And the greater is
our fear (says Origin) for that all this Army of our enemies stands armed
against us even within our own doors. For sin, is so far forth sin, as
it is voluntary. For if our Will would but stand sentinel without, it were
impossible for sin to enter. So that the greatest enemy that we have, is
our own proper Will. And therefore our Savior says, That From the Heart,
come murders, etc.

These are those spots wherewith man's soul is sullied; These the stains,
wherewith he is defiled. For those things which man eats, Non coinquinant
hominem, do not defile man. By the Prophet Esaias, God prophesied of the wretched
ruin and miserable desolation of Babylon, and paints it forth so to the full,
that there shall remain no more relics thereof than of Jerusalem: It shall
be made (says he) a dwelling for Hedge-hoggs, and a standing Poole of filthy
stinking waters, and as a City that is utterly overthrown and destroyed: all
shall be as heaps of earth and hollow banks, wherein shall be bread all kind
of creeping worms, and vermin, and venomous creatures; all shall be pits,
wherein shall be puddles of water for to make an habitation for Toads, Snakes,
Adders, and Serpents. This shall be the wretched condition and miserable
estate of this great Babylon. He farther adds, That he will sweep it with a
broom; a place so foul and so sluttish, as well in respect of those heaps of
earth and rubbish, as also those filthy pooles and stinking puddles of water,
How is it possible that he should come to sweep it and make it clean? I will
sweep it clean from it is sins. For all other kind of filthiness
whatsoever, in respect of the foulness of sin, No fowlnes to that of sin*
are nothing filthy. The Hedgehog, the Adder, and the Serpent, in the holes
of the earth, nor the poysonfull Toads in the puddles of water, are not able to
debar us of entrance into Heaven: but he that is sullied in sin, and is not
washed clean with the blood of our Savior Christ, let him never look to come
there. The Hedgehog with all his prickles shall not hurt thee, nor the Adder
wi^h his teeth, nor the Serpent with his sting, nor all the venomous Vermin in
the World: The standing pooles and stinking puddles shall not soil thee; but
the heaping up of money, and thy keeping of it close in thy Chest, when the
Poor are ready to starve for hunger, and have not a penny to buy them a loaf
of bread; that is it shall soil thee, and make thy soul all mud and filth.
That foulness which shuts us out from Heaven, is that of sin, and nothing
else but that. And therefore it is said in the Apocalypse, Nihil coinquinatum
intrauit in regnum Coelorum, Nothing that is filthy shall enter into the
Kingdom of Heaven. And therefore Saint Chrysostom advises us, That we should
have an eye unto that which defiles us, and seek to avoid it. Which that we
may so do, God give us the grace for his mercies sake, etc.

THE XXII. SERMON, UPON THE THVRSEDAY AFTER THE THIRD SUNDAY IN LENT.
LVC. 4. When he was come into Symons House, his mother in Law was held with a
great Fever.


Our Savior Christ having thrown out that talking Devil in Capernaum, and
enjoined him silence, Christ refuses no house, where there is a will to
entertain him.
Saint Luke here recounteth his entering into Peter's house; not into that which
Peter and Andrew had in Bethsaida, being Naturalls of that Country; for
neither that protinus of the Evangelist, nor the Sabbath, wherein they were to
walk but a mile, will give way thereunto. And though Peter had not a house in
Capernaum, yet his mother in Law might have had one there, or he might have
bestowed one on her daughter in dower. And albeit Peter had made a renunciation
of the propriety, yet might he have a reservation of the use thereof, as he had
of the Nets and fishing Rods. S. Mark says, That he went into the house of
Simon and Andrew; whither it were because it belonged to them both, or whither
or no because it might have been Peter's fathers house, and the fathers house we
use commonly to call it likewise the sons house. And though the house was
poor and mean, yet was it no such great wonder, that he who had left the
Palaces of Heaven, and made choice to be borne in so poor a thing as
Bethlem, should for one day make so mean a house his Inn, especially the will
of the party that entertained him, being so rich as it was to do him service.

And Symons wives mother. Saint Ambrose in his book De Viduis, reckons this
mother in law of Peter's amongst many other that were most famoused and renowned
in the world. And from this name of Socrus, which signifies our wives mother,
or a mother in Law, Tertullian and Saint Hierome does infer that Peter was
married; for Mother in Law signifies, an affinity derived from marriage. And
howbeit it seems unto Saint Hierome, That the wife of Saint Peter was
already dead, yet Clemens Alexandrinus affirms that she was alive, and that
she afterward suffered martyrdom for maintaining the Faith of our Savior
Christ. But in fine, it is a plain case that he had a wife.

Jesus rose up and came out of the Synagogue, etc. Our Savior Christ divided
his whole life into these two stations:

From the Synagogue to the Sick;

And from the Sick to the Synagogue.

Where (as Saint Luke reports it) he preached the Law. Acts 15.


In Jerusalem (says Genebrard) there was a principal Temple, which had in it
four hundred and eighty Synagogues, some more honorable than the other, and
some less; and in all the Cities of that Kingdom there was great store of
them, which occasioned our Savior to say, They affect the chief places in the
Synagogues. There, with a strange kind of silence did the people hearken unto
them, and it was counted a great punishment, to deprive any Citisen of this so
great a good. In these Synagogues our Savior Christ spent the greatest part of
his life, and when he went out of them it was to cure the Sick, or to relieve
others necessi^ies. And though now a days a Preacher comes sweating out of the
Pulpit, and goes to a friends house where he has warm Napkins clapped about
his neck, and is much made of; yet our Savior Christ goes here from Mary's
business to that of Martha's, and from that again of Martha, to that of
Mary's; from the Synagogue to the house of Peter, because Peter's wives mother
was sick. Chrysologus says, That it was easy to be seen, what was the
motion that carried him along to Peter's house, Vtique non discumbendi voluptas,
sed iacentis infirmitas, Not so much for his own ease, as to case the Sick.

He entered into Symons house, and Symons wives mother, etc. Our Savior Christ
had a great desire to cure her, and this good Widow had as great a care to
welcome him and to serve him; and her Fever did more grieve her out of the
hinderance of her service, than the cause of her torment: And Christ on the
other side, did accept of this inuitation more for to recover the Sick, than
to recreate himself. The Sick did desire more to give him kind entertainment,
for to manifest her love, than to receive health for to mitigate her pain.
Both their desires rested well satisfied; that of Christ, in healing the Sick;
and that of the Sick, in serving of Christ. And though the Angels might envy
this her care, yet did she seek to outstrip the Angels in her desire to serve
her Lord. Here may we see the practice of that which Ecclesiasticus
recommendeth unto us, Eccl. 14.
Let no^ the portion of thy good desires ouerpasse thee, give and take, and
sanctify thy soul, etc. Give away the goods of the earth, and thou shall
receive those of Heaven: According to that of S. Paul, 2. Cor. 8.14.
Let your abundance supply their wants, that their abundance may supply
yours; for by this chopping and changing of poverty for plenty, and of
plenty for poverty, neither of both have cause to complain. That emblem of
Alciat is well known unto you; A lame man and a blind man met both by chance
at a river, the lame man guided the blind man, and the blind man carried the
lame man on his shoulders. In like manner (says Chrysostom) we must succor
one another; the whole must cure the Sick, and the Sick must give the whole
loving and friendly entertainment.

Christ brings heal^han holiness wheresoever he comes.
The whole house was enriched by this reception of our Savior; the mother and
the daughter, by being not only made whole, but holy. If giving entertainment
to an earthly Prince inricheth the whole house that receives him, with earthly
blessings; How much more shall their happiness be, who feast the king of
Heaven? God has often notified unto us the great content that he takes in
hospitality, especially toward the poor and the stranger. That thou should
lodge and feast a King, thou countest it a great fortune and happiness unto
thee, for honors, favors, and rewards follow thereupon; but in entertaining
the poor, thou do him this kindness for no other respect in the world, but
because he is the Image of God. Hosp^talitatis nolite obliuisci, quidam enim,
etc. Alluding to that hospitage of Abraham* who thinking he had entertained
strangers in his house, entertained Angels. And S. Austen and S. Gregory, Some
men (say they) thinking that they only feed the Poor, they are mistaken, for
therein they feast our Savior himself. Chrysologus says, That in the breast
of the Blessed it is not possible there should be any desire or longing; but if
it were possible to have any, sure it would be that of relieuing the poor. The
Son of God has not a pillow whereon to lean his head. Why did Christ take
pleasure in such a strange kind of poverty? Because thou should take
pleasure in giving him entertainment. When Abraham went forth to meet the three
men from out his Tent, bowing himself down to the ground before him who he
thought was the chiefest among them, he said, Lord, if I have now found favor
in thy sight, go not I pray thee from thy servant; Genesis 18.
let a little water I pray you be brought and wash your feet, and rest your
selves under the shadow of this Tree, and I will bring a morcell of bread that
you may comfort your hearts, afterward ye shall go your ways. They accepted
of his kindness, and thanked the good old man; but he using none of these
courtly complements, in his plain country fashion assured them that they were
heartily welcome, and that he thought himself beholding unto them, that they
would take such as they found. Abraham he runs me to the beasts, and takes me
a tender and good Calfe, kills it, gives it to his servant, who hasted to make
it ready; then he hies him in to Sarah, and wills her presently to make ready
at once three measures of fine meal, to knead it quickly, and make Cakes upon
the hearth. The cloth is now laid, bread, butter, milk, and the Calfe which
he had prepared, is set before them; they fall too, and Abraham he in the mean
while stands by, and waits upon them. When they had eaten, they took their
leave and went on their way, and he likewise went with them to bring them on
the way. This virtue Lot had learned from him: Saint Paul commends him highly
for it: And Peter styles him, Just, He was righteous both in seeing and
hearing. Chrysostom. 2. Peter. 2.
says, That he staid waiting for these strangers in the street, and at the
gates of the City, till it was late in the night, that they might not light
into the uncleanly conversation of these wicked Citisens. So that it was late
ere he met with these Angels and adoring them as Abraham had done before, he
said unto them, My Lords, I pray you turn in now into your servants house:
Genesis 19.
And the Angels making show that they would abide in the Street all night, he
pressed upon them earnestly, and in a manner pulled them in by force; Coegit
illos, He was wonderful instant upon them. This enforced courtesy of his,
they afterward fully requited, by notifying unto him, How that Sodom was to
be destroyed with fire from Heaven. And although the Angels made have to be
gone, and to have Lot to get him packing out of the City; yet they deferred
the punishment a while, that he might have time to warn his sons in Law to
be gone. Lot thereupon went out and spoke unto his sons in Law which had
married his daughters, and said, Arise, get you out of this place, for the Lord
will destroy the City; but he seemed unto his sons in Law as though he had
mocked. Then the Angels hasted Lot, saying, Arise, take thy wife and thy two
daughters which are here, left thou be destroyed in the punishment of the
City. And as he prolonged the time, the Angels caught both him and his wife,
and his two daughters, by the hands, and brought him as it were forth by force,
and set him without the City; so he was saved, and the rest were burned. In
this virtue of Hospitality there are many famous women much renowned in the
Old Testament; as the Shunamite that entertained Elisha, and the widow that
harbored Elias; Rahab who received the Spies that were sent to Ierico: All of
them being so happy in this their hospitality, that it seems God sent them
such good guests, more for the good of those that gave them this friendly
entertainment, than that of those who were entertained by them. And if a man
shall pay so well for his Lodging, how much more will God requite it?

Symons wives mother was taken with a great Fever. Many of the Saints have
been at a stand, immagining with themselves, That being there is so great a
difference between the Old Law and the New, between God and God, a God of
Vengeance and a God of Mercy, between a Lion and a Lamb; that Christ's
friends should have had a privilege, and that scarce a house of theirs should
have known what sickness, danger, or death had meant. In the Flood, Noah's
house was preserved; in the flames of Sodom, that of Lot; and in that general
massacre of the Firstborn of Egypt, the houses of the Hebrews were
untouched: Ezec^. 9 4.
And God sending the man clothed with Linen, which had the writers Inkehorne
by his side, to take notice of the people of Jerusalem, he commanded them to
set a mark upon the forehead of his friends, that he might ouerskip them, and
not touch them in the day of destruction. But here now, a friends house is not
privileged, no not the house of Peter. What should be the reason of it? There
are many; but the main reason is this, With God, tribulation was evermore a
greater token of his love and favor, than prosperity: what said Job when he
sat scraping his sores upon the Dunghill? In my prosperity I only heard
thee; but now in my affliction I see thee. S. Chrysostom says, That Cain in
killing Abel, thought that Heaven would do him those favors which it did his
brother; but he was deceived, for God did better love a dead Abel, than a
living Cain; Non extraxisti, sed incendisti. Philon says, That the fire in the
bush was so far from consuming or burning it, that it left it fresher and
greener than it was before. But for all this, our miseries in the Old Law were
never seen to be so honorable as afterward, when God had clapped the thorns
(which were the fruit of our sins) upon his own head, The thorns of Christ
are the triumph of our troub^^s
then did they recover so high a Being, and grew to that worth, that the
heavier God lays his hand upon us, the more is his love toward us. The mark
of our happiness is the Son of God, not glorified, but scourged, spit upon,
crowned with thorns, torn with whips, and nailed to the Cross; and therefore
to be conformed to the Image of his Son, is fitting for us. In the
Apocalypse, Apoc. 1.15.
his feet are put into a hot fiery Oven. This was a ritratto or picture of his
many troubles: and though this Oven or fiery Furnace speak them much; yet sure
they were far greater, and beyond the tongues expression. The Angels did
scatter the coals of Gods wrath abroad in the World, sometimes lighting in one
place, and sometimes in another; but whose coals could be hotter than his,
whose feet, like unto fine Brass, lay burning as in a Furnace?

She was taken with a great Fever. The Evangelist here amendeth our usual
manner of speech: Prosperity the souls bane.
for with us it is commonly said, Tengo grandes calenturas, I have a great
Fever, whenas indeed the Fever has thee. God often afflicts the soul in the
sense, that the soul thereby may be made sencible. God, like the Bridegroom
to the Spouse, speaks a thousand sweet words to the Soul, he courts her and
wooes her with an Aperi mihi, soror mea, etc. Open to me, my sister, etc. but
this makes her the more to shut the door against him. The Soul when it is in
prosperity, grows proud, it is deaf, and will not hear; she must be
wrought upon inter angustias, she must feel the rod before she will have any
feeling. Jonas in the Whales belly, God is seldom thought upon but in our
misery.
the Prodigal in the pig-stie, the Sick in his Fever, thinks and calls upon
God: we listen unto the Devil when we are in the midst of our Feasts* our
Banquets, our Maskings, our sports and pastimes; but only hearken unto God
inter angustias, when we are afflicted and in misery. God being will^ng to
cure those that were stung with the Serpents, made a Serpent of brass, and
caused it to be set up, that by looking thereon they might be healed. Gregory
Nissen asks the question, Whither it had not been a shorter cut, and a more
speedy and effectual remedy, to have made an end of all these Serpents at
once? But he answers thereunto, If he should have freed them from those
Serpents, Which of them would have lifted up his eyes to Heaven? And therefore
let those Serpents continue still, and those wounds of the body, seeing they
cure those of the Soul. According to that of Solomon, Prou. 20.
The blewnesse of the wound serves to purge the evil. Saint Gregory the Pope
says, That the wound of the Soul is taken away by making another wound of
repentance and true sorrow. Euthymius cites to this purpose that verse of
David, Qui dat niuem sicut lanam, Snow to the earth is as wool, because it
keeps it warm, and gives heat thereunto, for to bring forth flowers and
fruits wherewith to glad the Spring and beautify the Summer: An^o de nieues,
an^o de bienes, (says the Spanish Proverb) A year of snow, a year of joy.
The snow of sickness and of affliction, in stead of cooling the Soul, it
gives it heat and fruitfulness, that it may bring forth flowers and fruits of
good life.

She was taken with a great Fever. The Physicians call a Calenture or burning
Fever, Calorem extraordinarium, An extraordinary heat, or calidam intemperiem,
a hot distemperature, which being kindled in the heart, and taking fire,
disperseth it self through all the parts of the body, catches hold of them,
offends them, and discomposeth that harmony of the humors, wherein our health
consists. Saint Isidore deriues it from Feruor, or that have and speed
wherewith it runs and disperseth it self through our bodies. Valerius
Maximus says, That in ancient time they did offer sacrifice thereunto, as to a
Goddess, because of all other sicknesses, a Fever is that which commonly comes
to make an end of our lives. For as heat well tempered gives life; so being
distempered it brings death. But if we shall go philosophising from the
infirmities of the body, by way of analogy, or proportioning them to the
soul; Love to the soul, is as Heat to the body. And when it does not exceed
the Laws of God, which is the life of our soul, it inioyes perfect health; but
when it grows once to an excess, it falls into a Calenture, or burning Fever.
And this excess succeeds two manner of ways.

Either by loving that more, which ought to be loved less.

Or by not loving that enough, which ought to be loved most.

The Spouse said of her Bridgroome, Ordinauit in me charitatem, Cant. 2.4. Two
things cause a fever in the soul.
He showed his Love unto me, He made exceeding much of me, He brought me into
the wine celler, and Love was his banner over me: He stayed me with flaggons,
and comforted me with apples, when I was sick of Love: His left hand was under
my head, and his right hand did embrace me. Extraordinary was this Love of
the Bridegroom to his Spouse, preferring her before all other things
whatsoever. God likewise being the greatest in Nature and Essence, ought to
be the greatest in our Love and Affection. How God ought to be loved.
Next under God enter those goods of Heaven and of Earth. And Good, being the
mark whereat our Love shoots, our greatest Love should direct it self to the
greatest good. And this is to observe an order and good temper in our Love. Now
touching the disorder of our Love, our Savior said, He that loves Father or
Mother more than me, is not worthy of me.

Again, In not loving God, to whom we owe so much love, this excess in the
contrary may turn to immodestie and impudency; And make us break out with
those Cast-awayes in Job, into these desperate terms, Get thee far from v^,
we will have no knowledge of thy ways.

Besides, In employing our love so wholely upon the Creatures, we may chance to
choke that love which we owe to the Creator. Saint Austen expounding that
place of John, Love not the World, neither the things that are in the world,
says, That our heart is like unto a vessel, 1. John. 2.
which if it be filled full with the World, it cannot receive God; being like
to that piece of ground, where the Tares did choke the Wheat: So that of
force we must empty the vessel, and weed well the ground of our hearts,
that the love of God may fructify in us. This inordinate love does set the
heart, like a Calenture, on fire. From the heart come all our evil thoughts,
Mat. 25.
and go festring through the faculties of the soul. And ^inne, when it is
finished, brings forth death, says Saint James.

She was taken with a great Fever. As there are diverse kinds of Fevers, so have
they a correspondencie with the diverse infirmities of the soul; your young men
are soon rid of their Fevers, especially if their fits be not violent: but an
old woman that is taken with a great Fever, will hardly recover her health. A
prisoner will easily shake off slight and slender shakles, but those that are
double chained and double bolted, he will hardly free himself from them. One
single stick is easily broken; but more being bound together, very hardly. A
threefold cord is hardly broken. The like reason may be given of old sins,
upon which, custom has drawn a necessity. Saint Austen treating of the
State of his own sins, says, That he was fast fettered with three strong
chains:

The one, of his own Will.

The other, of an ill Custom that he had gotten.

The third, of a kind of necessity, which did keep him as it were by force in
this so hard and cruel slavery, Tenebat me, dura seruitus.

They besought him for her. The motives of this intercession, were:

Pity has always a prayer in readiness for those that need it.
First, For that this good old woman, was of so sweet a disposition, and so
loving a nature: Which was much in so old a woman; and no small matter,
considering she was a Mother in Law. It may be, Mothers in law in those
days, were more loving, and better beloved than they are now. And one great
argument thereof is, That our Savior Christ should put the love of the Mother
in law and Daughter in law, in one and the same degree with that of the
Children and Parents, as it appears in that place of S. Matthew. I came to set
a man at variance against his Father, Mat. 10.
and the Daughter against her Mother, and the Daughter in law against her
Mother in law. Where you see he links them together all in one chain. And so
it ought to be: For, if the Husband and the Wife, by Matrimony remain one
flesh; the Daughter in law ought likewise to be so with the Mother in law,
though not in the self same degree, wholly and altogether.

The second motive, was the entreaty of the Apostles, who (as Saint Mark
makes mention) interceded for her. And such pitiful hearts, and tender
bowels as theirs were, being sought unto by so good an Hostess, who desired
so much as she did, to serve them, could not choose but take pity of her, and
speak a good word for her. Besides, the miserable pain she was in might have
moved the hardest heart to compassion, much more theirs, whose eyes had seen
in what an ill taking she was in. And kind hearts are soon sencible of those
sorrows which the eyes shall impart unto them.

Two things required, that our intercession may be ef^^ctuall.
They b^sought him for her. In the intercession of Holy men, God attends two
things;

The one, That we persuade our selves that they are preuailent with God, and
that they can effect much with his divine Majesty.

The other, That he is well pleased that we should make use of them, for the
honor that he receives thereby, and the good that we reap by it. A King is
well pleased that men should have recourse to his Fauorit, the more to honor
him. It was a great honor to Christ (says Gregory Nazianzen) that he was the
Mediator betwixt God and Man. Saint Cyril gives the same attribute to the
Apostles; and Deutronomie, to Moses, Medius fui inter Deum and vos, Deuteronomy. 5.
I stood between the Lord and you. But here is the difference, That the Saints
have need that others should intercede for them, but our Savior has no such
need, sed accedit per teipsum, ad interpellandum pro nobis. Al other Mediators
are through our Savior Christ; and that prayer which has not this mediation,
Saint Augustine says, That in stead of remoouing sin, it renews sin. And
Saint Ambrose, That Christ ought to be the Mouth by which we are to speak, the
Eyes by which we are to look, and the Hands by which we are to offer. In a
word, The Saints of God are very powerful with God, through Christ our Lord.
And therefore it is said, Whatsoever ye shall ask the Father in my name shall
be granted unto you.

Some make a doubt, Whither this be to be understood of the Saints that are
living, or those that are dead? That it is meant of the living, there are many
proofs thereof in Scripture. To Jobs friends God said, Go to my servant Job,
Job 42. Genesis 20.
and my servant Job shall pray for you; for I will accept him, etc. Abimilecke
having taken away Sarah, and God threatening him with death, and the King
pleading ignorance in his excuse; God said unto him, Give Abraham his wife
again, and he shall pray for thee, and thou shall live. Exodus 32.
Moses by his intercession procured the pardon of six hundred thousand
persons. The People said unto Samuel, 1. Reg. 7.
Do not thou cease to pray for us. Saint Stephen prayed for those that stoned
him to death; And by his prayer (says Saint Augustine) Paul was reduced to the
Church. In the Ship, the same Apostle by prayer, preserved the lives of two
hundred seventy six persons. Saint Basil cites that place of David, Psalm. 34.
The eyes of the Lord are upon the Righteous, and his ears are open unto their
cry. Those two sons which Joseph had in Egypt, Ephraim and Manasses, the
one signifying forgetfulness, the other Prosperity, Jacob adopted them for
his own, Sicut Reuben and Simeon reputabuntur mihi. Rupertus asks the
question, Why Jacob having so many sons, would adopt these two of Joseph
rather than the rest? And he answers it thus, that Joseph's forgetting of his
former troubles, and the prosperity which he now enjoyed, was procured by the
prayers and tears of Jacob.

He stood over her and rebuked the Fever. Our Savior used this ceremony,
Vainglory evermore to be avoided.
says Saint Chrysostom, the better to cover and dissemble the miracle, to the
end that he might not as then make his Divinity so manifest unto them. And as
your Physicians are wont stedily to behold the color and complexion of the
Sick, look on his tongue, and feel his pulse; so in a manner our Savior
Christ used the like kind of ceremonies, having a vigilant eye over those that
are soule-sick, and what course is to be taken for the curing of a penitent
Sinner, and to know how to distinguish betwixt leaprosie and leaprosie. Many of
the Saints did, the better to dissemble their miracles, use ceremonies, though
there was no necessity of them, nor were essential for that business: so the
Apostles by laying their hands on the Sick did heal them.

Secondly, Saint Matthew says, Tetigit manum eius, The touch of the hand was
enough to cure the sick: for the flesh of our Savior Christ, for that it was
the flesh of God, gave life and health to all that touched it, Virtus de illo
exibat and sanabat omnes, A certain virtue went out from him and cured all
men. Our Flesh will infect other flesh with it is sickness, but health and
life was a privilege appertaining only to our Savior Christ's flesh, which
(as it is noted by Saint Augustine and Saint Cyril) by the union with the
Divinity did quicken and give life. Spiritus est qui viuificat, caro autem non
prodest quidquam, It is the Spirit that quickneth, as for the Flesh, it
profits nothing: as an iron being heated does burn by it is union with the
fire; so the Flesh of our Savior Christ, etc. And from this divine Flesh, the
virtue thereof did extend it self to his very clothes. Si tetigero ta^tum
fimbriam vestimenti eius, saluaero, said the woman that was troubled with the
bloody Flux, If I can but come to touch the hemme of his garment I shall be
whole. Malach. 4.
Malachie prophesied thereof in these words, Sanitas in pennis eius, Health
shall be under his wings; and as feathers are to birds, so to man are his
clothes.

Thirdly, When a sick body is grown so weak that he can scarce put forth
his voice, the Physician leanes down his head the better to hear him: and
when he is so weak that he cannot rise of himself, the Physician lends him
his hand, Apprehensa manu eius (says Saint Mark) curauit eam. This burning
Fever had brought this good old woman so low, that Christ did bow down his
head to hearken unto her, and took her by the hand to help her up. Nor was it
much that our Savior Christ should raise those that were fallen, for that he
came into the world for this end, and had so great a desire thereunto, that he
was willing to fall himself, for the raising up of us. Nay, it was a Precept
of old, That if a Beast should take a fall, a man should not go on upon his
way till he had help him up. This desire of his is much indeered by the
Prophets; He bowed the Heavens and came down, he got upon the Cherubins and
flew, says David. And in another place, Stretch forth thine hand from on high,
and deliver me out of many waters. The Sinner being almost drowned in the mud
of his sins, cries out unto God to lend him his hand to get him out; but he
weighed so heavy, that he pulled God after him. Zach. 9.
Zachary says, Thou also through the blood of thy Covenant have loosed thy
prisoners out of the pit, etc. Where we are to weigh this same, Thou also; for
though thou were so great and powerful a God, yet it cost thee the best blood
in thy veins, to take those out of the pit that were fallen thereinto.

Man for disobedience shall be condemned by the creatures.
He rebuked the Fever and it left her. He spoke the word, and the Fever obeyed;
he commanded it to be gone, and it was gone in an instant. Origin says, That
one of the foulest and shamefullest things that the Creatures shall lay to Man's
charge at the day of Judgment, is, That all other creatures from the creation
of the World having been obedient to Gods Empire, without digressing in the
least point or tittle, only Man has been inobedient, impudent, and
shameless. This is the general opinion: but to reduce this to our present
purpose, and to show how obedient this Fever was, we know that God uses his
Creatures as so many whips and scourges.

One while he makes use of those that are without life, as of waters and
darkness, No creature but is pliable to the will of God.
in those plagues of Egypt, etc.

Another while, of those that have life, as the Serpents of the Wilderness, the
Lions which in Samaria slew the Assyrians, the Bears which killed the little
children which mocked Elisha, etc. All do move and obey at the beck of Gods
brow, at the cast of his eyes, as the second causes at the motion of the Primum
mobile. The like succeeds in the Angels; nor is it much, considering the
great good which they enjoy. But which is more, it succeeds so in the
Devils, who tugge at the Oar in Hells Galley. Our Savior Christ commanded
some Devils, That they should not speak a word, nor offer so much as to open
their lips, when their hearts were ready to burst because they might not
speak their mind. But it is a lamentable case, that one man should serve to
punish another man, and be made the instrument of his hurt, or become his
Hangman. Pilat commanded the Roman Soldiers to whip Christ; and they might
have bin excused, had they not exceeded their Commission. It was decreed in
Heaven, and foretold by the Prophets, That he was to be whipped; but the justice
of God contenting it self with a few stripes, these bloody villains gave him
5000. and but that his hour was not yet come, they would if it had been
poss^ible have whipped him to death. A common Hangman dare not exceed the order
of the Judge; but Man, when God makes him the Executioner of his wrath, breaks
the bounds of his Commission, and runs riot. Man being set on by God, is
like a Mastiffe that is set on by his Master, who is easily put on upon Bull or
Bear, but hardly taken off. Esaias says, That God made Zenacharib the rod of
his wrath, Esaias 10.
and the staff of his indignation; and that he commanded him to take the
spoil, and to take the prey, and to tread them under feet, like the mire in
the street; but exceeding his Commission (Gods purpose being only to humble
his Children, and bring them to repentance) he afterward scourged him soundly
for it. Iudignatio mea in manu tua; God had put this chastisement into the
hands of a tyrant (as his instrument) who had not the wit to carry himself
accordingly, and therefore he punished him according to his deserts.

He rebuked the Fever and it left her. Saint Augustine delivers some men's
opinions, who affirm, That things without life, as Sickness, Pestilence, and
Famine, were occasioned by evil Angels, one while for our good, another while
for our hurt; but always for the service of God, and to show themselves
obedient to his Empire. And this is the true sense and meaning of Imperauit
febri, He rebuked the Fever; and of Vocauit famem, He called a Famine. Psalm.
10^.
Not that a Fever or Famine have any ears to hear or understand any thing,
but because the Angel to whom the power is committed, does hear and obey his
will.

In this Article there are two manifest truths.

The one, That the Angels, as well good as bad, are many times ministers of
our punishments, by famine, pestilence, barrenness, tempests, sickness, and
death. And this truth is made good by innumerable stories in Scripture; as in
that of Job, whose Corn the Devil destroyed, threw down his Houses, carried
away his Cattle, and killed his Children; That of Sarah, who had seven
husbands slain by Asmodeus the Devil; Those plagues of Egypt, whereof (says
David) the Devils were the Instruments; He cast upon them the fierceness of
his anger, indignation, and wrath, and vexation, by the sending out of evil
Angels, Psalm. 78.49.
where God makes them his Hangmen or Executioners. And in another place, Fire
and hail, snow and vapors, stormy winds, which execute his Word, etc. Psalm.
148.
Of good Angels there are likewise many stories; as that of those that came to
Sodom; and that of the Angel that slew the soldiers of Zenacherib.

The other, That to have things without life to be obedient to the Empire of
our Savior Christ, Even things without sense are obedient unto God.
there is no such necessity that they should be moved and governed by
Angels, either good or bad, as Saint Hierome and Saint Augustine have both
observed. For albeit toward us, and in themselves they are insencible, yet
toward God they are not so, He calls the things that are not, as if they were.
Nor is it any thing strange, that the Heavens or the Earth should have ears,
or that those things should answer and obey at Gods call, whose end is Gods
glory: the waters at Gods command gather themselves into heaps, and when he
says but the word, they again withdraw themselves: he prescribes bounds to
the Sea, [ Hitherto shall thou come, and no further:] at his Word again, Psalm.
106.
the Sea is made dry land: he lays his command upon the fire to give light,
but not burn, curbing this his active quality, as it did in the ^irie Furnace,
when the childeren came forth untouched. At this Word the waters gushed out of
the hard Rock; the Winds are at his command; death and life, sickness and
health, and al things else whatsoever, do truly and punctually obey his will;
and so in this place, he had no sooner said the word, But her Fever left her.

And rising up, she presently ministered unto them. In regard that she was an
old woman she might very well have excused her self from doing this service,
but her health was so perfect, her recovery so sound, and her strength so
increased, that without further tarriance, She presently ministered unto them.
Your earthly Physic is long a working, and the Cures prove imperfect, but
Gods physic works contin^o presently; for, All Gods works are perfect. But
it is not so in nature. Pierius makes the Vulture the emblem of nature,
Auolatus tarditate, being a kind of Tortoise in his flying.

First of all, it is intimated here unto us, What have a Sinner ought to make
to get up. S. Peter being in prison, the Angel said unto him, Surge velociter,
Arise quickly; Acts. 12.
and without any more ado, not staying upon his gyues, chains, the gates, or
the guards, he presently rises up and gets him gone with all the speed he
could. Noah puts the Crow out of the Arc, Dimisit Corvum, qui egrediebatur,
and non reuertebatur: The Hebrew Text has it, Exiuit, exeundo, and redeundo;
He began to make wing, but seeing such a vastness of waters, fearing to fail
in his flight, he returned back again: but being entered, carrying about him
the sent of those dead carcasses which had perished by the Flood, he went to
and fro so long, till at last he went his way and was never seen any more.
Many there are that will put one foot forward, and pull two backward, make you
believe that they mean to go on well in virtue and goodness, but being
discouraged with the difficulty of getting up that hill, and having a months
mind to follow the sent of their former stinking (howsoever to them sweet
seeming) sins, at last they are utterly lost and never more heard of; so apt
is sinful man to leave the best and take the worst.

He that has received a benefit, must express his thankfullnes.
Secondly, By this her service this good devout old woman made known her bodily
health; and by the joy and comfort she took therein, she manifested her
souls health. At the very first voice of Ezechiel, the boughs began to
move, but as yet they had not life in them, [ Ossa arida, audite Verbum
Domini] they were afterward knit and joined together, and set in very good
order: but they had need of another kind of voice than Ezechiels to give them
spirit and life. Saint Augustine expounding that place of Saint John, Verba
mea, Spiritus, and vita sunt; says, That this Spirit and life is in himself,
and not in thee. For that Poenitent which does not give some sign or token of
life, has not yet obtained life; and that, He that in his service and
attendance does not make show that he is free of his former Sickness, his
health may justly be suspected. Saint Paul gives us this Lesson, He that
steals, let him steal no more, but, etc. He must not only content himself
with not stealing, or with working for his living, and that it is enough for
him to have labored hard; but of that which he has got by the sweat of his
brows, he must give part thereof to the Poor, if not for the satisfaction of
his former thefts, yet to show himself a good Christian by observing the rules
of charity. Zacheus did perform both these; the one, in making a fourefold
restitution to those whom he had defrauded by forged cauillation, the other,
Ep^. 4.
by giving to the Poor the one half of his goods. Let all bitterness, and
anger, and wrath, crying and evil speaking (says the Apostle) be put away
from you, with all maliciousness. First of all, there must not abide in your
breasts the least smacke of bitterness, anger, wrath, evil speaking, nor any
other maliciousness. But because it is not enough to shun evil, unless we
do also: he thing that is good; he adds in the second place that which
follows anon after, Be ye courteous one toward another, and tender hearted.
For a good Surgeon ought no^ only to take away the pain in the leg, but also
to enable it to go.

Thirdly, She did discover this beginning of her amendment and recovery, by
employing this her health in the service of our Savior Christ; and by laying it
down at our Saviors feet, she showed that she was not ill bred. If he that is
recovered of a sickness, when he is able to set foot on ground, and to walk
up and down his chamber, shall have recourse unto God, and give him thanks for
this his restored health, it is a sign that God gave it him. Thanks slowly
given (says Seneca) lessens the benefit received. Aristotle tells us, That the
Athenians admitted no other Temple, save that of Thankfulness, to the end
that they might not be slack and dull in making their acknowledgement. And if
he be blamed that is idle and slow in rendering of thanks, What shall we say to
him that never comes to offer his service, but is careless in committing of
sin, and offends daily more and more? The emblem of ingratitude
The Moon may serve for an emblem to these kind of unthankful persons; who
receiving all her light from the Sun, in requital of this so great a
kindness, seeks to cloud him by her often eclipses. Being herein like unto
him who sets himself down under the shadow of some Tree, and afterward
pluckes off the Fruit thereof, and tears down it is boughs.

Now when the Sun was down, all they that had sick folk of diverse
diseases, brought them unto him, and he laid his hand on every o^e of them and
healed them. They stayed till the Sun set, for the observation of the Sabbath
was so strict with them, that they held it not lawful on that day to cure the
Sick, much less to bring them abroad in a bed or a chair: And therefore said
the Priests unto the People, There are six days in which men ought to work, in
them therefore come and be healed, L^c. 13.14.
and not on the Sabbath day.

Amongst those Sick which received health, Saint Matthew says, Why the Devils
ro^ed when our Savior cast them out.
That there were some possessed with Devils, and that the Devils did rore and
cry, notifying the force where with they were driven forth their bodies, and
withal confessing him to be the Son of God: First, That he might let them
alone (says Saint Augustine;) Secondly out of a pride of heart, to the end
that none might presume, that any man (as being but man) was able to cast them
out of their habitation, and deprive them both of their power and pleasure. But
our Savior Christ, He s^ffred them not to speak, because they knew him to be
Christ. This proposition may admit a double sense.

The one, That this particle Quia, Because, is declaratiue: nor would he
suffer them to speak, Quae? What? T^a^ our Savior was the promised Christ.

The other, That this particle is causall; he would not permit them to speak,
And why? Because they knew he was the promised Christ. And as when Peter
confessed him to be Jesus Christ the Son of the everliving God, Mat. 16.20.
He charged his Disciples, that they should tell no man that he was Jesus
Christ; so here he inioyneth the like silence to the Devils, etc.

In this second sense, this sequel may be made, That the Devils knew Christ;
but is not to be gathred from the former: for they might speak this, either
me^tiend^, or adulando, in a lyin^, or flattering manner, though they had not
any knowledge of him: so that which of these two is most probable, it is yet
depending to be proved, whither they knew him or knew him not?

In favor of the former, to wit, that they knew him, we read in the Gospel,
That the Devils had thrice confessed Christ, To be the holy one of God, to be
the Son of God, and the Son of the most Highest. In this very Chapter one
of these foul Fiends said unto him, What have we to do with thee thou Jesus
of Nazareth? Luke 4.34.
Art thou come to destroy us? I know who thou art, even the holy One of God.
And now here, The Devils came out of many, crying and saying, Thou art the
Christ the Son of God. In the first Chapter of Saint Mark many Devils said
the like: And in the eigth Chapter of Saint Matthew, they called him the Son
of the Highest.

Where it is to be noted, That albeit our Savior Christ permitted the Devils
to take the name in their mouths, of the holy One of God, and of the Son of
the Highest; yet did he never suffer them to preach, that he was the Christ.
For although the name of Messiah and of Christ be all one; yet the names of
Christ and of the Messiah, were the most notorious amongst the Jews. Both the
Wise and the Ignorant did expect him and believed in him; but all of them did
not know that he was to be the Son of God. And therefore our Savior Christ
put this question to the greatest Doctors amongst them, pretending to prove the
divinity of the Messiah: What think ye of Christ? Whose son is he?

Math. 22.
Again, The name of Son of God, of Holy, and of Highest, may be attributed to
any holy Prophet whosoever, that is the Son of God by Grace; but the name of
Christ was the name of their Messiah, and of their King whom they looked for,
and that he should come to redeem Israel. And if the Devils did publish him,
they did withal put in the hearts of the Jews a great hatred against Christ;
as well by seeing the glory of their Messiah placed upon so mean and poor a
man; as also by seeing him thus applauded and proclaimed to the World by the
Devils, presuming thereupon, that he had made some Covenant and confederation
with them. Before Pilate they laid two things to his charge:

The one, That he made himself the Son of God; and of this they made least
reckoning.

The other, That he proclaimed himself King of the Jews. And this they held
the heynouser crime. Two things Whereof the Jews accused Christ. Luke 23.
And Pilat hearing that he was the Son of God, began to be afraid; And
would not take this for a sufficient cause to put him to death. But when he
heard that he took upon him the title of King of the Jews, he presently
pronounced sentence against him. And the Roman soldiers, flouting at his
Kingdom, put upon him the ensigns of a King; a purple roab on his back, a
scepter in his hand, and a crown on his head. So that the thing which did most
trouble them, was, The name of Christ. And therefore they said unto him, Si tu
es Christus, dic nobis palam, If thou be Christ, declare it here openly before
the people, and tell us plainly of it. But because he would not provoke them
nor give them occasion before hand, least they might accuse him in the Tribunal
of Rome, he would not make answer unto them, nor give them any farther
knowledge that he was the Christ.

In favor of the second, to wit, That they did not know him; we have on our
side the temptation of our Savior Jesus Christ: for if the Devils had known
him, they would not have tempted him.

Secondly, They knowing him to be the Christ and the Messiah, they must
likewise know him to be the natural Son of God: for the Devils could not be
ignorant of that in Hell, which the most learned in Iudaisme had attained to
here on earth.

Thirdly, (and it is the reason of that glorious Doctor Saint Hierome) No man
has known the Father but the Son, and he to whom the Son was willing to
reveal it. If the Father then did not reveal his Son to the Devils, nor
the Son himself reveal the same, why then surely they could not know him.
But some one will say, That the Son did reveal himself to the Devils, not
by infusing any light of Faith into them, as he did into those three Kings
that came unto him from the East, and to the Prophets that were before them;
nor the light of Glory, as he has to the Blessed* but by the light of his
miracles and prophecies, and by some secret and hidden signs of his presence,
(for that is S. Austens opinion) which the Devils might better attain unto
than men.

And this reason sufficiently proves, That they knew him before they tempted
him; yea, that they knew him even from his birth; for then did they presently
perceive in Jesus Christ our Sa^ior and Redeemer, Miracles, Prophecies, and
great signs of God. And albeit the miracles were not then so many as those
which he wrought afterward, when he had unfolded and spread abroad the sails
of his Omnipotency; yet a few were enough to make the Devil, who has so
great an insight into natural causes, to conceive and see how far short
Nature came in this great business.

Fourthly, 1. Cor. 1.
The glorious Apostle Saint Paul treating of our Savior Christ by the name of
Wisdom, says, That none of the Princes of this World knew him; for had they
known him, they would never have crucified him. And this may likewise be
understood of the Devil, whom our Savior styles the Prince of the world: but
in case it be understood of men, the Earth not coming to the knowledge
thereof, to whom God might have revealed it, hell could hardly know it.

In this doubt there are (me thinks) two truths that are most certain.

The one, That the Devil had not a full and assured knowledge, that our
Savior Christ was the natural Son of God: for his knowledge was not the
knowledge of Faith, nor any clear vision, but only opinion. And as a man of
very great understanding being without the light of Faith, howbeit by the
miracles and prophecies of our Savior Jesus Christ, he might happily believe
that he was the Son of God; yet some one doubt or other will be still
remaining, that he may not be that promised Son. So the Devil, ever since our
Savior Christ was borne, had many, and those strong suspicions, that God was
become Man: These jealousies and suspicions were daily by so much the more
increased in the Devil, by how much the more our Savior Christ went daily
discovering the signs and tokens of his Divinity; till at last, seeing
himself as it were convinced by the evidence thereof, that he might put
himself out of this perplexity, he first goes about to tempt him, and
afterward to solicit his death. And this is the opinion of that glorious
Doctor Saint Hierome, upon the eigth Chapter of Saint Matthew, where he says,
That all the Devils did beat upon this ha^^^, went nosing and winding of it
out, and were wonderful both fearful and jealous of the same, but that none
of them did assuredly know so much. And Saint Augustine in his books De
Ciuitate Dei, says, That our Savior and Redeemer Jesus Christ manifested
himself so far forth to the devils, as himself was willing, and he would no
more than what was fitting, and thought that fitting, which was sufficient to
daunt and terrify them, and to free those that were predestined, from his
tyranny. And this was the tracke that they did tre^d in, and all that they
could gather out of his miracles and former prophecies. Gregory Nazia^^^^
says, That the Devils had a great deal of knowledge of the pains and
torments which they did feel when our Savior Christ did cast them forth of
the bodies which they had possessed. And of this knowledge, that is to be
understood which is here delivered by Saint Luke, Because they knew him to be
Christ.

The other, That God did hold this their knowledge in suspense and in doubt, by
taking flesh in the womb of an espoused Virgin: Which was purposely done (as
Ignatius says) that he might be concealed from the Devil; for otherwise,
the Devils could hardly be ignorant that he was the Son of the Virgin Marie,
and not the Son of Joseph.

THE XXIII. SERMON, UPON THE FRIDAY AFTER THE THIRD SUNDAY IN LENT.
JOHN 4.5. Venit Jesus in Ciuitatem Samariae, quae dicitur Sychar.

And Jesus came into a City of Samaria, which was called Sychar.


This Story a most excellent d^monstration of Gods mercy. Prou. 8. Prou. 2.
IN matter of Conversion, this action of our Saviors seems of all other the
most famous for the manifesting of Gods mercy.

In matter of Faith we know very well, That he that shall seek him as he
ought, shall find him: And of this Truth God has given many testimonies in
Scripture, They that seek me^ early shall find me: And in another place, If
thou seek her a^ sil^er, and searchest for her as for Treasures, thou shall
find her. And elsewhere it is said, Seek and ye shall find, Esaias ^5.
knock and it shall be opened unto you. We know likewise, that some have
found him that have not sought him, I was found of them that ^^^ght me not: but
none did light on him with so little labor, and at so cheap ^ rate, Romans 10.
as this Samaritane. S. Paul was tumbled off from his horse on the ground, and
was strooken blind; the Adulteress passed through a purgatory of (...) and
confusion; Marie Magdalen for her part poured forth a sea of tears; and the
good Thee^e was feign to betake himself to a great deal of faith, love,
patience, and hope: but this woman, I know not what labor or pains it cost
her, more than the letting down of a Bucket and rope into the Well to draw a
little water. That such a dishonest woman as this was, whom five husbands could
not suffice, and had entertained a Ruffian or Swash-buckler to be her companion
and champion; that so base and vile a woman as she was (consider her which way
you will) in her lineage, her fortune, her life, her behavior, her age, o^
whatsoever else that savors of baseness; that Christ should make choice of
her to publish his name, to be as it were one of his Evangelists and Preachers
of his Gospel, cannot but appear to the World to be one of the greatest
demonstrations of Gods both bounty and goodness. This made Esaias to cry out,
Good news, good news I bring you, I have joyful tidings to tell you,
Fountains have gushed forth in the Desert, waters have shown themselves in
the Wilderness, and rivers appear where there was nothing before but dry
land. Grace does usually follow the steps of Nature, and though ordinarily your
Brooks and your Rivers keep themselves within their own bounds and
precincts, yet sometimes they leap out of those beds that were purposely made
for them, and ouerflow those brinkes that bind them in, watering those thirsty
places that stood in need of their refreshing. Just so stands the case with
Grace; for although it commonly keeps it is usual and ordinary course, yet now
and then it swells above it is channels, and rises out of it is bed, making the
wilderness a poole of waters, the barrainest grounds most fruitful, and the
greatest Sinners the greatest Saints.

And here some one perhaps will say, I will wait for the like coming of Gods
mercy: but let me tell him, whosoever he be, That this is not a going for
water to the Fountain, but that the Fountain should be brought home unto us.
It is sufficient, that we have so frank and free a God that will now and then
confer these his great favors upon us without our seeking of them: But what
will not he do for thee, if thou shall seek him with thy whole heart? Such a
one, our Savior compares to that Merchant which sought after precious pearls
of inestimable value. Wherein he notifieth unto us that extraordinary
diligence wherewith we are to seek after him; and this is that Via Regia, or
the Kings Highway in which we must walk, if we mean to find him; and this was
the track that was troad in by all the Saints of Heaven: Hi sunt qui venerunt
ex magna tribulatione, etc. These are they which came out of great tribulation,
etc. Others our Savior compares to hidden Treasure, which is found by chance,
and seldom happens; and this it was this woman's good luck to light upon,
which was revealed to some few, but from thousands of others hidden and
concealed, etc.

He came into a City of Samaria called Sycar. The Saints do render two
reasons of this journey. Saint Cyril says, That news was brought unto the
Pharisees, That Christ had more Disciples than John Baptist, though Christ
himself did no^ baptize; which raised such an enraged envy in the hearts of
them, that it coming to our Saviors knowledge, he left Judea and went for
Galilee, Being enforced to pass through the midst of Samaria. Wherein he gave
to the Ministers of the Gospel a twofold Lecture.

The one, A discreet fear is better than a forward boldness. Math. 10.
That they ought sometimes to prefer sufferance before boldness; and rather
to dissemble some fear, than to show themselves too forward; and to fly from
the sword of anger than to oppose themselves against the edge thereof. And
therefore it is said, If ye be persecuted in one City, fly into another.
Many account it a great point of valor, and that they prove themselves to be
stout men in standing stiffely to their Cause, and maintaining it with an
undaunted resolution; but this is rather Weakness than Fortitude, For in some
occasions, the greatest Victory, is to suffer himself to be vanquished.

The other, (and let this be the second occasion of our Saviors journey) That
the Minister of Gods word, who is to love all, to desire all should be saved,
and that all should have the hearing of the Gospel, not to sow all the seed of
Gods word in populous Cities. Clemens Alexandrinus compares our Savior to the
Sun, which inlightneth the World, expels Darkness, augmenteth Plants,
fomenteth Flowers, breeds Gold in the veins of the Earth, Pearls in the
shells of the Sea, inricheth and beautifieth all Creatures, and leaves no
corner of the earth, which he does not visit and comfort with the beams of
his light and splendour. The Pharisees murmuring, that our Savior Christ cured
the sick on the Saboth, he said unto them, My Father works hitherto, and I
work. It is said in Genesis, John. 5.17. Genesis ^.2.
He rested from all his work which he had made. True it is, that God had then
put an end to all the works of his Power, but not to all the works of his
Love. For in doing good deeds, the three divine persons never take any rest.
And as his love in it self is perpetual, so does it still continue toward
his Creatures. Dionisius styles Love, Mobile, incessabile, ^eruens, and
superferuens, Gods love does never rest, but is still working.
He might likewise have termed it Universal; for there is not that worm
whereunto it is virtue does not extend it self. In a word, As that Husbandman
in the Gospel, did not leave out any part of the land, but did sow the same
all over; so our Savior Christ did plough that holy Land, which had the
happiness to have him set his feet thereon, and did sow in it the seed of his
Word; and by his Apostles did afterward spread the same abroad through all the
World: and here now, falls himself a work at Sichar.

And there was Jacobs well. That the memory of dead friends should be so
powerful with God, as to make him afford favors to the living, it is much;
But that the places where his friends lived, should work this effect upon him,
it is more than much. But the Well of Jacob teaches us this truth, and the good
fortune that this woman had to find our Savior sitting there, where Abraham
had erected an Altar unto God; where he had received those great promises for
his posterity; where Jacob dug that Well, which was a great relief to that
City. God treating of anointing David King, willed it to be done in Hebron.
And why there more than in any other place, Abulansis renders this reason,
That, that people did not deserve so good a King as David, 2. Reg. 2.
but a Tyrant like his predecessors. And because in Hebron, Adam, Abraham,
Isaac, and Jacob were there interred, he would that it should be in Hebron,
that the place might supply that defect which was wanting in the peoples
desert. Our Savior Christ being born in Bethlem, the Angels came to tell the
tidings thereof to the Sheapheards. And why to the Sheapheards? What advantage
have they of Grace, Nature, or Fortune, above other men? Saint Jerome says,
That the ancient Patriarchs had fed their flocks in those fields; and that in
this, as likewise in Rachels being buried there, consisted this their
happiness: So that, not only the Saints of God, but those places wherein they
lived, or dyed, will be a means for thee to meet with God. As in the place
where sinners meet, as in your Conuenticles of Heretics, and Witches, the
Devil comes amongst them, offering them imaginary fountains of delights: So,
in holy places thou shall presently meet with God, who will offer thee
fountains of living waters, etc. Tertullian treating of the Amphitheaters
where men went in to kill one another, said, Tot daemones, quot (...), That
there were as many Devils there, as there were Men. And a woman that was a
Christian coming from these sports, the Devil entered into her. And being
asked how he durst do so to a servant of our Savior Christ, made answer, I
found her within the limits of my Jurisdiction.

Wearied in the journey. It was no wonder that he was weary, it being a
journey, of such painful circumstances.

First, In that our Savior went foot; a travail which in long iournies is
wont to tire out the strongest and ablest men. Those Posts which foot it, and
those Soldiers that march long and hard marches, remain oftentimes surbated
and lame of their feet. David pursuing those thieves that had fired Ziklag, one
part of his Soldiers were so tired out with their travail, that they abode
behind, and were not able to go over the river Bezor. 1. Reg. 30.
And David afterward flying from his son Absalon, the Story says, That he
and all his people were so weary, that Achitophell being advertised thereof,
would have set upon him at midnight, presuming that being so weary as they
were, they would not be able to defend themselves. The Prophet Elias flying
from Iezabel, 2 Reg. 16.
came so bruised and so leg-wearie, to the shade of a Juniper Tree, that he
desired of God, that he would be pleased to take away his life.

The second circumstance was, The scortching heat of the Sun, which in the
Summer time is so troublesome, that a Sheepeheard or Heardsman can hardly
endure it. The Children of Israel were afflicted in Egypt with the tale of
their brickes, with the gathering of straw for to make them, with their skins
rent and torn with rods of thorns and briars, and tormented with many
miseries: And God leading them one Summer through the Desert of Arabia, which
was a hot sandy ground, it seemed unto him, that it was intolerable trouble
for them to travel in such heats, and to march on as it were in despite of
the Sun; He spread a cloud over them like a curtain. Which i^ all one with
that of Wisdom, Psalm. 78. Sap. 18.
Thou made the Sun that it hurted (...) not in their honorable Journey.
Jonas being parched with the heat of the Sun in the Confines of Niniuie, did
suffer such great torment, that he held death the lesser pain of the two. The
Sun beat upon the head of Jonah, that he fainted and wished in his heart to
die; and said, Ionoh. 4.8.
It is better for me, Lord, to die, than to live. The glorious Doctor S. Austen
says, That the Sun did not know our Savior Jesus Christ till the hour of
his blessed death, and that his then retyring of himself, the hiding of his
head, and the withdrawing of the beams of his light, was not only in pity
and compassion of his Creator, but to show his sorrow and repentance for that
small kindness which he had used toward him when he went his journeys.

The third circumstance was, The extreme heat and drought of the Country of
Samaria; the heat of those sandy grounds being (as the Poet says) very
furious and raging; Furit ^stus arenis. This must needs cause thirst and
weariness in the hardest constitution whatsoever; How much more must they work
their painful effects upon so delicate and tender a body and complexion as
that of our Savior Christ?

Wearied with his journey. The ends which God intended in wearying out
himself, were not without some deep mystery; Non frustra fatigatur Jesus,
(says S. Austen) Jesus did not take this pains in vain.

First of all, He was willing thereby to honor our sweats and our labors, and
to give a sauorie relish to our trauells and pains taking. Reasons why Christ
would thus wear out himself. Psalm. 69.
Those waters which pass through a golden Mine, are very sweet and pleasing
to the taste; and your ^quae, waters, in Scripture are taken for poenae,
punishments. Save me, o God, for the waters are entered even to my soul. The
many waters of affliction were not able to quench my love. But these our pains
passing through those veins which are far better and more precious than gold,
do give a sweet and pleasing savor to Heaven it self. The horn of the
Unicorn makes those waters wholesome, Psalm. 29.
which before were full of poison and venom: Ou^ Savior, whom David calls a
Unicorn, makes our pains to turn to our good. In that day shall seven (...)
take hold of one man, Esaias 4.
saying, We will eat our own bread, only let us be called by thy name, and
take away our reproach. The name of Woman signifies weakness, and the number
of seven, multitudinem, a great sort: whereas he says, That seven women shall
take hold of one man; the meaning is, That our weaknesses, and our pains and
punishments in this life, shall take hold on that one man our Savior Jesus
Christ, and beseech him to take pity of us, and that he will do us but that
grace as to suffer us to be called by his name, it is all we will ask of him;
all the World will else shun and abandon us, as persons affronted and
disgraced: Aufer opprobrium nostrum, O Lord take this reproach from us.

Secondly, S. Bernard says, That God could have redeemed Mankind at a less
rate, but that he was willing by this so painful a course to banish
sloathfulnesse, laziness, and unthankfulness out of man's heart. For if God
journeying in the heats, suffering the scortching of the Sun, and neither
eating nor drinking, tireth out himself thus for thy sake; How can thou be
so lazy and ungrateful to this his great pains and weariness, as to sit
still upon thy stool to take thy ease and do nothing? How careful were those
two Tobies, in devising how they might requite Raphael for the pains which he
had taken in his journey? What shall we give him to content him? If we should
give him half of that we have, nay (said the young Tobie) if I should become
his slave, Tob. 12.
I cannot recompense the love and kindness that he has shown unto me. Esaias
treating of our Savior Christ, says, Et factus est saluator in omni
tribulatione eorum, and Angelus faci^i (...) saluabit eos: The Seventy
translate it, Neque Angelus, sed ipse Dominus saluabit eos, He shall be their
Savior in all their tribulations, not any Angel, but God himself. And here
it is not an Angel that takes this pains, and thus wearies himself, but it
is God himself. Is it much then, that thou should be careful and painful,
and toil and moyle to do good, seeing thy Savior has set thee so good an
example, and will so well accept and reward this thy labor and service?

The reason whereof is much strengthened and increased, by considering what a
powerful God our God is, Esaias 40.
and what a poor thing is Man. All nations are as a drop of a Bucket before
him, and are counted as the dust of the balance, which is with a very little,
little less than nothing. And as it is in the book of Wisdom, Sap. 11.22.
As the small thing that the balance weighs, so is the World before thee,
and as a drop of the morning dew that falls down upon the earth. S. Ambrose
questions God, Why, o Lord, so much for so little? And his answer is, That this
does indeere thy ingratitude, and his love. This is a thing to stunne a man,
and to make him stand astonished; that the Sea should go after a drop of
water, as if therewith it should augment it is immensitie and vastness; that
Totum should seek after Nihil, he that is all in all, after a thing of
nothing, as if thereby he should better his Being; that God should seek after
a wench that was a water carrier, and being so weary (as he was) he should sit
him down upon Jacobs Well, and there entertain himself in talk with her,
How can she ever be able to requite so great and undeserved a kindness?

This reason is also the more indeered, considering how little it concerns
God, and how much it imports man. What is it to God? Nothing. What can thou
give unto him? If thou should undo thy self in his service, thou shall not
add one dram of glory unto him. What is it to Man? The greatest happiness
that can befall him, in that God should tire out himself for him who is not
worthy the looking after. Much (says Saint Bernard) ought man to meditate on
this his weariness, considering how dear man did cost God. It were mere
idleness in man, to think that God made him for nothing, or to sit still and
be idle. In the sweat of thy brows shall thou eat thy bread: This was poena
culpae, a punishment appointed him for the fault he had committed, that every
bit of bread should cost him a drop of sweat* and this lighted upon our Savior
himself, The great cost and pai^es that Christ was at for our redemtion.
as being our Surety: the debt was ours; but he standing bound for us, was
forced to pay it, we failing therein. Meus cibus est, vt faciam voluntatem
patris: And here the meat that he was to feed upon, was a hard crust to gnaw
upon. The conversion of this woman; he was to tug for it and sweat for it, Esaias
53.
He shall see of the travel of his soul; and shall be satisfied. His body
traveled with weariness, his soul with thoughts and cares; but he shall see
that which he desired, and be satisfied. Saint Ambrose discoursing of these
our Saviors pains, says, That for that he did esteem so highly of them,
they are not to be considered as pains, but as the price of our Redemption. And
if the price of thy ransom cost God a great deal of labor and sweat, it is
not much, that the price of finding God should be thy labor and thy sweat.
Laurentius Iustinianus says, That God had contrived it so, that the Nin^uites
should see Jonas gaping for breath, and al-to-berayed with the filthy slime
and oil of the Whale; to the end that this so sad and sorrowful a spectacle,
should be of equiualencie to those miracles which he wrought amongst them, and
should persuade them to Fastings, Sackecloath, and Ashes, etc. Philon declaring
that place of Deutronomie, Deuteronomy 20.
That he that had planted a Vineyard, and not eaten of the fruit thereof; and
that he that had built him an house, and not dwelt therein; and that he that
had married a wife, and had not enjoyed her company, should return back from
the War: this learned Doctor says, That the reason of this Proclamation was,
for that it was not held fit, Heaven is not gotten with a Song.
that another should for a song (as they say) and doing little or nothing for
it, come to enjoy the fruit of another man's labors. Will God, That thou shall
not enjoy another man's house, or his Vineyard, for nothing; and shall he give
thee Heaven for nothing? Zenon infers the self same consequence, from that
place of Genesis, Gen 3.
He will not but thou shall get thy bread with the sweat of thy brows; And
do thou think thou shall purchase Heaven without taking of pains? This is
a strange and harsh kind of doctrine to our daintier sort of people and nice
Worldlings, who cannot be without their coaches, their warming-pannes, their
perfumes, their muffes, their banquets, their music, their Comedies, their
Gardens of pleasure, etc. as if this were the way to go to Heaven. But I would
have thee to know (says Greg. Nizen) that Heaven may be here fitted and
prepared for us, but not enjoyed. Do not thou weary out thy self in seeking
after that which our Savior Christ could not find. When I see a man fare
daintily and delicately, choice and nice in his diet and his clothes, and as
greedy after his profit as his pleasure; I would feign know of him, being so
great a Lover as he is of a merry and pleasant kind of life, being wholly
given to iollitie, How he dares to go treading and counting these his steps,
toward Hell? Does he think to lead the same life there?

Jesus then wearied in the journey, sat down on the Well. A Trauailer comes
all dust and sweat, and exceeding weary to a fountain, he washes himself,
makes himself clean, drinks, sits down, and so seeks to shake off his
weariness. But our Savior coming extreme weary to this fountain, neither
washes himself, makes himself clean, nor drinks, but only sat thus, as
being wearied, that this woman might take notice of his wearisomenesse, and
this his troublesome journey; and so Caietane, and the Cardinal of Toledo, do
expound the word sic; that he sat even thus upon the Well.

The ends why God expressed himself to be thus weary, are no less deep and
profound, than the former.

First, Because out of this his weariness, the sinner might apprehend his
love. Theodoret deriueth the name of God from a Greek word, which signifies,
To run. And they gave this name unto God, who took the stars to be Gods.
Damascene, that he was therefore called God, because he succors our miseries,
and releeues our necessities with that have and speed, that thereby we may
perceive how much he loves us. Leo the Pope, expounding that place of Saint
Luke, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me, says, That these words which
our Savior used to his father, were not words of complaint; but a Lecture
which he read unto Man, making upon the Cross a muster or beade-rolle of all
those troubles, that he had both in his life and death suffered for him: And
therefore cries out, I beseech thee (dear Father) that thou will give Man
eyes to see, The end why thou have forsaken me. For that thy natural son,
should come to this so miserable and wretched an estate, it was neither
disaster nor disgrace, nor force, nor any thing else that could cause it, but
the great love which I bore unto Man, seeing his disease was so desperate, that
it was requisite that I should taste of this so bitter a potion, and that if I
had been so necessitated and so sick as Man was, I could not have done more for
my self.

We have two principal fountains of Love to consider in God.

The one, In his Creating of us.

The other, In his Redeeming of us.

In creating us, he poured forth the rich treasure of his Love, Thy hands made
me, and fashioned me, etc. The Beasts, Birds, and Fishes could not say so
much. All the rest of the creatures had their being, God only speaking the
Word, Ipse dixit, and facta sunt. But when he came to the creation of Man, he
said, Faciamus hominem, etc. Tertullian, and Saint Austen are of opinion, That
God took the form of Man upon him, because he had created him after his own
image, and likeness. Wherein he manifested most strange pledges of his love,
not only because he was the workmanship of his own hands [howbeit Aristotle
says, that every man bears a love and affection to that which his own hand
has planted, and for which he has taken pains. As God said unto Jonas, Thou
weepest and take on for thy Gourd, for which thou have not labored, neither
made it to grow;] but for the good affection that he had placed upon man, and
for that he had taken Man's likeness upon him. Gods love to Man in his
Creation. The like in his Redemption.
But much more are we bound unto him, that he has redeemed us. He created us
by his power, but he redeemed us by his love; so that we owe more to his love
than his power. His taking of our weakness upon him, was our strengthening.
Thy power did create me, but thy frailty did refresh me, said Saint Augustine.
He calls our Redemption a second Creation: And as we use to sing in the Church,
What benefit had our birth been unto us, if we had not received the fruits of
Redemption? So likewise may we say, What good would our creation have done us,
if we must have perished had we not had the profit of Redemption?

Secondly, For to put a Sinner in some good hope and assurance; for why should
not I rely upon Gods love, being that he has taken such a deal of pains
form, and has wearied out himself to give me ease? Zachary represents our
Savior Christ unto us with wounds in his hands; Zacar. 13.
and asking the question, What are these wounds in thy hands? How came thou
by them? or, Who gave them thee? This answer is returned, Thus was I wounded in
the house of my friends. Rupertus and Galatinus are both of opinion, That this
is a metaphor drawn from a Labrador or Husbandman, who has his hands hardened,
and a kind of callum or thick skin grown upon them through too much labor.
So that seeing Man was condemned for his offense, to dig and plough the earth,
Christ undertook that task for him, as one that was willing to suffer for his
friends. Za^har. 13.5.
I am a Husbandman; for Man taught me to be a Heardsman from my youth up: for,
to ease them of this burden, I was willing to bear their punishment. He then
that shall take such pity and compassion of me, he that shall undergo such a
deal of trouble for my sake, makes me to have a strong hope and belief, that
he will deny me nothing. Jacob wrestled all night with God, the Patriarch in
that struggling got a lamenesse, and God grew so weary, that he cried unto him,
Let me go. Genesis 32.26.
But Jacob answered, I will not let thee go except thou bless me. Was this a
good time, think you, to crave a blessing? Yes marry was it; for I standing in
need thereof, and God waxing weary for my sake, What shall I ask, that he
will deny me?

Thirdly, Christ shows himself weary, to the end that by this his great pains
he might save the sinner from perdition. Saint Augustine says, Fatigatus
Jesus, quia fidelem populum inuenire non poterat, That Jesus was weary,
because he could not find out a faithful People. The Sheepeheard that seeks
after his lost sheep, may weary out himself very much in seeking of him
out; but much more will he find himself so, if he do not find him. It is not
so much Gods pains that he takes, but our sins, and our wandering so far
out of the way from him, that makes him so weary. And if a Sheep had but the
understanding to know the pains that the Shepherd takes, the care and
weariness that accompanies such a strange kind of straggling, besides his being
endangered of being devoured by that Wolf the Devil, which lies in wait for
his destruction; he would be better advised, and fall a bleating after his
Shepherd Christ Jesus, and hasten into the Fold.

Fourthly, The fear of a man's own hurt and condemnation; for though God now
show himself unto thee weary, and as it were quite tired out in seeking after
thee, who refusest to be found while it is day; thou shall see him hereafter in
pomp and majesty, to thy great fear and terror. Now, he calls unto thee,
inuites thee, and entreats thee to come unto him; now, thou find him here,
sitting and staying to see if thou will come unto him, being marvelous
willing and ready to do thee good, and to supply thy necessities; he is now
all pity and mercy, but hereafter he will be all rigor and justice.
Nothing has put God to half that pains, as has thy sins; it is they that
have wearied him, they that have wounded him, and they that have crucified him:
Our sins the cause of all Christ's sufferings.
and if therefore now thou shall not take the benefit of these his pains,
wounds, and crucifixion, they shall hereafter condemn thee. For you was my
side opened, and ye would not enter in, says Saint Augustine; my arms were
spread abroad to embrace ye, but ye would not come near me; and therefore
these my wounds shall be the Atotrney to accuse you, and the Witness to
condemn you: and all those things which heretofore did represent unto you
reasons of confidence and assurance, shall now drive you into the depth of
desperation, and make you call unto the Mountains, with a Cadite super nos,
Fall upon us and cover us. The Quail keeps a mourning and complaining in her
kind of language, when she sees the Sun; and the Condemned they will
likewise howl and lament, when they shall see Christ in the Heavens. The
Angels did ask, Who is this that comes from the earth so glorious and so
bloody? I have fought a bloody battle here upon earth, triumphing like a
Conqueror over the Devil and Death, etc. But then they replied and asked him,
What, blood and wounds in Heaven? to what end, I pray you? They are memorialls
of the wrongs I received: And in the day of vengeance I shall say unto you,
Behold the Man whom ye have crucified. Ye shall then take notice of these
wounds, and of this Cross of mine. So that those things that are now our
strong tower, our defense, our protection, our assurance, and our love, shall
be our fear, our cowardice, and our condemnation. In Exodus God commanded,
That they should not sees the Kid in the milk of it is Damme. Lyra and Clemens
Alexandrinus make this Gloss thereupon, That God would not have that which was
the beginning of it is life, to be the instrument of it is death. And this may be
verified of the weariness and wounds of our Savior Christ; neither the
torments of the Devil, nor the fire of Sodom, nor the water of the Flood which
drowned all the world, nor hell it self ought so much to fear thee, as to see
thy God thus wearied and wounded for thee.

Sedebat sic, He sat thus.
Saint Chrysostom, Euthymius, and Theophilact say, Sedebat sic, non in cella,
aut in loco honoratiori, sed in terra, He sat thus, not in a chair, or some
more honorable place, but on the ground: Conforming himself according to the
time and place, he sat him down as well as he could, not being curious of the
softness, easiness, or conueniencie thereof. Wherein are condemned two sorts
of persons.

The one, They, who for one hours pains, will have a thousand dainties to
delight themselves withal, and for one hours labor, a thousand refreshings.
They indeere this storm and tempest of theirs more than any Galley-slaue that
tugs at the oar; they extol their labor so high above the skies, that there
is no earthly reward that can recompense their pains. It is such a strange
thing for them to put themselves to any trouble, and so vain is their
presumption, that the sea and the sands are too little to content them. And
this is commonly the condition of base people, that are preferred to honorable
place.

The other, They who will not be pleased with accommodating themselves as well
as they can, or content themselves with that which is sufficient for them, but
are still seeking after more than is enough: And this is too common amongst us.

Christ the only Well of refreshing water.
He sat thus upon the Well. A woman (says Saint Augustine) eame to the well,
and found a Fountain there which she little thought of. And he farther says,
That he sat him down upon the Well, to the end that we should not seek to
draw water out of this depth, but endeavor to draw water out of that Fountain
which is above all the waters in the world. This Well is the water of life, let
us draw from hence, that we may drink of the cup of Salvation. One of the
attributes of Christ, is Oil or Balsamum poured forth and scattered abroad,
whose property and quality is to swim upon the water. The water drawn from
the Well gives a great deal of trouble, and little satisfaction; it is a
brackish water that quenches not the thirst: but this sovereign Fountain
affoordeth us that sweet and comfortable water which quenches the flames of
the fiery lusts and affections of this life, and allayeth the thirst of our
sins. Of that water of the mystical Rock which in those days of old did
quench the thirst of six hundred thousand persons, Thomas and Lyra affirm,
That it followed the Camp, and that God would not that any other water should
give them relief, but the water of the Rock; 1. Cor. 10.
which was a figure of our Savior Christ: This Water was Christ. This woman
came for water to Jacobs Well, but this could not quench neither her nor thy
thirst, but another Fountain that sat upon the lid or cover of this Well.

His Disciples were gone into the City to buy meat. Saint Chrysostom has
observed, That our Savior Christ and his Disciples had but little care of their
belly; yet it being now high noone, and having had so long and painful a
journey, they were enforced to go buy them some victuals. Esaias ^.
W^^ unto that land whose Princes eat betimes in the morning, and Woe unto them
that rise up early to follow drunkenness. He that has not broke fast at one
of the Clock in the afternoon, what will he say or think of him that rises
up to eat by day-breake? Seneca says, That Gl^ttonie has reached farther than
possibly the wit of man could reach. Nat^^e makes gold and pearls; Art, money
and jewels; and of all this, Gluttony makes a dainty dish to please the
palate. And in another Epistle he says, That we need not so much wonder at our
many sickenesses and infirmities, having so many Cooks and Kitchen Books, so
many inventions of sundry sor^^ of dishes and several kinds of services,
every one of them being it self a s^^knesse. Philon paints forth a Glutton,
in the Serpent, to whom God said, Terram comedes.

First, Because he trailes his breast upon the earth, which is his food.
Glutto^s compared to Serpents for diverse reasons.


Secondly, In regard of the poison which he always bears in his mou^h* so the
Glutton has always his mind on that which he is to eat; and poison in his
mouth, because he goes eating of that which shortens his life.

Thirdly, For that God admitting the excuse of Adam and Eve, did not allow of
the Serpents excuse: Maledictus super omnia animantia, Cursed art thou above
all the Creatures, etc. Which was all one as if he should have said, That
others sins might receive excuse, but to forsake God for to fill the belly,
is inexcusable.

They went into the City to buy meat. Saint Chrysostom says, No Travelers
in this life ca^ want that which is sufficient.
That it is super^^uous providence in a Traveler, to carry with him an
Alforias, or a Walle^, because he shall never want upon the way, that which
shall be sufficient to ^^^^sfie his hunger; and he farther adds, That it is a
needless care in the Soldiers of Jesus Christ. The fiercest beast dies not of
hunger, nor the Cork tree in the Desert, though never so much pilled, at any
time s^arueth. All the trees of the field shall be filled etc. And can the
Servant of God then want? When I s^nt^yee forth without a scrip, was there any
thing wanting unto you? If there be any need at all of provision (says the
said Chrysostom) it is for our journey for that other life: for, besides that
it is a long one and a narrow one, there is no bai^ing place by the way, no
Inn, no Victualling house, no Fountain, no Well, no Brook, nor Sheepheards
Cottage: It is a Sea voyage, wherein you must carry all your Matalotage and
provision with you ready killed, and powdered up. The rich Glutton, when he was
gone hence, because he made not his provision before han^* could not meet with
so much as one drop of water.

It was about the sixth hour. Saint Cyril says, That the Evangelist sets down
this word About, in token that even in the least things we should have a great
care of the truth, considering how hateful a thing a lie is. And here he
gives a reason of his Sedebat, why he sat there.

The one was, His extreme heat and weariness.

The other, (which was the maine cause) His expecting of the woman of S^maria's
coming to the Well; waiting there for her, as an Hun^s^an for his Game; and
het want of water makes the way for her to come thither, Ies^^ sitting there
all the while. Saint Augustine says, Sede^a^ iuxta p^t^um, ^ed (...)
qui^s^ebat, He sat by the Well, but took no great ^ase; his body rested it
self, bu^ not his soul. Philon says, That a man's sitting does not argue
case, but to sit, and to lean the hand on the cheek, as it seems our
Savior upon the Well-lid, is the posture of a pensatiue man, Exodus 2.
and one that is full of care. Moses flying from Pharaohs Court, the Scripture
says, That finding himself weary he sat him down by a Well; and that
loosing the sails to his thoughts, his mind was on Egypt, casting with
himself what they talked of him in the Princes palace; and being doubtful
what fortune should be fall him, got him to Midian. Ioseph^ Brethren (says
the same Doctor) sat them down in Egypt, unloaded themselves of their sackes
and wallets, as men that were willing to rest themselves; but what with the
sorrow that they took for their father, whom they left behind them in the
land of Canaan; and what would betide them with Joseph, they found but little
ease. Esaias painting forth God in his Throane, circled about with Seraphins,
Esaias. 6.
says, That every one of them had six wings: With twain he covered his face,
and with twain he covered his feet, and with twain he did fly. Saint
Bernard asks the question, how they may be said to fly, and not to fly? And
his answer is, That this was a Miracle of Love, that made them assist for Gods
glory, and yet fly abroad for man's good. It is a Type of our Savior Christ,
who resting his body on the cover of the Well, set the cogitations of his
soul upon it is wings; considering with himself, how far those sheep were
gone astray, which he came to bring back again unto the fold, and what a
deal of labor and pains he was to take, being scattered so far asunder as
they were.

There came a woman of Samaria to draw water. Our Savior Christ being weary,
and this woman being likewise weary, let no man in this life, be he
righteous, or be he a sinner, look for any ease or rest in this life. If Gods
elect children come bruised and broken to Heaven, passing through fire and
water, broyled, roasted, sawne, dragged on the ground, whipped, and quartered,
Sancti per (...) vicerunt regna, etc. And if the places of Scripture, which
indeere the torment of the just are many, many likewise are the indeerements of
the torments which sinners suffer. So that both of them plie the oar in the
Galley of this life. Si impius fuero, va mihi; si iustus, non leuabo caput,
etc. But the just has a double advantage.

The Just yet have a double advantage over the Wicked.
The one, That their pains are sauorie unto them, because they suffer them for
Gods sake. Saint Gregory says, That in the midst of his greatest miseries,
the just does enjoy a kind of secret glory. And that Job upon the dunghill did
enjoy this comfort, thinking upon the piece of pot-shard which God had put into
his hands; weighing and considering with himself, that as the fire does harden
the clay, and makes it a purer and better kind of Earth than before; so he
himself should be much bettered by this fiery trial of his, and be purified
the more by these sores and boyles that brake out upon his body. But the
sinner does not enjoy this happiness, even his very pleasures are painful
unto him, and his solace turns into sorrow.

The other advantage is the end of the Just. Saint Bernard treating of the two
Thieves, says, That they came both weary, and their bones broken, to that
other life, They had the same prison, the same shackles, bonds, torments, and
cross. But Quam ^imiles cruces, quam dissimiles exitus habuerunt, How equal
their crosses, how unequal their ends.

Wanton women usually subject to two great miserie^
S^e^ came to draw water. This woman it should seem, was borne under some
unhappy Star, That having buried five husbands, she should be so poorly
left amongst them, that she must be forced to fetch water her self at the
Well, and be driven to draw it up. But there are two great miseries that
accompany your women that are wanton and lascivious.

The one is, That they commonly come to a great deal of need and want, scarce
having bread to put in their mo^ths. Why ^unnest thou about so much to change
thy ways? Thou shall not p^osper thereby. The Prophet speaks here of his
people, I^rem. 2.36.37.
in the metaphor of an Harbor, who pilling this and that other m^n, and causing
the richest and wealthest Citi^ens in Jerusalem, to wast and consume their
means upon them, come themselves in the end to dye in an Hospital. She
gathered it out of the hyre of a Harlot, and they shall return to the wages of
an Harlot. He follows the same metaphor still, Micah. 1.7.
proouing that the wages and riches of Harlots seldom thrive, and as they are
wickedly gotten, so are they vilely and quickly spent. The price of a Whore,
is scarce worth a loaf of bread. So that, though such a one should chance to
gain a Million, yet (as Solomon says) were it a Kings patrimony, it would be
all wasted and consumed: For such a one shall be brought to that low estate,
that she shall be ready to starve for lack of food. And albeit, speaking in
the general, our never offending of our God, be a good means for the
purchasing of prosperity to our selves; yet to grow into wealth by this base
course, is but Vigilia inferni, Hels Wake-day; a little pleasure, for a long
torment. For that which generally happens to all, and in particular to women,
is the extremest of poverty.

The other is, She lets out her self, that she may hyre others. Ezech. 16.33.
That your H^rlot is (...) to bestow money to maintain her Lovers and to find
her friends. So Ezechiel complained of his people, They give gifts to all other
Whoores, but thou give gifts to all thy Lovers, and rewardest them, that they
may come unto thee on every side for thy fornication. There are some Whoores
that sin out of Covetousness, I will go after my Lovers, Hose 2.5.
that give me my bread and my water, my wool and my flax, mine oil and my
drink. Hose 2.8.
And because they do not acknowledge whence this good comes; For she did not
know that I gave her corn and wine etc. they come to suffer great hunger. For
God takes away those blessings from them, for the which they give thanks unto
their Lovers. Therefore will I return, and take away my corn in the time
thereof, Hos. 2.9.10.11.
and my wine in the season thereof, and will recover my wool and my flax lent,
and discover her lewdness in the sight of her Lovers; and no man shall deliver
her out of my hand; I will cause all her mirth to cease, her feast days and
all her solemn feasts, I will destroy her vines, and her figge-trees, whereof
she has said, These are my rewards that my Lovers have given me.

Others sin out of lasciviousness and wantonness, and these come to be so
vile and so base, that they woo men both with their person and their substance,
giving money to boot. And the more that time flies from them, and that their
goods forsake them, the more they pursue their pleasures and indeauor to enjoy
them. Let it be in thy Letanie, That God would deliver thee from this evil,
That the more thy Vices fly from the, the faster thou should follow after
them: For when thy youth inuiteth thee thereunto, and that thou inioyest these
humane pleasures and delights, even then it is bad; but when Time goes away
from thee, Age comes upon thee, and that it is high time that thy Vices should
leave thee, or thou them* that thou should then follow after them, that is
far worse, and the very utmost of Ill. (...) My days (says Job) have been
more swift than a Post, Job 9.25.26.
they have fled, and have seen no good thing. They are passed as with the most
swift ships, and as the Eagle that flies to her prey.

Woman give me drink. When our Savior craved water of her, waterdropped from
him, and he sweat hard for it. And Saint Chrysostom says, The first step to
justification is mercy and pity.
That Christ was willing that the Samaritane should confess this Alms upon
him, in token that the first step to our justification, should be mercy and
pity. Petrus Chry^logus says, That our Savior Christ did crave this humane
mercy of her, that toward her he might exercise his divine pity. If you
withhold the water a while in the Fountain, and keep it back from it is
course, it gusneth forth in greater abundance; so is it with the milk in the
breast; and so likewise is it with Almesdeeds, which still return a double
requital. Saint Ambrose expounding that place of Saint Paul, Pietas ad omnia
vtilis, says, That the man that is pitiful, though he suffer weakness in
respect of the flesh, Vapulabit, sed non peribit, He shall be beaten, but shall
not perish. For there is nothing in a greater disposition to make God to pardon
a sinner, than is Pity.

Give me drink. God gave way to his thirst, that he might make way the better
to that hunger and thirst which he has after the soul of a Sinner; which is
so great, that he only is able to indeere the same; it is meat and drink unto
him, and so sauorie to his taste, that none is able to express the true relish
thereof, sa^e only he that knows it. But here he made choice to manifest this
his desire rather by his thirst, than by his hunger.

First, By taking occasion from the water which this Woman drew out of the Well.

Thirst a greater torment than hungar.
Secondly, Because it is the more vehement passion of the two, and does commonly
more afflict and torment us; yet in the end, he did not drink, drowning that
his thirst in that other thirst which he had after this poor soul. The
enamoured. Spouse did not eat, though she were hungry, because her Beloved
was sick, and had no stomach to his meat. Our Savior seeing this Samaritane
had no great mind to drink of this living water, does not drink himself,
though he were athirst, and much desired to quench it with this dead water.
Sampson having a Fountain near at hand, would not drink, though he were
thirsty, til he had got the victory over his enemies. Saint Augustine says
of S. Laurence, That he did not feel the fire of the Tyrant, so strongly was
he affected with that diuiner fire. While the Heart is above the stars, the
heel has no feeling of the Stocks.
So our Savior was not sencible of his own thirst, nor of his wearisomenesse,
nor of the Suns heat, out of the desire that he had to obtain his pretended
victory. Saint Ambrose expounding that place of David, Cucurri in siti; says,
That it may be read, Cucurrerunt in siti: and he proves it out of the Greek
word, as also that which follows, Ore suo benedicebant, and cord suo
benedicebant: The letter treats of the Scribes and Pharisees; so that our
Savior Christ had thirst, and they had thirst; he thirsted for their life, they
thirsted for his death. And this was one of the reasons why our Savior Christ
did sweat blood in the garden; for that the Priests, the Scribes, and the
Pharisees had decreed his death in that their sacrilegious Council: for albeit
they had already treated before of his banishing of him from amongst them;
another while, of throwing him down from the side of a steep hill, and
attempted many other disgraces and violences upon his person; yet were they not
come til now, nor was it ever to be supposed that they would have been so
cruel, as to desire the shedding of his divine blood, and to pursue him with
that eagrenes as they did unto death. And because no other desire could
satisfy that their bloud-thirstie desire, than the desires of our Saviors
blood, to leap out of those his sacred veins, for their and our good;
therefore, Factus est sudor sanguinis, etc. To this end tended that Fac citius
of Judas: he had already driven the bargain, and the price for which he sold
him agreed upon, and his feet did now itch to be gone, that he might receive
his money; in token that Christ had a greater desire to be sold, than he had
to sell him: and therefore he said unto him, Quod facis, fac citius, That thou
do, do quickly. The like end he had in the institution of his blessed
Sacrament; the delivery was promised, but before Judas delivered him up, he
delivered up himself; Praestabilis super malitia, (says Joel) not only
because Gods mercy ouercomes Man's malice, but because it preuents it.

How comes it, that thou being a Jew requirest drink of me? When this
Samaritane woman did petition our Savior Christ, saying, Sir, give me of that
water; he might have made her this answer, How is it that thou bee^^g a
Samaritane, ask drink of me? But she was a woman, and weak, and therefore
she spoke as she did; but our Savior would not touch upon that string. For, to
take too much liberty to our selves in our own proper cases, and to use
hypocrisies and finesse in those of other men, is the condition of naughty and
ill natured people. Saint Chrysostom says, That when any scruple did arise,
our Savior took upon him to excuse it, Christum cauere oportebat, It
concerned Christ to look about him, Howsoever it did this Samaritan woman.
Absalon being up in rebellion against his father, when Hushai the Archite,
David's friend, was come unto him, and said unto Absalon, God save the King, God
save the King: Then Absalon said unto Hushai, Is this thy kindness to thy
friend? 2. Reg. 16. and 16.
He made no scruple to take his fathers Kingdom from him, and his life; but
could find fault with Hushai for forsaking his friend David. So blind are men
in seeing their own faults, and so apt to condemn others of that crime whereof
themselves are most guilty.

Yet notwithstanding, this woman was not quite disheartened herewith, she was
not clean dashed out of countenance; she had her boughs rent and torn, like
unto Daniels tree, yet at the root she had some greenenesse and sap
remaining. Saint John said to the Bishop of Philadelphia, I know thy works,
There Is hope of a ^ree, if it be never so little green. Apoc. 3.8.
for thou have a little strength, and have kept my word, and have not denied my
name. But a little strength, yet this little strength, this little virtue, may
make the tree to wax green again. Those trees that have no show of verdure,
no sign of greenenes, are commonly condemned to the fire. Thou suffer thy
self to be subdued by the world, the flesh, and the Devil; thou forgettest,
if not forsakest thy God, thou runnest on in thy sins, and make no
reckoning of them; yet there are some pawnes and pledges of Heavens love,
whereon thou may ground thy hopes, and betake thy self one day as seriously
to Gods service, as thou have earnestly followed thine own foolish pleasures.
Ezech. 16.
Ezechiell charging his people in the metaphore of a little pretty young maiden
child, whom God had protected from her cradle, reckons up one after another
the many courtesies and kindnesses that he did her, the rich apparel and
jewels that he bestowed upon her, and all to this end, that when she should
forsake his house and run away from him, she might carry with her some
memorials of his love; for Gods favors never are forgotten, and are never
unwelcome, come they never so late. Take compassion, o Lord, upon me, when I
cry unto thee, Ierom. 3.
For thou art my father and the guide of my youth. And God will then reply unto
thee, Be thou still of this mind, and see thou forget not to consider with thy
self that I am thy father and thy first love, to whom thou did make the
first tender of thy good will and affection; and let this be a Motive unto thee
to make thee to leave thy vile courses, and to repent thy self of the wrongs
thou have done me, and to bewail thy many slidings from me, that I may run
with open arms to receive thee and hug thee in the bosom of my love. It was
an especial providence of God, that the Babilonians burning and destroying all
the jewels and spoils of the children of Israel, they suffered them to carry
along with them to Babylon their instruments of Music, which was, to put them
in hope that they should one day return again to Jerusalem their beloved
Country. For in a strange land they could not play upon their Harps, nor sing
the Songs of Syon, Quomodo cantabimus canticum Domini, etc.

Saint Chrysostom says, That this woman gave wonderful great tokens of her
Predestination.

First, in those scruples that she made.

Secondly, in the desire and willingness that she had to be saved. Scio quia
Messiah ve^it. But Hell is full of good desires. Gilbertus the Abbot says,
That it is an ordinary thing with sinners to say, O, how I do desire to live a
godly and a holy life; and yet complying with all those other desires of the
body, they never complie with those of the soul. Saint Ambrose treating of
the good desires which the Prodigal had when he kept hoggs, to forgo that
base kind of life ( Surgam and ibo ad patrem meum) says, It little imports
to say, I will go, unless I put the same in execution. Otherwise, these weak
purposes of ours are rather deceits, wherewith the Devil goes entertaining and
deluding us. And as it is a folly to put any hope or confidence in weak
influences, which never take effect; so those our idle and dangerous
determinations, which possess and hinder the will, and still cry Cras, Cras,
are but the cords that draw us along unto death. Consider with thy self the
great good which the desire of Heaven works on the Just, and that little good
which it works on thee, and thou shall then plainly perceive, that it does
thee more hurt than good.

Again, Though this Samaritane discovered a great deal of ignorance in her
discourse with our Savior; Christ respects not our knowledge, but our Faith.
yet Christ offering her the water of Life, she said, Sir, thou have nothing
to draw with, and the Well is deep. And this was not much to marvel at in so
mean and silly a soul as she was: Nicodemus was a Doctor of Law, and yet
betrayed his great ignorance; Art thou a Master in Israel, and know not
these things? It was sufficient, that he showed his care in matter of Faith.
Our Fathers did worship in this Mountain; It was sufficient, that he
discovered his affection to those things that concerned his soul. Sir, give me
of that water, that I may not thirst, nor come hither to draw. Our Savior
having used this Woman thus kindly, and continued so long in conversation with
her, his Disciples at last coming unto him, The leaving of sin a sure mark
of our Predestination
thinking it now time to hie her home, leaving her Waterpots behind her, she
made all the have that she could to the City, magnifying the person of our
Savior Christ, and abhorring her former lewd life, she turned over a new
leaf, and made public profession to all that she met with, for what end they
were borne. Your Diamond will shine even in a Dunghill, and your Mariners
Needle in the darkest nights will ever look toward the North. Do not allege
Peter unto me, saying, Lord, whither shall we go? thou have the words of
eternal life: nor his confessing of Christ to be the Son of the living God;
but when he was charged with the denial of his Savior, with maledictions and
execrations, then did he show what he was. Lux in te^ebris l^cet, and ^enebrae
eum non comprehe^derunt; Those thatare predestined, are H^espe^es del Viti^,
Vices Guests, and oftentimes entertainers of sin. But as the Children of
Israel being Captives in Babylon, did upon every light occasion discover the
love which they bare to Jerusalem, [ Si non proposuero Jerusalem in principio
l^titi^ meae, etc.] so this woman did presently discover the embers that lay
hid in her breast.

If thou knew the gift of God, and who it is that says unto thee, etc.
Here begins this woman's Catechism; Christ dealing with her as Schoolemasters
do with little childeren when they teach them first to read; or as Riders with
young Colts, before they begin to break them, using them very gently, and
smoothing and stroking them with the hand. Saint Augustine understands by
this gift, the water of Life; and by the water of Life, the Holy Ghost. And he
alleges in favor of this sense, that place of Saint John, If any man
thirsts, let him come unto me and drink. He that believes in me, as the
Scripture says, out of his belly shall flow Rivers of living Water. And the
Evangelist adde^h, That our Savior uttered this sentence, Concerning the
Spirit, which Believers should receive. S. Cyril understands thereby, the
Grace of the Holy Ghost; Theodoret, the Word of God; S. Ambrose, Baptism. The
proportion consists in three things:

The first, That as living Water does enjoy an inseparable union with the
fountain from whence it flow^th; whence it follows, that it can never be
dried* up, nor have any evil savor, like those dead waters of your Cisternes
and your standing Pooles, which are dried up, stink and putrify, and breed
fil^hie vermin: So in like manner the grace of the Holy Ghost, the Word of
God, and the blessed Sacraments, enjoy the self same union with that first
beginning from whence they proceed.

The second, That as your living water does enjoy a kind of life, and
vncessable motion, (for which cause the Scripture attributes thereunto the
actions of life, The Floods are risen, the Floods have lift up their voice, the
floods lift up their waves, Psalm. 93. Eccles* 1.
etc.) So the grace of the holy Ghost, the Word of God, and the blessed
Sacraments, cause in the Soul the effects of life.

The third, That as your living Water does ascend to the height of it is birth
and Being; so the Grace of the Holy Ghost, the Word of God, and the blessed
Sacraments, ascend up even as high as to God himself, because they had their
birth and Being from God, he being the Spring or Wel-head from whence they had
their rising; Fiet in eo sons aquae salientis in vitam eternam.

If thou knew the gift of God. First, he sets down the original of all
our ill; which is, our not knowing, or our want of knowledge: Ignorance a maine
cause of all our evil.
According to that of Pope Clement, in an Epistle of his to the Council of
Toledo. And it is a most assured truth, That the first step to il, is the
ignorance of good. Solomon says, Without knowledge the mind is not good. Prou.
19.
He calls it the knowledge of the soul, which is the only thing that
imports us for Heaven: As for the knowledge of the World, and the wisdom
thereof, it is but foolishness with God.

Secondly, he does not say, If thou did but know who it is that talks with
thee, thou would have given him water without asking thee for it, All that
Man can give unto God, is to praise him for what he receives from him
and would have offered him to drink, of thine own accord: though comparing
Man with God, Man cannot be said to bestow any thing on God by way of gift or
donation; all that good correspondencie which can be held on man's part, is to
show himself thankeful for the favors which he receives from Gods hand. If
God shall give me wealth, he does it to the end that I should serve him; if he
give me honor, he does it to the end that I should maintain his cause, etc..
Anna, Samuels mother said, O Lord, if thou will look on the trouble of thy
handmaid, 1 Samuel 1.
and remember and not forget thine handmaid, but give unto thine handmaid a man
child, then will I give him unto the Lord all the days of his life. Nor does
this earths poverty owe ought more for those favors which we have from
Heaven. This made Saint Augustine to say, Da quod iubes, and iube quod vis. And
the truth of this is grounded upon that which is delivered in the last Chapter
of the first of the Chronicles, when as David and the Princes of the people
made a plentiful rich Offering of three thousand talents of gold, seven
thousand of silver, and as many of other metals, 1. Chron. 29.
etc. This holy King said, Who am I, and what is my people, that we should be
able to offer willingly after this sort? for all things come of thee, and of
thine own hand we have given thee. None can offer unto God, save what they
have received from God; Quis prior reddit illi, and retribuitur ei?

Thirdly, Christ did lay a double bait before this woman.

Two baits at which women usually bite.
The one, Curiosity of knowledge.

The other, Desire of receiving. Two things wherewith that sex of theirs is
soonest taken: and as the Holy Ghost has said, That in another third thing
woman's appetite is insatiable; so likewise is it in these two: and for this
cause they compare her to a Lamp, which goes still sucking in the oil with
which it must continually be maintained.

No doubt of Gods giving, if there be none in our asking.
Fourthly, Gregory Nazianzen has observed, That our Savior Christ did put a
doubt in the Samaritans desire, forsitan petisses, he put a doubt in her
asking, but not in his giving.

To show unto us, That albeit woman be covetous in receiving, yet God is more
bountiful in giving.

To receive, is proper unto Creatures that are in need and in want: all
Creatures have their mouths still open, craving their fullness from God; and God
he is always ready at hand to satisfy their hunger. Open thy mouth wide
(says the Psalmist) and I shall fill it. The soul desires but one only
thing, which is thy self, o God, this will suffice her: Nam vnum est
necessarium, for one thing is necessary. But the Flesh through it is many
longings, desires many things; yet let it desire never so many, it shall be
sooner wearied with asking, than God with giving, if it be for it is good.
Abraham did entreat for Sodom till he waxed weary of his suit; and had he
been earnest therein, and not have given it over, it may be God would have
spared that City. What shall I return to the Lord for all that he has
rendered unto me; I will take the Cup of salvation, and will call upon the name
of the Lord. Man is disingaged by paying, and is impawned by receiving: but God
holds himself fully satisfied for those former favors he has done thee, to
the end that thou may crave new courtesies from him; he looks not to have
old scores paid, and desires nothing of thee but a thankful acknowledgement.

And this is the reason why Christ became a suitor to this woman for a little
water; he was willing to beg of her a draught of dead water, that she might
beg of him a cup of living water: dealing with her as a father does with his
pretty little son, begging an apple of his child, that he may thereby take
occasion to throw upon him a thousand favors. Phi^^p. 4.
The Philippians made much of the Apostle, who thanking them for this their
kindness, says, I rejoice in your care for me; I speak not because of want,
for I have learned in whatsoever state I am, therewith to be content.
Notwithstanding ye have well done, that ye did commun^cate to my affliction;
not that I desire a gift, but I desire the fruit that may further your
reckoning. The rendering of thanks for one courtesy, is a requiring of
another; but I do not thank you to this end, but that ye may reap the
fruits of your charity extended toward me.

But some one will say, If God be so free handed, and so bountiful in giving,
knowing our necessities, why does he drive us to beg these his favors? Saint
Augustine answers it thus, That God will have us to exercise our selves in the
petitioning of our desires; Vt possimus capere quae praeparat dare, That we
may be made capable of those kindnesses which God is willing to confer upon
us. Thomas he puts the question thus; Either God will give me this or that, or
he will not give it me: For his will is immutable; and begging, be it in what
kind so ever, seems to be Quiddam accessorium. But his answer is, That
begging is the means which God has appointed and preordained, through which
you may receive that blessing which God before all ages was determined to give
unto you. So that Prayer, is that rope or cord by which we draw up water from
that deep Well of Gods ever flowing bounty.

Lastly, another doubt is put, whether she were willing to beg this living
Water or no, at Christ's hands? For the sinner will every foot be craving of
the goods for the body, but for those of the soul he often stands upon a
Forsitan, being careless whether he have them or no. It is our daily petition,
that God would give us the daily bread of this life, but take not so much care
for that of the other. The sons of Reuben, and of G^d in passing over Jordan,
saw certain fields that were very fertile and fruitful, and those pastures
seeming good unto them for their flocks, besought Moses and the Princes of the
people that they might have the possession of them; loosing the desire of their
promised Land. In like manner the sinner will be well content, to take for his
inheritance and possession, the forbidden fields of the humane delights of this
world, and forgo the desire of those that are heavenly and divine.

If thou knew the gift of God. When the rich denies the poor a cup of cold
water, a morsel of bread, an old shirt, or the like, a man may say unto him,
Si scires donum Dei, If thou did but know what thou deniest, and to whom thou
deniest; Now thou do not know so much, neither do thou think so much,
but the time will come when God shall say unto thee, Thou saw me hungry,
and gave me not to eat; To such as were weary thou have not given water to
drink; Job. 22.
and have withdrawn bread from the hungry. A Cauallero comes into the Church,
kneeling upon one knee, like a fowler when he makes a shoot at a foul, casting
his eye on every side of the Church, rolling them this way and that way; O! if
thou did but know whom thou adorest, or if thou could but see the
reverence wherewith the Angels stand in Gods presence! The Merchant, he will
swear and forswear for his commodity; The Soldier, he will turn Turk upon
point either of profit, or of honor; The Gamester upon every bad cast, or every
little hard carding, will curse and blaspheme; O! if thou did but know whose
name thou take in vain in that foul mouth of thine, or that thou would
but consider whom thou blasphemest, etc.

Lord, thou have not wherewith to draw, and the Well is deep. There is not any
History that can more indeere the great reckoning that God makes of a soul,
than to see how our Savior Christ does here suffer, and endure the ignorances
of this vile foolish woman. Do but weigh and consider the Majesty which God
does enjoy in Heaven, not as he is in himself, for Man's imagination is but a
thimble-ful in comparison of the incomprehensiblenesse thereof: but as the
Scripture paints him forth unto us. Daniell reckons up his pages by thousands,
his servants by hundreds of thousands, the Heaven of Heavens (says Solomon)
are straight and narrow Palaces for his dwelling, Excelsior Coelo est; 3. Reg.
8.
The wheels of his Caroch are the wings of the Cherubins. After that Job had
spent many Chapters in expressing his power, and relating his famous Acts, 2.
Chron. 2.
he adds Omnia haec ex part dicta sint viarum eius. We hear little, and
we know less; But if God should thunder out his greatness, who were able to
abide it? Quis poterit sustinere? But that this God, only Good, only Holy,
only Mighty, only Merciful, and only Infinite, should entertain talk so
long with a poor silly woman, being so lewd a creature, and of so evil a
life, shows what a wonderful great love he bears to a distressed soul.

Thou have not wherewith to draw, and the well is deep. Let us suppose that
the waters, in sacred Scripture (as before has been said) did signify
troubles; And let us likewise here deliver unto you, that they also signify
pastimes and delights: And not only humane but divine, so far as to become
the Symbolum and sign of happiness. That they signify humane happiness, we
may ground it upon this reason, that they are inconstant, fugitive, transitory,
and slide away as water, Omnes morimur, and quasi aqua dilabimur, said the
woman of Tekoah to King David. We must needs dye, and we are as water spilt on
the ground. And this Truth may be verified as well in men's persons, Ier. 2.13.
as their goods. They have forsaken me* the fountain of living waters, to
dig them pits, even broken pits that can hold no water. Qui bibit, etc.
(says Job) Which drinks iniquity like water. Quasi aquam super aquam
refectionis educauit me, Job. 15.16.
etc. (says the Psalmist) He makes me to rest in green pastures, Psalm. 23.2.
and leads me by the still waters. They are likewise the symbol or sign of
happiness.

First, Because Water is the Mother of fullness and abundance. For that land
that is without Water, voyceth out famine and hunger; Sicut terra sine aqua
tibi.

Secondly, Because nothing else can satisfy and quench our thirst, when we are
taken with the Calenture of Gold, of Jewels, and Pretious-stones; and then will
the soul cry out for Water.

Thirdly, Because nothing in comparison of Water can suit so well with a
thirsty appetite.

This truth being supposed, the Samaritan woman uttered one most certain and
approved Experience; And one most gross and foul Ignorance.

Worldly contents not ^ttained without much toil.
The Experience is this, That the Water of humane content, must be drawn out of
so deep a Well, and with that strength of the arm, that not any thing can
cost us more dear in this life. Dalila placed her content in knowing where
Sampsons strength lay; and the Scripture says, that she did sweat and toil,
and take no rest, Iud. 16.
till she could come to the bottom of this Well. Ad mortem vsque lassata est.
It was death unto her, til she had obtained her desire. Saint Ambrose compares
humane pleasures and delights to the Serpent, who all his life time goes
trailing his belly upon the earth, and eats and licketh up the dust thereof.
Boaetius compares them to the honey in your Bee-hyues, which although it be
sweet, yet it leaves a painful sting sticking in us. Seneca does celebrate
that saying of Virgil, who calls them Mala mentis gaudia. The water that came up
to Tantalus his chinne and glided away by him, signifies as much. And to take
such a deal of pains in the pursuit of these transitory pleasures and
delights, as it betraies our Ignorance; so it makes us to think that the sweet
taste of this living water, is tide to the rope and bucket.

Whosoever drinks of this water shall thirst again. But whosoever drinks
of the water that I shall give him, shall never be more athirst. Our Savior
here sets down the advantages, which the living water has of the dead; The
chiefest whereof is, That he that shall drink of the water of this Well, shall
soon after be athirst again. For, Aunque haze troguas, no assienta pazes,
Though he make a truce for a time, yet does he not conclude a final peace.
Saint Austen understands this difference touching the thirst of the body; but
diverse other Doctors, of the the thirst of the soul. But the Plainest and the
surest is, that it imbraceth both, and to clear this opinion, Let us first of
all suppose, that (laying aside the thirst of the body) all do generally suffer
the same in the soul. And he that from the clouds should behold this vale of
the world, shall perceive it to be like a desert, full of filthy standing
pooles of stinking water, and that all men go thirsting after the same. And
Saint Austen says, Ipsum desiderium sitis est anim^. For, as a man cannot live
without the desire of the soul, so can he not live without thirst. Inquietum
est cor nostrum, donec ^eniamus ad te. This our saturity and fullness is
reserved till we come unto God, who is our Center. Satiabor, cum apparauerit
gloria tua, I shall be satisfied, when thy glory shall appear. In the
interim, we must of force live tormented with hunger, and thirst.

Secondly, We are to suppose that this living Water, whether it be the Holy
Ghost, be it Grace, or the Word of God, or Baptism, does not in this life
quench either that thirst of the body, or that of the soul. Touching that of
the body, we know that many Saints of God, ravished with some deep
contemplation, have forgotten al hunger and thirst, without any torment or
trouble, even to the abhorring of meat. Nor is it much that the holy Ghost
should work this effect in man, seeing that the vehement passions of sorrow
and of joy, though in a different manner do daily cause the like. For this our
not eating nor drinking occasioned by passion, does debilitate our forces, and
weakens our strength; but being assisted by the help of the holy Spirit, it
does not only conserve, but renew our strength, and put as it were new mettle
into us; as was to be seen in Elias, who with that water and bread which the
Angel gave him, went up to Mount Horeb, and there fasted 40 days. And diverse
weak men have (helped by Grace) endured such hunger and thirst, as has made
the world to stand amassed at it. But the Holy Ghost does not alwais work these
effects, save only when it seems good unto him; nor at all times, nor toward
all persons, no not to the very Saints themselves; for those that have been
the greatest Fasters, have come in the end to suffer hunger and thirst.

And if we shall treat of the thirst of the soul, it is a plain case, that
this living water does not quench it, but that the Holy Ghost does to the
Righteous add more thirst after the goods of heaven, and those celestial
joys: According to that of Ecclesiasticus, Qui edunt me, adhuc esurient; so
that till we come to see God, no man shall see himself void of thirst.

Thirdly, The thirsting and hungring after these earthly goods and humane
blessings, many seek to quench the same by filling themselves full, and not
denying to their eyes (as Solomon says) any thing whatsoever their heart
desires underneath the Sun. But their thirst grows still more and more, and
their hunger increases, like him that has eaten salt meats, or drunk
brackish sea water. All that is in the world (says Saint John) is either the
lust of the flesh, the lust of the eyes, or the pride of life. Imagine three
Rivers to thy self; one of delights, 1. Io^n. 2.16. The Rivers of this world
are three.
a second, of riches, and a third of pride and vanity: this is all the good
that the world affoordeth, and he that shall drink of the water of any of
these three Rivers shall still be more and more thirsty. And for this cause it
is called Aqua concupiscentiae, the water of concupiscence; a lusting with
desire: and as he that shall drink and swallow down these his desires,
cannot choose but grow more and more thirsty; so he that shall drink of this
water, shall desire to drink more: And (as Solomon says) he shall follow the
birds which fly in the air. The truth whereof is well proved by that rich
man in the Gospel; who having food sufficient for many years, yet did toil
and labor (as if he had been in great want) to fill his barnes and his
Granaries as full as he could cram them, making more and more store, as if he
should never have provision enough, he thought all the rooms that he had were
too little, I will pull down my Barnes and make them bigger.

Ob.
And if any man shall ask me, If this rich man shall not be able as long as he
lives, though the years of his life were never so many, to eat out that which
he has stored up, why he should take such a deal of carke and care for his
diet and his drink? I answer, That for the feeding of his body much less
might have sufficed him, Sol.
a little thing would have served the turn; but it seems in the Story, that
he sought to satisfy his soul, and that he invited his soul to feast it
self, and to make merry, whose thirst is insatiable. Saint Gregory says,
That man, not finding in the pleasures and pastimes of this life, any humane
delights answerable to those which his heart desires, seeks after change and
variety of sports; Vt quia qualitate rerum non potest, saltem varietate
satietur, That if the quality could not, yet the variety of them might some
way give content: In a word, as well does the Covetous as the Prodigal die of
hunger. Solomon after that he had entered into such a full river of del^ghts,
and enjoyed such a plentiful harvest of all kind of worldly pleasures, having
the World at will, comes forth with two Horse-leeches of that insatiable
appetite, that they still followed him, and never left crying, Affer, affer:
And who could not find in his heart to curse that Creditor almost to the pit
of Hell, who shall still baule upon a man, and be as discontented being paid,
as if he were unpaid.

Others there are, which seek to satisfy this thirst with the goods of
Heaven, taking only from the earth as much as is sufficient for them; like
unto Gideons soldiers, who passing along by the river side, took up water in
the palms of their hands. God approouing in the warfare of this life, that we
should enjoy the goods of this life by snatches, and not to lie at rack and
manger, Enjoying this world as they enjoyed it not: Whereas those that lay down
upon their breast, and like dogs lay lapping up the water, were reproved by him.

Now by this time the advantage appears clear unto us, which living water
has over that which is dead: he that shall drink of this water, whither it be
this natural water, or the symbolicall water of humane delights, he will
quickly become thirsty again. For neither with the one water is the thirst
of the body allayed, nor with the other of humane pleasures, that of the
Soul: but he that shall drink of that living water that I shall give them,
shall thirst no more, reserving it is satisfaction and fullness to that other
life. This sense the Cardinal of Toledo follows. Yet me thinks there is a
plainer explication of this place, to wit, That he that shall drink of this
dead water, be it natural, or symbolicall, shall have thirst both here and
there, in this, and in that other life: in this, because the more water he
drinks, the more he thirsts: in that other, because Hell is a lake where
there is no water. The covetous rich man could not there get so much as one
poor drop of water; the thirst there is too raging and too hot to be quenched.
So that this very word Iterum, Again, does implie an eternity in their
thirst; but he that shall drink of the living Water, shall not suffer an
eternal thirst, because this his thirst shall be allayed in Heaven.

Shall thirst no more. In part, it may be verified of the fullness of this life.

First, Because albeit the Holy Ghost does augment the thirst of those divine
goods, giving the Righteous a taste thereof, as he did in Tabor to the three
Disciples, when he gave them a relish of his glory; yet that thirst and desire
which they had at first to enjoy that good, was not wearisome and troublesome
unto them, but rather that one little drop, that one small crumme, seemed so
^auorie to Peter, that he could have rested well contented therewith for many
Ages. So that those drops of water which are derived from the fo^^^ain of that
celestial Paradise, howbeit they augment our desire, yet they give us withal
such a pleasing taste, that Christ calls those happy that enjoy them. And
Ecclesiasticus says, That they surpass in sweetness the honey and the honey
comb; The remembrance of me is sweeter than honey, Eccle. 24.23.
and mine Inheritance sweeter than the honey comb. They that eat me shall have
the more hunger, and they that drink me shall thirst the more: And Saint
Augustine says, That as in Heaven there is fullness without fastidiousnesse;
so on earth there is a desire and a hope, but no grievous torment. Whereof we
have proof from many places of Scripture, which inuit us to drink of these
living Waters: As in Esaias, All ye that thirst, etc. Thou sweatest and
labourest, and all to no purpose, because thou betakest thy self to those
false brackish waters; have recourse rather to those faithful Waters, which,
as Jeremy says, make that good which is promised in Ecclesiasticus; Eccle. 5
23.
Draw near unto me ye unlearned, and dwell in the house of Learning; Wherefore
are ye slow, and what say you of these things, seeing your souls are very
thirsty? Your souls perish for very thirst, and only the water of Wisdom
is able to quench it. And this is the Argument of the eight chapter of
Wisdom, which is very excellent to this purpose.

Secondly, He that tastes the well of life will no more relish the bucket of
Samaria
Because this living Water does in the Righteous quench the thirst of humane
delights: and this woman here had scarce heard the news of this Water, but
she leaves her bucket and her rope behind her, as if she cared not now any more
for earthly water, or worldly pleasures. Melior^ sunt vbera t^a vino; [Another
letter has it Amores tui] the wine of the Vine makes me sleep, but the
sweetness that I taste from thee, and thy dear love (my Beloved) do in a
manner ravish me, and quite alienate me from my self, and do assuage in my
breast my disordinate appetites. One drop of the water of Heaven is able to
quench the flames of Hell fire: And this made the rich man in Hell, to beg the
same of Abraham: Introduxit me rex in cellam vinariam, in domum vini, [Saint
Ambrose reads it, Et ordinauit in me charitatem] He gave me to drink of the
wine of this cellar, and my love was reformed. Before I loved, but now I abhor
that which I loved, and love that which I abhorred: Wine is usually a spur to
sensuality, but my Beloved did not give me of this Wine, but of that which King
Lemuel gave to those that were comfortless, and of a sorrowful heart. Noli
Regibus dare vinum, etc. It is not fit for Kings to drink wine, nor for
Princes strong drink, Prou. 31.
lest he drink, and forget the Decree, and change the judgment of all the
ch^lderen of aff^^ction: give ye strong drink to him that is ready to perish,
and wine unto them that have grief of heart; let him drink, that he may
forget his poverty, and remember his misery no more. True it is, that in this
life our thirst cannot be fully quenched, by reason of those manifold sins
whereinto out of our weakness we cannot choose but fall, and that very often,
while we bear these bodies of sin about us.

Domine da mihi hanc aquam.
Lord, Give me of this water. Our Savior Christ had so indeered this water,
Men usually cover, what is specially commended.
that he set an edge upon this woman's desire, to enjoy it. The Serpent spoke so
much of the forbidden Fruit, that Eve, contrary to Gods command, did eat
thereof. The Queen of Sheba heard so much good spoken of Salomons wisdom,
that she undertook a wonderful great journey, that she might both see and hear
him. Abigal did so highly recommend to David the noblenes of pardoning of an
offense, that of a fierce Lion, she made him as gentle as a lamb: the woman of
Tecoa told David so handsome a tale, that he pardoned his son Absalon.

Some do seem to wonder, that the sin of dishonestie being so hateful a
thing in Gods sight, that permitting other sins in his Apostolical College,
as Pride, Covetousness, and Treason, he did never wink at this kind of sin;
and having anciently so severely punished them, that he should now with this
woman deal so mildly and so gently. The drowning of the World was for
wantonness, and such like dishonesties; the burning of Sodom, for unnatural
uncleanness. The punishing of David by the untimely death of Bersabes son, and
by visiting himself with sickness, was for his adultery with Vria^s wife.
Ezechiell calls Jerusalem a pot, and the Princes thereof flesh; because that
City was much given to sensuality. And he says, that he will put fire
thereunto, until all the flesh be consumed, Ob.
and that the pot be melted. How is it (o Lord) that thou went then so severe,
So^.
and art now become so mild? I answer, That it is wisdom in a Physician to
apply different medicines; sometimes Lenitiues, and sometimes Corasiues. The
sins of Jerusalem were grown hard and brawnie, (says Jeremy) Why cryest
thou for thine affliction? (...) 30.1^.
Thy sorrow is incurable; because thy (...) were increased, I have done these
things unto thee. All these bals of wild fire were no more than thy hardness
of heart had need of. But those sins of this Samaritan, and those of this
Adulteress, were sins of weakness, and these must be discreetly dealt
withal by the souls Physicians. There are some that we must preach nothing
unto but thunder, death, hell, and damnation. Others, grace and mercy, and win
them to amendment of life, by affectionating them to the delights of Heaven,
Considering thy self, least thou be also tempted: For if thou be sharp, Gal.
6.1.
tart, and bitter against weak consciences, God may chance to suffer thee to
fall into the like frailties. Judge charitably of thy neighbor, and censure
him by thy self; and seek rather to comfort, than cast down a soul, etc.

Lord, give me of this water. How powerful a thing is private interest! This
woman found excuses not to give, but none not to ask. The Ancients did paint
forth Interest, in Mercury the god of Wisdom, with a bunch of keys in his
hand; for the covetous man opens another man's breast, for to receive thence, and
shuts his own, that he may not give: and for both these things he is very
prudent and wise. The Pharisees had many reasons and places of Scripture, for
to persuade themselves that John Baptist was not their Messiah; to wit, for
that he was of the Tribe of Leui, that he wrought no miracles, that he lived
in the wilderness, and removed from the conversation of men, contrary to
that prophecy of Baruc, Baruc. 3.3^.
Cum hominibus conuersatus est, He dwelt among men. The only thing that did
speak for him, was, That he was a holy man, and a Saint of God: and (as Saint
Chrysostom has noted it) this one reason they pretended should prevail
against all the rest, because it was in favor of their own particular
interest. And it is a strange case, that the holiness of Saint John should be
sufficient to make them to conceive that he was the Messiah, but not sufficient
to make them do that which he commanded them.

Voca virum tuum, Call thy husband.
Wives ^ot to do any thing without the (...) of their Husb^^d. Ma^ach. 2.
Theophilact gathers this note from hence, That Christ's willing her to call her
husband, was to advise us, that a wife is not to crave or receive any thing, no
not so much as a pot of water, without the leave of her husband, and by order
from him, being so made one flesh, and so one spirit by marriage, that they are
not to be separated. Malachie treating of a married wife, says, Nonne residuum
spiri^^^ eius est? Is she not the remainder of his breath? Whither the allusion
be made to the formation of Adam (as Saint Chrysostom has observed) for that
with the same respiration wherewith God had created the soul in Adam, he
likewise created that of Eve; or whither it have relation to the husband, for
that the self same spirit which gives life unto him, is to give the same
likewise to his wife. Saint Augustine in a mystical kind of meaning
understands by the man, the understanding; but the plainer and truer meaning
is, That our Savior in willing her to call her husband, would thereby give her
occasion to confess her fault, and not to dismerit the mercy that was offered
unto her: for, to draw from a woman's breast such immodest and dishonest
weaknesses, will require a great deal of dexterity and cunning. The servant
that ought ten thousand talents, presently confessed the debt, and the King
forgave it him; Inconfessione debiti solutionem inuenit, His confession was his
solution, so says Saint Chrysostom. But he was a man, and his fault less
foul; but for an old woman to lie at rack and manger with her Lover in these
her elder years, will ask much labor, and no less skill, to bring her to
confession. Obstetricante manu eius eductus est coluber tortuosus, To take the
subtle winding Snake out of man's bosom, we had need of Gods helping hand;
that is the Midwife that must do it. For to sin (says Saint Chrysostom) the
Devil puts great confidence into the breast of a sinner; but to confess the
same, he infuseth far greater shame: so that dishonestie does not only
disjoyne us from God, but remooues us, like the Prodigal son, a great ways
off from him, in regionem longinquam, into a far Country. God has given us
so noble and so gentleman-like a nature, (says Saint Hierome) that Sin does
make us melancholy and sad; but Virtue, cheerful and merry. And from hence
(says Saint Augustine) arise those remorcements of conscience, those inward
stings of the soul, which like the flies of Egypt disquiet a Sinner. Our
Savior Christ therefore did here make mention of her husband, ( Como mentado
la soga, en casa del a horcado: as if one should talk of a halter in the house
of one that has bin hanged) to the end that her sin might trouble her
conscience, work some remorce in her, and make her to confess the foulness
thereof, to the intent that by this means she might come to taste of the living
water.

Thou have had five husbands, and he whom thou now have is not thy husband.
Women's incontinencie.
S. Chrysostom says, That not any one of these was her husband; and some
modern authors follow this his opinion. And this may be grounded upon that
which Saint Hierome has in an Epistle of his to Rusticus, Post sex viros
inuenit Dominum, After six husbands she found the Lord. Irenaeus says, That
all save the first were Adulterers. But these several senses suit not with
this Text. Athanasius says, That they had a Law in Samaria, that they might
not marry above five times; and that the incontinencie of this woman was so
great, that having buried five husbands, she took a friend into her house: to
whom Saint Hierome adding those five which had been her husbands truly and
indeed; said, Post sex viros, After six husbands. And though these were not
Adulterers, yet is it* sufficient proof, that Sensuality is a brackish kind
of water, which causes more thirst* and, for that Woman is an impatient
creature, and much subject to long after this and that other thing,
Ecclesiasticus styles her Multi^^la. If she be thirsty, and one cannot
satisfy the same, she will solicit six, nay sixty to allay this her thirst.
And therefore Saint Hiero^e equals viduall continency with virginity, in
regard of those her forepassed pleasures: for like the Phoenix she reuiues
again, by kindling the fire with the wings of her own proper thoughts; and
therefore in that respect preferres chaste widdowhood before Virginity. For in
every kind of vice one sin calls upon another; but it is most seen in these
two, to wit, sensuality, and heresy: And this peradventure is the reason, why
the Scripture commonly calls Idolatry, Fornication. Saint Ambrose treating
of (...) in laws burning fits of her Fever, says, For^asse in typ^ mulier^
illiu^, (...) languebat varijs criminum febribus, Peradventure in the figure of
that (...) flesh languisheth under the Fea^ers of diverse crimes. It may
likewise be (...) it was a stamp of this old woman, who was all this while in
a hot burn^^g ^e^uer. When Abimelecke fell in love with Saraah, some make her
to be (...) years of age; when Paris stole away Helena, she was fifty years
of age and upwards; In that Sea voyage of the Argonauts, wherein went ^as^or
and (...) her brethren, she was about some twenty years of age; and from that
time to the destruction of Troy, Theodoret puts thirty years, and Eusebius
ninety. So that according to one account she must be fifty, and according to
the other, ^n h^^dred and ten: and yet notwithstanding all this, she was
married afterward to Deiphoebus, Theseus having stolen her away the second
time. Isiodore says, That aged dishonestie is the sweetest and the hardest to
be left off.

But because many times the tyring of our selves out with sin, makes us to
grow weary thereof, and at length to loath it, and utterly leave it off; God
is wont to deal with Sinners as Fishers do with their Fish, who give them
li^e enough till the poor fools have played themselves weary, and then will
easily land them where they list. -- Et quae non puduit far, tulisse pudet,
says Ovid. I was not then ashamed when I did the sin, but I had no sooner done
it but I was ashamed. They have painted the god of Love with Torches and with
Wings, to show, That there is a time wherein these pleasing delights do flame
outright in us; and a time again wherein they betake them to their wings, and
fly away from us, and are never seen again. David, as it were by way of
hyperbole, said of a Sinner, Astitit omni viae non bonae, malitiam autem non
odiuit; It is an ordinary thing with most men to loath sin at last, and to
fall into a dislike thereof: So did Solomon, Sin at one time or other grows
loathsome through sa^^etie.
who after so plentiful a harvest, such a fullness of pleasures as he had, yet
cried out at last, Vanitas vanitatum, and omnia vanitas. (...) likewise says
in another place, Non est timor Dei ante oculos eius; he paints forth a sinner
that has cast behind his back the fear of God, and the shame of the world,
and has so wholly delivered himself up to all manner of delights, that he
comes at last to abhor his own wickedness. Moses Varceras in his Book
which he made of Paradise, says, That when Eve had eaten of the forbidden
Fruit, it seemed then as loathsome and unsavory unto her, as before she
tasted it, it appeared sweet and pleasant to the palate. Saint Augustine
reports in his Confessions, That the Divine providence did defer his
Conversion many days, as if it had been necessary for the clearing of his
error, that he should lie a little longer in the mire of his sins, Quasi
necesse esset adhuc S^rdi^^^e. And the reason of this truth is, Worldly
pleasures whereunto compared.
That worldly pleasures have a fair show and a sweet appearance; but if a man
be drowned in them, and come once to the lees, there is not any Rododaphne more
bitter: they shine and give a light at the first like lightning, but anon after
they leave us in a more than Egyptian darkness. This ^ence may be given to
that place of Micah, where treating of his people, he says, Ad Babylonem
venies, and ibi saluaberis, Thou shall come unto Babylon, and there thou (...)
be saved. And to that which Solomon has, Impius, cum ad profundum peccat^^^^
veniet, contemnet, The Wicked when he comes to the depth of Sin, he shall
contemn it.

The Disciples did wonder to see him talk all alone with a woman; Though none
of them did ask him what he made with her. And had he not been as well God as
man, they might have had some ground for it. For conversation with women
(according to Saint Basil) is that leaven which soureth the soul; be a man
never so holy, never so good, Tamen in ipso congress^, etc. In the very
meeting yet, the diversity and sex is soon discovered: And therefore he says,
That that man is happy which has least to do with them, but most happy that
does never see them. S. Cyprian says, That for a man to be environed on every
side with flames of fire, and not be burned; Nazianzen, That Flax should be
near the fire, and not take flame; that a young man should be in familiar
conversation with a young handsome maid, and not be tempted with an evil
thought, is a miracle. Theophilact delivers unto us, That after that miracle of
the Loaves and Fishes, the Apostles remained in the company of certain devout
women which had followed our Savior Christ into the Desert, and were indeering
unto them the greatness of Gods power; and that to divert them from their
conversation, Coegit illos, he enforced them to imbarke, and to put forth to
sea; and a fearful tempest followed thereupon: in token, that amongst those
rough billows, furious waves, and tempestuous winds, they did run less
danger, than in the conversation of those good and holy women. One of the names
(amongst many other) which the Philosophers and diverse other godly men have
given unto women, was, Tumulus Viuorum, The Grave or Sepulcher of the Living.
And as upon your Tombs and Sepulchers there are Epitaphs written, which speak
thus, Hic jacet, etc. Here lies such a one; so upon this living Sepulture,
innumerable Epitaphs may be put: Here lies the Prophecy of David; here lies
the Wisdom of Solomon; Here lies the strength of Sampson; Here, the valor
of Hercules: for woman is that shelfe or quicksand, wherein the valiantest, the
wisest, and strongest men in the world, have hasarded both their lives and
reputation.

THE XXIIII. SERMON, UPON THE SATVRDAY AFTER THE THIRD SUNDAY IN LENT.
JOHN 8. Perrexit Jesus in Montem Oliueti.

He went into the Mount of Olives, etc.


Our Savior Christ the evening before, had preached in the Temple til that the
drawing on of the night enforced him to make an end of his Sermon. Every one
of his Auditors hied them home to their own houses to ease and rest
themselves; but our Savior Christ, who had never a house of his own to put
his head in, nor was invited to any of theirs, betook himself to the Mount of
Olives, as at other times he was wont to do; which stood in that distance
from Jerusalem, that it was but a walk, as it were, or easy Sabbath days
journey: in the midst whereof was that little Brook beset with Cedars,
bending toward Bethania, where Martha and Marie dwelt. Here our Savior
Christ spent that night in prayer, but early in the morning came again into
the Temple, and all the People flocking about him to hear him, this History
happened of the woman that was taken in adultery; whereof we are now to treat.

What is typified by the Mount of Olives.
He went into the Mount of Olives, etc. Saint Augustine in a Sermon De Verbis
Domini, (taken out of that Tract which he made upon John) calls the Mount of
Olives, Montem chrismatis and vnguenti: And Bid adds, That the top of this
Mount does typifie the height of our Savior Christ's pity and mercy. And the
Evangelist here advises us, That he came from the Mount of Olives to the
Temple, where this Story succeeded; because a work of so great mercy and
clemency, could not conveniently come from any other place. Moses descended
down from Mount Sinay, but with so rigorous a Law, that he brake the Tables in
pieces, that all the People might not thereby endanger their damnation. Sinay
is a Bush, and from Bushes what can be expected but bruises and brushings, and
all sharpness of rigor? But from the Mount of Olives, nothing could come
thence but Oil, which is that common Hieroglyph of mercy and compassion.

First, For it is softness and sweetness; and therefore did the Divine
providence so order the business, that Priests and Kings should be anointed
therewith, signifying thereby, how loving, mild, and gentle they ought to be.

Secondly, Because it strengthens and inableth those members which are weak
and feeble. Deus ol^um permisit (says Clemens Alexandrinus) ad leuandos
labores. Your Wrestlers did use to annoint themselves with Oil, not only that
they might slip the easier out of their Adversaries hands, but also because it
made their joints and their limbs more strong and nimble.

Thirdly, For that it is a sovereign salve for all kind of wounds; for there
is not any thing that does so comfort, so supple, so assuage and disperse any
malignant humor, and cure any festred sore, sooner than your precious Oils.
The Samaritane cured with Oil the wounds of that Traveler whom he found
wounded on the way to Ierico. Esaias complains, Luke 10.
That no man would suck and draw forth the blood from the wounds of his
People, Esaias 1.6.
nor annoint them with Oil; Vulnus and plaga tumens non est circumligata, nec
sota oleo.

Fourthly, For it is stillness, softness of nature, and little noise that it
makes; beat it or batter it never so much, pour it out never so violently, it
makes no noise, but shows it self still and quiet; whence grew that adage
mentioned by Plautus and Plato, Oleo tranquillior, More still than Oil.

Fifthly, For the virtue that is in it for allaying of storms at Sea, and
repressing of the rage of the billows, for (as Pliny and Celius affirm) Oleo
mare tranquillatur, With Oil the sea is calmed.

Sixthly, Because there is not any liquor that does more spread and diffuse it
self; Oleum effusum nomen tuum, Thy Name is as an ointment poured out, said
the Spouse to her Beloved: Cant. 1.
And the Saints declare the same of the person of our Savior Christ.

Seventhly and lastly, Because amidst all other liquors it is still vpppermost*
and is always swimming aloft, and evermore keeping it self above the rest;
all which are proprieties of pity and compassion, of mercy and loving
kindness, which is soft, supple, and sweet this is that which gives ease to
our troubles, and remedy to our pains; this is that which refreshes and
strengthens our weak and feeble Members; this is that which cures our wounds
and assuages the swelling of them; this is that which suffers and says
nothing, though never so hardly used; this is that which composeth differences,
turbulent strifes, and the raging enmities of this Worlds sea; and this is that
which is a general salve for all sores, a friend at need, and the greatest
representation of Gods glory: for he is not seen in any attribute that he
has, so much as in this, Misericordia eius super omnia opera eius, His mercy
is above all his works. And to this purpose Pieri^s reports* That it was
concluded by a joint consent, that the Images of the gods, should be wrought of
no other kind of wood save that of the Olive.

He went unto the Mount of Olives, and came again into the Temple, etc. Our
Saviors ordinary Stations and employments.
These were our Saviors stations, from the Mount to the Temple, and from the
Temple to the Mount; in the Mount he prayed, in the Temple he preached. These
are those two imploiments of Martha and Marie, figured in Lea and Rachael*
herein is sum'd up the perfection of Christian religion. Where it is to be
noted, that Marie was still ravished as it were, with the love of our Savior,
and the swee^nesse of his words; and Martha with the care to do him service.
Rachael was very fair, but barren; Leah foul and tendereyed, but fruitful.
The contemplative life is wonderful beautiful, but not fruitful; Action is to
be preferred before contemplation.
the active life is foul and bleereeyed (nor is it any wonder, having it is
hands continually busied about wounds and fores) but is fruitful in children
and he that inioyes the beauty of Rachael, and the fruitfulness of Leah, the
contemplation of Marie, and the practice of Martha, has attained to the height
of Virtue and Holiness. Ecclesiasticus commends the son of Onias for these
two qualities, As a fair Olive tree that is fruitful, and as a Cypress tree
which grows up to the Clouds. The Olive is the emblem of fertilenesse, for
it is fruit and it is multitude of branches, and sprigges sprouting forth of it,
sicut nouellae Oliuarum. The Cypress is the Symbol of beauty; for although
it bears no fruit, yet it shoots up like a Pyramid, to an extraordinary
height: and both of them make the stamp of a holy Prelate, whose mercy and
compassion is most fruitful, and whose prayer is most beautiful and pleasing:
for there is not any thing that man can imagine to be more fair, than that a
creature by this means should come to grow so sweetly familiar with his
Creator.

Ob.
And all the People came unto him, and he taught them. Some man may doubt, How
the effects of Gods Word being so powerful and so full of life, [ Viuus est
Sermo Dei, and efficax poenetrabilior omni gladio] and this People showing
themselves so devout in hearing him; it should come to pass, that our Savior
coming so early into the Temple, and tarrying there all day long, to teach and
instruct them in the truth, they fell into so many sins as they did, and in
the end into the greatest that ever was heard of? Sol.
But that may be answered of those the Faithful that were then, which Saint
Bernard speaks of those that are now, That many profess themselves to be
Christians, and apply themselves to all those obligations that are befitting
Christians, and perform all other Christian actions, and come (out of custom)
to Sermons, to divine Service, to the celebration of the Sacrament, and
adoration in the Temple. And this is no great matter for them to do,
considering they are borne and bred amongst Christians; in far stricter
duties is the Moore tied to his Mahomet, and to the Laws of his Alcaron; and
in a far more rigorous manner is the Gentile bound to his false gods, for
that they sacrificed their sons and daughters to Idols; Immolauerunt filios
suos, and filias suas Daemonijs, For mine own part, I confess (says this
holy Saint) in all humility, That as the young Heifar being accustomed to eat
and tread out the Corn, takes the yoke patiently; so do I come to these
duties of a Christian, and of a religious man, Most Christians are led by
custom more than by devotion.
more out of custom, than devotion. Would to God that what this Saint said of
himself in humility, might not too truly be said of many Christians amongst
us, who submit themselves to the yoke of the Law, for the feeding of their
belly, and out of long custom.

Adducunt ei mulierem deprehensam in adulterio, and statuerunt eam in medio.
They brought unto him a woman taken in adultery, and set her in the midst,
etc. This woman was peradventure drawn to commit this foul sin, out of the
assurance that she had that this business would be closely carried, and out of
that good love and affection which she bare to the Adulterer, and he to her;
who happily had sworn unto her, That for her sake he would be content (if
need were) to lay down a thousand lives. But this love did end in leaving her
upon the Bulls homes, with danger both of her life and honor; and this secret
came to light in the sight of all Jerusalem.

There are four manifest truths in matter of secrecy.

The first, Not to rely upon secrecy; because, Nihil opertum, quod non
re^detur, There is nothing so closely carried, which is not at last brought to
light: the reason is, because there is no sin, be it committed in never so
secret a corner, which does not come forth in the end, and utter it is voice
aloud in the gates of the city. So God said unto Cain, presuming that that
fratricide of his, because it was done in secret, should have been buried for
ever, and never have come to light, If thou do well, thou shall be rewarded
for it; if ill, sin lies at the door. Gen 4.
And when Cain made himself as if he had been ignorant what was become of his
brother Abel; the Lord said unto him, The voice of thy brothers blood cries
unto me from the earth: And in Scripture it is an ordinary kind of language
to say, That our sins do cry out for vengeance. When one of Ioshuahs
soldiers hid a wedge of gold, Nicholaas de Lyra notes, Sin, if nothing, will
be it own discouerer. Job. 24.14.
That the original word signifies likewise a Tongue; for though it were hid
and buried under ground, yet did it cry out. Job painteth forth the wariness
of an Adulterer, He waits for the twilight, and says, No eye shall see me;
and disguiseth his face; Like the Owl, he comes not abroad till it be dark
night, he pluckes his hat down in his eyes, he muffles his cloak about his
face, he first looks on this side, and then on that, lest any one should
chance to epsy him: In a word, such lewd livers as these, like unto your wild
beasts, keep themselves close, watching for the darkness of the night:
Psalm. 104.20.
In ipsa pertransibuut omnes bestiae agri, Thou make darkness, and it is
night, wherein all the beasts of the Forest creep forth; and so it is with
these beastly minded men. Solomon makes another kind of description thereof; A
man breaks Wedlock, and thinks thus in his heart, Who sees me? I am
compassed about with darkness, Eccle. 23.18.
the walls over me, no body sees me, whom need I to fear? But the truth
is, That Walls have eyes as well as ears; besides, the eyes of the Lord are
ten thousand times brighter than the Sun, beholding all the ways of men, the
ground of the deep, and the most secret parts. And this man that thinks
himself so close and so cunning that no eye can find him out, shall be
punished in the streets of the City, and shall be chased like a young
horse-Foale, and when he thinks not upon it, he shall be taken: thus shall
he be put to shame of every man, because he would not understand the fear of
the Lord. Saint Augustine says, That none seek to carry these kind of
businesses more secretly and more cunningly, than your married woman, that has
a care of her reputation and honor; but she also, for all her sly carriage,
shall be brought out into the Congregation, and examination shall be made of
her children; her children shall not take root, and her branches shall bring
forth no fruit; a shameful report shall she leave, and her reproach shall not be
put out. Solomon after he had made mention of four things that left no sign
behind them, nor were to be traced out, or followed by the track; to wit, The
way of an Eagle flying through the air; of a Serpent gliding through the Rock;
of a ship sailing through the sea; and of the ways of a young man in his
youth; he further adds, Talis est via mulieris adulterae, The way of an
Adulteress may very well be likened unto these, for that great artifice and
cunning wherewith she dissembleth this her treachery, as being only privy to
this her foul play, and wiping her lips, she sits down full gorged at her
husbands board, and tells him that she will fast, contenting her self with
bread and water; to the end that by this her fasting and leading a godly life,
she may gain a good report, and be free from the razors of malicious tongues:
but in the end, (as before we have said) Nihil occultum quod non reueletur,
Nothing so secret which shall not be revealed. For Sin evermore leaves a
print behind it, like those footsteps of Baals Priests; those steps of our
forefather Adam; that coare of the cut Apple that choked all Mankind; and
those crummes and relics of their feastings, who said, Nulium sit pratum quod
non pertranseat l^xuria nostra, Let there be no meadows in which our riot may
not revel. The Devil, who assures us most of secrecy, takes off this cloak
which he casts over us, and discloseth these our secret sins, when he has
a mind to open our shame. David being a wise and discreet King, took
extraordinary care for the concealing of his adultery; Forsitan tenebrae
conculcabunt me, tu fecisti abscondite: he carried the business so closely,
that he thought it should not be discovered; but by those Letters that he wrote
unto the General of his Army, That he should put Vrias in the forefront of
the battle, and where the greatest danger of death was; Ioab smelt out David's
drift, and showed the Kings Letter to some of his Captains; who did blaspheme
God, for that he had set a King over them, who for to satisfy his lust, set so
little by the life of so brave and valiant a Soldier, and so serviceable as
Vrias was, and so well deserving of his Majesty.

Sin cannot be concealed from God.
The second, That though a sin be kept secret from the eyes of men, yet is it
not possible that it should be hid from the all-seeing eye of God. The Sun
has not so clear an eyesight as God has; The Sun pierces into the
bowels of the earth, it discovers the bottom of the Deep: in the one he
has certain Shops or Worke-houses, wherein gold, silver, and precious stones
are wrought; in the other, Pearl, and diverse other rich commodities, as
Coral, Amber, and the like. But although the Sun reaches to the utmost
corners of the earth, and the most hidden secret places of this Universe, by
his virtue and heat; yet are there many which he cannot come near unto with
his light and splendour: but from the eyes of God there is not that vein or
least crannie in the earth, nor that shell, though never so small in the sea,
that can hide it self; Sicut tenebra eius, ita and lumen eius, As the
darkness is his, so is the light also. In that beginning when God created the
World, he divided the night from the day, and the light from darkness: but
this was done for humane eyes; but to those diuiner eyes there is no night at
all, and innumerable are those places of Scripture which prove the truth
hereof unto us.

The third, That God many times affoords us a greater favor in publishing a
secret sin, than in letting it lie hid and reserved against the day of Wrath,
for our eternal and public confusion. Sin while it is hid, more dangerous to
the Soul, than when it is discovered.
The Schoolmen make a question, Which is the more grievous, the public or
the secret sin? and it is a plain case, that the public carries with it
more grievous circumstances of scandal, harm, and infection; and therefore
David styles it a Plague or Pestilence: but the secret sin is always more
dangerous, because it is in some sort incurable; there is no neighbor to
admonish thee of it, no witness to denunciate against thee, nor no judge to
punish thee for it, nor no Prelat to reprehend thee therefore; for sin once
reprehended in persons that have any shame in them in the world, turns to
amendment. Saint Augustine reports in his Confessions, That his mother had two
Maid servants, one a well grown wench, the other a little girl; and that when
they went for Wine to the Tavern, the bigger would drink a good hearty
draught, the lesser did but sip a little; but by sip after sip she grew by
degrees to be a good proficient: and falling out one day before their
mistress, the bigger complained of the lesser, That she did drink up the
Wine; whereof she was so ashamed, that she would never after so much as offer
to take it. Public sins, all labor to amend: When a house is on fire, there
is not that Tyler or Carpenter, or any near dweller, but will have in and
help all they can to quench it. Secret sins are like a smokie fire, which
lies smothering and not flaming forth, wastes and consumes inwardly: and this is
the cause that it is conserved and continued like a secret Impostume, which
occasioneth our death because it cannot be cured. Josh 7.
Upon Achans sin they did cast lots by Tribes, by households, and by
particular persons; and when the Delinquent was discovered, Ios^^ah said, Give
thanks unto God, that thy sin is brought to light and made known to the
world, and that thou shall smart for it in this life; for had it been kept
secret, thy punishment had been immortal. David's Adultery being brought
forth upon the open stage, [ In consp^^tu Solis huius] and Nathans reproouing
him for it, was the future occasion of all his good. It could not choose, to
this adulterous woman that was thus taken in the manner [ Con el hurto en las
manos, with the theft, as they say, in her hand,] but be a wonderful grief and
vexation, that she should be carried publicly through the streets, all the
boys of the City hooting at her, men and women poynting at her with the
finger, and crying shame upon her, and that at last she must be brought into
the Temple, and there be set in the midst of that reverend Auditorie and
Assembly, as a spectacle of shame and infamy. But the opening of this her
wound, was the curing of it; this which she thought was her ruin, was her
remedy; and this her marring was her making. The World held her to be a most
unhappy woman; for there being so many Adulteresses in the City, Whorings had
ouerspread the land, and blood had touched blood; that this flash of lightning
should light upon her alone, Hose. 4.
and that this sudden thunderclap should not only voice her dishonor, but
her death. Whereas the Adulterer was by all adjudged to be a happy and a
fortunate man, that by good hap he had escaped out of the hands of Justice,
either by flight, or greasing the Officers in the fist. Others stickt not to
say, Siempre quiebra la soga, por lomas del gado; the weakest still goes to the
wall: howsoever, the more certain truth is, That she was happy, and the
Adulterer unfortunate.

The fourth, That every sin is to be made public either in this present
life, or in the life to come; and this says the aforesaid Letter, Nihil
opertum quod non reueletur; and not only public notice to be taken thereof,
but to be accompanied also with shame and confusion. And this the Scripture
proves unto us in many places; and for the amending of these two mischiefs
there is no means so powerful, as to have recourse to repentance; from whence
proceed these two effects:

The one, That it couers our sins, Blessed are they whose sins are
forgiven, and whose iniquities are covered.

The other, That it does blot them out of Gods rememberance, according to that
of Ezechiel, At what hour soever a Sinner shall repent him, I will no longer
be mindful of his sin.

Haec mulier modo deprehensa est in adulterio.
This woman was taken in adultery in the very act, etc. Man's disrespect is
often an occasion of the woman's fall.
All these words carry with them a kind of emphasis which indeere the
aggrauation of the Accusation, Haec mulier: For howbeit the sin of adultery
may be greater perhaps in the husband, by giving by his little respect and his
bad example, occasion to his wife to play the Whore. [For as Thomas says, He
that treats with another man's wife, se and suam discrimini exponi^, exposes
himself and his own wife to a great deal of hazard* because he sows
bitterness in the marriage bed, contrary to that rule of Saint Paul, Husbands
love your wives, and be not bitter unto them. For which cause they took out
the gall from that beast which was sacrificed by married men unto Juno, for
that the Head (which is the man) ought to be obliged to more continency, to
more virtue, to more wisdom, and more fortitude, as Saint Augustine tells vs]
yet notwithstanding, this fault is held fouler in the woman. Eccle^iasticu^
treating of an Adulteress, says, ^he gets shame to her self, and her
reproach shall never be blotted out. I know not whence it comes to pass, that
the remembrance thereof is so soon blotted out in man, and that it should
stick by a woman all the days of her life.

Adultery how punished in former times.
She was taken now. Now, even in the nick: it is not a sin of any ancient
standing, it cannot plead prescription, that it was so many years since, or
time as they say out of mind: for time does either cover or lessen the offense;
or it may be pleaded, that it was formerly punished. But this is not a quarter
of an hour old, now, even now did we take her in the manner, In adulterio, in
the very act of adultery. And here notifying the same unto our Savior
Christ, they fall a aggravating the heinousness of the offense; and this is
proved unto us by four forcible arguments.

The first, That there were punishments ordained against Adulterers by all
Nations whatsoever.

Some did burn them alive, if we may believe Lucian; so the Philistines burned
Sampsons Spouse; and so Judah gave order to have his daughter in law T^mar
burned.

Some again did use to quarter them; and Euclides makes mention of a King that
executed this law upon his own son.

Others plucked out their eyes, as Valerius reports it.

And others did whip them and cut off their noses, as Siculus stories it of the
Egyptians.

Others (says Caelius) did hang them.

Others did stone them to death, and that was Moses his Law.

Others did tie them to two trees, which being bowed down by violence,
letting them suddenly go, did with a jerke rent one limb from another, etc.

Hence may be argued Gods chasticement; Per me Legum conditores iusta
decernunt. Prou. 6.
Solomon says, That as it is not possible that a man should carry fire in his
bosom, and his clothes not be burnt, or go upon coals, and his feet not be
burnt; no more is it possible, that a man should lie with another man's wife,
and that the justice of God should not take hold of him. And therefore it is
said, Non erit mundus cum tetigerit ^am, He that goes in to his Neighbors wife
shall not be innocent, whosoever touches her: The Hebrew letter has it,
Innocent, indemnis: The Septuagint render it, Insons, impunitus. So that for
other our sins, it may be God will let us escape unpunished; but in matter of
adultery, let no man expect the like favor. And therefore he commanded,
That in the Sacrifice of the Adulteress they should have no Oil; to signify,
that it was a fault that deserved little or no mercy.

The foulness of this sin, and how heinously the Saints have thought of it.
The second Argument of aggrauation is, that many of the Saints have given to
Adultery the name of the greatest and foulest offense. Philon says of it,
Ad^^terium malificiorum maximum, Of all wickedness Adultery is the worst.
Cornelius Tacitus affirms the like in his Annals. Pope Clement reports,
That Saint Peter was often wont to say, Quid in omnibus peccatis Adulterio
grauius? That amongst all the sins there was not any more heinous than
Adultery. Job by way of hyperbole breaths out this, Job. 31.
If I have sought to betray my friend, and have laid wait at the door of my
neighbor, let my wife grind unto another man, and let other men bow down upon
her. In the Book of Judges it is called Magnum nefa^, ^^^quam tantum piaculum
factum est in Israel, Iud. 20.6.
A villenie, the like was never committed in Israel. And a little before,
Adultery is said to be Iniquitas maxima. And a great proof of this truth is,
the comparing of it with other ^innes, and the heynousnesse wherewith they
qualify it above the rest. The murdering of (...) seemed a less sin to
David than his adultery with Bersheba. And Saint Chrysostom proves this out
of that act of Abraham's, who entreated Saraah to give out, that she was his
sister; for if it should be known that she was his wife, making lighter of
murder than adultery, they would not stick to kill him. Dan. 13.
Susanna esteemed less of death, than the dishonor to her self and her
house. Homer stories it of Ulysses, That when he was absent from his wife
Penelope, he was solicited and earnestly laid at by Circes the Sorceresse, who
promised to make him immortal: and howbeit he did verily believe that she
was able to make good her word, yet did he less reckon of immortality, than
of committing adultery. Solomon proves, That theeuing is a less offense; for
many men steal merely out of pure hunger, vt esurientem impleant animam, that
their hungry souls may be satisfied. But the Adulterer has no excuse at all;
the Thief may make satisfaction, Reddet septuplum, He shall restore seven
fold; the Law requires no more of him: but the Adulterer, with all that he
has, is not able to make satisfaction; all the wealth and lands that a man
has, cannot balance (be they never so heavy) the wrong that is done by an
Adulterer. In a word, The sin of Adultery is without all question of all
other sins the greatest. Summus saeculi reatus, Tertullian calls it. Saint
Cyprian, Summum delictum. And yet the Scripture confounds these two, and styles
Idolatry, Adultery: As in that of Hosea, Omnes adulterantur, quasi clibanus
succensus, They have all committed adultery, Osee 7.
they have run a whoring after strange gods, and are all as hot as an oven.
Saint Hierome understanding here upon this place, The Idolaters, etc.

The third argument is, The harm which insues upon this sin: Clemens
Alexandrinus terms Adultery, Pestem maximam. Job, a fire that sweeps all
away, makes havoc and ruin both of root and tree, and every branch thereof,
omnia eradicans germina, Rooting out all the Plants, even to the children and
nephews. Job. 3^.
Such adulterated Plants (says Wisdom) though they take deep rooting, and
spread abroad their branches, yet shall they not enjoy any stabilitie or
firmness. The Roman Emperors made good proof hereof, for such as were given
to Adulteries, never saw any succession of their own. The like did Herod, who
robbed his brother Abimileck of his wife: and so diverse others. Filij tui sicut
n^^ellae Oliuarum, which are never ingraffed into any other Tree. And the
Church, though she be so cockering and indulgent a mother, does disfavor them
and reprove them.

The fourth and last is, Natures dislike thereof, Adultery disalowed even by
Nature.
which thinks her self extremely wronged and injured thereby; Which seems
much to aggrauate the quality of the offense.

First, In the men; who perhaps though they do not come thereby to be
infamous, yet they are not able with all that they have, to recompense this so
foul an affront; so says Solomon. Alexander writing to his mother Olympias,
Prou. 6.35.
styles himself the son of Jupiter; but therein he exceedingly wronged his
mother, in making her an Adulteress, though it were by the greatest Deity of
Heaven.

Secondly, In the beasts, in whom there is a resentment of ^his wrong. In which
kind, Pliny, Aeli^^, and diverse other Historians tell strange tales.

But above all, God holds himself therein greatly offended; especially this
sin being committed by Christians.

First, Because Matrimony is a Mystery, which represents the union of the
marriage of God with his Church. And for this cause God calls them both but one
flesh; They are (...) more twain, but one flesh, let not man therefore put
^sunder that which God has coupled together. Where if you note it, he speaks
in the singular; for o^herwise they would not conveniently represent so strict
a union.

Secondly, Because God is the author of marriage; God created man and woman,
and being wedded each to other, he said, For this cause shall man lea^e father
and mother, and cleave unto his wife. And for David his adultery, the Lord
said unto him, 2. Reg. 2.
The Sword shall never depart from thy house, because thou have despised me,
and taken the wife of Vriah the Hittite to be thy wife; it was not Vriah, but I
th^^ was despised. Where I would have thee to weigh well the word Me, who in
the beginning of the world did authorize marriage; Me, who in the Law of Grace
was personally present at my friends marriage, and there unfolded the sails of
my Omnipotency, working there and at that wedding my first miracle. S. Paul
says, If the husband be of the household of the Faithful, and the wife of the
Unfaithful, non dimittat illam, let him not forsake her: but if she shall be
unfaithful to her husband, 1. Cor. 7.
he may lawfully then leave her. So that God seems to be more offended, that
she should not keep her faith toher husband, than that she should not profess
the Faith of Christ.

But this they said to tempt him. They put on a show of zeal, and feigned a
dissembled desire of knowledge, and to be satisfied concerning this point: but
the truth was, that they went a fishing, to see if they could catch our Savior
in some answer that he should give them contrary to the Law, to the end that
they might accuse him as a Transgressour. The Scribes they were jealous of
their Law, the Pharisees of their Religion; the one sought to pick a hole in
his coat upon some quirke and quiller of the Law; the other, for the wronging
of their Religion: and therefore they said unto him, Seeing thou art a Master,
to whom it belongs to expound our Laws, and that thou take upon thee at
every bout to unfold Moses his meaning; Moses law commands, That such should
be stoned; Leuit. 20. Deuteronomy. 22.
What say thou therefore? Euthimius says, That they took our Savior Christ
to be so merciful a minded man, that they did well hope that he would wrest
and wind the Law which way he listed, if not utterly overthrow it. And they did
ground these their suspicions upon some Sermons of his which he had preached,
wherein he had delivered to the People, That it was lawful to cure the Sick
on the Sabbath day; which was a new kind of doctrine in their Law. Saint
Gregory and Saint Ambrose do both affirm, That they did verily persuade
themselves, That our Savior Christ could not choose but ^e caught in the trap,
and necessarily fall into an error, one while by pardoning contrary to the
Law; another while by condemning, contrary to Grace.

Jesus autem inclinans se deorsum.
But Jesus stooped down, inclining his head toward the ground. Saint
Chrysostom says, That for the Pharisees it was a most severe act of Justice;
but for the Adultresse, a most noble act of mercy. These Hypocri^^ he
deprived of ^is sight, and would not cast his countenance toward them, which
is one of Gods seuerest chastisements; Thou turnedst away thy face from me
(says the Psalmist) and I was troubled. For a King to turn away his face from
a Favorite, it will shrewdly trouble him; What perturbation must that then
cause, When God shall not cast his eye toward us, but turn his favorable
countenance from us? Hide not thy face, o Lord, from me, lest I be like unto
those that descend into the pit; O Lord, to deny the light of thy countenance,
is to condemn me unto Hell: and the greatest torment of the Damned is, that
they are debarred thy sight; Cur faciem (...) abscond^^, and arbitrar^^ (...)
inimicum tuum? All my happiness consists in those thy eyes, and to deny them
unto me, is to use me like an enemy.

Toward the Adulteress our Savior carried himself as became a sovereign
Prince; for it is a common thing with Kings and Princes, to turn their eyes
aside from a woman that is shameless and of a lewd and infamous life; the
sight of a husband is a fearful thing to a wanton wife, so is the eye of a
severe father to a graceless son, so the austere look of a King to his
servant that has played the Traitor: how then shall Gods countenance skare us,
when he shall look askew upon us, and knit the brow of his heavy
displeasure? When the Adultresse did behold her self in that Crystal Glass,
Christ Jesus, in whom there was no spot nor least specke of blemish in the
world, and did see what a freckled soul she had of her own, how foulely
bespeckled with a loathsome morphew of this ouerspreading sin; In what a
confusion must she needs be, and how dashed out of countenance? David was as
valiant a King, and as brave a soldier as ever drew sword, and one that fought
the Lords battles; yet he considering the foulness of this his adulterous sin,
weeping and sorrowing for the same, when he saw Gods eye was fixed on his
fault, and that he had withdrawn his woonted favor from his person, he felt
such torment in himself, that in the bitterness of his soul he was forced to
cry out, Turn away thy face, o Lord, from my sins. What then should this
weak, this poor and wretched woman do in this case?

Jesus stooped down. Saint Cyril says, That our Savior herein did advise
your Judges, that before they proceed to sentence, they should well and truly
consider of the cause alone by themselves, and proceed with a great deal of
leisure and deliberation. Before that God did condemn the pride of those that
built the Tower of Babell, he said, Descendam and videbo, I will go down and
see what they do. And the cry of the sins of Sodom coming to his ears,
he said the same again: for there is no wisdom nor discretion in it, as
Nicodemus said, to condemn a man, Unless he first hear him speak for
himself, John 7.51.
and know what he has done. This is that which David said, Do righteous
judgment, o ye sons of men. Suting with that of our Savior, Judge not
according to the face or outward appearance. Daniel summarily shuts it up all
in this, The Judgment was set, and the Books opened. Dan 7.


He stooped down. For albeit a Judge ought to bear himself upright, Judges
must incline to mercy.
yet he ought still to stoop and incline himself to mercy. Christ looked
down upon the earth, and considered with himself, that he had made this woman
of earth. If a Judge may even in justice save a Delinquent, if he shall find a
way open for mercy; he may comfort himself, that it is Gods fashion so to
do, and this may be his warrant. Elisha said unto Elias, by way of petition, I
pray thee let thy Spirit be doubled upon me: This was a hard suit. Theodoret
asks the question, Ob.
Wherein the difficulty did consist? And he answers, Sol.
That it did not consist in miracles, nor in grace, but in that Elias his
Spirit was so sharp and so bitter: I destroyed the Israelites with fire from
Heaven, and punished that people with three years famine; if my spirit should
be doubled upon thee, upon the like occasion thou would consume them all, and
make an end of them at once.

He lift up himself. When he was to give sentence he stood up; for albeit a
Judge should in the medijs incline unto mercy, yet in principio, and in fine,
he ought to deal uprightly, and exercise integrity. Let a Judge use a
Delinquent with a great deal of courtesy and sweetness, let him seek out
all the means that he can, to save him and to set him free; but in the
apprehending of him, and the sentencing of him, let him be upright and sound in
that he shall resolve upon; And in point of Justice, let not the beam of the
balance lean aside, nor his fancy ouersway him, nor any fear of great men's
displeasure terrify him. Gracious an^ righteous is the Lord, Psalm. 25.
therefore will he teach sinners in the way. The Lord as he is sweet and
gracious, so is he upright and just; and therefore it is fit that a Judge
should not only know the Law, but should also sincerely execute the Law, not
interpreting the same according to his own pleasure, but according to reason
and equity.

With his finger he wrote on the ground. All that comment upon this place, do
agree in this, That he wrote in this manner, and why he did it:

And first of all, Saint Hierome says, That he wrote on the ground the sins
of those that had accused this Adultresse: According to that of Jeremy, They
that depart from thee shall be written in the earth; Ierem. 17.13.
their names shall not be registered in the book of Life: wherewith he left
them confounded and ashamed, and did prove thereby unto them, that they had
neither any zeal to the Law, nor any desire to observe the same. This was a
blazoning forth of the honor and glory of our Savior Christ, beyond that of
the Romans; here was a parcere subiectis to the purpose; and a debellare
superbos with a witness. And whereas the Scribes and Pharisees set upon him in
this their pride and bravery, when they saw their own sins set down before
their eyes (which to a Sinner is a terrible and most fearful sight) they let
fall their plumes, and hung down their heads for shame, being so basely
dejected, as none could be more. I will lay all thy abominations before thee;
O, this is a sad and heavy spectacle, What humane eye can endure to behold
them? especially when God shall raise up our old sins, which we thought had
been forgotten and buried in the pit of oblivion. O, how true is that of
Jeremy, and how pat to our present purpose, The yoke of my transgressions is
bound upon his hand, they are wrapped and come up about my neck. My heavy
sins are continually before his eyes, as he that tieth a thing to his hand
for a remembrance; the horror whereof has made my strength to fall. What a
dismal thing is it, to see those my wickednesses which I thought had been
quite out of his remembrance, and that he had cast them behind his back, to be
brought before my face, and he to hold the beadroll of them in his hand,
written in great capital letters, Circumuoluta sunt in manu eius, like a piece
of cork under a clew of thread. Esaias paints forth certain impudent and
shameless Sinners, and presently anon after says, Their destruction is
written down, and when I see my time I will speak thereof. Job. 13.
O how does Job complain hereof, Thou writest bitter things against me, and
make me to possess the iniquities of my youth. He calls these bitter things,
the sins of his youth. Saint Chrysostom says, That he borrowed this
metaphor from a Judge, who takes the pen in his hand for to pronounce
sentence, setting down the offenses of the Delinquent. And therefore Job says,
I see that thou look narrowly unto my paths, as though thou would
pronounce sentence against me. And therefore Saint Hierome says, That Christ
wrote on the ground. And as a Judge exposes a Butcher to public shame, by
hanging his false weights about his neck; so thou, o Lord, having ready
written in thy hand the yoke of my transgressions, thou exposest me to shame,
by wrapping them about my neck.

Saint Ambrose says, that our savior wrote that which Jeremy prophesied of
Ieconiah, Terra, terra, s^r be hos viros abdicatos, O Earth, earth, write these
men destitute, Ierem. 22.
etc. And in one of his Epistles he says, Thou see a moat in thy neighbors
eye, but not the beam that is in thine own. A late Commentator has this note
hereupon, That our Savior wrote down the sins of this Adulteress, that he
might see them satisfied; bearing himself like a pitiful Judge, who freeth a
poor debtor, but takes a note of the debt that is to be paid; Wholly to
forgive the same, the party not being satisfied, could not stand well with his
Justice; and to condemn her wholly, could not suit well with his Mercy. And
therefore he was bound to pay the debt for her. Supra dorsum meum fabricauerunt
peccatores. Another letter says, Scripserunt. He entered into bond for us all.
But although it be most certain, that he wrote some letters, or some sentence,
against the sins of these her accusers (and therefore the Greek text says,
Hoc digito scribebat in terra) yet what that was which he then writ, there is
no certainty thereof. And it is a great indicium or token that they did not
well understand those Characters, because upon that writing they did not depart
and go their way. But upon those words which our Savior afterward said unto
them, Qui sine peccato est, Let him that is without sin, And presently
thereupon the Evangelist adds, Audientes haec vnus post alium abijt, That
hearing these things, they went their way one after the other.

Secondly, Saint Austen says, That he wrote on the ground, for to signify
that the names of the Accusers were not writ in Heaven. Alluding unto that
which he said unto his Disciples; Rejoice, because your names are written in
heaven. Or, for to show that it was he himself, which with his own finger had
writ the Law in those Tables of stone; and withal to intimate, that the new
Law was not to be written in ragged stone, but in fruitful ground; not in the
roughness of the Law, but in the softness of Grace. And Saint Ambrose in the
Epistle formerly alleged, does in a manner repeat the very same words. So
that by all these circumstances, it plainly appears that he noted them out
to be transgressors of the Law, and to be such a kind of people that had not
the fear of God before their eyes, being neither just in their Judgments,
nor merciful in their Works.

Let him that is without sin, etc. He had recourse to the rigor of the Law,
by condemning the Adulteress to be stoned to death, which was an infamous kind
of death, Achan, Naboth, those false Judges that wronged Susanna, and good
Saint Steven suffered in this kind. He had recourse likewise unto his mercy, by
absoluing her of this her sin. For their condemning of her to be stoned, who
were faulty in the same kind themselves, was a kind of absoluing her. And this
limitation (as Saint Cyrill has observed it) was iuridicall, and according
unto Law. For as she was to be stoned by the Law, so she was to be stoned
according to the Law; But the Laws do not permit that the transgression of
the Law, should be righted by those that are transgressors of the Law. So
that when our Savior said, Let him that is among you without sin cast the
first stone at her; he understood by sin in that place, the sin of
Adultery, for otherwise it had been contrariam actionem intentare, and the
reconuention had not been so strong and forcible. When the Pharisees found
fault with Christ's Disciples for their not washing of their hands, he retorted
their own weapon upon them with a Quare and vos? And here treating with him
touching this woman's Adultery, he gives them this answer, Qui sine peccato
est, etc. Saint Austen makes a question, whether the Adulterer himself were
there or no? And his resolution is, that the rest were there. So that in the
Accusers there were two foul faults to be found, which are inexcusable.

The one to let go a Delinquent for particular interest, and private gain, as
we read in the Maccabees, of Ptolomeus his freeing of Menelaus from his
accusation, notwithstanding he was the cause of all the mischief wherewith he
was charged, and a man that deserved death in the highest degree: the Text
there saying, that he was Vniuersae malitiae reus.

The other, That they who should have been preseruers of the Commonwealth, and
maintainers of Justice, should be the Caterpillars of the Commonwealth, and the
ouerthrowers of Justice.

And if any body shall ask me, how they being faulty themselves, should dare
to accuse this woman of the same crime. Saint Austen in his Confessions renders
this answer, Fortis inscriptio, quam nulla deleuit iniquitas. Though God has
pri^ted with such deep letters in the paper of our Consciences, the
hatefulness of sin; yet notwithstanding those many sins of our own, we
will not forbear to condemn other men's sins, though we be faulty of the
same our selves. A Merchant apprehends a poor petty Thief, brings him before
a Justice, and causes him to be whipped, not considering that himself is the
greater Thief of the two. Diogenes told the Judges and other subordinate
Ministers of Justice, That the greater Thieves did hang the lesser. David's
adultery being put in the third person, 2. Reg. 12.
he told the Prophet Nathan, As the Lord lives, the man that has done this
thing shall surely die, Filius mortis est. How do thou condemn that in
another, which thou dissemblest and smootherest in thy self; Fortis
inscriptio, quam nulla deleuit iniquitas. Absalon had a great Councellor called
Achitophel; David had another as wi^e as he, called Cushai: now when Cushai
saw that Achitophel took part with Absalon, he said unto David, I do not so
much fear thy son, as this Counselor of his; for he has a shrewd
pestilent pate of his own: wherefore I think it very fit, That by your
Majesty's leave I should get me likewise to the Camp, to see if I can
overthrow his council. Thither he hasted, and kneeling down before Absalon,
he said unto him, I am come unto thee, because I see that God does favor thee;
and I had rather worship the Sun rising, than setting. Thy father is old,
etc. Notwithstanding all this, Absalon titted him in the teeth, saying, Is this
thy love to thy friend? Where it is to be noted, That though the Son had
rebelled against his Father, yet it seemed ill unto him, that a Servant should
be false to his Master; Fortis inscritpio, quam nulla deleuit iniquitas.

Satisfaction must go before absolution.
Woman, Where are those thine accusers? Has no man condemned thee? Before that
he would absolve her, he would infrome himself, Whither any body did accuse
her or no? For as long as any party found himself agrieued, his absolution
was of no force. If the oppressing of the Poor cry for vengeance, What shall
the dishonouring of a Virgin, and the adulterated bed do? And therefore this
Memento is given thee before thou offer thy Sacrifice, Thou shall call to mind,
whither thy brother have any thing against thee or no: First make atonement
with thy brother, and then present thy Offering to God. Abimelech craving
pardon for his offense, Genesis 20.
God said unto him, Deliver the man his wife again; This must be done first.

No man, Lord. And Jesus said, Neither do I condemn thee. It is a great
happiness in a Sinner, Mercy an argument of goodness, in whomsoeuerit be
found. Hosea 11.
to fall into the hands of God. Man, the wickeder he is, the crueller he is;
and the more ill, the less pitiful. But God, by how much the more good he
is, by so much he is the more mild and merciful; I will not destroy Ephraim in
my fury, because I am God, and not Man. There was not that man then, that
would have borne with Ephraim, nor excused his backeslidings: But I am God, and
therefore patient, long suffering, and full of goodness. Daniel when he was
put in the Lions den, the King commanded the door to be sealed with his own
seal, Ne quid fieret contra Danielem, Lest they should change their purpose
concerning Daniel, and plot some other villainy against him; conceiving the
hands of these men to be less secure than the claws and teeth of those
hungry Lions. 2. Reg. 24.
And this was the reason why David when he was to take his option of those
three Scourges which God had set before him to make choice of, upon that
vanity of his in numbering the People, either Famine, War, or Pestilence;
flying from the hands of men, he would by no means admit of War or Famine,
but of the Pestilence, that he might wholly put himself into the hands of God.
God of his infinite goodness, etc.

THE XXV. SERMON, UPON THE FOVRTH SUNDAY IN LENT.
JOHN 6. MAT. 14. LVC. 9. MARC. 6. Post haec abijt Jesus trans Mare Galileae.

After these things, Jesus went his way over the Sea of Galilee, etc.


Our Savior Christ, in that matter of multiplying the loaves and the fishes,
providing for the necessity of those people that did follow him, wrought two
miracles as famous as they were cheerful.

In the one, he gave food to four thousand persons, besides women and
children, with seven loaves and a few fishes, and they being all satisfied,
there were twelve baskets full remaining. This miracle is mentioned by Saint
Matthew and Saint Mark.

In the other, That which the Church does this day solemnise, which was the
more famous, not only for that the guests were five thousand, besides women
and children, the loaves five, the fishes two, and the leauings twelve baskets
full; but for that all the four Evangelists wrote thereof; and much the more,
for that it was an occasion (as it is observed by Saint Chrysostom) because
our Savior did preach that excellent Sermon of the Mount, for whose Doctrine
that miracle was most important.

After these things our Savior went, etc. Saint Augustine and Saint Hierome
are of opinion, That the occasion of our Saviors withdrawing of himself was,
the death of John Baptist; the joy for whose birth being so general, it was
not much, that the sorrow for his death should be great. And this suits well
with that Text of Saint Matthew, When the Saints either dye, or other^wise
depart from a places it is much weakened.
who reports it to be after the death of Saint John* This his departure thence,
showed his sorrow for his friends death: but that kingdom had greatest cause
to lament and bewail Saint John Baptists death, and Christ's going from them;
for what is a Kingdom without them. The Saints of God are the force and
strength of Kingdoms, the walls and bulwarks of Cities, the hedges about a
Vineyard, the foundation to a Building, bones to the body, life to the soul,
and the chief essence and being of a Commonwealth. And whilst they had Christ
and Saint John among them, there was not any City in the world so rich as
that; but the one being dead, and the other having left them, Jeremy might
very well take up his complaint, and bewail their misery and solitude. Esaias
treating of the misfortunes that should befall Shebna the High Priest, says,
Auferetur paxillus qui fixus fuerat in loco fideli, and peribit, quod
pependerat ex eo, The Nail that is fastened in the sure place, shall depart,
and shall be broken and fall, and the burden that was upon it shall be cut
off. Now paxillus is that which in poor men's houses is called the Rack
whereon they hang spits, or a shelfe whereon they set their vessels; which in
rich men's houses is called Aparador, a Court-cupboord, whereon is placed their
richest pieces of plate, and such as are most glorious to the eye. And hereof
mention is made in the one and thirtieth Chapter of Exodus, and the third of
Numbers. But your poorer sort of People, that are not scarce worth a pair of
Rackes, strike in certain pinnes into the wall; and as the shelfe falling, all
falls with it that depends thereupon, so when the High Priest (being a good
man) dies, all good perishes with him in the Commonwealth, because the chief
good of the State depends thereupon. The Homic^de had five Cities to fly
unto for shelter, but he could not return home to his own Country till the
death of the High Priest. And Philon rendering the reason of this interdiction,
says, That the High Priest is a Pariente or Kinseman of all those that live in
his Commonwealth; Qui solum habet ius in viuos and in mortuo^: as every
Citisen has his particular Kinsemen, to whom he owes an obligation, to
acknowledge the benefits he receives from him, and to revenge the wrongs that
are done to him; In like manner, the High Priest is the common Kinseman of the
Living, to whom he owes an Obligation to accord their discords, to cut off
their suits in Law, to quit their wrongs, and to desire the peace and
prosperity of them all. In conclusion, he being as it were a common father to
all, in so great a loss, in so sencible and general a sorrow, when a common
misfortune should compound particular wrongs, when all men's hearts are so
heavy, their eyes so full of tears, their minds so discomforted, it is a fit
season for a Homicide to return home to his Country. And if the death of a
High Priest, who happily was no holy man, causes in a Commonwealth so general
a grief; the death of John Baptist, and our Saviors departure from this
People, What effect of hearty sorrow ought that to work? God threatened his
People by Esaias, The Lord shall give you the bread of adversity, and the water
of affliction. Esaias. 30.20.
When the King of Israel commanded Micheas to be cast into prison, he said
unto him, Su^^enta tecum pa^e tribulationis, and aqua angustiae, Feed upon the
b^^ad of affliction, 3. Reg. 22.
and the water of affliction. In the Hebrew both places bear the same words:
but Esaias afterward says, That though Gods hand shall be heavy upon them, and
that he shall afflict them with many miseries, yet he will not take away their
Doctors and Teachers from amongst them, nor the light of his Doctrine. I have
threatened you with the famine of my word, I will send a famine in the land,
Hose. 8.11.
not a famine of bread, nor a thirst of water, but of hearing the Word of the
Lord. But God recalls this threatening oftentimes, Et non faciet auolare a te
vltra Doctorem tuum, and will not cause thy Teacher to fly from thee. But John
Baptist being dead, and our Savior withdrawn himself, that Country could
not rest in a more wretched estate.

Secondly, The death of John Baptist made him leave the land, and put forth to
sea, making a separation between him and them: for when God gets him gone from
thy house or thy city, thou art beaten out of doors (as they say) with a
cudgel; even then does a man go turning back his head, like a Heart that is
hunted and pursued by Hounds, never letting him to be at rest, but chasing him
with open mouth from place to place. God cannot absent himself from his
Creatures, nor can his immensitie give way to the utter abandoning of this
goodly Fabric, and wonderful Machina of the World: yet so great is the
hatred which he bears to sin, that he also commands us to get us out of that
City where Sin does reign; signifying thereby unto us, That if any thing
can make him to absent himself from us, it is our sins. God had his house
and his residence in Jerusalem; so says Esaias: Esaias 31.9.
God had his house and his hearth there, as if he had been one of their
fellow Citisens, and a Town dweller amongst them: but their abominations made
him to abandon that place. Ezechiel saw the glory of God how it went by
degrees out of the Temple, staying one while here, and another while there,
resting it self now against this pillar, now that, till at last, The glory of
God was clean gone out of the Temple. Their abominations did as it were drive
him out by head and shoulders, and shoov'd him forth by little and little.
Esech. 8.6.
The great abominations that the House of Israel commits here, causes me
to depart from my Sanctuary. Josephus in his book of the Wars of the Jews
says, That when Titus and Vespasian came and besieged Jerusalem, the gates of
the Temple flew wide open, in token that their sins had thrust God out from
thence. And Cornelius Tacitus adds, That they made a great noise at their
opening, in token of his loathnesse and unwillingness to leave them: howbeit
he spoke like a Gentile, having reference to the multitude of their own gods.
The Poets likewise have feigned, That Troyes vices were Troyes ruin, and had
banished the gods from them; for had they been present with them, neither the
fire that consumed their City, nor all the power of the Gretians had been
able to have done them the least harm in the world: So says Saint Augustine in
his books De Cinitate Dei. The Syrians tied their gods to the Alters of their
Temples, with fetters and with chains. And albeit Saint Chrysostom says,
That they did use them as they deserved, yet the intention and purpose of that
People was not to detain them there as prisoners and malefactors, but only to
have them in safe keeping, and to make them sure from getting away from them;
thinking themselves utterly undone if they should deprive them of their
presence. W^e unto them, when I shall go from them. If God be with us, no ill
but is good; if God be not with us, no good but is ill. Deuteronomy. 31.
Because God was not with me these miseries came upon me. Sampson as long as he
had God with him, neither Hercules, Milo, nor Theseus, were comparable unto
him; but when God left him, there was not any man more cowardly; Iud. 16.20.
He thought to have escaped as at other times, but he knew not that the Lord
was departed from him.

Saint Mark, renders another reason, Marc. 6.^^.
Come ye apart into the Wilderness and rest awhile. So great was the number
of those that followed him, that he had not any fit place for to give them
entertainment, and to make them to sit down and eat. And our Savior well
witting that these his followers were faint and weary, he was willing to give
them a little ease and rest. The soul is a strong and able Spirit, immortal,
incorruptible, unweariable, like unto that of the Angels; but the body is
weak, feeble, and mortal: It had need in the midst of it is labor to rest it
self, that it may return afresh thereunto. Men's bodies being like unto iron
tools, which being dulled with working must be ground a new, that they may
have an edge set upon them, and perform their work the better. In the Statua
of Nebuchadnezzar, the Gold, the Silver, and the Brass were lasting mettalls;
but the Clay was not so: And though the stone had not broken it, by little and
little it would have mouldred away of it self. Sambucus made an Emblem of
this subject. The bow cannot always stand bent; nor the treble string of a
Vial stand still strained to it is highth: Birds cannot always fly, nor
fishes swim, beasts cannot continually labor, nor the eyes watch, nor the
feet walk, nor the earth, nor the plants thereof still afford us fruit. In a
word, Quod caret alterna requie, durabile non est. Aristotle says in his
Problemes, That he that walks upon a plain even ground is wearied more
through that uniformity of motion, than if he went up hill and down hill,
which does give a greater ease unto the joints and muscles, etc. In like
manner, uniformity of life is commonly wearisome and tedious unto us, and
there is no life which is wholly molded after one fashion, that is held happy,
unless it enjoy some variety. Even those exercises which are most sauorie unto
us, are (if we do nothing else) most wearisome unto us. Eating, sleeping,
hunting, and gaming, if we continue them long, how unsavory, and how
unpleasing are they unto us? And the reason of it is, that our nature will by
no means suffer and endure any continued exercise, whether it be weighty, or
light, but holds it a mere tyranny, and extreme cruelty. Jeremy does
complain, for that in Babylon they did not allow the Captive Israelites any
time of rest: Our necks are under persecution, we are weary and have no rest.
Saint Luke says, Oportet semper orare; Saint Paul, Sine intermissione orate.
Luke 11.
The one bids us to pray continually; The other without ceasing or
intermission. But that word Semper, does not implie a continuation of time, but
a complying of our obligation, and the full performance of our duty in that
kind. Our Savior Christ therefore, seeing his Disciples were weary, and being
sencible of his own weariness, when he sat down to rest himself by the
Well of Sichar, he was desirous that they should take their ease, and said unto
them, Come rest ye a while.

R^st is to be ^ounted pains w^e^ we take i^ but to enable us for further
pains.
Let no man think it strange, that he that undergoes so painful an office as
preaching, should unbend the bow, and rest himself a while; who only rests
himself the more that he may take the more pains. Whence it is to be noted,
that God is so frank and so liberal, that the Rest that is taken to this end,
God puts it to the same account as his paines-taking, and rewards it as any
other the best service that he does him. So does Saint Basil expound that verse
of David, I will always give thanks unto the Lord, Psalm. 34.
his praise shall be in my mouth continually. Now David's thanks giving, and
praising of the Lord, was not continual; For, he had his hours of sleeping,
of eating, of conuersing with his friends and servants, and other his hours of
recreation; but because those hours of taking this his ease and rest, were
directed to the better inabling him to serve God, God accounts of them as if
they had been continually employed in his service. True it is, that those
hours of our rest and recreations, ought to be few, and short, a Requiescite
pusillum, Rest a while. A short come off. Let those that weild the world, and
their ministers take their rest; but let them rest but a while, for if thou
allowest thy self eight hours to sleep, six to play, and four for to
walk, thou robbest thy obligation of it is true time, and make those that are
suitors, to shed tears. And this is contrary to Christ's doctrine, and
condemns it in thee, when he says unto thee, Requiescite pusillum, Rest a
while: And here will I also rest from further prosecuting of this point.

And a great multitude followed him. The Gospel says, That the men that
followed him, reckoning those to be men (which the Scripture usually so
understands) that are from twenty upward, were to the number of five
thousand; S. Vincent Ferrar says, That with women and children, they were some
fifteen or twenty thousand: never any Prince in the world retyring himself
into the Desert so well accompanied, and yet so all alone; so well accompanied,
in regard of the multitude of the men; and so all alone, because all or the
most part of this people followed him either out of necessity, curiosity, or
out of malice. All the Court does attend and wait upon thee, because thou
command all; but thou art never more alone, than when thou have most
company: for all those that accompany thee, are not all of thy company; they
go not along with thee, but with themselves, following thee not so much out of
affection, as affectation, more to see thy miracles, than to receive thy
instructions. The pledges of true friendship indeed, are, to hazard a man's life
for his friend, to condole with him in his miseries, and to rejoice with him in
his happiness: but since wicked presumption (as Ecclesiasticus speaks) has
sprung up to cover the earth with deceit, Eccles. 37.
and that private interest, like the Iacke-Daw, has only learned to prattle the
language of love, there is no trust to be had in these pledges. A true friend
hard to be found.
There is some friend which is only a friend in name; and have thou not seen,
that when heaviness remains unto death, a companion and friend has bin
turned to an enemy? There is some companion which in prosperity rejoices with
his friend, but in the time of trouble is against him: There is some companion
again, that helps his friend for the bellies sake, and takes up the buckler
against the enemy; There are perhaps some such, that dare, nay will not stick
to lay down his life for a good friend indeed: And there are some likewise,
which for their own interest will hazard both goods and life, and all that they
have; but if they did think they should fail of their ends, and that it
should not turn to their greater advantage, they would not venture one
farthing, though it were to save thy life. When Adoniah usurped the Kingdom,
and proclaimed himself King, 3. Reg. cap. 1.
the Princes of the Blood took part with him, Ioab, David's General, besides
diverse other principal Captains and Commanders, and most of the valiantest
men of War, as also Abiathar the High Priest: In a word, the Clergy and the
Laity were both mainly for him; and yet having all these on his side, he was
all alone. All the strength of the Army was not with Adoniah: many understand
this of the Kings Guard; but for our purpose, it may be better understood of
all those who professed themselves to be Adoniahs f^iends, but were not true in
heart unto him, nor did not stick so close unto him as they made show; for
they did not so much respect Adoniah, as their own ends. The Kings sons
thought he would prove their best brother; the Nobility, their best King;
Ioab, that he would pardon his murdering of Amasa and Abner, and that he
should hold his place of General; Abiathar, That he would not put him out of
the Priesthood, though there was I know what prophesied to the contrary. But
the proclaiming of Solomon was no sooner heard, but they left one by one, and
went their ways, till they had left him like a single proposition to stand
alone by himself, having no champion to make good his Title. Seneca pressing
this Argument, says, Many Flies come to the Honey, many Wolves to the
Sheepefold, many Ants to the Wheat; yet the flies are no friends to the honey,
nor the wolves to the sheep, nor the ants to the corn: Nor art thou to
esteem those thy friends that accompany thee, for they are no better than
flies, wolves, and ants, which seek not thee but themselves. And if thou
should but hear, after they have professed themselves thy friends, fawned upon
thee with flattering terms, and vowed what a deal of love and affection they
bear unto thee, what they talk of thee behind thy back, and what they mutter
and whisper of thee in by-corners, thou would then see and perceive that all
thy prosperity, is the fable and common byword of their wrongs and
discontents.

Because they saw his Miracles, which he did on them that were diseased. All
the Miracles of our Savior Christ, were directed to the repayring of our
miseries.

First, for the furthering of our Faith, which depending upon the Will, comes
by benefits to be well affectioned thereunto, and to incline to Knowledge and
Understanding.

The other, To show by sencible signs, the end which caused him to come into
the world, which was to cure our Souls infirmities.

The third, That it might appear unto Man, that the only motive thereunto,
was his Mercy.

Now the Jews did neither fix their eyes, nor their thoughts upon any one of
these; but only upon their own proper ends. Either because he should heal
them, or fill their bellies. And therefore, albeit some say, that the
Evangelist did set down this reason, that he might thereby advise us, that our
Savior was bound as it were to do that he did, for these people that followed
him, yet I do rather believe, that he set down this passage, to give us
thereby to understand how vnobliged he stood to do them this so great a
favor, and how kind he was of his own accord, to those that did so ill
deserve any kindness at his hands. And therefore he discovers their minds,
lays open their intentions, and manifests their private interests. Because
they saw his Miracles, etc.

And therefore Saint Paul says, He did shut up all in unbelief, That is, He
did permit, that they should all fall into the net of sin, that he remaining
wholly disingaged, his obligation should by his mercy and his pity of them,
be the more esteemed, by how much the more it was undeserved.

Quia videbant signa. As if he should have said, That they sought rather after
meat, A true friend hard to be found.
than after him that was to give it them; and therefore he said unto them
elsewhere, Ye have followed me because I have filled your bellies, and given
you fullness of bread. For there are some people that seek after God for
worldly blessings, and never think upon him but in time of want and
necessity, and then if God do not relieve them, they care not a pin for him.
Elisha was with Ieh^ram, 3. Reg. 3.
and reproved him because he never sought after him, but in time of hunger and
thirst. Micah went weeping and crying after those that had stolen away his
silver god, but because he made use thereof for his own private interest,
when a greater conueniencie of gain was offered unto him, Iud. 18.
he forgot the former, and thought thereof no more: It is better for thee
(said they) that thou should be a Priest of a whole Tribe, than of one
particular House. Philon commenting upon Cains answer unto God, [the Seventy
rendering this Translation, Si proijcis me a facie tua, a facie tua abscondar,
If thou cast me from off the face of the earth, let me be hid from thy face]
says, That it was all one as if he should have said, If thou will not bestow
upon me the blessings of the earth, keep those of heaven to thy self; if I
may not enjoy the pleasures and delights of this world, let virtue and
goodness for me go a begging, I care not for it. Many make use of God as they
do of a Felt, to defend them from the Sun and the rain, which heats and
storms being ouerpast, they hang it up against the wall; serving God as many
servants serve their Masters, not so much for love, as gain. And this arises
from hence, that they know no other good save that which their senses set
before them, and this is the mark whereat they shoot.

And hence it follows, that in the predicament of those things that are good,
God of all other is the most disesteemed, and least accounted of. According to
that of Saint Augustine, Omnia diligimus, omnia amamus, and solus nobis vilis
est Deus. For the good of this life, men will do much more than they will for
God; they will go I know not how many leagues, some by sea, others by land,
for these temporal respects, but will scarce stir a foot out of doors for
Gods service. If they would but take half that pains for their salvation, as
they do for their damnation, they would all of them be Sainted in Heaven. Out
of the pleasure that some take in hunting, they care not whither they eat or no
for two or three days together; but it goes against their stomachs to fast but
one day for Gods sake. Out of the delight that some take in play, or in
rounding the streets, they will scarce sleep in thirty nights one after
another; but will not watch one in humbling themselves upon their knees, and
praying unto God: For these worldly vanities they will not stick to impawne
their whole estate, but it goes against the hair with them, to spend so much
as one poor Royal in Gods service. Upon a Prince, or the Princes Favorite,
they will make no bones to bestow some great and costly Present, but grudge to
offer up to God a poor hunger-starued Lamb. Of these kind of men Malachie
much complains, Ye offer the lame and the sick, and ye snuff at it when
ye have done, Malach. 1. No labor or cost more tedious to man, than that
which is bestowed upon Religion.
and think ye have been at too great charges with God, as if the worst of
your Flock were not good enough for him. Caligula gave to the repairing of the
Walls of Rome six thousand Sextercios, which are fifteen thousand Crowns;
and upon one of his Mistresses he bestowed as many Sextercios to buy her a
Kirtle, making his Whore equal in cost with the Commonwealth. Tibi soli
peccaui, and malum coram te feci: These words of David are diversely commented;
but one of the senses upon that place is this, O Lord I have only offended
thee, against thee only have I sinned, thee only have I despised; I was
careful that the people might not come to the knowledge of this my sin, and
that it might be hid from Vrias his house; I was more fearful of men's eyes,
than I was of thine, which are brighter than the Sun. And hereunto did that
holy King David allude in his 48 Psalm, Wherefore should I fear in the evil
days, when Iniquity shall compass me about, as at mine heels? That sin
which he made least reckoning of, and cast behind him as it were at his heels,
were those cords that did most wring him. It was an old Proverb, Oculus habet
in solea; that which he should have made most reckoning of, he put it under
the sole of his shoe: but God, whom he should have esteemed above all, him
he made least account of.

When Jesus lifted up his eyes and saw, etc. Saint Matthew and Saint Mark both
say, That he went, together with his Disciples, into a Bark, and that he
crossed over to the Desert which was on the other side of the River, and the
people that followed him taking notice of the voyage that he was to make,
whither it were that they wanted ship-room, or that the wind was against them,
they ran on foot thither out of all Cities, and came thither before him,
waiting for his coming. Our Savior being disimbarkt, went up to the Mount,
saying unto his Disciples, Rest a while. He went forth to see the people that
followed him, and when he saw them, being moved to pity and compassion of
them, because they were like Sheep that had no Shepherd, he entertained
them with much courtesy and kindness, and having instructed them in many
things concerning the Kingdom of God, he afterward cured those that were
sick. And when the day was now far spent, his Disciples came unto him,
saying, This is a desert place, and now the day is far passed, therefore I
pray you dismiss them and let them depart, that they may go into the Villages
and Towns about, and buy them bread, for they have nothing to eat: but he
answered and said unto them, It is better that ye should give them to eat.

When Jesus had lift up his eyes. To behold one earnestly, is a token of love
and care: and herein our Savior not only showed a token of his affection, but
also of his providence. That it is a sign of Love, Esther said unto King
Assuerus, If I have found favor in the sight of the King: Esther. 5.
she did take the eyes to be the Archiue of favor; and therefore did petition
him, That he would entertain her suit with the eyes of grace and favor. The
Prince of Poets painting forth Jupiters favoring of the Trojans, being driven
by tempest on the Affrican Coast; expresses it thus; -- Libiae defixit lumina
regnis: -- Inclining Dido's breast to take pity and compassion of them, and to
supply their wants, and to feast them in her famous city of Carthage.

That it is a token of Providence, Jove's Statue with three eyes does exemplify
it unto us; beholding things past, things present, and things to come. This
agrees with that other, Firmabo super te oculos meos, I will fix my eyes upon
thee. But this looking here, must be a looking with care and attention: and
therefore we have here a Seeing and a Seeing, it is ecchoed and redoubled unto
us, Cum subleuasset oculos, and vidisset, videns vidit afflictionem suam: Vide
Domine, and considera me.

There are some eyes which look, but do not see: Of the rich Fool Job said,
Job. 27.19.
He opened his eyes and found nothing. Your Hares sleep with their eyes open;
and Hermolaus reports the like of Jupiters Guard. Of your Images and Idols
David said* They had eyes, but did not see. And S. Luke says of S. Paul,
Being open eyed he saw nothing.

Others there are who see, but will not see; these see a poor Soul, but turn
their eye aside from him, because they will not see him: contrary to Salomons
council, Turn not away thine eye from the Poor. They will not afford them
their eye, lest their heart should follow after; such men will not take notice
of the wretched estate of the Poor, lest the pittifulnes of so miserable a
spectacle might chance to move them to charity, and draw something out of
their purses. Saint Bernard cites the Spanish Proverb, Ojos que no veen, cora
con que no quiebra, What the eye sees not, the heart rues not. Boaz knew well
enough the great want and necessity wherein Ruth and Naomi lived; but he did
not relieve this their poverty, because he did not see it: but when he saw the
one of them gleaning the skattered ears of corn that were left in the field,
his eyes wrought upon his heart, and taking compassion of her, he advised his
Reapers, That they should purposely leave some ears for her to pick up. O
Lord (said Martha to our Savior) Had thou been here my brother had not
been dead; for had thou but seen thy sick friend, and the affliction of
his sorrowful sisters thy servants, thou could not choose but have taken
pity of us. The Chroniclers of those Times report of Alexander the Great,
That he had Cor durum, and auarum, a hard and covetous heart: but his
covetousness he overcame by his ambition of command and empire; and his
hardness by his eye-pittie. Diodorus storieth, That seeing in Greece a great
number of poor souls that were naked and distressed, the tears trickled from
his eyes, and took order that they should be furnished fo^thwith both with
clothes and money. If then a heart that is naturally hard, cannot endure to see
men in misery, and not relieve them; How much more shall God, who is made all
of mercy and compassion, extend his pity toward us? The Princes of the
Philistines found this to be true, 1. Sam 6.
when making the similitude of their loathsome and painful disease in gold,
they presented them before the Arc, conceiting with themselves, That God but
looking upon the mere similitude of their Emerodes, his bowels would be
moved with compassion toward them. Pulchriores sunt oculi tui vino; Wine
quickens the spirits, it comforts and cheereth the heart; but the eyes of God
are more lovely to look to, and far better than the best wine.

Cum subleuasset oculos Jesus, and vidisset.
There was a time when God did put the repairing and remedying of our miseries
in our eyes; Sicut oculi ancillae in manibus Dominae suae, ita oculi nostri ad
Deum Dominum nostrum, etc. As the eyes of a loving and faithful handmaid are
always attending on her Mistress, observing every the least cast of her
countenance; so our eyes should be still bending, and as it were hanging
continually over that divine Fountain, till we draw from it the water of
Mercy and of Pity. O Lord, thou art bound to take pity on me, The eye is a
preualent orator with God.
because I have mine eyes fixed and nailed as it were to thy mercy. This care
God did represent unto us, when he commanded Moses to erect that dead brazen
Serpent, to the end that those who were stung by those living serpents, might
by looking thereupon be healed; As many as are bitten, and look upon it,
shall live. Number. 21.
That Precept of Leuiticus tended to this purpose, The seventh year shall be a
Sabbath of rest unto the land, Leuit. 25.
it shall be the Lord Sabbath, thou shall neither sow the field, nor cut the
Vineyard. This was Natures feast of rest; obliging us to lift up our eyes to
Heaven, and to beg of God our daily bread. For too much plenty and abundance
does make us oftentimes to abandon Gods providence, and to grow forgetful of
the care that he has of us. Out of the same reason he would not that the
promised Land should be Locus rigatus, a watered land, like to that of the
ouerflowing of Nilus, but that they should expect and look for their water
from Heaven: for in Egypt, the power that they had to open at their pleasure
the waters of Nilus, and to enrich their grounds therewith, was no small means
to make them forget God.

But Experience crying out with a loud voice, That our eyes do not endeavor to
look up so high as they should, and that when they ought to lift them up to
heaven, they cast them down to the ground: The remedying of our miseries was
made over to his eyes; giving us thereby such good security, that to behold
his eyes, and to be cured, is all one. The Fabric of the Temple being ended,
Solomon made a most devout prayer unto God; wherein he did earnestly petition
him, That he would be pleased to look down upon this his house with a
gracious and favorable eye; for, o Lord, if thou shall but vouchsafe to grace
this Temple by beaming forth thereupon the resplendent rays of those thy eyes,
which are the light and life of the Church, I shall give it for granted, that
it shall surely stand in thy grace and favor; Let thine eyes be open to this
house night and day. 3. Reg. 8.29*
There is no gage or pledge so sure, as God settling of his eye upon us: for
men's eyes do commonly follow the desires of their hearts; and because our good,
and the best estate we have, cannot rest well assured in the hands of our
desires, for that for the most part they are our greatest enemies, and
oftentimes prove our Hangmen and Executioners, God gave them over to the lusts
of their own hearts: so that there is no trusting to our own eyes. God left
Adam to his own liberty, and trusted him with the Empire and domination of
the whole earth, but he lost it in the turning of a hand, to give content to
his longing wife. Ne contristaret del^^ias, says the glorious Doctor Saint
Augustine; fearing more her sorrow, if he should not have satisfied her
longing, than the loss of Heaven, Earth, and God. Afterward, God fearing the
like frailty in man, when he had shut up that small remnant of mankind in the
Arc, (which he was willing to free from the fury of the Flood) he shut it
too, took away the key, and hung it at his own girdle; doubting with
himself, That if he had left it in Noah's hands, though he were so good and
holy a man as he was, it would not be safe in his keeping.

Amongst other innumerable reasons, there are two that we may specially rely
upon, and confidently build upon them:

The one, That the eyes of Gods providence are still watching over us, and
taking care of our good. Saint Cyrill says, That our Savior looking upon this
hungry people, and that had followed him thus afoot, did represent Gods
beholding from the top of that high hill of his eternity, all those things
that either are, were, or shall be. For as Boaetius says, Cunctorum, spectator
est Deus, God ouersees all. Of men Saint Austen says, That all that have
been, or are in the world are poor beggars which eat of the crummes which
fall from Gods Table; And as your poor wandering beggars which are almost
hunger-starued, stand at the gates of a rich man that is a great alms giver,
with their scrips and pilgrim staves, expecting an alms; so all men both
great and small, rich and poor, from the king to the beggar, stand waighting
at this great Housekeepers gate, looking for some relief from him. Nor is
there any man so rich, or so happy, that is not forced to be one of Gods
beggars. And that Kingly Prophet David says the like of the beasts of the
field in diverse places, The eyes of all wait upon thee o Lord, Psalm. 145.
and thou give them their meat in due season, Thou openest thy hand, Psalm.
147.
and fillest all things living with plentiousnesse, He gives fodder unto the
Cattle, and feeds the young Ravens that call upon him. By Cattle, he
understands whatsoever beasts of the field: And by the Raven, whatsoever
foul of the air. And he did purposely and more particularly put here the
Raven, either because those old ones do not acknowledge their young, for that
they are white when they are hatched, the damme and her mate being of a
contrary color: Or because it is such a ravening bird, that according to
Ari^^otle and Pli^ie, the old ones do banish their young ones as soon as they
are able to fly, and shift for themselves, into some other region further off,
that they may not rob them of their food and sustenance. In a word, great and
small, high and low, have their maintenance from God; Who is it but God, that
feeds the young Ravens when they call upon him? Of the trees and plants that
holy King Da^id says, Saturabuntur ligna campi, and Ce^ri Libani, etc. Of the
Angels, Planets, and Stars, a Philosopher says, Greges Astrorum semper
pasci^. And as the Shepherd numbreth his sheep, and puts a mark upon every
one of them; so our Lord God does number the multitude of the Stars, and
ca^^eth them by their names. The glorious Saint Chrysostom tells us in a
metaphorical language, That in those immense spacious walks in Heaven, there
are other more beautiful fields, other Fountains, other Flowers, other
Groves, and that God does sustain and maintain them all, All live under his
protection. Since then that all things live so secure under his divine
providence, Why should man distrust, especially seeing that he has an eye and
a care to his wants and necessities; Who is like unto the Lord our God, who
dwells in the highest clouds, and yet does behold from above, whatsoever is
in heaven or in earth? The sight is not qualified by seeing great things, but
by perceiving the least atoms or motes that are in the Sun. In an Epistle
which the glorious Apostle Saint Paul wrote to the Romans, he calls God, the
God of Hope; for he looking down upon us does enrich us with such assured
hopes, that we may hold them more firm and sure unto us, than any present
possession of those lands or goods which we enjoy.

The second reason is, That if any thing can grieve Gods heart, it is our
misery and necessity; and therefore he makes such have to help us, as if it
were his own case; My sister, my Spouse, thou have wounded my heart with one
of thine eyes, and with one hair of thy neck. Cant. 4.^.
The hairs are the symbol of thoughts and cares, for as the head is full of
hair, so is it full of care. The ^ye of the Huntsman does more harm than the
Arrow which he shoots; for he that does not thoroughly eye his game, seldom
kills: and therefore the Spouses Beloved says unto her, Every one of thy
cares, especially when I see thee look upon me, are so many darts sticking in
my heart. Abbot Guaricus discoursing of the Prodigal, says, That when his
father saw him so ill accoutred, compassion did more strongly possess him,
than the passion of sorrow for his sins did his son. When Abraham was
swallowed up as it were with sorrow, Genesis 22
as he unsheathed his sword to sacrifice his son Isaac; Dominus videbit (says
the Text) id est, prouidebit; which was the good old man's answer, when his
son asked him, Vbi est victima, pater mi? My father, where is the Lamb for
the burnt Offering? The Septuagint read Apparebit; the Tigurine, Videbitur. For
God seeing us suffer for his sake, is of it self a present help in our time
of need. Many of the Saints do ponder the grief which God did discover for
that dearth which Israel endured, 3 Reg. 17.
and the care that he took in allaying the sharpness and tartness of Elias
his austere and sour disposition, who when he had caused the windows of heaven
to be shut up for three years, yet he appointed him a Raven to be his
Steward, to bring him in provision, that he might not suffer in that common
cala^^^tie; yet giving him this check by the way, It is not fit that thou
alone shoulde^t eat, and (...) the rest of my people starve; but since I have
past my word, this Raven shall take care of thee. Saint Chrysostom says, Gods
care to work his children to mercy
That this was a severe reprehension of the Prophet Elias. That a Bird that
has no pity of her own brood, should take pity of thee; that a bird that
by nature is cruel, and lives upon rapines and spoil of others, should be a
Minister of mercy unto thee: and thou that should have been a mediator
betwixt God and his people, should be a prouoker of him to vengeance; he
cries out against him, Absurdum est, o Elias, Thou have committed a great
absurdity, o Elias. Saint Augustine further adds, That the Raven which
heretofore showed himself unthankful, in not returning again to Noah's Arc,
is now so far altered from that he was, that he brings thee bread and flesh,
affoording thee thy daily food; it had not been much for thee to have expected
an alteration likewise in the Children of Israel. Procopius tells us, That the
Raven is an unclean creature by the Law; and being that I, who was the
Lawgiver, did dispense that thou should take thy food from him, Why might
not thou as well have asked a dispensation of me, for this so long an
interdiction.

And he entertained them kindly. The grief which our Savior had conceived for
the death of John Baptist, did not cause him to withdraw his sweet and
comfortable countenance from others. For the mourning for the Just, is not a
hooding of the face to conceal our selves and our sorrow from the world; The
Saints of God, lament the loss which the Earth sustaines by the taking away of
the righteous from amongst us, but not their death. For he beholds not his
death with the eyes of death, but quickly passes it over. It is the fool that
thinks all is ended with them in death. But it is nothing so.

Good counsel the only prop of every commonw^ale. Eccl. 22.16.
Whence shall we buy bread, that these may eat. He here took counsel, what
were best to be done in this case? It being (as Plato says) amongst all other
things the most Sacred and the most Divine. And Ecclesiasticus tells us, that
counsel makes things stable, durable, and secure. As a frame of wood joined
together in a building cannot be loosed with shaking; so the heart, that is
established by advised counsel, shall fear at no time.

Whence shall we buy bread. Here our Savior consults with Philip, how, and
which way this may handsomely be done. This is a prudent proposition for a
Prince, when occasion is offered of some extraordinary expense, to treat with
his Counsel, how and which way these moneys are to be raised and ordered? He
that goes about to build him a stately palace, will first ask counsel of his
purse, how he shall be able to compass it. A King that breaks his League,
and is to enter into a War with his neighbor Prince, will first consult with
his subjects, how he shall undergo it. For, to go out with ten thousand
against an Enemy, that brings twenty thousand into the field, is not
wisdom. And he must have an eye unto this V^de, whence, and which way he
shall levy both men and money? For if it must be from the blood of the poor,
that blood which is thus wrung from them, is to draw the best blood out of his
own body, to the indangering of his life, if not of his soul. Those Princes
seldom or never thrive, who misseled by evil counselors, say with Rehobaam,
Whereas my Father did burden you with a grievous yoke, 3. Reg. 12.
I will yet make your yoke heavier; My Father has chastised you with rods, but
I will correct you with scourges; And my least part, shall be bigger than my
fathers loins. So unmerciful and intolerable are the greeuances and
oppressions which Kings Ministers exercise upon the poor, that the widow
weeps, and the orphant sheds teeres, and the teeres thatd, ^ckle from their
cheeks, howsoever Kings may conceive they fall to the ground, I must boldly
tell them, that they ascend up as high as Heaven, and are there turned into
flashes of Lightening, and their cries into Thunder, against those Ministers
that are the cause thereof, and those Princes that suffer the same, and consent
thereunto.

They must consider upon what ground they go, For if the cause be honest,
pious, and necessary, as to keep soldiers from staruing, that lie in
garrison; to bridle the insolences of the enemies of the Faith; to supply the
necessary provision of the Kings house, and the like, it is well and good, and
God forbid but we should think^ that to be very well employed, which is so
spent; and it is fit that every man that is of ability should contribute to
the charge. But to impouerish some to enrich others, to pill the Commonwealth
to make fat a favorite, to dispeople towns for to make forests, and to put
Naboth out of his lawful possession, nay and his life too, to make thy self a
house of pleasure, and gardens to feast and banquet in, etc. I will leave this
to their own consideration, without pressing this point any further, least
contrary to Salomons Counsel, by wringing the nose too hard, I might happen
to draw blood, and so offend the head.

Whence shall we buy bread? From the beginning of the world until then, Christ
never commanded us to sheare the sheep, but to feed them
it was never propounded in any Princes Council, how the Hungry should be
fed, or any care taken, how the Naked should be clothed: But how to raise
money for the Princes expenses, for the more magnificent maintenance of his
Majesty, and for the upholding of his Estate, this is every days example.
And if the royal Patrimony shall be impawned, there shall be sitting upon
sitting, project upon project, how to bring him out of debt, and to fill his
Coffers, and all of them will put a helping hand to lay more and more burdens
on the backs of the Poor; but whence the Poor should be fed, how your
decayed Towns should be repaired, how your ruined Commonwealths restored to
their former honor and greatness; let the great ones advise upon that, (if it
stand not with the hurt of their greatness) for I can say little unto it.
Saint Bernard has observed, That our Savior Christ said thrice unto Peter,
Pasce Oues meas, Feed my Sheep: but that he never said unto him, no not so
much as once, That he should sheere them. Signifying thereby, That it is the
office of a good Prelat, to have an especial care that his Sheep be well fed,
both with spiritual and corporal food, and not to study the raising of his
Rents, the racking of his Tenants, nor his own private profit.

Whence shall we buy bread. Our Savior Christ consulted with all his Disciples
concerning this business. And therefore he said unto them, Give ye them to
eat. And although the Disciples took care for the provision of these things,
they did not lift their eyes up any higher, then to the distribution of their
alms. But our Savior being willing to tax them for this their little faith,
he would first make a verification of those few loafes that they had in their
keeping. Quot panes habetis, etc. How many loaves have ye? He began first with
Philip, either perhaps because he was not present at what had passed; or
because he seemed to take the greatest care, how these should have
wherewithal to eat; or because he was less frugall and provident than the
rest (as Saint Chrysostom notes it;) or because he was not so quick witted,
and of that nimble apprehension as his fellows, (as it seems to Saint
Cyrill.) In conclusion, two necessities incountring together; one of the body,
another of the soul; one of bread, and another of faith; our Savior Christ
began first with that of the soul, having recourse to that his office of a
Savior, who made more reckoning of the more, than of the less.

Two hundred penny worth of bread is not sufficient for them. Saint Mark says
in the name of the rest, Let us go and buy two hundred penny worth of bread.
Whereunto Philip answered, that two hundred penny worth of bread would not be
sufficient for them; nay two hundred royalls would not come to a bit a man.
Philip regarded more Christ's purse, than his power, and so do many their own.
At which time he had turned his eye aside from our Saviors omnipotency,
placing his eyes upon his purse strings to see how strong they were: Whereas
the blessed Virgin casting her eyes off from the Master of the feast, threw
them on her sons omnipotency. So short sighted is man's wisdom, that in
seeing ordinary means fail, he holds the relieuing of his wants desperate,
not so much as once thinking what a thing it is to put our trust in God. And it
is a fearful thing to think, that man sinning, hopes that God will pardon
him; and that suffering hunger and nakedness, God should not help him. Thou
committest a mortal sin, thou reckonest not much of it, hoping that God will
be good unto thee, and forgive thee thy trespass; thou suffer hunger and
nakedness, and yet despairest of comfort, fearing more to be starued to death,
than to be damned to hell. Can thou hope then for so great a favor as to be
saved by his mercy and pity toward thee, and shall thou despair in these
lesser things of the infinite providence of God? It is a great shame for thee
so to do, and such a fowlenes, as none in a Christian can be more.

Hence is it that thou have recourse to evil means, for to free thee from
hunger. But this is a strange kind of ignorance in thee:

First, because the devil has not the power to do thee good in this kind.
Pharaohs inchanters did add plagues to plagues; flies to flies; frogs to
frogs; serpents to serpents; blood unto blood; but take them away they could
not. All the devils in hell cannot slack that hunger which God sends.

Psalm. 65.
Secondly; because God has reserved this care to himself, Thou preparest them
corn, for so thou appointest it. The Hebrews has it, Because it is thy
preparation, and thou prouidest it for us. Thou o Lord do furnish us with
food, because it appertains to the office of thy providence. Act. 14.17.
Nevertheless he left not himself without witness, in that he did good, and
gave us rain from heaven, and fruitful seasons, filling our hearts with food
and gladness. So that the Evangelist Saint Luke says, That albeit the Creator
of heaven and earth, did not suffer himself to be seen by humane eyes, yet he
left testimonies behind him, whereby they might know him; as by his
preservation of the world, his cheering of man's heart with food and gladness:
and for this cause he commands, That we should beg our daily bread of him.
And as he only can give us the Spiritual and Sacramental bread, so he only
can give us that material bread that must sustain our bodies, as that other
does our souls.

There is a little boy here, which has five barley loaves, and two fishes, But
what are they among so many? Whether this were a boy belonging to the
Apostolical College, (as it seems to Euthimius) or some boy of one of the
Towns thereabouts, as Chrysostom and Theodoret would infer, I will not stand
to dispute it: but it seems somewhat strange unto me, That there was not any
one man in all this Apostolical College, which did not seek to rid their hands
of this people, or despair of their being able to give them entertainment.
Some said, Dimitte eos, Send them away, dismiss them, what should they do
here? Saint Philip he comes in with Ducentorum denariorum, Two hundred
penniworth of bread will not serve the turn. Saint Andrew, Quid inter tantos,
What Is a pound of butter amongst a kennell of hounds? What Is this amongst so
many? Only our Savior Christ uses them with a great deal of courtesy and
civility, he only favors them, and is willing to bid them welcome. Saint
Ambrose says, That if they had bin fifty thousand, as they were but five
thousand, they should all of them have gone away satisfied and well contented.
Job says, If I restrained the Poor of their desire, etc. The multitude of the
Poor did never cause fear in me, as being well assured, that God has enough
in store for them. Now if man bear so brave a mind, because he is made after
the image of God; What a noble mind must there be in God? In a covetous man's
house there is too much penury for the poor, but too much excess for
vanity. When Nabal denied bread to David and his soldiers, the Scripture
says, That he had provided a feast for a King. And the rich Glutton in the
Gospel having his table plentifully furnished, denied the crummes to poor
Lazarus, that fell from his Table. There are three things which my soul
hates; whereof one of them is, A rich man a lier. Saint Augustine by this rich
man, a lier, understands the unmerciful man, who though he abound in wealth,
still answers the Poor, No ay, I have not for you; but the merciful minded
man still says, Para todos ay, I have for you all; but the covetous man, No ay
para nadie, I have for none of you.

Here is a boy that has five l^aues. It was great charity in God, Only our
Savior impouerished himself to make others rich.
to give away the provision of his own College. Seneca treating of the
liberality which one man ought to use toward another, says, Dabo egenti, sed
vt ipse non egeam; succurram perituro, sed vt ipse non peream; I will be
mindful of the Poor, but not forgetful of my self; I will relieve him that
is ready to perish, but will look to it that I may not perish my self. For,
What rich man did ever make himself poor to make a poor man rich? Only our
Savior Christ did so, When he was rich, he made himself poor, that by his
poverty we might be made rich. To give of our superfluities to the Poor, is a
virtue; to part with part of that which does not superabound, as the Widow of
Sarepta did, is more than a virtue; but to give all away that is necessary and
needful for a man's own life, only our Savior Christ did this. By whose
example, many Saints afterward became excellent Almoners; who were contented
to suffer nakedness and hunger themselves, that they might fill the belly of
the Hungry, and cloth the back of the Naked. And amongst the rest of these
Worthies in their time, (whose memory shall never be forgotten) very
memorable was that of Paulina Bishop of Nola, who to free another from
slavery, became a slave himself.

Make the People sit down. Saint Austen says, That the circumstances made
this miracle the more remarkable.

First, it is the fashion of the World, to have the meat set on the board,
before the guests sit down. At that Feast which the King made at his sons
wedding, Behold, I have prepared my dinner, mine Oxen, Mat. 22.4.
and my Fatlings are killed, and all things are ready, etc. Ester 1.
King Assuerus made a great banquet for the Princes of his Kingdom, in the
Court of the Garden and the Kings Palace; but the Vigiles were far longer
than the Feast. But Gods Feasts have no need of prevention or solemn
preparation. God created the earth rich in herbs and plants, before it
inioyed the benefit of either Sun or Water, (as Saint Chrysostom has noted
it) and therefore Christ had no need of Sun or Water, to furnish and set
forth a full table for man. He took all his Disciples opinions, and they all
agreeing, that there was not bread sufficient for them, nor money wherewithal
to buy it; when they held it to be a desperate case, then did our Savior say
unto them, Cause the People therefore to sit down. Where the word Therefore is
to be considered. Saint Chrysostom says, That he went about to prove by this
Therefore, that which he afterward said to the glorious Apostle Saint Paul, He
calls those things that are not, as though they were. In like manner, that
which is not, hears and obeys God, as though it were.

The second circumstance is, That from so poor a provision there should be so
rich an overplus. In the feasts of this world, there is much remaining, because
there is much provided, which does commonly extend it self more to vanity and
ostentation, than necessity. And that of much, much should be left, it is not
much: But of a little, to make a great deal; God can only do it. Of much to
make a little, is every days practice; for your Cooks and Manciples know how
to lick their own fingers, and for the most part are all of them thieves, and
unfaithful Ministers. But of a little to make much, is a Blazon that only
belongs unto God: For (as Saint Augustine says) he did feast this people, Non
solum pro bonitate, sed pro potestate; Not only out of his goodness, but also
out of his power: For God was not here willing to express himself only to be
good, merciful, and pitiful, but likewise to show himself powerful and
liberal. Joseph's brethren seeing their sacks full of corn that before were
empty, and finding their moneys in the mouths of their sacks, they said one
to another; What Miracle is this that God has wrought amongst us? Joseph was
the man that did it, but they could not believe that such an extraordinary
kindness could come from man, but from God. Men, when they fill their sackes
with come, they empty their purses; But to fill the sack and the purse too,
that is only proper unto God.

The third circumstance, is the order therein observed: Per quinquagenos, and
centenos. They sat down by rows (says S. Mark) by hundreds and by fifties.
Whereas in your great feasts now adays, all is disorder and confusion. Homer
says, That when the guests be many, nothing can be fauourie, for commonly all
is noise and disorder for want of good government. Plutarch reports, that the
Emperor Paulus Aemilius was wont to say, That no less prudence was required
for the well ordering of a feast, The Church why styled a well ordered Army.
where there are store of guests, than for to marshall a great Army. The Holy
Ghost styles the Church, a well ordered Army.

The one in regard of it is beauty; for which it deserves to be beloved.

The other for it is order; for which it ought to be esteemed.

In this feast there was good order taken for their sitting down, as also for
the equality in distribution of their fare. And where this decorum is kept, a
little will suffice many, and where it is not, much will not suffice a few.
Those houses where this order is observed, live always in plenty; where that
is lacking, there is poverty and want. ^. Chron. 22.
David was a poor King; In pa^pertate mea (says he of himself) According to
my poverty, I have laid up such and such talents for the building of a Temple
to the Lord: But because David was a good husband, and lived in an orderly
fashion, never any King bestowed so many and so rich rewards upon his Subjects
as he did, nor was at greater charge when occasion required it. For the
materials of the Temple he had disbursed a hundred thousand Talents of gold,
and a million of Talents of silver. He made shields of gold, he had gathered
together a great mass of iron, and other mettalls, besides a world of wood;
and yet when he died, left the patrimony royal disimpawned, having in his
Treasury three thousand Talents of gold, and seven thousand of silver, which
being reduced to our moneys, would hardly come to be summed. Solomon was so
rich a Prince, that all the garnish and service of his Palace, and other his
houses of pleasure, were of the finest and purest gold. And silver, the
Scripture says, Want oforder brings in all confusion.
was in no price or estimation in his time, being as common as the stones in
the streets. And yet, he having no wars, nor any forcible occasions of other
extraordinary expenses, laid tax upon tax, and tribute upon tribute upon his
subjects, and dying in the end very poor, he left the revenues of his Crown
so deeply indebted, that his son Rehoboam was enforced to impose new
tributes and taxations, by which he came to loose ten parts of his Kingdom.
The holy Prophet Jeremy noted this disorder in Eliakim King of Judah, the son
of Josias, Thou alleadgest (says he) that the Majesty Royal does suffer
want and necessity; and that for this cause, thou oppressest the poor, the
fatherless, and the widow. Thy father, was not he King as well as thou? Did
not he maintain the state and greatness of a King? Did he not afford many
favors for the ease of his subjects? yet we do not hear any complaint of his
grinding of the faces of the poor, nor of his wringing and racking of his
vassals.

Partiality in all things to be avoided.
The fourth circumstance, is the equality and fidelity of his Ministers, for
although they were but poor, yet did they not regard their private interest.
For although many of the guestes were known unto them, and that they had been
particularly beholding unto some of them, yet did they carry an even hand
toward them all. The Ministers of Princes should be like unto the stomach,
which does equally and faithfully repart that which it receives, through all
the parts of the body. David, that regal Prophet, prints out the stamp of a
perfect King; and one of the conditions is, That he should fix his eyes upon
Ministers that are faithful, euen-handed, full of integrity, disinteressed
and true both in their words and deeds. The government of Traian was famoused
throughout the world, for that he never suffered to be about him a lying
Minister, a covetous thief, nor any that dealt unfaithfully; for from the
Ministers unfaithfulness, of force an ill name must fall upon the King. And
put case, that we must of force endure one of these two mischiefs, either a
bad King, or bad Ministers, it were the less hurt, that the King should be
bad. For the Ministers being the Kings hands to dispatch all businesses, they
would amend what is amiss in his decrees and proclamations, and the like.

The faults which in Ministers ought most to be shunned, Ministers of State
seldom good, if needy; if covetous, never.
and for which they ought most to be reproved, is, to be poor and covetous.
For all that is poor, and has no good estate of his own to trust to, will
take away that which is another man's, unless the King shall give him
sufficient allowance for to maintain him. And hence it is, that we see many
Ministers, who entering into their office with five bare barley loaves, it
seems unto them that our Savior Christ has made them dispencers of his
bread, and that it is multiplied by their hands, since that in so short a time
they have so many baskets over and above full of bread. When Joshua made a
partition of the land of promise, and every man was to have his portion
proportioned forth unto him, he laid out nothing for himself, expecting that
the people should allot him out some convenient share. For as Theoderet has
noted upon that place, Magistrates are not to treat of their own particular
profits, but of the common good. The like nobleness and faithfulness Philon
has noted in Joseph, who being able (if he would) to have interessed himself
in that immense mass of wealth, which by his industry did accrue to the
patrimony royal, did not acquire to himself one single penny more than his
stipe^dary allowance from the King. There are some who are like unto Bells
Priests, who devouring the Kings treasure, and feeding themselves fat with his
wealth, make him believe, that the God Bell did eat up all that which was
brought in unto them. The Spleen or Milt in man's body, is the stamp or
Hieroglyph of these kind of people, which the fatter it grows, and the more it
swells, the feebler and weaker are the rest of the members of the body.

Less convenient is that Minister which is covetous, Covetousness never
satisfied
for though he have never so much, yet is he never satisfied. Valerius Maximus
reports, That it was propounded in the Senate of Rome, That two persons should
be nominated to go for Spain against Viriatus, and the worthiest of the two
to be made choice of; the one was Seruius Sulpitius; the other, the Consul
Aurelius; and the Senators referring the choice to Aemilianus Scipio, to elect
him whom he thought fittest for that employment; his answer unto them was, I
like of neither of them; for, Alter nihil habet, alteri nihil sat est, The one
of them has nothing, and to the other nothing is enough: not approouing the
one, because he was too poor; nor the other, because he was too covetous.
Your full fed Flies are wont to be less painful to the wounds of the
Poor, because their fullness has it is bounds and termination. But this
example is nothing to the purpose for your richer sort of Ministers; for your
Flies, and so all other birds and beasts, have their limits and bounds in their
fullness, whereupon they rest and dwell, as the sea does in the sand: but your
covetous men, the richer they are, the greedier they grow, and more hurtful to
the Commonwealth; for a poor Minister will content himself with small matters,
but the rich Miser is insatiable. The Prodigal keeping hogs at a Farmhouse in
the Country, suffered a strange and raging kind of hunger, but when he could
get no better food to satisfy the same, he was well content to take part with
the Swine. The rich man in the Gospel had the world at will, wanted nothing,
neither for his back nor his belly; Thou have much goods (said he of
himself) laid up for many years: but all this would not satisfy his
insatiable desire; The Barnes are not big enough, and my Granaries too little
for my hunger, I will pluck them down and make them bigger.

Jesus took the Loaves, and when he had given thanks, he, etc. It is first of
all to be noted, That our Savior took the Loaves and the Fishes first into
his own sacred hands, that he might thereby show himself to be the author of
this miraculous multiplication.

Secondly, He did lift up his eyes unto Heaven, in token that he had this power
from Heaven.

Thirdly, He gave thanks unto the father, as he was Man, because he was
pleased to work so great a miracle, for the spiritual and corporal good of
man, which he accounted as a kindness done unto himself.

Fourthly, He did bless the loaves and the fishes, giving them the virtue and
power of multiplication.

Fifthly, The partition and division of them, he did put them into the hands of
his Disciples, that they might divide them amongst them, and minister them unto
them. And all this was a type of the blessed Sacrament.

He could have as well created loaves and fishes anew, but then peradventure
the people would have thought that God had sent them down from Heaven, as he
did rain at the prayer of Elias, or Quails in the Desert, or as Manna; and so
they would have diuerted their eyes and their thoughts from the virtue of those
divine hands. And therefore it was fit and convenient, that he should add an
augmentation unto them, but not create them: as at the wedding he turned the
water into wine, which he could (if he would) have created anew. Saint
Augustine says, That this multiplication began in the hands of our Savior
Christ; Saint Chrysostom, That it enlarged it self in the hands of the
Apostles; Saint Hilarie, That it endured till it came to the hands of the
Guests: The virtue was all one, but it extended it self to all, that the
service might be the better performed, and the miracle made the more notorious
and manifest.

Our Savior Christ was willing that this multiplication should be by the
hands of his Apostles, for to fasten upon all Clergiemen this liberality and
bounty, Clergy men ought to be liberal.
in distributing of bread, and doing almesdeeds. A Bishop puts on his
Pontificiall robes in the Church, and in the Church he puts them off again;
and when he comes forth, his office is to enrich the widow with his purse, and
to spend his portion upon Orphans and fatherless children. Judas returned the
money for which he sold his Savior, to the Temple, and the Priests entering
into council, What they should do with it? they decreed, That it should be
spent upon the Poor, because it was the price of the blood of the High Priest,
who was the Father of the Poor. Saint Bernard says, That the Priest that has
his part here upon earth, must not look for a part in Heaven; Si quid habuerit
prater Deum, Then God have mercy upon many.
pars eius, non erit Deus. Saint Cyril, That when Bishops servants pass up and
down the Streets, and enter into unknown houses, he that looks upon them
ought to presume, That they go in there to seek after the Poor to relieve
them. And Saint John says, That the Disciples presumed this of Judas, Job. 13.
when our Savior said unto him, Quod facis, fac cito. Many stick not to say;
I shall dye ere long, and then I will give all unto God. What an ill account do
these men make (says Saint Cirill?) All Clergy men have to their heirs those
that are their enemies, who every moment desire their death. And because their
enemy shall not have it, they say; Let us give it unto Christ. Nihil
inuenerunt viri diuitiarum in manibus suis, The rich found nothing in their
hands. Saint Augustine gives the reason, Quia nihil posuerunt in manibus
Christi: Because they deposited nothing in the hands of Christ.

They did all eat, and were satisfied. Eusebius Emisenus says, That there was
a very sauorie contention between five loaves and five thousand men, besides
women and children; And that every one did resolve to make an end of their
piece of loaf and their fish, as well for to satisfy their hunger as for that
it was so sauourie to the taste. And in that bread which they thought would
have been but two bits a man, they had thirty, and the same imperceptibly and
insensibly increasing, those five loaves were too hard for those five thousand
persons and their hunger.

Our Savior Christ was herein desirous principally to prove, That in his
house, there are all sorts of dainties and fullness. The world seeks to
disgrace Gods hospitality, and good housekeeping; alleging, that to be his
friend, and to dye of hunger, is all one: And, that God is good for heaven, but
not for earth: Because he does interdict their pleasures and delights. This
unjust censure of theirs, is repeated by many of the Prophets in the name of
the cast-aways of this world. As Malachy for one; It is in vain to serve God,
and what profit is there in keeping his commandments? This is the scoffing and
flouting of fools, at those who serve God. Saturati sumus panibus (says Ier.)
and been nobis erat, and malum non vidimus. The Hebrew has it; Eramus boni, id
est, foelices. The Prophet does reprehend his people, That through their
Idolatries they were come to those miseries of their captivity, and that if
they did not labor to amend, he would lash them with sharper whips. And this
stubborn people replyeth; Nay rather, since we have forsaken God, the world
goes well with us; for we eat and drink, we are merry, sound and lusty, and
happier than before. But since we left of sacrificing to the Moon, our life
has been a continual misery, and a perpetual poverty. Peccaui; quid mihi
accidit trifte?

Secondly, God was willing to do this for his own honors sake, and for the
good of those whom the world had delivered up into his hands hungry, surbated,
and sick. All these he heales, all these he fills, and all these he comforts,
to the end that it may remain as a registered and notorious truth, That God is a
good God, both in heaven and on earth. When God did descend from the Mount to
give the Law, Exodus says, The children of Israel saw God, and did eat and
drink: so that their seeing of God did not put them beside their eating and
their drinking. And our Savior Christ said, That which enters in at the mouth,
defiles not a man, And by Esaias, My servants shall eat and drink, and be
merry, and ye shall perish. Abbot Gilbertus says, That the Prodigal forsaking
his fathers house, entered into a stricter kind of order, where he had fasting
enough, whereas in his fathers house, the very hindes, and meanest of his
servants had their bellies full of meat.

The world is a Cosiner and a Cheater, it promises mountains of gold, The
worlds entertainment mean and uncertain.
but performs molehills of nifles. Her provision is on the one part very bad,
and on the other very poor and miserable. She will give you bread, but it shall
be the bread of lying, molded up with stones and sand. Suauis est homini pani^
m^ndacij, (says Solomon.) This bread has a goodly outside, and carries a very
fair show with it, but when thou come to the chewing of it, it will break
thy teeth. Postea impl^bitur os eius calculo: Like unto that which they gave
unto Ieremias when he was in prison. Cibauit me cinere. It is a counterfeit
confection to proffer you that wine that shall prove to be your poison. Fell
draconum, vinum eorum, venenum aspidum insanabile. What stomach can digest
such bad bread, and such bad wine? This seeming fairness, this sophisticated
beauty, may very well reui^^ the remembrance of Eues Apple, and that face of
the Serpent, which (according unto Beda) had the appearance of a very fair
and beautiful Damsel. And Ecclesiast^cus, alluding hereunto says; Fly from
sin as from the face of a Serpent. Ecc. 21.
Wherein poison comes covered with a golden coat.

Besides, her provision is so poor, that if she should give all to one, she
would leave him still as hungry as if she had given him nothing at all. So that
he remains hungry, to whom she gives little, and he also to whom she gives
much. She gave the Prodigal very little, and he remained hungry. She gave
Solomon very much, and it seemed unto him, that all was but air that he had
eaten, Vanitas vanitatum, and omnia vanitas. S. Ambrose cites to this purpose
the fable of Midas, who was all his life time hungring after gold, and besought
the gods, that whatsoever he touched might be turned into gold; and they
granting his petition, he perished through hunger, For his meat and his
drink turning it self into gold, his hunger increased ypon him, till it had
wrought his death. Saint John says, in his Apocalips, That he saw a black
horse, Et qui sedebat super eum, habebat stateram in manu sua. By the black
horse, Beda understands sin; by him that sat thereupon, the Devil. The
balance which he held in his hand, was not that of Justice, but of scaricitie
and misery, for to weigh the bread which he gives in allowance to his
servants, Apoc. 6.
which he delivers out unto them by ounces, and by drams. And anon after he
says, that he saw another upon a pale horse, and his name was Death. Who had
power to aflict with hunger the four quarters of the world. These were the
horsemen on the one side; but there was heard from the other side, a loud
voice, which said; A measure of Wheat for a penny, and three measures of
Barley for a penny. But ye that take part with the black horse, must not
touch neither on the wine nor the oil there mentioned, it is not for your
mowing; signifying thereby, that when the vassal of the Devil, of the World,
and of the Flesh, perishes of hunger, the Just shall have their food good
cheap.

They eat and were satisfied. There is no mention made in this feast of drink;
because meat does increase thirst, and drink does quench it. And of Gods good
blessings we remain always more and more thirsty. Dionisius the Carthusian
says, That he gave unto the loaves and the fishes the virtue and power of
quenching their thirst.

Liberality must be waited o^ by frugalitie
Take up that which is left that the fragments may not be lost. Our Savior
here showed great care for the saving and gathering up of that which was left.

First, for to discover the virtue of Alms deeds, as Saint Cyrill observes
it. Saint ^^sten says, That the field of the poor is the fertilest, For he
that sowes in that* receives a hundred for one: Nor there is not any Merchant
that has so quick a return of gain, and so plentiful, as that husbandman
that sowes his seed in such a peec^ of ground. And he that gets least, is he
that ventures least. But some one will say, How can I want, or be in need, if
I keep my fruits safe under lock and key? etc. I answer, that because thou
keep them so close, thou may want them; but if thou should scatter the^
abroad, thou should have Gods plenty. He that sowes not, reapes not; Date,
and dabitur vobis, Give, Luc. 6.
and it shall be given unto you; and if your store shall not increase, Come and
blame me; Have I peradventure been to my People like a Wilderness without
fruit? Ier. 2.
The like conceit does S. Chrysostom touch upon, expounding, Communicating to
the necessities of the Saints. Saint Gregory treats the very self same
Doctrine, upon that place of Job, If I despised him that passed by because he
was not clothed. And Saint Ambrose in a Sermon which he makes of Fasting, puts
this difference betwixt paying that which thou owe, and giving of alms to
the Poor, to whom thou art not indebted; that the one is in profit of him that
receives it; the other in profit of him that gives. And therefore in Scripture
Alms is called Benedictio, A Blessing, which is that which augments our wealth.

Secondly, Our Savior was willing that they should gather up the fragments, to
the end that the greatness of the miracle should be the more notorious, and
that they should see of five loves twelve baskets full of what remained,
besides that which they carried away in their bosoms, their sleeves, and their
pockets, especially your women and your children. And howbeit some of them
might keep them as relics of this so rare and strange a wonder, yet the
diligence therein used might be very wise and devout. Saint Chrysostom gives
us this note, That albeit this miracle ought to have left a firm and assured
confidence in every one of them, yet they were so wholly forgetful thereof,
that our Savior was driven afterward to put them in mind thereof, Mat. 16.
Marc. 8.
and tax them of this their oblivion. There are other moral reasons given for
it, writ by diverse upon this place, which I purposely omit.

When the men had seen the miracle that Jesus did, said, This is of a truth
the Prophet that should come into the world. They considering the greatness of
the miracle, but not so much potentiam, as qualitatem and nouitatem, the power,
as the quatie and novelty thereof; they cried out, This is the Prophet whom
the World expects. Saint Augustine says, That greater is that miracle which
God works upon the multiplication of their wheat harvest; but because it is
so common, they make no great wonder of it. It is natural unto us more to
admire new, than great things. Seneca treating in his Natural Questions, of
our extraordinary comets, which do so much amase the world, says, That the
Heavens, the Stars, the Planets, strike no admiration into us, though it be a
marvelous and strange work, because we see it is so ordinary with us. The
Sun is the fairest Creature that ever God dispatched out of his hands [ Vas
admirabile, opus excelsi;] yet the beauty of it is beams does not draw on any
admiration; but it is Eclipses, because they are rare and seldom. So likewise
in the harmony and concord of the Heavens, their influences, and their
Stars, together with their disposition, and the beauty of the Orbs; Know
thou the course of Heaven? etc. The Greeks expound this place, of the Clouds;
Job. 38.
Who can declare the nature of the Clouds? Who, it is music and harmony? Who
can make the music of the Thunder to cease, or stop the course of the
Lightning? etc. And all these, though they be such strange wonders, do not
move us to admire them; but upon any change or alteration, we stand
astonished at the novelty thereof.

When Jesus therefore perceived that they would come and take him to make him a
King, etc. Courteous behavior is the greatest gain.
Our Savior Christ had gained so much good love and opinion amongst them by
this his kindness that he had showed toward them, that after the people were
dismissed (as Euthimius has observed it) they determined to make him their
King, not only offering him the Crown, but seeking perforce to set the same
on his head. And if the consideration of his miracles had been the occasion
thereof, they could not have taken a more discreet resolution; and not only
they, but all the world had a great deal of reason to put their helping hand
thereunto.

For first of all, he is painted forth to be so wise, that all Jerusalem was
stricken dumb at the wisdom of his words. Fit qualities for a King.


Secondly, He was as fair and beautiful to see to, as the Sun in all his
glory.

Thirdly, He was of that force and power, that he did drive out of his temple
with whips and scourges, the greatest power of the world.

Fourthly, He was so open handed, so liberal, and so bountiful, that with
five Loaves and two Fishes, he did fill the bellies of fifteen or twenty
thousand persons.

Fifthly, He loved man so well, that for his sake he willingly laid down his
life, and offered up his most precious body and blood upon the Cross. So that
there being so many strong and forcible reasons to draw us to love him, Who
would not willingly make choice of him to be their King? But let us that are
Christians, acknowledge him to be our King, and show our selves so loving and
obedient unto him, that we serving him in holiness and trueness of life, and
wholly relying upon his love and favor toward us, may come at the last to be
heirs of that his heavenly Kingdom. Which God grant for his mercies sake.

THE XXVI. SERMON, UPON THE MONDAY AFTER THE FOVRTH SUNDAY IN LENT.
JOHN 2. MAT. 21. MARC. 11. LVC. 10. He found sitting in the Temple, sellers of
Sheep, Oxen, and Doves, etc.


Our Savior went up to Jerusalem to the Passover, The greatest miracle that
ou^ Savior ever wrought, was this.
and entering into the temple where the law was read, where the Laity did pray,
he met with a most base and vile market, where they sold Sheep, Oxen, Kids,
and Doves, Money Changers, and Usurers, having their banks. Wherewith enraged,
like a Lion he sets upon the owners of them, upon the beasts, birds, and
tables; and making him a whip of the cords that bound their fardles, or those
halters wherewith they tied their beasts, there was never any Roman Cohort that
did that as he did; he overthrew their tables, scattered their moneys down
on the ground, and falling to whipping and scourging of them, he chased them
out of his fathers House. Saint Hierome and Saint Chrysostom reckon this of
all other to be the greatest miracle that ever our Savior wrought, preferring
it before the giving of sight to the Blind, of hands and fee^ to the Lame, of
life to the Dead, etc. And without doubt it is a thing much to be wondered at,
that one single man, and such a one as amongst the Jews (especially those of
the Temple) was held in such base esteem, should venture to trample them under
his feet, and to whip both great and small, and that not any one of them should
dare to open his mouth against him. Which was such a disco^ering of his
Omnipotency and Godhead, that we must imagine it to be a most foul fault in
them, either not to acknowledge him to be their Messiah, or not to lay hold on
him and bind him in bonds, for a mad man; as they afterward said, Sure he is
mad.

He found them in the Temple selling Sheep and Oxen, etc. The Messiah was
prophesied in the days of Iudaisme, to be mild, gentle, lovely, and peaceable;
Zephan. 2. Ier. 11. Esaias 16. Es^y 60.
Qu^rite mansuetum, says Zephaniah: Jeremy, Quasi Agnus mansuetus: Esaias,
Reparabitur in misercicordia solium eius: And in another place, Decl^nabo quasi
fluuium Pacis. For his first coming was to be in all mildness and
peaceablenesse; and therefore amongst many other circumstances which made this
act so famous, the greatest is, That his modesty should so break out beyond
it is woonted bound^, so many other affronts and injuries having not been able
to move his patience. And albeit reprehending the Pharisees, his patience
found it self offended, that he did not stick ^o tell them to their face, You
are of your father the Devil: and preaching to the People, the hinges of the
door to his words did creake, and did noise forth his displeasure, causing
great admiration in the hearers, He that has ears let him hear, etc. yet he
never took a whip in his hand, as he did now, to punish either them or their
faults; which is a manifest sign and token, that as his divine fury did
exceed it is bounds, so did the occasions by them given.

First of all then let me give you to understand, That Gods breast can by no
means brook the avarice and covetousness of the Priests. Saint Cyril, Saint
Chrysostom, and Saint Augustine say, That those lashes were not only laid on
the flocks of Sheep, and droues of Oxen, but also on the Merchants and
Priests. And Pope Anacletus, and Julius the first, affirm, (which is no more
than the Text says) Eiecit omnes de Templo, He drove them all out of the
Temple, as many as there bought and sold: where the Pr^ests (as it is noted by
Beda) reserving those beasts alive, which were offered up in the Temple, they
made sale of them for money; some of which beasts did pass from one master to
another, ^ix or seven times, like a jewel that is brought into an Almoneda or
public out-crie, to be sold. Deuteronomy. 14.
In Deutronomie God commanded, That those that lived far off from the Temple,
might make sale of their first fruits and tenths at home, turning it into
money; and when they had so done, to take that money along with them, and
coming to the Temple, to bestow the same either in Oxen, or Sheep, or Wine,
or whatsoever else he had most mind too: but these Priests for their own
greater gain, had their Cattle and their moneys there in a readiness, for to
trucke to their advantage, and make profit by putting it forth to use. Now our
Savior Christ not permit^ing the Merchants to make his Temple a house of
contractation, would much less give way that the Ministers of his house should
be Merchantmen, and such as should trade and deal in the world. Saint
Gregory writing to Nepotianus, says, Clericum negotiatorem, ex paupere
diuitem, v^pestem fuge, A Clergy man that shall drive a trade in the world,
an^ be a great Negotiant, whereby of a poor Minister he becomes a rich
Merchant, fly from him as thou would from the plague. Saint Crysostome is
of opinion, That a Merchant seldom or never can please God. And in another
place he says, That few of them are saved. And Saint Augustine renders the
reason of it, That out of their greediness of gain they live in an
everlasting kind of lying, blaspheming at their losses, and forswearing for
their profit. And ^s Aristotle says, There is no great gains without great
fraud; Quoniam non cognou^ literaturam: Which Saint Augustine renders in
another letter to be Negotiationem tuam, introibo in potentias Domini, Because
I never traded nor contracted in this dealing and winding of commodities too
and fro in the world, I hope through Gods mercy, to see my self with him in
his glory. And if in a Lay man trading and negotiation be so dangerous; What
shall it be in a Clergy man, whom the Cannons of the Council so grievously
censure and ^ondemne.

The honor of Priesthood.
The Priesthood is so sovereign and so divine a calling, that in it is pureness,
it admits of no Medium in it is sliding or slipping, but falls from one extreme
to another. And therefore God walks always with a wand of justice in his
hand, to beat out the dust of their imperfections. This made him say unto
Moses, Sanctificab^r ab ijs, qui appropinquant m^hi. Origin discoursing, That
God is a fire speaks in his name, Exodus 28.
Qui iuxta me est, iuxta ignem est, He that is near unto me, is near unto the
fire. Now then, if a Priest being partly apparrelled in linen, and partly
anointed with oil, shall draw near unto this fire, he had need be very
circumspect and careful, that not so much as the least spark thereof light
upon him. Paulus Scaliger says; That the Ancients painting forth a Priest,
place in one of his hands, a dial or mariners compass, and in the other the
sun. The compass, to show, that he should be the loadstone of the Common
wealth. The sun, that he might give such clear light, that no tongue might
be able to tax him: That they might make good that saying of Pythagoras;
Aduersus solemn ne loquaris. And because the clouds of the earth should not
darken the pureness of their light, God did ordain, that in the land of
Promise, those of the tribe of Leui, to whom the Priesthood did appertain,
should have no inheritance allotted unto them. Who then (will you say) shall
find them food and raiment? It is answered, The Lord himself is the^r
inheritance. Numb. 18.
They had the Lords portion amongst them, and did enjoy the fruits of the earth
without any labor. Alij laborauerunt* and vos in laborem illorum introistis.
The Priesthood served them (as Pelusiota says) as a Mediator betwixt God and
man, being bound to serve and honor the one, and to correct, and instruct the
other. And therefore this Doctor says, That the Priest ought to be all eyes,
and only blind to Covetousness. But many have turned their eyes into nails,
to scratch and scrape together a great deal of wealth. Judas out of
covetousness sold the Savior of the world. And would to God he had stayed
there. But when he returned the money to the Temple, he recommended
covetousness to the Priests, and making them heirs of all that he had, he
left nothing for himself, (as the Bishop of Hostia has observed) but a halter
to hang himself.

Hence it comes to pass, that the first step of a Priest, is Covetousness,
and even the first desire, wherewith he enters into those sacred Orders. And
when he gets in by this door, you may give him for lost, and count him the
child o^ perdition. Ezechiel painting forth the abominations of the Temple,
places at the entrance of the gate, the Idol of Zeal. The Seventy interpret
it, Statuam possidebitis, To wit, the Idol of Avarice. And if the root of all
evil be placed thus at the entrance, it is not much that the Temple should be
full of abominations within.

The second occasion, was the Priests cloaking of this their Avarice,
Covetousness worst, when cloked wit^ a show of Holiness.
with the color of Holiness, and service of God. And to make of scandalls,
services; Gods breast could not brook it. It is the common fashion of the
world to disguise a lie, with an appearance of truth, and to dawbe vice with the
color of virtue; These are the ordinary impostures of Hypocrisy. But some
hold them to be so hurtful, that if they should be suffered and borne withal
any long time, the world would be utterly undone by it. That a woman should
dissemble her evil feature, and the fowlenes of her skin, with rich and well
made clothes, and with borrowed colors, and that her beauty being not her
own, but a falsehood and lie from the head to the foot; she should make it to
appear as a truth: That a Merchant should carry the name of a very rich and
wealthy man, though he owe a great deal more than he is worth: That a Huckster
should sell Barajas Olives for those of Seuill, etc. Let it pass, Mundus in
maligno positus est: It is a naughty world. But that an Apothecary should put
upon a box of poison, a Rotulo, or written Scroll of wholesome physic, and
say rats bane is sugar, it is not a thing to be endured. Less are we to suffer
deceits in the medicines and confections for the soul. He that should have seen
the beasts, the birds, the boords, and the store of money that was there, and
the great noise of the sacrifices that were there to be made, would have
thought it had been the Priests zeal, divine worship, a relieuing of the
poor, and an easing of those that came a far off to the Temple* that they
might with the less trouble perform their devotions, but all this was nothing
but covetousness, and their greedy desire of greater gains. And perhaps for
this reason, Saint John called it the Passover of the Jews. Erat proximum,
Pascha Iudaeorum, The Jews Passover was at hand. Not my Passover, but yours;
where you do not treat of my honor, but of your own profit, Vias vestras,
and sabbatha vestra, odiuit anima mea, (says the Prophet Esaias.) And the
Prophet Malachie calls these their solemn feasts, dung; Behold, Malac. 2.3.
I will cast dung upon your faces, even the dung of your solemn feasts. Not
because they were so in themselves, but because theirayme was their own
private Interest, which is no better than a dunghill in the sight of God.

The third occasion, was their disrespect to the Temple; where God ever
pretended, that his Majesty should be more especially respected. Regna^it deus
super omnes gentes, sedet super sedem sanctam suam. The Majesty regal upon
earth is respected throughout the whole jurisdiction of his Crown, but much
more where he has his throane and chair of Estate. God, as he is King of
Kings, and Lord of Lords over all the nations of the earth, ought much to be
respected; but more especially, where he has his throane in every one of his
Kingdoms. In heaven, at the right hand of his father, which is the supreme
throane of his greatness and Majesty. In the Synagogue he had the
Propitiatory; and in the Temples, Josh. 5.
the Sacrarium. When the Angel appeared unto Joshua with a drawn sword, and
commanded him to put his shoes from off his feet, diverse grave Doctors do
concur in this, that this Angel was the Son of God, as he had before
appeared unto Moses in the bush, commanding him the like. Wherein he notified
two things unto them:

The one; the reverence that they ought to bear to that place, where he did so
especially manifest himself; For the ground wherein thou stand is holy
ground. By our feet, are meant our affections; by our shoes, our cares. And
many nations took from thence the putting off of their shoes, when they
entered into the Temple.

The other; That against those, who should loose this respect to that place,
the sword was drawn to slay them, and fire prepared to burn and consume them.
Ezechiel painting out the abominations of the Temple, says; Behold there came
six from the way of the upper gate, which looks toward the North, and
every one of them had, Vasa interfectionis, the vessels of slaughter in his
hand. The 70 translate it, Septem secures, Seven hatchets. It is Theodorets
observation, that against all Zenacharibs Army, God sent forth but one Angel
only; but against the prophaners of his Temple, six, according to the number
of the days of the Week: because there should not that day pass over their
head, wherein some new Executioner or other, should not but rise up to torment
them. In multitudine misericordiae tuae introibo in domum tuam, adorabo ad
Templum sanctum tuum in timore tuo. Caietan reads it, In multitudine gratiae
tuae. He that is predestined to salvation, has that respect to Gods house,
that if he did not persuade himself that he stood in his grace and favor, he
would not dare to presume to put his foot within the doors thereof: and should
he presume so to do, he would lean himself against the corner of the first
pillar he came at, not daring (like the Publican) to lift up his eyes. But your
Pharasaicall Hypocrite makes as bold with gods house as with his own: He lies
here and lies there; swears here and swears there; murmures here and murmures
there; he lives there as if there were no God; and lives here as if God did not
see him. And that which causes the more fear and horror is, That many times
they meet at the Church for to treat and talk of their greatest villainies.
Saint Jerome against Vigilancius says, Confiteor timorem meum, I confess my
fear. When entering into the Temple of the Martyrs, I conceive any anger or
evil thought in my mind; or when sleeping I have had any evil dream, it
makes my body and soul to tremble: Now then, when entering into Gods house, I
quake and tremble when I am to receive, what can I do withal? By Ezechiell,
God complains of those rich men that built their houses near unto his, Qui
fabricati sunt limen suum iuxta limen meum. Joining wall to wall to my house,
they have profaned my name with their abominations, And I consumed them in my
wrath. Being then, that God cannot endure such bad neighborhood, Will he bear
with those impudencies that as it were in despite, ye do before his face?
Saint Jerome has noted upon Esaias, that amongst other things that Solomon
offended God in, one was, That he had built up such a high Turret in his
palace, that it ouertopt the Temple, and did ouerlooke it. For Gods house
ought not to be inferior to man's; What shall we say then to those that make it
a den of thieves?

It has been observed, That all those great and powerful Princes which have
presumed to press into Gods Temples, have come to an evil end. Sabellicus
reports of Pompey, that having bin formerly very fortunat, after thathe had
presumed to profane the Temple, by entering into the Sancta sanctorum, nothing
afterward prospered with him.

The fourth occasion was, Christ's great zeal to his House, The nature of ^^ue
zeal.
Zelus domus tuae come^it me, The zeal of thy House has devoured me, or eaten
me up. Where it is to be noted, That it is one thing to eat and feed upon the
zeal of Gods House, and his service; and another thing, to be eaten of it: one
while there is an Ecclesiastical; another while a secular Judge, which is
very diligent in his office, out of the hatred that he has to Delinquents,
and he is held to be a very zealous man. But he eats, grows fat, and
waxes rich with this his zeal; and such a one eats of the zeal of the house
of God, but is not eaten of it. But there are others that are dried up and
consumed of the zeal which they bear to the Service of God; [ Tabescere me
fecit zelus meus] who wasting their wealth, their health, and their lives in
this their zeal, do more resent the wrongs that are done to God, than those
that are offered to themselves. Saint Paul says, Quis scandalizatur, and ego
non vror? Which made Saint Chrysostom to say, That of six hundred thousand
miracles, one cannot be found that may be compared with this his zeal: his
own tribulations and torments, he calls them Glory; and the offenses done
unto God, he calls Fire, which burns him. Lo here a miracle, a strange kind of
zeal.

Zeal is the Child of Love; but it is somewhat more inflamed, and more pure
than Love. To Love we attribute two powerful effects:

The one, Love and zeal wherein different.
That it is the author of the greatest acts and noblest exployts that man can
perform. Esaias in his ninth Chapter makes an enumeration of Gods greatest
acts, To us a Child is borne, to us a son is given, the government is upon
his shoulder* etc. And for an vpshot of these his glorious acts, he adds
this, Zelus Domini exercituum faciet hoc, The zeal of the Lord of Hosts shall
do this. Amongst Gods attributes, we consider a celestial competencie in the
greatest mysteries of his life, and of his death; but in the end, Love gets the
victory and glory of the day.

The second effect of Love is, To convert it self wholly to the service of the
thing beloved. He that is enamoured of God, will willingly pardon the injuries
that are done to himself; but those that are offered to God, he will never
forgive. And Ecclesiasticus renders the reason of it; Cognoui quod in multa
scientia, multa sit indignatio, He that has little knowledge of God, finds
himself but little offended, when the Majesty of God is wronged and abused;
but he that knows much, is much offended, when offense is offered to the
party he loves. A little child is never offended at vice or vicious men: Cum
essem parvulus, sapiebam vt parvulus; but a well grown man, will like Mathias,
kill an Idolator, or like Phineas, slay a fornicator, and set upon a
blasphemer, etc. or upon a whole city, like Simeon and Leui.

Et cumfecisset quasi flagellum.
Gods chastiseme^ts here, more in show than substance
He made as it were a whip. For the chasticements of God in this life, seem to
be whips and scourges, but they are not; Quasi morientes, and ecce viuimus. No
like, is the same; and that which is as it were such a thing, is not the thing
it self. Our life seems to be death, but it is not death; our portion
poverty, but it is not so; Sicut egentes, multos autem locupletantes. There
are three reasons of this Truth:

The one, That these whips come short of those scourges at the day of
Judgment, which will be most fearful and most terrible. Saint Matthew calls
them but the beginning of sorrows, Ha^ autem initia sunt dolorum. Those are
not sorrows, Mat. 24.
which are so soon ended. Of Antiochus his cruelties, whose soldiers slew in
three days fourscore thousand persons, captiuated forty thousand, and sold
as many more for slaves, not pardoning either old men, women, or children; the
Text says, Propter peccata, etc. For the sins of those that inhabited the
City, God was a little angry. Of those cruel torments which the Martyrs
endured, being fried, roasted, broyled, dragged, quartered, and sawne in
sunder; Wisdom says, Wisd 3.5.
They are punished in few things, but in many things shall they be well rewarded.

Another reason, Because these whips are not directed to our hurt and
perdition, but for our amendment; as Judith said in the siege of Bethulia, Haec
ipsa supplicia, non ad perditionem, sed ad emendationem euenisse credamus. They
are the whips of a father, that will not kill his son, but correct and amend
him. And therefore David calls this whip, Virgam Directionis, The rod of
Direction.

The third and last, Because whips and scourges are perforce; for, to give one
a stripe or a lash, you must perforce hold the whip in your hand, and strain
your self thereunto. And therefore it is said, Cum fecisset quasi flagellum.
Christ had never a whip about him, the Merchants themselves put it into his
hands. Seneca says, That the nature of the gods are so far from anger either
toward others, or in themselves; and of that goodness, clemency,
louingnesse, and peaceablenesse, that if they stretch out their arm, or lift
up their hand to punish you, you your selves must force and drive them
thereunto by your sins and offenses. And therefore Esaias says, Indignatio non
est mihi, Quis mihi dabit Spinam and Veprem? Saint Hierome, My People will not
believe that I can be angry, they take me to be so good and so loving, that
they cannot presume that any anger can proceed from my breast; Who will furnish
me with a Thorn or a Bramble, that I may make my People to fear me? Job
treating of the Devil, said, Ipse est principium viarum Dei, Job 40.
He is the chief of the ways of God. Saint Thomas says upon this place, That
God has two ways:

The one of mercy.

God has two ways, one of justice, another of mercy.
The other of justice.

The former is mentioned by David, Vniuersae viae Domini, misericordia, and
veritas; All the ways of God, are Mercy and Truth. God was Author of the
first, by creating man in Paradise, for to translate him from thence to heaven.
But the devil running a contrary course, gave the first beginning to the way
of Justice. For if there had been no fault, there had been no punishment. Two
things Eliphaz told Job, when he came to comfort him:

The one; That God was never Author of the death of the righteous.

The other; That many sinners perished at the breath of his nostrills.

Quin potius inueni multos, flante deo perijsse. Where, by the way, Saint
Gregory has noted, That for to breath, outward air is necessary; the air
must be without; so that thou art he, that make thine own rod, and that
prouidest materials for God. According to that of Solomon, Prou. 5.
His own iniquities shall take the wicked himself, and he shall be holden
with the cords of his own sin. The gluttony made the whip for thy gout; thy
uncleanness, for thy pocks; thy sweates and colds, for thy sciatica; thy
paintings, for thy Megrims in the head, thy wrincles in thy forehead, and the
stinkingnesse of thy breath; thy Covetousness, for thy insatiable and
unquenchable thirst; and thy ambition, for thy continual torment. The King of
Tyrus said; Deus ego sum; I am a God, But God hereunto made answer; Producam
ergo ignem in medio tui, Ezech 28.1^.
I will produce a fire in the midst of thee. Whereupon Theodoret says; Thy
pride and ambition shall be the twigs that shall make a rod to lash thee.

And from hence we may collect these two things.

The one, That for God to make an end of a sinner, neither thunders, God needs
no weapons to destroy the wicked.
nor lightnings, nor earthquakes are necessary; but that the breath of his
mouth, or the twinkling of his eye, is sufficient. In thered sea he did turn
but his eye upon Pharaoh, and presently ouerturned all his Charriots. That
which is to be feared, is that hand wherein the whip is: A hempen cord is more
to be feared in the hand of a valiant man, than a dagger in the hand of a
child. Miseremini mei, miseremini mei, sal^e^vos amici mei, quia monaus Domini
tetigit me. Job called all his stripes, The touch of Gods hand; and this is
that which ought to be feared.

The other, is the whip of Hell, those here are but gentle stripes, and short;
but those in Hell full of torment, and more heavy.

First, for that the latter are eternal, A fire is kindled in my rage, and it
shall burn, even to the lowest hell. So that a worse misery cannot be
imagined. Our Savior Christ said to Magdalen; Optimam partem elegit sibi
Maria, Mary has chosen the better part; And the reason was, Non auferetur ab
ea in aternum, It shall continue with her for ever. But of the damned we may
say, Pessimam partem elegit, All pains but pastimes to those of hell.
He has chosen the worser part, for that his torment shall endure for ever.

Secondly; for that the former are more gentle. For there is no pain in this
life, which has not some declination: And therefore your sorrows upon earth
are compared to rivers that ebb and flow. But Hell is like a standing poole,
that is always at one and the same stay. And therefore it is said in the
Apocalips, Death and Hell were cast into the lake of fire.

Take these things hence, make not my fathers house, a house of merchandise,
etc. Twice (as it is observed by Saint Augustine) did our Savior Christ work
this miracle.

The first; when he first began to preach.

The second; toward the time of his passion.

Of the first; Saint John only makes mention.

Of the second; the rest of the Evangelists.

And albeit the circumstances of the doing thereof were not one and the same,
yet the occasions were both alike. So that if we shall sum them up both
together we shall see in our Savior Christ the print or stamp of a most
perfect Prince, who proceeded with exceeding great equallitie, without
accepting of persons, or any other partiality in the world. Not permitting
that either hatred, love, fear, or his own private interest (which, according
to Isidore) are those four enemies to Justice) should make the beam of the
balance to sway awrie.

There is not any business of greater difficulty in the world, than to
govern, it is the Art of Arts; and the Science of Sciences; not only, because
to hit the vain aright of such v^rious dispositions, is a thing as it were
impossible, so inscrutable a thing is the heart of man: but also, for that man
amongst all other creatures is the most ungrateful, and forgetful. In that
pretension of the Priesthood, there was great debate and contention amongst
Gods people; for the better according whereof, and to appease this tumult, God
commanded, that every one should put a rod or wand into the Tabernacle, and
that which they should find to be budded forth the next morning, he whose it
was, should enjoy that dignity. And in the end, there was but one only rod
that was budded. Gregory N^ssen asks the question, Why in the passage of
Jordan, God commanded, That every Tribe should put a stone into the bed of the
river; and would here have but one only rod to bud? whereunto he makes answer;
That it is not much, that the remembrance and acknowledgement of a common
benefit should be common: but to govern with perfection, and for the budding
forth of such fair flowers, it is enough, if amongst many there be but one to
be found. For this is a white crow, a black swan, etc. And it was fit that the
person of our Savior Christ should be a pattern and example which they should
look upon and imitate, who govern the world; to the end, that though they do
not attain to the perfection of government, nor reach to the true height
thereof; yet at least, they may love it and desire the same; according to that
of Wisd. Love justice, ye that judge the earth.

Many things may he that gouernes, draw from this pattern.

Magistrates must be bold in reforming public abuses.
The first is; Courage and Valor. There was not that man, though never so
valiant in Jerusalem, no nor in the whole world, whom the authority of the
Priests would not make to turn cow. And here our Savior Christ with a whip of
cords chases them all away, leaving them amazed, ashamed, and confounded. The
Scripture blazons out the noble deeds of David, and the valiant Acts of his
Captains. Ecclesiasticus says; That David played with Lions as with Kids, and
with Bears as with Lambs. Eccles. 47. 2. Reg. 23. 1. Chron.
And that Adino of Ezni, one of his mighty men, slew eight hundred at one
time. That Abishai the brother of Ioab, lifted up his spear against three
hundred and slew them. That Benaiah slew two mighty Giants of Moab, and slew a
Lion in the midst of a pit in the time of Snow; and another Egyptian man of
great stature; he having a spear in his hand, and the other but a staff,
Virum dignum spectaculo: Who had a lance like a Weauers beam. All these were
famous acts; but none of them came near to that of Sampson, who with the
iawe-bone of an ass, did set upon three thousand armed Philistims which came
to take him, and slew a thousand of them. God had famous Captains amongst his
people, who with celestial fury did set upon his enemies, killed men of
moustrous might and stature, and valiant huge Giants. But that one with a whip
only should cast out such a rabble of Jews, force out so many merchants, and
drive so many Priests out of the Temple, none but our Savior could do this.
If (says Saint Jerome) with a bare whip in his hand, such a fearful number
fled from his presence, What terror shall he cause in the day of judgment,
when with a naked sword in his mouth, he shall pronounce the sentence of
eternal death? He that shall not assume valor and courage unto him, and shall
not put on a stout resolution in reforming public abuses, let him not govern
at all, Noli quaerere fieri judex, nisi virtute valeas irrumpere iniquitatem.
If thou do not find in thy self spirit and metal, to cast down to the
ground (laying aside all humane respects) those gross abuses that are not to
be borne withal, though the multitude should never so much oppose thee, seek
not for the Vara or Rod of a Judge. Job. Si expaui ad multitudinem nimiam, and
despectio propinquorum terruit me, Let this and that plague light upon me,
etc. But if neither the peoples multitude, nor my friends and kins folks
importunity, could prevail with me to make me pervert Justice, and to fail
in the execution of good government, why then o Lord, etc. A^hish King of the
Philistimes, banished David out of his Kingdom, though he knew how much his
person did import him, for fear of his Princes displeasure. Viuit dominus,
quia rectus es, sed satrapis non places. Here was a cowardly King.

The second thing, that he that gouernes may draw from this pattern, is;
Magistrates must heed morethe conversion of the offender than the correction
of his offense.
A true weight and measure in punishing. To those that sold the Doves, he
said, Auferte ista hinc, For this was not in it self an unlawful kind of
trading, had it not been in regard of the place. Besides, they were poor
people, and if there were any indulgence or favor to be shown in those
scourges of our Savior, it should have been used toward them. But some
Judges, Dan palos de ciego; bestow their blows like blind men; so as they hit
some body, they care not whom. The Fruiterer sels fruits that are not ripe;
Go thou and root up all the trees that are in his garden. There are many, in
drinking wine, that take a cup too much, go thou presently, and pluck up the
Vines. Plutarch in his book of moral Virtues, reports, That Lycurgus
commanded the same to be done in Thrace. A mad-headed Colt, that is wild and
kickish, it is not good counsel to kill him, but to break him of his knauish
qualities and to make him tame and gentle. Nor is it good advice to destroy the
Vines, but that men should be brought to drink moderately, and to temper their
wine with water. In a word, The delinquent ought not always to be cut off and
destroyed, but to be brought to amendment. And it is very fit and convenient,
that a Judge should now and then dissemble, and make as though he did not see.
Nonne dissimulaui, nonne silui, nonne quieui, says Job. Saul in the beginning
of his reign was a very good King, Puer vnius anni erat Saul, cum regnare
caepisset. Saul was a child of a year old, when he began to reign, so humble
and meek minded was he then, and though he were wronged very much, and much
evil spoken of him behind his back, Dissimulabat non audire, He would take no
notice of it, 1. Reg. 10.
but made as if he knew of no such matter. The book of Wisdom says, That
God does dissemble our sins, Sap. ^1.20.
and makes as though he saw not the sins of men, because they should amend.
And the Apostle Saint Paul says (taxing the Athenians of that idolatrous Alter
of theirs, whereon was written, Unto the unknown God;) That the time of this
their ignorance God regarded not, Act. 17.30.
but now he admonishes all men every where to repent. But when a Judge is
forced and driven to punish, the best course is (if he can) to work the
offenders amendment. Mercy to be preferred before justice.
If our Savior Christ should have whipped the Doves, they would have flowne up
and down the Temple, and that was no good means for to drive them forth. And
if a Governor shall at any time exceed, the excess of pity is the less
evil. Saint Gregory says, That false Justice, is all indignation; and that
true Justice, is full of compassion. The glorious Doctor Saint Ambrose calls
Mercy, The better part of Justice; and that out of the bowels of Justice,
Mercy is begot. Saint Gregory, That the one without the other, is lame and
imperfect. In the Arc of the Testament, Aarons rod and the pot of Manna were
placed together, Severity and Softness, Justice and Mercy; which ought to be
the Judges Compass whereby he is to shape his course. One of the seuerest
punishments which is in the holy Scripture, is that which Zachary painteth
forth touching impiety, Zac. 4.
in the Ephah, which was a kind of pot or measure containing some ten pottles,
being stopped close with abal of lead of the weight of a Talent, and a woman
sitting in the midst thereof, whose name was Wickedness. And lo there came out
two women, and took up this pot by the two ears from the ground, and carried
it to the land of Shinar. Great were the Idolatries of this his People, and it
was fit that they should be severely punished; yet notwithstanding, these two
women that carried this pot into a strange Country, had wings like a Kyte,
quasi alas Milui; which make many planes, and a smooth flight: but the word in
the original derive these wings from another Bird, which signifies Pity.
And therefore Montanus renders it thus, Ala^ Ciconiae, They had wings like the
wings of a Storke; Which is held to be a Foul full of pity. Of some rigorous
Judges the Delinquents may very well say, Would to God that my punishments and
my faul^s were weighed together in a balance, then would plainly appear to
the eye of the World, with what inequality the Judge has proceeded against me.

The third thing for our learning, which we may draw from hence, is, That our
Savior proceeded more severely and more rigorously against your Usurers and
Money Changers, breaking and throwing down their tables, and scattering abroad
their money.

First, Because in it self, and it is own nature, it was an unlawful kind of
trading, and therefore fit that the occasion thereof should be taken away, and
have no longer footing, especially in the Temple.

Secondly, Because money is a thing that clingeth close to the heart of man.
The glorious Doctor Saint Chrysostom did weigh this well, in that case of his,
who stole the wedge of gold in the spoils of Jericho. Ioshuah turning himself
toward the Sun and the Moon, he said unto them, Sol contra Gabaon ne
mouearis, and Luna, contra vallem Ayalon. He made likewise a Proclamation,
That none should privily convey away any gold, silver, or other prisall. Achan
lighted on a wedge of gold, took it up, and hid it. Where he observes, That
the Sun and Moon obeying the order and command of this valiant Captain, one
of his own soldiers refused to obey him, and only because the wedge of gold
was wedged too close to his heart. He likewise threw their money about, and
scattered it all abroad, in token, That when the covetous man least thinks on
it, Diuitias quas deuorauerat, euomet, and de ventre eius extrahet illas Deus,
He shall vomit up the riches which he has swallowed, and God shall pluck them
out of his belly. In ancient time they did stamp or ingraue upon their coin
an Ox, a creature that in his feeding goes still backward: which is the
hieroglyphicke or emblem of a covetous man, Prou. 23.
who the more he eats, the more backward he goes; Set not thy eyes nor thy
thoughts upon riches; for when thou least think of it, they shall betake
them to their wings like an Eagle, and shall fly up to heaven. Riches that are
ill gotten, fly up to Gods tribunal seat, and there like so many fiscalls or
busy Attorneys, accuse thee for an unjust possessor of them, and cry out as
loud against thee, as the blood of Abel against his brother Cain.

Old sores requi^e much scraping.
The fourth thing that we may draw from this pattern, is, That a Prince ought
more sharply to correct those abuses and vices which are grown old through
custom; especially those of your great and powerful Ministers, who commit
them without controlement by public authority. God deliver us from those
Ministers who sell that for their private profit, which they are bound to do
gratis out of their Office; and from that Priest which makes sale of the
administration of the Sacraments; from that Confessor that will be soundly paid
for his Absolution; From that Judge that will be bribed before he will do
justice; and from that Secretary that makes suitors come off roundly for their
quicker dispatch. These be things that send many of them quick to hell. The
Pharisees should have kept their Temple clean from all covetousness, have
banished your Merchants banks, and have favored and graced those their
Sacrifices; in stead whereof they sold those beasts that were to be offered,
made money of them, and put the same forth to use and profit, as others did.
Ezech. 22.26.
Sacerdotes eius, contempserunt lege^ meam, and a sabbatis mois ouerterunt
oculos suos, and coinquinabar in medio eorum, The Priests of my Temple have
broken my Law, and have defiled my holy things; They have put no difference
between the holy and profane, neither d^scerned between the unclean and the
clean; and have hid their eyes from my Sabboths, and I am profaned amongst
them. Where I would have you by the way to weigh that same word, coinquinabar.
For the Ministers of a State being thieves, they make their Lord and Master
likewise a thief, thou have made my house a den of thieves, by being thy self
a companion of thieves: According to that of Esaias, Socij furum. And therefore
Christ lasheth them with whips; a sitting punishment for thieves. Saint Jerome
says, That he is a thief, and makes the Church a den of thieves, Qui lucrum
de religione reportat, Who out of the duty of his Ecclesiastical dignity,
makes private gain and profit to himself. Saint Gregory is of the same mind.
And as Theodosius the Emperor said: Quid poterit esse securum, si sanctitas as
incorrupta, corrumpatur? What can be secure, if incorrupted Sanctity shall be
corrupted? Which is all one with that of Job; That a Governor should rob
widows, and devour their houses, being bound to defend and protect them; Job.
24.
that he should strip that poor man naked whom he ought to cloth; this is a
great cruelty. There is a curse that lies upon them that shall lead away the
Ass of the fatherless, and take the widows Ox to pledge, that shall rise
early for a prey, cause the naked to lodge without garment, and without
covering in the cold, and to pluck the fatherless from the breast, etc. It is
so due a debt which Princes owe, to favor, succor, and defend the right of
the poor, of the fatherless, and of the widow, that Cassiodorus in his thirty
nine epistle, says, That it is as needless and superfluous a business to
ask it at his hands, as to sue to that which is heavy to descend downward, or
to that which is light to ascend upward. But Saluianus lamenting the miseries
of his times, complains, That your great and powerful Ministers, in stead of
complying with their obliga^ion, and in stead of favoring and defending their
poor Vassalls, sell them Justice at a dear rate: Verifying that lamentation
of Jeremy, Aquam nostram pecunia bibimus, and ligna nostra praetio
comparauimus, Selling unto them the water of their wells, and a stick of fire
from their hearthes. And would to God they would but sell their water and their
wood, as others use to do at common and ordinary rates; for then there would
something remain to the buyer: but there is a new kind of tyranny now adays,
Sale of offices, the ruin of a Kingdom.
he that sells, wraps and wrings all he can unto him, but returns nothing;
takes all, but gives not a dodkin to the poor: whereas he that buys, gives
all that he has, and receives nothing. And therefore in that Country or
Kingdom where the Great ones are all so generally bad, it is no great wonder,
that Religion, Justice, and whatsoever else belonging to government, should be
sold and set forth to sale. Jeroboam made of the lowest of the people, Priests
of the high places. Who would give most money might consecrate himself, and
be of the Priests of the high places which; thing (as the Text says) turned
unto sin to the house of Jeroboam, even to root it out and destroy it from
the face of the Earth. Simon Magus sought to buy the grace of the holy Ghost:
What his graceless pretension came to I need not tell you, Act. 3.
you knowing already how dear it cost him. The Emperor Justinian said, That
the selling of Justice in a Commonwealth was the utter undoing of it: for why
should not that Judge or Officer rob and steal, who paid so great a sum of
money for his Commission? What would a Thief, an Adulterer, or a Murderer
care, if he knew he might redeem his offense with money? He that buys, must
of force sell; So said Alexander Seu^rus: And therefore he would never consent
(as Lampridius reports it) that any office, at least of Jurisdiction, should
be sold in the Empire. The Priests therefore of the Temple selling the said
oblations, it is not much that our Savior should whip them, and that he
should call them Thieves.

The last thing that a governor may draw from this pattern, is perseverance.
There are many which are (as the Gloss has upon the decretals) Primo fer^ens,
and postea deficiunt, Hot at first, and afterward grow cold. When they are a
little warm in their place, they flagge and fall off, punishing one, and
freeing another, and both unjustly: They wincke at thieves and robbers on the
high way, they cancel Deeds, falsify Records, conceal Writings, alter
Evidences, foist in false indictments, set delinquents at liberty, facilitate
causes, and a thousand the like disorders, to the great detriment and
disauthoritie of Justice. And therefore they make the Crane, the Hieroglyph of
a good Judge, which never changes his plumes, but is all of one and the same
color, both in his youth, and in his age.

Out of this History, I shall infer three or four conclusions.

The first, if the selling of birds, and beasts in the Temple, be so offensive
in the sight of our Lord God: What shall the selling in the Church be, of
benefices and Ecclesiastical dignities? Who although they make no public sale
of them, or open profession of it; yet do these men sell Doves in the Temple,
Qui de impositione manus pretium accipiunt, Hinc enim est, quod sacri Canones
symo^iacam haeresim damnant.

The second, If God so punish this slight respect which is shown to his
Temple, where there was neither the Arc of the Testament, Aarons rod, the pot
of Manna, nor the book of the Law; How will he punish the profaning of that
Temple, where himself is consecrated in the Sacraments of his blessed body and
blood, and where his holy word is preached?

The third, If he be so highly offended with the profaning of a dead Temple;
what will he say to the profaning of that living Temple of thy soul, which he
made choice of for his delight and recreation? Delitia meae, esse cum filijs
hominu^. Origin expounding that place of Exodus Dominus Zelotes nomen ei^^,
says, That there is not any thing that puts more jealousy into Gods bosom,
than that soul which after it has received Baptism, confessed the Faith, and
made a marriage with God by receiving his blessed Sacraments, should afterward
become a whore to the Devil, the World, and the Flesh.

The last, If he did drive out of this earthly Temple, the Merchants and
Priests, in this sharp and severe manner and with such a deal of disgrace;
Apoc. 22.
What will he do when he shall come to cast them out of that glorious Temple
of Heaven, Foris, canes impudici, Out with these dogs. And till they come
thither, Apoc. 22.
the good and bad fishes shall be both together; the chafe and the corn, the
tares and the wheat; the ministers of Christ, and the priests of Beliall. But
then, that powerful voice of the Judge, pronouncing this heavy sentence, Ite
maledicti in ignem aeternum, shall separate the one from the other with an
eternal banishment.

Destroy this Temple, and in three days, I will build it up again. The
turbation of this scourging being ouerpast, the Jews came unto our Savior and
asked him, Quod signum ostendis nobi^* quod haec facis? What sign showest thou
unto us, that thou do these things? The rest of the Evangelists renders it
thus, In qua potestate, haec faci^, By what power or authority, do thou do
these things? Seeming tacitly to grant, that it was ill done, and worse
permitted, that any market should be kept there. But because it did not
appertain unto al to amend those things that are amiss, but to him that has
power and authority so to do, they said to him; Whereby will thou make it
appear unto us, that thou do not usurp another man's office, and meddle
with that which belongs not unto thee? Whereunto our Savior answered, Soluite
Templum hoc, and in tribus diebus excitabo illud. In which words he did
prefigure forth unto them, his Death, and Resurrection. Which were two such
Mysteries, as did most discover all Gods Attributes. Touching his death our
Savior had said already, Si exaltaueritis filium Hominis, cognoscetis quia ego
sum. But they were like blind men, groping against a wall, in this knowledge of
his person. And therefore he said unto them; When ye shall have lifted me up
upon the Cross, ye shall then know, Quis ego sum, Who I am. Which ego sum, is
a blazon, only belonging unto God: and this the Cross did discover. Zacheus
clambered up upon a tree, that he might see our Savior Christ, as well in
regard that he could not come near unto him for the prease of the people, the
throng was so great; as also by reason that he was but a little man, and of a
low stature. Whereupon Origin gives this note, That there are not any Giants in
the world, no not the tallest of them all, but are Pigmies and dwarfes when
they come to look God in the face; and must be feign to clamber up to those
fair goodly trees of the virtues, and to the top bough of perfection; which
will cost us a great deal of trouble and labor, before we can get up so high.
And therefore our Savior Christ to save us so much pains, and that we
maywith greater ease come unto him, he says, Exaltate, etc. Put me up upon the
Cross, and not only you, that boast your selves of Learning, and Religion,
but the ruder rabble, those soldiers that whipped me, and those that did
execution upon my body shall come to know me. And this shall be your
Cognoscetis quia ego sum.

These words, Vidimus gloriam eius, gloriam quasi vnigeniti a patre, We have
seen his glory as the glory of the only begotten of the Father. Saint
Chrysostom declares them of his death; for then he showed himself of what
house he came, and whose son he was. Saint Paul says, If they had known what
they had done, they would never have crucified the Lord of Glory. Where
Chrysostom observes, That in a gallant season they called him the Lord of
Glory, having never before showed himself such a glorious Lord, as then: His
arms stretched out upon the Cross, were those two spreading wings wherewith
he flew up to Heaven; and under which he did clock and defend us here upon
Earth from the rapine of the Devil, as the Hen does her Chickins from the
Kyte. S. Jerome, and Hugo Cardinalis, allege upon this occasion that verse of
David, Et sub pennis eius sperabis. As also that place of Malachie, Orietur
vobis sol Iustitiae, and sanitas in pennis eius. And the Sun pulled in his
head as well for shame as sorrow, when he saw another Sun to appear, that
was greater than himself, whose beams spread abroad salvation to the whole
World. The Title of the fourth Psalm is, Pro sanguinolento, For the bloody
man. Another letter has it, Danti aternitatem, To the gi^er of eternity; The
one agreeing well with the other, for that Sanguinolentus, to wit, our Savior
that suffered for us upon the Cross, and there shed his blood for the
Remission of our sins, was that which did dare nobis aeter^itatem, gi^e us
eternity.

His Resurrection, Saint Chrysostom declares in these words, Qui
praedestinatus est filius Dei, ex resurrectione mortuorum, Another letter has
it, Qui declaratus est: this following afterward upon the neck of it, Soluite
templum hoc, etc. Where it is noted by Saint Cyril, That our Savior did not
command them to destroy his body, but did thereby advise them, what they
would do unto him; Ye shall destroy the Temple of my body, and I will build
it up again the third day, and this shall be a manifest, a certain, and a
sure sign unto you. Other his Miracles, though they were signs sufficient
enough, yet were they not so effectual, because by those other, the converted
were but few; but in the Resurrection, they were without number, Act. 2.3.4.5.
as it appears out of the Acts.

Our Savior Christ's answer was somewhat of the darkest to their clouded
understanding. And albeit they drew from thence a different sense and contrary
meaning, yet might it serve as a sign unto them, that he was able to do that
which he did. And they that would deny, that he could destroy the Temple, and
build it up again in three days, which was but a material Temple; would more
stiffly deny, that he could dye, and rise again the third day, by his own
virtue and power. Saint Matthew accuses these men to be false witnesses. Hic
dixit, (which was the Jews accusation) Possum destruere Templum Dei.

First; because they did wrest the sense and true meaning of our Savior.

Secondly; because they did alter and change the words.

Thirdly; because their proceeding against him was malicious.

Whence I may read this lesson to your Lawyers, your Registers, and your
Scriueners, That one Tilde, or Tittle, may condemn them of falsehood. When our
Savior Christ said of Saint John, Si cum volo manner donec veniam, quid hoc ad
te? John. 21.
If I will that he tarry till I come, (when Peter was so inquisitiue of him,
what should become of the Disciple whom he loved, and leaned in his bosom)
what is it to thee? Do thou follow me. Then went this word straight amongst
the brethren, That this Disciple should not dye. But the Evangelist did correct
this their mistake, For Jesus said not to him, He shall not dye; But if I will
that he tarry till I come, Job. 6. Job. 11*
what is that to thee? Job said, Ye shall not find iniquity in my tongue. But
Zophar, one of his friends laid it to his charge; Dixisti enim, Purus est sermo
m^^^, and mundus sum in conspectu tuo, For thou have said, My doctrine is pure,
and I am clean in thine eyes. And albeit it may seem, that he charged him
herewith upon his own confession, yet Saint Gregory gives it for a calumny
and slander, because Zophar had altered and changed his words. God make us so
pure both in Doctrine and life, that when this Temple of our bodies shall be
destroyed, it may by the mercy of our Savior Jesus Christ be raised again.

THE XXVII. SERMON, UPON THE TVESDAY AFTER THE FOVRTH SUNDAY IN LENT.
JOHN 7.14. Iam die festo mediante, etc.

Now when the Feast was half done, Jesus went up into the Temple and taught,
etc.


Seven continued days one after another, the Feast of the Tabernacles was
celebrated in the chief city Jerusalem, which was one of the three principal
Passeouers of the Jews: solemnising the same in remembrance of that benefit
which God did to that People, in leading them forty years through the Desert,
Leuit. 25.
not having any house wherein to dwell, and yet not wanting tents or booths
wherein to lodge themselves. To this Feast came all of all sorts, from all
parts of the land of Promise, building themselves Cabbins in the fields.
Josephus says, That they used Tents, from whence they went to the Temple, and
performed their Offerings for their families, according to their ability.
Christ came on the Tuesday to this Solemnity: of this opinion is Saint
Augustine; though some others are of the mind, that he came thither at the
very beginning of the Feast, though he did not make himself known till he
saw a more convenient time. He preached to the People; and so deep was his
Doctrine, that the Jews wondering thereat, said one to another, Quomodo hic
literas scit, cum non ded scerit? How knows this man the Scriptures, seeing
that he never learned? And howbeit this their voice of admiration was secret,
and whispered in the ear from one to another, yet Christ made answer thereunto
in public, showing therein the pledges and tokens of his Divinity; saying
openly unto them, My Doctrine is not mine, but his that sent me: He that shall
truly endeavor to do his will, shall know it is his; but he that preaches
his own proper doctrine, seeks after his own honor and commendation; but he
that preaches Gods Doctrine, can neither lie nor offend therein. The Jews did
lay a double slander upon him:

The one, Seducit turbas, He seduceth the People.

The other, Sabbathum non custodit, He keeps not the Sabbath.

But this his answer gives a blur to them both: Moses (says he) gave you a
Law, and yet none of you keeps the Law, Why go ye then about to kill me? For
ever since that he cured him that lay so long at the Fish-poole, they sought
after his life. In a word, this muttering and whispering of theirs tended only
to the apprehending of him; but not any one of them dur^^ ^y hands upon him,
because his hour was not yet come, and many of the People being won by his
miracles and his doctrine, believed in him.

Jesus went up into the Temple, and taught, etc. One of the greatest benefits
which the world received by our Saviors coming, was, That he reading in
Heavens Chair, to so wise and discreet a company, who by only reading in the
book of his Essence, were instructed in all kind of truth; did not for all
this disdain to become a Schoolmaster to little children here upon earth,
accommodating the profoundnesse of his deep learning, to our rude and weak
capacity; accomplishing that of Saint John, Erunt omnes docibiles Dei, They
shall be all taught of God. Ioh. 6.40.
And this may be verified of those Angels and blessed Saints that are in
Heaven, and of those faithful ones that are upon earth: for the very self
same truths he taught them in the Temple of his glory, which he did these
other in his Church; only differenced in this, That they see them, and we
believe them. Many Doctors have sat and read in their Chair here upon earth,
but because they drank not of the water of his Doctrine in this School, but
in the du^tie puddles of lies and falsehoods, Job 13.
they were, as Job says, The farmers of lies, and the followers of perverse
opinions. And as there are Artisans for Idols, which carue them, guild them,
and adore them; so are there Artisans of lies and false opinions, which frame
them, set them forth with painted eloquence, and adore them, as if they should
guide them to the end of their happiness.

He taught. The Evangelist does not here set down the Theme of his Sermon:
Wisd. cap. 8.
but in the Chapter of Wisdom Solomon says, She teaches soberness and
prudence, righteousness and strength, which are the most profitable things that
men can have in this life. Christ's doctrine pleasing and profitable
Two things the Scripture does every foot repeat of this celestial Doctor:

The one, The profitablenesse of his Doctrine, Ego Dominus doce^s vtilia, so
says Esaias, I am the Lord thy God, which teach thee to profit, and lead thee by
the way that thou should go. Esaias 48.17. Job. 8.
And Saint John says, Verba quae loquor, spiritus and vita sunt, The words
which I speak are spirit and life.

The other, The elegancie and sweetness of his delivery, Diffusa est gratia
in labijs tuis; such heavenly dew did drop from his lips, and diffuse it self
in that abundant and plentiful manner. Which graces of his poured forth thus
gracefully, Cant. 5.13.
the Spouse touches upon in the Canticles, His lips are like Lillies dropping
down pure myrrh. In the Lillies is painted forth our Saviors beauty; in the
Myrrh, the profit we reap from him, which is very great; Myrrh being a
principal preservative against corruption.

Mirabuntur omnes.
Wisdom despised of none but fools.
They all meruailed, etc. S. Chrysostom and Saint Cyril are of the mind, That
this admiration was amongst those that were the most incredulous of all that
company. It is an ordinary thing in your hearers, when they hear a famous
Preacher, to admire him, acknowledging his Doctrine to be so deep, that it
exceeds man's capacity: for Wisdom is so superexcellent and so divine a
thing, that in whomsoever it is found, it causes great admiration; Things high
and eminent shall not be so much as mentioned in comparison of her, Job 28.
Prou. 3.
so says Job. And Solomon, It is to be preferred before all riches. Every man
does prise and esteem it save the Fool: he that is most wise, does most
honor the Wise; but he that is a Fool, makes little reckoning of those that
are wise. Fools hate knowledge. Prou. 1.
Homer styles wise Apollo, a god multarum manuum, of many hands, because he
has a hand in every thing; a hand for to lighten the blind understanding, a
hand for to guide the soul in the way of virtue; a hand for to govern the
Commonwealth, and to appease the tumults and rebellions rising therein; a hand
to conserve the same in peace. In a word, as Apollo, who is the Sun, by
expatiating and spreading abroad his beams through diverse parts both of sea
and land, gives a being and a life to all things; to mettalls in the veins of
the earth, to pearls in the shells of the sea, to trees, plants, birds, beasts,
men, etc. so a wiseman is Vita generalis reipublicae, The general life and
liuelihood of a Commonwealth. Themistius calls him Deum, a God. Horace, Rex
Regum, a King of Kings, etc. And if any man shall say with Saint Paul, Scientia
inflat, 1. Cor. 8.
That Knowledge and Wisdom puffs up, and affoords matter unto man of pride
and arrogancy; Clemens Alexandrinus answers thereunto, That the word Inflat
does likewise enforce, that it does breath and inspire into us noble and
generous thoughts. Filijs suis vitam inspirat, says Ecclesiasticus: The Greek
Text renders it, Exaltat, Euebit. Eccl. 4.
Wisdom exalts her children, it gives them a new kind of Being, new
hearts, new resolutions, to undergo glorious enterprises: In a word, Qui illam
diligit, diligit vitam, He that loves her, loves his l^fe. So that if it be an
occasion of arrogancy, it is not so in it self, but by accident, when it
lights on an insolent breast, which conuerts good into evil. Your Kings and
Princes have in all ages honored wise men with great titles and preferments;
and not only your wise and prudent Princes, but those of meaner parts and
abilities, and even your worser sort of Kings. Dionisius the Tyrant sent to
Plato (that he might come to see him) one of his fairest Galleys, with store of
dainty provision, and well accompanied; and at the Haven where he was to land,
had provided a Coach with four horses to be ready to receive him, that he
might come in the greater pomp to his Palace: and all this honor he was
willing to do him, for that he was a wise man. And if such men as he should
cause such admiration in the world, What admiration must he raise in men's
minds, in whom all the treasures of Gods wisdom were deposited? Whence we may
consider, that if a few drops of that sovereign fountain did strike the
People into such admiration; when in Heaven we shall see the fullness of that
river, or rather immensitie of that great sea, What admiration must it needs
move? Yet notwithstanding Saint Augustine says, Mirabantur omnes, sed non
omnes conuertebantur, They were wonder-strucken, but not spirit-strucken; many
did admire, but few were converted. The like success for the most part have
the Sermons of your famous Preachers: Ezechiel reports, That it fell out so
with himself; That morning (says he) that he was to preach, the citisens
would call to one another saying, Let us go and hear the Prophet, let us see
what new thing will now come from him: they enter in thronging, sit them down,
bear themselves very gravely, and hearken diligently to my words, but are
far off from putting them in execution, being only unto them like a smooth
verse, or a musical Song, with a sweet and pleasing eire; nor was there any,
of that harsh ear, who will not one while commend the voice, another while the
tone; this man, the dittie; that, it is air; but go not a step further,
setting up their rest there. Music passes along by the door at midnight, it
wakens thee, thou ^isest out of thy bed, thou gettest to the window, thou
hear it, thou take delight in it; but when it is gone out of thy hearing,
thou returnest back again to bed, layest thee down, and fall'st again
asleep, as if thou had heard no such thing at all. Leuani oculos meos (says
Zachary) I turned me, Zachar. 5.
and lifted up mine eyes, and looked; and behold a flying book. Then said he
unto me: This is the curse that goes forth over the whole earth. Sa^nt
Gregory says, That this book is the sacred Scripture, wherein (as Lyra notes
it) are written the curses and chastisements against the ^infull men of this
world. A flying book. When there does appear in the air any new strange
sight, the Vulgar, he wonders at it; the wise man, he is afraid of it; because
it is a usual prognostication of miseries and disasters. As those fearful
fightings that were seen in the air in the time of the Maccabees, your
Comets, your Crucifixes of fire, and your showers of blood. The like effect
does Gods word work, Some stand wondering at it, and some grow sad upon it. The
Seventy translates it: Vidi falcem volantem, I saw a flying sickle; Which (as
Pierius notes) signifies the time of Harvest. Mitte jam falces, qu^^iam
maturae sunt messes, Thrust in your sickles, for the harvest is ripe. In token,
that when the word of God, and the malediction in holy Scripture comes to be
little or nothing at all regarded, and when the earth in stead of corn, brings
forth nothing but thistles and thorns, James 1.
it is high time to cut it down. Saint James compares the word of the Lord to
a looking-glass. And Saint Bernard calls it the Looking-glass of Truth, which
nor flatters, nor deceives any man: But he that shall look therein, shall
find himself to be the same he seems. Saint A^gustine has in a manner the
very same. In a looking glass, one beholds the gray hayres on his head, and
the wrinckles that are in his face, and when he has turned his eye off from
thence, the figure thereof is blotted out of his remembrance. Another, he
looks (especially if he have not seen himself a long time in a glass) and
wonders at himself, he knits the brows and cries out, I am grown old and
weak, and drawing near to my grave, Quod senescit, prope interitum est; He
that is old, has one foot in the grave. And therefore he had need make good
provision, being so soon to go his journey. But he that shall set before him
(as a glass) the Law of perfect liberty, as one, who with a great deal of
heed viewes a deep pit, or some remote place, This man shall be happy in so
doing.

How knows this man the Scriptures, seeing that he never learned? Learning is
not gotten without labo^
The admiration of the people was increased, by their considering with
themselves, That our Savior Christ had never been brought up in any
University, nor had cracked so much as an argument in the Schools, especially
in matter of learning. And as it is in the Proverb, Nunca mucho, costo poco,
Much is never got with a little; Eccl. 1.
That is to say, Qui addit scientiam, addit laborem, All things are full of
labor. In the multitude of wisdom, is much grief; and he that increases
knowledge, increases sorrow. That is; it cannot be come by without great
pain of body and mind. Or, as Aquila translates it; Addit tormentum. Holy Job
asks the question, Vbi inuenitur sapientia? Where is wisdom to be found? And
the first conclusion is, Non inuenitur in terra suauiter viuentium, It is never
to be found amongst those that are enemies to labor. Solomon says in his
Proverbs, That it must be got as we get treasure, dig and delue for it. There
was never in this world any famous man in learning, Prou. 2.
who had not studied very hard, and taken a great deal of pains. Vt
thesaurus, effoderis ^am, t^nc intelliges. Plutarch reports of Plat^, That he
never excused any trouble of body, or of mind. And of Demosthenes, That he
would Scotch and notch his hair crosse-wayes, that he might keep in for
three months together, and follow his study. All your great Philosophers did
break their brains, and dyed in traveling after the search of knowledge. The
solitudes of a Saint Jerome, the caves of other Saints and Doctors make this
truth clear. Antiquity celebrating Saturn for an inuenter of learning, put
in his hands (as Tertullia^ notes it unto us) a picke-axe, in token of the
great pains that he must take, that means to be a good scholar. Minerua,
Goddess of the Sciences, they painted close by Vulcan, who with an axe did
cleave her head in twain; signifying thereby, That to fetch out truths, and
to make them appear plain and clear, it will cost us either our life, o^ the
beating of our brains. Of the Lacedaemonians Valerius reports, That they had
a Statue of Apollo that had four ears, and four hands; signifying thereby,
That wisdom is got by much hearing, and much labor. They looking therefore
on the learning of our Savior Jesus Christ, so divine on the one side, and so
without any labor or pains on the other, it was not much, that they should
thus admire him.

Again: A strange effect, when the cause is secret and hid, it evermore
causes admiration. If the Sun should show his face on the sudden, Admiration
usually the child of ignorance.
and his beams break out in the midst of a dark night, it would cause great
fear. The Sun does still enjoy an equal light, though to the ignorant it
seem, that it shines brightest at midday. The light and splendor of Jesus
Christ our Lord and Savior that Sun of righteousness, was always one and the
same; but because he was a free Sun, and not tide, as that other, to a set
course, discovering his beams when he thought best, with a Lux in tenebris
lucet, he struck all the standers by with amazement and confusion, wondering
who this should be, and saying one to another; V^de hic literas scit, cum non
didicerit? How knows this man the Scriptures, seeing he never learned?

And this admiration is the more augmented by that which the glorious
Evangelists Saint Matthew and Saint Mark mention, Scandalizabantur in ^o, They
were offended thereat. Their indignation being greater than their admiration,
envy working more upon them, than the grace that was offered them; remaining
only thereat astonished, as men that are surprised with some sudden or
unexpected accident: Suting well with that which Saint Chrysostom and Saint
Cyril says of them; to wit, Mat. 13. Mark 9*
That these were those incredulous and unbelieving people. Whence has he all
these things? Is he not the Son of a Carpenter? and is not his mother called
Mary, etc. Whence it follows in all probability, that they had ripped up his
course of life, and made a strict examination of him from his childhood, his
youth, and better grown years; concluding all of them in the end, That he had
spent his time in helping Joseph in his trade, 2. Tem. 2. Deuteronomy. 29.
and not in applying himself to learning; stiling Learning the wisdom of
divine mysteries. The holy Apostle Saint Paul says to his Disciple Timothy,
Quia ab infantia sacras literas nosti. And in the 29. chapter of Deuteronomy. it
appears, That amongst the Hebrews, there were some that professed the teaching
of this kind of learning, which was the Grammatical and Historical sense of
the sacred books, which did dispose them to other things of greater moment,
and to mysteries of a higher and deeper nature. Epiphanius says, That they
were expounders of the Grammar, and were therefore called Grammatis S^ribae.
Being therefore grounded and confirmed in this their opinion, That he had not
learned their first rudiments and principles; they said, (wondering with
themselves) Vnde hic literas scit? Whence has this man his learning?

But all this made the worse for them, and their proceeding appears still
fouler and fouler.

First of all in this: O ye Jews (says Chrysologus) ye do not wonder, that a
Virgin should bring forth, that God apparelled in humane flesh, should treat
and converse with you, (as it is prophesied by Bar^ch) nor, that the blind
should see, the deaf hear, the dumb speak, the lame walk, the dead rise,
the Devils tremble: And do you wonder that he should show himself thus
learned, having not learned? you admire that which ought least to be wondered
at, and are vndmindfull of that which ought most to be meruailed at.

Secondly, It was a foul fault in them, to see such singular learning,
accompanied with so unblameable a life; and such strange miracles, and that
they should not once think that this was from Heaven. Especially they knowing,
that Adam, and Solomon, did enjoy this blessing. Of Salomons wisdom, and
whence he had it, 3 Reg. 5. 2. Chron. 2.
the History of the Kings, and that of the Chronicles, delivers the same
unto us: and of Adam the Schoolmen do affirm, That he could hardly have given
all things their proper names, (as Saint Chrysostom has observed it) if God
had not infused that knowledge into him, to call them after that fitting and
convenient manner. And this knowledge was communicated to Christ even from the
very instant of his conception; by means whereof he saw all things in their
proper species, besides that blessed knowledge whereby he saw them in God, as
in a glass. John 3.34.
Of this infused knowledge Saint John says, God gave not the spirit by measure
unto him; but it was without limitation: for he that is son and heir to his
father, is not to be stinted as those that are servants. And therefore it is
said, The Spirit of the Lord shall rest upon him; the spirit of wisdom and
understanding, the spirit of council and might, the spirit of knowledge, etc.
This infused knowledge was settled in others by fits, not in all times and all
places, nor so generally in all things, as in our Savior Christ, from whom it
sprouted as water from a Fountain. That fountain of the Rock, struck by the
Rod of Moses, it had been a foul sin in the Israelites to have searched
into the veins of Nature, whence these waters gushed out, and not to think on
Gods grace, from whence this favor flowed: And no less absurd was it in the
Jews, to seek in the Schools and Universities, after those veins of living
water, of that divine learning of our Savior Christ, which was that true
rock; and not to direct their eyes toward God, who is the true giver of
knowledge.

Lastly, It was a foul fault in them, to think that God is tied to humane
means, 1. Reg. ^.
knowing quod Deus scientiarum Dominus est, That God is the Lord of sciences,
and that it was the Holy Ghost that taught and instruucted those the Prophets,
taking one from following the herds of Kyne and Oxen* and another from keeping
of Sheep. Amos 1.
Non sum Phopheta, (says Amos of himself) I am not a Prophet, nor the son
of a Prophet, but a Heardsman of Tekoah. And of David it is said, That he took
him from the Sheepefold, following the Ewes with young. He indewed Daniel being
a child, with wisdom: and Joseph with understanding to declare King Pharaohs
dream. Nor was it needful for him to draw these men out of the Schools of
Athens, nor to take them from forth the Universities of Greece, etc. As soon
as ever our Lord God had discovered to the glorious Apostle Saint Paul the
beams of his light, he presently departed to Arabia and to Damascus to preach
the Gospel: he might have gone first to Jerusalem to take acquaintance of
those other Apostles of more ancient standing, and to confer with them what
he should preach: but this did not seem unto him a convenient means to credit
his Doctrine. Nec veni Hierosolimam ad Antecessores meos; to the end that the
Gentiles might not presume, that this his Doctrine was of the earth, Gal. 1.
and not of Heaven, as afterward he told the Galathians; The Gospel which was
preached by me, is not afterman, neither did I receive it of man, neither was I
taught it but by the revelation of Jesus Christ. And the Ephesians, What I
received from the Lord, I delivered unto you. But because the Jews did surpass
all the world in passion and malice, they did attribute all to the Devil, whom
the Gentiles had made their god.

My Doctrine is not mine, etc. The Commentators make three expositions upon
this place, My Doctrine is not mine, but I have received it from my father. The
Doctrine of the Father and of the Son, as he is God, is one and the same, as
is their essence; nor is there any other difference more, than that he has
received it from the Father: but as he is man, it is in it self diverse, as is
their nature; because it is an accident and an infused habit, though the truth
thereof in both, is one and the same. Saint Ambrose and Saint Augustine expound
this saying of our Savior, as he is man; and that this Doctrine of his, was not
his, but of his father that sent him abroad to preach and publish it to the
World. And the same Saint Augustine in some other places delivers it of
Christ, as he was God; but affirms in the end, That it may be interpreted
either way. Saint Cyril and Saint Chrysostom declare this of Christ, as he is
God: but which way soever you take, either sense does signify, That Christ is
the Son of God.

The second Exposition is, My Doctrine is not mine, that is, It is not only
mine, but his that sent me. And this sense and meaning is founded upon many
places of Scripture; wherein this Negative Non, is the same with Non solum, Not
only. As for example, It is not ye that speak, Mat. 10.20.
but the spirit of the father which speaks in you, (i.) Not you alone, but
the spirit of the Father. Again, John 5.45.
Do not think that I alone will accuse you to the Father, there is another
also that accuses you, even Moses, in whom ye trust, because ye believe not
that which he wrote of me: that is, He does not only believe in me. Thirdly,
He that believes in me, does not believe in me, John. 12. Marc 9.37. 1. Cor.
15.10.
but in him that sent me. In the fourth place, Whosoever shall receive me,
receives not me, but him that sent me; That is, Not only me. Lastly, I
labored more abundantly than them all, yet not I, but the grace of Godwhich
was with me.

The third, It is not mine, nor did I invent it, nor is it the Doctrine of men,
but of God. Many Philosophers have out of an ouerweening conceit, gone a
wandering, and invented new sects and strange Doctrines, that they might have
the honor to be accounted authors of novelties; answerable to that which God
said of certain false Prophets, They speak a vision of their own heart, and
not out of the mouth of the Lord: Woe unto the foolish Prophets, that follow
their own spirit, Ier. 23.15. Ezech. 13.3.
and have seen nothing. And it is Antichrist that shall be called, Pater
errorum, The father of errors.

Our Savior Christ teaches us here two things:

The one, That God is the Fountain of Wisdom; and that as the Earth cannot
yield it is fruit without water from Heaven, so the heart of man cannot afford
any fruit without the Doctrine of God. Concrescat vt plunia doctrina mea, fl^at
vt ros eloquium meum. The Husband in the Canticles was willing to insinuate as
much, when he compared the breasts of his Spouse to two little Kids, Cant. 4.
Duo vbera tua sicut duo hinnuli Caprae, Thy two breasts are like two young Kids
that are twins, which feed among the Lillies, pouring forth in due season their
milk unto us in a plentiful manner. Some Commentators understand by these two
breasts, the two Testaments, which like two breasts spring abundantly,
communicating unto us the milk of their Doctrine.

The other, That every one ought to acknowledge and confess, That whatsoever
good he enjoys, is of God* The Rivers return again unto the place from
whence they come. The rivers of our good do flow from that immense Sea, by
love, and are to return by thanks; Vt iterum fluant, That they may flow
again, and never grow dry. And this may prove as a general rule, and
approved truth, in all those blessings that befall us. But more particularly
ought we to acknowledge the same, that are Preachers of Gods word; for he that
praises himself, and priseth his own worth, (this is my opinion) cannot hope
for any fruit of his labors; 1. Co^. ^.7.
Neither is he that planteth, any thing; neither he that watreth; but God,
that gives the increase. That Gardner is a fool or a mad man, that does
attribute to his dib, to the water of his Well, to the labor of his hands, and
the sweat of his brows, the flowers and fruits of his garden; it is not thou,
nor thy pains, but Heaven that gives thee all that thou have. What have thou
that thou did not receive? 1. Cor. 4.7. 1. Cor. 8.2.
And in the eighth Chapter he says, Qui puta^ se aliquid scire, nond^m
cognouit quemadmodum oporteat scire, If any man think that he knows any
thing, he knows nothing yet as he ought to know. Aristotle first puts
down Mod^m, and then Scientiam; the means first, and the knowledge
afterward. And the Apostle says, That he that presumes that he knows, is not
yet come to the means of knowing; Thinking themselves wise, they are become
fools. The wisest men have evermore been the meekest and the humblest; in
Saint Augustine, humility and wisdom suited so well together, that no man was
able to judge which was the greater. Solomon said of himself, Surely I am more
brutish than any man, and have not the understanding of a man: Prou. ^0.2.
and the reason of this acknowledgment is, for that if a man look well into
himself, the wisest that is will hold himself a fool. We are not sufficient
of our selves to think so much as a good thought; but if a man look once into
God, he will acknowledge all to be from God. Saint Augustine com^ares him that
preaches, to the Sowers seed-leape; and as the seed-leape has not whereof to
boast of the sheafes of Corn, nor of those mowes of wheat that are stor^d up
in the barn; no more has the Preacher for carrying Gods Word in his mouth.
Quis credet (says Esaias) auditui nostro? Saint Chrysostom says, That he
confessed, that what he preached was not of himself, but of God; Oliuam
vberem, pul^hram, speciosam, fructiferam, vocauit Dominus nomen tuum, ad vocem
loquelae grandis exarsit ignis in ea, and combusta sunt fruteta eius. Saint
Gregory says, That this fat, fair, and fruitful Olive, is a fair and
fruitful Preacher; fruitful, for the fruit of his works; and fair, for the
elegancie and force of his words; but feeble and weak in regard of his
flatteries, which are that great voycewhich sets on fire, burns, and
destroys the fruit. We will magnify and ex^oll our own tongues. A Preacher
should never boast of his parts.
There are some kind of Preachers who thank their tongue for their preferment;
God-a-mercie tongue, it is that that has got me this my honor; it is that
that has raised me to such high place; nor am I to serve or magnify any other
Lord or Master, than this. Nolite loqui sublimia gloriantes. Saint Chrysostom
says, That Vainglory is that moath that fretteth and consumes the
sublimest and highest things: And therefore, Nolite loqui sublimia gloriantes.
Saint Augustine says, That he that preaches in a high strain, and flies
through the thickest clouds, and highest mysteries of Divinity, had need of
the jesses of Humility, lest through vainglory soaring too high, he scortch
his wings, and like Phaeton come tumbling down. The eyes of the Spouse, her
Beloved compares to the eyes of a Dove: For amongst all other Birds, the Dove
lifts up her eyes unto Heaven when she feeds, The Dove of all Fowls the most
thankful
as if she did give God thanks for the good she receives: and ever since that
she returned with a green Olive branch in her mouth, to Noah's Arc, she has
been taken for a thankful Bird; as on the contrary, the Crow is held to be
an unthankful Carrion. Of this thankfulness or grateful acknowledgement,
there are many symboles or emblems in humane Authors; as in the Sunne-Dyall,
with all the hours specified therein by distinct figures, with a hand poynting
out this Letter unto us, In vmbra desino; that is to say, To the Sun do I
owe my motion and being. As likewise in the Shell full of pearl, lying open
to the Sun and the dew of Heaven, with this word or motto, Rore Diuino, that
is, By the help and favor of the Sun of Righteousness; for without this
divine dew, there is no virtue in our selves. As also that of the Olive amidst
the craggie cliffes, without rooting or moisture, with this wreath coming out
of it, A Coelo, My happiness is from Heaven. Seneca says, That he that
acknowledges a debt by words, which he cannot satisfy by deeds, has paid
what he owes: And Cicero renders the reason thereof, It is not all one (says
he) to pay the debt of a benefit received, as that of money; for this is not
paid till the money be restored: but he that does acknowledge a benefit, and
confesses a kindness, being not otherwise able to make satisfaction, has
already made repayment. Of this kind are the favors conferred by Kings, which
we can no otherwise requite, than by our serving and magnifying of them. And
therefore much more those that come from God, from whose free hand we receive
whatsoever good we enjoy; nor are we able to repay it in the same money, but by
our serving him, and magnifying his holy Name: According to that of David,
Sacrificium laudis, etc. I will offer to thee the sacrifice of thankesgi^ing,
and will call upon the name of the Lord; and will pay my vows unto him in the
presence of all his People; in the Courts of the Lords House, and in the midst
of thee, o Jerusalem, will I praise the Lord.

If any man shall do his will, he shall know of the Doctrine, etc. Your
damnable Will is the occasion of your miserable blindness; if ye would but
do the will of my Father, you would then know that my Doctrine is his. In
humane speculatiue sciences, the Understanding goes before the Will; but in
that knowledge which the Divines call Mystical, which is the wisdom of
Heaven, the Will is first: And therefore Saint Augustine says, That the
knowing of a Doctrine, is the reward as it were of believing it; Understanding
is the reward of Faith, if thou understand not, believe. And Esaias, Unless
ye believe, ye shall not understand. It is the privilege of the deepest
mysteries of our Faith, to believe them before we know them: He that loves
truth (says Saint John) comes to the light. Our Savior Christ did not so
much endeavor to have us to understand, as to believe. John. 3.
This is the work of God, that ye believe on him whom he has sent. John. 6.
In Heaven our happiness consists in seeing; but on earth, in believing. Taste
and see how gracious the Lord is, Earthly food is first seen; after the sight,
follows the taste: The woman saw that the fruit was pleasant to the eye;
whereupon she took of the Fruit, and did eat. Here the sight did precede the
taste, but in Heaven we first taste, and afterward see; there the taste
precedes the sight: and in my opinion, Saint Chrysostom and Saint Cyril do
not differ much from this sense, being that they make bonam voluntatem,
dispositionem intellectus, the goodness of the Will, to be the disposition to
the understanding: but a depraved Will is like unto an infirm eye, which
through it is indisposition does not see the light. The places of Scripture
which confirm this Doctrine, are without number. Ecclesiasticus says, More
truths will one holy soul sometimes declare, than many unholy Doctors and
Philosophers, which wander out of the way, and wear out their eyebrows in
search thereof. Intellectus onus omnibus facientibus eum, Understanding is a
burden to all that d^e it. Gregory Nazianzen has noted, That the Prophet did
not say, Gods word the truest wisdom.
Praedicantibus eum, To them that preach it; but Facientibus, To them that do
it: I understood thy commandment, and therefore hated the way of Iniquity.
The second part is a cause of the first; because I did abhor all the ways of
wickedness, I attained to so much knowledge of thy Law: I am wiser than the
Aged, Psalm. 119.
because I have sought thy Commandments. Solomon says, My son seek after
wisdom, observe righteousness, and the Lord will show it unto thee. Job.
Behold, the fear of the Lord is wisdom, Hos^a 10.
and to turn back from evil is understanding. Osee. Sow to your selves in
righteousness, etc. according to the translation of the Seventy. Saint John
says, John 8.
If ye shall abide in my Word, ye shall know my will. Esaias. To whom shall
God teach his wisdom? To whom shall his Doctrine be revealed? Shall it
happily be to those that are weaned from his milk? To those that have Aloes
on their nipples? or to those that when the Prophet shall command them
something on his part, shall answer, Manda, remanda, expecta, re-expecta; What
does the Preacher mean to grind us in this manner, and to repeat so often unto
us, Haec mandat Dominus? etc. All these places prove that conclusion of the
first chapter of Wisdom, In maleuolam anim^m, non introiuit sapientia. Saint
Augustine says, That the two sisters Leah and Rachael, represented this order.
First, fruitful Leah was married, representing the fruit of good works; next,
beautiful Rachael, representing the fairness of wisdom and knowledge. In
the right erudition of man, the labor of operating those things that are
right, are preferred before the will of understanding those that are true. And
Saint Bernard persuading a friend of his to this truth, speaks thus unto him,
Experto creed citius illum sequendo, quam legendo consequipossis, and aliquia
magis inuenies in syluis, quam in libris; Believe me who am experienced herein,
that thou shall sooner come unto him by following, than by reading him; and
shall meet with something more amidst the Woods, than thy books. The shadie
trees, and the solitary Rocks will thoroughly instruct thee in that, which
many learned tutors are not able to teach thee.

Then said some of them of Jerusalem, Is not this he whom they go about to
kill? And behold, he speaks openly, etc. This place expresses the Empire,
the security, and liberty of Gods word. And this is specified in that
commission which God gave unto Jeremy, Ierem 1.10.
when he nominated him to be his Preacher, Behold, I have set thee over the
nations, and over the kingdoms, to pluck up, and to root out, and to d^stroy,
and throw down, to build, and to plant. This general power was granted unto
him, with a non obstante, no man could put him by it. Notable to this purpose,
is that History of Moses with Pharaoh; On the one side, we are to consider
the great interest wherewith he went unto the King, about the liberty of the
Hebrew people, being so much inslaued, inthralled, and so sorely taxed beyond
all right and reason: On the other side, so many scourges, so many plagues, so
much fear, and so much death; and yet notwithstanding he durst not cause him
to be apprehended, nor to be put to death, nor had not the power to touch upon
that thought. And questionless the reason thereof was, that he acknowledged a
superior power proceeding from Gods Word, which Moses did ever and anon repeat
unto him, Cant. 1.8.
Haec dicit Dominus, Thus says the Lord: I have compared thee o my Love, to
the troops of horses in the Chariots of Pharaoh. Rupertus says, That all Gods
Cauallerie against the power of Pharaoh, was only Moses Rod; this made that
great King turn coward; this struck a terror into him, made his heart to
tremble within him, and maugre his greatness to acknowledge God. The Beloved
says then to his love, As that Rod was Gods Army, wherewith like a Potters
Vessel, he brake that King and all his Host in pieces; so thy Army, o my
Church, shall be my Word, which shall be as it were another Moses Rod, against
those that shall withstand it. Virgam vigilantem ego video, I see a waking Rod,
says Jeremy: And God answers thereunto, Been vidisti, quia ego vigilabo super
verbum meum, Thou have well seen, for I will watch over my Word. Saint Paul
puts it to the question, What will ye? Shall I come unto you with a rod, or in
love, and in the spirit of meekness? And no less worthy the observation is
that History of Amos, There was a false Prophet called Amaziah, an Idol
Priest, whom Ier^boam had placed in Bethell, who could by no means endure
Amos; Amos. 7.
whether it were because he swayed much among the people, or for that by his
Sermons (as Saint Hierome has noted it) he had withdrawn the People from
those sacrifices wherein Amaziah was interessed; he labored with him, both by
cruel threatenings and gentle persuasions, that he would get him gone into the
Land of Judah, Get thee into the land of Judah, and there eat thy bread, and
prophecy there. But when he was most threatened, then did he preach most
against Jeroboam, not sticking to say, Jeroboam shall die by the sword; his
wife shall be a Harlot in the City, and thy sons and thy daughters shall
fall by the sword, and thy hand shall be divided by line, and thou shall die
in a polluted land, etc. For the Word of God, the more it is threatened, the
freer it is; and like the Cammomile, Dum premitur, surgit vberior, The more you
seek to suppress it, the more it shows it self. Certain Pharisees aduising
our Savior Christ, to get him gone out of Herod's Dominions, and to fly the
Kingdom; returned them this answer, Tell King Herod, for all this his heat and
spleen against me, that I will cure the sick, and cast out devils, to day and
to morrow, Et tertia die consumer. Signifying thereby, that he would live for
all him, as long as he listed, and dye when he listed. S. Ambrose when the
emperor Theodosius was so mightily incensed against him for his boldness in
preaching, said unto him, May it please your Imperial Majesty, it becomes not
an Emperor, nor is it in his power to impose silence upon the Preacher of Gods
word: Nor does it befit a Preacher to hold his peace where there is just reason
to reprehend. The one is an affront offered unto God, whose Legate he is that
preaches; the other, cowardice in Gods Minister, who carrying with him the
warrant of Gods word, ought not to be afraid of any thing. Many do excuse
themselves of using reprehensions, for that they suppose they will be Sin
prouecho, without profit, and work little good upon their Auditorie. And yet
our Savior Christ did seuerly reprove the Pharisees, though they were never
awhit the better for it, that others might reap fruit thereby, and be
admonished by other men's harms.

Iudgen ^t according to the appearance, but judge righteous judgment. Our
Savior Christ said formerly unto the Pharisees, Why do ye seek to kill me?
For ever since the time of the forementioned Miracle, they sought to slay him,
the common people charging him with a Daemonium habes, etc. But Christ making
no reply to the vulgar, passing that over, went about to prove the small
reason that they had to plot his death, because he had done this good deed upon
the Sabbath day, Vnum opus feci, and omnes admiramini. Saint Chrysostom
expounds this admiramini, to be a condemning of him to be a transgressour of
the Law. On the Sabbath (says our Savior) ye Circumcise; and Circumcision is
no breach of the Sabbath, much less the healing of him that is lame.
Circumcision heals the soul, but wounds the body: But I in less time
cure both body and soul. Circumcision is of the ancient Fathers, the Sabbath
of Moses: you suffer the Circumcision, and so did Moses. If of this work there
follows no transgression, neither ought there of mine. The Jews hereunto
might answer, Circumcision is of the ancient Fathers, and confirmed by Moses;
but thy work is of a base, vulgar, and ordinary person. Whereunto our Savior
answers, Nolite iudicare secundum, etc. Judgment ought to be made only of
men's actions, without acception of persons. Ye magnify Moses (as Saint Austen
says) and Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob; and ye despise me, my works being
more strange and wonderful: Without doubt ye are accepters of persons. The
Pharisees might reply, Circumcision is a divine precept, but thy work is not
so. This argument is of no force; for the observation of the Sabbath, was
likewise a divine precept; but because that of the Circumcision was the more
ancient of the two, they did prefer this before that: And therefore Christ's
work, being greater than the Circumcision, we are to suppose that it was
divine, and by consequence to be preferred before it. To conclude, it seeming
to the Pharisees an unworthy thing, that the authority of a common man should
be paralleled with that of the ancient Patriarchs, they condemned him for a
transgressour. Whereupon our Savior says unto them, Nolite iudicare secundum
faciem.

First of all, he here condemns in Judges the accepting of persons, contrary
to so many places of Scripture, which condemn this inequality. Ecclesiasticus
says, Fortissimus non habebit in illis patientiam. And though God be so
merciful a God, and of such great sufferance, yet here by an Hyperbole, he will
not have patience with those Judges, which for hatred, love, or profit, shall
be moved to pronounce an unjust sentence; nor with those princes and
potentates of the World, which in matters of Justice, shall carry an uneven
hand. And he commands those Kings that were to reign over his people, that
they should bear the book of the Law about them, and should read therein all
the days of their life, Deuteronomy. 17.
That they may learn to fear the Lord their God. For, If the fear of God does
not bridle them, they are headstrong and cannot be ruled. Judges, have for
their bridle, God, and the King; Kings, only God. And against those that shall
loose their respect toward him, he says, Hear therefore o ye Kings, and
understand, Wisd. 6.
learn ye that be Judges of the ends of the Earth; Give ear ye that rule the
multitudes, and glory in the multitude of people: For the rule is given you of
the Lord, and power by the most high, which will try your works, and search
out your imaginations. Because that ye being officers of his Kingdom, have
not judged aright, nor kept the Law, nor walked after the will of God; horribly
and suddenly will he appear unto you; for an hard judgment shall they have
that bear rule. And the mighty shall be mightily tormented. To many great
sinners, God gives a long life, having an eye to the ill that waytes for them;
but bad Governors and Judges, he cuts short, and permits them not to live out
their days. Deuteronomy. 1.
And therefore, Nolite iudicare secundum faciem, ita parvum a^dietis, vt magnum.

And because, sticking many times upon Gods recommending unto them the cause of
the poor, and the favor that should be showen them as well in their person,
as matter of Justice; and considering on the other side, their misery and
want, some pitiful Judge, contrary to Justice, many incline to favor his
cause; our Savior adds, Rectum iudicium iudicate, Let not your eyes, nor
your hearts, be carried away with the misery of the poor, nor the prosperity
of the rich. And as God has commanded, Regard not the Person of the mighty,
So likewise he says, Regard not the Person of the Poor, but judge rightly.
And this sense is that which is pretended in the Text.

Secondly, he condemns all kind of rash judgments, and all doubtful things
where there are not manifest proofs, or some indicia, or signs of evil, there
to lean to the better part. And so Thomas teaches them. To judge solely upon
suspicion, is mere rashness, which commonly arises from these three grounds.

Rash judgment altogether to be auded
The one, That the Judge is vicious himself; Stultus, omnes stultos aestimat,
so says Ecclesiasticus: The theife thinks all to be like himself, etc.

The other, proceeds from passion, which commonly judges ill upon light
occasions, of him whom he either hates or enuieth.

The third, from long experience of things past: And therefore Aristotle says,
That old men are very jealous and suspicious. And this is the least blameable;
for suspicion is apt to entertain a sinister opinion, but experience will go
upon certainties. There is great difference betwixt doubt, suspicion, and
judgment. There are indicia, or signs, that are sufficient for doubting,
which are not sufficient for suspecting; and for suspecting, which are not
sufficient for judging: and all of them recover more or less force from the
quality of the persons whom they concern; for there are many indicia or
tokens which are sufficient to condemn vicious and lewd persons, which are not
sufficient against persons of honester note, and of good report.

Then they sought to take him, but no man laid hands on him. The end of their
conference was to apprehend him, but not a man of them that durst adventure to
do it; for when as they sought to stone him, their stones were frozen to their
fingers ends; so now they had the crampe in their arms, their hands were
benumbed, and their strength failed them; discovering therein the greatness of
his power. At his wisdom they remained astonished, and at his power they were
forced to yield. And these are the two attributes of a powerful and absolute
Prince: Power without Wisdom, is an unruly beast, that runs on to his own
destruction; and Wisdom without Power, is too weak for atchieuement; nor is
there that rash action, which a powerful fool will not put himself into.
Dionysius the Tyrant was wont to say, That then he did enjoy the sweetness of
his Empire, when he did execute his desires in an instant. Power and Wisdom,
are not to be severed in a prince.
Power is a headstrong horse* and Wisdom serves as a bridle to curb and
restrain it is fury. The Wiseman alluded hereunto, when he said, That God had
given him wisdom like the sand that lies on the sea shore, which repells the
waves, though never so great, and bounds them in. Plutarch says, That to a
bare absolute power, not bounded in with this sand, malice and mischief was
never wanting. The Emperor Justinian in the entrance to his Institutions,
says, That in the Majesty royal, the beauty of arms is not only
necessary, but the force also of learning. He attributs Force to Learning,
because that bridles the strongest thing that is, which is Arms. Our Savior
Christ then, being the true pattern of so great and glorious a Prince, as
none greater; Power and Wisdom could not choose but concur and meet equally
in him; To whom, with the Father, and the Holy Ghost, be ascribed all Power,
Honor, and Glory, etc.

THE XXVIII. SERMON, UPON THE WEDNESDAY AFTER THE FOVRTH SUNDAY IN LENT.
JOHN 9.1. Praeteriens, Jesus vidit Caecum.

And as Jesus passed by, he saw a man that was blind, etc.


Our Savior Christ going out of the Temple, seeking to shun those stones which
they pretended to throw at him, The eye of divine pity ever fixed upon
poverty.
he cast his eye upon a poor blind man that was borne blind: for it is the
privilege of poverty and humane misery, to have the eye of divine pity to
look down upon it, and to favor the same; so that he healed him at once both
in body and in soul: the History whereof is no less large than it is
pleasing.

Christ had said, For judgment I am come into this world, that they which see
not, may see, John 9.39.
and that they which see might be made blind. Now here he began to fulfull this
prophecy, by revealing to the Pharisees, Antequam Abraham fieret, ego sum. He
left them so blind, that they took up stones to stone him to death; and in
that very instant, meeting with this blind man, he made his eyes so clear
and so perfect, that those did not know him, who held conversation with him.
And thus did the case now stand betwixt the Gentile and the Jew; the one was
stark blind, and the other did see perfectly; the Jew enjoyed none, the Gentile
much light, The people that walked in darkness have seen a great light; Esaias
9.2.
and they upon whom the light shined, dwell in the land of the shadow of
death. And in another place, We waited for light, but behold obscurity; for
brightness, but we walk in darkness; Esaias 59.9.
we grope for the wall like the blind, and we grope as if we had no eyes; we
stumble at noone day as in the night, we are in desolate places as dead men.
The Spouse speaking of her Beloved, says, En ipse stat post parietem nostrum,
Behind the wall of our humane nature: and our Pharisees groping and stumbling
in the dark, brake their heads against the wall. That place likewise of the 29
Chapter may be hereunto accommodated, Esaias 29.14.
Behold, I will proceed to do a marvelous work among this People, even a
marvelous work, and a wonder, by giving sight to one that was borne blind:
For the wisdom of wise men shall perish, and the understanding of their
prudent men shall be hid. The Scribes and Pharisees had the light of the
Scripture, Esaias 6^.1.
and did look for the Messiah; For Syons sake will I not hold my peace, and
for Ierusalems sake I will not rest, until the righteousness thereof go
forth as brightness, and the salvation thereof as a lamp that burns. But
they were unthankful for this light, that curse of Job lighting upon them, Let
them look for light, but have none, Job. 3 9.
neither let them see the dawning of the day. They were so blind, that this
blind man taught them the light, and told them who was the Messiah whom they so
long expected.

As Jesus passing by, etc. This business seems to be a thing done as it were
by chance; but there is not any thing that God does commit more to memory, than
the relieuing of our miseries. The Bush wherein God appeared unto Moses, which
did burn, and yet was not burned, did represent the stubble which his people
did gather to bake their brick, and those fiery tribulations which did burn,
but not consume them. And if any man shall ask me, How this Bush could be on
fire, and not be burnt? I answer, That God had such present use of the fire,
that it seemed to ouerslip the bush. The Prophet Abacucke went to carry food
to the sheepheards that were in the field, but the angel taking him up by the
hair of the head, carried him away into Chaldea, and landed him in the Lions
Den in Babylon; for Daniels hunger required that have, that the reapers in the
field were forgotten; which was an extraordinary care and especial providence
of God. But why does the Evangelist say, Praeteriens, passing by as it were by
chance? And Ezechiel under the similitude of an Infant, delivering unto us,
That as soon as she was borne, she was cast out into the open field, to the
loathing of her person in that day she was borne; When I passed by thee, Ezech.
16.
I saw thee polluted in thine own blood. Hereunto I answer, That God does
dissemble his care, because thou being not able to pay the principal, nor any
desire to satisfy this his great care and love toward thee, he would draw
thee (if it were possible) to the acknowledgement of that debt which is due
unto him: for it is a common custom amongst men, not to make requital of that
care and love which has bin shown unto them. A Goldsmith makes a cup for you,
you pay him for the weight of his plate according to it is ounces, and for the
fashion according to it is workmanship; but you do not pay him for his love
unto you, for Love is so noble a thing, that it cannot be repayd but with Love.
And if man's love cannot be repayd, much less Gods: but if it dasheth thee out
of countenance, Love cannot be repaied but with love.
to see what a deal of love God expresses toward thee, and that he makes thee
the mark whereat he aims al his care; yet at least show thy self so thankful
as to satisfy him for thy workmanship, as thou would the Goldsmith for the
fashioning of a piece of plate, whither he had by chance, or purposely made it
for thee. God demanded of Job, Where wast thou when I laid the foundations of
the earth? As if he should have said, Because thou came not then into the
world, thou may happily think that I made this so fair a fabric either by
chance, or for my own pleasure, [ Ludens in orb terrarum] and not purposely
for thee; but I would have thee to know* that I made this so princely a palace
for thee, furnishing it with all things fitting for thee, and that if I had not
foreknowne that thou should enjoy the same, I would not have made it. But if
thou shall not repay me for my care and my love, that I made thee for the end
of this so great a work; yet thankefully accept of the work i^ self, because
thou art he that receiuest benefit thereby.

Our Savior as he passed thus along, was very angry, and much offended; but
he had no sooner met with this blind man, but his anger was alayed, Christ even
in his sufferings mindful of our solace.
and grew more calm and mild. In Caiphas Court, a sea of injuries and
affronts came tumbling in upon him; and even then in this great inundation that
brake thus violently in upon him; he no sooner turned his eye aside upon Peter,
and beheld those two Fountains of tears that flowed from his eyes, but that
he presently seemed wonderful well contented. The book of Canticles
introduces the Beloved speaking to his Spouse, Cant. 5.
I have mixed my myrrh with my spice: o friends, drink of my wine, yea, drink
abundantly, o Beloved; for the end of his bitter draughts proved to be a most
pleasant wine for our palats. In any other breast than that of our Savior, the
stones of the Pharisees would have made a great noise: but malice is a very
shallow water, but goodness a very deep Sea. A stone in a shallow Well will
make a great noise, and will dash the water about thine ears; but in a deep
Well you shall scarce hear the sound thereof. But this comparison is somewhat
of the shortest; for it is one thing to suffer, and another in suffering, to
take compassion. But the goodness of our Savior Christ did patiendo compati:
non solum erat patiens, sed compatiens. Saint Bernard says, That he did not
only suffer ill, but did requite ill with good, Retribuebant mala pro bonis,
and odium pro dilectione mea, They returned evil for good, and hatred for my
love; But to return good for evil, is the highest round of Virtues ladder.
Solomon says, That wisdom is fairer to behold, and more beautiful than the
Sun, Speciocior est Sole: For the Sun is eclipsed by the darkness of
night; but the wisdom of the Father, neither malice, nor injury, nor any
other affront can cloud or darken it, but serves oftentimes as an occasion to
beam forth greater favors upon us. Saint Bernard compares our Savior Christ
to the Be, which always labors and takes pains for other folks profit: a
swarm of Bees lights in thy garden, leaves thee honie-combes and wax, all
this not costing thee so much as one crum of bread. But this comparison
likewise comes a little too short; for the Be being offended, stings thee; But
our Savior Christ enriching our house with worldly goods and heavenly
blessings, does not hurt us, though we provoke him never so much to anger; he
brings us in Honey, but leaves no sting behind him. Better and more proper is
that comparison of the Vine, whereunto our Savior compares himself, Ego sum
vitis v^ra, I am the true Vine, which if you cut and prune, it yields you a
hundred for one.

As Jesus passed by, he saw, etc. Here pity overcame passion, and clapped a
bridle on the hastiness of his anger; Pity ever profitable to them that use
it. 1. Kings 30.
for pity never blots out those businesses that require have. David marched
in great have with his soldiers after certain theeuish Amalekites, that had
burnt and spoiled Zicklag; in which hot pursuit he found an Egyptian in the
field, who was ready to give up the Ghost, for he had eaten no bread, nor
drank any water in three days and three nights. Whereupon David made a stand,
relieved him, and restored him again to life; for the which he well repayd
this his kindness; for he brought him to the place where these thieves were
eating, drinking, and dancing for joy of the spoil they had taken; from whom
David recovered all that the Amalekites had taken away. Some spiteful man will
not stick to say, We are now as pitiful: not considering in the mean while
with himself, that he would never forgo a Play, to go hear a Sermon, never
omit other his worldly business, to go visit an hospital, or to give an
alms to the Poor. Job complains, That when he sat scraping his sores upon
the dunghill, his brethren past along by him, not so much as once vouchsafing
to look upon him, Job. 6.
but hasted speedily by him, like the downfall of a water from a rock, which
swiftly glideth down to the bottom of some low valley: Praeterierunt me sicut
torrens in conuallibus. The seventy Interpreters render it, Non respexerunt,
They did no whit respect him, nor so much as offer to look after him. Imagine
(says Thomas) that four go hand in hand together all one way, and that one
of them falls into a pit, whilst the rest pass on and let him alone: In like
manner might Job say, that his brethren dealt so with him; being that neither
nature, neerenesse of blood, old acquaintance, nor long bred friendship, could
move their hearts to pity, or their eyes to tears.

Jesus saw a man that was blind from his birth. And his Disciples asked him
saying, Master, Who did sin, This man, or his parents? that he was borne
blind, etc. This is an old fe^tered wound, that we took in the fall of our
first parents, to be too curious in other men's faults, and too forgetful of
our own. Saint Chrysostom says, That there is scarce one to be found, even
amongst those that are most perfect, which are not infected with this vice. If
a man walk abroad in a morning into the fields, his neighbors inheritance is
more in his eye than his own; and when he comes home at night, he presently
asks what news there is stirring? And is well pleased with any tidings that
are told him, especially of other men's misfortunes. Plutarch makes this simile;
That as in Cities there use to be some unlucky gates, whereat nothing enters, or
goes out that is good, save dunghils that lie in the street, and persons that
are condemned to death; so likewise into the ears of the Curious, nothing
enters that is good. It was the saying of a certain Philosopher, that of all
kind of winds, those were most troublesome, which did whirle our clokes from
off our shoulders: In like manner, of all sorts of men, the Curious are most
to be abhorred, which unwrap the clokes of our shame, blow open our disgrace,
and rip up the graves of the dead: and as Xenocrates said of them, They enter
not into other men's houses with their feet, but their eyes.

He saw, etc. This might very well assure them, that he looked upon him with the
eye of Love.

First, because it is Gods nature and condition, when he does one favor, to
engage himself for many other courtesies. And therefore, Whom God once
favors, he still follows.
having done him the favor to look upon him, he was now obliged to give him
his sight. Cicero says, That it is the property of a noble breast, to him that
owes much, to desire to make that man more his debtor. Est animi ingenui, cui
multum debeas, eidem and plurimum velle debere. The bestowing of one favor
upon me (says Ecclesiastic^^) makes me the bolder to beg another; And since
thou have stuck unto me in my life, o Lord, do the like in my death. God did
reveal unto David by the Prophet Nathan, perpetuity of his Kingdom; and
after this so great a favor, he further adds, Therefore is thy servants
heart ready to pray unto thee. Ezechias had received extraordinary kindnesses
from Gods hand, and these were motives to make him intercede for farther
favors. In a word, one courtesy conferred upon us, incourageth us to crave a
second. But that the conferring of one favor should lay an obligation, or make
one desirous to do another on the neck of that, this only holds in God, as a
peculiar nobleness belonging unto him. And for to secure us of all those
favors, which we can expect from his greatness, the Church says of our
Savior Christ, that was offered up for us, Nobis pignus datur, A pledge is
given us. Now a pledge is always pawned for less than it is worth. Having
therefore thus impawned the infinite treasure of his person, what will he not
bestow upon us? If he have given thee eyes, will he not give thee hands? And
if he have given thee hands, will he not give thee a heart? So that Gods doing
of one favor, is the assuring of many. In the Wilderness when all Agars bread
and water was spent, and seeing her son ready to dye for thirst, she lifted
up her eyes to Heaven calling upon God, Et exa^diuit dominus vocem ^^eri, And
the Lord heard the voice of the child. His giving ear unto her, was a sign
that he would give her water, and suddenly a Well was discovered unto her, etc.
Here were two favors done her already; First, His hearing her. Secondly, His
granting her her request. But God did not stop here, In gentem magnam faciam
cum, Genesis 21.
I will make him a great Nation.

Secondly, Because man's wants and necessities being looked on by the eye of
Gods love and pity, his goodness never leaves him till his remedy be wrought.
And therefore it is said by the Psalmist, Psalm. 142.
I poured out my complaint before him, I showed before him my trouble: so that
when I present my griefs and tribulations before him, if he once but look
upon them, I am sure he will help me. This kind of cunning Martha and Mary used
with him, Behold, he is sick whom thou love. Ezechias opening Zenacharibs
letter in the Temple, fraught with such a deal of pride and arrogancy, 4.
Reg. 19.
exercised the same trick, Lord open thine eyes and see, and bow down thine
ear, and hear the words of Zenacharib, etc. And as our sins do cry unto
God for vengeance, so our miseries do cry unto him for mercy. God plagued
the Princes of the Philistines with that foul and grievous disease of the
Emmerods; but upon their presenting the Images of them before the Arc, he
freed them of that evil. Thou know my shame and my reproach, etc. And if my
prayers do not sometimes pierce Heaven, it is because my persecutions and
afflictions have ascended thither, and notified my misery: and when man is
ashamed to speak, yet that will speak for him.

Who did sin, this man, or his parents? Saint Cyril says, That the Disciples
having whispered amongst themselves touching this man's misfortune, Sin the
occasion of all evil.
they asked our Savior, Quis peccauit? etc. Wherein they went wisely to work,
in attributing punishment in the general, to sin; for by attributing them
many times to natural causes, as to the Sun, air, water, and other
distemperatures, the fruit of Gods chastisements is lost. Petrus Crysologus
treating of those tears which our Savior shed at Lazarus death, says, That
he did not bewail his burial, for he knew how happy he was in being out of
the world; but the occasion. He thought upon Adams apple, that had been the
cause of so much hurt, and this was it that made him to weep. And this his
weeping was, as if he should have said, What a deal of sorrow has this one
act of disobedience in him, brought upon all mankind, and consequently upon me,
who must bear the burden of his and their offense? O Sin, How dear will it
cost both Man and me? In a word, There is not any one thing so often repeated
in Scripture, as, That Sin is the cause of our miseries, De humo non egreditur
dolor. And in this respect, very just and lawful was this their demand,
touching, Quis peccauit? Who sinned?

First, Because they did desire to see it verified, whether this favor which
they muttered amongst themselves, were well employed or no: for it is a common
custom in Court, when the King shall cast a favorable eye upon any one, and
graciously look upon him; not only to examine his life, and to question what
he is, but to rip up that of his fathers and predecessors, to flea those that
are alive, and to disinterre those that are dead. And howbeit for provisions of
offices, and for the conferring of Court dignities, and other public
preferments in the Commonwealth, it is fitting for Kings and Princes to take a
strict view and examination concerning the honesty and ability of those they
advance; yet in the relieuing of wants and necessities, al such diligences are
unnecessary and unjust: For a Prince, or any other rich and powerful person,
(says Saint Chrysostom) ought to be like a good port or haven, which should
receive into her protection all sort of passengers whatsoever, but to those
that have suffered shipwreck, and are without present relief and help, upon
casting away, should more especially stretch out her arms, and take them in
before they sink.

Secondly, For that they attributed the blindness of Celidonius to the sins
of his parents: for albeit God does punish the sins of the fathers in the
children, even to the fourth generation; yet this punishment is never in the
soul, but in the body, for the souls are not by race and descent; neither
has the soul of the son any kindred or alliance with that of the father, as
the body has; only the sin of Adam has somewhat thereof, as being the
head and root from whom we all come.

Thirdly, They would have reduced this punishment to his own proper sins, for
that he was borne blind; for though God does use anticipation in doing favors
for some services that are to be done, yet does he never punish sins not yet
committed: but it is rather the blazon of his justice, to punish with a slow
hand; as it is of his mercy, to pardon speedily.

Fourthly, to attribute punishments to faults committed, is a good judgment,
and an approved censure, for our own sins, but not for other men's. When our
Savior Christ said to his Apostles, One of you shall betray me; every one
looked first into himself, demanding of him, Rabbi, Master, Am I the man or no?
And though he showed them a fair evidence, He that dips his hand with me in
the dish, etc. yet none of them fixed their eyes upon Judas, nor took notice of
the sign then given them. The Pharisee is not so much condemned for his own
proper sins, as for the scorn and pride wherewith he despises others, I
thank thee, o God, that I am not like other men. Emisenus says, That there
can be no greater misfortune, than to make those sins mine, which another man
does commit for his pleasure or his profit, both which I make to be mine, by
judging rashly of them.

Neither has this man sinned, nor his parents, Man the Epitome of the World;
the Eye, of Man.
but that the works of God should be made manifest in him. Some man may ask
me the question, Why God should make choice of these his eyes, to make them to
be an instrument of manifesting his works, rather than the hands of the
benumbed, the feet of the lame, the tongue of the dumb, the raising of the
dead, or the torment of those that are possessed with Devils? I answer
hereunto, That all these miracles might serve very well for Gods glory. And
of Lazarus his death our Savior said, That it was pro gloria Dei, for Gods
glory. The Eye is the Hearts market place.
But in the Eyes there is a more especial conueniencie (as S. Chrysostom has
noted it) than in other the parts of the body: For as man is the sum and
Epilogue of all the naturalities of the World, for which reason they call him,
Microcosmos, A little World; so the eyes are the sum and Epilogue of man. And
as Aristotle says, That the Soul is all things, (...) a certain kind of
manner, because all things are come under the compass of i^'s apprehension and
understanding; so the eyes in a manner are all things, because they comprehend
all things in them, the heavens, the planets, the stars, the elements, birds,
fishes, beasts, plants, and stones; nor do they only see in the eyes,
corporal creatures, and visible substances, but likewise the invisible
passions of our soul; as love, hate, pride, humility, and the like, so says
Pliny. And therefore Saint Augustine styles the eyes, the heralds of the
heart. Saint Peter tells us, That there are eyes full of adulteries: In a word,
2. Pet. 2.
The eyes ^as Solomon says) are the open market place of our bosom. And in
another place, All the ways of man are in his eyes: And Ecclesiasticus, Ex
visu cognoscitur vir. Our Savior Christ did restore this man to his sight, and
made his eyes become clear, to the end that in them might be clearly
manifested the most famous works of God. Irenaeus, Saint Chrysostom, and
Saint Ambrose say, That he made him without eyes, that by bestowing them
afterward upon him, he might manifest to the world, That God his Redeemer had
created him anew. Saint Austine harpt upon the same string, treating of Malchus
his ear.

Saint Augustine says, That God making these eyes of so base a matter as c^ay
or dirt, intermingled with spettle, represents the mystery of the
Incarnation, wherein God did raise and lift up our nature to the admirable
union of his heavenly condition, from whence the Word became flesh, which gave
light to this blind man, and those that sat in the shadow of death, having the
eyes of their souls darkened with sin.

Saint Ambrose affirms, That Christ taught us by this miracle, that for to
recover our souls sight, we must put dirt upon our eyes, that is, we must
think upon our own baseness and frailty: For the principium or beginning of
Christian perfection, is, for a man to know himself. Nor were his works only
manifested in these his eyes, but all his other perfections and attributes; as
his omnipotency, in restoring his eyesight, or rather making him new eyes,
molded out of dirt; his justice, in letting the Pharisees live in their
blindness; and his goodness and bounty, in giving light to this blind man.

Neither he nor his parents, etc. Saint Chrysostom asks the question, Why
God would manifest his works in this blind man so much to his cost, being that
he might have taken for this purpose, means of good, and not of hurt? Saint
Ambrose says, That our Savior Christ was willing to take our sins as a
pledge or gage of his glory, that he might make it thereby the surer: For
those that impose Tributes, or settle their Rents, are always careful to have
good security; and of all other assurances, Sin the only Security that God
could have of man, for his Glory.
the best is, that the State thus engaged or impawned, be properly belonging to
the debtor. And if God should ground his glory on our goodness, we cannot
give him any good security for it, because this is others goods, and not our
own: but our sins are our own, and whatsoever is ill in us, properly
belongs to us, and are so perpetuated to our persons, that they can never
fail us. Christ did redeem us from the captivity of our crimes, but in this
his redeeming and ransomming us from sin, this holy Saint says, That he had
a kind of interest of his own: Reasons why God suffers many corporal
defects, and weaknesses in man.
for although God did not remain thereby more powerful, more merciful, more
just, etc. Habuit tamen quod ad cultum suae Maiestatis adiungeret, He had
something by the bargain, that gave an addition to the worship of his divine
Majesty. And as it is in another place, by giving us liberty, Sibi etiam
aliquid acquisiuit, He got somewhat also to himself. What did he get by it? He
got in a manner all his glory by it; he got to be reverenced, served, praised,
acknowledged, and adored, to be as well a Savior as a God: so that in some
sort God may be said to be indebted to the ill that is in us. Tertullian says,
That God then loves this our flesh, when it is fullest of miseries, for by
giving remedy thereunto* his attributes are known and acknowledged in the
World: and I dare be bold to say it, That if it were not for the infirmities of
our flesh, and the inbred ill that is in us, those good things would not be
known and acknowledged, which come from God. In the 113 Psalm, David makes an
enumeration of those meruailes and prodigious wonders which God multiplied in
the behalf of his People, at their departure out of Egypt: And after that he
had related many of them, he ends with this, Go on as thou ha^^ begun, o
Lord, with these Nations. For although the profit will be ours, the honor will
be thine: and whereas these Nations do point out their gods with their
fingers, it is fit we should also know that we have a God amongst us, and not
a god of wood, as they have.

The second reason is Saint Bernards: Amongst all his other attributes, 2.
Reason.
none in our opinion, none (considering his natural condition) is to be
compared with that of his being misericors, a merciful God: He is called Pater
misericordiae, The Father of mercy; which presupposes our misery: and to
multiply his blessings and his goodness upon us, we having no sin nor evil
in us, he could hardly do it. If he should have dealt thus with Adam before
his fall, and with the Angels in their blessed estate, it might have been an
effect of his bounty, but not of his mercy, which is above all his works.

But some man perhaps will say, O Lord, to throw evils upon us, that thou
may afterward remove them from us, is no such great favor. Yes marry is
it, and that an extraordinary favor; for we do not know health, but by
sickness; the seizing of that soundly upon us, shows what a blessing a sound
body is: Speciosa misericordia Dei, quasi nubes pluuiae in tempore siccitatus,
As rain is welcome in a drought, so is Gods mercy to the Afflicted: and so to
this blind man was his sight.

The third is Saint Chrysostomes: God sometimes takes from us what is good, 3.
Reason. God never takes any thing from us, but (...) return a better.
that he may give us that which is better; whatsoever God does repair by
miracle, is better than that which is possessed by nature, as it succeeded in
the wine at the Wedding. Saint Bernard treating of the conversion of Saint
Paul, says, That it was a great happiness that he was stricken blind, for by
this his blindness he was taken up into the third Heaven, and there saw such
things as man may not utter; and when he came to receive again the eyes of this
his body, he possessed withal the eyesight of his soul: and so did it
likewise fare with this blind man.

The fourth reason is, God inflicting the evil of punishment upon man, 4.
Reason. Nothing which God inflicts upon us can savor of injustice.
God therein does not do man injustice; for (as Saint Chrysostom says) there
is in this life no more than one good, and one ill; the good consists in
serving God; the ill, in offending him. Let no man therefore complain of his
misfortunes, for there cannot be any disaster so great, that can hurt thee in
the least hair of thy head, Capillus de capite vestro non peribit. And if a
man do not run hazard in the loss so much as of one hair, there will be
much more care had, that the better and more material parts shall not perish.
Many in Jerusalem having eyes, remained blind; and this blind man having no
eyes, came thereby to enjoy his sight both in body and in soul. Seneca says,
That the want of eyes caused in many the want of sinning, and was a great
occasion of their innocence of life, and inculpabi^itie.

The fifth reason is, That it is no injustice in God, 5. Reason. No man but
d^serueth more than God does lay upon him.
to inflict punishment upon us; for albeit there be no proper precedent sin,
neither in our selves nor our Parents, yet the original sin that we are
liable unto, may draw, and that justly, most grievous punishments upon us; as
Saint Augustine has learnedly noted concerning little infants which suffer
sickness and death. So that Gods freeing of man from punishment, is mercy;
his not freeing him, no injustice. Thou have many debtors, thou forgiuest one,
and suest another; it is a kindness to the one, but no injury to the other.
One owes thee a great sum, thou art contented to ^ake a little; for this, thy
debtor owes thee a great deal of thanks. God took away this man's eyes from
him, he might likewise have bereaved him of his feet and his hands, he is bound
to thank him that he spared him the use of those. Besides, this cannot be said
to be so much a taking away of that which is due, as not a giving of that unto
him, which he might, if he would. The good things which we enjoy, are from God,
and he may distribute them as it best pleases him. Again, the arm is to
defend the head, though it run the hasard of being lost; a Citisen for the
safeguard of his Commonwealth, a Subject to save his Sovereigns life, a
Christian for the glory of Christ, a Creature for the honor of his Creator,
and Martyrs for the maintenance of their Religion, have not refused to lay
down their lives: it is not much then, that this man should be contented with
the loss of his eyes, that the Works of God might be made manifest.

6 Reason.
The sixth reason is, That because the heart does commonly follow after the eyes,
it is better to want eyes than to have them. It is the common opinion not only
of the Philosophers, but of Gods Saints, That the eyes are principium ^alorum
nostrorum, The induction to all our ill. Lucian calls them, Prima amoris vi^,
The only door that opens unto love. Plato, Principium amoris nostri, The
entrance to love. Dionysius, Adalides, or Duces amoris, The guides or
ringleaders to love. Seneca, Animae finestrae, The window to the soul.
Saluianus, The casements to man's breast. Clemens Alexandrinus, That the first
encounters and skirmishes sallie from forth the eyes. Nazianzen styles them,
The prime instruments of our bewitching. In a word, The eyes were the ruin of
Lots wife; the eyes, The bewitching of the children of Israel, Videntes filij
Dei, filias hominum, etc. The eyes, overthrew Eve in Paradise; the Judges that
would have wronged Susanna in Babylon, David, Sampson, and Solomon, might all
of them very well say, Vt vidi and perij, My sight undid me. Jeremy
complains, That all the Daughters of his City were utterly undone by their
eyes, Depredatus est oculus meus animam meam in cunctis filiabus vrbis. Saint
Peter, That many Cast-awayes have their eyes full of Adulteries. Plutarch
reports, That a certain Conqueror entering the City in triumph, casting his
eye aside upon a handsome young woman, had his heart taken prisoner by her; and
sending his looks still after her, he gave occasion to Diogenes to break this
jest upon him, That this fair maiden had like a Chicken wrung his neck thus
aside, looking still backward as his Chariot went forward.

7 Reason. It is God aloue must fashion us anew
The seventh is of Irenaeus, Saint Ambrose, and Saint Chrysostom; It being
manifested in this blind man, That God is our sole Creator, and that no hands
but his only, can mold and fashion us anew. Man considering the Worlds great
beauty, was desirous to search out the author thereof; and the Devil boasting
forth and assuming to himself the glory of this admirable piece of work,
blazoned it forth unto them, I am the Lord of all this Universe, I made the
world, and I possess it. Whereupon, Man gave unto him the honor of God, the
greater part of the world adoring him in his Idols. God finding himself thus
wronged, did permit in man these maimes and defects in the eyes, hands, and
feet, and other the like monstrous mis-shapednesse. Now if the Devil had the
power to repair these imperfections, he might then enjoy this glory: But if
all the Idols (as Baruc says) being put together, cannot give sight to the
Blind, how can they then be God? Baruc 6.
The wonderfullest work that God ever made, was Man; and in Man, the greatest
artifice and workmanship, are his eyes. Our Savior therefore had so ordered it,
that this man should be born blind, that his eyes being fashioned and given him
by his hand, the world might acknowledge him to be their God and their Redeemer.

When he had thus spoken, he spat on the ground, and made clay of the
spittle, etc. Saint Ambrose dwells much upon these ceremonies. And much ado is
made about the cost and cure of this poor man's eyes. O Lord, thou have
restored other men by a bare word only, so did thou revive the widows son
lying on the beer; and so did thou raise up Lazarus from the grave, thy
voice alone was sufficient. In the creation of man, thou did only use the
dust of the earth, and therefore man is said to be made de limo terrae. And
albeit some do affirm, that man was made de luto, of the dirt, or mould of
the earth, yet the Hebrew word, expresses it to no other fullness, than that
man was made of dust. And our vulgar translation says, Puluis est. But how is
it that these eyes must cost a little more labor than all the other eyes
besides, and all those other lives tha^ God has given man? There are ^hree
reasons rendered.

The first of Saint Cyprian, who says, 1. Reason.
That this blind man had not only laesa^ potentiam, the faculty disinabled
where the sight did reside, as many blind men, who having the organs of their
eyes whole, and the apples clear, see nothing at all; But this man had
otherwise the organs of his eyes wanting unto him, the hollow places thereunto
belonging, being like shop windows close shut up, and skinned over as the
rest of the face, and that our Savior did fill up those empty holes with dirt
which he had molded and knedded together into a mass or lumps of clay, with
the help of his spittle. And this was the reason, why they afterward said
unto him, How were thine eyes opened? But to give a man an arm, a hand, or a
foot, it may sooner be imagined, than made by any but by our Savior Christ,
who was God. Whence I infer, That because God had breathed the spirit of Life
into Man, there were certain Heretics that stickt not to say, that the Soul
of Adam was of the substance of God; they might better have said that it was
made of the substance of the eyes of this blind man.

The second, 2. Reason.
For that the Pharisees did attribute these our Saviors Miracles to the
Devil, he did prove in this blind man, that only the virtue of God was
powerful to work this wonder.

First, Because no natural virtue can give sight to the blind. And therefore
by consequence the Devil could not do it, whose miracles are wrought by
applying the natural virtue of the Creatures, as Saint Austen teaches.

Secondly, He made good this his miracle, by curing him with this clay, or
dust, which was very good means rather to put out, than do any good to the
eyes. Whereas if the Devil should have cured him, he must have done it, by
applying some helpful virtue that had been accommodated and fitted for the
sight. Only it is God that can work these strange effects by contrary causes.

The third, is of Saint Ambrose. Our Savior Christ was willing to advantage
this man's sight both in body and in soul: 3. Reason.
And therefore it is a far greater miracle to create the eyes, than to raise
up the dead to life. This blind man was to be the battalion that was to
withstand many great incounters, and contradictions; As the strict examination
of his blindness, what were his parents, what his birth, what his breeding:
And therefore it was requisite that he should be armed with a great deal of
light, with a great deal of courage, constancy, and resolution, not only to
answer the arguments, which the passion and hard-heartednes of the Judges were
to press him withal, but to suffer banishment, and extrusion from their
Synagogue, which sentence of excommunication they were to pronounce against him.

I must work the works of him that sent me, while it is day, etc. I must not
let slip the short time of my life, death draws near, and it behooues me to
make have. We must make hay while the Sun shines.
The Husbandman when he sees the ground is thoroughly soked with rain, he
hastens to the sowing. Saint Austen calls good Works, the Seeds of
blessedness, which we must sow in our life time, that we may reap the fruit of
them hereafter, They went forth weeping, sowing in tears, but they shall
return with joy, bearing sheaues in their bosom.

I must work, etc. Good God, What does this import thee? It imports Man to
look unto it. In that correspondence which God holds with Man, he will that
they be partners and share gains alike: and therefore he calls our good,
his; and his glory, ours. Our Savior Christ suffers death; and his death, is
our redemption. And therefore it is said, It was meet that Christ should dye.
Saint Paul preaches this Doctrine, and giving the World to understand thereof,
he discovers Christ's glory, uttering thereupon, I shall show unto you, how
fit it was that he should suffer for my sake.

The night comes, when no man can work, etc. Every one has his day, which
is the period of his sowing season, and of his labor; which done, he may have
the happiness to take his quiet rest in the night. He that shall go about to
make of night, day, shall find he is much deceived; for, The night comes
when no man can work. That which imports is, That while we have time, we
do good: for to this end Time is given unto us. And if the fig tree, because
it did not bring forth fruit in it is due time, was cursed by our Savior: what
shall become of the sinner that at no time brings forth any fruit? Saint
Bernard much condemns those men, which seeks after occasions for to pass
away the time, as to game, chat, read idle poems, and tell tales and lies, to
wear away the time, least otherwise it should seem tedious unto them. The
time which God gives thee for Repentance, to crave pardon for thy sins, to
sue for grace, and for to purchase glory, thou letst it run on without any
fruit: far better it were for thee to redeem this thy ill spent time; for
he that redeemeth his time by Repentance, redeemeth all sorts of time
whatsoever, Even the time that is past. For albeit, ad praeteritum non est
potentia, the time that is past can not be recalled, yet it is not to be
understood touching the time of Repentance; according to that saying of Saint
Paul, Redimentes ^empus, etc. Redeeming the time, etc. The present with good
works, the past with repentance, the future with perseverance, and a full
purpose of amendment of life. In a word, Repentance does not loose one hour,
no not one minute of time. The good Thief, in the very last hour, did repair
all the lost years of his life.

Humility a great help to the curing of a sick soul.
Go to the poole of Siloam, etc. First this blindman did herein show a great
deal of humility, in that he was not scrupulous what they should say of him
that should see him pass through the city with his eyes full of dirt. For
points of honor are oftentimes scandalls to the Soul, and make the infirmity
of the disease incurable. Naaman the Syrian stood upon point of honor, that
Elisha should come unto him, 4. Reg. 5.
and lay his hands upon his leaprosie; As also that he should bid him to wash
himself in Jordan; whereat he was very wroth, and refused to come at him, saying
in anger to Elisha's messenger; If we shall compare water with water, Are not
Abana, and Pharphar, rivers of Damascus, better than all the waters of Israel?
May I not wash in them and be clean? Which said, he turned and went away in a
rage. Saint Chrysostom says, That the Pharisees did not believe in Christ.
What, said they with themselves, shall we be so respectlesse of our honor, as
to subject our selves with the vulgar to so base a man as he? Saul made less
reckoning of loosing God, than the worlds honor, Honora me coram populo: So as
Samuel would but honor him before the people, come what would of the rest, The
like are Obedience and Faith
he did not greatly care.

Secondly, He showed a great deal of Obedience and Faith. The waters of Siloam
were not able of themselves to give sight to this blind man; but I believe
(said the blind man) that they will work this good effect upon me: He might
have willed me to do that which might have carried with it a greater reason of
hope; But the sheep (says Chrysologus) must go to his feeding, and his
folding, whether it shall please the shepherd to lead him forth. The scholar
must learn that which his master teaches him. The sick patient must be
ruled by his Physician. He has liberty (says Saint Chrysostom) to speak
unto his Physician, that he will do his best to cure him, but not to prescribe
him the Physic that he shall minister unto him. The like course we are to
take with the heavenly Physician of our souls: Sick patients may pray, but
not prescribe.
For it were a strange kind of unmannerliness in us, besides our diffidence to
rely upon an earthly Physician that can only cure our bodies, and not put our
trust in God, who can cure both body and soul. The Chirurgian comes to thee
with Cauteries, and lays corrosiues to thy sores, thou patiently indurest it,
and not once openest thy mouth, and shall thou not as well bear, etc.

Thirdly, he expressed a great deal of thankfulness. Saint Bernard applies this
virtue to those words of Ecclesiastes, The rivers come out of the Sea, and
return much bettered back again to the Sea; as giving thanks for the water
which they received: for the acknowledging of one kindness, is the drawing on of
another. And if those rivers should have rested themselves contented with the
waters they had received, and not have paid the Sea his due Tribute, that
bounty would not have been bestowed upon them. In like manner those good
things which we enjoy, flow from God, that immense Sea of goodness, and they
are again to be returned unto God through our thankfulness; and when that
ebbeth in us, the other never flows from him, Cessat gratiarum decursus, vbi
non est recursus. The rain from heaven arises from the vapors of the earth:
And when there are no vapors, there is no rain. Saint Augustine desired of
God, That he would be pleased to reveal the secrets of Scripture unto him,
promising in requital of so great a favor, a perpetual acknowledgement
thereof. Confiteor tibi quicquid invenero in libris tuis. Ecclesiasticus
commending the noble Acts of David, as his wrestling with bears, tearing the
jaws of Lions, killing of Giants, and ouercomming the Philistims, he
concludes, That all these things succeeded luckily with him, because he was
thankful to the Lord, Eccl. 47.
and directed his heart unto him, and established the worship of God.

Fourthly, before our Savior Christ had given this blind man the eyes of his
soul, he proceeded fairly, maintained Christ's honor against the Pharisees
that opposed it. And this, as I may so term it, his honorable carriage
prepared the way for him to attain to the height of virtue. The Romans had two
Temples adjoining each to other, (as S. Augustine reports it) the one of Honor,
the other of Virtue: But no man could come unto that of Virtue, unless he
first passed through that of honor.

And Valerius Maximus relates unto us, That M. Marcellus a Roman Senator, being
desirous to build one sole Temple to Honor and Virtue, the Priests would not
permit him to do it; Alleging, That it was not fit, for if by chance any
miracle should happen in that Temple, they were not able to auow, to which of
the two it ought to be attributed. Joseph fled from the inticements of his
wanton and lascivious Mistress, for that it was an offense both to God, and
his own honor, Quomodo possum hoc malum facere? My Lord has trusted me with
all his whole house, if I should be false unto him, I should hazard my happiness
in heaven, and my honor on earth. In a word, the Acts of Honor are sometimes
so heroical, that they seem to be miracles of Virtue.

He went his ways therefore and washed, and came seeing.
First, He returned such a strange altered man from that he was before, from
the Poole of Siloam, that his nearest neighbors and oldest acquaintance did
not know him: some said, It is the same man; others, It is not, but does
somewhat resemble him. But he that shall turn over a new leaf, and truly
change the form and course of his life, must not seem to be the same man that
he was before. It is Philons note, That it must fare with him as it did with
Enoch, of whom the Scripture says, Transtulit eum Dominus; from this earthly
life, he must pass to a heavenly life. Esaias did prophecy, That upon our
Savior Christ's coming, the dens of Thieves should be turned into Gardens, and
that the Lions should become as mild and gentle as Lambs; Esaias 35.
In cubilibus vbi Dracones habitabant, orietur viror iunei, etc. Si dormiatis
inter medios cleros pennae columbae de argentata, Psalm. 68.
etc. The Translation renders it, Inter medios tripodes; Though ye have lien
amongst the Triue^s and blackest Pots of Egypt, yet through repentance you
shall be as the wings of a Dove covered with silver, and her feathers with
yellow gold. Upon Saint Paul's conversion the People did not know him, Nonne hic
est (said they) qui expugnabat Jerusalem? Act. 9.
Is not this he that has done much evil to thy Saints at Jerusalem? So
likewise they said of this blind man, Nonne hic est qui sedebat mendicans? Is
not this he that sat and begged? Of a poor beggar, he came to be a learned
Doctor, and did confute many of the best and learned Students of Jerusalem.

Secondly, He was an Instrument of Gods omnipotency and power, whose blazon
is, to overcome swelling pride and puffing arrogancy, with the lowest
baseness, and the weakest frailty. Pliny reports, That Rats did dispeople
one city, and Conies another; but much more was it, to overthrow Phar^^h by
Flies and poor silly Gnats. If a Lion fear a Cock, and a Bull a Waspe, out
of a kind of instinct of nature; Why should not a man stand in fear of such a
Fly or a Waspe, Dan. 3.
whom God furnishes with a sting? The Babylonish fire did no hurt to the three
children that were in the midst of the fiery Furnace, but the flames that
came out from thence, did burn many of those Ministers and Officers that were
appointed to throw Faggots into the Furnace; Viros autem qui miserant,
interfecit flamma ignis. The Hebrew translation renders it, Scintillae, The
poor little sparks that flew from out the flame; etc. Thou, o Lord, that can
of a spark make a flame, increase our Faith, and inflame our love toward
thee, that we may with this blind man steadfastly believe, and so come to see
thy Glory, etc.

THE XXIX. SERMON, UPON THE THVRSEDAY AFTER THE FOVRTH SUNDAY IN LENT.
LVC. 7.11. Ibat Jesus in Ciuitatem Nain.

And Jesus went into a City called Nain, etc.


A Most famous encounter the Evangelist does here recite unto us, which happened
at the gates of the City Nain; he tells us of a Lion that was devouring and
swallowing down a Sheep, and of a David that ran in and took it out of his
throat; of a Thief that had stolen a most precious jewel, and of a Judge that
taking him in the manner, with the theft in his hand, took it away from him,
leaving him confounded and ashamed: Of two Fountains, the one of bitter
waters, the other so sweet and sauorie, that it took from those bitter
Fountains all it is gall and bitterness: Of Death and of Life, Death turning
coward upon this encounter, and flying (according to that prophecy of Abacus)
from before the face of our Savior Christ: And of a young man that was carried
out of the City upon a beer to be buried, whom his mother went to accompany
to the grave with tears in her eyes, and many more besides. Upon which
occasion, our Savior showed himself Lord of Death and Life.

Jesus went into a City called Nain, etc. The Evangelist had formerly
mentioned that miracle of Peter's mother in Law, that of the Leaper, and of the
Centurions servant; and continuing the same strain, he here goes on with a
factum est deinceps, And it came to pass, that the day after, he went unto a
City called Nain, where in the very gate of the City he met with a sad
company, that were going to a solemn Funeral, full of tears and sorrow. And
albeit this may seem to be a casual thing, and that happened (as we say) by
hap-hazard; yet was it the maine and chief care of our Savior Christ, to pry
into every corner of that holy land, and not to skip over any one place
therein, which he did not measure forth with his feet; so that he did not omit
that misery whereunto he did not giu^ a remedy: Suting with that saying, Et
sanabat omnes, And he cured them all; showing therein, what a good account he
made of his office of a Savior, since his first coming into the world. There
are two things which make a man very eminent in his office.

The one, His inclination and good intentions, which are the feet of our soul.

The other, His pains taking, and continual occupation in all kind of Arts,
as well Mechanical, as Liberal. And in very truth, in all both good and
evil exercises, so powerful is man's natural inclination, That although a man
may smother it for a time, yet like fire under ashes, it will at last break
forth into a flame, and discover his true disposition. A thief will never
leave his inclination to theeuing, Natural inclinations hardly admit a change
though he has often escapt the gallows: Nor a Cheater to his cogging; nor a
Merchant to his trading; nor the Mariner to his navigations; nor the Huntsman
to his hunting; nor the soldier his disposition to war, though he have
discontinued it never so long. David was grown old, and well stricken in
years, when his son Absalon rose up in rebellion against him, and yet they
could not persuade him from going into the field, though the whole Army were
against it, and cried out, Thou shall not go forth. And they gave him a very
good reason for it in the words following: For, if we fly (said they) they
will not care for us, neither if half of us dye, will they care for us; but
thou art worth ten thousand, etc. And this is a kind of voluntary violence,
which with a sweet kind of pleasingnesse hales the heart of man along. And the
like reason may be rendered of continual occupation and employment, it is
death to such a one to be idle; and he is no longer well, then while he is in
action. Saint Gregory has well observed, That Job upon every the least
occasion of happiness that befell him, it was his fashion of phrase, and a
usual custom with him to say, The Lords name be praised. So that afterward,
having formerly used himself thereunto in the tempest of his disasters, and
those bitter storms of his aduerser fortunes, it was never out of his mouth.
These two things were subsis^^^g in our Savior Christ in a superlatiue degree.

First, so great was his inclination and desire to save, that for others
welfare, he was careless of his own,

Secondly, he was so solicitous of this his business, and so wholly taken
therewith, that he cared not for any thing else, And this is expressed in the
word Ibat, He went. Which argues a continuation in his going on.

Some man may make a doubt, and say (though unadvisedly) Had it not been
better for our Savior to have been in the mount of Olives, or in the garden
of Gethseman, or on the hills of Ephrem, than to go thus from house to house,
from Castle to Castle, and from City to City? Whereunto I first of all
answer; That it is enough that he did not so, because it was not the better
course. Secondly, because he was the same that was personally promised to that
blessed Land, and that there was not a corner in all that Country to be left
out, which should not find the favor of his divine influences. Thirdly, the
exercises of the life active, Contemplation and action must never be severed.
and contemplative, are those two wings, whereby the soul sores up to heaven.
And because one wing will not serve the turn to reach to so high a pitch, we
must not only serve God in our prayers and meditations, but also in the
releeuing and succouring of our neighbor: And therefore our Savior Christ
spent the nights in prayer; Per noctabat in oratione: and the days, in healing
bodies, and curing of souls. Petrus Damianus, upon the life of Elias and
Elisha, says, That there is no remote solitary mountain, which does not
ground it is retyrednesse upon some one example or other of the Saints. One, is
a friend to the world, and a lover thereof; and this man alleages, That Elias
spent many days in the widow of Sareptaes house; And that Elisha soiourned
with the Shunamite, that was a great and principal woman in her country: And
that both of them did treat with great Princes and Potentates. Another is a
friend and a lover of delicacies, and alleges, That Elisha and Elias did
accept of them. But these men do not consider, That if these Prophets did
forgo their solitude, it was more for the good of others that lived abroad in
the world, than themselves, as also for the raising up of the dead: And if they
did receive good intertainment, it was no more than was necessary for the
sustenance of their bodies. Elisha would none of Naamans gold; Nor Elias be
feasted by King Ahab, and Iezabell his wife. It is a thing worthy the
consideration, That our Savior Christ having not so much as one penny of
money wherewith to pay Caesar his Tribute, willed Saint Peter to open the fish
that he had taken with his angling rod. Our Savior permitted Peter that he
should catch such a multitude of fishes, that the nets did break with the
fullness of them: But now he would not have him catch, but one only fish. For
a Churchman ought to fish for all the fishes that he can possibly take; and
the more he takes, he does God the more service: but for those money-fishes,
that have pence in their bellies, he must take but one only, and that too for
to pay Tribute, not for himself, nor to satisfy his own covetous desires, or
his idle pleasures.

Ecce defunctus efferebatur.
Behold there was a dead man carried out, etc. This word Ecce in the Scripture,
requires the eyes of the body, and the eyes of the soul, This life is nothing
but a Procession of quick and de^d
insinuating a great deal of attention. But to come here with an Ecce, it
being so common a thing in the world (as nothing more) to see the dead daily
carried forth to their burial, it seems a superfluous labor, and a
needless kind of diligence; especially, being that this our life is no other
thing but a continued Procession of the quick and the dead. When Adam saw Abel
was slain, and lay dead on the ground, being the first man of whom death had
taken possession, he was so heart-strucken, and so amassed thereat, so
fearful, so sorrowful, and so sad, that for many years after he was not
freed from this fear and horror, nor were the tears dried up from his eyes.
For albeit that God had notified unto him, That he was to dye the death, yet
did he not as yet know by experience what kind of thing death was. But after
that death had flesht himself in man's blood, cutting down more lives than a
Sithe does grass in your fair and goodly meadows; this his fear and horror
began by degrees to slack and fall off. An Eclypse of the sun does strangely
intertaine the senses attention, not only for to see so fair a Planet lapt up
in mourning weeds, but also for that it so seldom happens: But the Eclypses
of men's lives, though they be the fairest suns upon earth, they so hourly,
nay so momentarily succeed with us, that we can scarce (which way soever we
look) turn our eyes aside from them. No objects more usual than those of our
mortality.
And not to speak of those lingering deaths, wherein through sickness we lie
languishing a long time, besides those occasioned by famine, pestilence, and
war: yet those other sudden and unexpected deaths which daily succeed, may
every hour find our eyes occupied. For we see them ever and anon written on
the wall, as was that of Balthazar; hanging on the oak, as that of Absalon;
dipped in a dish of milk, as that of Sisara* represented in a dream, as that of
Holophernes; appearing at a feast, as that of Jobs children; put in the
porridge pot, as that of Elishaes Disciples, Mors in olla; in the bed, as that
of Adulterers; and in the Apoplexy, as that of your Gluttons.

Yet notwithstanding all this, and that it is every days example, None less
regarded, or remembered.
yet such and so great is the solicitude and care which the devil takes to
blot the remembrance of the dead from out the hearts and heads of the living,
That at every step we see the dead carried forth to their graves, and are so
far from ingrauing the thought thereof in our breasts, that at every step we
forget it. There is not that man alive, which does not feel and experiment
death in himself, complying with that sentence of God, Morte morieris, Thou
shall dye the death. Man is no sooner borne into the world, but deaths process
is out against him, which is not long in executing. As the week wastes the
candle, the worm the wood, and the moath the cloth, 2. Reg. 14.
so (as the discreet woman of Tekoa said to David) We must needs die, and are
as water spilt on the ground which cannot be gathered up again. The rivers
have recourse to the Sea, and are swallowed up in the deep, an^ this is the
end of them; so is it with our lives, they bend from their very birth to the
bed of death, we leap from our swathling clothes into our winding shee^e.
This is the end of all flesh. Seneca compares this our life to an hour glass,
and as the sand runs out, so runs away the hour; so as time runs on, our
life runs away; and as it was dust, so to dust it returns. When two Ships
sail each by other, it seems to them, That the one flies like an arrow out
of a bow, and cuts the waves with a swift wing, and that the other is a slugge,
and sails very slowly. And therefore of the way of a Ship in the sea, and of a
young man running on in a wanton course; Prou. 30.
whereunto may be added the uncertainty of the day of our death; Solomon
says, That they were things too wonderful for him, and past his finding out.

Efferebatur. He was carried out.
The word Efferebatur is worthy our consideration, it being a plot and devise
of the devil to carry the dead out of their Cities to be buried, The
remembrance of death affoords two benefits.
for to blot the memory of the dead out of the minds of the living. In the
remembrance of death, the Saints of God found these two great benefits.

The one, Amendment of life.

The other, Happiness in death.

Touching the former, it is by one common consent agreed upon by the Fathers,
That the perfection of our life does consist in the continual meditation of
death. Plato called Philosophy, Mortis meditationem, A meditation of death;
affirming, That the whole lesson of our life, was to learn to dye. The like
says Gregory Nazianzene, Many Saints and Doctors have demurred upon this
point, In that God should defer till the day of judgment the reward of the
body, this may seem an inequality to some, but there is none at all in it.
For the dust and ashes of the body, do persuade and preach unto us the
contempt of the world. Asahel being slain by Abner, 2. Reg. 2. Why the reward
of the body is de^erred till the day of Judgment.
lying dead on the ground, as many as came to the place where Asahel fell and
dyed, stood still as men amassed; This is that valiant Captain, this that
undoubted Soldier. There is nothing that does so quel the courage of Man, and
daunt his spirits, as death: it is natures terror. Those Spies that were sent
out to discover the Land of Promise, were stricken into a great fear and
amasement at the sight of those huge and monstrous Giants, In comparison of
whom (said they) we seemed as Grasshoppers: Dreading, that they were able to
devour them alive, and to swallow them down whole; And therefore made this
false relation at their return, N^m. 13.
The land through which we have gone to search it, is a land that eats up the
Inhabitants thereof; but the people that raised this evil reporr, died by a
Plague. More truly may it be said of Death, That he deuoureth the Inhabitants
of the earth, this is he that tameth the fiercest Giants.

That dream of Nabucadonezars, which might have been powerful (receiving it
by revelation) to make him abate his pride, and lay aside his arrogancy; the
Devil presently blotted these good thoughts out of his remembrance. The like
course does the Devil now take with us. He does not go about to persuade us (as
he did our father Adam) that we are immortal: But in two things he goes beyond
us, and is too cunning for us.

The one, That our death shall be delayed: God says, Mors non tardat, Death
lingers not. The Devil says, Tardat, It lingers. Moram faciet, It loyters. My
Lord will delay his coming, (said the servant in the Gospel) But this feined
supposition was his certain perdition. Ezechiel did prophecy the ruin of
Jerusalem, and the death and destruction of her Citisens, telling them their
desolation was near at hand, There shall none of my words be prolonged,
Ezech. 12.
but the word which I have spoken shall be done, says the Lord God. But the
Devil did otherwise persuade with them, making them to say, The vision that
he sees is for many days to come, And he prophecieth of the times that are
far off. The wanton woman in the Proverbs, which invited the young man to her
bed and board, sought to entice him by this means, The good man is not at
home, he is gone a long journey; Prou. 7.
Therefore let us take our fill of love, etc.

From this vain hope of life, arises, that our greediness and covetousness
to enjoy and possess the goods of this life. And a little, being more than
enough for him, yet it seems unto man, much cannot suffice him. And it is an
evil thought in man, and much to be pitied, that a man should afflict
himself for that which neither he himself nor all his posterity shall live
to enjoy. O foolish man, do thou think thou shall return to live again in
those goodly houses that thou have built, and to reinioy those pleasant
gardens, and orchards that thou have planted? No, But may rather say to thy
self, These my eyes shall never see them more. Why then so much carke and
care, for three days, or thereabouts? The Romans would not build a temple to
Death, nor to Poverty, nor Hunger; judging them to be inexorable gods; But
more inexorable is Death, for man never returns again from Death to Life. And
therefore the Ancients painted Death with the Tallons of a Griffine. Saint Luke
painting forth the vigiles of the day of Judgment, and the anguish and agony
of the World, he says, That many shall wax fearful, and trouble their heads
to see and think on those things, Which shall befall the whole World.
Pondering in that place, that they shall not be sensible of their own proper
danger, nor the adventure wherein they stand of their salvation, or
condemnation; and yet cease not to afflict themselves with the loss of the
World, and that the world shall be consumed and be no more. But o thou foolish
man, if thou must dye and return thither no more, what is the world to thee?
when thou art at an end, the World is ended with thee. And if thou be not to
enjoy it any more, what is it to thee, if God do utterly destroy it?

And all these evils arise from the forgetfulness of Death. We should set it
always before our eyes. Luke 9.
He lives secure from Danger, that thinks upon the preventing of Danger.
Saint Chrysostom expounding that place of Saint Luke, He that will follow me
must take up his Cross daily, and so come after me; Signifying that what our
Savior pretended, was, That we should always have our death before our eyes.
1. Cor. 1^.
I dye daily (says the blessed Apostle Saint Paul) My imagination works that
daily upon me which (when my time is come) Death shall effect. There is no
difficulty that is run through at the first dash, and there is not any
difficulty so hard to pass through as Death. A Shoemaker that he may not
loose the least piece of his leather or make any wast of it, casts about how he
may best cut it out to profit, and tries it first by some paper pattern, etc.
Plutarch reports of Julius Caesar, that he being demanded which was the
best kind of Death? Answered, That which is sudden and unlooked for. Julian the
Emperor dying of a mortal wound, gave thanks unto the gods, that they did
not take him out of this life, tormenting him with some prolix and tedious
sickness, but by a hasty and speedy death. And for that they do not
believe the immortality of the soul, they hold a sudden death a kind of
happiness: but a Christian, who confesses that there is a judgment after
death, desires a more lingering and leisurely kind of dying, for to prevent
future danger both of soul and body. In Leuiticu^ God commanded, That they
should not offer any c^eature unto him which did not chew the cud, or which had
not a cloven hoof: And he therefore joined these two things together; for, to
swallow the meat down whole is very dangerous for the health; and the foot
not clo^en, very apt to slip and slide: and in a mystical kind of sense is as
much as if he should have said, That he that shall swallow down so fearful
and dangerous a thing as Death, without chewing and meditating thereon, shall
doubtless slide, if not take a fall as low as Hell.

Neither youth nor age can privilege from death.
The only son of his mother. In the order of conueniencie, it seems fitter
that the old mother should have died, than the young son. But as there is
nothing more certain than death, so is there nothing more uncertain than the
time of our death; the young Bird as soon falls into the snare as the old one;
and your greater Fish as soon taken with the hook as your lesser Fry. Psalm.
7.
If the Wicked turn not, God will whet his sword, bend his Bow, and prepare
for him the instruments of death, and ordain his Arrows against them. For old
men that stand upon the graves brinke, death has a Sithe to cut them down;
for young men that stand farther off, he has his Bow and his Arrows. Saint
Augustine says, That God takes away the Good before their time, that they may
not receive hurt from the Bad; and the Bad, because they should not do hurt to
the Good.

As soon goes the Rich as the Poor, the strong as the weak.
The only son of his mother. Not that he was her only son, but her best
beloved son. Solomon styles himself, Vnigenitum matris suae, His mothers
only begotten son; not that he was the only son of Bershabe, as it
appears in the first of Chronicles; but because he was so dearly beloved of
his mother, as if he had been her only son: he was his mothers darling, her
best beloved, the light of her eyes, and her hearts comfort, she cherished him,
made much of him, would not let him want any thing; yet all this care and
providence of hers could not shield him from death. There is a man in the City
that is of a strong and able body, and abounding in all worldly happiness;
There is another (says Job) that is weak, hungerstarued, and his wealth
wasted and consumed; both these death sets upon, and lays them in the grave.
He exemplifies in the King and the Giant; for the rest, he makes no more
reckoning of them than of so many little Birds, whom the least fillip strikes
dead: but he sets upon a King like a Lion; a poor man has many means to
hasten his death, but Kings seldom die of hunger, of penury, of heats, or of
colds, etc. And a Giant seems to be a perdurable and immortal Tower of flesh;
but in the end, both Kings and Giants fall by the hand of Death. And since that
Death did dare to set upon the Son of God, and his blessed mother, let
neither High nor Low, Rich nor Poor, hope to find any favor at Deaths hands.
Ioshuah did stop the Sun in his course, Moses the waters of the red Sea,
Joseph did prophecy of things to come, and many of Gods Saints wrought great
Miracles: but there is no miracle to be wrought against Death. Ier. ^.
Jeremy tells us of certain Serpents that cannot be charmed, charm the charmer
never so wisely: of this nature is Death. Ecclesiasticus introduces a dead
man, who speaks thus by way of advice to the Living, Memento judicij mei, sic
enim erit and tuum, Heri mihi, hodie tibi. That man was never yet borne, nor
shall be hereafter, that shall not see death, or escape this heavy judgment.
Solomon commanded the child to be divided in the middle, about whom the two
mothers did contend; and that sentence which he did not then execute, shall be
executed upon all living flesh: for all men being in regard of the body
sons of the Earth, and in regard of the soul the children of Heaven, every
one receives this sentence from the Judge at his death, Let the earth return
to the earth from whence it came, and the Spirit to God who gave it life.

She was a Widow woman. The word Erat, She was, carries with it a kind of
emphasis; she was a sorrowful and forelorne Widow. A Widow ought to be a rule
and pattern of perfection to all other women, she should be the glass
wherein they should see their faults, and what is amiss in them: In a word,
she was a woman irreprehensible, and without blame. Nor (according to Saint
Paul) has the Virgin or the Wife that tie and obligation upon them as she
has: The one, because her small experience in the deceits and vanities of the
world, may excuse her in many things; the other the charge and care that
necessarily attends Wedlock. When Absalon entered into the wives and Concubines
of his father, the King gave command they should be shut up like so many
Recluses, because they had opened the door unto him, as if the King had been
dead. And Widows are to live so separated and severed from the world, as if
they lived not in it. Isiodore expounds the Spanish word Viuda, which
signifies a Widow, to be qua^i vidua, divided from her husband as the Vine from
the Elm, which was it is prop and stay, which being taken away, the Vine lies
level with the ground, and without any comfort. The Hebrew deriueth the name
of Widow from a certain word which signifies both bound and dumb; now to be
bound and dumb, are the conditions and properties of him that is dead, who is
neither able to move nor speak: So that the vulgar Translation calls a Widow
Sterilem, barren and unfruitful, as it is in Job and in Esaias. Another letter
styles her Eradicatam, Job. 24. Esaias 2^.
plucked up by the Roots as a tree that is quite rooted up, that it may never
grow nor wax green again. The smell of thy garments is like the smell of
Frankincense; They must not smell of Amber, nor of Ciuet, but of Frankinsense,
which they offer up in Incense: for a widow ought to lead the remnant of her
days so near unto her husbands Tomb, that her garments should savor of that
incensorie perfume. Of such Widows as these God has that especial care, that
none shall do them any wrong; for the tears that drop down from their
cheeks ascend as high as Heaven. And as the vapors that are exhaled from the
earth, come down again in lightning and thunder and terrible tempests; so
prove the Widows tears to those that shall unjustly cause them to weep, and
draw those watered drops from their eyes. Heliodorus pretended to rob the Temple
of Jerusalem, and to take away the portions that were deposited for the
maintenance of Widows, who wept most bitterly: this general lamentation made
way to Gods Tribunal; he sent down one on a goodly fair horse armed at all
points, who overthrew Heliodorus upon the pauement, and presently two young men
fell upon him, and whipped him with scourges till they left him as it were for
dead. For this cause did God comfort this Widow at the gates of the City,
where the Judges had their Tribunalls, notifying unto them, that they should
take Widows into their tutelage and protection; and the rather, for that a
supremer Judge, the Judge both of Heaven and Earth, was willing to take so much
the more care of them, by how the more was their solitude and private course of
life. Saint Hierome writing to Furia and Eustochius, utters excellent things
of those that are true Widows indeed, and of those that are Widows but in
jest and sport. Of the former, Judith and Anna, Samuels mother, were notable
examples: And amongst the Gentiles, Artemisia Queen of Caria, who not desirous
to bu^ie her husband in Vrnes of silver or gold, buried him in her own bowels
by drinking down his ashes: in contemplation whereof, there is a very
medicinable herb called after her name, Artemisia; which all Widows in stead
of other herbs or flowers, ought to have lying by them upon their Estrado's,
their beds, and their chamber windows. Of those other fabulous widows,
Alcione may serve as an example, who took on so extremely for the death of
her husband, that the gods were feign to comfort her; and when they had given
her comfort, she was metamorphised at last into a Bird bearing the same name:
of which Saint Ambrose says, That it lives about rivers of waters, the
feathers thereof being green, and the beak red, in token that those Widows
that so quickly receive comfort, their life is commonly green and youthful,
and their words red and full of amorous passions, lanching themselves forth
like Ships, into a sea of vices and voluptuous pleasures, turning their vails
to sails, which fail with every wind.

Christ taking pity of her, etc. It is not here said, That he pitied the
son, but the mother; for they that die are not so much to be pitied as they
that live: for if he that dies go to Hell, we wrong Gods justice if we take
any commiseration of them; and if they go to Heaven, their happiness does not
require it, having more reason to envy than pity them. Lots wife was turned
into a pillar of salt, because she sorrowed for the burning of Sodom: and in
Heaven, as there can be no misery, so is it impossible that there should be
any commiseration; so that pity is only to be reduced to those that live.
The Scripture calls death, Rest and Sleep. Saint Paul says, I would not
have you to be ignorant concerning them which are asleep, 1 Thessalonians. 4.
that ye sorrow not even as others which have no hope. And Ecclesiasticus
gives us this advice; Eccl. 22.
Weep moderately over the dead, seeing he is at rest. The Scripture calls life
a Warfare, a pilgrimage, a Husbandmans task or day labor, Job. 7.
a navigations, etc. Man's life is a warfare upon earth, and his days like the
days of an hireling, etc. The soldier desires to see the end of his War,
and the Traveler his travel ended, to return again into his own Country;
an hireling looks for a reward of his work, a Mariner for a good voyage, and
man for death, Gaudent vehementer cum inuenerint mortem. Great was man's
misfortune, that he was to enter into a sea so full of miseries. But (as
Nazianzen says) death again, was great gain unto him.

Christ more moved with those disasters which happen unto us, than we our
selves.
Taking pity of her, etc. Greater was Christ's sorrow and compassion for this
disaster, than that of this Widow woman; for that harm which happens unto us,
touches us in comparison but lightly, but touches God even in the very
apples of his eyes; and this did Christ's mercy and pity manifest, in the
have that he made in other his miracles: He had many suitors to entreat him to
raise up Lazarus, as Martha and Marie: so likewise to restore the Centurions
servant to his former health, he was solicited by the Priests and the Elders:
Here only his mercy moved him thereunto, and therefore it is said,
Misericordia mot^s. In the fiery Bush that flamed, and was not consumed with
the fire, God did represent those fiery scourges wherewith they scourged his
People, and the fire of those Furnaces wherein they baked their brick; and
therefore he said unto Moses, Vade, Go thy ways; which is all one as if he
should have said unto him, It is I that am thus scortched and scourged, and
therefore Vade, have thee to Pharaoh. But some will object, If God be so hasty
to help his People, why did he suffer them to be imbroiled 40 years before
they could cast out the Ammorits and the Iebusites, especially it being the
Land which he had promised unto them? Whereunto himself gives this
resolution, Their sins were not yet grown up to their height. So that his
leading them all this while through the Wilderness, was a less misery than
their remaining in Egypt; and therefore he dismisseth Moses with a Vade,
giving him full power and Commission to free his People; willing him to hasten
away, that they might be eased of their torment, as if himself had felt the
smart thereof more than they. He could not endure that his friends should
suffer affliction; and because he had said, Cum ipso sum in tribulatione, he
would not be taxed of the breach of his word. So that when God is with thee in
thy tribulation, he will give an issue to thine afflictions, because he
suffers in them as well as thy self; and if he do not come in to help thee,
it is because thy sins have made him vnsencible thereof. But do thou mouere
a peccato, and thou shall find him (as it is here in my Text) miseri^ordia
motus.

He said unto her, Weep not. It caused much admiration, and seemed somewhat
strange to those that were there present, that our Savior seeing the tears
and anguish of this sorrowful and wretched widow, should upon so sad an
occasion say unto her, Noli flere, Weep not.

We know that there are diverse and sundry sorts of tears.

Some are occasioned by the excessive sorrow and grief of our own sins; of
this nature were those tears of Marie Magdalen, of David, and of Peter.

Others are drawn from us upon a fellow-feeling and sorrowfulness for other
men's faults: of this kind were those of Saint Paul, 2. Cor. 2.
Out of much affliction and anguish of heart, I wrote unto you with many
tears, so much was he grieved with the news he received from them of that
incestuous person, and the punishment of Excommunication inflicted upon him.
And to the Philippians, Philip. ^.
I have told you often, and now tell you even weeping, that they are the
enemies of the Cross of Christ. And those tears likewise which those men shed
who did bewail the miseries of Jerusalem, Ezech. 9.
whose foreheads God commanded to be marked with the letter Tau.

Others are shed by us merely out of compassion for other folks misfortunes;
and such as these were the tears of our Savior Christ, He beheld the City,
and wept over it. So likewise at Lazarus death, Jesus wept; John 11.35.
Did not I weep for him that was in trouble? Was not my soul grieved for the
Poor? And Jeremy did never make an end of weeping for the miseries of his
people.

Others, the devout meditation of Christ's bitter torments extort from us,
According as it was prophesied by Zach. They shall look on me whom they have
pierced, Zach. 1^.10.
and they shall mourn for him as one mourns for his only son, and shall
be in bitterness for him, as one that is in bitterness for his first borne.

Others gutter down from us out of a vehement and earnest desire we have to
our celestial Country, and to the enjoying of that our heavenly habitation.
Of this quality were those of David, Woe is me, that the time of my
pilgrimage is prolonged. And in another place, My tears were my bread even day
and night.

And all these several sorts of tears spring from the Fountain of Grace, and
are comprehended under the style of blessedness, Beati qui lugent, Blessed are
they that weep, etc.

There is another sort of tears which flow from natural pity and conceived
grief, for the death of our parents, children, kinsfolks, and friends; as
also for loss of wealth, honor, health, and the like; and when the Scripture
mentions them, it does not reprehend them. The Shunamite bewailed her dead
son; Marie Magdalen, the loss of her brother Lazarus; and humane Histories
recommend these tears of pity unto us: Alexander wept when he met with a
troup of poor miserable Greeks that were all totterd and torn; and they who
upon such sad and miserable spectacles are not tender eyed, and hearted, are
cruel creatures. Viscera ^orum cruaelia, (says Solomon) and Saint Paul styles
them, Si^^ affectione, Void of natural affection.

Now these tears may offend two manner of ways:

First, In their excess; for God will not have us to bewail that thing much,
which in it self is little. Saint Augustine has observed, That after Jacob
began to mourn for the loss of Joseph, and the bereauing him of Benjamin,
which mourning of his continued almost the space of twenty years; God
withdrew those Regalos and favors from him which he was wont to confer upon
him: before, the Angels ascended and descended the ladder; before, the Angel
gave him strength to wrestle all night long, etc. before, he inioyed
prosperity, wives, children, and victory against Esau: but afterward, the
more tears, the more sorrow fell upon him; for God never grants to the tears
of the earth, the comforts of Heaven. And although he permit a mannerly and
moderate kind of natural pity, Eccl. 22. Eccl. 38.
according to that of Ecclesiasticus, Super mortuum modicum pl^ra: And in
another place, Quasi dira passus, incipe plorare, My son, let tears fall
down over the Dead, and begin to lament, as if thou had suffered great harm
thy self. Such few drops he favors and cherishes, but if they be
excessive, or overmuch, he condemns them as unlawful, and as a wrong done
unto God. For the losing of God, or the loss of his love, thou may well
weep World without end, because it is an incomparable loss; but for the
outward losses of this World; Incipe plorare, Begin thou to weep, but quickly
make an end.

The second offense is, That a man having cause enough to bewail his own
sins, the loss of his Soul, and of God; does notwithstanding lament these
earthly and transitory losses, neglecting the former. This disorder Christ
sought to rectify and amend in those tenderhearted women of Jerusalem, who
wept so bitterly to see how ill he was used by the Jews, and how heavy the
burden of his Cross lay upon him. Daughters of Jerusalem, weep not for me,
but weep for your selves, etc.

He went and touched the coffin. The first place is taken up here by his
mercy, which is the wel-head of al those blessings which we receive from his
bountiful hand. Gods mercy the Spring from whence all his blessings flow.
His Providence does conserve us; his wisdom protect us and govern us; his
Goodness, sustaines us; his Liberality, inricheth us; his Grace, heals us:
And all this flowe^h from the fountain of his Mercy. The ancients styled
Jupiter, Optimus maximus; Because (as Cicero notes it) the attribute of
Beneficence is more grateful and acceptable in God, than his Greatness and
Power.

In the second place, came in his words of comfort, Noli f^ere, weep not.

In the third, his hands, Tetigit loculum. Here he exercises his hands, his
tongue, and his heart. If we cannot imitate the hands of our Savior Christ in
doing good; yet at least imitate his heart, and his tongue. For Pity and
words cost nothing, and are wanting to few.

They made a stand, that bare him. Here he showed himself Lord both of the
living, and the dead. And therefore Saint Luke uses this word Domin^^, Han^
cum vidisset Dominus, When the Lord had seen her. These that bare him thus to
his grave, are first of all a stamp or token of the goods of this life, which
carry us step by step from our honors, riches, delights, and pastimes, to the
house of eternal lamentation and mourning.

Secondly, they are a stamp or token of il and lewd company, which say to an
unexperienced and ignorant yongman, Come along with us, and let us lay wait for
blood. They are like those highway robbers which persuade men to rob, and kill,
saying, We will make our selves rich, etc. Or like those carnal men which cry
unto us, Come, let us take our pleasure. Of this People the Prophet Esaias
complained, saying, This is a People robbed and spoiled, they are all of them
snared in holes, they are hid in prison houses, they are for a prey, and none
delivers, for a spoil, and none says, Restore. The Devil and his Ministers
lead your wilful young men away captive, clap them into Hels Dungeon, and
there is none that delivers them, or to say so much as, Alas poor man,
whither will thou run on to thy destruction?

Young man, I say unto thee, Arise. He called him by the name of his age or
youth, because that had brought him to his grave; for it is sin that sises
out our lif^, and cuts it short. Youth is a kind of broken Ship which leaks and
draws in water at a thousand places, so that of force it must quickly sink.
El^hu said, That if a young man will be obedient and be ruled, he shall enjoy
his days in peace; but if he will be headstrong, and ungoverned, Morietur in
tempestate anima ^ius, and vita inter effoeminatos. The Seventy render it, In
adolescentia; for, a Tempest at sea, and Youth, that is tossed too and fro with
it is unruly appetites, is al one. Et vita inter Effoeminatos: Another Letter
has it, Scortatores. The connection is good, for Youth runs it self quickly
upon the Rocks of death, Prou 31.
through it is sensualities and lewdness of life. There are two daughters of
the Horseleech, which still cry, Give, give: And the Wiseman pointing them
forth unto us, says, The one is, Infernus; The other, Os Vuluae: The Grave the
one; and Lust the other. And the Wiseman did link these two together with a
great deal of conueniencie and fittingnesse; for if Lust be never satisfied,
the Grave less.

This truth is likewise made good, forasmuch as the Scripture styles Sin,
Sin is death it self.
Death, If I do this I must die the death; So said Susanna to the Judges that
made unlawful and dishonest love unto her. And Cain seeing himself charged
with fratricide, at that very instant he gave himself for a dead man,
Whosoever shall meet me, will kill me. Youth then being a house whereinto the
rain does drip so fast, and at so many places, it is no marvel, that life
should cease and soon decay. It is prouerbially said, Love is as strong as
Death: The character of a young man
And as Love does usually set upon Youngmen, so does Death; and where Love
strikes Youth, Death may spare his Dart. The Ancients painted a Youngman
stark naked, his eyes with a Veil or Bend before them, his right hand bound
behind him, and his left, left at liberty, and Time followi^^ him close at the
heels, and ever and anon pulling a thread out of the Veil. He was drawn
naked, to show with what little secrecy he had used his delights and
pleasures; with his right hand bound behind him, to express that he did not
do any thing aright; his left free and at liberty, signifying that he did all
things aukwardly and untowardly; he was portrayed blind, because he does not
see his own follies; but Time goes opening his eyes by little and little, and
day by day brings him to the true knowledge of his errors.

And he that was dead sat up and began to speak. The Dead presently obeyed
the voice of the Living. And he sat up. God cries out aloud to those that
are dead in their Souls, yet do they not obey his voice; Arise thou that
sleep, etc. He began to give thanks unto him that had done him this so
great a favor; Thou have delivered me, o Lord* from the doo^es of death, and
therefore I will celebrate thy praises, and magnify thy name in the Gates
amiddest the Daughters of Syon. It is Saint Chrysostomes note, That the word
Doors is put here in the plural number, because many are the dangers out of
which God delivers a sinner, That all may speak of thy praise, and talk of
thy wondrous works.

And there came a fear upon all. It may seem to some, That the word Love
would better have become this place, and been fitter for this present purpose
and occasion: All (a man would think) should rather have expressed their loves
unto him, sung forth his praises, and offered their service unto him. In those
former punishments of a World drowned and overwhelmed with Water, of a Sodom
burned and consumed with Fire, it was very fit and meet that it should strike
fear and amasement into all: But in such a case as this, What should cause
them to fear? Hereunto I answer, That nothing does strike such a fear and
terror into man, as the great and wonderful mercies of God. A Roman Soldier
told Julius Caesar, It much troubles me, nor can I be heart-merrie, as often as I
think on the many favors that I have received from thy liberal hand; but do
rather hold them as so many wrongs and injuries done unto me; for they are so
beyond all requital, that I must of force prove ungrateful, which makes me to
fear, that thou will proceed against me for a heinous offender in this kind.
In like manner, so many are the mercies of God toward man, and so infinite,
that they may be held as Vigiles of his future seuerer Justice. Jacob did in a
manner utter the same sentence against himself, Minor sum cunctis
miserationibus tuis, The least of thy mercies is greater than all my merits;
nor can the best services that I can do thee, make satisfaction for the least
of those favors which I have received from thy bounteous liberality. Grant, o
Lord, that what is wanting in our own worthiness, may be made up in the
mercies and merits of our Savior Jesus Christ; To whom, with the Father, etc.

THE XXX. SERMON, UPON THE FRIDAY AFTER THE FOVRTH SUNDAY IN LENT.
JOHN. 11.1 Erat quidam languens Lazarus.

Now a certain man was sick, named Lazarus of Bethanie, etc.


PEtrus Crysologus calls this, Signum signorum, The raising of Lazarus Christ's
greatest miracle.
Mirabile mirabilium, Virtutem virtutum; The sign of signs, the wonder of
wonders, and the Virtue of virtues, or the power of powers. Saint Augustine,
Miraculorum maximum, The miracle of miracles, which of all other did most
predicate and blazon forth Christ's glory. Saint Hierome preferres it before
all the rest that he wrought here upon earth. By this prenda or pledge of his
Divinity, Death remained confounded, the Devils affrighted, and the locks
and bars of Hell broken. Genebrard, That it is the voice of a Crier which
goes before a Triumpher, who makes Death the triumphant Chariot of his Majesty
and glory. That a valiant Warrior should make a brave and gallant show on
horseback, having his Courser adorned and set forth with curious and costly
Caparisons, it is not much; but to seem handsome and comely in Deaths
palenesse, weakness, and foulness, being so ghastly a thing to look on,
God only can do this. Ante faciem eius, (says Abacuc) ibit mors, Death ^^all
fly before his face. Christ does deliver us from a double death, the one of
the soul, the other of the body, He delivered them from their distresses,
Psalm. 107.^0. 1. Cor. 15.54.
Death is swallowed up in victory. He that drinks takes the cup in his hand,
and does therewith what it pleases him: so did our Savior deal with Death,
and therefore he called it a cup, drinking the same up at one draught; Death is
a large draught, but Christ swallowed it down.
wherein he drank a health to all Believers. Saint Bernard upon this occasion
says of him, Mirabilis potator es tu, Thou art a strange kind of drinker: O
Lord, before thou tastedst of this cup, thou said, Transeat, Let it pass;
and after thou had drank thereof, thou said, Sitio, I thirst. The Flesh
was afraid, but the Spirit got the victory over Death, with that ease, as a
good Drinker does of a good cup of drink when he is very thirsty. In a word,
Not only because this was a miracle wrought upon a dead person that had lien
four days buried in his grave, but because the sacrilegious council of the
Scribes and Pharisees had laid their heads together, and plotted the death of
our Savior Christ; as also in regard of those other circumstances, That the
deceased party was nobly borne, and that many of good Q^alitie came to visit
him in his sickness, and did weep and bewail his death, did our Savior
perform this miracle. Amongst all those miracles which our Saour Christ
wrought, Saint Augustine gives to this the first and prime place: and indeed it
seems to be an epitome and short sum of all those other miracles that he
wrought in the whole course of his life; for in the resurrection of one that is
dead, there is given sight to the Blind, ears to the Deaf, a tongue to the
Dumb, feet to the Lame, motion to the Paraliticke, etc. And therefore Saint
John with this miracle does (as it were) shut up and give a close to the
proouing of his Divinity.

A certain man was sick named Lazarus, etc. Therefore his Sisters sent unto
him. Here we may consider the good aduisement and discretion of this noble
pair of Sisters. When Marie Magdalen treated of the reparation of her own
soul, she went her self in person, passing through a world of inconveniences;
but for the restoration of her brother to his bodily health, she thought it
would be sufficient and serve the turn well enough, to send her Servant with a
letter to our Savior. The Worldling for the health of his body will round the
world; but will not stir a foot for his souls health: For to esteem of
things as they are, and to give them their true weight, and to put every thing
in it is proper place, is not only the mark of a prudent, but of a
predestined person. Egypt taxed Moses of ingratitude (as Phylon has noted)
in his life, for that he did forgo Pharaohs Palace, refused to be called the
son of Pharaohs daughter, and chose rather to suffer adversity with the
People of God, those poor Israelites, than to wear the Crown of Egypt, and
to enjoy the pleasures of the Court; esteeming (as Saint Paul says) the rebuke
of Christ greater riches than the treasures of Egypt. But first of all, he was
not ungrateful; for concerning those good blessings which he enjoyed, he was
more bound to God for them, than to the King. Secondly, he showed he was no
fool in doing as he did; for better is one crumme of bread in the Lords house,
than all the prosperity of the world without it; Than to enjoy (to use Saint
Paul's words) the pleasures of sin for a season. I had rather be a
Doore-keeper (says David) in the house of the Lord, than to dwell in
Tabernacles of sinners. Nazianzen reports, That the Emperor Valens offering
Saint Basil his favor, and to be a friend unto him, if he would but be a
friend to E^doxius the Arian; he told him, That he should highly esteem of the
Emperors favor and friendship, but he was to esteem more of Gods. Saint
Augustine says, That Adam did eat of the Apple, Ne contristaret delitias, etc.
least he should grieve his Love; not led along with carnal concupiscence, but
with a friendly affection. Suting with that of Saint Paul, That Adam was not
deceived, but the woman was deceived: but it had been better for Adam to have
displeas^d his wife, than to grieve the spirit, as Saint Paul speaks of a
sinner. In a word, fathers, mothers, chi^dren, wives, friends, and all our
kindred and acquaintance, are to be had in less esteem than our souls, and
our God. And therefore Marie Magdalen went in person for to seek out Christ,
for her God, and for her soul; but did not so for her brother.

Behold, he whom thou love is sick, etc. The Saints do much ponder the
discretion of this letter.

The first consideration is, It Is briefness and shortness of style;
Imagination cannot desire an elegancie more brief, nor a briefness more
copious. Ap^leius ^coffes at the long and spacious Orations which the Priests
made of their Syrian Goddess. Elias mocked at those of Baals Priests continuing
from morning to high noone; Clamate voce maiori, (said he) Cry aloud, 3. Reg.
1^.
for he is a god that either talks, or pursues his enemies, or is in his
journey, or it may be that he sleeps, and must be awaked, etc. Our Savior
Christ aduising us how we ought to pray, says, When ye pray, use no vain
repetitions as the Heathen; Mat. 6.7. God regards not the length of our
prayers, but their strength.
for they think to be heard for their much babbling. It is now the fashion of
the World, to amplify reasons, and to enlarge it is discourses with the
ornaments of Eloquence, the flowers of Rhetoric, choice Phrases, and a great
deal of artifice and cunning; but that of Heaven consists of few words, but is
full of spirit and devotion: one single Pa^er noster vttred with fervor, is of
more force, than many vosario's without it. When a Vessel sounds, it is a
sign it is empty. Moses treating with God, said, O my Lord, I am not
eloquent, neither at any time have been, Exodus 4.
etc. but I am slow of speech, and slow of tongue. Moses was herin mistaken;
for I would have thee to know, that a talking tongue and a dumb heart do not
suit well together. Divine Bernard asks the question, Why God in the Lords
Prayer did put this word Qui est in Coelis, Which art in Heaven, being that he
is present every where, and in all places? And his answer is, That his desire
was, that our prayers should proceed with that feruencie and forcible
ejaculations, as if God could not hear us unless by our prayers we pierced
Heaven. As for our harpes, Psalm. 137.
we hanged them up upon the Willoughes. Ruffinus says, That your Willoughes
are but barren Trees, and without fruit; and when Prayer proceeds from a dry
heart, and a barren and unfruitful soul, it is like the Harp there spoken
of, that hangs upon the Willoughes by the waters of Babylon. In a word, your
Laconicall kind of Language, that which is short and full, Nazianzen says,
That it is The uttering of much matter in a few words; and the fewer the words
are, the greater are the voices of our desires. When the Devil left Jobs lips
only free from byles and sores, he did not do it out of any pity toward
him, but out of a desire that he had to draw some word of impatience or
blasphemy from them: but he was both deceived and ashamed, when he saw that he
employed them in these only four praise-worthie words, Sit nomen Domini
benedictum, Blessed be the name of the Lord. And say the Devil should have
bereaved him of the use of his lips, and that he should not have been able to
have uttered a word, yet his desires would have spoken their mind in a loud
voice. Cum inuocarem, exa^diuit me Deus justiciae mea: He calls him, Deum
justiciae meae, The God of my righteousness, not, The God of my Prayer: And
why so? The reason is, Works out-speake Words
Because Works out-speake Words. Saint John says, That he saw under the
Alter the souls of the Martyrs, Crying with a loud voice, How long Lord? etc.
But if these souls were severed from their bodies, how could they cry? Saint
Gregory resolves it thus, That their desires did cry out aloud. Moses did not
unfold his lips, nor once open his mouth, and yet God said unto him, Why do
thou (...) unto me? only because his desires did set out a throat. So Abels
blood was said to cry out against Cain. So that with God a few words will
suffice. Besides, your better sort of women ought to be very sparing of their
words, Auaritia in verbis (says Plaut^s) in f^eminis semper laudabilis. Of a
lewd and naughty woman Solomon reports, That she inuiting a young man,
irretiuit ^um sermonibus, provoked him with her words. Ecclesiasticus says,
That wisdom and silence in a woman, is the gift of God: Nature may give
beauty, blood, prosperity, and other good gifts; but wisdom and silence God
gives: Sicut vit^a cocci^^^ labia tu^, Cant. 4.^.
Thy lips are like a thread of scarlet, and thy talk i^ comely. Those your
women's hairs which are dis-she^^led and blown abroad with the wind, they did
use to br^id and bind them up with a red ribbond; And therefore the Bridegroom
compares his spouses lips to a thread of Scarlet, or some red colored fillet
to bind them up, the better to show, that she should not be too lavish of her
tongue, but of few words, and those too upon fit occasion.

The second consideration in this their discretion, was, That they called him
Lord, Domine, etc. Your greatest Kings and most powerful Princes upon earth,
have no dominion or empire over the soul, neither are they able to add or
take away one dram of the spirit. 3 Reg. 1^.
But thou, o Lord, Thou art the universal Lord both of Heaven and Earth, and
we are thy handmaides and servants; and therefore thou can not deny us thy
favor. Saint Ambrose, expounding those words of David, Seruus tuus sum ego, I
am thy servant, says, That they who have many Lords and Masters here upon
earth, cannot cleave unto God; Seru^^ t^us sum ego, serui dominati sunt nostri:
Those creatures which God has given us to be our slaves, flesh, the dainties,
the delicacies, the delights, and pleasant pastimes of this world, shall have
dominion over them.

The third, Quem amas, He whom thou love. Amatus, or beloved, is a more
honorable name than that of Angel, Beloved, a name of great pre-eminence.
Apostle, Martyr, Confessor, or Virgin: Lucifer, was an Angel; Judas, an
Apostle: The Heretic will not stick to say, that he dies for Christ's cause,
and that he is a Martyr and a Confessor: your Vestalles, styled themselves
Virgins; yet all these names, have been liable to sin, to misfortune, and
Hell. But the name of Beloved, is not compatibl^ in that kind, And Christ has
got the start of Man in his love, For he loved us first, And where he once
loves he never leaves off.

Besides, Two things I would have you to note, which are usual with the Saints
and children of God.

The one, to set before their eyes the favors they have received, to allege
them, to show themselves thankful for them, and to praise and commend them.

Gods favors seldom come single.
The other, Not to show themselves forgetful of their services toward God;
Knowing that it is Gods condition and quality, when he bestows one favor,
to engage himself for a greater. Ezechias alleged unto God his holiness and
goodness of life: 4. Reg. 20.3.
O Lord, remember now how I have walked before theein truth and with a perfect
heart, and have done that which is good ^n thy sight. Saint Gregory presses
hereupon; Were it not better to allege thy misery, than to represent those
many good things which thou have done, all which thou have received from his
hand? But with God, to allege them, and to show our selves thankful for
former received favors, is a powerful means for the receiving of far greater
benefits and blessings from him. After that David had made a large muster of
his tribulations, He says, Conuersus, viuificasti me, and de abissis terrae,
iterum reduxisti me, Thou have quickened me, and have brought me again from
out the deepes of the Earth. Where I would have you to ponder the word iterum;
For God never does one single favor.

The ^ighteous ever mind full of Gods service, forgetful of their Mat. 25.
Secondly, the righteous are forgetful of their own services, for that they
hold them so mean and so vile, that they judge them unworthy Gods sight. And
when in that general judgment God shall say, I was naked and ye covered me,
etc. The Saints shall answer, Lord when did we see thee naked, etc. And it is
noted by Theodoret, that these are not words of courtesy, or out of
mannerlines, but of mere forgetfulness. For it is their fashion, so to
despise their own services and deseruings, that they do wholly forget them.

The fourth consideration of their discretion was, That so especial is the
favor which God shows unto his friends; and the grief which he conceiueth of
any that shall befall them, that they held it a greater point of Wisdom to
allege that he was his friend, than their brother. Saint Bernard says, That
albeit the defect of my services do dishearten me, yet Gods great mercies,
and his many favors do encourage me: For it is not Gods fashion to forsake
his friends.

And therefore says Saint Austen, Non enim amas and deseris. The Princes of the
Earth are now and then well content, their friends should suffer, because in
them, Power and Love is not equal: But those in whom these attributes go hand
in hand, ought not to suffer their friends to miscarrie. They would seem here
to put this upon Christ, and to make this cause his own. O Lord, That we
should loose our brother, it is no great loss, because in thee we have a
brother: But thou (o Lord) amongst so many thy professed enemies, have lost a
great friend. It is the condition of Gods Saints to grieve for the death of the
Just, Injuries done to God, more grievous to the righteous, than if done to
themselves.
because God receives a loss in them; and to resent their own proper injuries,
not for that these injuries are done to themselves, but for that they are
injuries done unto God. Tabescere me fecit zelus meus, quia obliti sunt verba
tua, inimici mei: Upon which place, Genebrard gives this exposition, That mine
own injuries, do not so much offend me for that they are mine, but because
they are offenses done unto thee. And David in his thirtith Psalm treats of
some crosses and affliction, that God by sickness had laid upon him, after he
had built his palaces, Thou did hide thy face and I was troubled. I was
loath to dye, Psalm. 39.
not for mine own sake, for it were happiness to me if I should dye to day or
to morrow, but not for thee, What profit is there in my blood, when I go down
to the pit? What service can David do thee, when he is laid in his sepulcher?
But o Lord, in his life, in his honor, in his crown, and in his kingdom, he
may do thee good service: This, o Lord, concerns thee, and must run to thy
account. The like bold insinuation did Moses use, when he said, O Lord, pardon
this people; lest the Egyptians should say, Thou had plotted this of purpose
to lead them out into the Desert, and there to make an end of them, having no
body to help them. Tibi soli peccaui, and malum coram te feci, vt
iustificeris in sermonibus tuis, and vincas cum iudicaris; Saint Augustine
gives it this interpretation, Tibi soli peccaui, viz. Tibi solum sum relictus.
O Lord, this wound was only made for thee, that thou alone might heal it;
all other Physicians have quite given me over, there is not any one upon earth
that knows how to cure me, and therefore I lay the same open only to thee,
Vt iustificeris. Thou have ordained a Law, That at what time soever a Sinner
shall repent him of his sin, and turn unto thee, thou will blot out his
offenses: O Lord, I am sorry I have offended thee, I confess my fault, and
acknowledge my sin before thee, and therefore it must be put to thy account,
to pardon me; otherwise it will be said of thee, That thou do not comply with
thy promise.

Secondly, These two sisters did pretend to strengthen this our Saviors love
to their brother. No love where no relief.
For it does not stand with the rules of friendship that a man should love, and
not relieve the necessities of him he loves. One telling Theophrastus, That
two such were very great friends, and that the one was very rich, and the other
very poor; He returned him this answer, It cannot be, being they be
friends. This very argument did these sisters urge our Savior Christ withal:
Lazarus being thy friend, and thou being life it self, why have thou suffered
Death to lay hold upon him? Again, There is no force that is able to resist
Death, but Love, Love is as strong as Death. Death has been so audacious as to
enter within our doors; let Love revenge us of this his presumption. The
Athenians placed Loves Statua betwixt Mercury and Hercules, the one the god of
Eloquence, the other of Fortitude. To show that Love does not consist so much
in words, as in works. Thou have vouchsafed, o Lord, to honor our brother
with the name of friend, now manifest the same by thy strong arm, and thy
powerful hand.

The fifth, was their having recourse unto him, that had caused this wound and
was only able to cure it. First, for that God is highly offended that we
should have recourse to any but himself. Secondly, Because no Physician, nor
earthly physic can minister health without the will and pleasure of our
heavenly Physician, He wounds, and he makes whole. The former is notified
unto us in Ah^ziah, who finding himself sore sick of a fall through the
Lattice window of his upper chamber: sent (fearing he should die of that
bruise) to consult with Baalzebub the god of Ekron. Which Messengers Elias
meeting withal, said unto them; What is there no God in Israel that ye go to
inquire of Baalzebub the god of Eckron? 4. Reg. 1.
deliver therefore this message from God unto your king, Thou shall not come
down from the bed on which thou art gone up, Osee 4.12.
but shall die the death. Hosea does likewise complain, That his People had
recourse in their doubts unto Idols, My People ask council at their stocks.
Lyrae renders it, In simulachro ligni. This my People is so foolish, that they
go to ask council of a piece of wood. The seventy Interpreters turn it
thus, In virgis suis: Whereupon Rupertus has observed, That this was a kind of
superstition which cloue unto them from the Chaldeans, from whom they had
received this infection; for it was a fashion amongst them, when they would
know what should befall them, to throw up a couple of sticks as high as they
could fling them; or two arrows tied together, and marking the one for good
luck, and the other for bad, they mumbled I know not what words, and that
which in the falling fell uppermost, did prognosticate the success. Ezech.
21.21.
Ezechiel reports, That the King of Babylon coming with a great army,
doubting with himself, whither he should go against Rahab or Jerusalem,
coming where there were two ways to take, used this superstition of the two
Arrows, Quaerens diuinationem. The King of Babell stood at the parting of the
way, at the head of the two ways, consulting by divination, and made his
Arrows bright, etc. and the lot lighted against Jerusalem. This difference
there is betwixt him that is a Saint of God, and him that is not; that he in
his griefs has recourse first unto God, and next to humane remedies; whereas
the other has first recourse unto Physicians: and when they notify to the
former, the danger wherein he is, he falls to a confession of his sins, a
hearty repentance, and to the receiving of the blessed Sacrament. The Ancients
did picture Health in the form of a handsome fair Damsel sitting in a
Royal Throne; for without health there is no pleasure in royal Thrones, in
Scepters, nor in Crowns: for the better conservation whereof, we are to use
temperance in our diet. The Serpent is the Symbol of Prudence, without which
it is impossible to preserve our health. The foolish and indiscreet man, that
makes no reckoning of the falling of your Sereno's, or evening dewes,
oftentimes blasting those that are in them; as in Spain, and the like hot
Countries; of your Suns heats, and your Snowes colds, your foul and pockie
Whores, loose oftentimes their healths, if not their lives. But above all, we
must have recourse unto God, for God is all in all; and without God, little
imports temperance, prudence, Physicians, or Physic.

The sixth consideration of their discretion, was, That they did propose their
misery, but not prescribe the remedy; for it is sufficient, that we propound
our necessity unto God. Saint Augustine says* Amanti, sat est nunciasse, It
is enough for him that loves, to intimate his mind. And Saint Bernard, Sic
melius tanquam non orantes, oramus; tanquam diffidentes; confidimus, etc. A
modest kind of demanding, and a diffident seeming confidence, does oftentimes
further a suit, and promote the thing we pretend. Ezechias being threatened by
Zenacharib, 4. Reg. 19.
did before God unfold his menacing letter; O Lord, (said he) thou may read
in these lines the pride and arrogancy of this blaspheming King. Saint Peter
when his soul melted into tears, did not tell God what he pretended by them;
Which caused Saint Bernard to say, Lachrimas Petri video, precem non audio, I
see Peter's tears, but hear not his prayer. The blessed Virgin said no more
than this, Vinum non habent, They have no wine. And therefore, Psalm. 37.5.
Commit thy way unto the Lord, and trust in him, and he shall bring it to
pass, etc. The Sisters good will was well known to our Savior, but they did
not publish the same: for the Just never ties himself to his own will, Not my
will, but thy will, ^ Lord, be done; His will must be ours.
It was our Saviors saying to his Father, when praying in the Garden, he
besought him, Let this Cup pass from me. And in another place, I descended
down from heaven not to do mine own will, but the will of my Father that
sent me. Anselmus says, That a sovereign will in man, and which does not
submit it self unto Gods will, is the will of Worldlings, and sauouring too
much of the earth; and this superiority would (if it knew how) rob God of his
privileges, as proud Lucifer endeavored to do. And in another place, he
terms a man's own proper will, Pestem and lepram mundi, The plague and
leaprosie of the world; and that God does punish nothing more upon earth; and
that there had never been any Hell, The perverseness of man's will.
had it not been propter propriam voluntatem, for this self-will of ours.
Saint Bernard says, That it conuerteth good into ill, and that it loses the
reward of Fasting, whereby Heaven might be gained: Alleging that of Esaias,
Behold, Esaias 58.3.
in the day of your fast you will seek your will. Cassianus reports of a
holy Hermit, That a friend of his at the hour of his death asking his advise,
How he might be saved? Answered, That he was never wedded to his own proper
will. Taulerius reports of a certain Divine, That he did oftentimes desire
of God, That he would direct him to a Master that might teach him the way of
his salvation; and that at last he met with a poor man that was all ragged and
torn: God give you the good day, said he unto him: To whom the other replied,
I never had bad one yet: What meanest thou by that, quoth he? He told him, I
did ever place my happiness and content in submitting my will to Gods will; and
because his will diuides it self into good and evil, contenting my self with
his good will and pleasure, I have always led a contented life. But what (said
he) would thou do, if God should cast thee into Hell? He answered, My Soul
has two arms; the one of Humility, the other of Charity: with the one I
would obey; with the other I would take hold on God himself, and would force
him to descend down with me into Hell; and having him along with me, I should
enjoy all happiness and content. Leo the Pope says, That the dispossession of
our own proper will, Omnes fid^les instruxit, omnes Confessores incendit,
omnes Martyrs coronauit; Instructed all the Faithful, inflamed all the
Confessors, and crowned all the Martyrs.

Ecce, quem amas infirmatur.
Behold, He whom thou love is sick. This Ecce implies matter of admiration;
Behold, one that is beloved of God, and that is sick. The Angel said unto
Gideon, The Lord is with thee thou valiant man. But he answered with a kind of
admiration and wondering, Ah my Lord, If the Lord be with us, why then is all
this evil come upon us? This is a secret hidden from the eyes of the flesh;
wherein we are to acknowledge these two truths:

The one, That Tribulation conserueth Virtue.

The other, That God gives tribulation to his best friends, as a reward of
their great and good services.

Touching the former, In that earthly Paradise, Virtue was conserved in it is
perfect rest and quiet, because the goods of the body did concur with the
goods of the soul. But this concord was broken through sin; and then virtue,
amidst it is ease and pleasure, lived in greater danger; but in it is
tribulation, in greater security. Caietan says, That the certainest and most
assured sign that Virtues are such strangers here upon earth, is, for that
they have need of so many materials of persecutions for their preservation.
Fire being in it is own sphere, is solely by it self conserved without any
fuel to maintain it, or breath of air to blow it: the like succeeds with
Virtue.

Touching the second, Saint Ambrose says of Job, That before the storms of
affliction fell upon him, he was a holy man; yet for all that had he not the
reward of holy, The best reward that God can give his followers
Virtutis praemium non habebat, God had not rewarded him for this his virtue:
He had showed himself a valiant soldier in peace, but not a Conqueror in
war; and that his troubles and afflictions bestowed upon him the Palm of
this his victory. He says likewise of Joseph, That the temptation of his
Mistress clapped the Crown of Chastity upon his head; and the wrong he
received by imprisonment, was the Touchstone of his valor. Your earthly
Crowns are made of gold, but your heavenly Diadems, of the thorns of
tribulation; Necesse fuit, vt tentatio probaret te, It was needful that thou
should be tried by temptation. But this is a Theme which has been beaten
upon heretofore, and in many places much insisted upon, and therefore I will
pass it over.

Man's misery the blason of Gods Majesty.
This sickness is not unto death, but for the glory of God, etc. That great
and dangerous diseases honor the Physician that does cure them; that great and
terrible tempests recommend the Pilots skill that can preserve the Ship amidst
those cruel flawes and raging seas; that great victories innoble the Captains
that obtain them, is a manifest and known truth: but that those storms which
prick and pain my feet, should serve for flowers in Gods hands; that those
stones whereat I stumble, should serve as Diamonds for his Crown; this is a
hidden treasure, and a secret mystery of heavenly Phylosophie; but so certain,
that in case God had not created the world for any other end than to throw
tribulations upon his friends, it had been a famous piece of work, and a most
glorious Fabric: for so great is the glory which a Saint draws from his
sufferings, that he makes no reckoning of the pain that he indures. And it is
fitly termed glory, for that all our felicity consists in the seeing of
God, Tribulation opens the eyes of the Soul, whereby we come to see him the
better, Vexatio dat intellectum, It is a kind of glory to suffer affliction.
Heretofore (said Job) Auditu auris audiuite, nunc autem oculus meus videt te,
In my prosperity, o Lord, I had some knowledge of thee; but now in my misery
sitting on the dunghill, I have seen thee with mine eyes; I find a great
difference between that which I heard, and that which I now see. Not that he
saw God, (says Saint Chrysostom) but because his knowledge was by his misery
made more clear. After that man had fallen by sin, God gave that to him for
a punishment, which before he had bestowed upon him for entertainment: He had
placed him in Paradise, to dress and keep it; afterward he allotted it him
as a chastisement, In the sweat of thy brows, etc^ and the mystery is, That
Gods disfavor is Hell, his favor, Heaven: but trouble and affliction sent us
by God, is like unto Moses his Bush, which the more it flamed, the fresher it
seemed; for (as it is observed by Saint Gregory) the fire did serve there in
stead of water: Suting with that of Saint Paul, Licet is qui foris est, noster
homo corrumpatur; for by how much the more the body is dried up and withered
away, by so much the more does the soul grow green and flourish; and by how
much the more the outward man waxes weak, by so much the more the inward man
waxes strong.

For the glory of God, etc. Before your great battles are fought, they first
begin with skirmishes; in your Tilts and Tournaments they begin with proffers
and flourishes; between Love and Death, after eithers brauado's, the war is
now ended: Love skirmisheth with Death, and has gotten himself such great
glory in this conflict, that with a general shouting all cry out aloud, That
Love will win the field. There are many, who not truly looking into the cause
of their punishment, cry out with Job, O, that my grief were well weighed,
Job. 6.2.3.
and my miseries were laid together in the balance, for it would be now
heavier than the sand of the sea. And in another place, He has multiplied my
wounds without a cause. And David complains, I did not enter into the cause
of those many stripes which God had laid upon me. But to all this it may be
answered, That the cause thereof is the glory of God. The stench vapors it
self from forth the earth, it inuirons the circumuicining air; the Worms are
knawing on Lazarus carcass: all this loathsomenesse, this stench, and these
Worms, turn to the glory of God.

That Mary which anointed the Lord with ointment, etc. The titles whereby the
Spirit of God makes these Sisters, and their brother known, are those their
services expressed to our Savior Christ. Mary, who anointed his feet, Martha
who feasted him; and Lazarus, his beloved friend. For the greatest nobleness
that a soul can enjoy, is, To serve and love God; Fear God and keep his
Commandments, etc. This is the only true valor in man. Philon expounding
that place upon Genesis, These are the generations of Noah, etc. He says, That
God willed Moses to make a Pedigree or Genealogy of Noah, but he did not make
it by fetching it from his famous ancestors, as your Noblemen and Gentlemen do
now a days, but from his Virtues. Those forefathers, and great grandfathers,
which made Noah so renowned, were his obedience, his constancy, his fortitude,
and his piety. This is the true nobility of Gods Saints. The divine Histories
that blazons forth Job, describes him thus, Job. 1.
He was an upright and just man, one that feared God, and eschued evil, etc.
But why did he not make mention of his Fathers and his Kindred and Alliance?
Because Gods Saints, boast not their parentage, but their virtue. Saint
Chrysostom proves at large, that a man ought not to be commended for any
thing, but his virtue. And he rendereth three very good reasons for it.

The first is, That all other our goods end with our lives; Nothing more
properly ours, than Virtue.
but virtue indureth for ever. The rest are bona aliena, they are not ours, but
of others. But virtue, is bonum proprium, It is our own proper good. And Saint
Chrysostom treating of Nabuchadnezzars Statua, much condemns the means that
was used for the increasing of his honor, and authority: For he dishonored
himself by having that to be honored; showing thereby, that he relied more
upon a Statue of mouldring mettalls, than his own body and soul:
representing those therein, that are honored more in the world for those
outward goods of the body, than those inward goods of the soul; confessing as
it were, that because they have not any thing in them that deserves honor,
they erect them Statues to be adored.

The second, None of all these exterior goods does satisfy the soul, but
Virtue fills the Vessel of man's heart. Saint Ambrose interpreting that verse
of David, Accedite ad Deum, and illuminamini, (id est) illuminabimini; adds
thereunto, Accedite, and satiamini; accedite, and liberamini; accedite, and
dimittemini: Come unto God, and ye shall be illightned, for he is the Light;
come unto him, and ye shall be satisfied, for he is the Bread of life; come
unto him ye that are thirsty, for he is the Fountain of living waters; come
unto him and be freed, for he is freedom it self; come unto him ye that
desire pardon, for he is the Remission of sins.

In all humane goods the cretures have the start of man.
The third, These humane goods are so base and so vile, that none can truly
commend them. Art thou bold? A Lion is more bold than thou. Art thou strong? A
Bear is far stronger: Art thou beautiful? a Peacocke goes beyond thee: Art
thou brave and gallant? A Horse in his rich Caparisons is a more glorious
sight: Live thou in great Palaces? a Iackedaw, nay a Spider lives in greater
and far more sumptuous: Art thou a curious Workman? The Be is a better: Art
thou nimble of body? The Heart is more: Have thou a good eye? The Eagle has a
quicker: Have thou a quick sent, every Dog will out-nose thee: Art thou a
good husband? The Ant is a better. It is a shame therefore that thou should
boast thy self of those things wherein the bruit beasts do surpass thee. In a
word, it did stead Lazarus more to be our Savior Christ's friend, than nobly
borne, or anciently descended.

The goodness of Gods condition toward Penitents, expressed two manner of ways.
First, he never remembers their sins. Esaias 38.17.
Which anointed his feet with ointment. Here are two truths touching the
goodness of Gods condition, pointed forth unto us:

The first, That during all the time of Marie Magdalens perdition and
profaneness, there is not the least print or show in Gods book concerning any
such matter, nor any memory thereof remaining upon Record; Marry the World
calls her Maria la Peccadora, Marie the Sinner, and represents nothing else
unto us but her sins: but God does not so, nay he does not so much as think
upon them, or once offer to call them to mind. Projecisti post tergum tuum, (It
was the saying of good King Ezechias) omnia peccata mea, Thou have cast all my
sins behind thy back. It is a Spanish phrase, Echar al trancado, of that
which is no more to be seen. Saint Augustine expounding that place of Jeremy,
Ecce, ego obducam ei cicatricem; says, That the Chyrurgeon cures the wound,
but does not take away the skarre, but there is some mark thereof still
remaining; but God not only cures the wound, but therewithal quite quits the
sign, as if there had never been any such thing at all. Saint Chrysostom
adds hereunto, Cum sanitate reliquit pulchritudinem: Nor shall it be an
excess of speech, to affirm, That Marie Magdalens repentance made her appear
more fair and beautiful than Saint Agnes the Martyr, S. Agatha, or S. Cicile.

Secondly, he never forgets our services. Mat. 26.
The second is, That God never blotteth out of his remembrance those services
that he receives from us, nor will suffer his friends to be forgotten: And
therefore our Savior says touching this sinful woman, Verily I say unto you,
wheresoever this Gospel shall be preached throughout the whole world, there
shall also this that she has done, be spoken of for a memorial of her; ye may
chance to forget it, but God will not. Your Kings nominate Chroniclers to write
down the services of their Vassalls, and the famous acts of the valiant and
stout men of war; Iosaphat the son of Eliud (as we may read in the book of
the Kings) erat a Commentarijs, 2. Reg. 8.16.
was the Chronicler. But Kings either not read them, or soon forget them: In
Assuerus his Annals is set down the good service which Mardochee had done him,
by freeing his life from a treason that was plotted against him; but Assuerus
had quite forgot it. But God is so far from forgetting such services, that he
uses to assume unto himself a name from the service that they do him: he
said unto Jacob, Genesis 31.13. Malach. 3.16.
I am the God of Bethel where thou annointedst the Pillar, where thou vowedst a
Vow unto me. Corresponding with that of Malachie, Scriptus est liber monumenti
coram eo, And a book of remembrance was written. Anonother letter has it
Recordationis, agreeing with the common Translation.

Our friend Lazarus sleeps, etc. What a strange kind of thing is this, that
Lazarus being dead should find friends? For it is the course of the world, to
hold him our friend that lives in plenty, prosperity, and enioyes his health;
but not that a sick man, nay a dead man, should find a friend, etc. Job made
it his complaint, My friends and familiar acquaintance forsook me, and would
not look upon me in my misery: And he draws his comparison of their sudden
departure, from those downefalls of water in the Winter, which glide away with
all the speed that may be. Solomon compares them to a rotten tooth, and a
weary foot. The Harlot is likewise the hierogliphycke of false friends; whose
embraces and kisses are like those of Judas, for money: your Quicke-siluer is
likewise a simbole of the same, which forsakes the gold in the Chrisoll; these
are all of them things that fail in the time of need. The World has not any
one thing whereof it is more unmindful, than the Dead; Obliuioni datus sum,
tanquam mortuus a cord, O, that the Dead should be forgotten by that heart
which gave it life! and that he should be forgotten by his friend, who placed
him in honor and in riches. In a word, by how much the more misery increases
in the world, by so much the more friendship decreaseth. Saint Chrysostom
says, That the best friend that ever was, ascended up unto Heaven. Saint
Augustine, That a friend is like a Physician that loves the Patient, and hates
his disease; but if Death come betwixt him and home, his skill is at an end;
for he that can recover health, cannot recover life: this is only reserved for
our Savior Christ, who is Medicamentum vitae, and immortalitatis gratia. This
Physician styles Lazarus, his friend, in health, in sickness, and in death.
Manus eius tornatiles. That Artificer which leuels his work by his eye,
commonly goes crookedly to work, and commits many disproportions; but he that
works in a wheel as Turners do, or in a Press as your Printers, keeps a
continual euenesse and equality, in sickness and in health, in prosperity
and adversity, in Winter and in Summer; and such an Artisan was our Savior
Christ in all his actions.

Our friend Lazarus sleeps, etc. It is an ordinary Language in Scripture,
Death, whither temporal or spiritual, called a Sleep, and that fitly.
to call Death, Sleep; whither it be the death of the soul, or the body. To
him that was dead in the soul, Saint Paul says, Arise thou that sleep,
etc. Some sinners are so sound asleep, that neither lights, loud calling, nor
shogging of them can awaken them; Percussi eos, and non doluerunt, I smote
them, and they grieved not. Saint Augustine confesses of himself, That he lay
long in this Lethargy; and descending to vices in particular, he says, That
God calling upon your Thieves, for to have them to make restitution; upon your
reuengefull natures, that they should not seek revenge; and upon your
Sensualists, that they should leave off this their beastly course of life: some
of them answer, That they cannot; others, That they dare not. Other Sinners
there are that hear God in their sleep, taking their dreams to be
revelations; considering with themselves, That God is wont to speak in
dreams and in visions; Job. 33.
For God speaks once or twice in dreams and visions of the night, when
sleep falls upon men, and they sleep upon their beds, then he opens the
ears of men by the corrections which he had sealed, that he might cause man to
turn away from his wickedness, that he might hide the pride of man, and that
his life should not pass by the Sword.

The death likewise of the body, is, and that very fittingly, termed sleep.

First, For the rest that they take: The Philosophers called it Tempestatis
p^rtum, the Haven to our weather-beaten lives; Perigrinationis finem, the end
of our pilgrimage here upon earth; Omnium malorum medicamentum, A remedy
against all diseases.

Iud. 3.
Secondly, For the danger wherein it leaves sinners: Holofernes laid him down
to sleep, fully persuading himself, that he should have enjoyed Judith in his
arms when he awaked; but alas poor soul, before ever he was aware of it,
Genesis 20.
he found himself in Hell. Abimilecke got him to bed, with hope to have his
pleasure of Saraah, but in the dead time of the night he found himself in the
hands of an angry God. To the rich man that invited his soul to take his
fill, Luke 12.
for there was store enough for many years, Hac nocte, etc. This night shall
thy soul be taken from thee. Saul slept very soundly and carelessely in his
Tent, when David might have given him his passeport for another life. 1. Reg.
2.6.
And therefore no man ought to lay him down to sleep with less heedfulnesse,
than if he were now lying on his death bed. Your wretchlesse sinners feel a
harder passage of it, and far greater torment than the Just. Death uses to
bring great torments with it: First, In seperating the soul from the body.
Secondly, In forgoing those things it loves, as gold, silver, lands, houses,
wife and children, which are all of them strings whereunto the heart is tied;
besides the venture of our condemnation for ever, and the agony of so many
fears that will in this dissolution seize upon us. From all which the
Righteous, though they threaten him never so much, remains free and untouched.

Christ's passions differing from ours.
He groaned in the spirit, etc. The Greek word signifies to roar, to cry
out aloud, to wail, to lament, and to be much moved: According to that of
Theophilact, Et turbauit semetipsum, And was troubled in himself: It did
awaken in the sensitive part of him, those affections or passions, which (as
Aristotle says) are like unto dogs, who in hearing any noise, fall presently a
barking till that their Master do still them and make them hold their peace. In
us it is a kind of imperfection, because these affections or passions fall a
balling without any reason in the world, and no just occasion being given. But
in our Savior Christ, these passions were not without cause, as Saint Augustine
has noted it, Saint Gregory, and Saint Hierome; neither can they press him
further than he is pleased to command them. If here our anger take hold upon
us, it is like a fierce mastiffe, which being set on by his Master, takes hold
on the Bull, and will not let him go, though he be rated off again and again.
In conclusion, two things does here recommend themselves unto us.

The one, That our Savior Christ was angry.

The other, That he was moved to much compassion.

His anger was occasioned through the Jews incredulity, (as it is noted by
Cardinal Tolet and Caietane) whose hardness and unbelief was such, that he
was forced to take Lazarus his life from him, to disconsolate those two kind
Sisters, to draw tears from their eyes, and sobs from their breast, and
afterward to return himagaine unto the world, and only that some might be
drawn to bele^ue. Saint Cyril says, That this his anger was against Death and
the Devil, as if he had threatened their overthrow, and vowed their
destruction; as it is prophesied by Osee, O mors, ero mors tua, O death, I will
be thy death. etc.

Vbi posuistis eum? Where have ye laid him? etc. O Lord, Why should thou
ask this question?

I answer, That he did it for two reasons.

The one, The countenance of a Sinner is so strangely changed, and is so
strangely altered from what he was before he fell sick of sin, that it is a
phrase of Scripture to say, God does not know him. Thou lendest thy friend thy
Horse or thy Cloak, the one is returned to thee so lame and so lean, the
other so ill used and so utterly spoiled, that not knowing thine own, thou
say, This is not that which I lent. Of an untowardly and ungracious son
the father will usually say, He is none of my son; so said God to the foolish
Virgins, and to those that had wrought miracles in his name, Nescio vos, I know
ye not. Your Robbers on the Highway disfigure the faces of those whom they rob
and murder, to the end they may not be known. And there is nothing that makes
the Soul fouler, than Sin, Denigrata est facies eorum super carbones: and it
being so fair and beautiful before, it is no great marvel that God should
not know it. So that now our Savior seems not to know the place, there being
so great a difference between the one place and the other [that of the life of
Grace, and that of the death of Sinne] that he here asks, Vbi posuistis eum?
Where have ye laid him? Saint Chrysostom alleges, That he used the like
question when he called unto Adam, saying, Adam, Adam, vbi es? Adam, where are
thou? I find thee in a different place from that wherein I put thee; I placed
thee in prosperity and content, and I find thee now in wretchedness and in
misery: Who caused this so great an alteration in thee? Saint Cyprian says,
That this question was made more to the Sin than to the Sisters; and that
Lazarus representing Mankind, he said, (speaking of our sins) Vbi posuistis
eum? Where have ye laid him? I placed him in Paradise, and ye have put him in
the grave. The like is reported by Petrus Crysologus; and he calls the Grave,
the Cave wherein the Devil hides his thefts: and because the beginning of all
this harm proceeded from woman, he asks the Sisters, Vbi posuistis eum?
Where have ye laid him? For there are many women (God having placed man in
honor, happiness, and health) which bring man to his grave.

The other, A Sinner through sin is removed so far from God, Sin discoasts
a man from God.
( in Regionem longinq^am) that God asks, where he is? For if it were possible
for man to hide himself from the all-seeing eye of God, doubtless he would
hide himself in the land of Darkness, that is, of Sin. And therefore it is
said, Psalm. 1.6.
The Lord knows the way of the Righteous, and the way of the Wicked shall
perish.

And Jesus wept. Reasons why Christ wept.
Of this sheding of tears we have rendered many reasons elsewhere: Those which
now offer themselves are these:

The first is of Saint Ambrose and Saint Chrysostom, who say, That Christ was
moved to weep, by seeing Marie and Martha weep. Christ seeing the Widow of
Naim weep, said unto her, Noli flere, Weep not; and in the house of the
chief Ruler of the Synagogue, he sought to divert their tears; and yet here
these of Marie seem to extort by force the falling of these tears from his
tender eyes. Marie had accustomed her self to talk with our Savior in this
^ind of Language, it being a Cipher which only our Savior understood; and
because she talked to him in tears, he answers her in tears. The exhalations
of Mary's heart ascend up to the heaven of Christ's eyes; and these humane
tears draw down divine tears, obtaining that by grace which was impossible
for nature to compass.

The second is of Saint Hilarie and Epiphanius, who affirm, That he thinking
on the obstinacy of the Jews, and their final perdition, brake forth thus
into tears. For no man can comprehend what an offense to God is, save God
himself; and therefore none, o Lord, can so truly bewail sin, as thy self.
And it seeming to our Savior Christ, that two eyes were too little to lament
their misery, he added five wounds, which served as so many weeping eyes, not
shedding water, but blood. Saint Bernard says, That in the Garden our Savior
did sweat blood, that he might weep with all his whole body; treating therein
touching the remedy of the mystical body of the Church. Eusebius Emis^nus
says, That he did groan and weep, in token that we ought grievously to
lament and bewail our sins. Ier. 9.17.18.
And to this purpose says Jeremy, Call for the mourning women, that they may
come, let them make have, and let them take up a lamentation for us, that our
eyes may cast out tears, and our eye lids gush out of water. And why, I pray
you, so much weeping and lamentation, Quia ascendit mors per fenestras, Ibid.
21.
(as it follows anon after) Because death is come up into our windows, and
is entered into our Palaces, to destroy the children without, and the young men
in the streets. The Soul is gone forth, and Death has entered in, weep
therefore, The death of the soul is a true death; that of the body but a
shadow.
etc. The death of the body is a type of that of the soul: And therefore
Saint Gregory says, If I shall walk in the midst of the shadow of death. He
says, That the departing of the body from the soul is but a shadow, but the
departing of the soul from God is a truth; and as a shadow is a refreshing in
Summer, so is death to the Righteous. The Wicked stick not to say, There is no
comfort in the end of man: But Gods Saints say, Thou have covered us with the
shadow of death; When the fire of Hell did threaten us, Death did shelter us
with it is shade. Cada vno habla de la Feria, como le va en ella, Every one
speaks of the Market as he makes his pennie-worths. The Just has no cause
to weep, because he that enjoys God, enjoys all the happiness that can
be spoken or imagined; but the Sinner may cry out, Ego plorans, and oculus
meus deducens aquas, quia long factu^ est a me consolator. It being the soul
of my soul, and now severed so far from me: thou have cause to bewail a body
without a soul. It is a lamentable thing, (says Saint Augustine) that we
should bewail other losses, and not that of our soul: Men careless of
nothing more, than of their souls.
Quid tam male de nobis meruit anima nostra? How has our soul so ill deserved
of us? He there considers the great care we have of a new suit of clothes,
that neither the dust, the moath, nor the least wrinckle should hurt it, but
are very curious in folding of it up. He that buys, has an especial eye to
two things:

The one, to look very well to that he buys, be it pearls, apparel, or
horses, and will first make proof and diligent inquiry of their goodness,
etc.

The other, To cast about with himself, how he shall be able to pay, and to
drive the price as well as he can. Do thou likewise endeavor to use the like
diligences concerning thy soul; consider first, what kind of stuff it is, and
what it is worth, and then beat the price, and see for what thou can buy it:
Which course if thou shall but take, thou will look to it the better, and
esteem it the more and not set so slight by it as many do.

Dead Lazarus the emblem of a Sinner.
Take ye away the stone: He stinketh already, for he has been dead four
days. Lazarus being now four days dead, lying stinking in his grave, and
with a tombe-stone upon him, does represent a Sinner, that through long custom
is grown old in his sins; That which might well have been cured, having
gotten strength by time, is become incurable: not that it is impossible to be
healed, but because it is a strange kind of cure, and healed with a great deal
of difficulty. And therefore the Wiseman says, That a Young man enured to
ill, Age will not make him give it over. Chrysostom calls Custom, Febrim
furiosam, a hot burning Fever; whose raging flame taking hold on our appetites,
there is no water that can quench it. Phylon calls it Regem animae, The King of
our soul: agreeing with that language of Saint Paul, Let not sin reign in
your mortal bodies. Plato reprehending a certain Scholar of his, of some
^ight faults; which he confessing, but making light of them, his Master told
him, Custom is no such light thing as you make it. It is Saint Hieromes
observation, That Jeremy said, O Lord, I know not how to speak, because I am
but a child. And Esaias, Woe unto me that I have held my peace, for I am a man of
polluted lips. The one, God cured by only touching his mouth with his finger:
the other, he was feign to cauterise with a hot burning cole. Old sins, like
old sores, hardly cured.
Now the infirmity being all one, why should the remedies be so disequall? I
answer, That the sin of Jeremy was but a child as it were, very young and
tender, and therefore any the least remedy would serve his turn: but Esaias was
an old grown Courtier, etc. Saint Augustine dwells much upon this word
Quatriduanus, his four days lying in the grave. The Evangelists make mention
of three dead persons which our Savior raised up to life: not that he had not
raised up more, but because these do represent the deaths of our souls. The
daughter of the chief Ruler of the Synagogue which went not out of her house,
A threefold death of the Soul.
represent those our secret sins which pass in our withdrawn rooms, and
the closest by-corners about the house: The young man of Naim, those public
sins which proclaim themselves in the Market place, and coming out of
doors, offer themselves to every man's view, your widows sons being
generally lewd and ill given: Lazarus, those that stink and grow unsavory
through their too long custom of sinning, having lien long in this grave of
death. Saint Augustine says, That the name of three, in Scripture, betokens
many sins; but that of four, more than many. And this phrase of speech is
used by Amos, Amos 11.
For three transgressions of Moah, and for four I will not turn to it;
signifying thereby, many, and more than many. O terque quaterque beati, implies
a world of happiness: to the like sense sounds this word Quatriduanus, Four
days since.

Whence it is to be noted, Gods love seen by the delays he uses in his
punishing.
That sins when they begin like the waters to swell so high, they leave their
bed and run over the banks, causing a miserable inundation. Gods anger growing
weary in the expectation of our amendment, draws his sword at last to cut us
off. The sins of Sodom cried out so loud, that the clamor thereof came to
Gods ear; so shril was the noise, that it brake through those other inferior
heavens, and ascended up to the Throne of Thrones, where he sat in his
Imperial Majesty. God was wondrous angry at it, yet had he this patience
with himself, that before he would execute his wrath upon them, he said, Vadam
and videbo, I will go down and see whither they have done altogether
according to that cry which is come unto me, etc. What greater evidence, o
Lord, Genes. 1^.
of thy love, than these thy delays? God did bear with them yet a little
while longer, and he did look and stand waiting to see whether Sodom would
amend the foulness of her sin: so that when he came down to see how
things passed, had he found them sorrowful for what they had done amiss, and
repenting themselves of their former evil life, he would have sheathed his
sword, and withdrawn his displeasure. The same conceit passes in that Parable
of the Tares; the Tares grew up amongst the Wheat, and the servants asking
their Master, Will thou that we go and pluck up the tares? He said unto them,
No, let them grow up both together. And why so, o Lord? It may be they will die
and wither away of themselves; if not, the harvest will come ere long, and they
shall be cut down, bound up, and cast into the oven. So that Gods patience,
you see, is great; but when we persevere in ill, Gods anger comes like an
inundation upon us. But I will conclude this point with Saint Austens own
conclusion, Sub tali resuscitatore, de nullo iacente desperandum est, Let no
man despair of rising, be he never so much cast down, having such a one to
raise him up from Death to Life, as our Savior Christ Jesus, who is all Love,
and Mercy, and Goodness, and the Resurrection of all those that rely upon him
by Faith.

He stinketh already. Martha here showed herself of somewhat a queasie
stomach, and too dainty a nose, but so did not our Savior Christ. Giving us
thereby to understand, That a sinner savors ill to all the world, but not to
Gods nosthrils. When God showed unto Peter the sheet full of snakes, and
lizards, and willed him to eat, it caused a very great horror in him: But
understanding afterward, that the mystery was in that which was signified
thereby, and not in the doing of it, he did acknowledge that there was not
that sinner upon earth, that was cast out from Gods bosom. You may come to be
loathsome unto your self, Job. 7.
but not unto God, I am a burden unto my self. Job said this of himself,
even then when Gods eyes were gracious unto him, and looked favorably upon
him. My flesh is clothed with worms and filthiness of the dust, my skin is
rent and become horrible; I cannot endure the ill savor that I bear about me;
I have not eyes to behold mine own wretchedness. But God has an eye to look
upon thee, and a heart to endure thee, and loves thee more than thou love thy
self. Those five and twenty young men which Ezechiel painteth forth clapping
nosegaies to their noses, some say that it was to defend them from the evil
savor, as if they should have given Job a pomander to drown the stench of his
sores, being on the one side nothing but plasters, and noisome unctions, and
onthe other amber, and musk. But Isidorus Cladius reads, Applicant odorem
malum ad nares meos. They turn their eyes toward the Sun, and putting their
faces from me, they seek to avoid the evil savor that comes from me. The
translation of Ionathas does favor this conceit, Obuertebant podicum faciebus
eorum. In the honor of their Idols, and in their scorn of me, they did use
the greatest inciuilitie could be offered unto any. They are a stamp and
emblem of those sinners before whom Virtue, and Holiness of life sauoureth
ill; but the mire of Vice and Sin smells sweet. We know that the savor of
God is a sweet smelling savor: Christi bonus odor sumus, We are a sweet
smelling savor unto Christ. His name is a precious balm; His garments smell
of sweetness. But as unto weak eyes the Sun is hateful; so to a depraved
sent, this sweet odor is unsavory. Yet God will not take a loathing at
sinners, though like Lazarus, they lie stinking in their graves. For, albeit
their sins do offend his nosthrils, yet will he not turn away his eye from
a sinner, nor pull back his hand from the dressing and curing of him. And as
the father is not squemish and queasie stomacht, to help his child that is
fallen into the mire, and is nothing all over but filth and dyrt, but does take
him up and comfort him, and wash him, and cloths him cleanlier and neater than
he was before; so does God with Sinners, when they have fallen over head and
ears into most foul and loathsome sins, etc.

He cried with a loud voice, Lazarus, come forth. He cried out aloud; for
many, following the error of Pythagoras, did verily believe that the souls of
the dead did remain in the grave with their bodies. Why the heathen erected
Pyramides over their deceased.
To this purpose were erected those famous Pyramides of Memphis, and of other
parts of the World, I say these their Pyramides were directed to this end; for
they persuading themselves that the soul was a fiery substance, they imagined
it to be in form like a Py^amis. Saint Austen says, That at the sound of this
voice, Death was struck with astonishment. David in a Psalm of his, sets
forth the obedience which all creatures bear to the voice of God, as well
lightning, rain, and thunder, as the rest; The voice of the Lord breaks the
Cedars, Psalm. 29.
(...) the Cedars of Libanon: There is not the tallest Cedar in Libanon, which
a flash of lightning, or a crack of thunder will not rent and tear up by the
roots, and consume it to ashes. The voice of the Lord makes the Wilderness
to tremble, it divides the flames of fire; it makes the Hindes to calue, and
discovers the Forests; there is not that least of living creatures, the
poorest or the smallest Worm, that hides it self in holes and in the Rocks,
which is not brought to light, and shows himself when God calls unto him.
Phylon prosecuting this argument, weighes with himself the forcible violence
of the Winds, in that they turn up the sturdiest oaks, making the roots even
with the tops; in that they ouerwhelme the tallest ships, and that they level
with the ground the goodliest and the greatest buildings. Yet all these are
nothing, compared with the powerfulness of this our Savior Christ's voice,
which made Hell gates to shake, struck Death dead, and made the Devils roar
for fear, etc.

Then he that was dead came forth, ^o^nd hand and foot with hands, etc. The
difference betwixt Lazarus rising out of the grave, and our Savior.
This dead man came forth, his feet and his hands being bound; which caused
Saint Ba^il to cry out, Miraculum in miraculo, Here Is one miracle upon
another: To raise up one that was dead, was a strange and a ghastly kind of
miracle; but that being now alive, he should go, being bound hand and foot,
was another as strange and great a miracle. Lazarus (had God been so pleased)
might have left his winding sheet in the grave, his Kerchiefe, and the napkin
that covered his face and eyes, as our Savior Christ did in his Sepulcher; but
Lazarus here brings them out with him, in token that he did rise to die again;
but our Savior Christ rose never to die any more, though Lazarus died some
thirty years after this his resurrection, as it is left us upon Reco^d by
Epiphanius: And this was the reason, why the Sepulcher of our Savior remained
shut, and that of Lazarus left open.

Loose him and let him go. Occasions to sin must be avoided.
Here Christ wills to be taken from him all those occasions that might cause
him to stumble. If therefore thou will not fall, shun the occasions of falling,
fly as far from them as thou can. Saint Bernard finds fault with Eve, and
reprehends her severely for it, That she would presume to look upon the tree
of Life, that tree of good and evil, which she was so strictly enjoined to
abstain from; where the Text says, The woman saw that it was good, and the
eye no sooner saw, but the heart consented. But if any man shall reply and
say, That the eyes or the hands do only incline a man to this or that, let
him take this also from me, That the eyes are an Indicium and manifest sign of
a sin committed, at least a great occasion of that which may be committed.
Saint Cyril says, That God appearing unto Moses, and those twenty Elders or
Ancients of the People, in a throne of Sapphires of the color of Heaven, was
done only to take away all occasion from that People, of Idolatry. The
Egyptians did adore the Creatures, and did pull other things, though never so
great, under their feet, in token that only that Majesty ought to be
worshipped and adored. Athanasius says, That Gods appearing unto Moses in the
Bush, Why God appeared to Moses in a Bush.
and not in any other tree that was either bigger or better, was, because that
the Jews being inclined to Idolatry, would have made them gods of Cedar,
Pine, or Oak, to the diminution and lessening of the authority of the true and
living God. And therefore to remove this occasion from them, he appeared in
the fiery Bush, whereof they could not so well make any Image or figure. God of
his infinite goodness loosen us with Lazarus, from the bonds of our sins, etc.

THE XXXI. SERMON, UPON THE SATVRDAY AFTER THE FOVRTH SUNDAY IN LENT.
JOHN. 8. Ego sum lux Mundi.

I am the Light of the World, etc.


Our Savior Christ preaching to the People, had invited those that were
thirsty, to drink, If any be athirst, let him come to me and drink. There
was a great stir amongst them; some said, That he was a Prophet; others, That
he was Christ: but the Pharisees perseuering in their hardness, said, It is
not possible that so much good should come out of Galilee. But this dust was
laid with that plea of the Adulteress, putting the matter into their own
hands, leaving it to themselves, to judge her whom they had so maliciously
accused. This business being ended, Christ went on with his Sermon, and spoke
again unto them saying, Ego sum lux Mundi, etc. I am the light of the world.
Theophilact notes, That he went about to overthrow that which the Scribes and
Pharisees had alleged, Out of Galilee arises no Prophet. Ye hold me base and
mean, for that I am of Galilee; I am so far from taking any luster or
brightness from thence, that I give light unto all the World. He would
likewise prove that he was the Light, by that act of his, touching the
Adultresse. If he could discover such secret and hidden sins from the eye of
the world; if he could banish and drive away before him such thick and dark
clouds, he might very well say, Ego sum Lux mundi, I am the Light of the
world; and whosoever shall follow me, shall not walk in darkness, but shall
have the light of life. But the Pharisees looking for another, would not give
credit thereunto, but in a rebuking kind of fashion said unto him, Thou bear
record of thy self, and therefore thy Record is not true; thou may boast thy
self to be this and this, but we shall hardly believe thee. Whereunto Jesus
answered and said, Though I bear record of my self, yet my record is true,
for I know whence I came, and whither I go; for I came into the world to
lighten those that sit in darkness; and therefore I say unto you, that I am
the Light; but you do not know neither my beginning nor my end. Gods judgment
every way complete
And it is a needless scrupulositie in you, to doubt of this mine own
testimony; First, In regard of it is truth, being so true, as nothing more.
Secondly, In regard of it is quality, being so faith-worthie. Now that this our
Saviors testimony is firm and secure, quoad veritatem, he proves it unto
us, in that he says, If I judge, my judgment is true, for I am not alone, but
I and the father, etc. That it is likewise good, quoad qualitatem, it cannot
otherwise choose, in regard that he is the son of God, who is worthy of all
faith and credit. But if the Scribes and Pharisees will needs find fault, let
them find fault with their own ignorance, because they judge according to the
outward sense, not according as things are, but as they seem: Secundum carnem
iudicatis, Ye judge according to the flesh, and therefore your judgment is
very uncertain. I see not as man sees; 1. Reg. 16.
for man looks on the outward appearance, but the Lord beholds the heart:
According to that of Esaias, Non secundum v^sionem oculorum iudicauit. What, do
ye think that I only give ye this testimony, and that I go about to
deceive you? No, you are in an error; For I am not alone, but I and the father
that sent me; and your own Law allows the testimony of two to be true and
authentical. But then did they say unto him, Where is thy father? Jesus
answered, Ye neither know me nor my father; for if you know not me, who teach
daily in your Temple, how can you know my Father? etc. His pretension was to
prove, That his light was powerful to scatter those clouds of darkness that
had shadowed the eyes of their understanding, if the thick dust of their
sins had not hindered their sight.

I am the Light of the world, etc. Amongst other innumerable names which the
Divine Majesty does enjoy, (as Eusebius Caesariensis reports) one is, Christ
why called the Light of the world. 1. Io^n 1.5.
The Light; This is the message which we have heard of him, and declare unto
you, That God is Light. Of this Light, the Scripture tells strange things.

The first, That it is inaccessible; according to that of Saint Paul, He
dwells in the light that none can attain unto. Aristotle says, 1. Tim. 6.16.
That the cleerest eyes are in order and disposition to this Light; as the eyes
of the Owl in respect of the Sun: the chiefest and the highest of Angels,
has need of more ability for the light of this glory, that his eyes may not
be dazeled with the beams of this Light.

The second, That whatsoever light or beauty is to be found in the World, is
wholly derived from this Light; the Moon, the Stars, the Planets, and the
celestial Orbs. Dionysius says, That they receive their light and splendor
from the Sun; and that the Sun, and all that is above the Sun, Angels,
Arch-Angells, Thrones, Powers, Principalities, Dominations, etc. And whatsoever
is contained in Heaven and Earth, receive their motion and light from this
Light.

The third, That if the Light should fail, the World were nothing worth; for
then the life and being of the World could not subsist; the creatures, the
fruits, the Elements, the actions of men, the birds and beasts, without this
light were not able to last and continue.

Whence I infer, That the world remaining in such palpable da^kenesse, better
news could not betide us, than this glad tidings of our Savior, Ego sum Lux,
I am the Light. A man loses himself in a stormy and tempestuous night, The
benefit of this Light
he finds himself in a dark and mountainous Wilderness, compassed about
with pitchie Tents of darkness, with horrors, fears, lightning, thunder,
with the howling of Wolves, the shreeking of Owls, the rushing of Rivers, the
roaring of torrents, the blustering of winds, the croaking of Frogs and Toads,
the scratching of bushes and briars, with weariness, cold, rain, snow, and
all this in an Egyptian Darkness, able to quell the stoutest heart, and make
Courage turn coward: what a world of sighs would he send forth, if those were
able to disperse the Clouds and clear the Sky, that he might have light? he
is in as pitiful case, if not worse, as he that is tormented with a sha^pe
burning Fever, or with a furious Apoplexy, in a long and tedious winter night:
for he may better pass it over with the conueniencie of a good bed and
Chamber, clean linen, and a little sleep; comforting himself, that the day
will at last appear, and that he shall see the light. And if in a dainty fine
April morning, it gives a man such great content, to see the Trees apparelled
in green, the lights and the shadows which the Sun beams paint them forth
withal, the drooping and wither-starued herbs raising up their hanging
heads, helped by the dew of Heaven; the Flowers and the Roses discovering the
beauty of their faces; the singing of the Birds, which with their music
entertain the light; the bleating of the Kids and Lambekins, the Heardsman
going forth with his Cattle, the Faulkener with his Hawks, and the Huntsman
with his Hounds; What discomfort on the contrary must he take, that has lost
himself in avast Wilderness in the manner before mentioned; or keeps his bed,
tired out with a long and tedious sickness? etc.

Ego sum Lux Mundi, I am the Light of the world, etc. Out of the desire that
man had to enjoy more light than God had given him, bayted with the Devils
promise, he bit; Eritis (said the Devil) sicut Dij, scientes bonum and malum,
Genesis 3.
Ye shall be as gods, knowing good and evil. By which offense he was clouded
with the darkness of sin: verifying therein that which was afterward
verified by Esaias, We looked for light, and behold darkness. In the beginning
of the World, when all things remained in that dark Chaos, every thing was so
poor and miserable, as nothing more: by Light, God drew light out of
darkness, he therewith did beautify and enrich his Creatures, he did cheer
and clear the Elements, he did banish darkness, he gave those goodly and
lively colors to the whole Universe, and all of them jointly remained so
jocond, so merry, and so well pleased, that in their dumb kind of Language
they gave great thanks to that Light. Man remained in a Chaos no less dark,
through sin; and those that had the best sight, did confess, We groaped,
like blind men, against a wall at noone day. God did prepare great Lights for
to rid away this gross Darkness, as Patriarchs, Prophets, Kings, and famous
Captains: but as in the darkness of Egypt, That bright flame of the Stars
could not illighten that horrible dark night; So likewise in that night of the
old Law, those (though most excellent) clear Lights could not expel that
darkness. God for to repair his Peoples discomfort, did promise to give them
a great Light; The People that sat in darkness saw a great Light, That is,
The people shall see it, so says one of the Prophets; for, for the more
assurance of the Prophecy, they use to put the preterperfect for the future.
Orietur vobis Sol Iusticiae, says another Prophet, A S^n of Righteousness
shall rise unto you. The People cried unto God, That he would fulfill his word;
they did weep, lament, sigh, and mourn; all the Creatures at last, remained
so perfect, so prosperous, and so rich, and held themselves so happy, that
clothing themselves with new joy, they gave the good day to this Light. The
Histories are full of those prodigies and wonders which happened at our Saviors
birth. Baruc; The Stars shine in their watch, and rejoice; When he calls
them, Baruc 3.34.
they say, Here we be; and so with cheerfulness they show light unto him that
made them. And though those three Suns had given advice thereof, (which Pliny
speaks of) and those nine Suns whereof Bartolomeo Risana makes mention;
besides those Kings, Sheepheards, Sybils, Symeon, Anna, and the Prophecies; yet
this Light had not displayed his beams, but now clearing the earth with his
wonderful Miracles, he says, Ego sum lux mu^di, I am the Light, etc.

Two occasions offered themselves for this Revelation.

The one, The liberty and life of the Adultresse; for the freeing of whom, he
discovered the secret sins of her accusers, leaving them not only amassed and
ashamed, but agrieued and offended: and it seems that he answers to this
their complaint, Ego sum Lux mundi. Of force the Light must drive away
Da^knesse, and discover those secrets which are hidden under the cloak of the
night: This is the argument of that Parable, No man lights a candle, and
puts it under a bushel, but sets it on a candlestick, that it may give
light to all that are in the house. My Father did not send this Torch into the
world to put it under a bushel, and therefore you need not to be so angry, or
think you are wronged. One of the fearefullest accidents that ever was or
shall be seen, was, That the Light coming into the world, and all other
creatures remaining so raped with sudden joy at this so rich a treasure, Man
only should shut his eyes against his own good, giving Jeremy just cause to
cry out, Stand astonished, o ye Heavens, at this, That the Thirsty should
despise the Fountains of the waters of Life, and that the Blind should mislike
the Light. Whosoever (says Saint Bernard) had but seen our Saviors tears,
sighs, and sufferings, and all for our sins, and to redeem us from
damnation, would have sworn, no news could be so welcome as the coming of
this Sun of Righteousness, to illuminate the world, and to lighten those
that sat in darkness. But as your Quail rages when the Sun rises; and,
as Pliny says of the Athlantes, That they curse it with a thousand curses,
because it parcheth and burns up their grass; and as those (says Job) tha^
^^sh for Whales, do curse the day; and as he that is asleep is offended when
the light awakes him, and as weak and infirm eyes cannot endure the beams of
the Sun; so these Pharisees were offended and grew very hot and angry, that
the glorious Light of our Savior Christ should discover their sins.

Some man perhaps may ask, whence this hatred grows? Saint John resolves it
thus, As in the natural World, The reason why some hate and shun it.
amongst birds and beasts there are many that cannot endure the light of the
day, and coming in the night out of their caves and holes, seek their food in
darkness, according to the Prophet, They seek it from God; But when the Sun
begins to peep forth, he shuts them up in their dens, and makes them afraid
to show their heads: so in the Moral World, there are children of darkness and
of the night, which cannot abide the light of the day, That their Actions may
not be called into question. The night is the sinners cloak; The Light, the
Herald that proclaims all humane Actions; and such are those of these men,
that they have not the face to come abroad, or to stand in the light. And
therefore whilst our Savior Christ was writing on the ground with his finger
the sins of those that accused the Adulteress, they sneaked thence, and
shrunk away one by one, Vnus post vnum.

It seems a thing impossible, that the Light being so lovely and so amiable,
so fair and so beautiful, that any man should hate and abhor it, and curse
and damn it to the pit of Hell. But it should seem (me thinks) much more
impossible, that this Light being God himself, that man's eye should find any
thing in it, that may draw on a dislike and hatred thereunto. But Saint John
pondering the distasted palate of a sinner, says, They loved Darkness more
than Light. John 6.
And the book of Wisdom renders the reason thereof, Do not you marvel
that we should abhor it, seeing that the Light does discover unto us the
foulness of our lives, the treasons and trecheries of our hearts and bosoms,
which we seeking to cover with the nights mantle, it proposes us to the open
view of the world, and to the shame of the day, Job. 29.
Oculus adulteri (says Job) obseruat caliginem, The eye of the adulterer
waits for the twilight. They dig through houses in the dark; but the
morning is even to them as the shadow of Death. Many are the deceits and
errors of the night. He that travails in a dark night, takes Rocks, to be
Castles; Trees, to be Houses, Bushes, to be Men; Stubble fields, to be standing
Pooles; high banks, to be even ground; and that which is far off, to be near
at hand. In the City, a man is taken for a woman, a woman for a man, a widow
for a maid, a maid for a married wife, the mistress for the maid, the knight
for his footman, and the churchman for a whoores champion. All is maskes and
vizards, and disguises; and it is only the Light that does banish these
deceits and false dealing.

I am the Light of the World, etc. The other occasion that offered it self for
this Revelation, was the great noise and clamor of the people: Some crying out
that he was a Prophet, others that he was the Christ; but the Pharisees, that
he was a Galilean, Job. 7.
Out of Galilee arises no Prophet. In conclusion, There was dissension amongst
the people for him. They could not see the light, without the beams of the
Light. And therefore he says unto them, Ego sum lux mundi. And condemning
those that were most passionately bent against him, calling him in disgrace
Galilean, and that so bad a Country could not afford a prophet; while they
were vpbraiding this unto him, he tells them, Ego sum lux mundi. Galilee could
not give any luster to him that was the light of the World. The country does
not give an honor to the Man that was borne there, but the Man to the country.
Your most populous Cities, have your most heinous Delinquents. Amaziah King of
Judah, sent a proud message to Ioash King of Israel, Come let us see one
another in the face. To whom Ioash re^urned this answer, The thistle that is
in Lebanon, sent to the Cedar, etc. As if he should have given him this short
come-off, To boast to be borne in Lebanon, and to be but a poor thistle, is
an infamy and reproach unto thee; But to be borne in a barren Desert, and
become a Cedar, is a great honor and reputation. What boots it thee to be a
King lineally descended from David, and that thou wast borne in Jerusalem, if
the coursenesse of thy actions bewray thee to be a thistle? There are many
that are an honor to their house, and many again that are a disgrace unto it.
Many innoble their country, and many make it to be accounted base and had in
contempt. Some are made to honor it, some to dishonor it. Eve was made of
better earth than Adam, yet we see in her actions she was less noble, etc.

In man's life the^e are two ways, and he had need of a Guide.
He that follows me, shall not walk in darkness, etc. That a man may not
err in his way, he has not only need of a light, but a guide also. Thou
trauailest in the night, thou come to two several ways, and thou meetest
with no man; the day appears, the light ouercomes the darkness, but not thy
doubting of the way, and therefore thou had need to have a guide. In this
journey of man's life, there are two ways; The one the narrow way, that leads
unto Heaven, the other the broad way that leads unto Hell; the one to good,
the other to ill. The light that dispelleth the darkness, will not serve the
turn, but we must likewise have a guide to direct us and to tell us, This is
the way, and those are the towers of the City. Solomon says, That there are
ways which seem unto man to secure life, but lead unto death. Cogitationes
mortalium timidae and incertae prouidentiae nostrae, There is no humane thought
certain, no providence secure, And therefore we had need of a guide. Saint
Austen craves of God in his Confessions, Heal me o Lord of my painful
grief, and ease me of my heavy load; for whatsoever I say or do, is for me a
doubtful question, Et ipse est languor meus. As necessity does allege for
her part, that it is necessary to eat, for to live; for if our natural heat
did not find something whereupon to work and spend it is force, our life would
quickly be at an end. But as the having recourse to this necessity, is sweet
to the sense of our Taste; it alleges, that this maintenance is the medicine
of hunger, and that to the Sick we are not to give physic by ounces, who
has a good stomach, and is continually hungry: and for that what we eat must
necessarily pass through the Taste, our delight presses it self forward,
importuning for the Tastes sake, that something more be done, than that which is
due to necessity: and because necessity will be satisfied with a little, and
much will not suffice our Taste, Factus sum quaestio. The like plea passes with
the eyes; I place them upon colors, upon the beauty of Flowers and Roses,
upon the curious Pieces of the famousest Painters, and upon those more lively
Pictures which God has painted; presently there grows in me a contention,
betwixt Curiosity and Temperance: for Curiosity does so flatter and sooth up
the eyes, that it makes them oft-times to slip awrie, Periculosa, and
illecebrosa dulcedine; This befalling me many times before ever I do so much
as once dream or think upon it; happening as it were unawares, which is one of
the greatest miseries, and the most to be pitied either in mine own, or any
other man's life: For I know not how far my passions may trespass upon me,
they having taken possession of my heart, and living (like Inne-mates) within
the doors of mine own house. Nay rather even then when I think my self to
be freest from them, and most secure, as if they had roused themselves from
some heavy sleep, they rise up with greater force, and eagerly set upon me,
so that I am at perpetual question, and at continual odds with my self from
top to toe, from the crown of my head to the sole of my foot. And therefore in
so dangerous a doubting, it is fit (o Lord) that thy Light should be a guide
unto my feet, that I may know what, and how much I ought to minister to my
necessities, and to my senses. Plutarch reports of the Whale, That he has a
very little Fish that serves as his Gentleman-usher, and as a guide to lead
him through the perils and dangers of the Deep; and he shows himself so
thankful, that when this little Fish enters with others into his maw, he
acknowledges his kindness, and becomes his Guard or Sentinel whilst he
sleeps. The Wiseman sends the Sluggard to learn of the Pissemire; so may we
send the blind man to learn of the Whale: for, far greater are the dangers
of the sea of this life; the way is more dark, and therefore walk not without
a Guide, etc.

But shall have the light of life. The favorable influence of Light, The
glory of the Sun.
is a prosperous Prognostication of life. When Alexander was borne, the
Historians report, That he had the Sun for his Ascendent. Pierius sets down
for a symbol of Life, a Sun with a Star in the midst of it, which arises
from out the said Sun. Ezechias made choice of the Sun for a pledge and
token of his life: and as the benign aspect of the Sun does favor and
further our life, so the rigorous aspect thereof does threaten death and
destruction. Cyrus did dream, That he had the Sun between his hands; Whence
the Astrologers did divine, That he should be short lived. Sambucus did put for
an Emblem of the Pestilence, many dead persons, and over them a Sun which did
burn and consume them. But more favorable is the influence of the Sun of
Righteousness, who is the Light of life. Saint John painting forth in his
Apocalypse that superexcellent City of the celestial Jerusalem, says, That
there is no need of Sun nor Moon, Quia lucerna eius est Agnus, The light which
illuminateth it, is the Lamb, that Light of Life. The candle when it burns,
we say it is Vela viu^; but this is an improprietie, for the flame is not it is
Soul. Your Glow-wormes may be termed in some sort Luzes viuas, living Lights;
because (as Pliny reports) they shine in our mouths, our hands, and our
clothes: but these are but short Lights, the Carbuncle out-shineth all these,
yet all is too little for the immensitie and vastness of Heaven, nay for the
least corner therein, the Sun in it is greatest glory shall seem there but
as a Candle.

But shall have the light of Life, etc. By this Light, the Saints and Doctors
understand Faith; for in regard that it is Principium Iustificationis, The
first beginning of our Justification, Life is attributed thereunto. It has
been a thing often repeated by our Savior, Mat. 5. Romans 8. Luc. 17.
Thy Faith has made thee whole. And Saint Paul, The ^^st lives by Faith: He
begins with Faith; for, He that will approach near unto God, must first
believe. It was the Apostles suit to our Savior, O Lord increase our Faith,
and so we shall go on from Faith to Faith, and from Virtue to Virtue.

Christ testified by many, yet not embraced of the Pharisees.
If thou bear Record of thy self, thy Record is not true. Saint Augustine
says, That there preceded so many testimonies of our Savior Christ, as the
Patriarchs, Prophets, Prophesies, Sybils, Kings, Sheepheards, Simeon, Anna the
Prophetess, and lastly John Baptist, whom they held to be some Divine power
sent down from Heaven; that our Savior asking them, Whether the Baptism of
John were from Men, or from God? They durst not deny that it was from God,
least the People should stone them. And adding to these testimonies, the works
that himself wrought, If ye will not believe me, yet believe my works; for
if I had not done those things which no man else has done, they had not
sinned, but now they have no excuse for their sin. And for the testimony of
his Doctrine, Nunquam sic locutus est homo, Never man spoke as he spoke: God
may speak so, but Man cannot. What shall we say to that testimony of his
father in Jordan, This is my beloved Son in whom I am well pleased? And that
of the Holy Ghost in the form of a Dove, which (as it is observed by Saint
Hierome) sat upon our Saviors head, because none should presume that the
voice proceeded from Saint John? And that of the Son of God himself, Though
I bear Record of my self, yet my Record is true? Complying with that which
was spoken by the Evangelist, There are three which bear Record in heaven, the
Father, the Word, and the Holy Ghost: any one of these Testimonies might have
given satisfaction to a heart free from passion; but all of them put together,
were not able to move such rebellious breasts and such obstinate hearts as
theirs were. Great was the hardness of Pharaohs heart, since after so many
strange prodigies, he said, I know not the Lord. Moses did not see our Savior
Christ, nor had any more witnesses than his Rod: neither were his wonders so
great as those miracles which our Savior wrought: so that the Pharisees being
more hard than Pharaoh, said, If thou bear Record of thy self, etc.

Three conditions required in every Testimony.
If I bear Record of my self, yet my Record is true, for I know whence I
came, and whether I go, but you cannot tell, etc. The circumstances of my
Testimony admit no exception, and those that are required, are commonly three,
Natura, Conditio, Via.

Nature, Whether it be a man or a woman.

It Is Quality and Condition, Whether he be a Freeman or a Slave, an old man or
a young, a Clergy man or a Lay man.

The Way, whether it be of Virtue or of Vice. Our Savior Christ does not
allege any one of these circumstances, but only tells them, My testimony is
true, for I know whence I come, and whether I go. Which was as much in plain
language, as to tell them that he was God, I am God, and the Son of God, in
whom there cannot be the least sign or show of a lie; and his proof is, I
know whence I come, and whither I go. Man is not able to know from whence he
came, nor whether he is to go; for this is a privilege proper only unto God.
Saint Augustine interprets this of our Savior Christ, The Sun knows his
setting; for the material Sun knows it not; and none amongst men do know
their setting and their end. Your Astrologers do erect Figures, prognosticating
other men's successes, and casting their natiuities, but neither truly know
their own, nor other men's fortunes; for it is a thing reserved only for God:
The Wind blows where it lists, and thou know not whence it comes, nor
whither it goes. No man can attain unto the inspirations of the Holy Ghost,
nor to the designs of his actions. Of all those secret sins whatsoever,
which man commits alone by himself, as Sorcerie, Perjury, Murder, and the
like, no one man in all the world can give testimony thereof, but God can, for
he is present at all; Thou know my lying down, and my rising up, thou see
my ways, and understand my paths afa^re; if I ascend up into Heaven, thou
art there; if I go down into Hell, thou art also there. From Solomon was hid
the path of a Ship in the Sea, of an Eagle through the air, of a Snake through
the Rock, and of a young man in the flower of his youth; but from Gods eye
nothing can be hid.

The knowing of this truth will draw on the confessing of another; to wit, That
of the things appertaining to God, none can give testimony but God. No man
ever saw God, so says Saint John; Who then shall give us testimony of God?
The only begotten Son, which was in the bosom of his Father, he shall do
it* Of the Father, the Son shall give Record; and of the Son, the Father;
and of both, the Holy Ghost: In a word, every one of these Divine Persons, of
himself; but Man cannot do it but by revelation.

Thy Record is not true. Yes, it is; for I am the Light of the World, and of
the Light none can give Record but the Light. If any man should say unto the
Sun, Prove it unto me that thou art the Sun, it were a mere folly, if
not madness, for his beams do prove it and proclaim it to the World: In
like manner, that the Pharisees should say unto our Savior Christ, Prove unto
us, that thou art the Light, was a mere blindness in them; for, No Man could
do that which he did, unless God had been with him. Upon a Glass the Sun
is usually so translated, that it were a foolishness to ask a testimony,
Whether it be the Sun or no? And upon the humanity of our Savior Christ,
the beams of his Divinity were in that sort transferred, that it was
hardness of heart, and obstinate wilfulness, to desire further testimony
from God. Saint Paul says, He that drew light out of darkness, he did
inlighten our souls, that they might see the beams of the light of God, in
the face of his Son Jesus Christ. And for this the natural light was
sufficient: but in the Pharisees this was so blinded through the dust of their
sins, that they could not see this Sun. The Seal that is imprinted in Wax,
shows it self as clear as if it were graven in Brass or Steel; but with
time or with dust it comes to be blotted out, in that manner, that the stamp
and letters are not known. So does it succeed with a Sinner, with this
natural light, when it is once darkened through sin; whence it comes to
pass that he falls into those foul and gross ignorances which the brute
beasts would not fall into.

Ye judge after the flesh. He proves by another reason, Christ the ^^ly true
Sun that sees all things.
that his Record is true: Ye judge according to the Flesh, by that which is
not, but by that which seems so to be; but I judge according to the heart, I
search and try the very reins. Saint Ambrose called the Sun, Oculum Mundi,
The Worlds eye; not only because it affoords us that light whereby our eyes
have power to see, but because it sees all things: and in case that it being in
the other Hemispheare, it does not see that which passes in this; yet Gods
eyes see all that is both in this, and in that other world. Orpheus called the
Sun, Oculum Iustitiae, The eye of Justice; whose office it is, to discover
whatsoever is dark and secret. Antiquity painted him sitting in a Ship,
governing the same as a Pilot; for beholding the Stars and the Mariners
Compass, he does not only discern the dangers that are above the water, but
those hidden Deepes which are under the waters. But neither the Sun of
Heaven, nor those Suns of the earth can reach into the withdrawing rooms of
man's bosom; only the eyes of Christ can look into them, which are far
brighter than the Sun, His eyes are brighter than the Sun, Eccl. 23. Hier.
17. Apoc. 3.
I am the Lord that searches the heart, and tries the reins, so says
Jeremy and Saint John. The beams of the Sun discover the atoms and motes
in the air, but not the thoughts and secrets of the heart. But the beams of
the Sun of righteousness, discover our smallest thoughts. It was the fool
that said in his heart, There is no God. And though this saying came not out of
his mouth, yet he found it published in the market place; because God diueth
into the heart. The Spouse compares him to that Goat, which the Greeks call
Dorcas, for it is quicknes of sight, as Saint Gregory Nyssene has noted it: If
a man hide himself in darkness, shall not I see him? The Kings of the
Gentiles, pretending to have the world to take them for gods, they gave them to
understand, that they did know the thoughts of men. To this alludeth that,
which Joseph said to his brethren, An ignoratis, quod non similis in augurandi
scientia? Cicero says, That among the Persians, no man could be King, who was
not skilled in the Art of Divination. And for this cause, innumerable
Witcheries, and Sorceries were multiplied and increased amongst them. But it is
a foolerie to imagine, That any man can enter into them but God. To which God
be ascribed all honor, power, and glory, now and for evermore. Amen.

THE XXXII. SERMON, UPON PASSION SUNDAY.
JOHN. 8. Quis ex vobis arguet me de peccato?

Which of you will reprove me of sin?


Inconveniences which would have followed the peccabilitie of Christ.
Our Savior Christ's innocence, by many forcible reasons and strong arguments,
we have elsewhere sufficiently proved: Now shall I prove unto you the
inconuenien^es which would have followed his peccabilitie.

First of all, The blood of our Savior Christ was that wherein the Church
washed her self, These are they that washed their Stoles in the blood of the
Lamb: And he could not make them white, Apoc. 7.
had he not bin whitenes himself. The blood of her Beloved puts color and
beauty into her cheeks. Sanguis eius ornauit gen^ men's. She speaks of the
beauty of the soul; and he could not make her fair, had he himself been
foul. And therefore says Saint Paul, It was fit he should be so, that he
might be a high Priest, holy and undefiled, etc.

The second inconvenience that would follow thereupon would be this, That our
Savior Christ could not be a competent Judge, had he been a sinner, as he was
not. He that judges another, himself being faulty, condemns himself. And
for this reason, a Judge that is notoriously known to be a corrupt and naughty
man, may justly be refused. Judas acknowledging himself to be a delinquent in
the Incest of his daughter in law, Tamar* was so far from proceeding in
judgment against her, that he said, Iustior me est, 2. Reg. 11.
She is more righteous than I. When Ioab advised David of the siege of Rabbah,
and what a number of men he had lost in that service, the King might have
justly cut off his head for his rash and unadvised approach to the wall; But
David durst not condemn him, and put him to death, because he was an
Accessorie, or rather the principal in the business: and therefore Ioab charged
the messenger that carried the news, saying, If the Kings anger arise, so that
he say unto you, Why went you nigh the wall, etc. (the story is worth your
reading) then say thou, Thy servant Vriah the Hittite is also dead. This point
did that kingly Prophet touch upon in those words so diversely commented on,
Tibi soli peccaui. O Lord my sin was against Vrias, against those soldiers
that died for his occasion, against those which did blaspheame thy name, and
against the people, whom the robbing of another man of his wife, and the
killing of her husband, has scandalized, and been an occasion of great
offense unto them. But that which does most aff^ict and torment me, is, That I
have committed this against thee, and that I have thus sinned against thee; For
in any other person whatsoever in my kingdom, the rigor of Justice might have
restrained him from so foul a sin, but this did not once enter into my
thought. And therefore he comes with a Tibi soli peccaui; iumping with that
saying of Saint Paul, Qui iudicat me, Dominus est, He that judges me, is the
Lord.

The world has not that man in it, whom his Propria culpa, Sin makes the
most valiant man a Coward.
The sins which himself has committed, do not move or daunt him, and make
him turn Coward, saving Christ, who was made perfect by nature, Nemo mundus a
sorde, neque ^nfans vnius diei. How can he be clean that is borne of a woman?
John Baptist was sanctified in the womb of his mother, Job 25.
and was bred up from a child in the wilderness. Saint Peter was he that loved
most, No man free from sin.
Saint John that was most beloved, Saint Paul past through the third heaven,
and did afterward defy all the world: Who shall separate me from the love of
Christ? And Job was so bold to say, Would my sins were weighed in a balance*
etc. And in another place, Show me my sins and my iniquities what they be.
Also David, I have run without iniquity. Judith passing through the midst of
an Army of Barbarians, breaks out into these words, The Lord lives that
would not suffer his handmaid to be defiled; There was not that rough-hewne
soldier, that did so much as offer to touch her. Let us set side by side with
these Saints, the vnspottednesse of those Virgins, the constancy of those
Martyrs, and the courage of those Confessors that suffered for Christ's sake. In
a word, all the worthy squadrons of those blessed Saints that are now in heaven
will say thus (as Saint August. has noted) of themselves, which Saint John did
confess, If we say we have no sin, we deceive our selves, and the truth is
not in us. As also Job, If I wash my self with snow water, and purge my hands
most clean, yet shall thou plunge me in the pit, and mine own clothes shall
make me filthy. Job 9.30.
For, to be without sin, is the blazon or cognizance of God alone.

Many did live very well assured of their innocence in particular cases; as
Jacob, That the Idols of his father in Law Laban, were not received by the
servants of his house. As Benjamin and his brethren, that Joseph's cup was not
in their sacks. Saint Peter, that he should not deny his Savior Christ, had a
thousand more importunate women set upon him. The Pharisee, he thought with
himself, I am not as other men, etc. yet all of them may say with Saint Paul,
I am conscious of nothing to my self, yet am I not hereby justified; for Gods
eyes see that which man's eyes see not. In a word, the noble Acts of the
greatness and power of God, as his creating of the world, his conseruing it,
his redeeming of mankind, his justifying of souls, his seeing the thoughts of
the heart, his calling things that are not, as if they were, his commanding the
waters, the winds, death and life, and all those other wonderful things which
Job specifieth of God, (to whose 38 chapter I refer you) may make him
confidently to say, Quis ex vobis, Job 38.
arguet me de peccato, Which of you can rebuke me of sin.

Which of you can, etc. Saint Chrysostom says, That the greatest testimony
of our innocence, is that of our enemies. Non est Deus noster, sicut Deus
eorum, i^imici nostri sint Iudices; Our God is not as their God, let even our
enemies be Judges; And fit it was, that this testimony should precede and go
before, as well in regard of our Saviors life as his death.

Two things required in men of eminency and place, conscience, and fame
In regard of his life; for public persons that are placed in authority,
seated in high and eminent throanes, that have great governments, offices and
dignities committed unto them, are not only bound to be virtuous and holy, but
also to be so esteemed, which they must mainely strive and endeavor. So that
in a Prince, be he Ecclesiastical or Secular, two obligations ought to concur
in him.

One of Conscience.

The other of Fame.

Public persons must look to their fame as well as to their conscience.
A particular Christian, which does not give occasion whereby to be condemned
of his neighbor, may live satisfied and well contented with the testimony of
his own conscience; but not a Prince, or a Prelate; For if he suffer in his
good name, or in his fame, and be ill reported of, it is the destructionoftheir
Subjects. Saint Augustine says, That he that relyeth on his conscience, and is
careless of his good name, is cruel toward himself. We must not do good
only in Gods sight, b^t also before men. For fame (though false) does fall
heavy upon public persons. In the Temple, there was a vessel of brass, a
very fair one, out of which there ran a conduit pipe of water, and was without
adorned with those Looking glasses, which women that repented them of their
sins, had offered, Looking-glasses why placed about the Lauer of the Temple.
who forsaking the world had consecrated themselves to God, to the end that the
Priests which did enter to offer sacrifice, should wash themselves in that
water and behold themselves in those glasses; and it was Gods intent and
purpose (according to Philon) That they should place no less care in the
cleanenesse of their life, for to offer sacrifice, than those women did, in
appearing good to the world: beholding in those glasses the least mark or spot
in the face. And in the 28 chapter of Exodus, God commanded, That when the
Priest should enter or go forth in the Sanctuary, he should bear bells about
the border of his garment, The use of Bel^ in the border of the Priests garment.
to the end that the noise and sound thereof, might make his going in, and his
coming forth known. And the Text adds. Ne moriatur, Least he dye the
death. And the glorious Saint Gregory says, That the vestures of the Priests,
are their good works: Sacerdotes tui, induantur iustitiam, Let thy Priests be
clothed with Righteousness: And these are to sound aloud, being not holy
only in their tongue, but also in their actions. There must be a bell, and
there must be a clapper, preaching and doing must go together; one will not
do well without the other. Our Savior Christ advises us, That we should hide
our works, and not make them known, Let not thy left hand know what thy right
hand does: Least the wind of vainglory chance to blow away the fruit thereof.
Private persons must conceal their works, but men of public rank must show
them^elues examples. Genesis 39.3.
But in a Prince and a Prelat, God would have their works to be more public,
that they should not only be holy, but also seem so, for the good example of
the people. God placed Joseph in the government of Egypt, because his life was
so notoriously good, that his master saw that the Lord was with him, and that
the Lord made all that he did to prosper in his hand. It is a thing worthy the
consideration, That a Slave in the house of an Infidel, should profess so
much virtue, so much truth, so much faithfulness, so much courtesy, and so
much modesty, that he should make him ruler of his house, and put all that he
had in his hand. Oh how well beseeming are these and the like good things, for
the government of a kingdom.

In regard of his death; and that likewise for many good and great reasons.

First, it was fitting, Our Saviors innocence exemplified by his death.
That the testimony of our Saviors innocence should precede, to the end that
it might appear to the world, that the Devil by this his death was robbed and
spoiled of his Empire, through his righteousness. Saint Augustine delivers
three things upon this point.

The one, That God did justly deliver man over to the Empire of the devil; for
that he suffered himself to be overcome by his subtletie and cunning.

The other, That so great is the signiorie and dominion, that the devil has
over him, that he neither can with all the strength that he has, overcome his
temptations, nor avoid death, which he incurred through sin. Not that the
devil had any more right or power over him, than a hangman has for the
tormenting of a delinquent, who receives his command from the Judge.

The third and last, which is likewise of Leo, and Saint Gregory the Pope, That
God might very well free man from the slavery and bondage of the devil by his
virtue and power, without doing the devil any wrong. Even as a Judge who has
delivered over an offender to the hangman to torment him, may change his mind
and set him free; yet notwithstanding was willing to treat this business by way
of Justice, as if the devil had proper right thereunto.

First, for that it had been but small glory to Gods greatness, that the
Creator should ^on^est with his creature, and an infinite power with a limited.

Secondly, That he might not make his justice suspected. Christ's equal
proceeding against the devil, a pattern for all Magistrates.
For he that has the least Justice on his side, does now and then fly to his
force and power. The devil was to be overcome (says Saint Augustine,) by
justice, and not by might. Miro aequitatis iure certatum est (said Leo the
Pope.) Whence the Princes of the earth may learn this lesson, That sithence
the Prince of heaven proceeded so fairly and so justly with so base and bad a
creature, having no tie or obligation thereunto; let not any Prince of the
earth presume to say, Sic volo, sic iubeo, sit pro ratione voluntas; But rather
hearken to that of Job, If I refused to be judged with my servant, etc.

Besides, it is to be noted, That the devil did exceed his Commission; and
that God having given him power for to torment sinners, he fell a tormenting of
our Savior Christ, who was most innocent; he pursued him to the death, till he
had placed him upon the Cross. The cause was propounded in the Tribunal of
the most blessed Trinity, the devil was condemned and deprived of that power
which was given him. And so is that place of Saint Paul to be understood, De
peccato damnauit peccatum: Ioh. 11.
And that of Saint John, Now is the judgment of this world; now shall the
Prince of it be cast out. That happened to the devil, which bef^ll Adam, God
gave him free leave and full liberty to enjoy all the trees in Paradise, save
one only and no more; and he only pitched his palate upon that, and tasted but
of that one, and no more. God gave the devil leave to tempt all, only
interdicting him, That he should not touch upon our Savior Christ, and yet he
pusht most at him. And to the end that this fault and punishment of the devil
should remain notorious to the world, The Cross and death of Chri^ttormented
the devil more than himself.
it was fit that the testimony of his innocence should go before, and that he
should say, Quis ex vobis, etc. Which of you, etc. Guaricus says, That the
death and Cross of our Savior Christ, was more the devils death and cross
than his. For our Savior Christ rose again the third day, but the devil never
since was able to lift up his head. And as two going forth upon a challenge
into the field, are usually both run through and slain; so our Savior Christ
and the devil were both nailed to the Cross: Christ to his greater glory, the
devil to his utter destruction.

If I say the truth, why do ye not believe me? The truth is the Blanke and
Mark of our understanding; and being that man ought naturally to love it, it
is a metaphisicall case that he should come to abhor it. In satisfaction of
which difficulty, we have already rendered three reasons: Whereunto we may here
add that other which our Savior Christ gave unto the Pharisees by Saint John,
Ioh. 8.
Ye seek to kill me, because my word has no place in you. There are some
stomachs so ouerladen with evil humors, That they no sooner receive good
meat, but they vomit it up again, and by a depraved disposition, turn that
which is sweet into sowernes: In like sort, there are some souls so full of
hatred, envy, covetousness, and uncleanness, that they rise at Gods truths,
and are ready to spue them up, though they be sweeter then the honey or
hony-combe. To him that is sick of a Quartane, the brawne of a Capon is
unsavory; but a pickled pilchard, a strong onyon, and a piece of powdered
beef, have an excellent relish with him. To a breast surcharged with the
things of this world, of force the doctrine of heaven must be unsavory. Eyes
that are covered with clouds as with a curtain, hate the light, and cannot
endure the splendor of the Sun, Bonitatem, and disciplinam, and sci^ntiam
docemini. Saint Jerome renders it bonum gustum.

Truth less welcome to the ^ares of men than flatteries and lies.
And from hence arises one of the greatest abuses in all the world, to wit,
That we are readier to believe an enemy that lies unto us, than a friend that
tells us the truth. In all Arts, either Li^^rall or Mechani^all, we give (...)
^redit to them that are therein most eminent; As to the best Divine, the best
Physician, the best Lawyer, and to him that is our best friend, because we are
fully persuaded that he will not deal doubly with us, but deliver us the very
truth, and represent things as they are. In the salvation of the soul, we will
not believe our Savior, who is the best Artist, and our best friend; but the
devil, the world and the flesh, which are our three mortal enemies. The
first, being the father of lies, the first cause and first inuenter of them,
that is to say, Ex proprijs loquitur, out of his own Mynt he coins them; the
other two have inherited and professed lying time out of mind, five thousand
years ago, and upward. If it be not as I tell you* tell me I pray, when did
the world treat truth? Solomon styles it Diuitem mendacem, The World, the
Flesh, and the Devil, all liars.
A rich liar. As for the flesh, when did that ever leave off to lie? it was one
of Sampsons fooleries, That he knowing the intention of his false hearted
Dalila, and that her purpose was, to deliver him up into the hands of the
Philistims, and having thrice caught her with the theft (as we say) in her
hand, yet for all this fair warning, would not take better heed, but melting
with two drops, two poor tears that trickled down her cheeks, stickt not to
reveal unto her the secret of his strength, and where it lay. And Dalila
complaining, Thou have thrice beguiled me, and told me lies, yet this good
honest man never titted her in the teeth with her lightness, and her treason. It
is a strange kind of blindness, That thy flesh should commit so many treasons,
and poppe thee in the mouth with so many lies, and yet thou should still
believe her. But the Moors believe Mahomet who lies unto them; The Gentiles,
those Idols that deceive them; and only Christ comes to be the descreydo, a
man of no credit among us, and to whom we will not give belief. S. Bernard
talking in his name with a Christian, asks him the question, Why do thou
more affect my enemy, and thine, than me? I did create thee, I did redeem
thee with my blood, I did bear thee up in the palms of my hands; Sure it is,
because thy soul is full of evil humors. A fool receives not the words of
Wisdom, unless thou tell him that which is in his own heart. It is
Salomons, As is an house that is destroyed, Prou. 18.
so is wisdom unto a fool. Eccl. 21.
There is nothing more pleasing and peaceable than a well built house, and
nothing more unpleasing and unpeaceable, than an old ruinous house that is
ready to fall. And so is wisdom to a fool.

If I say the truth, etc. One of the most lamentable miseries of this age is,
That truth does not carry that credit and estimation as a lie does. As the true
sores of a poor wretched creature does not move man's heart to that pity, as
your false ones do: so truth do not generally go so far as does a lie. For
a lie is no sooner sown, but it presently grows up, and spreads it self
amain. o good God, how easily is it believed, how willingly entertained! Our
Savior Christ being risen, the High Priests, and other the Prelates of those
times, persuaded the soldiers, that were set to guard the grave, that they
should give it out, that his Disciples had stolen him away. But how my Masters
(replyde the soldiers) can we do this without danger to our selves, or be
able to answer the matter? For if the President should call us to account, and
examine us about it, either we must answer that we were asleep, and testigos
dormidos (you know) no hazen ^e, Sleeping witnesses will not be admitted for
proof, nor stand good in Law: Or that his Disciples did set upon us, and took
him thence by force, which likewise will hardly be believed, and will not sound
half handsomely. First, that silly fishermen should set upon soldiers;
Secondly, the stone not being taken away, we cannot well avouch that they stole
him away; yet notwithstanding the Clergy were instant upon them, and told
them, do you but say as we bid you, and it is enough: for, If it come to the
Presidents ear, we will work with him well enough. Whereupon having withal
well greased their fists, they published the theft. And the glorious Evangelist
Saint Matthew tells us, Mat 28.
This saying is noysed amongst the Jews unto this day. The like passes in
point of Heresy: What has ruined so many Kingdoms, destroyed so many
Churches, What mischiefs have proceeded from lying.
and tormented so many Saints, but the lies of your Arch-Heretikes, who will
not pardon God himself? In a word, God was to come into the world, for to give
testimony of the truth: Whereas for the receiving of a lie, one wicked man's
asseueration is sufficient. Osee says, That there is no truth in the earth, no
mercy, no knowledge of God, but that all is lies, thefts, murders, and
adulteries. Mendacium, furtum, homicidium inundauerunt. Where the word
inundauerunt is worthy your weighing. A river while it runs between two
banks, and keeps it self within it is bounds, the ways are free and open to
all; But when it leapes out of his bed, and ouerflowes the fields, and the high
ways, you know not in the world how to find sure footing, nor where you or
your horse may safely tread. There were evermore lies in the world, but now
they have broken their bounds in that strange manner, and leapt so far from
forth their bed, that no man well knows which way to take. What a world of
Evidences did David show unto Saul of his love unto him? What notable services
did he do him, in that hi^ single combat against Goliath? In getting so many
victories against the Philistims? In playing unto him upon the harp when the
devil tormented him? Afterward Saul pursuing him in the mountains, hunting
after his death, as if he had been a bear, or wild bore, once David took
away his spear, and the pot of water that stood at his beds head; another time
he cut off the lappet of his garment. This Saul saw with his eyes, and
confessed it with his mouth, saying, Iustior me es, Thou art more righteous
than I. And yet in the end he gave more credit to those lies which your Court
whisperers buzzed into his ears, than to those truths which himself fel^ with
his hands.

He that is of God, hears Gods words, ye therefore hear them not, because ye
are not of God. Gods word how to be heard, that the heari^g it may testify our
Predesti^ation
Saint Augustine and Saint Gregory expound this place of your Pr^cogniti, and
those tha^ are predestin^ted. And S. John does divide all the whole world into
two sorts of persons, Qui ex deo est, non peccat, qui peccat ex diabolo est.
The children of God, and the children of the devil; The one hears Gods Word,
the other hears it not. And though this be not a sense so suitable to the Text,
because Christ does there point out the immediate cause of that their
incredulity, and that this was not so much a predestination or reprobation, as
that their present hardness of heart, and unbelief; yet notwithstanding I
must give you to understand, That to hear the word of God, is a great Prenda
and pledge of our predestination; especially, being accompanied with these
four concurring circumstances.

The first is, Audire, To ^eare the word^ Blessed are they that hear the word
of God. Four circumstances requi^red to the hearing of Gods Word.
This is the first step. And he that does not put forward a foot to this, is
not to be accounted a child of God. The husbandman in the Gospel sowed his
seed in four several parts of the ground; and if in any one of them he
forbear to sow, it was because he did not take it to be his. Many birds are
taken and delighted with the light, as your partridges and your pigeons: But
your wolfes, bears, bores, and other wild beasts fly from it all that they
can. It is Chrysostomes note, That when God went about to catch Paul, the light
went before the voice. For the voice will affright the blind; but the light will
make him in love therewith. Saint Paul preaching to the Jews, said, The light
of the Gospel was principally ordained for you, But seeing ye put it from ye,
ye judge your selves unworthy of everlasting life. Act. 13.
And treating of the Gentiles, he says, That they did glorify the Word of
God, and that they did believe it and give credit thereunto. And when the
Gentiles heard it, they were glad (says the Apostle) and glorified the word of
the Lord; and as many as were ordained unto eternal life, believed, I am the
way, the truth and the life. And he that loses this way, loses the truth,
and loses life everlasting.

The second is, A^dire cum frequentia, To hear the word frequently and very
often. The earth that is extraordinary dry and scorched with heat, the drops of
water which it receives, it turns into toades. And he that seldom
frequents sermons, it is to be feared they work little good upon him, if not
turn to his hurt. Many will come to hear Sermons, but with a preiudicate
opinion, and are more careful to pick a quarrel against the Preacher, than
profit themselves. The frantic patient that throws stones at the Physician
that cures him, puts himself in great p^rill. In a word, The Word of God is
the Souls sustenance, and being ministered slowly, it is no marvel if it fall
into a Consumption.

The third is, Audire cum attentione, To hear diligently, and with attention,
freeing the soul from all worldly cares and encumbrances: for as the eyes
cannot jointly and at once, behold both Heaven and Earth; so the Soul cannot
attentively at one and the same time, behold the things of the World, and of
God, If any man love the world, the love of the Father abides not in him. When
a great and principal River is divided into many Riuolets or little streams,
so much the less water will every one of them have. The like succeeds with
that heart which is divided into many cares and desires, Foolish and noisome
lusts drown men in perdition and destruction. And Solomon says, 1. Tim. 6.
When thou sit with a Prince, observe what is before thee, and put thy
knife unto thy throat, if thou be a man given to thy appetite. A Christians
sitting at the King of Heavens Table, is the hearing of his Doctrine; this is
that Board whereunto Wisdom inuiteth us. Where the Bread of wholesome
Doctrine is set before thee, Prou. 23.
which strengthens the heart of man, and the Wine of Grace, which cheereth and
comfort the heart: At which Table whosoever shall come to sit, must consider
with attention that which is set before him, casting out of his mind all other
worldly things. Those Ministers that were employed for the apprehending of our
Savior Christ, finding him preaching to the People, they hearkened unto him
with that earnest and diligent attention, that they had quite forgot to put
that in execution which was given them in charge by the Pharisees: and being
demanded by them, Why did ye not bring him along with you? They returned this
answer, Never any man spoke as he spoke. The glorious Doctor Saint Augustine,
before that he had vnwinded himself out of the error of the Mani^hees, he
went of purpose to hear Saint Ambrose, but not with intention to give any
credit to his Doctrine, but to delight himself with the elegancie of his
phrase, and being ravished with the sweetness of his words, had his heart
taken, as well as his e^re; his attention supplied the fault of his intention;
this was that putting of the knife to the throat. The glorious Apostle Saint
Paul goes a little further, and calls Gods Word, not only Cultrum, but Gladium,
not a Knife, but a Sword, Take unto thee the Sword of the Spirit, which is the
Word of God: What then? Marry he gives thee a caveat in these ensuing words,
Si tamen habes in potestate anima^^ tuam, That thy soul be not distracted with
the troublesome businesses of this world. Saint Chrysostom compares the soul
of the Just, to a Poole of Water which stands all alone in some low Valley,
where there is all stillness, The soul of the just, and that of a sinner,
wherein differing.
reposednesse, freshness, cleerenesse, and the Sunne-beames purest
brightness. Solomon likeneth the Soul of a sinner, to a troubled and
tempestuous Sea, The heart of the Wicked is as a raging sea.

The fourth is, Audire cum conseruatione, To hear with a retention, and to lay
up the Word of God in our hearts, Blessed are they that hear the Word of God,
and keep it; Not they who hear the Word of God, and forget it, taking it in
at one ear, and letting it out at another; but they which hear it and keep
it. It is Saint Gregory's observation, That the Physician does despair of that
Patients stomach, that cannot keep it is meat, but throws it up as soon as
it receives it. Saint Chrysostom advises, That he that hears a Sermon
should do as he does that comes out of a Bath, presently to retire himself,
get him to his Chamber, there keep^ himself warm, wrap good store of clothes
about him, that the ill humors may the better be exhaled and drawn from him.
Plutarch tells us, That many take no pleasure in Flowers, or care any further
for them, than to look upon them, smell to them, and have them in their hands;
bu^ the Be draws from them both honey and wax, and the Apothecarie makes many
medicines of them against diverse and sundry diseases. Many hear Sermons only
for their pleasure, for the elegancie of the style, delicacie of words, gravity
of sentences, and the gracefulness in their delivery: but this is but to make
a nosegay to smell to for a while, and cast it anon after into a corner.

Men are never worse, than when they think all is well.
Say we not well, that thou art a Samaritane, and have a Devil? One of the
greatest miseries than can befall a Soul, is, To become so appassionated to
it is own disagreeable disposition, it is disjoynted judgment, and erroneous
opinion, that it persuadeth it self, that it proceeds prudently and wisely
in all that it does, not sticking to say in it is heart, I thank God I have my
wits about me, I am in the right way, I do well in this and in that, in
persecuting this man, and bringing that other to the stake; flattering and
soothing up themselves with a N^me benedicimus? Do we not do well in so doing?
The phrantick man uses to call the Physician that cures him, Fool; the
Blockhead, him that is discreet, Cockescombe; the Ruffian, him that is
religious, Distracted; and here the Pharisees accuse our Savior Christ, to
have a Devil, and to be a breaker of the Law: And it were well if they would
stay here, but they make the matter far worse by saying, Say we not well? To
sin, is not so great an ill, as to ground our sin upon reason; not so great
a fault to commit it, as it is to maintain it; it is an evil thing, to work
revenge, but far worse to seek to defend thy revenge by reason, for that is
but to wage an argument against God and his Law; to deny unto him Providence
and Wisdom, and to firm and set as it were under thine own hand, That God
did not see so much reason as thou did, to revenge thy self, alleging in
favor thereof, some particular exception (more than God did ever wot of)
against this his general rule. Passion (says Aristotle) blinding Reason, as
smoke does the eyes, makes white seem black. Envy so blinded Joseph's
brethren, that the Scripture says, That they could not afford him a g^^ll
w^rd, nor speak unto him in a mild and civil manner; but in this their
malicious humor were fully persuaded that they did him no wrong at all, first
in throwing him into the pit, and afterward in selling him. Zoylus the
Rhethorician, sy^amed the Dog, for his foul mouth and evil language, would
rail against Plato, Socrates, and other grave Philosophers; and being asked
the reason, Why he should wrong these good men? Passion alters all properties
to it self.
answered, For mine own part, I could have been content to have spared such
good people, but Passion would not give way thereunto. O this Passion, What an
evil property it has; it makes Innocence Sin; Christ, a Witch; God, a
Devil. Clemens Alexandrinus reports of Antisthenes, That he had rather be a
mad, than a passionate man; for the passionate man will seek a knot in a
bulrush, Better to be mad, than passionate.
so will not the mad man. In conclusion, when a man shall secure himself in
his sin, and the Soul go confidently on to it is own perdition, yet
persuades it self that it is in the right, and runs on fairly toward the
goal; that man, and his Soul, should be thus blinded, Saint Cyprian says,
That it is a great and strong evidence of Gods anger; for such not
acknowledging their error, will hardly crave pardon: besides, the passionate
man lives so secure, and yet so deceived, that those of Hell do not make a more
rash censure of the Just: Nos insensati, vitam illorum estimabamus insa^iam.

Say we not well, etc. God does not say so, nor the Angels, nor He^uen, nor
Earth; but we ^ay so, we that are Pharisees say so, and think we say well in
so saying. There are a certain kind of men that would seem to know more than
God himself: When some man of power, or some great rich person shall say, I
know it is so; it is received as Gods Oracle, though God oftentimes betrays
their ignorance to the world, to show them their error. It is a great hau^ines
and pride of heart in any man, to stand so much upon the authority of his
person, as to say, Basta, que yo lo diga, It is enough, that I have said it.
Pilat saw no cause why he should crucify our Savior Christ; but the Pharisees
roundly told him, it is enough, that we have delivered him up into thy hands,
without thy further enquiring into the cause. The Devil when he cannot
persuade a sin by reason, he alleges the authority of some noted person or
other, and by how many great and grave men it is approved, etc. Suting with
that of Seneca, Insanientium multitudo, est sanitatis protectio.

I have not a Devil, etc. Other whiles our Savior nipt the Pharisees, took
them up short, and used sharp reprehensions to them; as, You are of your
father the Devil, a wicked and adulterous Generation, etc. But here he is as
mild with them as a Lamb, and makes them this soft and gentle answer, I have
not a Devil. Which temperate behavior of his was grounded upon three reasons:

First of all, because he that upon the vying of an injury will not (though he
have the better cards in his hand, and that it be in his power to put the
other to the worst) reuie upon him, but let it pass, manifests to the world a
more noble and more glorious testimony of his mildness and patience, than he
that suffers and endures when he cannot otherwise choose, wanting not so much
will as power to revenge a received wrong. Patience when most to be applauded.
That is a generous patience, when a man has a smooth and easy way to work
revenge, and yet rather chooses to pocket than to press an injury. On the
Vigiles of our Saviors being apprehended, our Savior Christ said unto his
Apostles, Luc. 22.
He that has none, let him sell his coat and by a sword. Whereupon says
Saint Ambrose, Sweet Jesus, Why Swords, being thou will not give thy Apostles
leave to draw them? and were angry with Peter, and did reprove him for
drawing his sword in thy defense? Whereunto this glorious Doctor makes us
this answer, That their patience might appear more noble, by having Swords by
their sides, and yet not offering to draw them. Let a Christian therefore wear
a Sword, but let him not vnsheath his sword, to the end that all men may see,
that if he do not revenge an injury, it is not for want of a weapon to right
himself, but out of a superaboundance of sufferance and patience. Isiodorus
Pelusiota disputing the reason why Christ cursed the Fig Tree, leaving it
fruitless for ever, Never man eat fruit of thee hereafter while the world
stands, says, Marc. 11.1.
That the Jews considering those innumerable miracles which our Savior
wrought, and more particularly for the good and benefit of that people, might
happily presume, That Christ had power to do good, but not to do hurt: and
therefore that it might appear unto them, that he had power of and over all,
howbeit he did not in many of them punish their wickedness and ingratitude,
yet did he punish it in the Fig Tree, which was their true type and figure.

Secondly, Christ would teach us this lesson, To suffer injuries a great
nobleness.
That the best means to break anger in an enemy, and to assuage his choler,
are either soft words, or silence. Saint Chrysostom says, That to give a
fair and gentle answer to an angry man, is more than to prophecy of that
which is to come; for the gift of Prophesying God gives it Grati^, and it costs
the Receiver nothing; but to suffer an Enemy, costeth much. Gregory Nazianzen
expounding that place of Saint Luke, Unto him that smites thee on the one
cheek, offer also the other; adds further, If thou had three cheeks, thou
oughtst to offer them all for to keep him quiet. But some man will say, When
that Varlet, that base Slave smote Christ in ^aiphas his house, he did not
offer him his other cheek, but told him as one that was sencible of the wrong
he had done him, If I ^aue evil spoken, Job. 18.
bear witness of the evil; but if I have well spoken, why smitest thou me?
Saint Augustine answers hereunto, that to turn the other cheek to an angry
man, is not so much to be understood de part operis, as de preparatione animi,
No^ in regard of the work, by offering the cheek, as of the preparation of
our mind; for that were but to put a sword into a mad man's hand. And in another
place he says, That it is an hyperbolicall kind of speech, for that Christ did
pretend, That he that is offended should be so far from revenging a received
injury, that he should rather willingly receive a new, than revenge an old
wrong: And therefore if our Savior Christ returned this answer to that rude and
rough-handed Soldier, ( ^ur me caedis? Why smitest thou me?) it was either
because this his flattery, which he was willing to express to the High Priest
by this his cruelty, should not thereby be authorized, or because it might not
be presumed, that Christ had lost the respect due to the Priest; or because
that no man should suspect, that there remained any rancor in his breast, or
desire of revenge, (which they that heard him say, That the Son of Man should
come with power and Majesty, and that he had another Kingdom, where legions
of Angels should show themselves for to do him honor, might well suspect;) or
peradventure he returned him that answer for to pacify him, itbeing so mild
and gentle. In a word, The Rock in the Sea, A patient man whereunto resembled.
the Anuile in the Forge, the Just in the earth, continue still quiet; the one
enduring the waves, and suffering the surges of the seas; the other the strokes
of the hammers, and the third, the injuries of his enemies. My enemies have
compassed me about like so many Bees, so many Bulls, and so many Dogs, grinning
their teeth at me, but it neither troubles me nor grieves me, for I am
sufficiently revenged of them. Saint Augustine does here ask the question, How
(o thou Kingly Prophet) art thou revenged of them? Marry, by instructing them
in the truth, and by dissuading them from their errors. Job having received
great injuries from his friends, as taunting words, and false testimonies, the
revenge that he took of them, was, To pray unto God for them, and to give them
good and wholesome council, Job ^.
as Saint Gregory has noted it, Fly therefore from the face of the sword.

Thirdly, he read a Lecture unto Princes and Prelates, of that mildness and
gentleness; which they ought to profess toward their Subjects. Saint Bernard
says, That if Christ did condemn Peter for drawing his sword, when they came
to lay hands on his Master, and for cutting off of Malchus his ear, it was,
That Choler did not well become him, who was afterward to be a Governor of
the Church, where he should meet with many a Malchus. There is not any thing
that does more conserve Scepters and Crowns, than clemency and truth.
Alexander Seuerus was so soft and mild an Emperor, Clemency, a profitable
virtue.
that some did murmr thereat, saying, he would draw his Empire into contempt,
and be less esteemed of his Subjects. Whereunto he answered, Though it should
be of less esteem, I am sure it will be more secure and durable.

Saint Augustine, Saint Gregory, and Saint Jerome, make this doubt, Why our
Savior did not as well reply to their calling of him Samaritane, as for
tel^^ng him that he had a devil: And they resolve it thus, That concerning
these two injuries, the one was an affront done to his person, the other to his
Doctrine: for the wrong that was done to his doctrine, because it touched the
honor of his father he was bound to answer thereunto. For a servant must not
be silent, much less a son, in the agrauios, and injuries that are done
unto God. God promised Moses to make him a Captain and Governor of another
more noble and more honorable Nation, desiring that he might cut off and make
an end at once of that rebellious people. But Moses besought him, saying, My
good Lord, this were a great honor for me, but I am content to forgo it,
because thou shall suffer in thine honor if thou destroy this people, Exodus 32.
Least the Egyptians speak, and say, he has brought them out maliciously for
to slay them in the mountains, and to consume them from off the earth. This
were but to run the censure of evil tongues, and the hazard of thine honor.
Our Savior Christ did not resent any thing so much as affronts and dishonours;
this made him to break forth into this passionat speech, Ye went out with
swords and ^^aues to take me, as if I had been a thief. Again, Thou know
my reproach, and none knows it ^o fully as thou. To these shall we add that
other, Saturabitur opprobrijs; all his other torments made him still more and
more hungry, and abated not the edge of his stomach; but he was glutted with
his reproaches, and the affronts that were offered him, he had his belly too
full of them, more than he was well able to bear. Gods honor must ever be
preferred before our own.
Amongst other causes of that his mysterious swea^ing of blood in the Garden,
the Saints set down this as the most principal, That the dishonor did there
represent it self unto him, of seeing himself stark naked upon the Cross,
and that he was to be made a spectacle unto the world, his blo^d like a
faithful friend, having recourse to the bashful modesty of the whole body, as
it is wont upon some occasions to have recourse unto the heart. In a word, he
did evermore give approved pledges and tokens of the great reckoning that he
made of his honor: but when his Fathers lay at stake, he was forgetful of his
own; And therefore not answering to that of Samaritanus es tu, Thou art a
Samaritan; he mildly replied, Ego Daemonium non habeo, I have not a Devil, but
I honor my Father, etc.

I seek not mine own praise, but there is one that seeks it, and judges.
Truth can never be altogether suppressed.
Ye seek to blot my name out of the worlds memory, and to bury my honor and
authority with the infamy of a Witch, a Sorcerer, a Devil, and a Glutton. And
though I do not seek to repair this wrong, There is one that seeks after
it and judges. There is not any thing so hid and buried, that, though it lie
covered for a time, is not in the end discovered. Of Fire and of Love, Ulysses
sa^d, Quis enim celauerit ignem, Who can hide them? but the same may be better
verified of the Truth. Well may falsehood and passion, assisted by tyranny and
power, hide and bury it self, but in the end, There is nothing so secret but
shall be revealed: Mat. 10.
For time is a great discouerer of truths. Plutarch reports in his
Apothegmes, That at the sacrifices of Saturn (whom they adored for the god of
Time) the Priests had their heads covered till the Sacrifice was fully ended; a
ceremony which was not suffered by any other of the gods: And the mystery
thereof was, That Time does cover things now and then for a while, but
discouers them at last. And therefore Pindarus said, That the latter days were
the faithfullest witnesses. Time sometime sleeps, but it awakes again. But
in case it fall asleep, and never wake any more, Est qui quaerat, and iudicet,
God is still ready at hand, who searching out the truth, will judge his own
cause.

Oblivion has two bosoms, Obliuio^ has two bosoms.
wherein she burieth those things which she most desires to blot out of the
remembrance of the world.

The one, the bottom of the Sea.

The other, the bowels of the Earth.

Into the Sea, many Tyrants have thrown the bodies and ashes of the Saints, to
the end, that being devoured by fishes, or drowned in the deep, they might not
be adored on earth, as we may read in the History of Saint Cl^^ent, and diverse
others.

In the earth men bury the Dead; Highway Robbers, their spoils; Thieves, their
thefts; they that are either subdued by conquest, or banished their country,
their treasure; as Cacus did those cowes he had stolen in his cave. But God
causes those things that are the heauiest and the weightiest, and cast into
the bottom of the Sea, to swim like cork above water; and makes the earth to
vomit forth her most secret and hidden treasures. For, Nihil occultum, etc.
There is nothing so secret which shall not be revealed.

There is one that seeks it and judges it. O Lord, Thou remittest this cause
to thy father, Judges ought to be free from passion.
and thy father remits all unto thee. I answer, when I took the rod to revenge
the wrongs and injuries of the world, I was not to be like unto sparks that are
quickly kindled, nor subject to any the least passion of anger; for a Judge
that is so affected, cannot be a competent Judge in his own cause. And
therefore, Est, qui quaerat, and iudicet. My Father is to redress this wrong,
he is to look unto it. Whence I infer, That if our Savior Christ, in whom
there could not be any kind of passion, did remit to his Father the judging of
his cause; hardly can a Judge of flesh sentence his own cause. King David
being at the point of death, willed his son Solomon that he* should take away
the lives of Ioab and Shimei: He thereupon caused Ioab to be slain; but only
confined Shimei. The reason that induced him to mittigate Shimei his sentence,
and not that of Io^b, was, because the offenses which Ioab had committed, were
not done directly against his father David, but against Abner and Amasa, whom
he had ill killed; Whereas Shimeis fault was, in affronting the Kings person:
and because it might happily be thought that he might be carried away with too
much passion or affection in this his fathers cause, he deferred his death,
till he should fall through his own default, which he afterward did; and
then Solomon reckoned with him for the old and the new. 2. R^g. 14.
The woman of Tekoah receiving her instructions from Ioab, entered the Palace,
and having put on mourning apparel, as a woman that had now long time mourned
for the dead, and falling down on her face to the ground, and doing her
obeisance, she spoke thus unto him; I am a poor widow, my husband is dead, and
thine handmaid had two sons, and they two strove together in the field, and
there was none to part them, so the one smot the other and slew him: And
behold, the whole family is risen against thine handmaid, crying out, Deliver
him that smot his brother that we may kill him for the soul of his brother
whom he slew, that we may destroy the heir also; So shall they quench my
sparkle that is left, and shall not leave to mine husband neither name nor
posterity upon the earth; and I my self shall remain a miserable mother, not
having any child left me to be a stay and comfort unto me in my old days, Woe
is me that I must be deprived of both my sons in one day. The King pitying her
wretched condition, said unto her: I will take order for the freeing of thy
son. And to send her away well satisfied, vowed unto her, by that his usual
asseueration (as the Lord lives) there shall not one hair of thy son fall
to the earth. Whereupon she taking her leave, said unto him, Let my Lord the
King show himself as free from passion in his own proper cause, as he has in
another man's: Will thou free my son that has slain his brother, and will thou not free Absalon that slew Ammon? Rupertus says, That E^es hurt consisted
in the misprision of the fruit, and the ill judgment that she made in the
choice of the apple: For being too much wedded to her own appearing good
opinion, the eyes of the body persuaded those of the soul, that in so fair a
fruit, it was impossible to find death.

Then took they up sto^es to cast at him. Tyranny and persecution, evermore
attended the Saints of God: But there was this difference betwixt them and our
Savior Christ, That your Tyrants did seek to reduce these other to the
adoring of their gods, one while with promises, another while by threatenings;
now with courtesies and kindnesses, and by and by again with sundry sor^s of
torments. There was scarce any famous Martyr which did not tread in his
martyrdom in this path; nor any Tyrant which did not take this course with
them. And perhaps they followed herein the steps of Nebuchadnezzar, who, (as
the glorious Doctor Saint Chrysostom has observed) for those who would not
adore his Statue, had a hot fiery furnace, whose flames ascended forty nine
cubits in height; and for those that did adore it, he had all sorts of
exquisite music and choice instruments: warring against virtue with pleasure,
Daniel 3.
and with pain. But our Savior Christ was always ill entreated by the world.
In the desert, the devil once offered him stones; The Pharisees many times.
When he was borne in Bethlem, he had not wherewithal to defend him from the
cold, but was forced to be laid in the cratch among the beasts. Whilst he
lived here in the world, he had not any to relieve his hunger. The day that he
entered in Triumph into Jerusalem, he went forth into the field to seek after
figs. Dying, he had not any one that would give him so much as a jar of
water, when he cried out Sitio, I thirst, they gave him vinegre and gall to
drink. Pope Leo says of him, The days that were appointed for him, he began
them in persecution, and ended them in persecution. In his infancy, he began
with the Cross, and at his end he dyed on the Cross. Which was (as Gregory
Nazi^nzen says) a Prognostication, That that Disciple that will seek to
follow his master, shall never want a cross to carry, nor matter wherein to
suffer.

But Jesus hid himself, and went out of the Temple. Why Christ withdrew
himself from the Pharisees.
Upon this place we have formerly rendered four reasons, why our Savior
Christ avoided these ^tones by flight; and now adding others anew thereunto,
Orig^n says, That he withdrew himself, out of compassion, considering that
his counsels made the Pharisees more rebellious and more hard than before.
Rebellem non vult perdere, He shund the occasion, that they might not be
utterly lost, accommodating himself to that of Saint Paul, D^te l^cum ira,
Give way to anger. One of Gods great mercies is to fly from a sinner, that he
may not be bound suddenly to destroy him. In Exodus, he gave his people an
Angel to be their guide; saying, I will neither be your Captain, nor your
Guide, for through your stiffe-neckednesse and rebellion, ye will run great
hazard under my command. In some Parables, the holy Evangelists put the word,
Peregre profectus est, He is gone afar off. For albeit God be always
present, yet it is his exceeding great mercy now and then not to be present.
For there is no compatibilitie with his divine presence, and our shamelesnes
and loosenes of life. And so putting on as it were a kind of dissimulation, he
makes as if he went away from us, and did not see what we do.

Euthymius says, That our Savior Christ would rather exercise his patience in
flying, than his power in punishing, Fugiendo magis, quam puniendo. For
although he should have destroyed the^, yet would they never the sooner have
repented; Complying with that of the Prophet Esaias, Dissipati neque co^puncti.
In the garden he made those that came to take him to ^eele and fall on their
backs, with an Ego sum, I am he. But they not acknowledging this his divine
power, proceeded on in their apprehending of him. A hard heart can never be
mollified.
God deliver us from the resolution of a Reprobate, for there is not that
miracle either in heaven or on earth, that will bridle and restrain him. Of
those which began to build the Towet of Babel, the Scripture says, Nor will
they yet leave off. But such is the goodness of Gods nature, and is so kind and
loving unto us, That he does to the ill good, though they turn this good to
(...). But he does not do any ill unto them; for his patience is such, That he
does not think it much, that even those that were most ill, should enjoy some
good. Hugo de sancto victore, declares that place of the Proverbs, Prou. 26.
Answer a fool according to his foolishnes: And, Answer not a fool according
to his fool^shnesse. After this manner, i^ a fool shall amend by reprehension,
give it him: but if there be no hope of amendment, give it him not. God does
commonly treat of the most good, and the least ill; but the wicked man, of the
least good, and the most ill. Wherein, he proves worse than Pilat; For he
labored to set our Savior Christ at liberty, using the means for the
effecting of it, to have him well whipped, Luke 23.16.
I will chastise him and let him loose. But the Jews would not rest con^ented
with that, but went on in accomplishing the greatest sin that was ever
committed in the world.

Pope Gregory says, That our Savior Christ hid himself and went out of the
Temple, flying from the stones which they were about to fling at him, for to
show, That the world was all this while in an error, in holding it a point of
honor, Revenge in man a s^mptome of Cowardice.
and a brave and manly action to answer affronts with affronts, injuries with
injuries, and to revenge them to the full, holding it baseness and cowardice
either to suffer a wrong, or shun the occasion thereof: Wherein he has
showed his great love unto us. For he applying himself to the estimation
which man makes of his honor, permits us to defend our reputation, though
it be with the hurt of the Aggressor or Assaylant, and that we should not fly
that we might not loose it. So that Christ flying from the Pharisees, and
hiding himself, casting their sins behind his back, whilst he showed them
his back; and seeking to hide their faults, by hiding himself from them, he
did more for them, than they did for themselves. It is likewise a point of
Honor, That a husband, ^erem. 3.
should not receive the wife which has bin false and treacherous unto him.

But God says, As a woman rebelleth against her husband, so have ye rebelled
against me; Thou have played the harlot with many lovers, yet turn again to
me says the Lord, and I will heal your rebellions. Then shall thou call me,
saying, my Father, and shall not turn from me. To whom with the Son and the
Holy Ghost, be all honor, power, etc.

THE XXXIII. SERMON, UPON THE MONDAY AFTER PASSION SUNDAY.
JOHN. 7. Miserunt Principes Sacerdotum Ministros, vt apprehenderent Iesum.

The Chief Priests sent their Officers to apprehend Jesus.


HEre, No policy preualent against the word and wisdom of God.
the chief of the Priests (waiting on the voice and cry of the people, and
watching which way they were inclined, and beholding how they were ready to
mutine, and that many daily were converted, convinced by those miracles, which
were so great both in quality and number, that they could not be wrought by any
but the Messiah, whom they had so long looked for) fearing some alteration both
in their State and Religion, and devising with themselves, how they might cut
off this Good, as if it had been some Canker or Plague of the Commonwealth,
They sent Officers to take him. In which Discourse is discovered the force and
efficacy of Gods Word, and how little the industry and policy of man is able
to prevail against this Divine Wisdom.

The Highpriests sent to take him. The motive hereunto was their envy, Envy
of all vices the most unfortunate to it self, and fortunate to others.
a vice so unfortunate and so unlucky, that accounting for it is felicity, and
for it is good, another ill, commonly the ill raineth down upon the head of
the Envious, and the good, upon that of the Envied. Joseph's brethren threw him
into a pit, and then sold him, and all but out of envy; and this their
selling of him, was the means of his excelling of them; and their casting of
him down, the raising of him up: thus purposed adversity turned to future
prosperity. Haman that was King Assuerus his Favorite, had listed Gods people
in several rolls, with a full resolution to have them massacred all in one
day; he had set up a high gallows whereon to hang Mordochey: this his envy
was the means that Gods people found favor, Mordochey was advanced, and Haman
hung on the Gallous which he had made for another. The like success had Saul
with David; and Nebucadnezars Princes, with poor Daniel; and the Jews, with
our Savior Christ: which is no more than was revealed in that parable of that
Stone, which being rejected by that People, fell upon them, and made mortar of
them; that Stone being afterward made the head Stone of the Corner. Of the
Lynx the Naturalists do report, That he covers his urine, as the Cat does
her d^ng; and that this his covering of it, is the means that a Stone is
congealed thereof, of great both virtue and beauty.

The Highpriests sent, etc. By Saint Matthew our Savior did point forth to the
Pharisees a truth, Mat. 23.
which does suit well with this present purpose, W^e be unto ye Scribes and
Pharisees, because ye shut up the Kingdom of Heaven; for ye your selves go
not in, nor suffer them that would enter, to come in. That Gardiners Dog that
would neither eat Coleworts himself, nor suffer others to eat them, is of the
Devils condition, that will neither do good to himself, nor let others enjoy
it: And in some respect the Pharisees were far worse; for the people had not
the Devil for their North-Starre, nor their Guide, neither did they trust him
with the zeal and care of their good: but the Scribes and Pharisees were the
Lights of Israel, the Guides and North-Starres of the People, who with the
clouds of their passions did darken the very beams of the Sun it self.
Saint Luke cries out, Luke 11.
Woe be unto ye Scribes and Pharisees, ye that are Interpreters of the Law,
for ye have taken away the Key of knowledge, and of the Scriptures; ye entered
not in your selves, and them that came in, ye forbad; ye will not that any
shall control that which ye teach. What, does any one of the Chiefe-Priests
and Pharisees believe in him? In the Highpriests and the Pharisees all the
wisdom is deposited, as for the Common people, they are ignorant and
unlettered; if therefore none of these principal men believe in him, let him
that believes in him, go for a condemned man. From the head comes all the ill
to the body Natural; and mystically the same may be said of these and the
like Heads. Gen^^is rendering a reason of Gods sending a Flood upon the earth,
says, The whole earth was nothing but filthiness and corruption. Like Priest,
like People.
And to him that shall ask, Why this hurt and calamity was so general? it is
there answered, There were Giants in the earth in those days: The sons of
God, those that were great and powerful Princes linked themselves with the
daughters of men, with those that were the basest and vilest among them, and
begot upon them such vicious Giants, that they corrupted the whole land. Phylon
reports, That Goliath the Philistine was the first that presumed to lay hand
on the Ark of God, and that afterward all the people followed his example,
The whole head was sick, and the whole heart was hea^^e, etc. It was enough to
know, that the heads were so sick and so weak; for thereby it is to be
presumed, that the whole body of the People was full of tumors and swellings.

It is a most grievous sin, and God does punish them with a grievous
punishment, who pull down where they are bound to build. The Israelites being
much affectioned to the Midianitish and the Moabitish women, at their
persuasion fell to the adoring of Belfeg^r, Psalm. 106.
They i^yned themselves also unto Baal-Pe^^, and did eat the Offerings of the
Dead. God for this being so angry with them, that he said unto M^ses, Number. 25.
Take all the heads of the people, and hang them up before the Lord against the
Sun: And why against the Sun? To the end that the natural sun should
condemn these the Sons and Princes of thy people. The Spouse went forth one
night to seek her Beloved, and meeting with the Watch, they treated her ill,
and took away her Cloak from her. It is a hard case, that he that should
apparel and protect the Naked, should rob him of his clothes, and trample him
by oppression under his feet.

They sent Officers, etc. Ministers for ill, are never wanting. A Tyrant shall
never want Executioners to torment; nor a Judge, Sergeants to arrest; nor an
Usurer, knights of the Post to lie and swear; a Lady, a waiting maid to cover
her sin; a Noble man Pages, to bring him Loue-letters; a Gamester, cheaters
to foist in false dice and cards; Dancers, Fiddlers; nor Princes, Ministers.
Lucifer had no sooner propounded in hell, who amongst them would adventure to
tempt Christ, but innumerable numbers of the principal di^ells stood forth,
offering him their service, with promise of their best endeauours and
diligences. Saul had no sooner asked the question, who would undertake to
apprehend David, but presently all the Courtiers belonging to the Palace,
proffered him their lives and their persons to bring him in. King Ahaziah had no
sooner spoke the word, Who will rid me of this same troublesome Eliah who will
not let me live in quiet; when forthwith your Quinquagenarians and Captains
over fifties, every one of them proffered him their service; one saying, I will
serve thee; and another, I will serve thee, etc. That servants should obey and
serve their Lords, the Law of God commands it: Saint Paul says, Servants obey
your Lords according to the flesh, as ye would obey Christ. And Saint Peter
further adds, Servants be subject to your Masters with all fear, not only
to the good and courteous, but also to the froward. 1. Pet. ^.
By froward are meant those that are austere, sharp, severe, rough, and harsh:
as likewise those that are wicked men, and great sinners. Solomon tells us, He
that fears the commandment, he shall be rewarded. Prou. 1.^.
But we are not to obey them against God: And this the Apostle noted forth unto
us in that word, Carnalibus, in the flesh, that is, That they have not one
dram of jurisdiction over the spirit or soul of their servant. And not
contented with this, he goes a little further and adds, Tanquam Christo. For,
as Christ will not command you any thing that is against the good of your
souls; so neither is a master otherwise to command his servant. And if he
should command you the contrary, ye are not to obey him. And this was that
which the Tribes said to their General Joshua, Josh. 1.
As we obeyed Moses in all things, so will we obey thee, assuring our selves,
that God is with thee as he was with him.

There are many Courtiers that think that their Princes do them a great
favor, when they command them this or that thing against God, Honest service
little respected by earthly Princes.
that they may show what hazard they would run to do them service: Whereas
he that will serve him in only Licitis, et honestis, Those things that are
lawful and honest, gets no preferment, nor is not held by the world to be a
fit servant to attend a Prince. Though indeed (if it be duly considered) he
ought for that to be the more esteemed by him: No policy preualent against the
wisdom of God.

God must be served by us before man.




First, because to serve a Lord against a man's King, is Crimen lesae
maiestatis, Treason against a humane Majesty, so, to serve a king against God,
is treason in the highest degree against a Divine majesty.

Secondly, because your instruments, although they be inanimate and without a
soul, yet God is wont to punish them with a severe and heavy hand: As he did
the Serpent, Upon thy belly shall thou go, Genesis 3.
and dust shall thou eat all the days of thy life. And if upon the Serpent
which sinned not, God does lay so heavy a hand; what shall become of that
instrument that is a partner and shar^r in the sin? Our Savior Christ cursed
the fig tree: and Athanasius says, That at that very time that he cursed it,
It is bad service to share in other men's sins.
it came into his mind that it had covered those with it is leaves, that had so
highly offended him in Paradise. A heavy judgment for those that will serve to
be cloakes and bawdes to those sins which are committed against God and his
holy Laws.

Thirdly, God does permit, that for honest servants, and knauish servants,
there should be masters accordingly; masters that should use them well, and
masters that should use them ill. And though for a while till their turns be
served, they use them well, enriching them, and raising them to honor, yet
afterward they come to use them so ill, that they eat them out of all that
they have given them, calling in that which they but lent them, and engaging
the^ for more than they are worth; and at last a fire comes down from heaven,
and consumes all the wealth that they have thus ungodly gotten, as it did upon
those Captains which were employed by their bad King, against good Eliah.

The Cuttle-fishe is a stamp, or Emblem of your Princes, that have a great
train of servants attending their persons, as this fish has of finnes: but
deuoures them, as this fish does his tail and finnes when he is hungry.

Our longest life but little.
Yet am I a little while with you. He calls little, that little which was now
left him of his life: For he was to suffer about the feasts following, which
was now near at hand. The longest life, the Scripture styles little: and the
greatest troubles that we pass therein, likewise little. Antiochus his
Ministers, persuading one of those valiant Machabees, That he would free his
body from those cruel torments which he was to endure, 2. Mac. 7.36.
if that he would obey the king; answered, My brethren that have suffered a
little pain, are now under the divine Covenant of everlasting life. Eleazar
rendered the like reason to those his friends which importuned him, That albeit
he would not eat Swines flesh, yet he should make show that he did it:
Whereunto he replied, That such dissimulation did not befit his age and
authority, 2. Mac. 6.
Least the younger soul through mine hypocrisy (for a little time of a
transitory life) might be deceived by me; I should receive malediction and
reproach to my gray hairs. Saint Peter has it Modicum passus, etc. And there
are two reasons of this shortness of life.

The one, That life in it self is short, Ecce mensurabiles posuisti dies meos,
Behold thou have measured out my days. The Greek word which answers to
mensurabiles, signifies a measure of four fingers.

Job 9.
The other, because it flies away swifter than the wind, My days have been
more swift than a Post, and have seen no good thing. They are passed with the
most swift sh^ps, and as the Eagle that flies to the prey. Va^ablus has it,
As a Ship that goes as swift as thought, or as the Mariners and Passengers
could wish it; Pagninus, Like a Pirates man of War, which because it goes
light laden, seems rather to fly than sail: Or, Like an Eagle that flies to
the prey. The Eagle when she is sharp set, and pursues her prey, cuts the
air with her wings swifter than the wind, so that that which our Saviors
says, is this, Tell the high Priests that sent ye unto me, that I have but a
little while to live, and that when my hour shall come, I my self will put my
self into their hands; and if that they are so willing to have me dye, tell
them that I desire it much more.

Christ must be sought while he may be found.
Ye shall seek me and shall not find me. I came to seek you, ye shut the
door upon me; ye therefore shall seek me, but ye shall not find me. Euthymius
expounds that prophecye of David, of the Jews, Conuertentur ad vesperam, and
famem patientur vt canes, and cireuibunt ciuitatem; It shall be so late ere
they be converted, that the world shall be at an end, and in the interim, they
shall suffer hunger like dogs, which among all other beasts suffers the
most hunger: Hambre canina, a dogs hunger, is spoken by way of Proverb in the
Spanish tongue. They shall run rounding the world after their Messiah, but he
having retired himself to heaven, never to be seen by them any more here on
earth, this miserable people shall hardly be able to find him. Nichola^^ de
Lyra says, That that they sought him in that siege which Titus and Vespasian
laid to Jerusalem, when they saw themselves swallowed up in so many miserable
misfortunes, yet could they not find him: for albeit Gods bowe^ls are never
shut up for the pardoning of sin, yet are they shut up for the punishment
thereof; and even then did they look to find him, when his sword was already
drawn. So that that Language of Amos, For three transgressions, and for four,
etc. Amos 2.
The number of three expresses many sins, but the number of four, more than
many: And therefore when the Sinner shall come to this number, God will not
pardon him, Quatenus ad poenam, As touching the punishment of sin, though he
forgive him the guilt thereof. Saint Chrysostom says, That in the siege of
Jerusalem many were converted to our Savior Christ, repenting themselves of
that which they had alleged against him to Pilat, If we let go this man, the
Roman^ will come and take our Kingdom and our Nation from us, etc. Saint
Augustine says, That this prophecy (You shall seek me, Act. 2.
and shall not find me) was fulfilled in that Sermon which S. Peter made,
whereof S. Luke makes mention in the Acts; where many of them did repent, and
were converted to Christ, to the number of three thousand persons; but that
others did despair of pardon, considering the greatness of their offense.

But letting pass the people of the Jews, this sentence does advise all sorts
of persons, That they do not let slip the time of their good, whether it be
in regard of the person, or of the time which is offered unto them; for
afterward, they shall seek and shall not find. In regard of the persons, Good
never truly liked, till lost.
Good was never truly known till such time as it is lost; The covetous
Rich-man did acknowledge in Hell, the Riches that were hid under Lazarus his
Rags; The Damned confess amidst their slames, the wisdom of the Righteous,
whom before they held to be Fools or mad men: The Prodigal in the Pig-stie
knew the advantage that his fathers household servants had of him: The Hebrews
in their life time offered Moses a thousand Agrauio's and injuries; when he
slew the Egyptian, he was forced through them to fly the Country; when he
was their Captain and Commander, they multiplied mutinies upon him,
murmurings, disgraces, and were so mad at him, that they would have stoned him
to death; and yet after he was dead, if they had known where his body had bin
buried, they would have worshipped and adored him. King Ahab called Eliah while
he lived here, The Troubler of Israel; and Queen Iezabel she would have his
life taken from him; the People too, they complained of his too much rigor and
seueri^ie, and that he had petitioned God, That they should have no rain for
so many years, and that he took no pity of those poor souls that were
ready to starve for hunger in the streets: but when he was taken up into
Heaven in a fiery Chariot, Elisha then cried out, My father, my father, the
Chariot of Israel, and the Horsemen thereof; That is to say, Now Israel shall
know, that thou were more their Protector and Defender, than their armed
Chariots: Or as Saint Ambrose has it, Now Israel shall know, that thou were
he that did govern them, and that did repress their violent passions, and
bridle their wilful and headstrong affections, which were more hot and furious
than those of Beasts. In humane Histories there are infinite examples that
avouch the truth hereof, but none can allege for the present, nor the world
never yet did, nor shall, produce a man so persecuted, so abhorred, so trampled
upon, Never any m^^ so hated of the world, as Christ.
and so much des^ised and neglected, as our Savior Christ; Eradicemus eum de
terra Viuentium, Let us root him out of the land of the Living; as if he had
been the plague of the Commonwealth. But the World did afterward acknowledge,
That there was no man that deserved more to be beloved.

Time a precious Jewel.
In regard of the time, for the World has not any one thing of so great price,
as is Time, Fili, conserua Tempus, My son preserve Time; so says
Ecclesiasticus. Precious things ought charily to be kept and conserved,
whereof none is more precious than Time. Seneca writing to Lucilius, says, Who
can too highly esteem of Time? Who can give it the price that is due unto it?
All things else are Aliena, They are not ours; only Time is ours: it is a
Treasure that properly belongs unto us, which we may bestow as we will our
selves.

Now in the last and great day of the Feast, etc. This was one of the famousest
Feasts that the Jews had; they solemnised the same on the fifteenth of
September, and it did last seven days. Of the Ceremonies and Sacrifices of
this Feast, Leuit* 23. Number. 29.
Leuiticus, Numbers, and Josephus in his Book of Antiquities makes mention.
All these seven days the Hebrews lived in the field, and in Cabbins covered
with boughs, in remembrance of that time that God led them through the Desert
in Tents and Tabernacles: and therefore it was called the Feast of Tabernacles,
That your posterity may know, Why instituted. Leuit. 23.43.
that I have made the Children of Israel to dwell in Booths when I brought them
out of the land of Egypt; God pretending therein, That when the children of
Israel should see themselves seated in so populous a city as Jerusalem,
strengthened with such strong walls, and such proud and stately Towers, that
they did strike a fear and terror into Damascus, and all the heathen round
about them; fortified with so many several sorts of Arms, illustrated with
the Temple, which was one of the miracles of the world; the memory of their
forepassed misery might melt the vainglory of their present prosperity.
For the forgetting of our first rising, causes commonly pride and arrogancy:
your wiser sort of men, when they see themselves raised to the highest round of
Fortunes wheel, they always set before their eyes their base beginning.
Amongst those other Vessels of gold and silver on his Court-Cupboord, the
Emperor intermixed some of earth, in memorial that he was raised from being
a Potter, to the honor of being an Emperor. Amos did never forget that he had
bin a heardsman, though God had exalted him to be a Prophet; Armentarius ego
sum. Pride incident to Man.
David never denied that he had bin a Shepherd. Sinners when they come to be
Saints, they are never unmindful of the miserable estate of their sins;
Quorum primus ego sum, Whereof I am the chiefest, says Saint Paul. For a man
to be puffed with the state of a new fortune, and to forget his former base and
mean estate, is a thing proper to base, ungrateful, and foolish persons: and
this forgetfulness causes him to fall into discurtesies, inciuilitie, pride,
and bad behavior.

Good men are very rare.
If any man thirst, let him come unto me. Some say, That he calls unto all
that are thirsty, as elsewhere he called to all that were weary and heavy
laden with the burden of their sins. Others, That he calls unto those that
thirst after Heaven; and so puts it down conditionally: For albeit all do
thirst after happiness in the general, yet those that attain to this true
happiness by a lively Faith, are few. Things are by so much the more rare, by
how much they are the more precious; as we see in Gold, Pearls, and Precious
Stones, in Clothes of Tissue, Lawne, Silk, Scarlet, and delicacie of Diet.
Amongst this number, we List Good men, which are very rare, and very
precious: Iuvenal terms them, The Monsters of the World, and he draws his
comparison from a Mule great with Fool. Cicero says, That it is a rarer thing:
for, to see a Mule bring forth a Foale, is very frequent, but we seldom see a
perfect wise man. David said of himself, ^sal. 71.
I am become as it were a Monster unto many: A King so prosperous, so much
favored of God, and so good; a Monster? a King so powerful, such a pardoner
of his enemies, and so liberal toward them; and he a Monster? a King which
watered his couch with tears, and did mingle them with the water that he
drank, and did cover his flesh with Sackcloth; and he a Monster! Caietan
translates it, Tanquam Miraculum. It is the definition of the Just, That a man,
the World walking that broad way which leads to destruction, that he should
take pleasure to go the straight and narrow way, it is Miraculum, A mere
miracle: That a man, when all men besides shall say, Let us eat and drink, for
tomorrow we shall die; that he should say, Let us fast and pray, let us repent
us of our sins, that we may not die tomorrow, it is Miraculum, A mere
miracle: That a man, others believing and loving those things which they see
and enjoy; that he should love that which he enjoys not, and believe that
which he sees not, but hops for, it is Miraculum, A mere miracle: That a
man should desp^se Go^d, and esteem no better of the honors and pleasures of
this world, than of the dirt that he treads under his feet, (these being the
Idols that man's heart does usually most adore) it is Miraculum, A mere
miracle. Eccl. 49.
Zachary and Ecclesiasticus call Jesus the Priest the son of Iosedec, and
those his friends that were in his company, Viros portentosos, Prodigious men:
By whom some understand, Sidrac, Misach, and Abeanego, those three Children
which returned with Zorobabel to Palestine. But Saint John does indeere this in
his Apocalypse, Apoc. 12.
where making a description of the Just, he says, A great sign or wonder
appeared in Heaven. And that this conceit may extend it self a little further,
there are two things to be supposed.

The one, That God painting forth by Esaias the greatness of the world, compares
it to a drop of water, Quasi stilla situlae, As the drop of a Bucket: Who has
measured the waters in his fist, and counted Heaven with the spanne, and
comprehended the dust of the earth in a measure, and weighed the mountains in
a weight, and the hills in a balance: All Nations before him are as nothing;
all the world and it is greatness is as a drop of water, it is a dust, and
counted by him less than nothing. But of the Just we may say, Signum magnum
apparuit in Coelo, It is a great miracle in Heaven.

The other, That beholding from Heaven the breadth of the earth, it seems but
a poor Cottage; the least of the Stars is greater than the earth, and being
beheld from thence, it seems to be the palm of a man's hand; and the Sun,
which is a hundred and seventy times bigger, seems in comparison about the
bigness of a Buckler. And that a man should be just, it is Grande miraculum;
and that he should thirst after Heaven, it is Signum magnum; and therefore it
is here said, If any man thirst, etc.

If any man thirst. He inuiteth him that is thirsty, to desire it:

First, Because Heaven is to be gained, Labor and sudore, By labor and by
sweat; Heaven not gotten without pains.
and for this cause it is called in Scripture, a Crown, a Reward, a days
Wages: now for to clamber over so many walls, We had need be very thirsty,
and have a good desire unto it.

Secondly, Because such precious water is not fitting to be given unto him that
has no great mind unto it. If in those lesser things here on earth, he that
gives makes such reckning of the esteem that the pretender holds of that he
sueth for; What shall it be in that good, which being enjoyed, the soul is
not able to comprehend it? for, in the matter of giving and receiving, so
necessary is the gusto and contentment that a man takes therein, that he that
gives with disgust* gives not, and he that receives with disgust, receives not
what is given: And therefore Seneca in his book De Beneficijs, sets down
the decorum that is to be held therein. Ecclesiasticus says, There is a gift
which is not profitable, and there is a gift whose retribution is manifold. In
receiving, this reason carries the more force with it; for who is he that will
give to him that has no desire to receive? And with God it is more forcible;
for he will have all his gifts to be our rewards, and therefore he calls
those, our gifts, which in all strictness are his. The Lord respected Abel and
his gifts. The Lambs that were offered were Gods, All the best of the Woods are
mine, etc. yet out of his goodness he calls them Abels. All that we offer is
his ( Quae de manu tua accepimus, reddimus tibi) yet he styles it ours: so that
the loathing and distaste of receiving, takes away the desire of giving. When
the People of Israel began to say, Our stomach is weary of that light meat,
presently Gods providence judged them unworthy of that favor.

Whence it is to be noted, That this unwillingness does not only rise from a
little liking which man has of Heaven, but of the great liking that he has
to these earthly goods. And this is a two fold fault:

The one, That we should despise the fountain of living Water.

No appetite so fierce as that of a sinner.
The other, That we should thirst after the water of loathsome and durtie
puddles. Who will forgo clear and sweet waters for those bloody pooles of
Egypt? Exodus says, Quicquid habueris de pluuia, conuertetur in sanguinem;
Who will leave the sweet waters of Siloah, Ier. ^. Exodus 4. Dan. 7.
which silently glide along, for to drink of that fiery lake whereof Daniel
speaks: wherein (as he said) one sorrow is, That they should despise the
sweeter Waters; another, That they should thirst after the muddie Waters of the
earth? There is no impetuousnesse of the fiercest Bull, nor of the furiousest
Horse, comparable to that of a Sinner which thirsts after his vain appetites
and idle desires. Saint Hierome and Theodoret both say, That in this Si quis he
neither dismisseth nor inforceth, but that he publishes the general desire
which he has to communicate his spiritual Graces.

What meant by the water of life.
He that believes in me (says the Scripture) out of his belly shall flow
rivers of Water of Life. To the Thirsty that shall drink of this water of
Life, that shall not succeed to them as befalls those that drink of dead
standing Pooles, who within a little while after have greater thirst than they
had before; for they shall have within their breasts a living Fountain, whence
great rivers of water shall flow; they shall enjoy such a fullness of all good,
that they shall have enough to communicate unto others. Saint Gregory and
Saint Chrysostom understand by this Fountain, the Holy Ghost, from whom
every good thing does proceed.

Esaias 42, 43, 44.
As says the Scripture. Albeit there be many places in the sacred Scripture,
which prophecy the abundant plenty of spiritual Waters, there is none that
can say, That this is alleged in particular. Origin is of opinion, That that
of the Proverbs has the most appearance, Bibe aquam ex cisterna tua, and
fluenta putei tui: Prou. 5. Ezec^. 35. Joel. 2.
or (as the Hebrew has it) Et fluenta de medio putei tui: so that Fluenta, is
the same as Flumina, as it seems to the Cardinal of Toledo.

This spoke he of the Spirit which they that believed in him should receive.
And this blessed Spirit is fitly compared to water, The Holy Ghost Why compared
to water.
in regard of it is effects.

The first effect of water is, To cleanse: Ezechiel, I w^ll pour upon you
clean water, and ye shall be clean. But all the water in the world cannot
wash a Blacke-a-moore white; indeed there is no water that can make that which
is black, white; but the Holy Ghost can do this, it can add a new cleanness
and a new beauty thereunto; 2. Cor. 4.
Thou shall wash me, and I shall be whiter than snow; it shall not only lose
that whiteness which it had before, but shall surpass the snow in whiteness.
In like manner, a Sinner may be so washed and so cleansed, that he may remain
more pure and more fair than the Innocent. Again, water cleanses, but as it
washes, so it wastes and wears out that which it washes, as it is to be
seen in your Linen: but the Holy Ghost renews the Soul, giving new force
and new strength, Thy youth shall be renewed like the Eagles; and though our
outward man be corrupted, our inward man is revived yet day by day.

The second effect is, To fertilise and fructify the earth: The holy Spirit
works this with great advantage; My soul without thee is barren, but by thy
favorable influence it brings forth the fair fruits of Charity, Joy,
Patience, Long-suffering, Goodness, Gentleness, etc. All these things works
one and the same Spirit; and therefore it is called Viuificator, A Quickening
Spirit.

The third effect is, To quench thirst: Only the Holy Ghost can quench the
thirst of the Soul; all other humane goods increase our thirst, as it is
proved in many places. And therefore David did desire of God, that he would
quench this his thirst; My Soul thirsts after God, the Fountain of living
water, and woe is me, etc. He does sigh and groan for his God and his glory,
because only that is able to quench his thirst.

Never man spoke as this man. The Highpriests and the Pharisees asked the
Officers that were sent to apprehend our Savior, Why they had not brought him
with them? and the Officers answered, Never any man spoke like this man.

Wherein two things are to be considered:

First, The force of Gods Word.

Secondly, The little fear and great security which he inioyeth that
preaches, as also he that hears, and obeys.

Many excellent Divines have harpt upon this string, and great endeerings have
been delivered by Ecclesiastical and Secular Historians. Saul sent to take
David, the Officers found him playing upon his Harp, and were so ravished with
the sweetness of his Music, that they forgot themselves and what the King
had given them in charge: He sent others more stout and resolute, The power of
Gods word.
and the like happened to them. The King being enraged with anger, and waxing
wondrous choleric, went himself in person to apprehend him, using high
language, and throwing out great menaces and threatenings against him; but he
was scarce come thither, when he fell a prophesying; who (according as some
will have it) catching hold of a Harp, began to play upon it, and to sing; like
unto some Sergeant, who finding him whom he goes to apprehend, dancing at some
Wedding in a Country Village, lays aside his Mace, and falls a dancing with
the company. The Fables report, That Orpheus with his music made the torments
of Hell to cease, leaving those Tormentors in astonishment and amasement. And
great, questionless, is the suspension which Music causes in our minds.

Touching Eloquence, rare is that endeering of Cicero, The force of Eloquence.
whose Oratorie a Poet called, Flexamina, and omnium rerum Regina. That of
Marcus Antonius, that famous Roman Orator, was so singular in this kind, that
the Senate sending a Band of soldiers to cut off his head, he did earnestly
entreat them, that they would but give him the hearing of three or four words:
they did so; but those his words were so powerful, that forsaking their former
fierce resolution, they sheathed up their swords, and gave him his life; and
which was much more, they so melted into tears, That hanging their heads in
their bosom, and casting their eyes to the ground, they all fell a weeping.
Plutarch tells us, how that Palemon, a handsome young man of Athens, but of a
most loose and dishonest life, came in one day to hear Xenocrates in that kind
of wanton fashion and habit, that any Who^e or Curtezan could not trick and
set forth her self in a more lascivious manner: on which occasion the
Phlosopher taking hold, did plead in favor of Honesty, with such strength of
words, such excellent language, and such extraordinary eloquence, that in the
presence of the Auditors Palemon stripped himself out of all his gay clothes,
plucked the Rings out of his ears, and off his fingers, continuing from that
time forward, a very honest man, and a good pattern to others. No less
wonderful was that which befell Phyletus a Disciple of Hermogenes the
Inchanter, who came to dispute and maintain argument with Saint James the
elder, relying much upon his Sophistry; but the Apostle preached with that
powerfulness, that Phyletus returning back again to his Master, told him,
Magus abieram, Christianus reaco, I went forth a Magician, but I am returned a
Christian. To this purpose the Fables report of Hercules, That with chains of
gold which came forth of his mouth, he haled after him all the World. But
neither the truths of humane Histories, nor the lies of artificial Fables, can
attain unto the force and power of Divine Eloquence. Esaias foretold us as much;
All Nations shall flow unto him; borrowing his Metaphore in this word Flow,
from some great and principal River, which without any violence, runs along
with that strange force and swiftness, that nothing can resist it, but sweepes
all away that stands in it is way. Being one and the same comparison with that
of Saint John, Out of his belly shall flow Rivers of water of Life.

From hence (and that very fitly) we may draw a second consideration; which is
this, If from every one that enjoys this Spirit, there flow forth great
rivers of living water, well may those good men live without fear, and secure
from all harms, wrongs, affronts, and tyrannies. Consider with thy self in a
River, the force of the water, the impetuousnesse and fury of a swift Torrent,
the violence of a great stream, wherewith a hundred Mills are driven; Who will
dare to keep it back? Who will offer to stand in it is way? Who can resist it?
Of the coming of our Savior Christ it was prophesied, That he should banish
all fear and cowardice from out the hearts and breasts of his friends. David
compares the just man, to the Moon when she is at the full, He shall be
established for ever as the Moon, and as a faithful witness in the Heaven.
Alcyat says in one of his Emblemes, That a Dog then barketh most, when the
Moon is at the fullest; whether it be by some special influence that it then
works in the Dog; or whither it be occasioned by the macula's or spots in the
Moon, representing unto him the form and shape of another Dog: but though the
Dog bark never so much, yet does the Moon walk her Station securely through
Heaven; and though Tyranny bark never so much at the Just, yet shall he
walk in safety. The Spouse in the Canticles complains, That Tyrants had
taken her cloak from her: The Church calls this her Cloak, the Martyrs; we
see some of them roasted, some fried on the Gridyron, some sawne, some dragged
at the ^ailes of horses, some with their skins plucked over their ears, and
some tormented with sundry other torments, the Devil blowing the coals of
cruelty in the mouths and hearts of the Executioners. But in the end, those
cuts and slashes pass no further than the cloak, they wound the body, but
not the soul.

God of his mercy give us the grace to endure this our fireie trial, when
persecution shall set upon us, that being purified in the Furnace of
Tribulation, we may be like Gold that is refined, and shine with glory in the
sight of God, To whom, etc.

THE XXXIIII. SERMON, UPON THE TUESDAY AFTER PASSION SUNDAY.
JOHN. 7. Ambulabat Jesus in Galileam, non enim volebat in Iudaeam ambulare,
quia quaerebant Iudaei interficere.


AFter these things, Jesus walked in Galilee, and would not walk in Iudaea,
for the Jews sought to kill him. After these things, that is, after those
great miracles which he had wrought in Capernaum; and after that most deep and
learned Sermon of his body and blood, Saint John says, That our Savior
Christ retyring himself from Iudaea, went and wrought miracles in the Cities
of Galilee, because the Jews sought to kill him. And because the envious
Murmurer may chance to say, That he withdrew himself from Iudaea, lest the
Scribes and Pharisees should discover his tricks, and find out his false play;
the Evangelist adds, That there was no such matter to be feared, but that
waiting for the hour of his death, already determined in Heaven, he was
desirous in the interim to slinke out of the way, to free and deliver his body
from that malice and danger which he saw it was like to be subject unto in
Iudaea. The Greek Texts read, In Iudaea and Galilaea; but Saint Augustine,
Saint Cyril, and Saint Chrysostom read it in the Acusatiue, In Iudaeam and
Galileam, (id est) Per Galileam. Saint Chrysostom says, Non poterat ambulare
in Iudaeam; which is all one with Nolebat, He could not; that is, He would not:
which is an usual phrase of speech.

Jesus walked in Galilee, etc. It is made a general doubt amongst all the
Commentators, Gods power never more seen than in his Passion.
Why our Savior Christ, being able to triumph so easily over the power and
malice of his enemies, should withdraw himself from their presence, whom he
might (if he would) have trampled under his feet? To proo^e which point were a
needless labor, there being so many Prophecies and so many places of the one
and the other Testament, which say as much; and those loud shrieking cries
which the Devils roared forth, affrighted, and turning cowards in his
presence, are sufficient proofs thereof; likewise Deaths cowardlinesse
confirms the same, Egredietur Diabolus, ante faciem eius ibit Mors; the
overthrowing of the Roman Cohorts with one only word; his causing the stones
to freeze to their fingers that had so often sought to stone him to death; his
leaving them lying on the ground in a swoune that came to apprehend him, are
testimonies without exception. Why then at every step does Christ retire
himself, and seek to get from them? Saint Augustine makes this difficulty
seem greater in his books de Ciuit. Dei; For, reprehending Cato Vticensis,
who that he might not fall into Caesar's hands, killed himself, he says, That
for a man to fly from tribulation and danger, is a kind of Cowardice. And
Saint Paul says, Acts 20.
I know that bonds and afflictions abide for me at Jerusalem, but I pass not
at all, neither is my life dear unto me, etc. Esaias going about to relate in
his 52 chapter that which our Savior was to suffer, does first set down by
way of interrogation, Who will believe that which Gods arm is to suffer? He
calls his divine power his Arm, because God showed his power in nothing more
than in his passion. Tertullian in his book de Patientia says, That God did
not express his power so much in parcendo, as in patiendo; in pardoning, as in
suffering. That saying of the Church is worthy the weighing, Qui omnipotentiam
tuam parcendo maxim and miserando manifestus, Who show thy omnipotency in
nothing more, than in pitying and pardoning offenders. But what has the
strength of suffering to do, with the weakness of flying? Petrus Chrisologus
in a Sermon of his, De fuga Domini, taxes the Evangelists for relating our
Savior Christ's flying; For a soldier (says he) should publish his
constancy, his valor, the strength of his arm, and advance the noble Acts,
and conquests of his Captain, but not his weaknesses and his fears.

Behold again the difficulty, in regard of that our Saviors great anguish,
both in body and soul, Why Christ desiring to die, did fl^e to avoid death.
before he was to dye. None in the world did ever more desire to dye than he
did, as has already been proooued unto you. If then (sweet Jesus) thou do
so much desire death, and that the Jews hunt after thee for no other end, Why
do thou fly?

Before that I resolve this doubt, we are to confess and acknowledge with all
possible humility, that man's understanding comes far short of Gods thoughts.
Esaias says, see how much distance there is between heaven and earth; so much
is there between the imaginations of God and man: And therefore the Spouse
said, Gods Counsels unsearchable.
That they were high and black; high like the Palm tree, and black as the
Ravens quill. Who (says Ecclesiasticus) can count the sands of the sea, the
drops of the deaw, or the days of the world? Now if humane wisdom cannot
attain unto those things, which she has as it were between her hands, she
will less be able to search into the secret counsels of God. And therefore
the Wise man does advise thee, Seek not into those things that are too high
for thee. This way being thus made, let us now proceed to the reasons of the
Saints.

The first is of Saint Augustine and Saint Chrysostom. Our Savior Christ was
God, according to his Divine nature; and man, according to his humane nature:
and the confession of the one, being as necessary as the other, he had in all
his actions a great respect unto them both. All his words and deeds still
tended to this, that he might be believed to be both God and man. Saint
Augustine says, That his withdrawing himself aside as a man, did not withdraw
from his power as he was God; and his throwing down of his enemy flat on the
ground, as he was God, did not take from him his weakness, as he was man. If
Christ should not have showen in the flesh, the condition of flesh, in vain
had he taken flesh upon him: and if he should always have done the works and
actions of a God, and given perpetual pledges of his Divine nature, to what
use would have served his clothing himself with humane flesh? If Christ
should have been a continual Miracle, what room would there have been left
for faith, or what reward could that have received?

The second is of Chrysologus, which is this: That there is not that man be he
never so powerful, never so valiant, but does sometimes show the weakness of a
man, in hiding and withdrawing himself. But here he says, Artis est, non
timoris, Sacramenti est, and non Pauoris. It was not out of any fear, or
cowardice that our Savior fled. It is a kind of daringnesse, boldness of
spirit, and great courage to draw our enemy but into the field, or to toll him
along into the marketplace, and there to vanquish him in public, and obtain
an open victory. Mat. 6.
Epiphanius says, That Christ used this boldness in the garden, as well in
his sweating of blood, as in those his prayers that he made unto his Father, so
full of agony and anguish, to the end that by showing himself thus weak,
death might the more boldly set upon him. Joshua used the like slight with
those of the City of Ay; We flying, they will follow us, then ye shall rise up
from lying in wait, and destroy the City. Agesilaus, one of the Lacedemonian
Captains, Josh 8.
took the same course when he besieged the Phocenses; Alcybiades, with the
Vizancini: Advantage against an enemy, no Cowardice.
And the world never had any famous Captain which did not do the like upon
occasion: Julius Frontinus in his book of Stratagemes quotes you a world of
examples. Be ye wise as Serpents, said our Savior; the Serpent aduantageth
himself more by his craft and subtletie, than by his strength and force; the
experience whereof was to our grief to be seen in Paradise. And therefore it
is observed by Gods Saints, That he was more subtle than all the rest of the
beasts of the field, therein aduising us, That with the devil, the world, and
the flesh, it is now and then the wiser and safer course of the two, to retire
our selves and to fly from him, than either to wait for him, or to resist him.
Philip king of Macedon turned his back and fled before the Athenians, leaving
his Shield behind him, wherein these letters were engraven, Bona fortuna: And
some soldiers vpbraiding him with this his flight, he told them, He that
flies, may return again to the battle, but not he that dies. There was a
Captain belonging to the Emperor Charles the fifth, who made so famous and
honorable a retreat out of France, that it was called, La bella retyrada, The
fair retreat. Men fly sometimes to come on the fiercer.
Christ said unto his Disciples, If they persecute you in one city, fly unto
another. Rem^gius says, That this was a precept; Thomas, That it was only a
license and permission: For when a Christian man flies without wrong to the
faith he professes, and without detracting from the good opinion and credit
of Christian Religion, it is wholesome counsel. And this did the Patriarchs
of old follow, Jacob fled from Esau, Moses from Pharaoh, Elias from Iezabel; To
fly in time of persecution, how far lawful.
and those Prophets which hid themselves in the house of Abdias; and many
Saints in the Primitive Church fl^d from the cruelty of the Tyrants of those
times. Tertullian says, That upon no occasion it is fit for a Christian to
fly. But Saint Jerome avouches, That this opinion is contrary to the doctrine
both of Christ and of his Church. Athanasius defending his flight, made a book
concerning this subject, wherein he proves, That any man may fly in time
(...) persecution, so that he do not endanger his conscience: but when it
comes upon those terms, we must rather hazard the body, than peril the
soul; and with Sampson, rather encounter with a Lion, than to come to the
vineyards at Timnath.

Aristotle says, That Fortitude is placed in the midst between Daring and
Dreading. Daring without Dreading, is Timeritie; and Dreading without Daring,
is Pusillani^itie. Saint Ambrose ponders this in his Exameron, That that very
Elephant which valiantly breaks through a whole Army, is mightily afraid of a
mouse. The great Machabean who with his valiant Acts did innoble fame; 1. Mac.
^.9.9.
and who, for not to spot his honor, did at last most gloriously loose his
life, did sometimes give ground and make a retreat from his enemies. Saint Paul
escaped being let down in a basket by the walls of Damascus: And Saint
Augustine says, That it had been a tempting of God, and so a sin in him, if
he had not done it. Yet afterward, being prisoner in Macedonia, and that all
the rest of the prisoners saved themselves by flight, he would not then fly,
though he were thereunto entreated by the Jailer. David was of that true
metal and courage, In some cases it is fortitude to fly.
that he fought with Lions and Bears, making no more reckoning of them than of
so many lambs; and without once breaking of his Spear, he slew 800
Philistims, besides that stout Giant which outbraued Israel, and struck a
terror into them. And yet did it not seem cowardice in him to fly from Saul,
nor from his son Absalon. Upon this occasion he made that his 18 Psalm,
wherein he gives thanks unto God, not only for giving him arms of brass for
to fight, and even to break a bow of Steel asunder, but that he had given
him likewise the feet of a Heart to fly. Wherein he alluded (according to
Thomas) to that History which he recounteth in the second of the Kings, 2.
Reg. 4.
when he fled from Saul through briars and bushes, rocks and mountains. In a
word, the world styles rashness, daringnesse; and fear, cowardlinesse: but
God bewaileth this with a Woe be unto ye that call good evil, and evil good.

The third reason is, That Christ withdrew himself out of Judea to give way to
his enemies rage and anger. For a choleric man is so furious, that if he
have a present occasion offered him, that there is not any poulder will sooner
take fire than he; and therefore it is Christian wisdom to fly from him. The
Scripture compares him to a bear, Like a Bear robbed of her Whelps: of whom
your Naturalists report, That for very rage she will eat and devour her own
paws. Job 40.
And Job, Tygris perijt, eo quod non habuit praedam. And another letter has
it, Vrsus perijt, eo quod non est consequutus praedam. Saul being enraged that
he had not overcome his enemies, slew himself. Such a one is like a swelling
river that ouerflowes it is banks. It is a hot fiery furnace, whence issues
out a thick smoke, and after the smoke a flame. Ecclesiasticus says, As the
vapor and smoke of the chimney goes before the fire, Eccles. 22.
so evil words, rebukes and threatenings, go before bloodshedding. The smoke
is not that which burns, though it blinds and causes the eyes to water; but
who will abide the flame thereof? Who will tarry the coming of a Bear that
hunteth after her prey? Who the falling of a swift Torrent? The soundest
counsel is, to fly. And in the dangers of the soul, this doctrine imports
us much more. As the Heart that is wounded with an arrow that is poisoned, flies
to the rivers of water, so the heart that is touched with the venom of the
Devil, of the world, or the flesh, must fly unto that fountain, which is
God, My soul thirsts after God, who is the fountain of life.

The fourth, That though he were able to have trod down all his enemies under
his feet, Why Christ desiring to die would fly to avoid death.
yet he flies from them For a man will not always show all that he knows;
nor do all that he can. Your foolish Princes make ostentation of their power;
but wise Princes, of their Justice. The one make their power, their reason; the
other make their reason, their power, Sit pro ratione voluntas. Pilat pressed
our Savior Christ with his power, Know thou not that I have power to set
thee free? Power should never be shown but in extremity.
but because he was a Tyrant, he forgot his justice. But our Savior Christ he
forgot his power, and reads unto us a Lecture of Prudence; Teaching us, that
we must reserve our power, and our wisdom, for some good occasion.

The fifth and last, That albeit our Savior Christ felt the anguish and
agonies of death, yet were they nothing like unto those his enemies felt for to
work his death. For his death was not to be at their appointment, nor how and
when they would have it. The Pharisees sought to make him away secretly in a
corner, but he would dye in the face and sight of all the world, The greater
Chris^^ shame, the greater our redemption.
For the greater his shame was, the greater was our redemption. The Pharisees
would not have it on a festival day; Our Savior Christ, that it should be
upon a festival day: for it was to be the greatest feast that was ever made
for man. The Pharisees would have had him rid out of the way presently; Christ
that it should not be till his hour was come, and that he had finished all
things that his Father had given him in charge. And for this cause, when they
sought after him, he fled from them; and when they did not seek after him, he
came himself into the Shambles. Elias fled from Iezabel, that he might not dye
by her hand, and yet afterward sitting under the Juniper tree, he desired
death. The Juniper tree was a Type and figure of the Cross, for which was
reserved not only a willingness, 3. Reg. 15.
but also a sit season to die.

His brethren therefore said unto him, Depart hence and go into Iud^a.
Vainglory not to be affected.
These great and wondrous works of thine (said his brethren) are not fit for
these Galileans, being that they are but a rude and ignorant people; Get thee
to Judea, for there are the High Priests, and the Doctors of the Law, for whom
the examination and judgment of these wonders is reserved. Euthymius says,
That our Saviors brethren went hypocritically to work, and that making honor
the bayt, they would with that have drawn him along to Iudaea. Saint
Chrysostom, That they did herein tax Christ of a kind of Dastardlinesse and
fearfulness; as if they should have said, Lord, thou do on the one side
pretend honor; an don the other side thou art afraid that thy Miracles should
be examined, and come to the touch: and this makes thee fly from Iudaea. So
that it seems to this sacred Doctor, That Christ's kinsmen were doubtful of
the truth of his works. Whence it follows, That those whom the Evangelist
here calls Christ's brethren, were not of the Twelve: because he says of
them, His brethren believed not in him. But others, We know and believe that
thou art the Son of God. But that place of Saint Matthew does prove it more
plainly, where when Christ preached, one came unto him and told him, Thy
mother and thy brethren stay without to speak with thee: But he stretching
out his hand to his Disciples, said, These are my mother and my brethren. In
the first chapter of the Acts, naming the Apostles, and amongst them. Iacobus
Alphei, Simon, and Judas, he presently says, These did persevere in prayer
with the women, with the mother of our Lord, and with his brethren. Now his
brethren were not of the number of the Apostles. And of this opinion is Saint
Augustine, and Saint Chrysostom.

Saint Augustine says, That the end of this their counsel, was Ambition; and
that it seeming unto them, that they should have some share thereby in Christ's
glory, said unto him, Transi hinc. And to him that shall object that of S.
John, His brethren believed not in him; I answer thereunto, That they did not
believe that he was the promised Messiah: But withal, That they did not doubt
of the truth of his works; but did only desire to see them qualified and
approved by the Scribes and Pharisees, who were well skild in all the
prophesies.

My time is not yet come. Two things make this opinion of Saint Augustines very
probable. Men covet honor, though with the hazard of others.


The one, That it is very common and usual with men to seek to get honor and
profit from the prosperity and glory of a kinseman. And albeit it is very
likely that they did know, that in Iudaea they would seek to take away his
life from him, yet the thirst of their ambition was so great, that they
affected honor, though it were to be effected at the cost of their kinsmans
life; as the sons of Zebedee did their seats. And he might as well have said
unto them, Ye know not what ye ask: God uses no partiality in the
dispensation of his favors.
for it is not Gods fashion to confer favors for respect of country, or
kindred. The Princes of the earth oftentimes take this course, making a coward,
a Captain, and putting a Hare into a Lions place: But God does not hold him
worthy of reward, or of the least praise, who is not privileged as well for it
by his own proper virtue, as by blood and alliance. The Jews accounted it a
great honor unto them, that they were the sons of Abraham, but because there
was no show of worth in themselves, our Savior takes them up very short, We
must not rely on others Virtue, but our own.
telling them; Ye are of your father the devil: And therefore there is no
honor due unto you. And it is Aristotle's saying in his Ethnickes, Ab hu quae a
natura insunt, nec laudamur, nec vituperamur. Many Pagan Princes did follow
this tracke. Plutarch reports of King Antigonus, That a young Soldier
preferring a suit unto him, he returned him this answer: I evermore bestow my
favors on those that deserve the same in themselves, and not in others.
Pirrhus King of the Epyrots, his sons urging him to tell them, which of them
should be his heir, and succeed him in his Kingdom? answered, He whose sword
has the sharpest edge.

The other, Is our Saviors Christ own answer, My time is not yet come. Which
(according to Saint Augustine) was, as if he should have said, ye would have
glory, and take no pains for it. And therefore he says unto them, Your time
is always ready, but with me, my Cross must go before my glory, I must
mount by humility.

Now from these two considerations I will draw this one profitable p^int, That
when a favor is thrown upon a man, Honor where no merit is, ads to our shame,
not to our shining.
upon any other Title or Claim, save his own proper virtue and merit, it is
rather an affront than an honor. They give thee an office, or some dignity,
because thou have presented them with some foolish babble or other, or have
carried a shooe-clout in thy pocket to wipe such a Noble man's shoe; it is an
infamous Title, both in the giver and the receiver. They do thee some favor
for kindreds sake, and because thou art of their blood; it is a Title of little
honor to him that receives it, and of less Christianity in him that gives
it. They prefer thee to be the Princes servant, what good does that do thee?
It is so base a Title, That no Noble Spirit will desire it. Thou gettest thy
pretension by offering thy love and service to this or that Court Lady; it is a
dangerous pretension. Thou art raised by such a Lord, because thou have served
him in his unlawful pleasures; this is a damnable Title. God conferres his
favors upon no other Title than a man's own proper virtue. Upon Noah: But why?
Because thou wast upright before me in thy generation. And in the day of
judgment, who are they that shall be rewarded? and why shall they be rewarded?
Come ye blessed of my Father receive a Kingdom, For I was hungry, etc. Upon
this Title is grounded the reward of a good death, Blessed are they that dye in
the Lord, for their works follow them. Not because he was an Apostle, a
Prophet, a Doctor, Worship should not wait but upon worth.
a Confessor, a Prince, a Prelat, can he pretend a reward; but because he was a
good Christian and did all the duties belonging thereunto. Their works follow
them as a handmaid does her Mistres, or a Page his Master. If thou will have
honor, strive to win it. Your Ancients set two vessels before Jupiter, The
one of exceeding sweet liquor, the other exceeding sower; and no man could come
to taste of the honey, unless he did first try the gall. The Romans had two
Temples adjoining each to other; one of Honor, the other of Virtue: but there
was no coming to that of Honor, but by that of Virtue.

My time is not yet come, but yours is always ready. I expect eternal and
perdurable glory, but ye short and momentary in regard of mine. Christ must
suffer, and so enter into glory. But this time is not yet come for you, Your
time is always ready. That season suits best with you that is seasoned with
honors and pleasures: This is the North-starre of the world, All sail by it.
S. Augustine in his books de Ciuit. Dei, proves with great elegancie, That
the Romans had not any God which they so much adored, as that of Honor: and
for the Author of this truth, he alleges Salust, Ista ergo landis auiditas,
and cupido gloriae, omnia illa miranda fecit laudabilia scilicet atque
gloriosa, secundum existimationem ho^^num. This greedines of humane glory,
triumphed over all the rest of the things in Rome; and not only in Rome, but
in Greece. And in most of your other Nations, there was not a Captain or
Philosopher which did not eclipse all the other virtues that he inioyed, with
the shadow of this desire of Honor. This did Seneca, Plutarch, Aristotle, and
Plato pretend. And Socrates himself, who did so much blaz^n his poverty, and
seemed to take a pride in it, came to be an Idolater of Honor and Fame. This
pill they swallowed down, and conceiving a kind of immortality to be lapt
therein, crammed their conceits therewith, making the discommodity of life,
dangers, sweats, troubles, etc. seem sauoury unto them: Honor a bait which
all men bite at.
Which is a kind of birdlime which clingeth so close to our hearts, that Gods
greatest Saints do complain and bewail the great difficulty in being loosed
and freed therefro. Saint August. did entreat of God with tears and sighs,
that he would free him from this plague, Domine sine secatione tentamur, tu
nosti de hac re ad te gemitum cordis mei, and flumina oculorum meorum. And if a
Saint so humbly minded, as none more, does thus weep, sigh and groan, what
shall become of him that is as arrogant as he is ignorant? And in another
place, this Sacred Doctor says, The purer thou art from this uncleanness, the
liker shall thou be unto God. And in an Epistle of his, he says, That by how
much the Moon is more full and fair in our eyes, it participateth so much the
less of the same; which is all one with that of Ecclesiast. Eccl. 43.
The light thereof diminishes unto the end, and grows wondrously in her
changing. These words seem to carry a contrariety, but it is not so: for the
Moon does decrease to our seeming toward the end of it is waning; and yet even
at that very time it increases wonderfully, receiving from the Sun by the
contrary part a far greater light. It seemed then to these kins folk of Jesus
Christ our Redeemer, That the Feast of Jerusalem was a fit time for to gain
much honor, and therefore said unto him, Depart hence, and manifest thy self
to the world. Whereunto he answered, ye desire to see me in great honor and
estimation with the world, expecting out of my reputation and credit, to reap
unto your selves a temporal reward; but I do rather desire to see my self
dis-esteemed of the world, because thereupon depends your spiritual
promotion.

Saint Bernard discoursing how the blessed Virgin Mary, Kindred the overthrow
of many Prelates.
and the glorious Saint Joseph went to seek Jesus when he was lost (when he
was 12 year old) amongst his kindred and acquaintance; says, That many
miscarry by their kinsfolks means. And I my self have known many Prelates of
very good parts, and extraordinary gifts, of whom I have been afraid, that
their kinsfolk have been the cause of their condemnation, and casting down
into hell. For it is a woeful case, That for 200 Ducats pension, which a Prelat
bestows on a Student, he should oblige him to run over all the Divine
Service, and not to leave out so much as any one prayer, and that he should
confer on a kinseman thirty thousand Ducats pension, without obliging him to
pray a Paternoster, or say an Aue-Mary.

Two bloody mischiefs come unto us by our brethren and kindred.

The one in point of precedencie, Envy working most upon those that are
brethren; especially, if one get the start of the other, or chance to be
preferred before him. As the History of Joseph's brethren proves it unto us;
who (for those his dreams of his future prosperity) put him down into a pit,
and sold him away. So stood the case in Abimilecks business, who for
Superiorities sake, and that he might reign, slew at once 70 of his brethren.
Holy king David could not escape this mischief: His brethren could have eaten
him (as we say) with salt, to see that he should pop forth, and enter into the
field with that metal and courage against that great Giant Goliath, himself
being the least amongst his brethren. And was it not so I pray, Envy never
greater than amongst brethren.
with Abel and Cain? For a brother of all other can least endure that a brother
should outstrip him, though it be Gods own handiwork to advance and prefer
him. And the sons of Thamar are a type and figure thereof, who strove and
strugled in their mothers womb.

The other in regard of the desire that they have to see a brother or a kinsman
prosper, only that they may suck from him, and wholly disfruit him, as if he
were a tree of their own orchard, which, of these two mischiefs, is the
greater.

For in the first, the envious brother looses, and the enuyed gains.

In the second, all rob that tree which affoords them fruit, and that brother
or kinsman that is owner of it.

I remember a memorable saying that was uttered by a holy Prelat, relieuing
(being importuned thereunto) two of his brethren with 200 Crowns, for to buy
them Oxen to till their ground. I shall (said he) desire of God, That this
poor pittance which I now give you, do not consume the rest of that which ye
now enjoy. My brethren, to facilitate their request, told me that I was a
single man, had no body to care for, Kindred will cleave to a man in his
prosperity, but never look on him in adversity.
that I was a Guarda de Vinas, a Vine-keeper, a Churchman, and an ouerseer of
souls, Sed vineam mea^ non custodiui, But I did not keep this my Vinyard so
well as I should have done: for I could not defend it from my brethren and my
kinsfolk, one plucking this from me, and another that, til they had left me
nothing to pleasure either my self or the poor, whom I ought most to have
respected. If thou be rich, all thy kindred will be like so many horse-leeches
to draw thy blood from thee; but if thou be poor, not a kinsman that will
look upon thee. That mirror of patience, that holy man Job says in his 31
chapter, Despectio propinquorum terruit me, There was not that kinsman that
would look upon me in my misery, but beheld me with disdain and scorn, and
would not afford me any the least comfort. Vain is the confidence in friends
and kinsfolks; vain is the confidence in Princes. And therefore o Lord let us
rely upon thee, who never faylest those that put their trust in thee. To God
the Father, God the Son, and God the Holy Ghost, etc.

THE XXXV. SERMON, UPON THE WEDNESDAY AFTER PASSION SUNDAY.
JOHN. 10. Facta sunt enzenia Hierosolymis.

The Feast of the Dedication was celebrated at Jerusalem.


THe Feast de las Enzenias, or of the Dedication, was celebrated in Jerusalem:
The Greek word signifies, Renouation. Three Feasts of dedication among the
Jews. 3. Reg. 8.
The Jews had three Feasts of this name:

The first, in remembrance of the great solemnity made by Solomon when he had
finished the Fabric of the Temple, which was one of the Miracles of the world.

The second, in memorial of the re-edification thereof, Esdr. ^.
done by Zorobabel and the Princes of Judah, having Cyrus his Warrant for it,
who restored the gold and silver which Nebuchadnezzar robbed the Temple of.

The third, in remembrance of that Altar which Judas Machabeus built anew,
which Antiochus had profaned by placing thereon the Statue of Jupiter Olympus,
1 Match. 1.
and offering thereon costly and sumptuous Sacrifices. And this is that Feast
whereof the Gospel makes mention; it was celebrated on the twenty fifth of
November, which in the Jewish account was the ninth month, about the beginning
of Winter; and therefore it is said, It was Winter. Now our Savior Christ
passing along through the porch of the Temple, the Jews flocked about him,
both Nobles and Plebeians, and said unto him, How long do thou make us
doubt? How long will thou hold us in suspense? if thou be the Christ, tell us
so plainly without any more adoo. But Jesus gave them so unsavory an answer to
this their unmannerly demand, that they took up stones to stone him.

The feast of the Dedication was at Jerusalem. It is the language of the
Scripture, Man's Heart, Gods Temple.
and especially of the Apostle Saint Paul, to call our Breast, Heart, or Bosom,
Gods Temple; as in that to the Corinthians, Ye are the Temples of the living
God: And he cites that place of Leuiticus, As God has said, I will dwell
among them, 2. Cor. 6. Leuit 26.
and walk there. And Saint Ambrose further adds, That as in a material
temple made with hands, there are Porches, Floores, and Altars, etc. so within
us we have all these things. Phylon says, That an honest, a holy, and devout
Soul, is the Altar whereon God is adored.

But here we are to consider, That our heart, or the soul of a Christian man,
is a higher rooft Temple, and far more spacious. After that Solomon had made
an end of building his Temple, he said, O Lord, I have built thee an House to
dwell in, but it is too little for thy greatness; for if the Heavens, and the
Heavens of Heavens are not able to contain thee, how much more unable is this
House that I have built, it being but a Thimble as it were, in comparison of
thee, for that thou art higher than the highest Heavens, and deeper than the
profoundest Depth. What House is that (says Esaias, in a sleighting kind of
manner) which ye have built for me, and what is that place of my rest? Were
not all things made by my hand? If then a Temple made by such powerful hands,
be so small a House for God to dwell in, (for which cause Saint Paul said, He
dwells not in Temples made with hands) How great a one will that be, which
man shall make for him? So that the least unworthy, and the least narrow
house, is our breast; Greater yet is God than our heart, and yet God says, If
any shall open, I w^ll come in unto him, and will sup with him.

This is that Temple which God desires should be renewed. After that the
Temple was profaned by Ant^ochus, the Text says, They did wisely consider
with themselves, That that Altar should be destroyed, and a new one built: for
they thought it not fit to offer Sacrifice unto God upon that Altar, where^n
Antiochus (whom the Scripture styles, The Root of all wickedness) had
performed so many abominations. They therefore built a new Altar, and did
insti^ute a Feast in memorial of it is re-edification; wherein they gave
thanks unto God, That he had given them a time wherein they might truly serve
him, as they had done heretofore.

Now as the council was good in the Machabees, To build a new Alter (for had
they made the old one never so clean, Man's Soul must be renewed, to make it
a fit habitation for God.
yet the forepassed abominations would have caused a continual horror) so
will it be very good council, utterly to destroy a foul Soul, which has
been an Inn for Vice, and an habitation for Devils, and to create it anew,
that there might not remain any relish of it is former ill: And David seems
to desire as much of God in those words of his, Create in me, Psalm. 51.
o Lord, a new heart. When Liquor has layne a long time in a Ves^ell, though
you wash and rynse it never so much, it retains somewhat of it is ^ld odor.
The adultery of Bershabe, and the murder of Vriah, has layne a ^ong time in
my breast, and though I have washed and rynsed it with I know not how many ^ees
and Sopes, yet have I no hope to make it as clean as it was before: and
therefore, o Lord, I beseech thee, that thou will create a new heart in me,
wherewith I may love thee for ever. But if this cannot be, because the soul is
immortal, perdurable, and incorruptible, Renew a right spirit within me, that
there may not remain any sent or savor of my former foulnes; establish such a
spirit in me, that I may never fall from thy service; a spirit that may repair
those wrongs I did before: and if that were an occasion that many did blaspheme
thy Name, let this be such a one, that it may convert many unto thee, and that
they may truly serve thee. The glorious Doctor Saint Ambrose touched upon this
string, David (says he) did desire of God, That he would create him a new
heart, not that he should create it anew, but that he should so renew it, that
it might seem to be created anew; for to cleanse it, was all one as to create
it.

Baptism the fou^dat^on of Christian building.
It is the resolution of a man that is truly penitent, to desire to leave a lewd
life, and to avoid all occasions thereof. Anselme says, That the first
renouation which God effects in our souls, is in Babtisme: This is the
foundation of our Christian building, so says the glorious Apostle Saint Paul.
Afterward the eyes of our Reason being cleared, one lays his foundation on
Gold, another on Silver, a third on precious Stones, a fourth on Wood, a fifth
on Hay, a sixth on Straw: and though Hay and Straw be sometimes taken for Gold,
the fire will try the finenesse of it, and purify all.

The second renouation is by Repentance: When thou have an old beastly tatterd
garment, thou make thee a new one; thy soul is all to be rent and torn,
exceeding foul and filthy, cloth it anew. The first regalo or kindness
which the father showed to the prodigal child, was, his new apparelling of
him, A^ferte stolam primam. This is the greatest kindness thou can do to
thy soul; and that thou may not do as little children use to do, which are
well clad to day, and a few days after are nothing but rags and totters; do
not ye make your garments of paper, which the least blast of air rents
asunder, but put on Jesus Christ our Savior and Redeemer, which is a Raiment
that will last for ever.

And it was Winter. Saint Gregory says, That the Scripture sometimes sets
down the circumstances of time and place, to signify by them, Circumstances
of Time and Place in Holy Writ, of great significancie.
that which is not expressed by word of mouth. And that this circumstance of
Hyems erat, It was Winter, though it may be referred to our Savior Christ's
walking from place to place, yet does it declare the frostinesse and ycie
coldness of the Jews hearts. By coldness, the Scripture understands the
malice of sin; whence it is to be noted, That the History of the Machabees
calls this Solemnity, Ierem. 6. 2. Mac. 1.18.
The Feast of Fire; Whereas we are now purposed to keep the Purification of
the Temple upon the twenty fifth day of the month Chasleu, we thought it
necessary to certify you thereof, The feast of Fire.
that ye also might keep the Feast of the Tabernacles and of the Fire, which
was given us when Nehemias offered Sacrifice, after that he had built the
Temple and the Altar, etc. It appears by the sixth Chapter of Leuiticus, That
God did conserve a perpetual fire in his presence, The Fire shall evermore
burn upon the Altar, and never go out. Leuit. 6.13.
At their departure into Babylon, they hid their fire in a deep pit, and at
their return they found it turned into a thick water like a gellie; Nehemias
he takes it forth and sets it in the Sun, and presently it became fire:
the drops that remained, they did sprinckle or bedew the Altar therewith, and
they forthwith took fire; so that it was fitly called the Feast of Fire. But
that they who solemnise this Feast should be all Frost and Ice, is a thing
very worthy our consideration.

This is our ruin and perdition, That the very same day that we treat of
renewing our souls, which is the feast of the Fire of our Spirit, there should
be such a great coldness in us, etc. Take heed your flight be not in the
Winter, nor upon the Sabbath: Our Savior having revealed unto his Disciples,
whether it were the evils that should befall Jerusalem, or the ensuing miseries
of this world, or those that should threaten the Soul at each particular man's
death, or all of them jointly together; and supposing that none would be able
to abide them, but that they would be forced to fly from the evil to come;
he gives them this auiso, Take heed your flight, etc. Our Savior would not
have them to betake themselves to flight, neither on the Sabbath day, nor in
the Winter.

Not on the Sabbath day, because their Law did not give them leave to go any
more than a thousand paces, a matter of a mile. But say some one should have
ventured to break this Law, and to have gone further, he could not have
lighted on an Inne-keeper to bid him welcome, got no meat, no fire to dress
it, nor have met with any company on the way, but have traveled all alone in
a fearful kind of solitude.

Not in the Winter, in regard of innumerable inconveniences, as rain, dirt,
boggs, ice, frost, snow, rising of rivers, and days short and dark. Saint
Gregory expounds this place of those evils which threaten us at our death;
but be it in our death or in our life, the world has not any creature that is
more threatened and terrified than a Sinner. Who can look Sin in the face?
our best course is to fly from it, and to have recourse to the Sanctuary of
Repentance; but we must take heed that we do not fly on the Sabbath, or in
Winter. In die illa (says Zachary) non erit lux, Zach. 14 6.
sed frigus and gelu, In that day there shall be no clear light, but dark.
Saint Hierome says, That the Prophet speaks of the destruction of Jerusalem
by Titus and Vespasian: and because the misery and calamity thereof would
fall out to be so terrible and so fearful, that no man durst abide it, they
treated of their flying from it. But that time shall prove unto them to be
extreme cold, and exceeding dark; as if he should have said, If they should
have fled for Gods service, God will help those that fly for him, but not from
him.
the Pillar of fire should have gone before them and directed them in their
way; but when they shall fly to his disgrace and dishonor, the days shall be
cold, and the ways dark, etc.

Here are condemned your cold and frozen Confessions, your slack and slow
restitutions, Penite^ce compared to a Storm. Prou. 30.
your lukewarm intentions; being like unto those of the Sluggard, of whom
Solomon says, Vult and non vult, He will and he will not: and these are very
hurtful to the soul, for they cause more security than salvation; These
being a generation that are pure in their own conceits, and yet are not washed
from their filthiness. Caesarius Arelatensis compares Penitence to a Storm
or Tempest, where the winds, thunders, and lightnings play their parts: the
wind at sea rents sails, splits Masts, crackes Cables, teareth up Anchors, and
breaks the Oars in pieces: Penitence must rent the sails wherewith thou
sailest in this world with the wind in the poupe, it must crack asunder the
strong Cables of thy wilful affections, it must tear up the Anchors of thy
ill fastened hopes, and break those Oars of false and deceitful
Court-fauours, which thou falsely supposest shall row thee ashore to some safe
Harbor. On land, the wind turns up the tallest Cedars and hugest Oaks,
though they have taken never such deep rooting. There are men in the World
that have taken deeper rooting in worldly riches, in their honors and their
pleasures, than either the tall Cedar, or the sturdie Oak; and there is nothing
that can rent them up by the roots, and make them stoop, but the stiff wind
of Penitence. These men must have the Waters of Grace to quench the flames of
their covetous desires, and of the fiery lusts of the flesh; Every night
(says David) I will wash my bed. The fire of Concupiscence which is kindled in
this bed, must be quenched with the watrie tears of the eyes; and in stead of
that fire, take unto thee the fire of Zeal, of Charity, and of Love, that may
inflame the Soul, kindle the Will, and inlighten the Understanding; Ignem veni
mittere in terram, etc. Thou must likewise have the thunder of Gods judgments
in thine ears, to strike a terror into thee of Gods Majesty, to make thee
fearful to offend, and keep thee in a continual aw of keeping his
commandments, etc.

And Jesus walked in the porch of Solomon. There is no Falcon that flies so
high, gives so many wrenches to the Herne, or makes more stoopings with desire
to seize on his prey; no enamoured Gallant, that half so much rounds the doors
of her he adoreth; no Shepherd so trudgeth through the Mountains, seeking
after his lost Sheep; no poor Soul more seeks after the house of some rich
and well devoted Almes-giuer; nor does the Sun fetch so many turns through
the world, as the Son of righteousness does to recover a lost soul. Saint
Augustine before he had got out of his error, said, Circumuolitabat a long
misericordia tua, Thy mercy did fly about afar off. Sin does separate us
from God, and remooues us far from him. Long a peccatoribus Salus, Salvation
is far from the wicked. But his mercy though it stood aloof off, yet his eye
did still watch over me, which is a great argument of Gods love toward me.
And from hence it arises, That there is great feasts and joy made in heaven
for one soul that is converted; like unto those congratulations, and
fellow-feelings which the Shepherd desires others should entertain him
withal, when he has found his lost sheep. Great is the Shepherds joy when
he finds his lost sheep. But this is more especially verified in God, it
being his Delitiae, esse cum filijs hominum. Then do thou walk with great
delight and contentment through thy souls Temple, when thou do contemplate
the high mysteries thereof; Then do thou walk through thy understanding,
when thou art zealous in the love thereof; Then do thou walk through thy
will, when thou do call to mind the great blessings from Gods bountiful
hand, with a desire to be thankful and serviceable unto him; Then do thou
walk through thy memory, when thou do occupy thy self in holy things;
Then do thou walk through thy eyes, when thou do exercise thy self in
works of pity; Then do thou walk through thy hands, when thou do make
a bed for the poor, and bind up the wounds of the wounded; Then do thou
walk through thy tongue, when thou give wholesome counsel to thy brother.
In a word, then does thy soul take her ease and rest, sitting as it were on a
Throne, and on a living Altar, far better than that which is made of stone;
for one single sigh offered up upon this Altar, is able to prevail more than
many on any other Altar.

Jesus walked. Christ omits no means even to reclaim the Reprobat^ if it might
be, Exodus 3.
That our Savior Christ should use so many diligences for a soul that is
predestined for heaven, it is well and good; but for such a reprobate people
as this, that he should take such pains, it is but lost labor. God called
unto Moses, saying, Go and speak unto Pharaoh, that he let my people go; But
I know that he will not let them go. What says Clemens Alexandrinus? O Lord,
if thou know so much, Why do thou put thy self to so unnecessary a
trouble? Why do thou loose so much time? Whereunto there is given a twofold
answer.

First, That he that is of a pitiful nature and kind condition, does not
content himself with the justifying of his cause, but uses all possible
means to remedy what is amiss, and to set all things right. S. Bernard did
labor as it were with might and maine, as no Gally-slaue could tugge more at
an Oar, to reduce a Monk that had violated his Orders and gone astray; and
when a friend of his told him, What mean you to meddle in so thanklesse and
hopeless an Office, and a case so desperate, where there is no good to be
done? This man is flowne out so far to check, that he will never be
reclaimed. To whom Saint Bernard mildly answered, Non recipio consolationem,
vbi fratris video desolationem, I take no consolation, where I see my brothers
desolation. A tender hearted mother takes care of her son in a desperate
disease, using all kind of diligences, though they prove unprofitable.

Secondly, Saint Barnard says, That God does not oblige Prelates, that they
cure sinners, but that they procure to cure them. He does not reward a Preacher
according to the good that he has done, but according to the pains that he
has taken; and he cites that place of Saint Paul, I have labored more than ye
all. 1. Cor. 15.
He does not say, I have done more good than any of you all; for the reward is
not given according to the measure of the profit, but the pains; not for the
saving of Souls, but for his sweating to save them. And for the better
instructing us in this truth, our Savior Christ after so many miracles done,
so many Sermons preached, and all to no end, does not for all this forsake this
people, and give them over, but comes here unto this great Feast, to direct
them in the right way, Et deambulabat, etc.

Then came the Jews round about him. The Woolfes here come about the Lamb,
as your Dogs about a poor Beggar, as your bigger Vessels about a small Fisher
boat, or as your Sodomites about Lots house, or Saul's soldiers about David; In
modum coronae, They had shut him in on all sides, as a band of soldiers beset
a Castle, or as the Wicked, the Just; which is as much to say, In circuitu
Impij ambulabant, The Wicked walked in a Circle: And they learned this of the
Devil; of whom Saint Peter says, He goes about seeking whom he may devour.
They came about him: Upon so good a day, a day of good works, and on the day
of the renouation of the Temple, when they were to treat of the renouation of
their souls; Circumdederunt, They came athwart two walls, which would have
made even the Devils of Hell to have turned cowards.

The one was, The respect to this so solemn a Feast.

The other, To the Temple, and the sacred Pledges thereunto belonging.

None but Reprobates will store up injuries, revenge, treasons, gaming,
banqueting, whoring, and the like villainous actions, for the Sabbath day.
Nazianzen says, That the principal end of this or the like Feast, is a
remembering of God, and a grateful acknowledgement of those many favors we
have received from him: but that which was then, and is now a days most
practiced, is, a forgetfulness of God, and an unthankfulness for benefits
received. Where I would have you to observe, God did his greatest works always
on the Sunday.
(nor is it unworthy your noting) that God did on the Sabbath day do the
greatest works that ever he did; he rewarded the Angels, crowning them with
glory, he threw the Dragon and his followers down from Heaven, he freed his
people from Aegypts captivity, he was borne into the world, after so many
sighs he rose again, he sent his holy Spirit, he overcame the unbelief of
Thomas; and on the Sabbath day he shall judge the Quick and the Dead. In a
word, all your festival days whatsoever, were instituted in memorial of
extraordinary favors conferred upon us: and all these, the Ungrateful repay
with new offenses.

God will have his Temples honored.
Touching the Temple or Church, wherein God is to be honored, Nilus says,
That a Christian should bear no less respect to this his holy place, than if
he were in Heaven. Jeremy makes a fearful threatening against Babylon,
applying it against her, and against her King and the Medes, Acuite sagittas,
implete pharetras, arma, arma: And why so? Vltio Domini, and vltio Templi. He
weighs there the wrongs which Nebuchadnezzar had done to Jerusalem, by
dishonoring Matrons, deflouring Virgins, killing little children, tormenting
old folks, burning houses, their robberies and their spoils; and yet all
these he passes over in silence; the Prophet (as one that found himself
thereat much agrieued) pressing only the profanation of the Temple, and that
he had made it a stable for his Horses.

They came about him. Amongst many other things that they laid to our Savior
Christ's charge, one was, I can destroy the Temple; wherein they did not only
accuse him of blasphemy, for making himself of the same omnipotency with
God; but for his irreuerence also, and disrespect to the Temple. Saint
Augustine in his book de Ciuit. Dei, reports, That the Goths having sacked
Rome, as many as betook themselves to the Churches of Saint Peter and Saint
Paul, remained free; so much could the respect of sacred places prevail with
these cruel Barbarians: but it would not serve our Savior Christ's turn with
the Jews, though he had made a Law touching the immunitie of the Temple.

They came about him. Here was that prophecy of David fulfilled, Lost is that
Commonwealth, in which Magistrates and their Ministers are both faulty
Many calves encompassed me about, and the fat Bulls besieged me. Euthymius
says, That by your Calves he means the common people; and by your Bulls, the
Noble men.

And he says, That they all came about him, and compassed him round in form
of a ring; and that they roared like Lions, and snarled at him like so many
dogs: when in a Commonwealth the bulls are confederat with the dogs, when
the Lions take part with the wolfes; When your Patritij join with your
Pleybeians, your Nobility with the Communaltie, and all to do mischief, give
that Commonwealth for lost and undone; when your Gouernador and his Alguazil;
when your Alcalde, and his Procurador; when your Oydor, and his Escriuano; when
your Secritario and his Oficial, do go hand in hand together, it is all one.
Chrysostom expounding those words of Saint Luke, Dimitte nobis Barrabam, Luke
23.
Loose Barrabas, He says, That they that were thieves, did desire a thieves
liberty. And if they sought so earnestly to save a thief, it was not much
that they should condemn the innocent. Esaias bewayling Ierusalems ill hap, who
having heretofore been holy, had now turned whore, entertaining all sorts of
men, one while thieves, another while murderers, etc. Rendering anon after the
reason; Principies infideles, socij furum. It is no marvel that Princes
should strike hands with thieves, being that they are willing to share with
them in their thefts. Heretofore Princes were wont to favor the good, and
punish the bad. David says of himself, That when he did bethink himself a
mornings, he propounded to himself not to pardon any notorious offender, nor
to spare the life of the wicked, nor those that were ill members of the
Commonwealth. In matutino interficiebam omnes operantes iniquitatem, Oh what a
happy estate of a Commonwealth was here for a Prince? hating the wicked so
much, he could not choose but favor the good. But now the world was grown to
that pass, That your Herod's, your Pilats, your Highpriests, and your
Pharisees, in stead of doing of this, when they bethink themselves in the
morning, they call their Page unto them, and say, Go to such a one, remember
my service unto him, and know how he has slept to night, etc. Now adays your
Governors are adored in their Ministers: because they serve them with the hands
of Judas, and bring bribes unto them, strangling Justice with this close
covetousness.

They came about me. They did fill and shut up the door through which he was
to pass, thinking there to make an end of him: but when either God, God will
not suffer his children to fall into the hands of the ungodly.
or a man whom God favors, is thus enclosed on every side, this hedging of him
in will not serve their turn; for he has wings to fly from them. To this
purpose David being persecuted by Saul, composed some of his Psalms. The Kings
Soldiers had once compassed him in round, In modum Coronae, Vowing, that he
should not escape their fingers, unless he had the wings of a bird to fly
from them. In the Lord put I my trust, Why say you then unto my soul that she
should fly like a Sparrow to the Mountains, etc. But having God for my shield
and my defense, I may safely lay me down to sleep and take my rest. O Lord, a
great squadron may affright a very good man, when he shall see they have beset
him: But why should I fear as long as thou do guard and protect me? Thou art
my refuge in tribulation, etc. Saul sent some to apprehend David; Michal saved
his life by letting him out a window, Why did they not follow in pursuit of
him, being so much offended as they were at this trick, which Mich^l had put
upon them? Some Hebrews make answer hereunto, That God had damd up the window,
or cast a mist before their eyess that they could not perceive the manner of
his escape. Eccl. 21.9.
Ecclesiasticus says, The congregation of the wicked, is like tow wrapped
together: Their end is a flame of fire to destroy them. An Army of Reprobates
can no more stand against the godly, than bundles of Towe or Flax before a
flaming fire.

How long, etc. The Jews coming round about our Savior, they said unto him,
Quousque, etc. How long do thou make us doubt? As Love transformeth a man,
so does Hate, Vulnerasti cor meum soror mea, said the Bridegroom to his
Spouse. Another letter has it, Excordasti: Which alludeth unto that which the
Spouse answered, Ego Dormio, and cor meum vigilat. But how can the Spouse
sleep, and her heart wake? yes, her husband had stolen away her heart, and
that waked with him when she was asleep. Now Hate, no less transformeth than
Love. Saul did not live in himself, but in David; Haman not in himself, but
in Mardochee; the Pharisees not in themselves, but in Christ. And therefore they
say, Thou causest our souls to doubt, Thou have robbed us of our souls, we are
not our selves, but as bodies without a soul.

Entry of all sin the worst, and hardest to be cared.
And in token that the cause of this their suspension, was Envy, they confess
these their so many distractions, vexations, and torments of the mind. All
other kind of sins bring pain and torment with them, but it is after they
have tasted of their sins; but Envy torments before hand. The Pharisees had
scarce seen Christ's Miracles, and the applause which his doctrine had in the
world, when they began to suffer, and to be grieved. And this is the reason why
this Vice is harder to be cured than any other. Good does ordinarily quench
ill, as water quenches fire. But Envy, because it makes another man's good his
ill, that which to other vices is death, is to Envy, life. It is the fire of
brimstone, which the more water you throw on it, the more it burns. They came
about me like so many Bees who are exasperated and grow angry with those that
do them no harm but good. They waxed hot like fire among thorns, which no
water can quench.

Animam nostram tollis. Where I would have thee to weigh the word Tollis, Thou
take away our soul, Men are ever ready to unburden themselves of their
miseries. Esaias 63.
thou make us to doubt, etc. Thou art in fault, that we live in this pain
and passion. It is the common course of your greatest sinners to lay the blame
of their sin upon God, O Lord, Why have thou made us to err from thy ways
(says Esaias) and hardened our heart from thy fear? It is a sin inherited from
Adam, who laid the fault of eating the apple upon God, The woman which thou
gave me to be with me, Genesis 3.
etc. She that thou gave me to be my companion, to be my cherisher, and my
comforter, Who would have thought, that she would have entreated any thing at
my hands, that should not have been very lawful and honest? The sick man is
wont to lay the fault on the Clymat wherein he lives, and on those meats
wherewith he is nourished. Seneca tells a tale of a certain Shee-slaue, who
one morning when she awaked, finding her self blind, laid the fault that she
could not see, upon the house, desiring that she might be removed to another.
The cause of your Eclypses is the earth, which interposes it self between the
Sun and the Moon: Whereas he that shall impute the fault to the Sun, shall
but betray his ignorance. Of the Eclipses of these Jews, the cause thereof was
their passions, their covetousness, and their envy. If our Savior Christ
preached unto them, they desired Miracles; if he wrought Miracles, they desired
Doctrine; from his works they appealed to his words, and from his words to his
works; and laying the fault on the Sun, they said, Animam nostram tollis, Thou
make us to doubt.

If thou be the Christ, tell us plainly. In three words they uttered three
notorious lies: The subteltie of the Jews in circumuenting our Savior.


The first, Dic nobis palam, Tell us plainly; for all that thou have hitherto
said unto us, is as nothing.

The second, Dic nobis palam, and we will believe thee.

The third, Dic nobis palam; for that is the reason why we have not hitherto
believed thee. Saint Augustine and Saint Chrysostom have both observed, that
in these their lies there was a great deal of craft and subtletie; which was
this, That the Jews did still presume, that our Savior Christ would boast
himself to be King of the Jews, and that he was temporally to sit in David's
Throne; and they went about to draw this from him, that they might have some
ground of accusation against him; and therefore they thus cried out unto him,
Dic nobis palam, Tell us plainly: for in all the rest that they desired of him,
our Savior Christ had given them full satisfaction. For if Palam be to publish
a thing openly, and not to do it in hugger-mugger, or in some by-corner or
other, I have always preached publicly in your Synagogues, and in the
midst of your Marketplaces, And I said nothing in secret. If Palam shall
carry with it a kind of boldness and liberty, ye may call to mind my
whipping of you out of the Temple, the severity of my reprehensions, and that
I called ye the children of the Devil, that I might publish your evil
thoughts to the world, etc. If Palam shall signify, Clearly or Manifestly,
what more clear or manifest truth could ye hear, than that which I have
preached unto you? Will you that I shall tell you in a word, who I am, I and the
father am one. Of the material Sun a man may complain, That an earnest
eying of it, and a steadie fixed looking thereupon, may make us blind; but on
the Sun of Righteousness no man can lay this fault, for he himself gives
that light whereby our eyes are enabled to see; Psalm. 19.
The commandment of the Lord is pure, and gives light unto the eyes. And
therefore Saint Paul calls the old Law, Night; and the Law of Grace, Day: In
that Law the Sun had not showed it self, all was clouds and darkness; and
albeit they did enjoy some light, it was but a glimpse, or as the light of a
candle through some little chinke; but when the Son of God appeared in the
flesh, that darkness of the night was driven away, and the day appeared, etc.

I told ye and ye believe not; the works that I do in my fathers name, they
bear witness of me. The Jews wanted nothing to make them believe, but a
willingness to believe.
Our Savior Christ had proved himself to be both God and Man, by such
convenient means, that it had been folly, if not mere madness, to have
desired better proofs thereof: strong were his reasons, strange his miracles,
profound his discourse. In a word, his words and works were such, that they
made Admiration stand amassed, and Wonder it self, to wonder. Your not
believing me (says our Savior) cannot arise from my not speaking unto you,
but from your wilfulness; but if ye will not believe in my words, give credit
to my works.

Where by the way it is to be noted, That our Savior Christ having innumerable
testimonies to allege in his behalf, those shall first be represented unto
you, which are set down by Saint John, Tres. sunt qui testimonium dant in
Coelo, etc. There are three which bear Record in Heaven, the Father, the Word,
1. John 5.7.
and the Holy Ghost: and there are three which bear record in the earth, the
Spirit, the Water, and the Blood. Which we have treated of at large elsewhere.

Io^. ^.39. Act. 10.43.
The second is, That of the Prophets and Prophecies, Search the Scriptures; and
they (says our Savior Christ) are they that testify of me. And Saint Peter
he auerreth as much, Omnes Prophetae testimonium perhibent, To him also give
all the Prophets witness, etc.

And here we may more especially consider with our selves, one great and
singular wonder, That these the Prophets living in diverse times and places, and
prophesying different things that should befall our Savior Christ; as one, his
stripes; another, his buffetings; a third, his patience; a fourth, his silence,
etc. All of them did compose an excellent piece, and did set forth a most
absolute and perfect picture of the Messiah, for it was the hand of the
Holy Ghost that directed the pensill: and, that the seventy Interpreters
without seeing one another, without conuersing or communicating their minds,
should all of them jumpe and agree so well together, and extract one and the
same original, was a great wonder. That the Statuaries of Greece, living
asunder in different Cities, should frame a figure in several pieces, one
making the leg, another the arm, a third the head, and all of them meet in
handsomeness, shape, feature, and proportion, as heart could wish; this
likewise (if it be true) was a great wonder. But in the Prophets the
circumstances were far greater; as that of time, for that they were in
different ages, and of different estates, conditions, and qualities, etc.

The third is, The testimony of his own miracles; for (as Athanasius and
Iustine Martyr have noted) by an especial Divine providence it was so ordered,
that none of the Saints that were either before or after, could do any of
those same miracles which were prophesied of our Savior Christ. And this did
he himself deliver to the Disciples of John Baptist, Tell him (says he) from
me, The Blind receive sight, Mat. 11.
the Hault go, the Leapers are cleansed, the Deaf hear, and the Dead are
raised up, etc.

The Common people also did testify of him, Testimonium perhibebat turba. In
conclusion, having so many and sundry testimonies, he would not here make use
of any other, than the testimony of his works.

Why our Savior would prove his Divinity by no other testimony than his
works.
First, because such of us as remain here as his Agents upon earth, may by this
testimony prove his Divinity.

Secondly, To the end that no man should pretend to hold himself to be the
Son of God by Grace, unless he give testimony thereof by his works. There
is no great heed to be given to words, Quid verba audiam, cum facta non videam?
Our Savior Christ would take no notice of those Virgins who in good words
proffered their service to the Spouse, but performed nothing less in their
deeds, because they had not their Lamps lighted and ready at hand; Show me
thy faith by thy works. Clemens Alexandrinus expounding that place of Saint
Matthew, Mat. ^1.
Regnum Coelorum vim patitur, The Kingdom of Heaven suffers violence; says,
That this force or violence is not to be done, Contentiosis orationibus, sed
rectae vitae assiduitate.

A true Christian glories in nothing more, than in his sufferings for Christ.
And hence was it that many of Gods Saints did not rest contented with the doing
only of good works, but by showing also some open evidence of them. Nemo mihi
molestus ^it, (says Saint Paul) ego enim stigmata Domini Jesus in corpore meo
porto; Let no man trouble himself in enquiring after me, or to ask, Who I am?
the print of the yrons wherewith I am branded in the face, does plainly speak
my name, and publish to the world my profession and condition. He borrowed
this metaphore from your branded slaves, or as Anselmus will have it, from some
device born by the soldiers of the Roman Empire. Saint Chrysostom ponders the
word Porto; a Slave may bear a mark in his face, but makes no great braggs of
it, nor indeed has any great reason so to do: but Saint Paul he boasts
thereof, as an Ensign does of the Colors which he carries; suting with that
of the Bridegroom, Wear me in thy heart, as a Spouse does her ring on her
finger, or as a Lover does his Mistress favor on his arm.

But ye believe not, for ye are not of my Sheep. Saint Augustine understands
by these Sheep, the Preachers of Gods Word, because they hear the voice of
their Shepherd; but this his opinion may not stand as a general sentence.

First of all, Because many not predestined, do believe, hear, and obey, as
Judas, and others that were not of Christ's Sheep.

And many again of the Predestined, did not as then believe, (as S. August.
has noted it) which afterward came to believe. Now the Sheep is a fitting
figure or symbol of him that is predestined to salvation; and touching those
in particular to whom our Savior said, That they were not of his Sheep, who
notwithstanding had enjoyed such powerful and plentiful means to believe, if
they had been in the number of Christ's Sheep, doubtless they would have
believed: and therefore we are diligently to weigh these words, Ye believe
not, etc.

Next, we are to consider the conueniences which are betwixt the Sheep and the
Predestined.

The first is, They hear my voice. There is no living creature more obedient
to what he hears, or more apt to hear; the least whistle of the Shepherd is
the Sheep North Star. When God reprehended Elias at the mouth of the Cave,
there came first a great wind, And God was not in the wind: then anon after
came an earthquake, And God was not in the earthquake: after that, a flaming
fire, And God was not in the fire: at last there came a soft whistling sound,
and then God passed by. But why should he make his appearance in a whistle, or
a soft noise? Hot fiery Spirits unfit for the Ministry.
Marry therein he plainly told the Prophet, You, out of the abundance of your
zeal and hot fiery spirit, would have all to be winds, earthquakes, and
lightnings, thundering out nothing but damnation and vengeance; and howbeit I
hold this to be a fitting course to be taken with an idolatrous People, and
such as are Rebels to my House, yet for those that are my Sheep, a whistle or
a mild word is enough.

The second is, The meekness, softness, and evenness of their nature and
condition: Beati mites, B^essed are the Meek in spirit; your Reprobates are
sour, unsavory, and unquiet: In a word, they are like Goats, you shall scarce
meet with a Reprobate but leads a troubled life, like a Thief that looks
every hour when he shall be hanged, Genesis 4. Deuteronomy. 28.65, 66, 67.
or in such a distraction or deiection as Cain lived in; Cur concidit facies
tua? Why is thy countenance fallen down? And as it is in Deutronomie, The Lord
shall give thee a trembling heart, and a sorrowful mind, and thy life shall
hang before thee, and thou shall fear both day and night, No torture to a
guilty conscience.
and shall have none assurance of thy life: in the morning thou shall say,
Would God it were evening; and at evening thou shall say, Would God it were
morning; for the fear of thine heart which thou shall fear, and for the sight
of thine eyes which thou shall see. The heart of the Wicked is fearful, and
every bush represents a Dog unto him that bites him. In the midst of all his
pleasures Hell represents it self to the Reprobate, his soul is consumed with
sorrow, and quasi pendens ante se, He looks like one that is condemned to be
hanged. But the Just does enjoy an inward comfort, a heavenly joy, singing
cherefully with David that sweet Anthem, Psalm. 85.
Inhabitat gloria in terra nostra, etc. Surely his salvation is near to them
that fear him, that Glory may dwell in our Land.

The third is, the point of profit. For in the Sheep (which signifies the
Elect) there is wool, milk, butter, cheese, and flesh: But it is not so in
the Goat, (whereby are noted the Reprobate) as has been observed by Saint
Hilary and Saint Chrysostom.

The fourth is, The sheep walks in ways that are plain, quiet, and secure:
But the goat goes clambring on the tops of dangerous rocks, browzing amongst
bushes and thorns; and at last waxing weary, falls down headlong to hell.
Ambulauimus vias difficiles, lassati sumus via iniquitatis, We have walked
through craggie paths, and have tired our selves in the way of iniquity.

The ungratefulness of man's nature.
Many good works have I showed ye: for which of these works do ye stone
me? They took up stones for to stone him, and when they had them in their
hands ready to fling at him, he forced their attention, and made them whether
they would or no to hearken unto him. Many good works have I showed you; for
which of these works do ye stone me? It is an easier thing for a man to grow
unthankful and forgetful of a great number of benefits, than one single good
turn. One or two courtesies, men usually rest thankful for them, and bear
them still in memory; But (as the Spaniard says) Los muchos, se vienen por
muchos, a oluidar, Many, for that they are many, are forgotten by many. Their
muchnesse, Four fair mothers that ever bring forth foul children. Psalm. 106.
lessens their remembrance. There are four fair mothers that bring forth very
foul children: As Truth, enemies; Familiarity, contempt; Hope, despair; and
Muchnesse of benefits, muchnesse of oblivion; Incontinently they forgot his
works. David does there treat of the adoration of the golden calfe, and his
meditation thereupon is, That the many favors that that people had received
from Gods hands, being so fresh as they were in their memories, as the flies,
(which for their sakes he sent to afflict the Egyptians) frogs, gnats, water
turned into blood, darkness, the death of their firstborn, the Israelites
passing safe through the red sea, the drowning of Pharaoh and all his charriots
and horsemen, and the Law given them on the Mountain: yet notwithstanding
these great and singular favors, these wondrous signs and tokens, as the like
were never done, that yet for all this, they should like a broken bow so
suddenly start aside, and fall so quickly into so foul a sin, as none could
be more derogatory from Gods honor, They suddenly forgot his works. The
greater were Gods benefits, the more was their oblivion. And the reason of it
is, That laying more upon a man's shoulders than he is well able to bear, it is
a thousand to one that his load and he do not fall both to the ground. The
less the benefits are, the more cheerfully a man receives them. And why so?
Marry I shall tell you why: Because then there is some hope that a man may live
to requite them, and to discharge that debt, for the which (in thankfulness)
he stands bound. But when they are so great, that we are not able to make
satisfaction, such extraordinary courtesies, are repayd oftentimes with
unkindness, if not with hatred. Thou owe thy neighbor a sum of money, be it
more or less, nor does it grieve and afflict thee to see this thy Crediter, or
to look him in the face, but rather take pleasure and comfort in his
company; yet if all that thou art worth, should thou sell thy self to thy
very shirt, be not able to discharge that debt, thou had as liefe see the
devil, as him. Quintus Curtius reports, that Alexander grew to hate
Antipater, and for no other reason in the world, but that he had obtained so
many victories, and reduced so many nations to his obedience, that he did
tacitly demand that requital of him, which he was not able to make him: and
conferring many favors on those soldiers which had done him but little
service, he neglected Antipater that had done him most. The same reason is to
be rendered of Hannibal and Carthage* of Lycurgus and Lacedemonia, and of Saul
and David: but there is no example to that of a woman in this kind; serve her
never so faithfully, entertain her never so royally, court her day and night,
feed her humorous disposition, wast both thy purse and thy body, and consume
all that thou have to give her content, yet in the end will she grow to hate
thee; and that which thou think should be the means of winning her, will be
the cause of losing her: she will like a Lymbeck, draw whatsoever is good from
thee, first by drops, then by drams, afterward by ounces, and lastly by
pounds, till she have sucked thee dry, and that thou have wholly spent and
undone thy self in her service. In a word, (that I may grow to an end) the
Jews in those former times were evermore wonderfully beholding unto God for
those many benefits and favors which he had thrown upon them; but now his
grace and mercy (like a River rising from forth it is bed) extending it self
so far, that he came himself in person to visit them, and in such an
especial manner, as none could be more, saying particularly unto them, Non
sum missus nisi ad Oues Israel, I am not sent but to the Sheep of Israel; Why
this was so great a favor, that it overcomes man's imagination, the weight
whereof pressed both it and them to the ground. But God so support us with his
grace, that we may thankefully bear in our hearts the remembrance of his
manifold benefits. To whom, with the Father, the Son, etc.

THE XXXVI. SERMON, UPON THE THVRSEDAY AFTER PASSION SUNDAY.
LVC. 7. Rogabat Iesum quidam Pharisaeus, vt manducaret cum illo, etc.

A certain Pharisee requested Jesus, That he would eat with him, etc.


ROgabat Iesum, etc. And one of the Pharisees desired Jesus, that he would eat
with him. The Circumstances of Mary's perdition.
The whole History of Marie Magdalen is reduced to these three estates:

Of a Sinner; Of a Penitent; Of a Saint.

For all which she was most famous.

In that her first estate of her ^ewd course of life, she obtained a plenarie
pardon, and full remission of her sins. Were she either Widow (as Saint
Hierome would have it) or one that was never married, (as common opinion cries
it) Petrus Chrysologus says, That she had made the City so infamous, that she
might more fitly be called, Peccatum Hierosolimae, quam Peccatrix, The Sin of
Jerusalem, than a Sinner; because by reason of the bad fame and evil report
that went of her, the whole City did suffer therein, and was in a manner
spoiled and undone; some being taken with her beauty, others with her
graceful behavior, not a few with the pleasantness of her wit and liberal
language; but most with her ill example, occasioning murmuration in some, and
obduration in othersome, causing them not only to speak ill, but also to do
ill: In a word, she was Pestis generalis, A general plague, and Commune
scandalum, A common scandal to all.

The circumstances of her perdition were strange:

The sin of dishonest^e has two p^operties
First, In that her sin was a sin of dishonestie; wherein we usually see
these two effects:

It sticks of all others the closest to the Soul.
The one, That it clings like bird-lime to our souls. Thomas says, That it is
Peccatum maximae inhaerentiae, That it is a sin of all other that cleaves
closest unto us, and sticks longest by us. Saint Hierome, That it much
resembles the Bird called the Phoenix, which does revive and renew her self
with the fire which she kindles with the motion of her wings. Thou mournest,
thou bewailest and repentest thee of the dishonest sin which thou have
committed, and desire to give it over, and that it may die in thee; but with
the wings of thy thoughts thou blowest those coals afresh, and make them
flame more than before, so that thinking to kill the lusts of the flesh, thou
do quicken them and give them new life; so that what thou bewailedst before
for dead, thou now embracest as living, and huggest it in thy bosom, as a man
claspes his dearest friend in his arms, that after some long swoune recouers
again. A holy Hermit that led a devour and solitary life, talking one day
with the Devil, demanded of him, Which amongst the Sins, was the greatest?
He told him, Dishonestie. And he replying, What, are not Blasphemy, Murder,
and Swearing, far greater sins? Whereun^o he answered, In point of Divinity
these are the greatest; but the Rents and In-comes of the sins of the flesh
are far greater: and this is the reason why I do not tempt any with
blasphemy or murder, but some one desperate person or other; but with
dishonestie, all sorts of men; the Merchant imployes his Stock in that kind of
trading which shall turn most to his commodity, the Usurer puts forth his
moneys where he may have most profit, and best security. There is not any
other sin that like a plague has spread it self so generally over the world,
Genesis 6.
as that of the Flesh; and this was the cause that God repented himself that he
had made man: and if at any time in the world there has been any one that has
showed himself so valiant as to resist the assaults of hell, yet in the end
the very same party has been shrewdly encountered with the concupiscence of
the flesh, as Saint Gregory has noted it of Solomon, Et non custodiuit quae
mandauit ei Dominus, 3. Reg. 11.
It made him break Gods command.

It bli^^s the Understanding.
The other effect is, that it blinds the Understanding, as we shall show you
hereaf^er.

The second circumstance is, That it is an impudent and shameless sin; Marie
Magdalen by this means losing all fear of God, and shame of the world. When a
River runs between two banks well planted with trees which serve as walls to
hedge it in, the waters thereof do no harm; but if these Rivers break their
banks, and make their way over those walls, they ouerflow and spoil all that
is in their way. Whilst our life shall be bounded in betwixt shame and fear,
no great harm can come of i^* but when a Soul shall live deuoyd of shame or
fear, Lord have mercy upon it. Our Savior Christ, taking it to be the
extremity and utmost of all evil, said of a Judge, I neither fear God nor
Man: He that shall cast up his accounts with Heaven above, and with his Honor
here beneath, and when he has made this reckoning, shall think with himself,
that he has nothing to lose, What bridle can rest^aine him? One of the
reasons why God commanded, That a man should not defame his neighbor, was,
That he should not make his sin perdurable. Saint Hierome says, That we
should rather privately admonish, than publicly punish, Lest if such a one
should once lose shame, he should dwell in his sin for ever. Amongst noble
Natures, Honor is the bridle of Vice; and in case they should not profess
Virtue, yet will they have a care to uphold their credit. Saint Augustine
says, That God did not augment the Monarchy of the Romans for their virtue,
because whilst they adored false gods they could hardly profess it; but
because having set Honor before their eyes, it was a great bridle to curb in
their vices.

The third circumstance is, That she should purchase her self the name of a
Sinneresse in so populous a City. This was it that made the Evangelist say,
Behold, a woman in the City which was a Sinner, (this of Saint Luke was a
great endeering of the offense) De qua septem Daemonia eiecerat, Out of whom
he had cast seven Devils. Now by these seven Devils is to be understood the
manifoldnesse of her sins; this is Saint Gregory's opinion: but Saint Ambrose
will have thereby to be understood seven real Devils indeed, He dried up the
issue of blood in Martha, and drove out the Devils in Marie; and it is no small
proof thereof, that two Evangelists should express the same in plain and full
words: for when one Evangelist sets down a thing in dark and obscure terms,
another usually explaines the same; but Saint Mark and Saint Luke both, herein
agree and say, Out of whom he had cast seven Devils; and Saint Hierome in the
life of H^lar^on and Prosper likewise affirms, That this was a chastisement
which God did often use in great sins.

The fourth circumstance is, The great hurt which she occasioned to the souls
and bodies of men, a great cause whereof was her extreme beauty.

Sambucus, The force of Beauty.
amongst some of his Emblemes which he has made of humane beauty, he paints
forth in one of them, a Lion, a Hare, a Foul, and a Fish; for there is not any
creature more courageous than a Lion, nor any more cowardly than a Hare; nor
any creature higher than the Foul, nor lower in his mansion than the Fish; all
which, render and yield themselves prisoners to beauty. Balac lived in great
fear of Gods People, and when he could not get Balaam to curse them, aduising
with his Council, ( Balaam being the first proiector) he sent (as Lyra notes
it) a squadron of the fairest women that his Country could afford, amongst
the Israelites, who did bear in their Banner for their Device the Image of
Belphegor; and they who before did seem to that King to be invincible, rendered
themselves captives to the beauty of those Moabitish women; Et initiati sunt
Belphegor, and comederunt sacrificia mortuorum, They married them, and adored
their Idol; and (as Josephus sets it down) it was not only the common
people, but many of the chiefest amongst them, that offended in this kind. For
the flesh being not only baited, but blinded with this outward beauty, it
has no eyes to behold the light of the Sun, Supercecidit ignis, (that is)
The fire of Concupiscence fell down, and they saw not the Sun: The light of
mine eyes is not with me; thus David discoursed with himself, treating of his
adultery. ^osea 7.
Osee compares Adultery, to a heated Oven, whence comes forth the flame which
burns, and the smoke which blindes. See thou a man besotted with the love of
this or that woman, Adultry compared to a heated Oven.
and of that doting affection toward her, that having ^uffered for her sake,
in his honor, his estate, and his health; if he do not take up himself in
time, and look out some remedy for this sore, you may boldly say he is blind.
Saint John painting forth the fall of Lucifer, says, That the bottom less
pit was opened with a key; (for Lucifer, according to Rupertus, had the first
handsell of hell) and from forth that infernal pit, there went out such a
thick smoke, that it darkened the Sun and the Stars. And this is the stamp
and figure of him that shall throw himself down headlong into the bottomless
pit of dishonestie, whence comes forth so much smoke, that it blinds the
Sun of the understanding, and darkneth those stars of the faculties of the
soul.

From these circumstances do I draw the difficulty of Mary Magdalens
Conversion; grounding my supposition upon these three truths.

Gods glory greater in our conversion than creation.
The first, That for God to justify a soul, is a far greater matter than to
create heaven and earth, and all that therein is. This has been proved
elsewhere. And Job expressed as much, when he said, The creating of me was the
least of thy mercies toward me, Exaltare (says David) Exalt thy self o God
above the heavens, Psalm. 108.
and let thy glory be upon all the earth, that thy beloved may be delivered.
So that if we should put into the one hand of God, the world created; and into
the other, a soul converted; the glory of this hand is the greater. And there
are two very good reasons for it:

The one, For that in the creating of the world, God had no repugnancie or
resistance; To convert a sinner, is a work of wondrous difficulty in regard
of man's perverseness.
but in the converting of a soul, he may meet with opposition, by reason of
man's perverse will, Et qui creauit te sine te, non saluabit te sine te, For
though be created thee without thy will, he will not save thee without thy
will. God takes more pleasure in converting a soul, than in all the rest of
those wonders which he wrought with his hands, Auerte oculos tuos a me, quia
ipsi me auolare fecerunt, Turn away thine eyes from me; for even they have
made me fly away. Auolare is the same in that place, as Superbire, inflare.
Rabby Solomon renders it, Insolentior factus sum animo. To see thy eyes
heretofore so withdrawn from me, and now so busy in beholding ^e. So great is
the contention, which is betwixt the love of God, and the love of the world,
between the desires of the flesh, and of the Spirit, That the one does strive
to take the sword out of the others hand: -- Alterius vires, subtrahit alter
amor.


Plotinus calls Love a Painter: Divine Love, that paints; and humane Love, that
paints: This painteth forth our felicity in riches, beauty, and feasting;
That, in poverty, tears, and fasting. For, to ingraue such an image as this in
our hearts, to paint such a picture, we must blot out all those colors, which
any other love has drawn there.

The other, For that in creating the world, God did not show himself to be
weary, but made it as it were a kind of entertainment, and passe-time, Ludens
in orb terrarum: But in redeeming mankind, he was wearied out, even to the
shedding of his blood, and the loosing of his life.

The second truth is, That it is the easiest thing in the world with God, to
enrich a sinner with his grace. God sent Jeremy to the Potters house, who
beginning to work upon a piece of clay, it not fadging to his mind, he tore it
in sunder, and molding it anew, fashioned it afterward to his own good liking
and content. Cannot I deal by you as the potter does with his clay? Is my
power less than his? Noah kept a Lion in the Arc, but he continued still a
Lion. But our Savior Christ in his Church turns the Lion into a Lamb, The
pots in the Lords house shall be like the bolls before the Altar. Saint Jerome
says, Zachar. 14.
That he did prophetically decypher the time of the new Law, wherein the
black-souted Caldrons, should be so bright and beautiful, The justification
of a sinner, set out by diverse apt similitudes.
that they should serve for flagons full of flowers, and bolls of sweet and
precious odours. Esaias treating of the facility wherewith God does work this
change and alteration, draws his comparison from a little cloud, which a
contrary wind takes, and makes it disappeare in a moment, I shall put away thy
transgressions like a cloud, and thy sins as a mist. Esaias 44.
Ecclesiasticus compares it unto ice, which the Sun no sooner shines upon,
but it is melted, Thy sins shall melt away as the ice in the fair weather.
Eccles. 3.16.
David borrows his comparison from a frozen Torrent, set upon by a furious
South-west wind, and letting loose those waters, causes them to leap out of
their beds. For your frost and ice are the waters fetters which keep them
close prisoners, Hibernis vinculis soluta, says Nazianzene. And Niuale compede
vinctum, says Horace of the river Iberus. But all these comparisons are too
large and spacious in respect of Gods least breath, which in an instant does
banish sin from our breasts, and inricheth it with grace.

The third, That in regard of Man, it is a thing of great difficulty;
especially, if the foul fiend has got the masterie and possession of our
will. When a man has hired a house for term of life, with the liking and
consent of it is owner, for to put such a one out, we must necessarily have the
absolute Posse and power of the king, we must have his authority to turn him
out. The devil having taken a long lease of the house of thy soul, with thy
good liking and consent, thou must have Gods absolute power to eiect him, and
thrust him out: Not that the devil is so powerful as some make him, howbeit
the Scripture terms him, Vectem concludentem, a strong bolt which goes
athwart a door; Prou. 30.
and Serpentem tortuosum, a winding serpent which clewes himself up close, and
upon the least advantage takes hold (like the Cuttle-fish) with his claws; but
because God, howbeit he can do whatsoever he will, is now and then content to
give him leave to work upon our will.

This difficulty is somewhat the more increased, Woman the hieroglyphike of
weakness. Prou. 30.
in regard that Mary Magdalen was a woman, which is the Hyerogliph of weakness,
There be three things (says Solomon) hidden from me, yea four that I know
not. The Hebrew letter says, Three or four things are too hard for me. The
Hebrew renders the word, Admirabiles. The Seventy, Impossibiles, Impossible
for him to know. On the one side, because they are wreathing and winding too
and fro; on the other, because they leave no sign or print behind the^: the
one is of an Eagle in the air; the other of a Serpent upon a stone; the third,
of a ship in the midst of the sea, and the fourth, of a young man in his youth
(being so mutable a creature, and so full of foolish longings.) Even such is
the way of an adulterous woman, Which eats and wipeth her mouth, and says, I
have not done ill. When a woman is greedy in devouring good morsells in secret
behind the door, and wiping her lips, tells the world she has fasted and
eaten nothing all that day; when she commits folly in a corner, and boasts her
self in public to be honest, saying, There is not that woman living that
lives more honestly than I do; the devil having taken such possession of her
soul, it is a desperate piece of business.

All these circumstances of difficulty, and many more which we omit to set
down, are to be found in this story. But in those things that to us seem
impossible, God is wont to show his wisdom and his power, Great is the Lord,
and great is his power. And as a Physician (says Saint Augustine) does take
pleasure sometimes to light upon an incurable infirmity, not so much for his
gain as his fame; Mary's conversion affords hope to the most desperate
sinners*
Non quaerens mercedem, sed commendans artem; So was Christ well contented with
this occasion, Ad informationem eorum, qui credituri sunt, For the better
informing of those that were to believe. To give knowledge (says the Apostle)
to all sinners, That there is in God a power, a wisdom, and a will, for to
heal them of their infirmities, be they never so foul and enormious. So that
this conversion is the bayte of humane hopes, and the reparation of our
desperation. Had we none other to cast our eyes upon in the Church, but the
Virgin Mary, and John Baptist; where were our hopes? The Church therefore does
set two Mary's before us. The one free from sin, the other full of sin. The
one takes away Vainglory from all the righteous, and the other banisheth
Cowardice and despair from all sorts of sinners. At the presence of the Sun,
all the lights of heaven withdraw themselves, and hide their heads in a
cowardly kind of fashion; but when the Moon once begins to shine, they recover
their former boldness and liberty. The Sun presideth over the sons of the
day; the Moon over the children of the night. He that cannot come to be a
Sun, let him live in hope to be a Moon, Osee 2.
or a Star. What says Hosee? I will give her the valley of Achor, for the
door of Hope. The Prophet there touching upon the History of Achan, who in
the spoils of Ierico hid the golden wedge, contrary to Ioshuas proclamation,
wherewithal God was so offended, That the Army marching to a City called Ay,
was overthrown, and the Israelites turning their backs like so many hares, it
seemed the door of Hope was shut against them for entering into the Land of
Promise. But the delinquent being convinced, and stoned to death in the valley
of Achor, and all his family, God forthwith gave them victory over their
enemies. And therefore he says, I will give them the Valley of Achor for a
door of Hope. Saint Jerome renders it in another letter, I will give to my
Church the valley of perverseness, or of the perverse, for to raise up the
hopes of dejected hearts, as a Paul, a Mary Magdalen, etc. All this concerns
that her condition and state of sin wherein she stood; which Saint Luke
painteth forth in those his first words, Behold a woman in the City which was a
sinner.

Of Mary's repentance.
That we may the better treat of the second State, touching her Repentance, it
is to be supposed, that Mary Magdalen had heard some sermons of our Sauio^r
Christ (as heretofore has been proved) and that our Lord did direct his
discourse to a soul that had sustained so many losses, one while proposing the
shortness of this our life; another while, the fearful horrors of death,
together with the bitterness of sin, the terror of judgment, the torments
of hell, etc. Why should thou so highly prize thy beauty, that thou should
adore it? Why, being the Image of God in thy soul and thy body, should thou
be so much affected to the foulness of sin? What was it that made the
Angels so foul? etc. smelling so sweet of Amber, Musk, and Ciuet, how can
thou endure the evil savor of hell? Pro sua in odore, foetor, Thy soft bed is
wearisome unto thee, and being not able to abide in it all night long, thou
shiftest thy bed, and can thou then endure the bed of eternal flames,
moth-eaten mattresses, sheets of snakes, and bolster and pillowes of worms
gnawing continually on thy conscience? Thou changest thy gowns and thy
dressings twice or thrice a day, and can thou suffer the everlasting raiment
of hell fire? The daintiest dishes are set before thee to feed on; and can
thou endure that hunger, where tongues are bitten off and fed on? Fame
pascentur, vt canes manducauerunt linguas suas prae dolor. Thou can not
abide in thy house, no not one hour; and can thou live clapped up in the
dungeon of eternal death and damnation? O how many lie there in endless
pains and torments, never to be released, for far lesser sins than thine!
What can thou hope for, what can thou expect? Is it that the earth should
swallow thee up alive, as it did Dathan and Abiram? Or that fire should come
down from heaven and consume thee, as it did Sodom? or that God should shower
down lightning and thunder upon thee, as he did upon Sisera? what can such a
mad foolish woman think will become of her, when she grows thus bold and
presumptuous? Oh, if thou would but weigh with thy self what thou loosest,
and that which thou might gain! as also the hurt that thou do unto thy
self! Oh, if thou did but see the miseries whereunto thy sins have brought
thee! Thou have been so haled and pulled by that infernal Wolf, that thou
have scarce an ear left to hear thy Shepherds whistle. And yet for all this
I come through the bushes and briars, and those steep and dangerous rocks of
thy sins, to look thee out, and like a sheep that has been long lost and found
again, I desire to bring thee back again to the fold upon my shoulders. Oh,
if thou did but see the inward love of my bowels; or if thou did but know
the great danger thou art in; or if thou could but loath this thy lewd and
evil life! etc.

With this threatening sermon, expressing so many and such terrible hellish
horrors, Mary Magdalen was mightily moved, her heart melted within her, and
Gods Justice did beat so strongly at the door of her breast, that at last she
let him in. For in a word, his words are that fire which warmeth souls, that
hammer which breaks the hardness of our hearts, that shaft which pierces the
bones and marrow, that sword which divides the reins in sunder, and that
induction which gave an accomplishment and final conclusion to the rarest
Repentance that ever was seen.

And when she knew, etc. God gave her knowledge.

First, of her sin.

Secondly, of the danger of her soul.

Thirdly, of the misery of her estate.

The Law entered in by giving her this knowledge, We had not known sin, but
by the Law. And Saint Paul says, Death reigned from Adam to Moses, it ended in
Moses. For the written Law gave us some light; but that of Grace, much more.

Now besides this general help, God did inlighten Mary Magdalen, by
discovering the foulness of those vices which she loved, and the fairness
of that virtue which she hated.

Touching their foulness, notable is that place of David, The foulenes of
sin.
Illuminans mirabiliter a montibus aeternis, turbati sunt omnes insipientes
cord, God does inlighten the sinner, that he may see the face of his sins,
from the which he will fly the more, if he shall but behold those foul
fiends of hell. This is a remedy wherewith God cures the greatest infirmities.
Where by the way it is to be noted, that the rule for the griefs of the body,
is far different from those of the soul: In those, the sick patient has a
breathing time of ease, and by degrees grows better till the danger be past;
but in these he grows worse and worse. The husband is sick; his wife says
unto him, Por mi vida, que no es nada, My life for yours, We may dally with the
sickness of the bodi^, not of the soul.
it is a thing of nothing; his daughter, Man^ana se po^ra V. M. leuantar. To
morrow Sir, by the grace of God you shall be able to rise, and be as well as
ever you were; the neighbors Regalo de^e Ser, This is a Ladies fit, a gentle
visitation. The Physicians they withdraw themselves out of the room, and
consult in secret, that they may not dishearten their patient. And that this
should be so, it imports much for the body: but for the soul, that which is
fittest for it, is to notify unto it, that it is either at Heavens door, or
Hells gate. Saint Augustine confesses, that his conversion was by these steps,
Tu autem retorquebas me ad meipsum, vt viderem quam vlcerosus essem, Thou have
notified unto me (o Lord) my danger, by making me to turn mine eyes upon my
self, that I might see my sores: aduising me of that which Jeremy utters,
Thy wound is incurable.

God likewise did Mary Magdalen a great favor, in discovering unto her the
fair and beautiful face of Virtue, The fairenes of virtue.
kindling in her breast those hot coals of Love. A sinner in his vices and vain
pleasures, is like unto a horse, of whom Job says, That in hearing the noise
of the trumpet sounding to war, he enters into the battle with great
courage, scorning all kind of fear whatsoever. Virtue (me thinks) should not
be of worse condition. And the just knowing his own strength, and how fair and
beautiful he is in Gods sight, it is not much that he should courageously
enter the listes, laying aside all fear.

Secondly, she knew the season of this her happiness, That Jesus sat at Table
in the house of Simon the Leper, and she would not loose so fair an
opportunity; which being once lost is hardly recovered. The vocations and
inspirations of God, Psalm. 78.
are every days example, The waters saw thee and were afraid, the depths
trembled, the clouds powered out water, the heavens gave a sound, thy arrows
went abroad, the voice of thy thunder was round about, the lightnings lightened
the world, etc. Saint Augustine says, That the Prophet here treats of the
effect of Gods word, and compares it to those things which pass and quickly
disappeare, as the noise of a rushing of waters, or of some greatwhirle-wind,
or arrows shot with a strong arm, or of thunder and lightning. These are
things whilst they last, which do much amase, move, and disquiet us, The
earth saw it and was moved at it. But these things do not long continue, but
quickly pass away. And therefore our good consisting in it is good effect, it
were a great lasinesse and foul slothfulness in us not to take occasion by
the foretop. What says Lucan? Semper nocuit differ paratis? Good occasions
must be embraced with speed.
Sophonias? Coruus super liminari, Cras, cras. Saint Jerome has observed that
the Hebrew letter signifies a knife; In token that the deferring of a good
occasion, is the knife that cuts our souls, and the sword that kills them. The
damned do eternally bewail their lost occasion, Desideria occidunt pigrum,
For the sluggard desires, and desires, and holds one hand upon another, but
never sets his hand to any thing; but Mary Magdalen, vt cognouit, As soon as
she knew that Jesus was in Simons house, etc. The Evangelist says not, That
she stayed to take her Mantle with her, nor that she opened any coffer, or
took any Balsamum out of such or such a box, but, vt cognouit, as soon as
she knew where he was, she bestirred her stumpes, and made all the have she
could. And when she knew that he sat at Table in the house of Simon the
Leaper, it was a watchword unto her, that this was now a fit time for her to
come unto him. For he that would not loath the company of a Leper, and pardon
those faults which that Table might afford, would not be queasie stomackt
toward a sinner, Cant. 5.4.
etc. My well-beloved put in his hand by the hole of the door, and mine heart
was affectioned toward him. My well-beloved his putting in of his hand, is my
calling of me. And therefore our Savior Christ when he saw Mary Magdalens
modesty, and that out of bashfulnesse she forbore to press too near upon
him, he made signs unto her, imboldning her thereb^ to come unto him.

She brought a box of ointment, etc. This was a certain sign and assured
token of her general change and alteration. In the old Law, those women that
did wholly give over the world, and did consecrate themselves to the Temple, did
offer up those glasses, wherein they before beheld themselves, being a jewel
of great esteem amongst women, as being a means to preserve their beauties,
and repair those wrongs that any spot of foulness should do the face: And
Moses made a Lauatorie of Copper, for the Priests to wash themselves in,
adorning the same with these kind of glasses. For she that shall forgo the
world, and strip her self of all even to her very glass, wherein she was wont
to look, the holiest Priests may look that woman in the face without sinning.

There are certain sinners which will not let slip any occasion that offers it
self unto them. Petrus Chrysologus likens these unto devils. Amongst the
Gergesenes, our Savior Christ commanding the devils that they should come out
of those men that lived in the fields in the Sepulchers and graves of the dead,
as if they were houses of peace and pleasure, they besought him that he would
suffer them to go into the heard of Swine, to wit, out of one filthy place
into another; and so in like manner from sin to sin. Others there are, that
all their life long, have tide themselves fast to Occasions girdle, and have as
it were sworn and made a vow, never to forsake her: These two sorts of sinners
Jeremy pointed at; If the Blackemore can change his skin, or the Leopard his
spots; Now, which will first change his skin and condition, either the tanned
Negro, Ier. 3.
or the spotted Tygar? The sinner which lies at rack and manger, Relapses into
sin are dangerous.
and is chained fast to the ring of the cratch, or he that accustomes and uses
himself to change and alter every hour; and like the Cameleon, puts on as
many colors as come near him; Which of these two Estates I say is the more
dangerous? I answer, That amongst Reprobat people there is not a pin to choose:
But amongst those sinners that hope for heaven, That of the Cameleon seems to
be the more dangerous; because it may be presumed from his ordinary
reincidencie, that in the confession of his sins, he never truly repents
himself of them; whence great Sacriledges are wont to succeed. But for the
other, it may so fall out, That he may be as constant in good, as he has
been before in ill.

And she stood at his feet behind him. Retro, at his back; Whence we may
consider a wonderful and strange kind of change* God will never e^e our sins,
if we will eye them our selves.
When Mary Magdalen did cast her sins behind her back, God did set them
before his eyes: but when Mary Magdalen did set them before her eyes, and grew
fearful and timorous to look him in the face, and had not the heart to
press into his presence that was to be her souls best Physician, God did cast
her sins behind his back. Saint Augustine touches upon this string, upon
those words of David; Auerte faciem tuam a peccatis meis, Turn aside thy eyes
o Lord from my sins. Oh thou sinner (says the same Father) I shall give thee
a good remedy for this, Tu inde non auertas, Do not thou turn thine eyes from
off thy sins, and God will turn away his: but if thou shall cast them behind
thy back, Gods eye will be still upon them, and punish them severely in thee.

Standing behind. In that looking-glass of Christ, she saw the foulness of
her soul, and she startled at it, Statuam contra te faciem tuam. In a glass
that which is fair, seems more fair; and that which is foul, more foul.
There are some glasses which makes all those appear fair which fall within
the view of them. A glass standing in a window, makes the opposite wall
glitter and shine the more. The Rainbow leaves that fairest, which leans
nearest to it. The Sun setting upon a dark cloud, makes him become as bright
as gold. In like manner our Savior Christ laid open to Mary Magdalen the
foulness of her sins, that he might leave her more fair and more
beautiful than she was before.

Standing behind. Petrus Chrysologus cries out, Mary Magdalen what meanest thou
by this? Come thou as one that is sick to seek a Physician, and when thou
should come to him, do thou fly from him? Whereunto he answers, That as
one unworthy to look him in the face, she made choice to stand behind him; and
if it possibly could have been, she would not that he should have seen her;
though such was her wretched case, That she was driven to desire his favor and
best furtherance. The sick Patient cannot fly from the Physician which is
willing to cure him. In this perplexity and anguish of her soul, she
resolved with her self to shun the sight of our Savior Christ, though not
utterly put her self out from his presence. David did desire of God, that he
would not forsake him in his anger, nor go away from him in his displeasure:
Which seems contrary to that rule of S. Paul, Give place to wrath; and
contrary to Jobs desire, Quis mihi det, vt in Inferno protegas me, and
abscondas me, donec transeat furor tuus, etc. Saint Augustine says, The way to
fly from God, is to fly unto him.
That if it were possible for a sinner to fly from God, it were not the worst
remedy to hide himself whilst his fury be ouerpast and his anger quite
gone. But it being of necessity, that he must fall into Gods hands, and that a
sinner can no where hide himself from his all-seeing eye, the best counsel
were to advise him, That to escape Gods hands, he should put himself into
Gods hands, and prostrate himself at his feet. Jonas flying from God, told the
Mariners, I fear the Lord God of heaven, which made the sea, and the dry
land. If God then be the God both of sea and land, Why did thou seek to fly
from him by going to sea?

By or near unto his feet. When a Huntsman wounds a Dear with a forked
arrow that is sent from a strong bow, though the Dear may bound and stand up
for a while, yet at last he sinkes and falls down at the Keepers foot. Our
Savior Christ had wounded Mary Magdalen with the arrow of his word, he struck
her to the very heart, the barbes thereof sticking in the sides of her soul,
Sagittae potentis acutae cum carbonibus dissolatorijs. This Dear of his was so
sorely wounded, That she was forced to fall down at his feet in the house of
Simon the Leaper. One of the greatest glories that was prophesied of our
Savior Christ, was, That he should make his enemies his footstool. And in
another place, His enemies shall bow themselves down before him, and lick the
earth. And this is one of the greatest happinesses that can befall Gods enemy.

And she fell a weeping. Pliny says, That one of the Offices which Nature
bestowed on the eyes, The office of the Eye.
was, That they might serve as a Limbeck or Stillatorie to the heart; from
whence it might distill it is sadness and sorrow, and easing it self of so
heavy a load, it might thereby enjoy some comfort. Saint Gregory expounding
that place of the Lamentations, Mine eye casts out water, because the
comforter that should refresh my soul, is far from me, says, That as the
Gardener does derive the water from the Estanque or poole where it is kept, and
conueyes it to the borders in the garden, or the plants in the orchard: so a
true Penitent ought to direct the tears of his eyes to every one of those
sins which he has committed. And because Mary Magdalens tears were many,
the Evangelist says, That she did Rigare lachrymis, Shower down tears. Saint
Bernard says, That tears work two effects:

Tea^es work two effe^^s.
The one, To water the heart.

The other, To wash it.

And therefore he that does not gutter down tears, has commonly a hard and a
foul heart. Hard, because tears are they that soften and mollify the heart,
as Water does the earth: And as in a ground that is destitute of water, howbeit
Fruit may grow therein, yet does it never come to it is perfect ripeness, It
withered as soon as it came up, because it wanted moisture. In like sort, the
Soul which is not made tender with tears, although it may bud forth some
flowers and leaves of good intentions, yet it never comes to bear fruit.
Foul, because there is not that Collyrium or medicine which can so cleanse and
clear the eyes of the Soul, as Tears, though the eyes of the body should
wax blind with weeping.

She began to fall a weeping. We know the beginning of these tears, but not
the end; for that fountain of tears which had it is Wellhead and spring at
the feet of our Savior Christ, did never grow empty or dry in the eyes of
Marie Magdalen. Saint Basil asks the question, How it comes to pass that
tears sometimes should come upon us without desiring them, and at other times,
though we desire them never so much, we are not able to shed a tear? And his
reason is, That we have them now and then, God being willing to give us a taste
of them; for the Soul that once tastes of the sweetness of tears, will not
leave them for a world: for, as those vapors that are exhaled from those salt
and bitter waters of the sea, being converted into clouds, are afterward
resolved into a sweet and sauorie water; so those sighs and sobbs arising from
a sad and sorrowful Soul for having offended the Majesty of God, being
converted into Clouds of fear, resolve themselves at last into most sweet and
most sauorie tears. Tears sometimes denied us for our punishment.
Otherwhiles God denies them unto us, though we seek after them never so much,
in punishment of our forepassed negligence: for it is no reason that he should
on the sudden enjoy so great a good, who by long exercise has not deserved
them.

Saint Augustine after that he was converted, says, That his eyes were two
Fountains, and that he was very well pleased they should be so; Fluebant
lachrymae, and been mihi erat cum illis. David after that he had said, That
every night he washed his couch with tears; that is, Per singulas noctes,
Night after night; Tears for sin must never have an end.
(according to Saint Chrysostom) he adds, Amplius laua me, he calls for
more and more tears still: for weeping must have a beginning, but never have
an ending. In Heaven God only dries up our tears once and no more. God shall
wipe away every tear from their eyes. But Marie Magdalens tears, Tears the
delight of a Penitent.
many a time and often did he wipe; for enjoying through her tears so great a
good, she then took most pleasure when she wept most. Jacob had put on a
purpose, never to leave off weeping as long as he lived; Surely I will go
down unto the Grave to my son mourning, I shall never have dry eyes till I
see my son Joseph. If he did desire to shed such eternal tears of sorrow, it
is not much, that Mary Magdalen should desire to shed eternal tears of joy.

She fell a weeping. Chrysologus cites to this purpose that verse of David,
Praise ye the Lord ye Waters that be above the Heavens. Psalm. 14^.
Some understand by these waters that are above the Heavens, the Angels; some,
the Crystalline Heaven; others, What is meant by waters above the heavens.
the waters of the Clouds which are above the air, which the Scripture calls
Heaven: But I (says Chrysologus) considering these tears that were poured
forth upon our Saviors feet, cannot but confess, That these are those Waters
that be above the Heavens. The History of the Kings makes mention of the
gifts which the Queen of Sheba brought to King Solomon, and that none in all
the world had at any time brought such rich Presents, 3. Reg. 10.
nor so precious in their quality, nor so many in their quantity: The like
may be said of Marie Magdalens tears, never was there that woman in the world
that shed so many, and such rich and precious tears, as she, nor that
presentedthe like from her eyes, to the true Solomon. Zachary sets forth David
for an example of the penitent, Et erit, qui offenderit ex eis in illa die,
sicut David. In the new Law it is said, That sinners shall rise up with that
zeal and earnest fervor from their sinues, as did David: But the Prophet had
not then the example of Mary Magdalen; if he had, he would have preferred her
before him in that deluge of tears. God treating of clensing the world of it is
sins, he rayned down more and more water; but that was not a sufficient or
effectual remedy: on Sodom he rayned down more and more fire; but that
likewise would do no good. Sithence that neither water of it self, nor fire
of it self, will do the deed, let a Lee be made of fire and water together, for
there is not that spot or stain, which that will not take out. This Lee, is
the tears which come from the vapors of the brain, and the fire of the
heart. Saint Augustine weighing how mute Mary Magdalen stood, says unto her,
Quid quaeris? Quid dicis Maria? What would thou have? What do thou seek
after? What, nothing but weep? Why do thou not speak? She had found too
much sorrow to find a tongue. Deep sorrow wants a tongue.
They grieve but little that can express their grief: No marvel then if she
were dumbe-strucken, that was so heart-strucken. The sweet songs of the Sirens
have been turned into sorrowful sighs; the pleasing and delight fullest
voice, being altered by the heat of the blood, has admitted of a change, and
been turned into sad howlings and doleful notes. And as at the death of some
great Captain, the drums beat harsh and dead, and render a doleful sound; and
in stead of shrill and cheerful flourishes, the trumpets sound hoarse; so now
in this our Mary Magdalens death (who was the chief Captain and Ringleader
of the vices of that City) a hollow sound of sighs was heard, and a grievous
noise of confused groans and broken throbs, breathing out these woeful words: o
my good Lord, I have been like unto the Serpent, for on the one side I
sustained my self by the earth, without once offering to lift mine eyes from
the earth; on the other side, I did prostrate my self, laying traps and snares
for thy feet, soliciting the men of this City to tread thy Laws under their
feet. Oh Lord, since I have thus played the Serpent, tread thou upon me, crush
me in the head, and bruise out all the venom that is in me. O sweet Jesus, the
Serpent uses to enter in between the rocks, and rub off her old skin, and
leaving it there behind her, to renew her self again: I much desire to cast
off my old skin, and to leave it in the wounds of these thy feet, and on my
strong rock Christ Jesus. I wot well o Lord, that so vile and lewd a woman as
I am, is to be made no more reckoning of, than the dirt that is trod under foot
in the streets, Mulier fornicaria, quasi stercus in via conculcabitur. But
many times the dung of the earth does serve for the roots of trees and other
plants: and because thou art that Divine plant, whose branches reach up as high
as heaven, permit o Lord, that I though but dirt and dung, may lie at thy feet.
The Cananitish woman did show a great deal of humility, when she termed her
self a dog: but Mary Magdalen much more, Why Christ should not suffer his
Apostles to wash his feet, when he had washed theirs.
^earming her self dung.

And she wiped his feet with the hairs of her head. S. Ambrose asks the
question, Why some of his Apostles did not wash our Saviors feet, either
before or after that he had washed all theirs? He renders two reasons:

The one, for that Mary Magdalen had washed them, and he would not that this
luster which those her tears had given them, should be lost by washing them
with ordinary and common water. And the comparison is good, For he that is
washed with the water of Angels, will refuse to be washed with any other water.

The other (says Saint Ambrose) for that we should wash those his divine feet,
with the tears of our eyes. That mystical lauing of the Apostles feet, which
was directed to the cleansing of their souls, could not fit with our Savior
Christ, who was free from the least filth of sin: If any Lauatorie likes him,
it is that of our tears, because in them the heart is softened Besides, Those
eyes and hayres which were so well employed, did express her good desire and
thoughts. And there is not any Sacrifice so acceptable unto God, as to see the
desires and thoughts of our hearts to be offered up at his feet. Chrysologus
says, That after God had seen the resolution and courage of Abraham in the
sacrificing of his son, he cared not a rush for all the rest; and therefore
cried unto him, Lay not thine hand upon the child, neither do any thing unto
him; Genesis 22.
for now I know thou fear God, etc. For I take no pleasure in the death of
the Innocent, nor in the shedding of blood, my delight is, to see thy will
submit it self at my feet, Cont. 9.4.
My sister, my spouse, thou have wounded mine heart: Thou have wounded my heart
with one of thine eyes, and with a hair of thy neck. Following the selfsame
Metaphor, to wit, That the hayres are the thoughts, and the eyes, the desires.
As if her beloved should have said unto her, One desire, one thought my spouse,
one resolute determination, one firm purpose, has quite robbed me of my heart.
And he that shall indeere the delight that he takes in one single hair, will
take much more pleasure in that whole skayne of gold. Bonauenture says, That
she did behold our Savior by stealth, and peeping through the lattice of her
hayres, did ever and anon snatch a sight of him; But after that she had once
inioyed the brightness of his face, and the sweetness of his eyes, whence he shot
forth such sweet shafts of love, and that did light so right upon her, that her
heart was taken therewith; It seeming unto her, That the sky was now clear,
and the weather very fair and prosperous, she did vnruffle the sides of her
hairs, and spread them abroad to the wind, finding so good a gale. And as he
that has escaped many dangerous fits of death at sea, is never satisfied with
kissing the earth when he comes ashoare: so Mary Magdalen thought she could
never have her fill of kissing the blessed earth, of those her Saviors most
holy feet. And as the Traveler that has passed through the deserts of Arabia,
his mouth being as dry as those sandy grounds, or as tinder that is ready to
take fire, being driven to drink of foul and unsavory puddles, no sooner
comes to a clear fountain, but he rushes hastily to the water, and never
makes an end of drinking; so did it fare with Mary Magdalen, etc.

With her hayres. Absalons hair was Absalons halter; The Hair hurtful unto
many.
Sampsons locks served as bands to bind him fast; the Philistims by those
hayres haling him to prison. My hayres have been no less cruel to me, than
theirs were to them. God, he is said to have a head of gold, but hayres as
black as the Raven. But I, being a Raven in my soul for blackness, had my
hayres of gold, etc.

And anointed them with ointment. Saint Gregory says, Mary's entertainment
of our Savior, expressed in two things.
That Mary Magdalen entertained our Savior Christ at this feast, with two
great regalos, or dainties.

The one, That it was she that made him the feast. For albeit the Pharisee had
invited him, he had not set before him one sauourie morsel: For what could
savor well in the house of a proud scorner that is given to mock and scoff?
And howbeit for the body, the cheer was good enough, yet if it had not been
for Mary Magdalen, the soul might have fasted. But she did supply that defect,
by affording matter to our Savior, to tax the Pharisee of discourtesie, etc.
See thou this woman? I entered into thy house, and thou gave me no water to
my feet: but she has washed my feet with tears. Thou gave me no kiss: But
she since the time that I came in, has not ceased to kiss my feet. Mine head
with oil thou did not annoint, but she has anointed my feet with ointment,
etc.

The other, That at the feet of our Savior she made a general sacrifice of
all those things, wherewith she had before offended him; as of her eyes, mouth,
hayres, hands, heart, and soul, not leaving out so much as that her ointment,
which is that which women are loathest to leave, and do latest and hardliest
part withal. Saint Bernard says* That Mary Magdalen did climb up to heaven
by the same rounds, by which she went down to hell. We make a rope of our
vices, and a ladder of our sins, by which we descend to hell. In some, their
eyes are the instruments of their destruction, in others their hayres, in
others their dainties and delicacies in; Mary Magdalen, all whatsoever she
possessed: She was the net that swept all the vices unto her; and all those
good blessings which God had bestowed upon her, she had made them weapons
wherewith to offend him. And as the soldier that yields himself, holding his
weapon by the point, offers it to the Conqueror; so did Mary Magdalen, o Lord
(said she) with these weapons have I offended thee, but now I here lay them
down at thy feet.

If this man were a Prophet, he would surely have known who, etc. God does so
kindly and so lovingly entertain all those that are penitent sinners, that it
would make a man think that he had not known them. He that has killed thy
brother, if thou know him not, thou welcommest him to thy house, and set
him at thy table: behold here the immensiue Love of God, for that which thou
do out of mere ignorance, God does here do it out of clear knowledge. If
thou shall bewail thy sins and offenses, thou shall find God after that
manner, as if either he had not known thy faults at all, or if he did know
them, that he had quite forgot them. In a word, here the board of a sinner is
made the chair of holiness, and of virtue.

If this man were a Prophet. Your Hypocrites which desire no more but the bare
name of Prophets, The nature of a Prophet should be rather sweet than sharp^*
and to be only esteemed for such, are commonly severe and sharp: but those
which profess to be so indeed, will rather offend through mildness and
softness, than roughness and austeritie. Saint Chrysostom says, Melius est
Deo, de misericordia rationem reddere, quam de austeritate. It better agrees
with God to render an account of his mercy, than of his severity. If God be
naturally kind, Why should a Prophet be cruel? One of the reasons, Why the day
of judgment ought to be desired, is, That we may see the faces of those who
being very well satisfied of their own sanctity, are out of a loathing of
other folks sins, ready forsooth to turn up the stomach. Your Vultures are
all femalls, (according to the opinion of your Naturalists) and conceiving by
the Air, they are the stamp and Emblem of your Murmurers, which tear and
rend the flesh alive, as your Vultures do dead carcasses: and if thou would
know whereupon they ground this, thou shall find it is in the air.

True zeal never disheartneth, but encourages the weak.
If he but knew who, and what manner of woman this were which touches him. The
judgments that are most prejudicial to a Commonwealth, and most contrary to
Gods nature and condition, are the discrediting and disgracing of present
virtues, with the reproachful remembrance of forepassed vices: some do this
out of zeal forsooth; but true zeal never disheartneth or discourageth those
that are weak. How can that be zeal which persuades it self, Que el sap^,
siempre es sapo, That once a toad and ever a toad. This kind of zeal I should
hardly give credit unto, though it should descend down from heaven; especially
when I consider with my self, God in a moment can make of a sinner a Saint.
Que del sapo, puede hazer dios Perdiz, That God of a toad can make a
Partridge. What says Jeremy? Orietur sicut mane Iustitia, Consider the thick
duskinesse of darkness, and then again the glorious brightness of the light,
being on the one side such near neighbors, and trenching one upon the other;
on the other so contrary, and so far asunder, that there is nothing more
differing, than light from darkness, nothing in that extreme distance. A bird
passes in an instant over fields, mountains, valleys, rivers, and seas, and
flies from extreme to extreme, Quis mihi dabit pennas sicut columbae, etc.
Who will give me the wings of a Dove? What wonder is it then that God should
pass from the foulness of sin, to the fairness of grace. The hardest
thing in the world, is to vnteach a man that which he has learned: and
therefore the Philosopher did demand a double Salarie for teaching those
scholars that had been read too before by some other Philosopher. But this
shows the force and power of Gods Spirit, for that which humane industry
cannot end in many days, grace will end in an instant. Your aqua fortis will
eat out any written character, and cleanse those blots and blurs of ink, which
the dashing of the pen or any the like accident has occasioned, but you shall
never be able to write any letter well again in the said paper. But your
eye-water, that of tears, is far more forcible and strong than your aqua
fortis, for it does not only cleanse the soul of it is former blots and blurs,
but there may be written therein anew very fair letters, The efficacy of
penitential tears.
and handsome Characters. Aristotle says, That your Plants are watered with
the water of the earth, and with the water of heaven; but affirms with all,
That that of heaven works the more wonderful effects: 2. Reg. 19.
So likewise are there tears of the earth, and tears of heaven; but these
work heavenly effects. The History of Elias in that contention and opposition
which he had with the false Prophets, ^alls out very pat for this purpose: He
powered water on the Sacrifice, and filled the trenches full therewith, fire
descended down from heaven, and lickt up the water, till there was not one
drop left. The comparison is not much amiss of him, Who after that he had fed
upon many dishes, falls roundly to that which was served in last, because he
finds it more sauourie and pleasing to his palate, than any of the former. As
this fire that came down from heaven, consumed the beasts that were
sacrificed; with them the wood, the stones, and at last the very water: so was
it with this Sacrifice which Mary Magdalen offered to our Savior Christ; To
Christ they are more sauourie than wine.
He fed upon all those dainties she had set before him, her box of Alablaster
filled with costly ointment, her disheuelled hayres, her pretty mouth, her
fair hands, her sweet kisses, her modest looks, her blushings and her
bashfulnesse; but most of all on her tears, Lambebat, he did lick them up,
they were so sweet and sauourie to his taste, and left so pleasant a relish
behind them.

Jesus answered and said unto him, See thou this woman? Petrus Chrisologus
says, The reason of the demand.
That our Savior in this his answer shows unto us, that he was first of all
desirous to cure him who had least feeling of his grief, not thinking that he
was sick, because he felt no pain. And that these open and public tears of
Marie Magdalen, should discover the secret and hidden sores of the Pharisee,
making the same serve as a medicine for his malady, and a means to open his
eyes, who as yet had them blinded with self-love. Vides hanc mulierem? Seeest
thou this Woman? No, Simon thou do not see her; For thou do imagine her
to be a sinner, whereas indeed she is a Saint, Many sins are forgiven her.
Christ ever ready to forgive sinners.
That the sins of Mary Magdalen were many, the reasons before alleged, the
seven devils driven out of her, (delivered by Saint Mark and Saint Luke) and
the name of Sinneresse in so populous a City, are sufficient testimonies of
this truth. But a stronger proof thereof are those words uttered by our Savior
Christ, Many sins are forgiven her. Wherein we are to consider his franknesse
and freeness in forgiving: Showing his power and omnipotency in nothing more,
than in pitying our infirmities, and pardoning our offenses. For, that so
great a forgiuer of sins should say, Many sins are forgiven thee, does
argue, that her sins were many. And would to God, That those many deuotos* or
servants, that are devoted to Mary Magdalen, be not more for those many sins
which she had before she was converted, than those many deseruings which she
afterward had. For we have reason to be jealous of our selves, that we are
more affected to sins than tears, to carelessness than repentance. For we
daily see in our lives and conuersations many sins like unto hers, but little
or no repentance like hers. Many comfort themselves with the tears of this
holy woman, this blessed Saint of God; it seeming unto them, that they have a
kind of confidence in their breasts, that they likewise shall bewail their sins
as she did. It is no wonder to see them sin at every step, but it were a
wonder to find them every foot weeping. They will follow her in her faults, but
not in her amendment; in her sins, but not in her tears. Nazianzen says of
himself, Diutius viuendo, nihil aliud assequor, quam vt maiorem vitiorum
aceruum colligam, By living long, I get no other good, than make the heap of
my sins the bigger. The child of God weeps, and it grieves him to the heart
that he cannot amend as he would; and that the longer his life lasts, the
more sin he treasureth up: but the sinner does treasure up vengeance for the
day of vengeance, but never sheds a tear to wash away his sins, and to quench
those flames of hell, which without them, his soul may eternally suffer. O
Lord grant us the grace, that as we have sinned with Mary Magdalen, so with
her we may return again unto thee; and that having the like repentance, we
may find the like forgiveness of our sins. Grant this (sweet Jesus) for thy
mercies sake, etc.

THE XXXVII. SERMON, UPON THE FR^DAY AFTER PASSION SUNDAY.
IOH. II. Colligerunt Pontifices, and Pharisaei Concilium.

Then gathered the high Priests and Pharisees a Council.


THe high Priests and the Pharisees called a Council, to sit upon the
weightiest cause that was ever consulted of upon earth: wherein four things
did concur.

First of all, A Council for to deliberate what course were best to be taken;
for amongst many, the truth would be the better debated; and in grave
businesses, it is fit that persons should be called thereunto, that are men of
Authority and Learning.

Secondly, therefore the high Priests are called to this Council.

Thirdly, the Pharisees, who sat as Judges upon all matters touching doubts of
Faith, and causes of Religion.

Fourthly and lastly, The cause of this Council or Consultation; which was,
our Saviors raising up of Lazarus. For they saw that this Miracle had
converted many, Collegerunt ergo Concilium, They called therefore a Council.

Hitherto all goes well, a fair course was taken; but in the end they marred
all by plotting mischief against our Savior Christ. It had been better for
them to have received him, to have approved those prophesies which were
foretold of him, and to have enlightened the people by instructing them in this
his doctrine: but they met together for no other end, but to eclipse and darken
the sun, then when the beams thereof did most shine.

Then gathered the high Priests and the Pharisees a Council. After that the
devil had tempted our Savior, finding him somewhat sharp and sower toward
him, Saint Luke says, Reliquit eum diabolus ad tempus, The devil gave him
over for that bout, and would have no more to do with him for the present: but
left him then of purpose, waiting for a better season and opportunity, Vsque
ad tempus, For a time. Euthymius asks, for how long? And his answer is, Till
that the Priests and the Pharisees had called a Council. This was the devils
plot, though they did not then think so when they met in Council. And yet
they were no sooner sat, but that Sacrilegious decree went forth from amongst
them, To put him to death.

Some man perhaps will ask me, How the devil could hope to get the greater
victory of our Savior Christ by this means, working the same more by the
high Priests and the Pharisees, than by himself?

First of all I answer thereunto, One that serves on horseback is imagined to
be of greater force and power than he that serves on foot. And as a certain
gloss has it, which Thomas alleges, The wicked are the devils horses; and
being horsed upon the high Priests and the Pharisees, it is not much, that he
should presume to take away our Saviors life. If the high Priests and the
Pharisees had been horsed upon the devils back, the danger had not been so
great: But when the devil shall ride upon high Priests and Judges, etc. it is
a fearful thing.

Secondly, Saint Ambrose says, That albeit the devil be the Author of all
mischief, yet has he sent forth many learned and nimble witted scholars
which have wonderfully advanced his cause; suting with that of the Apostle, who
calls the wicked, Inuentores malorum, Inuenters of evil. The devil was the
first Inuenter thereof, but afterward there were some men that discovered much
more malice. Magellanes was the first that passed the Streights, but afterward
others went so far beyond him, that he is cast behind.

Thirdly, the devil by himself alone, can commonly do little, unless we
serve and supply him with materials. Satan can do little without us.
Comestor reports it to be a tradition amongst the Rabbines, that in the making
of the golden Calfe, the devil performed two Offices; the one of a Smith, the
other of a Mettall-founder: but, that the Hebrews furnished him with
Materials, they found the stuff, for the women (who commonly are most
superstitious, and by consequence fittest to be the devils instruments)
furnished him with their eare-rings, bracelets, and jewels of gold. Here now in
like manner the devil did employ his best industry and diligence; he was the
cause ofthis Consultation, and the plotter of this Council: but the high
Priests and the Pharisees were they that ministered the materials, helping him
with their voices.

They called a Council. Peace is the fruit of Grace. The fruits of the Spirit,
are Love, Gal. 5.
Joy, and Peace. And for that sinners live aloof off from Love and Joy, they
must likewise of force live far from Peace. How can a troubled sea enjoy a
Calm? But the wicked are a troubled Sea. In a word, There is no peace to the
ungodly. Esaias 67.
But how comes it now to pass, That they are at that peace and unity, that
they join together and gather a Council against our Savior Christ, with so
unanimous a consent, that there is not a voice wanting, but run all jointly for
his death?

First of all I answer thereunto, That the wicked usually enjoy a kind of
league and alliance, and confederat with a joint consent for their own private
profit, and another hurt. But they never enjoy any peace, So says Saint
Augustine, Eos copulat non amor, sed malitia, It is not love, but malice that
thus linkes them together. They confederat themselves, not that they love, but
that they hate that which they ought to love; wanting not so much
understanding, as will. Philon compares them to Reapers, who fall a singing but
have no other agreement in their music, but that they disagree alike. He
compares them likewise to the colds and heats of a quartane Ague, which being a
perpetual distemper, yet both iumpe and meet at such an instant, and such an
hour. Viam pacis non cognouerunt (says David,) They have not known the way
of Peace; But to shed innocent blood, their feet are very swift. Job thus
painteth forth the mystical body of the devil, The Majesty of his Scales,
Job 41.
is like strong shields, and are sure sealed; one is so set to another that no
wind can come between them: one is so joined to another that they stick
together and cannot be sundred. The wicked (says Lyra) are the flesh of this
body, and are like shields, and as arms made in the manner of scales, Se
praementibus, The wicked have a league, no love.
One pressing upon another: A shield upon a shield, and a scale upon a scale,
so close knit and joined together, that the air cannot get in between them,
Considering on the one side their ill neighborhood, and on the other, their
strict league and amity. David asks the question, Why do the Heathen rage,
the Kings of the earth band themselves, and the Princes assemble together
against the Lord, and against his Christ? Is there any man that knows the
cause of this discording concord, of this accursed combination? That Esau
should rise up against Jacob, Ismael against Isaac, Cain against Abel, the
brethren against Joseph, Iezabel against Naboth, the two old Leachers of
Babylon against Susanna; it is not much to suffer one enemy that persecutes
me, having many friends to protect me. But that the Gentile, the Jew, the
King, the Vassal, the Clergy, and the Laytie, should all cry out against our
Savior Christ, this requires a Quare? Why they should do it? The reason is,
because every one of the Saints in particular, and all in general, were
persecuted for his sake, and Christ for his own, Vnum contra vnum, The world
consists of nothing but opposition.
is the worlds Motto. God (says Solomon) created all things in an opposition,
Omnia secundum litem fiunt (says Heraclytus.) And that great Orator and Poet
Laureat, Petrarke, tells us, Sine lite, atque offensione, nil genuit natura
parens, That Nature, who is the mother of all things, and common parent of this
great universe, brought forth nothing into the world without strife and
contention. This is it that makes the holy man to set himself against the
profane; and the profane against the holy. And so in the rest. And because
every one of Gods Saints, though they were seasoned with all the other virtues,
yet were they more particularly pointed at for some one especial virtue. And
to this purpose is that usual song in the Church; Non est inuentus similis
illi, There is none like unto him. But our Savior Christ was that universal
glass, where in all the virtues were to be seen in their most perfect and
supremest degree. For this cause, the envy of Cain wageth war against those
favors God did to Abel; the little honesty of Joseph's brethren, and his
masters wife, against his great both honesty and goodness; the proud and
harsh nature of Esau against the meek and sweet disposition of Jacob: But
against our Savior Christ, all the wicked in general have combined
themselves; Come let us oppose our selves against the just, because he crosses
our actions, and likes not of that we do.

They called a Council. There is not any one thing more precious, or more
necessary than a Council. There is not that man (says Saint Chrysostom) be he
the wisest man in the world, but in fine is a man, and has need of Counsel:
only it may be said of God, Who was ever his Counselor, or was able to advise
him? What says Saint Augustine? Ego senex and Episcopus, paratus sum a puero
doceri, I, though an old man, and a Bishop, do not scorn to learn of a
child. Exodus 18.
Moses did not scorn the Counsel of his father in Law Iethro, though a Priest
of Midian; not so much regarding his calling, as his Counsel; his person, as
the project. The Counsel which Joseph gave to Pharaoh, imported him more than
if he had inricht him with much treasure: For treasure decreaseth through
wast; but Counsel increases through use. Treasure divided amongst many, comes
in the end to a little; and he oftentimes wants, that supplies others wants:
But Counsel, the more it is imparted, the more it profits, Good counsel a
precious Gen^me. Gal. 2.
returning back again to the fountain from whence it came. The Apostle Saint
Paul, after that he had been rapt up to the third heaven, and having been
now some fourteen years an Apostle, he says, That he went up to Jerusalem,
and communicated with them of the Gospel which he had preached among the
Gentiles: and presently renders a reason thereof in the words following, Least
by any means I should run, or had run in vain. No marvel then, if he
that is not such an Eagle as he was, nor has been rapt up into heaven with
him, should be so foolishly wilful, as not to advise with his Counsel, but
suffer himself to be carried away with his own passion, and proper ^pinion.

Counsel therefore ought to be pure and sincere, free from malice, passion,
and ignorance. Saint Ambrose tells us by way of demand; Ill counsel produces
ill effects.
Who amidst dirt and mudde, will seek for a clear fountain? Who will take
water out of a foul poole? How then can he give me Counsel that knows not
how to follow it himself? Never yet was a blind man fit to be a blind man's
guide, He that is a fool walks in darkness. Eccl. 2.
Throughout the Scripture we do not find the Counsel of the wicked to thrive
with them. The History of the Macchabees reports unto us certain wicked
persons that resolved to make a league or covenant with the Nations; from
whence sprung the ruin of all Religion. The rash counsel of a company of
young heads, was the loss of ten parts of Rehoboams kingdom. For such
counsels have two great enemies (Anger, and Have.) That Counsel of Jeroboam
for the erecting of two calves, for to detain those that went to offer
sacrifice at Jerusalem, blotted his house from off the face of the earth. That
of Pharaoh against the children of Israel, Exodus 1.8.
Behold the people of the children of Israel are greater and mightier than we,
come let us work wisely with them, etc. was the original of their utter
perdition. But no Council was comparable in mischief to this Council.

They called a Council against Jesus. These words, Against Jesus, are not of
the Evangelist, though they be to be found in many Missals: and they carry
with them a great Emphasis, Against Jesus, that is, Against their Savior. That
of Saint Ambrose, treating of Christ's agony in the garden, of his mystical
sweat, and his prayer to his Father, is worthy your consideration, Father if it
be thy will, let this cup pass from me; Where he says, That the^e were there
and then represented unto him the pains and torments which this people were to
suffer for his death, and being desirous that they should not be undone by
their own wilfulness, he said, Let it pass. So that it was not the fear of
death, that thus wrought with him, but the desire that he had to divert his
people from so great an ill. Against Jesus: What endeering can the conceit of
man imagine to be greater, than that God should sweat blood for their good,
that went about to do him all the mischief they could. 2* Mac. 4.
The Book of Machabees indeering the malice of one Simon of the Tribe of
Benjamin, reports, that he spoke much evil of an holy man called Onias; as
that he was a Traitor to the Temple and to the City, and that he held
intelligence with Heliodorus, aduising him to take thence the Orphans and the
Widows goods, that were there deposited. Howbeit Onias was a Father to his
Country, a Protector of the people, a Mediator betwixt God and them, and a
well wisher to the general good: and yet this wretched Villain, that was
himself a Traitor to his Country, called him a betrayer of the Commonwealth.
This was great malice, but nothing to this Counsel here assembled against
Jesus. And as Rupertus has observed it, whilst they were treating of this
business against Jesus, they kept out all that which might any way make for
Jesus: Neither Law nor Prophet entered into this Council, the Counselors were
Anger, Hatred, Covetousness, and their own private interest. Mark with whom,
and without whom they enter into this Council.

Against Jesus. No man that desires a good end in his businesses, would
willingly give them a bad beginning. Do thou take the burden of governing a
Kingdom upon thy shoulders? Psalm 2.
Take this Lesson then along with thee, Be wise now therefore ye Kings, be
learned ye Judges of the earth, etc. Moses nominating Ioshuah to be his
successor, gave him in charge, That he should evermore have the Law before his
eyes; Sic intelliges, and diriges viam Domini, By setting the Law before thee.
This is that Apprehendite dis^iplinam, which the Seventy translate, Osculamini
Filium, Kiss the Son. He that goes on some great employment abroad in his
Kings service, gives his first entrance thereinto by kissing his hand,
receiving his instructions, and offering him his service, though it be with the
hazard of his estate and life. O ye Kings look unto it, ye have taken a
great charge upon you, a dangerous enterprise; Osculamini Filium, Kiss the
Son, who is the Wisdom of God, and beg of him as Solomon did in his
government, that he will give ye the light of Understanding, to know how to
rule aright, and shoulders of br^sse to bear up so great a weight. Vae filij
desertores, vt f^ceriti^ concilium, and non ex me, and ordiremini telam, and
non per spiritum meum. Another letter has it, Vae filij Apostatae: Whether he
calls them Apostata's either for the Idolatries of Egypt in R^meses, which was
that Country which Pharaoh allotted unto them, near unto the City Eliopolis,
so much celebrated for that famous Temple of the Sun, (this plague of adoring
the Sun, cleaving still close unto them) for albeit God had published a most
rigorous precept in Exodus against it, Exodus 17.
yet this Idolatry continued till Josias his time, who burnt the Chariots and
Horses of the Sun: Or whether it were for their Apostacy, in delivering
t^emselues over to strange Kings, op^nly professing to the world, We have no
other King but Caesar. Saint Ambrose and Irenaeus treating upon that place of
Esaias concerning this Counsel, understand it thus, That they did con^riue a
Counsel, but God was not in the plot; they spunne a thread, but the Spirit had
no finger in it: and being that it was not called in Gods name, nor by the
Spirit of God, it must of force be done in the Devils name, and by his
suggestion; and all this Aduersus Iesum, Against the best friend they had.

What shall we do? for this man does many miracles. As the just hunger and
thirst after right, so do the wicked after blood.
The very first word they spoke, discovered their evil intention toward him:
This their What shall we do, is not a consulting with God, or having recourse to
the Scripture, where God has revealed unto us, what course we are to take in
such cases; but a condemning of their dullness and slownesse, that they had not
made an end of him no sooner. There are many sinners, who no longer than they
are plotting villainy, or committing one sin or other, think themselves idle
fellows, and loytering companions: as the Just, who are always hungring and
thirsting after righteousness, so the Wicked thirst after blood. Sap. 3.
In the time of their vision they shall shine and run through as the sparkles
amongst the stubble, with that have and speed as the sparks leap from one
side to another, in a field where the stubble is very dry; so do the Just
hasten and run on from virtue to virtue. In like sort there are sinners that
are swift in sinning, and think themselves idle when they are not ill
occupied. Four or five devout persons come from a Sermon, and say one to
another as they walk homeward, Trust me (my Masters) it is high time that we
should begin to amend our lives, and that so many truths that the Preacher has
delivered unto us, should bring forth some good fruit in us. Another as hungry
after sin, as these after goodness, comes to his fellow, pulls him by the
cloak, draws him out of the Church, and says unto him, What a Devil make
thou at a sermon? come let us go to such an Ordinary, there we shall be sure
to have the door open, and some good fellows or other to game withal and
spend the time. Your Curtezans they steal out by couples, saying to each
other, What should we do here? we mispend our time, for my part I shall lose by
the bargain; no longer sin, no longer gain, let us hie us home therefore,
one customer or other will come unto us. Good is that comparison of the
Physician and the Apothecarie, when a Commonwealth stands sound and in health,
and the one says to the other, Que se haze compadre? How goes the world
Gossip? No nada por nuestros peccados, Not very well I assure you, thanks to
our sins, which have drawn this punishment upon us: And the reason of it grows
from this, that no longer than they are ministering of purges and syrrops, they
think their time lost. So is it with a sinner that hungers after sin; there
are some men which every night get them to bed without any more adoo, laden
with mortal sins by the dozens, and yet think themselves to be Saints: But
being thus heavily laden, dare thou presume to lay thee down to sleep? take
heed lest they press thee too hard, and that thou accompaniest thy sleep with
death. O good ghostly father (say these men) I know not what this heaviness of
sins mean, that you talk of, I find no such matter, I thank God I sleep
soundly, I am not troubled with dreams, but take my rest as quietly as any man
in the world. Say you so my masters, you shall give me leave not to believe you;
for albeit by long custom of sinning, you do not feel the weight of this
tower, nor the height of this mountain that you bear upon your backs,
notwithstanding all this, you shall dream (as the Prophet says) fearful
dreams: and howbeit we are not to give credit to every idle dream, yet may
ye take these for revelations, and aduertisements and intimations from Heaven.
Jeremy.
And if thou will see and behold whether the sins of thy life weigh heavy or
no, take out thy heart and lay it on thy shoulders, and then thou shall see
whether the weight of thy sins be heavy or no. He alludeth to an ordinary
rule in phylosophie, That nothing seems heavy in it is own Element. When a
Worm dives into the bottom of the sea, and lies there, he feels not the
weight of innumerable Quintalls of Waters which he has upon his back; but if
upon dry land he has but a Cuba de agua, as much water as a Hoggs bladder
will hold, it troubles and torments him much. And therefore, o thou sinner, if
thy sins weigh not heavy, it is because thou have made thy heart their
natural center: so draw it out of the element of Sin, into that of Grace,
and thou shall then perceive, that thy shoulders will not be able to bear
them, and that the burden of them will be too intolerable for thee: Pondus
eius far non potui (said Job) My sins were more than I was able to bear.

What shall we do, etc. Thou workest miracles, assure thy self there will be
many that will say with these Highpriests and Pharisees, What shall we do?
Thou art a noted man for thy virtue and holiness of life, thou excellest the
rest in the City wherein thou live, provide thy self therefore against the
combats of Envy, for thou will be encountered therewith. Scarce has the
soldier entered into the field, glittering in his golden Armor and his plume
of feathers dancing on his crest, when lo, a thousand bullets fall as thick as
hail about his ears. When David had killed Goliath, and the Damosells of
Jerusalem sang, Saul has slain his thousand, and David his ten thousand,
Envy presently followed him at the heels. The low shrub or little tender
sapling that has his dwelling in the vale, shrowding himself in some humble
bottom, is not beaten by the winds; but if it grow up like the Palm or the
Cedar, or be seated on the top of some high hill, it is shaken with every
blast. Like the Apple tree among the trees of the Forest, Ca^t. 2.
so is my well-beloued among the sons of men. An Apple tree in the midst of a
Mountain, amongst Oaks, Ashes, Cork trees, Brambles, and Briars, shall be
much envied, and ill entreated.

What shall we do? for this man, etc. Before, they said he was indaemoniated,
a Sorcerer, a bibber of wine, and a friend of sinners; but now, This man does
many miracles: before, they were so harsh and so sour in their reproves and
reprehensions, that they brake forth into wrongs and reproaches; but now in a
more civil kind of deportment, they say, This man does many miracles. It is a
great comfort to those Preachers, who out of their zeal to God, plainly and
nakedly reprehend the sins and vices of the times; for albeit some of their
Auditors do for the present speak evil of them, when they shall afterward
call themselves to account, they will then speak well of them. Some there are
that paint Vice clothed; others, stark naked; but amongst Painters the latter
is held the more excellent piece. Sharp reproves work sweet effects.
Alexander did laugh at one of Apelles his Apprentises, for painting Hellen
rich in her clothes, but foul in her face. Your fiery cauteries make the
pained Patient to blaspheme God, and rail against his surgeon, swearing by no
small oaths, That a Turk is not half so cruel and so hard hearted as he is;
but when he sees the Cancer stayed by this cauterising, and that he now waxes
well and sound, he can then say, Gran oficial es fulano, Such a one is an
excellent Surgeon. It is a great comfort for us that are Preachers, when our
Hearers souls shall so smart with our sharp reprehensions, that they shall
exclaim and cry out against us, That we deal too roughly with them, and
that we lack a Ladies hand in the searching and dressing of their wounds and
sores. But when these men shall be freed of this their passion, and shall find
what good effect our Cauteries have wrought upon their cancer'd consciences,
though now they curse and revile us, they will then thank us and pray to God
to bless us.

For this Man does many miracles. All the words that were uttered in this
Council were mere fopperies and fooleries; Wickedness is mere folishnesse.
and it seems very strange and much to be wondered at, that the sin of malice
being pecado tan pensado, so premeditated a sin, that they could not pick any
other hole in our Sauiors coat, or pitch on some other more foul and heinous
offense, whose circumstances might have carried more color for Christ's death.
They did foulely ouershoote themselves herein says Osee, It would make a man
stand amazed as often as he but thinks with himself, That proceeding in that
malicious manner, as they did against him, they should so much betray their
ignorance: But questionless, it arises from that of the Philosopher, Omnis
peccans est ignorans. Even in the sins of malice, ignorance has a great
stroke: for a sinner knows not well how to leave, or choose. Chrysologus says,
That the devil in tempting our Savior, went foolishly to work; and that he
had forgot the office of a Tempter. Many Saints style malice blind: For there
is not any sin that treads surely, but still goes hood-winkt. The old Judges
in Susanna's business behaved themselves so simply, That a little child took
them in a lie, and bewrayed their folly. Joseph's brethren brought the
childlesse coat home to their father without any hole or rent, dipped in blood,
and told him, A wicked beast has devoured him. Genesis 37.
This beast had torn the flesh, leaving the Coat whole. He that buried ^is
Talent, when he was called to account, answered; I knew that thou wast a hand
man, looking to reap where thou had not sown. If I am such a one as reap
w^ere I do not ^owe, Why should I not reap where I do sow? The Jews being
desirous to conceal our Saviors resurrection, did multiply an innumerarable
company of fooleries; whereof Saint Augustine conuinceth them. In a word, in
the Sacred Scripture, the sinner in every place bears the name of a fool:
but not any one folly can compare it self with this; Let us kill this man,
for he does many Miracles. Jeremy says, Dabis eis sontum ^ordis laborem
^^um. Saint Gregory the Pope says, That by this labor is understood all that
good which God did for that people, by taking flesh upon him, by being borne,
by living, and by dying. All this was a labor unto him, and this labor served
the people in stead of a Shield against God himself: For, they did not only
make of his Miracles and benefits, Shields for to defend themselves from God,
but swords, nails, whips, and thorns, for to quit God of his life. Saint Paul
did bewail those Heretics, which did deny the Cross of our Savior Christ,
(being the efficacy of our remedy and redemption) and calls them enemies of
the Cross. No better does it fare with those, being they make poison of
Treacle, and matter of infirmity the means of their salvation. Saint
Chrysostom says, Philip. 3.
That they are worse than Devils: for one Devil does not persecute another,
but these did persecute their best friend and benefactor. The Devils held their
peace and did obey, and at the most, They went out crying and saying, Thou art
the Son of God. God commanded in Exodus, That they should not boil the Kid
in the milk of the Dam; and Philon expounding that place, says, That he held
it a thing unmeet and unjust, that that should be the instrument of it is death
which had been the beginning of it is life. And it suits well with that of
Gregory Nissen, who says, That the Miracles which God does, are man's milk,
dealing with him as with a little child.

This man does many Miracles, etc. If he had been a robber on the High way,
but being he came to make plain the way; If he had robbed thee of thy wealth,
took away thy life, or eclypsed thine honor; but being he came to give
health to thy body, to enrich thy soul, and to defend and maintain thine
honor (as was to be seen in the case of the Adulteress) What can be said in
your excuse? S. Augustine and S. Chrysostom pondering the ill carriage of this
bu^^nes* Why (say they) did Esaias prophecy of the Miracles of your Messiah, but
to the end that ye should receive him and adore him? (I pray take the pain to
read over that whole chapter for your better satisfaction, which will be worth
your labor: but in stead of receiving and adoring him, we have said with those
Farmers in the Gospel, Let us kill the Heir, And the inheritance shall be
ours.

If we let him thus alone, all men will believe in him. This is another most
foul folly of theirs, contrary to all Scripture. If we let him alone (say
they) all will believe in him. Whereas by taking his life from him, his death
(wherein they were deceived in their judgments) was to be Semen fidei, the
seed of faith; and augm^^tum Ecclesia, Esaias 53.
The augmentation and increase of the Church. Si posuerit animam suam pro
peccato, videbit semen longaeuum, etc. (It is Esayes prophecy of him,) When he
shall make his soul an offering for sin, he shall see his seed, and shall
prolong his days, and the will of the Lord shall prosper in his hand. He shall
see of the travel of his soul, and shall be satisfied. By his knowledge shall
my righteous servant justify many, etc. Let them then take away his life, and
there is no Arithmeticke that can sum up our happiness, and their misery.

The Romans will come, and take away both our place and nation. Here is another
blind consequence; if we let him live, the Romans will come and take away our
place and nation. Whereas, they might rather have inferred this conclusion; The
Romans will come, and they likewise will believe in him. For it is not much,
That he that could convert a Jew, should convert a Roman; considering that the
Romans amongstall their gods had not one that could work a Miracle to win
them. But suppose that the Romans should not have believed, and should have
treated to destroy them; he that raised up the dead, was not he of power to
resist the power of the Romans? One Judith triumphed over Nebuchadnezzar. One
Elisha blinded those of Syria, and led them into Samaria. One Elias consumed
with fire, Ahabs Quinquagenarian Captains, and their soldiers. And none of
all these had the like power to that of our Savior Christ.

Besides these vain discourses, they had another no less blind and impious;
If we kill him, the Romans will not come. It being rather an assured truth,
that they would come only upon this, Dan. 9.
as it was foretold by Daniel, The Messiah shall be slain, and the people of
the Prince that shall come, shall destroy the City and the Sanctuary. Had they
not put our Savior Christ to death, Jerusalem had stood and continued, but
having put him to death, there shall not be one stone left upon another. Simeon
and Leui, Genesis 49.
brethren in evil; Into their secrets let not my soul come, for in their
wrath they slew a man, and in their self-will they dug down a wall. It was
Jacobs prophecy against his two sons, Simeon and Leui, of whom these
Pharisees did descend, as it is noted by Nicholas de Lyra. Let not my soul
enter into their Council, for in their wrath they killed a man, and dug
down a wall. All which was but a signification of their killing of our Savior
Christ, and throwing the walls of Jerusalem down to the ground. Murus ante
murale, Christ was the bulwark to this wall: So Esaias styles him. This Council
made their Country desolate, For Titus and Vespasian had not otherwise been of
power to destroy it: but the Priests and the Pharisees fearful of their evil,
destroyed the fountain of all goodness.

The Romans will come. Great is the torment which a soul suffers, being
placed betwixt two extremes, Susanna, betwixt the fear of God, and the fear
of the Judges of Babylon; a damsel betwixt poverty, and the pursuit of a rich
wanton: If I consent, I loose God; if not, I perish for want of food. A
Physician betwixt a great weakness of body, and a double Pluri^ie; if I let
this sick man blood, he dies through weakness; if not let him blood, of his
grief. The rich man that enjoys another man's goods, if I restore (says he)
I must stand without doors and beg; If not restore, hells door stands ready
open form. Coelum vndique, and vndique pontus: on the one side is Scylla; on
the other Charibdis; So in this case (say the Pharisees) If we let this man
alone, it is ill with us; if we take away his life, worse.

But he that shall find himself perplexed, suffering out of his fearfulness
betwixt two evils, let him not once think of thwarting God; for then, both
those evils will fall upon him; as it is well observed by Saint Augustine,
Saint Gregory, and Saint Basil. So stood the case now with these men, either
they did believe that Christ was the Messiah, or they did not believe it; if
believe it, it was a notorious wickedness in them, to prefer a Temporal
kingdom before the open profession of their faith. And if they did not believe
it, they had no cause given them to fear any temporal harm from the Romans,
but the Spiritual damage of Religion. The Prince that says, Cut off this
Heresy for the conservation of my Crown, does not make any great reckoning of
his faith. What says Saint Augustine? Quia temporale regnum spirituali
praetulerunt, vtrumque amiserunt, Because they preferred a temporal kingdom
before a spiritual, they lost both. Experience teaches us, That Faith and
Religion conserve Kingdoms. Which Saint Chrysostom proves unto us in his
64. Homily, Iud. 5.
and Achior the Ammonite notified as much to Holofernes at the siege of
Bethulia.

And here we may take up a just complaint against your counterfeit Christians,
your dissembling Politicians, and their damnable Positions, who loosing in part
the name of Christians and of Catholics, bear themselves high upon the name
of Politicians and Statesmen, living wondrous well contented therewith; who are
a kind of cattle, that do so highly prize their Courtly carriage, their
courteous behavior and fair demeanor, that they seek to reduce the cause of
Religion, and Faith, to civility and courtesy; judging all the rest mere
rusticitie and clownishnesse: alleging in their defense, That many things must
yield and give way to the times; as also to dissemble with the times. And that
for the public peace, which ought above all things to be esteemed, they
affirm, That war ought not to be waged for matter of difference in Religion,
as well because it cannot be rooted out ofmens breasts; as also, because the
obligation of Religion is not so precise a thing, that we should for the same
adventure and hazard either our goods, our persons, or the peace of a State.
They say, That that which does most of all concern a Statesman, is above all
things to have an eye to the good of his Country, and the profit and benefit of
the people therein; but by no means to enter into a War, nor to draw too
much envy upon them for cause of Religion, leaving that care to Clergymen,
or to Preachers, or to God himself, Who, if the Church shall receive any
injury by the new broached opinions, is able of himself to revenge his own
qua^rell. In a word, There is not that mere Politician or Statesman, that is
not desirous to sleep in a whole skin, and to look well enough to himself
for one, without thrusting himself into quarrels and contentions for points of
Religion. Whence it comes to pass, that they forsake the Patrocinium and
protection of the Church, and upon foul terms put the Catholic faith into
their enemies fingers.

He that does not prefer the cause of Religion before all things else
whatsoever, does not deserve the name of a Christian; for Faith, Divine
Worship, and Religion, difference a Christian from a Gentile: He then that
shall slight the same, and make light account of it, how shall he enjoy this
name? If unto great sinners, our Savior says, Nescio vos, I know ye not;
though they confess and esteem of faith, What will he say unto Politicians
and Statesmen? The general voice of this Sect, is, Let us first regard our
temporal means, be it private or public; for religion and truth, so no hurt
thereby come unto us, let it shift for it self, what is it to us what hazard
it runs? Summa peruersio (says Saint Augustine) frui vtendis, and vti
fruendis. Your Politicians set up their rest and delight in enjoying temporal
goods, and in making use of spiritual goods. Pilat was a Politician, for the
Jews alleging unto him, If thou let this man loose, thou art not Caesar's
friend; he condemned our Savior Christ to death, preferring Caesar's friendship
before Christ's life. Jeroboam was a Politician, who made two cal^es for the
subjects of his kingdom, that they might not go up to Jerusalem. Those were
Politicians, which in Saint Augustines time enforced him to write those his
books de Ciuit. Dei, alleging, That they had many bad years, misfortunes,
and disasters for professing the Law of Christ. Those were Politicians, That
k^owing Christ, would not confess him openly before men, Least they should be
thrust out of the Synagogue. Joseph of Arimathea, and Nicodemus, were
Politicians, for that they sought after our Savior Christ by night, for fear
of the Jews. Politicians are those, of whom Ieremias said, Since we have left
off to burn ^^^ense to the Queen of heaven, Ier. 44.
and to pour out drink offerings unto her, we have had scarcenes of all
things, and have been consumed by the sword and by famine. Against all which
our Savior Christ said, What exchange can be made for a man's soul? The
temporal Monarchy of the whole world cannot be an equal Counterpoize to
Religion. This Sect had it is first beginning from Cain: God had revealed unto
father Adam the coming of Christ; Adam unto his sons; and Cain supposing
that he should lineally descend from Abel, and that he should be thrust out
and disgraced, resolved to remove that block that stood in his way,
preferring the temporal good of the body, before the spiritual good of the
soul.

The Romans will come. The harm was not hatched in Rome, but in the envy of
your breasts; Private interest must give way to the general good.
the general loss did not so nearly touch you, as your own private interest.
There are some Governors in a Commonwealth, which apply themselves wholly to
their private profit. King Don Alonso of Arragon was wont to say, That if he
had been Emperor when Rome flourished, he would have built a Temple before
the Capitol, where the Senators should have laid down their own particular
benefit. A conceit worthy such a King, who knew very well, what Interest will
work in a Governor. Moses did desire to see Gods face, Exodus 33.
Show me thy face: But Gods answer to him was, Thou can not see my face, for
there shall no man see me and live. The Prophet hereupon struck sail, and let
his desire fall. What Moses, art thou now turned coward? What had it been to
thee to have lost thy life, for to behold God face to face? We find afterward,
that desiring pardon for his People, he said unto God, O Lord pardon this
People, though thou blot my name out of the book of Life. Would thou not
forgo thy life to see Gods face, and will thou part with this and that other
life for thy people? That was a particular good, this a common; and a Governor
ought mainly and especially to have an eye unto that. Those Cowes which carried
the Arc to Bethshemish, never turned their heads at the lowing of their
Calfes, because being guided and led along with the love and zeal of the
common good, they forgot their particular longings and desires. He that
gouernes, must fix his e^e upon this White, without turning it aside through
the importunity of wife, childr^n, or kinsfolk, etc.

The Romans will come. This was but to give a color to the violence of their
envy and malice. All the world is a Mask or disguise. Dionysius the Tyrant
entering into a Temple of Idols, took away from the chiefest amongst them a
cloak of gold: and being demanded, Why he did it? his answer was, This
cloak is too heavy for the Summer, and too cold for Winter. Taking likewise a
golden beard from Aesculapius, he said, That his father Apollo having no beard,
there was no reason his son should wear any: all which, was but a mask for
his covetousness, Sim^lata sanctitas* duplex iniquitas. Hence come our
contrary nick-naming of things, tearming good, evil, and evil, good; sweet,
sour, and sour, sweet. The tyranny and cruelty wherewith Pharaoh afflicted
Gods people, he styled it wisdom, Come let us deal wisely. Iehu called that
passion and spleen which he bare against Ahab, Zeal, Behold my zeal for the
Lord. 4. Reg. 10. 1. Reg. 18.
Those perils of life whereinto Saul put David, he proclaimed to be Gods
quarrel, Go and fight the Lords battles. And here the Pharisees call this
their conspiracy, a Council, and their private profit, Zeal, etc.

Ye perceive nothing at all, neither do ye consider, etc. This was Caiphas
speech; as for Joseph of Arimathea, of whom Saint Luke says, Luke 3.
That he did not consent to the council and ^eed of them: And for Nicodemus
and Gamaliel, it is very probable, that they had no finger in the business:
but as it is in the proverb, The head draws the rest of the body after it,
as the Primum mobile does the rest of the Heavens; and therefore he said, Ye
know nothing: for that when in a Commonwealth a Citisen differs in his opinion
from a company of impudent and wicked persons, and lives therein with God and
a good conscience, presently they say, Que sabe poco, That he is a man of no
understanding, and knows not what he speaks. The reason that Caiphas
renders is this, It is expedient for us, that one man die for the people,
rather than that the whole Nation should perish. At that very instant when the
High Priest was to pronounce this decree, the Holy Ghost and the Devil moved
him thereunto both at once; the one directed his heart, the other his tongue:
but in Caiphas his purpose and intention, it was the wickedest Decree, and the
most sacrilegious determination that was ever delivered in the World. God could
not be well pleased with Caiphas for desiring the death of the Innocent; nor
yet displeased with his death, for that it was decreed in the sacred Council of
the blessed Trinity, That one should die for the sins of the people. But in
God and Caiphas the ends were diverse; this out of malice to our Savior; that
out of love to Mankind. Nor is it inconvenient, that one and the selfsame
proposition should have a different sense and meaning. Destroy this Temple, and
I will build it up again in three days: The Pharisees understood this of the
material Temple, but our Savior Christ, of the Temple of his body. That
which thou do, due quickly: Our Savior Christ spoke this of Judas his
treating to sell him, but his Disciples understood him as concerning the
preparation of the Passover. And so in this place, It is fit that this man
should die, (says Caiphas) that we may not become captives to Rome: and Heaven
says, It is fit that he should die, because the whole World should not
perish. The persecution and death of a Martyr turns to the Martyrs good, but
to the Tyrants hurt. Mat. 26.
Surely the Son of man goes his way as it is written of him, but woe be to
that man by whom the Son of man is betrayed, it had been good for that man
if he had never been borne. Heaven could not invent a more convenient means
than the death of Christ, for our good; but the world could not light on a
worse means than the death of our Savior Christ, for it is own ill. Caiphas
treated of temporal liberty, the Holy Ghost of spiritual liberty; Caiphas
of the safety of his own Nation, the Hol^-Ghost of the saving of the whole
world. And therefore Saint John adds, Non solum pro Gente, (or as the Greek
Text has it, Pro ea Gente) sed vt fili^s De^, qui erant disper^i, congregaret
in vnum; Not only for that Nation, but that he might gather the children of
God together that were dispersed throughout the world.

Origin has observed, That Caiphas prophesied, but that he was no Prophet.

First, Because one action of a Prophet does not make the habit or denomination
of a Prophet.

Secondly, because he did not attain unto the sense and meaning of the
Holy Ghost, the knowledge whereof in point of prophecy is necessary.

S. Ambrose says, That Caiphas pretended one thing, and uttered another, and
therefore that he sinned in the sentence which he pronounced, because hisintent
was bad and unjust; as it was with Balaam, who as he was a Prophet could not
curse the people of Israel, but as they were particular persons, they did
sin and err: so that the Holy Ghost serving himself with the tongue of
Caiphas, as the instrument, the High Priest did but determine that which the
Holy Ghost had before decreed.

The same words out of diverse mouths may be diversely relished. Romans 8.
Whence we may take occasion to weigh and consider the good and the ill of an
intention, since that one and the self same words are so good and so ill.
Saint Augustine pondereth upon those words of Saint Paul, Qui filio proprio suo
non pepercit, sed pro nobis omnibus tradidit illum, Who spared not his own
son, but gave him for us all to death. This word Tradidit, is verified both
of the Father, and of the Son, Tradidit semetipsum pro me, He delivered up
himself for me. As also of Judas, Qui autem tradidit cum, dedit and signum, He
gave them a sign that was to betray him. And of Pilat, Tradidit voluntati
eorum, He delivered him up to their will. The delivering of him up, was all one
and the same: but the Father and the Son did this out of their mercy and love
to the world; but Judas and Pilat, out of hatred, treason, Mat. 26.
and injustice. Saint Ambrose says, That that murmuring about the ointment [
Vt quid perditio ista vnguenti facta est? What needed this waste?] was uttered
by Judas, and the Disciples, in one and the same words: But in them they
proceeded out of a good mind; but in Judas, out of avarice: for the Disciples
had therein a respect to the poor; For this ointment (muttered they) might
have been sold for much, and been given to the poor. But Judas out of the
profit that he might have made thereby unto himself, by filching some of it
away, if he had come to the fingring of it. Saint Hilary expounding that saying
of our Savior Christ, Pater mayor me est, My Father is greater than I, says,
That it being heard from Arrius his mouth, Act. 19.
it sauoured like gall; but from our Saviors mouth, like honey. In Corinth,
certain Exorcists, sons of the Prince of the Priests, would take upon them
to cast out an evil spirit, Pessimum, the Text styles him. Who did demand of
them, Who gave you license to execute this Office? Vos autem qui estis? What
are ye? Jesus I acknowledge, and Paul I know, but who are ye? And the man in
whom the evil spirit was, ran on them, and prevailed against them, so that
they fled out of that house naked and wounded. Saint Paul did cast out devils
in the name of the Lord Jesus Christ, and these men likewise did use the name
of the Lord Jesus Christ: How comes it then to pass, that the success was so
contrary? I answer, The intention was different. Their words were the same, but
not their intent.

It is expedient for us that one man dye. The natural consideration of this
place, is the conueniencie of Christ's death: It was expedient for heaven,
earth, angels, men, as well the living as the dead. Whereof I have treated at
large elsewhere.

This spoke he not of himself. Saint Augustine, Hoc in eo egit propheticum
Chrisma, etc. The gift of prophecy, made him to prophecy his own evil life,
and that he did prophecy ignorantly and foolishly. Saint Chrysostom, Vide,
quanta si^ etc. The grace of prophecy, touched the high Priests mouth, but not
his heart. Whence Saint Chrysostom does infer, how impertinently the
Heretics do impugn the lives of the Priests, with an intent and purpose to
overthrow the force and power of Ecclesiastical dignities, and their sacred
command and authority. Moses his doubting, did not hinder the gushing of the
water out of the rock; nor the malice of Caiphas, Gods good purpose. Of
Treacle, the Physicians say, That it has a little touch of poison in it, and
it being it is natural condition and property to fly to the heart, though it
be hurtful one way, yet it carries it is remedy with it. So in like manner, the
holy Ghost made use of Caiphas his tongue, as the instrument of letting forth
that divine blood, whose shedding was our salvation. Of a leaud wicked fellow
Plutarch reports, That he uttered a very grave sentence, and that Lacedamonia
gave order, that it should be ascribed to another, Answering to our a semetipso
non dixit. This was not a bird of his hatching. Job seems to be somewhat
moved and offended, That God should aid the wicked in their distress,
Think thou it good to oppress me, and to cast off the labor of thine
hands, Job 10.
and to favor the Council of the wicked? But the divine providence is wont to
make use of the Councels of Tyrants, and such as are enemies thereunto, but
does never assist and help them forward. Saint Paul tells us, That some did
preach our Savior Christ through envy, others for opposition sake, and by way
of contention; and says withal, In hoc gaudeo, and gaudebo, In this I do and
shall rejoice. And Christ's Disciples aduising him, that some did cast forth
devils in his name, made them this answer, Nolite prohibere, Forbid them not,
For the indignity and unworthiness in the person of the Minister, does not
destroy the grace of his function and dignity.

This spoke he not of himself. From so bad a man could not come so deep a
Mystery, only God could put this so rare a conceit into his head, as the
delivering up of a Son, for the redeeming of a Slave.

Jesus therefore walked no more openly among the Jews. Seeing death now near
at hand, he withdrew himself; reading a Lecture therein unto us, That when we
are about to die, and drawing on to our last home, we should abandon the world,
and retire our selves, Remitte mihi (says David) vt refrigerer priusquam
abeam, and amplius non ero, Give me leave (o Lord) to dispose of my self, and
to render thee an account of my life, before I go hence and be seen no more.
For to propound your cause before a Judge, you prepare and address your self
unto him before hand; and shall you be negligent and careless when you are to
appear before God? Amongst the Judges of the earth you have a Vista and a
Reuista, Preparation against death necessary.
Hearing upon hearing: a primera, and segunda instancia; a first and a second
instance. But with God you cannot enjoy the like benefit, his Court allows no
such course. The Motto that is written there over his Tribunal, is, an Amplius
non ero, I shall be no more. We may not die twice, for to amend in our second
death, the errors of our former life. There is no reuersing of judgment, no
appealing from this Judge to that, or from one Court to another. That which will
concern and import thee most, is, That thou condemn thy self, before God
condemn thee; and that thou kill sin in thee, before God kill thee in thy
sin. This is the only way to secure danger, and to kill death. Many sit up so
long at play, that at last they are feign to go to bed darkling. This our
living in the world, is a kind of playing or gaming, whose bed is Aeternitie:
Walk while ye have light, least the night come upon you, and darkness
overtake you. Study to give over th^^ ^lay in some good time, do not continue
your sports in this world, to the very (...) ^^oppling out of the candle, least
ye run the danger of going to bed darkeling.

He went thence into a country near unto the wilderness, etc. If it go ill
with thee, and that thou can not live well and quietly amongst some men, fly
from the society of them. Our Savior Christ hyes him to the wilderness amongst
the beasts, and carries his Disciples thither with him, holding their
fellowship to be less hurtful and dangerous, Job 30.
Frater fui Draconum, says Job, I am a brother to the Dragons, and a companion
to the Ostriches. Inter Scorpiones habitaui (says Ezechiel) I dwelt among
Scorpions. Albeit by their habit and shape they seem to be men, they are
indeed no better than Dragons and Scorpions: and therefore of the two, it is
the lesser evil to live amongst these known wild beasts, than such beastly
minded men. Your Wolfes that are clad in sheep clothing, our Savior marks
out to be the utmost of evil. S. Ambrose treating of the sorrow which the
stones showed at our Saviors death, and that they were so sensible thereof
that they did split in sunder, says, That our Savior found more pity in
those stones, than in his peoples breasts.

Whence by the way it is to be noted, That when those that govern and sit at
the helm are generally naught and wicked, it is needful then for us to fly
unto the wilderness: for it is better to live with Dragons and Scorpions than
with them. When there is an earthquake in the City, all have out of it and get
them into the fields. All the foundations of the earth shall be shaken; What
do ye stay for then, Why do ye stand looking and gazing one on another as if
you had nothing to do, when destruction is so near at hand? In a word, Daniel
is cast into the Lions Den, and the same is sealed with the Kings own Signet,
not for any hurt that he had done the Lions, nor for any harm that he had
done his companions and play-fellowes, but thrown in thither by the malice of
the Princes of the people, and the Judges of the land. O Lord deliver us from
the oppression of powerful Princes, and the unconscionable dealing of corrupt
Judges.

That there should be but one bad Governor, or but one bad Judge, it is ill:
because such a one is the fountain whereof all do drink. Si autem nequam
fuerit totum corpus tuum, tenebrosum erit: But that there should be two such
bad members in a Commonwealth, is a great deal worse. Of those two naughty
Judges that wronged Susanna, God said, Et egressa est iniquitas a Babylone:
Your briberies, your thefts, and your adulteries took life from them, in whom
they should have dyed. But when the whole Bench of Judges shall be bad, get
thee gone into the desert, fly to the wilderness: for it is too great a boldness
then, not to be as others are. He that has a mangie hand, couers it with a
cloth, binds it up close, and dissembles the matter as much as he can; but if
he see other men in the same case as himself is in, he loses all shame. The
first day that a man enters into the Palace, or some place of government, etc.
He says, Dominus sit in cord meo, God be in my heart: but after some six
weeks he changes his mind, and says, Let us make profit of our places, as
others do. Birds that are free and at liberty, talk as Nature has taught
them; but being put into a Cage, prate according to the use and custom of the
Country: Your Thrush of Castile, and that of Cataluna have one and the same
note in the field: but in the Cage one says Deu, and the other Dios.

I fear me I have troubled your patience too long, and therefore I will rather
here abruptly end, than tire you our. God of his infinite goodness, etc.

THE XXXVIII. SERMON, UPON THE SATURDAY AFTER PASSION SUNDAY.
IOH. 12. Cogitauerunt Principes sacerdotum, vt and Lazarum interficerent.


THe High Priests consulted, that they might put Lazarus to death also. This
Gospel contains diverse and sundry mysteries: but the first and chiefest is,
a resolution taken by the Priests to put Lazarus to death. As if God could not
raise him from a violent death, who had raised him from a natural death. They
thought with themselves, that Lazarus holding his life by miracle, it would be
an addition of credit and reputation to our Savior. And, as to take away his
life, they had no other reason but his many Miracles, so did they likewise
seek to cut off Lazarus, thinking it very unfit, that he should be a witness
to make good the greatest Miracle that ever our Saiuour wrought, and that by
his life and words, he should notify Christ's Divinity to the Jews and
Gentiles that came to visit him.

The High Priests consulted. God the only Lord of all.
That the Devil has the disposing of the governments and dignities of the
world, is a notorious lie; though when he tempts any, he would seem to make
it have some appearance of truth. He said unto our Savior Christ, All this
will I give thee, Representing unto him a brief Cosmographie of all the whole
world; Insinuating, That he was Lord of all, and had the bestowing of all. The
like speech he used, when being asked of God, from whence he came, he answered,
I am come from compassing the earth, I have rounded my Heritage. And
doubtless, He that shall narrowly look into those who command and rule the
greater part of the world, will (I fear me) believe, that the devil did put
the same into their hands: but the truth is, That God is the sole Lord of all.
S. John styles him in his Apocalypse, King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, and
paints him forth with many Crowns upon his head, And on his head were many
Crowns, Apoc. 19.
in token that he has the donation of Scepters and Crowns. Artaxerxes styled
himself the great King, and had appertaining to his Empire 127 Provinces.
Nebuchadnezzar was a mighty Prince: but these and all that ever were, or shall
be, are but Pigmies to God, It is God that gives and takes away Kingdoms. Per
me Reges regnant, By me Kings reign. And when he divided it amongst the sons
of Adam, he did limit them their bounds, beyond which they were not to pass.
When the most high God divided to the nations their inheritance, Deuteronomy. 32.
when he separated the sons of Adam, he appointed the borders of the people,
according to the number of the children of Israel. The Statue of
Nebuchadnezzar, which signified the Empires of the earth, was but a Statue in a
dream, and so vanished like a dream. The Kings and Emperors of the earth,
some dye, others are borne, are here to day and gone to morrow, Hodie est rex,
and cras morietur. But Gods Empire endures for ever. Pliny says, That the
election of Traiane may be a sufficient argument to prove, That God sets up
Kings, not only among Christians, but the Gentiles; Suting with that of Homer,
Ex Jove, Reges.

This truth being supposed, some man may ask me, How comes it then to pass,
that God places in that City where his name is called upon, where he has his
house and his Altar, these high Priests, who after they had decreed the death
of Christ, did treat of killing Lazarus?

Which difficulty is the more augmented, because for the most part, the
governors of this world are naughty men; as was to be seen in the Roman
Empire. Thales Milesius, the prime wise man of Greece, being demanded, what he
had ob^erued in the world to be of most difficulty? Answered, Tyrannum senem,
To see a Tyrant come to be an old man. Irenaeus says, That God sets up
some, because they are worthy to bear rule, others, because they are unworthy.
But where there is a good Governor, that Commonwealth he favors. Phocas
was a most cruel Emperor of Constantinople; whereupon a holy Monk in a
corner of his Cell, thus complains unto God, Cur fecisti eum Imperatorem? Why
did thou make him Emperor? Who had no sooner made his moan, but he heard a
voice from heaven, saying, Non inueni peiorem, I could not find a worse. In
Thebes, there was a great Hypocrite, which was even ready to die out of the
great desire he had to be a Bishop; who had scarce obtained that dignity, but
that he fell a spoiling the Commonwealth: but an Angel told him, That he was
not made Bishop because he deserved to be a Bishop, but because that
Commonwealth deserved not a better Bishop. Ill Rulers sent by God to pun^sh
the people.
According to that of Job, He causes the Hypocrite to reign for the sins
of the land. Being all one with that which Jeremy said of his people, Dabo eos
inferuorem vniuersis regnis terrae propter Manassem, filium Ezechiae.
Anastasius reads it, Per Manassem. For, as a good King is a great cause, why
God with a gracious eye does look upon his people; so a bad king is the means
that he uses for the punishing of them. Saint Gregory, the Archbishopricke of
Milan being void, wrote to the Clergy, that they would obliege God by prayer
and by fasting, to give them a good Pastor. For, as God is pleased with his
people, so he gives them Prelates accordingly. The Queen of Sheba considering
the wisdom of Solomon, 3. Reg. 10.
said, That nothing did more manifest Gods love toward his people of Israel,
and the desire of their perpetuity, than in having given them so wise a
Governor. And Josephus reports, That he being but twelve years of age when
he first began to govern, the people listening to that sentence which he gave
at his first sitting in judgment, touching the two women that contested about
their child, Let the infant be cut in twain; Many laughed at it, deeming it to
be a childish sentence; but afterward wisely weighing the discreet course that
he had taken in justifying the truth, without any further proofs or
testimonies, they then cried out, De coelo elapsus, This King is sent us down
from heaven. And albeit the heavens, planets, and stars, are to man's seeming
far off; yet in regard of those influences which they cause in inferior
bodies, they are near at hand. And albeit they are incorruptible, yet do they
afford great favors to corruptible things. If heaven behold us with a
propitious eye, and the planets with prosperous aspects, the earth does enjoy
much fruitfulness and abundance. But contrariwise, our souls are not subject
to those material heavens; but to those heavens of our Prelates, and
Governors. Behold, I create a new heaven, and a new earth. This may be
understood of the Ecclesiastical Estate, and the Secular; of Superiors and
Inferiors. When these heavens afford a prosperous light, the earth is
beautiful, pleasant, plentiful, and fertile. And so on the contrary, Jeremy
says, I beheld the earth, and lo it was empty, I beheld the heavens, and
could see no light in them. What light then could there be in Jerusalem, when
as Annas and Cayphas were the high Priests?

The high Priests consulted, that they might put Lazarus to death. Saint
Augustine says, That this devise and drift of theirs was derived from the
devil, and from hell. There are some thoughts that are engendered and bred in
our flesh, as the rust in the iron, the rottennes in the wood, the moth in the
cloth, and the worm and mytes in butter and in cheese. Our flesh is a durtie
puddle, which sends forth such foul and thick vapors from it, that if you do
not make great have to expel and drive them thence, they will quickly cloud
and darken the light of the understanding. It is sick of the kitchen, the
gutter, whitherall the dust and sluttishnesse of the senses, gathers and meets
together to make such a stink and stoppage, that the water of Gods grace can
hardly get through, and cleanse the same; it is a most grievous and heavy
burden, not only because it is so painful and intolerable, but also
because it is inevitable. All the plagues of Egypt were removed by Moses his
prayer, save only the flies: And these are those our thoughts and cogitations,
being inexcusable, as importunate and troublesome, which are engendered in this
our body of flesh. Every one bears about him his particular affection, and the
Idol which his heart adoreth; This man his pleasures, that man his profit; one,
his honor, another his grace and favor with his king; some, their great and
strong Alliance; others, their dainty and delicious fare. And every one of
these, is like unto the beast that is tied to his rack and manger, whereon his
thoughts do continually feed. This is that same, Trahit sua quemque voluptas,
Every man is wedded to some one kind of pleasure, or other.

The Schoolmen set down two sorts of thoughts.

The one, which flesh and blood produces.

The other, which are sown in us.

Cogitatio innata, And,

Cogitatio, ab alio lata.

That which is bred in us. And that which is otherwise brought unto us. Some
herbs grow up in the earth ofthemselues; others are sown: So some thoughts
have their breeding in man's breast, others are sown there; and it must of force
follow, that they are sown either by the devil, or by God. Of those of the
devil, Saint Paul says, Let no temptation take hold on you, but that which is
humane. That the very thought of some extraordinary beauty should trouble
and disquiet thee, the thought of thy Princes favor, of Signiorie, or any
other temporal good, this is a humane temptation; but the killing of Lazarus,
and the selling and betraying of our Savior Christ, is a devilish temptation.
And therefore Saint John says, That the devil had put it into Judas his
heart, that it was he that had sown this bad seed there, and thrust this
thought into him. But whether or no, this thought be of the flesh or of the
devil; sure I am, that it is the general doctrine of the Saints, That we
should not nourish any evil thought, nor let it like a bottom of yarne, wax
warm in our hand. Esaias complains of his people, That they conceived
mischief, and brought forth iniquity; that they hatched cockatrice eggs,
and woue the spiders web; that he that eats of their eggs dies, and all
that which is trod upon, breaks out into a serpent. As out of an Aspick's
egg (says Aristotle) being kept warm and cherished, is hatched the Basiliske;
so from our thoughts, taking warmth from the heat of consent, is bred the
Basiliske of sin. This is for the sheep to breed up the wolf, or to give
suck to that toad which shall venom thy breast and work thy death. The Greek
Text says, Consultauerunt consilio, They did lay their heads together, they
sat in Council, they did not only think upon, but consent to the greatest
malice and wickedness, which ever the devil or hell could imagine, Vt Lazarum
interficerent, To kill Lazarus. This is the end of our thoughts, when they are
not cut off in time; Sin is so great an Usurer, that it goes daily gayning
more and more ground upon man's breast, till it has brought it to a desperate
estate. They were grown to that desperation, that they said unto filthiness,
I am thy servant. Saint Jerome says, That as the covetous thirst after money;
so do these after dishonestie. They are like those that go down into a deep
well; they knit rope to rope, and one sin to another. Why dyed I not in the
birth? Or why dyed I not when I came out of the womb? Why did the knees
prevent me? And why did I suck the breasts? Wherein the Prophet painteth forth
unto us the four estates of a child.

The first in the womb.

The second, when it is borne.

Four estates of a child, and whereunto alluding.
The third, when it is swadled up.

The fourth, when they give it the teat.

S. Gregory does apply these four, to the four estates of sin.

The first, in the thought which conceiues it.

The second, in the ill which brings it forth.

The third, when we put it on like a garment.

The fourth, when we nourish and maintain it.

Saint Augustine painteth forth these four estates, in these four dead
folks:

In the daughter of the Archisinagoguian, who stirred not from home.

In the son of the widow of Naim. who was accompanied to his grave.

In Lazarus, who lay four days dead.

And in him, whom our Savior Christ did not raise up at al; saying, Let the
dead bury the dead.

The Jews were murderers of all Gods Saints.
They consulted to put Lazarus to death. Our Saviors death was already
concluded on, and now this cruel people treated of making away Lazarus. Of whom
our Savior Christ said, Vt descendat super vos omnis sanguis iustus a sanguine
Abel, ad sanguinem Zachariae, etc. It is no marvel that they sought to kill
Lazarus: for in him was sum'd up all the blood of the just that had been shed
in the world. And the reason that makes this to seem so, is, because all the
just that dyed in the world since Abel, were a Type and figure of Christ: And
if they did die, it was to give testimony of his death; and had it not been
for our Savior Christ's death, his had not preceedd. And for that the life of
the just was a shadow of that of our Savior Christ; in taking away his life,
in whom all the lives of the world were contained, they were guilty of all the
rest, and as much as lay in them, were the Homicides of the whole world. And if
he that carries but one man's death about him, finds no place of safety upon
earth, What rest shall he find, that has so many deaths crying upon his
conscience?

Saint Chrysostom treating of the sin of Cain, says, That it was greater
than that of Adam. For, besides his loosing in the turning of a hand, the
greatest Empire that ever the world had; we cannot imagine any sin to be
greater than the barring of all mankind from heaven, the depriving him of
grace, and of the friendship of God: yet notwithstanding, this seems to be
the greater, and he proves it by the sentence that was given upon the one sin
and the other. God sentencing Adam, said, Cursed is the earth for thy sake,
etc. The blow of the curse was to fall upon Adam; and as the father which makes
show to throw the candlestick at his sons head, but flings it against the next
wall; so God says, Cursed is the earth for thy sake. But with the Serpent, and
with Cain, he proceeded otherwise. To the Serpent he said, Thou art cursed
above all cattle, and above every beast of the field, upon thy belly shall thou
go, and dust shall thou eat all the days of thy life. To Cain, Thou art
cursed from the earth, which has opened her mouth, to receive thy brothers
blood from thine hand, it shall not henceforth yield unto thee her strength,
etc. He did not forbid him to tread upon the earth, but he forbad him to enjoy
the fruits thereof, etc.

Secondly, The voice of thy brothers blood cries unto me from the earth. Saint
Ambrose says, That he heard the voice of Abel; for with God, the dead speak
as well as the living. The Hebrew has it, The voice of bloods; putting it in
the plural number (as Lyra has noted it:) For he had shed so many bloods as
Abel might have had children. For, albeit they had neither being nor life in
themselves, yet they might in their cause and beginning: It cries to me from
the earth. Not from his body, for though thy brother should have forgiven thee,
yet the earth would not pardon thee, to see it self violated by a Traitor. And
if God would have but given way thereunto, a thousand mouths would have opened
to swallow thee up alive; but being he would not consent thereunto, it goes
choking those seeds which might have served thee for thy sustenance and
delight; and shaking thee off from thence like a banished man, this Writ is
gone out against thee, A vagabond and runnagate shall thou be upon the earth.

Thirdly, All the superior and inferior creatures were to be his persecutors
and his tormentors; the heavens with thunder and lightning; the Angels with
fearful apparitions; the beasts of the woods, and men, shunning his company;
and God himself chastising him with a continual trembling. But some will say,
How could God persecute him, since he published a Proclamation, That whosoever
should kill Cain, should be punished seuen-fold, Sextuplum punietur: The
Seventy Interpreters render it, Septem vindictas exoluet, Seven several
reuenges shall be taken of him. Procopius answers hereunto, That this
Proclamation was made against Cain; For, a man cursed by God, persecuted by
heaven, by earth, by Angels, by men, by beasts, and by himself, would have
held it a happiness to dye; but God would not that he should enjoy so great a
blessing: But that he should live seven generations, and that in every one of
them, God would take severe vengeance of him, Septem vindictas exoluet; till
that Lamech should come, who gave him a sudden and violent death. And this is
a notable place against all kind of murderers, and man slayers. David would not
drink of the water, though he were thirsty, which his soldiers brought him,
because it had cost them the hazard of their lives; and therefore offered it up
in sacrifice to God. They did pour forth innocent blood like water in the
siege of Jerusalem. David did shed the water, because it seemed to him to be
blood; and others shed blood as if it were but water: some take blood for
water, and others, water for blood.

Cogitauerunt, vt Lazarum interficerent.
Esaias 59.
They consulted to put Lazarus to death. This their rage and fury can not be
sufficiently indeered. Esaias says, We roar all like bears, and mourn like
doves. These are both extremes. The Bear is a very furious beast, the Dove
very mild and gentle; the one does shake the mountains with his roarings, the
other scarce throbs forth her mournings from her breast; the one, if you rob her
of her young ones, is all rage and fierceness it self, Like a Bear robbed of
her Whelps; the other is softness and gentleness it self, who if you take
away her young, uses no other resistance but mourning, and a soft murmuring;
and therefore Osee says, that she has no heart. It was noted of this people,
That they were like doves that mourned with their friends, but like furious
bears toward their enemies. What greater fury than to seek to kill Lazarus?
What madness more notorious? Marsilius Ficinus says, That there is a twofold
madness.

One, of the brain.

A twofold madness.
The other of the heart. The one long, the other short. The one makes men madd,
the other angry. Aulus Gellius reports of the Sclauonians, That when they are
angry, they kill (like the Basiliske) with their very looks. Ecclesiasticus
says, Eccl. 30.
That Envy and Wrath shorten the life, and bring age before the time. Solomon
says, That three things move the earth, and that the fourth is not to be
endured; pointing out the fourth to be a Slave, that is made his Masters
heir: for a Slave being seated in honor, grows to be so insolent, that it is
a thing insufferable. Better may this be verified of the appetite, which being
a Slave, if it once through wrath rebel against reason, it treads it under
foot, captiuates it, and ill intreates it.

Because that for his sake, many of the Jews went away and believed in Jesus.
One of the greatest miseries that can befall a soul, To take occasion from
good to do ill, is hellish malice.
is, To make good, the occasion of ill. As one of the greatest pledges of Gods
love, is, to take occasion from ill, to do good; so one of the greatest
pledges of malice, is, to take occasion from good, to do ill. God gave unto
the children of Israel the gold and silver of the Egyptians (whether it were in
requital and payment of their troubles, or that he was Lord of all, and so
might dispose thereof as he listed;) and of this gold and silver they
afterward made a calfe, giving thereunto that glory and worship which was due
only unto God. Osee says, they did the like with Baal, I multiplied their
silver and gold, Osee 2.
which they bestowed upon Baall. God gave them a brazen Serpent, to the end
that by looking thereon, they might be healed of the bitings of the Serpents:
From this favor, they took occasion to commit Idolatry, 4. Reg. 18.
offering incense thereunto, as unto God, till such time as Ezechias brake it
in pieces. God does proceed by contrary courses: From Adams sin he took
occasion to redeem the world; and (as it seems to Saint Augustine) if Adam
had not sinned, God had not come in person to redeem him. And Saint Gregory
calls it Foelix peccatum, A happy sin; because it brought with it so
sovereign a Redeemer. And in many other occasions, we may say that of a
sinner, which Esaias says, Recepit de manu domini duplicia pro omnibus peccatis
suis. And that which David says ofan ungrateful people, Pro iniquitate, vide
tentoria Aethiopiae. He there sums up the many and great favors which he
had received; and in every one of them we shall find, pro iniquitate.

They consulted to put Lazarus to death. The blanke and mark whereat they
shot, was to darken and eclypse the name of our Savior Christ, and to cast a
cloud over that glory which could not possibly but show it self, in seeing
Lazarus to be raised up from death unto life. This damage the Lord did repair
with two great honors.

The first, That most solemn triumph wherewith they received him, whereof we
shall treat hereafter.

The second, of certain Gentiles which came according to the custom to the
feast. Leo the Pope says, That the Romans made a religion of it to adore the
several gods of all Nations; and therefore they entreated Saint Philip, that
he would be a means that they might have a sight of our Savior Christ, and
that they might be admitted to speak with him: Saint Philip communicated this
matter with Saint Andrew, and they both acquainted our Savior therewith. And
Jesus answered, The hour is now come, that the Son of man shall be made
manifest. The Apostles did not understand the mystery thereof: but our Savior
Christ took that his coming to be the despertador de su muerte, the awaker
and reuiuer of his death: For although he employed both his life and his person
in Israel, yet his death was to draw the Gentiles to his knowledge and
obedience. And these Gentiles being so desirous to see him, and to talk with
him; taking this to be the Vigile of his death, and vocation of the Gentiles;
He told them, Now is the hour come, wherein the Son of man is to be
glorified, not only amongst the Jews, but the Gentiles also.

He calls his death his glorification. For, albeit to dye, be weakness, yet
to dye as Christ dyed, was unspeakable valor, and virtue. Christ's death his
glorification.
He never showed himself more strong, than when he was most weak; and never
looked sweeter than when death was in his face. He had horns coming out of
his hands, And there was the hiding of his power. Abacuc. 3.
Those hands which were nailed to those arms of the Cross, were those horns
wherewith he overthrew the power of the world, and of hell. Jacob said of
Simeon and Leui at the hour of his death, In their self-will they dug
down a wall, which the Seventy translate thus, Eneruauerunt taurum, They
weakened a Bull: By this bull, Christ why called a Bull.
understanding our Savior Christ.

First, for it is beauty, Quasi primogeniti tauri pulchritudo eius, Deuteronomy 33.
His beauty shall be like his first borne bullock.

Secondly, For that as the bulls strength lies in his horns, so did Christ
discover his strength upon the Cross, Ibi abscondita est fortitudo eius.

Thirdly, because (according unto Pliny) the Bull loses his fierceness, when
he but sees the shadow of the Fig Tree: And our Savior Christ showed
himself most weak, when he saw the shadow of the Cross, desiring pardon
then of his Father for his enemies, who like dogs against a Bull, had with
open mouth set themselves against him, Many dogs are come about me. Psalm. 32.
But he repayd (though not allayd) their rage with this so loving and so sweet
a prayer, Father forgive them, etc.

The Pharisees seeing themselves thus mocked and deluded, and that their plots
and intentions took not effect, they brake forth and said, Perceive ye not,
how we prevail nothing? and how that the world goes after him? And albeit
Saint Chrysostom says, That these speeches were uttered by his friends,
thereby to persuade the Pharisees that they should not tire out themselves any
longer in persecuting of him, seeing it was to no end, but all went cross with
them; Saint August. yet says, That they were the speeches of his enemies,
which bemoned their own disgrace and misfortune.

There could not be any blindness more foul and beastly, than that of the
high Priests and Pharisees; who having had so many trials, how little their
power and their tricks could prevail against our Savior Christ, that all
this while they could not perceive that this was Gods business, against which,
nor counsel, nor wisdom can prevail. Saint Peter preaching Christ's
resurrection, the high Priests and Pharisees called him before them, notifying
unto him, That he should not any more touch upon that point: but he told them,
That he was bound rather to obey God than man. And perceiving his resolution,
Dissecabantur cordibus suis, They burst for anger when they heard it, and
consulted to slay both him and his companions. But Gamaliel a Doctor of the
Law, being there present, and one that was honored of all the people, advised
those that sat there in Council, Act. 5.
to put the Apostles forth for a little space out of the Council house: which
done, he then said unto them, Men of Israel be well advised what ye do
concerning these men: Time will prove whether this be a Truth or a Lie that
these men utter. It is not long since that one The^des boasted himself to be a
Prophet, who was followed by some four hundred Disciples, but in the end he
was condemned to death, and they al which obeyed him were scattered and brought
to naught. After this man, rose up Judas of Galilee, and drew away much people
after him, but he in the end also perished and all his followers. And therefore
I now say unto ye, forbear a while, and refrain your selves from these men,
and let them alone: For if this their doctrine be of men, it will come to
naught; but if it be of God ye cannot destroy it. In a word, Time will bring
this to light: but to go about to take away their lives now from them, were to
set your selves to fight against God. The like did the Prince of the Ammonits
deliver to Nebuchadnezzars Lieutenant General, at the Siege of Bethulia; If
God favor and protect this people, all Nebuchadnezzars forces are not able to
subdue them. And this was that which made Job so confident, Be thou on my side,
and let all the world be against me, I care not. Saul did use all his best
endeauours, and employed all the force and strength he had, to work David's
death, one while in his own person, seeking to nail him with his Spear to
the wall; another while by setting upon him with his soldiers; but never yet
could the power of a King prevail without Gods permission, against a silly
fly. Gods protection is above all his works: so the Princes of the earth, the
high Priests, the Pharisees, the Clergy, and the Laytie, did cry out against
Christ, but were forced to say in the end, We prevail nothing at all. They
were strangely blinded, that they could not perceive Gods power herein. Lord so
open our eyes that we may see the light of thy glorious Gospel. To whom, etc.

THE XXXIX. SERMON.
MAT. 26. MARC. 14. LVC. 22. IOH. 18. Of St. Peter's Denial, and Tears.


OF Peter's denial, there are two opinions, as opposite, as false. Two opinions
concern^ng Peter's denial.
The one, That Peter had lost his Faith. Grounding the same upon the testimony
of Saint Ambrose, Postquam Petrus fidem se perdidisse defluit, maiorem gratiam
reperit, quam ami^it, After that Peter had bewailed his lost faith, the grace
he found was more than that he lost. And in that our Saviors reprehension to
his Disciples at his departure to heaven, He reproved their unbelief and
hardness of heart, Where he excepted not Peter. Mar. 16.
This opinion is primarily contrary to those words of our Savior Christ, I
have prayed for thee (Peter) that thy faith might not fail thee. Luke 22.


Secondly, it is contrary to natural reason. For, to pass suddenly from one
extreme to another, though God does it by extraordinary ways, yet neither
Nature, nor Art, nor the Devil does it, be it either from ill to good, or from
good to ill. Nemo repent turpissimus, said the Poet. The sanctity of Peter
sure was one of the greatest; and to pass suddenly from a Saint, to an
Infidel, (which is numbered amongst those sins that are the most heinous) it
cannot sink into my head.

Besides, Faith is like unto your Ermine, who had rather mori, quam foedari;
rather dye, than durtie it self. And therefore Faith is clothed in white; a
color wherein the least spot or soil shows foulest. Corresponding with that
of Saint Paul, Having the mystery of faith in a pure conscience. The
conscience wherein Faith is to reside, must be pure and clean: and as it goes
soyling, so it goes lessening and losing it self. And as is the blood of the
soul, and the last humor which is vomited forth, as it is to be seen in
those that are sea-sicke; so is it in the virtues of Faith, Peruenit gladius
(says Jeremy) vsque ad animam, The sword has entered even unto my soul.
Saint Jerome, That the sword is come unto the soul, Quando nihil in anima
vitale reseruatur, When there is not any vital thing that is reserved in the
soul, when all goodness is gone out of it. How Peter may be said to have lost
his faith.
But Saint Peter was not come to that desperate pass, his case was far
otherwise. And if Saint Ambrose say, That he lost his Faith, he understood
thereby, that loyalty and fidelity which Peter ought better to have kept, or
that confession of his faith, which upon that occasion he was bound to have
made; according to that of Saint Paul, With the heart we believe unto
righteousness, but with the mouth we confess unto salvation. And for that
reprehension which our Savior Christ bestowed upon his Disciples at his
departure for heaven, Of Peter's Fall.
it is a clear case, that it was not directed to Peter, as appears by the
words following, where it is said, That the rest, when they were told by the
women that he was risen from the dead, it seemed unto them as a feigned thing,
neither believed they them: But Peter was one of the first that ran unto our
Saviors Sepulcher, and revealed to the rest the glorious resurrection of his
Lord and Savior.

Other Doctors excusing Peter, say, That in this Denial, he spoke
Amphibologically, his words carrying a doubtful or double meaning, and yet
might admit a good construction; and this opinion S. Ambrose, S. Hilary, and S.
Cyril touched upon: but the truth is, that S. Peter did grievously sin
therein, and that he had lost his love, but not his faith.

The occasions of it.
Some treating of the occasions that made God to turn his eye from Peter, some
(they say) were on Peter's part, others on our Saviors.

And the first and chiefest occasion was Saint Peter's confidence and
presumption. Saint Ambrose professes, Quod non erat humanae infirmitatis, sed
diuina potestatis, That it was not so much out of humane fra^ltie as divine
power; Such a thing, that all the strength and force of humane weakness could
not perform. Leo the Pope, Haesi^are permissus est, vt nemo auderet de sua
virtute confidere, He suffered him to stagger, that no man might dare to rely
upon his own strength; Using it as a cooling-card for confident Presumists.
Saint Augustine expounding that place of the Proverbs, Neque declines ad
dextram, neque ad sinistram, Do not decline neither to the right hand, nor the
left, does put the difficulty in declining to the right hand. We do
acknowledge two ways in this our earthly pilgrimage.

One of life.

The other of death.

That it is a dangerous piece of business to decline to the way of death, it
is a clear case; but to the way of life, very dark and intricate. S. Jerome
says, That the just man should have a care not to decline to the right hand,
because he may chance to offend God out of his double diligence, as Vzza did,
in staying the Arc, least it might fall to the ground. Saint Augustine says,
That our best service may be unacceptable, if not sinful, through our own
presumption. And so did Peter sin, presuming on his own proper valor, and
settled resolution: which made our Savior Christ say unto him, Thou shall deny
me thrice; and he replied thrice, Rather than I will deny thee, I will dye a
thousand deaths. O Lord, either thou tellest me thus out of the fear of my
weakness, or to try me what I will do, I have but one life to loose, If need
were I would dye with thee, etc. He promised that which was not in the power of
his strength to perform. Man promises he knows not what, because he knows
not himself. The Angel knew not what would follow: for had he had this
knowledge at the first, that alone would have lessened his contempt. Adam knew
by revelation, That his marriage did represent that of our Savior Christ with
his Church; but he knew not the Media, or means that led thereunto. Saint
Peter would never have presumed so much on himself, had he known what would
have followed thereupon: So that he promised that which he was not possibly
able to perform. But if presuming on our Savior Christ's favor, he had told
the wench that stood at the door, I am one of Christ's Disciples, and I will
lay down my life for the testimony of his truth, and mine own faith; he had
secured his life: For it was not possible that our Savior Christ should be
false of his word, If ye seek me, suffer these first to go their way. But
evermore those men that most presume, are most deceived. Pharaoh pursued the
children of Israel, boasting as he went, I will not leave a man of them alive,
I will at once make an end of these Slaves: But this presumption of his
succeeded so ill with him, that he and all his were made food for fishes, They
su^ke like lead to the bottom of the sea. And anon after it is said, Thy wrath
did devour the^, as the fire consumes the straw. They perished first like
lead, because they descended even to the bottom of the sea: and they perished
like straw, because they afterward floated above water; to the end that the
children of Israel might behold in their drowned bodies, the powerful hand of
God. That proud Philistim Goliath, vaunted himself, and cried out unto David,
Come to me, and I will give thy flesh unto the fowls of the heaven, and to the
beasts of the field. He was an able and a valiant man, but his valor was
nothing answerable to his arrogancy and presumption, so that for all his great
brags, himself was made a prey for the Vultures.

God would have his friends to be valiant, yet cowards; weak, yet strong;
fearful, and yet confident: and, that the one should grow from the
consideration of their own weakness; and the other, from their affiance in
God. Moses fled (being afraid) from the Serpent; but being animated by God, he
was so bold, as to take him by the tail. Tobias out of fear, fled from the
fish, but encouraged by the Angel, he set upon him, and was strong enough to
tear his jaws in sunder. And therefore Saint Paul says, All things are
possible unto me, in him that is my strength and my comforter. And he might as
well have said, Without God I can do nothing, In deo meo (says David)
transgrediar murum, In my God, I will leap over a wall; Whereas without him,
he is not able to crawle over a Threshold. The Scribes and Pharisees did
presume that they should enjoy those former good times and golden ages of their
great grandfathers and forefathers; but they were not confederat with them in
shedding the blood of the Prophets, and therefore our Savior made them this
answer, Behold, Man. 23.
I send unto you Prophets and wise men, and Scribes, and of them ye shall kill
and crucify. And of them shall ye scourge in the Synagogues, and persecute
from City to City; that upon you may come all the righteous blood that was
shed upon earth, from the blood of Abel the righteous, unto the blood of
Zacharias the son of Barachias, whom ye slew between the Temple and the
Altar. And yet ye are not ashamed to say, That if ye had been in the days of
your fathers, ye would not have been partners with them in the blood of the
Prophets. Benadab king of Syria bosting much of his power, he of Israel
answered him, Let not him that girdeth his harness, 3. Reg. 20.
boast himself as he that puts it off; He that fights for the victory, let
him not glory as he that has got the victory: for the success of war is
doubtful. The like judgment ought every one to make of the victory and the
war that is waged with the soul; which whilst it lives in this mortal
body, cannot assure it self; so various and doubtful are the successes of
this war. When Jacob had some difference with his father in Law about the
Idols which Rachel had stolen, Genesis 31.
he told him, Except the God of my father Abraham, and the fear of Isaac, had
been with me, etc. The Commentators here question it, why Jacob did not as well
say, the God of Isaac, as of Abraham? And Paulus Burgensis answers thereunto
out of the opinion of the Hebrews, That God was never called the God of any
man, God not called the God of any man, while he lives.
whilst that man was living: because he does not then enjoy a sure estate. And
therefore in regard that Abraham was dead, and Isaac living, he said, the God
of Abraham, and the fear of Isaac. After that brave resolution which Abraham
had to sacrifice his son, God said unto him, Now I know that thou fear
God. But here another doubt now offers it self, That Abraham having shown
such a great and extraordinary token of his love, why God did not say unto
him, I now know that thou love God. The reason is, That when a just man comes
to the top and height of his love, he may presume of himself, that he has
then begun to love. And, for that fear is the first step to love, he said,
Nunc cognoui quod timeas, etc. By the whole drift of this discourse, that
conclusion of Ecclesiasticus remains clear, Lift not thy self up in the
thought of thy soul, like the Bull. Let not thy thoughts and hopes make thee
do the things that are vain and foolish. He instances in the bull, an
untamed beast, which does not acknowledge heaven. Why will thou leave thy
leafes and thy fruit, and remain like a dotard in the desert? Job says, Job 4.
If he laid folly on his Angels, how much more on them that live in houses of
clay? If in the purest steel, he found rust, and in the finest cloth the Moth,
etc. S. Augustine says, Nullum peccatum facit homo, quod non possit facere
alter homo, si desit rector, per quem factus est homo, Man does not commit that
sin, which another may not ^oe, if that Ruler do not direct man, by whom man
is made.

Truths seldom heard in Princes Courts.
The second occasion on Peter's part, was the Palace of Caiphas. Saint Ambrose
says, That Peter coming to warm himself at the Palace, came to deny the
truth. For where Truth it self was taken prisoner, he had need of a great
deal of courage, that should not incline to a lie. Aeneas Syluius reports,
That Frederick Archduke of Austria, would go a nights disguised through the
Tauerns and Victualing houses belonging to the Court, only to hear what they
said of himself, and his Ministers; and being demanded, why he did expose his
person to that peril? his answer was, Because in Court they never tell truth.
Plutarch recounteth of King Antiochus, That having lost himself a hunting, he
lighted upon a Cottage where were a company of shepherds, and asking them
being at supper, What the world said of the King and his Ministers? The King
(said they) has the report of a good honest gentleman, but that the State was
never worse governed than now, for it is served by the greediest and the
gripingest Ministers that were in the world: and when he came back again to
Court, he told those that were about him; Since I first took possession of
this my Kingdom, I never heard the truth of things till yesterday. Amongst
four hundred Prophets, which Ahab consulted, 3. Reg. 22.
only he met with one that would not lie unto him, and the King hated him for
telling him the truth. Saint Ambrose calls the Palace, Basilica, deriuing it
from the Basiliske, which kills with it is look. Of this creature Aelian says,
That he vomiteth forth his poison upon a stone: And it fits well for Peter,
whom our Savior Christ termed Petram; upon whom the devil (whom the Scripture
styles a Basiliske) vomited forth his poison. Our Savior Christ received much
kindness and courtesy in the house of Martha, of Zacheus, and the Pharisee;
but in Herod's Palace they made a fool of him; In that of Pilat, they whipped
him, and crowned him with thorns; and in that of Caiphas he received so many
affronts, that God only knows what they were: according to that which David
said in his name, Tu scis impropirum meum, and confusionem meam.

The third occasion was, That he would enter into the Palace, by being
brought in by the hands of a woman. S. Peter's sin like that of Adam.
Saint Bernard says, Si infidelitas intrat, quid mirum, si infideliter agat?
Maximus Tirronensis says, That Peter's sin was much like unto that of Adam:
there being employed in both of them, a man, a woman, and a devil. Adam had a
warning not to eat, Peter not to deny: Eve was the occasion that Adam did
eat; and Cayphas maid-seruant, that Peter did deny. In a word, a woman was
the instrument of all our deaths, and threw down to the ground those two
Columbs and pillars of the world: but Peter's fall was the fouler, for Eve
proceeded with inticements and flatteries, and Adam suffered himself to be
overcome, Ne contristaret delitias, Lest he should grieve his Love. But this
woman (says Saint Augustine) proceeded with threatenings; now a woman is very
powerful in matter of allurements, inticings, dalliance, and deceiving,
through profession of love: but in matter of fear (as Saint Gregory has
observed) she is very weak. A woman triumphed over Sampson, David, Solomon,
Sisera, and Holophernes, by making love, and using deceit: but here a maid,
with only a bunch of keys hanging at her girdle, triumphed over Peter, by
fear.

The fourth occasion was, Saint Peter's offering to thrust into the Palace.
Joseph could not avoid the occasion, because his Mistress called him unto her;
David did cast his eye aside by chance: but Peter did seek occasion, And he
that loves anger shall perish by it. He does not say, He that loves war or
victory, but he that loves danger. Many of the children of Israel did cut off
the thumbs from their fingers, because they would excuse themselves from
profanation, by singing the songs of Sion; and being importuned thereunto,
Sing unto us one of the songs of Sion; They answered, How shall we sing one of
the Lords songs in a strange land, etc. Osee says, Non vocabis me vltra
Baalim, sed vocabis me vir meus. Baalim is the same, as Vir meus, But because
there was an Idol that was called Baalim, God said, Do not call me Baalim; to
the end that no man may presume that thou yet bear Baalim still in thy mind,
or for to take all occasion from thee, of thinking thereof any more.

On Gods part there are likewise very good reasons. Man bya sight of his own
weakness is taught to pity an others.


The first shall be of Saint Gregory. Saint Peter being to be a Pastor, it
was fit that he should fall into so foul a fault, least that afterward he
should be scandalized by other men's offenses, and carry too sharp and hard a
hand toward sinners. Saint Augustine touches upon the same reason, in his
books de Ciuitate Dei, persuading the Bishops of Galilea, Reasons why Christ
suffered Peter to deny him.
That Clemency should sway more with them, than severity; love, than power;
softness, than sharpness; for, there is no man that lives without sin. And
if our Savior Christ should have censured Peter after his first denial, he
would not have reapt from thence so much fruit, as now he did.

The second shall be of Saint August. who says, That it is a wholesom^
medicine for a proud man, to suffer him to fall into some grievous and manifest
sin; to the end, that the foulness of that fault may abate his pride. Saint
Peter was so peremptory and so presumptuous, that he did press this point
with such a deal of confidence and boldness, that he told his Master, Though
that all men shall be offended by thee, yet will I never be offended. M^t. 26.
And Christ then telling him that he should deny him thrice, he presently
replied thereupon; Though I should dye with thee, yet will I not deny thee:
but you see how this his courage was afterward cooled. Which presumption of
his, when he saw his great weakness, he humbly bewailed with many a bitter
tear, which turned to his exceeding great good. And this reason is confirmed
by Saint Chrysostom, who says, That God permitted Peter to deny his Master,
that he might thereby learn to rely more upon God, than himself. Saint Peter
gave less credit to Christ's words, than his own resolution: but the success
thereof did put him out of his error. Leo the Pope says, That God did suffer
Peter thus to fall, that the holiest might take heed not to trust too much to
their own strength. Euthimius further adds, that this negation of his, was
as it were a Fiador, or surety, against any bosting or glorying in those so
many miracles, which were afterward to be wrought by Peter. Saint Paul says
of himself, That the pricks that he had in his flesh, did serve as so many
Piguelas or lines to your hawks iesses, that he might not sore too high,
being puffed up with these his many revelations, Ne magnitudo reuelationum
extollat me.

The third shall be of Leo the Pope, who says, That God did permit in Peter so
great a sin, Vt in Ecclesia remedium poenitentiae conderetur, For the better
founding and establishing in the Church, the authority and efficacy of
repentance. The like reason is rendered by Saint Jerome, By Peter's fall (says
he) was manifested the virtue of repentance, against the poison of sin: which
is all one with that of Saint Paul; I was a blasphemer, a persecuter, etc. And
God was content to give way thereunto, for the better instruction of those that
were to believe hereafter. He that makes treacle, tryes it first upon his own
child, etc. God sent Jeremy to the Potters shop, that he might see how the
broken vessel was to be new molded again, and come out better than before.
And shall not I be able to do as much with you, as the Potter with his clay?
Where it is to be noted, That as the clay oftentimes receives a better form
and fashion than at first, and for more honorable use: So (says Saint
Chrysostom and Euthymius) Peter was made much the better by this.

First, because it was a very good warning unto him, not to presume any more on
himself. And therefore Christ asking him whether he loved him? He durst
neither say I nor no.

Secondly, because God pardoning this his disloyalty, it was but a further
inflaming of his love, and setting his heart more on fire in the zeal of his
service; according to that saying of our Savior Christ, He little loves to
whom little is forgiven. In a word, it was a fulfilling of Abacucs prophecy,
If thou did heretofore tread one step in the way of death, thou shall now
tread ten for it in the way of life.

Peter more injurious to Christ, than all his enemies Psalm. 142. (...) ^.12
Then he began to curse himself, and to swear, etc, This his negation or
denial, was foretold by David, I looked on my right hand, and beheld, but
there was none that would know me. As also by Jeremy, They have denied the
Lord, and said it is not he. S. Peter had learned in the school of Christ, Let
your Communication be yea, yea, and nay, nay. The maid asked him if he were not
one of Christ's Disciples, He answered, I am not. But she replied unto him, Thou
art; For thy speech does bewray thee. But he, that he might avoid all spies, or
any further inquiry, Began to fall a cursing, etc. How now Peter? Art thou
well in thy wits? know thou what thou do? Thou that sawst thy Savior so
glorious in Tabor, Thou that confessedst him to be the Son of the living God,
Thou, whom he called, together with thy brother Andrew, to be fishers of men;
Thou, to whom he stretched forth his hand in the sea, to save thee from
drowning; do thou not know him? I know him not. O Peter lament thy
ignorance, for thou have been more cruel to thy Master than all they that
conspired against him, and laid their heads together to torment him: for as for
them, some bound his hands, others his neck, others spat in his face, these
buffeted him, those platted thorns on his head, others pulled him by the
beard, and tugged him by the hair, one pierced his side; but thou did run
him through the heart. O Peter (says Saint Augustine) What is become of your
courage now? What, of your great brags? What of this your protestation and
strong resolution, I will lay down my life for thee? And of that your, Why
should I not follow thee, and die with thee? There was no torment that troubled
Job so much, as that his friends should forsake him, My friends and familiar
acquaintance stood afar off from me. David was not so sensible of any of all
his persecutions, as that of his son Absalon; And Julius Caesar took it not
half so tenderly at any of the other Traitors hands, as of his son Brutus,
and therefore said unto him when he stabd him, Et tu quoque Brute? Ha Brutus art
thou in this Conspiracy? Gentiles and Jews, Ecclesiastics and Seculars,
Patritians and Plebeyans, did all conspire against Christ; but none of those
injuries that they offered him, touched his heart so near as Peter's Denial of
him. That Judas should sell him, betray him, and deliver him up into his
enemies hands; that the high Priests, Herod and Pilat should desire his death,
and consent thereunto, it was nothing, because they hated him and were his
professed enemies: But that Peter should deny him, to whom he had made such
glorious promises, and having so often made offer unto him of his life, that he
should play the Renegado, and deal thus and thus, etc.

Then the Lord turned back, and looked upon Peter, and Peter went out and wept
bitterly. Saint Luke like a good Painter draws me Peter first with a cole, but
now he gives him his more lively colors. The first variegation and garnishment
that he gives this piece, was, our Savior Christ's looking back upon Peter: How
he looked on him, we have handled elsewhere. The effect, which this his looking
on him wrought, was the making of his heart to melt like wax; and the turning
of Christ's eye, the turning of Peter's eyes into two fountains. The Astrologers
say, That he that is borne in the aspect of Mars, is stern and cruel; in that
of Jupiter, merciful and courteous; in that of Mercury, industrous and
eloquent. The beams of the sun inlighten the air, dispellclouds, fertilize the
fields, breeds pearls in the shells of the rivers, coral in the bottom of the
sea, gold, silver, and other mettalls in the veins of the earth, and like a
well ordered clock, gouernes all the world. What shall the Son of
righteousness do then with the beams of his Eyes? Sidonius Apolinaris
reports of those of Thracia, The power of Christ's eyes.
That for to signify the virtue and power of the eyes of our Savior Christ,
they did paint a sun, whence three Rays, or bright-shining beams brake
forth: the one, raising up one that was dead; the other did break a stony
heart; and the third did melt a snowie mountain; and the Motto was this, Oculi
Dei, ad nos. The beams of Christ's eyes raise up the dead, break rocks, and
melt snow, A facie tua (says Esaias) montes defluent. The fire which they hid in
the transmigration of Babylon, the children of Israel found at their return,
turned into water; but exposing it to the beams of the sun, it grew again
to be fire, to the great admiration of the beholders: which is a figure of
Saint Peter, who through his coldness became water, but the beams of the Son
of righteousness, raised a great fire out of this water. Pliny reports of
certain stones in Phrygia, that being beaten upon by the beams of the sun,
send forth drops of water: But the beams of the Son of righteousness did
not only from this Petra, or stone Saint Peter, draw tears, but whole rivers
of water. According to that of David, Psalm. 114.
Which turns the rock into water-pooles, and the flint into a fountain of
water.

Saint Ambrose seems to stand somewhat upon it, why Peter did not ask
forgiveness of his sins at Gods hands? Inuenio (says he) quod fleuerit, no^
inuenio quid dixerit; lachrymas lego, satisfactionem non lego; I find that he
wept, but do not find what he said; I read his tears, but read not his
satisfaction. The reasons of this his silence, and that he did not crave pardon
of God by word of mouth, are these:

First, because he had run himself into discredit by his rash offers, and
afterward by his stiff denial; and therefore thought with himself, That it
was not possible for him to express more affection with his mouth, than he had
uttered heretofore, Etiam si oportuerit me mori tecum, non te negabo, etc. And
that tongue which had denied him, to whom it had given so good an assurance,
could never (as he thought) deserve to be believed. And therefore our Savior
questioning him afterward concerning his love, he durst not answer more than
this, Thou know, o Lord, whether I love thee or no.

Secondly, he asks not pardon by words, because the pledges of the heart are
so sure, that they admit no deceit. And for that, Lachryma sunt cordis sanguis,
Tears are the hearts blood; S. Ambrose therefore says, Lachrymaru^ preces,
vtiliores sunt, qua^ sermonu^; quia sermo in precando forte fallit, lachryma
omnino non fallit: The prayers of tears are more profitable, than of words;
for words in praying, may now and then deceive us, but tears never. S.
Chrysostom says, That our sins are set down in the Table-booke of Gods
memory; but that tears are the sponge which blotteth them out. And indeering
the force of tears, he says, That in Christ's soldier, the noblest Act that
he can do, is to shed his blood in his service, Maiorem charitatem nemo habet,
etc. For what our blood shed for Christ, effects; that does our tears for
our sins. Mary Magdalen did not shed her blood, but she shed her tears: And
Saint Peter did not now shed blood, but he shed tears; which were so
powerful, that after that he had wept, he was trusted with a part of the
government of the Church; who before he had wept, had not government of
himself: The efficacy of Tears.
for tears cure our wounds, cheer our souls, ease the conscience, and please
God, O lachryma humilis (says Saint Jerome) tuum est regnum, etc. O humble
Tear, thine is the kingdom, thine is the power, thou fear not the Judges
Tribunal, thou inioynest silence to thine accusers: if thou enter empty, thou
do not go out empty; thou subduest the invincible, and bindest the
omnipotent.

Hence it is that the devil bears such envy to our Tears. When Holofernes
had dried up the fountains of Bethulia, he held the City his: and the Devil
when he shall come to dry up the tears in our eyes, when he has stopped up
those waters that should flow from the soul of a sinner, he hopes he is his.
Elian of Tryphon, the Tyrant, reports of this one unheard of cruelty: Fearing
his Subjects would conspire against him, he made a public Edict, that they
should not talk one with another; and being thus debarred of talking one with
another, they did look very pitifully one upon another, communicating their
minds by their eyes. And being forbid by a second Edict, that they should not
so much as look one upon another, when they saw they were restrained of that
liberty likewise, wheresoever they met one another, they fell a weeping. This
seemed to the Tyrant the damnablest and most dangerous conspiracy of all the
rest, and resolved to put them to death. The devil is afraid of our words,
afraid of our affections, but much more afraid of our tears. O Lord so
mollify our sinful hearts, that whenever we offend thee, our words, our
affections, and our tears, may in all devotion and humility present
themselves before thee, craving pardon for our sins. Which we beseech thee to
grant us for thy dear Son Christ Jesus sake. To whom with the holy Spirit,
be all praise, honor, and glory, etc.

THE XL. SERMON. The Conversion of the good Thief.
MAT. 27. Cum eo crucifixi sunt duo Latrones, vnus a dextris, and alter a
sinistris.

There were crucified with him two thieves, one at his right hand, an other on
his left.


THere are three most notable Conuersions, which the Church does celebrate.

That of Saint Paul.

That of Mary Magdalen.

That of the good Thief.

The one, living here upon earth.

The other, now reigning in heaven.

The third, dying upon the Cross.

Of all the rest, this seems to be the most prodigious and most strange.

First, because Mary Magdalen saw many of our Savior Christ's miracles, heard
many of his Sermons; and besides, her sisters good example might work much
good upon her.

Secondly, Saint Paul saw Christ rounded about with glory, more resplendent
than the Sun; had heard that powerful voice which threw him down from his
horse, and put him in the hands of that dust whereof he was created.

But the Thief neither saw Miracle, nor Sermon, nor example, nor glory, nor
light, nor voice, save only Christ rent and torn upon the Cross, as if he
had been as notorious a thief as those that suffered on either side of him.

Again, How much the quicker is the motion, and the extremes more distant,
repugnant, and contrary, by so much the more strange and wonderful is this
change and alteration. This thief was a huge way off from either believing, or
loving our Savior Christ: and that he should now on the sudden and in so
short a space, pass from a thief to a Martyr, from the gallows to Paradise,
must needs be an admirable change. Mira mutatio (says S. Leo) vt insidiator
viarum, vsque ad Crucem reus, sit Christi repent Confessor, This is a
wonderful change, that a highway robber, condemned here to the Cross, should
in the turning of a hand come to confess Christ. In this one action did all
the attributes of God shine and show themselves in a most glorious manner; and
especially his wisdom, in making these extremes to meet and join together
so on the sudden, and as it were in an instant. Eccl. 3.
Ecclesiastes says, That there is a time to be borne, and a time to dye; a
time to plant, and a time to pluck up that which is planted; a time to slay,
and a time to heal; a time to break down, and a time to build; a time to
weep, and a time to laugh: All these extremes did his wisdom knit and link
together. In this action meet those two extremes of being borne, and of
dying; for as much as we see this thief dye to the world, and to be borne
anew to Christ. (And the death of the righteous, the Church styles it a birth.)
Those of planting, and plucking up that which is planted; because grace is here
planted in the soul of the thief, and sin plucked up. Those of slaying, and
healing; for that our Savior Christ receives these mortal wounds in his own
body, and heals those of the thief. Those of building, and breaking down
that is built; In regard that the body of sin is destroyed, and the building
of grace is set up in him. Those of weeping and laughing; in that the thief
does now bewail his sins, and laughes for joy to hear the gladsome news of
heaven. In a word, the more incurable that the diseases are which a Physician
cures, the more (says Saint Augustine) is his skill and cunning to be
commended.

Gods omnipotency, was likewise seen herein: Saint Chrysostom says, That it
was so great a Miracle, that the Sun should be darkened, that the earth
should tremble and shake, that the stones should dash their heads one against
another, or that the veil of the Temple should be rent in twain; as was the
inlightning of a blind understanding, the mollifying of a hard and stony
heart, and the remoouing from the soul, the veil of it is ignorance. And the
truth of this may very well be proved by Moses his rod, to whose Empire,
though the earth, the sea, the elements, light, darkness, and all creatures
whatsoever were obedient, yet could it not move hard-hearted Pharaohs breast.

He likewise discovered his omnipotency, in making the Thief an instrument to
revenge himself of the Devil, of the Pharisees, of Pilat, and of the people.

Of the devil, who (as Saint Ambrose says) had blasoned it abroad to the
world, and triumphed greatly therein, That our Savior Christ having but twelve
Apostles, he had won one of them from him; persuading him, that it were the
better life of the two to be a thief, than an Apostle: but for a Judas, a
poor base thief, which stole but blankes and farthings, from the poverty of
that sacred College, Christ won a thief from him, which had spent his whole
life in the devils service and had committed many famous robberies and
notorious thefts. Thieves are the devils weapons: but our Savior Christ being
the stronger of the two, took from him the greatest thief in the world,
leaving him with his own sword confounded and ashamed, Cant 1.
I have compared thee o my Love to the troops of horses in Pharaohs charriots.
Solomon had great store of horses of the Egyptian race for to furnish his
charriots, and to fear his enemies (as the French use to wage war against
Spain with Spanish Gennets,) He then says, that as Solomon made war against
the Egyptians, with the horses of Egypt: so the Church confounds the devil
with his own Arms, which are thieves and robbers. Confounding and making
ashamed Pilat, the high Priests, the Pharisees, and the people, with the tongue
of a thief. There is not any thing in the world more infamous than a thief.
Of all baseness it was the greatest, that our Savior should die as a thief.
It was much that he should become man, Exinaniuit semetipsum; more that he
should take upon him the form of a servant; Formam serui accipiens; and more
then that, That he should be no more esteemed of than a worm of the earth; and
more yet then this, That he should take upon him in his Circumcision the image
of a sinner; but most of all, that he should die as a notable thief, betwixt
two thieves. In the garden he said, Ye come forth to apprehend me as if I had
been a Thief. There he was taken like a thief, here condemned to death as a
thief, that no man might take pity of him. There is no man that dies by the
hand of Justice but is pitied of the people, save only the thief; not one
that takes compassion of him. He that sees a thief hung up in the highway,
uses as he passes by, to say, Benedictum lignum, per quod fit Iustitia,
Blessed be that gallows, on which such good Justice is done. The Church
receives the Jews, the Moore, and the Gentile, but will not entertain a
thief. In Leuiticus, God did forbid the Weasil, and the Mouse, and the frog,
also the Rat, and the Lyzard, and the Cameleon, and the Crocodile, and the
Mole, as unclean and unfit to be eaten: and if you will but read in the
natural Histories the conditions and properties of these creatures, you shall
see that they are all thieves. It made many men marvel, That the Crocodile
being so great a creature, the divine Historian should reckon him up amongst
these other contemptible and small creatures. And Rodolphus Flauiacensis
renders the reason of it to be this, That they have all of them theeuish
qualities. The Crocodile more particularly swims in the sea, runs on the
land, one while by day, another while by night; she lays a very little egg,
which afterward grows to be a great beast, and goes still increasing as long
as she lives; and is not only the stamp and figure of a Sea-pyrat, but of a
Land-robber, which night and day seeks all occasions to rob and steal. Like
unto that thief which in some poor country village, begins first to fall a
pilfring of some six royalls, and from this so small a beginning, raises his
stock to fifty thousand Ducats, and comes at last to be a Regidor, a
Cauallero, and a Titulado. And by this so vile and errant a thief, as is here
now treated of, our Savior Christ did confound all Jerusalem. He might have
made use of the tongue of a Prophet, or an Evangelist; but as Sampson showed
his valor in conquering a thousand armed men with the iawe-bone of an Ass,
which had not approved it self to be so great, had he made use of Golias his
sword, or Hercules club, or of Theseus his mace, so our Savior Christ, etc.

Gods mercy in this case, did also show it self exceedingly. Saint Augustine
says, That this Conversion was an especial Miracle of Christ's affronts and
wounds. He delivered up himself to the shame and reproach of the Cross, that
he might glorify this thief. That he might save a thief, was the intent of
his dying between two thieves. And in another place, he says, That he was
nailed on the Cross, and suffered his blood to be shed, that he might cleanse
a will that was grown so aged and foul with sin. Thomas says, That it is
Gods great mercy, that those that are grown old in their sins, should be
saved: For, having by ill and long custom their taste so quite marred and
spoiled, they abhor that which should give them health, and dye in the end by
the hands of their own foolish longings. On their graves that died by the fire
of Gods wrath, whilst the flesh of their quayles was yet between their teeth,
this Epitaph was put; Sepulchra concupiscentiae. For commonly, these their
masters and their delights are both buried together. And therefore S. Paul
says, 1. Cor. 10.
Now these are ensamples to us, to the intent that we should not lust after
evil things, as they also lusted. The truth is always answerable to the
figure: and if you prolong your longings as they did in your life time, your
death like theirs will be likewise bad. Saint Bernard treating upon that place
of Saint Matthew, Mat. 3.
The axe is now put to the root of the tree, says, That the tree does for the
most part fall to that side, whereunto the weight of it is boughs causes it to
incline; and that our lustful longings and desires are the boughs of this
tree, inclining the contrary way. And therefore if a man's whole life shall
lean wholly unto sin, and incline it self to wickedness, it must be Gods
exceeding great mercy, if it fall at last unto Grace.

Gods mercy was also the more, in regard of this thieves blaspheming of him,
The thieves likewise reviled him. Saint Augustine, Epiphanius, Anselme, Saint
Jerome, Saint Ambrose, and Beda says, That the plural number is put here for
the singular; and that only one thief did blaspheme,by the figure Synedoche,
or Analogia, as it seems to Saint Augustine; which (according to Saint
Jerome) is a figure frequently used in Scripture. Saint Luke says, That the
soldiers gave our Savior vinegre to drink, whereas the rest of the
Evangelists speak only of one. Exodus 32. Dan. 1^. Act 4. Psalm. 2. Heb.
Of the calfe, Exodus says, These, o Israel, are thy Gods. Nebuchadnezzar said
to the three children, Sydrach, Misech, and Abednego, speaking of the Statue of
gold, Ye will not worship our Gods. David treating of Herod and Pilat, as
appears by that of the Acts, says, The Kings of the earth band themselves,
and the Princes are assembled together against the Lord, and against his
Christ. Saint Paul in his Catalogue which he makes of the Saints, says, They
stopped the mouths of Lions; Daniel being the only man that did it: so, Secti
sunt, When it was only Esayas that was sawne asunder. Again, Circuierunt me
loris, which had only reference to Elias. And it is a very usual phrase both
in the Latin and the Spanish tongue, to say, Alexandros, Annibales, Scipiones,
etc. And a maine argument hereof, is that sharp and severe reprehension
wherewith he rebuked his companion, that blasphemed Christ; saying unto him,
Fear thou not God, seeing thou art in the same condemnation? Who if he had
blasphemed our Savior, would never have so roundly reproved him.

Of a contrary opinion to this is Saint Jerome, Saint Chrysostom, Cyril,
Hilary, Thomas, Origin, Theophilact, Euthimius, Saint Ambrose, and Saint Mark,
and Saint Matthew seem to express as much in plain terms: but be it in that
sense that they would have it, it is but so much the more indeering of Gods
mercy, who also has compassion even of the beasts of the field. According to
that which Esaias prophesied, Esaias 43. Job 58.
The wild beasts shall honor me, the Dragons and the Ostriches, because I gave
water in the desert, and floods in the wilderness to give drink to my people,
even to mine elect: as if he should have said, It is not much that the stars
of heaven should praise me, or the Quire of Angels, or the children of God,
which are captiuated by their knowledge of me, and the benefits that I have
heaped upon them. But that a thief, a villain, one that was bred up in
bushes, and lay lurking to do mischief in the thickest of the woods, and in
mountainous places, that such a one should praise and magnify my name, it must
have an Epithet beyond more than much.

Lastly, The divine prouidenc^ showed it self, in having hid and laid up such
it is treasures in a thief, Have thou entered into the treasure of the snow? or
have thou seen the treasures of the hayle, Job 38.22.
which I have hid against the time of trouble? etc. In the frozen breast of a
sinner, and in those storms of our sins, as thick and as hard as hayle, God
has hidden and stored up (as Saint Gregory says) against the day of trouble,
the great and rich treasures of his grace.

There were two thieves crucified with him, one on the right hand, and the
other on the left. The doubt which in this story does most gravel men's
thought, is, That of two thieves which were crucified on either side of our
Savior, the one should be saved, and the other damned. S. Aug. renders two
reasons thereof. And first of all we are to suppose, that there it not any
cause of predestination: Before that they had done either good or evil, I
loved Jacob, and hated Esau; So says Saint Paul. And in another place, Has
not the Potter power out of the same mass or lump, to make one vessel for
honor, and another for dishonor? Some for to serve in the kitchen, and some to
set upon the table. The judgments of God are secret, which we must rather
reverence than inquire into, crying out with the same Apostle, O altitudo
aiuitiarum, etc.

Secondly, it is to be supposed, that of our vocation to faith, there is
likewise no cause given. And therefore in this point, we must take Saint
Augustine along with us, who says, Quare hunc trahat, hunc non trahat? id est;
Ad fidem, noli iudicare, si non vis errare. Judge not, why he draws this man
to Faith and not that.

And here Saint Augustine brings in the example of Pharaoh and Nebuchadnezzar,
whom God sought to draw unto him with one and the selfsame kind of force and
violence: But the one did follow him that lent him his hand to direct him, and
the other refused to be guided by him. They were both men according to nature;
both Kings, according to their dignity; both had sinned alike, Quoad culpam,
for they had made Gods people slaves, and used them very ill and hardly; and
quoad poenam, they were both of them punished with stripes from heaven. The
warning was alike to both: but how then comes it to pass, That the means
being in both alike, the ends should be so diverse and different? That the one
should acknowledge Gods power, and repenting his wickedness, sorrowed with
tears, and said, I Nebuchadnezzar praise and glorify the King of Heaven; But
the other persisting in his obstinacy, said, I know not the Lord, Who is the
Lord? etc. In this account may come in those two servants of Pharaoh, which
were fellow prisoners with Joseph, whereof the one was saved, and the other
hanged. We may likewise put into the reckoning those two, of whom Saint Matthew
says, that grinding in one mill, The one shall be received, and the other
refused. Mat. 24.
And those two, who standing by Aaron, when he was offering incense, the one
was stricken dead, and the other remained alive. And as in the Tribunal of
judgment, God shall put the sheep on the right hand, and the goats on the
left, and shall separate the good fishes from the bad, and chafe from the
corn, and the tares from the wheat; so in the Tribunal of the Cross, Leo the
Pope says, he condemned the blasphemous thief, and saved the good thief.

The second moral reason, was to teach us in those two thieves, The nature of
Hope and Fea^e.
the easiest and the safest way to heaven: To wit, That a soul should live
between hope and fear. Fear is the bridle which holds in Hope; Hope is the
anchor which secureth Fear. Fear makes thee a coward, considering what thou
art, and the small worth that is in thee: But Hope makes thee confident,
considering what God is, and his infinite clemency. Upon these two virtues,
God imployeth all his favors, Gods eyes are upon those that fear him, and
those that trust in his mercy: For he has his eyes nailed unto those which
fear him, Genesis 49.
and place their hopes on his goodness. Jacob prophesied of Isachar, That he
should be a strong Ass, cowching down between two burdens. It is a common
saying, That those are not to be trusted that live between two Kingdoms:
because borderers (for the most part) are a bold and unruly people. But here it
is quite otherwise, The best people for heaven, are those that live between the
Fear of hell, and the Hope of heaven. Saint Augustine declares the
extraordinary happiness of this virtue of Fear, Beatipauperes Spiritu,
Blessed are the poor in Spirit, For they that have much to loose, live still
in fear. A stout Roman being threatened by Caesar, told him, Mihi senectus
metum ademit, Old age has made me fearelesse: He had but a few years to
live, which made him esteeeme the less of the loss of his life. But the
righteous considers with himself, that he has eternal years to loose, I
had those years still in my mind; Jude.
w^e therefore unto them that have followed the ways of Cain, and are cast
away by the deceit of Baalams wages. There are some which build too much upon
their own confidence, like unto Balaam, who having been both disobedient and
covetous, would yet notwithstanding dye the death of the righteous. Number. 33.
Without Hope, what good can man enjoy? The devil used all the tricks and
devices that his wit was able to invent, to put Job out of hope: For which end
he made use of two means.

Satan's practice to deprive Job of Hope.
The one he took from the earth, by procuring that those his friends, on whom he
most trusted, and hoped for greatest comfort from them, should cast him down,
and drive him into despair, by their bitter words and sharp censures.

The other from heaven, by getting fire to descend from thence; speaking in
these two thus unto him, What should thou now do but despair and die,
seeing thou have nothing to hope for either from heaven above, or earth
beneath. He has not only robbed me of my leaves and my boughs, tearing down
my branches, but has rent up my hopes by the roots. And yet for all this,
says patient Job, Though he kill me, yet will I trust in him. Saint Ambrose
says, That God does most of all resent the sin of desperation; Not because
of all other sins it is the greatest, but because it is most prejudicial to
man: for it shuts up the passage to blessedness, and bars the door of
heaven against us; God being more sensible of the hurt we do our selves, than
of the wrong we do him. And therefore Judas his despair did much more
trouble him, than did his selling of him: for in selling him, he did but show
what little reckoning he made of his Humanity; but in his despairing, the base
opinion that he had of his Divinity. Vae illis (as before) qui in viam Cain
abierunt, Genesis 4.
Woe unto them that have followed the ways of Cain. Now the worst of those
ways that Cain took, was his despair, Mayor est iniquitas mea, quam vt
veniam merear; as if he should have said, God either cannot or will not pardon
so grievous and heinous a sin as this is. Yet we see, that God did permit,
that he might lay some good ground for our Fear, that one of the thieves
should be damned: and that it is neither our dying side by side with Christ,
nor his bedashing us with his divine blood, neither the prayer which he made to
his Father with tears in his eyes, nor the having of the image of a Crucifixe,
or of the Virgin Mary hanging at our beds head [but the wearing of Christ in
our hearts by Faith] could do this thief any good, or keep him from leaping at
once from the Cross unto hell: and yet he would that the other should be
saved, not only as he was a thief, and to find pardon of that particular
offense; as to lay a foundation for the Hope of forgiveness, for all other
sins whatsoever committed by us in this world, and to the end, that his
absolution (as Saint Augustine says) and his indulgence might serve as a
comfort to all Christians, For, as in Adam we lost Paradise; so in the thief
we got it again. Certain desperate fellows uttered by Ezechiel, Our bones
are dried up, and our hope is perished: But God in answer says unto them, I
will open your Sepulchers, and put life into those your dry bones; do ye not
therefore despair. And for the better ingrafting of this truth in his peoples
hearts, he raised up a whole field that was full of these bones, etc. Arnoldus
the Abbot says, Non habet metas diuina clementia: Sit, qui inuocet; erit, qui
exaudict: Sit, qui poeniteat; non de^rit qui indulgeat: Gods mercy knows no
bounds, nor limits. Let man call, and God will hear: let man repent, and God
will forgive.

We indeed receive things worthy of that we have done, but this man has done
nothing amiss. This whole History does depend upon these four points.

The first point, are those motives, which moved this Thief to be converted.

The second, The great good hap that he had.

The third, The diligence that he used on his part, that God might pardon and
favor him.

The fourth and last, The favor that he did him, and the great reward he
bestowed upon him.

Amongst other Motives, the first shall be the Title of the Cross, Jesus
Nazarenus Rex Iudaeorum, Jesus of Nazareth King of the Jews. It was
prophesied, That his Kingdom should take it is beginning from the Cross,
Motives iuducing the thief to his conversion.
Dominus regnabit a ligno. The Jews did secretly honor the word a ligno; The
Saints did openly reverence it. Christ had given great pledges in his birth,
that he was a King, by Angels, Shepherds, and Kings; In his life, by the
obedience of all sorts of creatures, Who is this whom the winds and seas obey?
By the voices of the Devils themselves, by the whips of the Temple, and by his
last Supper. Here be some standing here which shall not taste of death until,
etc. In his passion. My kingdom is not of this world; and ye shall see the Son
of man coming in power. But in his death he gave far greater pledges. All
the creatures gave testimony of their Creator; The devils cried out (so says
Eusebius Caesariensis) Pan magnus interijt. And howbeit, on Pilats and the
peoples part, the Title of the Cross was placed there in scoff and scorn of
him; yet the divine providence made use of these living instruments. And as in
the creation he walked on the waters, so in the reparation of mankind, he
passed through punishments and pains; of our Savior Christ, making their
jests turn to earnest: The same consideration being likewise to be had,
concerning the Crown, the Scepter, and the Robe of purple, which in derision
they put upon him, etc.

Hilarie and Bonauenture both say, That our Savior Christ's Patience, was one
great Motive; In heaven, the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost bear
witness; Io^. 5.
In earth, the Holy Ghost, Water, and Blood: All these testimonies prove the
Divinity of Christ. But to let pass those of heaven; The Holy Ghost does
prove that he was a Divine person, whose voice was so powerful when the
Spirit took his leave of his body, that it forced the Centurion to say, Vere
filius Dei erat iste, Mar. 15.
Truly this man was the Son of God. The Water (which was miraculous) proves,
that he was a Divine person; for it is not possible, that water should
naturally flow from a dead body. The Blood, that proves it, not only in
regard of it is muchnesse, but that it was shed with so much patience. For
though his wounds were many, and his torments great, yet like a sheep before
the Shearer, he never once opened his mouth, or showed the least resistance.
And Euthymius, and Theophylact add, That the prayer which he heard him make to
his Father, Father forgive them; (which was the first that he uttered on the
Cross) did work that amasement in this thief, That he said with himself,
Sure this is no man: And thereupon began to have an assured hope of the
forgiveness of his sins. For (thought he) he that is so desirous to pardon
those that had used him so cruelly, not only tormenting him in his body, but
also scoffing and flouting at him, to vex (if it were possible) his soul,
will surely far more willingly pardon me, who being heartily sorry for my
sins, desire to become his servant. I have heard that the Kings of Israel are
merciful: but none of them all had so generous and free a heart, as our
Savior Christ. Tertullian says, That he came into the world, for to show
himself a God in his suffering; making Patience the badge and mark of his
Divinity. Patience the badge of Christ's Divinity.
And that the power which he showed in pardoning, being so great; much greater
was that which he showed in suffering. It was much that he should suffer for
man, much more in that he suffered for man, when as man would not suffer him to
be God. To admit a Traitor to his board, to bid him welcome, to feast him, and
make much of him, that finding himself so kindly used, he may make him
surcease from his plotted treasons, winning him unto him by these and the like
courtesies, well may a man do this; but that God should admit a Judas to his
table, that he should eat with God, God witting, That he would go from the
table to execute his treason, to sell God, and to deliver him up into the hands
of his enemies, only God and his patience could suffer so great an injury:
which made Saint Augustine to say, A potentia discimus patientiam.

S. Chrysostom, Origin, and S. Jerome, are or opinion, That the alteration of
the sun and the elements, wrought the same effect upon the thief, as it did
upon Dyonisius in Athens, when he cried out, Either the world is at an end, or
this man is God. Vincent Ferrariensis says, That the shadow of our Savior
Christ did inlighten this Thief. And that the shadow of Saint Peter healing
bodies, it was not much, that the shadow of Christ should heal souls.
Whereunto may be applied that of David, Thou have shadowed my head in the day
of battle.

Petrus Damianus says, That the blessed Virgin might be a means of this
Thieves Conversion, by entreating her son, that he would be pleased to open
the eyes of his soul: Whether she were moved thereunto, because the good
thief did not revile Christ, or whether (which Saint Augustine reports, though
some attribute the same to Anselmus) That in her journey to Egypt, he being
Captain of the Thieves, did the blessed Virgin many good services, being much
taken with the prettiness of the child, and the sober and modest countenance
of the mother; sure I am, that it was a happiness so sole in the world, and
consisting of such strange circumstances, That no man did, or ever shall enjoy
the like good luck. And as we cannot expect a second death of our Savior
Christ; so such a second happy encounter as this was, cannot be hoped for.
This Thief came in that good time, when as heaven did shoure down mercies;
when there was a plenary Indulgence and Iubilee granted; when God did pour
forth the balm of his Blood for to ransom man; when the doors of heaven, and
the wounds of Christ were equally open; when the fountain of living water, did
cry out in the midst of the world, If any man thirst, let him come unto me
and drink; when our Savior had such a longing desire to see the fruit of his
labors and sweats; when he had put that petition to his Father, which began
with Ignosce illis, Forgive them: And it seeming unto him, That his Father was
too slow in granting his request, he did thus pitifully complain unto him, O
my God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? Why came I into the world? Why was I
borne in poverty, lived in labor, and dyed in sorrow? What? Have I labored
then in vain?

Secondly, it was his happiness, (as Saint Gregory Nissen has observed) That
he inioyed our Savior Christ's side, and his shadow; that he was so close under
his wing. He that sails in a little Bark with a powerful Prince, as it
succeeded unto Julius Caesar, Caesarem vehis, and fortunam eius, It is not much
that he should be favored. Saint Ambrose says, That as long as Peter stuck
close to Christ's side, he did set upon a whole squadron at once; but when he
was gone but a little further off from under his wing, a silly maid did
outface him, and made him turn coward. And when he began to sink in the
sea, because he was near Christ, Christ stretched out his hand unto him to save
him, whereas if he had been but two strides further from him, he might have
been in danger of perishing. Saint Cyprian styles him, Collega Christi,
Christ's Colleague, His fellow and companion. When one goes forth into the field
upon a challenge, one girts his sword unto him, another buckles his armor, and
others accompany him into the field; and if he get the victory, all do share
in the glory of the Conqueror. In that his combat in the desert, the Angels
did wait upon him: In that combat of his death, an Angel comforted him. The
Thief, he goes along with him for company, and all do partake of his glory.

Thirdly, Saint Chrysostom says, That he met with another happiness, to wit,
That he dyed as Christ did, upon the Cross: God having proposed heaven unto us
in Conquest; only he shall enjoy it, that can get it by force of Arms. But
the Cross does excuse them this labor; For, it being heavens key, The Cross
is heavens Key.
whosoever shall come therewith, may enter without any violence; but others
must be forced to knock, and that hard, at the gates, and it is well if with a
great deal of labor he can get in at last. Saint Bernard says, That the
leagues which are between earth and heaven, are without number; but he that
has a familiar, let him bestride but a stick, and with that wooden horse he
will travel in two hours from Madrid to Rome: This virtue the Cross inioyes,
with much more advantage; do but fasten your self to that, and in an instant
you shall be conveyed to heaven. And expounding that word, Dum veneris in
regnum tuum, this Saint says, Et tum vidit, Then, even then did he see him
taking his journey for heaven, and said unto him, Lord remember me when thou
come into thy Kingdom.

Fourthly, it was his good hap to stand mainely then for Christ's honor, when in
a manner all the world had forsaken him, Quando Petrus (says S. Chrysostom.)
negabat in terrae, Latro confitebatur in Cruce, When Peter denied him on earth,
the Thief acknowledged him on the Cross. When Judas (says S. Ambrose) sold
him as a Slave, then did the Thief acknowledge him for his Lord. O my good
Thief (says S. Aug.) What could thou see in a man that was blood-lesse,
blasphemed, abhorred, and despised? What Scepter? what Crown could thou hope
for from him, whose Scepter was a reed, whose Crown thorns? etc. David
commanded his son Solomon, 3. Reg. 2.
that he should show kindness to the sons of Barzillai the Gileadite, and
cause them to sit down and eat with him at his own table, because they stuck
close unto him in his tribulation.

Fifthly, That he had the good hap to be there just in the nicke when Christ
was crowned with a Crown of glory, and had made this his wedding day, and all
things were ended according to his own hearts desire: and therefore so noble a
bridegroom could not but confer answerable favors; and so great and
generous a King, do no less than bestow a Crown upon him Shi^ei railed against
David, when flying from Absalon, he went half naked and unshod, by the skirt
of a mountain; but when the war was ended, he prostrated himself at the Kings
feet, and said, Let not my Lord impute wickedness unto me, nor remember the
thing that thy servant did wickedly, when my Lord the King departed out of
Jerusalem, that the King should take it to his heart: for thy servant does know
that I have done amiss. But Abishay the son of Zeruiah answered and said,
Shall not Shimei die for this? because he cursed the Lords anointed? Shall
four words of submission save the life of this blasphemous dog? But David
said, Shall there any man die this day in Israel? Do thou not know, that I am
this day King over Israel? Make account that they now crown me anew, and that
it is fit that I should show my self frank and generous, not conferring
favors according to the merit of him that asks them, but according to the
liberal disposition of him that does them.

This good fortune no man may expect, much less depend upon: and therefore
Eusebius Emisenus says, Repentance must not be delayed.
Periculosum est in vltimum diem promissa securitas; And that the example of
the Thief, does not favor deferred amendment till a man's death: And though we
are not to streighten Gods franke-heartednes; and howbeit it may be presumed,
that in that hour many thieves are in Gods secret will saved; yet did he only
leave this one public example unto us, Only this one, (says S. Bernard) that
thou may not presume; and only this one, that thou may not despair. And
weighing those words, Verily, I say unto thee, to day shall thou be with me in
Paradise; he says, That he did bind it with an oath, as he used to do in
matters of greatest moment and difficulty: To thee only, not to any other,
shall befall the like extraordinary good hap; for thee only, was this Hodie
ordained. Here then may thou see the rarest accident that ever happened, earth
and heaven reconciled, whilst rivers of Divine blood, run streaming from our
Saviors side for our salvation.

But some one will ask me, How comes it to pass, that this Thief in so short
a space knew the set time and season of this his happy chance, when as
Jerusalem in so many years could not light upon the like encounter? S.
Augustine, S. Chrysostom, and Leo, answer hereunto; That he had Christ for his
Master, who revealed the same unto him, complying with that delivered by
Jeremy, De coelo misit ignem, and eru diuit me. Gregory Nissen says,
Repleuit eum eruditione Spiritus Sancti. Cromatius; In ipso crucis candelabro
sol resplenduit, The Sun did shine unto him upon the candlestick of the
Cross. Theophilact does here apply that parable of Saint Mat. No man does
light a candle, and set it under a bushel. In a word, this light was so
powerful, that it awakened this drowsy and sleepie thief, snorting in the
security of sin, leaving him so well instructed, that S. Augustine says, He
remained as a Master in the Church.

First of all, he used extraordinary diligence in taking hold of this
treasure, leaving all, that he might not loose this, He gave God all that was
in his free power to give him. He had his hands and his feet nailed unto the
Cross; only he had left free unto him his tongue, and his heart: employing
in Christ's service, whatsoever was in his freedom to perform; as his tongue
in defending him, and his heart in loving him.

Secondly, He did not stand waiting for the last plucks of Hope. Emisenus
says, That it was not his last hour, but the first, wherein he knew his
Savior Christ to be God. It is now sixty years since (dearly beloved) that
some of you have known him, and yet ye defer your repentance till the hour
of your death.

Thirdly, he confessed his sins, and how deservedly he did suffer, We indeed
receive things worthy of that we have done. For he that will go about to crave
pardon for his sins, the first step to forgiveness, is to accuse himself of
them. David entered in this way, and the Prodigal, when they cried Peccaui; so
did the Publican, Propitius esto mihi Peccatori. And the Wise man teaches us
to get in this way, Dic tu prius iniquitates tuas, vt iustificeris. Iustus in
principio sermonis accusator est sui. Saint Bernard adds, Sui non alterius,
He is his own accuser, not another man's. Saint Chrysostom, That if the Thief
had not confessed the faults of his life, he would never have presumed to desire
Christ to remember him in his death. Saint Augustine, That if Adam had not
sought to excuse himself, God would never have thrust him out of Paradise.
Saint Chrysostom does much lament it, that our Savior saying; One of you
shall betray me; and prophesieng the bad end that he should make, Judas should
not confess his fault, but should so boldly utter as he did, Is it I Master?
He should have left out then Nunquid, Is it I? and said, Ego sum, I am the
man; then had he not lost heaven by a word. Saint Gregory, That the Thief
never showed himself so subtle and so crafty in the office of theeuing, as
now; for with this his last theft, he repaired all the thefts of his forepassed
life, Alij latrones, latrocinio vitam perdunt, hic autem latrocinio vitam
f^rator sempiternam, Other thieves by theeuing loose their life; but this
thief by theeuing, handsomely robs heaven, and goes clean away with an
everlasting life.

Lord remember me when thou come into thy kingdom, etc. As this petition
was a very humble one, and a modest one; so was it a most discreet one.

First of all, all man's happiness does consist in Gods having us in his
remembrance. Those that are predestined, Man is nothing but as God remembers
him.
have their names writ down in the book of Life; of the Reprobat there is no
mention made in that book. David asks the question, What is man that thou art
so mindful of him? Saint Augustine says, That the second part of this verse
is an answer to the former. Qu^a est homo? What? Quod memor es eius. For man is
neither more nor more worth, than as far forth as he is in Gods good
remembrance. Natural Philosophy does multiply the definitions of man; but in
Christian Philosophy, there are only two. Two definiti^ons of man.


The one, Deum time, and mandata eius ser^a. Hoc est omnis homo. All man's being
does consist in fearing God, and keeping his commandments.

The other, Quod memor es eius, His good continuance in Gods memory; and this
is employed in, Memento mei, Remember me. I do not desire that thou should
make me a free Denizen of thy Kingdom; nor that thou should honor me, as
thou do those that have truly served thee; but only that thou will be
pleased to remember, That though I do not dye here for thee, yet I dye with
thee: And that it grieves me to the very soul that I had not known thee, that
I might have suffered the torment of this Cross in thy service, and for thy
sake, and that I might have laid down my life, nay a thousand lives, if I had
had so many, for thy love. O Lord have therefore mercy upon me, and suffer me
to suffer not only so long as my life, but as the world lasts, so that at last
thou will but think upon me. Considerabat (says S. Augustine) facinora sua,
and pro magno habebat, si ei, in fine mundi parceretur, He did thoroughly weigh
his own wickedness, and would take it for an exceeding great favor, that
when the world should have an end, he might have his sins forgiven him. He
had happily heard that which our Savior Christ said, Videbitis filium hominis,
venientem in potestate, etc.

Saint Gregory does discourse very wittily of the Theological and Moral
virtues of this Thief. And beginning first with his faith, he compares it with
that of Abraham, of Esaias, of Moses, of the three Disciples, of Nicodemus, and
Nathaniel, with that of Saint Paul, and that of the Canaanitish woman; and he
seems to prefer it before all theirs: For, if Abraham believed, Genesis 15.
he spoke with God in person, he had many present favors done him, and fair
and ample promises, of f^r greater future blessings. If Esaias believed, it was
because he saw him sitting in his throne in great State and Majesty, Isay 6.
guarded round about with Seraphins, which cried, Holy, holy, holy is the Lord
of Hosts, the whole world is full of his glory. If Moses believed, it was
because he beheld him in a flame of fire, Exodus 5.
out of the midst of a bush, seeing the bush burn with fire, and yet the bush
not consumed. Mat. 17.
If the three Disciples believed, it was because they saw him transfigured in
Mount Tabor, in that glorious manner, That his face did shine as the Sun, and
his clothes were as white as the light; whilst a bright cloud shadowing them,
they might hear a voice from heaven, saying, This is that my beloved Son in
whom I am well pleased; not between two thieves, but between two Prophets. If
Saint Paul believed, it was because he had been rapt up to the third heaven,
and had seen strange sights, etc. If Nicodemus and Nathaniel believed, if the
woman of Canaan, and many others, they were moved thereunto by the Scriptures,
and by our Savior Christ's miracles. But this Thief neither saw him in his
offered favors, nor in his Throne of Majesty, nor in the fiery bush, nor
transfigured in the Mount, nor knew any thing of the Scriptures, nor of his
miracles; only he knew that Judas had sold him, that his Disciples had
forsaken him, and that he was reviled and hated of the people, etc. Et tanquam
in gloria adorat, And yet he adores him (says Chrysostom) as if he were
already in glory. Videt (says S. Augustine) in cruce, and rogat quasi
sedentem in coelis, He sees him hanging upon the Cross, yet sues unto him as
if he were sitting in ^eauen. Huic fidei, quid addi possit, ignoro. What more
may be added to this Faith, I know not. Those were wavering in their faith,
which saw him raise up the dead; and yet this Thief firmly believes, who saw
him hang upon the Cross. Leo and Eusebius Emissenus, indeere this his belief.
He did verily believe, That our Savior Christ should rise again; for he
would never have made a suit unto him, whom he saw was a dying man, if he had
thought there had been an end of him. He assuredly did believe the immortality
of the soul, and looked after another life; being more careful thereof, than
his fellow-theefe, who desired only this temporal life; saying unto Christ,
Salua temetipsum and nos, If thou be that Christ, save thy self and us. This
our good Thief believed that which Christ spoke before Pilat, My Kingdom is
not of this world: Quite contrary to those Apostles of his, who strove for
chaires of pre-eminence, one desiring to sit at his right hand, the other at
his left, supposing his Kingdom to be a temporal Kingdom.

No more was his Hope.
Again, His Hope was no less great than his Faith, Quis credet ei, qui non
habet nidum, etc. Who will ground the hopes of his happiness upon that man,
that has not a house to put his head in, nor a bed to sleep in? yet this
Thief had set up his rest upon him that had no resting place. Great was the
hope that Daniel had in the Lions Den, but he there saw that the Lions did lick
the shoes on his feet, like loving Curs. Great was Aminadabs confidence, who
was the first that adventured to set upon the sea, and to enter the deep; but
he had seen great prodigies in Egypt. Great was that assurance of David's, when
being beset round on al sides by Saul, his soldiers said unto him, Transmigra
in montem, sicut passer. But he answered, Ego dormiui and somnu^ coepi, surrexi
quia Dominus suscepit me, they would have had him fly like a bird unto the
hill; But he told them, That he would lay him down, Psalm. 4.
and sleep in peace, for the Lord was his keeper, and would make him dwell in
safety. He had such confidence in his God, that he took no great care
concerning his enemies.

Lastly, His Love was no less great than his Hope, Love (says Solomon) is as
strong as death. But here Love was much more strong than death, for death was
now scorned by Love. They hung not him up upon the Cross for any love that he
bare to our Savior Christ; yet before he dyed, he would have given a thousand
lives to have purchased his love, and it was a greater grief and torment unto
him, that he saw he was not crucified for Christ, than the Cross it self was
unto him. So that beginning to suffer like a Thief, he became to dye like a
Martyr.

Hodie mecum eris in Paradiso.
To day shall thou be with me in Paradise. Never did any former ages see a
favor comparable unto this.

First, in regard of that which heaven is in it self; being that next unto the
hypostaticall union, it is the greatest good that the omnipotency of God can
give us. All other good leaves us still hungry; this only affoordeth
fullness, I shall be satisfied when thy glory shall appear. All do seek
after heaven, and do appetere Deum, as their vltimum bonum, Desire the
fruition of God, as their chiefest felicity. But because they neither know
what God nor heaven is, they have scarce peept in with their heads within the
doors of that Supreme Princely Palace, but that they are ravished with that
strange and unspeakable admiration, that blessing themselves, they break out
in this manner; This surely is God. The glory of the heavenly Paradise.
Their weak apprehension not being able to conceive the least glory of that
great Deity, so that Esaias might very well say, I am found of those that seek
not after me. The capacity of our conceit, and the model of our imagination,
is but a thimblefull, in respect of that immense Ocean of Gods greatness. And
therefore true is that saying, That the Just does find that which he does not
seek for. And if the crummes which fall from that divine Table, do rob a
man of his understanding, banish all other thoughts from him, and do as it
were alienate him from himself, how will he be transported, when he shall
drink at the fountain of that river of delights, and when God shall say unto
him; Open thy mouth wide, and I w^ll fill it. So incomparable is the greatness
of this good, That God suffers himself to be robbed by the labors and sweats
of man. When we buy a thing dog-cheape, we use to say it is stolen. Put in one
scale, fastings, almes-deedes, sacke-cloth, and ashes, the torments of Martyrs,
the troubles of Confessors; and in another scale, one hour, nay one minute of
heaven, and in reason of buying and selling, heaven is robbed by us. And
hereunto does allude that phrase in Scripture, Et violenti rapinus illud; And
the violent take it by force. Now then, that after so many thefts, robberies,
deaths, our Savior Christ should grant so great a good to this Thief, a
greater favor cannot be imagined.

Secondly, in regard of the advantage he had of others. We know, that in glory,
some shall enjoy more, some less, As one star d^ffers from another in
brightness. All shall enjoy eternal glory, but not all the same degrees in
glory. But consider I pray you the great advantage that this Thief made; for
he held it to be a great happiness unto him, if God would be but pleased to
afford him any the least corner of heaven. Abbot Arnaldo, a grave and ancient,
Authorhathaduentured to say, That God had given him the chair wherein Lucifer
sat. S. Cyprian says, Quid tu Domine amplius Stephano contulisti? etc. Oh
Lord, what could that Protomartyr Saint Stephen enjoy more, or that thy beloved
Disciple which did lean his head in thy bosom? And (as Cirillus
Ierosolimitanus says) What could the long services of those that endured the
heat of the day, obtain more at Gods hands? But God makes the^ this answer, I
do not thee no wrong, did thou agree with me for a penny? Some laborers
were working hard at the Vineyardfrom the first hour; others from the third
hour; others began at the ninth hour; others when the sun was upon setting.
First came Adam, then Noah, after him Abraham, and the rest of the holy
Prophets: but the Thief came just at the Sunne-setting.

Saint Chrysostom says, That the same day that Adam was cast out of Paradise
of the earth, the same day did this Thief enter into the Paradise of heaven.
The word Amen, or verily, does imply as much. Aniently the Tribes were divided
and set apart upon two hills; the one breathing forth curses, Cursed is he that
honors not his Father, Cursed is he that leads the blind out of the way:
the other blessing; Blessed be thou in the City, blessed in the field, etc.
Only the difference was in this, That to these their maledictions and
cursings, they did ever say Amen. For (as it is in the Proverb) Para el mal
sobraua pann^, For ill, there was never yet cloth wanting; there was stuff
still enough ready at hand. But to their blessings, they answered with silence,
reserving their Amen, or, So be it, for the coming of our Savior Christ, from
whom all our good was to come. And Theodoret gives us this note withal, That
those that silenced their Amen, were those that were to be fathers unto Christ,
according to the flesh.

Fourthly, in regard that this favor is made the greater by it is quick
dispatch, Hodie mecum eris in Paradiso, To day shall thou be with me in
Paradise. Theophylact and Tigurino, read, Amen, dico tibi hodie, Making there
the point. But this ought not to be received, as Cassianus proves it, but
that this Hodie must go hand in hand roundly along with Mecumeris. And Justin
Martyr says, Iuxta fluenta plenissima, gratiam simul accepit and gloriam,
Grace and glory with a full tide, came flowing in both at once upon him. S.
Ambrose says, That our Savior Christ made this exceeding great haste, Ne
dilatione gratia minueretur, Lest the favor he intended to do him, should be
lessened by delay. This favor far exceeding all the rest in the world
besides; As that of Alexander toward Perillus, demanding a dourie of him for
his daughter; and that of the Gardener, who had the Kingdom of Sidonia given
him; or than that which Herod offered to his daughter Herodias, or Assuerus to
Queen Hester, Mar 9. Ester ^.
Si petieris dimidiam partem Regni mei, etc. If thou shall ask the one half
of my Kingdom, etc. And because Bis dat, qui cito dat, He does a double
courtesy that does it quickly. Least delay might lessen the Doners bounty, He
therefore says, Hodie mecum eris, This very day shall thou be with me, etc. S.
Ambrose says, Quod magis ve^ox erat premium quam petitio, That the reward was
quicker than the request. Seneca says, That he that gives, must not give
slowly: for the willing mind wherewith it is done (being therein the most to be
esteemed) it loses much of it is estimation by it is slow proceeding. Leo the
Pope says, That it was a great favor from Christ, to put this so humble and
so discreet a petition into the Thieves heart; but a far greater favor to
give him such a good, and quick dispatch. Joseph foretelling Pharaohs servant
of his liberty, being then his fellow-prisoner, said unto him, Memento mei,
Have me in remembrance with thee, when thou art in good case: But for all the
others fair promises, he continued two years after in prison. But the Thief
had no sooner said Memento mei, but his Savior saw him dispatched. O happy
thief, thou did negotiate well, and with a good Judge, that could dispatch
thy business so quickly, and so well.

Lastly, in regard of it is bounty and freeness, the reward outvying the
request; having more favor done him than he desired. His reward exceeds our
requests.
Vberior (says S. Ambrose) est gratia quam precatio. God has used (and still
does) the like liberality toward many. Abraham desired a son to inherit his
estate, and a son was given him, from whom God was to descend. Jacob begged
Benjamin, and god gave him both Benjamin and Joseph. Tobias desired that he
might see his son in safety, God returns him home unto him sound, rich, and
well married. Judith craved Bethulia's liberty, God gave her that, and
Holofernes head into the bargain, and victory against Nebuchadnezzar. Anna
prayed for a son, God gave her one, that was a Saint, a Prophet, and Gods
favorite. Solomon desired wisdom to govern his kingdom the better, he had
that and much more, besides infinite store of wealth bestowed upon him.
Ezechias sued unto God for life, and whereas he would have bin contented with
two years holding of it, God granted him a lease of fifteen years to come. The
servant that owed 10000 Talents, desired to be but forborne for a time, and the
whole debt was forgiven him. But God never dealt so frank and freely with any
man, as with this thief, for he but only entreating him to be mindful of him,
he gave him heaven, Qui merita supplicum excedis and vota, sings the Church.

Theophylact says, That your Kings, Princes, and great Captains, when they
obtain any notable victory, they reserve the principal captives for their
Triumph: So Saul spared King Agag, and the best things: so the Emperors of
Rome, Zenobia and others: Titus and Vespasian, most of the young men of Iudaea.
But that our Savior Christ should enter in triumph into heaven with a thief,
it seems a thing of small glory to the Triumpher, and little honor for
heaven. But Abbot Guericus answers hereunto, That it was a new and most noble
kind of victory, Nouum and pulcherrimum genus victoriae. The kings of the
earth get victories over their enemies, by treading them under, by kicking and
spurning of them, by contemning and tormenting them, as appears by Histories
both humane and divine: This is a tyrannous kind of revenge, and reuengefull
cruelty. But that of the King of heaven is a noble revenge, and a sweet
victory. The enemies of a king of this world will kiss the earth for fear;
but those of the King of heaven, for love. And therefore it is said, Inimici
eius, terram lingent.

Again, S. August. says, That Christ did enrich and illustrate heaven with
the person of this thief; so far was he from doing him any the least dishonor.
For it is a great honor to heaven to have such a Lord and Master, as shall
make of great Thieves, great Saints. S. Chrysostom. has the same, and further
adds, That by seeing one reign in heaven, who wanted earth to live on; every
man may live in hope to enjoy the like happiness: For it is not likely that he
will be miserable to any, that was so liberal to a thief.

The Doctors do doubt whether this Thief were a Martyr or no? For he that is a
Martyr, it is not the greatness of the pain, but the goodness of the cause
that makes him a Martyr. Achan was stoned to death, and Saint Stephen was
stoned to death: But Achan was no Martyr, because he dyed deservedly for his
sins. The like reason you will say may be rendered of the thief. But S. Jerome,
Eusebius Nissenus, and S. Cyprian style him Martyr; not because he suffered for
Christ, though he suffered not without Christ; but because suffering with
Christ, so great was the sorrow which he conceived for his sins, that Christ
taking this his torment to his account, as if he had suffered for his love,
made of the Cross a Martyrdom. S. August. says, That on the Cross he
acknowledged Christ, as if he had been crucified for Christ. Eusebius
Nissenus, That albeit he began with the punishment of a Delinquent, yet he
ended with the glory of a Martyr. And S. Cyprian, That Christ did convert the
blood which he shed upon the Cross, into the water of baptism, and that
presently he placed him in Paradise.

Justin Martyr and Irenaeus understand here by Paradise, some other place of
joy; but rather earthly than heavenly. Irenaeus proves it by the Priests of
Asia. But it is most certain, That by Paradise is to be understood, the blessed
presence of our Savior Jesus Christ. And that he went from the Superficies of
the earth, up to that heavenly Palace, etc. To which God of his great
goodness bring us all, Amen.

THE XLI. SERMON. Of the Lords Supper.
IOH. 13. Sciens Jesus, quia venit hora eius.


Our Savior Christ knowing that the hour was now come; For which were
reserved Gods greatest Grandezas, or Greatnesses. The blessed Virgin called for
wine at the wedding, but our Savior Christ answered, My hour is not yet come.
They carry him up to the top of a mountain, thinking to throw him down
headlong from thence: but he told them, My hour is not yet come. They go
forth to apprehend him, and yet, his hour was not come. But now, Sciens, quia
venit hora eius, When he knew that his hour was come.

There was not any thing in the world which he called his, but this hour; and
this he calls his, because it was the hour of our good and happiness. The
hours of his honor, Christ never counted any thing his, but our happiness.
when the Magi bowing to the ground, did adore him; when he entered in Triumph
into Jerusalem, drawing all the City after him; when he showed himself so
glorious in Mount Tabor; when the temptation in the desert being ended, the
Angels came to serve him; when all the creatures were obedient to his Empire:
All these hours were as strangers unto him, he did not reckon them as his; but
that hour wherein he was betrayed, tormented, and crucified for mankind, This
hour (he says) is my hour. Exinaniuit semetipsum, formam serui accipiens.
Thomas says, That all the servant get's, is his Lords, as the fruits of the
garden, and of the trees, etc. And he made himself a servant, that he might
make us Lords. Esaias 55.
Ho, every one that thirsts, come ye to the waters, and ye that have no
silver, come buy and eat: Come ^say, buy wine and milk without silver, and
without money. Saint Bernard asks the question, How a man can buy without a
price, or sell without money? And his answer is, That in buying and selling
betwixt man and man, there must of force some bargain be driven, some price
proposed; but with God it is not so, for, all that which we can buy, is from
God. In the world, he that buys, remains with that which he buys, and he
that sells, with the price thereof. God sells heaven unto us for our fastings,
our prayers, and our tears; and heaven, and the price thereof, remains at
home within our selves, and in our own keeping. And this is, Hora eius, His
hour.

In the Creation, God had his own hours, and our hours; Hours for himself,
and hours for us: But the world being created and fully finished, he gave us
all the hours appertaining to Time, Et requieuit ab vniuerso opere, quod
patraret, Genesis 2.
He rested from all his work which he had made. Rupertus says, That when the
Scripture makes mention, That God walked up and down in Paradise; it speaks
of God after the manner of man, who when he has ended all his businesses, sits
him down to eat, takes his rest, and gets him afterward out to walk in his
garden, there to take his pleasures as one that has now nothing else to do. So
that when God was al alone, he had some hours of his own; but after that he
had once made himself man, all those hours, were made ours. In token that he
who bears on his shoulders the burden of a Commonwealth, ought not to
account so much as an hour to be his, but that they are al allotted for other
men. Those that now adays govern the world, make many hours their own; They
must have their hour to eat, their hour to sleep, their hour to talk,
their hour to play, their hour to walk, making their government a matter of
recreation, casting all care behind their back, and never so much as once
thinking of their obligation. And whereas they should be in continual
occupation, using their recreations sparingly; they change lots, as if
government were conferred upon them, to sit still and do nothing, at least to
follow their pleasures and delights, whence great hurt does accrue to
themselves and others.

To themselves, because God will not call them to account for those hours,
wherein they did not game, walk, etc. but for those, wherein they did not
dispatch businesses.

To others, because thou art not thine own man, but art to spend thy time for
the good of those that God has committed to thy care, to receive their
informations, to peruse their petitions, and to give a speedy dispatch to
their just pretensions. For what hurt they receive through thy default, it is
put to thy account.

Saint Bernard says, That such Offices and places as these, are not for weak
men, effeminate persons, and such as are given to sports and pasttimes; the
weight of this charge is great, and therefore had need of a strong back, or
the shoulders of an Atlas. It being so, How comes it then to pass, that so
many do desire and hunt so earnestly after these great places? My answer is,
because they look not upon the weight and peril thereof, but the pomp and
estimation that waits upon them. Saint Augustine says, That if worldly honors
be taken for ease, there is nothing more sweet, nothing more pleasing, But
with God, nothing more miserable, more wretched, or more damnable.

Now when Jesus knew that his hour was come that he should depart out of this
world, unto the father, for as much as he loved his own that were in the
world, No love like to that of our Savior toward us.
[vnto the end he loved them.] So far was Christ from repenting himself of
his love toward his, that he gave them all possible pledges of this his love.
Great is the love and affection that a Thief has to theeuing, insomuch, that
though he know he shall be hanged the next morning, yet he takes pleasure in
robbing. A fine delicate lover is he, who knowing that to morrow he shall loose
his life for his love, lasheth out into greater extremes of love than before.
Many at their first entrance into love, promise many sweet contentments to
themselves, who if they had but thought what sower sauce they should have to
this their sweet meat, they would never have made love. But our Savior Christ
saw his death before his eyes, and yet that he might perfect his love when his
hour was come, he showed more and more love still. Saint Augustine says, That
he took flesh in the Virgins womb, that he might receive limbs and members
from thence, to deliver them up to the cruelty of the Cross: As a head, to
have it crowned with thorns, a face to be spit upon and buffeted, a mouth to
be distasted with vinegre and gall, hands and feet to be bored and nailed, a
side to be pierced. And though he knew that this his love to mankind, was to
bring all this torment and misery upon his sacred person, In finem dilexit
eos, Unto the end he loved them.

The nearer his death grew, the greater grew his love. That comparison of the
river is not much amiss, which takes it is head or beginning from a small
fountain, and by little and little goes increasing, till in the end it seems
to be a Sea. We cannot say that there was any thing little or small in our
Savior Christ: but in some sort, taking from his infancy, it may
comparitiuely be thus understood, His love was little at the first, it began
to purle forth in those his tears in the cratch; it went on, drawing more
water in his Circumcision; in his exile into Egypt, in his fastings, prayers,
penitences, sermons, miracles, and when he came to wash his Disciples feet,
and to give unto them his body and blood, then was it full sea with him. The
Jews did put this question, How can this man give us his flesh to be eaten?
Saint Augustine tells us, I will tell you how; In the beginning was Love, and
that Love was with God, and God was that Love; and this may serve as an answer
to all questions that may be demanded in this kind. And as in all other things
from his childhood, he went (to our seeming) growing up still more and more; so
did his love likewise go daily increasing, even to the hour of his death,
showing that he loved us unto the end. When a mountain takes fire, at first
the fire is but small, but by degrees grows greater and greater, till it comes
at last like another Aetna to be a mountain of fire. Jeremy says, That he saw
a seething pot, The pot by little and little comes to take heat, till at last
it falls a boiling, but the fire under it may be so great, that it may bubble
and run over, throwing out all that is within it. In our Savior Christ's
breast, the fire of his love did always sees and boil apace, but in the end
this fire grew to so great a flame, that it threw out that his flesh, and made
that his blood to ouerflow which was knit to his soul, and Divinity. That man
which Ezechiel saw in the first chapter of his Prophecy, one with his feet
standing upon a Saphyre, who was all fire; but from the head to the girdle, the
fire was secret and hidden; but from the girdle downward, even to the very
feet, all was on a bright flame. His feet stood upon a Saphyre, which is the
color of heaven, to show unto us the blessedness which he did enjoy from the
very instant of his conception, as also to signify unto us, that all the life
of our Savior Christ, was a flaming fire of Love. But in those his younger
years, it was for a while as it were smothered and repressed, but afterward
brake forth into those flames, that when his hour was come, and that he was to
dye, Those whom he loved, he loved unto the end. Some have sailed over the
whole Mediterranean, have touched upon the coasts thereof, and entered up into
it is rivers; Others have past the Straight, and arrived at the Cape de buena
Esperance, of good Hope. There was a man that rounded all the world, as if he
had stood in competition with the Sun; but for all this, his Nauagation was
not at an end. Every day more countries are discovered: but in the sea of Love
there is not that place, which the Ship of the Cross has not sailed into,
Omnis consumptionis vidit finem, and in finem dilexit eos, He saw the end of
all consumption, and loved them unto the end.

Three kinds of friendship.
Aristotle sets down in his Ethics three kinds of friendships.

Honestum, Vtile, Iucundum. That is, grounded on Honesty, Profit, and Pleasure.

That which is grounded upon profit, will cease, when that cease: Thou have a
friend, that furnishes thee with moneys; no longer furnish thee, no longer a
friend: So says Seneca in an epistle of his to Lucilius.

That which is founded upon pleasure and delight, lives or dies, as those
delights live or dye in us.

But that which makes Honesty it is aim, that endures for ever.

My friend (says Seneca) I ought to love him so well, as to follow him in his
banishment, to relieve him in his necessities, and if need were to dye for him.
Saint Augustine says, that Seneca lived in the time of the Apostles, and that
it is very probable, that he had some communication with Saint Paul, and that
the Apostle related unto him what our Savior Christ did for his, That he
accompanied them in their banishment, inricht them with the riches of heaven,
and in the end laid down his life for them. This is that, In finem dilexit
eos, He loved them to the end.

A great love can never endure a long absence. Theodoret says, That Saint
Peter having heard from Christ's own mouth, a Ter me negabis, Thou shall deny
me thrice, He would feign have fled many Leagues from that occasion; but that
his love was so great, that he held it a less ill to deny him, by following
him, than to confess him by flying from him. He took so much pleasure in his
presence, that he chose rather to hazard the loss of his soul, than of his
beloved sight: Holding it a less unhappiness to deny, than not to be in the
eye of him, whom he loved so dearly. Saint Bernard treating of that petition
which Moses made unto God, Either blot me out of the book of life, or spare
this people, gives us this note out of that place; That so great was the love
which the Prophet bare to that people, that albeit God did offer him to be
chief Governor over a far better and greater people, yet could he not
endure to be divorced from them, nor to absent himself from their company,
and therefore made choice rather of this so sad and grievous a resolution, Aut
dele me de libro vitae, etc. o Lord either pardon them, or condemn me: My love
toward them can better abide death, and hell, than their absence. Plut. says,
That Love is like Iuie, which if it cleave but to a stone, or an old wall, will
rather dye than forsake it. Christ said unto his Disciples, Unless I go
hence, the comforter will not come unto you: All their felicity consisting in
the coming of the Holy Ghost; But I go to provide a place for you. Nobody but
I, can open the gates of heaven unto you. Our Savior said, Lift up your gates
o ye Princes, etc. Where S. Chrysostom observes, That it had been
sufficient, had he but only said, Open the gates. But he did not say, Open,
but, take the gates away, heave them off the hooks. For heaven, that is never
shut against any, has no need of gates. His Disciples might have said unto
him; Lord, since we shall receive so great a good by thy departure; Fuge,
assimulare Caprae, hinnuloque ceruorum. Yet so great was their love unto him,
that with tears in their eyes, they desired rather their own hinderance, than
his absence. Many nations of the world made their gods prisoners, chaining them
fast with strong yrons; For, in seeing themselves to be forsaken by them, they
presently accounted themselves but dead men. Pausanias reports, that the
Lacedaemonians had tied fast the Statue of Mars with cords of silk. And
Alexander ab Alexandro says, That Hercules was bound fast with fetters of
gold. And Plutarch in his Problemes, recounteth the like of Apollos Image. And
the sacred Scripture delivers unto us, That Micas the Idolater followed with
tears in his eyes, those thieves which had stolen away the Idols belonging to
his house, or his household gods. And Laban upon the like occasion, pursued
Jacob. For it is impossible, that any body should suffer or endure the absence
of his God. Two powerful Loves therefore wrestling and struggling in the breast
of our Savior Christ: The one, to return to his father from whence he came;
The other, not to depart from his Spouse here on earth; his Love did lay a plot
how he might go away, and yet stay. And this was the vpshot of his Love.

When the devil had now put in the heart of Judas, etc. It is noted by Saint
John, That at the same time as our Savior Christ was busied about the
performing a point of that so meek and lowly a humility, as his washing of
his Disciples feet, and communicating unto them his body and blood; the very
same time did the devil enter into Judas his breast. Saint Chrysostom adds,
Admirans, dixit; That the Evangelist spoke this, as it were in the way of
admiration; Cum diabolus misisset in cor, When the devil had put it in his
heart, etc. Our thoughts are like gravel stones got into the shoo, which Satan
puts into man's heart, and made such have to thrust them into Judas his heart,
that he was much perplexed and troubled therewith some few days: but the
battery continuing, he fell at last to a final resolution, and when he was
resolved what he would do, himself made the offers of selling our Savior
Christ. Quid vultis mihi dare? What will you give me? In which sale of his, two
notable follies are to be noted.

The one, His selling of his Savior upon trust. S. Mark and S. Luke say, They
promised to give him money.

The other, His selling of him at so low a rate, standing to their courtesy
what they would give him. The devil offered our Savior Christ all the whole
world. But Judas was so base, That he went away well contented with three
Blanks, being willing to play at small game rather than to sit out. For he that
is a covetous wretch, even with the devil himself loses his credit. And
therefore the Church styles him a very Pedlar, the basest and worst of
merchants. Judas mercator pessimus. Saint Gregory says, That Judas did banish
from the world three things of great price and value.

The one, True Love: For ever since that false and treacherous kiss of Judas,
men's affections have likewise grown to be false, Judas banished out of the
world all Vert^^, Love, and Fear.
and love to be counterfeit and feigned, using strange disguises. Many
embracing those in their arms, whose throats they cut in their hearts.

The other, Virtue: For hypocrisy puts on a show of Sanctity, maskes her
self with Holiness, and dissembles good desires.

The third, Fear: For he that is nor afraid to betray God, What will he stand
in fear of?

Gregory Nazianzen says, That in selling our Savior Christ, he lost all the
right and claim that he had to his blood: for no man can challenge any right
to that which he sells; so that he did utterly renounce all kind of remedy, or
any soul comfort whatsoever.

Saint Bernard says, That by committing treason against the Lord both of
heaven and earth, he had so highly offended therein, that neither of them,
would give him any reception or entertainment at his death; only, having
hanged himself, the Element of the Air kept him tottering there to his
further disgrace.

When the devil had put it in his heart. There are some sins so foul, and
so enormious, that for to cease upon them, a man had need to have Judas his
heart, and the devils hands. He that is weak and frail, may sin out of a
natural inclination, or some long continued custom, and every occasion will
be sufficient to make him fly after his game, as the Hawke does after her
prey, etc. But to do ill to him that does us good, we had need of the help of
a Judas, or a devil. Joseph being woed by his wanton Mistrisse told her, Quo
modo potero. Being bound unto my Master with so many chains of his love and
kindnesses toward me, How can I do him so great a wrong? Saul was much more
beholding to David, than Joseph to Pataphar, yet the devil took strong hold
of him, Spiritus Domini malus vrgebat Saul. But let no temptation take hold on
you, but that which is humane.

He lays aside his upper garments. S. Ierom in his Epistle to Celancia,
says, Nihil est imperiosius amore, There is nothing of more power and command,
than love. Love triumphed even over God himself. Genesis 41.44.
Pharaoh leaving over the government of Egypt unto Joseph, said unto him,
Without thee shall no man lift up his hand, or his foot in all the land of
Egypt. It may seem that God said the like to Love, who drew God down from
heaven to live here upon earth? It was Love, who led him along through the
streets to Mount Caluarie, triumphing there over his power: It was Love, and
only love. O Love, if thou be so imperious, as to triumph over God himself,
Who shall be able to resist thee? Absque tuo imperio, etc. Without this Love,
we can neither stir hand nor foot, no not breath, or live one hour.

He lays aside his garment. Well did he repay that kind love of theirs, in
casting their clokes before his feet, when he road in Triumph through
Jerusalem, carrying palms in their hands. And he in stead of washing the
palms of their hands, disdained not to stoop so low as to wash their feet.
Saint Bernard says, That the Spouse did complain, that the Gards of the City
had taken her cloak away, Tollerunt pallium meum: Do not ye therefore
complain if ye be stripped stark naked for Gods sake, since he was pleased
to lay aside his garments to do you service.

He began to wash the Disciples feet. He had said before, No humility like our
Saviors.
Knowing that the Father had given all things into his hands. And Hilarie
adds, Etiam proditorem. So that God having put Christ into Judas hands,
Christ puts himself under Judas his feet. O Judas (says he) though thou have
given thy heart unto the devil, yet I pray thee give me thy feet, that I may
bath them with the tears of mine eyes, Thou have put all things under his feet,
The birds of the air, the beasts of the field, and the fishes of the sea. This
is much: But if God should have revealed unto thee, that thou should see his
son washing Judas his feet, etc. And there appeared a great wonder in heaven,
a woman clothed with the Sun, and the Moon was under her feet. Heaven being
to cloth her, what could it cloth her better withal, than with the Sun and the
Moon? But a greater wonder is it, to see the Son of heaven under Judas his
feet. O heavens, are ye not ashamed to see those hands which created you, which
did border you about with light, as with a rich imbroyderie, to be soiled with
the foulness of such feet? For to look her lost groat, the good wife swept
her house over and over, turning and sifting this and that other heap of dust,
leaving no corner unsearched, till she had found it. God has two houses: God
has two houses.


The Church Triumphant,

The Church Militant.

He did turn the first vpside down, when he kneeled on his knees to wash
Judas feet. Saint Jerome says, Quantumcunque te humilies, humilior Christo non
eris, Be thou never so humble, Christ will be more humble then thou can be.
For he will put himself under thy feet, As he did here stoop to Judas.

O Lord, for so forlorn a soul, which must be lost at last, so much pains
for so little profit, so much lost labor for one that is lost.

First of all, a Fathers care over his sick son, to whom he bears love,
is far different from that which the Physician takes, who only cures him for
his own private profit and particular interest.

Secondly, Because Love can never be subdued; where it finds one lost, it
thinks all lost. At the Wedding there was but one found unfitted for his
garment, Yet this inference was made upon it, Many are called, but few are
chosen. Saint Augustine says, That one is a great loss, where there is great
Love: and with the loss of Judas, Love was so much agrieued, that Saint
Ambrose says, That the freeing of the Thief out of the Devils hands, was
done in revenge of the loss of Judas. The Devil was much ioyed that he had
robbed our Savior of such a friend, as one of the Twelve; but he had been as
good let him alone, for he lost a Thief when he was upon the Gallows, and
thought he was sure then his own. Plus amisisti, quam rapuisti, Thou lost more
than thou gotst; thou robst God of a Thief, that had been thine but a few
days; and he robbed thee of another thief, which had been thine for many
years.

He began to wash, etc. Being to bestow upon them his body and blood, he
thought fit first of all to begin with the making clean of their feet, by
which the Scripture understands, our defects and foulness of our affections,
in token of that disposition and preparation wherewith we are to come to the
receiving of so divine a Sacrament. All the whole life of our Savior Christ
was a pattern of poverty, and that in the highest degree. The portall wherein
he was borne, was hung with Cobwebs in stead of Tapistrie; the Cratch and a
lock of Hay, were the sheet and pillow to his cradle; all the whole space of
his life, he had not a place where to lean and rest his head: his death was
upon Mount Caluarie, a place full of dead men's sculls and bones, whose bodies
had suffered by the sword of Justice. But for the institution of this divine
Sacrament, he had made choice of a goodly large Hall, well furnished, and
handsomely set forth; and for the consecration of the Wine, a Cup made (as some
think) of a costly Agat, which is offered to be seen in the Asseo of Valencia.

First, to signify unto us, That gold, silver, and precious stones, are on
nothing so well bestowed as on the service of God.

Secondly, That he that sits down at this sacred Table, must come accompanied
with great riches of virtue, The holy Sacrament not to be received, but with a
great deal of preparation.
and great pureness of conscience. To your great and solemn banquets, those
that are invited come thither in a sumptuous and gallant kind of manner, your
Romans did cloth themselves all in white, for they held such an inuitation ^o
sacred a thing, that it was held a great shame and infamy to any that should
fully the same with any kind of deceit or treason. The Gospel condemned him
that came unto the marriage without his wedding garment. Saint Cyprian says,
That we ought to please those Divine eyes, even with our outward habit. Saint
Hierome tells us, That when he had dreamed in the night any dishonest dream, he
did tremble and quake for fear when he entered into Gods House. Abulensis
reports, That the cause of Oza's death was, for that having laien that night
with his wife, he presumed to touch the Arc. The Libertine Council does
admonish us, That they who are to communicate, ought to abstain eight days
from conversation with women. The same advice is given us by Saint Augustine
and Saint Hierome: and it is a strange Doctrine to my seeming, No preparation
sufficient for the Holy Supper.
That he that is to say Mass every morning, should spend the nights with his
she-friend, Let every man first try and examine himself, and then let him so
eat of this bread, and drink of this Cup, etc. so that a man either must
examine himself, or must not; If he must let him weigh his worthiness and
unworthiness; if he shall find himself unworthy, he must rather excommunicate
and remove himself from the Altar. Saint Augustine says, That one of the
mainest reasons why our Savior Christ at his last supper, possessed with such
perturbation the breasts of his Disciples, telling them, That he that dipped his
finger with him in the dish should sell the Son of Man and betray him, was,
That every one might be afraid of himself, and might say not without some
suspicion and jealousy, What Master is it I? For there is no man so Holy, no
man so Pure and free from sin, but it will well beseem him to come wi^h a
great deal of respect and reverence, and a due examination of himself to this
celestial Table. Job when he sat down at the table used to fetch a sigh,
Antequam comedam suspiro. David did moysten with his tears the bread which he
did eat. Did these good men hold themselves unworthy of that material bread;
What ought we to do, when we come to the receiving of this divine Bread?
Dionisius, de Ecclesiastica Hierarchia; Clemens Romanus in his Apostolical
Constitutions; Hilary, Theodoret, Datianus Alexandrinus, hold (contrary to the
opinion of the Saints) that Judas did not then and there communicate with the
rest.

He came then to Simon Peter.
Saint Austen says, That Saint Peter first brake the ice, saying, Washest thou
my feet? O Lord, in thy transfiguration, Christ's Humility, the character of
his Love.
the resplendor of thy Glory did throw me down at thy feet, and shall I then
suffer thee to throw thy self down at my feet? Heaven did reveal unto me
that noble confession which I made, Thou art the Christ, the Son of the
living God: Sithence then, that I have confessed and acknowledged thee to be
the Son of God, shall I permit to see my Savior humble himself at my feet?
Clemens Romanus a Disciple of Saint Peter, reports in his Apostolical
Constitutions, That as often as Saint Peter did call this action of his to
mind, so often did he shed tears, to see Christ at his feet: whence we are to
weigh and consider the great modesty of Saint Peter, who was not so much
astonished to see Jesus Christ at the feet of Judas, as to see him at his own
feet. All the complements which Peter used with our Savior Christ, are worthy
commendation, full of discretion, reverence, and love: Only his default was,
That he would strive and contest with our Savior Christ, for want of true
knowledge of those ends, whereunto Christ's actions were directed. So that if
mannerlinesse may be a fault in any man* it was now in Peter, for refusing to
have his feet washed; the mystery whereof had he but known, he would not have
made so nice a matter of it.

Saint Cyrill treating of the ends of this act of our Sauiors, says, That he
desired by all means possible to ingraft Love in Man's breast; and to give us to
understand, That without great humility, there can be no great Love. Guarricus
says, That our Savior Christ did love man so well, yea, and in such a manner of
fashion, that he resolved with himself to iumpe and agree with him, and to
shape himself according to his humor, and to do any thing whatsoever, though
never so mean, so as it might make for his good. And when he saw that Man was
so proud, that he would not submit himself to serve him, he said, Well, seeing
Man will not be brought to serve me, I will submit my self to serve him, and
stoop to so low and so base a service, as to wash his feet. This made him dye
between two Thieves* Our Saviors art in gaining of wretched Man.
He was well content at his death, to want al other comforts the world could
afford him, only he could not be drawn from man's side; that would have gone
to the very heart of him. Thou art fair (my beloved) and comely. S. Bernard
says, That this repetition does point out a twofold beauty unto us.

The one of his Divinity, wherewith he does beautify and deifie the Angels,
and the Saints.

The other of his Love, which made him debase himself so much, as to wash his
Disciples feet.

The first, is of greater admiration.

The second, of much more consolation.

Ibi pietas magis emicuit, vbi charitas magis refulsit, There Piety did
glitter most, where Charity shined most.

Some man may ask me the question, Why the rest did not seek to excuse
themselves.

I answer, That this courtesy being complemented and pleaded by Peter, and
consented unto by Peter, the rest had nothing more to do, or say therein.

If I shall not wash thee, etc. Laurentius Iustinianus says, That the good old
man was somewhat daunted with this threatening, and now yielded and submitted
himself in such sort, that whereas before he had, being entreated, denied to
have his feet washed; being thus threatened by our Savior, he now offers to have
both his feet and his head washed. O Lord wash the whole man in us with thy
blood, that we may appear clear in thy sight, etc.

THE XLII. SERMON. Of our Savior Christ's death.
IOH. 19. Baiulans sibi Crucem, etc.

Bearing his Cross, etc.


Affliction alters the very form of Man.
WHat with the spittle, stripes, blows, buffets, mockes, scorns, scourges,
thorns, his beard and hairs clotted with blood; our Savior Christ was so
much altered from that man which the Spouse paints him forth to be [ Candidus,
rubicundus, Cant. 5.
electus ex millibus, My wellbeloued is white, and ruddy, the chiefest of ten
thousand] that Jeremy could say, Hier. 29.
He is a man, yet who can know him. Esaias. 43.
And Esaias, He had neither shape nor comeliness. Or as another letter has it,
He had not the form of a man. And he himself did not think himself to be a
man, Psalm. 21.
saying; I am a worm and no man. And it seeming unto Pilat to be the lesser
revenge of the two, to see him dead, than to be thus wounded and torn by
them; and that there could be no emnitie, no malice, so raging and so cruel,
which with so sad a spectacle, and so woeful a sight, would not loose somewhat
of i'ts fierceness and violence; leaning himself against the window, and
looking wistly upon him, he breathed forth these two words; Ecce homo. Behold
here a Man (says S. Austen) fitter for the grave than a throne; ye did
heretofore envy him for the great applause which the world gave unto his
Miracles, but now his Misery may blot that out of your breasts.

First, I would have yeto consider, what manner of thing Man was when he was
molded by the hands of God in the Creation; how rich, how wise, and how
perfect a creature he was. In his Incarnation, in what a prosperous estate did
he live, how mightily envied by Hell? In the Resurrection, how glorious, and
how immortal? And how God again by the hands of Man, is mocked, scourged,
spit upon, and contemned.

Secondly, if a Pilat taking pity of our Savior Christ, could say unto the
people, Ecce homo, Behold the Man! for to move them unto p^ttie: it is not
much that a Preacher of the Gospel, whose duty it is to preach Christ
crucified, should say unto Christian people, Ecce homo, Behold the Man. No man
will trust the pity and compassion of an enemy. Saul remained much amazed and
confounded, when David stole from his beds-head his spear and his pitcher; and
when in the cave he had cut off the lappet of his garment; and with tear did
propound and promise to himself to love him and favor him all his life long:
yet David would not believe him, because no man that is w^se will trust an
enemy. Jonas who was a figure of our Savior Christ, being overwhelmed in the
Sea, the waves thereof did assuage their rage and waxed calm: But our Savior
Christ, being overwhelmed in the Sea often hese his torments, he couldnot allay
the fury of those billows which grew still rougher and rougher in the
turbulent breasts of his people; for there was but little good to be expected
from so professed an enemy: yet he that is a Christian has our Savior
Christ to be his Friend, his Lord, his Father, and his God. And representing
himself unto us in this pitiful and lamentable manner, what heart is there so
hard, which will not be moved to commiserate so wretched a case? Saint Paul
had made unto those of Galilee a description of our Savior Christ upon the
Cross; and it seeming unto him, that they were not moved thereat, but that
their hearts were hardened, he cried out aloud unto them, O ye foolish and
senseless Galathians, who has bewiched you? Is it possible that Christ
crucified should not make your hearts to melt within ye? This is a mere
stupidnesse and insensibilitie.

Behold the Man.
If it will not move us to behold him thus tormented as a Man, Ch^^st on the
Cross the only ob^ect of Admi^ation.
let it grieve us at least to see God suffer so much misery for Man. Vidimus
eum (says Esaias) quasi percussum a Deo (quasi percussum Deum) For so Saint
Chrysostom renders it. Beatus, qui intelligit super egenum and pauperem.
Happy is he who under the humanity of man, will find out the humanity of
God. Lindanus commenting upon this verse, says, That the word Super in the
Hebrew, with it is points or pricks, signifies God: So that in the first
sense, it may be said, Beatus qui intelligit Deum, egenum and pauperem. Blessed
be those eyes, that under so many miseries, behold Gods greatness. Zacharias
does paint out Jesus the Priest with loathsome and unseemly garments, and that
a stone with seven eyes stood looking upon him. Can the stones find eyes to see
God whipped, spit upon, and crowned with thorns? And shall man be so blind as
not to behold him? Saint Luke titles Christ, mortem, and spectaculum. Men see
many things with admiration, but they see not the Angels: and many see the
Angels, but they see not God. But our Savior Christ torn and tormented on the
Cross; Men, Angels, and God, may behold this with admiration (if it were
possible that God could be subject to admiration) but men are apt to be taken
therewith. The Angels also did admire the ensigns of the Cross. And to God,
the Son said; My God, my God, look upon me. In a word, if there be any thing
that may cause a general astonishment, and admiration in all creatures
whatsoever, it is our Savior Christ crucified. The flood was a cause of great
amasement, beholding the waters, the heavens, and the dead bodies. The burning
of Sodom, and the swallowing up of Dathan, were things to be admired: but to
see Christ so cruelly tormented as he was, and Pilat in pity of him, leaning
himself in the window, and saying, Ecce homo, does drown all other kinds of
astonishment and admiration.

Et baiulans fibi crucem.
And taking up his Cross. When Pilat did look that the Jews would have
rested satisfied and well contented, then did they cry out louder than before,
Away with him, away with him, crucify him, crucify him. And being overcome by
the confused noise of that rascal ^abble, going from the window up unto his
Throne, which the Evangelist calls Lithostratos, a place paued with square
stones, pronouncing sentence against him, he condemned him to the death of the
Cross. Saint Chrysostom says, Senten^iam non tulit, sed tradendo eum,
permisit illos sua vti tyrannide, That he did not pronounce sentence against
him, but by delivering him up into their hands, he permitted them to use their
own Tyranny, He delivered him unto them to do what they would with him. But
the more probability is, that he pronounced sentence against him.

Job. 1^.
First, because Saint John says, He sat down in the judgment seat: There
being no need of his sitting down, had he not been to pronounce sentence.
G^llius, Vlpianus, and Pliny report, That with the Roman Judges, it was so
inviolable a custom to sit down when they pronounced sentence, that they
accounted that for no sentence, which was pronounced standing: In token, that
any sentence either civil or criminal, ought to proceed from a well settled
mind, and a stayed judgment.

Secondly, Saint Luke says, Pilat gave sentence, That it should be as they
required. Where we are to weigh the word, Luke 23.
Adiudicauit, Gave sentence.

Thirdly, The Jews had alleged for themselves, It is not lawful for us to
put any man to death. Pilat pronounced the sentence of death against Christ.
Which is to be understood (as the Cardinal of Toledo proves it) Unless the
sentence of the Judge do precede, and go before; and then they may.

The Tenor or substance of that which Pilat pronounced, your grave Doctors
deliver the same in different words, but the sum of it is this. We Pontius
Pilat by the will of the immortal gods, and by the authority of Roman
Princes, being President of this sacred Empire, condemn unto death, Jesus of
Nazareth, for having made himself King of the Jews, as appears by the
testimony of the High Priests of Jerusalem. Wherefore we will and command,
that he be carried from this place, forth of the City, to the place of
Execution, commonly called Golgotha, and there to be crucified between two
thieves, Dismas and Gismas, here convicted and condemned for their thefts and
robberies, to the end that this his death may make for the good and safety of
this people, and for the peaceablenesse of this Common wealth. Dated in
Jerusalem, in Lithostratos, vulgarly called the Pauement, Pasquo parasceuae, or
Preparation of the Passover, about the sixth hour.

No age, ever knew a more cowardly Judge, or a more unjust sentence. Pilat a
cowardly Judge.


First, because having said in public, Ego nullam in eo inuenio causam, I find
no cause of death in him: and thereupon, washing his hands before the
multitude, he made protestation, That he was innocent of the blood of this just
man: God not suffering him to have a mouth to say the contrary.

Secondly, because the innocence of our Savior Christ, was notorious; not
only because all the Prophets had given sufficient testimony thereof, Huic
omnes prophetae testimonium perhibent; but the people, Been omnia fecit. Pilats
wife, Judas, the Devils, and the President himself, who (as Sixtus Senensis
reports) writing to Tiberius Casar, confessed, That the High Priests had
accused him out of envy; and that by the common voice and consent of the
people, he had delivered him up to their will, against the testimony of his
own conscience.

Thirdly, Because both the Judge, and the Accusers, did proceed against him
contrary to all Law and Justice.

First, by receiving those as sufficient witnesses against him, which in all
right and equity, ought not to be admitted, Sciebat, quod per inuidiam
tradidissent eum. Cap. Testes, q. 3. Leg. Vaius.. de quaest. Testium vltro
accusandi, non est credendum.
And which was more, offering themselves to be witnesses, contrary to the Law,
Vnius.

Secondly, because no Judge can condemn any, unless he himself confess, or
be convicted of the fact that is laid against him; whereas our Savior Christ
was not only innocent of any crime, but in right of law likewise, because no
man could convince him of sin; for although he was falsely accused, yet was
he not convicted. And when the Judge knows, that the accused is innocent, he
ought strictly to examine the witnesses, seeking occasion to free him; as
Daniel did in the case of Susanna: but Pilat was willing to wink at the
matter, albeit he saw well enough, that the testimonies were not convenient and
fitting. And therefore Saint Ambrose says of him, That he washed his hands, but
not his heart. He did likewise swallow down one circumstance of great
consequence; to wit, a new Edict of Tiberius Caesar's, wherein express
commandment was given (as Suetonius sets it down) That the chastisements of
death should not be put in execution, till ten days full and complete after
publication of sentence: But Pilat made a short come-off with our Savior, and
gave him a quick dispatch. This sentence did surpass all the unjust sentences
that ever were pronounced. That of Iezabel against Naboth; That of the Judges
of Babylon against Susanna: For these had some form of a Legal proceeding.
But of this Esaias says, De medio iudicij sublatus est, generationem illius,
quis enarrabit? Another letter has it, Seculum illius. It is a bad world, when
an innocent person shall be put to the punishment of the Cross, without
sufficient witnesses to condemn him, or without lawful hearing, in
discharging himself of such things wherewithal he is charged. But as Saint
Gregory says, Si ipse indebitam mortem non suscepisset, nunquam nos a debita
morte liberasset, Had not he undergone an undeserved death, he could never
have freed us from a deserved death.

Christ being thus delivered up to the damnable will of those, who desired to
put him to death, and the cruellest death that Tyranny could invent, they
threw a halter about his neck, and laid a most heavy Cross upon his tender
shoulders, and being guarded along the street by the Roman Cohorts, Fear and
Jealousy, spurred up the Jews to crucify Christ.
they carry him away to Mount Caluarie. Their Fear and Jealousy, prompting
them to take this course with him.

First, That he might not as heretofore escape their hands.

Secondly, That in case he should escape their hands, the Temple should not
serve his turn. For, as Gellius does affirm in his Noctibus Atticis, Those
that were condemned to carry their Cross, had not the benefit of taking
Sanctuary.

Thirdly, Because the death of the Cross was so infamous a death, that none
but thieves and traitors to the Common wealth, could be condemned to this
shameful kind of death. And this (as S. Chrysostom has noted it) was
confirmed by the authority of Rome.

Fourthly, Because they would even then presently put him to begin his
suffering. For, it was a common ceremony amongst them, that they who were
condemned to death, should have a napkin fastened before their eyes, least by
seeing the Executioner, and the instruments of death prepared for them, they
might chance to fall into a swound, or faint in the way. But they would that
Christ, to grieve him the more, should have his punishment set before his eyes.

Fifthly, The divine providence (says Saint Augustine) had so ordered it; for
it was very fit and convenient, that the Cross which Kings use to wear on the
tops of their Crowns and Scepters, and Knights of diverse noble Orders on their
breasts, That the Prince of heaven should first bear the same upon his
shoulders, converting thereby the greatest infamy into the greatest glory
that ever was in this world: so that that which on the one side was a sad and
heavy sepctacle, on the other is a great and glorious mystery.

The people making a confused noise, the Trumpets send forth a hoarse voice,
the drums a dead sound, the thieves go cheek by iole close to our Sauiors
side, the cryers lift up their voices, and ball out aloud; This is the Justice,
which the Emperor of Rome, and Pontius Pilat in his name, with the consent and
approbation of the Princes of Jerusalem, has commanded to be done upon this
man, as a seditious person, a blasphemer, an impostor, a broacher of new
erroneous doctrine, stil^ng himself the Messiah and Savior of the world, the
King of Israel, and the Son of God.

He had to Mount Caluarie (according to the testimony of some grave Authors,
Mount Caluarie why so called.
which have measured out that space of ground) 1021 paces, which amount to
somewhat more than 3000 feet. And it was called Caluarie, either from the
sculls of those that had been there put to death, (as Saint Ierom would have
it) or from the scull of Adam, who was buried there; of which opinion is the
glorious Athanasius, Basil, Origin, Tertullian, and Saint Augustine: To the
end that it might be there more especially verified, Sicut in Adam, omnes
mori^ntur, ita in Christo omnes viuificabuntur, As in Adam all men were dead,
so in Christ all men shall be quickened and restored to life.

The Divine Providence had likewise so ordered the business, that the place
where our Savior Christ was to die, Christ suffered in the midst of the world.
should be in the midst of the world. And howbeit some Doctors do not admit,
that it is in rigor and strictness just in the middle, according to a
Geometrical proportion or Mathematical account, yet most do agree in this,
that it was in the midst of the land of Palestine, (as it seems to Josephus
in his third book, De bello Iudaico, as also to Aristeus) Or it may be said to
be in the midst of the world, Per Priuilegium, By way of Privilege, Because
that was the place where God had showed his greatest miracles. And of this
mind, is venerable Bede: yet notwithstanding of great force is that place of
David, Psalm. 74.12.
Operatus est salutem in medio terrae, He has wrought salvation in the midst
of the earth. Ezech 5.
And that of Ezechiel, Ista est Jerusalem, in medio gentium posui eam, and in
circuitu eius terras, This is Jerusalem, I have set it in the midst of the
nations and countries that are roundabout her. As also the authority of Saint
Jerome, who expounding this place, terms it, Meditullium terrae, and
vmbilicum; The very nauill or middle part of the earth. Which opinion is
strengthened by S. August. discoursing on the 75 Psalm.

Of the manner of their crucifying of our Savior Christ, there is this and
that doubt made, and one more probable than another. The common received
opinion of the Saints, is, That the Cross being fixed in Mount Caluarie, they
hailed him up first with cords, and afterward nailed him thereunto. And so
seems it good to that sacred Doctor Saint Gregory, Saint Bernard, Saint
Cyprian, and the revelation of Saint Bridget confirms the same. But Saint
Jerome, Anselme, Antoninus, and Laurentius Iustinianus say, That the Cross
being laid all along on the ground, they first nailed him unto it, and
afterward reared it up. And this part is much favored for two reasons.

The one, Because it was a more fitting and facile way to be done.

The other, Because in the Holy Land there is an especial place to be seen,
where they nailed our Savior Christ, which is a little ways off from the
place where the Cross was set up. But take which opinion you will, the plain
truth is, That it was one of the cruellest torments which our Savior Christ
suffered; for they having first nailed his right hand, they did so stretch and
strain the sinews, that they were forced with cords to draw out his left hand
at full length, to make it meet right with that hole which was bored in the
Cross for that purpose. And because they might stretch it out so far, that the
nail that fastened the right hand, might break the flesh, and tear the
sinews, they were feign likewise to bind his right arm with cords to the
Cross. And with this so violent a force and extreme reaching of his arms,
the bones of our Savior Christ's body were so dislocated, and disjoynted, that
you might plainly tell them; that prophecy of that Kingly Prophet David,
being then verified, Dinumerauerunt omnia ossa mea, They numbered all my bones,
etc.

Hilarie says, Christ's nayling, the cruellest part of his Passion.
That our Savior Christ gave here greater signs of his sorrow and grief,
than in all the rest of those bitter passages of his passion. And Rodulph, and
Saint Bridget affirm, That of all other his torments, this was the greatest.
And it is a thing worthy our consideration, That our Savior Christ should be
more sensible of this nayling of his hands, than of that Crown of thorns
which they platted on his head, those cruel stripes wherewith they scourged
him, and that vinegre and gall which they gave him to drink. Whereof there are
two reasons rendered.

The one natural, which Thomas touches upon. Delivering unto us, Two reasons
proouing him more sensible of this torment than any other.
that so intolerable is the pain and anguish of the sinews, that many that
were crucified, through the extreamitie of the pain, did swound and were
deprived of their senses. And therefore our Saviors torment must needs be so
much the more, by how much his wounds were greater than theirs. Foderunt manus
meas, and pedes meos. Hugo Cardinalis does ponder the Metaphor of foderunt, He
does not say, Clauarunt, but effoderunt: Like one that digges a pit in the
earth.

The other, moral, because he held us in his hands: And therefore it is said,
Omnia tradidit Pater in manus suas, and non rapiet eas quisquam de manu sua,
The Father has delivered all things into his hands, and no man shall snatch
any thing out of his hand. And in token that he was more sensible of our
torments than his own, the greatest pain he felt, was in the nayling of his
hands. Leo the Pope says, That to those that were crucified, they did use to
put a veil or bend before their eyes, when their hands were nailed, and that
they took the like course with our Savior Christ, but his Love had so ordered
the business, that he had eyes to see his own hurts, but not ours. The
Prophet Zachary asks the question, Quae sunt plagae istae, in medio manuum
tuarum? What are those wounds in the midst of thy hands? The like question he
might as well have made of the wounds in our Sauiors side, and his sacred feet,
but that Man was abiding in those the wounds of his hands, In manibus meis
scripsi te, I have written thee in my hands: And therefore made more reckoning
of them. And at the day of judgment he says by the mouth of Zachary,
Aspicient ad me, quem crucifix^runt, They shall look upon me whom they have
pierced. Zachar. 12.
The sinner shall open his eyes, whose name being written (like a posie) in
those hands, and himself worn by them, as a ring of remembrance, shall see
his salvation nailed to those hands, which his sins had nailed so fast to the
Cross. In a word, as in the garden, having more care of his, than himself, he
said in an imperious kind of manner, Sinite hos abire, Suffer these to depart.
And on the Cross he said unto his Father, In manus tuas Domine, commendo
Spiritum meum. Upon which place Saint Augustine says, That he there called the
faithful, his Spirit and his Soul; taking no care of his own spirit or
soul; for that was united to the Divinity. So that in this regard, for that
he held us in his hands, he felt more the torment of his hands, than of any
other part.

Never did humane Nature receive so great an injury as the death of the
Cross. Tostatus expounding that place of Deuteronomy. Maledictus a Deo, qui pependit
in ligno, Cursed is he that hangs upon the tree, says, That it was an injury
done to God himself, that a creature created after Gods own image, should dye
on the Cross, Nefas est (says Cicero) vincire ciues Romanos, scelus,
verberare, prope parricidium necare: Quid dicam in cruce agere? It is a heinous
act to bind a Citizen of Rome, a villainy to scourge him, and in a manner
paricide to kill him: What shall it be then to put him on the Cross? Pliny
says, That the Romans did set up certain Crosses, whereon they hung those
dogs, which did not give warning by barking; when the Gaulus did scale the
Capitol; which surprisal was prevented by the gaggling of the geese. Suidas
says, That when any one did die a bad and unfortunate death, they did put a
Cross upon his grave. Scaliger reports, That upon a time, there was a
strange kind of headache in Rome, which had spread it self over all the City,
which was so extreme painful unto them, that many of them did hang
themselves in their own garters, choosing rather to die, than to endure the
pain thereof; and some did hang themselves for fear of that sickness, before
ever it had seized upon them: Whereupon the Senate being desirous to prevent so
great a mischief, published a Proclamation, punishing therein these desperate
offenders with the infamy of the Cross, that dishonor might cut off that
inconvenience, which life could not persuade. Now so great then was the love
which our Savior Christ bare unto us, that he deposited in the infamy and
reproach of the Cross, all that honor which he had gotten himself by his
miracles, his doctrine, and unblameable life, leaving them all hanging on the
Cross, as a Trophie of his love. Hercules erected pillars, where he thought
the world had ended and extended it is utmost bounds, as a Trophie of his
prowess and valor; bearing this letter or inscription, Non plus vltra. Our
Savior Christ showed his Love unto us to the end, in that his Trophie of the
Cross, with this letter or inscription, No Love can go beyond this Love: And
therefore the Cross is the North-starre of our comfort and hope. For what can
he deny us, or what will not he grant unto us, who on the Cross showed such
exceeding great love unto us? But some man perhaps will ask me, How can so bad
a thing be able to afford comfort? Saint Basil cleeres it with this answer,
That the death of our Savior Christ did alter the nature and quality of
things; turning joy into sorrow, and sorrow into joy. And therefore it is said,
Vae vobis qui ridetis, Woe be unto ye that laugh. And as we see sometimes that
the fire does not burn, that the water does not drown, and that wild beasts
do not bite; because the divine Omnipotence does truck and exchange the
actiuenesse of those Elements, and beasts; so Christ took away the sorrow and
pain of the Cross, and placed thereon Joy, Comfort, and Hope. The daughters
of Jerusalem went forth to see King Solomon with that Crown wherewith his
mother had crowned him on his wedding day, and the day of the joy of his heart.
But Theodoret demands, How can a crown of thorns become a crown of joy? I
answer, As it is a crown of Love it may. Nilus, in an Epistle which he
writes to Olimpiodorus, Proconsull of Egypt, says, speaking of the Cross,
Per hanc desperabundis vndique spes annuntiatur, Every part of Christ affords a
sinner confidence.
To him, to whom (in all seeming) there remains no reason of hoping, the
Cross promises hope. There is no man so bad, no man so sad, to whom this does
not assure joy and comfort. Consider Christ from the sole of the foot, to the
crown of the head; and all that we there find, are nothing else but reasons of
confidence, and of comfort. His head bowing, his hands broken, his feet
fettered, his side opened: with his head he beckens us to him; with his arms
he imbraceth us; with his breast he does warrant us safety. The heart of man
is inscrutable. There were many that murmured at man's making, because he that
molded him, had not made him with a window in his bosom. But though thou
should be jealous of all the rest, yet can thou not be jealous of Christ,
nor of his Love, since that he lays open his bowels unto thee.

They had now set up the Cross, leaving our Savior Christ naked thereupon, as
already has been delivered unto you. And that History of the King of
Aragon, Don Alonso, further adds, That the most blessed Virgin being sensible
of the great shame which her beloved Son suffered upon this occasion, and
desiring much to cover him with the veil which she had on her head, the earth
heaued it self up by degrees, and served in stead of a ladder to perform this
good office. And though the Evangelists do not set down all the particulars
that passed then and there, yet this is so singular in it self, that I thought
it not fit to have it left out.

Upon the discomfort which Christ showed in some few words that he uttered,
Christ's Deity more concealed at his death than any time before
the Devils made a great muttering and whispering amongst themselves, that he
was a mere man and a sinner. And having gone always on in their blindness, in
not knowing of him, at this last push they bewrayed their blindness more than
ever heretofore. Eusebius Caesariensis says, That albeit all the whole life of
Christ was a covering, and discovering of the treasure of his Divinity; yet at
his death he did hide it in that manner, and kept it so close, that innumerable
Legions of Devils came to flout and scoff at him, as if they had now gotten
the victory; so does that place of Esaias express this their triumphing over
him, Infernus super te, conturbatus est in occursum aduentus tui, suscitauit
tibi Gigantes: by whom he understands the devils, which said to our Savior
Christ on the Cross, Et tu vulneratus es, sicut and nos, and nostri similis
factus es, detracta est ad inferos superbia tua, Thou have hitherto deceived
us, but now thou shall cousin us no more, we know now well enough what thou
art: We will now be Gods, Super astra Dei, exaltabo solium meum, and similis
ero altissimo, Thou would feign likewise have made thy self a God, but thou
art wounded and infected as well as we, with sin. Now thy eyes wax dim and
dark, thy face pale and wan, thy tongue furred and swollen; thy lips black and
blew; and thy whole body nothing from top to toe but stripes and goare blood.
Caesarius, that was a Contemporarie of Saint Bernards, says, That he did ask
a certain Devil, from whence he came? And that he should make him this answer,
I come from assisting at the death of Abbot Gerardo. How durst thou (said the
other) set upon so holy a man? Whereunto the Deu^l answered, Ego presens fui
super brachium crucis, quando Dei filius expirauit; I was present at the
cross, when the Son of God expired. And Didimus says, That Lucifer did
assist there at that time, accompaned with great squadrons of Devils in most
horible and fearful shapes. E^s^bius Caesariens^s, expounding that verse of
the 21 Psalm [ Circundiderunt me vitul^ multi, and aperuerunt super me os
suum, circumdiderunt me canes multi. Salua me ex ore L^onis, and a cornibus
vnicornium humilitatem meam: Dogs have compassed me, and the assembly of the
wicked have enclosed me; they pierced my hands and my feet; I may tell all my
bones, yet they behold and look upon me; They part my garments amongst them,
and cast lots upon my Vesture, But be thou not far off, o Lord my strength,
hasten to help me. Deliver my soul from the sword, my desolate soul from the
power of the dogs; save me from the lions mouth, and answer me in saving me
from the horns of the unicorn, etc.] says, That this was a Prayer which the
son made unto his father, entreating him that he would free him from the
Dogs, the Bulls, the Lions, and the Unicorns, who coming upon him with open
mouth, did cast a cloud of heaviness and sadness before those his Divine
eyes. Eusebius likewise expounding that verse of the 54 Psalm, [ Timor and
tremor venerunt super me, and contexerunt me tenebrae, Fear and trembling are
come upon me, and an horrible fear has covered me.] says, That as in holy
Scripture many Devils are called, spirits of Fornication, and of Horror, so
some men are called Ruffians, Raggamuffins, Swash-bucklers, etc. Contexerunt me
tenebrae, is there set down, to express the infinite number of Devils
attending then upon our Savior. They did cover him like a cloud, but they
could not comprehend him. To whom may be applied that place of Saint John, The
light did shine in darkness, and the darkness comprehended it not. God
permitting it should be ^o, Malice is ever it is own foe.
to the end, that that place of Saint Paul might be verified; Tentatum per
omnia He was tempted in all things. ^ut this Temptation proved worse than the
former to him: For the bait being thrown out, he caught at the mortal and
weaker part in God, and was taken f^orthwith by the hook of his Divinity.
Gregory Nissen applies to this purpose that history of David, when Saul
throwing his spear at him, he left it sticking in the wall, David remaining
unhurt. Quousque irruitis in hominem, interficitis vniuersi vos tanquam pariete
inclinato. Saint Jerome expounding this place of our Savior Christ, calls him
parietem, because he was our wall, Murus, and antemurale. So says Esaias. And
parietem inclinatum, because he hung upon the Cross inclinato capite, and
maceriae repulsae; like unto a wall that is pusht and should at; For, as some
setting their shoulders against a wall, and seeking by maine strength to throw
it down to the ground, they themselves usually fall with it, which thrust it
down, one remaining without an arm, another without a leg, and some without
their lives: So the Jews and Romans, setting to their shoulders to overthrow
the life of our Savior Christ; one lost his Kingdom, another his Monarchy,
this man his goods, that man his life, and many both their bodies and souls.
This is that Interficitis vniuersi vos; And as that spear which Saul threw did
not touch David, but smote the wall; So the nails, wounds, scourges, and
thorns touched our Saviors Humanity, but not his Divinity. So that the
spear which was flung at him, missing his Godhead, and hitting only his
Manhood, the Devil was thereby taken, mocked, overthrown, amazed, and
astonished. In Exodus, God being willing to give an end to the plagues of
Egypt, he commanded that every family of the children of Israel should on a
certain night kill a Lamb, and that they should sprinkle the posts of the
doors of their houses with the blood thereof; and, that when the Angel should
pass by, slaying the first borne of Egypt, he should skip over the posts that
were sprinkled with the blood of the Lamb, which the Israelites that night
had eaten to supper. S. Chrysostom says, That the Angel did fear the blood
of that Lamb, because it was a type and figure of that true and most innocent
Lamb, who was to have his blood sprinkled on the posts of the Cross. If then
an Angel of God were afraid of the blood of a beast, because it was a figure
of that blood which was to be shed on the Cross for the saving of sinners, and
such as were Gods chosen people; What fear and terror shall the blood and
death of our Savior Christ, God, and Man, strike into Hell? Saint Paul says,
Triumphans illos in semetipso, Triumphing over them in the Cross, subduing
powers, principalities, etc. It is Anselmes observation, Coloss. 2.
that the triumphers of this world, make their triumph by shedding the blood of
their enemies: The difference betwixt our Sauiour^ triumph, and those of Men.
but our Savior Christ triumphed over the devils, and over sin and death, by
shedding his own proper blood. God did anciently in those times of old, take
the same course with his enemies, as other t^^umphers in the world were wont
to do. Glorificabor in Pharaone, etc. I will get m^ honor upon Pharaoh, and
upon all his Host, Exodus 14.
upon his Chariots, and his Horsemen, that the Egyptians may know that I am
the Lord. God made himself then to be known by destroying, drowning, and
killing of them. But now he would get himself a name, and fame, by dying
himself on the Cross. This strange and new kind of victory, Esaias paynteth
forth by introducing our Savior Christ, who ascends all bloody up unto
Heaven; and by bringing in those Angels who ask the question, Who is this
that comes thus stained and died in his own blood, and yet is both fair and
valiant? Who is this (as it is in the Text) that comes from Edom, Esaias. 63.
with red garments from Bozrah? He is glorious in his apparel, and walks
with great strength. Wherefore is thine apparel red, and thy garments like him
that treads in the Winepresse? And the answer to this demand is, Ego
propugnator ad saluandum, I am mighty to save: I spoke in righteousness and
past my word to save the World, and to take them out of the hard bondage of the
devil, of sin, and of death; and I have performed my promise, and been as
good as my word, by leaving their enemies overcome, by ^reading them underfoot,
and by stayning all my raiment with blood, and by bringing down their
strength* to the earth. But, Quare ergo rubrum est vestimenium t^^m, Why is thy
raiment read? What, a Conqueror, and yet so be^^^eared with blood? It is
answered, I trod mine enemies under my foot, as he that crushing grapes
^readeth in the Winepresse; and my garments are sprinkled* and my ^ayment
stained with their blood. Calcaui eos in furore meo, I troad them in ^^^^^^ger,
and troad them underfoot in my wrath, for the day of vengeance was in (...)
heart, and the year of my redeemed was come. And so I was their savior. But
how could this be said of the Devils, and of Sin, being that they have
neither of them blood? It Is true, But humane nature has both flesh and blood;
Whereof they had made themselves Lords and Masters. And because I had (says
Christ) put on this particular nature, not in regard as it was in me, (for so
it was impeccable and without sin) but in regard of the rest of mankind, from
whom it was inseparable and not to be removed, and so must need Sin,
whilst that was about them: Christ was prodigal of his own innocent and
precious Blood, that he might save ours which was altogether tainted and
corrupted. He endured the Cross, that we might receive the Crown; he cast
himself into the Arms of Death, that he might raise us up to eternal life:
for which his great and unspeakable Mercy toward us most wretched, vile, and
miserable Sinners, to him, the Father, and the Holy Ghost, three Persons, one
true and ever living God, be rendered all Praise, Honor, and Glory, Might,
Majesty, Power and Dominion, as most due, World without end, Amen.

Laus Deo.
A Table of all the principal matters contained in this Book.
A
Abraham.
HOped, where he had no reason to hope. page. 68, 69. In sacrificing Isaac,
he sacrificed the joy and content of his life. 187 His courage was again
tried by being forced to forsake his country. 275
Adam.
For a foolish longing lost the greatest Empire. 273 His knowledge was infused.
466 If he had accused himself, he had freed his posterity. 288 The sight of
Abel being dead, was a terror to Adam ever after. 489 He laid the burden of his
transgression upon God. 564 He knew by revelation, that his marriage did
represent that of Christ, and his Church but he knew not the means. 608 If he
had not excused his fault he had not bin shut out of Paradise. 625 He was
buried where Christ was crucified. 642
Admiration.
Whence it proceeds. 35 It is commendation. ibid. It waits not but on
things that are rare. 320, 345 Usually the child of Ignorance. 465 Christ on
the Cross the chiefest object that ever it had. 639
Advantage.
Against an Enemy no cowardice. 551
Adultery.
How punished in former times. 418 The foulness of the Sin. ibid. Condemned
even by nature, 419
Affliction.
Beneficial. 27 But not to the wicked. 28 Why God afflicts his children. 63,
69, 179 It alters the very form of Man. 638
Ambition.
A strong temptation. 90 Blind in what it pursues. 228 It knows nor reason nor
religion. 229 The nurce and mother of many Cruelties. 230 Three sorts of
Ambition. 229
Anger, See Wrath.
It ought to be restrained. 58 Sometimes necessary. 126 As hurtful a Sin,
as Envy. 328, etc.
Angels.
The Protectors of Gods children. 89 Their Power. 97 They rejoice at our
coming to Heaven. 282
Evil Angels.
To what services deputed. 97
Antechrist.
His wonders shall be lying and deceitful, yet many. 120
Antiquity.
The praise of it. 41
Apparel.
How to be limited. 235 The abuse of it. 236
B
Baptism.
THe foundation of Christian building. 558 Bethesda, the figure of it. 165
Beloved.
A name of good pre-eminence. 502
Bells.
The use of them. 526
Beelzebub.
Why resembled to a fly. 295
Benefit, See Courtesy.
Well bestowed, if much desired. 546
Beauty.
The force of it. 571
Blessing.
Why Isaac would have conferred the blessing on Esau. 227 God measures out his
blessings to us more by Love than Wisdom. 262 He substracts them from the
ungrateful. 270
C
Centurion.
HIs behavior justified. 36 His faith commended. 34
Capernaum.
The glory of it. 23, 315 Why Christ would work no miracles there. 318 There
began the preaching of the Gospel. 315
Change.
A change to be seen in all things. 247
Charity, See Mercy and Unmercifulness.
Much respected of God. 100, praised of Men. 307 Must be practiced toward all.
337 How it differs from covetousness. 439
Chair.
What is meant by Moses his Chair. 212
Chastisement, See Punishment.
Gods chastisements whereunto resembled. 244 To what purpose they serve. ibid.
More in show than in substance. 452
Children.
What care Parents should have of them. 226 If virtuous their Parents glory.
310 Christ a Schoolmasters even to these. 462 Four degrees of childhood, and
whereunto alluding. 602
Christ. See Death.
His coming to Judgment. 93 With what Majesty it shall be. 96 and 97 His
combat with the devil. 71 How called the hope of the Gentiles. 142 Why called
the Son of David rather than of Abraham. 149 His transfiguration, and the
reasons of it. 184, etc. The necessity of it. 187, The quality. 188 Glorious
in his Passion three manner of ways. 192 His body twofold, Natural, and
Mystical. 193 His Passion the fountain of our glory. ibid. He suffered,
only because he would. 200 His willingness to dye. 219 Why called the Son
of Man. 223 His blood why shed in the Vineyard. 265 If conceived in the heart,
soon discovered. 309 His Pedigree, the noblest that ever was. 310 His works
of two sorts. 318 No Monopoly to be made of his Worth. 326 As he was meek in
reproving, so he was stout in revenging. 359 He brings Health and Holiness,
wheresoever he comes. 374 Compared to the Sun. 388 The only Well of living
Water. 394 A Controller of curious niceness. ibid. The prerogative of his
flesh. 379 More moved at our disasters, than he was at his own. 494 Why
without peccabilitie. 524, etc. His innocence exemplified both by his life and
death. 526 Never any so abused by the World, as he. 537 543 He must be sought,
while he may be found. 543 His power never more seen, than in his Passion.
549, 605 He proves his Divinity by no other testimony, than his works. 556
Always ready to forgive Sinners. 583 Why called a Bull. 605 His life was to
bring the Jews to knowledge, his death the Gentiles. 605 His Humility the
character of his Love. 637 His company a sure protection. 622 Every part of him
affoords a Sinner confidence. 645 His Dietie when most concealed. ibid. His
blood ought to be much regarded. 647 The difference betwixt his Triumph, and
those of Men. 16
Christians.
Led more by Custom than Devotion. 414 Many now worse enemies to Christ, than
were the Pharisees. 267 Many Christians why called sheep. 567
Church.
Why persecuted. 65 Likened to a Rock. ibid. Her greatest persecution is to
want persecution. ibid. Her firmness. 250 Gods favor toward her. 345 Why
styled a well ordered Army. 440 In her infancy she needed miracles. 326 She
thriues, because watered with the blood of Christ and his Martyrs. 251
Clemency.
A profitable virtue. 534
Communion.
Two dignities to be considered in it: One of the Person that receives Christ;
the other of the Preparation, wherewith he does receive it. 33, 636
Confession.
When to be made. 203 The only way to absolution. 281 Without it no true
comfort. 288 Satan would keep us from it. ibid.
Contemplation.
Must not be severed from action. 488 Nor preferred before it. 413
Conscience.
If guilty, the greatest torture. 567
Cooperation.
Necessary in things that concern the saving of our Souls. 147
Counsel.
Where good Counsel is wanting, all runs to ruin. 436 State Counsels more to
pill the poor, than to preserve them. 437 No man so wise, but may need good
Counsel. 587 Ill Counsel produces ill effects. ibid.
Country.
Every man must love his own Country. 275 316
Conversion.
Three conuersions celeberated by the Church. 615 That of the Thief
miraculous. 616
Covetousness.
Foolish and unnecessary. 8 The root of all evil. 234 Nothing worse than a
covetous man. 263 No Vice more severely punished. ibid. None so hard to be
reformed. ibid. The only God that commands the World. 264 Men usually covet
what is especially commended. 407 Covetousness and Mercy, how they differ. 439
Never satisfied. 441 Naught in a Magistrate. ibid. Worse in a Minister. 448,
457, 489
Courtesy.
The receipt of a courtesy is the engaging of our liberty. 226 A good turn is
a strong fetter. 253 Courteous behavior the greatest gain. 445
Court, Courtier.
The Courts of Princes like the poole of Bethesda. 162 The life of a Courtier
is wholly upon hope. ibid.
Cross.
Heavens key. 623 The death of the Cross an injury to nature. 644
Cruelty, See Unmercifulness. Curiosity.
Dangerous in divine matters. 125, as also in searching into other men's lives.
477 Curiosity and Temperance are still at variance within us. 521
D
Death.
THe Glorious change whereunto it brings the child of God. 242 No greater
dishonor than to dye by the hand of a base enemy. 74 Natural to shun
Death, and to seek Life. 219 Christ's willingness to dye. ibid. Christ's death
to be considered two manner of ways, etc. 222, etc. As a man's life is, so is
his death. 243 Why called a change. 247 We ought to pray against sudden
death. 331 492 The death of the wicked full of terror. 332 The death of the
Saints is the weakening of the place in which they dye. 426 Little regarded or
remembered. 489 The remembrance of it affoords two benefits. It is incident to
all. 490, etc. The living more to be pitied, than the dead. 494 Death a large
draught, but Christ swallowed it down. 499 Why termed a Sleep. 509, etc.
Christ's death how different from ours. 510. The death of the Soul a true
death, that of the body only a shadow. 512 Why the Heathen erected Pyramids
over their dead. 514 Christ's death, the Devils worst torment. 528 549 Why
Christ desiring to dye, fled to au^yd death. ibid. etc. Christ's death did alter
the nature of things. 645 The Devil never more deluded than by Christ's death.
646 Preparation against death necessary. 597
Devil.
He lays upon Man three burdens. 17. His description. 71. His trade is wholly
to do evil. 80 Why he appeared to Eve in the form of a Serpent. 81 His
subtlety. 82 A great prouoker to Gluttony, and why. Ibid. His malice
oftentimes outrunnes his Wit. 85 He is all tongue. 88 A false interpreter of
Scripture. 89 He has three ginnes wherewith to entrap man, suitable to his
ages. ibid. A great Bragger, but a mere Bankrupt. 90 Compared to a fly 91 His
imprisonment. 92, 304 His tyranny over those that follow him. 134, 286 Always
foiled by his own weapons. 269 God alone must untie his knots. 283, and
desolue his bargains. 284, and overcome his strength. 287 The way to punish
him, is to praise God. 289 Why God permits him to rage against Man. 292 Till
he be out of us, no good can enter in. 293 The Devils have their several
employments. 294 All at unity against man. 298 No Thief nor Tyrant to the
Devil. 299 His competition with God. 301 How he is said to possess what he
has, in peace. ibid. Why called the strong man. 303, and why the prince of the
world. ibid. The casting out of Devils, not always a sign of the coming of
Gods Kingdom. 302 Three sorts of persons possessed with Devils. 304 Whether
the Devils knew Christ, or no. 384, etc. His rest, is to do mischief. 304
God turns his tricks to man's advantage. 306 He can do nothing against us,
without us. 585
Discourse.
What discourses Christians should use. 218
Disobedience.
Man shall be condemned for it by all the creatures. 380, etc.
Doctrine.
Christ's doctrine both pleasing and profitable. 462
Dog.
A name which in holy writ implies the lowest baseness. 157
Dumb.
Dumbness in a Christian the greatest misery. 288 Dumb ministers the Devils
best agents. 289
Dust.
The period and the principle of all things. 7
E
Earth.
THe basest of all the Elements. 7
Eloquence.
The force of it. 547
Enemies.
Not to be hated for diverse reasons. 43, 47, 48 but loved, by the example of
Pagans. 44 of Christ. 52, 59 Only Gods instruments to punish our sins. 57
Excuses of the flesh against this loving of our his Enemies, and their
confutation. 59 Gods child thinks it no hard precept, to love Enemies. 60 Not
safe trusting an Enemy. 639
Envy.
The Nature of it. 125 Earthly things more envied, than spiritual. 183 A godly
kind of envy. 202 Three mischiefs arise from envy. 320 A dangerous Beast.
328 Envy and Love, alike humorous in making contrarieties. 342 The boldest of
all Vices. 353, and the most venomous. 356 A fortunate Vice to others,
unfortunate to it self. 539 Never greater, than among brethren. 556 Hard to be
cured. 564
Eye.
The office of the eye. 578 How Gods Eyes may be drawn unto us. 66 A weeping
eye causes a bleeding heart. 170 The eye is the storehouse of favor. 432
Difference of eyes. ibid. The eye of divine Pity ever fixed upon our poverty.
474, 478 The eye is the hearts market place. 479 The epitome of man. ibid. A
great misleader of the heart. 482 Gods pain in curing it. 483 The power of the
eye. 613
F
Faith.
IT has two wings, Prayer and Alms. 22 The Centurions Faith. 34 The Woman of
Canaan. 142 Faith* how said to be great. 36 The weakness of it in the
Disciples. 61 The power of it lively. 158 Things above the reach of reason,
hard to be believed. 178 Without faith in Christ, no remission of sins. 199 No
true knowledge of Christ without Faith. 385 Christ respects not our Knowledge,
but our Faith. 400
Fasting.
The antiquity of it. 11 The efficacy of it. 12, and 79 What to be observed
in Fasting. 13 What to be avoided. 14 Three sorts of Fasters. 20 True Fasting.
21 Our Saviors Fasting, differed from that of Moses and Eliah. 78 Motives to
Fasting. 79
Fear.
The occasion of many cruelties. 191 Nothing in the world but we ought to
fear it. 225 Fear ties a man to his duty. 248 The fear of the Lord, a strong
defense. 249 A discreet fear, better than a forward boldness. 387
Feast.
The feast of Tabernacles, why instituted, and how solemnised. 544 Three feasts
of Dedication among the Jews. 557 The feast of Fire. 559
Flattery.
Hated of God. 116
Fly. See Persecution.
No flying from God. 134, 138, 560, 578. Flight in Winter. 560 We must fly to
God. 504
Friend, Friendship.
Wherein true friendship consists. 313 It is not found amongst kindred or
brethren. 556 Three sorts of friendship. 632 A true friend hard to be found.
429, 430 False friends whereunto compared. 509
G
General.
THe maine thing in a General, is to free his soldiers from fear. 71, 73
Gentiles.
Their calling. 38, 269
Glory.
The Glory to come how excellent. 186
Glutton, Gluttony.
Gluttons compared to Serpents. 395 Gluttony, of all Vices the most dangerous.
237 It ill beseemes a Ruler. 395
God.
A sure Play Master. 21 His Majesty not to be described. 107 Ever ready to
help his children. 30. etc. His Bounty toward his suppliants. 30. How we
should behave our selves toward him. 34 His help never comes too late. 68 Why
he deferreth it sometimes. 69 Particularly the God of the Faithful. 75 His
friendship the surest. 86 He makes the Devils practices our preservatives. 87
His children, why called Sheep and Lambs in holy Writ. 154 He proportions his
favors and dis-fauors, according to our capacity, 156. and as he pleases.
166 The least of his favors not to be valued. 157 His respect in comforting
the distressed. 164 He pittieth when none else will. 170, 174. He preuents our
necessities. 172. How he may beseene of men. 184, etc. Signs whereby to know
whether we seek him. 202, etc. When he may be said to be absent from us. 256
He looks for fruit where heebestowes his favors. 258, 266 He requires nothing
of us, but what is for our own good, 258. and he requires notmuch. 259 Our
destruction greeues him more, than his own dishonor. 261 He labors our
conversion. 266, 267 He substracts his blessings, when we prove ungrateful.
270 His Bounty. 282 Why called the hidden God. 308 By weak means he
confounds the mighty. ibid. More to be honored than our Parents. 318 His
works and ways must be reverenced, not discussed. 322 Sometimes most our
friends, when he denies us what we ask. 323 No respecter of Persons. 327
Protects his children otherwise in the new Law, than he did in the old. 360 Why
called the water of Life. 401 Ever forward in releeuing our necessities. 435
His favors seldom come single. 502 He never forskes his friends. 503 We must
fly to him in all extremities. 504, etc. Why he appeared to Moses in a Bush.
515 His honor must ever be preferred before our own. 535 His counsels are
unsearchable. 550 Not partial in bestowing his favors. 554 The way to fly
from God, is to fly unto him. 578 The only Lord of all. 597, etc. No striving
against him. 606 Not called the God of any man, while he lives. 609 He
delayeth not his favors. 628 His reward exceeds our requests. 628, 629 His
absence terrible. 633 He has two Houses. 635.
Good.
Never truly liked, till utterly lost. 543 If public, to be preferred before
the private. 181, 185, 594
Gospel.
Milder than the Law. 346
Grace.
Enableth us to do what Nature cannot. 50 The order of it different from that
of Nature. 108 Not obtained without diligence. 166
H
Hair.
Hair has bin hurtful unto many.
Harlot.
The price of a Harlot no lasting portion. 397 Her manners. ibid.
Hardness of heart.
In the Jews without paralelle. 206 They that live in it, justly suffered to
dye in it. 58, 117 Marks whereby to know a hard heart. 296 A hard heart can
never be mollified. 537
Health.
Life is no life without it, 239
Heart.
It cannot love and hate both at once. 117 Man's heart, Gods temple. 557, etc.
Of the whole man, God desires only the heart. 369 What is understood by heart.
371 It has many enemies, and all within it self. ibid. The heart of the
Earth, what. 130.
Hearers.
Curious hearers reproved. 124
Heaven.
The joys of it. 194 Not purchased without violence. 230, 391 545 In our
passage to it, no ties of Nature to be regarded. 311 The glory of it. 627
Hell.
The pains of it how dreadful. 244, etc. All other pains, but pastimes to
these. 453
Honor.
Despised of Christ. 327 Never without it is burden. 35 Gods children more
ambitious to deserve it, than enjoy it. 192 Earthly honors brook no
partnership. 228 The desire of honor not always to be condemned. 327 Honors
where no merit is, adds but to our shame. 554 Desired of all. 555
Hope.
More prevailent with man than fear. 190 The nature of both. 619 Satan's
practice to deprive Job of his hope. 620
Hospitality.
Pleasing to God. 375 God the only keeper of it. 443
Humility.
Twofold, one of the Understanding, another of the Will. 33 The only way to
Heaven. 217 No Humility like our Saviors. 635
Hunger.
A great temptation. 80 Why Christ would hunger. 78
Hypocricie.
Feignes the good it has not. 15 A kind of Stage Play. 16 The Hypocrite has
no hope of Heaven. 18 The danger of hypocritical and lukewarm Christians.
268, 301 Hypocrisy strains at a Gnat, and swallows a Camel. 262, 368
I
Ego, I.
A Word of great authority. 45
Jealousy.
A true symptom of baseness. 338
Jews.
A jealous and envious people. 315 Gods many favors toward them. 316 Their
subtlety and incredulity. 565, 566 The murderers of all Gods Saints. 602 In
nature both like the Bore and the Bear. 604
Ignorance.
A maine cause of all our evil. 401, 591
Images.
What difference betwixt the maker of them and the worshipper. 151
Incredulity.
A maine let to Christ's miracles. 322
Incontinencie.
Is a Sin which has two properties. 570
Informers.
Like the flies of Egypt in a common weal.
Ingratitude.
The first fault that ever was committed. 143 Never unpunished of God. 144 No
cut to unkindness. 224 God substracts his blessings from the ungrateful. 270
It is usually the requital of goodness. 330 The Emblem of it. 383, 568 To
return evil for good, a devilish sin. 635
Inheritance.
Gods inheritance may run a twofold danger. 248
Injuries.
Must be patiently digested. 47 When, and how to beforgiuen. 333, etc. To
suffer them is true nobleness. 533
Intercession.
Not to be understood but of the living. 379 Two things required to make it
effectual. 378
Jonas.
Whence descended. 132 Reasons moving him to fly. 133 Why he would be cast
into the Sea. 136 The Mariners charitable affection toward him. 137
Iugde.
No small comfort, that Christ shall be our Judge. 94 Two properties of a
Judge. 95 He must not be rash. 137 Judges must incline to mercy. 421 A good
Judge compared to a Crane. 458
Judgment.
Why attributed to Christ. 94 Judgment how to be guided. 471, etc. All shall
appear in judgment. 98 The day of Judgment desired of the Just. 99 Pilats
Judgment against Christ. 640 The most unjust that ever was. 641
Judas
Foolish two ways in the sale of our Savior. 634 The vileness of his fault.
ibid.
Justification.
A greater work than either the creation of the World or of Angels. 294, 572
The first step to it is mercy and pity. 397 Set out by diverse apt
similitudes. 573, 582
K
Knowledge, See Learning, Wisdom.
TO know thy self the beginning of perfection. 480
L
Lambs.
A Name attributed to the just, and why. 154
Law.
Whereunto useful. 40 The law of Taliation. 46 Laws if many, gainefull to
some, but loss to the most. 363
Learning, See Wisdom.
Not gotten without labor. 464, etc. God the giver of it. 466
Lent.
Why called the Spring of the Church. 10
Liberality.
Must be waited on by Frugalitie. 444
Life.
This life only a procession of quick and dead. 489 True life, is to meditate
on death. 1, 4, 490, etc. Short life content with short allowance. 8, and 542
Whether better a public or a private life. 107 An evil life the loss of
Faith. 128 Long life the enlargement of sin. 136 Life seldom wearisome to
any, 174 The evils of this life are only seeming evils. 179, 180 Life
without health no life. 239 Why desperate sinners are suffered to live long. 241
Nothing permanent in this life. 243 This life is only toil and labor, both
to the wicked, and the just. 396
Light.
Twofold. 188 The excellency of that light which is spiritual. 189 Christ,
why called the Light of the World. 517 The benefit of this Light. ibid. etc.
Reasons why some hate and shun it. 519 What is meant by Light of life. 522
Looking-Glasses.
Why placed about the Lauer in the Temple. 526
Lord.
A name implying Honor and Power. 32
Love
To love our selves we need not be commanded. 42 We must love our enemies. 43
The causes why we cannot. 49 How our love must be ordered. 56 The perfection of
it, how to be discovered 57 Never without fear. 92 How God should be loved.
377 Gods love is always working. 388, 435* 475 etc. 477 It cannot be repayd
but with love. 475 No love where no relief. 503 Gods love seen by his delays
in punishing. 513 Love and Hate transform a man alike into their objects. 564
Nothing more tedious to one that loves, than the absence of what he loves. 633
Love triumphs over God himself. 635
Liar, Lying.
The World, the Flesh, and the Devil, all liars. 528 The mischief of lying.
529
M
Madness.
TWofold. 604
Magistrates.
Should be free from what they punish in others. 360, 457 Like sheepe-heards
they should feed their flocks, rather than fleece them. 437 In choice of State
ministers, what ought to be regarded. 441 Magistrates should be bold in
reforming public abuses. 454, etc. More heed the conversion of the offender,
than the correction of his offense. 455 Two things they should specially look
unto, their conscience and their fame. 526 They must be examples. 527 Christ in
his proceeding against the Devil, a pattern for all magistrates. ibid. That
Commonwealth is lost, in which the magistrates and their ministers are both
bad 563 They should ever have Gods Laws before their eyes 588 Ill Rulers sent
by God to punish the people. 600 They should account no time their own, but
other men's. 631
Malice.
Will never be assuaged. 530, 562 Blind and simple in all her practices. 592,
etc. Ever her own foe. 646
Man.
The name of man imports three things. 3, The quality of his thoughts. 601,
His pride and vanity. 2, Two definitions of him. 625 Deferres his promises.
159 His attributes, oblivion, and baseness. 3 His best knowledge is to know
himself. 4, The benefit arising from this knowledge. 6, 7 His only supporter
God. 160 Nothing his own in this life. 251 Nor can he do any thing of
himself. 252 The Vine of all plants, most resembles him. 255 God is able to
make of him what he pleases. 256 Good men are scarce. 259 Nothing so foul as
man, without his God. 279 He is the Devils Cittadell. 285 Why Satan is so
malicious against him. 291 Of all creatures the most furious, if not guided by
reason. 329, Christ's Art in gaining him 637, The Devil not more cruel. 381,
425, 598 Why God suffers in him so many corporal weaknesses and defects. 480,
etc. 506 Inferior to the creatures in all humane goods. 508 His ways are two,
and he needs a guide. 520, 608
Masters.
How to use and esteem their servants. 25, etc. They must visit and help them
in their sickness. 31 The benefit of having Christ our Master. 115
Meditation.
Like Gun-pouder. 5
Meekness.
Preuailes upon the fiercest persons. 51
Memory.
The true use of it. 3
Mercy, See Charity, Pity, Love.
Gods omnipotency seen most in his mercy. 54 The practice of mercy brings
with it the greatest glory. 55 It differenceth Gods children from those of the
Devil. 100 Works of mercy most enquired after in the day of Judgment. 105
Mercy and Justice the two Poles of Gods government. 108 Mercy a sure motive
to Mercy. 153 Merciful men the fittest to be about Princes. ib. God defers not
his Mercy, but to augment it. 159 Not so plentiful under the Law, as under
Grace 165 Gods Mercy ever in competition with man's malice. 260 He that would
find Mercy must seek it. 387 Judges must incline to Mercy. 421, 455, etc. An
argument of goodness in whomsoever it is found. 424 It Is Gods care to work
his children to Mercy. 435 He delights in no attributes of his own, so much
as this. 481 It Is the Spring from whence all his other blessings flow. 496
Sometimes so great, that we cannot think on it, but with terror. 498
Merits.
Utterly cried down. 148, 321
Ministers, See Preachers, Magistrates. Miracles.
When to be wrought. 85, 324 Why not in use now. Ibid. Hypocrites favor them
much. 120, etc. The nature of Christ's miracles. 122, etc. How they differed
from those of the Devil. ibid. Why miracles should be desired. 123 More
frequent in the time of Grace, than under the Law. ibid. Prophesies more
auailable. 190 Neither necessary to salvation, nor sufficient. 326 Christ's
miracles, all wrought for the reparation of our miseries. 430
Mirth. See Sorrow.
The best Physic. 167
Money.
The instrument of all mischief. 274
Moors.
Of all people the most fearful, and why. 73
Mortification.
If true, never without mirth. 19, 20
Moses Chair.
What it meant. 212
N
Niniue.
THe greatness of it, 132 How the Ninevites shall rise up in Judgment against
Christians at the latter day. 132
O
Oblivion.
Has two bosoms. 535
Offense. See Injury. Offerings.
No honor to God, when hurtful to others. 366
Offices.
The sale, of them the ruin of a Kingdom. 457
Olive.
Why the Hieroglyphicke of Mercy. 413 What was typified by the mount of Olives.
412
Order.
The want of it any where, brings all into confusion. 441
P
Paradise. See Heaven. Parents.
MVst be loved of their children. 275 They must have a care of them. 226
Partiality.
In all things to be avoided. 440 Most of all in Judgment. 472
Passion. See Christ. Death.
Christ glorious in his Passion three manner of ways. 192 Punctual in
discribing it. 220 It should be seriously considered. ibid. and 222 It Is the
fountain of our glory, 193 Passion alters all properties to it self. 532
Patience.
Christ's Patience more staggered the Devil than all his Miracles. 55 The
excellency of it. 68 Once wounded, outrageous. 356 Patience and Hope the only
means to bring us to Heaven. 156 Acceptable to God, and profitable to our
selves 169, 172 A patient Ear shall reap great profit. 349 Patience when most
to be applauded. 533 A patient man, whereunto resembled. 534 Patience the badge
of Christ's Divinity. 622
People.
Nothing fiercer than their fury. 314
Persecution.
Whether Lawful to fly in time of persecution. 551
Persuasions.
If false, the most dangerous invasions. 202
Peter.
Two opinions concerning his denial. 607 How it may be said, he lost his
Faith. ibid. The occasions of his fall. 608 His sin like that of Adam. 610
More injurious to Christ, than all his Enemies 612 Why he asked not pardon for
his denial. 614
Pity.
Has always a Prayer for them that need it. 378 Ever profitable to them that
use it. 476
Pharisees, and Scribes.
Their wicked behavior toward Christ. 113 Their office. 112 What they were.
210
Physicians.
Ought to visit the poor. 31 Christ the best. 171, 177, 380 Bad Physicians,
the Butchers of a Commonweal. 177
Place.
Many have often fared the better, for the place in which they were. 388
Pleasures.
Of this life altogether vanity. 186, 197 Whereunto compared. 410
Power.
Never to be shown but in extremity. 552
Poverty.
The whole life of our Savior was a pattern for it. 636 The poor more
respected of God than the rich. 30 They have usually the nobler minds. 189
Forsaken of all. 277 As necessary for the rich, as the rich for them. 374
Praise.
All the retribution that man can make to God for all that he receives from
him, is to praise him. 401
Precedents.
More available than Precepts. 214
Predestination.
A special mark of it. 155
Preachers, Priests, Prelates.
Ought to have but one Wife, one Vine, one Living. 254 Their several names in
holy Writ. 260 How the World uses them. ibid. Hot fiery spirits unfit for this
office. 567 The unworthiness of the Person, no preiudic^ to the Function. 597
Christ's preaching powerful. 100, 106 The office of a preacher. 133 The
efficacy of Jonas his preaching. 139, 141 The best preachers, have not always
the most Auditors. 141 Priests are to be both Sheep-heards, and Christians. 196
Three sorts of preachers. 213 Those of looser life, to what resembled. 214
Their maine aim is the glory of God. 215 The honor of priesthood. 448 A
Preacher should never boast of his parts. 468 He must reprove boldly. 471
Preaching and Practice should never be severed. 527 Like Priest, like People.
540 Kindred the overthrow of many Prelates. 555 Ignorant and sluggish Prelates,
the destruction of Gods Vineyard. 253
Prayer.
Prayer and Alms the wings of Faith. 22 We must pray for our enemies. 52
Reasons and inducements hereunto. 53 The excellency of Prayer. 114, efficacy.
144 Why God sometimes denies us what we pray for. 130, 149 Prayer must be our
practice in adversity. 138 Vocal prayer necessary. 148 What we are to demand
in prayer. ibid. Importunity in prayer pleasing to God. 151 We must pray
discreetly. 157 Not with the tongue only. 370 Sick patients may pray, but not
prescribe. 45 Heartlesse prayers like soundlesseinstruments. 501 Our prayers
must not be long, but strong. ibid.
Pride, Presumption.
What kind of sin. 7 Man's presumption. 230 The bane of the Soul. 257 Never
unpunished. 609, 610
Princes. See Magistrates.
Should regard their people. 216 They little respect honest services. 541
Profit.
Private profit regarded of every one. 418
Prosperity.
Always envied. 182 Finds Friends, Adversity none. 198 Worldly prosperity can
follow no man farther than the grave. 243 No sure token of Gods love. 376 The
Souls bane. ibid.
Providence.
Distrust of Gods providence the cause of much evil. 438 It reaches always
to the preservation of his children. 563
Punishments. See Chastisement.
Gods, different from those of earthly Princes. 109 He proportions them to our
sins. 102 He uses them only for preservation. 168, 249, 261, 486, and yet
many times prolongs them. ibid. 332 We are punishable even for our thoughts.
169 The less we are punished here, the worse our estate. 179 God labors to
conceal both his Rewards and Punishments. 190, 207 Princes have a threefold
end in punishing. 247 Great punishments not be inflicted without great
consideration. 267 Gods punishments of two sorts. 268
R
Recreations.
Lawful if moderate. 10 Necessary. 428
Redemption.
Christ took great pains for it, and was at much cost. 391 The greatness of
it may be seen by the greatness of Christ's shame. 553
Reformation.
Men's reformations, wherein differing from those of God. 271
Religion.
Sin never more odious than when masked with Religion. 40 Man's wantonness in
matters of Religion. 122 The dishonor of Christians is to differ in Religion.
298 No cost more tedious to man, than that which is bestowed upon Religion. 431
Religion must not be guided by policy, but contrary. 594
Repentance.
How it is to be framed. 9 The Ninevites Repantance. 140 It is never to be
delayed. 10, 141, 624 A pattern of it. 177, etc. What may cause it. 281 Two
things required of every true penitent. 293 We must hasten it. 382, 484
Humility, Obedience, and Faith, required thereunto. 484 The nature of it. 486
Gods goodness toward the truly penitent. 508 Of Mary's Repentance. 574
Reprobation.
Never discovered to any. 207 Gods prescience not the cause of it. ibid.
Reproaches.
Christ more sensible of them, than any other injuries. 535
Reproves.
Not always in seison. 297 Brotherly correction is to have place every where.
334 He that would reprove another, must correct himself. 338 Reproof when to
be used. 339, etc. how. ibid. They must be private. 343 We must not refuse to
reproved. 348 To reprove a sinner is the best service we can do to God. 350
The most faulty ever most ready to reprove. 399, 424 Sharp reproves work
weak effects. 590
Resurrection.
Christ's Resurrection the greatest Miracle. 128, etc. 460 That, and his Death,
two Mysteries discovering all Gods Attributes. 459
Revenge.
Belongs only to God. 43, 46, 342 In man a symptom of cowardice. 538
Riches.
Their vanity. 21 How they may be sought. 22 Not so much respected of God, as
poverty. 30 They may be possessed, but not desired. 233 Usually accompanied
with Pride and Cruelty 239
Righteous.
They are the strength of the land in which they soiourne. 426 God allows them
not Bread for nothing. 63 Sensible of Gods wrongs. 74 Very rare. 544, 545
Secure in all Storms because God is with them. 67 They long after the day of
Judgment. 99 Called Sheep and Lambs, and why. 154 They rejoice in
afflictions, why. 185, 396.566 Despicable without, but ^ich within. 188
Mindful of Gods service, not of their own. 502, So likewise of his injuries,
not their own. 503
Rivers.
Three in this World. 405
S
Sacrament. See Communion. Sacrifice.
The greatness of the Jewish sacrifices. 105
Salvation.
Diversely sought after by Christians. 325
Scribes and Pharisees.
Their austerity and hypocrisy. 112, 210 Their office. ibid.
Scripture.
Never to be searched unto the depth. 45
Scorning.
A vice particular to the Jews. 116
Security.
A dangerous state. 532
Sermons.
Ought to savor more of salt, than sugar. 124
Servants.
How to behave themselves toward their Masters. 25, etc.
Service.
If good, a sure motive to draw on a recompense. 29 Little regarded of earthly
Princes. 541 God must be served before Man. ibid. It is bad service to share in
other men's sins. ibid.
Sheep.
Gods children why so called. 154
Sin.
Not feared of Men, but only for the suffering. 70 All sins not punished
alike. 101, 170 Sin undermines the Soul by degrees. 128 It draws
destruction after it. 135 Occasions of sin must be avoided. 147, 181 515, 611
The foulness of sin. 204, 372, 575 It is the cause of all misery. 205,
279, 478, 589 Desirous to do more than it is able. ibid. God not the author of
it. 208 We must not judge of a man's sinfulness by his sufferings. 589 They
always go by sholes. 264 The lesser ever punished by the greater. ibid. Sin
causes the translation of Kingdoms. 270 Sin seperates Man from God, and
from himself. 280, etc. 511 Hard to be removed. 285, 378 Of all other things
most hurtful to man. 305 It drives us far from God. 331 A monster, and why.
334 The sin of Cain greater than that of Adam. 603 The leaving of sin a
sure mark of Predestination. 400 It is ever attended on by shame. 410 Grows
loathsome through satietie. ibid. Four principles concerning the secrecy of
sin. 415 It will discover it self. ibid Nothing so terrible to man as the
sight of his sins. 422 It Is only for sin that God forsakes us. 427 Sin
it self, a scourge to the sinner. 453 Old sins must be strongly reproved.
456 Sin the only security that God could have from man for his glory. 480
Sin is death it self. 497 It should be our Slave. 502 It so alters a man,
that God cannot know him. 511 Custom in Sin, whereunto compared. 513 Old
Sins hardly cured. ibid. Sin makes the most valiant man a coward. 525 No
man free from it. ibid. We may not dally with it. 575 Relapses into it,
dangerous. 577 Let us eye our Sins, and God will not. ibid. Why God suffers
his children many times to fall into Sin. 611
Sinner.
To Sinners all things work together for the worst. 131 Their society must be
avoided. 181 No Sinner but is sometimes touched. 204 Desperate Sinners why
suffered to live long. 240 Sinners, Slaves to their sins. 265 Usually taken
in their own snares. ibid. They love not to be checked. 273 Their miserable
estate. 279 Whereunto compared. 279 Their posture. 280 Four differences
betwixt a just man and a sinner. 354 Two sorts of sinners. 367 We must never
despair of their conversion. 399 Always ready to disguise and excuse their
sins. 595 Better to suffer with the Saints, than to be dignified with Sinners.
500 Dead Lazarus the emblem of a sinner. 512 He savors ill to all, but God.
514 Fierce in his appetites and desires. 546 God would have none despair. 574
Compared unto swine. 278
Slander. See Reproach. Soldier.
Only honorable when religious. 25
Sorrow.
Of two sorts. 20 A sharp Sword. 167 If deep, dumb. 580
Soul.
Why knit and linked to a body of Earth. 4 Her faculties. 49 To heal the
Soul, we must wound the body. 377 Two things cause a fever in the Soul.
ibid. The great reckoning which God makes of a Soul. 403 Noble, when it serves
God. 507 God only can satisfy it. 508 Man careless of nothing more, than of
this. 512 A threefold death of the Soul. 513 The soul of the just, wherein
differing from that of a sinner. 531 Partiality of judgment in things
spiritual the bane of the soul. 532 The labor and love of Christ in looking
after a lost Soul. 561
Spirit.
Gods spirit, the best Schoolmasters. 32
Stoning.
An infamous kind of death. 423
Sunday.
God did his greatest works ever on this day. 562
Sun.
The glory of it. 521 Christ the only true Sun. 523
Superiors.
Ought to respect their inferiors. 216
Sut^rs.
Not to be repulsed but with much mildness. 231 A faint suter, shows how to
be denied. 325
Swine.
Sinners resembled unto them, and why. 278
T
Tears.
OF diverse sorts. 495 Faulty two manner of ways. 496 They work two effects.
578 More sauorie to Christ than Wine. 583 Their efficacy. 614
Temptations.
Our Savior has sanctified them unto us. 71 The general good which is derived
from them 75 We may not thrust our selves into them. 76 They wait upon
perfection. 77, 84 Christ could not be tempted either by the World or the
Flesh. 78 Hunger a great temptation. 80 Ambition is the like. 90 Two kinds of
temptations. 91
Temple.
Gods temple ought to be reverenced, and why. 110, etc. 450, 562 The public
temple is to be frequented. 161
Thankfulness. See Ingratitude.
Req^^red for benefits received. 382, 475 The Dove of all foul the most
thankful. 468 Our thankfulness a motive to Gods bounty. 485
Thief.
The conversion of the Thief, in all respects miraculous. 617 'Twas the
blazoning both of Gods mercy, and omnipotency. 618, as also of his divine
providence. 619 By wat motives he was induced to his conversion. 621 His Faith
not to be paralleld. 626, Nor his Hope. ibid. Christ's bounty toward him. 627
Thirst.
A greater torment than hunger. 398 Spiritual thirst never satisfied. 405
Thought.
The quality and variety of man's thoughts. 601
Thresh.
To thresh, in Scripture, is to rule with tyranny. 307
Time.
How redeemed. 354
Torments.
Hell torments everlasting. 171
Tongue.
It must go with the Heart. 60 A good and an evil tongue. 290 No scourge to
the evil one. 296
Trading.
The best ever with God. 146
Traditions.
How far forth to be regarded. 365 Their variety. ibid. The Churches
perdition. 366
Tribulations.
More profitable for us than Prosperity. 376 Gods Eye is always upon the
Tribulations of his Children. 478 The Preservatives of Virtues. 506 The best
Reward that God can give his Followers. ibid.
Triumph.
Christ's Triumph, wherein differing from those of Men. 647
Trust.
The surest tie. 257
Truth.
Seldom welcombe unto any. 328, 528 Can never be suppressed. 535 Hardly heard in
Princes Courts. 610
Tyrants.
Ever their own torturers. 299 Their ferae, the mother of their fury^ 100
V
Vainglory.
EVer to be avoided. 379, 553
Victory
Temporal victories gotten by fighting, spiritual by flying. 76
Vice.
Hard to be removed. 24 Ever afraid of Virtue. 111 Never wants Agents. 541
Vine.
The Vines of the faithful spring out of the blood of Christ. 251 Every man's
soul is a Vine to himself, and he must dress it. 254 Of all plants it most
resembles man. 255 The Spouse compared to the Vine, and why. ibid.
Vineyard.
The cost which Christ was at with his. 250 Gods Vineyard must not be turned
into a garden. 254
Virgin.
The Virgin Mary is not to be too much honored of any. 309 Blessed, not for
bearing Christ, but believing in him. 311 Her dignity. 312
Unkindness.
No cut to unkindness. 224, 613
Unmercifulness.
Of all sins most abhorred both of God and Man. 240 The fearful estate in
which such are. 240
Unthankfulness. See Ingratitude. Usurpation.
The first original of Kingdoms. 299
W
War.
EVer betwixt Man and the Devil, and that by Gods own appointment, and why.
75
Water.
The Emblem of happiness. 404 The waters of Paradise only tasted, ravish the
Soul. 407 What is meant by the water of Life. 546 The Holy Ghost, why compared
to water. ibid Waters above the Heavens, what. 579
Weariness.
Christ was weary. 389
Wealth.
Brings with it Woe. 86
Weep.
Why Christ wept. 511, etc.
Whore. See Harlot. Wicked.
Have no peace. 586 Wickedness mere foolishness. 590
Widow.
What quality of life is required in a Widow. 493
Will.
Nothing so perverse as man's will. 118, 505 It is his own overthrow. 119, 469
Christ greatest labor was to correct it. 120 It concurres not with Grace in
our vprising. 173
Wine.
Not allowed the Israelites till they came into the Land of promise, and why.
83
Wine Press.
What it signifies in Holy Writ. 250
Wisdom. See Learning.
Despised of none but fools. 462 A wise man how profitable, and whereunto
resembled. 463 True Wisdom ever accompanied with Humility. 468 Gods Word the
truest. 469 Wisdom and Power not to be severed in a Prince. 473 No policy
preuailent against Gods Wisdom. 539, 588
Witness.
Three conditions required in every Witness. 522, etc.
Wives.
Must do nothing without the consent of their husbands. 408, etc.
Woman.
The Hieroglyphicke of weakness. 573 Though devout, yet dangerous to converse
with. 62, 411 Wanton women subject to two great miseries 396 Two baits at
which they usually bite. 402 Their Incontinencie. 409 Man's disrespect a
frequent occasion of their fall. 417
Works.
If good wishes were good works the wicked would soon be saved. 400 We must
work while we may. 483 Works outspeake words. 501
Word.
Gods word man's best sustenance. 87 Effectual by whomsoever it be uttered.
209, 211 Compared to a looking-glass. 464 The truest Wisdom. 469 The
majesty and efficacy of it. 470, 547 How to be heard. 530 The same words out
of diverse mouths, may be diversely relished. 596
World.
Worldlings most condemned of the world. 18 Nothing in it but disorder. 39
Likened to the sea, and why. 64 Nothing but in show. 91, 175, etc. A mixture of
good and evil. 272 Worldly contents not attained without much toil. 404 The
Worlds entertainment poor and base. 444
Wrath.
Gods wrath more violent, than lasting. 158, 201 The longer deferred the
fiercer. 256 No flying from it. 276
Y
Youth.
THe qualities of youth. 273 Too much liberty the bane of youth. 274 Liable to
many miseries and disasters. 497
Z
Zeal.
IF true, it carries with it both Lightning and Thunder. 362 Without action, no
mark of a Christian. 414 The nature of true zeal. 450 Wherein different from
Love. 451, etc.
Erata,
For Callite, read Catelli. 137. For make, mark. 414. For Abulansis,
Abulensis. 388. For Luuriabantur, Luxuriabantur, 122. For Bulzebub, Beelzebub,
125. For Sun, Son. 31. For Stauit, Stabit. 166. For has, that. 4.

There may be some other litterall escapes, but such as an ingenious nature
will willingly excuse, because they may be easily corrected.

FINIS.

