THE LOVERS Melancholy.

ACTED AT THE PRIVATE HOUSE IN THE BLACK Friars, and publicly at the Globe by
the Kings Majesty's Servants.

LONDON, Printed for H. Seile, and are to be sold at the Tigers head in Saint
Paul's Churchyard. 1629.

The Scene Famagosta in Cyprus.
The names of such as acted.
JOHN LOWIN. JOSEPH TAILOR. ROBERT BENFIELD. JOHN SHANCK. EYLYARDT SWANSTON.
ANTHONY SMITH. RICHARD SHARP. THOMAS POLLARD. WILLIAM PENN. CVRTEISE GRIVILL.
GEORGE VERNON. RICHARD BAXTER. JOHN TOMSON. JOHN HONYMAN. JAMES HORN. WILLIAM
TRIGG. ALEXANDER GOVGH.
TO MY WORTHILY RESPECTED FRIENDS, NATHANIEL FINCH, JOHN FORD, Esquires; Mt.
HENRY BLVNT, Mr. ROBFRT ELLICE, and all the rest of the Noble Society of Grayes
Inn.
My Honored Friends,
THe account of some leisurable hours, is here summed up, and offered to
examination. Importunity of Others, or Opinion of mine own, has not urged on
any confidence of running the hazard of a censure. As plurality has reference
to a Multitude, so, I care not to please Many: but wh^re there is a Parity of
condition, there the freedom of construction, makes the best musicks. This
concord has equally held between YOU THE PATRONES, and ME THE PRESENTOR. I am
cleared of all scruple of dis-respect on your parts; as I am of too slack a
Merit in my self. My presumption of coming in Print in this kind, has
hitherto been vn-reprooueable. This Piece, being the first, that ever courted
Reader; and it is very possible, that the like complement with Me, may soon
grow out of fashion. A practice of which that I may avoid now, I commend to the
continuance of your Loves, the memory of HIS, who without the protestation of a
service, is readily your Friend,

JOHN FORD.

To my Honored Friend, Master John Ford, on his Lovers Melancholy.
IF that thou think these lines thy worth can raise,
Thou do mistake: my liking is no praise:
Nor can I think thy Judgment is so ill,
To seek for Bays from such a barraine Quill:
Let your true Critic, that can judge and mend,
Allow thy Scenes and Style: I, as a friend
That knows thy worth, do only stick my Name,
To show my Love, not to advance thy Fame.
George Done.
To his worthy Friend, the Author, Master John Ford.
I Write not to thy Play: I Will not begin
To throw a censure upon what has been
By the Best approved; It can nor fear, nor want
The Rage, or Liking of the Ignorant.
Nor seek I Fame for Thee, when thine own Pen
Has forced a praise long since, from knowing Men.
I speak my thoughts, and wish unto the Stage
A glory from thy studies; that the Age
May be indebted to Thee, for Reprieue
Of purer language, and that Spite may grieve
To see It self outdone. When Thou art read,
The Theater may hope Arts are not dead,
Though long concealed; that Poet-Apes may fear
To vent their weakness, mend, or quite forbear.
This I dare promise; and keep this in store;
As thou have done enough, Thou can do more.
William Singleton.
To the Author, Master John Ford.
Black choler, Reasons ouer-flowing Spring,
Where thirsty Lovers drink, or any Thing,
Passion, the restless current of dull plaints
Affords their thoughts, who deem lost beauties, Saints:
Here their best Lectur^s read, collect, and see
Various conditions of Humanity
Highly enlightened by thy Muses rage;
Yet all so coucht, that they adorned the Stage.
Shun Phocions blushes thou; for sure to please
It is no sin, then what is thy disease?
Judgments applause? effeminated smiles?
Studie's delight? thy wit mistrust beguiles:
Established Fame will thy Physicion be,
(Write but again) to cure thy Jealousy.
Hum. Howorth.
Of the Lovers Melancholy.
It Is not the Language, nor the fore-plac'd Rimes
Of Friends, that shall commend to aftertimes
The Lovers Melancholy: Its own worth
Without a borrowed praise, shall set it forth.
(...)
THE PROLOGVE.
TO tell ye (Gentlemen) in what true sense
The Writer, Actors, or the audience
Should mold their Judgments for a Play, might draw
Truth into Rules, but we have no such law.
Our Writer, for himself would have ye know,
That in his following Scenes, he does not owe
To others Fancies, nor has layne in wait
For any stolen Invention, from whose height
He might commend his own, more then the right
A Scholar claims, may warrant for delight.
It is Arts scorn, that some of late have made
The Noble use of Poetry a Trade.
For your parts (Gentlemen) to quite his pains,
Yet you will please, that as you meet with strains
Of lighter mixtures, but to cast your eye
Rather upon the maine, then on the bye.
His hopes stand firm, and we shall find it true,
The Lovers Melancholy cured by you.
THE LOVERS MELANCHOLY.
Actus. I. Scena I.
Enter Menaphon and Pelias. Menaphon. DAngers? How mean you dangers? that so
courtly
You gratulate my safe return from dangers?

Pel. From Travails (noble Sir.)


Men. These are delights,
If my experience has not Trewant-like
Misspent the time, which I have strove to use,
For bettering my mind with observation.

Pel. As I am modest, I protest it is strange:
But is it possible?

Men. What?


Pel. To bestride
The frothy fomes of Neptunes surging waves,
When blustering Boreas tosseth up the deep,
And thumps a thunder bounce?

Men. Sweet Sir, it is nothing,
Straight comes a Dolphin playing near your ship,
Heauing his crooked back up, and presents
A Feather-bed, to waft'ee to the shore,
As easily as if you slepti'th' Court.

Pel. Indeed, is it true, I pray?


Men. I will not stretch
Your Faith upon the Teinters, prithee Pelias,
Where did thou learn this language?

Pel. I this language?
Alas, Sir, we that study words and forms
Of complement, must fashion all discourse,
According to the nature of the subject.
But I am silent, now appears a Sun,
Whose shadow I adore.
Enter Amethus, Sophronos, and Attendants.
Men. My honored Father.


Soph. From mine eyes, son, son of my care, my love,
The joys that bid thee welcome, do too much speak me a child.

Men. O Princely Sir, your hand.


Amet. Perform your duties where you owe them first,
I dare not be so sudden in the pleasures,
Thy presence has brought home.

Soph. Here thou still find
A Friend as noble ( Menaphon) as when
Thou left'st at thy departure.

Men. Yes, I know it,
To him I owe more service. --

Amet. Pray give leave,
He shall attend your intertainements soon,
Next day, and next day, for an hour or two,
I would engrosse him only.

Soph. Noble Lord.


Ame. You Are both dismissed.


Pel. Your creature, and your Servant.


Exeunt all but Ameth. Menap. Ame. Give me thy hand, I will not say, Thou Art
welcome,
That is the common road of common friends,
I am glad I have thee here -- O, I want words
To let thee know my heart.

Men. It Is peec'd to mine.


Ame. Yes, it is, as firmly, as that holy thing
Called Friendship can unite it. Menaphon,
My Menaphon: now all the goodly blessings,
That can create a Heaven on earth, dwell with thee.
Twelve months we have been sundred, but henceforth
We never more will part, till that sad hour,
In which death leaves the one of us behind,
To see the others funerals performed.
Let Us now a while be free. How have thy travails
Disburth'ned thee abroad of discontents?

Men. Such cure as sick men find in changing beds,
I found in change of Airs; the fancy flattered
My hopes with ease, as theirs do, but the grief
Is still the same.

Ame. Such is my case at home.
Cleophyla, thy Kinswoman, that Maid
Of sweetness and humility, more pities
Her Fathers poor afflictions, then the tide
Of my complaints.

Men. Thamasta, my great Mistress,
Your Princely Sister, has, I hope ere this,
Confirmed affection on some worthy choice.

Ame. Not any, Menaphon. Her bosom yet
Is intermur'd with Ice, though by the truth
Of love, no day has ever past, wherein
I have not mentioned thy deserts, thy constancy
Thy -- Come, in troth I dare not tell thee what,
Lest thou might think I fawnd upon a sin
Friendship was never guilty of; for flattery
Is monstrous in a true friend.

Men. Does the Court
Wear the old looks too?

Ame. If thou mean the Prince,
It does, he is the same melancholy man,
He was at's Fathers death, sometimes speaks sense,
But seldom mirth; will smile, but seldom laugh;
Will lend an ear to business, deal in none;
Gaze upon Revels, Anticke Fopperies,
But is not moved; will sparingly discourse,
Hear music; but what most he takes delight in,
Are handsome pictures; one so young, and goodly,
So sweet in his own nature, any Story
Has seldom mentioned.

Men. Why should such as I am,
Groan under the light burdens of small sorrows,
When as a Prince, so potent, cannot shun
Motions of passion? To be man (my Lord)
Is to be but the exercise of cares
In several shapes; as miseries do grow,
They alter as men's forms; but how, none know.

Ame. This little I Will of Cyprus sure abounds
In greater wonders, both for change and fortune,
Then any you have seen abroad.

Men. Then any
I have observed abroad: all Countries else
To a free eye and mind yield something rare;
And I for my part, have brought home one Jewel.
Of admirable value.

Ame. Jewel, Menaphon?


Men. A Jewel, my Amethus, a fair Youth;
A Youth, whom if I were but superstitious,
I should repute an Excellence more high,
Then mere creations are, to add delight.
I Will tell ye how I found him.

Ame. Prithee do.


Men. Passing from Italy to Greece, the Tales
Which Poets of an elder time have feigned
To glorify their Tempe, bred in me
Desire of visiting that Paradise.
To Thessaly I came, and living private,
Without acquaintance of more sweet companions*
Then the old In-mates to my love, my thoughts;
I day by day frequented silent Groves,
And solitary Walks. Vide Famistradam. lib. 2. Prolas. 6. Acad. 3. Imitat.
Claudian.
One morning early
This accident incountred me: I heard
The sweetest and most rauishing contention,
That Art or Nature ever were at strife in.

Ame. I cannot yet conceive, what you infer
By Art and Nature.

Men. I shall soon resolve ye.
A sound of music touched mine ears, or rather
Indeed intranc'd my soul: as I stole nearer,
Invited by the melody, I saw
This Youth, this faire-fac'd Youth, upon his Lute
With strains of strange variety and harmony,
Proclaiming (as it seemed) so bold a challenge
To the clear Quiristers of the Woods, the Birds,
That as they flockt about him, all stood silent,
Wondering at what they heard. I wondered too.

Ame. And so do I, good, -- on.


Men. A Nightingale.
Natures best skilled Musicion undertakes
The challenge, and for every several strain
The wel-shapt Youth could touch, she sung her down;
He coo'd not run D^uision with more Art
Upon his quaking Instrument, then she,
The Nightingale did with her various notes
Reply too, for a voice, and for a sound,
Amethus, it is much easier to believe
That such they were, then hope to hear again.

Amet. How did the Riuals part?


Mena. You term them rightly,
For they were Riuals, and their Mistress harmony.
Some time thus spent, the young man grew at last
Into a pretty anger, that a bird
Whom Art had never taught Cliffs, Moods, or Notes,
Should vie with him for mastery, whose study
Had busied many hours to perfect practice:
To end the controversy, in a rapture,
Upon his Instrument he plays so swiftly,
So many voluntaries, and so quick,
That there was curiosity and cunning,
Concord in discord, lines of diffring method
Meeting in one full Center of delight.

Amet. Now for the bird.


Mena. The bird ordained to be
Musicks first Martyr, strove to imitate
These several sounds: which, when her warbling throat
Failed in, for grief, down dropped she on his Lute,
And brake her heart; it was the quaintest sadness,
To see the Conqueror upon her Hearse,
To weep a funeral Elegy of tears,
That trust me (my Amethus) I coo'd chide
Mine own unmanly weakness, that made me
A fellow-mourner with him. Amet. I believe thee.

Mena. He looks upon the trophies of his Art,
Then sighed, then wiped his eyes, then sighed, and cride,
Alas poor creature: I will soon revenge
This cruelty upon the Author of it;
Henceforth this Lute guilty of innocent blood,
Shall never more betray a harmless peace
To an untimely end: and in that sorrow,
As he was pashing it against a tree,
I suddenly stepped in.

Amet. Thou have discourst
A truth of mirth and pity.

Mena. I reprieu'd
Th'intended execution with entreaties,
And interruption: but (my Princely friend)
It was not strange, the music of his hand
Did ouer-match birds, when his voice and beauty,
Youth, carriage and discretion, must, from men
Indu'd with reason, ravish admiration:
From me they did.

Amet. But is this miracle
Not to be seen?

Men. I won him by degrees
To choose me his Companion whence he is,
Or who, as I durst modestly inquire,
So gently he would woo not to make known:
Only for reasons to himself reserved,
He told me, that some remnant of his life
Was to be spent in Travail; for his fortunes,
They were nor mean, nor riotous, his friends
Not published to the world, though not obscure:
His Country, Athens; and his name, Parthenophill.

Amet. Came he with you to Cyprus?


Men. Willingly.
The same of our young melancholy Prince,
Meleanders rare distractions, the obedience
Of young Cle^phila, Thamasta's glory,
Your matchless friendship, and my desperate love
Prevailed with him, and I have lodged him privately
In Famagosta.

Amet. Now thou art doubly welcome:
I will not lose the sight of such a rarity
For one part of my hopes. When do you intend
To visit my great-spirited Sister.

Mena. May I
Without offense?

Amet. Without offense? Parthenophill
Shall find a worthy intertainement too.
Thou art not still a coward.

Mena. She Is too excellent,
And I too low in merit.

Amet. I Will prepare
A noble welcome. And (friend) ere we part,
Unload to thee an ouer-charged heart.
Exeunt.
Enter Rhetius carelessly attyr'd. Rhet. I will not court the madness of the
times,
Nor fawn upon the Riots that embalme
Our wanton Gentry, to preserve the dust
Of their affected vanities in coffins
Of memorable ^hame* when Commonwealths
Totter and reele from that nobility
And ancient virtue, which renownes the great,
Who steer the Helm of government, while Mushrooms
Grow up, and make new laws to license folly:
Why should not I, a May Game, scorn the weight
Of my sunk fortunes? snarle at the vices
Which rot the Land, and without fear or wit
Be mine own Anticke? It Is a sport to live
When life is irksome, if we will not hug
Prosperity in others, and contemn
Affliction in our selves. This Rule is certain,
" He that pursues his safety from the School
" Of State, must learn to be mad man, or fool.
Ambition, wealth, ease, I renounce the devil
That damns ye here on earth, or I will be --
Mine own mirth, or mine own tormentor, -- So,
Enter Pelius. Here comes intelligence, a Buz of the Court.

Pel. Rhetias, I sought thee out to tell thee news,
New, excellent new news. Cucolus, Sir,
That Gull, that young old Gull, is coming this way.

Rhet. And thou art his forerunner?


Pel. Prithee hear me:
In stead of a fine guarded Page,
We have got him
A Boy, trickt up in neat and handsome
Fashion;
Persuaded him, that it is indeed a Wench;
And he has entertained him, he does follow him,
Carries his sword and buckler, waits on his trencher,
Filles him his Wine, Tobacco, whets his knife,
Lackeyes his letters, does what service else
He would employ his man in: being asked,
Why he is so irregular in Courtship?
His answer is, that since great Ladies use
Gentlemen Vshers to go bare before them,
He knows no reason, but he may reduce
The Courtiers to have women wait on them,
And he begins the fashion; he is laughed at
Most complementally. Thou't burst to see him.

Rhet. Agelastus, so surnamed for his gravity,
Was a very wise fellow, kept his countenance
All days of his life as demurely, as a Judge that
Pronounces sentence of death, on a poor Rogue,
For stealing as much bacon, as would serve at a meal
With a Calves head. Yet he smiled once,
And never but once: Thou art no Scholar?

Pel. I have read Pamphlets dedicated to me:
Do call him Agelastus? why did he laugh?

Rhet. To see an Ass eat Thistles.
Puppy, go study to be a singular Coxcomb. Cuculus is an
Ordinary Ape, but thou art an Ape of an Ape.

Enter Cuculus and Grilla. Pel. Thou have a Patent to abuse thy friends:
Look, look, he comes, observe him seriously.

Cucul. Reach me my sword and buckler.


Grill. They are here, forsooth.


Cucul. How now ( Minkes) how now? Where is your duty, your distance?

Let me have service methodically tendered; you are now One of us. Your cursey;
good: remember that you are To practice Courtship* was thy father a Piper,
say thou?


Grill. A sounder of some such wind instrument forsooth.


Cucull. Was he so? hold up thy head; be thou musical
To me, and I will marry thee to a dancer: one
That shall ride on his Foot-cloth, and maintain thee
In thy Muffe and Hood.

Grill. That will be fine indeed.


Cucul. That art yet but simple.


Grill. Dee think so?


Cucul. I have a brain; I have a headpiece;
O my conscience, if I take pains with thee, I shood
Raise thy understanding (Girl) to the height of a nurse,
Or a Court-midwife at least, I will make thee big
In time, wench.

Grill. Even do your pleasure with me, Sir.


Pel. Noble accomplished Cuculus.


Rhet. Give me thy fist, Innocent.


Cucul. Would 'twere in thy belly, there it is.


Pel. That Is well, he is an honest blade, though he be blunt.


Cucul. Who cares? we can be as blunt as he for's life.


Rhet. Cuculus, there is within a mile or two, a Sow-pig
Has sucked a Brach, and now hunts the Dear, the Hare,
Nay, most unnaturally the wild Bore,
As Well as any Hound in Cyprus.

Cucul. Monstrous Sow-pig! is it true?


Pel. I Will be at charge of a banquet on thee for a sight of her.


Rhet. Every thing takes after the dam that gave it suck:
Where had thou thy milk?

Cucul. I? Why, my nurses husband was a most excellent maker
Of Shittle-cocks.

Pel. My nurse was a woman-surgeon.


Rhet. And who gave thee pap, Mouse?


Gril. I never sucked that I remember.


Rhet. La now, a Shittle-cock-maker, all thy brains are stuck with cork and
feather. Cuculus, this learned Courtier takes after the nurse too, a
she-surgeon, which is in effect a mere matter of colors. Go, learn to paint
and dawbe complements, it is the next step to run into a new suit; my Lady
Periwinckle here never sucked; suck thy Master, and bring forth Moonecalues,
Fop, do; This is good Philosophy, Sirs, make use on it.


Grill. Bless us, what a strange Creature this is?


Cucul. A Gull, an arrant Gull by Proclamation.


Enter Corax passing over. Pel. Corax, the Princes chief Physicion;
What business speeds his haste --
Are all things well, Sir?

Cor. Yes, yes, yes.


Rhet. Phew, you may wheel about, man, we know you are proud of your slouenry
and practice, it is your virtue; the Princes melancholy fit I presume holds still.


Cora. So do thy knavery and desperate beggary.


Cucul. Aha: here is one will tickle the ban-dog.


Rhet. You must not go yet.


Cora. I Will stay in spite of thy teeth. There lies my gravity:

Casts off his gown. Do what thou dare, I stand thee*


Rhet. Mountebanck, Empricks, Quacksaluers, Mineralists, Wizards, Alchimists,
cast-Apothecaries, old Wives and Barbers, are all suppositors to the right
Worshipful Doctor, as I take it.

Some of ye are the head of your Art, and the horns too, but they come by
nature; thou live single for no other end, but that thou fear to be a
Cuckold.


Cora. Have at thee; thou affect'st railing only for thy health, thy miseries
are so thick and so lasting; that thou have not one poor denier to bestow on
opening a vein. Wherefore to avoid a Plurisie, thou't be sure to prate thy
self once a month into a whipping, and bleed in the breech in stead of the
arm.


Rhet. Have at thee again.


Cora. Come.


Cucul. There, there, there; O brave Doctor.


Pel. Let Them alone.


Rhet. Thou art in thy Religion an Atheist, in thy condition a Curre, in thy
diet an Epicure, in thy lust a Goat, in thy sleep a Hog; thou take upon
thee the habit of a grave Physician, but art indeed an impostrous Emperike.
Physicions are the bodies Cobblers, rather the Botchers of men's bodies; as the
one patches our tatterd clothes, so the other solders our diseased flesh. Come
on.


Cuc. Tot, tot, hold him tot, hold him toot, tot, tot, tot.


Cora. The best worth in thee, is the corruption of thy mind, for that only
intitles thee to the dignity of a lowse: a thing bred out of the filth and
superfluity of ill humors: Thou byt'st any where; and any man who defends not
himself with the clean linen of secure honesty; him thou dare not come
near. Thou art Fortunes Idiot, Virtues Bankrupt, Times Dunghill, Manhoods
Scandal, and thine own scourge. Thou would hang thy self, so wretchedly
miserable thou art; but that no man will trust thee with as much money as will
buy a halter: and all thy stock to be sold, is not worth half as much as may
procure it.


Rhet. Ha, ha, ha; this is flattery, gross flattery.


Cora. I have employment for thee, and for ye all, Tut, these are but good
morrowes between us.


Rhet. Are thy bottles full?


Cor. Of rich wine, lets all suck together.


Rhet. Like so many Swine in a trough.


Cora. I Will shape ye all for a devise before the Prince, We Will try how that
can move him.


Rhet. He shall fret or laugh.


Cucul. Must I make one?


Cora. Yes, and your feminine Page too.


Gril. Thanks most egregiously.


Pel. I will not slack my part.


Cucul. Wench, take my buckler.


Cora. Come all unto my chamber, the project is cast,
The time only we must attend.

Rhet. The melody must agree well, and yield sport,
When such as these are, Knaves and Fools consort.

Exeunt. Enter Amethus, Thamasta and Kala. Amet. Does this show well?


Tham. What would you have me do?


Amet. Not like a Lady of the trim, new crept
Out of the shell of sluttish sweat and labor,
Into the glittering pomp of ease and wantonness,
Imbroideries, and all these antike fashions,
That shape a woman monstrous; to transform
Your education, and a Noble birth
Into contempt and laughter. Sister, Sister,
She who deriues her blood from Princes, ought
To glorify her greatness by humility.

Tham. Then you conclude me proud.


Amet. Young Menaphon,
My worthy friend, has loved you long, and truly,
To witness his obedience to your scorn,
Twelve months (wronged Gentleman) he undertook
A voluntary exile. Wherefore (Sister)
In this time of his absence, have you not
Disposed of your affections on some Monarch?
Or sent Ambassadors to some neighboring King
With fawning protestations of your graces?
Your rare perfections, admirable beauty?
This had been a new piece of modesty,
Would have deserved a Chronicle!

Tham. You are bitter;
And brother, by your leave, not kindly wise.
My freedom is my births, I am not bound
To fancy your approuements, but my own.
Indeed you are an humble youth, I hear of
Your visits, and your loving commendation
To your hearts Saint, Cleophila, a Virgin
Of a rare excellence: what though she want
A portion to maintain a portly greatness?
Yet it is your gracious sweetness to descend
So low, the meekness of your pity leads ye.
She is your dear friends Sister, a good soul,
An Innocent.

Amet. Thamasta.


Tham. I have given
Your Menaphon a welcome home as fits me;
For his sake entertained Parthenophill,
The handsome Stranger, more familiarly
Then (I may fear) becomes me; yet for his part,
I not repent my courtesies, but you --

Amet. No more, no more; be affable to both:
Time may reclaim your cruelty.

Tham. I pity
The youth, and trust me (brother) love his sadness:
He talks the prettiest stories, he delivers
His tales so gracefully, that I coo'd sit
And listen, nay forget my meals and sleep,
To hear his neat discourses. Menaphon
Was well advised in choosing such a friend,
For pleading his true love.

Amet. Now I commend thee,
Thou't change at last, I hope.

Enter Menaphon and Eroclea in man's attire. Tham. I fear I shall.


Amet. Have ye suruaid the Garden?


Men. It Is a curious,
A pleasantly contrived delight.

Tham. Your eye (Sir)
Has in your travails, often met contents
Of more variety.

Eroc. Not any (Lady.)


Men. It were impossible, since your fair presence
Makes every place where it vouchsafes to shine,
More lovely then all other helps of Art
Can equal.

Tham. What you mean by helps of Art,
You know your self best, be they as they are:
You need none I am sure to set me forth.

Men. 'Twould argue want of manners, more then skill,
Not to praise praise it self.

Tham. For your reward,
Henceforth I Will call you Servant.

Amet. Excellent Sister.


Men. It Is my first step to honor: May I fall
Lower then shame, when I neglect all service
That may confirm this favor.

Tham. Are you well, Sir?


Eroc. Great Princess, I am well, to see a League
Between an humble love, such as my Friends is,
And a commanding virtue, such as yours is,
Are sure restoratiues.

Tham. You speak ingeniously.
Brother, he pleased to show the Gallery
To this young stranger, use the time a while,
And we will altogether to the Court.
I will present ye (Sir) unto the Prince.

Eroc. You Are all composed of fairness, and true bounty.


Amet. Come, come, we will wait thee, Sister: this beginning
Does relish happy process.

Mena. You have blessed me.


Exeunt all but Thamasta and Kala. Tham. Kala, O Kala,


Kala. Lady.


Tham. We are private, thou art my Closet.


Kala. Lock your secrets close then:
I am not to be forced.

Tham. Never till now,
Coo'd I be sensible of being traitor
To honor and to shame.

Kala. You are in love.


Tham. I am grown base -- Parthenophill --


Kala. He Is handsome,
Richly endowed; he has a lovely face,
A winning tongue.

Tham. If ever I must fall,
In him my greatness sinkes. Love is a Tyrant
Resisted; whisper in his ear, how gladly
I would steal time, to talk with him one hour;
But do it honorably; preth'ee Kala
Do not betray me.

Kala. Madame, I will make it
Mine own case; he shall think I am in love with him.

Tham. I hope thou art not Kala.


Kala. It Is for your sake:
I Will tell him so; but Faith I am not, Lady.

Tham. Pray use me kindly; let me not too soon
Be lost in my new follyes. It Is a Fate
That ouer-rules our wisdoms, whilst we strive
To live most free, wee'r caught in our own toils.
Diamonds cut Diamonds: they who will prove
To thrive in cunning, must cure love with love.
Exit.
Finis Actus Primi.
Actus II. Scena I.
Enter Sophronos and Aretus. Sophronos. Our Commonwealth is sick: it is more
then time
That we should wake the Head thereof, who sleeps
In the dull Lethargy of lost security.
The Commons murmur, and the Nobles grieve,
The Court is now turned Anticke, and grows wild,
Whiles all the neighboring Nations stand at gaze,
And watch fit opportunity, to wreake
Their just conceived fury, on such injuries,
As the late Prince, our living Masters Father,
Committed against Laws of truth or honor.
Intelligence comes flying in on all sides,
Whilst the unsteady multitude presume,
How that you, Aretus, and I, ingrosse
(Out of particular Ambition)
The Affairs of government, which I for my part,
Groan under, and am weary of.

Aret. Sophronos, I am as zealous too of shaking of
My gay State fetters, that I have bethought
Of speedy remedy; and to that end
As I have told ye, have concluded with
Corax, the Princes chief Physician.

Soph. You should have done this sooner, Aretus;
You were his Tutor, and could best discern
His dispositions to inform them rightly.

Aret. Passions of violent nature, by degrees
Are easili'st reclaimed. There Is something hid
Of his distemper, which we will now find out.
Enter Corax, Rhetias, Pelias, Cuculus and Grilla. You come on just
appointment: welcome, Gentlemen,
Have you won Rhetias (Corax?)

Cora. Most sincerely.


Cucul. Save ye, Nobilities: do your Lordships take notice of my Page? It Is a
fashion of the newest edition, spick and span new, without example. Do your
honor, Houswife.


Grill. There Is a cursey for you, and a cursey for you.


Soph. It Is excellent: we must all follow fashion, and entertain Shee-waiters.


Aret. 'Twill be Courtly.


Cucul. I think so; I hope the Chronicles will rear me one day for a
headpiece --


Rhet. Of Woodcocke without brains in it; Barbers shall wear thee on their
Citternes, and Hucksters set thee out in Ginger-bread.


Cucul. Devil take thee: I say nothing to thee now; can let me be quiet?


Gril. You Are too perstreperous, Sauce-box.


Cucul. Good Girl, if we begin to puff once.


Pel. Prithee hold thy tongue, the Lords are in the presence.


Rhet. Mum, Butterflye.


Pel. O the Prince: stand and keep silence.


Cucul. O the Prince: Wench, thou shall see the Prince now.


Soft Music. Enter Pallador, the Prince, with a Book in his hand. Soph.
Aret. Sir; Gracious Sir.


Prince. Why all this Company?


Cora. A Book! is this the early exercise
I did prescribe? in stead of following health,
Which all me^ covet, you pursue your disease.
Where Is your great Horse, your Hounds, your set at Tennis,
Your Balloone ball, the practice of your dancing,
Your casting of the sledge, or learning how
To toss a Pike; all changed into a Sonnet?
Pray Sir grant me free liberty to leave
The Court, it does infect me with the sloth
Of sleep and surfeit: In the University
I have employments, which to my profession
Add profit and report: Here I am lost,
And in your wilful dullness held a man
Of neither Art nor honesty: you may
Command my head; pray take it, do; 'twere better
For me to lose it, then to lose my wits,
And live in Bedlam: you will force me to it,
I am almost mad already.

Prince. I believe it.


Soph. Letters are come from Creete, which do require
A speedy restitution of such ships,
As by your Father were long since detained;
If not; defiance threatened.

Aret. These near parts
Of Syria that adioyne, muster their friends:
And by intelligence we learn for certain,
The Syrian will pretend an ancient interest
Of tribute intermitted.

Soph. Through your Land
Your subjects mutter strangely, and imagine
More then they dare speak publicly.

Cora. And yet
They talk but odly of you.

Cucul. Hang 'em Mungrels.


Prince. Of me? my subjects talk of me?


Cora. Yes, scuruily,
And think worse (Prince.)

Prince. I Will borrow patience
A little time to listen to these wrongs,
And from the few of you which are here present,
Conceive the general voice.

Cora. So, now he is nettled.


Prince. By all your loves I charge ye, without fear
Or flattery, to let me know your thoughts,
And how I am interpreted: Speak boldly.

Soph. For my part (Sir) I will be plain, and brief:
I think you are of Nature mild and easy,
Not willingly prouokt, but withal headstrong
In any passion that misleades your Judgment.
I think you too indulgent to such motions,
As spring out of your own affections,
To old to be reformed, and yet too young
To take fit council from your self, of what
Is most amiss.

Prince. So -- Tutor, your conceit?


Aret. I think you doat (with pardon let me speak it)
Too much upon your pleasures, and these pleasures
Are so wrapped up in self-love, that you covet
No other change of fortune: would be still
What your birth makes you, but are loath to toil
In such affairs of State as break your sleeps.

Cora. I think you would be by the world, reputed
A man in every point complete, but are
In manners and effect indeed a child,
A boy, a very boy.

Pel. May it please your Grace,
I think you do contain within your self
The great Elixer, soul and quintessence
Of all divine perfections: are the glory
Of mankind, and the only strict example
For earthly Monarchies to square out their lives by:
Times miracle, Fames pride, in Knowledge, Wit,
Sweetness, Discourse, Arms, Arts --

Prince. You are a Courtier.


Cucul. But not of the ancient fashion, an't like your Highness. It Is I; I,
that am the credit of the Court, Noble Prince: and if thou would by
Proclamation or Patent, create me Ouerseer of all the Taylers in thy Dominions;
then, then the golden days should appear again; bread should be cheaper;
fools should have more wit; knaves more honesty; and beggars more money.


Gril. I think now --


Cucul. Peace you Squall.


Prince. You have not spoken yet.


Cucul. Hang him, he will nothing but rail.


Gril. Most abominable: out upon him.


Cora. Away Cuculus; follow the Lords.


Cucul. Close Page, close.


They all fall back, and steal out. Manet Prince and Rhetias. Prince. You are
somewhat long a thinking.


Rhet. I do not think at all.


Prince. Am I not worthy of your thought?


Rhet. My pity you are --
But not my reprehension.

Prince. Pity?


Rhet. Yes, for I pity such to whom I owe service, who exchange their
happiness for a misery.


Prince. Is it a misery to be a Prince?


Rhet. Princes who forget their sovereignty, and yield to affected passion, are
weary of command. You had a Father, Sir.


Prince. Your Sovereign whiles he lived. But what of him?


Rhet. Nothing. I only dared to name him; that is all.


Prince. I charge thee by the duty that thou ow'st us, be plain in what thou
meanest to speak: there is something that we must know: be free, our ears are
open.


Rhet. O Sir, I had rather hold a Wolf by the ears, then stroke a Lion, the
greatest danger is the last.


Prince. This is mere trifling -- Ha? are all stolen hence?
We are alone: Thou have an honest look,
Thou have a tongue, I hope, that is not oyld
With flattery. Be open, though it is true,
That in my younger days I often have heard
Agenors name, my Father, more traduced,
Then I could then observe; yet I protest,
I never had a friend, a certain friend,
That would inform me thoroughly of such errors,
As oftentimes are incident to Princes.

Rhet. All this may be. I have seen a man so curious in feeling of the edge of
a keen knife, that he has cut his fingers. My flesh is not of proof against
the metal I am to handle; the one is tenderer then the other.


Prince. I see then I must court thee. Take the word
Of a just Prince for any thing thou speak.
I have more then a Pardon, thanks and love.

Rhet. I will remember you of an old Tale that something concerns you.
Meleander, the great (but unfortunate Statesman, was by your Father treated
with for a Match between you and his eldest daughter, the Lady Eroclea. You
were both near of an age. I presume you remember a Contract, and cannot forget
Her.


Prince. She was a lovely beauty: Prithee forward.


Rhet. To Court was Eroclea brought, was courted by your Father, not for Prince
Palador, as it followed, but to be made a prey to some less noble design. --
With your favor I have forgot the rest.


Prince. Good call it back again into thy memory,
Else losing the remainder, I am lost too.

Rhet. You charm me. In brief, a Rape, by some bad Agents, was attempted; by
the Lord Meleander her father rescude, she conuay'd away Meleander accused of
treason, his Land seized, he himself distracted and confined to the Castle
where he yet lives. What had ensude was doubtful. But your Father shortly
after dyed.


Prince. But what became of fair Eroclea?


Rhet. She never since was heard of.


Prince. No hope lives then
Of ever, ever seeing her again.

Rhet. Sir, I fear I should anger ye. There was, as I said, an old Tale: I
have now a new one, which may perhaps season the first with a more delightful
relish.


Prince. I am prepared to hear, say what you please.


Rhet. My Lord Meleander falling, on whose favor my fortunes relyde, I
furnished my self for travail, and bent my course to Athens, where a pretty
accident after a while came to my knowledge.


Prince. My ear is open to thee.


Rhet. A young Lady contracted to a noble Gentleman, as the Lady we last
mentioned, and your Highness were, being hindered by their iarring Parents, stole
from her home, and was conveyed like a Ship-boy in a Merchant, from the
Country where she lived, into Corinth first, and afterward to Athens; where
in much solitariness she lived like a Youth almost two years, courted by all
for acquaintance, but friend to none by familiarity.


Prince. In habit of a man?


Rhet. A handsome young man, till within these three months, or less, her
sweet hearty Father dying some year before, or more, she had notice of it,
and with much joy returned home, and as report voyced it, at Athens enjoyed her
happiness: she was long an exile: For now Noble Sir, if you did love the Lady
Eroclea, why may not such safety and fate direct her, as directed the other?
it is not impossible.


Prince. If I did love her, Rhetias: yes I did.
Give me thy hand: As thou did serve Meleander,
And art still true to these, henceforth serve me.

Rhet. My duty and my obedience are my surety,
But I have been too bold.

Prince. Forget the sadder story of my Father,
And only Rhetias, learn to read me well,
For I must ever thank thee; thou have unlocked
A tongue was vowed to silence, for requital
Open my bosom, Rhetias.

Rhet. What s your meaning?


Prince. To tie thee to an oath of secrecy --
Unloose the buttons, man, thou do it faintly,
What findst thou there?

Rhet. A picture in a Tablet.


Prince. Look well upon it.


Rhet. I do -- yes -- let me observe it --
It Is hers, the Ladies.

Prince. Whose!


Rhet. Erocleas.


Prince. Hers that was once Eroclea: for her sake
Have I aduanst Sophronos to the Helm
Of government; for her sake will restore
Meleanders Honors to him; will for her sake
Beg friendship from thee, Rhetias. O be faithful,
And let no politic Lord work from thy bosom
My griefs: I know thou were put on to sift me:
But be not too secure.

Rhet. I am your Creature.


Prince. Continue still thy discontented fashion:
Humor the Lords, as they would humor me;
I Will not live in thy debt. -- We are discovered.

Enter Amethus, Menaphon, Thamasta, Kala, Eroclea, as before. Amet. Honor and
health still wait upon the Prince.
Sir, I am bold with favor to present
Unto your Highness, Menaphon my friend,
Returned from travail.

Mena. Humbly on my knees
I kiss your gracious hand.

Prince. It is our duty
To love the virtuous.

Mena. If my prayers or service
Hold -- any value, they are vowed yours ever.

Rhet. I have a fist for thee too (Strippling) thou art started up prettily since
I saw thee. Have learned any wit abroad? Can tell news, and swear lies with
a grace like a true Traveler? What new Owzle's this?


Tham. Your Highness shall do right to your own judgment,
In taking more then common notice of
This stranger, an Athenian, named Parthenophill.
One, (whom if mine opinion do not sooth me
Too grossly) for the fashion of his mind,
Deserves a dear respect.

Prince. Your commendations,
Sweet Cousin, speaks him Nobly.

Eroc. All the powers
That centinell just Thrones, double these guards
About your sacred Excellence.

Prince. What fortune led him to Cyprus!


Men. My persuasions won him.


Amet. And if your Highness please to hear the entrance
Into their first aquaintance, you will say --

Tham. It was the newest, sweetest, prettiest accident,
That ere delighted your attention.
I can discourse it, Sir.

Prince. Some other time.
How is a called?

Tham. Parthenophill.


Prince. Parthenophill?
We shall sort time to take more notice of him.

Exit. Prince. Men. His wonted melancholy still pursues him.


Amet. I told you so.


Tham. You must not wonder at it.


Eroc. I do not, Lady.


Amet. Shall we to the Castle?


Men. We will attend ye both.


Rhet. All three -- I Will go too. Hark in thine ear, Gallant: I Will keep the old
mad man in chat, whilst thou gabblest to the girl: my thumb's upon my lips,
not a word.


Amet. I need not fear thee, Rhetias. -- Sister, soon
Expect us: this day we will range the City.

Tham. Well, soon I shall expect ye. -- Kala?


Kala. Trust me.


Rhet. Troop on -- Love, Love, what a wonder thou art?


Exeunt. Kala and Eroclea stays. Kala. May I not be offensive, Sir?


Ero. Your pleasure; yet pray be brief.


Kala. Then briefly, good, resolve me:
Have you a Mistress, or a Wife?

Ero. I have neither.


Kala Nor did you ever love in earnest any
Fair Lady, whom you wished to make your own?

Ero. Not any truly.


Kala What your friends or means are
I will not be inquisitiue to know,
Nor do I care to hope for. But admit
A dowre were thrown down before your choice,
Of Beauty, Noble birth, and sincere affection,
How gladly would you intertaine it? (Young man)
I do not tempt you idly.

Ero. I shall thank you,
When my unsettled thoughts can make me sensible
Of what it is to be happy: for the present
I am your debtor: and fair Gentlewoman,
Pray give me leave as yet to study ignorance,
For my weak brains conceive not what concern me.
-- Another time. --

Enter Thamasta. Tham. Do I break off your Parley
That you are parting? Sure my woman loves you.
Can she speak well, Parthenophill?

Ero. Yes, Madame:
Discreetly chaste she can: she has much won
On my belief, and in few words, but pithy,
Much moved my thankfulness. You are her Lady,
Your goodness aims (I know) at her preferment:
Therefore I may be bold to make confession
Of truth, if ever I desire to thrive
In woman's favor. Kala is the first
Whom my ambition shall bend to.

Tham. Indeed.
But say a Nobler Love should interpose?

Eroc. Where real worth, and constancy first settle
A hearty truth, there greatness cannot shake it,
Nor shall it mine: yet I am but an Infant
In that construction, which must give clear light
To Kala's merit: riper hours hereafter
Must learn me how to grow rich in deserts.
Madame, my duty waits on you.

Exit Eroclea. Tham. Come hither.
If ever henceforth I desire to thrive
In woman's favors, Kala is the first
Whom my ambition shall bend to -- 'twas so.

Kal. These very words he spoke.

Tham. These very words
Curse thee, unfaithful creature, to thy grave:
Thou wood'st him for thy self?

Kala. You said I should.


Tham. My name was never mentioned!


Kala. Madame, no:
We were not come to that.

Tham. Not come to that?
Art thou a Rival fit to cross my Fate?
Now poverty and a dishonest fame,
The waiting-womans wages, be thy payment.
False, faithless, wanton beast, I Will spoil your carriage;
There Is not a Page, a Groom, nay, not a Citizen
That shall be cast upon ye. Kala,
I Will keep thee in my serui^^ all thy life time,
Without hope of a husband or a suter.

Kala. I have not verily deserved this cruelty.


Tham. Parthenophill shall know, if he respect
My birth, the danger of a fond neglect.

Exit Tham. Kala. Are you so quick? Well, I may chance to cross
Your peevishness. Now though I never meant
The young man for my self; yet if he love me,
I Will have him, or I Will run away with him,
And let her do her worst then: what, we are all
But flesh and blood; the same thing that will do
My Lady good, will please her woman too.

Exit. Enter Cleophila and Trollio. Cleo. Tread softly ( Trollio) my Father
sleeps still.


Troll. I forsooth: but he sleeps like a Hare with his eyes open and that is no
good sign.


Cleo. Sure thou art weary of this sullen living,
But I am not; for I take more content
In my obedience here, then all delights
The time presents elsewhere.
Menander within. Oh!

Cleo. Do hear that groan?


Troll. Hear it? I shudder, it was a strong blast, young Mistress, able to
root up heart, liver, lungs and all.


Cleo. My much-wrong'd Father: let me view his face.


Draws the Arras, Meleander discovered in a chair sleeping. Troll. Lady
Mistress, shall I fetch a Harbor to steal away his rough beard, whiles he
sleeps in's naps? He never looks in a glass, and it is high time on conscience
for him to be trimd, has not been under the Shauers hand almost these four
years.


Cleo. Peace, fool.


Trol. I could clip the old Ruffian, there is hair enough to stuff all the
great Codpieces in Switzerland. A begins to stir, a stirs. Bless us how
his eyes roll. A good year keep your Lordship in your right wits, I beseech
ye.


Mel. Cleophila?


Cleo. Sir, I am here, how do you Sir?


Troll. Sir, is your stomach up yet? get some warm porredge in your belly,
it is a very good settle-braine.


Mel. The Raven croakt, and hollow shreeks of Owls
Sung Dirges at her funeral; I laughed
The whiles: for it was no boot to weep. The Girl
Was fresh and full of youth: but, O the cunning
Of Tyrants that look big, their very frowns
Doom poor souls guilty, ere their cause be heard.
Good. What art thou, and thou?

Cleo. I am Cleophila,
Your woeful daughter.

Troll. I am Trollia your honest implement.

Mel. I know ye both. alas, why do you use me thus!
Thy Sister, my Eroclea, was so gentle,
That Turtles in their Down do feed more gall,
Then her spleen mixed with: yet when winds and storm
Drive dirt and dust on banks of spotless snow,
The purest whiteness is no such defense
Against the sullying foulness of that fury.
So rau'd Agenor, that great man, mischief
Against the Girl -- 'twas a politic trick,
We were too old in Honor. -- I am lean
And fallen away extremely; most assuredly
I have not dyn'd these three days.

Cleo. Will you now, Sir?


Troll. I beseech ye heartily Sir. I feel a horrible puking my self.


Mel. Am I stark mad?


Troll. No, no, you are but a little staring -- there is difference between
staring and stark mad. You are but whymsed, yet crotchetted, conundroun'd, or
so.


Mel. Here Is all my care: and I do often sigh
For thee, Cleophyla: we are secluded
From all good people. But take heed, Amethus
Was son to Doryla, Agenors Sister.
There Is some ill blood about him, if the Surgeon
Have not been very skillful to let all out.

Cleo. I am (alas) too grieved to think of love,
That must concern me least.

Mel. Sir, be wise, be wise.


Enter Amethus, Menaphon, Eroclea (as before) and Rhetias. Troll. Who I? I will
be monstrous and wise immediately. Welcome, Gentlemen, the more the merrier,
I Will lay the cloth, and set the stools in a readiness, for I see here is some
hope of dinner now.


Exit Trollio. Amet. My Lord Meleander, Menaphon your Kinsman
Newly returned from travail, comes to tender
His duty to you: to you his love, fair Mistress.

Men. I would I could as easily remove
Sadness from your remembrance, Sir, as study
To do you faithful service -- my dear Cousin,
All best of comforts bless your sweet obedience.

Clo. One chief of 'em (worthy Cousin) lives
In you, and your well-doing.

Men. This young stranger
Will well deserve your knowledge.

Amet. For my friends sake,
Lady pray give him welcome.

Cleo. He has met it, if sorrows can look kindly.


Eroc. You much honor me.


Rhet. How a eyes the company: sure my passion will betray my weakness -- O
my Master, my Noble Master, do not forget me, I am still the humblest, and the
most faithful in heart of those that serve you.


Mel. Ha, ha, ha.


Rhet. There Is wormwood in that laughter, it is the usher to a violent extremity.


Mel. I am a weak old man. All these are come To ieere my ripe calamities.


Mena. Good Uncle!


Mel. But I Will out-stare 'ee all, fools, desperate fools,
You are cheated, grossly cheated, range, range on,
And roll about the world to gather moss,
The moss of honor, gay reports, gay clothes,
Gay wives, huge empty buildings, whose proud roofes,
Shall with their pinacles, even reach the stars.
Ye work and work like Moles, blind in the paths,
That are bored through the crannies of the earth,
To charge your hungry souls with such full surfets,
As being gorged once, make 'ee lean with plenty.
And when ye have skimd the vomit of your riots,
You Are fat in no felicity but folly,
Then your last sleeps seize on 'ee. Then the troops
Of worms crawle round, and, feast, good cheer, rich fare,
Dainty delicious -- here is Cleophyl^:
All the poor stock of my remaining thrift;
You, you, the Princes Cousin: how do you like her?
( Amethus) how do you like her?

Amet. My intents are just and honorable.


Men. Sir, believe him.


Mel. Take her. -- we two must part, go to him, do.


Ero. This sight is full of horror.


Rhet. This is sense yet in this distraction.


Mel. In this Jewel I have given away,
All what I can call mine. When I am dead,
Save charge; let me be buried in a nooke.
No guns, no pompous whining: these are fooleries.
If whiles we live, we stalk about the streets,
Iustled by Carmen, Foot-poasts, and fine Apes,
In silken coats, vnminded, and scarce thought on;
It is not comely to be haled to the earth,
Like high fed lades upon a Tilting-day,
In antique trappings: scorn to vse-lesse tears.
Eroclea was not coffind so: she perished,
And no eye dropped save mine, and I am childish.
I talk like one that doates; laugh at me, Rhetias,
Or rail at me: they will not give me meat:
They have starved me: but I Will henceforth be mine own Cook.
Good morrow: it is too early for my cares
To revel. I will break my heart a little,
And tell ye more hereafter. Pray be merry.

Exit Meleander. Rhet. I Will follow him. My Lord Amethus, use your time
Respectively. Few words to purpose soon'st prevail:
Study no long Orations; be plain and short,
I Will follow him.

Exit Rhetias. Amet. Cleophyla, although these blacker clouds
Of sadness, thicken and make dark the sky
Of thy fair eyes, yet give me leave to follow
The stream of my affections: they are pure,
Without all mixture of unnoble thoughts.
Can you be ever mine?

Cleo. I am so low
In mine own fortunes, and my Father woes,
That I want words to tell ye, you deserve
A worthier choice.

Amet. But give me leave to hope.


Men. My friend is serious.


Cleo. Sir, this for answer: If I ever thrive
In an earthly happiness, the next
To my good Fathers wished recovery,
Must be my thankfulness to your great merit;
Which I dare promise for the present time:
You cannot urge more from me.

Mel. Ho, Cleophyla?


Cleo. This Gentleman is moved.


Ame. Your eyes, Parthenophill,
Are guilty of some passion.

Men. Friend, what ailes thee?


Eroc. All is not well within me, Sir.
Meleander within. Cleophyla?

Ame. Sweet Maid, forget me not; we now must part.


Cleo. Still you shall have my prayer.


Ame. Still you my truth.


Exeunt omnes. Finis Actus secundi.
Actus III. Scena I.
Enter Cuculus and Grilla, Cuculus in a black velvet Cap, and a white Feather,
with a paper in his hand. Cuculus. Do not I look freshly, and like a Youth of
the Trim?


Gril. As rare an old Youth as ever walked crosse-gartered.


Cucul. Here are my Mistrisses mustred in white and black. Kala the
Waiting Woman. I will first begin at the soote: stand thou for Kala.


Gril. I stand for Kala, do your best and your worst.


Cucul. I must look big, and care little or nothing for her, because she is
a creature that stands at livery. Thus I talk wisely, and to no purpose.
Wench, as it is not fit that thou should be either fair or honest; so
considering thy service, thou art as thou art, and so are thy betters, let them
be what they can be. Thus in despite and defiance of all thy good parts, if I
cannot endure thy baseness, it is more out of thy courtesy, then my deserving,
and so I expect thy answer.


Grill. I must confess --


Cucul. Well said.


Gril. You are --


Cucul. That Is true too.


Gril. To speak you right, a very scuruy fellow. --


Cucul. Away, away, do think so?


Grill. A very foul-mouthed, and misshapen Cockscombe


Cucul. I Will never believe it by this hand.


Grill. A Magot, most unworthy to creep in --
-- To the least wrinckle of a Gentlewomans
(What do you call) good conceit, or so, or what
You will else. -- Were you not refined by Courtship
And education, which in my bleare eyes
Makes you appear as sweet as any nosegay,
Or sauory cod of Musk new fallen from th'Cat.

Cucul. This shall serve well enough for the Waiting Woman. My next Mistress is
Cleophyla, the old mad-mans daughter: I must come to her in whining tune, sigh,
wipe mine eyes, fold my Arms, and blubber out my speech as thus: Even as a
Kennell of Hounds (sweet Lady) cannot catch a Hare, when they are full pauncht
on the Carrion of a dead Horse: so, even so the gorge of my affections being
full crammed with the garboyles of your condolements, does tickle me with the
prick (as it were) about me, and fellow-feeling of howling outright.


Grill. This will do it, if we will hear.


Cucul. Thou see I am crying ripe, I am such another tenderhearted fool.


Grill. Even as the snuff of a candle that is burnt in the socket, goes out,
and leaves a strong perfume behind it; or as a piece of toasted cheese next the
heart in a morning is a restoratiue for a sweet breath: so, even so the
odoriferous savor of your love does perfume my heart, (Hay ho) with the pure
sent of an intolerable content, and not to be endured.


Cucul. By this hand it is excellent. Have at thee last of all: for the Princess
Thamasta, she that is my Mistress indeed, she is abominably proud. A Lady of a
damnable, high, turbulent, and generous spirit. But I have a loud-mouthed
Cannon of mine own to batter her, and a penned speech of purpose observe it.


Grill. Thus I walk by, hear and mind you not.


Cucul. Though haughty as the Devil or his Dam,
Thou do appear, great Mistress: yet I am
Like to an ugly fire-worke, and can mount
Above the Region of thy sweet Ac -- count.
Were thou the Moon her self, yet having seen thee,
Behold the man ordained to move within thee.
-- Look to your self, Houswife; answer me
In strong Lines you are best.

Gril. Keep off, poor fool, my beams will strike thee blind:
Else if thou touch me, touch me but behind.
In Palaces, such as pass in before,
Must be great Princes; for at the back door
Tatter-demallians wait, who know not how
To get admittance: such a one -- art Thou.

Cucul. S'foot, this is downright roaring.


Grill. I know how to present a big Lady in her own cue. But pray in earnest,
are you in love with all these?


Cucul. Pish, I have not a ragge of love about me. It Is only a foolish humor I
am possessed with, to be surnamed the Conqueror. I will court any thing; be in
love with nothing, nor no -- thing.


Grill. A rare man you are, I protest.


Cucul. Yes, I know I am a rare man, and I ever held my self so.

Enter Pelias and Corax.
Pel. In amorous contemplation on my life;
Courting his Page by Hell. con.

Cucul. It Is false.


Grill. A gross untruth; I Will justify it, Sir, At any time, place, weapon.


Cucul. Marry shall she.


Cora. No quarrels, good'ee Whiske. Lay by your Trumperies, and fall to your
practice. Instructions are ready for you all. Pelias is your Leader, follow
him. Get credit now or never. Vanish, Doodles, vanish.


Cucul. For the Device.


Cora. The same, get'ee gone, and make no bawling.

Exeunt. To waste my time thus Droane-like in the Court,
And lose so many hours, as my studies
Have horded up, is to be like a man
That creepes both on his hands and knees, to climb
A mountains top, where when he is ascended,
One careless slip down, tumbles him again
Into the bottom whence a first began.
I need no Princes favor: Princes need
My art. Then Corax, be no more a Gull,
The best of them cannot fool thee, nay, they shall not.

Enter Sophronos and Aretus. Soph. We find him timely now let us learn the
cause.


Aret. It Is fit we should -- Sir, we approve you learned,
And since your skill can best discern the humors
That are predominant, in bodies subject
To alteration: tell us (pray) what devil
This Melancholy is, which can transform
Men into Monsters.

Cora. You Are your self a Scholar,
And quick of apprehension: Melancholy
Is not as you conceive. Indisposition
Of body, but the minds disease. So Ecstasy,
Fantastic Dotage, Madness, Phrenzey, Rupture,
Of mere imagination differ partly
Vid. Democrit. Junior.
From Melancholy, which is briefly this,
A mere commotion of the mind, o're-charg'd
With fear and sorrow; first begot in the brain,
The Seat of Reason, and from thence derived
As suddenly into the Heart, the Seat
Of our Affection.

Aret. There are sundry kinds
Of this disturbance.

Cora. Infinite, it were
More easy to conjecture every hour
We have to live, then reckon up the kinds,
Or causes of this anguish of the mind.

Soph. Thus you conclude, that as the cause is doubtful,
The cure must be impossible; and then
Our Prince (poor Gentleman) is lost for ever,
As well unto himself, as to his subjects.

Cora. My Lord, you are too quick; thus much I dare
Promise, and do, ere many minutes pass,
I will discover whence his sadness is,
Or undergo the censure of my ignorance.

Aret. You are a Noble Scholar.


Soph. For reward,
You shall make your own demand.

Cora. May I be sure?


Aret. We both will pledge our truth.


Cora. It Is soon performed,
That I may be discharged from my attendance
At Court, and never more be sent for after:
Or if I be, may Rats gnaw all my books,
If I get home once, and come here again,
Though my neck stretch a halter for it, I care not.

Soph. Come, come, you shall not fear it.


Cora. I Will acquaint ye
With what is to be done, and you shall fashion it.

Exeunt omnes. Enter Kala and Eroclea, as before. Kala. My Lady does expect'ee,
thinks all time
Too slow till you come to her: wherefore young man,
If you intend to love me, and me only,
Before we part, without more circumstance
Let us betroth our selves.

Eroc. I dare not wrong 'ee;
You are too violent.

Kala. Wrong me no more
Then I wrong you: be mine, and I am yours:
I cannot stand on points.

Eroc. Then to resolve
All further hopes, you never can be mine,
Must not, (and pardon though I say) you shall not.

Kala. The thing is sure a Gelding -- Shall not? well,
You Are best to prate unto my Lady now,
What proffer I have made.

Eroc. Never, I vow.


Kala. Do, do, it is but a kind heart of mine own,
And ill luck can undo me. -- Be refused?
O sciruy. -- Pray walk on, I Will overtake 'ee.
What a greene-sickness-liuer'd Boy is this!
Exit Ero. My Maidenhead will shortly grow so stale,
That'twill be moldy: but I Will mar her market.

Enter Menaphon. Men. Parthenophill past the way; prithee Kala
Direct me to him.

Kala. Yes, I can direct'ee:
But you (Sir) must forbear.

Men. Forbear!


Kala. I said so.
Your bounty h'as engaged my truth; receive
A secret, that will, as you are a man,
Startle your Reason: it is but mere respect
Of what I owe to thankfulness. (Dear Sir)
The Stranger whom your courtesy received
For Friend, is made your Rival.

Men. Rival, Kala.
Take heed, thou art too credulous.

Kala. My Lady
Doates on him: I will place you in a room,
Where, though you cannot hear, yet you shall see
Such passages as will confirm the truth
Of my intelligence.

Men. Twill make me mad.


Kala. Yes, yes: it makes me mad too, that a Gentleman
So excellently sweet, so liberal,
So kind, so proper, should be so betrayed
By a young smooth-chind straggler: but for loves sake
Bear all with manly courage. -- Not a word,
I am undone then.

Mena. That were too much pity:
Honest most honest Kala; it is thy care,
Thy serviceable care.

Kal. You have even spoken all can be said or thought.


Men. I will reward thee:
But as for him, ungentle Boy, I Will whip
His falsehood with a vengeance. --

Kala. O speak little.
Walk up these stairs, and take this key, it opens
A Chamber door, where at that window yonder,
You may see all their courtship.

Men. I am silent.


Exit Menap. Kala. As little noise as may be, I beseech ye;
There is a backe-staire to convey ye forth
Unseen or unsuspected. -- He that cheates
A Waiting Woman of a free good turn
She longs for, must expect a shrewd revenge.
Sheepe-spirited Boy, although he had not married me,
He might have proferd kindness in a corner,
And never have been the worse sor't. They are come;
On goes my set of Faces most demurely.

Enter Thamasta and Eroclea. Tham. Forbear the room.


Kala. Yes, Madame.


Tham. Whosoever requires access to me, deny him entrance till I call thee,
and wait without.


Kala. I shall. Sweet Venus, turn his courage to a Snow-ball, I heartily
beseech it.


Exit. Tham. I expose
The Honor of my Birth, my Fame, my Youth,
To hazard of much hard construction,
In seeking an adventure of a parley
So private with a Stranger; if your thoughts
Censure me not with mercy, you may soon
Conceive, I have laid by that modesty,
Which should preserve a virtuous name unstained.

Eroc. Lady, to shorten long excuses; time
And safe experience have so thoroughly armed
My apprehension, with a real taste
Of your most Noble nature, that to question
The least part of your bounties, or that freedom
Which Heaven has with a plenty made you rich in,
Would argue me uncivil, which is more,
Base-bred, and which is most of all, unthankful.

Tham. The constant Loadstone, and the Steel are found
In several Mines: yet is there such a league
Between these Minerals, as if one Vein
Of earth had nourisht both. The gentle Myrtle
Is not ingraft upon an Olives stock:
Yet nature has between them locked a secret
Of Sympathy, that being planted near,
They will both in their branches, and their roots
Embrace each other; twines of Iuie round
The well grown Oak; the Vine does court the Elm;
Yet these are different Plants. Parthenophill,
Consider this aright, then these slight creatures,
Will fortify the reasons I should frame
For that ungrounded (as thou think) affection,
Which is submitted to a strangers pity.
True love may blush, when shame repents too late,
But in all actions Nature yields to Fate.

Eroc. Great Lady, 'twere a dullness must exceed
The grossest and most sottish kind of ignorance,
Not to be sensible of your intents:
I clearly understand them. Yet so much
The difference between that height and lowness,
Which does distinguish our unequal fortunes,
Disswades me from ambition; that I am
Humbler in my desires, then Loves own power
Can any way raise up.

Tham. I am a Princess,
And know no law of slavery, to sue,
Yet be denied?

Ero. I am so much a subject
To every law of Noble honesty,
That to transgress the vows of perfect friendship,
I hold a sacrilege as foul, and cursed,
As if some holy Temple had bin robbed,
And I the thief.

Tham. Thou art unwise, young man,
To inrage a Lioness.

Eroc. It were unjust
To falsify a faith, and ever after
Disroab'd of that fair ornament, live naked,
A scorn to time and truth.

Tham. Remember well who I am, and what thou art.


Ero. That remembrance
Prompts me to worthy duty, O great Lady.
If some few days have tempted your free heart,
To cast away affection on a stranger:
If that affection have so ouersway'd
Your Judgment, that it in a manner has
Declyn'd your sovereignty of birth and spirit:
How can ye turn your eyes off from that glass,
Wherein you may new Trim, and settle right
A memorable name?

Tham. The Youth is idle.


Ero. Days, months and years are past, since Menaphon
Has loved and served you truly: Menaphon;
A man of no large distance in his blood,
From yours; in qualities desertfull, graced
With Youth, Experience; every happy gift
That can by nature, or by Education
Improve a Gentleman: for him (great Lady)
Let me prevail, that you will yet at last,
Unlock the bounty, which your love and care
Have wisely treasured up, t'inrich his life.

Tha. Thou have a moving eloquence; Parthenophill,
Parthenophill, in vain we strive to cross
The destiny that guides us. My great heart
Is stoopt so much beneath that wonted pride
That first disguised it, that I now prefer
A miserable life with thee, before
All other earthly comforts.

Eroc. Menaphon, by me, repeates the selfsame words to you:
You are too cruel, if you can distrust
His truth, or my report.

Tham. Go where thou will,
I Will be an exile with thee, I will learn
To bear all change of fortunes.

Ero. For my friend, I plead with grounds of reason.


Tham. For thy love,
Hard-hearted youth, I here renounce all thoughts
Of other hopes, of other intertainements, --

Eroc. Stay, as you honor Virtue.


Tham. When the proffers of other greatness --


Eroc. Lady.


Tham. When entreats of friends; --


Eroc. I Will ease your grief.


Tham. Respect of kindred;


Eroc. Pray give me hearing.


Tham. Loss of Fame;


Eroc. I crave but some few minutes.


Tham. Shall infringe my vows, let Heaven --


Eroc. My love speak to you; hear then, go on.


Tham. Thy love, why it is a Charm to stop a vow
In its most violent course.

Eroc. Cupid has broke
His Arrows here; and like a child unarmed,
Comes to make sport between us with no weapon,
But feathers stolen from his mothers Doves.

Tham. This is mere trifling.


Eroc. Lady, take a secret.
I am as you are, in a lower rank
Else of the self samesexe, a maid, a virgin.
And now to use your own words, if your thoughts
Censure me not with mercy, you may soon
Conceive, I have laid by that modesty,
Which should preserve a virtuous name unstained.

Tham. Are you not mankind then?


Eroc. When you shall read
The story of my sorrows, with the change
Of my misfortunes, in a letter printed
From my vnforg'd relation; I believe
You will not think the sheading of one tear,
A prodigality that misbecomes
Your pity and my fortune.

Tham. Pray conceal the errors of my passions.


Eroc. Would I had
Much more of honor (as for life I value't not)
To venture on your secrecy.

Tham. It will be
A hard task for my Reason, to relinquish
The affection which was once devoted thine,
I shall a while repute thee still the youth
I loved so dearly.

Eroc. You shall find me ever, your ready faithful servant.


Tham. O the powers
Who do direct our hearts, laugh at our follies!
We must not part yet.

Ero. Let not my unworthiness alter your good opinion.


Tham. I shall henceforth
Be jealous of thy company with any;
My fears are strong and many.

Kala enters. Kala. Did your Ladyship call me?


Tham. For what?


Kala. Your servant Menaphon desires admittance.


Enter Menaphon. Men. With your leave, great Mistress! I come --
So private: is this well, Parthenophill?

Eroc. Sir, Noble Sir.


Men. You are unkind and treacherous.
This it is to trust a straggler.

Tham. Prithee servant.


Men. I dare not question you, you are my Mistress;
My Princes nearest Kinswoman, but he --

Tham. Come, you are angry.


Mena. Henceforth I will bury
Unmanly passion in perpetual silence.
I Will court mine own distraction, dote on folly,
Creep to the mirth and madness of the age,
Rather then be so slau'd again to woman,
Which in her best of constancy is steddist
In change and scorn.

Tham. How dare ye talk to me thus?


Men. Dare? Were you not own Sister to my friend,
Sister to my Amethus; I would hurl ye
As far off from mine eyes, as from my heart;
For I would never more look on ye. Take
Your Jewel to you. And Youth, keep under wing,
Or -- Boy -- Boy.

Tham. If commands be of no force,
Let me entreat thee, Menaphon.

Men. It Is naught, fie, fie, Parthenophill, have I deserved
To be thus used?

Eroc. I do protest --


Men. You shall not,
Henceforth I will be free, and hate my bondage.

Enter Amethus. Amet. Away, away to Court, the Prince is pleased
To see a Mask to night, we must attend him:
It Is near upon the time. -- How thriues your suit?

Men. The Judge, your Sister, will decide it shor^ly.


Tham. Parthenophill, I will not trust you from me.


Enter Prince, Aretas, Corax (with a Paper-plot) servants with torches. Cor.
Lights and attendance, I will show your highness,
A trifle of mine own brain If you can,
Imagine you were now in the University,
You Will take it well enough, a Scholars fancy,
A quab. It Is nothing else a very quab.

Prince. We will observe it.


Soph. Yes, and grace it too Sir.
For Corax else is ^umorous and testy.

Aret. By any means, men singular in Art,
Have always some odd whimsey more then usual.

Prince. The name of this conceit.


Cora. Sir, it is called the Mask of Melancholy.


Aret. We must look for nothing but sadness, here then.


Cora. Madness rather
In several changes: Melancholy is
The Root as well of every Apish Phrensey,
Laughter and mirth, as dullness. Pray my Lord
Hold and observe the plot, it is there expressed
In kind, what shall be now expressed in action.
Enter Amethus, Menaphon, Thamasta, Eroclea. No interpretation, take your
places quickly.
Nay, nay, leave ceremony: sound to the entrance.

Flourish. Enter Rhetias, his face whited, black shag hair, long nails, a
piece of raw meat. Rhet. Bow, Bow, wow, wow; the Moone's eclipsed, I Will to the
Churchyard and sup: Since I turned Wolf, I bark and howl, and dig up
graves, I will never have the Sun shine again, it is midnight, deep dark
midnight, get a prey, and fall too, I have caught thee now. Arre.


Cora. This kind is called, Lycanthropia, Sir,
When men conceive themselves Wolves.

Prince. Here I find it.


Enter Pelias. A Crown of feathers on, Antickly rich. Pel. I will hang 'em
all, and burn my wife: was I not an Emperor; my hand was kissed, and Ladies lay
down before me. In triumph did I ride with my Nobles about me, till the
mad-dog bit me, I fell, and I fell, and I fell. It shall be treason by Statute
for any man to name water, or wash his hands throughout all my Dominions;
break all the looking-glasses, I will not see my horns; my wife Cuckolds me,
she is a whore, a whore, a whore, a whore.


Prince. Hydrophobia term you this?


Cora. And men possessed so, shun all sight of water:
Sometimes, if mixed with jealousy, it renders them.
Incurable, and oftentimes brings death.

Enter Philosopher in black rags, a copper chain on, an old Gown half off,
and Book. Phi. Philosophers dwell in the Moon Speculation and Theory girdle
the world about like a wall. Ignorance like an Atheist, must be damned in the
pit. I am very, very poor, and poverty is the physic for the soul: my
opinions are pure and perfect. Envy is a monster, and I defy the beast.


Cora. Delirium this is called, which is mere dotage,
Sprung from Ambition first, and singularity,
Self love, and blind opinion of true merit.

Prince. I not dislike the course.


Enter Grilla in a rich Gown, great Vardingale, great Ruff, Musse, Fan, and
Coxcombe on her head. Grill. Yes forsooth, and no forsooth, is not this fine, I
pray, your blessing Gaffer, here, here, here did he give me a shough, and cut
offs tail: busse, busse Nuncle, and there is a pum for Daddee.


Cora. You find this noted there, Phrenitis.


Prince. True.


Cora. Pride is the ground on it;
It reigns most in women.

Enter Cuculus like a Bedlam singing. Cucul. They that will learn to drink a
health in Hell,
Must learn on earth to take Tobacco well,
To take Tobacco well, to take Tobacco well:
For in Hell they drink nor Wine, nor Ale, nor Beer,
But fire, and smoke, and stench, as we do here.

Rhet. I Will soope thee up.


Pel. Thou'st straight to execution.


Gril. Fool, Fool, Fool, catch me and thou can.


Philos. Expel him the house, it is a Dunce.


Cuculus sings. Hark, did ye not hear a rumbling,
The Gobblings are now a tumbling:
Il^ tear 'em, I Will seare'em,
I Will roar 'em, I Will goare 'em:
Now, now, now, my brains are a Iumbling, --
Bounce, the gun's off.

Prince. You name this here, Hypocondriacall.


Cora. Which is a windy flattuous humor stuffing
The head, and thence derived to th'animall parts
To be too ouer-curious, loss of goods,
Or friends, excess of fear, or sorrows cause it.

Enter a Sea-nimph big-bellied, singing and dancing. Good your Honors,
Pray your Worships,
Dear your Beauties,
Cucul. Hang thee.
To lash your sides,
To taeme your hides,
To scourge your prides,
And bang thee.

Nym. Were pretty and dainty, and I will begin,
See how they do Ieere me, deride me, and grin:
Come sport me, come court me, your Topsaile advance,
And let us conclude our delights in a Dance.

All. A Dance, a Dance, a Dance.


Cora. This is the Wanton Melancholy; women
With child possessed with this strange sury often,
Have danced three days together without ceasing.

Prince. It Is very strange: but Heaven is full of miracles.


The Dance: -- Which ended, they all run out in couples. Prince. We are thy
debtor ( Corax) for the gift
Of this invention: but the plot deceiues us;
What means this empty space.

Cora. One kind of Melancholy
Is only left untouched; it was not in Art
To personate the shadow of that Fancy.
It Is named Loue-Melancholy. As for instance,
Admit this stranger here (Young man, stand forth)
Entangled by the beauty of this Lady,
The great Thamasta, cherisht in his heart
The weight of hopes and fears: it were impossible,
To lymne his passions in such lively colors,
As his own proper sufferance coo'd express.

Ero. You are not modest Sir.


Tham. Am I your mirth?


Cora. Love is the Tyrant of the heart, it darkens
Reason, confounds discretion, deaf to counsel:
It runs a headlong course to desperate madness.
O were your Highness but touched home, and thoroughly,
With this (what shall I call it) Devil --

Prince. Hold, let no man henceforth name the word again
Wait you my pleasure, Youth; it is late, to rest.

Cora. My Lords --


Soph. Enough, thou art a perfect Arts-man.


Cora. Panthers may hide their heads, not change the skin:
And love pent never so close yet will be seen.

Exeunt. Actus IIII. Scena I.
Enter Amethus and Menaphon. Amethus. Doat on a stranger?


Mena. Court him, plead, and sue to him,


Amet. Affectionately?


Mena. Seruilely; and pardon me, if I say basely.


Amet. Women in their passions,
Like false fires flash, to fright our trembling senses;
Yet in themselves contain nor light nor heat.
My Sister do this? She, whose pride did scorn
All thoughts that were not busied on a Crown?
To fall so far beneath her fortunes now?
You are my friend.

Mena. What I confirm, is truth.


Amet. Truth, Menaphon?


Mena. If I conceived you were
Jealous of my sincerity and plainness,
Then Sir --

Amet. What then, Sir?


Mena. I would then resolve,
You were as changeable in vows of friendship,
As is Thamasta in her choice of love.
That sin is double, running in a blood,
Which iustifies another being worse.

Amet. My Menaphon, excuse me, I grow wild,
And would not willingly believe the truth
Of my dishonor: She shall know how much
I am a debtor to thy noble goodness,
By checking the contempt, her poor desires
Have sunk her fame in. Prithee tell me (friend)
How did the Youth receive her?

Mena. With a coldness,
As modest and as hopeless, as the trust
I did repose in him, coo'd wish, or merit.

Enter Thamasta and Kala. Ame. I will esteem him dearly.


Men. Sir, your Sister.


Tha. Servant, I have employment for ye.


Amet. Hark ye:
The mask of your ambition is fallen off,
Your pride has stoop't to such an abject lowness,
That you have now discovered to report
Your nakedness in virtue, honors, shame --

Tham. You are turned Satyr.


Ame. All the flatteries
Of greatness have exposed ye to contempt.

Tham. This is mere railing.


Amet. You have sold your birth, for lust.


Tham. Lust?


Amet. Yes, and at a dear expense
Purchased the only glories of a Wanton.

Tham. A Wanton?


Amet. Let repentance stop your mouth.
Learn to redeem your fault.

Kal. I hope your tongue has not betrayed my honesty.


Men. Fear nothing.


Tham. If ( Menaphon,) I hitherto have strove;
To keep a wary guard about my fame;
If I have used a woman's skill to sift
The constancy of your protested love;
You cannot in the Justice of your judgment,
Impute that to a Coyness, or neglect,
Which my discretion and your service aimed
For noble purposes.

Mena. Great Mistress, no:
I rather quarrel with mine own ambition,
That durst to soar so high, as to feed hope
Of any least desert, that might entitle
My duty, to a pension from your favors.

Ame. And therefore Lady (pray observe him well)
He henceforth couets plain equality;
Indeuouring to rank his fortunes low,
With some fit partner, whom without presumption,
Without offense, or danger, he may cherish;
Yes and command too, as a Wife; a Wife;
A Wife, my most great Lady

Kala all will out.


Tham. Now I perceive the league of Amitye,
Which you have long between ye, vowed and kept,
I^ s^cred and inviolable, secrets
Of every nature are in common to you:
I have trespassed, and I have been faulty:
Let not too rude a Censure doom me guilty,
Or judge my error wilful without pardon.

Men. Gracious and virtuous Mistress.


Ame. It Is a trick,
There is no trust in female cunning (friend)
Let her first purge her follies past, and clear
The wrongs done to her honor, by some sure
Apparent testimony of her constancy:
Or we will not believe these childish plots;
As you respect my friendship, lend no ear
To a reply. Think on it.

Men. Pray love your fame.


Exeunt Men. Amet. Tham. Gone! I am sure awakt. Kala I find,
You have not been so trusty as the duty
You owed, required.

Kala Not I? I do protest, I have been, Madam.


Tham. Be no matter what.
I Am paid in mine own Coin; something I must,
And speedily -- so, -- seek out Cuculus
Bid him attend me instantly.

Kala That Anticke!
The trim old Youth shall wait ye.

Tham. Wounds may be mortal, which are wounds indeed:
" But no wounds deadly, till our Honors bleed. Exeunt.

Enter Rhetias and Corax. Rhet. Thar't an excellent fellow. Diabolo. O this
lousie close-stoole Empricks, that will undertake all Cures, yet know not the
causes of any disease. Dog-leaches. By the four Elements I honor thee, coo'd
find in my heart to turn knave, and be thy flatterer.


Cora. Sir, it is pity thou have not been a Scholar;
Thou Art honest, blunt, and rude enough. O Conscience!
But for thy Lord now, I have put him to it.

Rhet. He chafes hugely, fumes like a stew-pot; Is he not monstrously ouergone
in frenzy?


Cora. Rhetias, it is not a madness, but his sorrow's
Close griping grief, and anguish of the soul
That torture him: he carries Hell on earth
Within his bosom, 'twas a Princes tyranny
Caused his distraction, and a Princes sweetness
Must qualify that tempest of his mind.

Rhet. Corax, to praise thy Art, were to assure
The misbeleeuing world, that the Sun shines,
When it is in th'full Meridian of his beauty.
No cloud of black detraction can eclipse
The light of thy rare knowledge; henceforth casting
All poor disguises off, that play in rudeness,
Call me your servant: only for the present,
I wish a happy blessing to your Labors;
Heaven crown your undertakings; and believe me,
Ere many hours can pass, at our next meeting,
The bonds my duty owes, shall be full cancelled.

Exit. Cora. Farewell -- a shrewd-braine Whoreson, there is pith
In his untoward plainness. --
Enter Trollio with a Murrion on. Now, the news!

Troll. Worshipful Master Doctor, I have a great deal of I cannot tell what,
to say to you; My Lord thunders: every word that comes out of his mouth, roares
like a Cannon: the house shook once, my young Lady dares not be seen.


Cora. We will roar with him, Trollio, if he roar.


Trol. He has got a great Poll-axe in his hand, and fences it up and down the
house, as if he were to make room for the Pageants. I have provided me a
Murrion forfeare of a clap on the Coxcombe.


Cora. No matter for the Murrion, here is my Cap:
Thus I will pull it down; and thus out-stare him.

Trol. The Physicion is got as mad as my Lord. --
O brave, a man of Worship.

Cor. Let him come, Trollio, I will firke his Trangdido,
And bounce, and bounce in metal, honest Trollio.

Trol. He vapors like a Tinker, and struts like a Iuggler.


Menander within. So ho* So ho. Troll. There, there, there; look to your Right
Worshipful, look to your self.


Enter Meleander with a poll-axe. Mel. Show me the Dog, whose triple throated
noise,
Has rowzd a Lion from his uncouth den,
To tear the Curre in pieces.

Cor. Stay thy paws,
Courageous beast, else lo, the gorgeous skull,
That shall transform thee, to that restless stone,
Which Sysiphus roules up against the hill;
Whence tumbling down again, it, with his weight
Shall crush thy bones, and puff thee into Air.

Mel. Hold, hold thy conquering breath, it is stronger far
Then Gunpowder and Garlike. If the Fates
Have spun my thread, and my spent-clue of life
Be now untwisted, let us part like friends.
Lay up my weapon, Trollio, and be gone.

Trol. Yes Sir, with all my heart. --


Exit. Trollio Mel. This friend and I will walk, and gabble wisely.


Cor. I allow the motion: On.


Mel. So Politicians thrive,
That with their crabbed faces, and sly tricks
Legerdemayne, ducks, cringes, formal beards,
Crisp'd hairs, and punctual cheats, do wriggle in
Their heads first, like a Fox, to rooms of State,
Then the whole body follows.

Cor. Then they fill Lordships, steal women's hearts: with them and their's the
world runs round, yet these are square men still.


Mel. There are none poor, but such as ingrosse offices.


Cor. None wise; but unthrifts, bankrupts, beggars, Rascals.


Mel. The hangman is a rare Phisician.


Cor. That's not so good, it shall be granted.


Mel. All the buz of Drugs, and Myneralls and Simples,
Bloud-lettings, Vomits, Purges, or what else
Is coniur'd up by men of Art, to gull
Liege-people, and rear golden piles, are trash
To a well-strong-wrought halter; there the Coute,
The stone, yes and the Melancholy devil,
Are cured in less time then a pair of minutes.
Build me a Gallows in this very plot,
And I Will dispatch your business.

Cora. Fix the knot right under the left ear.


Mel. Sir, make ready.


Cora. Yet do not be too sudden, grant me leave,
To give a farewell to a creature long
Absented from me, it is a daughter (Sir)
Snatched from me in her youth, a handsome girl,
She comes to ask a blessing.

Mel. Pray where is she? I cannot see her yet.


Cora. She makes more haste
In her quick prayers then her trembling steps,
Which many griefs have weakened.

Mel. Cruel man!
How can thou rip a heart, that is cleft already
With injuries of time? whilst I am frantic,
Whilst throngs of rude divisions huddle on,
And do difranke my brains from peace, and sleep;
So long I am insensible of cares.
As balls of wildfire may be safely touched,
Not violently sundred, and thrown up;
So my distempered thoughts rest in their rage,
Not hurryed in the Air of repetition,
Or memory of my misfortunes past.
Then are my griefs struck home,
When they are reclaym'd,
To their own pity of themselves -- Proceed;
What of your daughter now?

Cor. I cannot tell ye,
It Is now out of my head again; my brains
Are crazie; I have scarce slept one sound sleep
These twelve months.

Mel. alas poor man; can thou imagine
To prosper in the task thou take in hand,
By practicing a cure upon my weakness,
And yet be no Physician for thy self?
Go, go, turn over all thy books once more,
And learn to thrive in modesty; for impudence
Does least become a Scholar. Thou art a fool,
A kind of learned fool.

Cor. I do confess it.


Mel. If thou can wake with me, forget to eat,
Renounce the thought of Greatness; tread on Fate;
Sigh out a lamentable tale of things
Done long ago, and ill done; and when sighs
Are wearied, piece up what remains behind,
With weeping eyes, and hearts that bleed to death:
Thou shall be a companion fit for me,
And we will sit together like true friends,
And never be divided. With what greediness
Do I hug my afflictions? there is no mirth
Which is not truly seasoned with some madness.
As for example. --

Exit. Cora. What new Crochet next?
There is so much sense in this wild distraction,
That I am almost out of my wits too,
To see and hear him: some few hours more
Spent here, would turn me Apish, if not frantic.
Enter Meleander and Cleophyla. In all the volumes thou have turned, thou Man
Of knowledge, have thou met with any rarity,
Worthy thy contemplation like to this?
The model of the Heavens, the Earth, the Waters,
The harmony, and sweet consent of times,
Are not of such an excellence, in form
Of their Creation, as the infinite wonder
That dwelles within the compass of this face:
And yet I tell thee, Scholar, under this
Well-ord'red sign, is lodged such an obedience,
As will hereafter in another age,
Strike all comparison into a silence.
She had a Sister too: but as for her,
If I were given to talk, I coo'd describe
A pretty piece of goodness: let that pass --
We must be wise sometimes: What would you with her?

Cor. I with her! nothing by your leave, Sir, I:
It is not my profession.

Mel. You are saucy,
And as I take it, scuruy in your sauciness,
To use no more respect -- good soul, be patient:
We are a pair of things the world does laugh at:
Yet be content, Cleophila; those clouds
Which bar the Sun from shining on our miseries,
Will never be chased off till I am dead;
And then some charitable soul will take thee
Into protection. I am hasting on,
The time cannot be long.

Cleo. I do beseech ye,
Sir, as you love your health, as you respect
My safety, let not passion ouerrule you.

Mel. It shall not, I am friends with all the world.
Get me some wine, to witness that I will be
An absolute good fellow, I will drink with thee.

Cora. Have you prepared his Cup?


Cleo. It Is in readiness.


Enter Cuculus and Grilla. Cucul. By your leave, Gallants, I come to speak
with a young Lady, as they say, the old Troianes daughter of the house.


Mel. Your business with my Lady daughter, Tosse-pot?


Gril. Tosse-pot? O base! Tosse-pot?


Cucul. Peace; do not see in what case he is? I would do my own
commendations to her; that is all.


Mel. Do, come my Genius, we will quaffe in wine
Till we grow wise.

Cora. True Nectar is divine.


Exit Mel. and Cora. Cucul. So, I am glad he is gone. Page, walk aside. Sweet
Beauty, I am sent Ambassador from the Mistress of my thoughts, to you, the
Mistress of my desires.


Cleo. So Sir, I pray be brief.


Cucul. That you may know, I am not as they say, an Animal; which is as they
say, a kind of Cokes, which is as the learned term, an Ass, a Puppy, a
Widgin, a Dolt, a Noddy, a --


Cleo. As you please.


Cucul. Pardon me for that, it shall be as you please indeed. Forsooth I love
to be courtly, and in fashion.


Cleo. Well, to your Embasie; what, or from whom?


Cucul. Marry what is more then I know? for to know what is what, is to know
what is what, and for what is what: but these are foolish figures, and to little
purpose.


Cleo. From whom then are you sent?


Cucul. There you come to me again: O, to be in the favor of great Ladies, is
as much to say, as to be great in Ladies favors.


Cleo. Good time a day to you; I can stay no longer.


Cucul. By this light but you must, for now I come toot. The most excellent,
most wise, most dainty, precious, loving, kind, sweet, intolerably fair Lady
Thamasta commends to your little hands, this letter of importance. By your
leave, let me first kiss and then deliver it in fashion, to your own proper
beauty.


Cleo. To me from her? It Is strange; I dare peruse it.


Cucul. Good, O that I had not resolved to live a single life! Here Is
temptation able to conjure up a spirit with a witness. So so: she has read it.


Cleo. Is It possible? Heaven, thou art great and bountiful.
Sir, I much thank your pains: and to the Princess,
Let my love, duty, service, be remembered.

Cucul. They shall Mad-dame.


Cleo. When we of hopes, or helps, are quite bereauen,
Our humble prayers have entrance into heaven.

Cucul. That's my opinion clearly and without doubt.


Exit. Enter Aretas and Sophronos. Aret. The Prince is thoroughly moved.


Sophron. I never saw him so much distemp'red.


Aret. What should this young man be,
Or whither can he be conuay'd?

Sophr. It Is to me a mystery, I understand it not.


Aret. Nor I.


Enter Prince Amethus and Pelias. Prince Ye have consented all to work upon
The softness of my nature; but take heed:
Though I can sleep in silence, and look on
The mockery ye make of my dull patience;
Yet'ee shall know, the best of ye, that in me
There is a masculin, a stirring spirit;
Which prouokt, shall like a bearded Comet
Set ye at gaze, and threaten horror.

Pel. Good Sir.


Prin. Good Sir. It Is not your active wit or language,
Nor your grave politic wisdoms (Lords) shall dare
To check-mate and control my just commands.
Enter Menaphon. Where is the Youth your friend? is be found yet?

Men. Not to be heard of.


Prince. Fly then to the desert,
Where thou did first encounter this Fantastic,
This airie apparition; come no more
In sight: Get ye all from me; he that stays,
Is not my friend.

Amet. It Is strange.


Aret. Soph. We must obey.


Exeunt all but the Prince. Prince. Some angry power, cheates with rare
delusions,
My credulous sense: the very soul of Reason
Is troubled in me -- the Physician
Presented a strange Mask, the view of it
Puzzled my understanding: but the Boy --
Enter Rhetias. Rhetias, thou art acquainted with my griefs,
Parthenophill is lost, and I would see him;
For he is like to some thing I remember
A great while since, a long, long time ago.

Rhet. I have been diligent (Sir) to pry into every corner for discovery, but
cannot meet with him: There is some trick I am confident.


Prin. There is, there is some practice, slight or plot.


Rhet. I have apprehended a fair Wench, in an odd
Private lodging in the City, as like the Youth
In face, as can by possibility be discerned.

Prince. How Rhetias!


Rhet. If it be not Parthenophill in long coats,
It Is a spirit in his likeness; answer
I can get none from her; you shall see her.

Prince. The young man in disguise upon my life,
To steal out of the Land.

Rhet. I Will send him to you.

Exit Rhet. Enter Eroclea in woman's attire, and listens.
Prince. Do, do my Rhetias. As there is by nature
In every thing created contrariety:
So likewise is there unity and league
Between them in their kind; but Man, the abstract
Of all perfection, which the workmanship
Of Heaven has modeled, in himself contains
Passions of several quality, the music
Of man's fair composition best accords,
When it is in consort, not in single strains.
My heart has been untuned these many months,
Wanting her presence, in whose equal love
True harmony consisted; living here
We are Heavens bounty all, but Fortunes exercise.

Eroc. Minutes are numbered by the fall of Sands;
As by an houre-glasse, the span of time
Does waste us to our graves, and we look on it.
An age of pleasures reuel'd out, comes home
At last, and ends in sorrow, but the life
Weary of riot, numbers every Sand,
Wayling in sighs, until the last drop down,
So to conclude calamity in rest.

Prince. What Echo yields a voice to my complaints?
Can I be no where private?

Eroc. Let the substance
As suddenly be hurried from your eyes,
As the vain sound can pass your ear,
If no impression of a troth vowed yours, Kneeles.
Retain a constant memory.

Prince. Stand up; it is not the figure stamped upon thy cheeks,
The coozenage of thy beauty, grace, or tongue,
Can draw from me a secret, that has been
The only lewell of my speechless thoughts.

Eroc. I am so worn away with fears and sorrows,
So wintred with the tempests of affliction,
That the bright Sun of your life-quickning presence
Has scarce one beam of force, to warm again
That spring of cheerful comfort, which youth once
Apparel'd in fresh looks.

Prince. Cunning Impostor,
Untruth has made thee subtle in thy trade:
If any neighboring Greatness has seduced
A freeborn resolution, to attempt
Some bolder act of treachery, by cutting
My weary days off. Wherefore ( Cruell-mercy)
Have thou assumed a shape, that would make treason
A piety, guilt pardonable, bloodshed
As holy as the sacrifice of peace?

Eroc. The Incense of my loue-desires, are slam'd
Upon an Altar of more constant proof.
Sir, O Sir, turn me back into the world,
Command me to forget my name, my birth,
My Fathers sadness, and my death alive,
If all remembrance of my Faith has found
A burial, without pity in your scorn.

Prince. My scorn (disdainefull Boy) shall soon unweave
The web thy Art has twisted: cast thy shape off,
Disroabe the mantle of a fained Sex,
And so I may be gentle; as thou art,
There Is witchcraft in thy language, in thy face,
In thy demeanors; turn, turn from me (prithee)
For my belief is armed else. Yet ( fair subtilty)
Before we part (for part we must) be true,
Tell me thy Country.

Eroc. Cyprus.


Prince. Ha: thy Father.


Eroc. Meleander.


Prince. Have a name?


Eroc. A name of misery, the unfortunate Eroclea.


Prince. There is danger
In this seducing counterfeit, great goodness!
Has honesty and virtue left the time?
Are we become so impious, that to tread
The path of impudence, is Law and Justice?
Thou vizard of a beauty ever sacred,
Give me thy name.

Eroc. Whilst I was lost to memory,
Parthenophill did shroud my shame in change
Of sundry rare misfortunes: but since now
I am, before I dye, returned to claim
A Conuoy to my grave, I must not blush
To let Prince Pallador (if I offend,)
Know when he doomes me, that he doomes Eroclea.
I am that woeful Maid.

Prince. Join not too fast
Thy penance, with the story of my sufferings.
So dwelt simplicity with virgin truth;
So Martyrdom and holiness are twins,
As innocence and sweetness on thy tongue.
But let me by degrees collect my senses,
I may abuse my trust. Tell me, what air
Have thou perfumed, since Tyranny first ravished
The contract of our hearts?

Eroc. Dear Sir, in Athens have I been buried.


Prince. Buried! Right, as I
In Cyprus. -- Come to trial, if thou be
Eroclea, in my bosom I can find thee.

Eroc. As I, Prince Palador, in mine: This gift
She shows him a Tablet. His bounty blessed me with, the only physic
My solitary cares have hourly took,
To keep me from despair.

Prince. We are but Fools
To trifle in disputes, or vainly struggle
With that eternal mercy which protects us.
Come home, home to my heart, thou banisht-peace,
My ecstasy of joys would speak in passion,
But that I would not lose that part of man,
Which is reserved to intertaine content.
Eroclea, I am thine; O let me seize thee
As my inheritance. Hymen shall now
Set all his Torches burning, to give light
Throughout this Land, new settled in thy welcome.

Eroc. You are still gracious. Sir, how I have lived,
By what means been conuey'd, by what preserved,
By what returned; Rhetias, my trusty servant,
Directed by the wisdom of my Uncle,
The good Sophronos, can inform at large.

Prince. Enough, in stead of Music, every night
To make our sleeps delightful, thou shall cloze
Our weary eyes with some part of thy story.

Eroc. O but my Father!


Prince. Fear not: to behold
Eroclea safe, will make him young again;
It shall be our first task. Blush sensual follies,
(...) A Castaway, a poor despised Maid,
Only for me to hope was almost sin,
Yet troth I never tempted him.

Tha. Chide not the grossenes of my trespass (lovely Sweetness)
In such an humble language, I have smarted
Already in the wounds, my pride has made
Upon thy sufferings. Henceforth it is in you
To work my happiness.

Cleo. Call any service
Of mine a debt, for such it is; the Letter
You lately sent me, in the blessed contents
It made me privy to, has largely quitted
Every suspicion of your Grace or goodness.

Tham. Let me embrace thee with a Sisters love,
A Sisters love, Cleophila: for should
My Brother henceforth study to forget
The vows that he has made thee, I would ever
Solicit thy deserts.

Enter Amethus and Menaphon. Ame. We must have entrance.


Tham. Must? Who are they say, must? you are unmannerly.
Brother is it you, and you too, Sir?

Ame. Your Ladyship has had a time of
Scolding to your humor:
Does the storm hold still?

Cleo. Never fell a shower
More seasonably gentle on the barren
Parcht thirsty earth, then showers of courtesy
Have from this Princess been distilled on me,
To make my growth in quiet of my mind
Secure and lasting.

Tham. You may both believe that I was not uncivil.


Ame. Pish, I know her spirit, and her envy.


Cleo. Now in troth, Sir,
Pray credit me, I do not use to swear*
The virtuous Princess has in words and carriage
Been kind, so ouer-kind, that I do blush:
I am not rich enough in thanks sufficient
For her vnequall'd bounty. -- My good Cousin,
I have a suite to you.

Men. It shall be granted.


Cleo. That no time, no persuasion, no respects
Of Iealousies past, present, or hereafter
By possibility to be conceived,
Draw you from that sincerity and pureness
Of love, which you have oftentimes protested
To this great worthy Lady she deserves
A duty more, then what the ties of Marriage
Can claim, or warrant: be for ever hers,
As she is yours, and Heaven increase your comforts.

Ame. Clophila has played the Church-mans part,
I Will not forbid the Banes.

Men. Are you consented?


Tha. I have one task in charge first, which concerns me.
Brother, be not more cruel then this Lady,
She has forgiven my follies, so may you:
Her youth, her beauty, innocence, discretion,
Without additions of estate or birth,
Are dower for a Prince indeed. You loved her;
For sure you swore you did: else if you did not
Here fix your heart, and thus resolve, if now
You miss this Heaven on earth, you cannot find
In any other choice ought but a hell.

Ame. The Ladies are turned Lawyers, and plead handsomely
Their Clients cases. I am an easy Judge,
And so shall thou be Menaphon. I give thee
My Sister for a wise; a good one, friend.

Men. Lady, will you confirm the gift?


Tham. The errors of my mistaken judgment being lost,
To your remembrance, I shall ever strive
In my obedience to deserve your pity.

Men. My love, my care, my all.


Amet. What rests for me?
I Am still a Bachelor: Sweet Maid, resolve me,
May I yet call you mine?

Cleo. My Lord Amethus,
Blame not my plainness, I am young and simple,
And have not any power to dispose
Mine own will without warrant from my father:
That purchased, I am yours.

Amet. It shall suffice me.


Enter Cuculus, Pelias, Trollio and Grilla plucked in by 'em. Cucul. Revenge, I
must have revenge; I will have revenge bitter and abominable revenge; I will
have revenge. This unfashionable Mungrill, this Linsey-woolsey of mortality by
this hand, Mistress, this shee-Roague is drunk, and clapper-clawd me without
any reverence to my person, or good garments, why do you not speak, Gentlemen.


Pel. Some certain blows have past, and't like your Highness.


Troll. Some few knocks of Friendship, some loue-toyes, some Cuffes in
kindness, or so.


Gril. I Will turn him away, he shall be my Master no longer.


Men. Is this your she-Page, Cuculus? it is a Boy, sure.


Cucul. A Boy, an arrant Boy in long coats.


Troll. He has mumbled his nose, that it is as big as a great Cod piece.


Cucul. Oh thou Cock vermin of iniquity.


Tha. Pelias, take hence the wag and school him for it.
For your part, servant, I Will entreat the Prince
To grant you some fit place about his Wardrobe.

Cucul. Ever after a bloody nose do I dream of good luck.
I horribly thank your Ladyship.
Whilst I Am in office, the old garb shall again
Grow in request, and Tailors shall be men.
Come Trollio, help to wash my face, prithee.

Trol. Yes, and to scowre it too. --


Exit Cuculus, Trollio, Pelias, Grill. Enter Rhetias, Corax. Rhet. The Prince
and Princess are at hand, give over your amorous Dialogues. Most honored Lady,
henceforth forbear your sadness: are you ready to practice your instructions?


Cleo. I have studied
My part with care, and will perform it ( Rhetias)
With all the skill I can.

Cor. I Will pass my word for her.


Flourish. Enter Prince, Sophronus, Aretius, and Eroclea. Prince. Thus Princes
should be circled with a guard
Of truly noble friends, and watchful subjects.
O Rhetias, thou art just; the Youth thou told'st me.
That lived at Athens, is returned at last
To her own fortunes, and contracted I oue.

Rhet. My knowledge made me sure of my report, Sir.


Prince. Eroclea, clear thy fears, when the Sun shines,
Clouds must not dare to muster in the sky,
Nor shall they here -- Why do they kneel? Stand up,
The day and place is priuiledg'd.

Soph. Your presence, Great Sir, makes every room a Sanctuary.


Prince. Wherefore does this young virgin use such circumstance,
In duty to us? Rise.

Eroc. It Is I must raise her.
Forgive me, Sister, I have been too private,
In hiding from your knowledge any secret
That should have been in common twixt our souls:
But I was ruled by council.

Cleo. That I show my self a Girl (Sister) and bewray
Joy in too soft a passion'fore all these,
I hope you cannot blame me.

Prince. We must part:
The sudden meeting of these two fair Riuolets
With the Island of our arms, Cleophila,
The custom of thy piety has built
Even to thy younger years a Monument
Of memorable Fame; some great reward
Must wait on thy desert.

Soph. The Prince speaks to you, Niece.


Cor. Chat low, I pray; let us about our business.
The good old man awakes: my Lord, withdraw;
Rhetias, let us settle here the Coach.

Prince. Away then.


Exit. Soft Music. Enter Melander (in a Coach) his hair and beard trimb,
habit and gown changed. Rhetias and Corax, and Boy that sings. The Song.
Fly hence, shadows, that do keep
Watchful sorrows, charmed in sleep;
Though the Eyes be overtaken,
Yet the Heart does ever waken
Thoughts, chained up in busy snares
Of continual woes and cares:
Love and griefs are so expressed,
As they rather sigh then rest.
Fly hence, shadows, that do keep
Watchful sorrows, charmed in sleep.
Mel. Where am I? Ha? What sounds are these? It Is day, sure.
Oh, I have slept belike: it is but the foolery
Of some beguiling dream. So, so, I will not
Trouble the play of my delighted Fancy
But dream my dream out.

Cor. Morrow to your Lordship:
You took a jolly nap, and slept it soundly.

Mel. Away, beast, let me alone.


Cease music. Cora. O, by your leave, Sir.
I must be bold to raise ye, else your Physic
Will turn to further sickness.

Mel. Physic, Beare-leech?


Cor. Yes physic, you are mad.


Mel. Trollio, Cleophila.


Rhet. Sir, I am here.


Mel. I know thee, Rhetias, prithee rid the room
Of this tormenting noise. He tells me, sir.
I have took physic, Rhetias, physic, physic.

Rhet. Sir true, you have; and this most learned Scholar
Applied to you. O you were in dangerous plight
Before he took ye hand.

Mel. These things are drunk,
Directly drunk. Where did you get your liquor?

Cor. I never saw a body in the wane
Of age, so over spread with several sorts
Of such diseases as the strength of Youth
Would groan under and sink.

Rhet. The more your glory in the miraculous cure.


Cor. Bring me the Cordial
Prepared for him to take after his sleep,
Twill do him good at heart.

Rhet. I hope it will, Sir.


Exit. Mel. What do think I am, that thou should fiddle
So much upon my patience? Fool, the weight
Of my disease sits on my heart so heavy,
That all the hands of Art cannot remove
One grain to ease my grief. If thou cood'st poison
My memory, or wrap my senses up
Into a dullness, hard and cold as Flints?
If thou cood'st make me walk, speak, eat and laugh
Without a sense or knowledge of my faculties,
Why then perhaps at Marts thou might make benefit
Of such an Anticke motion, and get credit
From credulous gazers, but not profit me.
Study to gull the wise; I am too simple
To be wrought on.

Cor. I Will burn my books (old man)
But I will do thee good, and quickly too.

Enter Aretus with a Patent. Aret. Most honored Lord Meleander, our great
Master,
Prince Palador of Cyprus, has by me
Sent you this Patent, in which is contained
Not only confirmation of the Honors
You formerly enjoyed, but the addition
Of the Marshalship of Cyprus, and ere long
He means to visit you. Excuse my haste,
I must attend the Prince. --

Exit. Cor. There Is one Pill works.


Mel. Do know that spirit? it is a grave familiar,
And talked I know not what.

Cor. He Is like, me thinks, the Prince his Tutor, Aretus.


Mel. Yes, yes; it may be I have seen such a formality;
No matter where, or when.

Enter Amethus with a Staff. Amet. The Prince has sent ye
(My Lord) this Staff of Office, and withal
Salutes you Grand Commander of the Ports
Throughout his Principalities. He shortly
Will visit you himself: I must attend him. --

Exit. Cor. Do You feel your physic stirring yet?


Mel. A Devil is a rare Iuggler, and can cheat the eye,
But not corrupt the reason in the Throne
Of a pure soul. -- Another? I will stand thee,
Be what thou can, I care not.

Enter Sophronus with a Tablet. Soph. From the Prince, dear Brother, I present
you this rich Relic,
A Jewel he has long worn in his bosom:
Henceforth he bade me say, he does beseech you
To call him son, for he will call you Father.
It is an honor (brother) that a subject
Cannot but intertaine with thankful prayers.
Be moderate in your loyes, he will in person
Confirm my errand, but commands my service.

Exit. Cora. What hope now of your Cure?


Mel. Stay, stay -- What Earthquakes
Roll in my flesh? here is Prince, and Prince and Prince;
Prince upon Prince: the dotage of my sorrows
Reuells in magic of ambitious scorn,
Be they Enchantments deadly (as the grave)
I Will look vpon'em: Patent, staff, and Relick
To the last first. Round me, ye guarding ministers
And ever keep me waking till the Cliffes
That over hang my sight fall off, and leave
These hollow spaces to be crammed with dust.

Cor. It Is time I see to fetch the Cordial. Prithee
Sit down: I Will instantly be here again --

Exit. Mel. Good, give me leave, I will sit down indeed:
Here Is Company enough for me to prate to,

Eroclea. It Is the same, the cunning Artsman
Faultred not in a line. Coo'd he have fashen'd
A little hollow space here, and blown breath
To have made it move, and whispher, 't had bin excellent.
But faith, it is well, it is very well as it is.
Passing, most passing well.

Enter Cleophila, Eroclea, Rhetias. Cleo. The sovereign Greatness,
Who, by Commission from the powers of heaven,
Swayes both this Land and us, our gracious Prince,
By me presents you (Sir) with this large bounty,
A gift more precious to him then his birthright.
Here let your cares take end; now set at liberty
Your long imprisoned heart, and welcome home
The solace of your soul, too long kept from you.

Eroc. Dear Sir, you know me.


Mel. Yes, thou art my Daughter:
My eldest blessing. Know thee? Why Eroclea,
I never did forget thee in thy absence.
Poor soul, how do?

Eroc. The best of my well-being consists in yours.


Mel. Stand up: the gods who hitherto
Have kept us both alive, preserve thee ever.

Cleophila* I thank thee and the Prince,
I thank thee too, Eroclea, that thou would
In pity of my age, take so much pains
To live, till I might once more look upon thee,
Before I broke my heart: O it was a piece
Of piety and duty unexampled.

Rhet. The good man rellisheth his comforts strangely,
The sight does turn me child.

Eroc. I have not words that can express my joys.


Cleo. Nor I.


Mel. Nor I: yet let us gaze on one another freely,
And surfeit with our eyes; let me be plain,
If I should speak as much as I should speak,
I should talk of a thousand things at once,
And all of thee, of thee (my child) of thee:
My tears like ruffling winds locked up in Caves,
Do bustle for a vent -- on the other side,
To fly out into mirth were not so comely.
Come hither, let me kiss thee -- with a pride,
Strength, courage, and fresh blood, which now thy presence
Has stored me with, I kneel before their Altars,
Whose sovereignty kept guard about thy safety.
Ask, ask thy Sister (prithee) she will tell thee
How I have been much mad.

Cleo. Much discontented,
Shunning all means that might procure him comfort.

Eroc. Heaven has at last been gracious.


Mel. So say I but wherefore crop thy words in such a sloth,
As if thou were afraid to mingle truth.
With thy misfortunes? Understand me thoroughly,
I would not have thee to report at large
From point to point, a Iournall of thy absence:
It Will take up too much time, I would securely
Ingrosse the little remnant of my life,
That thou might every day be telling somewhat,
Which might convey me to my rest with comfort.
Let me be think me, how we parted first:
Puzzles my faint remembrance -- But soft,

Cleophila, thou toldst me, that the Prince
Sent me this present.

Cleo. From this own fair hands I did receive my Sister.


Mel. To requite him, we will not dig his Fathers grave anew,
Although the mention of him much concerns
The business we inquire of -- as I said,
We parted in a hurry at the Court,
I to this Castle, after made my layle.
But whither thou, dear heart?

Rhet. Now they fall to it, I looked for this.


Eroc. I by my Uncles care ( Sophronos* my good Uncle) suddenly was like a
Sailors Boy conuey'd a shipboord that every night.


Mel. A policy quick and strange.


Eroc. The ship was bound for Corinth, whither first
Attended only with your servant Rhetias,
And all fit necessaries, we arrived:
From thence in habit of a youth we iourney'd
To Athens, where till our return of late,
Have we lived safe.

Mel. Oh what a thing is man,
To bandy factions of distemp'red passions,
Against the sacred providence above him?
Here in the Legend of thy two years exile,
Rare pity and delight are sweetly mixed,
And still thou were a Boy.

Eroc. So I obeyed my Uncles wise command.


Mel. It Was safely carried, I humbly thank thy Fate.


Eroc. If earthly treasures
Are powered in plenty down from Heaven on mortals;
They reign amongst those Oracles, that flow
In Schools of sacred knowledge; such is Athens:
Yet Athens was to me but a fair prison:
The thoughts of you, my Sister, Country, Fortunes,
And something of the Prince, barred all contents,
Which else might ravish sense: for had not, Rhetias,
Been always comfortable to me, certainly
Things had gone worse.

Mel. Speak low Eroclea;
That something of the Prince bears danger in it:
Yet thou have trauayl'd (Wench) for such Indowments,
As might create a Prince a wife fit for him,
Had he the World to guide: but touch not there;
How came thou home?

Rhet. Sir, with your Noble savor,
Kissing your hand first, that point I can answer.

Mel. Honest, right honest Rhetias.


Rhet. Your grave Brother
Perceived with what a hopeless love his son,
Lord Menaphon, too eagerly pursued
Thamasta, Cousin to our present Prince;
And to remove the violence of affection,
Sent him to Athens, where for twelve months space
Your daughter, my young Lady and her Cousin
Enjoyed each others griefs, till by his Father
The Lord Sophronos we were all called home.

Mel. Enough, enough, the world shall henceforth witness
My thankfulness to Heaven, and those people
Who have been pitiful to me and mine.
Lend me a Looking-glass -- How now? How came I
So courtly in fresh rayments?

Rhet. Here Is the Glass, Sir.


Mel. I Am in the trim too. -- O Cleophila,
This was the goodness of thy care and cunning. --
Whence comes this noise?

Loud Music. Rhet. The Prince my Lord in person.


Enter Prince, Sophronos, Aretas, Amethus, Menaphon, Thamasta, Corax, Kala.
Prince. Ye shall not kneel to us; rise all, I charge ye:
Father, you wrong your age, henceforth my arms
And heart shall be your guard; we have o're-heard
All passages of your united loves.
Be young again, Meleander, live to number
An happy generation, and dye old
In comforts as in years. The Offices
And Honors which I late on thee conferred,
Are not fantastic bounties, but thy merit;
Enjoy them liberally.

Mel. My tears must thank ye, for my tongue cannot.


Cor. I have kept my promise, and given you a sure cordial.


Mel. O, a rare one.


Prince. Good man, we both have shared enough of sadness:
Though thine has tasted deeper of th'extreme;
Let us forget it henceforth. Where Is the picture
I sent ye? Keep it, it is a counterfeit,
And in exchange of that, I ceaze on this,
The real substance: with this other hand
I give away before her Fathers face
His younger joy, Cleophila, to thee
Cousin Amethus: take her, and be to her
More then a Father, a deserving husband.
Thus robbed of both thy children in a minute,
Thy cares are taken off.

Mel. My brains are dulled;
I am intranc'd, and know not what you mean:
Great, gracious Sir, alas, why do you mock me?
I am a weak old man, so poor and seeble,
That my untoward joints can scarcely creep
Unto the grave, where I must seek my rest.

Prince. Eroclea was you know, contracted mine;
Cleophila, my Cousins by consent
Of both their hearts: We both now claim our own;
It only rests in you to give a blessing
For confirmation.

Rhetias. Sir, it is truth and justice.


Mel. The gods that lent ye to me, bless your vows:
O Children, children, pay your prayers to Heaven,
For they have showed much mercy. But Sophronos,
Thou art my Brother: I can say no more:
A good, good Brother.

Prince. Leave the rest to time.
Cousin Thamasta, I must give you too:
She Is thy wife, Menaphon. Rhetias, for thee
And Corax, I have more then common thanks.
On, to the Temple; there all solemn Rites
Performed, a general Feast shall be proclaimed.
The Lovers Melancholy has found cure;
Sorrows are changed to Bride-songs. So they thrive,
Whom Fate in spite of storms has kept alive.

Exuent omnes. FINIS.
EPILOGVE.
TO be too confident, is as unjust
In any Work, as too much to distrust;
Who from the laws of study have not sweru'd,
Know, begged applauses never were deserved.
We must submit to Censure: so does He,
Whose hours begot this issue; yet being free
For his part, if He have not pleased you, then
In this kind, he will not trouble you again.
FINIS.

