HOPLOCRISMASPONGVS: OR, A Sponge to wipe away the Weapon -Salve. A Treatse
wherein is proved, that the Cure late-taken up amongst us, by applying the
Salve to the Weapon, is Magical and unlawful

By WILLIWAM FOSTER Mr. of Arts, and Parson of Hedgley in the County of
Buckingham.

D. Augustinus de Trinitate lib.2. in prooemio. Non ero trepidus at proferendam
sententiam meam, in qua magis amabo inspici a rectis, quam timebo morderi a
perversis. LONDON Printed by Thomas Cotes, for John Grove, and are to be sold
at his shop at Furniuals Inn Gate in Holborne. 1631.

To the Right Honorable ROBERT Lord Dormer, Baron of Wing, Viscount Ascot,
Earl of Caernarvon, Lord Lieutenant of Buckingham shiere, and Mr. of the Kings
Majesty's Hawks, my very good Lord.
RIght Honorable and my very good Lord, three things made me take in hand this
unhandled argument.

1. The insulting of a Jesuit and Dr. of Divinity, Joannes Roberti. He has
written against this strange and magical Cure. I had some light from him. I
often cite and allege him. Thus far I commend him. But because some
Protestants practice this and Charactericall Cures, (which notwithstanding are
more frequent amongst Papists) he calls us Magi-Calvinists, Characterists,
etc. He makes that generally in us all, doctrinall, which is but in some few
personally practical. Herein I detest his Sophistry and discommend him.

2. The second thing moving me, was a commiseration of the case of some persons
of quality, reputed religious, which use the Weapon-Salve. I pity these. I
presume they imagine no harm in it. I pray for them in our Savior Christ his
own words: Father forgive them, for they know not Luke 22. 34.
what they do. Luke 22. 34.

3. Lastly, there are some Friends of J. S. E. C.
mine, which presume more of my ability to give the world satisfaction in this
question, than I my self do. At their requests I took this unusual task on
me. For where I may do good, little entreaty shall serve.

For the first of these; the Jesuit and his accomplices: I would have them pull
down their crestes. We of the Church of England detest superstitious and
magical Cures. We have many poor Parish Priests amongst us (whereof my self
is the meanest, placed over but a decade of families, consisting of eight times
so many souls as were in Noah's Arc) which dare handle an argument, and write
and preach against such practices (if they know of them) as well as their great
Doctors and University Readers.

For the second; the Persons of worth practicing this Cure; I have written this
Treatise for their reading. They may suppose their Cure lawful, because no man
amongst us has as yet written to contradict it. But I would have them know,
that till of late it was little known amongst us, and therefore little or not
at all inquired into. But now growing every day more common (so that I have
seen the Salve in the very hands of women) I have adventured (with Gods help)
to show the unlawfulness of it. In reading of it, I counsel them to anoint
their eyes with the Eye Salve bought of Christ, Revel 3. 18: and then I
Revelat. 3. 18.
doubt not, but the scales will fall from their eyes as from St. Paul's, Acts 9.
18: and Act. 9. 18.
they will plainly see the vanity of their Weapon-Salve. It is more ease and
security for me to be silent. I might say with St. Augustine; D. August. de
Tri^. lib. 3. in prooem.
Malle me legendo, quam legenda dictando labor are. I had rather be reading my
self, than be writing to be read by others. But I had rather hazard mine own
reputation, than they should their salvation.

And for the last, my Friends; at whose entreaty I condescended to this
undertaking; I desire them and others to know thus much from me, that I esteem
not my self, mine own; but Gods, my Countries, theirs. While I am able, I
will shun no labor for their sakes. I am not of their garb, which writing
nothing, think it enough to purchase to themselves the repute of great
Scholars, if they can shake their head, and play the malicious Critickes in
the works of others. Nor am I of their mind, which to become great, by being
counted good preachers, preach not above twice or thrice a year, and then lay
all their strength on their Sermon. My resolution is otherwise; I will read
much, write some what, and preach often. Reading in time may make one learned,
writing Judicious, and often preaching a ready man. So I may do good, I will be
dainty of none of these, when they are required. Better is goodness without
greatness, than greatness without goodness. These are the motives of sending
abroad this my Treatise. Coming forth, to whom should I first give it, but to
your Lordship, to whom I first gave my self? To whom but to you, for whom my
prayers to God (who gives Salatem sublimium orationibus humilium) are, that you
may ever be both good and great? I presume you will receive the work, because
you have owned the Author. It is like to pass through many a storm thundered
against it, by the malicious contradictions of some obstinate vnguentaries and
peevish Censurers. For most true is that of the Comoedian: Obsequium amicos,
Terent. in A^de. Act. 1. Scen. 1.
veritas odium parit. But if your Honor out of your wonted candor will be
pleased to shelter it and me, under your Wing, I shall be safe from biting, to
hurt me, though not from barking (if I cared for it,) to fright me. In
confidence whereof I humbly prostrate to your Nobleness this little work,
together with

Your Lordships devoted Chaplain and humble Servant to be commanded, WILLIAM
FOSTER.

Omnibus and Singulis eximiae artis Chirurgicae Magistris in Anglia, Scotia,
and Hibernia, praecipue in inclyta Londini Civitate Commorantibus: nominatim
Ornatissimis and doctissimis viris, Richardo Watsono Armigero dignissimae
Societatis Chirurgorum Londinensium Magistro, Iosepho Fenton^ Armigero and
propter egregiam eruditionem Chirurgorum omnium hac tempestate Antesignano,
Gulielmo Clouso Armigero, Sorenissimo Principi CAROLO Magnae Britanniae,
Franciae and Hyberniae Regi Atchi-chirurgo, Iacobo Molinao artis Chirurgicae
insigni and spectato Magistro, et amicis meis Ioanns Scot^ and Edward Charles,
(...).
EA est (viri gravissimi) hujus Tractatiunculae natura ut non solum magnatum
and potentium, sed and artis medicinalis peritorum, Aesculapij filiorum egeat
patrocinio. Quamvis enim contra cacomagiam Theologus scribo, tamen is est
ingenioli mei faetus, quem nunc parturio, ut nisi artis vestrae limits
aliquantulum pro modulo salutarem, in lucem faeliciter nunquam sit proditurus.
Nec opinor hoc factum and conatum renuetis. Nulla enim tam polita est ars, aut
sublimis scientia, quae Sacrosanctae Theologiae non ambiat ancillari. Sed esto
haec proles ejus open adjuta and nunc producta. Evenit huic human o partui non
multum dissimile. Inter nascendum mirum silentium, postquam autem Lucina opem
tulit, mulieres tolent pro facultatula garriendo sese exercere. Sic fore post
libri editionem comperimus. Certo certius scio multum fore multorum de hac
prole nostra garrulitatis. Quot homuuculi, tot sententiolae. Quidam asserent
partum hunc embryon esse and informem, alij mancum and deformem, nonnulli
imbecillem and nullius vigoris pusionem. Vulgus Proteus est ipsissimus. Sed ego
vos supra vulgarem captum doctos Patronos appello. Vos Medicinae peritos
(Chirurgia namque antiquissima medicinae pars) de hisce non latet judicare. Ad
pedes igitur vestros hunc laboris faetum, sese exactissimo judiciorum vestrorum
calculo submittentem, depono. Ego vos (viri ornatissimi) sicut olim Magnus ille
Augustinus, non solum August. in prooem. lib. 3. de Trinit. tom. 3.
pios lectores, sed liberos correctores desydero. Quod si in gremium vestrum
suscipiatur, ubi si non sum carus, tamen vel mediocri favore sit susceptus
and non spretus, maledicentium pus and venenum, qui aliena carpunt, necedunt
sua, nihili morabor. -- Invidia rumpantur ut ilia Codro. Eclog. 7.
Argumentum hoc prae quaestionis magnitudine stylum prementem magis exigit and
limatiorem. Sed nemo nostratium provinciam hanc subivit. Vnguentum hoc Armarium
paucis abhinc annis nemini fere de nomine notum, jam ad dei and artis legitimae
contemptum per multos hujus regni vicos and civitates passim devagatur. Ge^itur
in omnium manibus, non solum plebeiorum, sed equestris ordinis, ne dicam
altioris: imo vel mulierculis, inscienter doctis usui est and gloriolae. Bonum
quo communius eo melius; malum e contrario. Neigitur horrendum hoc corporis
remedium ad animarum ruinam latius serpat, ad onus hoc humeris impar
sustinendum, animum appuli. Doleo enim and misereor magnopere omnium peccatorum
vices, inscientium autem maxim Deus Opt. Max. inscios peccatores, si veniam
petant, facilius condonat. Inscij peccatores quia veniam petere vix sciunt,
difficilius impetrant. Christus igitur eorum misertus, patrem orat eorum
condonatione^. Pater ignosce illis, non enim sciunt quid faciunt. Luc. 22. 34.
Id est, aperi eorum oculos, and ignorantiae Luc. 22. 34.
nubes amoveatur, ut peccata sua videant and intelligant, intelligentes
poeniteant, and poenitentes a te miserecordiarum patre indulgentiam accipiant.
Sed poenitentia est (ut loquitur D. Hieronymus) secunda Hieronym. ad Demetr.
Epist. 8. com. (...).
tabula post naufragium: Et melius est ut integra servetur navis, quam ut
naufragi tabulae haereamus. Quis enim sanae mentis non maluerat quod nunquam
amiserit securus possidere, quam anxius quaerere quod perdiderat? Ne quis
igitur in hujus perniciosissimu^ unguenti scopulum tenerrimam animae suae navim
impingat, periculum ubi sit, ut Palinurus, praemoneo. Et si qui in hoc aequore
dubij circumnatent, non solum tabulam quam apprehendant ostendo, verum etiam
manum, qua apprehensa, ad litus tuti appellant, porrigo. Haec sunt conatus
nostri molimina, quae ut sub auspicijs vestris prodeant in publicum, and cedant
in dei omnipotentis gloriam, and grassantem vndique (hoc unguentum quod
attinet) plurimorum superstitionem profligent, humilimus Orator petit
obsecratque

Dignitatis vestrae studiosissimus Gulielmus Fosterus.

To the Reader.
Gentle Reader,
I Jntended not this Tracts coming forth thus, single. These times of dearth
and also of sickness incitedmo (in behalf of the poor) to meditate and write
of the seven works of corporal mercy. Amongst them that sacred action of
visiting the sick and wounded has its place. This was framed as an appendix
to that. That and the rest in composing grew to a bigger bulk, than I either
at first intended, or have leisure as yet to make ready to come abroad.
Wherefore perceiving this magical and superstitious unguent every day to
spread and come into more hands, in a zealous * indignation, I send this single
Sinatura negat, facit indignatio versum Iuvenal. Satyr. 1.
Tract into the world (if possible) to decry it. If it may warn thee (good
Reader) from it, or fore-arme thee with sufficient reasons against it, I have
attained my wished scope. But be not too hasty to judge of the work. A sturdy
oak is not cut down with a blow or two; nor so knotty a matter in a line or
page, or two, made facill. That may be but marked and lightly touched at one
time and place, which is paid home, and cut down in another. Read then all,
or none, before thou settle thy judgment, and pass thy censure. With St.
Augustine I must confess; Multa quae D. August, de Trinit. lib. 3. in procem.
nesciebam, scribendo me didicisse; that by writing on this subject, I learned
many things I was ignorant of before: So peradventure may thou in the
reading. Yet I could wish some more skillful pen had taken this argument in
hand. But I hope these my weak labors will break the Ice, and lead on
greater abilities. A torch may be lighted at a candle. This my unpolished work
may occasion some other, absolutely perfect. So be that a torch may come in
place, to give more light, I can endure my candle to be extinguished. I aim
not at mine own luster, but the good of Christian souls. So God may be
glorified, his Church profited, and my brethren instructed, let me be counted
a snuff, a nothing (with St. Paul) Anathema, Romans 9. 3.
worse then nothing. In the mean time, some may think me too tart in this
argument. With the Poet they will say,

Plus aloes, quam mellis habet -- Iu venal Satyr.

Let these know I love their persons, they are Gods creatures, the sheep of
his hands (as David Psalm 95. 7.
speaks, Psalm. 95. 7.) but I hate, and am tart against mine own and other
men's faults, they are the works of the devil, the unfruitful works of
darkness, with which we must have no fellowship, but (as St. Paul exhorts,
Ephesians. 5. 11.) rather reprove Ephesians. 5. 11.
them. And I dare call sin, sin, in whom soever. If Iefabell be painted, with
Iehu I will not have peace with her to commend her, though a Queen. If Herod
be incestuous, with the Baptist I Will not sooth him, though a King. If Simon
Magus be a Sorcerer, I fear not his devil; with St. Peter I Will rouse him,
though a witch. Shall any for my boldness think to sit upon my skirts? Let
those know I esteem my self infra invidiam. I cannot have less in the
Church, unless nothing. And if they shall endeavor to keep me still low, let
them know I look for no good, from them that envy my endeavors to do good.
If I sit panting on the ground, I will not refuse to be sed by ravens to keep
me alive with Elias; but I look not to be lifted up by any but Eagles,
heroicke spirits, men fearing God, and hating Simoniacall covetousness, and
magical superstition. And so I rest,

Thy well wisher, William Foster.

A SPONGE TO Wipe away the Weapon-Salve.
Whether the curing of wounds by the Weapon-Salve, be Witchcraft and unlawful
to be used? affir.

The Proeme.
Wherein the scope and Method of the Tract is recited.

IN this question I look for opponents. Me thinks I hear, ne suitor ultra
crepidam, sounded and resounded in mine ears. What has the Author to do with
this question? What? a Divine a medler in the Art of Medicine? Is not this
besides his text? Surely no. This question may be handled three ways, and so
incident to three several sciences. For

It may be considered, 1. As consisting of such and such Ingredients, of such
and such doses, so and so collected and compounded; and thus it belongs to the
Art of medicine. 2. Whether agents and patients being not conjoined in
corporal or virtuall contact within a limited sphere of activity, can
naturally produce any cure of alteration, as this unguent does? And thus it
belongs to natural Philosophy. 3. Whether that which produces supernatural
effects, having no divine institution (as this has none) be not from the
devil, and so the use of it witchcraft, and not to be practiced by any honest
and religious man? And thus it is of Theological and Ecclesiastical
cognizance.

In the first consideration I leave it to learned Physicians, skillful
Chyrurgions, and expert Pharmacapolists. But if I enter into consideration of
it the two other ways, I am neither ultra crepidam, nor extra textum. I am not
beyond my Last. My Last extends to Philosophy. I am a Mr. of Arts in both
Universities. I am not besides my text. I am a Divine by profession. Visiting
the sick and wounded is not the meanest part of my duty. In that sacred
action it is not to be forgotten, to admonish that medicines be used for
recovery. And if superstitious and magical remedies be attempted, they must
be instructed otherwise, and by all means be persuaded from them. For their
damnation is just, which do evil that good may come of it. Now when suspected
cures are performed (as by this ung^ent,) that Divine which takes into
consideration, whether this or the like be not done by Magic and witchcraft,
cannot properly be^ said to be Non-resident from his profession. Divinity is
that science which teaches the means to everlasting salvation both of body
and soul. Nay the Heathen Poet can advize us as much,

Orandum est, ut sit men's sana in corpore s^no. Iuvenal. Satyr 10

We must pray that we way have sound souls as well as bodies. He then that
forewarnes to take such medicines for the curing of our bodies for a while, as
may endanger both body and soul for ever, does the part and duty of a
Theologue, and keeps himself within the bounds of Divinity. Thus much by the
way of anticipation. Now to the question and disputation. In which that I may
not rove, but deal punctally and martially with this martial salve, Pede
pedes and cuspide cuspis, I shall in two members observe the Hoplomaticall
method;

Of Offense and Proving against it. Disproving whatsoever is brought for it.
Defense

Membrum primum.
First I shall prove against it, that it is no lawful Membrum (...)
cure, but a magical, done by the help of the devil the corrupter of nature,
and that 4. ways, in 4. Articles.

viz. By 1. Reason and Philosophy. 2. Authority of Writers. 3. The effects of
this ointment. 4. The Author or first inventer of it.

Articulus primus.
Wherein Natural Reason and Philosophy is brought to prove that this cure is
not natural, but Magical and Diabolical.

ALL lawful medicines produce their effects either by divine institution, as
Naamans seven times washing himself in the River Jordan to cure his leprosy,
2 Kings 5: and the poole of Bethesdaes curing such 2 King. 5.
as entered into it after the Angels stirring it, John 5. 5. or by natural
operation, according to such virtues John 5. 5.
as God in the creation endued such creatures with, whereof the said medicines
are composed. So the Prophet Esaias prescribed King Ezekiah a lump of Figs to
cure his Aposteme, 2 Kings 20. 7. 2 King. 20. 7.
And the Samaritan bound up the wounds of him that was half dead in the way,
and powered in wine and oil into them, Luke 10. 34. Both these Luke 10. 34.
were natural medicines, found to have natural virtue to produce their wished
effects, by Sons of Asculapius, conversant in the inquisition of secrets of
nature. Galen therefore the Prince of Gale^* ^e Art Curativa ad Glan^. lib. 2.
cap. 7. Levin. Lem. Herb. Bibl. cap. 7. Francisc. Val^^. de sa(...) Phi^^s.
cap. 8(...) page (...).
Physicians, directs the application of Figs to rebellious tumors, which
hardly break and come to suppuration. And Levinus Lemnius says, that Figs are
a powerful and present remedy. And Franciscus Valesius, greatly commends not
only the charity, but also the judgment and skill of the Samaritan for his
fit and proper application. That which the Gracians call (...)* was in that
case an artificial and sovereign fomentation. For whether his wounds were
compound (by contusion or dilaceration) or simple (by the sole solution of
continuity) the medicine was most proper for the first intention. If compound,
nothing more agreeable to the rules of Art: If simple, yet seeing the Patient
had layne long in the air destitute of help (his wounds not so much as
covered or bound up) his wounded parts were become exasperate and refrigerated,
Cui malo (says my Author) nullare melius succureretur quam calente Idem
Ibide(...)
(...), which evil could no way better be helped, than by fomenting the parts
with wine and oil warmed. But this Weapon-Salvo works neither of these
ways; Ergo, the cures done by it are not lawful, but prestigious, magical
and diabosicall. The minor or assumption I prove thus. First, that it is not of
divine Institution, because it is no where registered in Scripture. Secondly, it
works not naturally, See Aristol. Phys. l. 7. text. 10. 11. 12. Aqui^. 1. q.
8. Art 1. Durand. 1. Sent. did. 37. 1
because it works after a different manner from all natural agents. For it is
a rule amongst both Divines and Philosophers that; Nullum agens agit in
distans. Whatsoever works naturally, works either by corporal or virtuall
contact. But this works by neither, therefore it works not naturally. It
works not by corporal contact, the bodies are disjoined. Paracelsus says, if
the weapon be anointed, the wounded party may be cured, Parace^s. Archidox.
Mag. lib 1. p 12 (...) Oswald. Cr^ll. Chim. basil. page 278. (...). tract. de
unguent. Armar H(...), de.
though 20. miles absent. Oswaldus Cr^llius, ^o^linius, Helmontius, and others,
put an unlimited distance. Therefore there is no corporal contact. So that
this cure (if lawful) must needs be performed by virtuall contact. But not so
neither. All Agents working by virtuall contact work within a certain
distance, and limited sphere of activitie, beyond which they cannot work. The
loadstone works upon iron by virtuall contact: but it works See C^s^. Comment.
in Ph^s. Arist. lib. 7. c. 2. August. de Civitat Dei. lib. 21. cap. 4. tom. 5.
Pl^^. l. 37. c. 4. Sol^^. c. 55. etc (...):* R^^i. degemmis, 1. 2. c. 15. page
254. Plutarch in vita Hannib.
but a small distance. And if the Iron be rustie, or oil, or a Diamond placed
betwixt them, the stone cannot so affect the iron as to draw it: Say Divines,
Philosophers, and Lapidaries. Vinegar is a most subtle penetrating agent. It
is like hunger; it eats through stone walls. Hannibal that great Carthagenian
Captain, made his passage over the rockey Alps (before unpassable) with
vinegar. Yet the interposition of tallow stays his appetite. Stones or other
objects anointed with it remain safe and undiminished in his voracious and
sharp set presence, though his jaws and teeth be set to it. Fire is the most
raging agent of all; but a fire of ten miles or greater compass (if such
could be) could not burn, heat, or warm a man two miles distant from it.
The celestial bodies, as the Sun and the rest of the Planets excel in
virtuall operation all sublunary agents. The light and heat of the Sun goes
through the whole world. It goes from the uttermost part of the heaven, and
runs about Psalm. 19. 6.
to the end of it again; and there is nothing bid from the heat thereof,
Psalm. 19. 6. But yet a little cloud interposed obscureth the light, and abateth
the heat. The interposition of the earth keeps the light from Antipodes. The
interposition of the body of the Moon eclypseth the Sun in our Hemisphere,
in part to some inhabitants, and totally to others, which in a diametricall
descendent line inhabit under it. It never works alike upon all parts of the
earth. When it is Winter with us by reason of his Southern journey and oblique
beams, it is Summer in the other temperate Zone, because his beams strike
down in a direct line, and cause a stronger reflection, and that stronger
reflection the greater heat. And when again it is Summer with us, it is
Winter with them, by reason of the Suns approaching near unto us, and
departing from them. So though it work upon all things under heaven, yet it
works not at all times alike, by reason it is not at all times from all
things distant alike, nor at all times free from interpositions alike. Now then
shall terrestrial agents by distance and interposition be totally, and
celestial partly hindered; and shall this Weapon-Salve work from the weapon to
the wound at all distances? Vide Barth. ^ecker. Phys. lib. 1. c. 9. de Alterat.
Theor. 3. page 73.
Shall the interposition of neither air, woods, fire, waters, walls, houses,
Castles, Cities, mountains, heat, cold, nothing stay or hinder the derivation
of the virtue of it, to the body of the party wounded? O Agent beyond all
Agents! Certainly the Angels of heaven cannot work at such a distance. Only
God whose Essence is infinite, and is Omnia in omnibus, all in all, can work
thus: because from him nothing is distant at all. For in him we live, move Act.
17. 27, 28
and have our being, Acts 17. 27, 28. Let the judicious and religious Readers
judge then, if these weapon* curing mediciners make not a god of their unguent,
and commit not idolatry in attributing that to a little smearing ointment of
their own making, which is proper to God only, the maker of al things. I
cannot be persuaded but that this Salve, consisting amongst other things, of
Moss taken from the skull of a thief that has been hanged; of man's fat; of
man's blood warm: as it is taken from his body, collected and composed with a
great deal of superstition (as hereafter shall be related) the devil usually
delighting in such things) is accepted of the devil as a kind of sacrifice,
and that he greedily takes it from the Weapon, and makes the mediciner believe
it is spent by the virtue of it going to the wound, whilst he (skillful by
reason of his long experience in all Arts, and so in the Art of medicine) does
himself secretly apply some other virtuall operative medicine to cure the
wound, and to delude his credulous Mountabankes, makes them believe that this
Salve (which dropped out of the hangmans budget) has performed it. And I am
drawn to this opinion, by an argument a comparatis. Canidiaes, witches and
impes of the devil when they go a hagging, annoint themselves, See Doctoris
I^^n. Robert. Anatom. Sect. 43. and Magnet. Curae Impost. page 13. 14. Gaud.
Merul. Memorab. lib. 1. cap. 13. Hieronyus. in Dan. cap. 2. ^om. 4. Ap^lei^^
Mo^amor. lib. 2. C^jet. 2. 2. q. 5^. art. 3. Mart. Navar. in Man. cap. (...) 1.
number. 38. Paul. Gr^lland. de Sortilegi^s, l. 2. q. 7. (...). B^di^. l. 2. c. 4.
Mat, 4. 5. 8.
and are suddenly carried into remote places through the air, riding upon a
broom, a hog, a goat or the like; and the devil makes them believe that
this their transportation is naturally effected by virtue of their medicament.
But in very deed these their ointments (which are made besides other things of
the fat of infants, as testifies Gaudentius Merula; man's flesh as S. Hierome;
man's blood as Apuleius) do not do the feate, but the devil himself carries
them, as testifies Cajetan, Navar, Grillandus, Bodin, etc. And the holy
Scriptures which tell us of the presumption of the devil to carry Christ
himself and set him on a pinnacle of the Temple, Math. 4. 5. and on an
exceeding high mountain, verse 8. So the devil when men in this case annoint
the weapon, makes them believe that it is a natural cure,when in very deed
(...) Tostet. ^ Genesis c. 13. l. 354. fol. 140. col. 2.
(if any cure be performed) it is done by him self, by secret application of
other meanesendued with virtue to produce such effects. And the (...) vell does
this for his own greater advantage, (...) shall more at large be related
hereafter.

Artiticulus secundus. 2

Wherein is brought the Authority of Writers dis. allowing this Care, and
condemning it for magical.

THe Weapon Salve is the new invention of the devil, an old impostor. I can
bring neither Plato nor Aristotle for ancient Philosophers, Galen nor
Hippocrates for Physicians, Tertull^an, Cyprian, nor Augustine for Fathers,
Aquin^^, or Alexander de Hales for Cardanus (...) venen. 1. 2. c. 0. Joan.
Scheo^. (...) observation number medicarum rararum novarum admirabilium and
monstraosarum. l. 5. page 801. impressed Fra^^^. 160 ^ pe^ N. Ho^^ amanum. Andr.
^ibav. Apocalipseor ^ermet^e^ pars prio. c 22. page ^. ^. impress. Franc^^.
1615. Fran. T^^^^^^ The^^^ p. 278. etc.
Schoolmen directly and expressly writing against it. The first I found to
make mention of it was Cardanus de venen^ libro 2. cap. 6. yet he (though much
given to magic had no farther knowledge of it than report, and that it was
said to consist of such ingredients as he there mentions. The next was one
Schenk^us, who calls it Prodig^osa vulnerum curatio per opochrysmatis usum. A
prodigious curing of wounds by the use of the Weapon-Salue. No better
commendation is given of it by Andreas Libavius, who calls it Impostoria
vulnerum per unguentum armarium sanatio Paracelsis usitata. The imposterous
cure of wounds by he Weapon-Salve used by Paracelsians. The like Elog^e is
given it by one ^ranciscus Tidi^^us. Calvin also (as testifies Rodolphus
^^clinius* denies this R Goclin. Synarth. page 20. Barth Rockerman Syst Phys.
(...). c. 9. page 74. 75. 7^. (...) Joan. Robert. Anatom. ter^m, ^ess. Trevir.
d(...)de Lovani. ult(...) Luxco. burg. 1618. G(...). Heautontimo. impresse.
Luxemb. 1618. Magn. curationis Impostura impress. Luxemburg. 1621. Belgicarum
Academiarum de Helmonti* Doct. judicium, anne^um. Doctoris Joan. Rober. magnet:
Cu^^ Impoctur^^. page 97. 98. 99. and 100. Paracel. A^chidox. Mag. (...). 1.
page 121.
cure to be natural. Bartholomaeus Keckemannus says that this Weapon-Salve is
no natural agent, but supernatural. Not from God, nor from his holy Angels,
nor miraculous, but from the devil; as shall be more at large declared
hereafter. Doctor Ioannes Robert^ wrote three Tracts to prove the unlawfulness
of this cure. The first he calls Anatome brevis tractatus novi de magnetica
vulnerum curatione. A short Anatomy of a new tract of the magneticall cure of
wounds. The second is an answer to R. Goclinius his Synarthrosis, which he
not unfitly calls Goclinius Heautontimorumenos. The third and last he calls
Curationis magnetica Impos^ura; containing an answer to the pernicious
disputation of Ioannis Baptistae ab Helmont, a Physician of Bruxels. To all
which is added the censure of two Universities, Lovain and Doway, both
pronouncing the magneticall cure (as it is termed) of the Weapon-Salve, not to
be natural, but superstitious, magical and diabolical. I will conclude with
the saying of Paracelsus himself, who speaking of the operations of this
unguent, averreth that Certe haec omnia miracula and Dei dona sunt: Surely
these are all miracles and the gifts of God; Therefore not natural. But let
his words sound what they will, the god which Paracelsus means, was deus
bujus mundi, the god of this world, 2 Cor. 4. 4. the 2 Cor. 4. 4.
devil, whom he too much followed, as shall anon be expressed. So that here by
the authority of learned Physicians, Philosophers, Divines, and two
Universities, the use of this unguent is condemned as prestigious and
unlawful. Wherefore seeing (as the Apostle speaks) We are compassed about
with such a cloud of witnesses. Heb. 12. 1. let those which Heb. 12. 1.
use it, with repentance lay aside the use of it, and those which have not used
it, praemoni^^ praemuniti, with caution shun and avoyde it.

Articulus Tertius.
Wherein the effects of this unguent are compared with other magical
ointments, and found in operation like them.

VArious and pernicious, strange and unparalleled by any other medicine, are
the effects and feats wrought by this unguent. By the weapon you may divine
whether the Patient shall live or die. Warm the anointed Weapon, so that you
may endure your hand on it, cast on poulder of red Saunders and bloodstones: if
the Weapon thus heated, salved, and pouldred, sweat drops of blood, he will
dye, if not, he will live, says Crollius. And by the Oswald. Croll. ubi supra
appearing of spots of blood, at any time upon the Weapon, only anointed and
not pouldred or heat, it may be known whether the Patient disorder himself by
Racchus or Venus. Nay by the anointed Weapon you may kill the Patient (if you
will) without touching him. O gladius Delphicus! If the anointed Weapon be not
wrapped in clothes to be kept from the cold air, the Patient incurres a
shaking Ague. If it be kept too warm, he falls into a hot burning Fever. If
a Ligature be made about it, and tied hard, the Patients body is tortured as if
his limbs were coa(...) If the Weapon be put in the fire, his body will be See
^^cker. ubi supra.
blistred as if the fire it self had burned it.

I know not to what to liken these feats, but to those of Witches, who make
pictures of men in wax, and pricking them, the party for whose picture it is
made, is tormented; and burning them, their limbs are burned and blistred. Of
which practices the Poet spoke long ago of Medea.

Devovet absentes, simulacraque cerea singit, Ovidius. Epist. (...).
Hipsipelles ^aso^^.

Et miserum tenues in jecur urget acus.
Medea curses those which absent are,
And with her charms she wounds men's hearts from far;
Of wax she images does make of men,
And places needles in their bosoms then;
These needles by th* help of the envious Fiend,
Torture poor souls, and bring them to their end.
The effects then of this ointment symbolizing thus with the practices of
Witches; to my reason they seem to have no reason, which deny these to come
from the same founder the devil. Surely they are ejusdem farinae. For when I
find them of the same ^oafe, I cannot but judge them of the same meal.

Artic. quartus.
Wherein the vanity of this Salve is discovered by the 4
iniquity of the Author, or first Inventer of it.

THe Author of this Salve, was Philippus Aureolus Bombastus Theophrastus
Paracelsus. Fear not Reader, I am not a conjuring, they are only the names of
a Conjurer, the first Inventer of this Magical ointment. Therefore Crollius
calls it, Vnguentum Sympatheticum seu stellatum Oswald Croll. ubi supra. Them.
Frast. cit. Rat(...)e ^a Torre (...) Theol. (...). ^5. At. 4. disp. 1. p. 15^.
tom. 2. Conrad Gesner. ^n ^rumeratione Alphabetica Scriptorum Chirurgiae let.
(...). impress. T^guri, at no. 1555.
Paracelsi, the Sympathizing or Starry-working unguent of Paracelsus. Of this
Paracelsus, Thomas Erastus a Physician, says, that he brought an hundred
thousand false imaginations and solemn doteme^ts into the world, never dreamed
of before, either by Wisemen or Fools. And it is recorded, by Conradus
Ges^erus, that he was a man which contemned all ancient Physicians and
Philosophers: That he endeavored to bring many strange and unheard of practices
into the Art of Medicine: that he was a man of base and wicked life and
conversation: that he conversed with a Familiar Spirit, (...) tract. page ^5.
and was given to all kind of Magical and Necromanticall practices. Malus
Corvus, Malum ovum. An ill Bird laid this ill Egg. But Goelinius faith, that
Paracelsus was not the first Inventer, but only A L(...) ubi supra. Joan.
Paptist. Port. Mag. ^a uralis. (...). 8. c. 12. Joan. Burgra^. in (...)oly
ch^i^. page 123.
an illustrator and amplifier of it, the Author of it being much elder then he.
But besides Crollius the great Champian for this Weapon working Medicine: A.
Libavius, Ioannes Baptista Porta, Ioannes Burgravius, etc. (all which I rather
credit than one single Goclinius attributes the first invention of this
wonder-working Ointment to the Bombasticall brain of Theophrastus Paracelsus.
If any other brain were the Forge, in which it was first hammered, why does he
not name his Author? Surely if it were not he, 'twas a Whelpe of the same
Litter, a Magician, an Impe of Cerberus. For indeed Keckerman says, that one
Anselmus, an Italian of Parma, (who it seems lived before Paracelsus) Barth.
Kecker. System. Phys. lib. 1. page 75.
was the first that brought this Cure to light. Which of them soever it was, it
skilleth not much. They were both Magicians, conversant with the Sea Raphael.
de la Torre summae Theol. q. ^5. art. 4. disp. 1. p. 287. tom. 2. Gesuer. ub^
supra. Vide. D. Iean. Robert. G^cl^^. Heauton. Sect. 12. page 125. 126. See
Perkins Gover. of the tongue, c. 5. page 444. P(...). Archidox. Mag. lib. 1.
page 121.
Devil. Anselmus Parmensis, though some Saint him and mistake him, for Anselmus
Cant. was rather a Devil. It is apparent then whence it came, and what
earth-compassing Mountebanke it was that first taught it. For that, Paracelsus
was a Conjurer, working besides the bounds of Nature, it is most evident,
(besides the testimony of Gesner) by some propositions gathered out of his
works, by Doctor Ioannes Roberti. But for mine own part, to satisfy my self
and my Readers, I will go no farther than to the Tract wherein the Unguent is
described, and there to the prescription next adjoined, which is a Receipt to
cure one decayed in Nature, unable to perform due berevolence. The Cure by his
direction is thus to be effected. Take an horse-shooe cast from a horse, let it
be wrought into a trident Forke, impresse these and these Characters on it, put
a staff of such a length into the socket for the stale of it; Let the Patient
take this Forke and stick it in the bottom of a River of such a depth, and
let it remain sticking there so long as is prescribed, and he shall be restored
to his former manlike ability. If this be not Witchcraft, I know not what is!
Now then Paracelsus being a Witch, and this experiment being placed amongst his
Diabolical and magical conclusions, it cannot choose but be Witchcraft, and
come from the grand master of Witches the Devil, if Paracelsus were (us most
repute him) the Author and Founder of it. Neither can it be better, if Anselmus
were the Author of it, as Keckerman reports. For, says the same Keckerman,
Kecker ubi supra. See R^ph de la T^rre ubi supra.
this Anselmus (how soever he is by some now esteemed) was a noted Magician
whilst he lived.

Now then if we make a collection of all. First, of natural reason and
Philosophy. Secondly, of the opinion of Authors decrying it. Thirdly, of the
effects of it compared with other Agents. Fourthly, of the Author that first
invented it; the total sum will be Witchcraft. Witchcraft is an offense of
the highest nature against God. Therefore in the bowels of Christ, I advise all
good Christians to shun and avoid the use of it. ^iscite justitiam moniti,
and non temnere Divos.) Virgil. Ae^eid. lib. 6. To^. in Mat. part. 5. c. 19. q.
90. ^ol 120. col. 2.

And to follow the counsel of Tostatus, who says, that Toleranda potius sunt
quaecunque mala, quam recurramus ad malisicos. We must rather endure any
misery, than have recourse to them which practice Witchcraft.

Membrum secundum.
Hitherto I have dealt by the way of offense, Memb, secund
proving against it. Now I come to defense, disproving what ever the Devil or
man has brought for it: that so the Reader may be the better satisfied, by
seeing all fully retorted and answered. And I shall still be at the same guard
with this Weapon-Salve. I shall lay on as many strong blows to maintain it,
as I have brought against it to consure it. I shall be the same in order and
method for the unguentaries, that I am for my self and the Contr unguentaries.
Four Articles shall stand up for them as for us. I shall bring

Their 1 Reasons and Philosophy maintaining it. 2 Writers and Authors allowing
it. 3 Effects and operations approving it. 4 Inventor and first composer
commending it.

Articulus primus.
Wherein the reasons and Philosophy brought for it 1*
are collected and disproved.
THose Medicines are lawful however they work, where no enchantments, no
spells, no characters, no charms, no invocation, no compact with the Devil, no
superstitious observations are used. But in the (...). Objection.
applying of the Unguent to the Weapon, there are none of these. Therefore this
Medicine is lawful.

I deny the minor proposition. For there is a (...)t on.
kind of superstition, and compact with the Devil in the use of it. First,
there is superstition, and that twofold. First, in the collecting of the
ingredients. The Moss must be scraped when the moon increases, See Oswald.
Cres^, ubi supra.
and is in a good house, as of Venus, not of Mars or Saturn, (as Crollius tells
us.) That some Plants are of greater virtue, gathered in the new or full of the
Moon, (because they have then the greater dryness or moisture in the^) I will
not deny* but that the Moon must be likewise in such or such of the twelve
houses, is an Astrologicall and superstitious observation. And in the
Scriptures, Astrologers, Dan. 2. 2.
Magicians and Sorcerers, like birds of a feather are linked together.
Secondly, there is superstition in the manner of anointing the Weapon. If the
wound came by a thrust, you must anoint the sword from the point to the hilt.
If with a cut, then from the edge to the back. In either, just so much must be
annoiated as hurt the Patient. For, says the same Crollius; Alioquin
nocumentum Idem Ib. See Cornel. Agri^pa. de van. Scient. c. 46. Act. 17. 22.
adferretur Patienti. You may else hurt the Patient. And that day the Mediciner
smeares the Weapon, he must abstain from Venus. Of which Mediciners I cannot
but say as S. Paul to the men of Athens: I perceive that in all things you are
too superstitious, Acts 17. 22.

Lastly, there is a compact with the Devil. For See. August. de doct. Christi.
l. 2. cap. 20. tom. 3. Aq(...). 2. 2. (...) 5. and (...). and Ca^^t. in Thom.
lb.
the Devil may be compacted with two ways, as Saint Augustine, Aquinas, and
other Fathers and Schoolmen teach.

Either by Express and open or tacit and implicit contract.


In the use of this Salve, though therebe no express and open, yet there is a
tacit and implicit contract with the Devil. For Tacit invocatur demon,
quando Mart Nava^ in Manual. Confess. cap. 11. number. 25. Tolet. Summa Cas.
Co^scien. l. 4. cap. 16. number. 1.
aliquis co^tendit facerc aliquid, per causas quae necvirtute sua naturali, nec
divind institutione possunt illud efficere. The Devil is then implicity
invoked, when any man attempts to bring any thing to pass, by See Memb. (...)*
A^^.1.
means which have neither natural virtue, nor divine institution thereto. And
contrary to this rule is the use of this unguent, as is before demonstrated.
See Perkins his discourse of witchcraft* ^. 2. p. 616. col. 1. volum. 3
For a man may receive this Salve from a friend which plainly and totidem
verbis, never had to do with the Devil. That friend may have had it from
another, as far from such practices as himself. Thus it may be derived
through infinite See Oath. Cas^almanus. Ange lograph. part. 2. cap. 24. page 653.
hands: yet all these traditors in the use of it, had an implicit compact with
the Devil; in as much as the Devil was the first inventor of it. For the
Devil when he first appoints to any man enchantments, spells, characters,
charms, herbs, ligatures, or ointments to produce such effects, enters not
into covenant with that individual party for himself, but also for others
specificall; that whosoever shall according to his prescription use them, shall
bring to pass such effects by them. Not that the very charms, characters, or
ointments, do by themselves or his help produce such effects. There Is no such
force in them. But these are signs whereby the Devil knows our desires, and
then he himself by some other means (if God restrain him not) secretly
works our desires. Therefore says Saint Augustine, Daemones alliciuntur --
non ut August. de Civit. Dei. l. 21 cap. 6. romans 5.
animalia cibis sed ut spiritus signis -- per varia genera lapidum, herbarum,
lignorum, animalium, carminum, rituum. The Devils are drawn to our purposes not
as beasts, by meats, but as spirits by signs, by sundry kinds of stones, of
herbs, wood, living creatures, conjurations, and ceremonies. The Conjurers
circles, his invocations, his enchantments, his characters, his rod, his
charms, cannot conjure the Devil to appear will he, nill he; but out of
former compact, he comes when these signs are exhibited. Yet the subtle Fiend
feignes himself to be compelled. But it is to delude and deceive man, to gain
him to him, to be of his condition, says Scaliger, and so the more freely and
frequently (...) Scalig. Subtle. exercitat ^49. Henri(...) H^ssi^ in Genesis
citatur a D^lrio. l 2. disquisit. magic. q. 30. Sect. 3. Vide D. Cyprian. Epist
8. Vi(...). and D. (...)ronym. in vita H^^ar. ^o^. 1. page 250.
to converse with him and use his help. Therefore says Henricus de Hassia^
most excellently; Ipse simulat se captu^ ^t te capiat, se vin^^u^ ut se
vinciat, se tuo imperio subditum, ut te sibi subdat, a te inclusum ut te
finaliter includat, singet se tua art vel imagini vel lapidi alu^gatum, ut
funibus religatum te ad infernum ducat. The Devil feignes himself to be
taken, that he may take thee; to be bound, that he may bind thee; to be under
thy command, that he may bring thee under his; to be kept in and restrained,
that he may restrain thee for ever: he feignes himself to be bound by thy
Art, either to this or that character or stone, that he may lead thee in his
ropes bound to Hell fire. And of this opinion is Wierus (a man well skilled in
such business) Wierus de praestig. dae(...)monum lib. 4. Testat. in Matthew.
part. 5 cap. 19. q. 90. fol. 119. col. 3* Cae(...). An (...)graph. part. 2, c.
17. (...).
and Tostatus and others. Now then collect the sum of this answer, and you
shall find the falsehood of the minor proposition: that the use of this
ointment is unlawful, there being first superstition, and then a compact with
the Devil (a tacit compact) in the use of it.

The Devil goes about like a rearing Lion seeking whom he may devour, 1 Pet.
5. 8. The Devil rages 1 Pet. 5. 8. (...) Object. 2,
to destroy us, he runs not to helpeus. Therefore this medicine curing and
helping men wounded, is not from the Devil, and so is lawful.

I deny the argument. For the Devil, for ever to endanger two souls, the
Mediciners and the Medicined, Solution.
may be ready by natural means secretly applied to cure the wounds of one
body for a time. This is not to do any good to man, but to bring him to ruin
and destruction. The Devil is a liar from the beginning, the father of lies,
yet sometimes he tells truth, to insinuate himself to be trusted and believed,
when he deals falsely. Christ therefore, and Saint Paul, though the Devils
told the truth in the possessed, Mark 5. 7. and Acts Mark. 5. 7. Act. 16. 17.
16. 17. yet they silenced them and cast them out: So, though the Devil would
cure our wounds or diseases, we must not accept it, because he intends not our
good, but our utter ruin and destruction by it. Like a Boat-man he rows one
way, and looks another, quite contrary.

Those are natural and lawful cures which are 1. Objection.
wrought by Sympathies. But this cure is wrought so, and is called by Crollius
unguentum Sympatheticum, Croll. ubi supra.
the Sympathizing unguent. For this unguent consisting of mans-mosse, blood and
fat, has in it a natural Balsame. This natural Balsame by the influence of
the Stars, causes a sympathy betwixt the weapon and the wound: and so the
application of the Medicine to the one, effects the cure upon the other.
Therefore this cure is natural and lawful.

I will not contradict the major proposition. But the minor is in part
improbable, in part false. It is Solution.
improbable that this stinking Weapon-medicine should have a natural Balsame
in it, more than others. That odoriferous ^pobalsamum, gotten in Judea and
Egypt, the Jews chiefest treasure, (as Iustine Iusten. Histo^. l. 36. Sect. 3.
tells us) reputed the best in the whole world, curing wounds in three days,
cannot work such wonders as this. And it is false that that Balsame (if there
be any) causes any sympathy betwixt the wound and the Weapon. For the Weapon
is an hard insensible substance void of all affection and pathy. It is not
altered by the dressing of it. It Vide (...)er. Phys. l. 1. c. 9. page 74. and
75.
comes not to suppuration as wounds do. And where there is no affection and
pathy, there can be no co-affection and sympathy. Besides, all things
sympathizing affect the sympathized within a certain distance (as has been
before related.) This See Memb. 1. Art. 1.
does not so. What sympathy then is there betwixt the Wound and the Weapon? And
that the influence of the Stars should cause this sympathy, is yet more
strange. As if the smearing of a Weapon here below, can call the Stars above,
at any time when we will, to give an influence which they gave not before, nor
had not given at all, had not the Weapon been smeared at all. O enchanting
Salve! -- vel possit coelo deducere lunam! Virgisius.



Thus Witches by anointing themselves with their venificall ointments are
carried up in the airy Heaven. Thus our Weapon-Salve-mongers by anointing
their tools, bring an influence down from the starry Heavens. These like the
Woman-Priest of Massyls in the Poet can command the stars. Of whom Virgil,

Haec se carminibus promittit solvere mentes, Virgil. Aene^d. lib. 4.

Quas velit, ast alijs duras immittere curas:
Sistere aquam ^luvijs, and vertere sydera retro.
Those which are sad, with charms she will undertake
To cheer up, and buxsome and glee to make;
And others which to mirth themselves compose,
To strike in dumpes, and all their mirth to lose:
She Will make the Rivers cease to run their race;
And stars in heaven go backward from their place.
That the anointing a piece of Iron here below, should draw down an influence
from the celestial bodies above, to conjoyne in sympathy two bodies far
disjoined in place, is to me an argument sufficient to prove (that if any such
thing be) it is Witchcraft: and so I shall account it.

Magneticall cures caused by emission of radij Object. 4.
and spirits, carrying a curing virtue from one body to another, are lawful.
But of this sort is this cure. For as the Loadstone being sensible of an
understanding fantasy, and endued with life, sends forth his radij and
spirits even to the Articke pole, though far distant. So this Salve when the
weapon is anointed with it, causes the blood residing on it, by magneticall
operation, to send forth his spirits by the vicine air, to the wounded body;
and this spirit carries the sanative virtue from the weapon to the body, and so
the weapon and the wound are (though not immediately yet) mediately joined
together by the spirit of the blood which has life and motion in it, as
Paracelsians teach. For whersoever the carkeise is, that is, the body, Mat. 24.
28.
there will the Eagles be gathered together, that is, the spirits, Matthew. 24.
28. For the spirit of the blood does sympathize with the body and has life and
motion in it. And this appears by the coming forth of fresh blood out of the
carkeise and dried limbs of a man murdered, when the murderer is present.
And by the testimony of holy Scripture, Levit. ^^vit (...)* 17. and ^7. 14.
Dent. 12. 23.
3. 17. and 17. 14. Dent. 12. 23. All which places tend to this purpose, that
in the blood of creatures is life. This likewise is manifest by the sundry
motions of blood in the body of man. In anger the blood of man will boil. In
sorrow the blood is cold. In fear there is a palenesse in the face by a flight
and recesse of the blood. In shame there is a blushing or flushing of blood in
the face. All these are proofs of the life and motion of the blood. Nay, the
blood of man has a voice, though we hear it not. For Cardanus says, that
Motus S^^l. de subt^l. Ex^r. ^^5.
aer semper sonum excitat quamvis non audiatur. But God who sees and hears all
things, hears the voice of it and understands it. Therefore God said to Cain,
What have thou done? the voice of thy brothers blood cries unto me from the
ground, Genesis 4. 10. These Genesis 4. 10.
are magnalia naturae, the wonders of nature. These are occultae qualitates,
secret qualities. Every Peripateticke, every pccorius asinus, rural Rhombus,
and pedainticall Parish Priest understands not these magneticall cures by
emission of the spirit of the blood. Only Paracelsians (whose studies are to
bring to light the abstruse and hidden secrets of nature) know and understand
them, and to good purpose, for the health of man, practice them. The Levite and
the Priest pass by the wounded man to Jericho. But the Lay* Samaritan versed
in the mysteries of Nature, takes him up, releeves and cures him, Luke 10. 33.
Must it therefore be called in Luke 10. 33.
question, whether his applications be Witchcraft, because each obtuse
understanding apprehends not the reason of them? God forbid. To attribute any
thing to the devil, whereof God and Nature is the Author, is to rob God and
man of the honor due to each of them, and to give it to Satan, which is slat
idolatry, and a great discouragement to learned men, to put in practice their
rare and vulgarly unknown experiments. Thus Galen himself complained, that
when he sometimes brought wonderful things to pass, by his accurate
knowledge in natural Philosophy, he was accounted no better than a Necromancer
familiar with the devil. Thus that learned Christian Roman Consul Boe^ius
complains that he was falsely accused of Boet. de Consolat. Philoso. (...)*
1. Prosa 4.
Sorcery, because he was excellently skilled in the noble science of natural
Philosophy. All which I urge to this purpose, that because each person
apprehends not the reason of this cure, it is not by and by to be accounted
Witchcraft and Sorcerie.

Here is argument enough to furnish the magniloquent (...)tion.
speech of a thundering Mountabanke, which though you have drawn it out of the
writings of the prime unguentaries, as Crollius, Goclinius, Helmontius and
others: yet you dispute fallaciously, and do (as we speak in Schools) petere
principia, take that for granted, which we utterly deny and relinquish. For I
deny in your argument no less than five things.

As 1. That the Loadstone does work upon the Articke pole. 2. That the
Loadstone has sense, understanding, fantasy, life. 3. That this cure is done
by magneticall operation. 4. That blood separated from the body of man has
life, spirit, natural motion, o^ voice. 5. That your expositions of several
places of Scripture are genuine and consonant to truth.

First, I deny that the Loadstone does work up on the North Pole. The pole
rather works upon the stone. So testifies Franciscus Ru^us an expert Francis.
(...) de gemmis* (...)* 2. c. 24 page 270
Lapidary. Thus Philosophy. That celestial bodies work on terrestrial is,
ver a philosophia, true Philosophy. But that terrestrial work on celestial,
is plana morosophia, plain foolosophie.

Secondly, I deny that the Loadstone has sense, fantasy, understanding, and
life. I have read of Plantanimalia living plants, seeming to have sense,
fantasy, and understanding. As of the tree growing Scalig. de s^btil.
E^ercitat. 181. Sect. 27. and 28.
in the Province of Pudiseram; to which when a man comes, ramos constringit, it
shrinkes up the boughs, but when he departs, ramos pandit, it opens them
again. And of the plant called the Tartarean Lamb, resembling a Lamb in
shape and proportion, Joan. (...)* Com. Phys lib. 5. c. 16.
and grasing and eating up the grass round about it. But of Saxanimalia
stone-living creatures, never did I hear, unless by some new Paracelsians, as
Goclinius and Helmontius, and old heretics whereof S. Hierom speaks, who
maintained D Hieron in Matthew. c. b. tom. 6. p. 12.
omnia esse animantia, that all things were living creatures, to whom for their
superstitious vanities, the Lord (as the Apostle speaks) has sent strong 2 Thessalonians. 2. 11.
delusions that they should believe a lie, 2 Thessalonians 2. 11. For all things living
do live, either with a vegetative life, as trees and plants; or a sensitive
life, as bruits and beasts; or with a rational life, as men and Angels. The
Loadstone living none of these Vide Joan. (...) phys. (...). c. 6. page 628.
ways, has no life in it. Having no life, it has no sense, fantasy, and
understanding; and I think their understanding little better which maintain
the Sea Marsil. Ficin* in Plotinum de any na. (...). 4. c. 30.
contrary. When Marsilius Ficinus can persuade me that the Stars have the
senses of see^ng and hearing, and do hear men's prayers; then Paracelsians shall
persuade me that the Loadstone has life sense and fantasy.

Thirdly, I deny that this cure is done by magneticall operation. My reasons
are given in my Solution to the third objection and else where. To their places
I refer you.

Fourthly, I deny that the separated blood of man has any life, spirit,
natural motion, or voice. The blood contained in man's body is not truly and
properly his life. Man's life is his soul. Absit ut anima hominis sanguis
putanda sit, says S. Augustine. August. in Levit. quast. 57. tom. 4.
Far be it from us that we should think the blood of man his soul. Valde
cavendus est hic error and omnibus modis refutandus, We must by all means take
heed of, and refute this error, says the same Father. Idem ^b.
Though the blood of beasts (which have mortal souls) be their life and
soul, as Tully and M. T. C. Tuscu. l. 1.
others thought; yet the blood of man whose soul is immortal is not so. When
we say the blood is Ista propositio est falsa, sed tatre magis vera. in brutis
quam hominibus. Tostat in Levi. c. 17. q.7. * Sanguis anima est Augustine
tantundem valet atque animae signum. Calvin. in. ^ praecept. page 523. Francis.
Vales de Sacra Philosoph. c.5.p.104.
the life, it is a figurative speech. Metenomia subjecti. The thing containing
is put for the thing contained. For the blood is animae vitalis vehiculum, the
continent or channel of the natural spirits in the liver, of the animal in
the brain, and of the vital in the heart. It carries some spirits in the
flesh, more in the veins, most and the purest in the arteries. The heat,
motion and actions in the body of man, are begotten and conserved of blood, as
Valesius observes out of Galen. Therefore man's life, and the life of other
creatures is said to be in the blood. And the Poet describing one bleeding to
death, says,

Purpuream vomit ille animam -- Virgil. Aeneid. l. 9.

He sends forth his purple soul -- -- that is, his blood of a purple color.
What Oil is to the Lamp, such is the blood to the body. It is the juice of
the whole body. Other juyces are proper See vales ubi supra. and Joan. Combach.
Phys. l. 4. c.1. page 611.
to their parts. Chylus is the juice of the ventricle, milk of the breasts,
marrow of the bones, seed of the genitals, but blood of the whole body. Now
then, if there be not life in the blood of man, when it is diffused through his
whole body, certainly there is none in it parted and let out of the body. If
there be no life in the fountain and whole blood of man, there is none in the
drops shed from the fountain, and out of man. Neither is there any spirit in
the blood departed, which has recourse to the body again. For then one man
should have infinite souls. So many drops of blood, so many souls or spirits.
For where the spirits, the operations or instruments of the soul are, there the
soul must needs be. For they are Relata. (Instrumenta Zabarella de facultat
bus animae. c. 3. Vide Kecker. ^yst. log. l. 1. c. 15 p. 132.
sunt instrumentati instrumenta.) And the rule is that; Relatorum vno posito,
ponitur and alterum, nec est relatio nisi inter ea quae sunt actu, says
Zabarel. Or else the same soul should be divided into infinite parts; all which
are contrary to the affections of the soul, which are three. Simplicity: it
consists Vide (...). Combach. Phys. l b. 4. c. 1. page 650.
not of parts. Indivisibility: it cannot be divided into parts. Immobility: it
gives motion to others, but it is immovable it self. I have heard and read of
spirits and quintessenses, artificially extracted from insensible bodies, by
the Art of Chimistry, but I never heard nor read of spirits or fantasies
naturally residing in insensible parts separated from their bodies. That any
such fantasies or spirits are, is a fantastical conceit hatched by the
spirits of Bombastus Paracelsus, which are (...), evil spirits. And these
spirits are they which in this cure (if any cure be) carry the sanative virtue
from the weapon to the wound. Neither has the blood of man, once fixed and
dried on a weapon, any motion. Nay, when it is but once settled in the cadaver
or carkeise, it has ordinarily and naturally no motion at all, unless to
corruption, which (as Aristotle speaks) is rather a mutation ^ristotl. Phys.
(...)5. c 1. tex. 8.
than a motion. And for the fresh bleeding of a murdered man, at the approach of
the murderer, it is no natural and ordinary motion proceeding of any life of
the blood, but a supernatural motion proceeding from the just judgment of
God, who gives the blood a wonderful and supernatural motion to come forth
and meet the murderer, and accuse him to his face. I am not ignorant that
there are some which would assign natural causes of this fresh bleeding
(which who desires Vide He^ric. ^ocer. l. C. in tract. de quast. and tort*
reorum. page 93. etc. (...). ^asm. Somatalog. cap. ult. quaest. ult. Lem. (...)
(...) Miraculis naturae. l. 2. c. 7.
to know, let them read Bocerus, Casman, and Lemnius.) But for my part nothing
more resolves me, that it is supernatural, appointed by God, than the bodies
of such as are executed by course of Law. The Hangman or Headsman may come
near and touch the dead cold bodies of the executed, and they bleed not a
fresh, because he is no murderer, but is the hand of the Magistrate, whose
ordinance is from God, and bears not the sword in vain, Romans 13. 4. Now dead
bodies bereaved of Romans 13. 4.
life by external violence, whether it be by a malicious murderer, or a
legal executioner, would have all one effect, (for each bodies are of like
senseless qualities) but that God the supreme judge has ordained and
commanded the one, and in his Law expressly forbidden the other. The public
Magistrate may in justice kill, and no blood will cry, because with such
actions God is well pleased. A private person cannot in malice kill, but
innocent blood will come forth, cry and accuse the murderer; because with such
actions God is most displeased. Not that the blood of the murdered has any
voice, as is alleged by Cardanus Scalig. de subtle. Exercitat. 345. Genesis 4.
10. Mercerus in Genesis 4. p. 112. col. 2. and Luther. in Genesis c. (...). fol. 87.
his inaudible voice (which is sufficiently refuted by Scaliger) and out of
Scripture of Abels voice, Genesis 4. 10. For that is a Prosopopeia, says
Mercerus. A figure whereby a voice or speech is attributed, to that which has
none. Thus in Scripture there are four sins, which have voices attributed to
them, and are called crying sins; such sins as cry to heaven for vengeance.
The Ancients have expressed them in two Hexameters.

Clamitat ad coelum vox sanguinis, and Sodomorum:
Vox oppressorum, merces detenta laborum.
Four sins there are which unto heaven cry,
The voice of blood, and of Sodomitry:
Oppression of the poor, and laborers hier,
Kept back unjustly when they it requier.
The sin of Sodom cries, Genesis 18. 20. Blood Genesis 18. 30. Genesis 4. 10. Esaias.
5. 7. Dent. 14* 15.
cries, Genesis 4. 10. Oppression cries, Esaias 5. 7. And detaining the hirelings
wages cries, Deuteronomy. 14. 15. Now the money the hireling has right unto, has
truly no voice, but only by prosopopeia: and so the blood of the murdered.
Therefore the Scriptures are not urged to purpose. And for the boiling of the
blood in anger, palenesse and flight of the blood in fear, redness of the
face and blushing in shame, etc. These come not by reason of life and motion in
the blood: but because the blood is moved according to the affections of the
soul: and the soul is in the blood (as Valesius speaks) Francis. Vales. de
Sacra Philosoph. c. 4. page 105.
Non per informationem aut praesentiam, sed per potentiam and operationem.

Lastly, the interpretations of Scripture are false. That of Christ,
Wheresoever the carkeise is, there will Mat. 24. 28.
the Eagles be gathered together, Mat. 24. 28. is interpreted of the
Paracelsia^ cure by the spirit of blood, carrying the sanative virtue from the
blood fixed on the weapon to the wounded body. Where the carkeise is, that is,
the body, there will the Eagles, that is, the spirits of the blood, be gathered
together. O unheard of exposition! Who but Helmontius an impudent Paracelsian
Doctor of Physic ever interpreted this place thus? This place is fruitful
for exposition. I find no less then four several expositions of it.

1. Some by the c^rkeise understand the Church, O(...)genesis (...) Matthew. c. 145
tract at. 30. tom. 2,
by the Eagles, the Doctors of the Church; by their gathering together, their
unity and consent in the faith of Christ crucified. Thus Origin.

2. Some here by the carkeise understand the Hieron. in Matthew. c. 24. tom.
(...).
passion of Christ, by the Eagles, the Saints, and by their gathering together,
the efficacy of his merits, sufficient for all. Thus Hierom.

3. Others understand this place to be an adumbration Chryso. Hom. 77. in
Matthew. tom. 2. Hilar. in Matthew. Canon. 25. Stella in Luc. c. 17. Ferus Mal. in
locu^
Arc.

of the day of judgment. By the carkeise they understand Christ the Judge. By
the Eagles, the souls coming to judgment. By the gathering together, the
general judgment. So S. Chrysostom, S. Hilarie amongst the Ancients. And
Stella, Ferus, Maldonat, and Aretius, amongst the neoterickes.

4. Lastly, others interpret this place of the Saints August. quaest. Evang. l.
1. c. 4^. tom. 4. Gregor exposit. Mor. in Job. l. 31. c, 33. tom. 1. page 206.
ascending up into heaven, whither Christ has carried his humane body which
suffered death for us. That where Christ now is, there all his Saints shall
ascend and be hereafter. So S. Augustine, and Gregory.

These expositions I have met with; but such an exposition as these
Bombasticall Mountebanckes bring to patronize their stinking Weapon-Salve,
never did I meet with. Now for the other places of Scripture out of L^viticus
and Deuteronomie, I have already showed the absurdity of their Gloss,
corrupting the purity of the Text. And for their making themselves the only
Samaritans, out of Luke 10. 33. if they will needs be so, they shall be Luke
10. 33.
so. But it shall be truly said of them in that sense which was falsely and
blasphemously said of Christ. Say we not well thou art a Samaritane, and have
John 4. 48.
a devil? Ioh. 4. 48.

And whereas they say this Cure is done by occult qualities of the ingredients,
there is no such matter, as shall anon be made apparent. What Infra mem. 2.
art. 4.
hard hap Galen, Boethius, or any other person had to be accounted Sorcerers,
because they were skillful in the occult and secret qualities of things I know
not, but this I know, that the devil often uses this appellation, as a cloak
to cover his villainy. Thus Cornel. Agrip. de occult Phil.
Cornelius Agrippa sent forth his books of occult Philosophy, stuffed with
Conjurations of the devil. Thus Ioannes Trithemius hides his unlawful Joan.
Trithem. Stenograph.
magical operations, under his Art of Stenography. Of which Bellarmine says,
Opus hoc merito prohibitum Bellar. de Eccles Script. in opus^. tom. 7. col. 194.
est, etc. This work is deservedly prohibited, because it is full of
pernicious assertions tending to Magic. Thus our Countryman Friar Roger
Bacon, used to boast, that he could by natural magic (that is, the
application of actives to their passives in a due time and proportion) cause
thunder, rain, storms, and produce beasts of diverse sorts, etc. (as Agrippa
testifies) when indeed it Cernel. Agrip. de van. Sci(...) (...). 42.
was mere diabolical Magic and conjuration. And of this kind is the Author
of the Book to Alphonsus, published under the name of Piccatrix, which
intermedleth much superstition, conjurations, and diabolical operations, with
natural Philosophy. And thus I suppose all the Vnguentaries reasons are fully
answered.

Articulus secundus.
Wherein the Authors brought for this Cure, are cited 2
and refuted.

THe first Author is Paracelsus Archidoxis (...). Arch^d. Mag. l. 1. page 121.
Magiae, lib. 1. page 121. He was a man of great understanding, and brought to
light many things hidden before, whereby many men have been cured since. He
commends this Salve, and says it is, Dei donum, the gift of God.

Secondly, Oswaldus Crollius, a man rarely seen Oswald. Croll. Chim(...).
Basi(...). page 278.
in the Art of Chimistry, gives us the receipt of this Unguent, commends the use
of it to us: defends it not to be Witchcraft, and calls them imperiti fatui,
unskilful fools which suppose so.

Thirdly, Ioannes Baptista Porta, a noted Philosopher, Joan. (...). Port Mag.
not. l. 8. (...). 1^
sets down for posterity the receipt of this ointment, as it was given him by a
Courtier, and that Courtier had it from Maximilian the Emperor, and he from
Paracelsus.

Fourthly, Cardanus a renowned Philosopher Cordan. de ven l. 2. c. 6..
and Physician, does allow this Unguent.

Fifthly, Ioannes Ernestus Burgravius, highly extols Joan. Ernest. Burg. (...)
p. 123
this Salve, calling it illustre unguentum, a famous unguent performing the
cure by an hidden mystery, which as yet no man has sufficiently manifested

Sixthly, Rodolphus Goclinius, a Protestant by Religion, (...)od. Mag. (...)e
(...)r. Rodolph. (...) (...)hrosis.
and for his learning public professor of Physic at Marpurg, has written
two books, to defend the lawfulness of this cure. One he calls Magneticae
curae Tractatus; the other, his Synarthrosis.

Seventhly, Ioannes Baptista ab Helmont, a Doctor Joan Baptist. ab Helmont.
disputatio.
of Physic of Bruxels, has like wise written a defense of this Magneticall
cure.

Eighthly, Doctor Flud, a Doctor of Physic yet D. Flud. Anatom. Sect. 1. Port.
(...) part. (...). l. 2 de mist. anatomia Sanguinis c. 9. page 236. 237. 238.
239.
living and practizing in the famous City of London, stands tooth and nail for
it, and in his large works, being three folio volumnes, amongst other secrets,
makes mention of this cure, and allows it, and proves it to be natural and
lawful.

Lastly, the learned Sir Francis Bacon, Lord Verulam, Sir Francis Bacon his
natural histor. Cent. 10. Expe(...). 998.
and sometimes Lord Chancellor of England, recites and allows this cure in his
natural History.

The answer to these Authors.
To all which we answer, there is no cause so bad but has found some Patrons.
Here are a goodly company of Authors, but they are taken up by tale, not by
weight. Some of these are not for this Unguent at all. Others are not home for
it. And others are parva aut nullius fidci, of small or no credit at all.

First, Paracelsus is of no credit. For he was (as has been proved out of
Gesner) a Witch and Conjurer; and so the God whose gift he means it is, is
Deus hujus mundi, the god of this world, (as Saint Paul calls the Devil, 2 Cor.
4. 4. For he maintained 2 Cor 4. 4 G(...) (...)2. B(...)r (...) page 1(...).
(as Doctor Ioannes Roberti tells us.) That so a sick man may receive cure, it
is no matter how, or from whom, though it be from an unclean spirit.

Secondly, Oswaldus Crollius, is a Bird of the same feather. His works are as
full fraught with superstition, detestable characters and diabolical trumpery,
as Paracelsus. Therefore he is of little credit.

Thirdly, Ioannes Baptista Porta, was indeed a (...) (...)a Tor(...) Theol.
(...). art. (...). p. 2(...). Joan. Bap(...). ub(...).
great Philosopher, yet a man suspected to be given to diabolical Magic. And
Raphael de la Torre, says, his books are prohibited in Spain. Therefore he
is of suspected credit. Neither does he so much commend this Salve. He sets
down indeed a receipt of it, and says it was given to the Emperor by
Paracelsus, who much esteemed it, and used it to his death, and the Emperor
gave it a Courtier. And the Courtier gave it to him. Now the Devil might
deceive Paracelsus: Paracelsus the Emperor, the Emperor the Courtier, and the
Courtier Baptista Porta, who had not entered into sufficient consideration of
it. For he utters not a word of the seven superstitious observations, the five
notes, and the two experiments given by Crollius, Croll. ubi supra.
but only prescribes, that the Weapon be sticking in the Salve; and so the
cure will be effected.

Fourthly, Cardanus, neither speaks with or against Car^an. ub supra.
it. He only says, that he heard a report of such an Unguent, and that it was
said to be composed of such ingredients: as he there recites.

Fifthly, Ernestus Burgravius, is an Author as full of superstition and
charactericall impieties, as any of them. He teaches by the help of a strong
fantasy, and by the thundering forth of certain verses, Joan. Burg. Lucer.
page 105.
to make an enchanted impenitrable sword: such a sword as the dint of no other
shall hurt; such a sword as no man shall be overcome in conflict which uses
it. Also he teaches to make a lamp of oil, made of the blood or excrements
of a man. This lamp once fiered shall burn continually without renewing. This
lamp cannot be extinguished Academici Doctores and Professores qui Lovanij and
Duaci sanam medicinam prositentur, hoc mendacium diabolicum censent and damnant.
by any thing during the whole life of the man of whose blood or ordure the
said Oil is made. This lamp will of it self go out at that very instant and
punct of time the man dies. All the while the lamp burns, it may be known
by the bright or dim burning, whether the man be well or sick, merry or sad.
All which I cannot but believe to be done by the help of the Devil. He
secretly renues it, the man living, and blows it out the man dying, and makes
it burn clear or dimne as he knows him to be affected. For Saint Augustine
August. de Civit. Dei. l. 21. c. 6. tom. 5.
makes mention of such a lamp, called (...), an unextiguishable lamp among
the Heathens, in the Temple of Venus. This lamp, says he, no tempest or water
could extinguish, because some Devil, under the name of Venus, did maintain
it. This Author then is of no credit. Neither does he determine the question.
He only says this cure is performed by an hidden mystery, which no man has
as yet sufficiently manifested.

Sixthly, Rodolphus Goclinius is so full of charactericall superstitions and
magical cures, that I am ashamed that any such cures should come from one
reputed to be a Protestant.

Seventhly, Ioannes Baptista ab Helmont, is of the same strain.

Eighthly, Doctor Flud has had the same censure Doctor Flud (...) written
against by Marinus Mersennus, Petrus Gassendus, and others for a caco-magician.
pass on him, and has been written against for a Magician, and I suppose
this to be one cause why he has printed his books beyond the Seas. Our
Universities, and our Reverend Bishops (God be thanked) are more cautelous
than to allow the Printing of Magical books here. But because I will not so
slightly slurre by Master Doctor, I will answer him in a digression to that
purpose.

Lastly, the learned Sir Francis Bacon is not at all Sir Francis Bacon ubi
supra.
for this cure. He professes himself not resolved whether it be effected or
no. And for the lawfulnes of it, he inclines rather to a starting suspicion
than a settled approbation. Now then, some of these Authors being not for this
Unguent at all, as Cardanus. Some not home for it, as Ioannes Baptista Porta,
and Sir Francis Bacon. Others of little credit for it, as Burgravius,
Goclinius, Helmontius, and Doctor Flud. Others of no credit for it, as
Paracelsus and Crollius: and I, having brought six credible Authors, not once
suspected for Magicians, and the censure of two Universities, directly against
it; these will turn the balance, and exauthorize their authority.

A Digression wherein Doctor Flud, his reasons are examined and answered.
DOctor Flud has written some Folio pages, Vide Francisc. Lanovij judicium de
Rob. Flu(...), ad Marinum Mersonn(...) annex. epist. exer. Petr. Gassend^,
impr. Parisi^^ anno 1630.
for defense of the Weapon-Salve! Well he may. He writes himself Armiger and
medicinae Doctor, is called by Franciscus Lanovius Medico-miles, a soldier
Physician; and being a Weapon-bearing Doctor, may well teach the Weapon-curing
medicine: especially setting the Armiger before the Doctor, the Gunne before
the Gown, and the Pike before the Pen. I have read some dispute, whether a
Knight or See Sir Tho. Ridley his view of the Civil and Ecclesiastical Law.
Doctor should take place: never of an ordinary Esquire. Herald I am none. But
I suppose that the worthy Gentlemen which profess it, will betwixt these two,
decide the controversy with that of Tully, Cedant armatogae, concedat laurea
Lingua. M. T. Cicero offic. lib. primo.



But the quarrel is not betwixt the Doctor and me for his Weapon, but for his
Weapon-Salve: whether that be Witchcraft or no? Surely his very defense of it
is enough to make it suspected, himself being accused for a Magician, by
Marinus Mersennus, with a wonder that King James (of blessed Marinus Mersennus
in Genes.
memory) would suffer such a man to live and write in his Kingdom. But if to
be accused were to be guilty, who could be innocent? Master Doctor has excused
himself in his book, entitled, Sophiae cum moria certamen (cujus contrarium
verum, See (...). Flud. certa (...) en l. 3. p. ^7. ^8. Lanovius ubi supra.
Ioach. Friz. sum. Bon. annex. D. Flud. Sophia cum Moria certamini. impress.
1629.
says Lanovius.) His friend Ioachimus Frizius (or rather his own self, says
Lanovius) in a book annexed to his, called Summum Bonum, excuses Friar Roger
Bacon, Trithemius, Cornelius Agrippa, Marsilius Ficinus, and Fratres Rosea
crucis, from being Caco-magicians. I wonder at nothing more than that Beelzebub
was not in the number! Whether the Doctor excuse himself any better, than
these Arch-magicians can be excused, I leave to the learned judicious and
religious Reader? Yet thus much for him in the question. He prescribes no
superstitious, either collections of the Ingredients, composition of the
Unguent, or observation at the anointing of the Weapon. His directions are,
that the Weapon be left in the Unguent pot, till the Patient be cured: and that
the wound be kept clean with a linen cloth, wet every morning in his urine.
Whether this be a fallacy or no, I commend to the judgment of those which are
expert in the renowned Art of Surgery. For let the Doctor be sure to keep a
wound clean, and I suppose, they will tell him that it will cicatrice without
his Weapon-Salve. Neither does he ascribe an unlimited sphere of Activity
(though a large one) thirty or sixty miles (which is false too) unto it. And he
says, that an Horse pricked with a nail, may be likewise cured, if the nail
be left sticking in the unguent pot. I desire the Doctor to remember this his
horse-leechry, as an argument to overthrow his natural balsame and sympathy.
But Master Doctors reasons to maintain the lawfulness of this cure, are not
yet called to speak for themselves. Now they come. I have made them as short
and perspicuous as I can, speaking another language, consisting of more words.

Scull-mosse or bones (says he) Mummy and the Fat of Man (the special
Ingredients) comprehend the corporeal perfection of Man, and so are apt to
heal, by reason of a natural Balsame resting in them, sympathizing with the
hypostaticall Balsame residing in living man. These Ingredients have their
beginning and aliment from the blood. In the blood reside the vital spirits:
in the vital spirits the soul after her hidden manner. This causes the blood
to have recourse by sympatheticall harmony, to the mass of blood remaining in
the body. For the spirit of the blood shed is carried by the air (which is the
carrier of the spirits of every thing) to his body: this spirit going by this
air, in a direct invisible line, carries the sanative virtue from the
anointed Weapon to the wounded party. For the Weapon communicates it to the
blood fixed on it, the blood to the spirits, the spirits conducted by the air,
communicate it to the body, and so the Patient is (without application of
Plaster) naturally healed. For as the radij or Sunbeams are a messenger
betwixt heaven and earth: So this vital beam or invisible line is a messenger
and conductor (by a kind of Magneticall attraction) of the healing virtue of
the balsame, residing in the unguent, to the body of the wounded party: and the
sympathy betwixt the blood on the anointed Weapon, and the blood in the body
causes the cure. That there is such a sympathy betwixt the blood in the body,
and the blood drawn from the body, is most evident by the example of Witches.
The Devil sucketh blood from them. This blood remaining with the Devil,
participates of his malign nature, and having recourse by the spirits thereof
to the Witches body, makes all their blood sympathize with that the Devil
has; and so the blood changes the Witches nature, and they become malign and
diabolical, and so addicted to the service of Satan, that it is impossible to
reclaim them. This is the sum of Master Doctors reason: against which least
any should object, that the sanative virtue may be interrupted by the
intervening motion of the sundry creatures, and so the virtue lost and not
carried to the wished port: He answers, that though the air be by
intervening bodies interrupted, nay, parted and divided, yet it will after the
passage of that body be reunited. As when we divide the air with a sword, the
blow ceasing, the air returns again to his former unity of substance. And as
Dyers water cast into a River, protracts it self into a long line, and for
some time keeps his color and line; and if a Boat cross and divide it, the
Boat gone, the line comes together again: So though some creatures do by
their interposed motion interrupt and break off this spiritual line carrying
the sanative virtue, yet it will be so but a season; for they passed the line
will be reunited, and so though somewhat for a time hindered, yet nothing of
the end frustrated.

To all which I answer, that Master Doctor does petereprincipia. For first, I
deny that Scull-mosse or bones, Mummy and man's Fat have (though they be
medicinable) any natural balsame or radical humor (for so some call natural
balsame) residing in them, sympathizing with the hyposticall balsame See
Combach. Phys. 1 4. cap. 5. p. 1000. number 4.
remaining in living man; unless a horse have a balsame sympathizing with
man's. For, says Master Doctor, which I advised him to remember, if the nail
which pricked an horse be put into the ointment pot, the horse shall be cured.
I say there is no such sympathy betwixt horse and man. And if there be no cause
at all to believe the one, there is but little to believe the other.

Secondly, I deny that man's bones have their beginning and aliment from blood.
For Physicians and Philosophers say that they have their beginning Vide (...)ni
institut. anatom. p. 6. Sect. 5. (...). (...)an(...) 1616.
from the grosser seminall parts, and their aliment from blood, or marrow, or
both.

Thirdly, I deny that any spirits reside in separated blood, my reason is
already given in my answer to the fourth objection. To which I farther add,
that Casman is so confident in this, that in parts separated from the body,
remain no spirits, (...)th Casm. Angelog. part (...). c. 21. p. 605.
that he says, the very Devil cannot beget or conserve any spirits in them.

Fourthly, I deny that the soul resides after any hidden manner in the
spirits. The Stoickes indeed held that the spirits were vinculu^ anima and
corporis; and so the soul may be after a kind in the spirits, as that which is
bound is within the teather. But the Peripateticks and Divines deny this as
needless. For seeing the body is generated for the soul, and the soul
created for the body, and both make the totum compositum, what need these any
bond to fasten them together? There is a reciprocal desire of coming together
at first, and endeavor after the union, so to keep together. The spirits
indeed are the instruments of the soul, by which it works: and when these
instruments (...), the work fails, and the soul, the worke-mistresse takes
her leave, not because she is hid in the spirits, as the contiuent to abide in,
but because she wants the spirits as her instruments, to work by. For the is
corporis organici actus seu (...) the act and perfection A(...) any(...) l. 2.
(...).
of the body; not only for that she gives the body act and being (as
Aristotle defines it) but also because she gives the body action during the
being: As Tully not improperly interprets it. Now M. T (...). T(...)nl. l.
(...).
then as the workman cannot be said properly to reside in his instruments, but
rather the instruments in the workman (because as Logicians (...)r. System
log. l. 1. c. 15. p. 13 3.
speak, tota instrumenti vis in usu consistit:) So the soul cannot in any
kind depend on, or reside in, the spirits her instruments, but the spirits on
the soul. Therefore as the Axe must not boast it self against the hewer, nor
the Saw magnify it self against the shaker, Esaias 10. 15. No more must the
Doctor set E^r (...).
up the spirits against the soul to be her upholder, from whom they have all
their being and operation.

Fifthly, I deny Master Doctors carrier, viz, his direct invisible line,
carrying the sanative virtue so many miles from the weapon to the wound. Surely
this is Tom Long the Carrier, who will never do his errand. But the Sun has
his beams a true messenger betwixt Heaven and earth: and so this Salve betwixt
Weapon and Wound. O incomparable A^. T. Ci(...) not. deo(...) l. 2.
comparison! Tully says, the Sun is called Sol quasisolus, as having no
peer, no creature working like it. But the Doctor, like another Archimedes,
can by his Art make one working by sending forth beams like it.

Sola Sophocleo tua carmina digna coth^rno! Virg. Eclog. 8.
The Sun beams, the Messenger between Heaven and Earth, proceed of the
light of the Sun, in whom is such innate light, that he is the fountain of
light. But what light has this Salve to send forth radiant messengers? The
Sun, and the rest of the celestial bodies, is ordained by God and Nature, to
work upon the terrestrial by light or beams, motion and influence. Art
immitates Nature. But what Art has in this kind overtaken Nature? The Sun
is a Giant, says David, Psalm. 19. 5. many degrees, even 166, Psalm. 19. 5.
bigger than the earth, as the Astronomers collect, and so may by proportion
work on it. The Sun is Vide Comment. lac. Christmanni super Alphraganum, citat
Kecker in Astronomi^. Psalm. 19. 6.
the eye and visiter of the whole world, there is nothing hid from it, says the
Psalmist, Psalm. 19. 6. and so by his presence is within the sphere of his
activity. The Sun is above, and so sends down in a direct line, his beams
without hinderance. But this Unguent has no proportion: it is little in See
Mem. 1. Art. 1.
respect of the Patient; it has no presence or contact with him; It must work
in a laterall oblique line, and so is subject by interposed bodies to be
hindered. A little fire cannot burn or heat a great body, at a great distance,
in an ascendent direct line; much less an oblique, many other bodies being
interposed. No more can a little Salve work naturally on a Patient at a great
distance, when many other bodies are interposed. The line and the air carrying
it so long a journey, will be hindered and stopped; if not altered and changed.
The line and his carrier the air may be stopped and hindered, not only by
moving intervening bodies, which may give place again to the line and air
when they have cut and crossed it, as the Doctor instanceth in the cutting of
the air with a sword, and the reunion after the blow is ceased, and the
reunion of the line of Dyers water cut with a Boat; but also it may meet with
stationary immovable bodies, as walls, woods, houses, castles, towns, cities,
fires, seas and waters, which will not give place to the Doctors line, though
it were as strong as an halter. How then shall this line be carried thus
intercopted? It must either penetrate the bodies, or shun them before it comes
at them, or when it comes at them, glyde in a laterall course by them, or per
saltum, ascend in a transcendent course over till it comes beyond them, and
then betake it self to its old course again. Penetrate them it cannot: Nature
abhorres vacuity and penetration. Avoid them before it comes at them, it cannot
neither. To avoyde hurtful things, is an act either of reason, sense, or
natural instinction. This Carrier the air has neither of these to go his
journey. Not reason, it is not rational. Not sense, it is no sensible
creature. It has not natural instinction to shun any place. Air fills
every place (without exception) not filled A^^st^^. de Genesis l. 2. c. 3. Natura
nihil agit per saltu^. Tastat. in l. cvit. c. 17. q. 7.
with some other body, says Aristotle. Glyde by or leap over these bodies it
cannot. And Mr. Dr. says, this line is a direct invisible line. It must then
go point blancke, (as we use to say.) If it glance a skew, or leap over, and
make an angle, then the rectitude of this line is broken, and Mr. Doctors
reason is broken also. Besides, the carrier failing, the line, the portadge
must needs fail also. And the air the carrier may fail, by being changed and
altered into an other body. For See Aristot. de Ort, and Inter. c. 4. (...) 25.
air and water are symbolicall elements, such as are easily transmuted into
the substance of each other. The air when it comes into moist and vapourous
places, (Robertus de Fluctibus) or when it meets with glabritious and terse
bodies, as polished iron (like Mr. Doctors weapon) stone, glass, etc. (as
experience teaches) is turned into water. Or the air in a long journey may be
turned into one of the other elements. For air may be changed into fire,
commodissime and parvo momento, says Scaliger, fitly and in a short time, and
it may become Scalig. de subtle. exer. 16. Sect. 1.
earth also, though not so easily by vicissitude and often changing, seeing
there is (as Keckerman Kecker. System. Phys. l. 2. c. 9. Theor. 4.
speaks) Elementorum transmutatio circularis, a circular transmutation of the
elements. Now then unless the Doctor can secure his carrier, that part of the
air which carries his invisible line, from transmutation (the air only
being his carrier) his carrier will fail, and be sit to go of none but a
dead man's errand; and so Mr. Doctors line will fail, the Cure fail, and the
reason fail. Neither if the line should not fail, but the carrier truly do
his message, and carry it from the weapon to the wound, can the Cure be done
by sympathy, betwixt the blood residing on the weapon, and that in the body.
The one is warm, living by the vital spirits, the other cold and dead by the
loss of them. The one is blood in his persection, the other in corruption, the
one properly, the other equivocally. And what actual sympathy or
correspondency is there betwixt heat and cold, perfection and corruption? Blood
in their living fountains may sympathize. The plague and other sickness is
apt to run in a kindred or blood, because of the similitude. Were I persuaded
of the artificial incorporation of the warm blood of one man with another, I
might in time be brought to believe a sympathy (and also the Doctors nancius
inanimatus) See D. Flud. ubi supra.
because of the life in it, either by some spark of spirits by the warmth
detained, or by union acquired: but that cold, dead, dry, corrupted blood, out
of the body should smpathize with moist, warm, living, perfect blood in the
body, seems to me such a paradoxe, that I think I shall not believe in
whilst I have blood in mine own body. But the Doctor proves it by the example
of blood sucked by the Devil from Witches; which remaining with the devil,
and sympathizing with the blood in Witches bodies, changes their nature, and
makes them become malign and diabolical* O profound example! Non valet
exemplum quod litem lite resolvit. Keeker. Syst. ^ log l. 3 (...). 4.



Here Master Doctor closely conveyes a ground for his Argument, which neither
true Philosophy nor Orthodoxe Divinity will give us leave to assent to. The
Witches blood remaining with the blood-sucker the Devil, sympathizes with the
blood in the Witches body? How can this be? How can blood, a substance
corporeal, remain with the Devil a spirit and incorporeall? I smell a Rat. I
know the Doctors intent. He would lead us into Apuleius do Deo Socratis.
Theup. Academ contemp. l. 6. c. 4. See Pet. Gassend exercit. epistol. in
^lu^danam Philosoph. part 3. c. 13. p. 121.
the error of Plato as Iamblicus, followed by Apuleius and Theupolus, who hold
that the Devils have tenuia corpora, tenuious and slender bodies; for the
Doctor who impiously attributes composition to God, dares falsely (though it be
a sin to be* lie the Devil) attribute corporeity to Devils. The contrary of
which, that they have no manner of bodies, is the tenent of the Church. And the
truth of it may be manifested four ways.

viz. the authority of 1 Scriptures. 2 Councels. 3 Fathers. 4 Schoolmen.

First, Scripture teaches that the Devils have no manner of bodies. We wrestle
(says Saint Paul) not against flesh and blood, but against spiritual
wickedness (or wicked spirits in high places, Ephesians. 6. 12. And Ephesians. 6. 12.
indeed living bodies may be touched and handled; therefore Christ said to his
disciples when they were terrified and affrighted, and supposed that they had
seen a spirit, Luke 24. 27. Handle me, Luke 24. 37.
and see, for a spirit has not flesh and bones, as ye see me have, verse. 39.
But Devils cannot be handled, therefore Devils have no bodies. Besides, our
Savior Ibid v. 39. Luke 8 30.
cast out a legion of devils out of the possessed, (...)h. Casm. Angelog part
1. c. 3. page 65.
Luke 8. 30. A legion is six thousand, says Casman and others. Now six
thousand devils could Minsh^i Dictionar. page 271. number. 7666.
not really and substantially possess one man (as a Pilot does the ship, being
the external mover of it) if devils were corporeal.

Secondly, the second Lateran Council (held at Lateran in Rome, anno 1^^5. in
the time of Innocent the third, where were present 1284. Prelates, besides
Ambassadors from the East and Western Barthol. Caranza, summa Council. Lateran.
Can. 1. p. 240.
Emperors, and from the Kings of Jerusalem, England, Spain, France and
Cyprus) ranks it amongst the Articles of Faith, that we are to believe: That
God created some creatures corporeal only (as stones, De. Basil. Hom. ^. quod
Deus non est author malorum. Gre. Nazian. in Not. Dom. Chrysostom. in Math. Hom.
44.
metals, etc.) some spiritual only (as Angels good and bad) and some of a
common and middle nature, participating of both, as men.

Thirdly, the Fathers teach the incorporeity of Angels, both celestial and
infernal. As Saint Basil, Gregory Nazianzen, Chrysostom, Gregorius Magnus,
Cyrill, Theodoret, Venerable Beda, Isiodor, Damascen, etc. Gregor. Moral.
lib.4.c.^. Cyrill Sent lib. in Joan. c 11. Theodor. contra Graecus. lib. 3.
Beda de^^^ment Pu^^^. l. 1. Isiodor de sum. Po^o. c 3. Damasc. orthod fide^. 2.
c 3. Hurtad. de Mend. Pkilostom. 1 de Anima disp. ^. Sect. 4. quid. sit corpus
and spiritus. Lod. Vives in Com. in August. de Civi^. Dei. l. 15. ^. 23.
In very deed, Origin, Tertullian and Saint Augustine seem to incline to the
contrary, as that the Angels are corporeal substances. But Origin was a
Platenist and followed his Philosophy too much, whereby he brought himself into
many errors in Divinity, amongst which this is one, wherein we leave him. And
for Saint Augustine that incomparable Father, there are three opinions
concerning the verity of what he held in this point. Some say he did somewhat
incline to this opinion: So Hurtadus de Mendoza. Others say that it cannot be
denied, but that he was absolutely of this opinion: So Lodovicus Vives. Lastly,
others say, that he delivered not this opinion as his own dogmaticall tenent,
asserendo, maintaining it, but recitando opinionem aliorum, as the opinion of
others reciting it. So Thomas Aquinas and Durandus Aqum part 1 quaest. 51.
(...)* 1. Durand Sent. l. 2. did. (...)* q. 1. resp. ad pr(...). Casm.
Angelog. part 1. (...). 4. Estius in Sent. l. 2. Sect. 3. page 98. let. C.
de Sancto Portiano. But Casman, Estius, and other Schoolmen excuse both Saint
Augustine, Tertullian and other Fathers; that they delivered not this opinion
positively, but comparatively in respect of God: who is so incorporeall, that
he is all act without power of future being, what he now is not: infinite;
repletively filling all places, without being circumscribed any where as man,
or defined as an Angel: pure, and simple without composition of quantitative,
essential, or integrall parts: without composition of matter and form,
without composition Sex mod^ compositionis, a philosophis valgo a^^gnati.
of subject and accident, without composition of power and act, without
composition of kind and difference, and without composition of being and
essence. Man is not simple, but compounded ail these ways. God is most simple
and absolute, compounded none of these ways, Angels are not simple but
compounded some of these ways. Therefore when the Fathers said that Angels are
corporeal they meant it, secundum quid, non simpliciter, comparatively, and in
respect of God, who is actus simplex, void of all composition, not absolutely
in respect of themselves.

Fourthly, and lastly, the Schoolmen run in this stream, as Aquinas, Durandus,
and all the rest. For Aqum. ubi supra. Durand. ubi s^pra. (...) in Sent. l. 2
did. 8. Sect. 1.
so says Estius, a late and most learned Schoolman. It is the common and
constant doctrine of all Schoolmen, that Angels are altogether incorporcall
and purely spiritual. Now then the Devils being not corporeal, how can they
so retain and incorporate the blood sucked from Witches, as to alter and
change the nature of it into their nature, and that altered blood by sympathy
to change the mass of blood remaining within the body? For though it be a
common received opinion, that the Devil uses to suck some place of the
Witches body, and to that purpose either enters a true body of some creature,
as the Devil in Paradise entered into the body of a Serpent to deceive Evah,
Genesis 3. 1.
Genesis 3. 1. (and now adays appears to Witches like Dogs, Cats, Hares, etc.)
or assumes a body of co^densed thickened air, compacting it to the shape and
color of man: and when he has done his errand, lays it aside again (as a
man does his garment) it being resolved into the former matter, yet this body
(because it is not united to, or long kept by the Devil) cannot keep the
blood it sucked, but it is disposed some other way, spilt or lost, when the
body is put off, and so there is no participation of the blood with the Devils
body, nor of the Witches separated blood, with that in her body.

Besides, if there were any heat or spirit residing in the blood sucked from
the Witch, the coldness of the Devils assumed body is such, it would straight
chill and extinguish it. This Alexander ab A(...) Alexand. (...) nial* d(...)*
(...).
Alexandro relates to be true, by the experience of an acquaintance of his,
who touched the heel of a Devil that assumed the shape of a man, and found it
so could that no Ice could be compared to it. And Cardanus (a man conversant
with spirits) affirms Hieron. (...) ^^n. de v^^^et (...) lib. 1. cap. ^3.
the like of his own experience, that he being touched with the hand of a
Devil, found it so cold that it was not at any hand to be endured. And other
examples are recited by Lavater, in his book (...)ater of walking spirits, the
first part and 15. Chap.
of walking spirits: by all which it is apparent, that there can be no sympathy
betwixt blood separated and the fountain, be it the blood of Witches, or of
any other person whatsoever. The Devil indeed may by compact of Witches which
shall serve him, and so endeavor to be like him (as the fervant endeavors to be
like his Master) or by the permission of God, stir and excite the humors of
man's body (be he Witch or not) inflaming his blood, kindling his choler,
disturbing his fantasy, cause a malignity of Nature in him. But to do it by
a sympathy of the blood remaining with him, with that which remains in the
body, is altogether a thing impossible. And so Master Doctors argument of
sympathy, and his sympathizing Salve, cannot be salved to be natural and
sympathize with reason, though he has fetched an argument from Dyers and
Liars, from the Devil, the father of Liars to maintain it.

Articulus tertius.
Wherein the operations and effects of this Unguent 3
brought by the Vnguentaries, to prove the sympathy, and to approve the Cure,
are alleged and confuted.

THose which deny a sympathy betwixt the anointed Weapon and the wounded
party, may easily be convinced, by the strange operations and effects of this
ointment. For if the cold air come to the Weapon, the wounded party will
incur an Ague, or if the Weapon be bound hard with a coard, the party feels
it in his joints and limbs. And the Weapon being put into the fire, the
wounded parties body will be blistered. What is the reason of this, but the
sympathy betwixt the Wound and the Weapon, caused by emission of the spirit of
the blood? what greater and more demonstrative evidence can be of a sympathy?

To which I answer. This reason is no reason. Therefore I will say of it as
Tully did of an unreasonable (...)ero ad (...) (...)* 4.
reason. Cujus rationis non est ratio, ci rationi non est ratio fidem adhibere:
Where the reason has no reason, there a man has no reason to give credit to
the reason. For there is no sympathy betwixt See Me^. b. 2. art. 2.
the Wound and the Weapon, as has already been declared. For another
substitute weapon, if the very weapon which inflicted the wound cannot be had,
will do the feat as well as that, so it be drawn through the wound. Where then
is the sympathy betwixt the Weapon and the hurt, when another Weapon will do
the feat, which never caused the hurt? Nay, a Sallow stick will do it (say
these Croll. G(...)* and c.
Vnguentaries) if some blood of the wound be but sprinkled on the stick, and
then the stick be left sticking in the Unguent pot. Nay, some have cured
V(...) R(...) ^eau^.
the wound by applying the Salve to the Hose, Doublet, or Shoe of the wounded
party, nay, to a stool which has hurt a man, nay, to a stool which never
hurt him. Where is then the sympathy between the Wound and Weapon, when it may
as well be applied to any thing, as to the Weapon?

Besides, this Salve is not made alike by all men. Read Paracelsus, Cardanus,
Crollius, Baptista Porta, Goclinius, D. Flud: so many several Authors, so many
several Receipts of this Unguent. Some put in Moss grown on the Scull of a
Thief hanged. Others say it may be of any man taken away by any kind of
violent death. Others prescribe Moss grown upon the Scull of any dead man,
whether he came by his death violently or naturally. Some prescribe blood
warm, as it comes from man's body. Others, blood indefinitely, whether warm or
not. Some put in Oil of Line-seeds, Turbinthine and Roses, others none. Some
blood-stones beaten to powder, others none. Some put in Hoggesbraines, others
none. Some worms washed in Wine and burnt in a pot in a Bakers Oven, others
none. Some Bole Armenicke, others none. Some Musk, bdelium, storax, and other
Gummes, others none. Some appoint the Fat of a Bore, and the Fat of a Bear,
others none. Some say the fat of the Bore, and the fat of the Bear, must be
the fat of a Bore and Bear killed in the act of generation; others however
killed. Some allot Bulls fat to the making of this Salve, others none. Some
Honey, others none at all. I think it is no matter what the Salve be of. For
when men go about such unlawful Cures, the Devil (delighted therewith) is
ready to help them, so they put belief in the Salve, whatsoever the Salve be.
For some, says Doctor Ioannes Roberti, have performed the Cure, D. Joan.
Roberti. G^^len. Heauton. Sect. 19. ^ng. Arm. compositio.
only with Auxungia porcina, Hogges-fat. Nay, the same Doctor tells us, that he
knew a Nobleman, which, having entered into a persuasion of this Cure, made his
Salve of such ordinary herbs as grew in his Garden, and it performed it as
well as all the moss, mans-fat, warm blood and Mummy in the world: and indeed
Cardanus reckons nine Cardanus ut(...) supra.
herbs said to go to the composition of this Salve. Where is then the
sympathy? where is the Balsame residing in the Moss, Mummy, and Man's fat? Where
is the Magneticall operation? Where Is the spirit of the blood? where the occult
qualities? where is the invisible line carried in the air? Surely all in the
Devil. He is all in all in the business, and for my part to him I leave it
all.

Articulus quartus.
Wherein the Author or first Inventor commending 4
it, is showed not to be worthy of commendations, nor in this to be followed.

THe Author or first Inventor of this rare Unguent, was either Paracelsus or
Anselmus. Both these were famous in their time, especially Paracelsus, who is
an Author of such allowed authority, that he is followed almost by all
Physicians. Some do, as the Poet speaks, Iurare in verba magistri, and
following him solely, are called Paracelsians. Therefore it is lawful to use
his Medicines, and this amongst the rest.

To which I answer, That both these were famous indeed. They were both of them
infamously famous. For what both these were is already related. Surely they are
gone, when they went See Memb. 1. art. 4.
hence, to the graund master of such Impostures, if they did not before they
went hence, earnestly repent, of this and other their magical and
superstitious operations and diabolical Conjurations. From which evil and
mischief, from sin, the crafts and assaults of the Devil, and from
everlasting damnation: Good Lord deliver us.

Now then, this Cure being done, neither by natural means, nor divine
institution, but by Magic and an implicit compact with the Devil. It being
not done by natural Balsame, causing a sympathy by the influence of the
Stars, nor by magneticall operation by emission of the radij and spirits of
the blood, carrying in a direct invisible line the sanative virtue: nor by
occult and hidden qualities (because any Salve applied to any thing which never
touched the wounded body (where the belief is strong) will effect it as well
as the moss, warm blood, and other things. Seeing there are no credible
Authors home for it, seeing the effects symbolize, with the practice of
Witches, seeing the first Inventor was a Conjurer, familiar with the Devil:
Considering, I say, all these things, it cannot be lawful for an honest and
religious man to use it.

FINIS.
The Printer to the Reader.
Some faults are escaped in the margin, some in the Text, some of omission,
others of commission. It Is almost impossible that a Treatise wherein so many
unusual Authors are cited, should at the first be absolutely truly Printed. I
hope therefore the learned Readers will excuse the Author, and not much blame
me. Aquilae non capiunt muscas. These following I have noted; and others (if
any be) may be borne with. Ne^osine cri^ine vivit.

Errata.
In the Latin Epistle, read homunculi; in margin Virg. Eclog. 7. page 3.
line 18 punctually. Ibid. l. 19. ^ode pes. p. 5. in marg. Helmont de unguent.
Armar. p. 19. l. 10. te vincat. p. 33. in marg. Cardanus. p. 38. and is called.
p 41. l. 14. sundry creatures. p. 45. in marg, Testat. p. 48. l. 6. and
Ia^^licus. ibid. l. 10. by the authority.


