THE BROKEN HEART.

A Tragedy.

ACTED By the KINGS Majesty's Servants at the private House in the BLACKFRIARS.

Fide Honor.

LONDON: Printed by I. B. for HVGH BEESTON, and are to be sold at his Shop,
near the Castle in Corne-hill. 1633.

TO THE MOST WORTHY DESERVER OF THE noblest Titles in Honor, WILLIAM, Lord
CRAVEN, Baron of Hamsteed-Marshall.
MY LORD:
THE glory of a great name, acquired by a greater glory of Action, has in all
ages lived the truest chronicle to his own Memory. In the practice of which
Argument, your grouth to perfection (even in youth) has appeared so sincere,
so vn-flattering a Penneman; that Posterity cannot with more delight read the
merit of Noble endeauours, then noble endeavors merit thanks from Posterity
to be read with delight. Many Nations, many eyes, have been witnesses of your
Deserts, and loved Them: Be pleased then, with the freedom of your own Nature,
to admit ONE amongst All, particularly into the list of such as honor a fair
Example of Nobility. There is a kind of humble Ambition, not vn-commendable,
when the silence of study breaks forth into Discourse, coveting rather
encouragement then Applause; yet herein Censo^re commonly is too severe an
Auditor, without the moderation of an able Patronage. I have ever been slow in
courtship of greatness, not ignorant of such defects as are frequent to
Opinion: but the Justice of your Inclination to Industry, emboldens my
weakness, of confidence, to relish an experience of your Mercy, as many brave
Dangers have tasted of your Courage. Your Lordship strove to be known to the
world (when the world knew you least) by voluntary but excellent Attempts: Like
Allowance I plead of being known to your Lordship (in this low presumption) by
tend^ing to a favorable entertaiment, a Devotion offered from a heart, that can
be as truly sensible of any least respect, as ever profess the owner in my
best, my ^eadiest services, A Lover of your natural Love to Virtue,

John Ford.

The Prologue.
Our Scene is Sparta. HE whose best of Art
Has drawn this Piece, calls it the Broken Heart.
The Title lends no expectation here
Of apish laughter, or of some lame Ieere
At place or persons; no pretended clause
Of iest's fit for a brothell Courts' applause
From vulgar admiration: such low songs,
Tuned to unchaste e^res, suit not modest tongues.
The Virgin^ Sister then deserved fresh bays
When Innocence and Sweetness crowned their layes^
Then vices gasp'd for breath, whose whole Commerce
Was whipped to Exile by vnblushing verse.
This law we keep^ in our Presentment now,
Not to take freedom more then we allow;
What may be here thought a fiction, when Times youth
Wanted some riper years, was known A Truth:
In which, if words have clothed the subject right,
You may partake, a Pity, with Delight.
The Scene, SPARTA. The Speakers names, fitted to their Qualities.
AMYCLAS, Common to the Kings of Laconia. ITHOCLES, Honor of loveliness, A
favorite. ORGILVS, Angry, Son to Crotolon. BASSANES, Vexation, A jealous
Nobleman. ARMOSTES, An appeasor, A Counselor of State. CROTOLON, Noise,
Another Counselor. PROPHILVS, Dear, Friend to Ithocles. NEARCHVS, Young
Prince, Prince of Argos. TECNICVS, Artist, A Philosopher. LEMOPHIL, Glutton,
Two Courtiers. GRONEAS, Tauernhaunter, Two Courtiers. AMELVS, Trusty, Friend to
Nearchus. PHVLAS, Watchful, Servant to Bassanes.
CALANTHA, Flower of beauty, The Kings daughter PENTHEA, Complaint, Sister to
Ithocles. EVPHRANEA, Joy, A Maid of Honor. CHRISTALLA, Crystal, Maids of
Honor. PHILEMA, A kiss, Maids of Honor. GRANSIS Old Beldam. Ouerseer of
Pe^thea.
Person's included.
THRASVS, Fierceness, Father of Ithocles. APLOTES, Simplicity, Orgilus so
disguised.
THE BROKEN HEART.
Actus primus,
Scaena prima.
Enter Crotolon and Orgilus. Crot. DAlly not further, I will know the reason
That speeds thee to this journey.

Org. Reason? good Sir^
I can yield many.

Crot. Give me one, a good one;
Such I expect, and e're we part must haue^
Ath^^s? pray why to Athens? you intend not
To kick against the world, turn Cynicke, Stoicke,
Or read the Logic Lecture, or become
An Ar^^pagite; and Judge in causes
Touching the Common wealth? for as I take it,
The budding of your chin cannot prognosticate
So grave an honor,

Org. All this I acknowledge,

Crot. You do: then ((...)) if books and love of knowledge
Inflame you to this travel, here in Sparta
You may as freely study.

Org. It Is not that Sir.

Crot. Not, that Sir? As a father I command thee
To acquaint me with the truth^

Org. Thus I obey ^^:
After so many quarrels, as (...)
Fury, and R^ge had (...) in blood, and (...)
Wit^ (...)
With now (...)
Our present King (...)
Your eager swords, and Sealed a (...) peace:
Friends you prosest your selves, which to conf^^me,
A resolution for a lasting league
Betw^^t your Families was entertained,
By joining in a (...) bond,
Me, and the fair Penthea, only daughter
To Thrasus.

Crot. What of this?

Org. Much, much (dear sir)
A freedom of converse, an enterchange
Of holy, and chaste love, so sixth our souls
In a firm grouth of union, that no Time
Can eat (...) pledge: we had enjoyed
The sweets our vows expected, had not cruelty
Prevented all those triumphs we prepared for,
By Thrasus his untimely death.

Crot. Most certain.

Org. From this time splouted up that poisonous stalk
Of Aco^it^, whose ripened fruit has ravished
All health, all comfort of a happy life:
For Ithocles her brother, proud of youth,
And prouder in his power, nourisht ^losely
The memory of former discontents.
To glory in re^enge, by (...) partly,
Partly by threat^, a woo^s at once, and forces
His virtuous sister to admit a marriage
With Basanes, a Nobleman, in honor
And riches, I confess beyond my fortunes.

Crot. All this is no sound reason to import me
My leave for thy departure.

Org. Now it follows,
(...) P^uthe^ wedded to this torture
By an insulting brother, being secretly
Compeld to yield her virgin freedom up
To him, who ^^uer can vs^rp^ her hear^
Before contracted mine, is now so (...)
To a most barbarous thr^ldome^ misery,
Affliction, that he sauo^^ not humanity^
Whos^ sorrow melts not into more then pity,
In hearing but her name.

Crot. As how pray?

Org. Bassanes
The man that call^ her wife; considers truly
What Heaven of perfections he is Lord o^,
By thinking fair Penth^^ his: This thought
Begets a kind of Monster-Loue, which Love
Is nurse unto a fear so strong, and servile,
As brands all dotage with a Jealousy.
All eyes who gaze upon that shrine of beauty,
He does resolve, do homage to the miracle;
Some one, he is assured, may now or then
(If opportunity but sort) prevail:
So much out of a selfe-vnworthinesse
His fears transport him, not that he finds cause
In her obedience, but his own distrust.

Crot. You spin out your discourse.

Org. My griefs are violent^
For knowing how the Maid was heretofore
Courted by me, his iealousies grow wild
That I should steal again into her favors,
And undermine her virtues: which the gods
Know I nor dare, nor dream of: hence, from hence^
I undertake a voluntary exile.
First, by my absence to take off the ears
Of Jealous Bassanes, but chiefly (Sir)
To free Penthea from a hell on earth:
Lastly, to lose the memory of something,
Her presence makes to live in me afresh.

Crot. Enough (my Orgilus) enough^ To Athens
I give a full consent: -- Alas good Lady --
We shall hear from thee often?

Org. Often.

Crot. See
Thy Sister comes to give a farewell.

Enter Euphrania. Fuphr. Brother.

Org. ^
A brothers kiss (...)
Thy health, and thy well-doing, then my life.
Before we part, in presence of our father,
I must prefer a lu^t to '(...).

Euphr. You may style it,
My brother, a command.

Org. That you will promise
To pass never to any man, how ever worthy,
Your faith, till with our Fathers leave
I give a free consent.

Crot. An easy motion,
I Will promise for her, Orgilus.

Org. Your pardon;
Euphrania's oath must yield me satisfaction.

Euphr. By Vesta's sacred fires I swear.

Crot. And I
By great Apollo's be^mes join in the vow;
Not without thy allowance, to bestow her
On any living.

Org. Dear Euphrania
Mistake me not; far, far it is from my thought,
As far from any wish of mine, to hinder
Preferment to an honorable bed,
Or fitting Fortune: thou art young, and handsome;
And 'twere injustice; more, a tyranny
Not to advance thy merit. Trust me Sister,
It shall be my first care to see thee matched
As may become thy choice, and our contents:
I have your oath.

Euphr. You have: but mean you brother
To lea^e us as you say?

Crot. I, I, Euphrania^
He has just grounds direct him: I will prove
A father and a brother to thee.

Euphr. Heaven
Does look into the secrets of all hearts:
Gods you have mercy with 'ee, else --

Crot. Doubt nothing
Thy brother will return in safety to us.

Org. Souls sunk in sorrows, never are without 'em;
They change fresh airs, but bear their griefs about 'em.

Exeunt omnes. Flourish. Scaene 2.
Enter Amyclas the King, Ar^^stes, Prophilus, and attendants. Amy. The Spart^ne
gods are graciou^, our humility
Shall bend before their Altars, and per^^^^^
Their Temples with abundant sacrifice.
^ee Lords, Amyclas your old King is entering
Into his youth again. I shall shake on
This silver badge of age, and change this snow
For hairs as gay as are Apollo's locks;
Our heart leaps in new vigor.

Armo. May old time
Run back to double your long life (great Sir)

Amy. It will, it must Armostes, thy bold Nephew,
Death-brauing Ithocles, brings to our gates
Triumphs and peace upon his conquering sword.
Laconia is a monarchy at length;
Has in this latter war trod underfoot
Messenes pride; Messene bows her neck
To Lacedemons royalty: o 'twas
A glorious victory, and does deserve
More then a Chronicle; a Temple Lords,
A Temple, to the name of Ithocles.
Where did thou leave him Prophilus?

Proph. At Pephon
Most gracious Sovereign; twenty of the noblest
Of the Messenians, there attend your pleasure
For such conditions as you shall propose.
In settling peace, and liberty of life.

Amy. When comes your friend and General?

Pro. He promised
To follow with all speed convenient.

Enter Cretol^n, Calantha, Chrystalla, Philema and Euphrania. Amy. Our daughter
-- Dear Calantha, the happy news,
The conquest of Messene, has already
Enriched thy knowledge.

Calan. With the circumstance
And manner of the fight, related faithfully
By Prophilus himself; but pray Sir, tell me,
How does the youthful General demean
His actions in these fortunes?

Proph. Excellent Princess,
Your own fair eyes may soon report a truth
Unto your judgment, with what moderation,
Calmness of nature, measure, bounds and limits
^f thankefulne^^^ and joy, 'a does digest
Such amplitude of his success, as would
In others, molded of a spirit less clear,
Advance 'em to comparison with heaven.
But Ithocles. --

Call. Your friend. --

Proph. He is so Madam,
In which the period of my Fate consists:
He in this Firmament of honor, stands
Like a Star fixed, not moved with any thunder
Of popular applause, or sudden lightning
Of selfe-opinion: He has served his Country,
And thinks 'twas but his duty.

Crot: You describe
A miracle of man.

Amy. Such Crotolon,
On forfeit of a Kings word thou will find him:
Hark, warning of his coming, all attend him.

Flourish. Enter Ithocles, Hemophill, and Groneas: the rest of the Lords
vshering him in. Amy. Return into these arms, thy home, thy sanctuary.
Delight of Sparta, treasure of my bosom,
Mine own, own Ithocles.

Itho. Your humblest subject.

Armo. Proud of the blood I claim an Interest in;
As brother to thy mother, I embrace thee
Right noble Nephew.

Itho. Sir, your love's too partial.

Crot. Our Country speaks by me, who by thy valor,
Wisdom and service, shares in this great action;
Returning thee, in part of thy due merits,
A general welcome.

Itho. You exceed in bounty.

Calan. Chrystalla, Philena, the Chaplet. -- Ithocles
Upon the wings of Fame, the singular
And chosen fortune of an high attempt,
Is borne so past the view of common sight,
That I my self, with mine own hands, have wrought
To crown thy Temples, this provincial garland;
Accept, wear, and enjoy it, as our gift
Deserved, not purchased.

Itho. You Are a royal maid.

Amy. She is in all our daughter.

Itho^ Let me blush,
Acknowledging how poorly I have served,
What nothings I have done, compared with the honors
Heaped on the issue of a willing mind;
In that lay mine ability, that only
For who is he so sluggish from his birth?
So little worthy of a name, or country,
That owes not out of gratitude for life,
A debt of Service, in what kind soever
Safety or Counsel of the Commonwealth
Requires for payment?

Ca^. A speaks truth.

Itho. Whom heaven
Is pleased to style victorious, there, to such,
Applause runs madding, like the drunken priests
In Bacchus sacrifices without Reason;
Voycing the Leader on a Demi god:
When as indeed, each common soldiers blood
Drops down ^s current coin in that hard purchase,
As his, whose much more delicate condition
Has sucked the milk of ease. Judgment commands,
But Resolution executes: I use not
Before this royal presence, these fit sleights,
As in contempt of such as can direct:
My speech has other end; not to attribute
All praise to one man's fortune, which is strengthed
By many hands. -- For instance, here is Prophilus
A Gentleman (I cannot flatter truth)
Of much desert; and, though in other rank,
Both Hemophil and Groneas were not missing
To wish their Countries peace; for in a word,
All there did strive their best, and 'twas our duty.

Amy. Courtiers turn soldiers? -- we vouchsafe our hand.
Observe your great example.

Hemo. With all diligence.

Gron. Obsequiously and hourly.

Amy. Some repose
After these toils are needfull^ we must think on
Conditions for the Conquered; they expect 'em.
On, -- come my Ithocles.

Euphr. Sir with your favor,
I need not a supporte^.

Proph. Fate instructs me.

Exeunt. Ma^^n^ Hemophill, Gro^^a^, Chris^alla et Philema. Hemophill stays,
Chrystalla, Gro^^as, Philema. Chry. With me?

Phil. Indeed I dare not stay.

Hem. Sweet Lady
Soldiers are blunt, -- your lip.

C^ris^. Fie, this is rudeness;
You went not hence such creatures.

Gron. Spirit of valor
Is of a mounting nature.

Phil. It appears so:
Pray in earnest, how many men apeece
Have you two been the death of?

Gron. Faith not many;
We were composed of mercy.

Hemo. For our daring
You heard the Generals approbation
Before the King.

Christ. You wished your Countries peace:
That showed your charity; where are your spoils,
Such as the Soldier fights for?

Phil. They are coming.

Chri. By the next Carrier, are they not?

Gr^^ Sweet Philena,
When I was in the thickest of mine enemies,
Slashing off one man's head, another nose,
Another arms and legs.

Phil. And altogether.

Gron. Then would I with a sigh remember thee;
And cry dear Philena, it is for thy sake
I do these deeds of wonder: -- do not love me
With all thy heart now?

Phil Now as heretofore.
I have not put my love to use, the principal
Will hardly yield an Interest.

Gron. By Mar^
I Will marry thee.

Phil. By Vulcan you are forsworn,
Except my mind do alter strangely.

Gron. One word.

Chri. You lie beyond all modesty, -- forbear me.

Hem. I Will make thee mistress of a City, it is
Mine own by conquest.

Chri. By petition; sue for it
In Forma pauperis: -- City? Kennell. Gallants
Off with your Fathers, put on aprons, Gallants;
Learn to reele, throm, or trim a Ladies dog,
And be good quiet souls of peace Hobgoblins.

Hem. Christalla?

Chri. Practice to drill hogs, in hope
To share in the Acorns. Soldiers? Corn^cutters;
But not so valiant: they often times draw blood,
Which you durst never do. When you have practiced
More wit, or more civility, we will rank (...)
I th list of men: till then, brave things at arms
Dare not to speak to us, -- most potent Groneas.

Phil. And Hemophill the hardy, -- at your services.

Gron. They scorn us as they did before we went.

Hem. Hang 'em, let us scorn them, and be revenged.

Eexunt Chri. at Philema. Gron. Shall we?

Hem. We will; and when we slight them thus,
Instead of following them, they will follow us.
It is a woman's nature.

Gron. It Is a s^^ruy one. exeunt o^^ies.

Scaene 3.
Enter T^cnicus a Philosopher, and Orgilus disguised like a Scholar of his.
Tecn. Tempt not the Stars (young man) thou can not play
With the severity of Fate: this change
Of habit, and disguise in outward view,
Hides not the secrets of thy soul within thee,
From their quicke-piercing eyes, which dive at all times
Down to thy thoughts: in thy aspect I note
A consequence of danger.

Org. Give me leave
(Grave Tecnicus) without fore-dooming destiny,
Under thy roof to ease my silent griefs,
By applying to my hidden wounds, the balm
Of thy Oraculous Lectures: if my fortune
Run such a crooked by-way, as to wrest
My steps to ruin, yet thy learned precepts
Shall call me back, and set my footings straight:
I will not court the world.

Tecn. Ah Orgilus,
Neglects in young men of delights, and life,
Run often to extremities^ they care not
For harms to others, who contemn their own.

Org. But I (most learned Artist) am not so much
At ods with Nature, that I grutch the thrift
Of any true deseruer: nor does malice
Of present hopes, so check them with despair,
As that I yield to thought of more affliction
Then what is incident to frailty: wherefore
Impute not this retired course of living
Some little time, to any other cause
Then what I justly render: the information
Of an unsettled mind, as the effect
Must clearly witness.

Tecn. Spirit of truth inspire thee.
On these conditions I conceal thy change,
And willingly admit thee for an Auditor.
^lete my study.

Org. I to contemplations:
In these delightful walks -- thus metamorphiz'd,
I may without suspicion hearken after
Penthe^s usage, and Euphranias faith:
Love! thou art full of mystery: the Deities
Themselves are not secure, in searching out
The secrets of those flames, which hidden wast
A breast, made tributary to the Laws
Of beauty; Physic yet has never found
A remedy, to cure a Lovers wound.
Ha? who are those that cross yo^ private walk
Into the shadowing grove, in amorous foldings?
Prophilus passes over, supporting Euphrania, and whispering. My Sister; o my
Sister? it is Euphrania
With Prophilus, supported too; I would
It were an Apparition; Prophilus
Is Ithocles his friend: It strangely pusles me:
Again? help me my book; this Scholars habit
Must stand my priuilege^ my mind is busy,
Mine eyes, and ears are open. walk by reading.

Enter again Prophilus and Euphrania. Proph. Do not wast
The span of this stolen time (sent by the gods
For precious use) in niceness! Bright Euphrania,
Should I repeat old vows, or study new,
For purchase of belief to my desires --

Org. D^sires?

Proph. My service, my integrity --

Org. That Is better.

Proph. I should but repeat a lesson
Often conn'd without a prompter; but thine eyes,
My Love is honorable --

Org. So was mine
To my Penthea: chastely honorable.

Proph. Nor wants there more addition to my wish
Of happiness, then having thee a wife,
Already sure of Ithoclas a friend,
Firm, and vn-alterable.

Org. But a brother
More cruel then the grave.

Euphr. What can you look for
In answer to your noble protestations,
From an unskillful maid, but language suited
To a divided mind?

Org. Hold out Euphranc^.

Euphr. Know Prophilus, I never vnder-valued
(From the first time you mentioned worthy love)
Your merit, means, or person: It had been
A fault of judgment in me, and a dullness
In my affections, not to weigh and thank
My better Stars, that offered me the grace
Of so much blissfulness. For to speak truth,
The law of my desires kept equal pace
With yours, nor have I left that resolution;
But only in a word, what-euer choice
Lives nearest in my heart, must first procure
Consent, both from my father, and my brother,
E're he can own me his.

Org. She is forsworn else.

Proph. Leave me that task.

Euphr. My brother e're he par^ed
To Athens, had my oath.

Org. Yes, yes, ^a had sure.

Proph. I doubt not with the means the Court supplies,
But to prevail at pleasure.

Org. Very likely.

Proph. Mean time^ best, dearest, I may build my hopes
On the foundation of thy constant suffrance
In any opposition.

Euphr. Death shall sooner
Divorce life, and the joys I have in living,
Then my chaste vows from truth.

Proph. On thy fair hand
I seal the like.

Org. There is no faith in woman --
Passion? o be contained: my very heart strings
Are on the Tenters.

Euphr. Sir, we are overheard;
Cupid protect us: 'twas a stirring (Sir)
Of some one near.

Proph. Your fears are needless, Lady;
None have access into these private pleasures,
Except some near in Court, or bosom Student
From Tecnicus his Oratory; granted
By special favor lately from the King
Unto the grave Philosopher.

Euphr. Me thinks
I hear one talking to himself: I see him.

Proph. It Is a poor Scholar, as I told you Lady.

Org. I am discovered -- Say it: is it possible
With a smooth tongue, a leering countenance,
Flattery, or force of reason ( -- I come to you Sir)
To turn, or to appease the raging Sea?
Answer to that, -- your Art? what Art to catch
And hold fast in a net the Suns small Atoms?
No, no; they will out, they will out; ye may as easily
Outrun a Cloud, driven by a Northern blast,
As fiddle faddle so. Peace, or speak sense.

Euphr. Call you this thing a Scholar? alas he is lunaticke.

Proph. Observe him (sweet) it is but his recreation.

Org. But will you hear a little Lion are so teatchy,
You keep no rule in argument; Philosophy
Works not upon impossibilities,
But natural conclusions. -- Mew? -- absurd;
The metaphisicks are but speculations
Of the celestial bodies, or such accidents
As not mixed perfectly, in the Air engendered,
Appear to us unnatural; that is all.
Prove it; -- yet with a reverence to your gravity,
I Will baulke illiterate saw^inesse, submitting
My sole opinion to the touch of writers.

Proph. Now let us fall in with him.

Org. Ha ha ha.
These Apish boys, when they but taste the Grammates,
And principals of Theory, imagine
They can oppose their teachers Confidence
Leads many into errors.

Proph. By your leave Sir.

Euphr. Are you a Scholar (friend?)

Org. I am (gay creature)
With pardon of your Deities, a mushrome^
On whom the dew of heaven drops now and then:
The Sun shines on me too, I than^e his beams,
Sometime I feel their warmth; and eat, and sleep.

Proph. Does Tecnicus read to thee?

Org. Yes forsooth,
He is my master surely, yonde^ door
Opens upon his Study.

Proph. Happy creatures;
Such people toil not (sweet) in heats of State,
Nor sink in thawes of greatness: Their affections
Keep order with the limits of their modesty:
Their love is love of virtue. -- What Is thy name?

Org. Aplotes (s^mptuous master) a poor wretch.

Euphr. Do thou want any thing?

Org. Books ( Venus) books.

Proph. Lady, a new conceit comes in my thought,
And most available for both our comforts.

Euphr. My Lord. --

Proph. Whiles I endeavor to deserve
Your fathers blessing to our loves, this Scholar
May daily at some certain hours attend,
What notice I can write of my success,
Here in this grove, and give it to your hands:
The like from you to me; so can we never,
Barred of our mutual speech, want sure intelligence;
And thus our hearts may talk when our tongues cannot.

Euphr. Occasion is most favorable, use it.

Proph. Aplotes, will thou wait us twice a day;
At nine in the morning, and at four at night,
Here in this Bower, to convey such letters
As each shall send to other? Do it willingly,
Safely, and secretly, and I will furnish
Thy Study, or what else thou can desire.

Org. Jove make me thankful, thankful, I beseech thee
Propitious Jove, I will prove sure and trusty^
You will not fail me books.

Proph. Nor ought besides
Thy heart can wish. This Ladies name's Euphra^ea,
Mine Prophilus.

Org. I have a pretty memory,
It must prove my best friend. -- I will not miss
One minute of the hours appointed.

Proph. Write
The books thou would have bought thee in a note,
Or take thy self some money.

Org. No, no money:
Money to Scholars is a spirit invisible,
We dare not finger it; or books, or nothing.

Proph. Books of what sort thou will: do not forget
Our names.

Org. I warrant 'ee, I warrant 'ee.

Proph. Smile Hymen on the grouth of our desires,
We Will feed thy torches with eternal fires. Exeunt. manet Org.

Org. Put out thy Torches Hymen, or their light
Shall meet a darkness of eternal night.
Inspire me Mercury with swift deceits;
Ingenious Fate has lept into mine arms,
Beyond the compass of my brain. -- Mortality
Creeps on the dung of earth, and cannot reach
The riddles, which are purposed by the gods.
Great Arts best write themselves in their own stories,
They dye too basely, who out-liue their glories. Exit.

Actus Secundus:
Scaena prima.
Enter Bassanes and Phulas. Bass. I Will have that window next the street damned
up;
It gives too full a prospect to temptation,
And courts a Gazers glances: there is a lust
Committed by the eye, that sweats, and t^a^els,
Plots, wakes, contriues, till the deformed bear-whelpe
Adultery be licked into the act,
The very act; that light shall be damned up;
Do You hear Sir?

Phul. I do hear my Lord; a Mason
Shall be provided suddenly.

Bass. Some Rogue,
Some Rogue of your confederacy, (factor
For slaves and strumpets) to convey close packets
From this spruce springall, and the the other youngster;
That gaudy Eare-wrig, or my Lord, your Patron,
Whose p^usioner you are. -- I Will tear thy throat out
Son of a Cat, ill-looking Hounds-head; tip up
Thy vlterous maw, if I but scont a paper,
A scroll, but half as big as what can cover
A wart upon thy nose, a spot, a pimple,
Directed to my Lady: it may prove
A mystical preparatiue to lewdness.

Phul. Care shall be had. -- I will turn every thread
About me to an eye. -- here is a sweet life.

Bass. The City houswiues, cunning in the traffic
Of Chamber-merchandise, set all at price
By wholesale, yet they wipe their mouths, and simper,
Cull, kiss, and cry Sweet-hart, and stro^ke the head
Which they have branched, and all is well again:
Dull clods of dirt, who dare not feel the rubs
Stuck on the foreheads?

Phul. It Is a villainous world,
One cannot hold his own in it.

Bass. Dames at Court
Who flaunt in riots, run another by as^
Their pleasure heaues the patient Ass that suffers
Up on the stil^d of Office, titles, Incomes;
Promotion iustifies the shame, and ^ues for it:
Poor Honor! thou art stabbed, and bleed'st to death
By such unlawful hire. The Count^y mistress
Is yet more wary, and in blushes hides
What ever trespass draws her tro^h to guilt;
But all are false. On this truth I am bold,
No woman but can fall, and does, or would --
Now for the newest news about the City;
What blab the voices sirrah?

Phul. O my Lord,
The rarest, quaintest, strangest, tickling news
That ever --

Bass. Hey da, up and ride me Rascal,
What is it?

Phul. Forsooth (they say) the King has mewed
All his gray beard, in stead of which is budded
Another of a pure Carnation color,
Speckled with Green and Russet.

Bass. Ignorant block.

Phul. Yes truly, and it is talked about the streets,
That since Lord Ithocles come home, the Lions
Never left roaring, at which noise the ^eares
Have danced their very hearts out.

Bass. Dance out thine too.

Phul. Besides, Lord Orgilus is fled to Athens
Upon a fiery Dragon, and it is thought
A' never can return.

Bass. Grant it Apollo.

Phul. Moreover, please your Lordship, it is reported
For certain, that who ever is found jealous
Without apparent proof that is wife is wanton,
Shall be diuorc'd: but this is but she-newes,
I had it from a midwife. I have more yet.

Bass. Anticke, no more; Idiots and stupid fools
Grate my calamities. Why to be fair
Should yield presumption of a faulty soul?
Look to the doors.

Phul. The horn of plenty crest him.

Exit Phul. Bass. Swormes of confusion huddle in my thoughts
In rare distemper. Beauty? o it is
An unmatched blessing, or a horrid curse.
Enter Penthea, and Gransis an old Lady. She comes, she comes, so shoots the
morning forth,
Spangled with pearls of transparent dew,
The way to poverty is to be rich;
As I in her am wealthy, but for her
In all contents a Bankrupt. -- Loved Penthea,
How fares my hearts best joy?

Gran. In sooth not well,
She is so ouer-sad.

Bass. Leave chattering Mag-pye. --
Thy brother is returned (sweet) safe, and honored
With a Triumphant victory: thou shall visit him:
We will to Court, where, if it be thy pleasure,
Thou shall appear in such a rauishing luster
Of Jewels above value, that the Dames
Who brave it there, in rage to be out-shin'd,
Shall hide them in their Closets, and unseene
Fret in their tears; whiles every wondering eye
Shall crave none other brightness but thy presence.
Choose thine own recreations, be a Queen
Of what delights thou fa^ciest best, what company,
What place, what times, do any thing, do all things
Youth can command; so thou will (...)
From the pure firmament of thy fai^e lookes^

Gran. Now it is well said my Lord, what Lady? laugh,
Be merry, time is precious.

Bass. Furies whip thee.

Pen. Alas my Lord, this language to your Handmaid
Sounds as would music to the deaf: I need
No braueries nor cost of Art, to draw
The whiteness of my name into offense;
Let such (if any such there are) who covet
A curiosity of admiration,
By laying out their plenty to full view,
Appear in gaudy outsides; my attires
Shall suit the inward fashion of my mind;
From which, if your opinion nobly placed,
Change not the Liuory your words bestow,
My Fortunes with my hopes are at the highest.

Bass. This house me thinks stands somewhat too much inward^
It is too melancholy, we will remove
Nearer the Court; or what thinks my Penthea
Of the delightful Island we command?
Rule me as thou can wish.

Pen. I am no Mistress;
Whither you please, I must attend; all ways
Are alike pleasant to me.

Gran. Island? prison:
A prison is as gaysome: we will no Islands:
Marry out upon 'em, whom shall we see there?
Sea-guls, and Porpiseis, and water-rats,
And Crabs, and Mewes, and Dogfish? goodly geere
For a young Ladies dealing, or an old ones.
On no terms Islands, I Will be stewed first.

Bass. Gransis,
You are a Iugling Bawd. -- This sadness (sweetest)
Becomes not youthful blood, -- (I Will have you pounded)
For my sake put on a more cheerful mirth,
Thou't mar thy cheeks, and make me old in griefs.
-- (Damnable Bitch-foxe.)

Gran. I am thick of hearing
Still when the wind blows Southerly. What think 'e^,
If your fresh Lady bre^d young bones (my Lord?)
Wood not a chopping boy do you good at heart?
But as you said,

Bass. ^
Or chop thee into collo^^

Gran. Pray speak louder^
Sure, (...), the wind blows South still,

Pen. Thou prai'st madly.

Bass. It Is very hot, I sweat extreamely^ -- Now.

Enter Phula^. Phul. A heard of Lords, Sir.

Bass. Ha?

Phul. A (...) of Indies.

Bass. Where?

Phul. Shoalds of horses.

Bass. Peasant, how?

Phul. Caroches
In drifts -- the one enter, the other stand without, sir.
And now I vanish. Exit Phulas.

Enter Prophilus, Hemophil, Groneas, Christalla and Philena. Proph. Noble
Bassanes.

Bass. Most welcome Prophilus, Ladies, Gentlem^n,
To all, my heart is open, you all honor me.
(A tympany swe^s in my head a^r^ady)
Honor me bountifully. -- (How they flutter,
W^^ ^ailes and ^ayes together?)

Proph. From your brother,
By virtue of your love to him, I require
Your instant presence faire^h

Pen. He is woll Sir.

Proph. The gods preserve him ever: yet (dear beauty)
I find some alteration in him lately,
Since his return to Sparta. My good Lord,
I pray use no delay.

Bass. We had not needed
An inuitation, if his sisters health
Had not fallen into question. -- Have Penthea,
Slack not a minute: lead the way good Prophilus,
I Will follow step by step^

Proph. Your arm fair Madam.

Exeunt omnes sed Bass. and Gran. Bass. One word with your old Bawdship: the
had bin better
Raild at the sins thou worshipst, thou have thwarted
My will. I Will use thee cursedly.

Gran. You dote.
You are beside your self. A Politician
In jealousy? No, you are too gross, too vulgar.
Pish, teach not me my trade, I know my ^ue:
My crossing you, sinks me into her trust,
By which I shall know all: my ^rade's a sure one.

B^ss. Forgive me, Gransis, it was consideration
I rellisht not, but have a care now.

Gran. Fear not,
I am no new-come-too't.

Bass. Thy life's upon it,
And so is mine. My Agonies are infinite. Exeunt omnes:

Scaene 2.
Enter Ithocles alone. Itho. Ambition? it is of vipers breed, it knawes
A passage through the womb that gave it motion.
Ambition? like a seeled Dove, mounts upward,
Higher and higher still to perch on clouds,
But tumbles headlong down with heavier ruin.
So squibs and crackers fly into the air,
Then only breaking with a noise, they vanish
In stench and smoke: Morality applied
To timely practice, keeps the soul in tune,
At whose sweet music all our actions dance;
But this is form of books, and schoole-tradition,
I^ physics not the sickness of a mind
Broken with grief^^: strong Fe^^ers are not eased
With counsel, but with be^^ receipts, and meane^:
Means, speedy means, and certain; that is the cure.

Enter Armoster and Crotolon. Armo. You stick (Lord Crotolon) upon a point
Too nice, and too unnecessary. Prophi^us
Is every way desertfull. I am confident
Your wisdom is too (...) to need instruction
From your (...)

Crot^ ^et not so ripe
(My Lord Armoster) that ^t dares to do^e
Upon the painte^ (...) smooth persuasion,
Which tempts me to breach of faith.

Itho. Not yet
Resolved (my Lo^^^) (...) consent
Be so available, we will wri^^ to (...)
For his (...) to (...). The Kings (...)
Will join with our d^^^res, he ^as been ^^^'d too^.

Armo. Yes, and the King himself ^mportun'd Crotol^^
For a dispatch.

C^o^^ (...) command, their will
Are Laws not to be questioned.

Itho. By this marriage
You k^it an union so denout, so hearty,
Between your loves to me, and mine to yours,
As if mine own blood had an interest in it;
For Prop^ilus is mine, and I am his.

Crot. My Lord, my Lord.

Ith. What, good Sir? speak your thought.

Crot. Had this sincerity been real once,
My Orgilus had not been now vn-wi^'d,
Nor ^ our lost Sister buried in a Bride bed.
Your Uncle here, Armoster knows this truth,
For had your father Thrasus lived, but peace
Dwell in his grave: I have done.

Armo. You Are bold and bitter.

Itho. 'A presses home the injury, it smarts;
No reprehensions Uncle, I deserve 'em.
Yet gentle Sir, consider what the heat
Of an unsteady youth a giddy bra^^e,
Green indiscretion, flattery of greatness,
Rawnesse of judgment, wilfulness in folly,
Thoughts vagrant as the wind, and as uncertain
Might lead a boy in years too; 'twas a fault,
A Capital fault, for then I could not diue
Into the secrets of commanding Love:
Since when, experience by the extremities (in others)
Has forced me to collect. And trust me Crotolon,
I will redeem those wrongs with any service
Your satisfaction can require for current.

Armo. Thy acknowledgement is satisfaction.
What would you more?

Crot. I Am conquered: if E^phra^^^
Her self admit the motion, let it be so.
I doubt not my sons liking.

Itho. Use my fortunes,
Life, power, sword, and heart, all are your own.

Enter Bassa^es, Prophilus, Cala^^, Pe^th^a, E^phrane^, Chrystalla, Ph^l^ma,
and Gra^si^. Armo. The Princess with your sister.

Calan. I present 'e^
A stranger here in Court (my Lord,) for did not
Desire of seeing you, draw her abroad,
We had not been made happy in her company.

Ith. You are a gracious Princess. -- Sister, wedlock
Holds too severe a passion in your nature,
Which can engrosse all duty to your husband,
Without attendance on so dea^ a mistress.
It Is not my brothers pleasure, I presume,
TO immure her in a chamber.

Bass. It Is her will,
She gouernes her own hours; (noble Ithocles)
We thank the gods for your success, and welfare.
Our Lady has of ^ate been indisposed,
Else we had waited on you with the first.

Itho. How does Penthea now?

Pen. You best know brother,
From whom my health and comfort^ are derived.

Bass. I like the answer well; it is sad, and modest;
There may be tricks, yet, tricks. -- Have an eye Gransis.

Calan. Now Crotolon, the suit we joined in must not
Fall by too long demurre.

Crot. It Is granted, Princess,
For my part.

Armo. With condition, that his son
Favor the Contract.

Calan. Such delay is easy.
The joys of marriage make thee, Prophilus,
A proud deseruer of Euphrama's love,
And her of thy desert.

Proph. Most sweetly gracious.

Bass. The joys of marriage are the heaven on earth,
Life's paradise (great Princess) the souls quiet,
Sinews of concord, earthly immortality,
Eternity of pleasures; no restoratiues
Like to a constant woman. -- (but where i^ she?
'Twould puzzle all the gods, but to create
Such a new monster.) -- I can speak by proof,
For I rest in Elysium, it is my happiness.

Crot. Euphrania how are you resolved, (speak freely)
In your affections to this Gentlem^n?

Euphr: Nor more, nor less th^n a^ his love assures me,
Which (if your li^ing with my ^^^^hers warrants)
I cannot but approve in all point^ worthy.

Crot. So, so, I know your answer.

Ith. 'T had bin pity
To sunder hearts so equally consented.

Enter He^^phill. Hem. The King (Lord Ithocles) commands your presence;
And (fairest Princess) yours.

Calan. We will attend him.

Enter Groneas. Gron. Where are the Lords? all must unto the King
Without delay: the Prince of Argos --

Calan. Well Sir.

Gron. Is coming to the Court, sweet Lady.

C^lan. How!
The Prince of Argos?

Gron. 'Twas my fortune, Madam,
TO enjoy the honor of these happy tidings.

Ith. Penthe^!

Pen. Brother!

Ith. Let me an hour hence
Meet you alone, within the Palace grove,
I have some secret with you -- Prithee friend
Conduct her thither, and have special care
The walks be cleared of any to disturb us.

Proph. I shall.

Bass. How Is that?

Ith. Alone, pray be alone.
I am your creature, princess. -- on my Lords. Exeunt.

Bassanes. Bass. Alone, alone? what means that word alone?
Why might not I be there? -- hum! -- he is her brother;
Brothers and sisters are but flesh and blood,
And this same whoreson Court ease is temp^^tion
To a rebellion in the veins ^ -- Besides,
His fine friend Prophilu^ mus^ be her guardian.
Why may not he dispatch a business nimbly
Before the other come? -- or -- pa^^ring, pandring,
For one another? be it to sister, mother,
Wife, Cousen, any thing, amongst youths of met^all,
Is in request: It is so -- stubborn Fate:
But if I be a Cuckold, and can know it,
I will be fell, and fell.

Enter Gro^e^s. Gron. My Lord, you are called for.

Bass. Most heartily I thank y^, (...) my wi^e pray?

Gron. Retired amongst the (...)

Bass. (...) thank ^ee^
There Is an old waiter with (...) ^^w you (...)?

Gron. She (...) p^esence Lobby fast a^^e^pe ^ir.

Bass. Asleep? sleep Sir^

Gron, Is your Lordship troubled^
You will not to the King?

Bass. Your humblest Vassaile.

Gron. Your servant my good Lord.

Bass^ I wait your foot st^ps.

Exeunt. Scaene the third.
P^ophilus, Penthea. Proph. In this walk (Lady) will your brother find you:
And with your favor, give me le^^e a little
To work a preparation, in his fashion
I have observed of late, some kind of slacknesse
To such alacrity as Nature
And custom took delight in: Sadness grows
Upon his recreations, which he he h^^rds
In such a willing silence, that to question
The grounds will argue skill in friendship,
And less good manners.

Pen. Sir, I Am not inquisitiue
Of secrecies without an inuitation.

Phoph. With pardon, Lady, not a syllable
Of mine implies so rude a sense; the drift. --

Enter Orgilus. Proph. Do thy best
To make this Lady me^ry for an hour^. Exit.

Org. Your will shall be a law, Sir.

P^n. Prithee leave me,
I have some private thoughts I would account with:
Use thou thine own.

Org. Speak on, fair nymph, our souls
Can dance as well to musick^ of the Spheres
As any's who have feasted with the gods.

Pen. Your School terms are too troublesome.

Org. What heaven
Refines mortality from dross of earth,
But such as uncompounded beauty hallowes
With glorified perfection.

Pen. Set thy wits
In a less wild proportion.

Org. Time can never
On the white table of unguilty faith
Write counterfeit dishonor; turn those eyes
(The arrows of pure love) upon that fire
Which once rose to a flame, perfumed with vows
As sweetly scented as the L^cense smoking like
The holiest A^tars, Virgin tears
On Vesta's odours) sprinkled dewes to feed 'em,
And to increase their fervor.

Pen. Be not frantic.

Org. All pleasures are but mere imagination,
Feeding the hungry appetite with steame,
And sight of banquet, whilst the body pines,
Not relishing the real taste of food,
Such is the le^nnesse of a heart divided
From intercourse of troth-contracted lones;
No horror should deface that precious figure
Sealed with the lively stamp of equal souls.

Pen. Away, some fury has bewitched thy tongue:
The breath of ignorance that flies from thence,
Ripens a knowledge in me of afflictions,
Above all suffrance. -- Thing of talk be gone,
Be gone without reply.

Org. Be just, Penthea,
In thy commands: when thou send'st forth a doom
Of banishment, know first on whom it lights;
Thus I take off the shroud, in which my cares
Are folded up from view of common eyes;
What is thy sentence next?

Pen. Rash man, thou layest
A blemish on mine honor with the hazard
Of thy too desperate life: yet I profess,
By all the Laws of ceremonious wedlock,
I have not given admittance to one thought
Of female change, since cruelty enforced
Divorce betwixt my body and my heart:
Why would you fall from goodness thus?

Org. O rather
Examine me how I could live to say
I have bin much, much wronged; it is for thy sake
I put on this Imposture; dear Penthea,
If thy soft bosom be not turned to marble,
Thou't pity our calamities; my Interest
Confirms me thou art mine still.

Pe^. Lend your hand:
With both of mine I claspe it thus, thus kiss it,
Thus kneel before ye.

Org. You instruct my duty.

Pen. We may stand up: Have you ought else to urge
Of new demand? as for the old forget it,
It Is buried in an everlasting silence,
And shall be, shall be ever; what more would ye?

Org. I would possess my wife, the equity
Of very reason bids me.

Pen. Is that all?

Org. Why it is the all of me my self.

Pen. Remo^e
Your steps some distance from me; at this space
A few words I dare change; but first put on
Your borrowed shape.

Org. You are obeyed, it is done^

Pen. How (Orgilus) by promise I was thine,
The heavens do witness; they can witness too
A rape done on my truth: how I do love the^
Yet Orgilus, and yet, must best appear
In tendering thy freedom; for I find
The constant preservation of thy merit,
By thy not daring to attempt my fame
With injury of any loose conceit,
Which might give deeper wounds to discontents:
Continue this fair race, then though I cannot
Add to thy comfort, yet I shall more often
Remember from what fortune I am fallen,
And pity mine own ruin. -- Live, li^e happy.
Happy in thy next choice, that thou may people
This barren age with virtues in thy issue:
And o, when thou art married, think on me
With mercy, not contempt: I hope thy wife,
Hearing my story, will not scorn my fall:
Now let us part.

Org. Part! yet advise thee better:
Penthea is the wife to Orgilus,
And ever shall be.

Pen. Never shall nor will.

Org. How!

Pen. Hear me, in a word I Will tell thee why^
The Virgin dowry which my birth bestowed,
Is ravished by another: my true love
Abhorres to think, that Orgilus deserved
No better favors then a second bed.

Org. I must not take this reason.

Pen. To confirm it,
Should I outliue my bondage, let me meet
Another worse then this, and less desired,
If of all the men alive thou should but touch
My lip, or hand again.

Org. Penthea, now
I tell 'ee you grow wanton in my sufferance;
Come sweet, thou art mine.

Pen. Uncivil Sir, forbear,
Or I can turn affection into vengeance;
Your reputation (if you value any)
Lies bleeding at my feet. Unworthy man,
If ever henceforth thou appear in language,
Message, or letter to betray my frailty,
I Will call thy former protestations lust,
And curse my Stars for forfeit of my judgment.
Go thou, sit only for disguise and walks,
To hide thy shame: this once I spare thy life;
I laugh at mine own confidence; my sorrows
By thee are made inferior to my fortunes.
If ever thou did harbor worthy love,
Dare not to answer. My good Genius guide me,
That I may never see thee more. -- Go from me.

Org. I'e tear my veil of politic French off,
And stand up like a man resolved to do
Action, not words shall show me. O Penthea. Exit Orgilus.

Pen. 'A sighed my name sure as he parted from me,
I fear I was too rough: Alas poor Gentleman,
'A looked not like the ruins of his youth,
But like the ruins of those ruins: Honor,
How much we fight with weakness to preserve thee.

Enter Bassanes and Gransis. Bass. Fie on thee, damb thee, rotten magot, damb
thee,
Sleep? sleep at Court? and now? Aches, convulsions,
Impostumes, themes, gouts, palsies clog thy bones
A dozen years more yet.

Gran. Now you are in humors.

Bass. She Is by her self, there is hope of that; she is sad too,
She Is in strong contemplation: yes, and ^ixt.
The signs are wholesome.

Gran. Very wholesome truly.

Bass. Hold your chops night mare. -- Lady, come your brother
Is carried to his closet; you must thither.

Pen. Not well, my Lord?

Bass. A sudden ^it, 'twill off;
Some surfeit or disorder. -- How do d^erest?

Pen. Your news is none o'th best.

Enter Prophilus. Proph. The chief of men,
The excellentest Ithocles, desires
Your presence Madam.

Bass. We are hasting to him.

Pen. In vain we labor in this course of life
To piece our journey out at length, or crave
Respite of breath, our home is in the grave.

Bass. Perfect Philosophy: then let us care
To live so that our reckonings may fall even
When w' are to make account.

Proph. He cannot fear
Who builds on noble grounds: sickness or pain
Is the deseruers exercise, and such
Your virtuous brother to the world is known.
Speak comfort to him Lady, be all gentle;
Stars fall but in the grossness of our sight,
A good man dying, the Earth does lose a ligh^. Exeunt omnes.

Actus Tertius:
Scaena prim^.
Enter Tecnicus, and Orgilus in his own shape. Tecn. BE well advised, let not
a resolution
Of giddy rashness choke the breath of reason.

Org. It shall not, most sage Master.

Tecn. I am jealous:
For if the borrowed shape so late put on,
Inferred a consequence, we must conclude
Some violent design of sudden nature
Has shook that shadow off, to fly upon
A new-hatch'd execution: Orgilus,
Take heed thou have not (under our integrity)
Shrouded unlawful plots: our mortal eyes
Pierce not the secrets of your hearts, the god^
Are only privy to them.

Org. Learned Tecnicus,
Such doubts are causeless, and to clear the truth
From misconceit, the present State commands me.
The Prince of Argos comes himself in person
In quest of great Calantha for his Bride,
Our kingdoms heir; besides, mine only sister
Euphrania is disposed to Prophilus.
Lastly, the King is sending letters for me
To Athens, for my quick repair to Court.
Please to accept these Reasons.

Tecn. Just ones, Orgilus,
Not to be contradicted: yet beware
Of an unsure foundation; no fair colors
Can fortify a building faintly ioynted.
I have observed a growth in thy aspect
Of dangerous extent, sudden, and (^ooke to it)
I might add certain --

Org. My aspect? could Art
Run through mine inmost thoughts, it should not sift
An inclination there, more then what suited
With justice of mine honor.

Tecn. I believe it.
But know then Orgilus what honor is:
Honor consists not in a bare opinion
By doing any act that feeds content;
Brave in appearance, 'cause we think it brave:
Such honor comes by accident, not nature
Proceeding from the vices of our passion
Which makes our reason drunk. But real Honor
Is the reward of virtue, and acquired
By Justice or by ^^lour, which for Bases
Has Justice to uphold it. He then fails
In honor, who for lucre of Revenge
Commits thefts, murders, Treasons and Adulteries,
With such like, by intrenching on just Laws,
Whose sou'raignty is best preserved by Justice.
Thus as you see how honor must be grounded
On knowledge, not opinion: For opinion
Relyes on probability and Accident,
But knowledge on Necessity and Truth:
I leave thee to the fit consideration
Of what becomes the grace of real Honor.
Wishing success to all thy virtuous meanings.

Org. The gods increase thy wisdom (reverend Oracle)
And in thy precepts make me ever thrifty. Exit Org.

Tecn. I thank thy wish. -- Much mystery of Fate
Lies hid in that man's fortunes, Curiosity
May lead his actions into rare attempts;
But let the gods be moderators still,
No humane power can prevent their will.
Enter Armostes. From whence come 'ee?

Arm^. From King Amycl^^; (pardon
My interruption of your Studies) -- Here
In this sealed box he sends a treasure dear
To him as his Crown, 'a prays your gravity
You would examine, ponder, si^t and bolt
The pith and circumstance of every tittle
The scroll within contains.

Tecn. What is it Armostes?

Armo. It is the health of Sparta, the Kings life,
Sinews and safety of the Commonwealth,
The sum of what the Oracle delivered,
When last he visited the propheticke Temple
At Delph^s; what his reasons are for which
After so long a silence he requires
You counsel now (grave man) his majesty
Will soon himself acquaint you with.

Tecn. Apollo
Inspire my Intellect. -- The Prince of Argos
Is entertained.

Armo. He is, and has demanded
Our Princess for his wife; which I conceive
One special cause the King importunes you
For resolution of the Oracle.

Tecn. My duty to the King, good peace to Sparta,
And fair day to Armostes.

Armo. Like to Tecnicus.

Exeunt. Soft Music. A Song.
CAn you paint a thought? or number
Every fancy in a slumber?
Can you count soft minutes rouing
From a dyals point by moving?
Can you graspe a sigh? or lastly,
Rob a Virgins honor chastely?
No, o no; yet you may
Sooner do both that and this,
This and that, and never miss,
Then by any praise display
Beauties beauty, such a glory
As beyond all Fate, all Story,
All arms, all arts,
All loves, all hearts,
Greater then those, or they,
Do, shall, and must obey.
During which time, Enters Prophilus, Bassanes, Penthea, Gransis, passing over
the Stage; Bassanes and Gransis enter again softly, stealing to several
stands, and listen. Bass. All silent, calm, secure. -- Gransis, no creaking?
No noise; do hear nothing?

Grans. Not a mouse,
Or whisper of the wind.

Bass. The floor is matted,
The bed-posts sure are steel or marble. -- Soldiers
Should not affect (me thinks) strains so e^^eminate;
Sounds of such delicacy are but fawnings
Upon the floth of Luxury: they heighten
Cinders of covert lust up to a flame.

Grans. What do you mean (my Lord) speak low; that gabling
Of yours will but undo us.

Bass. Chamber-combats
Are felt, not hard.

Pro. A wakes.

Bas. What Is that?

Ith. Who Is there
Sister? all quit the room else.

Bass. It Is consented.

Enter Prophilus. Proph. Lord Bassanes, your brother would be private,
We must forbear; his sleep has newly left him.
Please 'ee withdraw?

Bass. By any means, it is fit.

Proph. Pray Gentlewoman walk too.

Gran. Yes, I will Sir.

Exeunt omnes. Ithocles discovered in a Chair, and Penthea. Itho. Sit nearer
sister to me, nearer yet;
We had one Father, in one womb took life,
Were brought up twins together, yet have lived
At distance like two strangers. I could wish
That the first pillow whereon I was cradell'd,
Had proved to me a grave.

Pen. You had been happy:
Then had you never known that sin of life
Which blots all following glories with a vengeance,
For forfeiting the last will of the dead,
From whom you had your being.

Itho. Sad Penthea,
Thou can not be too cruel; my rash spleen
Has with a violent hand plucked from thy bosom
A louer-blest heart, to grind it into dust,
For which mine is now a breaking.

Pen. Not yet, heaven
I do beseech thee: first let some wild fires
Scorch, not consume it; may the heat be cherisht
With desires infinite, but hopes impossible.

Itho. Wronged soul, thy prayers are heard.

Pen. Here lo I breathe
A miserable creature led to ruin
By an unnatural brother.

Itho. I consume
In languishing affections for that trespass,
Yet cannot dye.

Pen. The handmaid to the wages,
The untroubled of Country toil, drinks streams
With leaping kids, and with the bleating lambs;
And so allayes her thirst secure, whiles I
Quench my hot sighs with fleerings of my tears.

Itho. The labourer does eat his coursest bread,
Earned with his sweat, and lies him down to sleep;
Which every bit I touch turns in disgestion
To gall, as bitter as Penthea's curse.
Put me to any penance for my tyranny,
And I will call thee merciful.

Pen. Pray kill me,
Rid me from living with a jealous husband,
Then we will join in friendship, be again
Brother and sister. -- Kill me pray: nay, will 'ee?

Itho. How does thy Lord esteem thee?

Pen. Such an one
As only you have made me; a faith-breaker,
A spotted whore, forgive me; I am one
In art, not in desires, the gods must witness.

Itho. Thou do be lie thy friend.

Pen. I do not Ithocles^
For she that is wife to Orgilus, and lives
In known Adultery with Bassanes,
Is at the best a whore. Wilt kill me now?
The ashes of our parents will assume
Some dreadful figure, and appear to charge
Thy bloody gilt, that have betrayed their name
To infamy, in this reproachful match.

Itho. After my victories abroad, at home
I meet despair; ingratitude of nature
Has made my actions monstrous: thou shall stand
A Deity (my sister) and be worshipped,
For thy resolved martyrdom: wronged maids,
And married wives shall to thy hallowed shrine
Offer their orisons, and sacrifice
Pure Turtles crowned with myrtle, if thy pity
Unto a yielding brothers pressure, lend
One finger but to ease it.

Pen. O no more.

Itho. Death waits to waft me to the Stygian banks,
And free me from this Chaos of my bondage,
And till thou will forgive, I must endure.

Pen. Who is the Saint you ser^e?

Itho. Friendship, or
Of birth to any but my sister, durst not
Have moved that question as a secret, Sister:
I dare not murmr to my self.

Pen. Let me,
By your new protestations I conjure 'ee,
Partake her name.

Itho. Her name, -- it is, -- it is, I dare not.

Pen. All your respects are forged.

Itho. They are not. -- Peace
Calantha is the Princess, the Kings daughter,
Sol^ heir of Sparta -- Me most miserable,
Do I now love thee? for my injuries
Revenge thy self with bravery, and gossip
My treasons to the Kings ears. Do; Calant^^
Knows it not yet, nor Prophilus my nearest.

Penth. Suppose you were contracted to her, would it not
Split even your very soul to see her father
Snatch her out of your arms against her will,
And force her on the Prince of Argos?

Itho. Trouble not
The fountains of mine eyes with thine own story,
I sweat in blood for it.

Pen. We are reconciled:
Alas, Sir, being children, but two branches
Of one stock, it is not fit we should divide:
Have comfort, you may find it.

Itho. Yes in thee:
Only in thee Penthea mine.

Pen. If sorrows
Have not too much dul^'d my infected brain,
I Will cheer invention for an active strain.

Itho. Mad man! why have I wronged a maid so excellent?

Enter Bassanes with a poniard, Prophilus, Groneas, Hemophill and Gransis.
Bass. I can forbear no longer: more, I will not;
Keep off your hands, or fall upon my point:
Patience is tired, for like a slow-paced Ass
Ye ride my easy nature, and proclaim
My sloth to vengeance, a reproach and property.

Itho. The meaning of this rudeness.

Proph. He Is distracted.

Pen. O my grieved Lord.

Grans. Sweet Lady come not near him^
He holds his perilous weapon in his hand
To prick 'a cares not whom, nor where, -- see, see, see.

Bass. My birth is noble, though the popular blast
Of vanity, as giddy as thy youth,
Has reared thy name up to bestride a cloud,
Or progress in the Chariot of the Sun;
I am no clod of trade, to lackey pride,
Nor like your slave of expectation wait
The baudy hinges of your doors, or whist^^
For mystical conueyance to your bed-sports.

Gron. Fine humor^, they become him.

Hem. How 'a stares,
Struts, puffes, and sweats: most admirable lunacy?

Itho. But that I may conceive the spirit of wine
Has took possession of your soberer custom,
I Would say you were unmannerly.

Pen. Dear brother.

Bass. Unmannerly -- Mew Kitling -- smooth formality
Is usher to the rankness of the blood,
But Impudence bears up the train: Indeed, sir,
Your fiery metal, or your springall blaze
Of huge renown, is no sufficient Royalty
To print upon my forehead the scorn Cuckold.

Itho. His Jealousy has robbed him of his wits,
'A talks 'a knows not what.

B^ss. Yes, and 'a knows
To whom 'a talks; to one that franks his lust
In Swine-security of bestiall incest.

Ith. Hah devil.

Bass. I will hallo't, though I blush more
To name the filthiness, than thou to act it.

Ith. Monster!

Proph. Sir by our friendship.

Pen. By our bloods,
Will you quite both undo us, Brother?

Grans. Out on him,
These are his megrims, firks and melancholies.

Hem. Well said, old Touchhole.

Gron. Kick him out at doors.

Pen. With favor let me speak. -- My Lord? what slacknesse
In my obedience has deserved this rage?
Except humility and sin lent duty
Have drawn on your unquiet, my simplicity
Never studied your vexation.

Bass. Light of beauty,
Deal not ungently with a desperate wound!
No breach of reason dares make war with her
Whose looks are sovereignty, whose breath is balm
O that I could preserve thee in fruition
As in devotion!

Pen. Sir, may every evil
Locked in Pandora's box; shower (in your presence)
On my unhappy head, if since you made me
A partner in your bed, I have been faulty
In one unseemly thought against your honor.

Itho^ Purge not his g^^e^e^, Penthea.

Bass. Yea, (...) on,
Excellent creature -- Good be not a hinderance
To peace, and praise of virtue. -- O my senses
Are charmed with sounds caelestiall. -- On, dear, on^
I never gave you one ill word; say, did I?
Indeed I did not.

Pen. Nor, by Juno's forehead,
Was I e're guilty of a wanton error.

Bass. A goddess, let me kneel.

Grans. Alas kind Animal.

Itho. No, but for p^nnance.

Bass. Noble sir, what is it?
With gladness I embrace it; yet pray let not
My rashness teach you to be too unmerciful.

Itho. When you shall show good proof that manly wisdome^
Not ouer-sway'd by passion, or opinion,
Knows how to lead judgment; then this Lady
Your wife, my sister, shall return in safety
Home to be guided by you, but till first
I can, out of clear evidence approve it,
She shall be my care.

Bass. Rip my bosom vp^
I Will stand the execution with a constancy:
This torture is insufferable.

Itho. Well Sir,
I dare not trust her to your fury.

Bass. But
Penthea says not so.

Pen. She needs no tongue
To plead excuse, who never purposed wrong.

Hemo. Virgin of reverence and antiquity
Stay you behind.

Gr^n. The Court wants not your diligence.

Exeunt omnes, sed Bass. and Grans. Grans. What will you do my Lord? my Lady's
gone,
I am denied to follow.

Bass. I may see her.
Or speak to her once more.

Grans. And feel her too, man,
Be of good cheer, she is your own flesh and bone.

Bass. Diseases desperate must find cures alike:
She swore she has been true.

Grans. True on my modesty.

Bass. Let him want truth who credits not her vowes^
Much wrong I did her, but her brother infinite;
Rumor will voice me the contempt of manhood,
Should I run on thus. Some way I must try
To out-doe Art, and cry a Jealousy. Exeunt omnes.

Flourish. Enter Amyolas, Nearchus leading Calantha, Armostes, Crotolon,
Euphranea, Christalla, Philema, and Amelus. Amy. Cozen of Argos, what the
heavens have pleased
In their unchanging Counsels to conclude
For both our kingdoms weal, we must submit to:
Nor can we be unthankful to their bounties,
Who when we were even creeping to our graves,
Sent us a daughter; in whose birth, our hope
Continues of succession: As you are
In title next, being grandchilde to our Aunt,
So we in hear^ desire you may sit nearest
Calantha's love; since we have ever vowed
Not to enforce affection by our will,
But by her own choice to confirm it gladly.

Near. You speak the nature of a right just father:
I come not hither roughly to demand
My Cozens thraldom, but to free mine own:
Report of great Calantha's beauty, virtue,
Sweetness, and singular perfections, courted
All ears to credit what I find was published
By constant truth: from which if any service
Of my desert can purchase fair construction,
This Lady must command it.

Calan. Princely Sir,
So well you know how to profess observance
That you instruct your hearers to become
Practitioners in duty; of which number
I Will study to be chief.

Near. Chief, glorious Virgin,
In my devotions, as in all men's wonder.

Amy. Excellent Cozen, we deny no libertie^
Use thine own opportunities. -- Armoste^,
We must consult with the Philosophers,
The business is of weight.

Armost. Sir, at your pleasure^

Amy. You told me, Crotolon, your sonne's returned
From Athens? wherefore comes 'a not to Count
As we commanded?

Crot. He shall soon attend
Your royal will, great Sir.

Amy. The marr^age
Between young Prophilus and Euphranea,
Tafts of too much delay:

Crot. My Lord.

Amy. Some pleasures
At celebration of it would give life
To the entertainment of the Prince our kinsman
Our Court wears gravity more then we relish.

Armo. Yet the heavens smile on all your high attempts,
Without a Cloud.

Crot. So may the gods protect us.

Calan. A Prince, a subject?

Near. Yes, to beauties scepter^
As all hearts kneel so mine.

Calan. You are too Courtly.

To them, Ithocles, Orgilus, Prophilus Itho. Your safe return to Sparta is
most welcome,
I joy to meet you here, and as occasion
Shall grant us priuacy, will yield you reason^
Why I should covet to deserve the title
Of your respected friend: for without Complement
Believe it, Orgilus, it is my ambition.

Org. Your Lordship may command me your poor servant.

Itho. So amorously close close? -- so soon? -- my heart!

Proph. What sudden change is next?

Itho. Life to the King,
To whom I here present this Noble gentleman,
New come from Athens; Royal Sir, vouchsafe
Your gracious hand in favor of his merit.

Crot. My son preferred by Ithocles!

Amy. Our bounties
Shall open to thee Orgilus; for instance,
Hark in thine ear; if out of thos^ inventions
Which flow in Athens, thou have there ingrost
Some rarity of wit to grace the Nuptials
Of thy fair sister, and renown our Court
In the eyes of this young Prince, we shall be debtor
To thy conceit, think on't^

Org. Your Highness honors me.

Near. My tongue and heart are twins.

Calan. A noble birth
Becoming such a father. -- worthy Orgilus,
You are a guest most with'd for.

Org. May my duty
Still rise in your opinion, sacred Princess.

Itho. Euphranea's brother, sir, a Gentleman
Well worthy of your knowledge.

Near. We embrace him,
Proud of so dear acquaintance.

Amy. All prepare
For Revels and disport: the joys of Hymen,
Like Phoebus in his lustr^, puts to flight
All mists of dullness; crown the hours with gladness:
No sounds but music, no discourse but mirth.

Calan. Thine arm I prithee Ithocles. -- Nay, good
My Lord keep on your way, I am provided.

Near. I dare not disobey.

Itho. Most heavenly Lady. Exeunt.

Enter Crotolon, Orgilus. Crot. The King has spoke his mind.

Org. His will he hath^
But were it lawful to hold plea against
The power of greatness, not the reason, happily
Such vnder-shrubs as subjects, sometimes might
Borrow of Nature, Justice, to inform
That license sovereignty holds without check
Over a meek obedience.

Crot. How resolve you
Touching your sisters marriage? Prophilus
Is a deserving, and a hopeful youth.

Org. I envy not his merit, but applaud it:
Could with him thrift in all his best desires,
And with a willingness inleague our blood
With his, for purchase of full growth in friendship^
He never touched on any wrong that malic'd
The honor of our house, nor stirred our peace;
Yet, with your favor, let me not forget
Under whose wing he gathers warmth and comfort,
Whose creature he is bound, made, and must live so.

Crot. Son, son, I find in thee a harsh condition,
No courtesy can win it; it is too ranckorous.

Org. Good Sir be not severe in your construction,
I am no stranger to such easy calmes
As sit in tender bosoms: Lordly Ithocles
Has graced my entertainment in abundance;
Too humbly has descended from that height
Of arrogance and spleen which wrought the rape
On grieved Penthea's purity; his scorn
Of my untoward fortunes is reclaimed
Unto a Coutship, almost to a fawning:
I Will kiss his foot, since you will have it so.

Crot. Since I will have it so? Friend I will have it so
Without our ruin by your politic plot^,
Or Wolf of hatred snarling in your breasts
You have a spirit, Sir, have ye? a familiar
That poasts in the air for your intelligence?
Some such Hobgoblin hurried you from Athens,
For yet you come unsent for.

Org. If unwelcome,
I might have found a grave there.

Crot. Sure your business
Was soon dispatched, or your mind altered quickly.

Org. 'Twas care, Sir, of my health, cut short my journey;
For there, a general infection
Threatens a desolation.

Crot. And I fear
Thou have brought back a worse infection with thee,
Infection of my mind; which, as thou say,
Threatens the desolation of our family.

Org. Forbid it our dear Genius, I will rather
Be made a Sacrifice on Thrasus monument,
Or kneel to Ithocles his son in dust,
Then woo a fathers curse: My sisters marriage
With Prophilus, is from my heart confirmed:
May I live hated, may I dye despised,
If I omit to further it in all
That can concern me.

Crot. I have been too rough,
My duty to my King made me so earnest;
Excuse it Orgilus.

Org. Dear Sir^

Enter to th^m^ Prophilus, Euphranea, I^hocles, (...), Hemophil. Crot. H^^e
comes
Euphranea, with Prophilus and Ithocles.

Org. Most honored -- ever famous.

Itho. Your true friend,
On earth not any true^. -- With s^^oth eyes
Look on this worthy couple, you^ consen^
Can only make them one.

Org. They have it. -- Sister,
Thou pawn'dst to me an oath, of which engagement
I never will release thee, if thou aym'st
At any other choice then this.

Euphr. Dear brother,
At him or none.

Crot. To which my blessing's ^dded.

Org. Which till a greater ceremony perfect,
Euphran^a lend thy hand; here take her Prophilus,
Live long a happy man and wife; and further,
That these in presence may conclude an omen,
Thus for a Bridal song I close my wishes:
Comforts lasting, Loves increasing,
Like soft hours never ceasing;
Plenties pleasure, peace complying
Without iarres, or tongues envying;
Hearts by holy Union wedded
More then theirs by custom bedded;
Fruitful issues: life so graced,
Not by age to be defaced;
Budding, as the year ensu'th,
Every spring another youth:
All what thought can add beside,
Crown this Bridegroom and this Bride.

Proph. You have sealed joy close to my soul: Euphranea,
Now I may call thee mine.

Itho. I but exchange
One good friend for another.

Org. If these Gallants
Will please to grace a poor invention,
By joining with me in some ^light devise,
I Will venture on a strain, my younger days
Have studied for delight^

Hom. With thankful willingness
I offer my attendance.

Gron. No endeavor
Of mine shall fail to show it self.

Itho. We will
All join to wait on thy directions, Orgilus.

Org. O my good Lord, your favors flow toward
A too unworthy worm; but as you please,
I am what you will shape me.

Itho. A fast friend.

Crot. I thank thee son for this acknowledgemen^,
It is a sight of gladness.

Org. But my duty. Exe^^t omnes.

Enter Calantha, Penthea, (...) Calan. Who e're would speak with us deny his
entrance^
Be careful of our charge.

Chri^ We shall m^dam.

Calan. Except the King himself, (...) none admittance,
Not any.

Phil. Madam it shall be our care. Ex^unt^

Calantha, P^^thea. Calan. Being alone, Penthea, you have granted
The opportunity you sought, and might
At all times have commanded.

Pen. It Is a benefit^
Which I shall owe your goodness even in death for^
My glass of life (sweet Princess has few minutes
Remaining to run down; the sands are spent;
For by an inward messenger I feel
The summons of departure short and certain.

Calan. You feed too much your melancholy.

Pen. Glorie^
Of humane greatness are but pleasing dreams,
And shadows soon decaying: on the stage
Of my mortality, my youth has acted
Some scenes of vanity, drawn out at length
By varied pleasures, sweetened in the mixture,
But Tragical in issue; Beauty, pomp,
With every sensuality our giddiness
Does frame an Idol, are unconstant friends
When any troubled passion make^ assault
On the unguarded Castle of the mind.

Calan. Contemn not your condition, for the proof
Of bare opinion only: to what end
Reach all these Moral texts?

Pen. To place before 'ee
A perfect mirror, wherein you may see
How weary I am of a lingering life,
Who count the best a misery.

Calan. Indeed
You have no little cause; yet none so great
As to distrust a remedy.

Pen. That remedy
Must be a winding sheet, a sold of lead,
And some vntrod-on corner in the earth.
Not to detain your expectation, Princess,
I have an humble suit.

Calan. Speak, I enjoy it.
Vouchsafe then to be my Ex^^^^ria,
And take that trouble o^ 'ee, to dispose
Such Legacies, as I bequeath impartially^
I have not much to give, the pains are easy,
Heaven will reward your piety, and thank it
When I am dead; for sure I must not live,
I hope I cannot.

Calan. Now beshrew thy sadness;
Thou turn'st me too much woman.

Pen. Her fair eyes
Melt into passion; Then I have assurance
Encouraging my boldness. -- In this paper
My Will was Charactered; which you, with pardon,
Shall now know from mine own mouth.

Calan. Talk on, prithee,
It is a pretty earnest.

Pen. I have left me
But three poor Jewels to bequeath; The first is
My youth; for though I am much old in griefs,
In years I am a child.

Calan. To whom that?

Pen. To Virgin wives, such as abuse not wedlock
By freedom of desires, but covet chiefly
The pledges of chaste beds, for ties of love,
Rather than ranging of their blood^ And next
To married maids, such as prefer the number
Of honorable issue in their virtues,
Before the flattery of delights by marriage,
May those be ever young.

Calan. A second Jewel
You mean to part with.

Pen. It Is my Fame, I trust,
By scandal yet vn^ouch'd; this I bequeath
To memory, and Times old d^ughter Truth^
If ever my unhappy name find mention
When I am fallen to dust, may it deserve
Be seeming charity without dishonor.

Calan. How handsomely thou playst with harmless sport
Of mere imagination; speak the last,
I strangely like thy will.

Pen. This Jewel, Madam,
Is dearly precious to me; you must use
The best of your discretion to employ
This gift as I entend it.

Calan. Do not doubt me.

Pen. It Is long agon^ since first I lost my heart,
Long I have lived without it, else for certain^
I should have (...)
Of it, to great Calantha, (...)
By service bound, and by affection vowed,
I do bequeath in holiefe rites of love
Mine only brother Ithocles.

Calan. What saydst thou?

Pen. Impute not, heauen-blest Lady, to ambition,
A faith as humbly perfect as the prayers
Of a devoted suppliant ^^^^indow it?
Look on him, Princess, with an eye of pity;
How like the ghost of what he (...) appe^r'd^
A' moves before you.

Calan. Shall I answer here,
Or lend my ear too gr^ffely?

Pen. First, his hear^
Shall fall in Cynders, scorched by your disdain,
E're ^e will dare, poor man; t^ ^pe an eye
On these divine looks, but with low-be^t thoughts
Accusing such presumption; as for word^,
A' dares not utter any but (...)
Yet this lost creature lo^es'^^. -- Be a (...)
In sweetness as in blood; give him his do^^e,
Or raise him up to comfort.

Cal^^^ What new change
Appears in my behavior, that th^^ (...)
Tempt my displeasure?

Pen. I (...) the world
To revel Elysium, and it is (...)
To wish my brother some advantage her^^
Yet by my best hopes, Ithocles is ignorant
Of this pursuit. But if you please to kill him,
Lend him one angry look, or one ^^^sh w^rd,
And you shall soon conclude how ^^rong a power
Your absolute authority h^ld^ (...)
His life and end.

Calan. You hau^ forgot, P^nthea,
How still I have a father.

P^^. But remember
I am a sister, though to me this ^^^ther
Has been you know vnki^^e^ ^ most unkind!

Calan. (...) -- Lady,
Your check lies in my (...).

^ Both. Madam, here.

Calan. I think 'ee sleep, ^ee dro^es; wait on Penth^a
Unto her lodging. -- Ithoc^^s^ wronged Lady!

Pen. My reckonings are made even, Death or Fate
Can now nor strike too soon, nor force too late. Exeunt.

Actus Qua^tus:
Scaena prima.
Enter Ithocles and Armostes. Itho. Forbear your Inquisition; curiosity
Is of too subtle, and too searching nature:
In fears of love too quick; too slow of credit:
I am not what you doubt me.

Arm. Nephew, bethen
As I would wish; -- alilis not right, -- Good heaven
Confirm your Resolutions for dependence
On worthy end^ which may advance your quiet.

Ith. I did the Noble Orgilus much injury,
But grieved Penthea more: I now repent it;
Now, Uncle, now; this Now, is now too late:
So provident i^ (...) in sad iss^^,
That after-wit, like Bankrupts debts, stand tallye^
Without all possibilities of payment:
Sure he is an honest, very honest Gentleman;
A man of singl^ meaning.

Arm. I believe it:
Yet Nephew, it is the tongue informs our cares;
Our eyes can never pierce into the thoughts,
For they are lodged too inward: -- but I question
No truth in Orgilus. -- The Princess (Sir)

Ith. The Princess? ha?

Arm. With her the Prince of Arg^s.

Enter Nearchus leading Calantha, Amel^^, Christalla, Philema. Near. Great
(fair one) grace my hopes with any instance
Of Livery, from the allowance of your f^uour,
This little spark.

Call. A Toy^

Ne^r. Love fea^^ on Toys,
For Cupid is a child, -- vouchsafe this bounty^
It cannot beny'd.

Calan. You shall not value
(Sweet Cozen) at a price what I count cheap,
So cheap, that let him take it who dares stoop for it,
And give it at next meeting to a Mistress,
She Will thank him for it, perhaps. Casts it to Ithocles.

Ame. The Ring, Sir, is
The Princesses, I could have took it up.

Ith. Learn manners, prithee. -- To the blessed owner
Upon my knees.

Near. You Are saucy.

Call. This is pretty,
I am, belike, a Mistress. -- wondrous pretty:
Let the man keep his fortune, since he found it;
He Is worthy on it. -- On Cozen.

Ith. Follow Spaniell.
I Will force'^e to a fawning else.

Am^. You dare not.

Exeunt. Mane^t Ith^. and Armost. Arm. My Lord, you were too forward.

Ith. Looke'ee Uncle:
Some such there are whose liberal contents
Swarm without care in every sort of plenty;
Who, after full repasts, can say them down
To sleep; and they sleep, Uncle: in which silence
Their very dreams present 'em choice of pleasures:
Pleasures (observe me Uncle) of rare object:
Here heaps of gold, there Increments of honors;
Now change of garments, then the votes of people;
Anon varieties of beauties, courting
In flatteries of the night, exchange of d^lliance,
Yet these are still but dreams: give me felicity
Of which my senses waking are partakers;
A real, visible, material happiness:
And then too, when I stagger in expectance
Of the l^ast comfort that can cherish life:
I saw it (Sir) I saw it; for it came
From her own hand.

Arm. The Princess threw it to you:

Itho. True, and she said -- well I remember what.
Her Cozen Prince would beg it.

Arm. Yes, and parted
In anger at your taking on it.

Ith. Penthea!
Oh thou have pleaded with a powerful language^.
I want a fee to gratify thy myrit.
But I will do --

Arm. What is it you say?

Itho. In anger,
In anger let him part; for could his breath,
Like whirlewinds, toss such ser^ile slaves as lick
The dust his footsteps print, into a vapor,
It durst not stir a ^aire of mine; It should not,
I Would rend it up by the roots first. To be any thing
Calantha smiles on, is to be a blessing
More sacred than a petty-Prince of Argos
Can wish to equal, or in worth or Title.

Arm. Contain your self, my Lord, Ixion aiming
To embrace Juno, bosomed but a cloud,
And begat Centaures: it is an useful moral,
Ambition hatched in clouds of mere opinion,
Proves but in birth a prodigy.

Itho. I thank 'ee;
Yet, with your License, I should seem uncharitable
To gentler Fate, if rellishing the dainties
Of a souls settled peace, I were so feeble
Not to digest it.

Arm. He deserves small trust
Who is not privy Counselor to himself.

Enter Nearchus, Orgilus, and Amelus. Near. Brave me?

Org. Your Excellence mistakes his temper^
For Ithocles in fashion of his mind
Is beautiful, soft, gentle, the clear mirror
Of absolute perfection.

Amel. Was It your modesty
Termed any of the Prince his servants Spaniell?
Your Nurse sure taught you other language.

Itho. Language.

Near. A gallant Man at arms is here: a Doctor
In feats of Chiualry; blunt, and rough spoken,
Vouchsafing not the fustian of ciuility,
Which rash spirits style good manners.

Ith. Manners.

Org. No more (Illustrious Sir) it is marchlesse Ithocles.

Near. You might have understood who I am.

Ith. Yes,
I did -- else -- but the presence calmed the affront;
Y' are Cozen to the Princess.

Near. To the King too;
A certain Instrument that lent supportance
To your Collossicke greatness: -- to that King too
You might have added.

Itho. There is more divinity
In beauty then in Majesty.

Arm. O fie, fie

Near. This odd youths pride turns heretic in loyalty.
Sirrah! low Mushroms never rival Ced^rs.

Exeunt Nearchus and Amelus. Itho. Come back: what pitiful dull thing am I
So to be tamely scoulded at? Come back;
Let him come back and echo once again
That scornful sound of Mushrome; painted colts,
Like Heralds coats, guilt over with Crowns and Scepters,
May bait a musled Lion.

Arm. Cozen, Coxen,
Thy tongue is not thy friend.

Org. In point of honor
Discretion knows no bounds. Amelus told me
'Twas all about a little Ring.

Itho. A Ring
The Princess threw away, and I took up:
Admit she threw't to me; what arm of brass
Can snatch it hence? No, could a' grind the hoope
To powder, a' might sooner reach my heart
Then steal and wear one dust on it. -- Orgilus,
I am extremely wronged.

Org. A Ladies favor
Is not to be so slighted.

Itho. Slighted.

Arm. Quiet
These vain vnr^ly passions, which will render ye
Into a madness.

Org. Griefs will have their vent.

Enter Tecnicus. Arm. Welcome; thou come in season (reuereud man)
To power the balsome of a supplying patience
Into the festering wound of ill-spent fury.

Org. What makes He here?

Tecn. The hurts are yet but mortal,
Which shortly will prove deadly: To the King,
Armostes, see in safety thou deliver
This sealed up counsel; bid him with a constancy
Peruse the secrets of the gods: -- o Sparta,
O Lacedemon! double named, but one
In fate: when Kingdoms reele (mark well my Saw)
Their heads must needs be giddy: tell the King
That henceforth he no more must enquire after
My aged head: Apollo will it so;
I am for Delphos.

Arm. Not without some conferenc^
With our great master.

Tecn. Never more to see him,
A greater Prince commands me. -- Ithocles, When youth is ripe, and Age from
time does part,
The liuelesse Trunk shall wed the Broken Heart.


Ith. What Is this, if understood?

Tecn. List Orgilus,
Remember what I told thee long before,
These tears shall be my witness.

Arm. Alas good man.

Tecn. Let craft with courtesy a while confer,
Revenge proves its own Executioner.

Org. Dark sentences are for Apollo's Priests:
I am not Oedipus.

Tecn. My hour is come;
Cheer up the King: farewell to all. -- O Sparta,
O Lacedemon.

Arm. If propheticke fire Exit. Tec^^
Have warmed this old man's bosom, we might construe
His words to fatal sense.

Ith. Leave to the powers
Above us, the effects of their decrees;
My burden lies within me. Servile fears
Prevent no great effects. -- Divine Calantha.

Arm. The gods be still propitious. -- Exeunt, manet Org.

Org. Something oddly
The booke-man prated; yet a' talked it weeping^ Let craft with courtesy a
while confer,
Revenge proves its own executioner.

Conne it again; for what? It shall not puzzle me;
It Is dotage of a withered brain. -- Penthea
Forbad me not her presence; I may see her,
And gaze my fill: why see her then I may;
When if I faint to speak, I must be silent. Exit Org.

Enter Bassanes, Gransis, and Phulas. Bass. Pray use your Recreations, all the
service
I will expect, is quietness amongst 'e^:
Take liberty at home, abroad, at all times,
And in your charities appease the gods
Whom I with my distractions have offended.

Grans. Fair blessings on thy heart.

Phul. Here Is a rare change^
My Lord, to cure the itch, is surely gelded;
The Cuckold, in conceit, has cast his horns.

Bass. Betake 'ee to your se^^rall occasions,
And wherein I have heretofore been faulty,
Let your constructions mildly pass it over,
Henceforth I Will study reformation, -- more,
I have not for employment.

Gran. O sweet man!
Thou art the very hony-combe of honesty.

Phul. The garland of good will; -- Old Lady, hold up
Thy reverend snout, and trot behind me softly,
As it becomes a Moile of ancient carriage. Exeunt, manet Bass^

Bass. Beasts only capable of sense, enjoy
The benefit of food and ease with thankfulness;
Such silly creatures, with a grudging, kick not
Against the portion Nature has bestowed;
But men endowed with reason, and the use
Of reason, to distinguish from the chafe
Of abject scarscity, the Quintescence,
Soul, and Elixar of the Earths abundance,
The treasures of the Sea, the Air, nay heaven
Repining at these glories of creation,
Are verier beast^ than beasts; and of those beasts
The worst am I; I, who was made a Monarch
Of what a heart could wish, for a chaste wife,
Endeuour'd what in me lay, to pull down
That Temple built for adoration only,
And leuel't in the dust of causeless scandal:
But to redeem a sacrilege so impious,
Humility shall power before the deities:
I have incenst a largeness of more patience
Then their displeased Altars can require:
No tempests of commotion shall disquiet
The calmes of my composure.

Enter Orgilus. Org. I have found thee,
Thou patron of more horrors then the bulk
Of manhood, hoop'd about with ribs of Iron,
Can cramb within thy breast: P^nthea (Bassanes)
Cursed by thy Iealousies; more, by thy dotag^
Is left a prey to words.

Bass. Exercis^
Your trials for addition to my penance,
I am resolved.

Org. Play not with misery
Past cure^ some angry Minister of Fate has
Deposed the Empress of her soul, her r^^son,
From its most proper Throne; but what is the miracle
More new, I, I have seen it, and yet live.

Bass. You may delude my senses, not my judgment:
It Is anchored into a firm resolution,
Dalliance of Mirth or Wit can never vnfixe it.
Practice yet further.

Org. May thy death of love to her
Damn all thy comforts to a lasting fast
From every joy of life: Thou barren rock,
By thee we have be split in ken of harbor.

Enter Ithocles, Penthea her ba^re about her ears, Philema, Christalla. Ith.
Sister look up, your Ithocles, your brother
Speaks to you: why do you weep? Dear, turn not from me:
Here is a killing sight: lo, Bassanes,
A lamentable object.

Org. Man, do see it?
Sports are more gamesome; am I yet in merriment?
Why do not laugh^

Bass. Divine, and best of Ladies,
Please to forget my outrage? mercy ever
Cannot but lodge under a root so excellent:
I have cast off that cruelty of frenzy
Which once appeared, Impostors, and then iugled
To cheat my sleeps of rest.

Org. Was I in earnest?

Pen. Sure if we were all Sirens, we should sing pitifully;
And 'twere a comely music, when in parts
One sung another knell: the Turtle sighs
When he has lost his mate; and yet some say
A' must be dead first: it is a fine deceit
To pass away in a dream: indeed I Have slept
With mine eyes open a great while. No falsehood
Equals a broken faith; there is not a hair
Sticks on my head but like a leaden Plummer
It sinkes me to the grave: I must creep thither.
The iourny is not long.

Ith. But thou, Penthea,
Have many years, I hope, to number yet
E're thou can travel that way.

Bass. Let the Swan first
Be wrapped up in an everlasting darkness,
Before the light of nature, chiefly formed
For the whole worlds delight, feel an Eclipse
So universal.

Org. Wisdom (look 'ee)
Begins to rave: -- art thou mad too, antiquity^

Pen. Since I was first a wife, I might have been
Mother to many pretty prattling Babes:
They would have smiled when I smiled; and, for certaine^
I should have cried when they cried; -- truly brother,
My father would have picked me out a husband,
And then my little one^ had been no bastards:
But it is too late for me to marry now,
I am past childbearing; it is not my fault.

Bass. Fall on me, if there be a burning Etna,
And bury me in flames; sweats hot as sulphur,
Boil through my pores: affliction has in store
No torture like to this.

Org. Behold a patience^
Lay by thy whyning gr^y dissimulation,
Do something worth a Chronicle; show Justice
Upon the Author of this mischief; dig out
The Iealousies that hatched this thraldom first
With thine own poniard: every anticke r^pture
Can roar as thine does.

Ith. Orgilus forbear.

Bass. Disturb him not, it is a talking motion
Provided for my torment: what a fool am I
To bawdy passion? e're I Will speak a word
I will look on and burst.

Pen. I loved you once.

Org. Thou did, wronged creature, in despite of malice;
For it I love thee even.

Pen. Spare your hand,
Believe me, I Will not hurt it.

Org. Pain my heart to
Complain not though I wring it hard: I Will kiss it;
O it is a fine soft palm: hark in thine care,
Like whom do I look, pre^he? nay, no whispering.
Goodness! we had been happy: too much happiness
Will make folk proud they say -- but that is he; points at Ithocles.
And yet he paid for it home; alas, his heart
Is crept into the cabinet of the Princess;
We shall have points and bridelaces. Remember
When we last gathered Roses in the garden
I found my wits, but truly you lost yours:
That Is He, and still it is He.

Ith. Poor soul, how idely
Her fancies guide her tongue.

Bass. Keep in vexation,
And break not into clamor.

Org. She has tutored me:
Some powerful inspiration checks my laziness:
Now let me kiss your hand, grieved beauty.

Pen. Kiss it.
Alack, alack, his lips be wondrous cold;
Dear soul, h'as lost his color: have 'ee seen
A straying heart? all crannies, every drop
Of blood is turned to an Amethist,
Which married Bachelours hang in their ears.

Org. Peace usher her into Elysium:
If this be madness, madness is an Oracle. Exit Org.

Ith. Christalla, Philema, when slept my sister,
Her rauings are so wild.

Chri. Sir, not these ten days.

Phil. We watch by her continually; besides,
We cannot any way pray her to eat.

Bass. Oh -- misery of miseries!

Pen. Take comfort,
You may live well, and dye a good old man:
By yea and nay, an oath not to be broken,
If you had joined our hands once in the Temple,
'Twas since my father died, for had he lived
He would have don't: I must have called you father:
Oh my wracked honor ruined by those Tyrants,
A cruel brother, and a desperate dotage!
There is no peace left for a ravished wife
Widdow'd by lawless marriage; to all memory,
Penthea's, poor Penthea's name is strumpeted:
But since her blood was seasoned by the forfeit
Of noble shame, with mixtures of pollution,
Her blood ('it is just) he henceforth never heightened
With taste of sustenance. Star^e, l^^ that fullness
Whose plurisie has ^euer'd faith and modesty,
Forgive me: o I faint.

Arm. Be not so wilful.
Sweet Niece, to work thine own destruction.

Ith. Nature
Will call her daughter, monster, -- what? not eat?
Refuse the only ordinary meane^
Which are ordained for life? be not, my sister,
A murthresse to thy self. -- Hear'st thou this, Bassanes?

Bass. Fo, I am busy; for I have not thoughts
Enough to think all shall be well anon.
It Is tumbling in my head there is a mastery
In Art to fatten and keep smooth the outside;
Yes, and to comfort up the vital spirits
Without the help of food, fumes or perfumes,
Perfumes or fumes: let her alone, I Will search out
The trick on it.

Pen. Lead me gently; heavens reward ye
Griefs are sure friends; they leave (without control)
Nor cure nor comforts for a leprous soul.

Exeunt the maids supporting Penthe^^ Bass. I grant to you; and will put in
practice instantly
What you shall still admire: it is wonderful,
It Is super singular, not to be matched:
Yet when I Have don't, I Have don't; ye shall all thank me.

Exit Bassanes. Arm. The sight is full of terror.

Ith. On my soul
Lies such an infinite clogge of massy dullness,
As that I have not sense enough to feel it.
See, Uncle, th'augury thing returns again,
Shall's welcome him with Thunder? we are haunted,
And must use exorcisme to conjure down
This spirit of maleuolence.

Arm. Mildly, Nephew.

Enter Nearchus and Amelus. Near. I come not, Sir, to chide your late disorder:
Admitting that the inurement to a roughness
In Soldiers of your years and fortunes, chiefly
So lately prosperous, has not yet shook off
The custom of the war in hours of leisure:
Nor shall you need excuse, since y^ are to render
Account to that fair Excellence, the Princess,
Who in (...) private Gallery expect it
From your own mouth alone: I am a messenger
But to her pleasure.

Ith. Excellent Nearchus,
Be Prince still of my services, and conquer,
Without the combat of dispute, I honor 'ee.

Near. The King is on a sudden indisposed,
Physicians are called for; 'twere fit, Armostes,
You should be near him.

Arm. Sir, I kiss your hands. Exeunt.

Manent Nearchus and Amelus. Near. Amelus, I perceive Calantha's bosom
Is warmed with other fires then such as can
Take strength from any fuel of the love
I might address to her: young Ithocles,
Or ever I mistake, is Lord ascendant
Of her devotions; one, to speak him truly,
In every disposition nobly fashioned,

Ame. But can your Highness brook to be so riual'd,
Considering th'inequality of the persons?

Near. I can, Amelus; for affections injured
By tyranny, or rigor of compul^ion,
Like Tempest-threatned Trees vnfirmely rooted,
Never spring to timely growth: observe, for instance,
Life-spent Penthea, and unhappy Orgilus.

Ame. How does your grace determine?

Near. To be jealous
In public, of what privately I Will further;
And though they shall not know, yet they shall find it.

Exeunt omnes. Enter Hemophil and Groan as leaving Amyclas, and placing him in
a Chair, followed by Armostes, Crotolon, and Prophilus. Amy. Our daughter is
not near?

Arm. She is retired, Sir,
Into her gallery.

Amy. Where Is the Prince our Cozen?

Proph. New walked into the Grove (my Lord.)

Amy. All leave us,
Except Armostes, and you Cr^tol^n,
We would be private.

Proph. Health unto your Maiesty^

Ex^unt Prophilus, Hemophil, and Gro^^ Amy. What, Tec^i^us is gone?

Arm. He is to Delpho^^
And to your Royal hands presents this box.

Amy. Unseal it, good Armostes, therein lies
The secrets of the Oracle; out with it;
Apollo live our patron: read, Armostes.

Arm. The plot in which the Vine takes root,
Begins to dry, from head to foot,
The stock soon withering, w^nt of sap
Does cause to quail the budding grape:
But from the neighboring Elm, a d^w
Shall drop and feed the Plot (...)

Amy. That is the Oracle, what exposition
Makes the Philosopher?

Arm. This brief^ one, only: The plot is Sparta, the (...) a Vine the King;
The quailing grape his daughter; but the thing
Of most importance, not to be reu^al'd,
Is a near Prince, the Elme^ the r^st concealed.


Te^nicus. Amy. Enough; although the opening of this Riddle
Be but it self a Riddle, yet we constru^
How near our laboring age dr^wes (...) rest^
But must Calantha quail to the young grap^
Untimely budded! I could mourn for her,
Her tenderness has yet deserved no ^igor
So to be crossed by Fate.

Ar^. You misapply, Sir^
With favor let me speak it what Apollo
Has clouded in hid sense: I here co^iectur^
Her marriage with some neighboring Prince, the dew
Of which befriending Elm shall ever strengthen
Your Subjects with a Sovereignty of power.

Crot. Besides, most gracious Lord, the pith of Oracles
Is to be then digested, when the events
Expound their truth, not brought (...) to ligh^
As vtter'd; Truth is Child of Time^ and herein
I find no scruple, rather cause of comfort^
With unity of kingdoms.

Amy. May it prove so^
For weal of this dear Nation. -- where is Ithocles?
Armostes, Crotolon; when this withered Vine
Of my frail carcass, on the funeral Pile,
Is fired into its ashes, let that young man
Be hedged about still with your cares and loves;
Much owe I to his worth, much to his service.
Let such as wait come in now.

Arm. All attend here.

Enter Ithocles, Calantha, Prophilus, Orgilus, E^phranea, Hemophil, and
Groneas. Call. Dear Sir, King, Father!

Ith. O my royal Master!

Amy. Clean not my heart (sweet Twins of my life's solace)
With your fore-iudging fears: there is no Physic
So cunningly restoratiue to cherish
The fall of Age, or call back youth and vigor,
As your consents in duty: I will shake off
This languishing disease of time, to quicken
Fresh pleasures in these drooping hours of sadness:
Is fair Euphranea married yet to Prophilus?

Crot. This morning, gracious Lord.

Org. This very morning^
Which with your Highness leave you may observe too
Our sister looks (me thinks) mirthfull and sprightly;
As if her chaster fancy could already
Expound the riddle of her gain in losing
A trifle; Maids know only that they know not:
Pish, prithee blush not; it is but honest change
Of fashion in the garment, loose for straight,
And so the modest maid is made a wife:
Shrewd business, is it not sister?

Euph. You are pleasant.

Amy. We thank thee, Orgilus, this mirth becomes thee:
But wherefore sits the Court in such a silence?
A wedding without Revels is not seemly.

Call. Your into indisposition, Sir, forbade it.

Amy. Be it thy charge, Calantha, to set forward
The bridal spo^ts, to which I will ^e ^resent:
If not, at least consenting^ (...) own Ithocles,
I have done little foe th^e yet.

Ith. Y'haue built me
To the full height I stand in.

Call. Now or never
May I propose a suit.

Amy. Demand and have it.

Call. Pray Sir give me this young man, and no further
Account him yours, then he deserves in all things
To be thought worthy mine; I will esteem him
According to his merit.

Amy. Still thou art my daughter,
Still grow'st upon my heart, give me thine hand;
Calantha take thine own; in noble actions
Thou Wilt find him firm and absolute: I would no^
Have parted with thee, Ithocles, to any
But to a mistress who is all what I am.

Ith. A change (great King) most wished for, cause the sam. --

Call. Thou Art mine. -- Have I now kept my word.

Ith. Divinely.

Org. Rich fortuness guard to favor of a Princess,
Rock thee (brave man) in ever crowned plenty;
You Are minion of the tim^, be thankful for it:
Ho, here is a swinge in Destiny. -- Apparent,
The youth is up on tiptoe, yet may stumble.

Amy. On to your recreations; now convey me
Unto my bedchamber: none on his forehead
Were a distempered look.

Omnes. The gods preserue'ee.

Call. Sweet be not from my sight.

Ith. My whole felicity.

Exeunt carrying out of the King, Orgilus stays Ithocles^ Org. Shall I be bold
my Lord?

Ith. Thou can not, Orgilus;
Call me thine own, for Prophilus must henceforth
Be all thy sisters; friendship, though it cease not
In marriage, yet is often at less command
Then when a single freedom can dispose it.

Org. Most right, my most good Lord, my most great Lord,
My gracious Princely Lord, I might add royal.

Ith. Royal, a Subject royal?

Org. Why not, pray Sir?
The Sovereignty of Kingdoms in their nonage
Stooped to desert, not birth: there is as much meri^
In clearenesse of affection, as in puddle
Of generation: you have conquered Love
Even in the loueliest; if I greatly err not,
The son of Venus has bequeathed his quiver
To Ithocles his manage, by whose arrows
Calantha's breast is opened.

Ith. Cannot be possible?

Org. I was my self a piece of suitor once,
And forward in preferment too; so forward,
That speaking truth, I may without offense (Sir)
Presume to whisper, that my hopes, and (hark 'ee)
My certainty of ma^riage stood assured
With as firm footing (by your leave) as any's
Now at this very instant -- but. --

Ith. It Is granted:
And for a league of priuacy between us,
Read over my bosom, and partake a secret;
The Princess is contracted mine.

Org. Still: why not?
I now applaud her wisdom; when your kingdom
Stands seated in your will secure, and settled,
I dare pronounce you will be a just Monarch:
Greece must admire, and tremble.

Ith. Then the sweetness
Of so imparadis'd a comfort, Orgilus,
It is to banquet with the gods.

Org. The glory
Of numerous children, potency of Nobles,
Bent knees, hearts pau'd to tread on.

Ith. With a friendshi^
So dear, so fast as thine.

Org. I am unfitting
For Office, but for service.

Ith. We Will distinguish
Our fortunes merely in the Title; partners
In all respects else but the bed.

Org. The bed?
Foresend it Jove's own Jealousy, till lastly
We slip down in the common earth together;
And there our beds are equal, save some Monument
To show this was the King, and this the Subject.
List, what sad sounds are these? extremely sad ones.

Ith. Sure from Penthea's lodgings.

Org. Hark, a voice too.

Soft sad music. A Song.
Oh no more, no more, too late
Sighs are spent; the burning Tapers
Of a life as chaste as Fate,
Pure as are unwritten papers,
Are bur^t out: no heat, no light
Now remains it is ever night.
Love is dead, let lovers eyes,
Locked in endless dreams,
The extremes of all extremes,
Open no more, for now Love dies,
Now Love dies, implying
Loves Martyrs must be ever, ever dying.
Ith. Oh my misgiuing heart!

Org. A horrid stillness
Succeeds this deathfull air, let us know the reason:
Tread softly, there is mystery in mourning. Exeunt.

Enter Christalla and Philema, bringing in Penthea in a chair vaild: two other
servants placing two chaires, one on the one side, and the other with an E^gine
on the other; the maids sit down a^ her feet mourning, the servants ge^ out,
meet them Ithocles and Orgilus. Ser^. It Is done, that on her right hand.

Org. Good, begone.

Ith. Soft peace enrich this room.

Org. How fares the Lady?

Phil. Dead.

Chri. Dead!

Phil. Starved.

Chri. Starved!

Ith. Me miserable!

Org. Tell us
How parted she from life?

Phil. She called for music,
And begged some gentle voice to tune a farewell
To life and griefs: Christalla touched the Lute,
I wept the funeral song.

Chri. Which scarce was ended,
But her last breath sealed up these hollow sounds,
O cruel Ithocles, and injured Orgilus!
So down she drew her veil, so died.

Ith. So died.

Org. Up; you are messengers of death, go from us;
Here Is woe enough to court without a pr^mpter.
Away; and hark ye, till you see us next,
No syllable that she is dead. -- Away, Exeunt Phil. and Chri.
Keep a smooth brow. -- My Lord.

Ith. Mine only sister,
Another is not left me.

Org. Take that chair,
I Will seat me here in this: between us sits
The object of our sorrows; some few tears
We Will part among us; I perhaps can mix
One lamentable story to prepare 'em.
There, there, sit there, my Lord.

Ith. Yes, as you please.
Ithocles sits down, and is caught in the Engine. What means this treachery?

Org. Caught, you are caught
Young master: it is thy throne of Coronation,
Thou fool of greatness: see, I take this veil off;
Survey a beauty withered by the flames
Of an insulting Phaeton her brother.

Ith. Thou mean to kill me basely.

Org. I foreknew
The last act of her life, and trained thee hither
To sacrifice a Tyrant to a Turtle.
You dreamed of kingdoms, did 'ee? how to bosom
The delicacies of a youngling Princess,
How with this nod to grace that subtle Courtier,
How with that frown to make this Noble tremble,
And so forth; whiles Penthea's groans, and tortures,
Her agonies, her miseries, afflictions,
Never touched upon your thought; as for my injuries,
Alas they were beneath your royal pity,
But yet they lived, thou proud man, to confound thee:
Behold thy fate, this steel.

Ith. Strike home; a courage
As keen as thy revenge shall give it welcome:
But prithee faint not; if the wound close up,
Tent it with double force, and search it deeply.
Thou look that I should whine, and beg compassion,
As loath to leave the vainness of my glories;
A statelier resolution arms my confidence,
To cozen thee of honor; neither could I,
With equal trial of unequal fortune,
By hazard of a duel, 'twere a bravery
Too mighty for a slave intending murder:
On to the Execution, and inherit
A conflict with thy horrors.

Org. By Apollo,
Thou talk a goodly language; for r^quitall,
I will report thee to thy mistress richly:
And take this peace along; some few short minutes
Determined, my resolves shall quickly follow
Thy wrathful ghost; then if we tug for mastery,
Pentheas sacred eyes shall lend new courage.
Give me thy hand, be healthful in thy parting
From lost mortality: thus, thus, I free it. kills him.

Ith. Yet, yet, I scorn to shrink.

Org. Keep up thy spirit:
I will be gentle even in blood; to linger
Pain, which I strive to cure, were to be cruel.

Ith. Nimble in vengeance I forgive thee; follow
Safety, with best success o may it prosper!
Penthea, by thy side thy brother bleeds:
The earnest of his wrongs to thy forced faith,
Thoughts of ambition, or delitious banquet,
With beauty, youth, and love, together perish
In my last breath, which on the sacred Altar
Of a long looked for peace-now-moues-to heaven. moritur.

Org. Farewell, fair spring of manhood; henceforth welcome
Best expectation of a noble suffrance:
I Will lock the bodies safe, till what must follow
Shall be approu'd^ -- Sweet Twins shine stars for ever.
In vain they build their hopes, whose life is shame,
No monument l^sts but a happy Name. Exit Orgilus.

Actus Quintus:
Scaena prima.
Enter ^ass^nes alone. Bass. AThens, to Athens I have sent, the Nursery
Of Greec^ for lea^ning, and the Fount of knowledge:
For here in Sparta there is not left amongst us
One wise man to direct, we are all turned madcaps:
It Is said, Apollo is the god of herbs;
Then certainly he knows the virtue of 'em:
To Delphos I have sent to; if there can be
A help for nature, we are sure yet.

Enter Orgilus: Org. Honor
Attend thy counsels ever.

Bass. I beseech thee
With all my heart let me go from thee quietly,
I will not ought to do with thee of all men.
The doublers of a Hare, or, in a morning,
Salutes from a splay-footed witch, to drop
Three drops of blood at the nose just, and no more,
Croaking of Ravens, or the screech of Owls,
Are not so boading mischief as thy crossing
My private meditations: shun me, prithee;
And if I cannot love thee heartily,
I Will love thee as well as I can.

Org. Noble Bassanes
Mistake me not.

Bass. Phew, then we shall be troubled;
Thou were ordained my plague, heaven make me thankful,
And give me patience too, heaven I beseech thee.

Org. Accept a league of amity; for henceforth
I vow by my best Genius, in a syllable,
Never to speak vexation; I will study
Service and friendship with a zealous sorrow
For my past inciuility toward 'ee.

Bass. Heydey! good words, good words, I must believe 'em,
And be a Coxcombe for my labor.

Org. Use not
So hard a Language; your misdoubt is causeless
For instance; if you promise to put on
A constancy of patience, such a patience
As Chronicle, or history never mentioned,
As follows not example, but shall stand
A wonder, and a Theme for imitation,
The first, the Index pointing to a second,
I will acquaint'ee with an vnmatch'd secret,
Whose knowledge to your griefs shall set a period.

Bass. Thou can not ( Orgilus) it is in the power
Of the gods only; yet for satisfaction,
Because I note an earnest in thine utterance,
Vnforc'd, and naturally free, be resolute
The Virgin Bays shall not withstand the lightning
With a more careless danger, than my constancy
The full of thy relation: could it move
Distraction in a senseless marble statue,
It should find me a rock: I do expect now
Some truth of unheard moment.

Org. To your patience
You must add priuacie, as strong in silence
As mysteries looked up in Jove's own bosom.

Bass. A skull hid in the earth a treble age,
Shall sooner prate.

Org. Lastly, to such direction
As the severity of a glorious Action
Deserves to lead your wisdom and your judgment,
You ought to yield obedience.

Bass. With assurance
Of will and thankfulness.

Org. With manly courage
Please then to follow me.

Bass. Where e're, I fear not.

Exeunt omnes. Scaene 2. Loud music.
Enter Groneas and Hemophil leading Euphranea, Christalla and Philema leading
Propholus, Nearchins supporting Calantha; Crotolon, and Amelus; cease loud
Music, all make a stand. Call. We miss our servant Ithocles and Orgilus,
On whom attend they?

Crot. My son, gracious Princess,
Whispered some new device, to which these; Revels
Should be but usher: wherein I conceive
Lord Ithocles and he himself are Actors.

Call. A fair excuse for absence: as for Bassanes.
Delights to him are troublesome; Armostes
Is with the King.

Cr^t. He is.

Call. On to the dance:
Dear Cozen, hand you the Bride, the Bridegroom must be
Entrusted to my Courtship: be not ica^o^^^
Euphranea, I shall scarcely prove a temptresse:
Fall to our dance.

Music. Nearchus dance with Euphranea, Prophilus with Calantha, Christalla
with Homophil, Philema with Groneas. Dance the first change; during which,
Enter Armostes. Arm. The King your father's dead. -- in Calantha's eare^

Call. To the other change.

Arm. Is It possible?

Dance again. Enter Bassanes. Bass. O Madam!
Penthea, poor Penthea's starved.

Call. Beshrew thee,
Lead to the next.

Bass. Amazement duls my senses.

Dance again. Enter Orgisus. Org. Brave Ithocles is murdered, murdered
cruelly.

Call. How dull this music sounds? strike up more sprightly?
Our footings are not active like our heart
Which treads the nimbler measure.

Org. I am thunder-strooke.

Last change. Cease music. Call. So, let us breath a while: has not this
motion
Raised fresher color on your cheeks?

Near. Sweet Princess.
A perfect purity of blood enamels
The beauty of your white.

Call. We all look cheerfully:
And Cozen, it is, me thinks, a rare presumption
In any, who prefe^s our lawful pleasures
Before their own sour censure, to interrupt
The custom of this Ceremony bluntly.

Near. None dares, Lady.

Call. Yes, yes; some hollow voice delivered to me
How that the King was dead.

Arm. The King is dead:
That fatal news was mine; for in mine arms
He breathed his last, and with his Crown bequeathed 'ee
Your mothers wedding Ring, which here I tender.

Crot. Most strange!

Call. Peace crown his ashes: we are queen then.

Near. Long li^e Calan^ha, Sparta's Sovereign Queen.

Omnes. Long live the Queen.

Call. What whispered Bass^^^^?

Bass. That my Penthea, miserable soul,
Was starn'd to death.

Call. She Is happy; she has finished
A long and painful progress. -- A third murmr
Pierced mine unwilling ears.

Org. That Ithocles
Was murdered; rather butchered, had not bravery
Of an undaunted spirit, conquering terror,
Proclaimed his last Act triumph over mine.

Arm How? murdered?

Call. By whose hand?

Org. By mine; this weapon
Was instrument to my revenge: the reasons
Are just and known: quit him of these, and then
Never lived Gentleman of greater merit,
Hope, or abiliment to steer a kingdom.

Crot. Fie Orgilus.

Euph. Fie brother.

Call. You have done it.

Bass. How it was done let him report, the forfeit
Of whose allegiance to our laws does covet
Rigor of Justice; but that done it is,
Mine eyes have been an evidence of credit
Too sure to be conuinc'd: Armostes, rent not
Thine Arteries with hearing the bare circumstances
Of these calamities: thou'st lost a Nephew,
A Niece, and I a wife: continue man still,
Make me the pattern of digesting evils,
Who can out-liue my mighty ones, not shrinking
At such a pressure as would sink a soul
Into what is most of death, the worst of horrors:
But I have sealed a covenant with sadness,
And entered into bonds without condition
To stand these tempests calmely; mark m^, Nobles,
I do not shed a tear, not for Penth^a:
Excellent misery!

Call. We begin our reign
With a first act of Justice: thy confession,
Unhappy Orgilus, doomes thee a sentence;
But yet thy fathers, or thy sisters presence
Shall be excused: give, Crotolon, a blessing
To thy lost sonne^ Euphranea, take a farewell,
And both be gone.

Crot. Confirm thee, noble sorrow,
In worthy resolution.

Euph. Could my tears speak,
My griefs were slight.

Org. All gooddesse dwell amongst yee^
Enjoy my sister, Prophilus; my vengeance
Aimed never at thy prejudice.

Call. Now withdraw:
Exeunt Crotolon, Prophilus, and Euphran^a^ Bloody relator of thy stains in
blood;
For that thou have reported him whose fortunes
And life by thee are both at once snatched from him,
With honorable mention; make thy choice
Of what death likes thee best, there is all our bounty.
But to excuse delays, let me (dear Cozen)
Entreat you and these Lords see execution
Instant before 'ee part.

Near. Your will commands us.

Org. One suit, just Queen, my last; vouchsafe your clemency
That by no common hand I be divided
From this my humble frailty.

Call. To their wisdoms
Who are to be spectators of thine end,
I make the reference: those that are dead,
Are dead; had they not now died, of necessity
They must have paid the debt they owed to nature,
One time or other. -- Use dispatch, my Lords,
We Will suddenly prepare our Coronation.

Exeunt Calantha, Phile^a, Christa^ Arm. It Is strange, these Tragedies should
never touch on
Her female pity.

Bass. She has a masculine spirit:
And wherefore should I pule, and like a girl,
Put finger in the eye: let us be all toughness,
Without distinction betwixt sex and sex.

Near. Now Orgilus thy choice.

Org. To bleed to death.

Arm. The Executioner.

Org. My self, no Surgeon.
I am well skilled in letting blood: bind fast
This arm, that so the pipes may from their conduits
Convey a full stream: here is a skillful Instrument:
Only I am a beggar to some charity
To speed me in this Execution,
By lending the other prick to the the other arm,
When this is bubling life ou^.

Bass. I am for 'ee.
It most concerns my art, my care, my credit;
Quick, fillet both this arms.

Org. Gramercy friendship^
Such courtesies are real, which flow cheerfully
Without an expection of requital.
Reach me a staff in this hand: if a pronenesse,
Or custom in my nature, from my cradle,
Had been inclined to fierce and eager bloodshed;
A coward guilt, hid in a coward quaking,
Would have betrayed fame to ignoble flight,
And vagabond pursuit of dreadful safety:
But look upon my steadiness, and scorn not
The sickness of my fortune, which since Bassanes
Was husband to Penthea, had lain bedridden:
We trifle time in words: thus I show cunning
In opening of a vein too full, too lively.

Arm. Desperate courage.

Org. Honorable infan^y.

Lem. I tremble at the sight.

Gron. Would I were loose.

Bass. It sparkles like a lusty wine new broacht;
The vessel must be sound from which it issues;
Graspe hard this other sticke^ I Will be as nimble.
But prithee look not pale; have at 'ee stretch out
Thine arm with vigor, and vnshooke virtue.
Good; o I envy not ^ Rival fit^ed
To conquer in extremities; this pastime
Appears maiesticall: some high tuned poem
Hereafter shall deliver to posterity
The writers glory, and his subjects triumph:
How is it man, droope not yet.

Org. I feel no palsies:
On a pair royal do I wait in death;
My Sovereign, as his Liegeman; on my Mistress,
As a devoted servant; and on Ithocles,
As if no brave, yet no unworthy enemy:
Nor did I use an engine to entrap
His life, out of a slavish fear to combat
Youth, strength, or cunning, but for that I durst not
Engage the goodness of a cause on fortune,
By which his name might have out-fac'd my vengeance:
(...) Tecnicus, inspired with Phoebus fire,
I call to mind thy Augury, 'twas perfect;
Revenge proves its own Executioner^
When feeble man is bending to his mother,
The dust 'a was first framed on, thus he totters.

Bass. Life's fountain is dried up.

Org. So falls the Standards
Of my prerogative in being a creature:
A mist hangs over mine eyes; the Sun's bright splendour
Is clouded in an everlasting shadow:
Welcome thou ice that sit'st about my heart,
No heat can ever thaw thee.

Near. Speech has left him. dies.

Bass. A' has shook hands with time: his funeral vrne
Shall be my charge: remove the bloodlesse body;
The Coronation must require attendance:
That past, my few days can be but one mourning. Exeunt.

An altar covered with white. Two lights of Virgin wax, during which music of
Recorders, enter four bearing Ithocles on a ^ease, or in a chair, in a rich
robe, and a Crown on his bead; place him on one side of the Altar, after him
enter Calantha in a white robe, and crowned Euphran^a; Philema, Christalla in
white, Nearchus, Armostes, Crotolon, Prophilus, Amelus, Bassanes, Lemophil, and
Groneas. Calantha goes and kneeles before the Altar, the rest stand off, the
women kneeling behind; cease Recorders during her de^otions: So^a music.
Calantha and the rest rise doing obeisance to the Altar. Call. Our Orisons are
heard, the gods are merciful:
Now tell me, you whose loyalties pays tribute
To us your lawful Sovereign, how unskillful
Your duties or obedience is, to render
Subjection to the Scepter of a Virgin,
Who have been ever fortunate in Princes
Of masculine and stirring composition?
A woman has enough to govern wisely
Her own demeanours, passions, and divisions.
A Nation warlike and inu^'d to practice
Of policy and labor, cannot brook
A feminate authority: we therefore
Command your counsel, how you may advise us
In choosing of a husband whose abilities
Can better guide this kingdom.

Near. Royal Lady,
Your law is in your will.

Arm. We have seen tokens
Of constancy too lately to mistrust it.

Crot. Yet if your highness se^tle on a choice
By your own judgment both allowed and liked of,
Sparta may grow in power, and proceed
To an increasing height.

Call. Hold you the same mind.

Bass. Alas great mistress, reason is so clouded
With the thick darkness of my infinites woes
That I forecast, nor dangers, hopes, or safety:
Give me some corner of the world to wear out
The remnant of the minutes I must number,
Where I may hear no sounds, but sad complaints
Of Virgins who have lost contracted partners;
Of husbands howling that their wives were ravished
By some untimely fate; of friends divided
By churlish opposition, or of fathers
Weeping upon their childrens slaughtered carcasses;
Or daughters groaning ore their fathers hearses,
And I can dwell there^ and with these keep consort
As musical a^ their^^ what can you look ^^r
From an old foolish peevish doting man,
But crasinesse of age?

Call. Cozen of Argos.

Near. Madam.

Call. Were I presently
To choose you for my Lord, I Will open freely
What articles I would propose to treat on
Before our marriage.

Near^ Name them virtuous Lady.

Call. I would presume you would retain the royalty
Of Sparta in her own bounds: then in Argos
Armostes might be Viceroy; in Mess^ne
Might Crotolon bear sway, and Bassanes --

Bass. I, Queen? alas! what I?

Call. Be Sparta's Marshall:
The multitudes of high employments could not
But set a peace to private griefs: these Gentlemen,
Gron^as and Lemophil, with worthy pensions
Should wait upon your person in your Chamber:
I would bestow Christall^ on Amelus,
She Will prove a constant wife, and Phil^m.
Should into Vesta's Temple.

Bass. This is a Testament,
It sounds not like conditions on a marriage.

Near. All this should be performed,

Call. Lastly, for Prophilus^
He should be (Cozen) solemnly invested
In all those honors, titles, and preferments
Which his dear friend, and my neglected husband
Too short a time enjoyed.

Proph. I am unworthy
To live in your remembrance.

Euph. Excellent Lady!

Near. Madam, what means that word neglected husband?

Call. Forgive me: now I turn to thee thou shadow
Of my contracted Lord: bear witness all,
I put my mother wedding Ring upon
His finger, 'twas my fathers last bequest:
Thus I new marry him whose wife I am;
Death shall not separate us: o my Lords,
I but deceived your eyes with Anticke gesture,
When one news straight came hudling on another,
Of death, and death, and death, still I danced forward,
But it struck home, and here, and in an instant,
Be such mere women, who with shreeks and out-crie^
Can vow a present end to all their sorrows,
Yet live to vow new pleasures, and out-liue them:
They are the silent griefs which cut the hart-strings;
Let me dye smiling.

Near. It Is a truth too ominous.

Call. One kiss on these cold lips, my last; crack, cr^cke.
Argos now is Sparta's King: command the voices
Which wait at the Altar, now to sing the song
I fitted for my end.

Near. Sirs, the ^ong^

A Song.
All.
Glories, pleasures, pomps, deligh^s, and ease,
Can but please
outward senses, when the mind
Is not untroubled, or by peace refined.
1
Crowns may flourish and decay,
Beauties shine, but fade away.
2.
Youth may revel, yet it must
Lie down in a bed of dust:
3.
Earthly honors flow and wast,
Time alone does change and last.
All.
Sorrows mingled with contents, prepare
Rest for care;
Love only reigns in death: though Art
Can find no comfort for a broken heart.
Arm. Look to the Queen.

Bass. Her heart is (...)
O royal ma^d, would thou had mis^ this part:
Yet 'twas a brave one: I must weep to see
Her smile in death.

Arm. Wise Tecnicus, thus said ^e^ When youth is ripe, and age from time does
part,
The liuelesse Trunk shall wed the broken hearts

It Is here fulfilled.

Near. I am your King.

O^^^^. Long live
Nearchus King of Sparta.

Near. Her last will
Shall never be digrest from; wait in order
Upon these faithful lovers as becomes us.
The Counsels of the gods are never known,
Till men can call the effects of them their owne^

FINIS.

