THE CHVRCH CONQVERANT OVER HVMANE WIT.

OR The Churches Authority demonstrated by M. William Chillingvvorth (the
Proctour for Wit against her) his perpetual Contradictions, in his book
entitled, The Religion of Protestants a safe Way to Salvation.

In ventre Ecclesiae Veritas manet: Quisquis ab hoc ventre separatus fuerit,
necesse est vt falsa loquatur.

Aug. in Ps. 57. v. 4. Permissu Superiorum. 1638.

THE PREFACE.
WHOSOEVER has attentively perused the Book, the Confutation whereof I have
undertaken, cannot but with horror perceive therein a direct, and often
iterated exprobation made to the whole Army of the living God. For he charge
as subject to universal damnable Errors not only the present Catholic
Church, and that of some later times before; but also the most prime and
Primitive Page 292. nu. 91.
Ages of the 5.4.3.2. by Name, yea the Church Apostolical, the Page 144. n. 31.
Blessed Apostles themselves, even after they had received the Holy Ghost.

2. Against this Defyer, and Challenger of the Church of God, as I did heartily
wish, so did I hopefully expect, that of the famous University, in the sight
and hearing whereof this hateful exprobation was made, an University stored
with so many well experienced warriors and redoubted Champions, some one would
have appeared in field with the complete Armor of Christian invincible
learning. My desire was grounded on fear, least otherwise in the judgment of
Posterity the most impartial Arbiter of former demerits, this Nursery of
sciences in ancient times so renowned for Christian piety and learning, might
be thought to have wanted, in this occasion, either Knowledge of Theology to
discern, or Maturity of Judgment to consider, or Zeal of Christianity to
detest, or Grace of Elocution to confute such unchristian Principles.

3. What may have been the cause of this their forbearance, I will not pass my
Judgment. Whatsoever it were, I am confident of their Christianity, that they
will approve, favor, and applaud Christianity maintained, and say with S.
Paul, Philip. 1.18.
so that Christ be preached any manner of way, I joy therein, and will joy.
Which Treatise if they have read over and perused, I dare say, they have found
therein a little David, short and solid, pious and pithy, learned and religious,
armed with smooth stones of clear Truth, gathered from the current of
Christian Tradition, delivered by the Pastoral slinge of the Churches
Authority. On the other side, a mighty Giant destitute of all the signs and
marks of a Christian soldier, armed neither with the authority of the present
Christian Church, nor perpetual Traditions, nor Counsels, nor Consent of
Fathers, nor with their single sentences, which he reiects as Bul-rushes of no
strength.

4. He lays claim to the Armor of light, the Holy Bible: but this is only
to daunt his Adversary with words, not to use the same in deeds: For never
Writer appeared in matter of Controversy more bare then he is of this kind of
proof. He has cited twice or thrice some texts of Scripture, so few, and so
short, that I dare say, all the words of Scripture urged in his Book against us
may be co^prized in ten lines. He co^fideth only in the lance of his
Dialectical Discourse, Discourse grounded on Scripture by the never failing
rules of Logic Preface n. 12.
which he presumes he can deliver so assuredly by the strong Arm of his
Human Reason, and dexterity of natural Wit, as ever infallibly By discourse no
man can possibly be lead into Error. ibid.
to hit the mark of revealed Truth.

5. That short Treatise as I said, of Christianity maintained, has foiled this
daring challenger by a stroke on the forehead, by laying open his Principles,
how they destroy Christianity; whereby he cannot but fall to the ground in the
Judgment of all Christian Churches. The spoils of his victory, he leaves to
his Armiger to gather, that he may also have part of the honor, and in the
glorious victory, which is, as Epist. 84.
S. Hierome says, cum Dauide extorquere gladium de aduersarij manibus, and
superbissimi Goliae caput proprio mucrone truncare, to confute and make away
with the heads of his erroneous doctrine, by the force of his own sword, his
words, sayings, and principles.

6. To take this course for the Confutation of his Book I was urged by
Necessity, and Charity. Necessity, against an Adversary who denies all the
Principles of Christian faith. He often repeates with much pride, but still
without proof: Page 376. lin. 6. page 131. lin. 27.
I see plainly and with my own eyes, that there are Popes against Popes,
Counsels against Councels, some Fathers against others, the same Fathers
against themselves, a consent of Fathers in one age against a consent of
Fathers in another age, the Church of one age against the Church of another
Age. Scripture remaynes, which he does (though not so openly and professedly,
yet) clearly and manifestly discard, as a contradictious witness. For he
teaches, that in respect of making a thing incredible, or of no credit, it is
all one Page 215. lin. 16.
whether the Contradictions be real, or only seeming: So that a writing full
of seeming contradictions can be of no more credit with us, then if the
contradictions were real. Now he professes, that Page 136. n. 9. lin. 15.
in all Controversies betwixt Protestants one with another, which are
innumerable, there is still a seeming conflict of Scripture with Scripture;
that the Scripture may with so great probabilities be alleged on both sides,
that we Page 41. l. 7.
may expect an Elias to reconcile the repugnances. If then the Scripture be to
our seeming, full of conflicts and irreconciliable repugnances, as well as
Popes, Counsels, Fathers; how can it be of more authority and credit?

7. Who does not see, that there is no way to deal with this man, but to
hamper him in the knots of his own speech, from the Authority whereof he will
not disclayme. He is not Page 152. l. 15.
an Idolatour of S. Austen, but of himself: D Field Page 84. n. 86.
is not infallible, but he is: Optatus Page 298. n. 97.
his sayings be not fit to determine controversies of Faith, but his are. S.
Cyprians Page 268. n. 44.
sentences be not a rule of faith, but his be. The Scripture is full of seeming
co^flicts, Contradictions, and irreconciliable Repugnances; but he will never
confess so much of his own Book. There be Christian Ages against Christian
Ages; but he will think we do him wrong, if we say, that in his writings
Pages are repugnant to Pages, yea many times sentences of the same Page are at
deadly food the one with the other. This then is the way to confute, and
confound him; to show that being lead by passion one way, and by the evidence
of truth another, he has spoken seelily and vaynely against the Authority of
the Church, solidly and iudiciously for it.

8. This is the style still held by the Almighty to vanquish and overthrow the
Enemies of his Church by sending the Isa. 19 14.
spirit of giddines upon them. A victory which may seem not unlike that which
Gedeon Iudic, 7.
got against the Madianites, who lay like a multitude of locusts wasting and
destroying the land of Israel. Three hundred soldiers by Gods appointement,
having empty pitchers in their hands, and in each of the pitchers a light
hidden, breaking the pitchers one against the other, the Madianites were
confounded with the sudden noise and light; so as they fell to Jmmisit Dominus
gladium in omnibus castri and mu ua se caed: true ^abant.
quarrel with each other, and mutually destroy themselves. The Conceytes of this
man may be termed a multitude of locusts which wast and consume the whole land
of Israel, all the grounds and principles of Christian faith In his Book there
be Pages (those aparted which co^teyne the Text of Charity mantayned) about
three hundred, which empty of proof for his own Religion, have hidden in them
the light of Catholic Truth. These Pages being in this Reply, by violent
encounter of his direct Contradictions, beaten and broken the one against the
other, sound out by the noise of the crack, the emptiness of his vain
Religion, and together show forth the clee^e light of Catholic doctrine. Hence
his wasting and destructive Principles come to fight together, and destroy each
other, and so leave the holy Church, and the Gedeon thereof, conquerant over
humane Wit.

9. Charity also has set me on this Course of answering, by the discovery of
his Contradictions, as judging the same more efficacious then any other, for
the reclayming of him, and the like Wanderers who are lead into contempt of the
Churches Authority, by the ouer-valuing of their own wits. When he shall find
himself, and others see him lost in a labyrinth of inexplicable perplexities,
enclosed on every side with the contrarieties of his own sayings, they will
happily reflect, how weak, blind, miserable humane Reason is, and unfit to be
the guide of Christians in their walking by faith toward eternal life. For
this cause, have I styled this Treatise, The Church conquerant over humane Wit,
to signify that he needs not be more ashamed of being conquered by the Church,
then of being of the number of men. My drift is not to insult over him fallen
so low into folly, but to condescend to help him up again, by confessing my
self subject to the like imbecility of wit. My mind is not to blast or
blemish the good opinion, that some may have conceived of his sharp
understanding; nor do I charge him with any want of common Judgment, besides
that which is caused through want of special Grace. It was want of Grace that
he undertook the ungracious Attempt of opposing the whole Church of God, no
want of Wit not to have performed what no wit can effect. No man will have
better success that shall go about so bad an enterprise.

10. Giving thanks unto God, I may confess, that Catholic Education has
instilled into my soul such reverence toward the whole Church of Christ, as I
know not what way I should go about to oppose her Judgment: that were there no
other way to salvation, then that which this man teaches, and runs, of
relying on my own wit and discourse, against the whole Church, General
Counsels, Consent of Fathers; I should verily think salvation for me
impossible. Nevertheless should I be tempted, and such a phrensy of Pride take
hold of my soul, I believe I should fall into the like Contradictions against
my self, as now I admire how this man being of so good a wit, could possibly
fall into. What he tells us out of Gusman de Alfarache, Page 12 n. 50.
that the Hospital of fools is of a large extent, I do verily admit to be
most true. And therefore being as all men are, sick and subject to ignorance
about divine matters, should refuse to be under the CVRE of the Catholic
Church, I am persuaded, I should be no sooner out of the Hospital of Sancto
Spirito at Rome, then in Goosmans Hospital, in the number of those who, as S.
Paul Dicentes se sapientes stulti facti sunt. Romans 1.21.
says, Presuming themselves to be wise, prove to be fools, by contradictions
against themselves.

11. King Alexander by self flattery, and the flattery of others, thought
himself to be the Son of Jupiter, but wounded in battle, he became docible
and apt to learn the lesson, which blood running about his ears, told and
taught him, that he was mortal. But M. Chillingworth being entered into the
lists of single Combat with the Maintayner of Charity, though he be beaten,
wounded, disgraced at every bout, forced to contradict himself, to say and
unsay, to recall his words, to deny his grantes; yet high conceyte of his own
worth, makes him so insensible of these his wounds, as he does boast and
brag, that in answering the Maintayners Arguments he has not been any way
perplexed. I therefore in this Confutation open again the wounds which
selfe-Ignorance had closed up from his sight, that by these ouertures that
wholesome lesson of Christian Humility may find entrance into his head and
heart, That no wit of man, is a fit match to encounter with the whole Catholic
Church.

12. Wherein if I put him to some pain, he will I hope remember, that it is
Meliora sunt vulnera diligentis quam frandulenta osculae odientis. Prou. 27.6.
better to be recalled to life out of a sound, by the blows of a friend, then
to be betrayed, and stifled unto death by the kisses of a foe He has drunk
over much of the sweet milk of self pleasing Conceyte, which by flattery of
some other may be increased in him, that he seems lulled into a dead sleep as
Iud. 4.
Sisara was, I can do him no greater charity, then to pinch him with his own
Contradictions so hard, and hold him so fast, that he may in the depth of his
soul feel the smart of his folly, and awake to repent before Soporem morti
consocians defecit and mortuns est.
Iahel, or rather Hell strike the nail of obdurate obstinacy into his head,
and so join his sleep with death, his death with everlasting damnation.

13. Together with the discovery of Contradictions, I still lay open and
demonstrate in them, and by them, the Infallible Authority of the Church
assisted not to err by Gods infinite wisdom; that if pinched by his
Contradictions he awake and open his eyes, he may presently behold the beauty
and glory of this unspotted spouse of the lamb, the Virgin Mother of
Christians, and so be moved to lay down his Gregor. in cap 39. Job. Jn sinum
virginis omni feritate deposita caput depouit. 2. Cor. 10.5. In captinitatem
redigentes omnem intellectum in obsequium Christi.
head, and the Unicorns horn of his singular Wit, in the lap of her
Communion; choosing to be rather taken captive by voluntary subjection to her
Truth, then showed a thrall of error, in the chains of insoluble
Contradictions against himself.

14. In citing his testimonies I have been exact and punctual even to a line;
and to set down formally, fully and largely his words, and whole discourses;
more perhaps then some may think necessary or fitting: but I had rather be
found faulty for excess in sincerity, then for defect. Yea the words that
were upon some occasion cited before, I have, when in other occasions I make
use of the same, repeated them again at large, for the Readers greater ease,
not to bind him to seek for them in the place of the former citation. I have
quoted not the Pages, but the Chapter, Number, and line of the number, that so
the quotations may be common both to the first, and second Edition which agree
in Chapters, Numbers and lines, but not in Pages. Yet sometimes when the
numbers are long, I have quoted the page and the line of the first Edition in
the text; of the second in the margin. The Chapters of the book be these
following.

1. That Christian faith is not resolved finally into natural wit and Reason,
but into the Authority of the Church. 2. That Christian faith is absolutely
certain and infallible. 3. That the current of Christian Tradition is
incorrupt, both in the fountain, and in the stream. 4. That the Scripture is
not the only Rule. 5. That the Church is infallible in all her Proposalls of
faith. 6. That all Protesters against the Church of Rome, are Schismatiques. 7.
That they are also Heretics.
An Advertisement to the Reader.
THis Treatise, Good Reader, was to the last word and syllable thereof,
finished, reuiewed, and ready for the Print long since, even in April of this
year 1638. so that it might have been printed, and published, and have come to
thy sight in the last Trinity Term, but for the tempests and storms of
war, which infested vltra-marine Countries near unto England, and were no
where more boisterous then over that place, where this Treatise should have
been pressed into the light. For this thundering noise of Mars frighted
workmen, and drove them away into other calmer coasts, and afterward brought
sharp and long sickness, both on the Printer and Author, which has been
the cause it comes so late unto public view. I hope this remissnes, and
tardity will be recompensed, and satisfied by ensuing speed and diligence, in
delivering unto the world other Treatises, which have been also long since
ready for the Print, against this cunning and close Underminer of Christian
Religion, whiles he pretendes to be an opposer but of the Catholic Roman.

The Church conquerant over Humane Wit.
That true Christian faith is not finally resolved by natural Wit, and Reason,
but by the Churches Authority. CHAP. I.
CHRISTIAN resolution about believing the mysteries of our faith, Cap. 1 n 8.
(as you also note) stands upon two Principles: The one, Whatsoever God
reueales for true, is true; or, which is the same, The word of God is certain
truth. The other, The articles of our faith are revealed of God. About the
truth of the first Principle we are fully and abundantly resolved by the
Authority of God Revealing, who can neither be deceived himself, nor deceive
us. The question is, by what means may Christians be sure, that the articles
of their Religion are the word of God. Catholics make their last resolution
into the word of God unwritten, delivered by universal Tradition evidently
credible for it self; or (which is all one) into the authority of the Church,
delivering what by the full consent of Christian Catholic Ancestors she has
received from the Apostles. Protestants resolve to rest finally on Scripture,
which (as they pretend) by the clear beams of its own light, shows it
self, and the sense they make thereof to be Divine supernatural Truth, and
consequently the word of God. You, agreeing nether with the one nor the other,
both reject resolution by the inward evident certainty of Scripture as a fond
conceypt; and also banish the infallible authority of the present Church, as an
intolerable usurpation: and so finally you come to rest upon the judgment and
choice of natural Reason, pretending that every man and woman in the choice of
their Religion, must at last follow their own best wit, understanding, and
discourse. In which conceit you are not constant, you contradict it often; yea
you are so uncertain and unsettled in all your discourses as you say nothing in
one place, which you do not in some other place utterly deny. The discovery of
this your perpetuail iarring and fighting with your self, is the mark this
Treatise aymeth at: whereby it will appear whether you had reason to write as
you do in the conclusion of your work, Though the music I have made be dull
and flat, and even down right plainesong; yet your curious and Critical cares
shall discover no discord in it. Mare. c. 7.
I hope together with this discourse the fingar of our Savior will enter into
the deaf cares of your soul, and open them to discern the perpetual iarring
of your voice with it self, and also make you see, that it will be always so,
except you give over singing the canticle of our Lord in the high strain of
quauering, and wavering division from the Church, according to the crochets of
your own conceyt; and fall to the plain Gregorian Ecclesiastical tune,
humbling your Treble-wit to sing the base, in the lowest note of subjection to
the Holy Catholic Church,

The first Conviction.
2. THis Conviction is grounded on this contradicting your self, that cap. 2.
n. 3. in fine, you say, The Scripture is the sole judge of controversies, that
is, the sole rule to judge them by; those only excepted, wherein the Scripture
is the subject of the question, which cannot be determined but by natural
reason, the only principle besides Scripture which is common to Christians. To
the contrary, cap. 2. n. 153. you write: Universal tradition is the Rule to
judge all controversies by: and Preface n. 13. to the Directours assertion,
That if the true Church may err in defining Canonical Scripture, then we must
receive Scripture, either by the private spirit, or by natural wit and
judgment, or by preexamination of the doctrine contained therein; you answer:
Though the present Church may possibly err in her judgment touching this
matter, yet have we other directions besides either of these three, and that is
the testimony of the Primitive Christians. Thus you consider what sweet harmony
and concent there is betwixt these two sayings; Controversies wherein Scripture
it self is the subject of the question, cannot be determined but by natural
reason, the only principle besides Scripture common to Christians: The
controversy which Scripture is canonical (wherein Scripture it self is the
subject of the question) may be decided for Christians affirmatively, by
another principle or direction besides natural wit and judgment, to wit by the
testimony of the primitive Church, or by tradition which is a rule to judge all
Controversies by.

3. If you reply, that the question, which Scriptures be canonical, is indeed
determined by the testimony of the primitive Church, but not only by it without
the concurence of natural reason; this evasion is stopped by what you write cap.
2. n. 2^. lin. 26. The question whether such or such a book be Canonical
Scripture, though it may be decided negatiuely out of Scripture, by showing
apparent and inreconcileable contradictions between it and some other book
confessedly canonical; yet affirmatively it cannot be decided but only by the
testimony of the ancient Churches. Behold the controversy wherein Scripture is
the subject, cannot be decided affirmatively by any rule or principle, but by
tradition only, that is, by the testimony of the ancient Church, a rule
distinct from that of natural wit and judgment.

4. You will say, yea you do say, that Tradition though a principle distinct
from reason, yet is not able to stand by it self, without the support of
natural reason, cap. 2. n. 31. Though Scripture be a principle most known in
Christianity, yet this is not to deny, that Tradition is a principle more
known then Scripture, but to say, it is a principle not in Christianity but in
reason, not proper to Christians but common to all men. And cap. 2. n. 114. You
would have men follow authority; on Gods name let them; we also would have them
follow authority, for it is upon the authority of universal Tradition, that we
would have them believe the Scripture. But then, as for the authority you
follow, you will let them see reason, why they should follow it. And is not
this to go a little about, to leave reason for a short time, and then to come
to it again, and to do that which you condemn in others? It being indeed a
plain impossibility to submit reason but to reason: for he that does it to
authority, must of necessity think himself to have greater reason to believe
that Authority. Thus you. And though you often iterate this falsehood, that
tradition is not rested upon for it self, but proved by reason; yet you do as
often inculcate the contrary truth, that it is a principle evident of it self,
independently of any reason besides that credit it has of it self. Cap. 2. n.
155. The Scripture is not an absolutely perfect rule, but as perfect as a
written rule can be, which must always need something else, which is evidently
true, or evidently credible to give attestation to it, and that in this case is
universal Tradition; so that universal Tradition is the rule to judge all
controversies by Cap. 2. n. 25. lin. 3. We believe not this (the books of
Scripture to be canonicll) upon the authority of your Church, but upon the
credibility of universal tradition, which is a thing credible of it self, and
therefore fit to be rested on. Cap. 4. n. 53. lin. 26. you say, That Charity
maintained, though he differ from D. Potter in many things, yet agrees with him
in this, that tradition is such a principle as may be rested on, and requires
no other proof.

5. By these later texts of clear Truth I convince the falsehood of the former,
that Tradition universal is not a principle in Christianity but in reason; nor
proper to Christians but common to all men. How can tradition universal (that
is derived from the Apostles by the full consent of all former Christian ages
to this present) be a rule to determine all controversies amongst Christians;
and yet not be a rule in Christianity, but in preason only? And whereas you
say, That tradition is a principle not proper to Christians, but common to all
men; I wonder, what mist of disaffection against this truth could be so thick
between your understanding and it, as to hide it from your sight. Is not
tradition universal from the Apostles, a rule of belief proper to Christians,
that is, for Christians only? Do any men in the world but Christians believe
Doctrines to be true Institutions and Laws, holy and pious, because they are
delivered as such by full consent from the Apostles? who but Christians admit
Scriptures to be the word of God, because received from the Apostles, by
tradition as such? How then is not Apostolical tradition a principle proper to
Christient, but common to all men? You will say, Infidels also believe the
tradition of their Ancestors, and so tradition is a principle which Christians
have common with them. I answer in like manner, Infidels believe the
Scriptures and writings of their ancestors; will you then say, that
Apostolical Scripture is not a principle proper to Christians, but common to
all men? If not, I hope then you will easily understand, that though profane
tradition be a principle with Infidels, yet Apostolical tradition may be, and
is a principle proper to Christians.

6. The Principle whereby you prove, that the authority of Tradition is
resolved into Reason, because, It is impossible that any man should submit his
reason but to reason, for he that does it to authority, must of necessity
think himself to have greater reason to believe that authority. This
principle I say, is not only false but impious: For according to it it is
impossible, that any man should believe the mystery of the most blessed
Trinity, except he have greater reason to believe it, then the authority of God
revealing it. For if he have not, then he submits his natural reason not unto
reason, but unto the authority of God, revealing things far above the reach
of reason.

7. I conclude the principal intent of this Chapter with a demonstration from
your contradictions, that with Christians the authority of Apostolical
tradition is not a principle in reason, but of Christian faith above Reason,
able to command Reason to believe, even what may seem repugnant to reason. You
affirm, that in Scripture there are many irreconcilable contradictions to the
seeming of reason. ca. 3. n. 19. In all the controversies of Protestants, there
is a seeming conflict of Scripture with Scripture. And cap. 1. n. 13 lin. 26.
The contrary belief may be concerning points, wherein Scripture may with so
great probability be alleged on both sides, that true lovers of God and truth,
may without any fault some go one way, and some another, and some (and those
as good as either of the former) suspend their judgment and expect some Elias
to reconcile the repugnancies; Now reason cannot but feel much difficulty and
repugnance, to believe a book full of seeming contradictions to be the word of
God, and to contain nothing but infallible truth. And yet all true Christians
(and you profess with them) do upon the authority of Tradition believe
Scripture to be Gods word, and every word and syllable thereof to be infallible
truth, notwithstanding all the seeming contradictions, which most of Christians
know not how to compose, but must expect some Elias to reconcile them: Ergo
they hold (and you profess to hold) Tradition as a Principle above reason, and
so high in authority above it, as it is able to command reason to believe, what
to the seeming of reason cannot possibly be true. Thus by your own
contradictions the resolution of faith, that Scriptures be the word of God, is
convinced to rest finally not on Reason, but on Tradition, a Principle
superior to all human Reason.

The second Conviction.
AS the text of holy Scripture, so likewise the sense thereof is proved to be
Divine, and true; not because congruous and conform to the rule of natural
Reason; but because delivered by Tradition unwritten. This truth I am to make
good by your sayings, wherein you contradict your self, leaving the victory to
that part of your contradiction which stands for the Catholic side.

8. Cap. 2. n. 1. lin. 24. you reprehend the Roman Church: Because we settle in
the minds of men that the sense of Scripture is not that which seems to men's
reason and understanding to be so; but that which the Church of Rome declares
to be so (by tradition unwritten) seem it never so unreasonable, and
incongruous. Your saying contradictory of this, and whereby this may be
refuted, you deliver some three pages after, to wit, Cap. 2. n. 8. Lon. Edit.
p. 55. in. 8.
Though a Writing could not be proved to us to be a perfect rule of faith, by
its own saying so (for nothing is proved true by being said, or written in a
book, but only by tradition, which is a thing credible of it self): yet it
may be so in it self etc. By this saying the former is proved to be false,
that the Scripture is to be understood according to the seeming of man's reason,
and not according to Tradition, or doctrine unwritten. If nothing be proved true
by being written in a book, but only by Tradition unwritten, then no doctrine,
or sentence is proved true because written in a book of Scripture, according
to the judgment of man's understanding; but only because delivered by Tradition
as divine doctrine and the true sense of Scripture: Consequently not Scripture
understood according to human sense and reason, but Scripture understood in the
sense of perpetual tradition from the Apostles is the rule of Christian truth
and faith.

9. This you also suppose, preface n. 12. Where you say, That, Discourse
guiding it self only by the principles of Nature, is by no means the guide of
Christian faythin the understanding of Scripture, and drawing consequences from
it, but the rule is right Reason grounded on divine Revelation. Now right
Reason not guided by the principles of Nature, but by the light of divine
Reuclation, is not natural wit, nor human understanding, but dunne and
fupernaturall sense, and Reason. Nor can our Reason precedently unto Scripture,
be grounded on, and guided by the light of Divine Revelation written, as is
clear. Frgo the rule to prove any doctrine to be Divine truth, is not
Scripture understood according to man's understanding, according to the light of
natural Reason, but Scripture understood according to the wisdom of God,
known by the light of Divine Revelation unwritten, to wit by Tradition, which
is (you say) credible of it self.

10. This resolution of Faith finally and lastly not into natural Reason, but
into divine Revelation unwritten, is gathered from the saying of S. Peter: 2.
Pet 1.20.
No prophesy of the Scripture is made by private interpretation; for not by the
(...) of man Prophesy came in at any time, but holy men of God spoke inspired
by the Holy Ghost. This discourse of S. Peter is demonstratiue, and may be
redueed to this syllogisticall form. The Scripture cannot be interpreted by
any spirit, wit, or mind inferior to that from which it did originally
proceed. For an inferior spirit, as is the natural wit and spirit of man, 1
Cor. 2.14.
is not able so much as to conceive the things of God; Yea that which is
wisdom with God is folly with men: But all holy Scripture proceeds
originally from the spirit, wit, and mind of God: Ergo, it is not to be
interpreted, that is the sense thereof is not to be judged true or false, by the
seeming of natural reason, or wit, but by the spirit and wisdom of God,
which spoke in Christ Jesus and his Apostles, the sound of whose voice has
been by perpetual tradition continued, and conveyed unto the present Catholic
Church.

11. Nor do you page 95. lin. 1. sufficiently excuse your course of Resolution
from being private interpretation condemned by S. Peter, where you say. Is
there not a manifest difference between saying, the spirit of God tells me, that
this is the meaning of such a text (which no man can possibly know to be true,
it being a secret thing) and between saying, these and these reasons I have to
show, that this is the meaning of such a Scripture? Reaso^n being a public
and certain thing and exposed to all men's trial and examination. But if by
private spirit you understand the particular reason of every man, your
inconveniences (against resolving by the private spirit) will be reduced to
none at all. Thus you, understanding by private, a thing that is hidden,
secret, insearchable, not exposed to the sight and examination of all. But this
notion of private is against the meaning of S. Peter in this place; because in
this sense, even the Holy Ghost is private, the true sense of Scripture is
private, because hidden and secret, not to be discerned, nor judged by the
natural man. S Peter then by private interpretation, understands
interpretation made by private men, who have no public authority, nor power
to command in the Church of God. Now your particular reason (I William
Chillingworth have this reason, that this is the meaning of such a Scripture)
is private, not endued with public authority, nor with any right to command
private men to submit their private reason and judgment unto yours. Ergo, your
rule of interpretation (I william Chillingworth have these reasons for this
sense) is private, and consequently of no authority in Gods Church. I add,
that interpretation by the private spirit, that is by the spirit of God
speaking in private men, is not so abhorrent, and exorbitant from truth, as
yours, by the natural wit of every man. For extraordinarily it may fall out
that, that may be the true fense of Scripture, which is taught by the Holy
Ghost unto some private and particular person; but it is impossible that, that
should be the true sense of Scripture, about the mysteries of faith, which
seems reasonable and congruous to human understanding; because the wisdom of
God revealed in Scripture seems folly unto the natural man. So that of
necessity in many texts of Scripture, that must be the true sense, which seems
unreasonable, and incongruous to man's natural understanding.

12. I must here finally note, that in saying, that Scripture is not proved to
be a perfect rule by its own saying so; for nothing is proved true by being
said or written in a book, but only by Tradition: you singe out of tune, so
high in the praise of Tradition, and so decry Holy Scripture, as even our
Catholic ears will not endure it; except the harsh sound thereof be allayed
and tempered by some reasonable restriction, to wit, that nothing is proved by
being written in a Book, as by the last principle, or proof whereon our
persuasion does rest. I fear Protestants will be offended at this your speech,
and judge your Book in respect of this Blasphemy worthy of the fire. For
verily your words (as they sound) make Scripture no rule, or principle of
faith at all, but clearly disannull, and make void that so frequent Protestant
argument Scriptumest, it is written, it is Scripture. For how can this argument
be of any force, if nothing be proved true, because written in a book, but
only by tradition? The best favor I can do you, is to show Protestants a place
of your Book, where you contradict your self about this assertion. For this
may perchance pacify them, to wit cap 4. n. 53. lin. 33. A man believing the
Scripture to be the word of God, must of necessity believe it true: and if he
believe it true, he must believe it contaynes all necessary directions unto
eternal happiness, because it affirms it self to do so. Behold Scripture
proved a perfect rule by its own saying so, and not only by tradition.

The third Conviction.
13 YOur conceit of resolving by reason and discourse, implies a double
blasphemy; first by your own contrary sayings it is proved to imply, that God
requires of men impossibilities, Preface nu. 12. If by discourse you mean
right reason grounded on divine Revelation, and common notions, written by God
in the Hearts of all men, and deducing, according to the neuer-fayling rules of
Logic, deductions from them: if this be it you mean by discourse, it is
meet, and reasonable, and NECESSARY, that men, as in all their actions, so
especially in that of greatest importance, the choice of their way to
Happiness be left unto it. And in saying this, I say no more then S. John to
all Christians: Dearly beloved, Believe not every spirit, but try the spirits,
whether they be of God or not: I say no more then S. Paul, in exhorting all
Christians to try all things, and to hold fast that which is good: then S.
Peter, in commanding all Christians to be ready to give a reason of the hope,
that is in them: then our Savior himself in forewarning all his followers,
that if they blindely followed blind guides, both leaders and followers should
fall into the Ditch: and again in saying even to the People, Yea, and why of
your selves, judge ye not what is right?

14. But are all men able to do this, able to give a reason of their faith by
the rules of logic? Experience shows, and you confess they cannot cap. 6.
n. 10. l. 10. I could wish with all my part, as Moses did, that all the Lords
people could prophesy, that all that believe the true Religion were able
(according to S. Peter's iniunction) to give a reason of the hope in them etc.
But should I affirm, that all true belieuers CANDOSO, I suppose it would be
much against experience, and modesty etc. Thus you grant that all Christians,
are not able to giuea reason of their faith; and yet you say, that this is
commanded unto all Christians under pain of falling into the ditch, that is,
of being damned. What is conseque^t hereupon? That your doctrine, that true
faith is finally resolved into human reason, that all men and women that will
be saved must be able to be their own judges, able of themselves to judge of
so many Religious and different pretended ways to Heaven, Oxf. edit. page 18.
n. 26. l. 29. Land. edit. cap. 2. n. 26. page 18. l. 11.
which is the right, This your doctrine is (to use your own words against
your self) iniurioust God and man, robbing God of his goodness, and man of his
comfort, making God a Tyrant exacting of men what he knows they cannot do,
and causing man to be desperate, seeing he cannot be saved, but by doing things
which to him are impossible.

15. Secondly your way of resolving by reason, by your contrary sayings, is
proved blasphemous against Jesus Christ, making him (O vild impiety!) a blind
and false Prophet. You say, he foretold and forewarned all his followers, that
if they blindly followed blind guides, both leaders and followers should fall
into the ditch, of damnation. And yet else where you say that millions of his
followers, who blindely and imprudently believe upon the word of their father,
or Master, or Minister, have true faith and are saved cap. 2. n. 49. lin. 18.
There ara millions amongst you and us, who believe upon no other reason, then
their education, and the authority of their Parents and Teachers etc. And will
you proscribe from Heaven all those belieuers of your own Creed, who do indeed
lay the foundation of their Faith no deeper, then upon the authority of their
Father, or Master, or Parish Priest etc? What if their motive to believe be
not in reason sufficient? Do they therefore not believe what they do believe?
They choose their Faith imprudently perhaps, but yet they do choose it; unless
you will have us believe, that is not done which is done; because it is not
done upon good reason etc. Wherefore you must for shame recant this fancy when
you write again, and suffer true faith to be many times where your Churches
infallibility has no hand in the begetting of it. Behold how earnest you are to
prove many millions of Christ's followers, who believe upon no good reason, but
blindely follow their blind and fallible leaders, a father, a master, a
Minister, have true faith, and are saved, consequently that our Lords
forewarning, that if the blind follow the blind, both shall fall into the
ditch, is not true.

16. Thus you make our Lord, (which I have horror to think) a blind prophet,
out of your own damnable blindness. For our Lords saying is most true and
infallibly certain, that if the blind lead the blind, both shall fall into the
ditch; but your doctrine is blind and impious, that the Catholic Church as a
blind guide, and many times they that follow it follow a company of beasts. Nor
is it true that many of ours have true Christian faith of the Creed, who
believe upon no better authority then the word of a Father, or Master etc. For
how can they believe the Creed (whereof one article is the holy Catholic
Church,) without apprehending better authority to believe, then the bare word
of a Father? If they want discretion to conceive the notion of the holy
Catholic Church, they want understanding to believe actually, and so are
saved by Habitual faith: but if they apprehend what is meant by the holy
Catholic Church, the Churches authority concurrs to the begetting of faith in
them together with the illumination of Gods spirit, making them to apprehend
more deeply and divinely of the thing, then otherwise naturally they could by
sole Church proposition. You having made it necessary unto salvation, that men
do not blindely follow blind guides, but that by their own wit and reason
every one choose and frame to himself his Religion, being his own caruer and
judge: having (I say, laid this ground, you should in consequence have
maintained, that such as ignorantly and blindely follow a blind Church fall
into the ditch and are damned. But now making it the word of God, that the
blind following the blind must needs perish, and yet laboring to save some
blind followers of the blind, your self are fallen into blasphemy by following
your own blind discourse, which still through want of light stumbles at every
step, contradicting is self.

The fourth Conviction.
17. You contradict your self again about simple and ignorant Christians,
whom you term Fools In one place you teach, they ca^ hardely be saved, in
another that they cannot err from the way of Salvation, unless they will. The
first you affirm page 96. lin. 12. For my part, I am certain, God has ginen
us reason to discern between truth and falsehood, and he that makes not this
use of it, but belieues things he knows not why, I say, it is by chance, and
not by choice, that he belieues the truth; and I cannot but fear, that God
will not accept of the sacrifice of Fools. Thus you. The second in plain and
direct contradiction of, this you deliver Second edit page 212. lin 5.
page 221. lin. 17 saying of your safe Way to Salvation; This is a way so
plain as fools, except they will, cannot err from it. Now by Fools in
matters of Religion you understand such as want strength of understanding, and
wit, to judge by themselves, and to discern truth from falsehood, in mattets of
Religion and controversies moved by Heretics against the Church. How then it
is true that Fools cannot miss of the way of Salvation except they will, if
such only be saved to whom God has given such reason and understanding, that
of themselves they be able to discern truth from falsehood in matters of faith
controuerted betwixt Heretics and the Church? If God will not accept of the
sacrifice of Fools, that is, their devout obedience unto the doctrine which
they believe to be his upon the word of his Church, without knowing any other
why; your word that Fools cannot err from Salvation unless they will, is so
far from being true, as the contrary is true they cannot be saved though they
would never so feign.

18. Your two sayings are clearly and mainely opposite the one to the other,
the first being false, and the second true: For it is against experience and
modesty to say as you do, that God has given us, that is, all Christians
reason to discern truth from falsehood in the controversies of Religion. No man
huing can do this, by the reason given him of God, without relying for his
assurance on the authority of Gods Church. Yea your self, though you much
presume of the goodness of your understanding and excellency of your wit, have
not reason enough for this, which I convince by what you write Cap. 3. n. 19.
lin. 19. Where there is a seeming conflict of Scripture with Scripture, reason
with reason, Authority with Authority; how it can consist with manifest
revealing of the truth I do not well understand. What is, I do not well
understand, but as if you had said, God has not given me understanding and
reason to discern assuredly Christian truth from Heretical falsehood in the
controversies about Christian Religion, where Scripture, reason, authority are
seemingly alleged on both sides? as in the controversies betwixt the Roman
Church and your Biblists and Gospellers (namely Arians and Socinians) they are.
And if you have not sufficient understanding and reason to diseerne truth from
falsehood about the fundamental article of Christianity, the Godhead of Christ,
how has God given all Christians reason to frame an assured judgment of
discretion about this, and all other fundamental points debated betwixt any
kind of your Protestants and us?

19. The other part then of your contradiction is true, that Fools cannot err
from the way of Salvation except they will, because God will without doubt
accept of the sacrifice of their humble devotion firmly to believe what they
have received from the Church as his Word. For you say c. 5. n. 64. lin. 20.
God requires no more of any man to his Salvation, but his true endeavor to be
saved: But Fools, that is such as want strength of understanding to discern
Truth from Falsehood in the Controversies about Religion, the best they can do
to believe aright and be saved, is to rest on the word and tradition of the
Church, without asking her Why she teaches this or that Doctrine: For what can
they do better? You will say, let them search the Scriptures, and look into
the writings of the primitive Fathers. First being ignorant men and of mean
capacity they cannot do it; and when they have done it, how can they be the
wiser, seeing (x) you say, nothing is proved true, because written in a book,
but only by Tradition which is credible for it self? And to what purpose to
go from the Church, and her tradition for a short time, and then presently to
come to it again? For even as the Dove departing from the Ark of Noah, not
finding where to settle her foot in such a deluge of waters, returned
instantly to the Arc; so man's reason leaving the Churches Authority to find by
Scripture which is the true Religion in the vast deluge of contrary wauing
Doctrines, will meet with nothing where on he may firm his belief, and so
will be forced, for rest and assurance, to fly back to the Arc of Gods Church.

20. Add that the truth of your second assertion, that the way of Salvation in
the Law of Grace is so plain, that Esaias. c. 35. v. 8. Via sancta vocabitur and
hac erit directa via, ita v^ stu^ti no^ errent per eam.
fools cannot err from it, was foretold by the prophet Esaias, and he gives
the reason thereof, because they should have a visible Teacher or Esaias. c. 30.
v. 20 Erunt ocult tui videntes preceptorem tunm and anres tua andient voce^
post tergum monentis, Haec est via ambulate (...) ca.
Master and should hear his voice behind them, saying, This is the way, walk
therein. From this truth I conclude that every man and woman is not to resolve
for his belief by his own reason but by the voice of the Church. Because in
the way of Wit and Discourse, according to the rules of c. n. 8.2.
Logic, Fools may err against their will as not being able of themselves to
discern assuredly betwixt saving truth, and damnable falsehood gilded with
many seeming clear texts of Scripture. But the true way of Salvation even
fools cannot err from it, except they be wilful against the teaching and
voice of the visible Church telling them this is the way, walk therein; Ergo,
the way of believing simply the voice of the Church, is the sole way of
Salvation; and your way of Wit and proud Disdain of the Church, is the way to
the bottomless pit.

The fifth Conviction.
21. YOUR way of resolving your faith by reason is refuted, because by this
means you may be forced under pain of damnation, to admit the Devil himself
to be your Master, and bound to receive his false suggestions as the word of
God. What absurdity more immane, vast, and horrible then this? And yet it does
so necessarely follow upon your foresaid Doctrine as you are forced to grant
it, cap. 2. n. 12. lin. 22. If by the Discourse of the Devil himself, I be (I
will not say convinced, but) persuaded though falsely, that it is a Divine
revelation and shall deny to believe it, I shall be a formal (though not a
material) Heretic.

22. You will perhaps say I do you wrong, and mistake your meaning: For you do
not mean that you are bound to believe any falsehood proposed unto you by the
Devil in persuasiue, or conuictiue discourse, but only if you have believed
upon the Devils persuasion any thing to be Divine Revelation, you cannot, this
supposed, disbeleeue it, or think it to be false. I answer, the drift of your
discourse shows this could not be your meaning; and if it were, the same is
proved (by your own confession) sottish. In that place you discourse upon a
difficulty debated between D. Potter, and the Maintayner of Charity, what is
required to sufficient proposition obliging men to believe? D. Potter D. Pot.
page 247. (a) Be it by a Preacher, or lay man, or reading Scriptures, or
hearing them read, that a point be cleared to him.
thinks that to be sufficiently proposed as God's Word, which is proposed by
seeming evident proof from Scripture, whosoever the Propounder be. The
Mantayner judges sufficiency of Proposition to depend, not so much on the
seeming clarity of Scripture, as on the Authority of the propounder, that he be
worthy of credit, and such an one, as on his word and proposition we may
securely rely. You take part with D. Potter, and affirm, that what is proposed
by good and sufficient proof, by conuictiue, or persuasiue discourse as the
word of God, is sufficiently propounded unto faith, though the propounder be
the Devil himself: Be the means of proposal what it will, sufficient or in
sufficient, worthy of credit or not worthy, though it were the discourse of the
Devil himself; yet if I be (I will not say convinced, but) persuaded, though
falsely, that it is a Divine revelation, and shall deny to believe it, I shall
be a formal (though not a material) Heretic. These be your words which show
evidently your mind to be, that men are bound to believe the Devil himself, if
his discourse be sufficient, that is, conuictiue, or evidently probable and
persuasiue.

23. For the sense, that if you were persuaded by the Devil, that it is a
divine Revelation, and yet should refuse to believe it to be true, that then
you should be a formal Heretic, this sense is idle and sottish, not formal
heresy but plain impossibility, as you say Second edition page 10. lin. 2.
Page 10. lin. 12. How is it not apparent contradiction, that a man should
disbelieue what himself understands to be a truth, or any Christian what he
understands, or but belieues to be testified by God? D. Potter might well
think it superfluous to tell you, This is damnable, because indeed it is
impossible.

24. Moreover, this obligation of believing the Devils Discourse and
Conference, if it seem to you to be conuictiue, or persuasiue, is necessarily
consequent upon these your principles, 1. That proposition sufficient does not
depend on the authority, of the propounder, but only on the apparent goodness,
or seeming evidence of his discourse. 2. That he who follows God only and his
own reason cannot possibly err. 3. That by discourse no man can possibly be
led into error. For all men are bound to believe that to be the word of God
and infallible truth, which they judge sufficiently propounded as such. But you
judge that sufficiently propounded, which is propounded by conuictiue or
persuasiue discourse from Scripture, whosoever the propounder be, though he be
the Devil himself. Therefore you are by your principles bound to believe even
the Devil himself when his discourse to you seems conuictiue or persuasiue;
as Luther did, and by diabolical persuasion was induced to abrogate the Mass.
This being so (that your way of resolution binds you to believe the Devils
discourse) I subsume: But in the true Christian way of resolution, none can be
bound to believe the Devil, when he knows him to be the Devil: Therefore this
your Wit-way of resolution of faith, is the right way to make the Devil the
ruler and guide of your wit. You say Second Edit. page, 340. lin; 22.
Page 357. lin. 13. That our Devils at Lowden doing tricks against the Gospel
shall not move you. I am persuaded the Devil will not give so much as a false
miracle for your soul, seeing he may have it at an easier rate. For he can
easier frame an hundred arguments of conuictiue discourse from Scripture in the
behalf of his falsehoods, that is, such as you with all your wit shall not be
able to solue; then do such tricks as he is said to be forced to do at Lowden.
And yet you do not ask so much as a conuictiue Argument for your soul, if he
can by probable reasons from Scripture hammer into your head, that his doctrine
is divine revelation, you are sure his own.

The sixth Conviction.
25. WHereas the Directour offers you the perpetual visible Church, descended
by never interrupted succession from our Savior, for your guide instred of
your natural wit and reason, you reject the offer Preface n. 12. saying: He
that follows reason in all his opinions, follows God, whereas he that
follows a company of men, may oftentimes follow a company of beasts. And
against the Catholic Roman Church thus you declame Cap.6. n. 72. If I follow
your Church for my guide, I shall do all one, as I should follow a company of
blind men in a judgment of colors, or in the choice of a way: For every
inconsidering man is blind in that which he does not consider. Now what is your
Church, but a company of vnconsidering men, who comfort themselus, because they
are a great company together; but all of them, either out of idelnesse refuse
a severe trial of their Religion, or out of superstition fear the event of
such a trial, that they may be scrupuled and staggered by it, etc. You are a
company of men un willing, and afraid to understand, least you should do good;
that, have eyes to see, but will not see; that, have not the love of the truth,
and therefore deserve to be given over to strong delusions: men that love
darkness more then light: in a word you are, the blind, leading the blind.
Thus you; And this is the flat down right plain song you promised your reader
without any discords in it; for it is rust that tune of concord, and harmonious
concent which scoldes use to singe when they rail at some modest Matrone. You
will I trust find by experience, that we are not all such Cowards, blind men,
and beasts as you make us; you will see that considering we have considered
your Babylon with lights, and have been bold to enter into the darkest corners,
and dens of your book, and find your Lions to be but of the Cuman kind. Will
not you say, I have made a diligent and severe search into your book, if I can
out of it produce two propositions, which joined together conclude in good
form against your head, what I am loath to utter, worse blindness then you
object to us, whereas the present Church is not capable of such folly?

26. None can believe contradictions at once, but such as are Fools, and have
their brains cracked. This you suppose Cap. 6. n. 33. lin. 14. unless you will
say, that they (S. Austin and the African Bishop^) were all so foolish as to
believe direct contradictions at once. And c. 5. nu. 105. lin. 40. 2. Edit.
page 292. n. 105. lin. 40.
Who can join together in one brain not cracked these assertions, In the
Roman Church there are errors not damnable: In the Roman Church there are no
errors at all? And 2. Edit. page 10. lin. ^
Page 10 lin. 12. It is an apparent contradiction, That a man should dis
believe what himself belieues to be a truth. And 2. Edit. page 10. lin. ^
Cap. 5. n. 59. That a man who is persuaded, that your Church does err in
these things should together believe these things true, is implicatio in
termini, as Schoolmen speak, a contradiction so plain as one word destroys
the other. Thus you: and yet that foolery, that men may believe contradictions
at once, you affirm, and prove it by your own experience 2. Edit. page 20^.
lin. 6.
Page 215. lin. 3. Though there can be no damnable Heresy, unless it
co^tradict some necessary truth, yet there is no contradiction, but the same
man may at once believe this Heresy and this Truth: because there is no
contradiction, that the same man at the same time should believe
contradictions. Thus you: wherein you manifestly contradict your self and
practice what you say, no man can do whose brains be not crakt: For what
contradiction can be more plain and direct then this betwixt your two sayings,
It is no contradistion, that a man believe contradictions at once, the same
doctrine to be heresy and truth. It is apparent contradiction so plain as one
word destroys another, that the same man at the same time should believe
contradictions, or should believe that to be Falsehood which he belieues to be
Truth.

27. No man therefore in his wits can believe contradictions at once, only
cracked brayns can think they do it, when they do it not; as madmen imagine
they fly when they rest in their bed. In which number you rank your self,
Cap. 4. n. 47. Indeed that men should not assent to contradictions I willingly
grant; but to say it is impossible, is against every man's experience; and
almost as unreasonable, as to do the thing which is said to be impossible.
Thus you: that other men besides your self believe, or think they believe in
their heart contradictions at once you cannot say, but only by the experience
you have of your self, that you do in your conceyt heartily believe
contradictions, and thereupon imagine that other men do the like. Now put
together your two assertions: Whosoever thinks he can believe contradictions
at once is a foolish creature, has his brain cracked: I William Chillingworth
know by experience, that I can believe contradictions as the same time. What of
this! O that you would conclude what these premises urge you unto. Therefore I
will never more trust my own wit and discourse in matters of religion; I will
abandon those false principles, Preface n. 12.
He that follows his own discourse still follows God: By discourse no man
can possibly be lead into error: I will take the Church for my guide which is
constant in the truth and cannot oppose herself, as I my self confess.

28. For so you do, 2. Edit. p. 32. lin. 7
Page 33. lin 9. It is impossible the Church should oppose the Church, I mean
the present Church oppose it self. Now seeing men are naturamendaces, mutable,
subject to error, to change and to be contrary to themselves, this
impossibility of opposing it self, which you attribute to the Church must of
necessity be acknowledged to be a Divine privilege, caused by the continual
assistance of the spirit of Wisdom, in whom and his doctrine there is not est,
and non est, 2. Cor. 1.18.
as the Apostle says. Hence I conclude the infallibility of the Church: You
say, Page 215. lin. 29. that he that belieues the Bible, and together belieues
some errors against the Bible, contradicts himself, believing
contradictions at once: But it is impossible, you say, that the present Church
should oppose and contradicte it self: Therefore it is impossible, that the
present Church believing the Bible should hold any error against the Bible.

29. Except perchance you will say, that the Church can do things impossible,
as you say your self can: In proof whereof I give one instance instead of
many. Your adversary urges you often, and hard to set down a Catalogue of
your Fundamentals of faith: You after many tergiuersations say at last, 2.
Edit. 193. lin. 10.
Page 201. lin. 25. To set down a catalogue of Fundamentalls (because to some
more 2. Edit. page 206. lin. 27.
is fundamental, to others less, to others nothing at all) had been
impossible. And 2. Edit. page 129. l. 15.
Page 134. lin. 25. This variety of circumstances makes it impossible to set
down an exact Catalogue of fundamentalls, and proves your request as
unreasonable, as if you should desire us to make a coat to sit the Moon in
all her changes. Can you make this impossible Catalogue of the Fundamentalls of
your Church, that is a coat for the moon in all her changes? Yes surely you
say you can 2. Edit. page 154. l. 21.
Page 160. n. 53. lin. 25. I could give you an abstract of the essential parts
of christianity if it were necessary, but I have showed it not so, and at this
time I have no leisure to do you courtesies so trouble some to my self. Thus
you. Nor will we request you to do us courtesies impossible, which are (I
confess) troublesome things to be done, and the doing of them requires time
longer then Eternity: only we will beseech you as you tender the good of your
soul, to do a courtesy to your self very possible to be done; That you will
reflect, that you, being a man witty, and brought up in learning, it were not
possible you should fall into such contradictions as these are, were not the
hand of divine permission therein for the eure of your capital evil, which is,
Confidence in your own wit, and contempt of the Whole Catholic Church as of
a company of only blindmen and beasts. It is not weakness of wit, but
dizzinesse of pride which makes you thus reele in your writing, as even here
you do again. You auerre, that to some more is fundamental, to others less,
to others nothing at all. Which is not only against D. Potter but your self
have in your book contradicted it (I am sure) more then twenty times; as Cap.
3. n. 20. lin. 9. Points fundamental be those only which are revealed by God,
and commanded to be prach't to all, and to be believed of all. If fundamental
points be those only which are to be D. Potter p. ^11.
preached unto all, and to be believed of all, how is it possible, that there
should be some points fundamental for some only, and not for all?

The seventh Conviction.
30. With this Conviction I mean to conclude this first Chapter, and answer
your chief argument against our grounding Faith on the authority of the Church
for (say you) the infallibility of the Church, the Principle we build on, is
not evident of it self, and therefore needs proof. It cannot be proved by
tradition, because none can be showed for it; nor by Scripture, because the
Scripture is received upon the authority of the Church, and so the Church must
be believed infallible before we believe Scripture; wherefore it cannot be
proved by Scripture, except we will run round in a circle, saying, We believe
the Scripture to be Canonical, because the Church which is infallible says so,
and, We believe the Church to be infallible, because the Scripture Canonical
says so. To get out of this circle, we must say, that we believe the Scripture
to be the word of God, because the Church infallible in all her proposalls does
so affirm, and the Church to be infallible we believe, because our natural
reason guided by the motives of credibility, and prudential motives, does
persuade us that it is so. This argument (by the repetition whereof your book
is grown into a great bulk) I could answer by retorsion, and show that you
are forced to dance the round in a circle, though many times you run in and
out, by contradicting your self. But I will not go so far about, I answer
directly, that the Church may be considered, either as delivering Traditions
received from the Apostles, or, as defining Controversies of faith which for
the present arise. The infallibility of the Church as delivering Traditions is
not proved by Scripture, nor by tradition, but is evident of it self: for the
authority of the Church delivering Traditions by lively voice is nothing else,
See convict. 1. n. 7.
but the authority of universal tradition; which Authority you grant to be
evidently credible of it self, and fit to be rested on. And on what principle
can Christian Faith rest, but on that which is infallible, by relying whereon we
cannot be deceived?

31. You are a man so courteous and kind to the Church of Rome, as for her sake
you will deny your self; you will destroy your own writing, you will grant
this infallibility of the Church in plain terms to do her a pleasure. Cap. 2.
n. 44. lin. 6. There is no repugnance, but we may be certain enough of the
universal Tradition of the ancient Church etc. and not certain enough of the
definitions of the present Church, unless you can show (which I am sure you
never can do) that the infallibility of the present Church was always a
Tradition of the ancient Church. Now your maine business is to prove the
present Church infallible, not so much in consigning ancient traditions as in
defining emergent controversies. Thus you. In which words I note how you
shuffle and imply, in saying: We cannot show tradition for the infallibility of
the present Church, for tradition is a lively voice to be heard, and believed
of such as have ears to hear, not a thing of sight to be showed in books. Do
not you say, nothing is proved true by being written in a book but only by
tradition (of lively voice) which is credible for it self? Why then do you
require proof of that, which you say needs Cap. 4. n. 53. l. 24. Tradition is
such a principle as may be rested on, and which requires no other proof.
no proof? And how can you deny the tradition for the infallibility of present
Church against emergent Heresies, seeing it is consigned to her Children by the
present Church which you do not deny to be infallible in consigning ancient
traditions? It is true, you do not in this place make us of this truth an
absolute deed of gift; you are afraid, it goes something against your heart,
but you will be presently more kind-hearted For in the next Cap. 3. n. 45. you
speak thus to your adversary. You were to prove the Church infallible, not in
her Traditions (which we willingly grant if they be as universal as the
tradition of the undoubted books of Scripture etc. not therefore in her
universal traditions were you to prove the Church infallible) but in all her
decrees and definitions of Controversies. Behold now you grant willingly, and
with all your heart, that the present Church is infallible in her universal
Traditions, but not in all her definitions. With this your grant we remain
content for the present, and for the grant of the second, we shall expect your
leisure, for you will grant it in the end, as shall be showed in the 7. Chapter.

32. This grant of the Churches infallibility in delivering Traditions, you
confirm unto us, by the authority of S. Austine cap. 3. n. 43. For to his
testimony brought by Charity mantayned, That which the whole Church holds, and
is not ordained by Councels, but has alwais been kept, is most rightly
believed to be delivered by Apostolical authority; you answer: Very right, and
what then? therefore the Church cannot err in defining of Controversies? Thus
you; and then you fall to skoffe at your learned Adversary, saying, You are at
your wits end to find some glue, or soder, or cement, or chain, or thread, or
any thing to tie together the Autecedent and the Consequent of his Enthimemes:
and so wish him, when he writes again to write nothing but syllogismes. I
believe what you say, that in writing thus scornefully and crakingly, you were
at your wits end, that is, at that end of your wit you prefixed unto it, when
you undertook to answer Charity mantayned. For it appears by your untaught,
and base manner of answering, that your end was only by petulant abusing the
modesty of the Author, to obscure as much as you might, the clear truth of
that excellent Work. So you do here forging an Enthimeme he never thought on,
making a conclusion which he did not intend to prove in this place; and yet,
would you turn your wit the right way, and use it to that end for which God
bestowed the same on you, you would easily find a proposition, which does tie
the Antecedent and Consequent, even of this by you so scorned Enthymene, with
an vnsoluble knot.

33. But to my purpose you grant with S. Austin, that whatsoever the whole
Church holds and delivers not as a thing ordained by Councels, but as always
kept, is most righty beliened to be an Ap^stolical Tradition, so that the
testimony of the present Church in delivering traditions is credible, and most
worthy to be belicued for it self without other proof: and Edit. page 113. n.
163. li. 26.
page 119. n. 12. you say S. Austen says, that Christ has recommended the
Church to us for a credible Witness of ancient Tradition, not for an
infallible Definer of all emergent Controversies: which supposed, I would know
how with this truth, that can consist which you write 2. Edit. p. 61. lin. 1.
Page 63. lin. 30. The truth is, that neither the Scripture, nor the present
Church has any thing to do in this matter, for the question which be Canonical
books cannot be decided, but only by the testimony of the ancient Church. How
has the present Church nothing to do in deciding the question, which be
canonical books, if her testimony be infallible in this matter? if herein she
do the part of a credible witness? Have you any glue, or sodder, or cement, or
chain, or thread to tie these your two sayings together? Or rather have you
any chain to keep them asunder, that they come not to fight, and mutually to
murder each other? Also what you say 2. Edit. page 147. lin. 1.
Paeg. 152. lin. 44. Who can warrant us, that the universal Traditions of the
Church were all Apostolical etc. who can secure us, that human inventions might
not in a short time gain reputation of Apostolic? how does this agree with
what you say in the next lines after. Cap. 3. n. 45. That the Church in her
universal Traditions, is as infallible as Scripture? Do not you also affirm,
That Tradition universal is the rule to judge all Controversies by credible for
it self, and fit to be rested on? how can this be true if we can have no
warrant, no security, but that the universal Traditions of the Church may be
false and forged, not delivered by the Apostles, but a quocunque traditore,
inventions of men? and if there be no warrant, but that universal Traditions
may be false, what warrant is there, that you have the true vncorupt text of
Scripture, not depraved by the secret creeping in of damnable errors? Do not
you say Page 55. n. 8. that these books cannot be proved Canonical, but only
by Tradition? and cap. 2. n. 114. It is upon the authority of universal
Tradition that we would have men to believe Scripture. If then universal
Tradition be fallible, if there be no warrant, no security of the certainty
thereof; how are you secure, that you have the true text of the true Canonical
books of Scripture? But of this more in the next Chapter.

34. By what has been said your so often repeated, yea perpetual and only
argument of the circle, is showed to be frivolous, and you running about therein
have made your head so dizzy, as you forget your self. For in arguing you
always presume without any proof, that the infallibility of the present
Church delivering Traditions, or which is all one, that the credibility of the
universal Tradition of the Church, is not evident of it self. A supposition
which you never would have presumed, had not that been out of your mind which
you often affirm and confirm, that the authority of universal Tradition, is
evidently credible of it self, and fit to be rested on. No less unproven, yea
more worthy to be reprou'd is your other (b) presumption, that we do not so
much as pretend, that there are certain evident notes to know the true Church,
and discern it from all others, nor that it is evident of it self, that those
notes agree only to our Church; all men will wonder how you could be so
ignorant, or not being ignorant, how you would be so bold. For who does not
know we teach, that the Church is known by visible marks even evident to
sense, as succession, Universality, and Unity; and that these marks do shine
manifestly and conspicuosly only in the Roman Christianity. Which truth is a
necessary sequel of your doctrine, That tradition universal is the rule to
judge all Controversies by, fit to be rested on, and evidently credible for it
self. Behold the deduction thereof.

35. That Church only is the true christian Church which has universal
Tradition of Doctrines evidently credible for it self. This is clear, because
if Tradition credible of it self be the rule to judge all Controversies by,
and the only means to know which be Canonical Scriptures, then the Church
which wants Tradition credible of it self, wants the fundamental Principle,
and ground of all Christianity, and so cannot be the true christian Church: But
that Church only has Tradition of doctrines, credible of it self, whose
Tradition of Doctrines is evidently perpetual by succession from the Apostles,
evidently universal by diffusion over the world, evidently one and the same in
the mouth of all the reporters thereof. For Tradition which is not perpetual
from the Apostles, but has a known after-beginning wants credibility that it
is Christian: Tradition which is not universal and notorious to the whole
world, but clancular, and in a corner wants credibility that it is from the
Apostles, and the sound of their universal preaching: Tradition which is not
one and the same, but dissonant in the mouth of diverse reporters wants
credibility that it is from truth, and not a devise of human fiction, or of
deceived discourse from Scripture: Ergo the Church, whose Tradition is
evidently credible of it self must be evidently perpetual, by succession from
the Apostles: Universal by the notorious preaching of her Tradition diffused
over the world One and the same, and uniform in all her Professors, so that
they all agree in the belief of all doctrine delivered unto them by the full
consent of Tradition. For they who of Traditions delivered by full consent
choose some, and reject others, are Choosers, that is Heretics. Nor can such
Choosers choose, but there will be amongst the^ variety of choice, and
consequently dissension, whereby they will appear a company void of all
authority and credit to testify what is the true Christian Tradition from the
Apostles. These be the marks whereby the true Christian Catholic Church is
known, which to be found in the Church of Rome only, shall be showed in the
seventh Chapter, though I cannot but presume the thing is to every considering
man evident enough. Wherefore Catholics, and all true Christians do not
choose their Church or Religion by their own natural reason and and wit; but
Tradition notorious, and evident of it self, Perpetual, Universal, Uniform
shows them the Church, and with her, and in her that Religion which was for
them chosen, ordained, delivered by the wisdom of Christ Jesus, brought by
him from the bosom of his heavenly Father. You see then that in granting
Tradition to be the ground of all Christian belief, you have granted as much
as we can desire, and (howsoever you be pleased to term us vnconsidering men)
yet we have considered the sequels of your assertions, perchance more deeply,
then you have done your self.

That the assent to Gods Word of Christian saving Faith, is not mere human,
moral, and probable; but Divine, infallible, and certainly unerring. CHAP. II.
THE contrary error cozen german to the refuted in the former Chapter, and
consequent thereupon, is often inculcated by you in your book; That an
infallible faith Cap. 6. n. 6.
is not necessary unto salvation, nor for our walking unto happiness, through
a world of oppositions backed by the strength of flesh and blood. A weak
probable and credible assurance, that there is an Heaven suffices, though Cap.
1. n. 8. versus finem.
indiscernable from the belief we give to other human hystories. It is enough
men believe the Gospel, and mysteries of faith, Cap. 6. n. 5. l. 28.
as much as Cesars Commentaries, or the history of Salust. That men are not
bound, nor is it possible they should believe Preface n. 8. in fine.
things impossible in human reason. Cap. 6. n. 7. in fine.
That we should believe the truth of any thing, the truth whereof cannot be
made evident with evidence proportionable to the degree of faith required of
us, this for any man to be bound to, is unjust, because to do it is impossible,
As sure as God is good he will not require impossibilities of us; but Cap. 6. n
7. circa medium.
infallible certainty of a thing which though it be in it self, yet is not
made to appear to us to be infallible certain, is an impossibility. These and
the like nullifidian Pardoxes you often utter, and endeavor to prove, which
are plausible and applauded by those S. Peter terms unlearned and unstable
heads, Varro.
who now pass under the name of Gallant wits, whose life we may fear is
suitable to the leuity and vanity of their Faith; Nam quae venustas hic adest
Gallantibus?
Quae casta vestis? --
These doctrines (I say) be welcome to such as groan under the Nam vera
Religio omnino sine graui Authoritatis imper^o intri recte nuilo pacto potest.
August. de vtil. Cred. Cap. 9.
yoke of humble obedience to Gods word; under Christian duty of believing
things invisible, the revealed manner whereof is incomprehensible to humane
understanding, who because they find difficulty to do it, will not endeavor by
Gods grace to raise their erring, and wandering thoughts, and stay them by firm
and fixed faith, on high and heavenly objects. For as Ser. 2. de Asconsione.
S. Leo says, it is the vigor only of generous minds to believe without
doubt what comes not within sight, and there to rest with our heart, whither we
cannot reach with our eye. And because you accuse Catholics, that they
require men to yield, upon only probable and prudentiall Page 79. n. 70. Upon
prudentiall motives, fallible and uncertain grounds
motives, Page 79. n. 70. Upon prudentiall motives, fallible and uncertain
grounds
most certain assent to things impossible in human reason; that the falsehood
of this slander may be made apparent, I must briefly declare our Catholic
doctrine, and together prove it, which shall be of this your error.

The first Conviction.
2. TO the constitution of an assent absolutely infallible, five things
concur, all which by the consent of Catholic Deuines are most certain and
infallible in the assent of Christian faith. 1. The Object, with is doctrine
revealed of God. 2. The motive, and reason of believing which is the Authority
of God revealing whose veracity is altogether infallible. 3. Because we believe
Revelations not made immediately to our selves, but to the blessed Apostles, it
is necessary there be a Proponent of Gods word, that is a Witness worthy of
all credit, an Authority whereon we may securely rely, that those Christian
doctrines were delivered and preached by the Apostles as Divine Revelations.
This Proponent and Witness is the present Catholic Church, delivering what
she received by full universal tradition from her Ancestors, or (which is the
same in effect) universal Tradition. Now we hold tradition to be altogether as
infallible as Scripture, and that it ought to be received with the same
reverence, with the same submissiue devotion of pious belief, as Scripture, as
you acknowledge that we do. chap. 2. n. 1.

3. Fourthly, that an assent be infallible it is necessary, that the thing
believed, be represented and proposed to the Understanding of the belieuer in
such manner, as he may know the same to be infallible, and that in believing
it, he cannot possibly err. For the manner of believing, if it be not known
to the belieuer to be infallible, though it be infallible in it self, will not
make him sure and infallible. This condition is found in the assent of
Christian faith; for the things to be believed are represented as clear by
noted and marked with divine and supernatural proofs, that is, confirmed with
innumerable manifest miracles, which the belieuers have seen with their eyes,
or else know them by the report of whole worlds of those that beheld them, by
report so full constant and brim as it is equivalent to the evidence of sense.
These Divine proofs and marks evidently show, that the things marked with
them, are under the special care of God and of his infinite goodness, that he
cannot but provide, that the pious belieuer be not deceived about them.

4. Hereby is concluded, that the Christian manner of apprehending the
mysteries of faith is infallible, and more sure and certain then any manner of
natural representation, and apprehension of things can possibly be. Natural
knowledge is either Physical, whereby we apprehend things as true, because
represented as such by the evidence of sense; or Metaphysicall, whereby we
apprehend things as true, by the light of understanding, which clearly beholds
the necessary connection the thing apprehended has with truth. As in this
proposition, Every whole thing is greater then any single part thereof, our
understanding, by the notion of the single words, presently without discourse
sees and belieues the truth of the speech. Neither of these representations is
so certain and infallible, that it implies contradiction that men should be
deceived by it, either by some extraordinary working of God to men unknown, or
through the infinity of the thing apprehended, which men cannot comprehend. For
example, men see the Chymnies of a Town smoke, thence they conclude with
Physical certitude, that there is fire in those Chymnies; wherein they may be
mistaken, seeing God may have raised that smoke without any fire. We are better
assured, by the light of understanding about universal principles, which
appear manifestly true, by the very notion of the single words; yet not so
universally sure, but we may be deceived by them about infinite and
incomprehensible things. That Principle I before named, Every whole thing is
greater then any single part thereof, we are not sure thereof in infinite whole
things; yea many learned men do maintain, that in an infinite multitude, the
whole multitude is not greater then a single part thereof. That known rule and
principle of all discourse, The things with be one and the same with a third
thing, are one and the same between themselves, Faith assures us, that the
same fayles in the divine Nature, which being infinite and incomprehensible,
may be and is identified with three divine Persons really distinct. Nor is this
to destroy all certitude of natural knowledge, but only to make the same
finite, and limited within the compass of its weak reach and capacity,
infinitely inferior to divine wisdom, and altogether subordinate to his most
infallible word.

5. Now deception cannot possibly happen in our believing of doctrines
represented to our understanding, clearly marked with evident miracles and
other supernatural notes, showing they are revealed of God. For God working by
his power above nature to move men to believe such Divine and miraculous
doctrine, cannot also work above nature what may be the cause of our deception
therein: for then he should be contrary to himself, with is altogether
impossible Nor can there be fear, danger, or possibility, that in this belief
we may be deceived through weakness of judgment, caused by the finite capacity
of humane wit, because in this belief the light of nature all reason is not our
guide, but the word of God discovering high mysteries and hidden secrets
conform to his infinite and undeceivable understanding. Hence a late learned
Writer our Countryman says excellently to this purpose, P. Thomas Baconus
Southellus in sua Regula viua seu Analysi fidei. Dispat. 3. cap. 6. n. 122.
Haec motiua conuincunt necessario and metaphysice, quod si vlla vera sit in
mundo Religio etc. ea alia esse non possit quam baec nostra his motiuis
insignita.
That the motives of Christian Catholic credibility are most certain and
infallible in themselves, and do most manifestly, and even with metaphysicall
evidence convince our Christian Catholic Religion to be the true way of
salvation, as certainly, as that there is any true religion in the world, or
any divine providence about the salvation of mankind. Who can desire greater
certitude, and evidence then this?

6. The fifth thing is firm adherence to the doctrine proposed, so that the
belieuer cannot at all, or else very hardly be driven from his persuasion of
the truth thereof. This adherence in Christian Catholics is so firm, that
they are ready not only to give their life in testimony thereof; but also will
deny their own senses, their reason, and all natural evidence, rather then
admit any doubt of doctrine in this manner, represented to them as Gods
infallible word.

7. If any object, that the assent of Christian faith, is often shaken with
doubts, sometimes overthrown; whereas the assent of natural knowledge stands
constant and unmoved without danger of falling: I answer, this is true, but
the reason hereof is not because the assent of natural knowledge is more
certain and firm of it self; but because Christian faith, is more exposed to
the blasts of temptation. An Oak, on the top of an high mountain is shaken
with wind and storm, and many times beaten to the ground; whereas a tender
sprig growing low out of the wind is not subject to this danger; yet no man
will say, that the sprig is more firm and deeply rooted in the ground then the
Oak. Christian faith stands on high having for matter and subject, high
invisible and incomprehensible mysteries, which though they are by the belieuer
sufficiently seen to be revealed of God; yet not seen at all by natural
reason to be true in themselves; yea still in themselves they remain dark,
obscure, difficill, and seemingly impossible in humane reason. Hence though
faith be firmly grounded, and deeply rooted on the authority of God revealing
Christian doctrines, yet strong apprehensions of the seeming impossibility
thereof, like violent blasts cause the same sometimes to shake and waver with
inuoluntary doubts: whereas the assent of natural knowledge is never, or
seldom tempted to doubt, because there is no seeming impossibility in such
truth. By this explication of our Catholic Resolution of faith, it is
manifest, you have done us wrong in saying, that we require, That men build a
most certain assent on fallible, uncertain, and only probable grounds.

The second Conviction.
8. YOur ground to make the assent of Christian faith fallible, and only
probable, is because it is an assent to a conclusion deduced from two premises,
whereof the one is fallible and only probable: Cap. 1. n. 8. lin. 28. Our faith
is an assent to this conclusion: The doctrine of Christianity is true, which
being deduced, from the former Thesis, All which God revealed for true, is
true, which is metaphysically certain; and the former Hypothesis, All the
articles of our faith, are revealed of God, whereof we can have but moral
certainty, we cannot possibly by natural means be more certain of it, then
of the weaker of the Premises; for the conclusion still follows the worser
part, (if there is any worse) and must be negative, particular, contingent, or
but morally certain, if any of the propositions from whence it is derived be
so. Neither can we be certain of it in the highest degree, unless we be thus
certain of all the principles whereon it is grounded. As a man cannot stand,
or go strongly if either of his legs be weak, or as a building cannot be
stable, if any one of the necessary pillars be infirm and instable. Thus you;
And then to show, this Hypothesis, All the articles of our faith, that is, all
the doctrines of the Christian Creed and Scripture be revealed of God, to be
only morally certain; you bring this reason, because it is proved only by
tradition universal, only by the testimony of the ancient Churches, an
argument only probable. Cap. 6. n. 40. The joint tradition of all Apostolic
Churches, with one mouth, and with one voice teaching the same doctrine, was
urged by the Fathers, not as a demonstration, but only as an argument very
probable. Cap. 6. n. 8. Tradition of Christian doctrine from age to age, from
Father to son cannot be a fit ground but of moral assurance. Cap. 3. n. 44.
lin. 55. Who can warrant us that the universal Traditions of the Church were
all Apostolical. Thus you.

9. This is your discourse to prove your Paradoxe, that the assent of Christian
faith is fallible and only morally certain. But the foundation whereon you
build your maine Principle, Universal Tradition is not infallible, you your
self over throw, and establish the contrary ground that tradition unwritten is
as infallible as Scripture. Cap. 4 n. 13. lin. 19. Universal and neuerfayling
Tradition gives this testimony both to the Creed and Scripture, that they both
by the works of God were sealed and testified to be the word of God. Behold
the Hypothesis, that the articles of Christian Religion (that is of the
Christian Creed and Scripture) are revealed of God, stands upon a pillar
firm, and never failing. If you say, morally certain, and never failing, not
absolutely; I reply obiecting unto you another place where you expressly
suppose your certainty of the Scripture to be absolute, to wit of those books
of which there was never doubt made. Page 69. We do not profess our selves so
absolutely and undoubtedly certain; neither do we urge others to be so, of
those books with have been doubted, as of those that never have. How clearly
and in express terms do you profess, that your certainty of the Scriptures
that were never questioned, is not only probable and moral, but absolute
certainty undoubted. And how can it be otherwise, seeing Tradition by lively
voice conueyeth unto us what the Apostles delivered about the Canon of the
Scripture, to wit, which books were to be held as the word of God. For no man
can doubt, but the Apostles delivered, what they had by divine revelation from
Christ Iesns, and the holy Ghost; and consequently, that these books be the
word of God, is a divine revelation unwritten, as certain as if it were
written. For as D. Field D. Field of the Church l. 4. c. 20. page 238.
says, It is not the writing that gives things their authority, but the
worth and credit of him that delivers, though by word, and lively voice only.

10. Perhaps you will tell me, as you do Charity maintayn'd upon another
occasion, cap. 2. n. 86. If D. Field were infallible, and these words had not
slipped unadvisedly from him, this had been the best argument in your Book. Well
then: I must, I see, bring an Author infallible in proof, that Tradition is
equal in certainty unto Scripture, and one so advised as all Catholics
compared to his wisdom, be but a company of blind vnconsidering men. What if I
find this Doctrine in your book proved even by the same argument D. Field
uses, because, being written gives not Authority to God's word, then I hope
you will say without any if, that this is the best argument in my book. But
where is this passage to be found? Perchance if you were to find it your self,
you would be to seek, and more to seek if you go about to reconcile your
contradictions. In which case you who vaunt your self for the witty Oedipus in
soluing the Sophismes and Knots of Charity maintained, will perhaps be at a
stop, and be forced to say with Oedipus being to solue his own riddle.

Ego ille victae spolia qui Sphyngis tuli,
Haerebo Scripti:
fati tardus interpres mei.
11. The place is Page 153. n. 45. where you speak thus to your Adversary: No
less (say you) is S. Chrysostom for the infallible Traditions of the Church.
But you were to prove the Church infallible, not in Traditions, which we
willingly grant (if they be universal as the Tradition of the undoubted books
of Scripture is) to be AS INFALLIBLE AS THE SCRIPTVRE is. For neither does
being written make the word of God more infallible, or being unwritten make it
less infallible. In these words you affirm, that Traditions universal,
namely and principally, that Tradition, that the undoubted books of the
Scripture be the word of God, are as infallible as Scripture. You prove it,
because, Neither does, being written, make the word of God more infallible, or
being unwritten make it less infallible. In which proof you suppose that as
Scripture is the written word of God, so Tradition is the word of God
unwritten, and therefore equal in certainty and infallibility to Scripture.

12. Now the ground of your error being by your contradiction thereof, and by
your confession, yea by your demonstration of the contrary truth overthrown, I
prove the assent of Christian faith to be absolutely certain in this manner:
Christian faith is an assent to this conclusion, The doctrine of Christianity
is true. This conclusion is deduced from this Thesis, Whatsoever God reueales
for true is true, and this Hypothesis, The Christian Creed and Scripture be the
word of God. So that if both these propositions be absolutely certain, then
the assent to the conclusion is infallible and absolutely certain. Now that
both these Premises or Propositions be absolutely certain I prove; The Thesis,
Whatsoever God reueales is truth, you grant to be absolutely and metaphysically
certain: But the Hypothesis, The Christian Creed, and Scripture is divine
revelation, and the word of God, is also absolutely certain. First, because it
is, as you grant, an universal Tradition as infallible as Scripture. But
Scripture is absolutely and metaphysically certain truth, because it is
doctrine revealed of God. Secondly, whatsoever God reueales whether it be
delivered in writing or by lively voice only, is absolutely and metaphysically
certain: But the Tradition, That the Creed and Scripture is the word of God,
is divine revelation which the Apostles delivered by lively voice, sealing and
confirming the truth thereof with works of God, as you confess: Ergo the
Tradition, that the Christian Creed and Scripture is of God is absolutely
certain and infallible. Finally you say, cap. 1. n. 8. in sine. 2. edition
cap. 2. n. 8. infine.
If a message be brought me from a man of absolute credit by a messenger that
is not so, my confidence of the truth of the relation, cannot but be rebated
and lessened by my diffidence in the relatour. This you. I subsume: But the
message of the Gospel is brought to me and to every Christian, from a man of
absolute credit Christ Jesus the Eternal Son of God, in whom are all the
treasures of Divine wisdom by a messenger of absolute credit, to wit, by the
Church, delivering universal Tradition, which is as you confess as infallible
as Scripture: Therefore our faith of the Creed and Scripture is not rebated or
lessened by being delivered by the perpetual visible Church of Christ, but is
as infallible, as if we had had the message immediately from the mouth of our
Lord and Savior.

13. Iadde, Tradition universal is not only as infallible as Scripture, but
also more certain in respect of us. This I ground upon what you write Cap. 6.
n. 59. We must be surer of the proof, then of the thing proved thereby,
otherwise it it no proof, that is, the certainty of the proof must be better
known and more evident to us, then the thing proved. But cap. 2. n. 8. you
say, the Scripture cannot be proved to be the word of God, and a perfect rule
of faith, but only by Tradition, which is credible for it self. Ergo, the
certainty of Tradition is surer, that is, better known and more evident to us
then the Scripture. Yea further, Tradition is a Rock of our belief, a
principle so evident, that it needs no further proof. This I prove by this
argument grounded upon your sayings; That which is credible for it self, and
fit to be rested on, must be so evident, that it need no further evidence. This
you suppose Cap. 2. n. 45. lin. 8. where you say, I will never cease
multiplying demands upon demands, until you settle me upon a Rock, I mean
give me such an answer, whose truth is so evident that it needs no further
evidence. But Cap. 2. n. 25, lin. 5. you say, The credibility of universal
Tradition is a thing credible of it self, and therefore fit to be rested on.
Ergo, the Authority of Tradition universal, or of the Catholic Church is a
Rock, a rule, a reason of believing, so evident and credible of it self as it
needs no further evidence.

The third Conviction.
14. WE have convinced your error by the overthrow of the ground thereof: Now
I prove the absolute infallibility of Christian faith by the proper cause,
showing why it is so, and must of necessity be so, grounding my proofs on
truths so clear, as they are by you granted. Cap. 6. n. 9. lin. 2. you say,
If we were required to believe with certainty, (I mean a moral certainty)
things no way represented, as infallible and certain (I mean morally,) an
unreasonable obedience were required of us. And so likewise were it, were we
required to believe, as absolutely certain, that which is no way represented
to us as absolutely certain. Thus you. Now I subsume. But the Articles of our
faith are represented unto you as absolutely infallible, not only as morally,
but as metaphysically, and mathematically certain in themselves. This I prove
by what you write Cap. 6. n. 3. lin. 6. I do heartily acknowledge and believe,
the articles of our faith be in themselves Truths, as certain, as the very
common principles of Geometry, and Metaphysickes. But that there is required of
us a knowledge of them, and an adherence to them, as certain as that of sense
or science, that such a certainty is required of us under pain of damnation,
this I have showed to be an error etc. Thus you. Here you profess, that you
do heartily believe the articles of our faith to be in themselves truths
altogether infallible, even metaphysically certain. But you could not believe
them heartily, as absolutely certain Truth, were they no ways represented to
your understanding as absolutely and metaphysically certain. What more clear
then this? For how can you apprehend that truth, by firm and hearty faith,
which you do not apprehend at all? Or how can you apprehend that truth at all,
with is no ways represented to your understanding? Ergo, the mysteries of
Christian Religion are by the reasons and motives of Christian Tradition
represented to your understanding, as truths most certain and infallible in
themselves. How then are you not bound to believe them as Truth, absolutely and
metaphysically certain in themselves, with an hearty adherence to them, as
certain as that of sense and science? The mysteries of Christian faith being
represented to you as morally certain, you are bound (as our confess) under
pain of damnation to believe them with moral assurance: Ergo, if they be
represented to your understanding as truth absolutely certain, you are bound
to believe them with absolute certainty, equal to the certainty of
mathematical, and metaphysicall science. But they are so represented to your
understanding, and you heartily apprehend them as absolutely infallible in
themselves.

The fourth Conviction.
15. I convince the absolute infallibility of Christian faith by what you write
Cap. 4. n. 11. lin. 20. Which of us ever taught that it was not damnable either
to deny, or to so much as doubt of the truth of any thing whereof we either
know or believe, that God has revealed it? Thus you I do not know of what sect
you are, and so I not say which of you, but I ca^ say, that you, of what Sect
soever you be have taught, that it is not damnable for men not to doubt of that
doctrine which they believe to be revealed; for you accuse Catholics, as
blind, as perverse enemies of truth, and of many the like crimes, and in proof
thereof, you say. Cap. 6. n. 72. lin. 15. My own experience assures me, that
in this imputation, I do you no injury; but it is very apparent to all men, by
your ranking doubting of any part of your doctrine, among mortal sins. Here
you reprehend our doctrine, that to doubt deliberately of the doctrine we
believe to be revealed of God, is a mortal sin, that is, damnable: for I
hope your own experience assures you, that we believe our Catholic doctrine,
and every part thereof to be the word of God written or unwritten. With what
reason and congruence then, can you reprehend us for holding that it is a
mortal sin, to doubt of any part of our Religion, which we hold to be the
word of God? Especially seeing you say, Cap. 2. n. 122. lin. 12. That if you be
persuaded by the Devil though falsely, that it is divine revelation, you are
bound not to disbelieue it under pain of formal heresy. But to our purpose,
we will take of your contradictions that part which is manifest truth, that it
is damnable to doubt of the truth of any doctrine we believe to be revealed of
God, and then I dispute thus: There can be no more certain nor stronger
adherence to any doctrine, then that which is so firm, and undoubted, as the
belieuer esteems it damnable, and an heinous crime, so much as to doubt
thereof. But this adherence to Christian doctrine you require as necessary,
damning all those that admit any voluntary doubt of the verity thereof: Ergo,
an adherence to Christian doctrine most certain, equal to that men give to
the principles of Metaphysicke, is required of Christians under pain of
damnation, yea stronger adherence, seeing a Christian is ready, and ought to be
ready, to deny the principles of Metaphysicke, rather then doubt of Christian
doctrine proposed to him as Gods word by perpetual Christian Tradition.
Finally it is unreasonable that men should be bound under pain of damnation
never to doubt of that doctrine, which is not so much as represented unto them,
as undoubtedly and absolutely certain. It is a burden intolerable to
maintain a thing without any staggering and doubting, which is proposed only
as probable and but morally certain, against arguments which seem
demonstratiue and metaphysically certain, and it is a condition very dangerous
for men to live under such hard or impossible laws. But God does not require
of us things unreasonable, his yoke is sweet, his burden light. Ergo, he has
provided motives which propose matters of faith, as undoubtedly and absolutely
certain.

The fifth Conviction.
16. YOu set down the principle whereon you rely in teaching the absolute
fallibility of Christian faith Page Second edition page 314. lin. 27.
329. lin. 27. Had you made the matter of faith, either naturally or
supernaturally evident, it might have been a fittly attempered and duly
proportioned object, for an absolute certainty natural or supernatural. But
requiring, as you do, an infallible certainty of a thing, which though it is in
it self, yet is not made to appear to us to be infallibly certain, to my
understanding you speak impossibilities. And truly, for one of your Religion
to do so, is but a good Decorum. For the matter of your Religion being so full
of contradictions, a contradictious faith, may very well become a
contradictious Religion. Your faith then, let it be a free, necessitated;
certain, uncertain; evident, obscure; prudent, and foolish; natural, and
supernatural; unnatural assent. Thus you, with a Demosthenian thunder of
eloquence, discharge your bolts upon our Church, without taking any pity of a
poor company of only blind men, though some drops of Xantippes rain come
mingled therewith.

17. But your misery is a poor memory; words be no sooner out of your pen,
then out of your mind. Forin other places you approve this very contradictious
doctrine, which here you so fluently declame against. For though you say. Page
330. lin. 14. That God cannot infuse a degree of certainty into our
understanding beyond the degree of the evidence he gives us of the object; yet
cap. 6. number. 7. lin. 9. 2. Edit. page 315. lin. 5.
you say to the contrary, Well may we assent to a thing unknown, obscure, and
vneuident etc. Could any words be invented more directly repugnant to what you
said before, that assent and evidence must correspond to each other in degree; a
probable assent must have an object of evident probability; a certain assent
an object of evident certainty? Now you say absolutely, we may well, that is,
not only possibly, but also easily assent to a thing unknown, obscure,
vneuident; How does this agree with what you say, Cap. 6. n. 7. in fine. It is
impossible I should believe the truth of any thing, the truth whereof cannot be
made evident to me, with evidence proportionable to the degree of faith
required of me. How contrary is this to what you say Cap. 2. n. 154. lin. 6.
Gods spirit, if he please may work more, a certainty of adherence, beyond the
certainty of evidence. But neither God does, nor may require of us etc. And cap
1. n. 9. lin. 43. The spirit of God being implored by devout and humble prayer,
and sincere obedience, may and will by degrees advance his servants higher, and
give them a certainty of adherence beyond the certainty of evidence. Thus you,
most directly against what you said before, that infallible certainty of a
thing not evidently certain, is impossible; that if God infuse certainty into
the assent of faith, he must infuse also evidence into the object, and so make
the object of faith as visible and evident, as the assent of faith is certain.
Which is now the contradictious Religion?

18. And where you say that God does not require of men more then they can do
by themselves; 2. Edit. page 315. lin. 13.
and that the contrary were (you say, page 350. lin. 15.) as unreasonable, as
to bind a man to go ten miles an hour, on an horse that will go only five,
is impious, as disanulling all precepts of divine and supernatural actions.
For why may not God require of a man, that is able of himself to go only five
miles an hour, that he go ten, moved by his hand: binding him not to
resist, but to concur with that his special moving, above the strength of
natural forces? And what Christian dares deny this to be required of all
Christians, to wit, that they come unto come unto me all. Mat. 11.28.
Christ, and believe in him, which yet is the work of This is the work of God
that you believe.
God, and an act which the understanding does not exercise; but by the special
motion, and Except my Father draw him.
attraction of Divine grace.

The sixth Conviction.
19. YOu affirmed in the prealleadged place of the former Conviction, that our
Catholic says is contradictious, free, necessitated; certain, uncertain;
evident, obscure; prudent, foolish; natural, supernatural; unnatural assent.
A declamation backed with no proof, childish fluent Rhetoric, Claudite iam
riuos pueri. -- I will make the same good upon your self, and prove you do
attribute in direct terms these contradictious conditions to your witty
witless faith. First you make it free, necessitated. That your faith is free
you say c. 6. n. 7. lin. 16. 2. Edit. cap. 6. n. 7. lin. 16.
It is necessary to faith that the objects of it the points which we believe be
not so evidently certain, as to necessitate our understanding to assent. That
it is necessitated and enforced by evident reasons, you suppose cap. 1. n. 9.
lin. 15. God requires of all, 2. Edit. cap. 1. n. 9. lin. 2^.
that their faith should be proportionable to the motives enforcing to it.
Behold reasons enforce, that is, necessitate you to assent and so make it a
free necessitated assent. Secondly evident, obscure: Evident, because you say
cap. 6. n. 7. in fine. That I should believe the truth of any thing, the truth
whereof cannot be made evident to me, is impossible: Obscure, because you say,
Cap. 6. n. 7. lin. 10. Well may we assent to a thing unknown, obscure,
vneuident. Thirdly certain, uncertain: most certain and infallible, cap. 3.
n. 86. lin. 12. Use the means, 2. Edit. cap. 3. n. ^6. lin. 12.
and pray for Gods assistance, and as sure as God is true, you shall be lead
into all necessary truth. Here you profess, that Christian Religion is the
true necessary way to salvation; and that you are hereof as sure, as you are
sure that God is true. Now I hope you are, and I am sure you profess to be (d)
most undoubtedly sure, that God is true. Ergo, 2. Edit. cap. 2. n. ^.
you are most undoubtedly sure, that Christian Religion is the true necessary
way to heaven. For how can you assure others of that whereof you are not sure
your self? And if this be so, then contrary to the ground of your impious
error, you here profess certainty of adherence, beyond certainty of evidence.
You say you are as certain as God is true of Christian saving truth; and yet I
think you will not say, that the truth of Christian Religion is as evident to
your understanding, as it is evident that God is true. Your faith then in this
place is most infallible; but in other places it stands upon weak legs, upon
Tradition which is fallible, upon Cap. 2. n 154 Highly credible but not
infallible motives.
only probable motives. Fourthly, Prudent, foolish: Foolish because you say
cap. 6. n. 10. many of yours believe a right which are not wise. And cap. 6. n.
74. in fine The imprudent faith of Protestants may proceed from Divine motion.
Is not this to say your Faith is prudent, foolish? Prudent, because they that
follow it, go to heaven and follow therein the spirit of wisdom. Foolish,
because you say they be not wise, their believing is justly Cap. 6. n. 9. in
fine.
condemned of leuity and rashness Cap. 2. n. 49. lin. 35.
a foolish and imprudent action. Fifthly, your assent is natural, unnatural.
Natural, because Preface n 12.
resolved by Logic, finally determined Cap. 2 n. 3 in fine.
by natural reason. Unnatural because it ca^ (against nature, against the prime
rule of natural reason and discourse) stand with the contradictory assent at
the same time Page 215. lin. 4. and 2. Edition page 206. lin. 6.
: your faith I say, of this truth, Christ is the eternal son of God, with
your belief of this Socinian Heresy, Christ is not the eternal son of God.
Is not your faith then natural, unnatural; noble; base; Catholic,
heretical; reasonable, unreasonable all at once? Finally, vndernaturall,
supernatural: which is proved by what you write Cap. 6. n. 62. Reason will
convince any man unless he be of a perverse mind, that the Scripture is the
word of God, and then no reason can be greater then this, God says so,
therefore it is true. From these words I gather first, that your faith of the
Scripture is vndernatural, and inferior in certainty to natural reason; for
you say, by natural reason the same is conuincingly proved to be the word of
God; but in the same Cap. 6. n. 60. you say, we must be surer of the proof,
then of the thing proved by it: Ergo, your fayths certainty of Scripture is
under natural reason, and not so sure and infallible as your reason. And yet
it is also supernatural certainty because you say, no reason can be greater
then this, God says so, therefore it is true. And preface n. 2. page 2. lin.
14. I submit all other reasons to this one, God says so, therefore it is true.
Now that one reasou to which all other natural reasons yield and submit
themselves, must needs be supernatural and superior in certaynty to all
natural reason; so that I have proved by your own plain and express words,
that your Religion of Wit is contradictious, free, enforced; evident, obscure;
certain, uncertain; prudent, foolish; natural, unnatural; vndernatural,
supernatural; whereby one may see, your assertion, that Christian faith is not
certain and infallible, but only highly credible, what a main and mighty
contradiction the same is, and what a world of gross absurdityes, and
repugnances are inuolued therein.

The seventh Conviction.
20. CAP. 2. n. 154. lin. 8. you give this reason why the assent of Christian
faith is not certain and infallible, and why God cannot require it of
Christians, because, say you, No man can give, and so cannot be required to
give a greater assent to the conclusion, then the premises deserve. And Cap. 6.
nu. 7. ante finem, Nothing is more repugnant then that a man should be required
to give most certain credit unto that which cannot be made appear most
certain credible. But c. 5. n. 8. to the contrary you write, Of this that we
are to believe Christian Religion, we are, and may be made infallibly certain.
And c. 6. n. 9. Arguments so credible that though they cannot make us see what
we believe, yet they evidently connince that in true wisdom and prudence the
articles of it deserve credit, and ought to be accepted as things revealed of
God. Thus you. And are you so dull as not to see how from these your two
sayings joined together in discourse vild blasphemy may be concluded? The
mysteries of Christian Religion cannot (you say) by the motives of credibility
be made certain, or fit to be credited with infallible faith. But the
mysteries of Christian Religion can be made credible, and fit to becredited as
things revealed of God: Ergo things credible as revealed of God, are not
credible with infallible faith. And consequently to things revealed of God a
most certain and infallible assent is not due. Is not this to deny the infinite
verity and veracity of God and his word? Hence grounding upon the contradictory
I dispute in this manner. What we may and must believe as the word of God, that
we may, and must believe with a most certain and infallible assent; for
nothing can be more certain, and so nothing can more deserve to be undoubtedly
credited then the word of God. But we are (as you say) infallibly certain, and
arguments evidently convince, that we may and must believe the articles of our
faith as the Word of God, or as things revealed of God. Ergo, we may, and we
are bound by Christian duty to adhere to the articles of our Faith with a most
certain, and infallible assent.

The eight Conviction.
21. IN your Preface. n. 2. you say, I am most apt, and most willing to be lead
by reason, always submitting al other reasons to this one, God says it, Ergo
it is so, This saying does imply of necessity that the adherence of faith unto
Gods word, is more certain, then that of sense, or any knowledge grounded on
reason. Because if all other reasons must yield and submit to this one reason,
Gods says it, therefore it is so, then this reason, I see this with my eyes;
Ergo, it is so, must yield to this, God says, it is not so, Ergo it is not so.
But if the assent due to the word of God were not more certain and infallible
then that of sense, the conclusion from the evidence of sense were not to yield
to the conclusion from the certainty of Gods word: Ergo by your own profession
you are convinced to be false, in saying the adherence by faith to the word of
God, is not more certain then that of sense; or else you cogge and dissemble
to hide your infidelity, when you say, I submit all other reasons to this one,
God said so, Ergo it is so.

22. Hence I further infer that Christians ought, and you are bound to
believe, the mysteries reueased in Scripture, though they seem implicatory,
and impossible to your human reason which you deny Page 215. 2. Edit. page 206.
lin. 18.
lin. 16. For if all other reasons must yield to this one, God says so,
therefore it is so, then also this reason, The mysteries of the Trinity, of
Hypostaticall union of two natures in Christ, of the Real Presence seem
manifestly impossible to my reason, therefore they are impossible; ought to
yield to this reason, God says these mysteries are possible, and certainly
true; Ergo they are possible, and certainly true. You will say, that though this
consequence be most certain, this is the word of God, Ergo it is most true,
yet you cannot be so certain that this is the word of God, as you are of that
which you see with your eyes. But this is refuted by what you say that the
Scripture is proved by Tradition, which is as certain and infallible, as
Scripture and evidently true and credible of it self: Ergo your belief of
Scripture, that it is the word of God, is also resolved into this one reason,
unto which all others must submit, and yield themselves humbly subject, God
says that these books are his word, and infallible truth; Ergo it is so,
these books are his word, and infallible truth; so that Christian resolution
of faith even by your own confession, rests finally upon a reason unto which
all human reason and understanding ought to submit, and captiuate it self. You
see how by your contradicting your self, your errors are over thrown, and true
Christianity established.

The ninth Conviction.
23. Land. Edition page 340. lin. 14.
Page 357. lin. 3. cap. 6. n. 28. thus you write: I certaeinly know, that I do
believe the Ghospel of Christ, as it is delivered in the undoubted books of
canonical Scripture, as verily as that it is now day, that I see the light,
that I am now writing; and I believe it upon this motive, because I conceive it
sufficiently, abundantly, superabundantly proved to be divine Revelation. And
yet in this I do not depend upon any succession of men, that have always
believed it, without any mixture of Error. Nay, I am fully persuaded, that
there has been no such succession, and yet do not find ANY WEAKNESS in my
faith, but am so fully assured of the truth of it, that though an Angel from
heaven should gayn-say it, or any part of it, I persuade my self I should not
be moved. Thus you: many ways establishing the absolute certainty of Christian
faith, and in direct terms contradicting what elsewhere you most earnestly
affirm.

24. First, you overthrow what you else where Page 325. n. 3.
say, that the certainty of faith is not equal to that of sense, for now you
say, that you certainly know, and that you are fully assured that you believe
the truth of the Gospel, as verily as that now it is day, as that you see the
light, as that when you writ this you were writing, which is most assured
certainty of sense. For you say, you are fully assured, that without depending
on succession, you believe (not that which you think to be the truth of the
Gospel (for every Heretic does so) but the true Gospel: consequently you
are as sure, that what you believe is the true Gospel, as you are sure that it
is light which you see at noonday; as you are sure you write when you write.
And so you profess that the certainty of your faith is equal to the greatest
certainty which can be had by sense. If you say you speak this, not of
ordinary Christian faith, which is rational, and grounded on reasons, but of
special faith which you have from God infused into your understanding in reward
of your holy life; I answer this cannot be so, because you speak expressly of
your faith which stands v. pon the proofs of Christianity, and the motives of
credibility, and of that assent which you conceive, because proved unto you
abundantly by the said reasons, which is ordinary Christian faith, and so you
say in this place, that any man may believe the foresaid truths upon the
foresaid motives.

24. Secondly, here you affirm that Christian Religion or the Ghospel is
proved to be divine Revelation sufficiently, abundantly, superabundantly to
bear the weight of a most certain and fully assured faith, wherein there is
not ANY WEAKNESS. By which you overthrow what you say elsewhere, Page 36.
that Christian faith stands upon two legs, upon two pillars, the one that
whatsoever God reueales is true, which is most strong, firm, immovable; the
second, that the Ghospel is revealed of God; which pillar, you say, is weak,
infirm, and instable, Page 112. ^. 154.
moralty certain, but not able to bear the weight of an absolute certain and
infallible essent, free from all weakness.

25. Thirdly, you say that faith built upon the forsaid motives, is so firm,
and so strong, so assured as you should not (as you think) be moved, though an
Angel from heaven should gainsay it, which does manifestly contradict and
destroy what you so often contend, that the assent built upon the motives of
credibility, cannot be absolutely certain, no not though it were infused into
the understanding from God. What you say of your self, you should not be moved
from the faith of the Ghospel, though an Angel from heaven should gainsay it,
how stubborn and pertinacious in error you may be against the light of your
conscience I do not know: but if your faith of the Gospel be not certain and
infallible, if it be but a very probable, seeming, or a moral certainty, in
this case that you could stand against an Angel from heaven prudently, and
according to the right dictamen of conscience, this I will believe, if you can
make me believe, that a Shilling-worth is as much as an Angell-worth: Otherwise
what greater folly then for a mere mortal man of so weak memory and
miserable discourse, as he cannot write three pages together in good sense
without contradicting himself, to prefer his private seeming, his human
fallible certainty, his moral probabilities, that this is Gods word, before the
word of an Angel, and all the arguments he can bring against it?

26. I conclude with this demonstration for the infallibility of our Christian
faith. God commands all Christians, and requires of them under pain of
damnation to stand constant in the belief of the Gospel, even against an
Angel from heaven that should Euangelize to the contrary, as you suppose
truly, this being the very doctrine of S. Paul. Gal. 1.8.
But except God did infuse into the heart of every true believing Christian a
most certain, undoubted, infallible assent, and adherence to the Ghospel; this
command were unjust, unreasonable, and such a precept as no man prudently might
observe. For it cannot be wisdom to oppose the testimony of men, and seeming
probabilities of reason against the word of an Angel, against Angelical
reasons and discourse. Ergo, God does infuse and binds all Christians to
admit a most certain, and infallible assent of the truth of the Ghospel, and
of Christian Religion.

That Christian Religion and Tradition is pure and incorrupt, both in the
fountain and stream. CHAP. III.
WHAT may have been your personal intention in penning and publishing of this
work, the searcher of hearts knows best. The end whereunto your course
drives, the mark whereat it aymeth, the work it labors with all might and
main to bring to pass is the total overthrow of Christianity. In the first
Chapter I have showed, that you resolve Christian Religion into natural
reason, whereby you destroy the Divinity thereof. In the second, that you make
the same to stand upon principles and motives credible but fallible, whereby you
undermine the absolute certainty thereof In this third Chapter I am to show, you
overthrow the truth thereof, and make the same stained with ignorance and
error, not only in the whole current of Tradition from the Apostles; but also
in the fountain thereof the holy Ghospel, and in our Savior and Lord Christ
Jesus the Author.

The first Conviction.
1. You thrust a mortal stabbe into the heart of Christian Religion through S.
Augustine his side, whiles you charge his speech with palpable falsehood which
is the express word of Christ. S. Austine say you ca 6. n. 14. in fine) as he
was in the right in thinking, that the Church was extended further then Africa,
so was he in the wrong, if he thought that of necessity it always must be so:
but most Palpably Mistaken in conceauing, that it was then spread over the
whole earth, and known to all nations; which, if passion did not trouble you,
and make you forget, how lately almost half of the world was discovered, and
in what state it was then found, you would very easily see, and confess. Thus
you. Unto whom I say what the same S. Augustine said to Maximinus an Arian,
that is almost the same though not altogether so bad as a Sociniam: Aduersu^
Maximinum. lib. 2. c. 2.
O quam de proximo te corrigeres, si timeres credere quod times dicere! O how
soon would you reclayme your self, did you fear to believe in heart, what
you fear to say in words. For although you dare not openly profess with the
Samosatenians, yet you dare believe that Christ Jesus is a mere man, that he
was ignorant, that there were any such people as Americans in the world, and so
out of ignorance uttered a palpable falsehood, when he said, Luc. 24.47.
that his Apostles should preach penance in his name unto all Nations: that
they should be witnesses unto him, not only in Jerusalem, Iewry, and Samaria,
but also unto thee vt most of the world. Hereby he induced the Evangelists to
mistake, Mar. vlt.
and falsely say, that the Apostles going preached Every Where, our Lord
working with them, and confirming the word by signs that followed. And S.
Paul; Romans (...) 18.
that the Apostolical Preaching was spread into all Lands, and their words
unto the ends of the world. If I say, S. Augustins saying, that the Church was
spread over all Nations in his days, be a palpable falsehood, because it was
not then in America; then the prophesyes of our Lord, that his Apostles should
spread his name, and plant Christianity in all Nations, as also the testimony
of the Gospel, that this was performed by the Apostles, were also manifest
mistakes; and if the Gospel be mistaken in one point through ignorance in the
Author thereof, we can be certain of nothing.

2. For if one confess, that our Savior was true God and knew all things, and
that there were Americans at that time, he must say, that either our Lord
willlingly spoke an untruth, in saying the Apostles should preach to all
nations, and so by admitting on lie to be in one saying of the Gospel, he
destroys the certainty of all; or he must say that the Apostles preached to
the Americans, and made them Christians (and if they were Christians in the
days of the Apostles, how can you tell they were not also in the days of S.
Austine?) or finally he must confess the truth, that this speech of the
Gospel, that the Church was every where, and in all nations, was a most
certain, and infallible truth, even when the Americans: were not Christians,
nor had heard of Christ. But this you deny and call it a palpable falsehood so
clear, as every man not blinded with passion does now perceive the falsehood
thereof. Ergo you deny the Gospel, which you grant to be the word of God, and
consequently you are a formal Heretic, c. 2. n. 122. you do a thing not only
impious but also impossible, that any Christian should do, as you say cap 4. n.
4. lin. 19. a supposition impossible. cap. 3. n. 35. lin. 21. you do a thing
you profess against, saying you would not be moved from the truth of the
Gospel or any part of it, even by the preaching of an Angel from heaven. So
that your last refuge must be to confess, that to call S. Austins speech,
which is the express word of Christ, a palpable falsehood, you were persuaded
not by an Angel from Heaven, but by the spirit of error, which makes you hate
subjection to the one universal visible Church.

The second Conviction.
3. You do not undermine, but openly dig up the Foundations of Christianity
by teaching, that the Apostles through ignorance, oversight, or partiality
erred in matters of Religion which they were bound to know; Erred I say, and
the whole Church with them, even after the coming of the holy Ghost, for thus
you write c. 3. n. 31. That the Apostles themselves even after the sending of
the holy Ghost, were, and through inaduertence, or prejudice, continued for a
time in an error, it is (as I have already noted) vnansverably evident from
the story of the Acts of the Apostles. Thus you, and you avouch the same cap.
3. n 21. But in direct contradiction of this, you say cap. 3. n. 74. lin. 14.
about the perpetual infallibility of the Apostles, according to that promise
of our Lord, that he would send them the holy Ghost, the spirit of truth, which
should teach them all truth, and stay with them for ever. It signifyes, say
you, not eternally without end of time, but PERPETVALLY without interruption
during the time of their lives: So that the force and fense of the words is,
that they should never want the Spirits assistance in the performance of their
function. If the holy Ghost leading them into all truth did after his coming
perpetually without interruption during the time of their lives stay with them
always assisting them, and teaching them all truth; how can it be true, that
even after the sending of the holy Ghost they were lead into error, and
continued therein for as TIME, through inaduertence or prejudice? An error so
plain and manifest against the word of God, and which they could not fall into
without they were stupide, seeing the very gift of speaking the tongues of all
nations, which they received together with the holy Ghost, still continued
with them. Were they so dull and heauy-hearted even after they had received the
holy Ghost, as not to understand, that by the gift of Tongues they were
declared, and made preachers of Christ unto all nations under the cope of
heaven?

4. What you say that they erred and continued in error through inaduertence,
and prejudice, you contradict else where; saying cap. 2. n. 155. that the
Apostles in their persons while they were living were the only judges of
Controversies. And, c. 2. n. 17 you say, In matters of Religion none are fit to
be judges, but such as are infallible. And cap. 4. n. 88. lin. 20. It is
necessary for the constitution of infallible judges, that though they neglect
the means of avoiding error, yet certainly they shall not err. Now can you
put these propositions together in discourse? The Apostles were, whiles they
were living, the infallible guides and judges of faith so made and ordained by
the coming down of the holy Ghost upon them: Judges and guides infallible
certainly shall not err, though they through inaduertence or prejudice neglect
the means of avoiding error: Ergo the Apostles certainly did not err, nor
deliver error through negligence, inaduertence or prejudice. And yet more to
the same effect you write. C. 2. n. 34. The Apostles infallibility was in a
more absolute manner, the Churches in a more limited sense. The Apostles were
lead by the Spirit into all truth efficaciter: The Church is lead also into all
truth sufficienter. So that the Apostles and the Church may be fifthly compared
to the Star, and the Wisemen. The Star was directed by the fingar of God,
and could not but go right to the place where Christ was. But the Wisemen were
lead by the star to Christ, lead, I say, not efficaciter or irresistibiliter,
but sufficienter; so that, if they would, they might follow it, if they would
not, they might choose.

5. But you stay not long in this conceyte of their absolute infallibility, and
being irresistably lead into all truth; for within two or three pages you say,
that the promise of not erring was made them, but upon condition if they were
not negligent, and if they kept their station. And. cap. 3. n. 77. Our Savior
said to his disciples, Yea are the salt of the earth, not that this quality was
inseparable from their Persons, but because it was their office to be so. For
if they must have been so of necessity, and could not have been otherwise, in
vain had he put them in fear of that which follows; If the salt lose the
savor, wherewith shall it be salted? Behold how you faulter: before they were
lead into all truth of necessity, efficaciter, irresistibiliter; now not
infallibly, not of necessity, they were in possibility to err. Neither yet do
you take up your standing here; Cap. 6. n. (...).
you run into the contrary extreme, that the Apostles, could not lose the
savor of sanctity, or charity and truth, because it is certain they could not
have any worldly or sinister intention in their preaching. And then again to
the contrary, cap. 2. n. 93. This were to cross the end of our creation, which
was to be glorified by free obedience. To conclude (for I am weary with the
following of your lightheaded guide fetching frisks every way) you iumpe at
last upon a truth, the direct contradiction of that you said of the Apostles
erring for a time about the Churches Universality. For you say cap. 6. n. 14.
The Apostles who preached the Gospel in the beginning, did believe the Church
universal, though their preaching in the beginning was not so. They did believe
the Church universal, even in your sense, that is, universal de iure, though
not de facto. Thus you. Now this proposition; The Apostles even in the
beginning, before their preaching was universal, when they preached to Jews
only, did believe the Church universal de iure, by divine law; is it not a
direct contradiction of this; The Apostles in the beginning before their
preaching was universal, did not believe the Church universal de iure, by
divine law; yea they erred thinking it was against the divine law to preach
universally, or to any but Jews? It is well that your wit, the guide of your
faith, does profess that it can believe contradictions at once, this Heresy,
and this Truth, otherwise it could not be the guide of that Religion you
maintain in your book.

The third Conviction.
6. FRom the Apostles you pass to the second age after Christ, accusing the
universal Tradition of that Primitive Church as stained universally with impure
and corrupt doctrine. Cap. 5. n. 91. lin. 41. seeking to answer what Charity
Maintayn'd objects, that sundry Protestants acknowledge many of our doctrines
to be taught by the ancient Fathers, you say, No antiquity, except it be
absolute and primitive, is a certain sign of true doctrine. For if the Church
were obnoxious to corruption (as we pretend it was) who can possibly warrant
us, that part of this corruption might not get in, and prevail in the 5. or 4
or 3. or 2. age? Especially seeing the Apostles assure us that the mystery of
iniquity was working, though secretly, even in their times. If any man ask,
how could it become universal in so short a time? let him tell me how the
error of the Millenaries, and the Communicating of Infants, became so soon
universal, and then he shall acknowledge what was done in some, was possible in
others. Thus you. Which you repeat, and inculcate, more then forty times at
the least; wherein you are like to the false witnesses, to one of the which
Daniel said very well: Thou have spoken falsely against thy own head, for the
Angel of God shall divide thee with a sword in the mids, and do thee away.
You are false against the spouse of Christ, the holy primitive Church, as that
witness was against Susanna; and the same punishment of division, and
contradiction against your self is by God's just sentence fallen on your head.

7. You are false in saying, so many times, that the doctrine of the
Millenaries (to wit of Christ's earthly Kingdom in the earthly Jerusalem, full
of all earthly felicity for a thousand years) was delivered, as you say, page
347. lin. 24. as an Apostolical Tradition; that it was universally received,
taught by all the Doctors, and Saints, and Martyrs, of, or about that time,
whose judgment in this point is any way recorded. This to be false is proved
by your falsification of S. Iustine Martyr, whom you make say, that all good
and orthodoxe Christians in his time believed it, and only heretics denied it:
for his words are, I, and the Christians who are rightly persuaded in all
things, believe the Resurrection of the bodies, and a thousands years in the
new Jerusalem. It is true, all good Christians believe the Resurrection of the
body (which you skippe over, because Socinians do not believe it in the
Christian sense) and a thousand years of felicity in the new Jerusalem, in
heaven not upon earth. Yea S. Iustine in that place does plainly confess that,
Many Multos qui purae piaeque sunt Chriistianorum sente^tiae, hoc non agnoscere
tibi significan^.
who are of the pure, and pions Christian faith, did hold against this conceyt
of Christ's earthly Kingdom.

8. More false you are about the Communicating of Infants for you are not able
to name so much as one Father of the second age which holds it. The words of
Dionysius Arcepagita, the only witness produced in this cause, being short of
this sense, as Vasquez Tom. 3. in 3. p. Disput. 212. c. 2. n. 13.
shows: S. Cyprian Sermon. delapsis.
is the first that mentioned this custom to communicate sucking Infants under
one kind, to wit, giving them to Paruulis saltem sub specie vini tradatur.
drink of the Chalice, which custom was good and lawful, as all Catholics
defend Council. Trid. sess. 21 c. 4.
It is clear that Pope Innocentius with Nisi manducauerint carnem cius non
habebu^t vitam, significat Baptizatos vitam habere non posse praeter Christi
corpus cui vt incorporentur Sacramento baptismatis imbuuntur. de poceat. merit.
and r^^ miss. lib. 5. c. 4. vide sermon. eiusden^ citatum a Beda in cap. 10. ad
Cor. and Claud. Sanchez Rep. 6. c. 7.
S. Austine and other Fathers disputing against Pelagius, who denied Original
sin, and taught that Children were saved dying without Baptism, did by the
eating of the body of Christ, and drinking his blood necessary for Infants,
understand no more then incorporation into the mystical body of Christ, which
was done by Baptism. And this was in Infants to eat the body of Christ, and
drink his blood, not with their own Qua^uis suo cord and ore id non agant.
August. de peccat. merit and remiss. lib* 1. c. 20.
mouth, but by the mouth of the body whereof they are members, to wit of the
Church.

9. I have cleared the Catholic primitive Church, and showed her innocent of
your slanders, now I come to the second, that mentitus es in caput tuum, your
own false accusations light upon your own head, that by your depositions you
are proved more impudent then impudencieit self. For c. 2. n. 163. in fine you
say, That it is evident, and to impudence it self vndentable, that upon this
ground of believing all things taught by the present Church, as taught by
Christ, Error was held. For example, the necessity of the Eucharist for
Infants, and that by S. Austen himself, and therefore certain this is no
certain ground of truth. Thus you. Now what you here prononce undeniable by
impudence it self, your self deny contending that S. Austin held the
necessity of the Eucharist for Infants upon the warrant of the Tradition of all
ages since the Apostles, which is a proof distinct from the doctrine and
practice of the present universal Chusch, as you say, cap. 2. n. 53. lin. vlt.
The credit of Tradition is not the Tradition of the present Church, which we
pretend may deuiate from the ancient. Now that S. Austen did ground upon the
credit of Tradition Apostolical, or of all ages, you say, cap. 3. n. 47. in
fine. The pactice of communicating Infants had even then, in the time of S.
Augustine, got the credit and authority, not only of Universal custom, but
also of an Apostolic Tradition. Behold the necessity of Communicating Infants
is held by S. Augustine upon the warrant not of the present Church, but of the
Church of all ages and places, which you, even in that very place allow to be a
good warrant. Yea you affirm that S. Augustine in thinking the necessity of
giving the Eucharist to Infants to be a Tradition of all ages since the
Apostles to his time was not deceived, saying page 152. lin. 32. The doctrines
of the Millenaries, and the Eucharist necessity for Infants have been taught
by the consent of the eminent Fathers of some ages (you mean the. 2.3.4.5.)
without any A manifest falsehood They were contradicted by Dion. Areop. de
Eccles. Hierar. c. 7. By Clem. Alex. 3. Strom. in the second age By Caius. S.
Cyprian, Dionys. Alexan. Eusebius. in the 3.
opposition from any of their contemporaries, and were delivered by them, not
as Doctors, but as Witnesses, not as their own Another impudent falsehood For
they delivered their Millenary doctrine as an exposition of Mill Anni of the
Apocalypse c. 20. v. 3.
Opinions, but as Apostolic Traditions. Thus you. Who now is more impudent,
then impudence it self? Do not you deny S. Austins persuasion of the necessity
of the Eucharist for Infants to have been grounded on the bare universal
custom of the present Church? And yet it is also false, that S. Austine
grounded the necessity of the Eucharist for Infants on the custom of the
present Church, or on the Tradition of all ages. For though there were an
universal perpetual custom of communicating Infants; yet that does not
enforce that it was a thing necessary, but only lawful and godly, because all
universal customs used in the primitive Church, were not necessary, but
pious; S. Austine then his persuasion, that the eating of the body of Christ
was necessary for Infants, he did build on the Scripture only, and the evidence
thereof upon this text, Joan. 6.36.
Except you eat the flesh, and drink the blooud of the Son of man, you
shall not have life in your, which testimony he terms De peccat. merit and
remiss. lib. 1. c. 20. Nisi pertinacia pugnaces neruos aduersus
constantiamperspicuae veriati^ intendat.
diuina luce clarissimum, diuina auctoritate certissimum so clear as it cannot
be resisted but by pertinacity it self.

10. You contradict your self so far as to prove your self to be a formal
Heretic against God and his Word: For you say, cap. 1. n. 13. cap. 4. n. 11.
it is most impious for one to deny that to be true, which he knows, or
belieues to be Gods word; In so much that if one be persuaded, though falsely,
even by the Devil himself, that it is the word of God, if he disbelieue it,
you say, he is cap. 2. n. 122.
a formal Heretic. But you profess your self not only persuaded, but
convinced, not by the Devils discourse, but by the cap. 2. n. 25.
evident credibility of the thing, that universal Tradition since the Apostles
is the word of God unwritten, as certain and infallible as Scripture, cap. 3.
n. 45.
the rule of faith to judge all controversies by. And yet you say, that this
Tradition, this word of God unwritten, is fallible, yea false, and erroneous in
some particulars. Could you have professed greater impiety, or more formal
emnity against God and his word?

11. Thirdly, by your contradictions and divisions against yourselfe, you
divide your self from Christ and salvation. cap. 6. n. 1. you say, that it is
most absolutely, and indispensablely destructive of salvation to deny Jesus to
be the Christ, or the Scripture to be the word of God. But you are convinced by
your own words, to do this, by charging with fallibility and falsehood even
the Tradition of the primitive Church of the very first age since the Apostles.
For you confess that the Scripture cannot be proved to be the word of God, by
the divinity and light of the matter, nor by any Apostolical writing, but by
tradition, c. 2. n. 8. lin. 9. and cap. 2. n. 27. lin. 33. ONLY by the
testimony of the ancient Church. Now if the only means to know that the
Scripture is the word of God, be the testimony of the anccient Church, and of
the primitive Christians, if you make (as you do) their testimony to be
fallible, obnoxious to error, and in many things false, you make all assurance
of this necessary point, that the Scripture is the word of God, impossible. You
contend our Catholic Roman Church to be fallible, and to have erred in many
things, and thence conclude, you can rely on her authority in nothing. I might,
say you, cap. 2. n. 25. lin. 9. as well rest upon the judgment of the next man
I meet, or upon the chance of a Lottery for it. For by this means I only know
I might err, but relying on your Church, I know I should err. Thus you of the
Roman church, which agrees to Tradition universal of the primitive Christians:
for if it be, as you say it is, fallible, we cannot be possibly warranted that
it does not give quid for quo, a scorpion for an egg, an error in steed of
Apostolical doctrine: for she has done so, you say, in some other universal
Traditions, and what was done in some, was possible in others. The primitive
Church (as you contend) did by universal Tradition, and full consent deliver
the doctrine of the Millenaries, and of the Communion of Infants for
Apostolical, which you say be errors, and so it may be that the same consent
of primitive Christians has delivered unto us the Gospel of S. Luke, and of
S. Mark, as approved by Cap. 1. n. 7. Wrote indeed by some but approved by all.
all the Apostles, though there were never any such thing; nor have we any
possible means to know whether herein we be deceived or no. You say cap. 2.
n. 93. lin. 11. It was necessary that by his providence he should preserve the
Scripture from any indiscernable corruption in those things he would have
known, otherwise they could not have been known, the only means of
continuing the knowledge of them being perished. Now the only means to know
which Scriptures be the word of God, and rule of says is (as you confess) the
testimony of the ancient Churches since the Apostles, and yet you say, God has
not preserved the same from indiscernable corruption; for the Church has been
corrupt in some of her universal Traditions from the Apostles: so that there is
no means to be sure that her Tradition about Scripture is incorrupt: For you
say, what was done in some, was possible in others, and so we have no warrant
that the canon of Scripture is not corrupt universal Tradition of the Church
since the Apostles. You see that I said true, that by being a false witness
against the incorrupt purity of the Primitive Church, you have been false
against your own Salvation, and have lost all means to be assured of Saving
faith.

The fourth Conviction.
12. FROM the second age you proceed, affirming that still the mystery of
iniquity wrought more openly in the ensuing ages, and that in the days of S.
Austin, Page 155. lin. 20. cap. 3. n. 47. Second Edition page 149. and 150.
the Catholic Church it self did tolerate, and dissemble vain superstitions,
and human presumptions, suffer all places to be full of them, suffer them to be
more severely exacted then the Commandments of God, Page 156. lin. 1:
doing therein directly against the command of the holy Ghost; Ibid. lin. 11.
permitting the divine precepts every where to be laid aside; so that these
superstitious Christians every where might be said to worship God in vain, as
well as Scribes and Pharisees. Great variety of superstitions in this Kind were
then already spread over the Church, being different in diverse places. That
Page 156. li. 36.
this universal superstition in the Church, nourished, cherished, strengthened
by the practice of the most, and urged with great violence upon others as the
Commandments of God might in time take deep root, and pass for universal
custom of the Church, and an Apostolic Tradition, he that does not see, sees
nothing. Finally, that in S. Austins days the Church did not tolerate only
such superstitions, (for but a part only, and far the lesser did tolerate
them in silence) but the Church or the far greater part publicly allowed
them, practiced them, and urged them upon others with great violence etc.

13. Thus you write, and make the face of the Church in S. Austines days to
have been most miserable, full of superstition, in which not so much as one
could be saved, but by repentance, and leaving their superstitions, which they
never did. But, as it is your fury against Gods Church to utter whatsoever
comes into your mind to her disgrace, without any care of truth, so your folly
is to forget presently what you have said and speak the contrary. For Cap. 6.
n. 101. lin. 12. you say, that in S. Austin's time the public service, wherein
men are to communicate was impolluted, and no unlawful thing practiced in
their Communion; which was so true as even the Donatists did not deny it. And
c. 6. in fine, you say, The Church which then was a Virgin, now may be an
harlot. Now, if a man would have studied to contradict your slander against
the Church of S. Augustins time, could he have done it more directly? The
Church being then, as you say it was, in her communion and divine service, an
impolluted virgin, how can it stand with what you said before, that Christians
in all places were urged with great violence to communicate in superstitions,
and vain worships, and to lay the commandments of God aside? Again, you
clear the Church of that age cap. 6. n. 101. versus finem. The Donatists (in
S. Augustines time) were separated from the whole world of Christians united in
one communion, professing the same faith, serving God after the same manner,
which was a great argument, they could not have cause to leave them; according
to that of Tertullian, that where there is erring, there is variety of errings.
And, is not this a variety, yea a direct contradiction in your writing, an
unanswerable argument that you err and wander from the truth? Now, you say,
there was then every where the same faith, the same communion, one manner of
serving and worshipping God, without any variety of superstitions, and errors;
whereas before you said, that in S. Austins days, all places were full of vain
superstitions, vain worships, with great variety of them, spread over the
Church being different in diverse places, urged with great severity, and
violence. How different are you from your self in diverse places? To bring in
your new Religion of the Bible, and only the Bible, you accuse the Ancient
Fathers, that they are with full consent, opposite one to another, ages against
ages; but in your so wisely chosen Religion, there is such a perpetual fighting
that there is more difference betwixt two of your pages, then betwixt all
Christian ages.

14. I must note in this place (to answer a seely calumniation against our
Church, the only argument in your Book that may trouble an ignorant Reader,
because it requires some little historical erudition to confute it) that though
you feign the Church in the days of S. Augustine full of great variety of
superstitions, yet you say, that the Donatists did falsely calumniate
Catholics, that they did set Images upon their Altars, and Cap. 6. n. 101.
S. Austine does not justify the Church, saying, as we would have done in that
case, Those pictures were worshipped not for their own sake, but for them who
were represented by them, but does abhor the thing, and deny the imputation.
Behold here a tale of a Tub, or of I know not what. For, cap. 6. n. 16. you
acknowledge that S. Augustine makes no mention of any picture, but by a
Rhetorical figure calls it (I know not what:) but (say you) compare him with
Optatus, and you shall plainly perceive, that this, I know not what, pretended
to be set upon the Altar, was indeed a picture. Behold in this your second
telling the tale of a Tub, or of (I know not what) you are fallen from pictures
to a picture, granting that the Donatists did not accuse Catholics for setting
up all kind of pictures in the Church, or upon the Altar, but for a picture. I
will not stand to note and show the ridiculous vanity of the inference you
tacitly make; It was a picture; Ergo the picture of Christ, or of some Saint:
but tell the Reader, what that picture was, and of whom, to wit of Constans
the Emperor, Son to Constantine the Great. This most pious Christian
Emperor (as Optatus relates) sent two chief noble men of his Court Paulus and
Macarius eminent for Christian piety and wisdom in Ambassadge into Afric,
with Cum elee mosynis, quibus subleuata per Ecclesias singulas, possit
respirare, vestiti, pasci gaudere paupertas.
great liberalities to bestow on poor Christians, Donatists especially, hoping
by this courtesy, to win their hearts unto unity with the Church. The Bishops
of the Donatists fearing the success of this Imperial liberality, did mightily
malign the two Noblemen, especially Macarius, whom they sometimes assaulted in
his iourneys, put him in danger of his life, sought to take from him by force
that Imperial treasure: and because in one assault they made, some two
Donatists were slain, they presently proclaimed them Martyrs, Aug. contr.
liter as Pitil. l. 2. c. 39.
Macarius a Persecutour, a Pagan, and called Catholics Macarians of him.
Amongst other tales and slanders they gave out, that Falsa opinio omnium
populorum aures oppleuerat Dice batur enim venturos Paulum and Macarium, qui
interessent sacrificio, vt cum Altaria solemniter aptarentur preferrent illi
imaginem and sic Sacrificiu^ offerretur. Optat. lib. 3. circa finem: 2. Edition
page 331. lin. 9. 2. Edition page 322. lin. 15.
Paulus and Macarius when they were present at the Christian sacrifice, used to
set up the image of the Emperor, on the Altar, and that before it sacrifice
was offered, and the oblations of the people made: whereof the Reader may be
more fully informed in Baronius Anno 348. Behold the best argument and
erudition of your Book, what a poor snake it is being brought to light out of
the lurking hole of your dark and dimidiate narration of the fact.

The fifth Conviction.
15. YOu often affirm that the whole Church cannot vtterlyperish, nor loose
its Essence and Being. cap. 3. n. 78. You know we grant, and must grant that
the Church still holds all necessary truths; for it is of the essence of the
Church to do so. But page 347. l. 21. You fay the contrary The Roman Church in
particular was forewarned, that she also, nay the whole Church of the Gentiles
might fall if they looked not to there standing. Page 338. lin. 11. speaking
against the privilege of infallibility of the Roman Church, Me thinks (you
say) S. Paul writing to the Romans could not but have congratulated this their
privilege to them, bad he acknowledged, that their says was the rule for all
the world for ever. But then sure he would have forborne to put them in fear,
that they, nay the whole Church of the Gentiles, if they did not look to their
standing, might fall away to infidelity, as the Jews had done. Cop. 3. n. 30.
in fine. It is in the power of she Church to deuiate from this Rule, being
nothing else but an aggregation of men, of which every one has free will, and
is subject to passion and error. This your reason conuinceth, if your
suppositio^ be true, to wit, that the Church is NOTHING else but mere men left
to their ntture having freewill, subject to passion and error. But for my part
I did ever and shall still believe, that no true Christian will be so profane,
as to think that in the Church there is freewill without divine grace; nothing
but nature subject to passion and error, without the spirit of God guiding
them into all truth; the Church being the mystical Body animated with his
spirit, which she shall never abandone.

16. Nor does S. Paul fright the whole Church of Rome, much less the whole
Church of the Gentiles with possibility of falling away into Infidelity, but
says in the singular number Romans 11.
thou stand by faith, be not high minded, but fear, to show that he
speaks of every single Christian, that he may fall away from the faith; on
the other side, he says in the plural number Romans 1.4.
Your faith is declared in the whole world: which words the Fathers Hieron.
Apolog aduers. Ruf. Scito Romanam fidem huiusmodi praestigias non recipere, and
Pauliauthoritate munitam, non posse mutari.
understand to signify, that the faith of the Romans shall ever be an
infallible rule of Faith to the rest of the Christian Church. But more clearly
afterward in the end of his epistle; Romans 16.17.
Note such as make dissensions against the doctrine you have received:
signifying that the Church of Rome has the office to note and censure all
Heretics, that shall raise discord in the Church against the Roman Tradition
of faith. And incontinently he shows the privilege of Divine efficacions
assistance not to err in this office, saying, And the God of peace shall crush
Satan under your feet with speed. What is this, but the God of peace has made
the Church of Rome the head and root of peace and unity (as Radicem and
matricem Eeclesiae Catholicae. Cyp Ep. 45.
the Fathers term it) to the rest of the Church, to crush Satan, that is
(says Origin) every contradictious spirit that teaches against the doctrine
of Tradition, under their feet? Which speech has no small allusion to the
Reverence used by Catholic Christians to the feet of S. Peter's Successor.
If you had any text in Scripture but half as clear against the infallible
authority of the Roman Church and Bishop, as this is for it, your triumphing
vociferations that the text is clear as the sun, would hardly be contained
under the cope of heaven. This appears by your urging the place, Be not high
minded, but fear, as threatening the whole Church of Rome with possibility of
falling from Christ; which, seeing you could not do without inuoluing in the
same damnation and defectibility the whole Church of the Gentiles, you profess
the whole Church of God may fall away into Infidelity against the promises of
Christ, Infra c. 7. conu. 9.
yea against what your self affirm an hundred times.

That scripture is not the only Means, or Rule to know all necessary truths:
or that all necessary things are not evidently contained in Scripture. CHAP.
IIII.
1. IN this Chapter I lay the axe to the root of your unfruitful tree covered
with green leaves of assertions without any branch or bow of strong proof I
dig up the ruinous foundation of your Babilonicall building of confused
language full of doctrines different, yea opposite the one to the other; I shall
demonstrate that you mistake the Protestant sense of this their principle, The
Scripture is the only Rule, o^, All necessary points of faith are clearly
contained in Scripture; that you understand not the state of the Controversy
betwixt us and them about Tradition unwritten; that you run headlong on with
this principle in your mouth without any bit of true sense, or Christian
belief, stumbling against all the Articles of Christianity, whereby you get
many new noble victories over your self, by falling down in flat
contradiction upon your self.

2. To understand this we must observe, that a thing may be contained most
clearly to the seeming in some text of Scripture taken singly by it self,
which yet if places of Scripture be conferred, and all things considered, is
but darkely and doubtfully delivered therein. For example, by the saying of S.
Luke, that Joseph the husband of the Virgin Mary, was the Son of Hely; it
seems most clear and evident that Hely was his true and natural father;
neither would any Christian have doubted thereof, had not S. Matthew written
that Jacob begat Joseph the husband of Mary; so that the two texts, which taken
by themselselues seem most clear, being conferred together, do mutually
darken and obscure each other. This truth supposed the doctrine of Protestants
about the question, whether all points of necessary faith be contained in
Scripture, consists in two assertions, in the one they agree, in the other they
disagree from us.

3. First they teach that all necessary things of Faith are not contained
clearly in Scripture understood by conference of places, but for the clearing
of ambiguytyes, the Rule of faith delivered by Tradition is necessary; which
Rule comprehends all points of faith which have been always notoriously
known, and explicitly believed of all Christians. Thus far they and we
consent. There is D. field of the Church lib. 4. c. 16. item. c. 14.
says D. Field) betwixt our Adversaries and us, no difference in this matter;
for we confess, that neither conference of places, nor consideration of
antecedentia and consequentia, nor looking into the Originals ARE OF ANY FORCE,
unless we find the things we conceive to be understood, and meant in the
places interpreted to be consonant to the rule of faith etc. neither is there
any of our Deuines that teach otherwise. Thus he.

4. Secondly, Protestants teach that all necessary points of faith are clearly
contained in Scripture, in some text or texts of Scripture clear and
conspicuous, taken by themselves; so that though we need the rule of Tradition,
that we may assuredly understand the Scriptures co^ferred together, yet not to
deliver unto us some necessary matters of faith D. Field. lib. 4. c. 14. We do
not so make Scripture the rule of our faith, as we neglect the other (of
Tradition:) nor so admit the other as to detractany thing from the plenitude of
Scripture, in which al things are contained that must be believed.
which are no ways delivered in Scripture. Heerin there is some disagreement
betwixt them and us, because we hold that some verities of necessary belief
cannot be proved by any text of Scripture, sufficiently to be a matter of
faith, by that sole proof without the help of Tradition. Now you agree neither
with Protestants nor with us: you maintain that all necessary things are
evidently certain in Scripture, expounded by conference of places without any
rule of Traditiue interpretation; yea you contend that no such rule is extant.
This you do not as Protestants do, to establish the total sufficiency and
clarity of Scriptures about the received articles of Christian faith, but to
overthrow totally all explicit belief of any Christian mystery whatsoever, as
by the ensuing Conuictio^ of your error from your own sayings will manifestly
appear. For whiles you endeavor to spread this Infidelity covertly under the
mask of a Protestant, or of a Christian, for want of consideration, memory and
wit, you every where contradict your self; affirm, and deny; say, and unsay;
build, and vnbuild.

The first Conviction.
5. THus you write cap. 2. n. 159. lin. 9. The books of Scripture are not so
much of the being of Christian Doctrine, as requisite to the well being thereof:
men may be saved without believing the Scripture to be the word of God, much
more without believing it to be a rule and perfect rule of faith. And cap. 2.
n. 33. lin. 7. If men aid believe the doctrine contained in Scripture it would
no way hinder their salvation not to know, whether there were any Scripture, or
no. Those barbarous nations S. Irenaeus speaks of were in this case; yet no
doubt they might be saved. Yea, say Cap. 2. n. 159. lin. 20.
you, though they had rejected the books of Scripture proposed unto them by
all the rest of the Church which received them, I do not doubt but they might
be saved, God requiring of us under pain of damnation, only to believe the
verityes therein contained, and not the divine authority of the books wherein
they are contained. Thus you, destroying your Principle, that Scripture is the
only rule, and the only safe way to heaven, as I prove by three arguments,
from these words which indeed are evident truths. The first argument: Christian
faith cannot be ruled and guided to salvation, and attain to heaven without
the only rule, without the only guide, without the only means. No man in
his wits can deny this: Now you say, men may attain by faith unto salvation
without Scripture, though they be wholly ignorant of Scripture (as you truly say
with us) yea though they actually reject Scripture, and refuse to be ruled by
it, though the same be proposed to them by the whole Church (as you say without
us, and truth:) Ergo, Scripture is not the only rule, and means of Salvation.

6. Hence you contradict your self, when you say. To Cap. 6. n. 19.
reject Christ, or to deny the Scripture is such an heresy, the belief of
whose contrary is necessary, not only necessitate praecepti, sed medij; and
therefore is so absolutely destructive of salvation, that no ignorance can excuse
it, so that the Church may most truly be said to perish, if she Apostate from
Christ absolutely, or directly reject the Scripture; denying it to be the word
of God. Thus you: so conrradicting you self, that if what here you write so
absolutely be true, your doctrine, that men wholly ignorant of Scripture, yea
though they reject and deny it to be Gods word, may be saved, is not only
heresy damnable in it self, but also Heresy Apostaticall, so absolutely, and
indispensably destructive of salvation, as no ignorance can excuse it. You are
a fit man to teach others the safe way of salvation, who by your own words are
convinced to run a way absolutely destructive of salvation.

7. The second argument. If the divine authority of the Scripture be the only
rule and guide of faith, then it is so appointed of God, and God requires of
men, that they should believe Scripture to be their rule as being his
infallible word, and his only doctrine. But you say, God requires not, that men
believe the divine Authority of Scripture, yea they may reject this light and
the direction thereof, without doing against any divine ordinance, or
appointment: How then is Scripture the only rule of faith, the only means and
way to salvation? except you will say it is the rule appointed not of God, but
by your self, and the deep wisdom of your excellent wit. We shall doubtless
be well guided, and besure not so miss, if we follow you for our guide: you
will teach us to go every way, yea contrary ways at once, to believe
contradictions at the same time. Consider, I pray you, this your saying now
refuted, how contrary the same is to what you write cap. 6. n. 54. in fine,
where you set down the total Sum of your new chosen Religion. I am fully
assured, that God does not, and therefore that men ought not to require any more
of any man, but this; To believe the Scripture to be the word of God; to
endeavor to find the true sense thereof; and to live according to it. -- Quo te
Maeripedes? Quae te via ducet ad Orcum? You go contrary ways, yet both be
damnable errors, and lead directly to Hell. One way to damnation is, believing
that God does require nothing else, no more then, that we believe the Scripture
to be his word, not the verityes contained therein, but only that we endeavor
to find them. This way you take, and it is your Cap. 6. n. 57. I am verily
persuaded that I have wisely chosen after a long deliberation.
new wise choice, the only After a long impartial search I cannot find any
rest for the sole of my foot but upon this rock only.
rock of rest for the sole of your foot, wearied with a long search of the true
way to eternal happiness. You have indeed found rest, not for the foot of your
soul, but for the sole of your foot; because your Religion newly chosen has
no footing in your soul, but only Ventosa lingua, pedibusque fugacibus. --
Hence your sole in your foot wearied to stand long upon any persuasion, flies
from this way, God requires of us, that we believe the Scripture to be his
word, and no more, to the plain contrary, That God requires of us that we
believe the verityes contained in Scripture, not the divine authority of
Scripture, or, that it is his word. Betwixt these two contraries you fly from
the one to the other, without any rest or end.

8. Poor wearied, commiserable creature! One of those wavering babes tossed
this way and that way with every gust of different fancyes. Behold the only
rock of rest for Christian faith is offered you in your own words, you have it
if you know what you say, if you will not stand over by proud ignorance, but
understand, or stand with humble belief, under this your own saying,
Scripture is not so much of the being of Christian Doctrine, as requisite to
the well being thereof. For on this Catholic saying of invincible truth, I
ground my third argument, and by it prove, that not so much the being written
in Scripture, as the Being taught by the Church, is the rule to know which is
the Christian Doctrine, and to believe it. For the Being proposed and taught
externally is requisite not to the well being only, but to the very being of
Christian Doctrine; because it cannot be credible, and fit to be believed of
Christian men, except it be externally proposed and taught them to be of God by
some credible witness. But the Being taught, which is so much of the being of
Christian Doctrine, is not the being taught in Scripture: For this is requisite
but to the well being thereof, as you say. Ergo, besides being written and
taught by Scripture, another external being taught is requisite, which is of
the very essence of Christian doctrine, which makes the same credible, and fit
to be believed, and this can be no other but the Being taught by the Church of
Christ, the pillar and ground of truth. So that the rock, the solid, firm,
substantial reason of believing Christian Doctrine, is the Being taught by the
Church; and the Being written in Scripture is requisite ad melius esse, to the
well being thereof, because we believe it better, and more assuredly when we
find that which is taught by the Church to be also written in Scripture, though
this be not absolutely necessary to the constitution of Christian Doctrine.
Behold what is contained in your words: Hoc fac and viues; hic sta and
quiesces: follow the counsel of S. Austin Si iam satis tibi ia ctatus videris,
finemque huiusmodi laboribus vis imponere, sequere viam Catholicae disciplinae,
quae ab ipso Christo per Apostolos ad nos vsque manauit. de vtil. The cred. c.
8.
which I I have noted for you in the margent, and abandon that sandy banck, an
imaginary rock, the Scripture is the only rule of faith, from which you are
carried away into a sea of inconstant swelling fancyes, which fight together
like waves to the dissolution of each other.

The second Conviction.
9. THis Conviction I ground upon this truth^ that Scripture cannot prove it
self to be the word of God: which truth you deliver ca. 2. n. 46. That the
Divinity of a writing cannot be known from it self alone, but by some
extrinsicall authority you need not prove: for no wise man denies it. But then,
this authority is that of universal Tradition, not of your Church. From this
truth by you granted, I thus argue: That cannot be the only rule, or by it
self alone a rule of faith, with is not of it self able to prove and show
that which it contaynes to be the word of God. For the matter of Christian
Faith being the word of God only, that which cannot show it self to be the
word of God, cannot show it self to be matter of Christian faith. But
Scripture alone by it self, cannot prove it self, nor consequently the
doctrine it contaynes to be the word of God, but to this end needs the
extrinsecall Authority of Tradition. Therefore not Scripture alone, but
Scripture joined with the extrinsecall authority of Tradition is the rule of
faith.

10. This defect of Scripture, in respect of being the only rule, or by it
self alone any rule of faith, you lay open, cap. 2. n. 8. lin. 7. Though a
writing could not be proved to us to be a perfect rule of faith by its own
saying so (for nothing is proved true by being said or written in a book) but
only by Tradition which is a thing credible of it self: yet it may be so in
it self. Thus you. I would gladly know, how can Scripture be the only rule of
faith, or by it self any rule of faith, if nothing be proved true, nothing
showed to be the word of God barely by being written therein, but only by the
light of Tradition, joined unto Scripture?

11. Hence I infer, if Scripture by it self without Tradition cannot be a
rule of Faith, nor show any doctrine to be of God; how much less can it be a
rule of faith against the universal Tradition of the Church? It is deep vanity
in you, and dull inconsideration of the consequences of your doctrine, to boast
as you do cap. 3. n. 40. that by Scripture you can confute the Church which
taught you Scripture to be the word of God, as well (say you) as of my Master in
Physic or the Mathematickes, I may learn those rules and principles by which
I may confute his erroneous Conclusions. Thus you, who verily are such a
master you speak of. For you deliver rules and principles by which you may be
confuted your self. For do not you often inculcate this Principle, that the
Scripture is known to be the word of God only by Tradition, only by the
testimony of the ancient Churches? If then you prove by Scripture any Tradition
of the ancient Church, to be against Scripture, you shall not prove that
Tradition of the Church to be against the word of God; but that you have no
sure ground to believe the Scripture to be of God: and that you were unwise to
believe it upon the warrant of Tradition, as you say you do. For the rule which
may be false in one thing, cannot be a sure ground of belief in any thing. May
I learn this lesson of my good Master your book, which being your scholar,
has taught me many rules and principles by which I might confute his master?
Page ^5. lin. 23. The means to decide Controversies in Faith and Religion must
be endued with universal infallibility, in whatsoever it propounds as a
divine truth: For if it may be false in one thing of this nature, we can yield
unto it but a wavering and fearful assent in any thing. Thus you Wherefore if
Tradition be not endued with universal infallibility, if it may be false in
any one thing it proposes for divine truth, it cannot be believed with firm
assent in any thing at all. Now the principles of Physic or Mathematics are
believed because evident of themselves and not upon the bare word, tradition,
and authority of the master. For a scholar if he be not assured of those
rules and principles, otherwise then by the word of his master, cannot by the
authority of these rules and principles prove any thing against his master,
but only against himself, that he is a fool, either in believing these rules
upon his Masters bare word, or else in thinking he can by those rules convince
his master of falsehood. In like sort you show small judgment and discretion,
who persuade your self you are able to prove some Church-Traditio^ to be
against the word of God by Scripture, which Scripture you believe to be the
word of God only upon the warrant of universal Church Tradition, for this is
a thing impossible and implicatory, as any considering man will see: wherefore
not only Scripture, but Scripture joined with Tradition is a rule of Faith, and
consequently it is not possible to confute any Church-Tradition by Scripture.

The third Conviction.
12. THis conviction is grounded on this truth, that unlearned men cannot be
assured they have the incorrupt text, or the true Translation of Scripture, but
only by the word of the Church. This you affirm page 79. lin. 7. 2. Edit.
page 75. lin. 36.
It were altogether as abhorrent from the goodness of God, and repugnant to
it, to suffer an ignorant lay man's soul to perish, merely for being mislead by
an indiscernable false Translation, which yet was commended unto him by the
Church, which (being of necessity to credit some in this matter) he has reason
to rely upon, either above all other, or as much as any other; as it is to
damn a penitent sinner for a secret defect in that desired absolution. Thus
you, from which I convince two things: First, that the Scripture is not the
rule: Secondly that the Church must of necessity be still visible and
infallible in guiding men to heaven. The first I prove in this fort. The only
rule of faith must be for the capacity of all men as well unlearned as learned,
simple as judicious, occupied in worldly affairs as disoccupied. The only rule
I say must be able to assure all men of the Scripture, that the Text and the
Translation thereof is not corrupt in any substantial matter. But Scripture is
not able to do this, as you do confess, and consequently there is a necessity,
that men unlearned, men of mean capacity, men occupied in worldly affairs,
trust the Church. Ergo, not Scripture alone, but Scripture joined unto the
authority of the Church, is the rule of faith.

13. Secondly, that the Church is visible and an infallible guide, I prove. You
say, It is repugnant to the goodness of God, to suffer the souls of men to
perish for their trusting the Church, which they had reason to trust above all
other, being of necessity to trust some. If this be true (and it is most true)
then God is bound in his goodness to provide, that the Church which is to be
trusted above all other, be not so bidden as it cannot without extreme
difficulty be found; nor fallible, that it cannot without extreme danger be
trusted: 2. Edit. cap. 6. n. 20. page 322. li. 4.
For as you say page 337. n. o. lin. 23. A doubtful and questionable guide is
as good as none at all. Is it then impious to think, that men being in
necessity of a guide to heaven and for want of one in terms of perishing
eternally, God has commended and commanded unto them for their guide, a
doubtful and questionable Church which men neither know where to find, nor
being found how to trust.

14. What you say of a penitent sinner, that God will not damn him for the
secret defect in his desired absolution, because his Ghostly Father was perhaps
an Atheist and could not, or a villain and would not give him absolution.
First you are deceived in thinking, that a secret Atheist cannot give
absolution; for he may, if he have intention to do what Christ instituted: and
this intention he may have, though he esteem of that institution no better
then of a foppery. As for a Villain, it is not credible, that any Christian
Priest will be such a villain, as not to give his Penitent absolution: in
which case if (perhaps it fall out) we think God of his goodness will not
permit such a Penitent to perish: yet the case being rare and extraordinary, he
has appointed no ordinary means of succor, but he will supply such defects
(as he many ways may easily do) by his special providence. Now the necessity
of Christians for the defect in their assurance of the true text of Scripture,
and vncorrupt translation is continual, ordinary, and it implies incertainty
in all matters of faith, in respect of all Christians. For there be scarre any
that can assure themselves of the true Text, or of the truth of the Translation
they use, by searching into the Originalls and ancient coppies. Wherefore God
has provided for them an ordinary means of assurance, continually at hand,
and for the capacity of all, to wit a Church infallible, and so conspicuous as
she may be seen of all.

The fourth Conviction.
15. ANother Principle you deliver c. 3. n. 33. li. 10. wherein you co^tradict
your self and deprive Scripture of being the only, or the prime Christian rule
of faith. I must learn of the Church, or of some part of the Church, or I
cannot know any thing Fundamental or not Fundamental. For how can I come to
know, that there was such a man as Christ, that he taught such doctrine, that
he and his disciples did such miracles in confirmation of it, that the
Scripture is the word of God, unless I be taught it. So that the Church is,
though not a certain foundation and proof of my Faith, yet a necessary
introduction to it. Thus you, and in like manner you make the Creed containing
all Fundamental articles of simple belief independent of Scripture. Cap. 4. n.
15. The certainty I have of the Creed, that it was from the Apostles, and
contaynes the principles of faith I ground it not upon Scripture etc. But the
contrary to this in formal terms your affirm. Cap. 3. n. 37. lin. 9. saying
of Protestants, They ground their belief, that such and such things only are
Fundamental on Scripture only, and go about to prove their assertion by
Scripture only. Behold contradiction upon contradiction. For to say you ground
your belief of the Fundamental articles or Principles of faith not upon
Scripture, and you ground it on Scripture only, is direct contradiction. What
you say that you believe such and such things only to be fundamental and prove
it by Scripture, is repugnant with what you contest more then in an hundred
passages of your Book, that you neither know, nor can know exactly which
points be Fundamental.

16. But omitting your contradiction, I convince that Scripture cannot be the
rule of our faith about Fu^damentalls, Cap. 2. n. 48 circa. finem.
which must of necessity be known and believed before Scripture, I prove by
what you write, Page 70. lin. 29. If our understanding did assent already to
what purpose, should the Scripture do that which was done before? Nay indeed
how is it possible it should be so, any more then a Father can beget a son,
that he has already? or an Architect build an house that is built already? Or
then this very world can be made again, before it be unmade:
Transubstantiation indeed is fruitful of such monsters. But they that have not
sworn themselves to the defense of error, will easily perceive that iam
factum facere, and, factum infectum facere, be equally impossible. These be
your words, from which I thus argue: The Scripture cannot be the rule and
reason of believing such points of faith, which must of necessity be believed
before we can receive Scripture. But before we believe Scripture, we must
believe the fundamental articles of Christianity, that Christ was, and taught
such and such doctrine essential to the Gospel; that he chose Apostles to
preach it, who confirmed it with new miracles, and left it us written in these
books of Scripture: These things and the like you confess must of necessity
be known upon the Tradition and Authority of the Church before we can believe
Scripture. Ergo, the assent we yield unto the truth of these articles, is not
by Scripture but by the Churches Tradition precedently to our belief of
Scripture. And so the Church teaching us the Christian Tradition is the
fundamental and essential rule of faith, and the Scripture is requisite not
to the being of Christian faith, nor for the begetting thereof, but only ad
melius esse, to the well being thereof, to confirm us more and more in what we
are taught by the Church.

The fifth Conviction.
17. CAp. 2. n. 19. For so should it be though it be in the book n. 9.
lin. 15. you write, In all the Controversies of Protestants betwixt
themselves, there is a seeming conflict of Scripture with Scripture reason with
reason, authority with authority; which how it can subsist with manifest
revealing of the truth, I cannot well understand. And cap. 1. n. 13. lin. 25.
The contrary belief may be concerning points, wherein Scripture may with so
great probability be alleged on both sides (which is a sure note of a point
not necessary) that men of honest and upright hrearts, true lovers of God, and
the truth, such as desire above all things to know Gods will and to do it, may
without any fault at all, some go one way, and some another; and some (and
those as good men as any of the former suspend their judgment and expect some
Elias to solue doubts, and reconcile repugnances. And Preface n. 30. There is
no more certain sign, that a thing is not evident, then that honest
understanding and indifferent men, after a mature deliberation of the matter,
differ about it. From this your confession, that there be seeming
contradictions and conflicts of one part of Scripture with another, which set
good and honest men of your stamp together by the ears, I gather three
arguments, which convince that Scripture by it self cannot be the only rule of
faith. First, That cannot be a rule of believing with is incredible it self.
But Scripture being seemingly contrary to it self and contradicting it self,
is by it self incredible, therefore it cannot be a rule of faith by it self;
but to be a rule of faith it must be made credible by some extrinsecall
Authority, with is so worthy of credit, as upon the warrant thereof we may
believe things incredible which is as you grant the rule of universal
Tradition.

18. Secondly that cannot be the only rule, or by it self a rule of Christian
faith, with is not able to assure us about the chiefest articles of our faith,
as the Trinity, Incarnation, Real presence, the knowledge whereof is for
Christians essentally necessary unto salvation. For if Christ Jesus be the true
God consubstantiall to his father, then Heretics, to wit Socinian and Arian
Protesters against the Church of Rome, cannot be saved by Christ, seeing they
refuse to believe and worship him as the true God. On the other side, if Christ
be not the true God, then Roman Catholics cannot be saved by the true God,
seeing they were worshippers of a false God Now this article that Christ Jesus
is the true God, so absolutely necessary, cannot be proved unto them by
Scripture only: for about this point Arius did allege against the God head of
Christ 40. places of Scripture and Catholics allege no fewer.
Scriptures are alleged with so great probability on both sides, that of
learned Christians honest and understanding men, esteemed pious, religious, true
lovers of God and his truth, Pastors and guides in the Christian Church, some
have gone one way, some another as is notorious. Wherefore, what you say, that
this so probable allegation of Scriptures on both sides is a sure sign of a
point not necessary, implies Atheism, to wit, that it does not import
Christians to know whether in worshipping Christ Jesus as the true God, they be
not worshippers of a false God. And if this be Atheism, the^ is it blasphemy
to say that Scripture only is the rule of Christian faith, and that Christians
cannot be assured of any doctrine whereof they be not assured by the rule of
Scripture only. For it is evident truth, and undeniable (though other
Protesters against us, will not confess it so clearly as you do) that where
there is a seeming conflict of Scripture with Scripture, where Scripture is
alleged on both sides with so great probability, that learned, understanding
and indifferent men differ about it; it is clear I say, that about such points
there cannot be any decision of controuersyes by Scripture only.

19. Thirdly by defending the Scripture to be the only rule (besides this
blasphemy that Christians by their rule of faith cannot be assured, that they
be not worshipers of a false God) you are forced to add another; that on God
and his word the fault lies that there be so many factions of faith, and so
great dissenssion amongst upright hearted Protestants; for that these your true
lovers of God and his truth stand for contrary belief, that in matters of
Religion Christendom is divided into Factions and Sects, that some go one way
and some another, cursing and damning each other to Hell, is no doubt a great
fault, a mighty scandal, an huge mischief, which must of necessity lie
heavily either upon such Dicisioners, or upon God But you excuse the
Diuisioners, saying that Cap. 1. n. 13.
they go some one way, some another, without any fault at all. Ergo, the whole
fault must rest on God, who gave to these true lovers of him and his truth the
Scripture for their only rule, which being it self as you say seemingly
factious, contradictious, and one part thereof fighting against another set
these innocent, honest, upright hearts together by the ears, one with the
other, in good earnest, and implacably. Thus to excuse Protestants, you protest
against God, that he is not the God of peace, but of dissension, and the
author of all the discord among Christians in matter of Religion, and of all
the mischiefs, that are consequent thereupon by giving a Scripture so full of
seeming conflicts for the sole rule of their faith. The day will come, that
these boasters of their honest and upright heart, of their true love to God and
his truth, shall sind the Apostles saying true, Not who commendes himself, but
whom God commendes, he is approved. They shall see that in their trusting
only the Scripture, and their own reason in expounding it, contemning the
Tradition of the Church, they were not lovers of God and his truth, but fast
friends to their own fancy and fond conceits, lovers of themselves, adorers of
their own poor miserable wit.

The sixth Conviction.
20. THough we were sure that the Scripture is the word of God, that we have
the incorrupt text, the true translation thereof cleared from seeming
contradictions; yet for all this, Scripture could not be to us a rule of faith
alone by it self, by reason of the high senses of Scripture, incredible and
incomprehensible to humane reason. This I prove by your own writing, wherein
you deliver a grand Catholic verity, which overthrows the Scriptures being
the only rule. Protestants pretend they know their doctrine and interpretation
of Scripture to be the word of God, by the divine light and evident certainty
thereof: you will not believe this resolution to be theirs, and affirm the
contrary cap. 6. n. 5^. That the Scripture is not evidently certain, nor of it
self disuested of the motives of credibility evidently credible. For
Protestants (say you) are not so vain as to pretend that all men do assent to
it, which they would do, if it were evidently certain, nor so ridiculous as to
imagine, if an Indian who had never heard of Christ should by chance find a
Bible in his own language, that he would by reading it without miracle
certainly believe it to be the word of God, which he could not choose if it
were evidently credible. Thus you, and hence I thus argue.

21. That Authority cannot be of it self, and by it self alone the rule and
guide of Christian saving faith in the understanding and believing of
Scripture, which is not of it self evidently credible, and worthy of all
credit. This I prove because the rule and reason to believe the Scripture, must
be able to convince the understanding, and to resolve it to believe many high
and incomprehensible mysteries. For these are taught and delivered in
Scripture, and must be believed by every Christian that will be saved. But an
authority which of it self is not evidently credible, or worthy of all credit
is not of it self a sufficient reason, or a good rule for me to believe
incredible things, incomprehensible to my humane reason, as is manifest to
every man that has wit to apprehend the sense of this speech. Ergo the
Scripture alone, and by it self not joined with the evidently credible
authority of some other witness cannot be the rule of faith. This may be made
manifest by examples, as by this; What the Scripture says, Asonne of thirty
years was David, when he began to reign, and he reigned forty years, I
easily believe in the plain sense, because there is no incredibility therein.
But when the Scripture says a son of one year was Saul when he began to
reign, and he reigned two years, the incredibility of the sense (the
Scripture in other places assuring me, that when he began to reign he was
higher by head and shoulders then any man in Israel) makes me presently
stagger, and to seek for some stronger pillar then the evidence of the text in
my private seeming; and finding none, my reason is presently overcome, and wone
to forsake the seeming evidence of the the text. The same no doubt would happen
in other texts of Scripture about the B. Trinity, Incarnation, and other
mysteries of faith; My faith, I say, would give back had I no stronger rule
and reason of believing them, then the evidence of the text in my private
Judgment. But when I perceive the evidence of the text in my private Judgment,
to be vpheld and confirmed by the Judgment of the Catholic Church, which did
ever understand and believe such texts in that incredible and incomprehensible
sense; then am I fully confirmed and Christianly resolved to believe those high
senses, though never so impossible to the seeming of my reason; because
tradition, or traditine Interpretation, as you speak, that is, the perpetual
doctrine and belief of Christians in all former ages is able to overcome all
incredulity which the incredibility of the thing may represent unto reason. For
it is (as you are forced to confess) the rule to judge all controversies by,
Cap. 2. n. 25. and ca. 3. n. 45.
being Gods infallible word evidently credible of it self, and so a fit rule
whereon Christian faith may rely; for what witness can be more illustrious and
known, and of more eminent credit, then the Church founded by Christ Jesus and
his Apostles, bathed with the blood of innumerable Martyrs, adorned by the
glorious lives and miracles of millions of holy men?

22. I confess the Protestants opinion, that the doctrine of Scripture is to
them evident, that they see the truth thereof, as clearly as they do the light
of the sun, to be absurd, fond, ridiculous as you tear me it. But also I must
acknowledge, that they speak consequently, other wise they could not say their
faith does finally rest on the Scripture, nor pretend the Scripture to be their
only rule. And you who reject this Protestants conceit of the intrinsecall
light of Scripture do not only harbor Infidelity in your heart, but also
profess it openly in words, page 330. lin. 28. I deny not, 2. Edit. n. 318.
lin. 24.
but I am bound to believe the truth of many texts of Scripture, the sense
whereof is to me obscure, and the truth of many articles of faith, the manner
whereof is obscure, and to humane understanding incomprehensible. But then it
is to be observed, that not the sense of such texts, nor the MANNER of such
things is that which I am bound to believe, but the truth of them; for that I
should believe the truth of any thing, the truth whereof cannot be made evident
to me with an evidence proportionable to the faith required of me: this, I say,
for any man to be bound to, is unjust and unreasonable, because to do it is
impossible. Thus you profess, that you neither do, nor can believe the
incomprehensible mysteries of Christian Religion. For when the manner is the
very substance of the mystery, then the very substance is incomprehensible. For
example in the B. Trinity that Three, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost be One, the
mystery is not, that these three names signify one thing (as Sabellians and
Socinians understand it) but that in the unity of the Godhead there be three
Persons distinct, of one substance But you profess not to believe the manner
of these mysteries, because it is incomprehensible: Ergo, you do not believe
the substance of the mystery, the substance thereof being a manner of being
incomprehensible. Moreover he is no faithful Christian, who belieues not the
articles of Christianity, according to the Christian manner and sense; But the
Christian manner of believing them is according as they are incomprehensible to
humane understanding, and seem to profane Wit and Gentilisme follies and
absurdities, as S. Paul does declare: 1. Cor. 1. 23.
Ergo, you are no Christian who openly show your self a shamed to believe any
MANNER of things revealed by Christ upon his word, that is incomprehensible,
except he make it evident to your understanding; and then if you believe him he
shall be much beholding unto you for believing him, so far as you see he
speaks truth, and no further, that is, so far as you will trust any liar
whatsoever. The sum of all is, that seeing you reject the Puritanical
conceit, that Scripture is known to be the word of God by its own light, as
a foolerie (for so really it is) you must either deny the Scripture to be the
only rule, or else continue to profess unbelief of Christianity, and of all
manner of incomprehensible mysteries.

The seventh Conviction.
23. YOur Adversary often urges you to set down an exact Catalogue of
fundamentalls or necessary truths, without the particular and distinct belief
of which you contend that it implies contradiction that any man be saved. You
having used many tergiuersations to divert the mind of the Reader, at last
confess 2. Edit. page 22. lin. 13. 2. Edition Page 129. lin. 15.
Page 23 lin. 8. That it is an intricate piece of buisinesse, of extreme great
difficulty, and of extreme little necessity, almost impossible. And page 134.
lin. 28. This variety of circumstances makes it impossible to set down an
exact Catalogue of Fundamentalls. And 2. Edition cap. 4. n. 19. page 193. l.
10. Cap. 4. n. ^.
page 201. lin. 23. A Catalogue of Fundamentalls (because to some more is
fundamental, to others less, to others none at all) had been impossible. By
this confession you overthrow your Principle, that Scripture is the only rule
wherein all necessary things are evidently contained. For fundamental points
being the essential parts of the Gospel, Doctrines intrinsecall to the
covenant betwixt God and man, Cap. 4. (...) 4. lin. 29.
not only clearly revealed, and so certain truths, but also commanded under
pain of damnation to be distinctly known and believed of all, and so
necessary truths: I demand whether these divine fundamental and essential
laws about the distinct knowing and believing of these points in particular be
clearly delivered in Scripture, or not? If not; Ergo, there be some divine
Laws necessary unto salvation, without the observance of which it implies
contradiction any man should be saved, Cap. 6. in fine.
not clearly delivered in Scripture. If they be clearly delivered, then
points fundamental be clearly discernable from points not fundamental, as
being not only clearly revealed in Scripture, as some points not fundamental
may be; but also clearly commanded unto the belief of all under pain of
damnation, as vn-fundamentall points cannot be. What more easy for a man that
has eyes then to discern the places of a garden on which the Sun shines,
from those on which it shines not, but are shaded from his beams? When light
from heaven shined on the howses and habitations of the Israelites, Exodus 10.
and not on the houses and habitations of the Egyptians, was it an intricate
piece of business for a man not blind, to have discerned the one from the
other? But you affirm often and earnestly, that it is a thing of extreme great
diffieulty, yea morally impossible to distinguish in Scripture, things
fundamental from things not fundamental. Ergo, they are not clearly
commanded in Scripture and consequently some things necessary, to wit, Cap. 4.
n. 42.
some divine commandes of faith, the observance of which is fundamental to the
covenant betwixt God and man for their Salvation, are not contained in
Scripture at all; or else only intricately and obscurely.

Cap. 4. n. 40. and. n. 43. lin. 4.
The eighth Conviction.
24. BY the discovery of this contradiction your chief, or rather only
argument for the sufficiency of Scripture is answered. Cap. 4. n. 40. and n.
43. lin. 4.
Page 210. lin. 28. and page 212. lin. 1. you affirm, that in the sole
Gospel of S. Lake all necessary things are contained; so that in other books
of Scripture, Cap. 4. n. 42.
namely in the Gospel of S. John, whatsoever is revealed over and above that
in S. Luke, is indeed profitable truth, but not necessary or fundamental. This
you prove, because S. Luke in the entrance to his history of the Acts of the
Apostles says: The former treatise have I made, O Theophilus, of all that
Jesus began to do and teach. This argument you of ten inculcate, and prosecute
with great vehemence and (according to your almost perpetual ridiculous manner
of disputing) with a cart load of interrogations; but in fine the substance of
all the difficulty is, how could S. Luke truly say, that he had written a
treatise of all that Jesus began to do and teach, if he have left some
necessary doctrines, and fundamental matters unwritten?

25. In this argument you contradict in plain terms both S. John, and your
self, showing your want of Christianity in the one, your want of wit, memory,
and consideration in the other. The Eternal Generation of Christ whereby he is
the only begotten of God in the bosom of his Father, is no where clearly
delivered in the Gospel of S. Luke; yea your Socinians collect out of his
Gospel many strong arguments (as they conceive) against this article of our
faith: And yet the same is clearly delivered in the Gospel of S. John, and
the belief thereof commanded unto all expressly under pain of damnation,
John. 3.18. He that belieueth is not judged, he that belieueth not is already
judged, because he has not believed in the name of the only begotten Son of
God. Also ver. 36. He that belieueth not the Sone shall not see life, but the
wrath of God abides in him.
How can you believe in the Gospel of S. John; and not believe the Eternal
Generation of the Son of God, and the eternal damnation of the disbelieuers,
thereof; and consequently that there is some necessary commanded truth in S.
John's Gospel above the Gospel of S. Luke?

26. You also contradict your self, and overthrow this your so often asserted
plenitude of S. Lukes Gospel, by obiecting out of the Gospel of S. John,
the Precept of Communion in both kinds, as a thing necessary to be known,
believed, yea practiced of all, as well of the Clergy, as Laytie: for in proof
of this (in your conceit) so necessary truth, you produce not any text, word,
or syllable out of S. Luke. Yea S. Luke is so far from teaching the necessity
of both kinds, as he signifies the contrary clearly enough. Luke ^: 22. v. 19.
For in his narration of the Eucharist how it was instituted, he does
expressly note, that our Lord delivering the Sacrament under the form of
Bread, said: Do this in remembrance of me; but in delivering the Chalice he
makes no mention of any such command: To this institution comfortable was our
Lords practice, recorded by Luke 24.21.
S. Luke, that in Emmaus he gave the two difciples that were laymen, the
Eucharist in the form only of consecrated bread. Nor is S. Luke his saying,
that he had written his former treatise of all things Jesus began to do and
teach, to be restrained to necessary things only, his words being all things
absolutely without limitation. He writ then all things not only necessary but
also profitable, which he judged fit for the end and purpose of his writing;
which was not (as you fondly imagine) to set out a Catechism, or brief Sum
of Christian doctrine, but to write such a History of the whole life of our
Lord as might serve to confirm, and assure Luke cap. 1. v. 4. That thou
might know the certainty of these things wherein thou have been instructed.
Christians in the belief of that form of Doctrine, in which they had been
instructed, catechized, and christened by the Apostles, and other Apostolical
men.

27. I conclude this Chapter, with noting the extreme misery, poverty, futility
of your whole book. Do not you say in your Preface. n. 34. that this
Principle, all things necessary are evidently contained in Scripture, is not
only the corner stone and chief pillar, but even the base and adaequate
foundation of your answer? Now this Principle, not being prime, immediate, or
evident of it self, you have not brought for it any solid argument or proof.
The plenitude of the other Ghospels besides S. Lukes you dare not so
confidently maintain: you Page 210. lin. 25. Of all the four Evangelists this
is very probable but of S. Luke most apparent. Cap. 4. n. 43.
say no more but that it is very probable, that in each of them all necessary
things are delivered; you Page 212. lin. 2.
stand absolutely only upon the Ghospel of S. Luke, that therein all is
contained; which is so false and vain as it is contradicted even by your
self, nor do any Protestants hold it, but only Socin^a^s, who by pretending
this fulness of S. Luke his Gospel, would put off the necessity of believing
the Gospel of S. John. and the high mysteries thereof: and so you had good
reason to term this principle by you so stoutly and perpetually avouched, so
poorly and miserably proved, the adaequate Base of your Book.

That there is one visible Society of Christians infallible in all her
Proposalls, known unto all, by subordination to one visible Head, or Pastor.
CHAP. V.
IN proof of this Title, omitting many other, I produce only two or three
arguments, as well to be brief, as because these be so full conuincing and
well grounded, even by such an Adversary as you are, that more will not be
required.

The first Conviction.
1. IF the Church be an infallible guide in fundamentals, or which is all one,
an infallible teacher of all necessary truth, then is she a certain Society of
Christians of one denomination, of one obedience, subject to one visible head,
in fallible in all her Proposals. But the Church is such an infallible teacher
of all necessary truth, or such a guide in fundamentals. In this argument both
propositions are yours, and I shall set down your words fully, whereby you not
only deliver, but also demonstrate them. The Major you acknowledge ca. 2. n.
139. You must know, that there is a wide difference betwixt being infallible in
Fundamentals, and being an infallible guide in Fundamentals. The former we
grant, for it is no more but this, that there shall be a Church in the world
for ever. But we utterly deny the Church to be the later: for to say so, were
to oblige our selves to find some certain Society of men, of whom we might be
certain, that they neither do, nor can err in fundamentals nor in declaring
what is fundamental and what is not; and consequently to make any Church an
infallible guide in Fundamentals would be to make it infallible in all things
she proposes to be believed. This therefore we deny both to your Church, and to
all Churches of one denomination, that is indeed we deny it simply to any
Church. For no Church can be fit to be a guide, but only a Church of some
certain denomination. For otherwise no man can possibly know which is the true
Church, but by a praeexamination of the doctrine controuerted; and that were
not to be guided by the Church to the true doctrine, but by the true doctrine
to the Church. Hereafter therefore when you hear Protestants say, the Church
is infallible in fundamentalls, you must not conceive them, as if they mean,
as you do, some Society of Christians, which may be known by adhering to some
one Head, for example to the Pope or Bishop of Constantinople etc. Thus you
deliver the sequells of this proposition, the Church is an infallible guide in
fundamentalls, which are in a word our whole Catholic doctrine about the
Church: that if that proposition be by you granted expressly and clearly, yea
proved inuincibly from Scripture, you must return again to the Church of
Rome, or else by your own judgment be damned to Hell; specially because you
repeat the same consequences of the granting of an infallible guide in
fundamentalls, and both approve, and prove them Cap. 3. n. 39. lin. 11.
speaking to your Adversary, Good Sir, you must needs do us this favor, to be
so accute, as to di^tinguish between being infallible in Fundamentalls, and
being an infallible guide in Fundamentalls. That she shall be always a Church
infallible in Fundamentalls, we easily grant: for it comes to no more but this,
that there shall be always a Church. But that there shall be always such a
Church which is an infallible guide in Fundamentalls, this we deny. For this
cannot be without settling a known infallibility in some one known Society of
Christians, as the Greek, or the Roman, (or some other Church) by adhering to
which guide, men might be guided to believe aright in all Fundamentalls. A man
that were destitute of all means of communicating his thoughts to others,
might yet in himself, and to himself be infallible, but he could not be a
guide to others. A Man, or a Church that were invisible, so that none could
know how to repair to it for direction, could not be an infallible guide, and
yet he might be unto himself infallible.

2. Thus you have told us clearly and fully what will follow if you grant the
Church to be an infallible guide in Fundamentalls: which sequells be so much
denied and detested by you, as one would think it were impossible you should
be so forgetful as to affirm it. And yet you do clearly say, that the Church
is not only infallible in Fundamentalls, but also an infallible guide in
Fundamentalls, being even by essence not only a belieuer of all necessary
truth, but also a teacher or mistress thereof: Cap. 2. n. 164. initio. The
visible Church shall always WITHOUT FAIL PROPOSE so much of Gods revelation
as is sufficient to bring men to heaven; for otherwise it will not be the
visible Church: yet it may sometimes add things hurtful, nay in themselves
damnable. And cap. 2. n. 77. in fiae, and n. 73. initio, you grant, that the
Apostle terms the Church of God, the pillar and ground of truth, not only
because by duty it is still the teacher of all truth, though not so ever in
fact, but also, because it always shall and will be so; yet, (say you) this is
short to prove your intent, that the Church is infallible in all her
proposals, unless you can show, that by Truth is certainly meant not only
necessary to Salvation, but all that is profitable absolutely, and simply ALL.
For that the true Church always shall be the MAINTAINER and TEACHER of ALL
NECESSARY TRVTH you know We grant and ^^st grant: for it is of the ESSENCE of
the Church to be so: and any company of men were no more a Church without it,
then any thing can be a man, and not be reasonable. Thus you: Verily were it
possible for a creature to be a man, and not reasonable, you deserve to carry
away the title of a true unreasonable man, from all men that hitherto have
ranked themselves in the number of Writers. You are a true man, for that you
deliver manifest truth; made good by strong reasons; you are an unreasonable
man, in that you wilfully and obstinately stand in defense of the contrary
falsehood. I will briefly note first your contradictions, secondly the sequels
thereof.

3. In the words cited in the first place, you distinguish betwixt a Church
infallible in Fundamentals, and such a Church as is an infallible guide in
Fundamentals, granting the true Church to be the former, but not the later,
jesting at your Adversary, as though his confounding them did argue in him want
of such an acute wit, as you suppose your self to have. But in the second
citations you do us the favor to be so acute, so perspicacious, so
sharpe-sighted, as to penetrate into the very essence of the Church, and out of
that Closet of Truth pronounce, that to be infallible in Fundamentals, and to
be an infallible guide in Fundamentals, be inseparably co^ioyned in the Church;
and that to grant the former to the Church and deny the later, were to divide
the Church from its very essence. For I hope you will not be so acute, as to
distinguish betwixt an infallible guide in Fundamentals, and such a Church as
is always in fact without fail the teacher, the proposer, the maintayner, in
a word the mistress of all necessary truth even by essence; that she can no
more depart from teaching, proposing, and maintayning all fundamental
Christian doctrine, then from her own being. Nor do you only so affirm the
Churches essential infallibility in teaching all Fundamentals, but also prove
the same by the word of God, which proposes the Church of Christ as the pillar
and ground of truth, as built on the Rock against which the gates of Hell shall
never prevail. For these words at least euince (as you confess Cap. 3. n. 70.
that there shall still continue a true Church, and bring forth children unto
God, and send souls to Heaven: which could not be unless she did always
without fail teach all necessary truth, and so be an infallible guide in
Fundamentals.

4. Now this being a truth infallible, that the Church cannot err in teaching
fundamentals, let us proceed to note and number the doctrines which you openly
grant and prove to be consequent thereupon, which be such as no more could have
been desired. A Sicilian Nobleman, when Scipio Praetor of that country offered
him one wealthy and talkatiue, but of little wit for advocate of his cause,
replied, I pray you Sir give this man for Advocate to my Adversary; and then I
will be content to have no Advocate at all. So we may say that the cause of
Protestants about the Total of their Religion and Salvation controuerted with
the Church of Rome, being abandoned by learned Protestants, none presuming to
appear against evident truth so clearly demonstrated by Charity maintained,
it was the Roman Churches good luck you should prefer your self, and be
admitted for their Advocate, for you speak so wisely, so pertinently, so
coherently for Protestants, as the Roman Church needs not any other Advocate in
her behalf. No Catholic Patron, no learned man howsoever well seen in
Controversies of Religion, nay the Author of Charity mainteyned himself could
not have spoken more fully, grou^dedly, unanswerably in the defense of the
Roman Catholic Church, then you have done, while you are persuaded, that you
plead against her, as appears by these Conclusions, the deduction whereof is
confessed and expressed by your self.

5. First there is, ever was, and shall be a true Church visible and conspicuous
to the world, that all men according to the will of God may be saved (if they
please) by the means of her preaching over the world. This you grant in
saying, that if the Church be an infallible guide in Fundamentals, then this
known infallibility, must be settled in some known Society of Christians, by
adhering to which guide men may be guided to believe aright in all
Fundamentals. 1. Tim. 2.4.
No was the Apostle says, God will have all men to be saved, and to come to
the knowledge of truth, and consequently he will have the means, which
proposes all the truth of Salvation infallibly guiding men to heaven, to be
sisible, and so diffused in the world as all men may come to see her, and
learn of her, and be saved if they will by the grace of Christ Jesus.

6. Secondly this Church being an infallible guide in Fundamentals, must be
likewise infallible in all her proposals in matter of faith. This sequel,
according to your good custom, you both deny and grant. You deny it page 177.
saying, that the Church, though she be the ground and rock of all necessary
truth, yet not the rock and ground, or infallible teacher of all profitable
truth, but may err and mainteyne damnable error against it. But page 105. n.
139. you grant the Consequence, saying, To grant any Church an infallible guide
in Fundamentals, would be to make it infallible in all things which she
proposes, and requires to be believed: and Cap. 3. n. 36. you say, The Church
except she be infallible in all things we can believe her in nothing upon her
word and authority; which you prove by this demonstration unanswerably,
Because, say you, an authority subject to error can be no firm and stable
foundation of my belief in any thing. And if it were in any thing, then this
authority being one and the same in all proposals, I should have the same
reason to believe all, that I have to believe one. And therefore must do
unreasonably either in believing any one thing upon the sole warrant of this
authority, or else in not believing all things aequally warranted by it. Behold
how earnestly you auerre and forcibly demonstrate what before you did so
peremptorily deny, that the Church being the pillar and ground of some Truth,
to wit of Truth necessary to Salvation, must of necessity be the pillar and
ground of all saving Truth; because a Church subject to error in some things
cannot be the ground and firm foundation of my belief in any thing whatsoever.

7. Thirdly, the true Church of Christ, the pillar and ground of Truth, to
which it is essential to propose teach, and mayntaine all necessary truth, is
one Society of Christians notoriously known by subordination to one universal
visible Head or Pastor. This you grant saying, that an infallible guide in
Fundamentals, or, which is all one, such a Church as shall always without
fail be the pillar, ground, and teacher of all necessary truth must be one
known Society of Christians, by adhering to which we are sure to be gurded
aright to believe all Fundamentals; one certain Society of men by whom we are
certain they neither do, nor can err in Fundamentals; one certain Society of
Christians which may be known by adhering to such a Bishop as their Head.

8. Fourthly there being such an infallible Church in all her doctrines, you
suppose that we are not to find out which is the true Church by preexamination
of the doctrine controuerted, but by evidence of the mark of subordination to
one visible Head find the true Church, by whose teaching we are lead to all
necessary truth, if we follow her direction and rest in her Judgment. These
four sequels you teach to be inuolued and contained in your grant, that the
Church is always, even by ss^nce, the pillar and ground of faith, the
infallible teacher and maynteyner of all necessary truth; whence we shall in
the sixth and seventh Chapter infer the total overthrow of your cause, and
show salvation to be impossible against the Catholic Roman Church.

The second Conviction.
9. FOr the total infallibility of the Catholic Church I propose this
Syllogism out of your sayings: In matters of Religion none can be lawful
Judges, but such as are for that office appointed of God, nor any fit for it,
but such as are infallible; but the Catholic Church is lawful Judge endued
with authority to determine controversies of Religion; Ergo, she is appointed
of God, and made by him fit for that office, that is, infallible. In this
Syllogism, as in the former, both propositions be your own; the Mayor you
deliver page 60. n. 21. For the deciding of civil controversies men may
appoint themselves a Judge: But in matters of Religion this office may be given
to none, but whom God has designed for it And page 59. n. 17. In civil
Controversies every henest understanding man is fit to be Judge; but in matters
of Religion none but he that is infallible.

10. The Minor also you deliver often, but specially in two places. Cap. 2. n.
162. explicating a Conclusion defended in Oxford the year 1633. That the
Church has authority to determine Controversies of faith, obrected by your
Adversary; you answer; Me thinks so subtle a man as you are should easily
apprehend a wide difference between authority to do a thing, and infallibility
in doing it: and again, between a conditional infallibility, and an
absolute. The former the Doctor together with the Article of the Church of
England attributes to the Church, and I subscribe to this opinion, that is, an
authority in determining Controversies of faith, according to plain, and
evident Scripture, and universal Tradition and infallibility, so long as they
proceed according to this rule. As if there arise an Heretic that should call
in question Christ's Passion and Resurrection, the Church had authority to
decred this Controversy, and infallible direction how to do it, and to
excommunicate this man, if he should persist in error. I hope you will not
deny, but that Judges have authority to determine criminal and civil
Controversies; and yet I hope you will not say, that they are absolutely
infallible in their determinations. Infallible, while they proceed according to
law if they do so; but not infallibly that they shall ever do so. Thus you. Now
let the Reader be Judge whether it be not a thing in you both ridiculous and
hateful to be still vanting of the subtilty of your wit, and reproaching want
thereof to your Adversary, whereas your subtilties be gross contradictions of
your self, that I am even amazed how any man could be so forgetful and void
of consideration. You say, there is a wide difference between authority to
decide matters of Religion, and Infallibility in doing it; which you prove,
because Judges have authority to determine criminal and civil Controversies,
and yet are not absolutely infallible, but infallible only conditionally if
they proceed according to law. Now this your subtility your self condemns for
ignorant folly, as not considering the wide difference betwixt Judges in civil
Controversies, and Judges with authority to determine matters of faith: that
the former may be fallible, but not the later. Be not these your very words
page 59. lin. vlt. and page 60. lin. 1. In civil Controversies every honest
understanding man is fit to be a Judge, but in Religion none but he that is
infallible. How then do you now distinguish betwixt a Judge, and an infallible
Judge in matters of Religion?

11. Your other distinction also of Infallibility absolute and conditional, is
a mere fopperie as you declare it: and by attributing only conditional
infallibility to the Church, you contradict your self. For you say, in civil
Contronersies every honest understanding man is fit to be judge, but in
Religion none but he that is infallible: here you attribute greater
infallibility to the Church or Ecclesiastical Judge, then to a Judge in civil
causes; But you say, a Judge in civil affairs is infallible conditionally if
he proceed according to law. Ergo, the Church is infallible absolutely, so that
she cannot err in her definitions and sentences, but still proceed according
to the divine law, or sacred Scripture. Besides the Church is infallible in a
higher and absoluter manner then every private Christian: But every private
Christian is infallible conditionally, to wit, while, he proceeds according to
the true and undoubted sense of Scripture: Ergo the Conclusion of Oxford, The
Church has authority to determine Controversies of faith, was by the defendant
Doctor understood of infallible authority, or else it was a mere mockery.
Moreover authority to determine Controversies of faith, must be sufficient to
make the determination to be an assured stay whereon Christian faith may
securely rely, which before was not known to be such; otherwise there is no
determination of faith, but faith about that point remaynes as uncertain and
vnderermined as it was before. But a Judge absolutely fallible, and only
conditionally infallible, cannot determine any controversy infallibly, that
Faith may determine to believe it without danger of being deceived. Again, you
say page 337. n. 20. A questionable guide for men's direction is as good as none
at all: But the Church infallible only conditionally, that is, if perchance she
hit upon the true sense of Scripture, is a guide or determiner of Controversies
questionable, because after such a determination, the question still remaynes
undecided, whether that be the true sense of Scripture. Add heereunto that
Protestants do not attribute so much as this conditional infallibility to the
Church, that her determinations are infallible when they are according to
plain and evident Scripture. For they will not believe Transubstantiation,
though they grant, that the Lateran Council defining it, proceeded according
to the plain and evident sense of Scripture. Morton of the Sacrament. lib. 2.
initio.
If, says D. Morton the words of Christ, This is my Body, be certainly true in
the proper and literal sense, we must yield to Papists the whole cause,
Transubstantiation, corporal, and material Presence etc So that the Church is
not infallible with Protestants, if she proceed according to the plain,
proper, and litterall sense of Scripture, but only when she hits on those
figurative, tropicall, improper senses they fancy to themselves. And I pray
you, give me a reason, why the Catholic Church may not condemn you, for
expounding figuratively, symbolically, tropically the text of Scripture
delivering Transubstantiation, according to the plain proper and literal
sense; as well as she may condemn any Heretic, that should expound the place
of Scripture about our Lords Passion, and Resurrection figuratively against the
plain, proper, and litteral sense? Finally, whereas you say the Church is to
determine Controversies, not only by the rule of plain Scripture, but also of
universal Tradition, you say a truth against the whole drift of your book,
that the Bible is the only rule; and against what you write Cap. 2. n. 155.
nothing but Scripture comes to us with a full stream of Tradition, and so
besides Scripture there is no unwritten doctrine.

12. A third place yet more clear for the Churches total infallibility you
have cap. 2. n. 77. where you grant the Church to be the pillar and ground of
truth by office. Our Savior said to his disciples, ye are the salt of the
earth, not that this quality was inseparable from their persons, but because it
was their office to be so. For if they must have been so of necessity, in vain
had he put them in fear of that which follows, If the salt have lost his
savor, wherewith shall it be salted? So the Church may be by duty the pillar
and ground of Truth, of all truth not only necessary, but also profitable to
Salvation; and yet she may neglect and violate this duty, and be in fact the
teacher of some error? Thus you give us every where sal infatuatum, infatuated
salt, salt unsavory. You often set good salt on the table, but insta^tly you
corrupt it, and the good season and reason thereof, by senseless
contradictions, That the Church is by office the rock and pillar of all truth
in matter of faith, is good salt, has the favor and sense of divine
infallible truth; but that which follows, that she may fail in this office,
violate this duty, is senseless, and spoken without any salt. Do not you say,
that in Religion none is fit to be Judge, that is fit for the office of judge,
but he that is infallible? How then can the Judge in matters of Religion,
endued with power to determine Controversies of faith, violate his duty,
except you can conceive that he that is infallible may fail? In like manner
that the Church is by office, by duty, appointed of God to be the pillar and
rock of all truth both necessary and profitable to salvation, is salt,
doctrine of heavenly favor, and wisdom worthy of God: But what you presently
add, that in fact she may be the teacher of error, is extremely sottish. For
if the Church be a sure and firm foundation of Faith, how can she be fallible
and subject to error? Do not you say page 148. n. 36. lin. 11. An authority
subject to error can be not firm or stable foundation of my beli^fe in any
thing? What is this, but that a fallible Church in something, and which de
facto teaches errors, cannot have the office of pillar and ground of any
truth, much less of all truth? How often do you teach that God cannot command
us to do things impossible, or command us to be, what is not in our power to
be? Should God command you to be immortal, were not that command unjust? For
you being by nature mortal according to the body, and not able to shake that
corruption of; how can you be immortal except God take away mortality, and
bestow the gift of immortality on you? Can God appoint, that glass be in
office as strong and hard as marble, or that sand be as firm and stable as a
rock without taking brittlenes from the one and unsteadfastness from the other?
I conclude with this syllogism wherein both Propositions being your own, you
cannot deny the Conclusion. God has appointed the Church to be by office the
pillar and ground of all Christian truth, a firm and stable Foundation of
faith in all matters of salvation: But a Church subject to error cannot be a
pillar, ground, or foundation of Christian belief in any thing: Ergo, the
Church is an infallible teacher of all truth, an infallible guide in
fundamentals, and consequently in all her proposals.

That Protesters against the Church of Rome, be Schismatiques and Heretics,
and cannot be saved without actual dereliction of their errors. CHAP. VI.
I SAID in the title Protesters, not Protestants: for though with you,
Protestants and Protesters be the same, yet it is not so according to the
acception of the word Protestant commonly received in England. You define
Protestants to be such as Protest against the corruptions and abuses of the
Church of Rome, Cap. 2. n. 2. Cap. 6. n. 56.
all of them agreeing in this principle, that the Bible, the Bible, and only
the Bible is a perfect rule of faith and action. So that all pretended
Gospellers and reformed Churches, all that infinite diversity of sects, which
agree amongst themselves as King James says, in nothing but in union against
the Pope; Caluinists, Lutherans, Brownists Anabaptists, Against Vorstins page
65.
refermed Eutychia^s, Arians, Sabellians, Samostatenians or Socinians
Tritheists, and others innumerable are by you comprehended under the name of
Protestants, whom you maintain to be free from damnable error, Preface n. 39.
and in a safe way to Saluatson.

2. But in England (as all men know) by the name of Protestants we properly
understand, that part of the pretended English Reformation, which is
condistinct from Puritans, and opposite against them. Hence Protestants with us
be not the whole multitude of Protesting Biblists, or of the pretended reformed
Churches, but, only one branch of them, the most moderate of all, and that
which does least exorbitate from the Doctrine and Discipline of the Roman
Church. Wherefore by Protesters in this discourse, we shall always understand
them, and every one of them, that oppose and Protest against any doctrine
proposed as matter of faith by the Catholic Roman Church, of what Sect or
Religion soever they be; and that these cannot be saved by ignorance, or by
repentance, without actual detestation and abandoning of their errors in
particular.

3. For though they ignorantly judge, that they have the truth on their side,
yet this ignorance does not excuse their erring, because it is not simple
ignorance, but such ignorance as is ever essentially inuolued and contained in
the crime of Heresy, to wit, the ignorance of Pride and Presumption; ignorance
whereby they prefer the seeming of their fancy or judgment before Traditions,
Counsels consent of Fathers, miracles, the plain proper and literal sense of
Scripture which stand for the Roman Church and Religion; These I say, cannot be
saved in their errors, but are Schismatiques and Heretics, as I shall
clearly demonstrate in this Chapter, even by your own sayings and Principles,
and first,

That they are Schismatiques.

4. To prove this we must briefly declare what Schism is. The word Schism
comes originally from (...), which signifies any division, cutting, breaking,
renting away of any part from an entire and whole thing, as a bough from a
tree, a stone from a building, any member from man's body. By Metaphor the word
is applied to signify breaches and divisions in any moral Body, which is of
two kinds, Political and Mystical. In Political Bodies, or Temporal
States, Schism happens when any part of the States departs from the
Communion and fellowship of others in being subject to the supreme authority
which rules, governs, knitteth and keeps the whole together, whether this
authority be Monarchical, Aristocraticall, or D^mocraticall. Mystical whole
Bodies be only one, the holy Catholic Church, the Body of Christ, of which to
be a member, as it is the sole and only state of Salvation, so to be divided
from it is sinful and damnable. Schism then in this sense may be defined. A
voluatary choice whereby a Christian does divide, and cut away himself from
the Communion and fellowship of other Christians, in the common knot of
subjection and subordination unto the supreme Head and Authority of this Body:
I say voluntary choice, for no man can be made a Schismatique against his will,
Schism being a sin and a most grievous sin. Every Schismatique then
deuideth himself from the Church by his voluntary choice; either direct, as
when one does in plain terms refuse, and detest subjection to the common Head
and Pastor of the Church; or indirect when he stands peremptory against the
Church, either obstinately against her Doctrines, or contumaciously against her
Commandes. For such an one is hocipso cut of, and cast away out of the Church
in the sight of God, and the sentence of the Church does declare him to be such
an one, and makes him known for such an one, to them of the Church. This
supposed I come to prove, that they who separate or oppose against the Church
of Rome are Schismatiques.

The first Conviction.
5. YOu say Cap. 5. n. 36. initio. For men to forsake the external Communion of
them with whom they agree in faith, is the most formal and proper crime of
schism: very true. Thus you. But Protestants agree with the visible universal
Church in all fundamental points of faith (as you pretend) and yet they have
forsaken her external Communion. For cap. 5. n. 52. initio. you speak thus to
your adversary: Whereas you say, that Protestants divided themselves from the
external Communion of the visible Church; add, which external communion was
corrupted, and we shall confess the accusation, and glory in it. And cap. 5.
n. 55. As for the external Communion of the visible Church, we have without
scruple formerly granted, that Protestants did forsake it. Ergo, it is very
true, that Protestants in separating from the Church of Rome did commit the
proper and for mall crime of Schism.

6. This Syllogism does consist of propositions which are formally and
verbally yours, yet because you falter and halt in the assertion of them
contradicting your self, to make this demonstration conuincing, I will prove
both the Premises clearly by such truths as you are forced to acknowledge. The
mayor Proposition, that it is formal Schism to forsake the visible Church, or
her external Communion, which you grant in the words I cired, you deny cap. 5.
n. 25. lin. 3. in these words to your adversary: Whereas you take for granted
as an vndoubied truth, that whosoever leave the external Communion of the
visible Church, are Schismatic, I tell you, Sir, you presume to much upon
us, and would have us grant, that which is the maine point in question. Behold
now that is false, which before you said was very true; Which also to be
absolutely true, I prove by what you write cap. 5. n. 45 lin. 16. A man may
possibly leave some opinion or practice of a Church formerly common to
himself, and others, and continue still a member of that Church: Provided,
that what he forsakes be not one of those things wherein the essence of the
Church does consist. And c. 3. n. 66. lin. 9. You may not cease to be of the
Church, nor depart from those things which make it so to be. This you. Now I
subsume: but external Communion, that is, external Society, fellowship, and
unity of the members of the Church, in their subordination to the common Head,
and supreme external Authority thereof, is one of the things wherein the
essence of the Church does consist, one of the things which make it to be a
Church. This is clear, because as it is of the essence of an human organicall
Body, not only to have a multitude of members locally laid together in one
heap; but also that they be knit and compacted together in the unity of one
Body by joint subordination to the head: so it is of the essence of every
moral or mystical body, not only to have a multitude of members or persons,
but also that the persons, members and subjects be knit together, and united in
the Society of one Communion, that is, of one common union of subordination to
the Head.

7. And this Communion or common subjection must in the members of the Church
be external and visible: because it is of the essence of the Church to be an
external and visible Society or Body; which is proved, because you say Cap. 3.
n. 78. That it is of the essence of the Church to be the rock and pillar, that
is, still in fact a proposer, mantayner, and teacher of all necessary truth.
But it is of the essential necessity of a teaching Church, to be visible and
external, as you suppose Cap. 3. n. 39. lin. 23. A Church that were invisible,
so that none could repair to it for direction, could not be an infallible
guide, that is a teacher of truth, yet it might be in it self infallible.
Wherefore external Communion, or common Union of the members of the Church in
their subjection to one common Head, or visible supreme governing Authority, is
of the essence of the Church; it is one of the things which make the Church a
Church. But Protesters forsook the external Communion, the common Union and
knot with their fellow members in the unity of subjection to one visible
governing Church Authority, and made to themselves new Conuenticles, and
Churches under new Governors, and forms of government, as is notorious. It is
therefore manifest, that they forsaking the external Communion of the visible
Church (because in their judgment corrupted) forsook the Church of God in one
of the things wherein the essence of the Church does consist; in one of the
things which make the Church a Church; and consequently are Schismatiques.

The second Conviction.
8. IT is, you say, of the essence of the Church of Christ to be by office the
pillar and ground, that is, the teacher of truth, and of all truth, and always
in fact the teacher and guide of men in all truth necessary to Salvation.
Consequently it is of the essence of the Church to be able to perform this
office, Cap. 3. n. 7^.
and to be still in act a Direstour of men to heaven But you say Page 163. lin.
6. That Church alone can perform the office of Guide or Directour, which is of
one denomination, that is, a settled certain Society of Christians,
distinguishable from all others by adhering to such a Bishop for their guide in
Fundamentalls. Ergo, it is of the essence of the visible Catholic Church of
Christ to be of one denomination, adhering to one common Bishop, as to their
guide in Fundamentalls. This supposed: that Protestants be severed from the way
of Salvation, Schismatiques and aliens from the only Church that can be the
guide to heaven, I shall not need to prove; you grant it Cap. 5. n. 27. versus
finem.
Page 264. lin. 4. Put case I should grant of mere favor, that there must be
always some Church of one denomination, free from all errors in Doctrine, and
that Protestants had not always such a Church; it would indeed follow, that I
must not be a Protestant; but that I must be a Papist, certainly it would
follow by no better consequence then this: If you will leave England, your must
of necessity go to Rome. Thus you. From which saying I argue. If there must be
always some Church of one denomination, free from all errors in doctrine,
subject to one visible head and guide: then you must not be a Protestant if you
will be saved, that is, then Protestants be not a true Church, but a Company
that has forsaken the true Church, and cannot be saved if they continue where
they are. But that there always was, and always must be such a Church of
Christ, such a Society of Christians, which is the ground and rock of all
truth, settled and certain, and of one denomination, was in the precedent
Chapter not by you granted of mere favor, but extorted from you by the
evidence of truth, and undeniable texts of Scripture. Ergo, Protestants are
Schismatiques, and separated from the Church, the rock and ground of faith;
and cannot be saved except they remove to the one Church and be built thereupon
by dependence on the Rock, by subordination to the Head thereof. Now, if there
must be such a Catholic Church of one denomination, whether the Roman be that
Church, and not rather the Grecian or Abissine, is in the judgment even of
Protestants I dare say, a ridiculous doubt and a fond fancy: but more hereof in
the next Chapter.

The third Conviction.
9. YOu are convinced of proper and formal Schism, by the Confutation of your
excuses, whereby you would clear your revolt from so heinous a crime, which
you set down Cap. 5. nu. 36. I would feign know wherein, I may not without
Schism, forsake the external Communion of them, with whom I agree in faith:
whether I be bound, for fear of Schism, to communicate with those that
believe as I do, only in lawful things, or absolutely in every thing, whether
I am to join with them in superstition, and Idolatry, and not only in a common
confession of faith, wherein we agree, but in a common dissimulation or
abiuration of it? These your questions or excuses be frivolous and idle for
many reasons. First, because you suppose without proof, that the universal
visible Church may be stained with superstition and Idolatry, which is the
main point in question. And your supposition to be false we prove even by
this argument: That Church cannot be stained with superstition and Idolatry,
whose external Communion or union of the members thereof under one head, cannot
be forsaken without the most proper and formal crime of Schism. But to
forsake the external Communion of the visible Church, you confess to be the
most formal crime of Schism. Ergo, the external Communion of the visible
Church cannot be stained universally with superstition and Idolatry.

10. Secondly, your questions are vain, because they imply contradiction and
destroy each other. For how can it consist together, that you do agree in faith
with the Church in fundamentals, and that yet she teach Idolatry, and urge you
to abjure with her the faith wherein you, and she both agree? Thirdly, if the
Church be supposed to be stained with universal error and Idolatry, it does
indeed follow, that you must not communicate with her in Idolatry, but not that
you may forsake the external common Union of all the members thereof to the
Head and universal Authority, which joins them together in one Society of a
Christian Church: But Protestants forsook the unity of their follow-members,
refusing to communicate with them, not only in superstition, but also in the
unity of subjection to the Head-authority of the whole body. They did divide
themselves from that Body, erecting to themselves new Conuenticlss, new
Churches, under new chosen heads, guides, and pastors. Ergo, they cannot be
excused from the formal and proper crime of Schism and Rebellion against the
Church.

11. You will say: had they not forsaken that unity of subjection to the common
head, they must have professed Idolatry, or else have been burnt: I answer if
the supposition be true of Idolatry in the Church, they had been blessed Martyrs
in choosing rather to dye, then either to commit Idolatry, or divide the
Church: But because they did not so, but sought to divide the Church, to save
their lives, they be now damned Schismatiques. For will you dare to say, that
men may commit the most formal crime of Schism and rebellion against the
Church,, rather then be put to death? Then if a Prince perfecute men for
Religion, they may rebel and divide his Kingdom if they be able, rather then
dye for their Religion.

12. You say Cap. 5. n. 55. in fine. No man can have cause to be a Schismaque.
I assume, But to forsake the external unity of Gods Church, or the fellowship
of subordination to the head-authority of the whole Body is to be a most
formal and proper Schismatique. Ergo, No fear of being either stained with
superstition or put to death could justify your relinquishing the external
Communion, or union with Gods Church, nor your erecting of new Conuenticles
under new Superiors from being formal and proper Schism.

13. Moreover you say, that in the days of S. Austine there Page 156. lin. 50.
was universal superstition in the Church; that page 155. lin. 21. Second Edit
c. 3. n. 47. page 149. 150.
all places were full of superstitions, humane presumptions, vain worships,
which were Page 156. lin. 36.
urged upon others with great violence, and the stream of them was grown Page
156. lin. 24.
so strong that S. Austin durst not oppose it. And yet S. Austin did not
therefore forsake the Church, and his subordination to the Pastors thereof:
nay he does every where most earnestly and severely, and (as you confess)
justly rebuke, and convince the Donatists of damnable sin for dividing the
Church, and erecting new Conuenticles, Altars, Churches under new Pastors. It
is manifest therefore even by your own Principles and Professions, that
Protesters cannot be excused from damnable Schism, though the visible Church
had been (as in S. Austins time you make it) so, when Luther revolted, full of
superstitions, human presumptions, and vain worships: which yet to have been,
or to be in the church, you neither do, nor can prove, otherwise then by your
bare word, which I hope is no rule of Faith, more then S. Cyprians, which being
objected to you, you reject Cap. ^.43.4^.
saying angerly to your Adversary: Why in a contronersy of faith do you cite
any thing which is confessed on all bands, not to be a rule of faith?

The fourth Conviction.
14. WE proceed to convince Protesters of Schism, even though your most false
suppositions were true. Let us suppose inevitable necessity to have been
urgent upon them (as you say it was) either to abandon the unity of
subordination to Gods Church, Cap. 5. n. 72.
or else against their conscience to profess her errors; I say they should in
that case rather have undergone this hypocritical dissimulation, then that
Schismatic separation. This I prove, because though that be true, which S.
Paul teaches, That evil is not to done, that good may follow; yet that is
false which you affirm. page 283. n. 72. We must not do evil to auoydeuil.
This is against the known Principle of reason that of two Evils we are to
choose the less, when we cannot avoid both, because a lesser Evil, considered
as necessary to avoid a greater, is endued with the quality of goodness, and
is not so much evil as good. But to profess against ones conscience an error
small and vnfundamentall Cap. 3 n. 10. What else do we understand by an
vnfundamental error, but such a one with which a man may be saved.
Which does not overthrow Salvation, wherewith one may be saved, is a less
evil then separation from the unity of Gods Church, and from subordination to
the authority there of, for this is most formal and proper Schism. Hence it
is false (what you with D. Potter page 77.
D. Potter so much auerre, and lay as the fundamental stone of your building)
that it is damnable sin to profess any the least venial error against ones
conscience, and that it were better to depart from the Church and erect new
Conuenticles, as Protesters did, then hypocritically to profess, Cap. 5. n.
59. versus finem.
that there be no Antipodes, should the Church enforce you either to profess
there be none, of else forsake her Communion. This is a false and pernicous
principle, and (as I said) against the light of reason and common notion
written in the hearts of all men, that of two Evils we are to choose the less,
if of necessity we must do the one, or the other. The light of the truth seen
of every man was not hidden from you, when you were not blinded with actual
reflection, that by the light thereof your separation from the Church is showed
evidently to be Schismatic. For Cap. 4. n. 18. in fine, you say, I willingly
confess, the judgment of a Council though not infallible, is yet so far
directive and obliging, that without apparent reason to the contrary it may be
sin to reject it, at least not to afford it OVTWARD submission for public
peace sake. Now what is outward submission to definitions which you do not
receive in your heart, but outward Profession to believe what in your
conscience you think to be false? If it be lawful, and men may be bound under
sin, to profess outward submission unto what they judge erroneous, for
public peace-sake, that is, for the avoiding of Schism; who does not see,
that the doctrine whereon the justification of your revolt from the Catholic
Church rests to be false, to wit, that it is always impious and damnable to
profess outward submission to any the least error, which in conscience you
think to be error.

The fifth Conviction.
15. TO forsake the visible Church without any cause, upon a mere fancy, is
damnable sin: This you affirm a thousand times in your fifth Chapter. But
Protestants abandoned the Church of Rome without any just cause: this you allow
and justify seeking to answer the objection, How may a Protestant, who is at
least as fallible as the Church, be sure that the Church erreth, and that he
has hitt on the truth, that he may with a good conscience forsake her
Communion? you say cap. 5. n. 63. in fine. Hemay be sure, because he may see
the doctrine forsaken by him to be repugnant to Scripture, and the doctrine
embraced by him consonant to it; AT LEAST this he may know, that the doctrine
which he has CHOSEN, to him SEEMS TRVE, and the contrary which he has
forsaken SEEMS FALSE. And therefore without REMORSE of Conscience he may
profess that, but this he cannot. O houw true is the Proverb, What abounds
in the heart will out at the mouth, yea out of the quill, which is ruled by an
vnconsidering Writer. You harbor in your heart that Socinian impiety, that men
may be saved in any Religion; but you would feign hide it, and therefore make
great show Page 392. fine 2. Edit. page 373. lin. 26.
to abhor it, as most impious and execrable doctrine by foul calumny imputed
unto you. And yet in this passage you do clearly profess it, and so fully,
that irreligion it self could not do more, saying absolutely without any
limitation: That if a man know, that a doctrine to him seems false, he may
without remorse forsake it and the Church which teaches it, and go to another
Society which teaches the contrary: so that if a man know, that to him
Christianity seems false, and Iudaisme or Turcisme true, though he have no
certain ground so to think, he may without scruple, without remorse of
conscience, leave Christianity, and become a Jew or Turk. Puritans, Brownists,
Anabaptists Arians, Socinians, Tritheists know, that to them the Religion of
the Church of England seems false, and the contrary which destroys
Christianity true; may they with a good conscience without scruple or remorse
leave the Church of England, and join themselves to their most impure Familian
Co^uenticles and Churches?

16. When the Maintayner of Charity lays some testimonies of Fathers in your
way, you fall a singing, In nonafert animus -- Cap. 5. n. 43.
telling him, that the Fathers be not the rule of your Faith, and that their
testimonies be no more pertine^t the^ that semi-verse. Verily you could not
have found a ditty more proper and fitting the tune of your soul so fertile
and full of novelties. Nor is there any man living I know, that can better then
your self out of his own experience -- mutatas dicere formas. What you have
done your self you allow unto others, that by your principles they may change
Religions as they do their linen, and forge new forms of faith as often as
they make new suites of apparel. Being questioned about the ground of their
change, they may answer In noua fert animus -- I know that this nouel choice to
me seems good, and that the doctrine of the Church of England to me seems
false, and M. Chillingworths book, which goes for current in England, assures
me, that this alone without further assurance suffices, that without remorse
of conscience I may forsake her, and go to some other Congregation in the
world which pleases me better, and whose Religion I know to me seems true.

The sixth Conviction.
17. COntradicting the leuity of your former assertion, that a man though he do
not evidently know his cause to be just may forsake the Church; if at least he
know that her doctrine to him seems false, you write very gravely and soberly
to the contrary, saying Cap. 5. n. 53. initto. It concerns EVERY MAN who
separates from any Churches communion, even as much as his salvation is worth,
to look most carefully to it, that the cause of his separation be just and
necessary: for unless it be necessary it can hardly be sufficient. Under the
wings of this most true proposition I shroud this assumptio^ to be made good by
your principles. But Protesters had no just or sufficicient cause to rent
themselves from the Roman and visible Catholic Church. This I prove for their
pretense is, Cap. 5. n. 107. lin 3.
they were forced and necessitated to do so by the evidence of Scripture, which
in formal and express terms contaynes many of their opinions, and is
against the Roman Catholic Religion as clear as the light at noone. Cap. 3.
n: 86.
But this to be false, and that you and they herein speak against your
consciences may be made as clear as the Sun even by your own principles.

18. For page 156. n. 9. you say, In all controversies where there is is a
seeming conflict of Scripture with Scripture, Reason with Reason, Authority
with Authority; how this can consist with the manifest revealing of the truth
of either side I cannot well understand. Now it is as manifest as the Sun,
that in all controversies betwixt Protesters and the Church of Rome, there is a
seeming conflict of Scripture with Scripture, of Reason with Reason, of
Authority with Authority: yea in many controversies the Scripture is clear on
our side taken according to the plain and evident sense of the text; that
Protesters are forced like Proteus to turn themselves into all manner of
figures, and hide themselves with a figurative sense, that they be not taken in
manifest and confessed unbelief of Gods word.

19. This may be confirmed by the examples you bring in this your book, to
show that in some points the Scripture is clear against the Church of Rome, to
wit against the worship of Angels, Communion in one kind, Latin service, an
infallible Judge; for in this maine decretory battle for the whole, it may be
well supposed you would produce your best soldiers, and use your strongest
weapons: yea to take away all doubt of the matter, you profess, that they are
the cleerest you have, nay that there cannot possibly be any plainer. These
instances by you often repeated, which are the substance and pith of your
Book, I will prove to be weak, vain, improbable, incredible, even by your
own principles.

20. First then, Preface n. 11. lin. 18. How (say you) is it possible any thing
should be playner forbidden then the worship of Angels in the Epistle to the
Colossians? Thus you, without proof. Against whom I reply, that the place is
dark, obscure, doubtful, ambiguous, as none can possibly be more; which I
prove. First it is ambiguous and questionable in respect of the translation,
or rather without question it is falsified by you Cap. 2. nu. 1. versus finem.
Page 52. lin. 26. where speaking to us you say: Do not impose upon men that
humility of worshipping Angels which S. Paul condemns. The true text is: Nemo
vos seducat volens in humilitate and religione Angelorum: let no man beguile
you of your reward in voluntary humility and religion of Angels. Hence
appears, that your cha^ging, corrupting, perverting of holy Scripture in this
place is as great as any could possibly be used upon a text of so few words.
You turn the particle and, into of, (...) which signifies Religion or divine
and Religious worship due to God only, not so much the act as the form, you
translate simply worshipping. Angelorum being the Genitive case, of the Angels,
you make it the Accusative, the humility of worshipping Angels, as if the Latin
text had been in humilitate colendi Angelos. And this alone were sufficient to
prove the place impertinent, because the Apostle does not reprove any kind of
worship of Angels but only (...), Thre^kia a Tracibus est religio^e sacrificijs
and orgijs colere. Gregor. Nazian.
the worshipping them Religiously as Gods, offering sacrifice to them.

21. Secondly the text lies open unto ambiguity of senses in regard of the
particle of, which may refer Religious worship to Angels as to the objects
thereof, the Religion of Angels, that is, the Religion wherewith Angels are
worshipped; or else, to Angels, as the Authors thereof, the Religion of Angels,
that is, the Religion which was delivered unto men and revealed by Angels.
Hereupon arises a question indecidable, in which sense S. Paul intended to
speak. Many, as even Calvin Calvin Comment in hunc locum.
grants, understand not Religious worship offered unto Angels, sed cultum ab
Angelis traditum, the form of divine worship delivered by the Angels: such was
the Religion of the Jews by Angels Alij Religionem Angelorum intelligunt
Religionem Iuda^cam, quae data est Moysi per Angelos. Cornel.
delivered unto Moses, which exposition Calvin does not dislike.

22. Thirdly the word Angels is much more ambiguous, there being two kinds of
Angels some good some bad, and in each kind there is a great variety of offices
and degrees, and consequently great diversity of opinions amongst Fathers and
Expositours, which kind of Angels are meant, as you may see in Iustinianus and
Cornelius. Amongst the which opinions the most probable is, that by Religion of
Angels in this place, the Magical Ad magicam illam superstitionem a Simone.
institutam, Paulum respexisse haud ambiga^. Iustinianus.
adoration of devils, or bad Angels is understood, taught by Simon Magus. Now
this being proved we will entreat you to call to mind what you write Cap. 2.
n. 104. lin. 8. When a place by reason of ambiguous terms lies indifferent
between diverse senses, whereof the one is true and the other false, to say,
that God under pain of damnation obliges men not to mistake, is to make God a
Tyrant. Now where is your text as clear as the sun? Is it not now as dark
as night, to show the worship of Angels used by the Catholic Church unlawful?
May not I with good reason give you warning in the words of our Lord, Si lumen
quod in te est tenebrae sunt, tenebrae tuae quantae erunt? If your text, then
which none can possibly be cleerer, is so dark; how dark are your other
texts, which even in your own sight seem not so clear?

23. On the other side, the text wherein the Saints of God Genesis 18 by Abraham.
Genesis 19. by Lot. Number. 22. by Baala^ Ios. 5. by Iosue.
adored holy Angels prostrate on the ground, yea inuocated Angels, as Genesis
48.16. Angelus qui eruit me.
Jacob, The Angel that delivered me from all evil bless these two children.
These texts I say are clear as none can be cleerer: And Protestants not to be
scorched with the heavenly heat of reverend and fervent Devotion toward the
blessed Angels, which might be kindled in their hearts by the lightsome
influence of Gods word, pretend over the litterall evidence a mystical or
rather misty veyle or cloth of their textobscuring interpretations, painted
with unseemly figures of improper sense. Cap. 3. n. 71.


24. Now for Communion in both kinds, Who (say you) can deny, but they are
taught it by our Savior Joan. 6. in these words according to most of their
own expositions. Unless you eat the flesh of the son of man, and drink his
blood you have not life in you. Thus you, in which speech your words
interfere, gall each others ankles, destroy themselves: for to say, Who can deny
according to the exposition of most Catholics, that this text is understood
of Sacramental eating and drinking, does imply that many Catholics, and with
them most of Protestants deny it. And consequently, Who can deny it according
to most, is as wise a speech, as if you should say, It is a most undeniable, by
many justly denied, truth. For do not you write, Preface n. 30. in fine. There
is no more certain sign, that a Point is not evident, then that honest, and
understanding, and in different men, and such as give themselves liberty of
Judgment after a mature deliberation, differ about it?

25. Thirdly you urge Scripture as plain against Latin service saying Cap. 3.
n. 21. and n. 71. It is a plain revelation of God, that the public Prayers
and Hymns of the Church should be in such a language as is most for
edification: yet these reuelatio^s the Church of Rome not seeing etc. I omit
that you corrupt the Scripture, by adding to the text the word most. And page
173. lin. 3. you cite these as the very words of S. Paul, to use a language
which the Assista^ts generally understand not is not for edificatio^, which is
Scripture verbatim coined and forged in your own head. I pretermit also so
many clear and fully satisfying answers given by Catholics which you do not
mention much less confute: I will show that you behead this your Argument with
your own sword. Do not you say Cap. 3. n. 32. that the Apostles in their
writings deliver some things as the dictates of human reason and prudence, and
not as divine revelations, and that you see no reason why we should take them
to be divine revelations? This supposed, I assume: But S. Paul delivers this
order, that an unknown tongue is not best for edification and decency, as a
dictate of humane reason and prudence, as is manifest by the whole tenor of
his discourse: Ergo, there is no reason why we should take it as a divine
revelation upon your word? We believe it indeed as the word of God, that the
Apostle did judge that observance most for edification and decency in those
times, when Latin and Greek were vulgar languages almost every where commonly
known of all. Since his time the Latin being not known and vulgar in every
Country of the Latin Church as it was before, whether in this respect the Latin
ought to cease, to be the Universal language for the Liturgy of the Latin
Church, is a question not decided by divine revelation, but to be decided by
human reason and prudence; for it is different in state and quality from that
decided by the Apostle: such kind of dictats of human reason being variable
according to the diversity of times, places, persons, customs. Add that Latin
which most men of better education and quality understand, and all Churchmen
understand, cannot be termed a language unknown in the Church, yea rather
vulgar tongues are unknown and barbarous in the Christian Church.

26. Fourthly against infallible Judges Cap: 4. nu. 16. lin. 23. Ca. 4 n. 53
Cap. 6. n. 61. and in many other places.
in the Church since the A postles, you come forth every foot with this
Scripture, Be not called Masters upon earth, for one is your Maistere Christ.
The vanity of which objection I demonstrate by this Syllogis me wherein both
propositions be your own, and most infallible truths: The Apostles Cap. 2. n.
155.
were the infallible Judges of Controversies about faith so long as they lived,
the Masters, Doctors, Guides of the Church. But the A postles heerin did not
transgress the command given them by our Lord, be not called Masters on
earth. Ergo, to be, and to be called Judges, and Masters of the Church in the
place of Christ, and subordinate unto him, is not against that precept of our
Lord.

27. I conclude this Argument, requesting you in the sight of the Inspectour of
hearts (as you believe there is any such) to ruminate and ponder your own
saying: It imports every man who separates from any Churches Communion, even as
much as his Salvation is worth, to look most carefully that the case of his
separation be just and necessary. The cause pretended of your separation from
the Communion of the whole Catholic Church, is the evidence of Scripture
against her custom. The strongest testimonies you do, or can pretend are these
by me now answered, then which, you say, there cannot possibly be any playner.
Now can you think in conscience, that the former testimonies are clear,
evident, necessary, such as necessitate, convince, and compel the
understanding to assent? Can you presume you shall be so eloquent at the day of
Judgment, as to make our Lord believe you were so simple and of so little
Judgment, as you did really, and in conscience undoubtedly believe, that these
texts were evident, necessary, formal, express, as clear as the Sun?
Think of it I pray you, for by your own confession, it co^cernes you and
every Protestant, as much as his eternal salvation is worth.

The seventh Conviction.
27. YOu forsake the Roman and the Catholic external Communion, not only
without just cause, but without as much as a seeming cause, even against your
conscience out of hatred of known truth: What is damnable Schism if this be
not? that you go against your conscience and impugn known truth, though you
be very loath this mystery of your heart should be disclosed, yet such is your
inconsideration as you profess it openly enough in words, but practice the
same much more openly in deeds. cap. 2. n. 47 in fine. The rest of this
Paragraph I am as willing it should be true, as you are to have it, and so let
it pass as a discourse, wherein we are wholly vnconcerned. You might have met
with an Adversary, that would not have suffered you to have said so much truth
together, but to me it is sufficient, that it is nothing to the purpose. These
be your words; in which you lay the inside of your heart outward, and plainly
discover your wifull auersion from known truth. You suffered Charily
mainteyned to speak so much truth together: Why did you so? Not because it
was truth, but because it was not to the purpose, that is, it made not against
you, and so you were willing it should be true. And does not this imply that
had that part of the Paragraph made against you, had you been unwilling it
should have been true, you would not have endured it, you would have impugned
it with all might and main, though it had been truth never so much? Had you
said, You might have met with an Adversary that would not have suffered you to
have said so much untruth together, but to me it is sufficient that it is
nothing to the purpose; this had been some courtesy of forbeara^ce: but to say,
that you would not suffer so much truth to be said together, but that it made
not against you, this is Charity with all my heart. You will suffer us to
speak truth if you are willing it should be truth; a great favor. But if you
hate that truth we speak, because it presses your pride, which will not let
you stoop to submit your wit to the word of God proposed by his Church: you
will rage and storm against it, deny it, impugn it, seek to darken the light
thereof, to make the same hatcfull by uttering any untruth against it.

28. For example, you are not willing the Roman Church should be the true
Church; therefore to hide the light of this truth you heap lies together, and
fill whole pages and leaves with rage and fury, without any the least lucidum
interuallum. To give the reader a little taste of your bitterness, and one
draught of your salt sea; you, page 90. thus declaime against us. See. edit.
cap. 2. n. 101. page: 26. lin. 26.
You who have wronged so exceedingly Christ his miracles, and his doctrine, by
forging so evidently so many false miracles for the confirmation of your new
doctrine; who with forging so many false Stories, and false Authors have taken
a fair way to make the faith of all Stories questionable; who have brought in
doctrines plainly and directly contrary to that which you confess to be the
word of Christ, which for the most part make for the honor and proffit of the
teachers of them; who make profession of corrupting al sorts of Authors, whose
questioned doctrines none of them came from the fountain of Apostolic
tradition, but have insinuated themselves into the streams by little and
little, some in one age, some in another etc. and men are told they were as
good believe nothing at all, as not to believe these things to have come from
the Apostles, which they know to have been brought in but yesterday; whether
this be not a ready way, and likely way to make men to conclude with
themselves, I will believe nothing at all; and whether this conclusion be not
to often made in Italy, and Spaiue, and France, and England too, I leave it to
the Judgment of those who have wisdom and experience. Thus you. And is not
this a good proof of your profession, that you will suffer no truth, if you be
unwilling it should be truth, but will load it with all manner of unproven and
improbable falsehood?

29. As for the last point of your inuectiue, whether there be not too many in
Italy, Spain, France, and England, who because they are urged to believe more
then they list, thereupon conclude to believe just nothing, at all, with firm
Christian faith; you leave it to be determined by men of wisdom and
experience: I think every man may resolve it by the experience which you will
not let them want, to wit, that in England certainly there is one such, and
that is too many by one; for you hate and abhor to believe the revealed Page
330 lin. 24.
manner of Christian mysteries, which is incomprehensible to your human and
carnal reason; and in this respect also hate and abhor the Church of Rome,
which will not allow Salvation without belief thereof unto any Christian, to
whom it is proposed by her preaching. Yea you do both by word and deed further
profess, that you will not suffer any truth which crosses this your impious
fancy; though it be truth never so much, you will deny it, impugn it, disgrace
it by all kind of fictions and lies. And whereas you say, that some other
answerer of your Crew would not have been so good to the Mainteyner of Charity:
for they would not (you say) have suffered him to have said so much truth
together; whereas to you it is sufficient that the truth makes not to the
purpose: Pardon me, Sir. I tell you plainly, I do not believe you. For why
should they deny known truth and rage against it, if they be willing it should
be truth, as not being against them? It may well be, that they may hate some
known truth which you do not hate; and again, you may hate some truth (as the
mystery of the B. Trinity) which they do not hate; but for malignity and
wilful opposition against known truth, for not enduring it, for being rebels
against the light, for being in the number of them in whom S. Paul's Prophecy
is verified, That, in the later days there should arise many, who would not
SVFFER or enaure wholesome doctrine, but turn away their hearing from truth,
to the believing and venting of fables, tales, lies, villainous slanders: In
this respect (Isay) they cannot be worse then you are, as appears by your
profession and practice set down in this argument; from which we will pass to
the next, wherein you assure Protesters of their Salvation, notwithstanding
their living and dying in these kind of direful passions and preiudices,
instilled by education against the truth.

The eight Conviction.
30. THey who against the salvation of that Church from which they separate,
protest through extreme want of charity, partiality, and manifest imustice,
through hatred of that Church, not out of Judgment, are damnable Schismatiques.
That Protestants of your stamp be such is manifest by your words and deeds.
Cap. 3. n. 63. circa finem. We Protest and proclaim the contrary, and that we
have very little hope of their salvation, who either out of negligence in
seeking the truth, or unwillingness to find it, live and dye in the errors
and impieties of that Church. And c. 5. n. 34. in fine, you tell us, That God
is infinitely just, and therefore it is to be feared, will not pardon Roman
Catholics, who might easily have known the tauth, and either through pride,
or obstinacy, or negligence would not. And Cap. 7. n. 6. in fine.
Page 389. lin. 10. To live and dye in the Roman Church, is as dangerous as to
shoot a gulf, which though some good ignorant souls may do and escape, yet
it may be well feared scarce one in a hundred, but miscarries.

31. This you make the case of poor Catholics even of good ignorant souls,
if happily they err, and might have been rid of their errors, by speaking with
so learned and Religious a Teacher as you M. William Chillingworth are. There
is little hope of their salvation, because they were unwilling to confer with
you, as supposing for certain, you could be of no credit to oppose, and accuse
(as you do) the whole Christian Church of all ages as subject to universal
damnable errors. On the other side, if your Protestants err, not through
negligence only, but through Cap. 3. n. 52. lin. 7. Betrayed into and kept in
error by their fault, vice or passion, by pride, obstinacy, (as most men are)
page 21. lin. 40. If any protestant or Papist be betrayed into, or kept in any
error by any sin of his will, as it is to be feared many millions are.
passion, pride, obstinacy, through sin of the will, as millions of them you
fear do, I pray you is there any hope they shall be saved? What hope say you?
Spes est re^ incertae nomen. -- There is no doubt but these Protestants shall
be saved. This you teach: for having page 136. endeauored to excuse their
contentions by laying the fault on Scriptures seeming conflicts with it self,
Cap. 3. n. 9. aliter 19. in fine.
Page 137. lin. 1. you add. Besides though we grant that Scripture, Reason and
Authority were all on one side, and the apparences of the other side all
answerable: yet if we consider the strange power, that education and preiudices
instilled by it, have over even excellent understandings, we may well imagine,
that many truths which in themselves are revealed plainly enough, are yet to
such or such a man prepossest with contrary opinions, not revealed plainly
NEITHER DOVBTI, but God who knows whereof we are made, and what passions we
are subject unto, will compassionate our infirmities, and not enter into
judgment with us for those things, which all things considered were
unavoidable. Thus you. Who are like as like may be to that naughty Servant in
the Gospel, who having obtained of his Lord remission of a debt of ten
thousand talents, presently took his fellow servant by the throat and would
have choked him for a debt of an hundred pence.

32. Let us set before us two men, the one a Protester, who through the
preiudices of pride and presumption on his own wit, through proud contempt of
the whole Catholic Church, of general Councels, of consent of Fathers,
instilled into him by education erreth against plain Scripture: On the other a
Roman Catholic, who through reverence to the authority of the present Church,
to the Church of all ages, to general Councels, to the consent of Fathers,
instilled into him by education, neglects to hear your wisdom, and thereby
is kept in some error against Scripture, which by hearing a man of so great
learning and Religion, he might (as you think) have avoided; let any man of
discretion and conscience be judge, whether the former Errant do not sin ten
hundred thousand times, that is, incomparably, more then the later. And yet you
leave little hope of salvation to the later Catholic ignorant good-soule, who
(if he sin at all in neglecting your wisdom, persuading him to trust his
own wit) sins only out of a too low conceit of himself, and of his own
wit, and through to much respect to general Councels and Christian consent of
holy Fathers: Whereas that other Protesting proud fool, who both obstinately
and erroneously resists all Christian Churches, general Councels, and consent
of Fathers, through confidence on his own wit, through contempt of all others
instilled into him by education shall (you say) without doubt be saved.

33. God (say you) is infinitely just, and therefore there is little hope of
salvation for Papists if they err, though but of only negligence and
unwillingness to seek the truth. But he is infinitely good, and therefore
though we Protesters hold errors against plain Scripture out of passion and
pride (auersions, contempt of the Church, and the Pastors thereof) instilled
by education, there is no danger. God knows that to these passions of pride,
presumption, contempt, we by education are subject, and so without doubt will
compassionate our infirmities, and not enter into Judgment with us for such
things, which all things considered were unavoidable. Poor men blinded with
self conceyt, who think your will and pleasure shall at the last day be the
rule and measure of divine Justice; who vainly flatter your selves, and think
you may deal with God as you do with us. No, no: You will suffer us to speak
much truth together, if it be to no purpose against you, or you be willing it
should be truth. But the truth of Gods most just sentence you shall endure and
suffer, will you, nil you, though it be most hateful to you, and terrible
against you. Then you will find, that as no one sentence was oftener repeated by
the Judge living in this world; so none will be found more true at the last day
then this, He that humbles himself shall be exalted, and he that exalts
himself shall be humbled. It is then manifest that with extreme malice,
partiality, injustice, you separate from hope of Salvation the Catho. lique
Church, from which you are separated, and so are guilty of Schism, and of
most malicious and damnable Schism.

That Protesters are Heretics. CHAP. VII.
THIS was part of the title of the last Chapter; but because the matter is
distinct, to the end that no one Chapter or matter hold us ever long, I have
divided the former into two. To make the Title good, we must declare and
suppose the definition and nature of Heresy. Christian faith stands upon two
grounds or principles, divine Revelation, and the external Proposition thereof;
For we cannot by Christian faith believe any thing which is not revealed of
God, nor what is revealed of God is credible and worthy to be credited and
believed of us, till the same be externally proposed to us by some credible
witness. For as we could not believe the word of God, were not the Author
infinitely credible and worthy of credit; so likewise our persuasion cannot
rest firmly upon the proposition, that God has revealed such things, except
the Proponent be evidently credible of it self. This you affirm Page 62. n.
25. and page 69. lin. 7. Cap 2. n. 25 and n. 45.
That our inquisition of what is revealed of God, never cease till at last we
find a principle to be rested on for it self, which may be a rock and ground
unto our belief. Hence there be two Adversaries of Christian faith,
Ethnicisme, and Heresy: Ethnicisme opposes and denies expressly Christian
doctrine to be divine revelation, and calls in question the authority of God.
Heresy opposes the authority of the Christian Proponent of divine Revelations,
and though he profess to believe Christian doctrines and divine revelations,
yet in the question, which in particular they be, he will be his own chooser,
as the word Heresy does declare, being in english the same as Choice.

2. Whosoever then refuses to believe any doctrine proposed to him by the last
Christian Principle and rule evidently credible of it self, such a man is an
Heretic, and to be accounted as a Heathen and Publican. As whom we cannot
make to see the light of the sun shinning at noone day, we leave him for a
blind man; whom we cannot make to apprehend the prime principles of reason
evident of themselves, we leave him for a sot, and incapable of learning: So
whom we cannot wyn to believe, what is proposed by the last and uttermost
evidence, Christian Proposition can possibly have, we leave him for wilfully
blind, for one void of faith, for a heathen and publican. For what can we do to
him more? If such an one be not an Heretic, that is, under the name of a
Christian, a wilful obstinate opposer of divine Revelations sufficiently
proposed to him, how can any man possibly be an Heretic?

3. Some may say, if he see the doctrine to be contained in Scripture, and yet
disbelieue it, then is he an Heretic. I answer, then he is not an heretic,
but a Heathen, openly and formally an Infidel. For you say Sec. edition. cap.
4. n. 4 post medium.
Page 194. lin. 14. To disbelieue any doctrine which one knows to be revealed
in Scripture, is for a Christian not only impious, but also impossible. D.
Field. of the Church. l. 5. c. 5.


4. Some may also pretend, that an Heretic is one, that erreth about some
truth, which does directly and essentially concern matter of Salvation, though
he join not obstinacy to his error. But this is manifestly false. An
Heretic is one hateful, horrible, and detestable, but a man that erreth in
matters of salvation ignorantly for want of sufficient instruction and
proposition, is commiserable and to be pitied, not to be abhorred. He that
being in the dark sees not the meat that is near him, and so starueth for
want of food, cannot be said to be a blind man, or a wilful staruer of
himself: so the Christian who does err about some essential points of
Salvation, the necessary food of the soul, and so perishes, because the light
of credibility does not shine upon it in respect of him, cannot be said to be
an Heretic, or an Infidel, but only in this respect an unhappy wretch;
though this case among Christians can hardly happen. Finally an Heretic is
one that erreth through inward indisposition to believe: but the man that does
disbelieue a truth, only because he is not sufficiently in structed, may want
no good disposition and readiness of mind to believe; Ergo, he cannot be an
Heretic.

5. Now this main and last principle for resolution of the Controversy, which
be divine Revelations, is the Christian Catholic Church delivering perpetual
Traditions from the Apostles, or, which is all one, as you confess, Cap. 2.155.
Universal Tradition is the rule to judge all controversies by Cap. 2 n. 28.
being a thing credible of it self, and therefore fit to be rested on. Other
principles and rules though they be not evident of themselves, yet are good
stays of our faith, because evidently Cap. 2. n. 8. That Scripture cannot be
proved to be a perfect rule by its own saying so but only by Tradition, which
is a thing credible, of it self.
conjoined with this principle of Tradition, credible of it self, against all
which your Protestants or Protesters directly oppose, and so err
fundamentally, and are Heretics, as these Arguments convince.

The first Conviction.
6. FIrst I prove them to be Heretics against their own last Principle and
rule, their rock pillar and ground, the Scripture, evident of it self and
known to be the word of God by its own glorious beams and rays. Though
sometimes you reject this Principle, as not only false; but also Cap. 6. n. 55.
Cap. 2. n. 47.
fond, ridiculous, unworthy to be the conceyt of any wise man; yet to keep
your good purpose of contradicting your self in every thing, you approve it
also, c. 4. n. 53. lin. 25. where to the question, What assurance is there,
that the Scripture is the word of God, you answer, The doctrine it self is
very fit, and worthy to be thought to come from God, nec vox hominem sonat.
What is this but to make the Scripture credible and worthy of credit for it
self, seeing the credibility or worthiness of credit Scripture has from its
own doctrine, style, and language, it has of it self. But howsoever
Scripture be not the last stay of your belief in the question, Whether it be
the word of God; yet in respect of your Faith of the sense of Scripture, you
make Scripture the last Principle, yea the only rule thereof, clear,
manifest, evident of it self. This supposed I subsume: but Protestants
disbelieue doctrines proposed clearly and plainly by Scripture, through
preiudices and passions instilled into them by education, Cap. 3. n. 19. lin.
18. Second Edit. pa. 21. lin. 4.
as you confess page 137. lin. 6. and there be millions of them that are
betrayed into error, not by ignorance, but by the sinful and damnable
passions of their will, page 21. lin. 40. Ergo, Protestants err fundamentally,
and are proved Heretics by their own fundamental rule and last Principle
of faith: for if they be not Heretics who contradict a doctrine which is
propoposed unto them by clear, plain, and evident texts of Scripture; it is
not possible there should be any Heretic by their grounds.

7. This is confirmed, because the same Protestants believe truths, proposed
unto them by texts not so clear and evident, as those are the true sense
whereof they disbelieue: Ergo, the cause why they do not believe other more
plainly and clearly proposed Truths, is not want of credibility in the
proposition, nor of faculty in their understandings, but want of disposition to
believe in their wills. This you confess saying, Page 137. lin. 6.
That truths revealed in Scripture plainly enough in the mselues, be not
plainly revealed to such and such men, into whom passions and preiudices
against such truths have been by education instilled. Now to disbelieue truths
proposed sufficiently and enough by plain texts of Scripture (that is, in your
way, with the uttermost light and evidence of credibility any Christian
proposition can possibly have) not to believe I say, truths so proposed through
passion and prejudice, is the formal crime of Heretical obstinacy and wilful
blindness.

8. Hence we may further conclude, that disagreeing Protestants are Heretics
to each other, and their dissensions Heretical on the one side, or on both. As
to say of one, he wants light to see the sun shining at noone day, is to say
he is stark blind; To say of one he wants wit to appehend the truths that are
evident of themselves is to say, he is a fool; so to say of one that he wants
disposition to believe Christian doctrine proposed by clear and manifest
Scripture, is to say, he is an Infidel, and void of Faith, if doctrine
proposed by clear texts of Scripture, be hoc ipso proposed to Christian
belieuers sufficiently and enough, as Protesters teach and must teach, else no
doctrine can be in their Religion proposed sufficiently and enough. What you so
often Page 336. n. 19. and else where a hundred times.
object that then the Dominicans should be Heretics unto Jesuits, because in
the opinion of Jesuits their opinion is clearly repugnant to Scripture, is
frivolous and vain. For to Jesuits and Dominicans the sole evidence of the
text of Scripture is not sufficient proposition (because many plain texts are
not to be understood in the plain and litterall sense), but that the
proposition of Scripture be sufficient, the evidence of the text must be backed
and strengthened by the Tradition, definition, or declaration of the Church: Now
you and your Protesters hold the sense of Scripture, proposed by the mere in
ward evidence of the text, only and alone, to be the last and uttermost
evidence of credibility a Christian doctrine can have, the rock and pillar of
belief: Ergo, when you accuse each other of disbelieuing evident and plain
Scripture, you accuse each other of the formal and proper crime of heresy so
that Protesters are, according to S. Paul, delinquishers of the Church,
convinced, and condemned by their own Judgment.

The second Conviction.
10. THey that protest against the pillar, ground, rock of that Credit and
Authority which does up hold, propose, and expose all truth of Salvation unto
Christian belief, and make the same worthy of all credit in respect of us,
err fundamentally and are damned Heretics. This is manifest by what is
proved in the Preface of this Chapter. But you protest against such a Rock,
for you protest against the Catholic present Church of every age since the
Apostles, Cap. 5. n. ^^. circa. medium. Cap. 5. n. 91. paulo post medium.
as subject to fundamental and damnable errors, and ever stained, even in the
second age immediately upon the death of the Apostles, with universal errors;
whose Catholic external Communion you have forsaken, because universally
polluted with superstitions, as you confess, and profess to glory therein.
Now, that the present Catholic universal Church in every age, is the pillar,
Cap. 5. n. 52. Cap. 3. n. 77. and. n. 78.
ground, rock, that is, teacher of all Christian truth by duty and office, and
in fact always the pillar and ground, that is, the maintayner, and teacher of
all necessary truth, which she could not be, unless she were infallible in all
her proposals: Page 108. n. 139. Cap. 2. n. 139.
these things you grant as has bin showed at large in the fifth Chapter: Ergo,
Protesters are guilty of Heresy, as over throwers of the rock, pillar, and
last Principle of Christian faith.

11. Moreover, you grant Tradition universal to be the last Principle of
Christian faith, evident of it self and so the pillar and ground of all truth,
fit to be rested on. But by making the Church fallible, and subject to error
in delivering Apostolical Traditions, you destroy this Rock, and make the
same no ground to be rested on in any kind of truth. For, say you, an authority
subject Cap. 3. n 36. lin. 12.
to error cannot be a firm foundation of my belief in any thing: and Cap. 5.
n. 91. lin. 40. expressly to this purpose you say; If the Church were
obnoxious to corruptions, as we pretend who can possibly warrant us, that part
of this corruption did not get in and prevail in the 5. or 4. or 3. or 2. age?
etc. The error of the Millenaries was, you say, in the second age universal,
and what was done in some was possible in others. Now seeing the authority of
the Scripture, and of the four Ghospels, and our whole Christian faith depend
upon the tradition of the primitive Church, you that make the authority of the
primitive Church and Tradition, subject to error and fallible; how do not you
err most fundamentally, destroying the last stay and only rock to be rested
on by Christian belief? Tradition primitive universal being uncertain and
fallible, what certainty can Christians have of the Scriptures being from God,
Page 63. lin. 34. Only by the testimony of the ancient Churches
the testimony of the ancient Churches, the only means of our certainty in
this point being uncertain?

The third Conviction.
12. IF the Roman Church be the pillar, ground, rock, that is, the teacher
both by duty and in deed of all Christian truth; then Protesters against the
Church of Rome be Heretics as you grant, and must needs grant. But the
Antecedent is true and proved evidently by what you grant, and by what has
been showed to be consequent of your grants, that there must be always a
Church of one denomination, always in fact, even by essence the teacher of all
fundamental truth, visibly discerned from other Christian Societies, by this
note of Unity and Subordination to One. Now, if there must be always such a
one Church, the Roman must of necessity be this Church. Supra c. 6. convict. 2.
This consequence you denied as we noted before, which now I make good by this
Argument. The Church which can, must, and in fact does perform the office of
guide and directour, must be of one denomination subject to one certain Bishop,
and also universal, Apostolical, one and the same every where for matters of
faith: But there is no Church of one denomination in the world noted with these
marks, but only the Roman: Ergo, the Roman, and only the Roman is that Church
of one denomination and obedience, Cap. 3. n. 39. lin. 18.
wherein a known infallibility is settled, by adhering to which men are guided
to believe aright in all fundamentals. The mayor proposition of this argument I
prove by what you write page 91. Cap. 2. n. 101.
where you apply a testimony of S. Austin against us: Every one may see, that
you so few (in comparison of all those, on whose consent we ground our belief
of Scripture) so turbulent, that you damn all to the fire and to Hell, that
any way differ from you etc. Lastly so new in many of your doctrines, as in the
lawfulnes and expedience of debarring the Laity the Sacramental Cup, the
lawfulnes and expedience of your Latin service, Transubstantiation, Purgatory,
the Popes infallibility, authority over Kings etc. So new, I say, in respect of
the undoubted Books of Scripture, which contains or rather is our Religion,
and the sole and adaequate object of our faith: I say, every one may see, that
you so few, so turbulent, so new can produce nothing deserving authority.

13. This whole discourse (though the last two lines only be sufficient to my
purpose) I have produced at large, that the Reader might see by this pattern
(for all your Book is of the same style, method, and pith) what a
Kilcow-Disputant you are, that is, a cursed Cow with short horns, yea without
horns at all: for your Heart is not so cursed and fierce in uttering, what you
conceive to the discredit of the Roman Church; but your Understanding is as
weak and faint in proouing what you say. You have heaped together many
doctrines of the Roman Church, which you traduce as novelties; but in all your
discourse there is not any strength of Argument, to show them to be such. So we
cannot say of you -- Cornu ferit ille, caueto; for you strike us only with the
bare forehead of impudent assertion, without proof, yea without offer or
proffer of proof. Nor could you prove them, these being, for the most part,
all manifest Christian truths, which you would have taken upon your bare word
to be errors. For how can you prove, that Communion in one kind, for Laymen,
was not practiced by our Lord and Savior, given unto the two Luc. 24.30.31.
lay Disciples in Emmaus? Was not the Latin service every where in use, during
the Primitive times, I mean Ang. lib 2 de doctrine. Christ. c. 11.
in all Countries of Europe and Afric, which did pertayne to the Latin part
of the word? Was not Purgatory believed, and Machab. l. 2. c. 12.
prayer for the relief of the dead practiced by the people of God, even before
the Gospel was written? Do not Morton of the Sacrament lib. 2. c. 1. page 91.
If the words of Christ be certainly true in proper and literal sense, then are
we to yield Transubstantiation etc.
Protestants profess, that Transubstantiation is as true and ancient as the
Gospel, if the words of our Lord be certainly true in the plain and proper
sense? And be not his words true in that sense he spoke them, though the same
be never so high, obscure, and to human understanding incomprehensible? But
your discourse though always without horns of Conviction of what you object
to us, you will be sure it shall never be without horns of stiff and direct
Contradiction against your self: for even this short period has two horns of
this kind. First where you say, We damn all to Hell fire that any way differ
from us, whereas more then forty times in your book you say, you page 404.
lin. 7. We censure your errors as heavily as you do ours.
damn us to Hell as much as we do you, and that, we grant Page 283. n. 74.
lin. 15. You your self affirm that ignorant Protestants dying with contrition
may be saved
Salvation to Protestants as much as they do to us. Secondly you say here,
that the Scripture is the sole and adaequate object of your faith; but else
where you say often, that it is no object of your faith at all, but only the
means of believing. Cap. 2. n. 32. lin. 5. Scripture conteynes all material
objects of faith, whereof the Scripture is NONE, but ONLY the means of
conueying them to us.

14. Now to our purpose, I take out of your dunghill this gem of clear and
manifest truth, worthy of S. Austin his divine wit and faith; that the Church
which prefers authority which is evidently credible of it self, the pillar
and ground of truth, must not consist of a few, but be diffused and spread over
the world; nor of turbulent persons that are full of discord and contention one
against another, but all agreeing in full unity about matters of faith; not a
new Church founded in after times, but instituted by the blessed Apostles,
adorned with an illustrious succession of known Bishops to this present: which
is the very Mayor proposition of my Argument, which was, that the Church which
is the pillar and ground, that is the teacher always without fail of all
necessary truth, must be both of one Denomination and Catholic, that is,
universally Apostolical by succession of Bishops from them, one and the same
every where for matters of faith. For if it be not such, but a company of a
few, in one corner of the world, divided into innumerable factions and sects,
founded not by the Apostles but only yesterday, or within the memory of men, it
can prefer no authority.

15. Now, Ecclesia totum poffidet quod a viro accepit in dotem. quaecunque
congregatio cuiustibet haeresis in angulis sedet, concubina est non matrona.
Augustine. l. 4. de symb. c. 10.
what more evident then the Minor of my former argument, No Church of the
World, but the Roman is adorned with these glorious marks, she wing the
evident credibility of that Church, in which they are. For dare you say your
Protesting Church is dilated over the word? Is it not confined to one corner of
Europe, and reigns most in the climate which is most North, Quod latus mundi
nebulae, malusque
Jupiter vrget? --
Can you say that your Church is one and the same every where, and not divided
into turbulent factions and iects? Do not you say Page 90. lin. 12.
there is among them infinite variance, and King James Against D. Vorstius page
65.
an infinite diversity of Sects agreeing in nothing but in union against the
Pope? Can you say it is Apostolical, having succession from the Apostles? Do
not you confess it began but yesterday by dividing themselves from the
external communion of the Roman, and whole Catholic Church?

16. On the other side, can you deny the Roman to be spread over the world, to
be in Europe, Afric, Asia, America, and almost in all countries of these
four quaters of the world, every where famously known; that every man that
will be saved, may come to this rock and be built thereon unto everlasting
salvation? For what you say cap. 6. n. 53. That the Roman Church is like the
frog in the fable, who thought the ditch he lived in to be all the world, is a
speech not of truth and reason, but of prejudice and passion which education
has instilled into you; the passion, I say, and custom of lying and uttering
any falsehood or scornful reproach that may disgrace the Roman Church. This
you do without remorse of Conscience, because you say, you are sure without
doubt, Page 137. n. 19.
God will not enter into Judgment with you for such passions, which custom
and education have made to you vnauoydahle; Which I will believe if you can
make me sure, that God did not damn to Hell Nero, Domitian, and such other
Monsters for their pride and contempt of God and preiudices against Religion,
which by education, and custom were to them all things considered, unavoidable.

17. The Church of Rome is also Apostolical by a notorious succession of
Bishops from S. Peter, that we may with S. Austyn Aug. in Psalm. contra partem
Donati.
say to you: Number the Bishops succeeding in the sea of Peter, this is the
Rock the proud gates of Hell do not conquer. This Church is also the same
every where in all the professors thereof for matters of Faith. This you
confess page 129. and very wittily, and prettily contradict your self within
few lines. In that page 129. n. 4. you speak to us, If you say, you do agree
in matters of Faith, I say this is ridiculous. For you define matters of Faith
to be those things, wherein you agree; so that to say you agree in all matters
of faith, is to say you agree in those things wherein you do agree. But you are
all agreed that only those things wherein you agree are matters of Faith. And
Protestants if they were wise would do so to. Sure I am, they have reason
enough to do so, seeing all of them agree with explicit faith in all those
things which are plainly and undoubtedly delivered in Scripture. Thus you. Is
not this a wise discourse of a man who holds his discourse to be infallible,
and Preface n. 12. By discourse no man can possibly be lead into error.
that thereby he cannot possibly be lead into error? Protestants all of them
great and little, men and women believe with explicit faith all things
whatsoever are plainly and undoubtedly delivered in Scripture. Is not this
ridiculous? Credat Iudaeus Apella, Non ego. You say it is ridiculous, that we
define matters of faith to be those wherein we agree, and then say, we agree in
all matters of faith. And yet presently you say, that Protestants if they were
wise would do so too, to wit, agree that those things only wherein they agree,
be matters of faith, and then stop our mouths, when we reproach them with
disagreements, by saying they agree in all matters of faith; because matters of
faith be those only wherein they agree. Is this discourse coherent? If it be
ridiculous in us to do so, how were it wisdom for Protestants to do the same?
And how have they reason, and reason enough why they might do so? Though also
it be false, that we define matters of faith to be those wherein we agree. We
define matters of faith to be all doctrines proposed by the Church as her
traditions or definitions, wherein all Catholics must agree.

The fourth Conviction.
18. I prove directly by the word of God the Roman Church, that is, the Church
subject to S. Peter and his successor, to be the Church of one denomination,
which is the pillar and ground of truth. There was always (as you have
confessed by force) a Catholic visible Church by duty and in deed, the
teacher of necessary truth, and that no Church is fit, or able to perform this
office which is not of one denomination; Ergo this church was built dependently
upon one Rock, subordinately to one visible head, by Christ Jesus our Lord:
because such a Church could not be instituted but by him as is manifest. But
Christ did not institute or build any Church of one denomination, but only on
S. Peter, Thou art Peter (a Rock) and upon this Rock I will build my Church:
Math. 16. Joan 21.
To the I will give thee keys of the Kingdom of Heaven: Do thou love me,
feed my lambs, feed my sheep. What can be more clear? Now this power of
Rock to uphold, this authority of Pastor to guide, this Superiority of Head
to govern the universal Church of one denomination, was to descend, and did
descend to S. Peter's successors. This cannot be denied; because this Church
was to be always successively in the world, Ergo the Rock sustayning it, the
Pastor guiding it, the Head ruling it, was to be always successively in the
world, which is to say, that S. Peter must always have a successor in the
Headship of the one Church, which I further more prove in this manner.

19. If the institution of the Apostles to be Priests by these words, do this
in remembrance of, me, do import that the Apostles should have successors in
their Priesthood; then this institution of S. Peter, to be the one Pastor and
Guide of the Church, does import that he should have a successor in that
office of Pastor. For as Priesthood was not instituted for the Apostles sake,
but for the divine worship, which was to continue in the Christian Church till
the world ended: So the Pastourship of S. Peter over the one Christian Church
and flock, was not instituted for S. Peter's sake, but for the good of
Christians, that by adhering to one guide they might all vnitedly be lead into
all truth. But the Institution, Do this in remembrance of me, does import
successors in Priesthood; Ergo this Institution, feed my sheep, Cap. 2. n.
23.
does import the office of Guide and Pastor, was to go to S. Peter's
successors, until the consumamtion of the world. But you say page 62. n. 23.
If our Savior had intended, that all Controversies in Religion should be by
some visible Judge finally determined; who can doubt, but in plain terms he
would have expressed himself about this matter? He would have said plainly,
The Bishop of Rome I have appointed to decide all controversies. Thus you.

20. And this is your perpetual impertinency of arguing by interrogations,
supposing that to be undeniable truth, which is manifest falsehood, for which
you can say nothing. This manner of arguing you use often through whole pages
and leaves together, that should I transcribe the places I might set down
more then half of your book. But now to your question; Who can doubt, but
Christ would have said plainly the Bishop of Rome I have appointed to decide
all Controversies? I answer, every man that has any brains or wit in his
head. For such an one cannot but see, that Christ our Lord could not have said,
as you would have him to have spoken, without untruth. For though he did
appoint that S. Peter and his successor should be the Guide and Pastor of his
flock, yet that S. Peter or his successor should be the Bishop of Rome more
then of Jerusalem, or Antioch, this he did not appoint, at the least whiles he
lived on earth. Why may it not suffice you, that by clear Scripture, and by
what you your self grant, S. Peter's successor is to be for ever the guide and
Pastor of the Church of one denomination, the pillar and ground of Truth? Do
you doubt whether the Roman Bishop be S. Peter's successor, or no? Of this you
cannot doubt, if you will not stagger at your own principle, which you deliver
as undeniable Cap. 4. nu. 53. li. 20. All wise men for the assurance of truth
in all matters of belief, rely upon the consent of ancient Records and
universal Tradition. Now universal Tradition does deliver by full consent, that
S. Peter was Bishop of Rome, and that the Bishop of Rome is his successor. Or
if you doubt of this, you may as well doubt whether ever Julius Caesar was at
Rome.

The fifth Conviction.
21. THat the Bishop of Rome is appointed of God to decide all emergent
Controversies, I prove by Principles acknowledged and set down by your self.
For whereas the Mainteyner of Charity says, that Protestants deprive S. Peter
and his successors of the Authority which Christ our Lord conferred upon them,
over his whole militant Church, which is a point confessed by Protestants to be
of great Antiquity, and for which they reprove diverse of the most holy Ancient
Fathers, as Brerely shows at large; you, c. 5. n. 98. first question the
worth and authority of the holy Fathers, as no certain rule of faith: then
write in this sort lin. 14. Yet this I say not, as if I did acknowledge what
you pretend, that Protestants did confess the Fathers against them in this
point: for the point here issuable is not, Whether S. Peter were head of the
Church, nor whether the Bishop of Rome had any priority in the Church; nor
whether he had any authority over it given him by the Church; but whether by
divine right, and by Christ's appointment he were head of the Catholic Church.
Now having perused Brerely, I cannot find any Protestant confessing any one
Father to have concurred in opinion with you in this point. Thus you. From
these words we have this great Truth, (which by the consent of ancient Records,
and universal Tradition is most certain and undeniable) that S. Peter and his
successor for the time, was ever acknowledged to be the Head of the Catholic
Church, with authority over it in all Ecclesiastical causes. You add, that
the point here issuable and controuerted betwixt Protestants and us, is not,
whether he had his authority (for hereof you seem to suppose, that Protestants
make no controversy) but only whether by divine right and our Lords appointment
he were Head of the Catholic Church. Now I assume; If he were Head of the
Church, he was so by divine right, and Christ's appointment, and could not be so
by human institution. How prove I this? Even by your own words Page 60 nu. 22.
For the deciding of civil controversies men may appoint themselfes a Judge:
but in matters of Religion this office may be given to none, but whom God has
designed for it. Thus you; hence I enforce the Conclusion, by joining together
in form of discourse your two Propositions: S. Peter and the Roman Bishop his
Successor was ever held by the consent of Fathers the Head, the Pastor, the
Judge of the Catholic Militant Church: But he could not be so by the
appointment of men; Ergo, he was so by divine right, and by the institution of
Christ our Lord.

22. And I wonder, what did bleare your eyes in perusing Brerely, that you
could not see in him so much as one Protestant confessing any one Father to
have concurred in opinion with us in this point. For does he not cite the
Centurists (that is, a mess of Protestants at once) who reprehend Tertullian
for agreeing herein with us, saying, Centur. 3. c. 4. col. 84. lin. 60. edit
Basileae.
Tertullian did erroneously think the Keys to have been committed to Peter
alone, and the Church to be builded on him: Who charge S. Cyprian for his
affirming Centur. 3. c 4.
the Church to have been built upon Peter, and one Col. 84. lin. 60.
Chair founded by our Lords voice upon the rock; and that Col. 84 lin. ^4.
there ought to be one Bishop in the Catholic Church; and for calling Peter's
Chair Col. 84 li. 19.
the principal Church, from whence Priestly unity arises; and lastly for his
teaching (say they) without any foundation of Scripture, that Col 84. lin. 51.
the Roman Church ought to be acknowledged of all other, the Mother and root
of the Catholic Church. They likewise reprehend as a corrupt saying,
concerning the Primacy of the Roman Church, that of Irenaeus, All Churches
ought to agree with the Roman Church, in regard of a more powerable
Principality.

23. You more then once fall upon Cap. 6. n. 30. This is falsely translated (say
you) for conuenire ad Romanam Ecclesiam every body knows signifies no more
then to resort etc.
Cardinal Peron, and his noble Translatresse about this place, Ad quam propier
potentiorem principatitatem necesse est omnem conuenire Ecclepam, which they
turn thus in English, To which Church it is necessaerie, that every Church
should agree in regard of more powerful principality: you say they make bold
with the Latin tongue, as though conuenire did signify to agree, whereas it
does signify to resort. Hence of this sentence, ad quam propter potentiorem
principalitatem necesse est omnem conuenire Ecclesiam, you make this
construction: To this Church, by reason of the powerful principality it has
over all the adjacent Churches, there is, and awayes has been a necessity of
perpetual recourse of all the faithful round about. Thus you, showing your
self to be no better a Grammarien then you are a Christian? Who ever did deny
that conuenire, according to the property of the Latin tongue does signify to
agree rather then to resort? I think the Lady translatresse, and every Lady
that understands English, know, that to resort, is to repair frequently to a
place, which conuenire does no more signify, then to leap over a ditch.

24. But this is your audacity to make bold with Latin, and then rail against
others who translate according to the property of the Latin, whereof I can give
another exemple. S. Austin against some abuses in his time says, Quae in
diuinis libris saluberrime praecepta sunt, minus curantur. This (say you) I
suppose I may Cap. 2 n. 47. page 156. Edit. 1. page 150. lin. 6. Edit. 2. Cap.
3. n. 16. li. 10.
very well render in our Saviors words, The commandments of God are laid
aside. Thus you, and upon this false translation, you slander and rail at the
Church in S. Austins time, as universally superstitious, for two pages
together.

25. Item Page 176. n. 76. in this place of S. Paul to Timo thy, Quomodo
oporteat te in demo Dei conuersari, quae est Ecclesia Dei viui, and columna,
and firmamentum Veritatis; you will have columna and firmamentum veritatis, not
to be referred to the Church, with which it agreeeth in case, but to Timothy
which is the accusative case by subaudition of the particle As, te vt columna
and firmamentum veritatis, and in Greek (...), just as if one should say to
you, vt scias quomodo oporteat te subdi Archiepiscopo Cantuariensi, qui est
successor Sancti Augustini, primas Angliae, amicus veritatis: you should
contend that amicus veritatis, were referred from his Grace to your self, by
this construction, quomodo oporteat te amicus veritatis subdi etc.

26. But to return to the place of S. Irenaus, I say, that conuenire does
signity to agree, not only when it is referred to a thing, by the preposition
Cum, as, Conuenire cum alique, but also many times when it is referred by the
preposition Ad. When Cicero says, Pro Sylla.
Conuenit ad eum haec contumelia, will you translate, this reproach resorteth
to him, and not, agrees to him? When he says Lib. 3. de finibus. De re rustica
c: 6. Varro. lib. 1. cap. 19.
Conuenit optime ad pedem cothurnus, will you translate, the buskin resorteth
to the foot, and not, agrees with the foot? when Cato and Varro say, as they
do often, conueniunt hae vites ad quemuis agrum, will you translate, these
vine-trees resort to any soil, and not, agree with any soil? When Plautus
says conueniebat ad vaginam tuam machaera militis, will you translate the
blade of the soldier resorted to thy scabbard, and not, agreed with thy
scabbard? Surely, if you do, you may give the Lady Translatresse just cause to
smile at your simplicity, as now she has cause to admire your ignorance in
Latin, yea want of judgment in playing Monus at her Translation. For every man
of wit and common sense must of necessity perceive, that S. Irenaeus could not
mean corporal resorting to Rome, without being ridiculous. For though we
should grant that conuenire may signify to resort, yet it is clear, that it
does not signify barely to resort, but to resort, or come to a place together,
to meet there in one assembly. Now it is ridiculous to think, that S. Irenaeus
would have all Churchs, and all the faithful on every side to be bound not
only to come to Rome; but also to come thither all at the same time, and at
once. It is therefore manifest, that S. Irenaeus does attribute powerful
principality to the Roman Church and Bishop over all Christian Churches, by
reason whereof all other are bound and obliged in duty, to come together with
the Church of Rome, not by corporal repair to the City; but by consent of
mind to the Roman Faith. But this more powerful Principality, this Judicial
Authority, and Headship, the Roman Bishop could not have by gift of men, as you
confess: Ergo, he had it by divine appointment as the successor of S. Peter,
in whom by the voice and word of our Lord it was instituted. So that Protesters
by opposing the Church of Rome and S. Peter's successor, oppose the ground and
pillar of all Christian truth, and so are Heretics.

The sixth Conviction.
27. THE visible Church is the Judge of Controversies, and therefore infallible
in all her Proposals; so that to oppose her is as much as to oppose God
himself: and consequently whosoever opposes against the Doctrine of the
visible Church is an Heretic. This argument is proposed by the maintayner of
Charity c. 6. n. 15. to which you answer cap. 6. n. 13. First you deny the
Church to be Judge of Controversies: How (say you) can she be the Judge of
them, if she cannot decide them? and how can she decide them, if it be a
question whether she be Judge of them? That which is questioned it self cannot
with any sense be pretended to be fit to decide Controversies. Secondly you
say: If she were judge, it would not follow that she were infallible, for we
have many Judge in our Courts of Judicature, yet none infallible. Thus you. How
could you possibly be so obliuious, as not once to imagine, that both these
answers are direct Contradictions of what you before affirmed. Cap. 2. n. 162.
you say, The Church has authority of determining Controversies of faith,
according to plain and evident Scripture, and universal Tradition, and to
excommunicate the man that should persist in error against her determinations.
Now if she be not Judge, if her authority be questioned, how can she do this?
Secondly she being Judge of Controversies that she must be infallible, though
Judges in the Courts of Civil Judicature be not such, you affirm cap. 2. n.
17. We are to obey the sentence of the (civil) Judge, and not resist it, but
not always to believe it just: but in matters of Religion such a Judge is
required whom we should be bound to believe to have judged right: so that in
civil Controversies every honest and understanding man is fit to be a Judge,
but in Religion none but he that is infallible. Thus you: whose words co^taine
an unanswerable demonstration against your self, that the Church being Judge
to determine Controversies of faith, must of necessity be infallible.

28. Thirdly, you say, That though she were a Judge infallible, yet to oppose
her declaration, would not be to oppose God, except the opposer know that she
does infallibly propose the word of God. I answer, that to oppose the
Propenent of faith Cap. 2 n. 26. That which is either evident of it self and
seen by its own light or reduced unto, and settled upon the principle, that is
so.
which is evidently credible of it self, or evidently reduced to such an
evident credible Principle, is Heresy, and a vertuall opposing of God and his
Revelation. For the Propone^t being a witness worthy of all credit, the
disbelieuer of this proposition must of necessity assent, except he be mislead
by Passion against the truth revealed, or by pride against the proposer thereof
as I showed in the preface to the arguments of this chapter.

The seventh Conviction.
29. THE Church gathered together in General Councels, or a General Council
of Christian Bishops have Power to propose and define with infallibility the
Co^ttouersies of Religion and bind all Christians under pain of heresy to
believe their definitions. But Protesters oppose General Councels and such
definitions of faith which they know and confess to have been enacted by
them; contending that such Christian Assemblies, representing the whole
Christian Church, are fallible, and have been many times false, as is
notorious: Ergo, they contradict the infallible Proponent of Christian Faith
preferring their own private fancyes, and so are guilty of Heretical
obstinacy and pride. The mayor Proposition of this argument is evident and
undeniable by the perpetual Tradition and practice of all former Christian
ages, even of the Primitive times. For though then they could not meet together
all in one place; yet they did assemble generally in different places and
determine the Controversies of Religion against Heresies that did arise. In
proof hereof the testimony of Tertullian is clear and direct, mentioning
general Councels gathered by command no doubt of the Roman Bishop: De iciunijs
cap. 13.
Aguntur praecepta per Graecias illas certis in locis Concilia, ex vniuersis
Ecclesiis, perquae, and altiord quaeque in commune tractantur, and ipsa
representatio totius nominis Christiani magna veneratione celebratur. Behold
the notorious Antiquity of the Catholic Tradition about the venerable
Authority of General Counsels to determine the highest matters of Religion, as
being the representative Church or representations of the whole Christian Name.
Wherefore Protesters who contemn this Tradition evidently certain or credible
of it self, and oppose General Councels, cannot be excused from damnable
Heretical pride.

30. But Tradition though never so perpetual and primitive, full and
universal, will not grow in your garden, except the same be watered from your
Well, with whom nothing is well, but what is your own, Thus you write c. 2.
n. 85. lin 6. This we know, that none is fit to pronounce for all the world a
Judicial definitive obliging sentence in Controversies of Religion, but only
such a Man or such a Society of men as is authorized thereto by God. And
besides we are able to demonstrate, that it has not been the pleasure of God
to give to any Man, or Society of men any such authority. The truth of the
first part of this saying will establish the authority of General Councels
from God, when the falsehood of the second shall be confuted by D. Potter, yea
by your own contradiction thereof. D. Potter writes page 165. We say that
such General Councels as are lawfully called, and proceed orderly, are great
and awful representations of the Church; that, they are the highest Tribunals
the Church has on earth; that, their Authority is immediately derived, and
delegated from Christ; that, no Christian is exempted from their censures and
jurisdiction; that, their decrees bind all persons to external obedience, and
may not be questioned but upon evident reason. Behold D. Potter cries, We
(Protestants) say that General Councels are authorized of God to pronounce a
Judicial definitive sentence obliging all persons: and you cry the contrary,
We say, and are able to demonstrate, that God has not given any such authority
to any Society. Council, or Congregation of men. How do you not fear least by
thus contradicting your Potter, Isa. c. 45.
you incur the curse of the Prophet, Vaequi contradicis fictori tuo testa de
Samijs terrae: Woe unto thee that dare contradict thy Potter, though thou art
but Samosatenian.
a Samian Pot-sheard.

31. But I can easily make you friends with the Doctor, showing that else
where you contradict your self, and agree with him, that Councels are
authorized of God to pronounce a definitive obliging sentence, c. 4. n. 18. in
fine: I willingly confess, that the judgment of a Council, though not
infallible, is yet so far directive and obliging, that without apparent
reason to the Contrary, it may be sin to reject it, at least not to affoard
it outward submission for public peace-sake. Hence I thus argue: Christian
Councels have power to pronounce a Judicial definitive obliging sentence as
you confess, and from that obligation you except no Christian, and
consequently they can bind all persons of the Church, at the least to outward
submission and external obedience for peace-sake. But none are fit to
pronounce such a sentence, but such a Congregation or Society of men as are by
God, authorized thereto, as you also affirm. Ergo, a Christian Council or
Convocation of Bishops is authorized of God to pronounce a Judicial definitive
sentence obliging the whole Christian world.

32. And whereas you say with D. Potter, that such Councels be not infallible,
and so may be questioned or rejected upon evident reasons; and that they do
bind us to external obedience for peace sake, but not to an inward assent that
their Decrees are true; you contradict what you write page 59. n. 17. In Civil
Controversies we are bound to obey the sentence of the Judge, or not be resist
it, but not always to believe it just: But in matters of Religion such a Judge
is required whom we should be obliged to believe to have judged right. So that
in civil Controversies every honest understanding man is fit to be a Judge,
but in Religion none but he that is infallible. Now seeing you say cap. 2. n.
22. That in matters of Religion the office of Judge may be given to none but
whom God has designed for it, a General Council which has the office of
judge to pronounce a Judicial obliging sentence in matters of Religion, must
of necessity be infallible, and bind Christians not only to outward
submission; but also to believe, that it has judged right and according to the
word of God: Except you will say, that God does assign and authorize such
Judges as are not sit for the office, nor such as the state of Religion does
require. Besides, to say that General Councels have authority immediately from
Christ to bind all persons to external obedience, and yet that such Councels
be fallible, and false many times; what is it but to say, that Christ has
appointed such Authority and government in his Church, by the force whereof men
are bound to dissemble and play the Hypocrites in matters of Religion? For
example, General Councels have defined, That Communion in one kind is lawful
and command all Christians to approve and practice it. You are persuaded in
conscience, that this is unlawful, a sacrilegious mayming of the Sacrament,
and yet by your doctrine, That Councels bind at the least to outward submission
and external obedience, you are bound outwardly to practice it, and to make a
show as if you did judge the same lawful. It is therefore evident truth (and
the contrary impious) that General Councels appointed of Christ, as the
highest external Tribunals the Church has on earth, and which bind all
persons to external obedience, are infallible. And if they be infallible, then
they who moved with conceyte of their private skill in Scripture, which they
pretend to have gotten by the excellency of their wit and discourse; or by
singular illumination from God, reject their judgment, and openly Potest that
they may err and have erred, are proved damnable Heretics.

The eight Conviction.
33. PRotesters are Heretics, because they condemn and contemn that Church,
upon whose authority they have believed Christ, and Christian Religion. For
they have received Christ and the grounds of Christianity by the preaching,
Cap. 2. n. 101.
and upon the Authority of some Church, as you say cap. 3. n. 33. lin. 10. Now
the Authority of this Church ought to be to them to firm, and infallible as
their Christianity, so as they should rather not believe in Christ, then
believe any thing against them by whom they believed Christ. This you teach
page 90 lin. 2. Why should I not most diligently inquire, what Christ
commanded, of them (the Church of England) before all others, by whose
Authority I was moved to believe, that Christ commanded any good thing? Can you
F. or K. or whosoever you are, better declare to me what he said, whom I would
not have thought to have been, or to be, if the belief thereof had been
recommended to me by you etc? Surely, if they were not at all, and could not
teach me any thing; I would more easily persuade my self, that I were not to
believe in Christ, then that I should learn any thing concerning him from any
other, then them by whom I believed him. This is your discourse, full of
impieties: because what S. Augustine says of the whole Christian Catholic
Church, you apply to the Protestant Church of England. It is false, that any
true Christian belieues in Christ by resting on the Authority of the Church of
England; nor does this Church, if it make Christians, propose her self, but
the Holy Catholic Church, for the irrefragable witness of Christ. It is
impious, that you would never have believed Christ nor Christianity, if the
belief thereof had been recommended to you by us, that is, by preachers of
the Roman Church, and Holy monks sent you for that office from Rome. It is
Antichristian to profess, that you would more easily not believe in Christ,
then learn any thing concerning him from any other, then them (the Church of
England) by whom you believed him: so that if the Church of England should fall
away from Christ into Infidelity, you profess aforehand, that you will fall
away, and become an Infidel with her.

34. Hence it is clear, that the saying of S. Augustine, I would not believe
the Gospel unless the Authority of the Church did move me: I would more
easily persuade my self, that I were not to believe Christ, then that I should
learn any thing concerning him from any other then them by whom I believed
him; this Profession I say though most evident truth, cannot without impiety be
applied to any church which is not indefectible, and infallible in all her
Proposals. It is evident truth, because the proof must be to us more manifest,
and we surer of the truth there of then the thing proved thereby, otherwise it
is no proof as you say Cap. 6 n. 59. in fine. But the only proof, the only
motive and reason we have to believe Christ, that he lived on earth, and that
his doctrine and Religion is contained in the Christian Scripture, is the
Catholic Church and her word and Tradition, as you often grant. Therefore as
S. Cap. 5. n. 64. lin. 8.
Augustine says, how can we have evidence of Christ, if we have not evidence
of the Church, that she cannot err in her Proposals? And if true Christians be
surer of the Tradition of the Church then of Christ, then according to reason
they may sooner disbelieue Christ then the universal Church. But you Protest
against the visible Catholic Church, that she is not free from damnable
errors in faith and damnable corruptions in practice, that Church by whom you
have believed Christ if you do truly and Christianly believe in him: How then
can you be Christians, or have any grounded assurance of faith concerning him?
You will say, that you have believed in Christ not by this present Catholic
Church, but by the Church of all ages. This is vain, because you can have no
assurance of the Church of all former ages, and of what they believed and
taught, but by the word and testimony of the present Nor do you hold the Church
of all ages infallible, Cap. 5. n. 91. post medium.
yea you expressly teach that the same was presently upon the Apostles death
covered with darkness and universal Errors: how then be you not heretics
and false Christians, who believe Christ and Christianity upon no other, or
better ground then your own fancy?

The ninth Conviction.
35. PRotesters destroy by their doctrine the being and essence of the Catho.
Christian Church: But the doctrine destructive of the Church or the denial of
the holy Catholic Church is a damnable blasphemous heresy: Ergo, Protesters
be Heretics of the worser and more damnable sort; You deny both Propositions
of this Argument, yet you teach principles by which they are demonstratiuely
cleared against you. The mayor is proved, because you often teach (and it is
the main point of your Religion) that the whole Catholic Page 291. lin. 9.
or c. 5. n. 88 in ^edio.
Church is subject to errors, to damnable errors, yea Cap. 5. n. 7. Cap. 3.
n. 36. li. 12.
to fundamental errors in some kind: But this doctrine does totally and
essentially overthrow the being of the Church. For you grant that the Church is
always by essence the Rock and ground, (c) that is, always the actual
Teacher of all necessary truth, so that they who take this from her, take her
essence from her, Cap. 5. per to ^u^.
and essentially destroy her being. But he who says that the Church is subject
to errors in matter of faith makes the Church not to be the pillar and ground
of truth; for you say, An authority subject to error cannot be a firm and
stable foundation, (a pillar and ground) of belief in any thing. Ergo, they
that make the Church fallible and subject to some errors, in some proposalls
of faith, destroy her essence. Hence your distinction of a true Church, and of
a pure Church free from errors, and that there was, ever shall be a true
Christian Catholic Church in the world, but not a pure, unspotted Church from
all errors; this distinction, I say, by you repeated many hundred of times is
vain: for I have demonstrated, that impurity in matter of faith, yea
possibility to be impure and erroneous in any Proposals of Faith, is against
the very essence of the Church, The minor also you deny. See. Edit. 6 n. 9.
circamed.
Cap. 2. n. 13. lin. 12. If Zelots had held, that there was not only no pure
visible Church, but none at all, surely they had said more then they could
justify: but yet you do not show, nor can I discover any such vast absurdity or
sacrilegious Blasphemy in this assertion. Thus you. And this fancy then did so
occupy the short capacity of your brain, that the contrary declaratio^s which
you make in your Book were driven quite out of your mind. Page 336. lin. 25.
Into such an heresy (which destroys essentially Christianity) if the Church
should fall, it might be said more truly to perish then if it fell only into
some errors of its own nature damnable; for in that state all the members of
it without exception, all without mercy must perish for ever. Thus you,
teaching that if the Church perish essentially and remain Christian, not in
Truth, but only in name, that all the members thereof without exception, all
without mercy perish with it. Can any absurdity be more vast, and full of
horror then this? You teach this immanity to be consequent upon the total
destruction of the Church; and yet say, that you cannot discover any such vast
absurdity in that destructive doctrine. So small a matter it seems to you to
grant, that all Christians since the days of the Apostles perished
everlastingly.

36. Is it not sacrilegious blasphemy to make Christ a false Prophet, who said,
that the gates of Hell should never prevail against is? Which promise does
import, as you acknowledge cap. 3. n. 70, that she shall always continue a
true Church, and bring forth children unto God, and send souls to Heaven. Now,
they who contend, that there was for many ages no Church, make this promise of
our Lord to be false. Therefore they are guilty of most sacrilegious Blasphemy,
as the Maintayner of Charity said, and none will deny that has in him any
spark of Charity toward Christ.

The Conclusion.
37. ANd now give me leave (Courteous Reader) to make an end. For what has
been said may more then abundantly suffice, to show the vanity of this man's
enterprise, who would cut out a safe way to Salvation through the flint of
Heretical obstinacy. If any think this cannot be performed against such a
volume by a Treatise so small as this is, for bigness not comparable unto his;
let him examine comparatively the strength, the pith the arguments of the one
with the other, and I do not doubt but in this comparison the Proverb will
also be found true, A Cane non magno saepe tenetur aper.

38. The Crocodile, that vast venomous Serpent of Nilus is conquered and made
away by a little fish termed Ichneumon, which watching an opportunity, and
finding the Crocodile sleeping with his mouth wide open, by that ouerture
gets in, and there vasteth and destroys all his vital parts. This our
Adversary has opened his mouth, no man wider, into bold reproach and
reprehensio^ of the whole Christian Catholic Church; but he does it always
Sleepingly, with such dull inconsideration, with such manifest contradiction of
himself, as he lies open to any Adversary to enter upon him, and work his
confusion, by showing the intestine dissension of his most intime, and
essential doctrines one against another. I am content to venture it to the
verdict of any learned and judicious Protestant, who has attentively perused
his large Volume, and this short Reply, whether I have not overthrown the
grounds and foundations of his edifice, destroytd all the most intrinsecall
Principles that have influence of life into his discourse.

39. His Book indeed is a vast bulk made big, not with variety of matters and
proofs, but by the repetition of those principles I have proved in this
Treatise to be both false, and contradicted, impugned rejected even by
himself: Principles I say, by him insisted on, urged and repeated some many
hundreds, some even thousands of times. For the rest it is an heap of manifest
slanders, base calumniations ridiculous brags, vild, reproaches, concumelious
speachs against the Church, the Pope, the Jesuits, and namely the Author of
Charity mainsayned, wide mistaking of the force of his Adversaries Arguments
wild and exorbitant answers, his arguing upon this false supposition
pitifully begged, and assumed gratis without (I will not say a Schillingworth,
but) a Pennywarth of proof, that our Religion is but the Doctrine of the
Council of Trent, his, the pure Word of God, the Bible, and only the Bible.
These Arguments for multitude innumerable, and diffused by large extent over
all the leaves, pages, and numbers of his book, make it unworthy to be read,
and much more unworthy to be, for all the particulars thereof, distinctly
answered, and refuted.

40. I also would have him to know, that I keep more then an hundred of his
contradictions and gross ignorances in store to bestow on him for his reward,
if he shall undertake to reply. These I omitted in this Treatise, not to cloy
with superfluities, the appetite of judicious Readers, who with the discovery
of a few gross contradictions (such as these be wherewith I have charged him)
remain satisfied, and filled with contempt of such a writer. I likewise was
fearful least by some, the censure of small discretion might belayd upon me,
for spending so much time against such an unworthy writing, wherein the Author
himself will not be able to show three Pages together which be coherent, and
not contradictious against other parts of his Book. Finally many new
contradictions and impertinences by him uttered will be laid open in the
Treatise of the Total Sum, which I intend as an Appendix unto this.

FINIS.
Faults escaped in the Print.
Page. Line. Error. Correction. 15. 20. you consider you: consider 25. 10.
part heart 26. 7. ara are 28. 10. of, this of this 38. 32. prach't preached 45.
18. world One world: One 60. 12. as our as you Ibid. 27. thus you I thus you: I
Ibid. 27. I not say I cannot say 95. 15. certain contained 98. 15 sole soul
100. 26: book) but book; but Ibid. 27. it self: it self) 102. 16.
tradition, for Tradition. For 103. 5. the rule the only rule 106. 5. should be
so should do so 126. 8. by whom of whom 131. 27. not firm no firm 158. 20.
ente enter 81. 20. Propenent Proponent.


