Fortunes Tennis-ball: A warning to all that are Nursers of Pride,
For Justice is known to be Eagle-ey'd;
Those that will climb must look to have a fall,
For Fortune will pat down her Tennis-ball:
Let no man frown, for i will have all know it,
This wicked age must have a biting Poet.


OR, A Proviso for all those that are elevated, to take heed of falling, for
Fortune spights more the mighty then the poor: According to the Poet: Qui
cadit in terram non babet unde cadit.




Printed Anno Dom. 1640.

On the Frontispiece.
SEe for the Frontispiece here a Cedar tree,
Whereon sits Fortune in her Majesty.
Those that presume t'aspire unto its top,
She slilie gives the highest branch a lop,
And topsie turvie they come tumbling down,
As dazzled with the brightness of her crown.
You that look on the root, pray look no higher
Then its true Motto, Cease too high t'aspire.
Pride will have a fall.
The downfall of Pride, and aspiring wits,
Painted at full in their ague fits.
PRide that aspiring girl, whose soaring mind
Flies swifter then the air or Eastern wind,
Has got a downfall, when she thought to fly,
Time held her tresses, pulld her back, her eye
Which still was fixed upon the highest spheere,
Is, taught now to look lower, and her ear
Set to a lower key, her lofty front
Must be new Christened in afflictions font.
Our Noblemen, me thinks, I now epsy
Like splendent stars fixed on our azure sky:
Where each man studies to outshine the rest,
And he most proud that can be counted best.
Yet know ye stars, who bespankle our sky,
Know that the Sun is still the worlds eye,
From him you shall receive your luster, and
Must pay't again when he shall it demand;
Our King, I mean, who is this Islands eye
Of Government by true Epitomie:
The moon oftimes does strive to eclipse the sun,
As overgiddie stars of late have done,
I read how Phaeton Don Phoebus son,
That he might know from what race he was sprung,
Swelling with pride, desired his father grant
This one boon to him, who thus himself did vaunt,
That he might guide his fathers horses and,
Have his bright charret at his own command;
Which thing was granted caused the world burn,
And threw the child to his untimely urne,
It Is no expedient for a vulgar eye,
To stare upon superior Majesty,
Nor can you great ones, though you're crept so high,
Say you can rule the bright translucent sky:
No god can thunder but the mighty Jove,
Yet all are gods as well as he above;
Therefore be wise, and cease to high to aspire
Least you do burn in Phaetontike fire,
Let Soll's bays alone, I mean the crown,
Those that soar high are aptest to fall down,
Have you not seen the lofty Cedar fall,
When shrubs fast rooted stand within the vale,
It Is not your riches, nor your pomp of state,
Honors nor strength, nor can powers mitricate
Secure you here on earth, fate will overthrow,
When blastering storms of fortune 'gin to blow
Caesar and Pompey in their golden prime.
Whose arms did thunder terror in their time
Wear queld by fate, pride naught availed there then,
Their graves were digd on earth amongst other men,
Ye kinglike eagles which on this Cedar top
Do perch, pray look how soon man's life does stop,
It Is as soon here and yet it is sooner done,
Then the hot summers rain, or winters sun.
Set fast your footing lest you catch a fall
We hope to rise at honors trumpets call.
I Have seen our Bishops on the wings of hope
Flying with swiftness to the reverend pope
Thinking to cloak all with their fallacies,
Which had no credence from our watchful eyes;
First Metrapollitan, could not a Miter
Suffice your little pate would you be whiter
Then La^vne can make you, you strive to pull down
Religion here to gain the Triple crown:
and how you bend and bow to the altar placed
In an old corner which is ^oward the east,
And how you cringe and creep when ye shall hear
The name of Jesus touch your reverend ear.
Displace the Levite who shall ^eed his flock
Twice on a sabbath from the common stock.
Beware, repent, for now the Scottish club,
Has drove the into Englands powdering tube:
Scholiers are bound to curse thy aspiring mind,
Nor here, nor there they can no comfort find,
But they are merciful, and still will pray
That great Jove would be pleased to send a day
That they might hear you preach on tower hill,
Which thing they hope will rid thee from all ill.
If the low keele of a great ship shall fail,
What 'ist the better for a brave top sail,
Or if the root of a fair tree does rot,
How can we well believe the tree does not,
The root of this our kingdom rotten found:
But yet I hope the kingdom is still sound,
The Land the root which was made rotten quite
For some there were through weakness of their sight.
Cannot view its splendour, the kingdoms still sick
Being troubled with the subtle politic,
Better some members perish then the whole
Body should languish in continual thrall;
Our Judges are corrupt, they should dispense
The Law according to each man's offense
Which they wrest other ways, pride bids them rise
And mount above the bright bespangled skies,
But judgment pulls them down and they shall find
What dangers hap to the aspiring mind,
Hear this proud courtier, whose aspiring brains
Are never fed but with strong Ela strains,
Refrain to soar aloft, lest that you fall
With prides projecters to eternal thrall;
Seek not to stop petitioners who sue
To right old wrongs, for it is your scarlet crew
That Is Banished, which for bribes, or hope of gain
You Will gain the devil, and stop justice reign.
Next leave your swearing, you strive to invent
New oaths, and make them but a complement,
Gods name is bare of honor in our hearing
And quite worn out by our blasphemous swearing,
It Is taken in vain by iesters every day,
Unless that actors swear, it is no play:
An execrable vice when you shall die
Your selves in sins vault, and crucify
Our Savior, hourlie make his wounds bleed fresh,
And thrust sharp pricking spears into his flesh.
Leave off for shame lest judgment over take you,
For when that comes your pride must needs forsake (you)
O how you will cringe and prate if a great Pear
Shall daigne to lend the audience of his care,
Or how officious will you seem to be
If you shall but espy his Majesty,
Superiors you adore, like Persians
You Will worship the bright sun, not country Pans.
Inferiors shall not gain that curtesey
As once to wag your hat, or bend your knee,
But near me Squashers, let me tell you plain,
If you use those things my pen shall complain,
Let pride persuade what she can I know,
If Fortune once shall kick you down below
We shall epsy you, your supposed sky
Will prove at length but a mere timpany:
Your moon will waine, your hour's of pride will waste
Then what will come to those who are Ianus faced.
Gentiles refrain the sharking cards and dice,
Hearken to counsel and hear sound advice,
What pride does bid you spend, give to the poor,
Let hospitallitie fatten at your door,
So shall you rise when prides associates fall,
Who yield themselves as Fortunes Tennis-ball.
Expect a while, and you shall quickly see
The derivation of their pedigree.
If any one of this proud troop should die
Then who should write their epitaphs but I.
An epitaph on a noble man.
Here lies the Cedar who aspired so tall,
That Joue took notice of, and caused him fall.
On a gentleman.
Here lies the very timpanie of pride,
Which made him break at length, and so he died.
On our great Bishop. W. L. A. B. C.
If any stranger shall ask who lies here,
Let this new toomb this for inscription bear.
Paint Pope and devil, make the stranger laugh;
Mix his own shame, and there is his epitaph.
On a Judge.
He that judged many is condemned now,
Because 'twas proved by law he broke his vow;
Pride was his Goddess, he thought still t'aspire,
But sure his grave is nere a whit the higher.
On a Courtier.
He that took many bribes thought to bribe death,
But death dealt cunningly, took bribe, and breath.
FINIS.

