A word of Comfort.

OR A DISCOVRSE CONCERNING The late lamentable Accident of the fall of a room,
at a CATHOLIC Sermon, in the Black-friars at London, wherewith about fourscore
persons were oppressed.

WRITTEN For the Comfort of Catholics, and Information of Protestants, By I. R.
P.

Printed Anno M.DC.XXIII.

TO THE READER.
LET the duty of weeping for the Dead, Tempus flendi Eccl. 3.6.
in this late dismal Accident, so rufull to flesh and blood, which from our
hearts both common Humanity and private Friendship enforce; Tempus loquendi.
give place unto the duty of writing in the behalf of the living, which at our
hands both Christian Charity, and Priestly obligation exact. Let Nature, which
at this present makes me more willing to wett my paper with tears then with
ink, Ipsi pene viuendi vsui cessationem hoc tempus indicit, nedu^ studijs. l.
2. de Consid. Cap. 4. 31. Cap. 9. 1.
and (as S. Bernard says of himself in a like doleful disaster) weary not
only of studying, but even almost of living, that in lieu of penning discourses
of erudition and learning, I could much rather power forth untaught sighs in
the language of Jeremy his Threnes, Defecit anima mea propter Inte^fectos: My
soul is gone from me in sorrow of them that are slain: and, Quis dabit capiti
meo aquam, and oculis meis flumina lachrimarum, and plorabo die ac nocte
Interfectos filiae populi mei! Who will give me water unto my head and fluds of
tears unto mine eyes, that I may be wayle day and night the Slain of my
Country! Let (I say) this weak inclination of Nature yield unto Gods holy
will, and unto the motion of heavenly Grace concurring with Obedience, to
prefer before private sorrow for friends, the public defense of our
Catholic Cause, seeing ignorant zeal is ready upon any the least occasion to
disgrace it. Let mourning for corporal Death, which the Holy Ghost confines
within the compass of seven days, Eccl. 22. v. ^^.
Luctus mortui septem dies, especially for them whose souls (as we with reason
hope) do reign in glory, be changed into mourning for blind Ignorance and
Impiety, which the same Holy Spirit will have commeasured unto the length of
their life, luctus fatui and impij omnes dies vitae eorum, to wit, so long as
there is hope by tears of instruction to reclayme them.

This Duty is necessary for four ends, and undertaken for the satisfaction of
four sorts of persons. First to refute their folly who with this dark mist
of Gods unsearchable Counsels, seek to obscure the clear light of his
revealed Doctrine, shyning in the Catholic Church. Secondly, to still their
tears who think they cannot weep enough for their Friends, not so much at
their death, as at their being taken away by so strange and dreadful a
mischance. Thirdly, to allay the wondering of them that secretly may complain
of the severity of Gods judgments, that in these circumstances he would not
spare his own People, not spare his own Name. Fourthly, to somewhat assuage
their sorrow who grieve not for temporal respects, Psalm. 41.3.
but their tears are to them bread day and night, to see Gods Enemies insult
upon his Church, and to say unto her, where is thy God? Which four kinds of
persons styrred up and troubled with different affections, by one, and the same
commiserable mishappe, we shall endeavor to quiet by four kind of Arguments;
by Testimonies of holy Scripture; by Examples of former Christian times; by
comparison with some more prodigious events unto our Adversaries; finally by
showing Gods ends in the permission of this Accident, of which we may make our
Profit.

CHAP. I. Comfort from the holy Scriptures.
THere is not any greater affliction unto Gods servants in this life, nor any
more sharp corrasiue unto their heart, then the happening of strange and
dreadful mischances, that carry a show of his anger against their Religion,
whereby the enemies thereof harden their souls as stone, against it. And Gods
Omnipotent Wisdom, as he resolved for reasons best known to himself, to
divide indifferently amongst the good and bad, these terrible casualityes of
mortal life: So likewise in his Mercy, Cui vanitati intimandae totum illu^
librum vir Sapientissimus deputauit. Aug. l 10. de Ciuit. c. 3. The Preacher c.
8. 14.
he would have his servants warned heerof abundantly by his holy Word. For not
only every Book of the divine Scriptures be full of documents against this
discomfort, but also (as S. Augustine notes) one whole book of that heavenly
learning, to wit, that of Ecclesiastes, beginning, Vanity of Vanities, and all
things vanity, is entyrely spent in the prosecution of this argument, That
there is this Vanity upon earth, that there be just men unto whom it happens
according to the work of the wicked: again there be wicked men unto whom
things happen as if they were just, that so (says the same Father) Men might
love the life that has not Vanity under the sun, but verity under him that
made the sun.

Out of which book I will allege only one sentence, but the same so full,
and so fit for our purpose, Cap. 9. initio.
as it may seem written a purpose by the spirit of Prescie^ce, to be used in
this occasion: This is the worst of all things under the sun, that the same
things happen alike unto all, to the just and to the wicked, to the good and to
the bad, to the clean and to the unclean, to them that sacrifice, and to them
that contemn Sacrifice, to them that swear the Truth, and to them that are
forsworn. Hence the hearts of the sons of men are filled with malice and
contempt in their life time, and afterward shallbe carried unto Hell. To these
words of the Holy Ghost, what can be added as more clear in proof of our
Argument? what may be spoken more complete, proper, and pithy for our comfort
in this accident?

Here by Gods holy Word we are informed that such is his providence in this
life, that an house or room may fall, no less upon the Just, as they are
hearing his heavenly Doctrine, then upon the Wicked, as they are blaspheming
his blessed Name. No less upon the Good, that are weeping for pardon and
remission of their sins; then upon the Badde, that feast and banquet, riot
and rejoice in their sins. No less upon the Clean, that by humble
Confession and penal Satisfaction purify their souls, Psalm. 6.26.2.
then upon the unclean, whose ways are at all times impure, the judgments of
God (by the doctrine of only Faith) being taken away from before their eyes. No
less upon them that offer the Christian unbloody Sacrifice of the immaculate
Lamb, then upon the^ that contemn this holy Sacrifice, and would rather
massacre the Priests that consecrate the same. Finally no less upon them that
swear the Truth, that that doctrine is Christian which from the mouth of
Christ, by the universal cry of Christian Preachers in all Ages has been
successively sounded unto the^; then upon the^ that depose their private
conceyts gotten by their own inquisition into Gods word, to be the only
Christian divine saving Truth, so filling the world with innumerable dissonant
sects. For as what fancy thinks, that the bell ringeth: so what Heresy
imagines, that in their conceyte the Scripture sounds.

This being so, why does Heresy insult upon Religion, in regard of an accident
common unto men, and unto which their own sect is continually subject? Why
should Charity be frighted to see such deaths in their dearest Friends, that
may happen, and often do happen unto greatest Saints? Why does Faith complain
or wonder at this course of Gods providence which he has set down to himself
in his Word, and which has been still his ordinany since the world? Why does
zeal grieve without comfort to see the Church her enemies triumph, and not
rather pity their case, that after a moment of malice and contempt, shall be
carried to burn for ever in Hell? The Holy Ghost does acknowledge this kind of
Crosses to be the greatest, the worst under the sun, yet not so ill unto you
the children of the Church, as unto the sons of men; I mean them, whose
Religion as different from the Catholic is humane, nothing but a denial of
high mysteries As that the Eucharist is not bread, but the body of Christ. That
the Saints hear our prayers. That God assist his Church she cannot err. That
the Body of Christ is in sundry places at once. That Sacraments work Grace:
Priests remit sins etc. Tobias c. 2.
contrary to the seeming of flesh and blood: Unto these Humanists, I say, this
accident is worse, and causes greater mischief then unto you. It does grieve,
and afflict your heart, it does harden and obdurate their heart. It does fill you
with sorrow and sadness, It fills them with malice and contempt. It brings
tears from your eyes, groans from your breast, it fetches blasphemies from
their mouths, injuries from their hands. It makes you weary of mortal and
miserable life under the sun, not desiring comfort till you come to enjoy
with your Friends the felicity above the sun: It makes them joy in the
sunshine of the greatest vanity under the sun, not admitting of the light
of Faith, that looks above the sun; so continuing in their errors, until
they be carried from under the sun, unto the greatest mysery that is under
the earth.

Call to mind the Example of the holy Tobias, in whom you may behold a pattern
of your present afflicted state. He was stricken blind with swallows dunge
falling into his eyes, when coming home from burying the bodies of the
faithful that had been slain, he cast himself down under the wall of his
house to sleep, through wearines of pious labor, not able to go further. A
strange and miserable accident scarce ever heard of before, sent (as it might
seem) by the hand of Gods providence upon him even in his most fervent
exercise of Religion. Amici and cognati eius deridebant eum. c. 2. v. 15.
Neither was infidelity then wanting straight to scorn and deride his piety,
yea his own countrymen and kindred insulted upon him. Where is thy hope for
which thou did good works? Now thine almes-deedes appear. As if they had
said: Now the fruit of thy deeds of Charity is seen. Now thy Religion of
works is brought to light. Thou art punished with blindness, that thou may
see thine own blindness, to think that one by works can please God, win his
love, merit his favor, purchase heaven. Thus did ancient Infidelity speak in
the Puritan language, which now daily soundes in our ears. Hence we know, that
for God to send strange disasters upon his servants has been ever his custom,
whereby their Religion has been brought into scorn, and themselves into sorrow,
as now we are. In which occasion on what can we better think for our comfort,
then on the golden words of this glorious Toby, which he spoke in answer unto
his deriders, showing the Tradition of his holy Ancestors that delivered from
hand to hand that doctrine unto him, from which they had changed: Nolite ita
loqui, quia FILII SANCTORVM sumus, and vitam illam expectamus, quam daturus est
ijs qui Fidem suam NVNQVAM MVTANT ab eo. Do not speak in this manner, because
we are the Children of the Saints, or holy Fathers, and we exspect that life
which God will give unto them that NEVER CHANGE THEIR FAITH from him, upon any
accident, or occasion whatsoever.

Put before your eyes the patience of holy Job, in that most rufull and
horrible disaster, when all his ten Children with many servants were oppressed
by the fall of an house, together all once. Betwixt which accident and our
mischance there are so many similitudes, In domo fratris primogeniti Job. 1 13.
Le Filz aisne de l'Eglise. Hoc est Praecep^u^ meum. Ioa. 15. 22. Orig. l. 1. in
Job.
corporal in their behalf, spiritual on our side, as that may seem to have
been a figure of this. That happened in the house of the first begotten son of
Job: This in his house who represents the person of that King, that is termed
the fi^st-begotten Son of the Church. They were oppressed as they were
sitting at the meat of their body: These as they were taking the ghostly
refection of their soul. They died as they were keeping a Feast in token of
their fraternall unanimity and concord: These as they were at a spiritual
banquet, at a Sermon, wherein was preached unto them the Christian Precepts of
mutual charity and love. So the words of Origin are true of them both, Tunc
nouissimum vnanimitatis and concordia prandium pranderunt super terram: In
coelis namque aeternae gloriae and incorruptionis beatitudine pariter fruuntur.
The cause of that slaughter was Satan in malice against the Religion of their
Father; The cause of this slaughter was the same Satan (for he is the Author of
all evil) in hatred of the Religion of their Forefathers, and of the Holy
Catholic Church their Mother. See Titelmanus in Job. Factu^ est in principio
Hebdomadae. ita paraphrasis Chaldaica. Job. 1.5.
They were slain after the circle of the seven days were run about, on the
Sabbath when in the morning before, they had been sanctified by the sacrifice of
their holy Father, offering an Holocaust for every one; These also were slain
when the week was expired, on the day of the Christian Sabbath, when (the most
of them at least) had been sanctified in the morning by the Christian most pure
Sacrifice, and by being partakers of the Sacrament, or Holocaust of Christ his
most precious Body and Blood, given whole and entire severally to every one.

Compare your case with that of this holy Prophet, and consider what reason of
comfort he had, which you have not much more strong? what cause of sorrow you
have, which he had not in greater measure? what solace had Job that you want?
That his Children so suddenly slain were of holy life? Lib. 1. in Job.
The same you may presume of these your Friends: and take the words of Origin
as agreeing equally unto them both. They were simple and sincere of heart, chaste
and pure in soul, of unspotted conscience, beloved of God, dear to his Angels
for their innocence, full of brotherly charity one toward another, not any
did, or could speak of them an evil word. That they had been sanctified not
long before by the sacrifices then in use? These also on the very same day were
expiated by the Christian Sacraments, and by a sacrifice of a far greater
force, yea of infinite price. De sanctitate secu^ loquentes and cum sororibus
etc.
That they died holily in an action of brotherly charity and love? In a far
more holy action and exercise of piety were these taken away: that what Origin
says of the^, is much more certain of these. They were taken as they were
discoursing of Piety and Sanctity among themselves, honoring God in their
hearts, praising him as their Creator, adoring him as their Benefactour,
giving him thanks as unto their Foster-father. Filij sancti sanctissimi Patris.
As little Innocents sit and stand, play and sport together without any malice
or uncleanness in mind, so were these holy Children of their most holy Father,
when the blow came upon them.

On the other side, what cause have you of affliction that did not press more
heavily upon the fatherly heart of holy Job? You have lost them that were dear
unto you; but not more dear then was unto him his whole family of children. A
stroke (says Origin) whereof none can comprehend the dolefulnes, but such as
know by experience what is the love of a Father, though the sole imagination
thereof may move any man's heart unto tears of compassion. He lost his Sons
whom he had nourished, to whom he had given best education, Orig. l. 1. in Job.
that now were come to ripe years; His Sons whom he had brought up in piety,
seasoned with the fear and worship of God, settled in charity and mutual
love, made in all kind of sanctity like to himself; His Sons whose issue he
did desire to see, whose posterity he did so earnestly expect, from whom in his
old age he did hope for comfort; These Sons, and not they only, but also his
Daughters, so chaste, so pure, so religious, immaculate, without blemish, on
whose heads on the day of their marriage he did intend to set garlands of joy.
All these perished together at once, and together with them, spes quanta
nepotum! all his joyful hopes of glorious offspring.

The death of your Friends was dreadful, horrible, whereof the very
remembrance is execrable, how much more the sight? Not more rufull and terrible
then the death of the holy Children of this blessed Patriarch, which Origin
describes in these words? Orig. vbi supra.
They dyed not an ordinary but a most lamentable death, they were most
miserably slain. Their bodies were torn in pieces with stones, bruysed with
the weight of beams, covered and defiled with dust, lime and rubbish. Mamocks
of their torn flesh, together with pieces of their broken bones, their
brains, their bowels, their blood, the brothers with their sisters, the
sisters with their brothers lay mingled with clay, mortar and stone in one
inseparable mass. For the Devil left nothing of them entyre, not their
sculls, not their bowels, not their stomachs, not their arms, not their
hands, not their legs, not their feet, in sum not any part of their body.
A rufull spectacle, a woeful sight, yea rather no spectacle, no fight at all.
For nothing was to be seen, nothing that could be known, flesh and bones,
stones and timber, clay and mortar, blood and wine lay so confusedly together
in one heap; Neither the masters from the servants, nor the brothers from the
sisters, nor his children among themselves were discernable the one from the
other, either by their faces, or by their persons. Thus dyed the holy and
innocent Children of Job, whose death yet was dear and precious in Gods sight,
that we might not judge of the sanctity of men's lives, by the hydeous show of
their deaths.

But Job his Religion (you will say) was not reproached in regard of this
accident. Yes, and perchance much more then the Catholic now is, in respect of
this late Event. For I am persuaded that all moderate Protestants behold this
mischance with the eye of pity, as a misery indifferently incident unto
mankind, not with eyes of disdain, as an argument of just contempt of the
Religion of them that stood obnoxious thereunto. Neither do I think, that they,
unto whom indiscreet auersion from every thing of our Church has given the
name of Pure, do press this fall as a just reason, to fall from our Religion,
except they be so void of discretion and unwise, as to make the truth of GODS
Word, which will not fail though heaven and earth pass away, to depend on the
standing or falling of an house. If some, whom the temporalities they have
gotten, by the banishment of our Religion engage, and late, vain, and idle
fears of loosing what they have gotten, enrage against the Roman Church; if
these men (I say) by their declamations in pulpit, incense the rude vulgar
multitude to take this occasion to insult upon our Religion, Beato Job
insultaba^t Reges. Tob. 2.15.
they do no more unto us then was also done unto the most holy Job in his
distress by the Ministers of Satan. For who knows not, how he was assaulted
and iusulted upon, by them that upon the news of his mishapp, came to comfort
him; Orig. l. 1. in Job.
but the Devil changed their hearts into bitterness against him, filled their
mouths with blasphemies and injurious words. So that in place of consolation,
they fell to reproach his Religion, urging the said mischance to condemn his
sincerity of divine service, and true practice of piety.

Wherefore as you are the consorts of holy Job in your trial, so be like unto
him in your trust and confidence in God, and from his goodness expect, in devout
silence, the like reward of your constancy, not only a crown of patience in
the next world, but also increase of temporal comfort in the present.

CHAP. II. Comfort by the Examples of former Christian times.
THe comfort of holy Scripture, is seconded by the practice of Gods Providence
in the Christian Church, Quaecu^que sunt carnis inco^moda, Sa^ctis sunt cum
ceteris sine exceptione communia. Cyp. ser. de mortal.
which has been still subject unto the dreadful mischances of mortality, no
less then other men, whereby both Pagans and Heretics have been moved to insult
upon the Catholic Christians, as I shall demonstrate by diverse Examples of the
first six hundred years, during which time most Protestants dare not say that
Christianity was unsound.

Examples within the first three hundred years.
BEing to allege Examples of dreadful deaths, and mischances happened unto
Saints since the Christian times, where can I better begin then with Christ
Jesus himself, Heb. 12.2. Ephesians. 1.22. Romans 8.19.
the founder of our Faith, the accomplisher of our Hope, the head of the
Christian elect, the Pattern of perfection, according to the model whereof the
Saints of God are framed. Could the eternal Father design for his beloved
Son any kind of death more dismal and pitiful, more disgraceful and
horrible then that of the Cross? A death infamous unto the Gentile, execrable
unto the Jew, Maledictushomo qui pe^det in ligno. Deuteronomy. 21.23.
branded with a curse by Gods own word. Which Cross though he embraced out of
his voluntary choice and infinite charity for the redemption of mankind, yet
that the same might seem more ignominious in the eye of the world, he would
have things carried in such sort, as if against his will his enemies, through
the treachery of his disciple, and strength of their practices had prevailed to
lay that horrible death upon him. This course of providence, God used toward
Christ Jesus the Saint of Saints, for the Comfort of Christian Saints, amongst
whom (as Saint Angustin writes) Multi multarum mortium faeda varietate
consumpti sunt: Lib. 1. de ciuit. c. 11.
Many have been destroyed with strange variety of dreadful deaths. By this
Example we are taught, that (as says the same excellent Doctor) No death is
evil which is the sequel of good life: That death is made miserable, not by
the miseryes that go before it, but by the miseryes that follow upon it: That
men (seeing they must of necessity dye) are to regard not the horror of the
mischance by which they are taken away, but the quality of the place they are
by death carried unto.

But as Christ Jesus in regard of the dignity of his person is without peer,
so this example by reason of the strangenes thereof, shall pass as
incomparable, and not to be put in number with the rest. I will therefore pose
proud presumers that dare determine when, and on whom God sends his
vengeance, with the different kind of providence he showed toward two Roman
Emperors of contrary dispositions, to wit, Caius Caligula, Senec co^solat. ad
Heb. Quid su^ma vitia in summa fortuna possint^ Hieron. de obitu Nepotiani.
and Titus Vespasianus: The one surnamed the monster of mankind, whom Nature
(as Seneca writes) may seem to have brought forth to no other end, then that
in him as in a glass, it might appear unto what extremity of wickedness man
may arrive, when the basest disposition unto vice, and the highest condition of
Prince, meet together in the same person: The other surnamed Delitiae generis
humani, The joy and pleasure of mankind, in whom was seen a secret never
before, nor perchance since seen in the world, Nec caedes fecit nec amoribus
inseruiuit comis and continens adeo mores statim mutauit. Sueton. in Tito. c.
11. Dio, and Sueton in Caio. Dio and Sueton in Tito. Philo de legate. ad Caium.
one made better that is mild, modest, chaste, clement and courteous, by being
raised unto the height and dignity of Emperor. I will not stand to rehearse
the barbarous crueltyes of Caligula, without any cause used upon his nearest
kindred and friends; nor the incredible clemencyes of Titus toward his
enemies, and even unto them that he knew by daily practices went about to
shorten his life. This I may further affirm, that the first, to wit Caius, was
an enemy of true Religion, or rather a bloody persecutour of all Religion,
causing himself every where to be adored as the only God, with murders and
massacres of the^ that would not yield unto this impiety. Titus on the other
side a friend and favorer of Christians, who stayed the persecution that Nero
had raised against them. Oh into what danger of erring do they precipitate
themselves, that presume they can diue into the depth of Gods secrets, and will
judge of men, and Religion by disasterous events! For the days of the Empire
of the most wicked Caius were full of prosperity, Sueton. in C^io. c. 31.
no misfortune of war, no famines, no plagues, no burning of towns, no
earthquakes, no falling of houses, in so much as the barbarous Tyrant was
grieved thereat, wishing that his Empire by some memorable calamity, might be
made renowned unto posterity. On the other side, what of the short Empire of
Titus? Sueton. in Tito. c 8.
The same was from the beginning to the end infested with dreadful
aduersityes, with fires from heaven, with earthquakes so strange and hydeous,
as the like were never heard off before, nor recorded in any History: Dion in
Tito. Incendiu^ no^ ex terr^, diuinu^ potius quam humanum id malum fuit.
wherewith not only towns and cittyes, but many whole countries were laid wast
and destroyed, chiefly the city of Rome, with all the most excellent ornaments
thereof. These calamityes were the cause that he pined away with sorrow to the
great grief of all good men, particularly of Christians; his death being also
hastened with poison given him by Domitian his unnatural Brother, whose cruelty
he could never overcome with all kind of courtesies, clemencies, and tokens of
more the^ brotherly love. Who considering these things, will not rest
astonished at Gods inuestigable judgments? Who will not with the Prophet
acknowledge, Psalm. ^3.5.
that he is terrible in his counsels above the Sons of men? Specially seeing
Infidels took this occasion of calamityes happening upon this Emperor the
friend of Christians, Tertul. Apolog. cap. 40.
otherwise so just and benign, to calumniate their Religion, as if all
miseryes were sent upon the world in regard of them? which sca^dalous conceyt
by this accident of Titus his unfortunate reign, took such root in the heart
of Pagans, Aug. l. 1. de Ciuit. c. 2.
as it never afterward went out, so long as they breathed within the Roman
Empire.

Heerin they were confirmed by the success of the reign of Gordian the
Emperor, a friend of Christian Religion, if not also a worshipper of Christ
secretly, See the life of S. Cecily Virg. and Mart. Julius Capitolin. in
Gordiano. Nissen. in vita Greg. Thaum. Civitates omnes and quae circu^ circa
Regiones. Cyp. sermon de mortal. Orig. contra Col. l. 3.
and in heart. In the beginning of his Empire, when he had forbidden the
persecution raised against Christians, by Maximinus the Thracian his bloody and
barbarous Predecessor, presently happened most horrible Earthquakes, wherewith
whole Cittyes with all the people dwelling therein perished, and were swallowed
up alive by the opening of the ground; many of them without question being
Christians of very holy life. For Christians were then so multiplied, as they
filled all Cittyes, Towns, and almost Villages of the Roman Empire: and S.
Cyprian bears witness that in all kind of calamityes, famine, Pestilence,
sack of Cittyes, shipwrackes, Earthquakes etc. Christians were destroyed and
consumed without exception, as much as any other.

By which Mischances the hearts of Infidels were hardened against Religion,
even as much as new Sectaries are in this Age, whereof Origin living at that
time does complain in these words. Denuo calumniatores nostritantorum motuum
causamin multitudine^ Fidelium confer coeperu^t quod non impugnemur a
Principibus sicut superiori tempore: Here again our calumnious Adversaries,
laid the cause of so miserable mischances upon the multitude of the Faithful
daily increasing, because now we are not persecuted by our Princes as in former
times. Behold the ancient language of Infidelity, which heresy especially by
hipocriticall Purity now has made the vulgar English of our Country, whereby it
may appear, that both Pagans and Puritans impugn the same Church, and that
both are moved to speak by the same spirit, seeing they utter their mind so
just in the same form of words.

Neither was this the first insultation of Infidels over Christians in that
Age, in regard of mischances, nor was this the first occasion they took of
hardening their hearts as stone against them. A little before happened the
lamentable murder of Alexander Seuerus a most just Emperor, Lampridius in
Alexandro.
a great admirer of Christian Religion, yea Mammea his Mother was esteemed a
Christian. He kept in his Cabinet a picture of Christ, he exhorted Pagans to
imitate the sanctity of Christians; when men were punished for any crime of
in^ustice, he did use by the voice of the crier to proclayme that Christian
sentence, Quod tibi non vis, alteri ne feceris. Finally he was resolved to have
built a Temple unto Christ, where Christians might worship him: but the Pagan
South-sayers opposed against it, affirming (even as heresy now does (for all
error is guilty to its own weakness) OMNES Christianos futuros, and reliqua
templa deserenda, Lampridius in Alexandro.
that then all would become Christians, and no other Temple be frequented. When
I say this just and good Emperor, such a lover of Christians was slain, a
most horrible earthquake following thereupon in most parts of the world, by
which Christians were particularly consumed, it is incredible what an outcry
and uproar was raised by the seditious worshippers of false Gods against them,
whereof Origin then also living makes mention, and complayneth saying:
Earthquakes happen even also amongst us in sundry places, Origin. in Joan.
tom. 28.
with the ruins of houses and swallowing up of many people; the impious deuoyd
of faith, crying every where that to punish Christians such earthquakes are.
And not only these, Firmil. in Epist. ad Cyprian. quae est 75 inter Ep. Cyprian.
but they that seemed wise did in public affirm, that these Earthquakes in
regard of Christians were caused.

Firmilianus a Bishop living in that Age affirms, that such miseryes and
strange vengeances, some of them were priuatae Christianis, fell upon
Christians only: as also Origin insinuats in the former words, even amongst us
earthquakes happen. And Firmilianus adds, that these earthquakes were
raised by the enchantment and witchery of a woman professing her self a
Christian, and a Prophetess, being (as it is likely) of Montanus his sect,
which then was in strength. Who will not wonder at Gods holy permissio^, that
such miseryes should be inflicted upon Christians, (as aunciently upon holy
Job) by an heretical Witch, so making Religion a scorn and obloquy amongst
Infidels: As also this our mischance, though there was a natural apparent
cause thereof, yet we need not doubt but Satan therein had secretly his hand.
But in these permissions and doleful accidents we cannot say unto God, Why
do thou so? We must with holy Job and the ancient christians, lay our
selves prostrate at his feet, in the silence and sorrow of soul, Iudici^ Dei
abyssus multa. Psalm. 35. and Psalm. 118.72.
drowning our shallow selfe-humane wisdom in the bottomless depth of his
judgments, crying as they did with the Prophet, Thou art just (O Lord) and
righteous are thy judgments. And again: The judgments of God are justified
within themselves, though out of themselves, and unto us their justification
does not always appear.

Of the scandal of Infidels and Heretics, at the lamentable destruction of
Nicomedia, and Nicea.
AFTER Constance had set up the profession of Christian Religion every where in
the world, in the days of his Son Constantius, the whole City of Nicomedia,
the place which so many christian Martyrs had consecrated with the precious
effusion of their blood, with Earthquakes and fire was utterly destroyed, being
then not only Christian, but also Catholic, or the most part, Ammian.
Marcellin. l. 17.
as appears by S. Vrsacius his communion with them in Religion and Prayers.

This miserable mischance is by Ammianus described in these words. Straight
after the break of day, a suddayne concourse and thickning together of dark
clouds took away the sight of the sun, which was risen clear unto the
world, so that for want of light men could not see things that were near unto
them, and which they touched with their hands. Then as if God had resolved to
send a fatal destruction upon them, calling the winds from the four coasts
of the world for that purpose, behold a most horrible fury of storms invaded
the City. An hydeous noise was heard from the mountayns round about shaken
with the violence of the winds, as also from the shore beaten with the rage of
roaring waves. Heerupon ensued horrible whirlewindes with such dreadful
shaking of the ground, as therewith both the City and the Suburbs were
overthrown. And as a great part of the city stood upon the side of hills,
buildings fell one upon another, men languishing away with fear and grief
through the most rufull noise caused, as well by the cracking of houses that
fell on every side, as also with the lamentable cries and schriches of men and
women, bewayling the loss of parents, husbands, wives and children, and
whatsoever else by the band of kindred was near and dear unto them.

At two of the clock after dinner somewhat before three, the sun shined out
of the clouds clear and bright, as it were smiling at their misery, and
coming a purpose to discover unto them, and lay before their eyes as it were
upon a Theater, the whole most execrable spectacle of that rufull slaughter.
Many under the ruins pitifully broken and chrusht in pieces by the weight of
things that fell upon them. Some covered in the rubbish up to very neck, only
their heads being out, might have lived if any had given them their helping
hand, who for want of succor perished. Others hunge in the air upon the end of
beams and rafters, which had pierced into their bowels, and through their
bodies. Many hundreds lay together in one heap slain at one clapp; a little
before, a company of living men, now nothing else but a mangled multitude of
deformed corses. Diverse within their own houses were with ruins round about
enclosed and imprisoned alive and sound, to be consumed with anguish and
hunger, amongst whom Aristenaetus governor of the town, breathed out his
soul by the torment of a long death. Some in their falling had their heads
bruyzed and broken one against another, some their legs, some their thighs,
some their arms, some their very shoulders stroke^ off from their bodies, who
lay groaning betwixt life and death, with most pitiful cries and obsecrations,
imploring the aid of them that were in the same misery. A great part of that
unfortunate City, alwell of Churches as of houses and men, might
notwithstanding this calamity have remained, had not terrible globes of flame
issued out of houses, which wandering every where about the City for fifty
days and fifty nights, consumed into ashes whatsoever was obnoxious unto fire.
Thus Ammianus.

This dreadful destruction of Nicomedia, was censured as a vengeance of God
against Christian and Catholic Religion, because it happened at the same time
when against the error of Photinus, and Aetius, a Council of Bishops was
thither summoned to be held. Sozom. ^ 4. c. 15.
The Bishops were in their way, yea some (though few) already arrived who
perished with the rest. Amongst others, that most holy man Vrsacius, Episcopus
Nicomediae and alij ex Bosphoro. Sozom. ibid.
that had been a glorious Confessor of Christ, in the persecution of Licinius,
who forsaking the court of the Emperor, having given away all to the poor,
there lead an heavenly form of Monastical life in continual fasting and
prayer, renowned also for miracles, as casting out of Devils, and by a word
only killing a Dragon that infested the city, who likewise had foretold this
calamity, wishing the citizens, particularly the Priests, by penance and
prayer to seek to prevent the same. This great Saint I say, put into the
Catholic Martyrologe, was found dead in his cell, Martyrol. Roman. 16. Aug.
or little cottage he had built to himself, lying prostrate on his face as he
did use in his prayers, either stifled with the smoke of the fire, or else
dying in his prayer out of grief: For he had desired of God that he might not
live after the destruction of that city, wherein he had been made a Christian,
and afterward professed the state of Evangelical perfection. The death of this
holy man and of many others, was taken of Infidels as divine vengeance upon
Christian Religion, so that full of joy they went triu^phing unto the Emperor,
and mingling falsehood with truth said, That the whole multitude of Christian
Bishops and Priests, men, women, and children, had been slain by the vengeance
of their Gods, within their very Churches, whither they were fled for security
and succor: M^gno Episcoporu^ qui sacrae doctrinae fauebant dolor.
yea that the famous Temple built unto Christ, by Constantine his Father, was
utterly from the very foundation razed, as indeed it was to the great grief of
the orthodoxe Bishops, especially in regard of the scandal that Heretics and
Infidels took thereat. Whereby the vanity and headlong blindness of our
Adversaries may appear, who insult upon Catholics in regard of a vulgar event,
a very trifle in comparison of this. But something they must have that may give
them occasion to rail at our Religion, which by reason they cannot impugn, no
nor dare look upon it truly related, they know the same to be so warrantable.

Not altogether so terrible, yet in respect of the circumstance of the time
more scandalous was the wonderful destruction of the city of Nicea, where the
first Christian general Council was celebrated against the Aria^s, and the
doctrine of Homousion, or Co^substantiality defined. When Valence the Arian
Emperor began to persecute the Nicen Faith, some few years after his being
come to the Empire, just at the same time the City of Nicea was ouerthrown
from the very fou^dations by an earthquake. Saint Gregory Nazianzen terms
this earthquake the greatest that had happened within the memory of man.
whereby his holy Brother Caesarius then the Emperors Receauer, was in danger,
and miraculously escaped. For being covered within the rubbish of the ruins,
the same were a defense unto him against further mischief, till he was thence
taken out a little hurt, and thereupon resolved to give over the world. Here
the Arians did triumph against the Catholics of that time, (even as some hot
Puritans do now against us) as if God together with the Emperor, heaven
together with earth had co^spired against the Nicene doctrine, of Christ's
being Coeternall and Consubstantiall unto God his Father. These our Antagonists
that are so jolly and iocund, so puffed up with pride at the fall of a rotten
chamber upon some few at a Catholic sermon, where no doctrine was then
preached which they dare say was contrary unto theirs; how insolent and
intolerable would they be, if the Emperor should turn to be of their Sect,
and persecute the Catholic Faith; and that just in that conjunction, the City
of Trent, with the Church and place where the Council did meet, and made
their Decrees, should by some earthquake or lightening from heaven be
destroyed. And yet should they have no greater argument against the Tridentine,
then the Arians had against the Nicene definition of Faith. Whence one may
gather how vain, empty and destitute of solid causes of joy their heart, and
their Religion is, that do so much triumph at a trifle, whereby they make not
their strength of Faith, but their weakness of judgment, and want of charity,
manifest unto the world.

Other Examples strange and wonderful.
HOw much did Infidels rejoice when the Christians of Moguntia were slain by
the Barbarians, Ammian^ l. 20.
not as Christians in hatred of their Religion, for then they had been happy
martyrs, but as subjects of the Roman Empire, and out of their auersion from
the same, which S. Hierome deplores, saying: Hier. ep. 11. ad Aregut.
Moguntiacum in former times a famous and glorious City, is now destroyed, and
many thousands murdered within the very Church. As also in the death of Iouian
Emperor, that under Julian had suffered persecution, and presently upon the
death of Julian, was by the consent of the army chosen Emperor. Ammian. l. 25.
When Christians were fullest of joy, glorying that the Empire was given him of
God, in reward of his constancy in Christian Religion, Iouianus gustatis tantum
Imperialibus bonis prunarum foetore, suffocatus est. Hier. ep. ad Heliodo. de
morte Nepot. Socrates l. 7. c. 38.
in the midst of their acclamatio^s and triumphs, he was taken away by suddane
death, choked with the smoke of coals, in the 7. month of his Empire.

How did the Nouatians exult against the Catholics, when in a most strange and
horrible conflagration of the City of Constantinople, all the chief momuments
of the city and Catholic Churches being wasted with fire, only the Nouatian
Church or meeting place for prayer escaped, the houses round about being al in
a flame. Which they did attribute unto the prayers of their Bishop, who was
then praying in their Church, and in memory of that supposed miracle did early
keep a solemn feast; and yet after their triumps and insultatio^s against
Catholic, their sect vanished away, and within short time after, there was
scarce any memory thereof, which will be also the end of these torre^ts of error
that now swell with waters, and keep a noise in the world. How great was the
joy of the Pagans, when at the time of the banishment of S. Chrysostom, the
Church of Constantinople being consumed with casual, or with procured, or (as
other rather think) miraculous fire, together with the Emperors palace, and
house of the Senate? all Christian monuments were wasted and consumed, and in
particular the Statua's of Constantine, and Theodosius the great, the two
Christian Emperors whom Idolatry did most detest, yet two images or Idols, the
one of Jupiter, and the other of Minerua, were found in the confused mass of
ashes untouched: Infidels did interpret this prodigy that the Gods had not
forsaken the Empire, but would again return. Which foolish conceyte of
comfort, was but a lightening before death, seeing presently the Goths
preuayling, together with their entrance, Paganism was wholly and utterly
extinct, not any practice thereof being left in the Empire.

I will conclude with one more Example of the divine providence, in afflicting
his servants the Orthodoxe Christians, in such sort that in the judgment of men
and Heresy he might seem to mislike their Religion. The city of Antioch,
being by situation of the place subject to earthquakes was free and quiet from
such mischances, in the government of three Eutychian Emperors Zeno,
Basiliscus, and Anastasius, for the space of threescore and seven years,
Heresy rejoicing and flourishing therein. Euagrius l. 4. c. 5.
Iustine the most Catholic Prince succeeding them in the Empire, the Catholics
of Antioch were exceedingly comforted to see their long persecution now at end.
For, Seuerus the Eutichian, and head of the Acephali being expeld, a Catholic
Patriarch was ordained in his place, chosen by the Pope and the Emperor,
Ammian. l. 3. c. 6.
with exact care to give the afflicted Antiochians the best they could find.
The Catholics being full of content in respect of this change, and peace, after
so long molestations, God in his secret judgments would alay their wine with
water, their joys with sorrow. For their Bishop being come, behold a suddan
earthquake surpriseth the city, at dinner time, as they were at meat. And a
whirlwind rising unfortunately at that very instant, blew the fire and flame
of the kitchins, then burning according to the time of the day, upon the
buildings that were shaken by the earthquake. So the commiserable city set
upon by a double mischief and enemy together at once, was destroyed with the
most of her inhabitants: amongst them was her Catholic and holy Bishop
Euphrasius, who (his head being first stricken off by the fall of a pillar) was
buried in a sepulcher of fire, to the excessive joy of the Eutychians, and
Seuerus their ringleader, but to the great lamentation of Catholics, specially
of the good Emperor. Paulus Diaconus in Miscell. l. 15.
For upon news heerof he put off his Diadem and purple, vested himself in
sacke-cloth, sat solitary many weeks together weeping in silence, not
admitting of any mirth, though the days were solemn and festival, upon which
his custom was to go with great pomp and splendor unto the Church. Where
also we may note, that the joy the Eutychians took in this mischance, was but
the dancing of death, seeing presently hereupon they were so rooted out, that
in the hystories of the next succeeding Age, there is no memory of them.

As Catholics have cause of comfort in these Examples, to see things succeed
with them, as they did with the orthodoxe Christians and Saints of God in
former ages, so likewise our Censurers, that making themselves of Gods Privy
Counsel give out their Writs against us, may tremble, to see themselves
hardened in malice, as former Heretics were, and to feel the same lightenings
of death as they did. And for conclusion of this Chapter, I will again repeat
the words of the Holy Ghost wherewith I began, in which Catholics may receive
comfort, and our insulting Adversaries may hear their doom from Gods own
mouth: This is the worst of all under the sun, that the same things happen
alike unto all, to the good, and to the impious. Hence the hearts of the sons
of men, are filled with malice and contempt in their lyfe-time, and afterward
they shall be carried into Hell.

CHAP. III. Comfort, by comparison with our Adversaries, and Gods clear
Judgments against them.
BEfore I begin to discourse of this Argument, I must here meet with an
Objection, which I know will be made against what has been said; to wit, If
mischances happen alyke to the good and to the bad, to the Christian and to the
Infidel, to the Catholic and to the Heretic, Why does Cardinal Bellarmine
make Temporal felicity a Mark, De Eccles. l. 2. c. 20.
whereby to discern the true Christian Church? I answer, that without all
doubt there is a kind of Temporal felicity proper unto the true Church,
according to the prediction of the Prophets that have spoken so much of the
Te^porall glory and happiness thereof. This felicity (though the same be mingled
with many private mischances) is apparent, and may be discerned from the
felicity of profane worldlings by three notes, by the Author, by the End, by
the Effect thereof. The Author of this felicity is God, not working according
to the ordinary course of things, but by miracle, sending the same down from
heaven. And therefore it is termed by Bellarmine, Diuinitus data, Lib. 5: de
ciuit. c. 46.
especially given of God; and by S. Augustine, A Deo euidentissima largitate
concessa, coming apparently from the special bounty of God. This felicity God
uses to grant when the same is necessary for the defense of true Religion
against Infidelity and Heresy: and it appeared manifestly in the victories
obtained by Constantine the Great, by Theodosius the great, by Honorius his
Son, by Charles also the great. Neither has the like special providence and
supernatural assistance been wanting or less apparent in sundry battayles
fought in this age betwixt Catholics and Heretics. For though God permit
strange accidents sometimes, which tend to particular trial of his servants,
yet misfortunes and miraculous overthrows, dismal and unfortunate deaths fall
more frequently upon his enemies, as might be proved by examples ten for one,
if need so required. Lib. 5. de ciuit. c. 18.
God (says S. Augustine) that men might not think that the prosperity of this
life, were not to be gotten but by serving the Devil, adorned the two most
Christian Emperors Constantine and Theodosius, with all kind of worldly
felicity the heart of man could wish: On the other side that Christians might
know that they are not to serve God for these temporal goods, he would have
the reign of Iouian a most pious Emperor more short, then that of Julian the
Apostata. Also Graetian a godly Prince (not so gracious in name, as in manners)
he permitted unto the sword of a rebellious Tyrant.

Secondly this felicity the Mark of the Church, is known by the End, which is
the salvation of souls, by dilatation of Christian Religion amongst Heathens,
and by maintenance of peace and unity in the Christian Church against the
breaches of factious doctrine. For without question, Felicity that serves to so
divine and heavenly an end, is divine and heavenly, and shows the Church, in
favor whereof the same is granted, to be the only true Christian Church.
Neither it is hard for any man to discern unto which Church this felicity,
mantayning peace of Religion amongst Christians, and dilating Christian
Religion among the Heathens, does belong: as also where that accursed kind of
felicity is found, by which no Nation of Infidells has been converted, but
only the quiet of Christendom, in matters as well of Religion, as of civil
Government, perverted.

Thirdly, this felicity proper unto the Church, is made evident by the Effect,
to wit, by the pious works and godly liberalityes thereof, shining in the
Princes unto whom the same is granted. For as God does by special providence,
honor and enrich these Princes for the benefit of his Church; so likewise by
secret inspiration, he does infuse acknowledgment heerof into their heart, and
moves them to discharge their debt of gratitude toward him, by showing their
liberalityes unto his Church. Thus Cyrus though a Pagan did acknowledge his
temporal felicity in being made Monarch of the world from the hand of the God
of Israel, 2. Paralip. c. 36. v. 23.
for the comfort of his banished people; whom therefore he set at liberty,
restored unto their country, and assisted them both with his authority and
liberality to rebuild their Temple. Who does not know the reverence unto the
Church, the obedience unto Bishops, the magnificent bounty of erecting every
where Temples unto Christ that shined in the most mighty and fortunate
Christian Emperors, as were Constantine, Theodosius, and Charles, all three
surnamed the Great? Who does not see the works of true Christian felicity in
our country, and of what Religion those Princes were, by whom Churches,
Monasteryes, Hospitalls, and other works of Piety, with their temporal
endowments were founded?

This then is that kind of Temporal felicity, which is to be held a Mark of
the Church, to wit, That, whereof Gods miraculous providence, is the Author,
Propagation of Christianity amongst Heathens, the end, Liberalityes in temporal
works of Piety, the effect. Without these respects, to make happy Event a note
of the truth, or unlucky success a sign of falsehood, what is it, but to set
Religion on the dyce, to expose Conscience unto chance, to make Faith mutable
with the wind? If the Professors of true Religion, cast out of Churches, by the
piety of their Ancestors built, meet to hear Gods word in a private chamber,
shall Truth that remaynes for ever, Veritas Domini manner in aeternum. Psalm. 136.
stand obnoxious unto the rottenes of the room? must their faith also fall to
the ground and perish with their bodies, if happily the place break through
the weight of the multitudes that thither ouer-zealously flock? Desire of the
food of their soul, so drawing away their thoughts, as they did not aforehand
apprehend the danger of their corporal life? God forbid.

Progidious things that did happen at the change from Catholic Religion in
England.
Will our Adversaries themselves be content to have their Religion put to this
trial? If they be content, things in this kind recorded by their Annals, will
bring their cause in danger. When King Henry the eight had withdrawn himself
from the obedience of the Sea of Rome, together with Schism (though against
his will) did enter Irreligion toward the most blessed Sacrament reserved in
Churches, what happened? Stow, or Howes cronicle.
they shall understand in their own Croniclers words. Upon the 25. of May,
the rood of S. Margarets Patins by the Towerstreet in London was pulled down
and broken in pieces together with the Tabernacle. And three nights after, to
wit on the 27. of May, was a great fire in the same S. Margarets Parish not
far from the Church, the which flre consumed there more then a dozen ^ouses,
and many persons, men and women brent to death. Was not this a judgment? did
not God presently punish that fact of Heresy with fire, the punishment by
Christian custom appointed for that kind of impiety? Did not the fire come
just in time to punish that irreligious act, having given them first three
days to repent, according to that decree of the Scripture, Esd. 10. 8.
He that within three days shall not come back to Jerusalem his whole
substance shall be consumed? Did not the fire fall right in the place where the
sin was committed, as if God by sending that fire had said unto them, you have
disquieted my Tabernacle, violated my house, abused my sacred Body left you
under the form of bread, and would not repent: therefore in vengeance thereof, I
now burn your tabernacles, fire your houses, consume your bodies into ashes.

When Queen Elizabeth in the second year of her reign, had put Catholics
from all Churches, not permitting them so much as one for the Religion that all
her Christian Progenitors Kings of England had professed: who knows not what
happened unto the Chief, the most goodly and glorious of all those Churches,
presently upon the very next year, their Religion being scarce yet warm in
the profession thereof? An. Reg. 3.
On the fourth of June (says the same Annalist) between four and five of the
afternoon, the steeple of Paul's in London was fired by lightening. The fire
brast forth (as it seemed to the beholders) two or three yardes beneath the
foot of the Cross, and from thence, brent the speere (which was of two
hundred and sixty foot) down to the stone-worke and bells, so terribly that
within the space of four hours the same steeple with the roof of the Church
so much as was timber or otherwise combustible, were consumed, which was a
lamentable sight, and pitiful remembrance to the beholders thereof. Thus he.
This was the welcome Heaven gave unto the new Religion then entering into our
Kingdom, by fiering upon them that most magnificent Temple, which under
Catholics had stood almost a thousand years. They that urge the falling of an
old chamber as miraculous vengeance sent from heaven upon Catholic Religion:
what can they with any show of probability answer unto the^ that will press
them with this prodigious lightening and fiering which came directly from
heaven upon them? Specially seeing therewith their Communion Table was also
fired, though their Cronicler, to save the credit of their Gospel make no
mention thereof? Neither is it without mystery, that this fire brake forth from
under the foot of the Cross, as coming against the enemies of the sign of
the Cross, and to show Gods anger against them for their contempt of that most
holy instrument of our redemption.

What will they say unto another Prodigy also set down in their Annals, that
upon the time their Religion was begotten by Q Elizabeth, and christened in
England? Just at the same time so many monstrous births happened within two or
three months, as the like is not noted in any of our antiquityes. This year
(says the said M. Stow) were many monstrous births. In march a mare brought
forth a foale with one body and two heads, and as it were a long tail,
growing between the two heads: also a Sow farrowed a pig with four legs,
like to the arms of a man-child with hands and fingers etc. In April a Sow
farrowed a pig with two bodies, eight feet, and but one head. Many calves and
lambs were monstrous, some with collars of skins growing about their necks
like to the dubble ruffes of shirts and neckercheffs then used. On the twentieth
of May, a man-child was borne at Chichester in Sussex, the head arms and
legs whereof were like an anatomy, the breast and belly monstrous big, from
the nauill, as it were a long stringe was hanging, about the neck a great
collar of flesh and skin like to the ruff of a shirt, coming up above the
ears playting and folding. Thus he. Was it by chance (think you) that so many
monstrous and ugly Births happened thus on a heap together with the birth of
your Gospel? or rather were they not sent by Gods providence, to lay before
eue^ your carnal eyes, the fedity and deformity of your change from the faith
of all your Christian Ancestors?

I will here conclude without passing into forrayne countries, only I will
entreat our Adversaries to look out of England no further then they may
almost from thence reach with their corporal sight, to wit, unto the Hill on
the Sea-shoare near unto Deep. There the ruins of one of their Temples are
yet to be seen, which fell upon their reformed Puritan Auditory, at the time of
the Preach, wherewith four hundred with the Minister were oppressed. The cause
of this overthrow was not vulgar and ordinary as in our case, but a strange and
terrible whirle-winde, raised and sent by Gods special providence to punish
them. The remembrance of this whirlwind and woeful accident will happily take
from them their insulting spirit, or at least so blow away their vain and
frivolous clamors, that this accident was Gods vengeance upon us for our
Religion, as they will not be heard with esteem by any man of judgment.

The death of the Catholic Preacher of this Sermon, compared with the death of
Calvin and Zuinglius.
But they think we shall not find amongst their Ministers, any that was
stricken with so suddayne and disastrous a death as the Jesuit Preacher of this
Sermon was. This shows how ignorant they are of their own Church, and how like
the Lamiae, of whom Plutarch writes, that being at home they pull their eyes
out of their head, Luther. tom. 7. Witte^b. fol. 230. a. post medium. Conradus
Schlusselburg. in Theolog. Calvin. l. 2. fol. 72.
and lock them up in coffers, and they only use them, when they are disposed
to go abroad to visit their Neighbors. Does not Luther write, that their
great Grand-sire Oecolampadius was killed in his bed, shaken with horrible
frights, the Devil appearing to him, and this in punishment of his error
against the Sacrament? Does not a famous Protestant Super-intendent give this
testimony of the death of the Puritans Dad John Calvin? God (says he) in the
rod of his fury punished Calvin before the dreadful hour of his unhappy death
with his mighty hand. For being in despair and calling upon the Devil he gave
up his wicked soul, swearing, cursing and blaspheming. He dyed on the disease
of lice and worms, increasing in a most loath-some ulcer about his privy
parts, so as none present could endure the stench. These be the words of that
Protestant.

But because this happend within the walls of Geneua, and in Caluins privy
Chamber, we cannot have such proof thereof, but Puritans will outface both
Protestants and us. Wherefore we will bring them out of the walls of Geneua
into the open field, out of Caluins closet into the sight of heaven and earth,
Iuell defense of the Apology. page 6^6. Osiander in Epitom hist. Eccl. Cent.
16. page 203. Gualt. Apol. fol. 30. a. prope finem obijt in bello Zuinglius,
and Armatus obijt.
unto a spectacle whereof two whole armies were witnesses. Behold Hulderick
Zuinglius whom they honor as a Prophet joined in commission with Luther, to
preach the eternal Gospel, as an excellent man sent of God to give light
unto the whole world, in the midst of darkness when truth was unknown and
unheard off. This Minister or rather Patriarch of the Ministry, as themselves
confess, having sought by famine to oppress five Catholic towns, and force
them by want of victuals to consent unto his doctrine, when they stood in their
defense, came armed into the field, where having first embrued his sword in
much Christian blood, himself together with five other Militant Ministers,
was slain in the battle.

I desire the Christian to compare together these two deaths, the one of
Robert Drury that dyed preaching by this last accident: The other of the
Reformitan Zuinglius which I have set down out of their own records. This
done then in the sight of that God that hates iniquity and loves charity, let
him define which of the two deaths be judges most Christian and happy, or with
which of the two Preachers he would rather wish his soul. Lutherani apud
Gualteru^ in Apol. fol. 8. a initio. Gladium a Christo prohibitu^ corripuit
Gladius Spiritus, quod est verbum Dei. Ephesians. 4.26.
Zuinglius the Patriarch of Puritans and Ministers dyed as he was pransing on
his warlike palfrey with his pistol at his side and lance in his hand. This
Father of the Society of Jesus, sitting in a chair, the seat and ensign of
Apostolical authority to preach, clothed with such Priestly ornaments as the
Church does prescribe, for the more decent performance of that office. The one
with a sword in his hand, stretching forth his arm to spill Christian blood:
the other with the sword of Gods holy truth in his mouth, the enemy only of
sin and vice, spreading abroad his arms, to gather into the bosom of God
and his Church, souls redeemed with Christ his most precious blood. The one
exhorting both by word and example his armed auditory, Noui and exquisitissimi
facinoris fax. and auctor. Osiand. vbi supra.
to revenge, to murder, to massacre: The other ( His text was, serve nequam
omne debitum dimisi tibi etc. Superbia, and crudelitate impulsus. Osiand.
Epitom. hist. fol. 30 Qui manet in charitate in Deo manet. 1. Io. 4.16. Qui non
diligit manet in morre. 1. Io. 3.15. Valerius Max. l. 4. c. 4. Daniel. 12.^.
for that was the subject his sermon) preching the Precept of charity,
persuading his devout Auditors to love their enemies, to forgive iniuryes, to
root revenge and rancour clean out of their heart. From the eyes of one
sparkled fire of anger and Martial fury, not to be quenched but with the blood
of his enemies; From the eyes of the other sprunge tears of Devotion and
Piety, which by Sympathy caused waters of Contrition in the hearts of his
hearers, which flowing out at their eyes, might serve as a second Baptism, to
wash their souls pure in that moment of dissolution and death.

Is there any man so void of Christianity that will not prefer this death in
charity, and therefore in God, before that death of hatred and revenge, and
therefore a death not of body only, but even of soul? Oh that the Spirit of God
with the gale of his aspiring Grace, would drive away the clouds of human
sorrow that ouer-whelme the hearts of flesh and blood, that pure Christian
Faith, shining in her proper brightness, might give sentence of the quality of
this accident! Then we would not so much pity, as envy such happy passages
out of this life, nor term them disastrous, but rather (if I may so speak)
Astruous deaths. For (that I may apply the words of a profane Author unto a
true subject) Non ita homines ex spirant, sed Astra seeds suas repetunt. These
be deaths by which men fall not to the ground, but STARS return unto their
heavenly home: those stars I mean, whereof Daniel says, They that inform
men unto righteousness, shall shine as STARS in the firmament for all
eternity. Certainly his body fell not so fast to the ground, but his soul flew
up as fast unto heaven, like the Dove into Noe his Arc, with the branch of
Olive, the Word of Peace and Charity in mouth. King Euander in the untimely
death of his only son, took comfort to consider he dyed in a glorious
enterprise of human friendship, in the conducting of his exiled friends into
theit promised Country of rest, professing that he would ever joy in the memory
of that heroical death, -- Ducentem in Latium Teucros, cecidisse iuuabit.

What greater, or more glorious endeavor of Divine Charity, then to guide
souls made to Gods image into the felicity of their cecestiall Country, that
is, the blissful vision of the face of their Creator? Seeing it was Gods holy
pleasure to take them out of the world, whose longer lives in our judgment
would have been beneficial unto his Church; though we cannot but feel their
immature death, yet we cannot also but joy in this happy circumstance thereof,
that they dyed in the exercise of the highest act of Christian Mercy; that
their last breath was, in calling men unto God, most blessedly spent, that the
sweat of death they felt, was no other, but the sweat of burning charity
toward God and man, -- Ducentem ad caelos animas, cecidisse iuuabit.

Here we may with reason take into our mouth King David his funeral song in
praise of Abner, As the slothful use to die, thou did not dye, O Abner: 2.
Reg. 2.3
not groaning and breathing forth thy soul and spirit in bed, but thundering
and breathing forth Gods holy Word and spirit in pulpit. Thine hands were not
bound, but still moving in charitable deeds, so long as they had motion of
life. Thy feet were not put into fetters, but free; and that of them
particularly the Prophet may seem to have spoken, Isa. 52.7.
How beautiful are the feet of him that does preach Peace, that does denounce
the best things! For what thing better then charity and love? as men fall
before the sons of iniquity, so thou fallest, a Martyr in the sight of God
and his Angels, though the persecutor appeared not in the sight of men. What
shall I say more? I will conclude with the words of our Savior, Matthew. 24.45.
so proper to set forth the happiness of this death, as I shall not need to add
so much as a word by way of application. Who is the faithful and prudent
servant whom his Lord has put over his family to give them MEAT in time? Non
in pane sed in VERBO.
Blessed that servant whom his Master coming shall find SO DOING. Verily I say
unto you, he will place him over all his goods.

Protestants that were present at this Sermon defended.
SOme urge this accident as a judgment of Gods vengeance, not so much against
Catholics as against Protestants, that having preachers of their own, would
resort unto this Catholic Sermon, whom I will refell briefly, not by way of
Rhetorical discourse, but by way of Syllogism, proving by their own
principles these four ensuing propositions, unanswerably.

The first Proposition. Protestants by the Law of God, may hear Catholic
Sermons.
THis is proved. Because Protestants may hear the Ministers of Gods holy
Word, that have Divine Order, Divine calling, Divine Commission to preach it.
For whom may they hear, if they may not hear them whom God appoynts? But the
Priests of the Roman Church have Divine Order, Divine Calling, Divine
Commission to preach Gods holy Word, as now Protestants, and eue^ Luther did,
who says, The Papists have the TRVE office of Preaching, In Papatu est VERVM
prudicandi officiu^. Luth. co^t. Anabapt. Mason his book of this argument.
acknowledge with full consent: yea they pretend and contend to have a Divine
Order, Calling, and Commission to preach and administer Sacraments, by the
Tradition of our Church, from hands of Catholic Bishops, originally from the
Pope. Therefore Protestants by the law of God, may hear the Sermons of
Catholic Priests, at the least with the same prouiso, wherewith they hear
their own, to approve what they find to agree with Scripture, and reprove what
they find preached against it.

The second Proposition. Protestants should rather hear Catholic Sermons,
then Puritan.
THis is proved. Because wisdom teaches, that in doubtful Questions we
choose the surest side, specially in affairs that concern the everlasting
salvation of our souls. Wherefore in this question, whether Catholic or Purita^
Preachers are to be heard, we must rather choose the certainest part. But that
Catholic Priests are the Ministers of God, endued with Divine Order and
authority to preach his Word, and consequently the Men who by Divine Ordination
are to be heard, is most sure and certain: because all agree therein; in so
much as Protestants as I said, chaleng their Orders from the Roman, that if the
Roman ordination be not current, M. Bridges defense of the Govern page 1276.
much less can theirs be current, as says the Protestant Bishop of Oxford: If
the Roman Priests be not Ministers, then are not we Ministers at all, for we
are Ministers of those Ministers. Therefore out of the principles of Christian
wisdom, men should rather hear Catholic, then Puritan Preachers.

The third Proposition. Protestants by the principles of their Religion, See
John White his way, page 126. Every particular man must judge of the Churches
teaching.
are bound to hear Catholic Sermons.
THis I prove: because the Judge is bound by the law of God and man, and light
of reason to hear both parties before be give sentence for, or against either,
and to condemn either side unheard is intolerable wrong: But every particular
Protestant, and every one of the common people is a judge appointed of God,
having the public authority of Gods spirit, speaking openly unto all in
Scripture, whereby he may reprove the greatest and most Catholic Church in the
world, No private judgment but the public censure. A private man may find
fault with the best Church. page 128.
to wit, the Roman, and may find a fault in the best Church in the world, to
wit, the Protestant, as themselves most earnestly teach; auerring that this
doctrine was never denied by any Church, but the Roman, that knowing her
doctrine to be dross, durst not put herself to this trial. Therefore every
particular and private Protestant is bound by the law of God, and Man, Grace
and Reason, to hear the Roman Church, as well as the Protestant.

The fourth Proposition. They that hear not our Sermons, but condemn us upon
trust of their Ministers, cannot be saved.
THis I prove. Because they that built upon the trust and credit of the
Protestant Church, and pass not to the trial that they may say of their
certain knowledge this is error, this is truth, these cannot be saved. This is
clear, because none is saved without divine, and supernatural most certain
Faith: Sine Fide impossible placere Deo. Heb. 11.6. Field in his Appe^dix p.
2. p. 18.
but Protestants themselves acknowledge that Faith built upon the authority of
their Church, is but humane, acquisite, and fallible, seeing the same may err:
therefore, they that build upon the trust and credit of their Church cannot be
saved. But they that hear not the Roman Church, condemn her only upon the
trust and credit of the Protestant, for they cannot say upon their own
knowledge that this, or that is her doctrine, nor consequently that she is in
error: Therefore except they hear the Catholic Church her sermons (if they
can) that they may say of their own knowledge her doctrines are erroneous and
theirs the truth, Every particular man must Try all things. John Whites way p.
126.
they cannot be saved. For how can they be saved except they comply with that
Precept, Try all, and hold the best: this Precept as Protestants teach being
Divine, and such a one as does concern every private man? Is not the Roman
Religion one amongst all Religions that are to be tried, yea the only one,
amongst them all? How then can they be saved that will not try the Roman among
the rest, that not upon trust, but by their own trial they may know whether
her Doctrine is to be held? Wherefore they that reprehend those Protestants for
coming to this Sermon are ignorant, eue^ in the first principles of their own
Faith.

Hence I infer, that our Adversaries cannot esteem of this Accident as a
punishment of God, if without passion they will pronounce sentence by the
principles of their own Religion, supposing (which is most certain) that the
subject of the sermon was the duty of Charity to forgive each other, and to be
ready to give account unto God when we are called out of the world. For what
was there in that Sermon that God may be thought to have punished by that fall,
the Doctrine preached and the order to preach it, being both his own? If this
mischance ought to be taken as a token of Gods vengeance against the doctrine
of the Jesuits, surely God was singularly offended with that doctrine the
Jesuit did actually preach at that very instant, when by the fall his breath
was stopped, which was the doctrine of Charity and Peace. O heavenly doctrine,
and O happy breath that is lost in the preaching thereof! which was the last
sermon and Cygnaean song as of this Father of the Society of Jesus, Hier. in
ep. ad Gal. l. 3. c. 6.
so likewise of the Disciple beloved of Jesus, whose life ended, whose breath
expired in breathing forth this doctrine, Love each other.

Hence also appears the vanity of the^ that have found this far fecht
argument against us. This accide^t, say they, happened upon the Papists on the
fifth of November, stilo nouo, therefore it was a punishment of the Treason
they intended against us on the 5. of November stilo veteri. First this their
arguing is folly, because in their comparison or congruence, against the rules
of Logic* they do transire degenere ad genus, that is, compare things
together of different kinds, stilo nouo, and stilo veteri, being different
kinds of computation. So that if we take the thing according to the truth, and
not according to the sound of words, the 5. of Noue^ber stilo veteri, is not
the 5. but the 15. of noue^ber stilo nouo. Secondly against this vanity
grounded upon words without sense we have an argument invincible derived from
the first principles of Christianity, to wit, that God being just, cannot
punish men for sins they never committed, but ever detested. Now these that
fell at this Sermon, never intended that gunpowder-treason (as these accusers
belly them) nor ever thought thereof but with detestation and terror. Therefore
certainly God being holy and just, did not intend this accident to punish that
sin upon them. Finally what sense or congruence is there in this providence,
for that a sin committed against Christian Charity, many years ago, God
should now punish men altogether innocent thereof: and this in the act of
preaching Christian Charity, against rancour and malice, which doctrine of all
other, is opposite unto such execrable undertakings?

Some perchance will say, that though he preached Charity, yet he preached in
the Popish fashion, that by deeds of charity they merit heaven. I do not know
if he made mention of merit; De Ciuit. l. 2. c. 29. Casta celebritate
confluunt, vbi audiant quam been ad te^pus viuere debea^t vt beato semperque
viuere mereantur.
suppose he did: Is the sermon and meeting to be censured in this respect? Let
these censurers receive their doom by the mouth of S. Augustine. They be
(says he) impious, they are ungrateful unto God, they are deeply oppressed
by the wicked spirit, who murmr against the chaste celebrity of such meetings,
where men are taught, how they are to live well for the time in this present
world, that so they may MERIT to live blessedly for ever in the next world.

CHAP. IIII. Comfort, from the Ends and Intentions of God in this Accident,
whereof we may make Profit.
IF the Doctrine preached was so pious, and the Preacher authorized to preach
by Divine Order, why was the sermon overthrown by suddayne death, in the
midst thereof? Why? Because God is Lord, he may permit, he may do as he
pleases, and yet no man may say unto him, Why do thou so? Propter fines
nobis ignotos, Deo notiffimos, in die Iudicij declarandos. August.
He will not have man think he has right to be of his privy Council, nor in
his doings to reprehend what he does not comprehend. Notwithstanding why this
mischance fell on these persons rather then on others, is a mystery that lies
hidden with a million of more in the treasury of Gods secrets, to be revealed
at the day of Judgment: yet in general why this same was permitted in some
Catholics, reasons may be rendered, by which we may reap both comfort and
profit.

Reasons in regard of Protestants.
Will Protestants have a reason why God would have this Jesuit dye before
their eyes, preaching forgiveness of iniuryes, charity and peace, that they
might be witnesses of the fight against the vulgar Puritan slander, that
Jesuits incense Catholic people against them, unto bloodshed and murder?
Behold a Martyr, a witness that lost his breath in the refutation of this
slander: Nor can their accusers name the Jesuit, that for the time he was
Jesuit, killed any man, or ever drew sword in anger, or went armed into the
field. They be present indeed many times in battle to help the souls that
are wounded, and can make use of their help: and though they walk in the
midst of dangers, yet have they no other armor, then their habit, no other
pistol but their beads by their side, Iniquissimus belli Author. Osiander
Hist. Ce^t. 16. fol. 30.
no other sword and lance, besides a Cross in the one hand, and their Breuiary
in the other. How would Puritans insult, and traduce Jesuits as manquellers,
could they prove one of them to have dyed as did their Archminister Zuinglius,
with his five Martial Mates, fighting in the field unto death, drowned like
Pharao in the red sea of blood, of the effusion whereof himself was Author? In
hoc cognoscent homines quod discipuli m^iestis. Ioa. 14, 15.


Will they have a reason? God would have this Catholic Priest dye in the
commendation of Charity, then which no doctrine is more properly Christian,
that they might feel even with their hands, the rashness of them that judged
the fall was to punish the then preaching of Doctrine Antichristian. They
judged (being ignorant of the Catholic custom) that our Ministers of Gods
holy Word be like theirs, who commonly spend the time, not in exhortations unto
good life, but in bitter declamatio^s against the Pope. This accident has made
known our Sermons to be made in another Tune, as opposite unto theirs, as is
light unto darkness, sweetness unto bitterness, Charity unto hatred, mildnes unto
arrogance.

Will they have yet another reason? God permitted this accident, that the zeal
of hearing Gods word, and the hard condition of Catholics might hereby be
made known unto the Christian world. All the Churches of England have been
erected by our Catholic Ancestors, and yet Catholics now have not permitted
the^ so much as one Church of so many, to hear the word of that Christian
Faith, whereby the same were founded. They must either want the comfort of the
bread of life, or else resort to private Chambers for the same with danger of
mischance; that the ancient cause of Jeremy his complaint may seem renewed in
us, Thren. c. 5. 10.
In animabus nostris afferebamus nobis panem: With loss of our lives we get
the bread of our souls. And which is worse, when such disasters happen, they
that have taken our Churches from us, insult against us, and the Religion that
built them.

We may yet add hereunto a fourth Reason. Seeing God in his judgments still
aymeth at the final end of his mercyes, why may we not think he permitted
this Accident to mitigate men hearts toward Catholic Religion, Disponit omnia
suauiter.
causing, according to his sweet course of providence, the instinct of nature
to concur heerin with the motion of Grace? For such is the disposition of
mankind, that the most Innocent being in excess of prosperity, are enuyed,
their great virtues suppressed, small faults eagerly pursued to their disgrace.
On the other side, when men are fallen from the highest of felicity into the
depth of misery, even the wicked'st are pittyed, their faultines extenuated,
and what may be in them worthy of praise, is presently called to mind. Iehu
when he saw Iesabel stand in her window, looking proudly and wantonly into the
street, 4. 10
commanded her to be cast down. When she was dead and her body lay bleeding in
the way, her known imme^se wickedness could not hinder his heart from a
compassionate remembrance of her worth, saying, She was a Queen, Sepelite eam
qui^ filia Regis est. v. 23.
and a Kings daughter, let her be buried with honor. Who knows not the
weeping of Alexander at the death of Darius? The tears of Caesar upon the
fight of Pompey his head, through remembrance of his former high worthiness and
state? The destroyers of Jerusalem, as Jeremy foretold, Josephus de bello
Iudaico. Herem. 2. 15.
wept in her destruction; yea the Emperor that was Gods instrument therein,
passing afterward by occasion that way, shed many tears upon her, This is
Jerusalem that was once the fair and beautiful City, the joy of the whole
earth. If misery be thus able to purchase favor unto wicked persons and
mortal enemies, how much more unto Catholic Religion that in so many of her
children, slain in that their innocent exercise of devotion, lay so woeful a
spectacle to our Country? It is scarce possible, but by that pitiful sight,
men should be warned to remember her Sanctity, her Dignity, her inestimable
Benefits in former times bestowed on this Land; and in their hearts to say:
This is the Religion, that, from her Head-Citty Rome, sent hither Christian
Preachers, Beda hist. Angl. Tob. 13.22 Per vicos Alleluia ca^tabitur.
Angloru^gens quae nihil nouerat nisi Barbaru^ frendere, nunc Hobraeum didicit
Alleluia ca^tare. Greg.
whereby we Englishmen were first converted from Idolatry unto Christ, and by
the merits of his Blood washed from the crimes of our cruelty, in the heavenly
lauer of Purity. This is the Religion that did first banish from our mouth the
uncouth names of Panime Gods; that taught us first to pronounce the saving Name
of JESUS; by whose means the sweet Alleluia began first to be song in our
streets, in hope of heavenly felicity. This is the Religion that for a
thousand years together was the sole Christian Queen reigning in all our
Catholic Princes, working in their hearts knowledge and love of celestial
things, and moving their hands to leave monuments of their piety, memorialls
of their charity, religious examples of sanctity, to the joy of heaven and
wonder of earth. These cogitations of truth, and the like are both easy and
obuious to be had of any that will not shut their eyes against them,
Spera^dorum substantia. Heb. 11.1. Granum frumenti cadens in te^ram. mortuum.
Io. 22.24.
and most efficacious to move hearts not altogether deuoyd of humanity. How can
Christians be so barbarous as to hate that Church, by which they were first
changed from Barbarism unto Christianity? Or persecute and seek to overthrow
that Religion, that is the only ground and pillar of hope, that any of their
Christian ancestors were saved? We may therefore think that God would have
these Catholics as so many graynes of wheat, to the end that they might bear
fruit in abundance fall together in terram bonam and optimam, upon the ground
of the good, Luc. 8.15.
yea of the best natures that are; no nation being (if affection do not deceive
me) more then English merciful by kind? And so we cannot but hope the Catholic
Religion, so full of inestimable worth, and of motives to win love, her
doctrine being thus sowed in hearts mollified by just compassion, will bring
forth a stock, if not of fervent profession thereof, yet at least of more
clement disposition toward them that profess it

Reasons for Puritans, and the Inhumanity of some of them.
Will Puritans have a reason of Gods permitta^ce on their behalf? God
permitted it, to the end that by occasion thereof that might happen, whereby they
may see the rudenes of their Pretented Holy Discipline, behold the inhumanity
their Heresy puts into peoples hearts, Hooker l. 4. Ecc. Polit.
and so endeavor some remedy thereof; Least (as a learned Protestant warnes
them) under pretense of rooting out Popery, they bring extreme Barbarity into
the Church. For there did not want a multitude, Tuleruut lapides Iudaei. Io.
8.58. and 10.31.
that not only with contumelious speech, flowing from bitterness abunding in
their heart, not only with dirt, the image of their contaminate soul; but even
with stones, the instruments of Jewish cruelty, set upon the poor creatures
hurt by that fall, presently as they were taken up from under the ruins and
rubbish, that some Gentlewomen were forced to leave their coach to save
themselves in a house of their Friends. This was not the fact of Englismen;
they are of more noble nature: Nor of English Protestants; Heresy has not made
them so wild: but of Puritans, not of the whole Land, See their Pamphet
termed, Something
nor of all London (let us excuse as many as we may) but of one particle of
London, which Puritans boast to be their special Nest. How behofefull it is,
that this people so pure in name, rude in manners, were taught the first
rudiments of Christianity; Whitak, de Ecc. cont. 2. q. 5. page 301. Si quis
actum fidei habeat, ei peccata non nocere, id omnes dicimus. Lut. tom. 1. ep.
latin. fol. 334. Etiamsi millies in die etc. 1. Joan. 3. Trabem in oculo tuo
habes. Luc. 6.42 Est peccarum ad mortem. 1. Io. 5.15.
that the doctrine of good works and Christian Charity were more frequently
preached unto them; that the fancy of sole Faith were silenced, to wit, that
(if they once believe) they never cease to be the children of God and gracious
in his sight, though they commit murder an hundred times a day. I confess that
no circumstance of this accident does so grieve me to the heart as this; not for
any hurt they did therein unto us, for the hurt was only to themselves. They
showed themselves more dead in conscience for want of charity, then the other
were dead in body for want of life: the Beams that did oppress and buize the
bones of Catholics were not so heavy nor so deadly, as were the beams of
passion and hatred in the eye of these miscreants, bruyzing and wounding their
soul with the sin unto death, it being better as the holy S. Wenceslaus.
King of Bohemia said, to dye an Abel, then to live a Cayn. The cause of my
grief is, that any in our Country, should be found so void of common humanity,
to the discredit of our Nation, this being done in the eye of the Stranger,
whence now it is spread abroad, to the horror of the Christian world.

For every Nation under the Cope of heaven, both Christian and Heathen, both
Civil and Barbarous does by custom pity, yea reverence them that are newly
saved from under the death-blow of chance. Whereof we may give three reasons
grounded on the pious instinct of nature. The first is, because men saved from
this deadly stroke, seem then to begin to live, and to be then as it were
borne a new. Wherefore nature bidds men to congratulate, and welcome the^ again
into the world: and the contrary, to wit, to seek to stop the first breathings
of this their new life, is the greatest barbarity that may be. Against which,
one bitterly but justly inueigheth, as we may read in the Prince of Poets,
whose inuectiue I could wish none of our Nation had drawn particularly upon
themselves.

Quod genus hoc hominum? quaeue hac tam barbara morem
Permittit Patria? --
What wild me^ be these? what barbarous country is this?

We being saved from sea, even from the jaws of death,
They rise against us straight, they do not us permit
In quietness to set first footings on the ground.
Bella cient, primaque vetant consistere terra.
The second reason is, because the stroke of chance, as it is in truth, so is
it taken by the instinct of nature, as the stroke of Gods special providence,
and hand. From this stroke they that are saved, as they live by his special
will and love toward them, so they are regarded of others as things sacred
unto God, Cicero Act. 7. in Verrem initio. Veheme^ter vererentur ne quem virum
fortuna seruasset etc. Viri Niniuitae surgent in iudicio etc. Matthew. 14.

Propter iniquitate^ corripuisti homine^. Ps. 38.1^.


and by special band of Religion tied unto him, that it is a kind of
sacrilege to violate them. An Orator of Rome (as Tully writes) pleading for
the life of a Captain, that had in the field received many dangerous wounds
on head and breast, showed the scarres or marks thereof unto the Judges,
wherewith he moved them not so much to pity, as to religious reverence of the
Man, that they feared to condemn him to death, from so many dangers whereof he
had been by fortune, that is Gods special protection, most strangly saved.
These Judges in the Day of Judgment shall condemn the Puritans, seeing they
being Heathens bare more reverence unto the dead and dark signs of Divine
Protection in a guilty person, then these did unto the fresh tokens of Gods
special salvation, in innocent Christian Women.

The third reason is, because the punishment of disastrous change, is by the
instinct of Nature accounted the punishment of God, as it were taking the
execution of Justice immediately into his own hand. Hence it is that they, who
from the hand of Divine execution escape afflicted, frighted, wounded and hurt,
are to be held as set free by Gods special warrant, as punished enough,
according to the equity of his judgment. Wherefore presently to set upon them,
as deserving more punishment, is not only injustice and cruelty, but also a
kind of impiety and condemnation of God, as if he wanted either wisdom to
know, or justice to hate, or power to punish sufficiently the grieuousnes of
man's sins.

We will not stand upon the Denial, but this chance might be sent upon these
persons as a punishment of God in regard of their lesser or venial sins;
seeing even Martyrdom it self, the death most glorious of all other, may be
inflicted as a punishment in this kind, ^. Match. 6.14.
as the Machabees Martirs said: Nos propeccatis nostris ista patimur. At least
they that suffer, may and ought to make that account, as S. Cyprian
counsels, Decet Martyrs verecundos esse, Cyprian. in exort. Martyr.
and supplicia sua peccatis ascribere, and non se de passione iactare. Wherefore
these wounded Catholic men and women, supposing in Christian humility this to
have been the stroke of Gods hand for their sins, how properly might one of
them have turned unto the Puritan with the words of holy Job, Job. 19, 22.
Have pity, have pity on me, for the hand of God has stricken me, for my
sins, as you suppose, and I do not deny; yet the number of them, and how
great or small they are, God knows much better then you do. Deserved I
punishment? Behold these bleeding wounds, witness I have already had my
punishment at the hands of the living God; Creatures may well spare me, at
least you my friends, allied unto me both in nature and country, whom the
like mortality (may not I say the like iniquity?) makes liable unto the same
mischance. Call to mind the saying of our Savior unto the eager enemies of the
guilty Woman, He that amongst you is without sin, let him cast the first
stone at her, Joan. 8, 7.
Quare persequimini me sicut Deus, and carnibus meis saturamini? Why do you
pursue me, as if your were God, Job. 19.22
innocent from sin, pure from misery, your selves? yea rather why do you
pursue me as if you were more then God, either more wife to apprehend, or more
zealous to detest, or more strong to revenge the greatness of my sins, that
whereas He after punishment has set me free, you to fill up the supposed defect
of his judgment, would come upon me with a new supply of your strokes. Have
pity, have pity on me, for the hand of God has stricken me.

But these words would not have moved merciless hearts, and so those
distressed souls might better (as perchance they did) lift up their eyes unto
God in holy David his complaynt: Psa. 78.27
Quem tu percussisti persecuti sunt, and super dolorem vulnerum meorum
addiderunt: ego sum pauper and dole^s, salus tua Deus suscepit me: Whom thou
had struken they pursued, and added new grief unto my wounds: I am poor
and in pain, thy salvation has taken me up. O cruelty of men! they had not
pity of me being poor, destitute of aid, nor commiseratio^ of me bleeding in
pain, not only outwardly through the wounds of body, but also inwardly though
griefs and frights of soul. They bare no respect unto me, as a thing
particularly beholding, and belonging unto thee, as one whom thy salvation
took up into thy hands out of those ruins. If a Tygar or Shee-wolfe having a
man in her paws should out of compassion let him free, how cruel would he be
thought that should seek to make that man away presently upon his escape? O
Lord thine anger (as the Prophet says) is as fierce as the Shee-beare that
has lost her whelps. Osee 13.8.
Whence we may gather how wild and savage they are, that would stone them to
death, that come bleeding from under the hand of thy terrible anger, Whom thou
had struken, they pursued, and added new grief unto my wounds. But shall
such cruelty pass without punishment? No. They shall receive the greatest
punishment that God in his implacable anger can lay upon men in this life,
which is set down in the words that next follow: Appone iniquitatem super
iniquitatem eorum, and non intrent in iustitiam tua^: deleantur de libro
viuentium, Psalm. 68.28.29.
and cum justice non scribantur. Lay upon them iniquity upon iniquity, and let
them never enter into thy righteousness: let them be blotted out of the book of
life, and not be written amongst the just.

And this may be another reason of this permission in regard of Puritans, to
wit, for the greater obduration of the more hot, unmerciful and obstinate
sort of them. For as their malice is such, as they would, if they could, load
the Catholic Church with wound upon wound, so God permitting mischances to
happen before the eyes of their body, that carry some show of scandal, and
subtracting from before the eyes of their soul the light of his grace to make
due inspection unto them, gives them occasions, whereby they heap iniquity upon
iniquity, filling their hearts, more and more, with malice and contempt, till
being come to the measure of Gods appoyntme^t, they be carried into Hell. These
judgments of God are so much the more terrible, because they least of all
regard the^ whom they most co^cern being so blinded and deluded with the
delightful imaginations of selfe-fancy in their interpretation of Scripture, as
they never so much as apprehend the heynousnes of their offense in conte^ning
the perpetual Christian Tradition of the Church. I will not insist upon this
point, but refer it unto the inward search of their Conscience, desiring them
in Christ Jesus, and as they tender their salvation, that they will call to
mind how many thousands of Heretics have been in former Ages, that thought
themselves no less secure of the truth then they now do, did allege
Scriptures for their errors as fast as they now do, and more clear and
express then they can do any, and yet now burn for ever in hell, for their
contempt of the Tradition and Authority of the Church.

Reasons in the behalf of them that were slain, and the happiness of their
death.
TO come to the principal intendment of God, who in the midst of his
judgments, is ever mindful of his mercyes: Psalm. 33.8.
He permitted this mischance for the same cause for which he permitted the
misfortune of the Christian army in the holy Land, whither by his special
ordinance they were called against the Saracens. Godefred. in vita Bern. l. 3.
c. 4. Otto Frising. in Fred. l. 1. c. 38. Baron. Tom. 12. An. 1145.
S. Bernard was summoner of this Holy Host, in which the Emperor was in
person with other great Princes of Europe. And the Saint wrought many miracles,
as the healing of diverse that had been borne blind and lame, to show it was Gods
will they should go. They went, they were dispersed, they were killed, they
dyed of Famine, very few returned back into their countries. A most sad
accide^t, and so dreadful, as it filled all Europe with lamentations and
tears. Why was this done? Gods holy purpose heerin was, that men by that
leaving their friends and country, by the pious labor of the journey, Vide ep.
Bern. 333.
by that offering their lives unto danger for Christian Religion, being
cleansed, and having satisfied for their sins, might in the seruour of their
penance happily die, and be eternally saved. Some holy me^ that lived in that
Age, Io^annes* Abbas Casaemarij.
had revelations, wherein whilst the whole Christian world was drowned in
sorrow for the dishonor and death of their friends, they saw the Angels exult
in heaven, and heard them rejoice and singe, because many of their seats, made
void by the fall of their fellows, were filled again with the saved souls of
them that dyed in that voyage. O how contrary unto the judgments of flesh and
blood are the courses of God! who to work the salvation of souls, little
regards, yea laughes at the temporal disgrace, overthrow and slaughter of a
thousand of armies: and no wonder, seeing in this case he spared not the blood
of his only Son.

What can Christian Piety think better of Gods infinite goodness, but that he
ordained this meeting for the salvation and entrance into heaven of many souls
at once, seeing they were before hand so Religiously prepared for death. For that
day (the most of them) were purified by the Sacrament of the Church, and all of
them afterward sanctified by the preaching of Gods holy Word, and the doctrine
of Charity, which hydeth the multitude of sins. Proverb. 10.12. 1. Pet. 4.8.
Isa. 6.3.
Why then may we not think, that as their bodies by the weight of nature fell
to the ground, so their souls with the Seraphicall wings of Charity, which
the Sermon gave them took their flight together at the same time into the
bosom of God. Illuminatos oculos cordis. Ephesians. 1.18.
They that have the eyes of their Faith more quick then their sight of flesh
and blood, will easily believe there was not greater weeping amongst their
friends on earth for their bodies, then was rejoicing among the Angels in
Heaven for their souls. (...) the saying of S. Hierome be true (and what more
true being taken from the mouth of Verity it self? Hier. ep. ad Heliod. Luc.
12.37. Beatiser^^ quos cum venerit Dominus inuenerit vigila^tes.
) Happy the ^an whom the LAST HOVRE finds employed in the Divine ^eruice, Then
were these men most happy whom the LAST HOVRE, yea moment of life, found in the
^blest act of the Divine service, hearing his holy Word ^ith great content and
devotion of soul.

As for Protestants that were present, it is likely there were few such in
heart, yet it there were any, we may ^pe, yea we need not doubt, of Gods mercy
toward them in that moment. He endued their hearts with the ^ght of true
Faith, with sorrow for their sins, with ^uall, or at least virtuall desire of
the Sacraments of the Church, and so they found by happy experience the ^th of
that Divine promise, Isa. 45. 1^ and Ezec. 18.21. 1. Pet. 3. Matthew. 24.37.
Hier. in qq. Hebr. Bellar. l. 4 de Christ. c. 11.
In whatsoever hour the sinner ^ene unto me, I will not remember any of his
sins. If many that ^^^ been incredulous in the days of Noe, feasting and
banqueting, i^ derision of the Deluge he threatened to come upon them, ^en they
saw themselves enclosed with inundations of water, cried unto God, and God as
soon as they cried (...) pardon, sent upon them the Spirit of his grace, heard
(...) groans and sighs of their penance, notwithstanding (...) hydeous roaring
of waves; may we not with more ^son hope of the conversion of these that came
sponta^^ously to this Sermon? They were taken, not feasting ^d banqueting, but
in an exercise of piety, not as they ^e deriding, but as they were diligent in
hearing Gods ^y Word* and as they were by the power thereof mol^ied, together
with others, to sorrow for their sins; Could the crack of the chamber in the
fall so drown their groans, as they passed not into the ear of Gods mercy?
Could the dust and rubbish so hide their lifting up of hearts and hands for
pardon, as not to be perceived by the eye of his goodness? Can we think that
God that loves souls, brought these men desirous of saving truth to a Sermon
where the same was preached, Sap. 11.17.
to dye in the very preaching thereof, but that they should be saved? He
provided them a Preacher to sound the word of Salvation to their care; and
shall we think his spirit was wanting to print the same in their heart? A
Sparow (though not worth a farthing) falls not to the ground without the
heavenly Father; Matthew. 10.27.
and could men desirous of saving truth for whom Christ dyed, fall with the
sound thereof in their ear, without the Heavenly Father working in their
souls? No, no: Surely it was for their eternal happiness, that he conducted
them where they should be so Religlously occupied, so devoutly disposed, Eve.
13.30.
so penitently affected, in that moment on which eternity dependes. Coming
with the last, they were rewarded with the first, and they have proved with the
holy Prophet, Psalm 83.11.
that it is a better choice, Abiectus esse in domo Domini quam habitare in
tabernaculis peccatorum, To be abiected or cast down to the ground in the
house of God, the^ to live in the Tabernacle of sinners.

Now to return unto the Catholics slain, some may object that they dyed
suddenly when they did not think. I answer that suddaynes of death is a
favor in them that are prepared as these were. In this their death co^curred,
what is good and to be wished in each kind either of sudden or expected
death. The good of suddaynes is to be quit of the terror of expectation of
death, which many times is more terrible then death it self. ^ long grauior
expectata quam illata mors. Hier. in vita Malchi.
They that expect death as imminent, their good is to be prepared by hearty
co^trition of sins against it, the want whereof is the only thing feared in
them that are suddenly taken away. Now behold the happiness of these men, they
wanted the terror of the expectation of death, but not the piety of
preparation for death, through the suddaines of the accident whereby they dyed,
the weakness of Nature had scarce any time to feel the terror of death:
through the sanctity of the action wherein they dyed, the power of grace had the
fittest commodity to make them feel contrition of their sins. The
expectation of death was laid before their eyes, not by the violence of
sickness, but by the verity of Gods Word, which caused in the^ not sadness, 2.
Cor. 7.10.
according to the world, but sadness according to God, which (as the Apostle
says) works penance with assured salvation. Hence their purposes to leave
sin were as hearty as in the sad expectation of present death, and their
purposes to do good works as absolute as in the prudent expectation of long
life. They then resolved to live better then the custom of other men, Rapti
su^t ne malitia mutaret mentem. Sap. 4. 11.
when they thought (as they might) they should live as well as other men; but
they were straight taken away, and not put to the trial, wherein they might
have failed as well as other men. In them that look to dye, grief for sin is
strong, but commonly stained with some seruility of fear: in them that think
to live, though grief for sin may be pure, yet commonly it is so weak as it
does not conquer the ensuing temptations of sin. The death of these was
hidden and sudden, hidden from their eyes of flesh, that fear might not stayne
the purity of their penance; sudden, coming in the very instant, that time
might not weaken the constancy of their purposes.

But some again will say, their death was dreadful, their bodies bruyzed,
their faces disfigured, they were not known of their friends. Let S.
Augustine answer. l. 1. de ciu. c. 6.
Seeing (says he) Christians believe the death of Lazarus among dogs licking
his sores, more happy then the death of Dives in purple and fine linen; they
that lead holy lives, Quid illis horrenda genera mortium obfueru^t. qui been
vixerunt? 1. Reg. 6. v. 24. 2. Reg. 6.6. and 7.
what are they worse in that they dyed terrible deaths? God will have his
children fear any the least sin more then any the dreadfullest death, and
therefore sometimes he does punish small offenses with horrible slaughters. The
Bethsamites in the midst of their pious joy, for the return of the Arc, were
slain by fifty thousands, only for a curious look: Oza that put his hand to
save the Arc from falling, was stricken dead, because he did it in less
reverent manner. In the Books of Kings is recorded the death of an holy
Prophet, presently upon his working a most strange miracle, ^. Reg. 13. 24.
Greg. l. 3. ep. 10 ^
killed by a Lion for a sin of mere ignorance. S. Gregory writes of many
holy Monks and Religious Officers, that dug out of devotion for the greater
orname^t of the place about the tomb of S. Laurence; because, though by chance
and against their will they opened his Shrine and saw his body, fell presently
sick, and dyed all within ten days after. Vi^ae Patr. Herebert. (...) libell.
(...)
In vitis Patrum we read of a godly man going ^o visit an Ermite his friend: As
he passed in the street he saw the body of a great rich man famous for
wickedness that had dyed a still death in bed, carried with great honor unto
his Sepulture: When he came to the wilderness he found the Ermite that had lead
an holy and austere life devoured of wild beasts. Astonished thereat with many
tears, he besought of God he might know the reason of this proceeding, and God
thought good for our instruction in like events to reveal him the mystery by
his Angel. The richman amongst many enormous crimes had done some smaller good
deeds; These were rewarded with peaceble death and honorable exequyes,
whilst his soul for the other burned in fire inextinguishable. The E^mite
with his many daily excellent works had mingled some lesser offenses, which
were expiated by that horrible death, that his soul might go presently to
enjoy his Crown.

Can the world discern any difference of unhappiness betwixt the death of our
King Edmund the Martyr. and the death of our King Richard the Tyrant? They both
were defeated in field, both killed and covered with an heap of slaughter, the
dead bodies of them both came into the power of their enemies to be scorned.
Compare the death of King Lewis the Saint, with the death of King Antiochus the
wicked, no dissimilitude appears in outward show. Both dyed in a strange
country, both after a shameful repulse, both stricken with a loathsome pestilent
ulcer. And yet these deaths, such paralells in the aye of flesh and blood, did
differ no less then Heaven and Hell in the sight of God and his Angels. Man
judges acco^ding to the face, God looks into the heart: 1. Reg. 10. 7.
It is fedity of soul not deformity of body that makes God say unto some, I
know you not. It little importes the dead that their bodies be known of their
friends, who when they know them will but lay them under earth to be the food
of worms. Matt. 25.1^
That which importes the^, is that their souls be known of the Angels, that
going out of their bodies, Luc. 10.^. and 22.
they may be car^^^d by them into the bosom of Abraham, and into the
everlasting ^^^^rnacles.

And yet I dare say, their bodies were not so disfigu^^d as they may compare in
deformity with the body of their crucified Lord and Savior, Isa. 53.4.
of whom the Prophet says, We saw him, and there was neither shape nor figure
in him, so we know him not, but made esteem of him as of a leaper, and as of a
man strocken of God. It is a part of their honor they were so like to their
Master, and the day shall come when the disfigured bodies of their humility,
Phil. 5.^^.
shall be configured unto the body of his clarity, then be so much the more
beautiful, by how much now they seemed horrible.

Reasons for the Profit of Catholics: and the Conclusion.
TO Conclude with whom I began. You the worthy Children of the Church; God
has permitted this Accident to be unto you a Warning, a Trial, an Occasion, a
Presage: a Warning of Death, a Trial of Charity, an Occasion of more Penance,
a Presage of Comfort.

The Deaths of these our Friends, are Documents how incertayne life is, and
Warnings to be at all times, and in every place provided for death. God showed
in his Saints what may happen unto sinners, he stroke their bodies with
suddayne and short oppression of death, to strike into our souls long and
perpetual meditation of death. The Chambers of impurity have no privilege
against death, more then the Chapells of sanctity; nor have riotous feasters in
a Tavern, a surer warrant of life then Religious hearers of a Sermon. Death
which came upon these as they were in the act of abhorring, may likewise set
upon them as they are in the act of committing sin. Behold here, Heb. 11.1.
as I may say with the Apostle, Nubes testiu^, a whole cloud of witnesses,
suddaynly dissolved into the bloody rain of death, that upon the consenting
testimony of so many dying men, we may believe and still remember, that our
life, when it is at the best, is but vapor, Jacob. 4. 15. Eccl. c. 7.3
ad modicum parens, a shining cloud or vapor which in a trice, ere one can
think is vanished. The holy Ghost wishes us to resort often unto the house of
Mourning, wherein we are warned of the end of all living things. Behold here
that holy House of Mourning, which ringes of this Warning, with so sharp and
shrill a sound, as may penetrate into the deafest heart. For the Auditors of
that sermon became Preachers in their death, crying unto all men, BE READY FOR
GOD IN EVERY PLACE, AT EVERY MOMENT, who will come when men least think: This
is ours, to morrow will be your dying day: in this doleful cry we must breath
out our soul that the wholesome sound thereof MAY NEVER DYE IN YOVRS.

This accident is a Trial, not of your Faith (which being built on the Rock
cannot be shaken with the fall a room, Matt. 16.15 Matt. 5.51.
yea the same would stand, though Heaven and earth should pass away) but of
your Charity. To love Protestants that in their noble and courteous
disposition, pittyed the mischance; to love those worthy Magistrates that being
in authority did their endeavor to show their humanity by their deeds. Even
as those four renowned Magistrates of the City of Samaria stood against the
immanity of their brethren that would have tyranized upon them they had taken
of the Tribe of Judah, ^. Paral. 28 v. 12. and sequent.
crying unto them: Nequaquam facietis, grande enim Peccatum est. Quid vultis
noua cumulare delicta? And having freed them out of their hands, restored them
with all kind of courtesy unto their friends. To love these I say, with inmost
affections, to show toward them all kind of grateful acknowledgment as far
as you are able both by word and fact, you will be, as Duty requires, most
foreward. You may rather fear, promptnes of Nature herein will prevent, or
outrunne Grace, and so deprive you of a Reward. Matt. 5.48.
For (as our Savior says) If you love them that love you (upon human and no
higher behoofes) what reward shall you have? But to respect them that insult
upon you, to requite bitterness with love, iniuryes with good turns, Romans 1^.10.
to heap the coals of charity on their heads, that cast stones of cruelty at
yours, This is the patience, this is the charity of Saints, in the exercise
whereof these our Saints dyed. For the pardoning of injuries, the rooting
revenge out of their heart was the Testament and last will they made upon earth,
in the sermon of that subject, by a public Notary, according to the
authe^ticall instrument of Gods word. And as they have left you the heirs of
their Faith, so likewise they have made you the executors of their Will:
neither can you do them any greater pleasure, then to pray for these their
enemies and yours, whom for their part in that their last will they did
aforehand eternally pardon. Excuse this their zeal with all kind of mild
interpretation within your heart; Believe that in many it was but a passion in
the heat of blood, whereof perchance since they are abashed: do not forget to
allege unto God, our Saviors excuse of his crucifiers, nesciunt quid
faciunt? Consider with hope that they may happily repent: call to mind the
sweet saying of S. Augustine, Lib. 1. de ciuit. c. 35.
sufficient to banish all bitterness out of heart. In inimicis nostris latent
conciues futuri, adhuc ignoti, non solum nobis sed etiam sibi: Amongst our now
enemies ly hidden those that shallbe our fellow citizens in Heaven, as yet
unknown not only unto us, but even to themselves. You heard the severe
sentence of Gods justice against the^, That they shall never enter into his
righteousness, and shallbe blotted out of the book of life. Seek with tears
of sorrow and earnest entreaty to blot out this sentence against them, offer
unto God your blood (if need be) to be shed by their hands, for the ink
wherewith to write their names amongst the saved. O that there were a Moses
now upon earth, so gracious with God, so charitable toward these men, that he
might and would effectually say, Lord ^^^don them, (...). 1^. ^^.
or blot me out of the Book of Life.

But in your Charity toward other, forget not the per^ection of ^our own
conscience, for which God permitted this accident, to give you an occasion to
increase (...) mortification and penance. (...)
As holy Job upon the new^^ (...) the doleful death of hi^ children, rent in
pieces his (...) and ^ate in sacke-cl^^n and ashes, so take you hold of (...)
to cast away from you such need^esse vanitye (...) ^he choice of you^ ^art, but
the (...) of time has put upon you. (...)
Now says S. Pete^ (...) that i^ chas^isment and affliction (...) ^f God, so
that, they that are of his household, his servants* his Saints must nyther
themselves mortify and chasti^^ ^^eir desires of worldly content, or th^^^
expect punishment and restrain^^ from Gods heau^e^ ^^nde. If we did judge our
selves says S. Paul^ we should ^ot be judged ^^d when we are judged we are
chastized of God, (...)
(...) with the world we be not damned. For the heavenly Father a^ he loves
you, so is he jealous of you: he will (...) let you live without a Cross to
puis^e you, that your Love may never rest upon earth, but still be flying
toward him and your true country. (...)
Which ^ather^ Providence he showed toward his special Saints Me^^e^ and
Samuel, as David says, Propitius suit eis* vleiscens in (...) affectiones
eorum, as S. Augustine read, He was ^^^^ull unto them, taking revenge of their
affections unto life, by t^^ cross of contradictious people, who made life a
torment vnt^ them. You have more need of admonitions in this kind now ^hen
before, as you stand now in greater danger (...) his life* which some
mitigation of troubles had ^^de lest^ bitter. The safe ariuall of your Hopeful
^o^ ^^^^^ed Pr^nce delivered from the dangers of sea, (...) (...) of con^ent,
wherein though you were in (...) Dutiful and Divine ^spects, yet i^ (...)
Nature many times has secretly a part. And if he^^^ your mortal flesh
ouerdesirous of ease from persecution made you sick of a Plurisy of Joy, you
see the careful hand of our heavenly Surgeon comes in time to let you blood.

Finally God permitted this accident, to be a presage of your approaching
Comfort, and of the speedy overthrow of your hoater Adversaries: Their
overthrow I mean in their error, and heresy, not in the life of their bodies,
which we desire may not be shortened, but run out, according to the full
length of Natures race and Gods holy will. You may remember the examples of
former Heresies I brought in the second Chapter, that dancing for joy at the
mishap of Catholics, Psalm. 9.7.
leapt themselves out of the world. And that the saying of the Prophet may be
true of all, Perijt memoria eorum cum sonitu, their memory shall perish with an
empty sound of exultation and joy. Such also shall be the Conclusion of the last
Infidelity in the end of the world, to wit, that of Antichrist. When the two
Prophets shall be slain, and their bodies ly a bloody spectacle in the streets,
then shall his followers exult and triumph. Gaudebunt super illos (says the
Scripture) and iucundabuntur, and munera mittent inuicem, Apoc. 11.8.
quia hi duo Prophetae cruciauerant eos. They shall make such rejoicing and
triumphing, as our Adversaries full of the persecuting spirit, now make for the
bodies of these two Catholic Priests and Preachers slain in their Puritan
street: so showing the saying of Wisdom to be true, ante ruina^ exaltatur
spiritus. Prou. 10.16. Dominus Jesus interficiet spiritu oris sui. 2 Thessalonians.
2*8. Apoc. 11.13.
For this rejoicing in the death of the two Prophets, is to be the last flash
of Antichristan felicity and light, which presently thereupon by the breath our
Saviors mouth, shall be blown out, and they converted to give glory unto the
God of Heaven.

And as vain and empty joy is the Presage of the ruin of Heresy, that the
same will soon vanish out of their hearts; so likewise affliction sent on Gods
servants by him, is the harbinger of Comfort, that according to the
prognostication of Saints, the surest presage of a fair Day is a misty
Morning, as does signify the Prophet Amos. For having foretold a great
affliction that God would send upon his people, straight added these
comfortable words, wherewith I will conclude this Word of Comfort. Postquam
haec fecerit tibi, praeparare in occursum Dei tui O Israel, Amos. 4.12.13.
quia ecce faciens nebulam matutinam: When he has laid this affliction upon
thee, then O Israel, make thy self ready to go meet thy God, for behold he
makes a mist in the morning: as one should say, when you see a mist of
affliction in the morning, then prepare your self for the fair and lightsome
day of comfort. We now are in the mist of sorrow and affliction for this
mischance, that has cast a mist of new darkness and ignorance over the eyes of
some, which the light of truth joined with the burning flames of your charity
and mercy, and also with the shining beams of humility and mildnes, may soon
dissolve. And these Innocents that dyed in this so pious exercise of Religion,
will be your Aduocats with God, your Aduocats with men; they will plead your
cause in Heaven, they will plead your cause on earth; their blood will in time
mollify hearts as hard as Dyamond: The voice of their blood having a better cry
then that of Abell, Heb. 11.24
will penetrate into the ear of your merciful Savior, into the ear of your
Gracious Sovereign, and obtain more then you perchance would presume to ask.

FINIS
Faults escaped in the Printing.
Page Lin. Errata. Correct. 8. 26. all at ibid. vlt. precepts precept 17. 23.
Constance Constantine ibid. 30. or for 30. 20. they then 32. 26. true truer
ibid. 25. astruous astrious 33. 24. deleatur and 38. 6. terror horror 38. 8.
for that that for 39. 12. reason why God. and deleatur why. reason? God,


