THE Picture of a perfect Common wealth, describing as well the offices of
Princes and inferior Magistrates over their subjects, as also the duties of
subjects toward their Governors.

Gathered forth of many Authors, as well humane, as divine, by Thomas Floyd
master in the Arts.

Printed at London by Simon Stafford, dwelling on Adling hill. 1600.

HONORAtiss. and magnifico Domino, D. Thomae Egertono, Equiti aurato, D.
Custodi magni sigilli Angliae, ac Regii Senatus dignissimo Co^ciliario: Necnon
D. Ioanni Egertono, vnico eius filio and Haeredi. S. P. D.
QVI celeberrimum iurisprude^tiae stadium studiumque sieve philosophiae, quam
vulgo Ethicen appellant, ac aliqua saltem politices notitia contingere
autuma^t: aut alternatim in Ethicis disciplinis, and politica philosophia se
anteire posse sine iurisprude^tiae adminiculo arbitrantur: certe, illi, veluti
pisces hamo irretiuntur, decipiuntur, and toto aberrant coelo. Omnium rerum est
vicissitudo, discolorque vsusreru^, and vnares adiumento alterius indiget: sic
mercatores vicissim nobis aduehunt commoda.

Mercibus ac Anglis mutant sub sole recenti.
Rugosum piper, and pallentis grana cumini.
Quippe iurisprude^tiae absque Ethicis and politicis disciplinis, leuidensis,
horridula, and semianimis quaedam facultas, dicenda, and ducenda est.
Illarumque praecepta nisi iurisprudentiae typo, ceu gemelli vrsarum foetus
formentur, etiamque atque etiam lambantur minus, fermentata censentur, and
veluti veratro seu helleboro atro inebriantur. Nec iniuria itaque Bartalus,
aliique iurisprudentiae antesignani vtrasque facultates tanquam speculatiuas
cum practicis copulandas esse iudicant. In eo proculdubio iudicio tu
(Nobilissime heroes omnimodisque literaru^ dotibus insignite Iudex) es
constitutus, qui ad nominis tui sempiternam gloria^ cum practicis
speculatiuasfa cultates semper coniu^xisti, idque non in philosophia solu^, sed
etia^ (vt inquit Cicero de seipso) in dice^di exercitatione fecisti, ita vt
iam, te esse in vtraque facultate parem quis nisi luscus neget? Quae quidem cum
ego mecum alta mente reputauerim, hominumque huius tempestatis mores tam
incultos, and tam rudes esse animaduerterim, co^mouebar animo, and quasi oestro
extimulabar, vt illis, quantum in me esset, consulerem, vtque hoc qualecunque
sit opusculum, construere^, constructumque tibi, tuoque Gnato and Haeredi,
praeclarae indolis and magnae spei Iuueni coniu^ctim consecrare^. Quis enim in
tanto morum naufragio tacere potest? Ne ego quidem. Accipite igitur placida and
placata mente (magnifici DOMINI) hoc ingenioli mei symbolum, accipite (inquam)
and meipsum, cui cordi erit quicquid vobis and honori and gloriae fuerit, toto
animo perficere. Deus optimus maximus amplitudines vestras et dignitate^
prorogare, fulcire, et co^seruare dignetur. Oxonii, e collegio Jesus, Anno a
partu virginis. 1600.

V. A. Thomas Floyd.

To the Reader.
EVEN as the music of an Instrument, whose harmonious sound either delights
or displeases the hearers, according to the skill of him that plaieth thereon:
So these my first fruits, proceeding from my barren invention and shallow wit,
do yield like content or discontent, resembling well my silly Muse, which
makes me more to fear, that it will be as hard for me to obtain thy
plausible favor, as it was for hard conceited Anthony to gain the good will
of the Senators, when his deeds had proved him a peremptory foe to Rome.
Nevertheless, Aristotle, who all his days in a manner had bin an Atheist, yet
crying, O Ens entium miscrere mei, in his last and lost day, caused the people
to think yt he had some knowledge of God. Whereupon afterward being dead, they
eternized his name. So now I in like sort do hope, thou will suspense thy
favorable censure, and grant me a pardon of course, that I may use the like
excuse, differing in effect, as an answer for my defense: which if it seem
sero to any one, yet serio, as observed of the Philosophers and husbandmen, who
with one assent agreed, perfectione^ prioris esse aliquam priuationem
consequentis, proceeding from the self same stock: for the tree yt bears
twice a year, or often, first brings fruit sauouring of sweetness, the last
tasting somewhat sour. So this my little one and first borne has more
imperfections (I confess) and therefore craves some pardon: for as Hercules,
which conquered and overcame by his wreathes and victories, the most part of
the world, and when he could proceed no further, thereat ending and making a
full period, caused pillars to be set up, which were termed after his name, on
which was written non vltra: But of late days, Christophorus Columbus, finding
a farther passage, and going beyond Hercules his non vltra, in respect thereof
there were other pillars set up, on which was written, Plus vltra. So I in like
manner (gentle Reader) with Hercules, being equal in number, though far
interior in quality, wading as far as my simple ability could afford, and
my slender wit allow, according to that small talent of learning and knowledge
I had, having more perfectly composed and compild this my little pamphlet, that
I might well with Hercules say, Non vltra. Of which I was by some domestical
yonker privily bereft, being thereat not a little moved, and almost
discomfited, unless the entire love and fervent affection I bare toward my
high renowned Lord, and toward the young virtuous Gentleman his son, M. John
Egerton, who jointly as a Paracelsia^ Quintessens, reedified the wrack of my
decay, and caused me again to take heart of grace, and to redouble my
courage, that I was thereby rather enforced by affection, than persuaded by
reason, to attempt with Columbus, the finding out of Plus vltra, fearing to
incur the backbiting of the envious, which might say, that my sting was lost
in the first assault, and my courage was quailed in the bud; applying that
saying unto me, that Milo Crotoniates used to apply to himself, being not
able to attempt and perform any Chivalry or Act, which before he used: and
thereupon beholding his arms and thighs, lamented and cried, At hi iam mortui
sunt. So should it be said of me, His spirits are dead, his courage abated,
that he can perform and accomplish no more. Entering (courteous Reader) with a
strict regard of these considerations, iam tandem clasping hold on me, that I
deemed it better to adventure this my torn, rent and lacerated ship into the
maine sea, than to be carped at, or to desist from my intended purpose: which
considerations caused me rashly to reach above my pitch, and to adventure the
more, presuming upon thy gentle courtesy, to pardon this my rude and barbarous
style, being willing (according to the proverb) to be beaten on the anuill
by Vulcane, and withal, to yield my self to the censure of thy verdict to
conjecture, committing thee to the tuition of Almighty God.

T. F.

A Table of all the contents and matter contained in this book.
FIrst, what is a Common wealth, cap. 1. f. 1. 2 How many sorts are there of
Common wealths. cap. 2. f. 11. 3 What is an Aristocratie, cap. 3. f. 12. 4 What
is a Democratie, cap. 4. f. 14. 5 What is a Monarchy, cap. 5. f. 20. 6 Which
of these sorts is best, cap. 6. f. 24. 7 What things are requisite in a king,
cap. 7. f. 46. 8 Magistrates ought to see justice administered, cap. 8 f. 47. 9
What is a Tyrant, cap. 9. f. 48. 10 What is the nature and condition of an
Oligarchie, cap. 10. f. 53. 11 What difference between an Oligarchie and a
Democratie, cap. 11. f. 54. 12 Of law, cap. 12. f. 55. 13 Of Magistrates, cap.
13. f. 65. 14 Of Counsailors, cap. 14. f. 76. 15 Of Judges, cap. 15. f. 85. 16
Of Oeconomikes or domestical government, cap. 16. f. 93. 17 Of Virtue, Cap.
17. f. 106. 18 Prudence, cap. 18. f. 111. 19 Fortitude, cap. 19. f. 123 20
Patience, cap. 20. f. 135. 21 Constancy, cap. 21. f. 142. 22 Of Te^perance,
cap. 22. f. 150. 23 Modesty, cap. 23. f. 158 24 Chastity, cap. 24. f. 164. 25
Justice, cap. 25. f. 172. 26 Charity, cap. 26. f. 182: 27 Obedience, cap. 27.
f. 187. 28 Hope, cap. 28. f. 196. 29 Faith, cap. 29. f. 207. 30 Truth, cap. 30.
f. 207. 31 Friendship, cap. 31. f. 212. 32 Liberality, cap. 32. f. 220. 33
Clemency, cap. 33. f. 227. 34 Peace, cap. 34. f. 235. 35 Of Idleness, cap. 35.
f. 239. 36 Pleasures and delights, cap. 36. f. 246. 37 Intemperance and
gluttony, cap. 37. f. 253 38 Lust and lawless delites, cap. 38. f. 258. 39
Envy, cap. 39. f. 264. 40 Covetousness, cap 40. f. 271. 41 Usury, cap. 41. f.
276. 42 Ambition, cap. 42. f. 281. 43 Anger, cap. 43. f. 288. 44 Sedition, cap.
44. f. 244. 45 War, cap. 45. f. 297. 46 Conclusion to the magistrates, cap.
46. f. 303.
FINIS.
What is a Common wealth. Cap. 1.
A Common wealth is a living body compact of sundry estates and degrees of me^:
this body is composed of two sorts, namely of the soul the worthiest wight,
and of the members or parts. Aristotle
The soul is the king or supreme governor: which I so term, for two
considerations: first by a simile, in respect of his authority: for as
Aristotle says, that anima is tot a in toto, Aristotle de anima lib. 2.
et tota in qualibet part. That is, is wholly in the whole body, and in every
part thereof: so the king in regard of his authority is accounted. The second
and last reason, is in respect of his being and ending, who is no sooner said a
king, then a king of some Common wealth, nor no Common wealth can be rightly a
common wealth, without a king: so the body is no living body without the soul,
nor no longer lives, then the soul remains. For as Augustine says, August.
Anima in hominem creando infunditur, infundendo creatur. Or as some would have
it, A common wealth is a congregation, or a multitude of inhabitants; being as
it were, Arist. politic.
the mother of us all. Which we ought to hold so dear, that in defense thereof
we should not fear, to hazard our lives. Cicer. off. lib. 1.
For (as Cic. says) we are borne not for our selves, but for our country,
kindred, friends and parents: children, parents, and friends are dear to us:
but our country chale^geth a greater love, and exacteth a farther duty. This
word Common wealth is called of the Latin word, Respublica, quasi res
populica, the affairs of the people: which the latins call the Government of a
common wealth, or of a civil society, and is termed of the Grecia^s a
political government, derived of the Greek word Polutia, which signifies the
regiment and estate of a city, disposed by order of equity, and ruled by
moderation of reason, which answers and concurreth most fitly to this my
present discourse and purpose, as the order and estate whereby one or many
towns are governed, administered, ordained, to that end, that every society
should by due order or policy be framed. Arist po(...).
Al men are naturally borne to affect society, whereof there be 3. sorts; the
one being given to the engendring and procreating of humane race, as that of
man and woman and this is wholly by nature, Nam omnium societatum nulta est
magis secundu^ naturam, quam maris and foeminae. Plato.
The other addicted to policy and civil government, as lawmakers within their
several precincts and limits; and this proceeds partly by nature, partly by
other causes. The 3. to lewdnes, and wickedness, as that of pirates, thieves and
conspirators, which society nature needs not: this happens in many places,
either for want of law, or the execution thereof. This natural inclination of
society in general, is in it self rude and barbarous, unless it be governed
by counsel, and tempered by wisdom: wherefore some of themselves, either by
instinct of nature, or by divine essence or secret influence from above, have
delivered unto their posterities, a perfect way and sure reason, as a sugared
potion or sweet balm of their benevolence, to mitigate this humane society,
among whom many were termed authors: but God alone has so framed the state of
the whole common wealth and the government thereof, by his own eternal
providence, and also co^stituted and appointed Moses, as an instrument, to
publish the same, for our instructions and knowledge, by which means, many
profitable things, for the due ordering of a common wealth, may be reaped and
gathered, for whose preseruations, as amongst the Grecians, Persians, Jews,
and in these our days, many were accounted authors of reformations: yet
howsoever, we ought somewhat to restrain our liberty, diminish our credit,
and endammage our lives, in the greatest ieopardy, for the safety hereof. So
dear was the love of Ulysses to his country, Homer Odiss.
that he preferred his native soil Ithaca, before immortality. Camillus a
noble Roman, being Dictator six times, and though banished, yet when the
Frenchmen had taken the City of Rome, and compelled the Romans to redeem
their heads with gold; he with the Ardeats, with whom he lived exild, slew
the Frenchmen, and saved the city from bondage. So Horatius Cocles a valiant
Roman, with two more, at a bridge that entered into Rome, kept back, and
caused the whole army of Porsenna to retire, until the bridge was broken
down behind them; and then in spite of his enemy, armed as he was, did swim
safe into the city, and saved his country. So likewise Cynegirus a man of
excellent virtue, willing to incur any torture or torment for his countries
safety: who after many conflicts had with his enemies, whom he put to flight,
and hardly pursued, until they were compelled to take shipping, yet this
valiant man being not willing to let them sail scot-free, fastened his right
hand on one of their ships, not letting go his hold, until it was cut off,
and then he held with his left hand: of which also he being deprived, held at
last with his teeth. Such was his excellency, Trogus Pomp.
and loyalty toward his country, that no enterprise how great soever, could
cause him to desist, to patronize the safety thereof. But contrariwise,
Coriolanus, whom if the fates had prescribed his end in his infancy, had not
so treacherously, and unnaturally borne arms to the ruin of his own natural
country. Dictis Cretens. Plutarc.
Antenor also blemished with this detestable vice, and spotted with this
stain, most caitifly fled, with two thousand men, into Italy, and yielded his
native city into the hands of his enemies the Grecians. And no marvel,
seeing neither the love of their country, nor their own loyalty could move
them to desist from so loathsome and detestable a fact. Alas, who is he that
would not lament, to see the wrack and ruin of his own country, and the
happy stay thereof turned into hellish state? much more, perverting the laws of
nature, yield his consent to level at the bitter bane, and lay a plotte for
the final destruction of his native soil, considering and calling to mind
the pain due to such graceless disobedient conspirators, and lewd
caterpillars, who never mist to suppe of the same sorrow, and taste of the first
fruit of their dismal misery. Happy then is that common wealth, whose
safety is no less joyful to it self, then to all, and whose loyalty may
be said with Syllas host to cry out, to Sylla, Solus ego extinct a patria non
relinquar, now that my country is destroyed, I will not live alone. Most happy
then is the city and common wealth, where the people in general do observe
the customs and rightes of law, fearing them as a tirant.

1 That life which is due to death is canonized; and reaped double reward, if
eclipsed in the defense of his country.

2 All men are by nature bound to embrace their native soil, not in regard of
the possessions which they enjoy therein, but for the mere love thereof.

3 In the love of our country we ought to persevere, as being not sufficient
once to have loved it, unless we continue to the end.

How many sorts are there of Common wealths. Cap. 2.
OF Common wealths there are three sorts, Arist. Po lit. lib. 3.
Aristocratie, Democratie, and Monarchy.

What is an Aristocratie. Cap. 3.
ARistocratie is a government, or empire, depe^ding on the arbitrament of the
best nobility, derived of the Greek word Aristocratiae, in Latin, Optimorum
potentia, in English, the rule of men of the best disposition, from which
regiment Kings were discarded and excluded. Such was the government or estate
of Rome, wherein the Senators ruled: this in the original had experience, of
the Empire of Kings, which within a little after was changed into an
Aristocratie, as into a wors and meaner estate: at which time Tarquinius was
banished, for the detestable crime and rape of Lucrecia, committed by his
son: after which time, the tried moderation of nobles or ancient Pieres of
Rome steeded as a law: for all the authority and jurisdiction consisted in
the hands of Senators or Aldermen, which were in number a hundred; who were
accustomed to creat two yearly consuls, so named, for the provision and
consultation that they made for the common wealth. The Thebans of a long time
observed this government. This manner of government is this day in Venice,
howbeit there is a Duke, which stands for naught else but for a vain cipher.
Such has been ye imperial state of Carthage. In this Aristocraticall
government, mercenarie craftsmen, have not been thought worthy, to have any
place of any desert or estimation, appertaining to this or the like government.

What is a Democratie. Cap. 4.
DEmocracie is a popular regiment, tending to the common good. (...) de origin
iur. (...) ex^^^^^ vsqu^ ad.
This word Democratie is derived of the Greek word Democratia, in Latin
Popularis potentia, in English, the Rule of the Comminalties, who obtained the
superiority. This Empire was sustained by gentlemen, who^ we this day in
England do term Esquires, such a government is at this present time at
Switzerland, where the people are divided into Cantons or hundreds, from whence
the nobility have bin rejected and excluded. Such sort of government was at
Florence, until 60. years ago, which afterward was changed into a
Monarchy. So likewise was that Empire of Athens, in which Democratie aforesaid
the seed of rashness and lawless lust held the superiority: because in a
disordinate multitude the fruits of displeasure, as hate, rebellion, sects,
and factions, and other heinous crimes must needs be nourished, by a confusion
of misgouernment, for defect of one sole sovereign, in whose hands the first
and chiefest form of government depe^ded: which being rightly established, is
termed a kingdom, or royalty, which falling into these vices, having most
affinity therewith, and being nearest unto it, as into a tyranny of their
abolition, arises an Aristocratie, which is commonly or often changed into an
Oligarchie and when the people conspireth reuengement of the injustice of the
governors, there happens this inferior government of Democratie, because the
virtue of commanders are not always alike. Those men are accounted good
members of the Common wealth, which to themselves live least, and most to their
citizens, and is hardly to be found in the pernicious state of Democratie,
because it is thought a cruel conflict in diverse, combred with sundry
cogitations, to level and aim at the self same mark: insomuch that the
desire of the one is the content of the other, and al their desire tend to the
commodity of the Common wealth: In which there are 3. principal things to be
noted in the governors thereof: First their love toward it that is now
established: Secondly, their authority in governing: Thirdly, their virtue and
justice: all which are banished out of a Democratie. Wherefore I worthily judge
this sort of government, to be the meanest and worst of the three, because
there are many that see the beginning of the miseries which arise, but few
respecting their own commodity least, that seek to suppress the same. There
is no Common wealth more loose then that wherein the common people have most
liberty, Cicero.
which is their wished desire, Nihil enim magis cupit popularis multitudo, quam
potestatem viuendi vt velit, Cicero et Floren.
The common people do desire nothing more, then liberty to live at their
pleasure, which argues and shows their immoderate vanity and lightness, their
headlong doings, and unadvised dealings, void of discretion, which procures
deadly sedition, mutinies, and vproares, to the utter destruction of their
kingdom. Wherefore there can no greater danger ensue, or happen to a Common
wealth then to tolerate the rude, and common sort to rule, who (as their
property is) are always noted to be unconstant and wavering, tossed with
every sudden blast, and carried with every light chafe, as the Proverb is,
Scinditur in contrarium semper instabile vulgus. The weatherlike vulgar are
prone to admire every thing, and ready to turn as often as the tide. Wherefore
they are rightly accounted to resemble the ugly Hydra, which is said, no sooner
to lose one head, then immediately another grows. Herehence they are called
the monsterous beast of many heads, whose Empire beginning Ordine retrogrado
resembling the Hebrew, Chaldeake, and Syriake, that are written from the right
hand to the left with points in stead of vowels: so this Democraticall
government begins topsie turuy, from the meanest to the highest, and as
wanting vowels, with the Hebrews, that is, imperial o^ royal government,
ends without any point or period, with Fiat destruction.

What is a Monarchy. Cap. 5.
A Monarchy is the royal estate of an empire or government, where one sole
Prince most magnificently reigns, assigned unto us as a perfect caulme of
permanent felicity, against sturdy storms of pinching misery. This word
Monarchy is derived of the Greek word Monos and Archos, which in Latin is
Vnius principatus, in English the government of one, in which Co^monwelth many
cannot fitly govern, Homer.
wherefore it is thought expedient, that one should be created sovereign. In
the beginning of the world, al people were willing to subject themselves unto a
Monarch which was Nimrod; Genesis 11.
and so they became civil, calling to mind, that mighty men did lay engines,
traps and devices to rifle them. Not long after, being sundry times annoyed by
fierce and savage beasts, betook themselves to societies, freque^ted and
resorted unto consorts of a settled stay, fenced and environed within one
circuit as their defense and safeguard, which were termed Cities. Likewise
every country as hope of safety, desire of security, enforced them to choose a
Monarchy, the Jews only excepted, who were governed by Judges and
Commissioners especially elected to administer Justice, and continue peace: but
they after the custom and manner of other nations desired to have a king, to
whom Saul, according to their wished desire was granted, and then were al
people governed by kings, and one king of all the world was the Monarch, which
Empire or Monarchy first began in Babylon and Assyria, consequently to the
Persia^s, than to the Grecians, last to the Romans it was translated. Plato
that divine and famous Philosopher, wished that there were on earth but one
King, as there is in heaven but one God, to the end that humane government
might resemble the divine, which Lord of the world, as a true Messiah or
shepherd of mankind, should affect and love all men alike, as his natural
subjects, guiding them with good manners, laws and judgments, affording them a
secure intercourse in all places, so mighty a Sovereign or Potentate, enuiyng
no person, and desiring no occasion to enlarge has frontiers by ambition, which
would be a means of ceasing so many enormities, wars, slaughters spoils
and robberies, incident to men, in respect of plurality and dissentions of
government. Plato de legibus.
Likewise Zeno the first and chiefest author of the sects of the Stolkes,
imagined one universal form of government, tending to this effect, that all
men should not live by people and nations, being separated by particular laws,
rites, and customs, but that they should acknowledge themselves fellow
citizens: and as there was but one sort of life, as there was but one world,
none otherwise than as it were but one flock, feeding under one shepherd in
common pastures, which is more easily to be wished than effected, considering
the disorder amongst men.

Which of these sorts is the best. Cap. 6.
THere is no estate so highly established, or so perfectly ordered and managed,
to be compared to the royal scepter of a Monarchy guarded with good and
wholesome laws, preventing perils, by imposing penalties on such as happily in
tract of time eclipsed with lascivious perturbations of the mind, might
otherwhiles infringe the rights of Justice, and derogate from equity and
truth, if the severity of laws did not somewhat bridle their haughty minds,
and repress their froward dispositions, whereupon that the Empire of a
Monarch is the soueraignest and chiefest, if my censure may stand for a
sentence, may be evidently proved by four reasons. First, in that the peace,
unity, concord and tranquillity of the communalties, ff de off. presil.
co^gruit in princ. and autem de mendatis princ.. deinde conueniens col. 3.
is said and accounted to be the final end of the governor. But this peace,
unity and concord, may rather be maintained and augmented through the rule of
one, then of many: therefore a Monarchy is best. Secondly, by the rule and
government of one, the power of the Common wealth is rather fortified, which
may be thus proved: Vt autem de co^sangui. and vt e. infra. quia igitur col. 6.
Virtue by how much more it is united, is so much the more corroborated, then
if it were dispersed into many parts. If therefore the Common wealth be guided
by the hands of one supreme governor, it is the rather munified, and by this
means the Prince shall with greater power, pomp, and might rule. Vt. l. si
pri. in. fi. cum l. sequent. ff. de adop.
Thirdly, art or handicraft is the more excellent, by how much more it does
imitate nature. But an universal Common wealth, is nothing else saving an
imaginary, ff. de iure. l. preponebat and de fideius. l. mortuo.
or artificial perpolited body, seeing that in such a natural body, we do
conjecture and see one head and many members: wherefore a City or Monarchy,
if it be so governed, it far exceeds: Ad idem ex de off. oc. c. quonia^
plerisque and hoc ver. determinatu^ vii. q. I. cum apibu^.
because it more imitates and resembles nature. Fourthly, provinces which are
subject unto many, cannot enjoy peace and tranquillity, but are the rather
molested and cumbred with iarres, bickerings, turmoiles, never living in
quietness, or possessing rest. But contrariwise, in a Monarchy men are ignorant
of quarrels, living in safety and security void of all annoiances, Bart.
tract. de regimine ciuitat.
incombred with no care, abounding with store, and flowing with plenty of all
abundance: to which if any will object, that by how much the more the number
of rulers are, by so much the more excellent is the government, L. hac
co^sultissima infi. et ar. c. de testi. l. iure.
because many are more provident to foresee and prevent casualties which might
happen to ensue, and withal, one is easier to be corrupted than many:
Therefore the government of many is to be preferred before the government of
one: To which I answer, that although a king or Prince is but one, yet he
ought to have many prudent and wise Counselors, and in respect thereof he
seems as many: and amongst many, one who cannot possibly be corrupted,
unless all be corrupted, perverted, and prove mutable. Shall we then prove
far inferior, and more senseless than the unnatural brute beasts, which
only are by sense guided? they do create and elect one to be their king and
chief governor, as experience of the Bees teaches us, which do make choice
of the chiefest Be, to be a king over all the hieue, l. hac co^sultissima
infi. et ar. c. de testi. l. iure.
by which the whole swarm are led and guided, as being more provident and
wise than the rest.

What things are requisite in a King. Cap. 7.
If. de just. and iure ^. 1.
FIrst a king ought to have reason and knowledge to distinguish Justice from
injustice, truth from falsehood, lawful from unlawful, allotting no
privilege to defraude any of his right, remembering dominion, power, and
superiority not only granted him: but withal confidence and trust to be
reposed, not to that end he might at his pleasure condemn whom he lust, and
effect what he wished; Cicero.
but what both law and religion should require, abandoning cruel fear: for
the Prince, that is feared of many, needs most to fear many. Quis enim cum
diligat quem metuit, aut cum a quo se metui putet? Secondly, a king should have
free will, a right and a true meaning to leuy every one, not according to
affection, but to desert and Justice, every man by even portion his own:
Aristot.
for as the mind of man in it self is more precious and excellent then all
the other parts, as being void of indignity and blemish: so ought the
judgment and sentence of a king be incorrupt and irreprehensible in all
points. Also he should have a perfect consta^cy to persevere in well doing,
that at al times his deeds might prove his doctrines; for constancy and
temperance in all points makes virtue strong. This is proved by the definition
of justice, Instit. li. 1. Arist. Ethic. li. 1. cap. 4.
which is a constant and a perpetual will, yielding every one his own. For the
better acco^plishme^t hereof, four things herein are to be noted: first, the
subject wherein this Justice is contained, which is Men's omnium pars
nobilissima. Secondly, the consideration of the parties in behalf of who^ it
is put in ure, who are the most dear and loving creatures of God: Thirdly, in
respect of the original cause from whence it proceeds, that is to say, from
the omnipotent God, from whom all good things do proceed: Fourthly, in
respect of the authority of the person who^ he represents, which is the most
glorious father. Also it is expedient for a K. to have wisdom to decide
controversy, fortitude to defend his Common wealth, valor to patronize his
communalties security. Wisdom without justice, is but craftines, justice
without tempera^ce is mere cruelty, temperance without fortitude is extreme
sauagenes. To the first, Nunquam enim temeritas cum sapientiae comitatur,
Cicero.
neque ad consilium casus admittitur. Rashness never accompanies wisdom,
neither is blindhap admitted to counsel. Except wisemen be made governors,
or governors wisemen, mankind shall never live at rest, nor virtue be able to
patronize and defend her self. Plato.
To the second, it behooves a Prince to have such a zeal and godly courage,
that he may always show himself a strong wall for the defense of the truth
and security of his subjects. Quis enim non obstare cupiat, Cicero.
quis non tantum quantum audet et potest, conferat ad co^munem salutem. It is
requisite for a king to have severity tempered with lenity, to repress the
fury of the froward and wicked men, as a scourge allotted to extirpate and
root out al iniquity, carrying a majesty in his thought, which might guard his
mid from cowardice, as the only privilege to contempt. Majesty is accounted to
resemble the lightening from the East; and the threats of a king, the noise of
a thunder: wherefore it behooves a king to place such in authority, as are of
an exquisite virtue, and aim least thereat, and to repel them from
government, that press most forwards to attain the same. Also it is
expedient for a King, in executing of justice, Aristot. Ethi.
in diverse matters to make no procrastination or delay, which causes
oftentimes great dangers to happen: which had it been observed at the first,
might easly have bin prevented, when as letters were sent from Athens to
Archias governor of Polemarches, detecting the treason of certain outlawes who
had conspired against him, which letters after the receipt thereof, careless
without any perusing he laid all night under his pillowe, saying, Because I
judge they are weighty matters, I will adiourne them till the morrow. But
before the morning his life was taken from him. Which caveat Cicero did put in
practice being consul, having a decree and an order to suppress rebels: who
as soon as Fuluia the paramour of Quintus Curious had disclosed their intent,
prevented it, otherwise he had the same night bin slain in his own house, and
the whole City fired. It is necessary for a King to be stout and rich,
Plutarc.
that by the one he may boldly challenge his own, and by the other repress
his enemies, which for want thereof many become tyrants, and of over abundance
become envious. Agesilaus.
A King ought to govern his realm and reign over his people, as a Father
over his children, and consider the cause of the innocent, following the example
of God, in hearing and regarding the complaint of the distressed and needy,
who^ God regards and pittieth, and as he will not suffer the reprobate to
escape unpunished, so will he not permit the injuries done to the innocent, to
escape the grave without revenge. Also it is expedient for a prince to have a
charie care to his cou^sellors, in noting who soothe his lust, and tender the
public commodity, for thereby shall he decerne the good from the bad. Plutarc.
In decerning good from evil, he may eschew al enormities and vices, as envy,
anger and other odious crimes: for envy is a filthy slime and an impostume of
the soul, a perpetual torture to him in whom it rests, a venom, a bitter
bane, a caterpiller or fretting corasiue, which consumes the flesh, Socrat.
and dries up the marrow of the bones. What destroyed countries? subdued
kingdoms? depopulated Cities? but envy. Julius Caesar waged war with his own
son in law Pompeius, being moved with envy. Qui summum imperium in Repub.
gesturi sunt, tria habere debent, primo, amorem erga Rempub. iam constitutam,
secundo facultatem adminisirandi et gubernandi: tertio virtutem et iustitiam,
according unto that of Deutronomie, Deuteronomy. ca. 16.
Thou shall do according as they teach thee, and not bow either to the right
hand, August.
or to the left. Justice is to God the chiefest incense, and equity without
guile is a sacrifice of ye sweetest savor, whereby governors must measure
nothing by report, but by the way of conscience: for it little avails a Prince
to be Lord of many Monarchies, if on the otherside he become a bondslaue to
vice: wherefore a Prince ought to abandon anger as a notorious vice. For as
Solomon says, Anger in a King is death: grimme and terrible is his
countenance, when he is puffed with wrath, hurtful to many, odious to al is the
sight thereof. Alexander waxed so furious and angry, Valerius li. 9. c. 3.
that he could not permit his dear friend Clitus, to commend his own father
king Philip of Macedony. O witless will, O fancy fraught full of frenzy and
fury, in stouping without a stall, to such a frantike and vain fury, which
in whosoever it rests, enforces either to break or bend: as therefore
holding the flagge of defia^ce against these lewd vices, let virtue be thy
life, Justice thy love, honor thy fame, and heaven thy felicity.

1 Kings ought to be the shelters to poverty, their seats the sanctuaries for
the distressed.

2 As a king excels in pomp, power and riches, so ought he to exceed in
virtue and wisdom.

3 Rulers do more heynously offend, in tolerating the company of vicious
persons, yielding ill example, because the offense that is committed in his
company, is accounted evil.

4 The duty of a king is to listen and consider the complaint of his people
without respect of person.

Magistrates ought to see justice administered. Cap. 8.
THe greatest part of the office and duty of kings in ancient time, was to
see the administration of Justice. Homer the poet may be a sufficient witness,
when he faieth of Agamemnon, that the Scepter and law was committed to him by
GOD, to do right to every man: answerable to the which (Virgil describing the
Queen of Carthage) says she sat in judgment in the midst of the people,
as if there nothing beseemed such a person, but such an action, and therefore
the poets not without a cause fame Jupiter always to have Themis, that is,
Justice, at his elbow: signifying, not that whatsoever Kings or Princes did,
was justice and lawful, be it never so vile in his own nature, (as that
wanto^ flatterer Anaxarchus said to Alexander) but that equity and justice
should always accompany them, and never depart from their sides: and hereupo^
it was that Adacus, Minos, and Rhadamanthus, the first king of Grecia, were so
renowned of old antiquity, because of their true and upright execution of
Justice; and therefore were not honored with greater title, than with the name
of Judges. It is said of K. Alexander, that although he was always busied in
the affairs of the wars and in giving battles, yet he would sit personally
in judgment to hear criminal causes and matters of importance pleaded; and
whilst the accused laid open his accusation with one hand he would stop one
ear, to the end the other might be kept pure, and without prejudice for the
defense and answer of the accused. The Roman Emperors also were very careful
and diligent in this behalf: as first Julius Caesar, who is recorded to have
taken great pains in giving audience to the parties, and in dealing justice
between the^. In like manner Augustus Caesar is co^me^ded for his care in this
behalf, for he would ordinarily sit in judgment upon causes and
controversies of his subjects, and that with such delight and pleasure, that
oftentimes night was feign to interrupt him before he would give it over: yea,
although he found himself not well at ease, yet would he not omit to apply
himself to the division of judgment, or else calling the parties before him to
his bedside. Iora^ king of Israel son of Achab, though a man that walked not
uprightly before GOD, but gave himself to work abominatio^ in his sight, yet
he despised not the poor. A famished woman of Samaria, when she demanded
justice at his hands, although it was in the time of war, when laws use to
be silent, and in the besieging and famishment of the city, neither did he
request the Sunamite for the recovery of her house and lands, but caused them
to be restored unto her. So that then it is manifest, that those which in old
time reigned over the people of God, albeit they had in every city Judges,
yea, and in Jerusalem also, as it appears in the 19. chapter or the 2. book
of Chronicles, yet they ceased not to give ear to suites and complaints that
were made unto them, and to decide controversies that came to their knowledge:
and for this cause it is that Wisdom says, That by her kings reign, and
Princes decree justice: whereunto also belongs that which is said in an other
place, that a King setting in the throne of judgment, chaseth away all evil
with his eyes.

What is a tyrant. Cap. 9.
A Tyrant is a superior Governor that rules as he lists, who only
reigns to pleasure a few, and not to the public profit, Aristot.
who is accounted a rigorous ill disposed king, that persisteth in extremes,
perseuering in moodlesse modesty, accustoming to chastise many for the fault of
one, which is amongst evils the greatest evil, and amongst tyrants the greatest
tyranny, that they of themselves will not live within the precincts, and under
the rights of law and justice, nor yet consent that malefactors should receive
punishment: he esteems it better to have his own palace costly furnished, and
the common weal poor, than his palace poor, and the common weal rich. A
tyra^t is a king chosen by popular and ambitious election, on the behalf of the
co^munalties, to patronize their cause against the chiefest citizens,
preventing injuries, whose property is not to respect the public utility,
but only his private commodity, whose glory consists in riches and delight,
in pleasure and pomp. Such a one was Dionisius the tyra^t chose^ of the
Syracusia^s. The like king was Atreus, brother to Thyestes, and son to king
Pelops, who tyra^nously slew without compassion three sons of his brother
Thyestes, whose blood he caused his brother and their own Father to drink
unawares, and having hidden their bodies in a cave, cut off their members, and
made their Father to eat thereof. So likewise Astyages played the tyrant,
enforcing Harpagus to eat his own son, Trogus Pomp.
dressed and served at his table before Harpagus, of which as being ignorant he
fed: but not long after, as a reward for this detestable tyranny, Harpagus
caused his own nephewe young Cyrus to wage war against him: of whom he was
overcome and exiled out of his kingdom. Like as a battered or a crazed ship by
letting in of water, not only drowneth her self, but all that are in her: so a
king or a vicious tyrant, by using detestable enormities, destroys not
himself alone, but all others beside that are under his government; and though
unjust offenses escape for a time without penalty, yet never without revenge:
wherefore, as many have been remembered through equity and justice, advanced to
great honor, even so injurious invasions, oppressions, cursed and reprobated
speeches, and sundry enacted cruelties, have been the utter wrack, ruin, and
endless decay of famous men, and honorable peers: therefore the miserable
wretchedness almost of all savage tyrants, may well yield a sufficient testimony:
for not only they were bereued of their lives, and deprived of dignities, but
such as were alied unto them by blood and consanguinitie, or adherents by
confederacy, in so much that the greatest died the like death, and the rest
being spoiled of their goods and possessions, hardly escaped death by
banishment, nevertheless they could not happily escape, and avoid the spot of
slander and shameful obloquie: and that I may here without offense speak of
Phalaris the lewdest and vnsatiablest bloudsucker that ever nature yielded,
against whom rebelled the whole multitude of the city Agrige^tinum; and that
I may lightly pass over diverse others with silence, whose manners were
infected with the like barbarous cruelty, as being nulled with vice, and weaned
from virtue, assuredly all the blood and race of Phistratus by this only way
lost their government and principality. What should I speak of the Tarquines?
were not they traced in the same vice, and trained in the same ininiquitie, and
for the same cause banished Rome, because they regarded no right, but doing all
by violence and extreme cruelty? and whereas Sextus Tarquinius, imitating the
lewd and abominable steps and wickedness of his Father, had after many
injuries, whereby he had wronged the Romans, before committed, and used
violence to chaste Lucretia, lived with his Father and brethren as an outcast
and a straggling stranger in a strange country. Aristot.
Wherefore it may be well imagined, that such an Empire cannot long endure,
because all the government thereof consists in extremes and violence, doing
all things without the consideration of justice, truth and equity. Lastly,
amongst government or soueraintie, a tyrannical government is the worst,
Democratie the second; but amongst these evils, Oligarchie is the least evil.

1 In vain is that Prince which is fortified with terror, and is not guarded
with Justice.

2 The tyrant that will lose many friends, to be rid of one foe, may be admired
for his policy, but condemned for his impiety.

3 Tyrants, which by fained government and blazed virtue do win admirations,
are said to buy just possessions with wrongs.

4 The tyra^nie of Princes opens every gappe for ruin to enter, which
Justice keeps back.

What is the nature and condition of an Oligarchie. Cap. 10.
THe nature or condition of an Oligarchie is, that few nobles, and the
chiefest rich men should have the superiority, because the state thereof does
consist of abou^dance of wealth and riches: therefore what cities or Common
wealths were noted to flourish with sumptuous excess of variety, wealth and
chivalry, and therein excelled, such cities were termed an Oligarchie; as
amongst the most people of Asia.

What difference is between an Oligarchie, and a Democratie. Cap. 11.
Aristot. Politic.
THe politic government of an Oligarchie is more severe and strict, and more
royal and magnificent, than the government of a Democratie, being of equal
authority in all degrees of persons, and more remiss and mild; which
government continued in diverse places, and especially at Athens, until such
time they sustained the heavy yoke of the thirty tyrants: Herodo.
which Democraticall Empire, as Cicero says, is most disordinate: for there
is no Common wealth more loose, than that, wherein the people have overmuch
liberty. This sort of popular government is two fold: the one consisting in
the rule and government of the chiefest citizens, the other consisting in the
rule of free men. The first, of Theseus and Draco instituted, the second, by
Aristides, Pericles and others, haunting after popular applause.

Of Law. Cap. 12.
XEnophon that famous philosopher, extolling the Persian laws, testifies, that
their citizens, from their very childhood, were taught to attempt, or almost
imagine nothing dishonest or unlawful: after which manner, as it were for the
confirming thereof, Draco, as Gellius reports being a citizen of Athens, and
endued with wisdom and prudence, first of all decreed a law to the Athenians,
the which, as Plutarch reports, was so bitter and strict, imposing deadly
punishment to the transgressors thereof, for every light offense. Whereof
proceeded this excellent voice of Demadis, saying, The laws of Draco were
written with blood, and not with ink. Of which speech being demanded a
reason, he answered, that those Laws imposed overmuch severity. This or the
like speeches have been uttered by Anaxerxes to the like effect, who hearing
that Solon made a law to the Athenians, he smiled thereat, comparing it to the
web of a spider, which is wont to take the lesser flies, and suffer the greater
flies to escape and break the web. Whereby he meant, that Solon had used
parcialitie in the constituting thereof, by which means grow many
inconveniences: for the law is not too cruel in her frowns, nor too parciall in
her favors. First, too much extremity and overmuch lenity should not be
used, because extreme law sometimes is thought to be extreme wrong, and
overmuch lenity breeds illicentiousnes and sundry vices in all sorts. But
omitting these particularities, who so deemeth of the general nature and
disposition of laws, takes his aim amiss, and shoots wide from the mark:
for doubtless the law will tolerate no parcialitie, the condition thereof
being alike to all ages and all degrees: for as Cicero says, Vera lex est
recta ratio, naturae congruens, diffusa in omnes, constans sempiterna. True
Law is a right reason of nature, agreeyng therewith in all points, diffused
and spread in all Nations, consisting perpetual: and though men err in
construyng the true meaning thereof, and albeit diverse in the executing
thereof have used parciality, being moved by affection or the like occasion, as
Alexander told his father Philippe of Macedonie, who hearing and judging the
cause of Macheta negligently, and giving no right judgment, told his Father
that he had done amiss: against whom also Macheta exclaimed. The which Philip
hearing, demanded, Whom do thou mean? He answered, I speak unto you,
desiring that you would hear my cause more attentive, and judge more
circu^spect. But for that time departing as being angry, within a little after
Macheta returned unto him, he considered thereupon, Et quasi meliori iudicio,
Taking counsel of his pillow, changed his former sentence and judgment.
Nevertheless the law, God himself being author thereof, cannot prove mutable:
for as Plato says, Lex nullo affectu mouetur, non irascitur, non odit, non
ambitione ducitur, diligit omnes, pariterque omnibus indulget. The Law is
moved by no affection, and is not puffed up with anger, hatred or ambition, for
it loves all men, and embraces every one alike, which breeds quietness to
all, increases love, augmenteth Charity, and continues peace and concord
amongst all estates; whereof we have manifest proof: For what caused Moses to
be highly esteemed, and exceedingly beloved of the Jews, but the establishing
of their Law, which according to the original has been invented, both for
the maintayning of equity and Justice, embracing of virtue, and to salve the
decayed estate and frailty of ma^s nature, which has been guided by justice,
tempered with honesty, instructed by rules, examples and exhortatio^s, from
which having swarued to chastise the insolent and hauty behavior of lewd
persons, laws were invented, enacted and devised: whereof there were three
sorts: the law of nature, whose virtue is all one, Iustinianus institu. lib.
1.
and the same every where in all, or rather a very notice of Gods laws,
engraffed in the mind of man. The second is the law of nations, which no
otherwise may be described, than of customs, manners, and prescriptions, which
is of like condition to all people. Thirdly, Civil law, which is an
abridgeme^t derogating many illicentious customs, which grew by perverseness
and corruptnes of nature: and this is termed Peculiar, used by one kind of
people; Justinian. lib. 1.
civil, Quasi vnius ciuitatis propriu^. Besides these, there have bin other
laws called Moral, of the x. Commandments, and ceremonial laws and rites
enioined to the Levites, besides the laws of Moses, and many other judicial
statutes of natural policies, of which I need not to speak. But to draw nearer
to my purpose, and to speak more proper, I think it not amiss, to lay down
somewhat of the law of Aristotle, which he calls, Ius legitimu^, and seems
to have some affinity with this our law of England, being made by common
consent prescribing thereunto: wherefore in my judgment, it may well challenge
the name of Statute law, or Act enacted and concluded in a parliament: all
which laws were invented for the upholding of truth, maintaining of justice,
being as a measure which God has ordained amongst men in earth, to defend the
feeble from the mighty, for the suppressing of injuries, and to root out the
wicked from among the good, which prescribes these special points, To live
honestly, to hurt no man wilfully, to render every man his due carefully, as
proceeding from the mind of God, furthering what is right, and prohibiting
what is wrong, according to the definition thereof; which is termed a singular
reason imprinted in nature, as an unviolable and perpetual good, without which
no house, no city, no country, no estate of man, no natural creature, nor
yet the world it self can firmly consist: for those cities, in which there
are no laws, imposing penalties of sin, and yielding a reward to the good,
may be counted rather wild forests for Tigers, then inhabitable places for men:
yet the most necessary law for the Common wealth is, that the people among
themselves live in peace and unity, without strife and dissension.

1 Every man in general loves law, yet they all hate the execution thereof in
particular.

2 The law judges with extremity, and equity with lenity.

3 He is much to be condemned, that lives in fear of judgment, neglecting the
rights of law.

4 The heart that loves the Prince loially, observes his laws carefully, and
defends his country valiantly, is to be commended far above all others.

Of Magistrates. Cap. 13.
FOr the executing of laws, and the observing of Justice, Magistrates are to
be ordained, which are the to^gs of law, and law a mute Magistrate, who
should be both religious and godly: for the only motions thereof, are the most
special guard of a flourishing Common wealth, whose property above all
others, is to show themselves godly patterns of equity and piety, because the
people might so much the more fear to live recklesse and ruthful: in the
discharging and accomplishing whereof, they should remain constant, and not
subject to any chance or transmutatio^, nor by any way led either by
friendship or affection, or seduced by any other sinister means, as bribery,
or riches, which though a man abound with never so great store, yet deserves
he not to enjoy the function of a magistrate, unless he be adorned with sundry
virtues, and qualified with rare qualities, as diverse learned men have
verified, waying not the outward value, but the inward virtue. Wherefore Demonax
when he saw a jolly swain sit in his Scarlet gown, well pleasing his own
humor, beholding himself placed in the Theater of dignity, said unto him, Sir,
this robe of yours was a sheep coat, before it came to your back; noting
that his wealth or gay attire could not shrowde his rustic manners. Whereby we
may learn, that it is not only wealth, gay attire, or gorgeous robes, nor yet
gravity of years without wisdom, knowledge, prudence, and other virtues,
that can cause a man to deserve that place, wherein he is to minister justice
and equity: riches cannot alter simplicity, nor wealth procure prudencie; and
as for gravity of years and ripenes of age, it is a thing which ought somewhat
to be regarded, if so be it carries a smacke of virtue and a taste of
wisdom, for experience has a great prerogative, because gravity of years
furthereth credit: but as for wealth only they are not to be esteemed,
neither should a Magistrate in consideration thereof be chosen; for abundance
of riches makes him to live securely, and want of wisdom, to attempt any
thing wilfully, for ignorance is a blind guide, and a rude mistres, and none
prove more bold then blind bayardes: but yet I deny not, but measure of
wealth is necessary to maintain honor: but how soever, it is hard to rule,
and troublesome to undertake the charge: for the executing of justice is an
office that must be stre^gthned by zeal, and zeal makes equity invincible,
by which means they must needs offend some; for that which seems just to
many, is offensive to others, and seems unjust: so by judging rightly they
must offend men, and in effecting the contrary, they displease God: wherefore
as being difficult, and the burden ouerweighty, it was reported, that Pompey
being co^bred with his honor, exclaimed to see Scillas cruelty, being
^gnorant after what sort to behave himself in the dignity he had, and cried
out, O peril and danger never like to have an end. Whereby it appears, that
he thought it far better, to proceed from a mean and base stock, that
thereby he might lead a private and quiet life, then to be employed in any
politic government. As therefore the consideration of the charge is great, and
the execution weighty, so for the better accomplishme^t of both, should none
but the worthiest approach thereunto, whose worthiness and dignity should as much
grace the place, as the place his person. But leaving these circumstances, I
will approach unto the Magistrates, of which, as Aristotle says, there are in
general two kinds which do bear office; whereof he calls one a necessary
Magistrate, without which a city cannot rightly stand. Of the sorts of
Magistrates belonging to the first kind, there is one politic, which is
employed about civil matters, as were those of the city of Rome, conversant
about civil affairs, and munera municipialia, by which means they were
partakers with the citizens of any gift or reward, which by right they might
challenge in regard of their civil offices. There is an other holy or godly
magistrate which is busied in divine affairs. The aforesaid politic
Magistrate, is either a superior officer, or an inferior: superior officers
were they, in whose hands all the government did depend or consist, as in the
city of Rome, wherein the Senators were the superior officers, or as some
would have, the Patricians were the superior officers, who were made by the
Centurian convocation, and as thought necessary, confirmed Lege curia. The
inferior officer was accustomed to care and foresee common matters, and
enquired of any lawful or unlawful thing committed, and after what sort they
were done, whether just or unjust, and assisted other officers in executing
their duties. Such officers also were in the city of Rome, which were thought
to be the common people, created Lege Tributa and this inferior was of two
sorts, either of small note or account, or of lesser regard or estimation* they
that were of small account, they again were either in the town, because
townsemen, or without the town and precincts, which were termed of the
suburbs, The vrbane and town officers, were those which were careful
overseers, providing all things necessary, and supplying the want thereof,
instituted to make provision, and procuring reformation either of
dilapidations, or any decayed or ruinate thing to be amended. The Magistrates
that were without the city or suburbs, were the overseers of the fields, and
provided wood and such necessaries. The foresaid Divine officers, were those
which were busied in godly and holy matters: of which there were two sorts,
either those which did accomplish holy and divine things, or else did care and
provide for holy matters: they that busied themselves in holy matters, were
Priests and Preachers: those that cared for holy and divine affairs, were
inferior ministers, unto whom ye charge of the holy sanctuary was committed,
and those were termed, Quaestores sacri: or High priests. The Magistrate
belonging to the first kind, that Aristotle called, Less needful, was
required as an ornament for civil life, for reformation of manners.

1. Magistrates are commonly called Phisicians of the public weal, yielding a
potion for the ridding out of all distemperate humors.

2. The Magistrate that politikely intends the good of the common weal, may
be termed upright, but he that practices only for his own profit, is a
vicious, and a lewd Magistrate.

3. A Magistrate is likened to a running or springing fountain, which the more
it runs, the greater and wider it opens the path: even so a good
Magistrate, the longer he rules, the greater sway in subuerting vices he
bears.

4. The only scope of a magistrate, is to glorify God in the executing of
justice, discharging of his duty, and causing men to live uprightly, and
further the truth.

Of Counsailours. Cap. 14.
FOr the aduising and directing of the communalties in all affairs without
confusion, and the procuring of the security of the common wealth in all
estates, Counselors are necessary to be required, and thought expedient, to
resolve al doubts, to decide debates, and deliberate wisely, as well in time of
peace, as war, what are to be effected, what enterprise to be taken in hand,
lest that folly giving the mate, the communalties by their wisdom might with
more ease avoid the check: for he that is forewarned by counsel, of
imminent danger, against all future mishap and calamity, may thereby prevent
perils, if it be possible, or if by sinister fortune it may not be eschewed,
then he may bear the cross with more patience and smaller grief: for happy
is he that is warned by other men's harms, and such are most miserable, that are
wise by their own woes. Counsailours are called by Licurgus, The Champions of
the Common wealth, and by diverse other learned authors, The keys of
certainty, The sacred anchor or defense of the Common weal, being one mind,
seeing with many eyes, and working with sundry hands, and for wisdom,
exceeding in consultation, as being many, and yet consenting in one, and all
for the prosperity of the common wealth, to which end they are constituted,
some waying and forecasting imminent perils and inconveniences, which want no
damage; others, searching out remedies, which have their profits and
emoluments. These Counselors being garnished with learning and experience,
ought deliberatly and vigilantly, to tender the security of the common wealth,
preferring the public profit, before their particular commodity, as having
these circumstances before their eyes, premeditating whether it be lawful or
unlawful, whether necessary, with the considerations thereunto annexed,
comparing honesty and credit, as twins and adherents together; and in the
diversity of these causes, which is most honest and most profitable, omitting
no circumstances: for as Cicero says, A discreet and wise Counsailour never
yields his consent, or prescribes to any Act or Statute, to be promulgated
and proclaimed, before he has some singular reason conceived with himself,
as a sufficient token and proof thereof, or else has learned of others, the
cause wherefore the same should be worthily executed and established. He that
does nothing without counsel or advice, needs not to repent him of his deed:
for it is the beginning and ending of every good work. Cicero.
He that will not at the first hand buy counsel good cheap, shall at the
second hand, buy repentance dear. Wherefore let none contemn the counsel of
their friends, Pythago.
nor reject the advice of the wise, preferring his wit before their wisdom,
nor lean to wilfulnes, lest had I wist come too late. For none is of such
perfection, that he may have an instant remembrance of all things. Romulus the
first king of the Romans, in the first constitution of their common weal,
having of his own people, not above three thousand footmen, and three
hundredth horsemen, yet selected and picked out of the eldest and wisest of them
all, one hundred counselors, thinking that the common wealth could not
rightly be governed without them.

A common wealth, is like the Celedonie stone, which retains her virtue no
longer, than it is rubbed with gold: so the happy state of the common wealth
flourishes no longer, than it retains Counselors: which whosoever wants,
though he possesses never so great store of riches, enjoys care to himself,
envy for his neighbors, spurs for his enemies, a pray for thieves, toil
for his person, anguish for his mind, a combersome scruple and care for his
conscience, danger for his friends, woe for his children, wretchedness to his
heirs, in that he finds ready way to heap riches, and wants counsel
to dispose his gettings. The Ninevites ouerweaned with wantonness, their
surcoates being of bliss, all polished with gold, pampering themselves with
palpable follies, as wanting counsel, until Jonas by his Ambrosian and divine
counsel, reclaimed them to a better conformity.

The Oracle of Apollo at Delphos, being demanded, Why Jupiter should be the
chiefest of the gods, since Mars was the best soldier? answered, Mars is
valiant, but Jupiter wise: concluding by this, that counsel and policy are of
more force to subdue, than valor: Parua sunt arma foris, Cicero.
nisi sit consilium domi: Weapons do little stead in wars, unless there
be Counsel at home to direct them. The necessity whereof, the equal
authority in all degrees of a Democratic, may be a lively witness, who did
all things without counsel or advice, void of discretion in their furious
outrages and follies, imposing most cruel torments undeservedly upon diverse
innocent persons, and condemning most sage and wise Counsailors by false
surmises, as Solo^, and Phocion, to the utter decay and ruin of their Common
wealth: and therefore in no wise are cou^sellers to be wa^ted in a common
weal, that are meet for so necessary a charge, whose worthiness (no doubt)
consists in manner, wholly in their good example of honest and godly
conversation and orderly living. The which saying, Demosthenes well declared to
the people of Athens, when Philip king of Macedonie, under color dissembled
peace with the city, and so offered truce, upon condition, that they would
deliver Demosthenes and nine other, which he thought of most force against him
in their common counsels: of which if he had obtained his expectation, no doubt
but he thought, the want thereof would the sooner cause him to captiuate their
whole city, and endaunger their lives; which being denied, procured the cities
security.

1 Counsel is a sweet conserve, and advice the purest auditor.

2 In counsels we must be hard to resolve, and constant to perform.

3 We are warned by the wise, not to accept the counsel of the worldly man,
whose advice will prove to be his own desire.

4 Counsel is the sure ground of reason, and the scourge of the wicked is law.

Of Judges. Cap. 15.
IVdges are the Phisicions of the Common wealth, ordained to administer
justice, to decide controversies, and for the punishing of malefactors, by
whose means worldly quietness is preserved and truth maintained. In these Judges
there are 4. things to be considered: first, to hear courteously, to answer
wisely, to consider soberly, and to give judgment without parciality: which
are no less necessary, then is the soul in a living body. For being
indifferent to both parties, he reduces that to equality, which he thinks
unequal: not unlike unto a line cut into unequal parts; that part which is
too long is cut shorter, and added to the other. So does the Judge, being the
living law, and as it were an Oracle in the common weal. The Judge ought also
to account himself an interpreter to lawmakers, a minister of justice, and his
chief virtue must be, to know what is just and true: he ought therefore not to
swerve from law, and the meaning thereof, but give judgment as the law, equity,
and justice does command: for which respect it behooves him to be sworn, to
the end that God may be present to witness his intent and conscience, which of
al other things God has made in man most divine. Let ye Judge be free from
ire, and all suspicion of hope, love, and hatred, not corruptible with gifts,
not fearful of threats, nor by flattery seduced: for where Judges are
subject to these passions, Justice is far removed from the judicial seat,
and the Judge himself. For there is nothing that infecteth the Common wealth
more with seditious hate, and injuries, than the corruption and injustice of
Judges, By good and equal judgments, the love universal of men is preserved,
quarrels, enmities, wars and sedition are thereby appeased, because they are
in every estate of such great force, as by good judgments, the whole Common
wealth does seem to be maintained, and by evil Judges subverted. This Justice
which concerns judgment, has greatest power to extirpate vices in all
estates: for if offenders be punished, there will be no place left for
violence, fraud and audaciousnes, presumption and injuries. The person of
Judges was by the ancient Philosophers painted like unto a fair virgin,
having a severe and fearful aspect, piercing eyes, chaste and modest
countenance, inclined to gravity: which image seems to represent, that
Judges ought to be incorrupt, chaste, severe, sharp witted, good conceiuers of
all things, grave, constant, and inexorable. Cambises, king of Persia, caused
the skin of one unjust Judge, to be slayed from his body, and hanged up in
the place of judgment, to the end that thereby, all Judges might be warned to
be just and upright. In like manner ought our Counselors to take heed that
their Justice (which extends to all sorts of people) may be most dutiful,
and that both in making and executing of Laws, he may show himself a man of
a singular justice: for it were shame for him not to observe Laws, who is the
executer of them. He commands others, and the law commands him, not that
law only which is written in books, and tables of brass, but the living law
of reason which remains in our minds. Julius Caesar had such regard of equity
and justice, after he had obtained the government of Rome, that he never
omitted any pain or labor, as well in common causes, concerning the defense
and assistaunce of the innocent, as also in hearing and studiously discussing
all controversies, almost daily in his own proper person. But happy were those
days wherein Basil the Emperor of Constantinople lived, that whensoever he
came to his judgment seat, found neither party to accuse, nor defendant to
answer; which was a sign of an upright living. Herein might that of Solon be
said to be observed, who being asked how the common wealth might be preserved:
answered, If the people obey the Magistrates, and the Magistrates be vigilant
in executing justice, and in obeying the Laws. And also that of Bias verified,
who said, that the Commonwealth might be best assured, where all men lived
uprightly, not tra^sgressing the laws, yet fearing the^ no less than a tyrant.
It were then a thing most unfit and inconvenient in all estates, that the law
should be reputed, as the spiders web, to take hold of the weak or simple,
and suffer the strong and mighty to pass: of which error Judges should be
heedful, endeavoring themselves to love, observe, and continually be careful,
how the Laws may inuiolably be preserved, to which all men are servants, that
they might be freemen.

1 A wise Judge always preferres consideration before conclusion.

2 Judges ought to dispatch with speed, and answer with patience.

3 The Judge himself incurreth the fault, when the guilty person is pardoned.

4 Happy is the country, whose Judges are just me^, and whose just men are
Judges.

Of Oeconomikes, or domestical Government. Cap. 16.
Having handeled of the two parts of regiment, which are requisite in every
action in general of all men, either in a Monastike life, that is solitary,
or in a politic; now it follows next, that I should handle of that part,
which is required in a Domestical government, ordered for the right managing
of the affairs thereunto belonging, which consists in the well governing and
disposing thereof, whose end is to be prudently governed, for the credit of
every one that is a governor or master thereof: for a family consists either
of those things which are to be ordered or governed, or else of them which are
the Lords, Masters or governors thereof, who have authority of all things
thereunto appertaining, as of wife, children and servants. First, the man and
wife being by a divine ordinance of God, linked together in wedlock, and of
two bodies being made one, should love one another mutuallie without
dissension, iarres, and broiles, comforting one an other in distress, and
reioicing with one another in prosperity, so that ye desire of the one, should
be the content of the other, the husband tendering the wife, as the weaker
vessel, and providing all things needful, supplying the wants of his
family: so likewise the wife obeying her husband, with all modesty and
decency, and of that provision made by the husband, endeavoring her self to
play the good huswife, which procures love and unity on both parts: otherwise
there would be no domestical government, neither is that man fit to govern
any where, or to bear authority, that cannot govern his own house: the
which was objected to Philip King of Macedony, who would have pacified the
strife risen in the City, and read a book of exhortation unto the people: to
who^ they said, his admonition would little prevail to govern them, when he
could not govern his own house at home, because he, his wife and son were
at a continual discord at home. Wherefore in this government, and for the
maintaining hereof, man and wife should not disagree, imitating the example of
Hector and Andromache his wife, who loved each other so entirely, that Hector
grieved more at his departure from his wife, than for parents, children and his
whole country, as Homer testifies. By the observing hereof, all things may
rightly be ordered, and household affairs well managed, being so governed.
First, the parents of children are to have great care in the orderly bringing
up of the^, who first begin to live with the mother, which should have great
care in the nursing and tenderly using thereof, after the manner of the Grecians
and Persians, who never were accustomed to see their sons, until they were
ready to be trained up in wars: the mother having discharged her charge and
done her task, then the Father is to have the^ brought up in learning, and
trained in nurture: for after what sort they are at the beginning taught, they
will taste of the same in their old age, eue^ as a twig that yongly sprowting
is bent and made crooked, proves a crooked old tree: which Aristotle in the
end of his moral books testifies, arguing upon certain opinions, that most
of al may fashion an honest and civil life, to the which some partly thereunto
are inclined by nature, some reformed and framed by good usage and custom, as
by doctrine and other precepts: Hereupo^ he concluded at last, that use and
custom are of most force: for wherein children are trained up in their young and
tender age, thereof they must needs savor in their ripe years: As that of
Horace, Quo semel est imbuta recens seruabit odore^, testa diu: That which is
once bred in the bone, is hardly rooted out of the flesh, wherefore educatio^ is
so necessary, that it does not only guide the^, which nature has made of a
perfect disposition: but also corrects and reformeth that which nature has
left unpolished. What difference is between man and beast, but reason? what
instructs reason, but education? without which we are worse then the
senseless brute beasts. Doubtless then we are as much bound to our teachers
for our education, as to our parents for the begetting of us: for of the one
we have our being, and of the other our well-being, who temper our crooked
nature, which otherwise should remain deformed. What force therefore this
education works, may be well approved by Socrates answer to the Phisiognomer
that judged him lewd by his exterior countenance. To whom Socrates said, I
confess that I am by nature such a one, but by good instruction and educatio^
I am better fashioned. By which answer, he likened youths unto soft wax, apt
to receive every impression, who should be handled as one would fill a glass
with a narrow mouth, by pouring in the water with a pipe by little and little:
meaning that the tender childhood of young ymps, is most gently to be handled
and mildly to be entreated, until they approach unto the age of discretion,
which is limited to be at 14. years, at which time obedience and good manners
should be engraffed in them. Hereof may Phocion be a lively witness, who was
wished by a friend of his to provide for his children, that they might increase
and maintain the honor of his ancesters: to whom he said, As for my children
if they embrace virtue, which I ever endeavored to teach them, the little
possessions I have shall make them deserve more, but if they prove otherwise,
let no man be of that opinion, that I their father will provide any thing to
maintain their pomp and riot. This is a worthy sentence of all men to be
embraced, and a right precept for the fathers to instruct their children,
confirmed with that saying of Menedemus which he used to his son Clinia,
Terence
, Ego te meum ^antisper dici volo, du^ id quod te dignum est facias. So long
shall thou be my son, as thou behauest thy self with honesty: but if the
father neglects to reform his son with this precept, or forgets to have him
instructed and brought up by a right compass of education, what pity does the
want of education breed, whereof the child shall have just cause to curse the
parents, and the parents in their decrepit age to condemn themselves, when the
child shall impute all to the security of his licentious nurturing, which
brings ofttimes to the children an unhappy end, and causes the father with
Augustus to repeat that saying of Homer, Coniuge non ducta natis vtinam
caruissem. I would that I had never married wife, so that I had never been
troubled with children: which he uttered in respect of his vicious daughter
Iulia, whom his overmuch remissness at first had caused to prove so lewd. But
omitting to speak further of this reformation, leaving it to the consideration
of parents, who have more discretion in the governing hereof, then I ca^
prescribe, I think it not a miss to speak a word or two concerning ye
government of servants: for as magistrates and officers are ordained and
instituted to minister justice: so it is expedient that every householder and
master of servants, should rightly govern the state of his own house, that
servants therein excersicing obedience, might the rather be admitted to the
general condition of the public government, imitating the good example of
their Master laid before them, who is to use his servants after a moderation of
chastisement: because many servant are of that nature and condition, that
they will do more by one mild or gentle word, than with a thousand severe
stripes: the Master thus teaching and instructing them unto honesty, they may
live more uprightly, and think the yoke of service sweet, and the burden
light, which procures credit to the Master, and commendation to the servants.

1 Every beginning comes by nature: but the progress by household educatio^.

2 Governors of families not endued with wisdom, in stead of good government
do bring forth briers and brambles.

3 That man holds his goods in danger, his house in suspision, his honor in
bala^ce, and his life in peril, that cannot govern his own family.

4 The force of Samson, the prudence of Augustus, the cautels of Pyrrus, the
patience of Job, the sagacity of Hanibal, and the vigilance of Hermogenes, be
not sufficient to govern that house, where man and wife are not at unity.

5 That house may be rather termed a den for wild beasts, and a receptacle
of fools, then a dwelling for man and wife, which is not rightly managed.

Of Virtue. Cap. 17.
NOw I come to entreat of the means whereby a Common wealth is preserved,
safely munified, and rightly polished. Aristot.
Which as Aristotle and diverse others do affirm, is by virtue; for the end of
a city and Common wealth (that is, the happiness and felicity thereof) is
concluded to proceed of a good life, which must require virtue, which to us is
an impregnable towr, a floodde that needs no flowing, a perpetual during
treasure, an invincible army, a strong fortress, a true harbinger, a burden
supportable, a balm that presently cures, and an eternal honor that never
dies. Socrat. in Phoed.
For (as Socrates says) virtue is a thing that conducteth us unto immortality,
and makes us equals with the heavens, and is called, An elective habit of the
mind, agreeing with reason and moderation of nature, Aristot. Politic. cap. 8.
and 9.
consisting in a Mediocritie between two extremes, the one in defect, and the
other in excess: wherefore it excels all other things in goodness. For if by
liberality, substance, health, and living, our country, parents, and children
do well, it happens in respect of virtue, which does advance all, and under
whose wings all things are hatched, which rese^bleth the Cameleo^, that is of
al colors saving white: so virtue tastes of all diversity excepting vice.
This virtue is well compared by a wise Philosopher, to the letter Y: which is
small at the foot, and broad at the head, meaning, that to attain virtue, it
was difficult and hard, but the possessions thereof were passing pleasant, for
thereby we are said to attain everlasting felicity, that is to wit, by
virtues actions, which are of two fold: The one variable or mutable, the which
may soon be changed or hindered, especially the obiectes and means which are
used in the attaining thereof being taken away: and this action has no
fellowship, society, or affinity with felicity. The other constant and
inuariable, which is firm and perfect, intending a good effect, always
perseuering in action and contemplatio^, which by no means may be hindered or
enforced to prove a changeling; and this action is mere felicity, which ought
to be in a Commonwealth well established: which being otherwise neglected, or
lightly regarded, and slightly practiced, or on the contrary side immoderately
used, might engender sundry vices: Plato in Tymae^.
for all immoderate actions on both sides are hurtful to nature. For he that on
this side flies peril in an honest cause, is termed timorous and fearful: and
he that on the other side aduentreth overmuch, is termed rash: therefore virtue
is said to consist between extremes, as not participating thereof. The due
observation of this virtue, makes a stranger grow natural in a strange
country, and the vicious a mere stranger in his own native soil, which if
it be so, that the efficacy of this virtue is so great and works such
wonders, no marvel that Aemilius Paulus, when it was reported him being a
sacrificing, that one of his sons, the elder by birth, was slain in the
field: therewith being moved, threw off his laurel and triumphing crown, and
within a little pawsing and deliberating with himself, at last asked after what
sort his son lost his life, and yielded up the ghost: to whom it was told,
that he was deprived thereof valiantly fighting, and at last breathing became
breathless. At which saying being comforted, he laid on his triumphing crown
again, protesting and calling the gods to witness, that he conceived greater
pleasure at the death of his son (because of his virtue) then grief and
sorrow for his death. Seeing virtue has such a disposition and power of the
reasonable part of the mind and soul of man, which brings unto order and
decency the unreasonable part being out of square and frame, causing it anew to
propound a convenient end, to her own affections and passions, by which means
the soul abides in a comely and decent habit, accomplishing and discharging
in all duty and vprightnes of life, what ought to be done according to reason.
Who the^ respecting the properties thereof, would not with all might and maine,
endeavor to be traced and trained herein, wearing this as his recognizance and
chief badge, which ever glistereth and shines, though it be never so much
obscured whereof Socrates having sufficient trial, was wont to give these
precepts to his scholars, That they should every morning behold their
Phisiognomy in a looking glass, wherein if they should seem fair, then they
should employ themselves in Virtue, that they might inwardly rese^ble the
outward appearance: if deformed, then should they especially endeavor
themselves in virtuous actions, that thereby they might by the inward virtue,
shroud their outward deformity.

1 It is the property of virtue, in suffering patiently to overcome.

2 The first degree to virtue, is, to admire virtue in an other man.

3 Virtue gets no superiority by birth, nor prudence by years: for there
may be old fools, and young counselors.

4 Virtue is a seemly goddess of toil, imagination the mistres of fools,
leuity the pride of nature, and dissension the ruin and overthrow of families.

Of Prudence. Cap. 18.
PRudence is a busy searcher, and true inuentor of verity, which allows
nothing to have fellowship with the truth, except it be seasoned with reason,
and tempered with wisdom. This virtue is allowed as a sovereign precious good
and is termed the very touchstone of truth, which guides the steps of men, in
an infallible way, to the attaining and understanding of virtue, which
procures felicity. Cicero defines this virtue to be the knowledge of things
which ought to be wished or obtained, and of those things which ought to be
eschewed, like a provident mother foreseing what with decency should be
accomplished in every enterprise, who prepares a convenient and fit abode,
where all other virtues might securely execute and discharge their several
duties and offices: for she accustometh to be conversant in the choosing of
good and evil, being the captain and mistress of all other virtues whom she
feeds. This virtue cannot easily be taynted, or inueigled with any lewd
canker of vanity, nor fettered within the bonds of folly, being guarded with all
the troops of virtues, and tried in the fire of zeal, shining bright, and
yielding a fragrant smell and favor to the nostrels of the lovers and
possessors thereof, like a beam proceeding from the clear sun, which does
not only lighten and kindle the affection, but also does illuminate the
understanding and knowledge of man: wherefore wise men have laid a difference
between science and prudence, saying, that science is a dead knowledge of
things, which of it self cannot change the will, in such sort that it may
embrace and follow the known good, and avoid the evil, which is evident in
wicked men, imbrued with vice, and endued with knowledge. Wherefore Socrates
was wont to admonish his scholars, that in all their life time, they should
have these three things in memory, to wit, Prudence in mind, which is an
inviolable castle (as Antisthenes says) Scilence in their tongue, and
shamefastness in their countenance, without which, nothing may be done
wisely: because prudence is the prince and guide to all other virtues, wherein
the knowledge of our sovereign good, and the end of our life depends.
Wherefore we may in no sort behave our selves more prudently, then by
considering how we may deal imprudently. Such a prudent man was Agesilaus king
of the Lacedaemonians, who, when there was a battle to be pitched at Mantinia,
by his subjects the Lacedaemonians, counseled them thus wisely, that they
should be^d all their force and strength, and level at Epiminondas, saying, It
was a poinct of prudence to cut off the hartiest soldier first of all; meaning
that valiant men were the causers of victory, which when they had observed,
obtained the conquest, and so prevented the danger, and preserved their lives
and safety. Whereby it was concluded, that in war one prudent man was of
greater force to subdue, then an whole army of vnwisemen. For (as Homer says)
Ille sapit solus, volitant alii velut vmbrae. Likewise Joseph so excelled in
prudence, in aduising Pharao to provide a man of wisdom and understanding,
and set him over the land of Egypt, saying, Let Pharao make and appoint
Officers over the land, and take up the first part of the land of Egypt in the
seven plenteous years: also let them gather all the food of these good years
that come, and lay up corn under the hand of Pharao for food in the city,
and let them keep it; so the food shall be for the provision of the land, Genesis
41.
against the seven years of famine which shall be in the land of Egypt, that
the land perish not for famine. and the saying pleased Pharao and al his
servants, and therefore accounted Joseph a most prudent and wise man. In like
sort the prudence of Licurgus, the reformer and lawmaker of the Lacedemonia^s
was the cause of the maintenance of their flourishing estate above 500.
years, so that it was the chiefest in all Greece, both for glory, and
excellency of government: from whence they digressed not, until such time as
they wholly neglected those laws, and godly ordinances the which he gave them.
Wherefore to conclude, the vigor and strength of this virtue in all actions,
whether it be ingeneral to all in a Monastike life, or Oeconomicall
appertaining to families, or politic which is the chiefest of all, used to the
good of the Common wealth, has such efficacy, that nothing without the same
may rightly be effected: for the confirmation whereof and a final conclusion,
we need no more then the lively example of Argos, which had his head environed
with a hundred watching eyes: signifying unto us, that he was every way endued
with great prudence, and singular discretion: wherefore if a Pagan and a Heathen
man, by the reports of the Poets, so excelled in the atchiuement of virtue,
wisdom, and prudence, how much the rather ought we Christians to be
furnished with the same, as an only ornament of all actions? For although the
wit of man is most precious and apt to al goodness, glistering as the iron and
brass, more and more in wearing, whose sharpnes and brightness is like the
sparkle that soonest kindles desire; though eloquence be a divine influence,
and invention the daerling of nature: nevertheless invention brings forth
often times a rude and deformed matter, and eloquence sings a song harsh, void
of tune and concord of true melody, without prudence: by which men are always
clothed and invested with a mild and settled disposition, wherein it steadeth
them no less, then a ship floting on the Sea, does the presence of a Pilote
that may prudently undertake, and wisely execute whatsoever he knows to be
good, after mature deliberation and consideration of all the circumstances of
the fact. If therefore a governor be not endued with prudence and learning,
civil policy cannot be maintained, and his Empire or government avails not.

1 Prudence reformeth abuses past, orders things present, and foreseeth
things to come.

2 Justice without Prudence, is dissolved into cruelty, temperance into fury,
and fortitude into tyranny.

3 It is a point of great Prudence, to lament the life of a wicked man, more
then the death of the just.

4 To the prudent it is more pleasant to hear counsel mixed with mirth, then
to the foolish to want sport mixed with rudeness.

5 He that searches out prudence, finds treasure in this life and enjoys
perfect happiness in the life to come.

Of Fortitude. Cap. 19.
FOrtitude is an invincible virtue, or courage of the mind, undertaking any
peril in an honest and good cause: also it is defined of some, to be a fiery
humor of the spirit, inflaming the mind with boldness in all assayes, and
conducting the body through a million of perils, in attempting hard adventures,
because nothing ought to be hard for a valerous man to attempt, which might
daunt and abate his courage. This virtue is of two sorts, either consisting of
the mere strength of the body, which ought not to be termed fortitude, because
there be many men that have stout bodies and great strength, and yet cowards:
And is therefore called natural vigor, or else fortitude, otherwise it is taken
for the constancy of the mind, and so it is termed a moral virtue: wherefore
by the assent of the Philosophers, it deserves the uppermost room and the
greatest dignity amongst moral virtues, for two considerations. First, in
respect of the primate and chiefest man, whose mind attaineth this virtue.
Secondly, in respect of the whole city which he enioieth, and in enjoying
defends her territories and turrets, aduenturing any enterprise for the
security thereof. The properties of this virtue consist in two things: First in
despising outward casualties, not being moved to admire thereat: in admiring,
not to desire or wish any thing but what is honest, holding the flagge of
defiance against the allure and beck of fortune, suffering al things
patiently, if any thing happen bitter or grievous, which is a token of an
invincible mind, as Cicero says, Cicero.
Si quid obtigerit, aequo animo paratoque morear, neque enim turpis mors forti
viro potest accidere, neque immatura consulari, nec misera sapienti. The second
is, that if thou art of that mind and courage, see thou employ thy self in
those things which are most difficult and full of peril, which may as well
co^serue the life of man, as sundry other things thereunto appertaining, that
it may be said as it was of a certain Philosopher, who being busied touching
his countries affairs, and pleading truce for his friends lives, happened to
fall into the lapse of his enemies, and having many cowardly soldiers, who
regarding neither their friends lives, nor their own countries security, most
timerously flying, demanded of this valiant man what they should do: to whom
he answered, that they should report to those that were alive, that he
valiantly fighting for their security died: and I will in like sort report to
the dead, that you escaped cowardly, as being the last in the field, and first
in flight. We see therefore, that courage, and magnanimity, are daunted with no
danger, and yet conquer by perseverance, and triumph with honor. So then as we
shall find our bounden duty to honor our country, with all gratitude, and
to defend it with all power and might, showing our selves valiant and
courageous, following the example of Curtius the Roman, when there appeared a
great gulf in the market place, which could by no means be stopped; and an
answer being given by the Oracle, that it was only to be stopped by that
which was of most value to the city of Rome, he deeming that the city had
nothing so precious as stout and valiant men, armed himself and leapt into the
gulf, which stopped immediately: declaring thereby how light, men ought to
esteem their lives, when as the same might yield profit and commodity to their
country, in regard of such adventures which every man ought in the behalf of
his country to enterprise. Herehence it happens out sometime, that diverse rash
and wilful me^, carried with an erroneous opinion, do esteem it mere
cowardnes, not to fight for every light offense, which is well approved to be
otherwise, as Alexander the son of Mammena testifies: who hearing that
Artaxerxes the king of the Persians, came with a great army of soldiers, about
to invade the Roman Empire: it behooves valiant and moderat men (said
Alexander) to wish always the best, and to bear patiently whatsoever
happens contrary to their expectation: for it is the point of fortitude,
neither to encombate for every small trifle, triumph in prosperity, nor yet to
be dismayed in adversity: concluding with Cicero, that a valiant man should be
always girded with patience, and guarded with constancy: the one to persevere in
well doing, the other to tolerate sundry enormities: Cicero.
for, Fortes and magnanimi sunt, no^ qui faciu^t, sed qui propulsant iniuriam.
Calling to mind, that not only they which do offend are valiant men, but they
which do defend. Hereupo^ Laches demanded of Socrates what Fortitude was: he
answered, It was a virtue, by which a man not forsaking right and custom,
repelleth the force of his enemy: which he confuted, saying, Plato.
A man after the manner of the Scythians, no less in flying, then in
persisting, overcomes his enemy, and so in like manner may be called a valiant
man. Wherefore Homer calls him a valiant man, which dares according to
opportunity, and as time, place, and occasion shall require, boldly resist or
fear his enemy: gathering hereby, that a valiant man or light not for every
trifle or light occasion fight or encombat: For it is a rude thing (as Cicero
says) after the manner of beasts to commit such wilful rashness, unless it be in
defense of country, or for virtue and honesty sake, regarding both time,
place, and the person: for as he is called desperate and rash, that fights
for every small matter: so again are they accounted valiant, that suffer and
tolerate small injuries, unless they impair their credit, or derogate ^^om
their honesty: then if they resist not an ini^^e if it be offered, they are in
as great a fault (as Cicero says) as if they should forsake both country,
Cicer. offic.
parents, and children: deeming it better to die free, then to live captive: of
which opinion was Mucius Scaeuola that valiant man, who willing to incur any
sinister hap for the safety of his country, was taken of his enemies, at which
time he thought to slay the king his enemy, but missing the king, slew the
secretary, and was afterward brought to a great fire to be burnt: into the
which he willingly thrust his hand that had falled to slay the king, and
suffered it to be burnt to ashes. Likewise also Abraham was of such excellent
valor, that when he heard that his brother was taken by the kings of Sodom
and Gomorrha, Genesis 14.
brought forth of them that were borne and brought up in his house three
hundred and eighteen, and pursued them unto a place called Dan.

In like manner Mithridates king of Pontus, after he had pestered the Romans
with wars the space of 40. years, during which time he behaved himself no
less valiant in mind, then hardy in body, in resisting their strong forces,
and withal in attempting the fortitude of the Romans, though he was by fortune
shaken in his old years, and eclipsed of his wealth, friends, country,
kingdom, and al worldly chiualry, yet in despite of fortune went to Celta,
meaning with them to transport into Italy, whereby the Romans might have
intelligence, that albeit he of his friends and country, by the frown of
fortune was deprived, yet neither fortune, nor the Romans could subdue his
valiant heart. In this triumphed valiant men, because they might not be
vanquished, and gloried, being free from subjection.

1 Lightning or thunderclaps dismay infants: and threats annoy fools, but
nothing dismaieth the resolution of a valiant man.

2 Fortitude is the champion to equity, which never ought to strive, except in
righteous actions.

3 Valor is a wise man's coat, and a fools cognizance.

4 Those that are stout in body and cowards in mind, are dissemblers with God
and man: with God, because they may be good and will not: with man, because
they seem and are not.

Of Patience. Cap. 20.
PAtience is an excellent virtue, belonging as well to outward empire as to
inward governance: it is said to be the shield of intolerable wro^gs, the
va^quisher of wickedness, that lighteneth the burden of adversity, and is a sure
card against all assaults and passions of the soul, seasoning the ioys of
prosperity, and retaining a continual glad assembla^ce in adversity and dolor,
consisting stoutly and valiantly in sustaining all labors and griefs for the
love of honesty and virtue. For as S. Augustine says, it is more commendable
to conte^ne an injury, the therewith to be grieved or to pine, by reason that
in despising, we seem a^ though we were not moved therewith, or felt nothing,
regarding it nothing at all: but on the contraryside, he that is thereat
sturred or grieved, endures torment and feels the smart, because the more
impatient we be in sustaining injuries, we aggrauate the grief by so much the
more, and grievous, and uneasy is the burden thereof. Patience then sucking
the dregs of sorrow, and pestered with the bitter pills of distress is made
more strong and perfect: which seems to be well approved by the Lacedaemonians,
who were noted to be patterns of patience, sustaining all pains, wars, vinde,
and weather. So likewise, as Pliny reports Anarchus, of all men was most
patient in all his torments: which is a special token of an heroical mind,
to set light by small wrongs, and little regard mean adventures: But as for
this kind of patience these examples may serve, because we have sufficient
daily before our eyes: wherefore I will draw nearer unto the inward governance,
upon whom patience should attend, to the subversion and oppressing of natural
passions, to the sustaining of the frowardnes of fortune, lest that they which
have the fu^ction of authority, and be employed in matters of great importance,
their lives be not only replenished with toiles and heinous displeasures, but
withal be subject unto diverse casualties. To these the only prouiso and
ready way to have patience, is thought by two ways invented. First a direct
and an upright conscience, a true and constant opinion in the estimation of
goodness, which seldom proceeds by instinct of nature, unless it be exquisit,
and excellent; but by the diligent study and attaining of virtue. For he which
bends himself to revenge, does imitate his doings who is molested with
impatience, and he that imitateth an evil man, will hardly prove good himself:
it were difficult and hard for a valiant man, to tolerate any injury without
revenge, though oftentimes he is accounted more valiant in suffering, then in
hasty reue^ging: for he that enterpriseth any thing hastily, may repent him by
leisure: Nevertheless I deny not, but it is almost a thing impossible for a
courageous man, to tolerate an indignity, the which if he does suffer, the
only and the surest way to be reue^ged, is to contemn and rebuke it, and to
live with such godly courage, behavior, and upright life, that the doer and
actor of the wrong, shall have sufficient occasion thereat to be ashamed, or at
leastwise lose the fruits of his envy, having no joy of thy hinderance and
damage. Laerti. lib. 6.
Antisthenes was wont to glory that he had sufficient virtue to the attaining
of felicity, and wanted nothing, save only the strength of Socrates meaning,
his mayle coat of patience, was a sufficient armor of proof. Tiberius Caesar
was in this one thing most highly commended, because he refused honors that were
gratefully proffered him, Guide. vitu vicen. ex Suet.
shunned flattery, and suffered all reproaches patiently, saying, that in a free
city there ought to be free tou^gs: that is to say, void of iniquity, and
tempered with this mild sovereign, named Patience. Whose advice Julius Caesar
seemed to imitate, when Catullus the Poet wrote very many contumelious Epigrams
against him, he notwithstanding not only forgave him, but was reconciled, and
often invited him to his house. But omitting to speak any more of this virtue,
since it seems sufficient, to the instruction of a governor, if any thing
remain, I refer him to Plutarch and Plato, where he may find sufficient to
satisfy his mind, and accomplish his expectation.

1 The sweetest salve to a deformed shape, is patience, and no greater revenge
can be proffered to Fortune, then to live contentedly in the midst of misery.

2 The final end of patience, is the expectation of promises.

3 He may be well verified to be right patient, which in his outrage can bridle
his own affections.

4 Patience winketh at apparent follies, and refraineth to prosecute manifest
injuries.

Of Constancy. Cap. 21.
Aristot.
COnstancy is a fortitude, as Aristotle says, perseuering in well doing,
defined of Cicero to be a provident guide, teaching us the force and efficacy
of wisdom, and directing us to tread our steps steadfastly in the continual
trace of virtue, our nature being frail, lest that any puff of vanity, or
gale of wind should toss our light affections: like the bramble, being
wavering and wanting stay, we are ready to shipwreck at every sudden wave or
the least blast, unless we be cunningly guided by a Pilote of experience,
whom, neither fear of adversity, exterior damage, nor private familiarity
may cause to desist from so commendable and comely a virtue as constancy, in
which remains nothing worthy of blame as a note of blemish: for albeit we
have both by nature and nurture, obtained the guerdon due unto our labor, and
do miss of constancy, when experience claspeth hold on us; if we then omit
any part of our gotten talent or effected virtue, moved by private affection,
fear of adversity, or any other exterior damage, desisting from constancy,
proving unstable and wavering in our actions, then is the estimation of our
credit eclipsed, and what may be worthy of commendations in us. A man in
nothing less resembles a man, then to prove in his action unconstant, which
is a great blemish in any man, as appeared in Metellus, which after his master
Diodorus being dead, laid upon his sepulcher a stone, made after the fashion
of a Crow: which Cicero understanding, said, that he had well rewarded him,
Plutarc.
because he taught him to fly, and not to speak. Whereby he noted the
inconstancy of Metellus. Also heretofore men were rebuked for their
inconstancy, and likened to women and to children: to the one, because in
respect of their infancy and young years, were not able to effect any thing:
to the other, as being the weaker sort, at whose hands no great exploit was to
be expected; but now a days it is contrary: for women are noted for the most
part to be of greater constancy then men, and if any prove vnco^sta^t, the
feminine sort are accustomed to term the same to resemble some wavering or
vnco^stant man: what should be the cause of this, I know not, unless it might
come to pass, that men for their leuity are too often said to resemble women,
and so with Caeneus changing sex, who of a woman became man, so men become
women. Constancy being a property only unto man, ought to be of no small
reputation: for as the wise man says, It is better to have a constant enemy,
then an unconstant friend, whereof we have diverse lively examples: therefore I
will draw a little nearer to the nature and property of constancy. The
property of a constant man, (as the Philosophers do affirm) is, not to insult
in prosperity, nor to pine in troubles or calamity, nor to mourn in adversity,
but as Plato says, to hold a mean between submission and ambition, guided
by reason; whereby we may note the ambitious and envious men to be excluded, of
whom there is no mean observed, nor true constancy used, being by these
vices, as by a cable rope, haled with insatiable desire, making no period or
comma, from the highest Zodiac and climate, to the lowest Center, by which
means their minds cannot be permanent. Moreover we must not deceive our
selves, in deeming that the stiff necked and stubborn man is constant,
although he continues, as being void of al virtue, in his perverse opinion,
as Zeno the philosopher well testifies, saying, Facilius esse ventrem inflatum
emergere, quam quemuis improbum ad aliquid agendum cogere: Who yields to no
man is sooner like a Serpent to be broken, then bent: but on the contrary side,
the constant man persisteth not according to opinion as the stubborn man,
which is grounded, Innanibus (as they say) and quasi labentibus fundamentis,
upon no certain fundation, but upon true knowledge or science, wherein he is
assured not to err. Such a constant man was Anaxarcus the philosopher, that
when he was beaten in a hollow stone of Micocreon the tyrant, was of such
invincible mind, that he bad the tira^t, Knock, knock this carcass of
Anaxarcus, but thou shall never infringe his constancy. Likewise Alexander had
such great co^stancy, in trusting his friend against misreport, that it saved
his life, whereof all men despaired. Xantippe the wife of Socrates, did report
that Socrates had always the same countenance, both going from home, and
returning home, which was a sign of great constancy: wherefore nothing is more
requisite in a governor, then during all his life time, in all actions to
prove stable and constant.

1 To live to God, to contemn the world, to fear no mishap, are the ensigns
of constancy.

2 The treasure that men gather in process of time, may fail, friends may
relent, hope may deceive, vain glory may perish, but co^stancy may never be
conquered.

3 Constancy is the blessing of nature, the sovereign salve of poverty, the
mistress of sorrow, the end of misery.

4 It is the sign of leuity and lightness of wit, unadvisedly to promise, what
a man may not, or will not perform.

Of Temperance. Cap. 22.
TEmperance is a virtue, moderating and bridling lusts, defined by Aristotle,
to be a mean in moderating of the pleasures of the body, and may be fitly
likened to a lamp that shines, lightneth and expels away the dim and
obscure passions that may enuiron it: before this virtue can be rightly settled,
we must be void of distemperature, or annoya^ce of contrary vice: to the
attaining whereof we must use such means, as the Chyrurgians do: Before they
apply any medicine or salve co cure any festered ulcer or wound, they first
draw out all bad and corrupt humors, dead and rotten flesh, and then do
proceed further to the cure thereof: so must we begin first, to cleanse and
purge the mind of all distemperate humors, or noisome passions which may seek
harbor and rest therein, so that this virtue may have no seat or room to
abide: whereby as her nature and property is, it may preserve both private and
humane society, curing the soul, most miserably throwe^ down in vice,
restoring it again to her accustomed abode therein, foreseing all disordered
and unbridled appetites, to yield to the yoke of reason and discretion, which
is not only effected by the abstaining from meat and drink: but also in
vanquishing the lust, and bridling lascivious affections, and suppressing
wanton wills, which are the utter wrack and ruin of man, the which to subdue,
is thought by wise men a greater conquest, the^ to overcome an enemy in the
field, as by their deeds and doctrine it evidently appears. Antisthenes that
famous man, did so much loath vnte^perate pleasure, that he was wont to say,
that he had rather wax mad, Laertius.
then to be moved thereby, proclaiming openly, I will be distracted, rather
the^ I will delight in vntemperature, because the Physician may cure this malady
and madness, but pleasure or any vntemperature, when it causes a man to be void
of reason, and without himself, is a mischief that has no remedy, and is
incurable. Likewise Demosthenes that famous Orator of Greece, affirmed, no
greater evil to happen to any earthly wight, which had any taste of virtue,
then incontinence and vntemperature: accompting it the greatest virtue that
could be, to abstain and utterly to abandon banqueting, swilling, and
drinking, because temperance does very much avail us, which is especially
tried in contemning and abandoning pleasures in all actions. This is it that
deserved that daily commendation of Solon which was wont to cry out, Ne quid
nimis. Wherefore the Persians listening thereunto, caused their children in all
actions daily to be exercised herein. Likewise the Turks do observe daily
this virtue with all modesty, in such forte, that they excel the Greeks and
the Romans, who are wont in war to sustain themselves with bread half
baked, and rice, with the powder of flesh which is dried in the Sun; their
drink is fair water, such as the ancient Carthaginians used in war by
prescription of law, as Plato says. In like manner, Agesilaus king of the
Lacedemonia^s, passing through the city of Thracius, being met and
entertained by the Nobles and the people, with diversity of banquets and rare
dainties, to gratify his coming, who nevertheless tasted not their dainties,
feeding only on bread and drink, and commanded his foot men to feed upon
such cheer, saying, that a Prince ought not to pamper himself with varieties
or dainty cheer, but to abstain: meaning, that immoderate eating and drinking
do infer great damages to man's body, which were only ordained to sustain
the life of man, which otherwise used do cause great sin before God and man,
and ingendreth diverse diseases and sicknesses, as dropsies and sundry other
infections. Who would not therefore, considering the discommodity hereof,
refrain, and willingly loath all insatiable gluttons, as Vitellus and
Appitius, to which cormora^ts, neither land, water, air, might be sufficient?
which is the greatest blemish that can be in any man. Julius Caesar so much
abhorred intemperance, as Plutark rehearses, that he was accounted in regard
thereof, the very lamp and Lantern of all Europe for his abstine^ce, and
thought the very mirror of Italy, who by ouerco^ming of himself, overcame all
Europe: so, no less are all governors for their temperance and abstinence to
deserve praise and fame, then dignity and honor for their rule and Empire.

1 Heroical virtues are made perfect by the unity of temperance, and
fortitude, which separated, becomes vicious.

2 There is nothing in the world that deserves greater felicity, then
moderation, that overcomes the assaults of the flesh, and the fruits of a
good life are revived by it.

3 Temperance enforces us to yield to reason, brings peace to the mind, and
mollifieth the affections with concord and agreement.

4 It is impossible for him to praise temperance, whose delight is in pleasure,
or affect government, that delights in riot.

Of Modesty. Cap. 23.
MOdesty is a temperate virtue, or a precinct or limite, which honesty
commands to be observed: so called, as Aristotle says, because it observes
a mean, not exceeding nor declining in any thing: And as Osorius says, It is
a vehement fear and shamefastnes of ignominy or reproach: but Plato calls it
the only preserver of all virtue, which first shines or appears in youths,
like a lamp, and especially in those which are of the greatest towardnes, who^
we perceive to blush, not for any infamy or reproach which they have committed,
but for fear of committing any thing worthy the reprehe^sio^, which is ye only
felicity in all estates, and may be called, the only repairer of decayed
virtue. Since then the country which we must desire to inhabit, is so high and
heavenly, and the way thither is Modesty, wherefore then desiring to enjoy
this happy country, do we refuse the way? for doubtless, as Osorius says,
that he which altogether has lost this virtue, and passes the goal, is
either of presumption or of mere slownesse reputed, and may be well thought
to have no sparkle of honesty. Was not impudence and ouerboldnes one of ye
greatest blemishes that Cicero was wont to reprehend in Cateline? But modesty
now a days, as Plato says, is exilde out of the land. Wherefore did the
Lacedaemonians and Romans banish out of their country, all vanity and other
lewdnes passing the limits of modesty: but because they hated and utterly
detested this vice, as deeming nothing honest which wanted this virtue?
Aristotle admonished, that no man should praise or dispraise himself: which on
the one side he thought to be the property of a vain glorious man, and on the
other side to be the point of an unwise and foolish person: deeming on every
side, that it was the poinct of no modesty, seeing it is accounted so unseemly
a vice, and detestable a crime amongst all good men, who would be ouerslow in
the observing hereof. The very Turks do so embrace this virtue, and follow her
train so much, though being addicted unto wars, yet to prevent immodesty
which they greatly detest, they carry no weapons in court, towns, nor yet in
camp: but when they are to fight, they show great staiednes in their manners,
avoiding haughtines and lightness in their deeds, gestures, apparels, and
speeches: As for example, when Amirath, who^ they account and canonize as a
Saint, who was very valiant and fortunate in arms, went to the temple to hear
prayers without any pomp, accompanied only with two servants, would not be
saluted or flattered with acclamations. Seeing such modesty has been used
amongst those Turkish infidels, what should be used amongst Christians, and in
well ordered commonweals, where nothing, but what with virtue and decency
should agree, ought to have any place? for the chiefest point of honesty
consists in modesty, which subiecteth and reclaimeth all diste^perature, and
enforces it to observe a moderate decency. Consider well the grave matrones of
Rome, and it shall suffice for an example, who used themselves so modestly and
decently, both in behavior and diet, and called those shameless and impudent,
that did drink wine or favor thereof, the which Cicero testifies in his
fourth Book De Rep. saying, that they observed it for a token of
shamefastness, and not for any reprehension: wherefore Cato by report of
Pliny in his 14. book De historia naturali, said, That the neighbors for no
other reason did use to kiss and busse the female kind, as we do now for
fashion sake upon seldom meetings in kindness, but for that purpose only, that
they might know whether they sauoured of wine, from which to abstain was a
token of modesty. Iuuenal.

1 Modesty has often effected that, which no virtue nor reason can perform.

2 Men are in nothing more like to their maker, the^ in sobernes and modesty.

3 The glorious seat and throne of the highest is in heaven: if thou
presumptuously endeavor to lift up thy self unto him, he will fly from thee;
but if otherwise thou observe true modesty before him, he will desce^d unto thee.

4 After that Dio was made king of the Siracusians, he would never change his
accustomed diet and apparel, which he was wont to wear being a student of
the University.

Of Chastity. Cap. 24.
CHastity is a bridled temperance of lawless lust, or as Aristotle says, is a
sweet blossom of the soul, and an integrity of life, which rayseth up slewces
to avoid the floods of vain pleasure, or refrain the act of carnal appetite,
whereunto a man is vehemently moved, or else enjoys his wished desire therein:
which to refrain, undoubtedly is a thing almost impossible, and betokens a
great wonder in a man of noble race and of great dignity: but in whosoever it
happens to be, must of necessity be reputed of great wisdom and virtue,
considering that it is enjoyed only of those, that keep their bodies clean
and unspotted. This chastity abides neither in sincere Virginity, not sacred
Matrimony, yet being good in wedlock, as a peace to desire, commendable in
virginity and widdowhood, as an only dignity and grace to their bodies:
gracious is that face that accomplisheth only pure love, and most celestial
is the resolution grounded upon chastity: for what can be more acceptable
before GOD and man, then to keep our bodies and minds clean from all
blurres, spots, or blemish? He that stoupeth to the lure of vain delight,
whereby he might breed his own content, and satisfy his lawless lust,
strikes often his foot against dangerous rocks, and by haunting after vain
follies, falls into most perilous dangers, not respecting the end, which is
the only salve to tame the flesh, that wanton is and bold, well to weigh what
it shall be, once dead and laid in molde: For, Non melius poterit caro
luxuriosa dominari, quam been (qualis erit post mortem) recordari. Which to
forget, is a most detestable sin in all ages, and especially in old years to
be stained with the spotte of incontinency. Wherefore it is reported by
learned Authors, that amongst the Caspions there was a law decreed, that who
soever should marry after he had passed fifty years of age, should in common
assemblies be placed in the lowest room and the meanest seat, as one that had
committed a heinous fact against nature, whom they entitled no better then a
filthy doting old leacher: meaning, that to live chaste, was the only felicity
of an earthly man, the which in this world could be effected: wherefore Cyrus,
as thinking it a thing most needful to live in chastity, abstained from the
sight of Pantha: and when Araspus told him, that she was a woman of excellent
beauty, and worthy to be a kings paramour, Therefore, said Cyrus, the rather
must I abstain: for if by thy advice I shall go unto her, when she is
solitary, peradventure she will persuade me to use and frequent her company when
she has no need; then must I daily be with her, neglecting the serious business
and affairs of the Common wealth: concluding hereby, that he detested
unchastity: for if thereunto he should be addicted, then he could not as a
king, rightly discharge the duty of a governor: for he had daily experience
before his eyes, of those which have been employed in war, who after many
wreaths and victories, being once intrapped and inueigled with the love of
unchastity (their minds being linkt thereunto) could no more use any of their
former Stratagems, or busy themselves in such affairs, being imploid
otherwise: whereof we have diverse examples, as namely that of Alexander, who in
stead of his Pollaxe and Curtilax, had a curtisan, whose favor he wore, as a
sign of the devotion he bare to this his mistres: which is a thing greatly to
be admired, that men of such resolutions and courage, should be so quickly
entrapped and weaned from so great affairs, to such toies and vanities,
considering the disco^modities incident thereunto: which Socrates well weyed,
who beheld on a time Sophocles the writer of tragedies, following after a young
boy, being rauish^ with his beauty: To whom Socrates said, O Sophocles, it is
the part of a man, not only to abstain his hands from incontinency, but also
his eyes. Which is a saying worthy of all men to be embraced, and especially of
such as have authority or government, or are admitted into any place of
dignity, or estimation in the Common wealth.

1 Pure chastity is beauty to our souls, a heavenly grace to our bodies, and
peace to our desires.

2 Chastity is the seal of grace, the mark of the just, the crown of
virginity, the glory of life, and comfort in matrimony.

3 Chastity is like the stars in heaven, and beauty is like the marigold which
opens her leaves no longer then the sun shines: so beauty endures but for
a moment.

4 Chastity is a sign of true modesty, which in extremity is crowned with
eternity, whose presence strikes more shame, the^ the sight of many wicked and
immodest persons can stir to filthiness with their immodest speeches.

Of Justice. Cap. 25.
Justice being an excellent and matchless virtue, is thought expedient to be
in all degrees, and especially in the governors of the Common wealth, without
the which nothing is commendable: for it is the right guide unto godliness,
goodness, and the knowledge of God; the which virtue Cicero called the Queen
and mistress of all virtues, and defined it to be the habit of the mind,
which respects the public commodity, and yeldeth equally every man his own.
This virtue Aristotle calls the affection of the mind, by which men are
prone to administer justice, as being the fundatio^ of all other virtues, which
allots no privilege to defraude any man of his right: wherefore, as being by
the providence of God invented, for the acco^plishment hereof, there were
certain Images of Judges (by report) set up at Athens, having neither hands
nor eyes: describing that rulers and Magistrates should neither be infected
with bribes, or any other way drawn from that which was lawful and right. To
this purpose, as it seems, in the original, an upright and a just man was
chosen by full consent and assent of the communalties, of an equal
indifferency, which should excel in virtue, to decide all controversies, lest
the inferior fort should be ouerpressed by mighty and wealthy me^: such a man
at that time held the superiority, and ruled as a King. All this was effected
for the executing of justice, and the right administration thereof: which is so
necessary, that no governors without it can rightly rule, nor no Common wealth
be well established, which ought to be of force amongst the greatest enemies,
according to the nature and disposition thereof, Justin. de iustitia and iure.
which is a perpetual and a constant will, yielding every one his own by even
portion, wherein prudence, magnanimity, and co^stancy, as assistants or gards,
are requisite: the one to distinguish lawful things from unlawful: the other,
not to be daunted or held back by any sinister chance: the third and last, to
persevere in yielding justice. For as Osorius says, In repub. been
co^stituta, leges sunt in armorum tutela: sic in been moratis animis omnia
iustitiae praescripta, fortitudinis praesidio, prudentiae auxilio, and
constantiae adminiculo muniu^tur. In a well ordered Common wealth, laws are in
stead of weapons: so in well moderated minds, all the rights and prescripts of
Justice are patronized by the safeguard of fortitude, by the aid of prudence,
and under the wing of constancy. Of this justice, as Cicero says, there be two
sorts, the one Distributive, the other Commutatiue, and is of Aristotle called
in greek Diorthotick, in English Correctiue, or as the Philosophers do say,
there are four sorts of justice, the first celestial, the second natural,
the third civil, the fourth judicial. Celestial is the perfect consideration
and duty to God: natural is that which al men have among themselves by nature:
civil is that which is made either by laws of nature, ye statutes of the
people, the consultation of the Senators, or the authority of grave and wise
men, and the device of Princes, as amongst the Athenians and Romans: judicial
justice depe^ded upon laws made for the commodity of the common wealth: But
because of these, Plato ( de legibus) and Cicero with diverse others have spoken
sufficiently, I will leave off to speak any thing of the diversity of the
sorts and nature thereof, but yet not forgetting the quality, I think it meet
to proceed farther, because as Cicero testifies, without this virtue there is
nothing done or effected any manner of way, which in process of time wears
not away, excepting Justice, which the more ancient it is, the more it
flourishes: wherefore there ought to be no time which should be void of
justice, as it well appeared by Byas the sage and grave Philosopher, being to
judge a man to die, bewailed and lamented the misery of ye man, and thought
woorthily he should bewail his sinister fortune: whom a certain man
beholding, demanded why he should weep and power tears, when it rested at
his pleasure to condemn or free any man. To whom Bias answered, I must of
necessity pardon the frailty of nature, but to err from justice and law, is a
pernicious thing, and not to be tolerated: meaning that justice was a measure
ordained from God, amongst his creatures, to his honor, and the defense of the
feeble and innocent, without which he esteemed nothing perfect, except it were
guided by this virtue: wherefore he ought not to err herein, nor derogate any
thing from the property, being the fundation of all creatures. Therefore, as it
were for the auerring of this saying, Manlius Torquatus showed himself so just
in the executing of justice, that he condemned his own son, and caused him
to be put to death, being against equity a conqueror: deeming that he owed
more duty to maintain the rights of justice, then either love toward his
son, or else to the triu^ph and glory of the conquest that his son had
gotten. Phocion also of Athens, being of Antipater requested, that he would
use injustice privily, answered him, Thou can not use me both a friend and a
flatterer: for a friend does so long continue a friend, as Justice and equity
do permit him. Meaning, that neither friends nor kinsmen should be an occasion
to hinder the execution of justice, which being neglected, both the love of God
and man is contemned, and the destruction of the state of the Common wealth
almost in a moment decayed and ruinated, as we may see in diverse cities and
countries, and also in the governors thereof: as King Philip was killed by
Pausanias a gentleman, for denying justice at the marriage of his daughter
Cleopatra, and diverse others by the transgression hereof. Wherefore let every
good christian, and especially governors, eschew injustice, and be moved with
zeal to discharge their duty, and execute with equity and justice whatsoever
they undertake, for the reverence they do owe toward God, and the regard of
their countries safety.

1 Justice is the mother of virtues, the right spouse of fortitude, for which
kings be created, and by whose virtue they rule.

2 Justice allots no pardon to the wicked, which might bring the hazard of the
country.

3 Justice requires equity, equity judges with lenity, lenity procures laws
which do judge with extremity.

Of Charity. Cap. 26.
CHarity is a virtue proceeding from the highest throne, attributed to all
Christians, as an vndissoluble yoke, for the knitting and joining together with
loving hearts of both body and soul in Christ; without which there is no
certainty, save only in the full assurance hereof: for hope and faith without
charity are of no effect. This virtue in the midst of calamities is secure,
that neither infinite toils, nor continuance of service abateth her courage,
being in displeasure meek and humble, in concealing wrongs innocent, in
truth quiet; not like hatred, rejoicing at others calamity, and pining with
their prosperity: But on the contrary does as humane nature is, Humanis casibus
ingemescere, at others misfortune she bewayleth, and at their prosperity is
joyful, observing the right precepts of GOD, in obeying him, and loving her
neighbors as her self. The Carthaginians and Egyptians, of al vices hated
immodesty, and of al virtues embraced charity. Trogus Pomp.
Thrasybilus was so charitably devoted toward his country, that safely he
defended it from the thirty tyrants. Jonathan so entirely loved David, that he
told him all whatsoever his father intended against him. Likewise the Turks,
which are inferior to all others, as Histories do report, never use to be
above ten in a company, in which society they are so marvelous loving, and
charitable one toward an other, that they need of none other means to
govern themselves within the compass of comlines and decency, save only by
signs of hand, and beckning of countenance, without uttering any word, which
is to be wondered at, that there should be such love and charity amongst those,
who do wander in so great darkness and obscurity of life, which is of no less
marvel the^ truth as credible authors do report. Seeing they are so given to
embrace this virtue, what should we, that have the cleerenes of the gospel,
and the truth always before our eyes? yea we should be so fettered and linkt
thereunto, as the only patterns of charity, whereby we might rest blameless
before the presence of our glorious God, abou^ding with ioies, hearing that
comfortable voice of our blessed Lord, which shall sound unto us: Come, O ye
blessed of my father, inherit the kingdom provided for you. For the attaining
of this virtue we have a good example of a certain elderly man amongst the
Egyptians, who being demanded, why he refused to have any thing in his house,
which was either money, or else appertained to the use of humane life? he
answered, that the use of those things auailed not to the atchiuing of
charity, but charity was sufficient to procure any other thing: co^cluding
hereby, that it was impossible for man, either to leuel his own life after a
right line, or else to govern others within the compass or limits to him
prescribed according to duty, without charity; in accomplishing whereof he
might be called absolutely perfect, and a right vpholder of this virtue.

1 Charity ransometh us from the fetters of iniquity, and delivers us from
the sting of death.

2 Charity is compared to an euerturning spy, always providing and laboring
for him in whom she rests.

3 It is the point of a charitable minded man, to inuit the poor, courteously
to entertain them, and speedily to let them depart.

4 Charity is commonly in the mouth of many, but regarded of a few.

Of Obedience. Cap. 27.
OBedience is the final period or end, whereunto true felicity te^deth, and
whereupon it depends, because it is a zeal and a testimony of an upright and
an humble conscience, showing in all enterprises that we should observe decency
and honesty, which constrains the soul, Intus and incute, willingly and
wittily, without instigation to yield every one his proper duty; as honor to
whom honor belongs, reverence to to whom reverence, tribute and succor, to
whom they belong; which is an infallible observation to guide our steps unto
eternal bliss: for first, the neglecting of this duty shows our rebellion,
and in accomplishing it, we leave an example of the fear and diligent care we
have in the observing and effecting of that, that we are commanded. The
diversity of this virtue is manyfold, as belonging unto diverse persons. First,
our obedience toward God, unto whom belongs all honor, duty, and obedience,
whereupon all our stay, hope, and felicity is built: secondly, our obedience
toward our king and superiors, to whom we ought in all humblenes and
submission, to show our selves obedient and loyal, as we are commanded by
the holy scriptures in these words, Let every one submit himself unto the
higher power. Thirdly, we are bound to obey our parents; for as Tully sayleth
in his book of the answer of southsaiers, that nature in the beginning had
made a concord between us and our parents: so then it were detestable to
infringe the rights of nature, and not to obey them. Fourthly, and lastly, is
the obedience of servants toward their masters, whom in all honest and meek
sort they should obey and reverence. In neglecting of this general duty, we
show our selves bastards and reprobates deserving the curse of our savior, and
the severity of law, not imitating the example of Christ, who obeyed his
father, even to death. Is it not the^ the duty of subjects, with all humblenes
to obey their superiors, holding them in such high estimation, and serving them
both with life and goods, which is the proper duty of every natural subject?
for therein consists the stay and state of al countries, because nothing
thriueth where there is strife and contention; and on the contrary side all
things do flourish, where there do remain love, unity, and obedience. When
Solomon deliberated with himself in this behalf, viz. after what sort a city
might be safely preserved: he answered, If the citizens obey the magistrates,
and the magistrates observe the laws: meaning, that obedience in the subjects
was a sign of great love and loyalty, and a cause why the common wealth should
long flourish, as having notice and sufficient knowledge of the ruin and
wrack of many Cities, because of disobedience. Wherefore we should utterly
detest this kind of vice, which has bred so many calamities, and engendered
sundry depopulatio^s and destructions of countries, and ought to endeavor and
show our selves obedient, imitating the example of Abraham, who obeyed the will
of God, in offering his son Isaac as a sacrifice: so ought we with all might
and maine, to behave our selves obedie^tly toward our governors, so that
neither the banishment of Aristides, neither the imprisonment of Anaxagoras,
nor yet the destruction of Phocion should terrify or cause us to desist from
the executing of our obedience. But leuing this general duty, I mean to
express somewhat in particular of our several duties and obedience toward our
parents, whereof we have diverse and sundry examples. First, of Christ himself,
which obeyed his mother Marie and her husband Joseph: then of David, who after
he was anointed King, obeyed his parents, and followed their direction in all
domestical affairs. Whereby we may gather, the great duty we owe unto our
parents, to be no less then a firm bond of nature, fixed in the minds and
bowels of every one: Cicer. pro Plan.
the which obedience Cicero so highly commended, that he said, The obedience of
children toward their parents, is the fundation of all virtue. Of which mind
Torquatus son was, who thought nothing so wicked, as to disobey the will of
his parents: wherefore being upon the displeasure of his father banished, he
killed himself. So likewise the duty which servants do owe to their masters,
is not much inferior to this, whom they are to serve with all lowlines and
seemly demeanure, sustayning with patience all corrections, though I deem
them not so much subjects, as the servants of Frenchmen were, over whom their
masters had power of life and death; and as Gellius says in his 15. book and
19. chapter, The ten wisemen thought, that authority not only of masters over
their servants, but also of parents over their children, was very necessary
throughout al dominions, by which means they report the Common wealth long to
have stood. Doutles, if parents over their children, and masters over their
servants, had such authority, that in respect thereof the common wealth
flourished: then the supreme governor should in equity have far greater
preeminence, being of both parents, children, masters and servants a
commander, unto whom all should be most obedient, whereby the state of the
Common wealth might perfectly stand, and that it might be said in respect of
this obedience, as it was of a certain man coming to Sparta, who beheld what
honor, obedience, and reverence, the younger sort did to the elders, and the
elders to their superiors, and said, It is expedient in this city to become an
old man, and of authority: meaning, that the Magistrates being so much regarded
by the co^munalties the Common wealth should of necessity long continue. Herin
I conclude of obedience, determining to pass further.

1 Obedience forms peace, establishes common wealths, and preuents discords:
wicked men obey for fear, but good men for love.

2 It is a commendable virtue in a servant, to know how to obey well.

3 That country is well kept where the prince governs rightly, and the
people are submissiue and obedient.

Of Hope. Cap. 28.
HOpe is a sure ground of future things wished for, whether they be divine or
tra^sitory, extolling the mind of man with great extacy, being grounded upon
good fundation, and having laid an infallible anchor, depending thereon with a
sure confidence to effect and accomplish his desire; which means is a sure
remedy to help our frail nature being full of mistrust and diffidency, whereby
the spirit of man puts great trust in weighty affairs, reposing such
certainty and confidence in himself, which otherwise would be vain and
imperfect: for he that is void of all hope, may be accounted to be partaker of
the incide^t mishap to an unhappy man. Having then so sure a sovereign kindling
our desire, and emboldening our courage, we cannot possibly miss a good
effect proceeding from so heavenly a stay, and so sure a safeguard, who
rese^bleth the pure Indian spice, which the more it is pund, the more fragrant
smell it yeeldes: so the more our hope is, the greater is our comfort to enjoy
that happiness which we expect; for a good and virtuous man should always hope
well and fear no mishap, especially being grounded upon the grace of God. Such
a man was one of Rhodes, who was cast of a tyrant into a hollow cave, wherein
he was fed after the manner of a beast, being enforced to sustain reuiles
and torments, his face being mangled and martyred with wounds: who being
admonished of one of his friends, that he should seek an end of his torments,
answered, All things are to be hoped of man, as long as he enjoys life. Even
so Thales Milesius, being demanded what was common to all men, answered, Hope:
meaning, it was a sovereign good, and a confederate to faith, which whosoever
has, may well assure himself, that he in continuance of time, may attain any
thing how difficult so ever. Whereupon Socrates the Philosopher said, that it
was impossible, that either woman without man should bring forth good fruit,
or good hope without labor: whereby he judged, that good hope should not be
grounded upon any vnco^stancy, which is the subject of a vain and licentious
life, whereupon evil hope which takes no toil is planted: therefore Socrates
said, hope without labor could effect no good thing; which like a careful nurse
should be always imploid or busied about some affairs or other, which hinder
the increase of vice: for security and idleness are accounted the mother of al
enormities and lewdnes: by which means true hope is excluded out of doors,
which in whosoever it remains, never fails them in the greatest extremity.
Such a man was Daniel, who hoped so much in the mercy of God, that being
thrown into the Lions den, yet escaped harmeles only by his mere hope.
Likewise also Job, a man that was full of good hope, who in his greatest
distres mistrusted not, saying, Lo, though the Lord slay me, yet will I put my
trust in him. Whereby it may appear, that he that hops well, shall never be
frustrated of his expectation.

1 Hope grounded on God, never fails, but built on the world, it never
thriueth.

2 Hope, of all the passions yields the sweetest savor, and the most pleasant
delight: whereof it is said, that hope only comfort the miserable.

3 A dastardly lover shall never without hope gain fair love, without
frowning fortune.

4 Mellifluous words procure hope, large protestations cherish it, and contempt
spils it.

5 Hope is the fools sovereign, the Merchants comfort, the Soldiers
confederat, and the ambitious man's poison.

Of Faith. Cap. 29.
FAith (as Cicero says) is a constant and firm bond of all sayings, and
contracts, appointed for the accomplishing of promises, and what should be
assuredly decreed upon, or as Divines term it, is a sure stay and rock of all
Christians, whereupon consists all their felicity, and if it be firmly
settled, it never deceives: the which to infringe, there can be nothing worse
unto any man, especially to him that rules, because this blemish by how much
the more excellent the party is wherein it rests, by so much the more openly
it is to be seen, and more hardly to be rooted out. Ennius reprehended the
Carthaginians, because they violated their faith and fidelity, which was the
first cause of the subversion of their city, who contended for the empire of
the whole world, with the Romans, which of al nations, were a people of most
prowess and valor. But what marvel is it that these were so slender in
observing of faith, which is the fundation of all equity, when in all places it
is little regarded, and utterly excluded out of doones, begging her bread with
tears, as a vagabond of no reputation, that I am almost ashamed to speak of
the diffidency of men, and the little regard which they have of their faith,
which ought to be of effect amongst enemies, unless it be unlawful, by
constraint and compulsion assured? And yet we have experience of many, that
would rather die, then upon compulsion or constraint pawn their faith and
credit: as for example, Po^tius Caesar the Centurion, being taken of Scipio,
the father in law of Pompey, to whom Scipio promised pardon, upon condition
that he would be the Soldier of Cnaius Pompeius: to whom Pontius answered,
Scipio, I yield thee thanks; but I need no such condition of life, for I had
rather die, then to violate my faith. Whose fidelity may be unto us a most
lively pattern to imitate: in so doing we purchase our selves eternity, and
the safety of our realm hereby is maintained: for what else does cause the
common wealth to be overwhelmed, but where the people are vnloial and
disobedient toward their governors? But on the contrary side, happy is that
estate, wherein the subjects are most loving and faithful unto their
governor, and where the governor studieth his communalties security, and is
full of clemency, which is the next way to bind and unite affection in duty:
seeing the^ nothing keeps together a Common wealth as faith, which is both the
original, and as it were the chief constitutor and seruator thereof:
therefore it is a reproach, either to promise lightly without performing, or in
firmly promising to infringe and neglect it: as Alphonsus king of Aragon was
often wont to say, that the very bare word of a king to the performing of his
fidelity, was so much reckoned, as the oath of private men, and said, It was
an unseemly thing for any man to prove unfaithful, much more for a king. But
omitting many other notable examples, which both in writing and of late
remembrance are extant, I will only speak of the diversity and difference of
this word Faith, how it is taken. Sometimes it is called faith, sometimes
credance, sometimes trust, after the imitation of the Latins, faith, by the
Frenchmen, loialty. First, in the assured belief of the precepts of God, it is
termed faith: in contracts between man and man, it may be called credance:
between persons of equal degrees, it is called trust: in respect of the servant
or subject to his sovereign or master, it is properly named fidelity. And so
much touching the difference hereof.

1 Faith being honest, may reap disdain, but no disgrace.

2 Faith is the daughter of destiny, the Sympathy of affections is
foreappointed by the stars.

3 Faith moves mountains, vanquisheth tyrants, conquereth the malice of the
envious, reconcileth mortal foes, to perfect love and amity.

4 Faith is not to be suppressed by wisdom, because it is not to be
comprehended by reason.

Of Truth. Cap. 30.
Truth is the just performance of speech, observing integrity, and ye true
messenger of God, which every one ought to embrace for the love of his master,
as being an infallible way to reason, which reuealeth the creation of the
world, the power of our creator, the eternal crown of bliss, which we hope
for, and the punishment due for our transgressions. It is also termed a virtue,
whereby we attain to speak no otherwise with our tou^gs, then our hearts do
conceive: which consists not in glosing speeches, or sugared melody,
proceeding only from the brimme of the mouth. This excellent champion lies
not hidden nor obscured with any cloudy mist, but shines in the greatest
darkness, yet hidden under a Chaos like the Mineral, which lies not upon the
face of the earth, that every one should carelessly without any pains find it:
but in the bowels of the earth secretly hidden, to that purpose, that those
which were willing to attain it, should toil and labor in the getting
thereof. So is this virtue enclosed and compassed within the vale of blessedness,
to the which, what man soever will knock at that heavenly palace, shall have
entrance. This is the right square of speech, which effects stratagems in
the hearts of men: wherefore let all christians endeavor to the artaining
thereof, that they may boldly approach before the tribunal seat, and be
accepted before God: otherwise they shall be disinherited as bastards and
unlawful heirs. For none is accepted before God, but he that has no guile,
and speaks the truth from his heart. Elia. lib. 12.
When as Pythagoras the Philosopher disputed of diverse matters, he said, that
two things were divinely given to man: the one was to embrace truth, the
other to do good turns, which both were to be compared to the works of the
immortal gods. Maximius.
So likewise Demosthenes being demanded what men had, that most resembled
God, he answered, To be charitable and embrace the truth. Concluding, that in
all estates, and amongst all degrees, nothing could be rightly established, or
by due course observed, without this virtue, which needs no help of any
eloque^t Orator, but is sufficient of it self to effect all things. Mat. 14
Mark. 6
John Baptist was such a lover of this truth, that he doubted not to tell King
Herod openly of his incest, the which of all me^ ought in like manner to be of
so great account and reputation, that neither loss of goods, hazard or damage
of life, should cause them to forsake it; by which means they might be
acceptable servants unto their masters.

1 Truth has no need to impair: for it is a sure pledge, a shield that is
never pierced, a flower that never dies, a stately stay that fears no frown,
a port that yields no danger.

2 Truth is the only anchor whereon all things depend, the Card whereby we
sail, the sweet balm whereby we are cured, the strong tower whereon we
rest, the glistering light, that lights us, and the only shield of our
defense.

3 Truth may incur blame, but never shamed, whose privilege is such, that
when time may seem to crop her wings, then as immortal she takes her defense.

4 Truth is a sure pledge to maintain justice, to govern a common weal, to
kill hate, to nourish unity, and to disclose secrets.

Of Friendship. Cap. 31.
FRiendship, Aristo. Ethic.
ingenerall is a mutual and secret good will of those, which do affectionat
each other, and endeavor to profit and better the good: more particularly, it is
termed a virtue, by which good and learned men, for conformity and likeness of
manners, are conglutinated and united in charity and love. This connection of
sundry wills and mutual consent of minds, is hardly to be found, unless it be
between good men, and withal cannot be found without virtue: because as
Aristotle says, Friendship is a virtue joined to virtue, and requires
equality. Wherefore in all that be good this friendship cannot be, except they
be of like condition, equal degree, and not exceeding one an other in age; for
where there is repugnance of nature, there may be no amity, because it is an
entire consent of wills and degrees. In respect hereof, Aristotle says, that
friendship has three objects, that is, Honesty, profit, and pleasure.
According to the first, the friendship of good men consists (as I have before
mentioned) that there could be no friendship but amongst good men: according to
the second, proceeds a familiarity of daily conversion, and that is between
merchants, and diverse other mercenary trades men, given to the world, and
regarding profit, amongst whom there is no friendship: for as Cicero says,
Amicus est alter ego: that is, I esteem my friend as my self: but they regard
more their wealth, the^ friendship, which they think may procure them
sufficient friends every where. Is not this an odious thing in a Common wealth,
that friendship should be contemned, which procures concord and unity, unity
peace, peace tranquillity, tranquillity security of life, which are the only
causes of the maintayning and long continuance of the good estate of the Common
wealth? The third, and last object, is pleasure, according to which, the
friendship of yo^g youths and children depends, for the delight they enjoy
in pleasure and pastime together; which is not to be termed friendship, because
in such there wantes constancy and discretion, as it evidently appears: for
this friendship endures but for a time. The like unto this (though a worse) is
that of thieves, robbers, conspirators, and diverse other malefactors, who, as
birds of the same feathers, do flock and resort together, not for any love
they owe one the other, but for the good will they bear unto those lewd
practices which they do use. Wherefore they are excluded of all men, and in
respect hereof, they consort together for friendship sake, as they term it,
which is no frie^dship, but carries a show of friendship: because friendship
only is said to be amongst good and virtuous me^, which is the necessariest
thing that should be esteemed amongst men. For as Socrates was wont to say,
Erasm. lib. 3.
there could not be a more excellent possession enjoyed of any man the^ a good
friend; wherein Epamino^das much delighted, and was wont to glory, that he
never returned from any town, before he had gotten the friendship of some man
or other. Whereby he coniectured, that there could be nothing of greater
efficacy and force, then friendship: which was well approved by Lucullus and
Voluminous, who were such intimate friends, that when Marcus Anthonius had the
Empire of Rome after the death of Caesar, and also had put Lucullus to death,
for his conspiracy against Caesar, Volu^nius hearing of his friend Lucullus
death, came with sobs and tears before Anthony, requesting on his knees one
grant, and desiring Anthony to send his soldiers to kill him upon the grave
of his friend Lucullus: which being denied of the Emperor, then immediately he
wrote upon a piece of paper, the which he carried in his hand, until he had
access unto the grave wherein Lucullus was laid; and there holding fast the
paper in one hand, and his dagger in the other hand, imbrued his hand with his
own blood, upon the very grave of his friend, having also clasped his hand
fast upon the piece of paper, wherein was written this worthy sentence, Thou
that know the loyal friendship betwixt Voluminous and Lucullus, link our
bodies together, as our minds were one, being alive. Such friendship was
between Pomponius and Caesar, that the one wanted nothing that the other had:
whose examples we should ingenerall imitate: for though wealth decay, fortune
frown, and we be of honors and dignities deprived: yet shall not fortune with
all her troops change or alter friends, who in prosperity or adversity might
rejoice one with an other, or else in bewayling, ease one an others calamity,
which is the chiefest sacrifice that may be offered unto God, and the greatest
terror unto our enemies.

1 The smile of a foe that proceeds of envy, is worse then the tears of a
friend flowing with pity.

2 We make experience of a friend, as the goldsmith does of his gold, in
trying him before we have need.

3 To set on forwards in folly, argues no discretion, and to dissuade a man in
course of honor, were not the part of a friend.

4 The counsel and persuasion of a friend are always fortunate in prosperity,
and his company in misery is always delightful.

Of Liberality. Cap. 32.
LIberality is a virtue, gratefully bestowing gifts upon others, and is said
to be the increase and yearly fruits or annuities, of those blessings which God
has bestowed upon us, for the relieuing of the distressed. For the chiefest
honor thereof consists in helping of the poor. And as Ambrose says, this
virtue is in league with justice: wherefore it should be ruled by moderation
and reason, aiming at her revenues, and thereof giving freely: as Bion
Borystenite was wont to say, it was good to bestow a portion of that talent we
have, upon others, yea far better then to receive any gift, though bestowed.
So Demosthenes being asked, what was most possessed of men, that resembled GOD,
answered, To bestow bountifully, and to effect good things. Nevertheless in
bestowing we must be circumspect, and consider where, when, and to whom;
because liberality consists not in the quantity of the thing bestowed, but in
the true meaning and natural inclination and disposition of the giver. For he
is never said to give in vain, as Augustine says, that gives with a zeal
and devotion: and they are accounted liberal and bountiful, which bestow
gifts upon him that deserves well, and requesteth nothing. For doubtless,
that gift is double to be accepted, which proceeds from a free hand and a
liberal heart: because Plautus says, that he gives too late, that gives
when he is asked: for the request of the thing that is given, deserves the
gift: wherefore he is rightly accounted liberal, that gives of his own accord,
and receives not, and withal the benefit of the giver does more profit him
that gives, then the receiver; which Phocion, the whole credit of Athens, did
esteem rightly to be no otherwise, who when Alexander the great had presented
him with gifts, and sundry costly Jewels from Persia, did show a lively
example hereof in refusing the gift, adding this sentence, I will not learn to
take, lest I forget to give. Wherein he showed himself a pattern of
liberality, well befitting the worthiness of his person. Herby we may
conjecture, that to be liberal, is a sign of an excellent mind. This property
of bestowing, is a commendation in noble persons: for in liberal giving and
beneficial doing, are princes compared unto God. For what may be more
commendable in subjects toward their Prince, then to be faithful and loyal?
or what may deserve greater praise, the^ liberality and clemency in a prince
toward his subjects? What made Julius Caesar to be beloved of his soldiers,
but magnifice^ce and liberality? who vanquished Darius, whose treasure and
substance were brought before him, which amounted in ready coin, to two
hundred thousand pounds, beside infinite treasures and jewels, whereof he took
nothing from his soldiers, but a little book, named Homers Iliades, in which he
delighted much, only to note the exploits of the Grecians, and the worthy
feats of the Trojans. This man exceeded so much herein, that happy was that
soldier, that could be a soldier to Caesar. O liberal heart, O passing policy,
O happy estate, and glorious stay of such a Common wealth, wherein like
liberality of Princes toward their subjects is found, and such loialty and
fidelity of subjects is showed and performed. Seeing liberality is a virtue that
deserves so great praise, what man is he that carries never so base and abject
a mind, that having any possessions or wealth, and would not be moved with some
remorse of conscience, to bestow a small portion thereof, upon the poor
distressed and needy? if not as being addicted to liberality, yet as being
moved with pity, he would gladly imparte some of the increase thereof, for his
sake that bestows the stock, and yields the increase.

1 Liberality has a zealous heart, open hands, invincible faith in earth, and a
perpetual dwelling in heaven.

2 The liberal man reco^cileth displeasure, the vnliberall engenders hate.

3 A liberal man beginning to decay, shall in his feebleness and want, find
his friends and foes.

4 He that is liberal, concealeth nothing from them whom he does affectionate,
by which means true love increases, and amity is made more firm, and stable.

Of Clemency. Cap. 33.
CLeme^cy is a virtue which belongs to the invincible part of the soul,
whereby we are slowly addicted to any kind of vices, which all decay in process
of time: only this mercy or clemency increases. Haughtiness seeing this virtue
to be honored, desires oftentimes to be covered with the cloak thereof,
fearing, lest appearing in her own shape, she should be little regarded. The
property of this matchles virgin, is to sustain those crimes which are laid
upon her, not tolerating her self to be hastily carried to revenge, nor easily
spurred to wrath: but enforcing him in who^ she rests, to be of a settled and
stayed resolution, and to carry a mild and gracious mind: for he that
purchases otherwise, wanting clemency, is said to carry dust against the
wind. Wherefore let all Governors, which do know for a certainty they have
their power from above, po^der in their minds in what case they themselves be
daily, if God did not abound in mercy, who would speedily, as soon as they had
grievously offended, smite them with his rod of correction, although as the
Scripture says, the purest man living passes not one hour, which deserves
not some punishment: but God being infinite in mercy, upon hope of amendeme^t
pardons. As therefore imitating his example, and following his steps, let all
me^ most willingly embrace clemency, which is of such excellency, that the heart
of man cannot conceive, nor his tongue utter either the infinite goodness
thereof, or how admirably it linketh humane society. Wherefore as Demonax was
wont to say, me^ ought not to want clemency, nor to wax angry in correcting
faults, using the example of Physicians, which are not moved to fret at their
sick patie^ts, but mildly to cure the disease: meaning hereby, that the only
remedy, and surest way to win the good will of the subjects, is always for
the ruler to be courteous and gentle, which causes love in the subjects, and
procures the good of the Common wealth. Of such clemency was Pompey the great,
who, when Tigranes king of Armenia by him conquered, kneeled before him,
yielding up his Crown and Scepter at his feet, and himself to his mercy as a
captive, took him up in his arms, embraced him, put on his crown on his
head, and restored him to his kingdom again. Was there ever Monarch more
feared of his enemies, the^ Alexander the great, invincible in all enterprises
he attempted, in so much that he could not only force all humane powers, but
also time and place themselves? and yet who has left greater proof of
meekness then he? for as he was on his voiages, vndertake^ for the conquest of
the Indians, he and Taxilles might not war one against the other. If thou
(says this king unto him) art less then I, receive benefits: if greater, I
will take them of thee. Alexander greatly commending, and withal admiring the
gravity and courteous speech of this Indian, answered thus, At the least we
must co^bat for this, namely whether of us twain shall be most beneficial unto
his companion. So loath was this noble Monarch to yield to the other the
superiority in clemency. What can more stir up humane hearts to great
affections? what more maintains love? what joins the hearts of subjects
unto their sovereign? Nothing so much as clemency. Adrian a noble Roman,
conceived great hatred against a famous gentleman of Rome: but as soon as this
noble Adrian was made Emperor, by chance meeting his enemy in the street,
that very day that he was created Emperor, said with a loud voice, in the
presence of all the people, Euasistime, Thou have wo^ne the conquest: meaning,
that he being made a Prince, might in no sort revenge the wrongs that he
conceived before. O unspeakable humanity, and passing cleme^cy in a Prince.
Julius Caesar was also of such courteous behauior, that having conquered Pompey,
and all his enemies, he wrote to his friends in Rome, that the greatest and
most estimable fruit, which he of his victory conceived, co^sisted in saving
daily the life of men, being his own country men, who had borne arms against
him. For especial proof of this meekness and gentleness, that speech may
serve which he uttered, when he understood, that Cato returning unto the town
of Vtica, after the loss of the battle, had violated his own life. O Cato
(says this Monarch being then very pensive) I envy thee for this thy death,
seeing thou have envied me the glory of saving thy life: I never yet denied
clemency (said that good Emperor Marcus Aurelius) to him that demanded it of
me, much less have I evil entreated, or offered dishonor to any that reposed
any confidence in me: affirming, that there could be no victory, which should
enjoy the name of a true and perfect victory, excepting that which harbors
clemency, alleging, To overcome, was humane, but to pardon, was divine.
Wherefore, says this Prince, of who^ we made mention, that we ought to esteem
the magnificence of the immortal Gods, not so much for the chastisement, as
for the mercy which they use.

1 Clemency is the character of an unspotted soul, which never lightly
suffers innocence to be trodden under feet.

2 Pride is vain, cruelty is hated, but cleme^cy alone for her meekenes is
canonized.

3 Clemency overmuch used, is no cleme^cy: to be too submissiue and humane
ingenerall, is to prove humane to none, because that generality can never at
any time prove particular.

4 Clemency in majesty, is the rightest path to bind affection in duty.

Of Peace. Cap. 34.
PEace is a virtue, that purchases the security and quietness of kingdoms,
suppressing al tumults, vprores, and factions, planting quietness and
tranquillity of life* But as Cicero says, Peace is the end of war; dignity
and renown, the joy of peace; and in a well established government, an anchor
to both, without which no life is quiet, no estate well stayed, nor no affairs
rightly managed. Wherefore, they that wish the want hereof, and refuse the
conditions, may rightly be said to deserve the sword of war, which no man,
except he be void of reason and senceles, would willingly desire: for as Cicero
says, there is nothing so much to be wished, as peace, by which, not only
those things which have sense in the^ by nature, but also the very walls and
houses do seem to glory and rejoice thereat: for when there is no trouble of
war, the spirit is quiet, and fit for every kind of honest rest, justice
florisheth, virtue shows her effects, vice languisheth, the zeal of pity
increases, the discipline of the Church is authorized, both the noble and
mean man preserves and governs his wealth, trade and traffic is free:
briefly, every one receives good and commodity, and so consequently the whole
body of the commonwealth. Archidamus king of Lacedemonia, knowing well the
effects of peace and war here briefly touched by us, and hearing that the
Elians sent succor to the Archadians, to war against him, took occasion to
write unto them, after the Laconicall manner, in stead of a long discourse,
Archedamus to the Elians: peace is a goodly thing. And an other time he gave a
notable testimony, how far he preferred peace before war, when he made
answer to one that commended him, because he had obtained a battle against
the foresaid Archadians, It had been better if we had overcome them by
prudence, rather then by force: every prince that desires war, stirs up
against himself, both the hatred and weapons of his neighbor, he vexes his
subjects unworthily; seeking rather to rule over them by violence, then to
gain their good will by justice, he quite overthrows his country.

1 Peace triu^pheth, where reason rules, and security reigns, where wisdom
directs.

2 It is a sign of godliness, to be at peace with men, and at war with vices.

3 Peace from the mouth of a tyrant, is often promised, but seldom performed.

Having laid down somewhat of the virtues, which are the cause of the
flourishing estate of a Common wealth, it follows in brief of the vices
which are the destruction, and utter ruin of all governments, and of every
Common wealth.

Of Idleness. Cap. 35.
Idleness is a fear of labor, desisting from necessary actions, both of body
and mind: it is the only nurse and norisher of sensual appetite, and the
sincke which entertaineth all the filthy channels of vices, and infecteth the
mind with many mischiefs, and the sole maintainer of youthly affections. They
therefore that do nothing, says Cicero, learn to do ill, and through
idleness the bodies and minds of men languish away, but by labor great
things are obtained; yet travail is a work that continues after death:
therefore it was well ordained in the primitive Church, that every one should
live of his own labor, and sweat of his own brow, that the idle and
slothful might not consume unprofitably the goods of the earth: which reason
brought in that ancient Roman edict mentioned by Cicero in his book of
Laws, that no Roman should go through the streets of the city, unless he
carried with him the badge of that trade whereby he lived; insomuch that Marcus
Aurelius speaking of the diligence of the Romans, writes, that all of the^
followed their labor. It is our duty therefore, to abide firm and constant in
that good and commendable kind of life, which we have chosen from the
beginning, so that the end thereof be to live well: and let us shun idleness in
such sort, as to say with Cato, that it is one thing whereof we ought to
repent us most, if we know that we have spent a whole day, wherein we have
neither done nor learned any good thing. Phocilides minding to instruct us in
this matter, said, that in the evening we ought not to sleep, before we have
thrice called to memory whatsoever we have done the same day, repenting us of
the evil, and rejoicing in our well doing. Apelles the chiefest paynter that
ever was, would not suffer one day to pass, without drawyng some line: meaning
thereby (as he said) to fight against idleness, as with an enemy. Eleas King
of Scythia, said, That he deemed himself to differ nothing from his
horse-keeper when he was idle. Dionisius the elder, being demanded if he was
never idle, answered, God keep me from that horrible vice: for as a bow
(according to the common Proverb) is broken, by keeping it in too much
bending: so is the soul through too much idleness. This is that which
Masinissa the Aphrica^ would learnedly teach us, of who^ Polibius writes, that
he died when he was fourscore and 10. years of age, leaving behind him a
son that was but four years old a little before he died, after he had
disco^fited the Carthaginians in a maine battle, he was seen the next day
eating of course brown bread, saying, to some that maruailed thereat, That as
iron is bright and shines as long as it is used by the hand of man, and as a
house falls to decay wherein no man dwells (as Sophocles says) so fares
it with this brightness and glistring light of the soul, whereby we discourse,
understand, and remember. The same reason moved Xerxes father to say to Darius,
that in perilous times and dangerous affairs he increased in wisdom. Likewise
political knowledge, is so excellent a prudence, settled mind, justice, and
experience, as knows full well how to make choice of, and to take fit time
and opportunity in all things that happen, which cannot be maintained but by
practice and managing of affairs, by discoursing and judging. Now to conclude
our present treatise, seeing we know that we are borne to all virtuous actions,
let us fly from idleness and sloth, the welspring of al injustice, and
poverty, the stirrers up of infinite passions in the soul, and the procurers
of many diseases in the body, even to the utter destruction of men: And let us
embrace diligence, care, travel, and study, which are sure guides to lead us
to that end, for which we ought to live, wherein consists all the happiness
and co^tentation of the life of good men: and let us not dout, but that all
time otherwise spent, is lost time, knowing that all times in respect of
themselves are like: but that which is employed in virtue in regard of us, and
that which is unprofitably wasted, and in vices, is naught.

1 Idleness makes of men women, of women beasts, of beasts monsters.

2 To fly with idleness from that we should follow, is to follow our own
destruction.

3 To idleness belongs correction, to correction amendment, to amendment
reward.

Of Pleasures and delight. Cap. 36.
DElight is a pleasure, that moves and tickleth our senses, raising our hopes
on hills of high desire, which quickly fades and vanquisheth away, and rather
leaves behind it an occasion of repentance (how delectable soever these
pleasures be) then any reason to call it again to remembrance, albeit amongst
the pleasures and delights which men have in this world, some are decent, holy
and honest; as those which we conceive in the reading and meditation of the law
of God, in our obedience toward him, and of the faith and hope we have in his
promises. All which (as David says) are more to be desired then gold, yea the^
fine gold, and are sweeter then the honey and honey co^be. It is also a singular
pleasure to behold the providence, wisdom and goodness of God toward his
creatures, and to consider how every one of them, and every part of them, are
appointed to some good purpose, and ordained for the use, pleasure and profit
of man: in these plesures there is neither shame, sorrow, nor repentance: for
every thing is holy, and there is no evil, unless it be, that we are not
greatly desirous to fall into these considerations, or because we are
ouer-weary of them. There are other pleasures which are natural, as to eat
when we are hungry, to drink when we are thirsty, to rest when we are weary,
and such like; by the sweetness whereof, our good God, which is a lover of our
welfare, would stir us up to be careful of our selves. There are also some
which are superfluous and unprofitable, as that of Socrates, which was
accustomed to stand in one place gazing at the Sun, from the rising thereof
until Sun set: or as the Dear that delights to gaze so long on the bow,
until he is hit with the bolt: or that of sundry others, which they take in
tricking toys, as in engrauing or such like: othersome spend the most part of
the day at the door, to show their beauties, and to behold the passengers by:
not unlike ye wolves of Syria, which delight to bark against the Moon,
spe^ding their time about nothing, which every man ought to hold most precious,
and especially governors, who are always to be employed in matters of great
consequence, whereof the charge is such, that if they discharge their duty,
they shall hardly have so much leisure, as to eat their meat, and take their
rest, unless they omit some of that time which should be employed in public
affairs. Moreover there are other pleasures which are lewd, and are termed by
the name of carnal and worldly pleasures, and these are they whereof at this
present I purposed to discourse. Herein let us resolve our selves, that it is
not sufficient to do our endeavor, that according unto the example of S. Paul,
and following his advice and counsel, we do apply our selves to the persons
with whom we live, and that we transform our selves unto them, though that
their natures be oftentimes different and disagreeing from us; but withal, we
must apply our selves to the sudden chances and sundry accidents of this
life, and keep our minds always in one estate and condition, whether we be
poor or rich, as it is said of Socrates, that unto what house soever he came,
were it to the Kings palace, or the beggars cottage, were he in Silks, Velvet
or Frise, he always kept a decorum and a comlines in his behauior, beseeming
such a philosopher as he was. So in like manner must we apply our selves and
learn to use al alterations and changes, whether they should be ease or
labor, honor, or dishonor, poverty and riches, friends and enemies, health
and sickness, imprisonment and liberty, rest and pains, sorrow and gladness,
without doing any thing unprofitable or not befitting a Christian, or
disagreeing, and not beseeming our estate and conditions and in so doing, a man
that shall moderately and wisely enjoy any pleasure as God shall minister him
occasion, giving thanks unto him, and acknowledging his goodness, ought much
more to be commended, the^ he that refuses his grace and favor, depriving
himself of those gifts and talents which God has given and offered him: for
he does it either through contempt, superstition, or detestable pride, thinking
himself to be more wise in rejecting, then accepting the goodness that God
has offered him.

1 Worldly gladness rides upon the wings of time, but he that sits surest,
may be overthrown.

2 Conceal thy delights in thy heart, lest shamefully they be discovered.

3 Delight is the brook of evils, quenching the light of the soul, and
hindering counsel, turning men aside from the right way.

4 The delight of the heart adds length to life, but sorrow of life hasteneth
death.

Of Intemperance and Gluttony. Cap. 37.
INtemperance is an enemy to frugality, a daughter to excess, a foe to
temperance, and a fauourit to immoderate appetite, that craves daily more then
it needs, like an unthankful beast, unwilling to gratify the pleasure done
it, which lives as a slave to the mouth and belly: for what can be more vile
and loathsome, the^ is the dru^kard, whose mouth is the lodge of poisoned
sauors, whose body through excess does tremble and shake, whose promises are
large, whose tongue bewraieth secrets, whose mind is soon changed, whose
countenance is transformed: for where drunkenness reigns there secretie
bears no sway: for commonly when the head is full of wine, the tongue is set
at liberty; besides, this wine does not only suffice a drunkard, neither is he
content with many sorts of wine, as sack, bastard, hipocras, and such like,
but he drowneth his senses in all variety of liquor, making himself the
mo^ster of excess. O desire insatiable, O fire inquenchable. This is the
nursery of al co^te^tion and strife: for as the wise man says, Much drinking
of wine kindles the coals of wrath, and is the root of all misbelief and
ruin, and the sequel thereof is fornication, yea fornication, wine, and
dru^kennes, bereue noble minds of al strength and courage, corrupt the blood,
dissolve the whole man, and finally make him forgetful of himself altogether.
Therefore the Apostle writes, Be not dru^k* with wine, wherein is lascivious
wanton lust. And that wise king says, That wine is a leacherous thing, and
that drunkenness is full of strife and dissentio^. The children of Rachab, and
the sons of Zachary drank no wine, nor no other kind of strong drink that
might overcome their se^ses, Gluttony the mother of uncleanness, brings
forth a more unclean daughter: for it is very agreeable to reason, that what
is already unclean, should become as it were more disparged with uncleanness.
For all those which commit fornication, are like unto the bakers oven made hot
with fire. The princes and rulers began to rage through wine: for the belly
which is daintily fed, most willingly of it self embraces carnal pleasures,
and extreme rage of unclean lust, which does not only effeminat the mind, but
also weakneth the body, and indaungereth the person in this life, and brings
both body and soul in peril of damnation in the life to come: for all the sin
that a man commits, is without the body, but he that offends
infornication, commits an offense against his own body. Heat and lust are
the harbingers of fornication, and it is always combinat and accompanied with
vnclea^nes, and vndecentnesse, but sorrow and repentance do speedily overtake
it: for the lips of an harlot (says Solomon) or like unto a dropping honey
co^be, and her throat is more neat and cleaner then oil, but the and and
latter days of her are as bitter as wormwood, and her tongue is as sharp as a
two edged sword. Let al men therefore eschew this odious vice, which though at
the first it seem pleasant, yet in the end it will wound like Basi^icocks,
which slay and kill men with the poison of their sight.

1 Sobriety co^teineth that in a wise man's thought, which a fool without
discretion has in his mouth.

2 Gluttony stirs up lust, dries the bones, and more die by it, then perish
by the sword.

3 Intemperance is a root proper to every disease, and he that too much
pampereth himself, is a heavy foe to his own body.

4 Inte^perance increases anger, and anger in extremity extinguisheth
understanding opinion and memory.

Of Lust, and Lawless delights. Cap. 38.
Lust is a desire against reason, that enforces us to covet beyond our power,
a furious and an unbridled appetite, which procures us to act beyond our
nature, and to die before our time, in that it rooteth al good motions out of
the mind of man, leaving no abode for virtuous actions: for in the beginning
of man's life bread and water was his food, and a simple garment with a poor
cottage were thought sufficient to cover his deformity: but now the fruits of
trees, the sundry sorts of grains, the roots of herbs, the fishes of the
sea, the beasts of the land, the fowls of the air, do not satisfy the
greedy appetites of gluttons, and ravening men; now they seek for pleasant
dishes with painted colors, they procure delicates and hot spices, choice
meats, sugared morsels for their dainty mouths, those things do they feed upon,
which be curiously wrought by the art of cookery and other officers: one by
stamping and straining changes some things from their proper nature, laboring
by art to make that accident, which of it self is a substance: an^^^er
compou^deth things together, to make that delicate, which of it self is
unpleasant: and all this is to turn excess to hunger, to bring an appetite to
the stomach oppressed with saturity, and to fill the greedy desire of gluttony,
rather the^ to sustain the weakness of nature. Gluttony is an enemy to health,
a friend to sickness, the mother of wanton lust, and the instrument of death.
Be not greedy, says the wise man, at any banquet, nor feed not on every
dish: for with the diversity of dishes the health is endangered, and through
surfeit of wine many have perished: meat is ordained for the belly, and the
belly to receive the meat, but God shall destroy both the one and the other.
Gluttony requires a costly and chargeable tribute, but yet yields a very
base and vile rent: for how much more delicate the meat is, so much more
odious are the fruits thereof. Gluttony diste^pereth the body, corrupts the
stomach, and makes al parts noisome: Genesis 3.
gluttony did shut up the gates of Paradise against mankind: gluttony caused
Esau to sell his inheritance: Genesis 25.
gluttony was the maine path which led Pharaos baker to the gallows: Genesis 40.
Mat. 14
gluttony was the instrument that wrought John Baptist his death: Nabuzardon
the chief cook of the king of Babylon, burnt the temple, and destroyed the
city Jerusalem. Dan. 5.
Balthazar the king of Babylon in his great and sumptuous banquet, saw a hand
writing on the wall, Mane, Thekel, Phares, and the same night he was killed by
the Caldeans. The people o^ Israel sat down to make good cheer, and rose up
to play: but whilst the meat was yet in their mouths, the wrath of God fell
upon them, and destroyed them all, for their voluptuous and lewd kind of
living. The rich man which did feast, banquet, and abound in worldly pomp and
vanity, is buried in hell. Vitellius also was so much given to gluttony and
excess, that at one supper he was served with two thousand several kind of
fishes, and with 7000. flying fowls. Also Aristotle mocking the Epicures,
said, That upon a time they went all to a temple together, beseeching the gods,
that they would give them necks as long as Cranes and Herons, that the
pleasures and taste of meat might be more long, co^plaining against nature for
making their necks too short.

1 Lechery is a strong tower of mischief, and has many vpholders, as
needines, palenesse, anger, lust, discord, love, and longing.

2 Concupiscence in decrepit old age, is loathsomnes, in youth excess, and
between both, the fruit of idleness.

3 Concupiscence is an enemy to the purse, and a foe to the person, a canker to
the mind, procuring blindness to the understanding, hardness of heart, and want
of grace.

4 Concupiscence is a sin finished with sorrow, a lust that grows by
continuance, an infamy nourished by lasciuiousnes.

Of Envy. Cap. 39.
Envy is a grief arising of other men's prosperity, to which vice malignity is
always a confederat: this hate or envy springs of certain pleasure or
delight, conceaned by other men's harm, although it reapeth nor enjoys
pleasure or profit thereby, yet as being an enemy to unity, rejoices thereat.
This triuiall vice is said to be the mother of wickedness, and accounted to sit
in an immaginary theater, her palace is a dim and hollow vaute, wherein she
waxes pale and wanne, as having the co^sumption of the liver, looking askwint,
as borne under Saturn, flowing with gall, as having no affinity with the dove,
never rejoicing, being conceived without a spleen, yet smileth at other men's
misfortune, being in a league with the Crocodile: she is always careful, and
never resting, as though she were an arm of Ixions wheel. This vice, as the
Poets do say, is a monstrous vermin, and an enemy to concord, engendered and
hatched by the ugly Megera of hell, that feeds and cra^mes her gorge with
dragons, and fomes out again deadly poison; then which vice, nothing is more
pernicious to the estate of the common wealth: for what may be more unseemly
and detestable, then one man to pine away at an others good estate, or rejoice
at an others harm? The causes that do bring forth this vile bratte, are
many, (as diverse do rehearse) whereof one, as I my self by experience have
partly known, is, that whereas some springing from base stock, and withal
like the Scaribe, bearing low thoughts, yet have envied and grudged at others,
that both by nature and nurture, were well qualified, and of good deserts,
because they were not willing to see any other prosper or of any estimation and
dignity; not because they hate praise or dignity themselves, but because they
have nothing in themselves worthy of fame, nor any sparkle left by their
posterities, that might rightly challenge any prerogative: and this is the
meanest sort of envy. Some other are envied by the better sort, for their hauty
and insolent pride, who will admit no coequall, or second. Such a one was
Sesostris, who was so proud and haughty, that whenever he went to the temple
or any whither in public, caused his chariot to be drawn by four tributary
Kings or great Lords, instead of horses: showing thereby, that none of the
other kings or captains were to be compared to him in virtue and prowess. And
this sort of envy is somewhat tolerable. Some others are envied, being
promoted to honor and dignity, or increasing in wealth and substance: so
likewise the good of the evil and lewd sort, are hated for their goodness and
virtue, which vice is intolerable, and as unfit to be in the Common weal, as a
coward in wars: wherefore says a worthy man named Demor^s, that the laws did
not forbid every man to live according to his own wished desire, unless the
one were envious and injurious to the other: meaning, that envy was the only
beginner and stirrer up of hatred, and of other vices. Such was the envy of
Themistocles, who repined and was puffed up with great envy, when he perceived
Melciades to be honored for his conquest, that he could not take quiet rest,
and being demanded what might be the cause thereof, answered, that the
triumphs of Melciades would not suffer him to take any rest. Wherein he showed
himself a vicious man and worthy of reproach. But on the contrary side, Socrates
being told that he was envied of one, appeased his anger and answered, It is
not material: alleging, The harm will be his, and not mine: for both his
own ill hap, and my good success, shall torment and put him to pain: Adding
that of Horace, Inuidus alterius rebus macrescit opimis: The envious man pines
away, to see an others prosperity.

1 A discreet man had rather be envied for provident sparing, then pitied for
his prodigal spending.

2 Envy is the daughter of pride, the companion of magnificence, the beginner
of secret sedition, and the perpetual corrupter of virtue.

3 Envy swalloweth up the greatest part of her own poison.

4 The envious man that carries hatred in his face, and folly in his head, is
combred with two worms, the one fretteth life, the other consumes goods.

Of Covetousness. Cap. 40.
Covetousness is a deformity of the soul, whereby a man most greedily desires
to heap riches from all parts without measure, regarding not how unjustly he
detaineth goods belonging unto others, so that he may augme^t his riches, which
he gathers with great travails, and keeps them with more danger. The
covetous man is always ready to ask, but slow to give, and bold to deny: all
that he spends, he thinks it lost, and after expense he is full of sorrow,
full of complaints, froward and hard to please, he is pressed with care, and
sigheth through the remembrance of that which is spent, he is troubled in
mind, tormented in body, and if ought go from him, it is much against his
will, GOD wot, he makes his own gifts glorious, and embraces not that
which he receives from others, he gives in hope to receive, and of his
gifts he makes his gain, he is free of expense where others bear ye charge,
very sparing in spending of his own, he forbeareth his food, his treasure to
increase, he pineth his body, to multiply his gain, he puts back his
hand, when he ought to give, but he stretches it far forth, when he is to
receive any thing: howbeit, the wealth and substance of the unrighteous shall be
dried up as a river, because goods evil gotten are soon again consumed; for
it is a just judgment, that wealth of evil beginning, should have an evil
ending, and that those things which be unjustly gathered, should be unjustly
and unthriftily scattered: The covetous man has therefore his condemnation in
this life, and in the life to come. Tantalus, as the poet says, thirsts
amidst the waters; even so the covetous man stands in need amongst all his
great wealth, to whom that which he has, does as much good, as that which he
has not, because he never uses it, but always gapeth after things not as
yet obtained: he is, says the Wise man, as though, he were rich, when he
has nothing, and is as though he were poor, when he flourishes in wealth.
The covetous man and the pit of hell do both of the^ devour, but they do not
digest, they receive both, but they do not render again: the niggard does
neither pity those that suffer affliction, nor yet have compassion of those
that are in misery, but he forgets his duty to GOD, and the due to his
neighbor, seeking his own harm and disquietnesse: for he holds back the
due unto God, he denies to his neighbor things necessary, and withdraws
from himself things that be needful, he is unthankful to GOD, unkind to his
neighbor, and cruel to himself. To what use has the covetous man
substance, and to what end has the spiteful and malicious man gold? how can
he that is evil to himself, be good to others? Or he that takes no profit
of his own gotten goods? He that has the substance of this world, and sees
his brother in necessity, and shuts up his compassion from him, how
dwells the love of GOD in him? For he loves not his neighbor as himself,
whom he suffers to perish for hunger, and consume for need, neither does he
love God above all things, who more then God, respects gold and silver.

1 The covetous man bettereth no man, and worse befriendeth himself.

2 A covetous man's purse is the devils mouth, his life is to live a beggar, and
his end to die in want.

3 Riches gathered by the covetous, are lightly wasted by the prodigal person.

4 The covetous man can learn no truth, because he lotheth the truth.

Of Usury. Cap. 41.
Usury is an active element that consumes all the fuel that is laid upon
it, gnawing the detters to the bones, and sucketh out the blood and marrow from
them, ingendring money of money, contrary to the disposition of nature, and
holding a disordinate desire of wealth; of which it may be said, as it was to
Alexander, of the Scythians, What need thou of riches which constrain thee
always to desire? thou art the first, which of abundance have made indigence,
to the end that by possessing more, thou might with more ease by unlawful
usury enjoy that thou have not. This vice is so loathsome, and contrary to
equity and reason, that all nations, which were led by the instinct of nature,
have always abhorred and condemned it, in so much as the condition of thieves
has bin more tolerated, then usury: for theft was wont to be punished but with
double restitution, but usury with quadruple: and to speak truly, these rich
and gallant usurers do more rob the people, and purloine from them, then all
the public thieves that are made examples of justice in the world. It is to be
wished, that some would examine usurers books, and make a bonfire of their
obligatio^s, as that Lacedemonian did, when Agesilaus reported, that he never
saw a cleerer fire: or that some Lucullus would deliver Europe from that
contagion, as that Roman did Asia in his time. Licurgus banished this canker
worm out of Sparta, Amasis punished it severely in Egypt, Cato banished it out
of Sicilia, and Solon condemned it in Athens. How much more should it be held
in detestation amongst Christians? S. Chrysostom compares it fitly to the
biting of an Aspe: as he that is stung with an Aspe, falls asleep as it were
with delectation, but dies yer he awaketh: so money taken in usury, delights
and contenteth at the first, but it infecteth all his possessours, and sucketh
out the marrow of them suddenly. Seeing that it is so abominable by the law of
God and nature, let us shu^ne it as a toad, and fly from it as from a
Cockatrice. But if these persuasions will not serve, let them turn their eyes
to these examples following, wherein they shall see the manifest indignation of
GOD upon it. Sergius Galba, before he came to be Emperor, being president of
Africa under Claudius, when as through penury of vitailes, corn, and other
food were very sparingly shared and divided amongst the army, punished a
certain soldier, that sold a bushel of wheat to one of his fellows, for a
hundred pence, in hope to obtain a new share himself: in this manner he
commanded the Questor or treasurer to give him no more sustena^ce, since he
preferred lucre before the necessity of his own body, and his friends welfare,
neither suffered he any man else to sell him any, so that he perished with
famine, and became a miserable example to all the army of the fruits of that
foul dropsy covetousness.

1 Usury is like a whirle poole, that swalloweth what so ever it catches.

2 The serpent hidden in the grass, stingeth the foot, and the usurer under
shadow of honesty, deceives the simple.

3 Usury deceiues the belly, takes away the title of gentry, and becomes
careless of the souls safety.

4 Covetousness finds out usury, usury nourishes idleness, idleness is the
bringer forth of evils.

Of Ambition. Cap. 42.
AMbition is an unmeasurable desire to enjoy honors, preferments, estates and
great places of dignity; it is a vice of excess, and contrary to modesty:
repugnant to this, amongst the Romans there was decreed a law, to this end or
purpose, viz. that none might obtain any dignity, or other function, by
proouing liberal, bestowing gifts, or in using any other unlawful means;
which law yielded no favor to the offender: For whosoever were found guilty
and condemned, should assuredly suffer death. Which law, doubtless, was
needful, waying what sundry calamities by ambition happen: for they that be
ambitious, are, as it were, with Iccarus wings carried with an insatiable
desire of sufferaignty, admitting of no period, or stay, from the lowest
centure, to the highest heavens. If they that are with this vice attainted, do
obtain any authority, then as supposing the rights of law to be in their own
hands, they will effect what they list, deeming whatsoever is pleasing unto
them, is lawful. By reason hereof, they do sever themselves, as though they
were by nature mela^cholike, and given to embrace solitariness, fearing
contradictions, or censure of any others touching their enormities, whereby
diverse injuries have risen: For as Osorius says, The more hawtie mind and
noble a man has, that is desirous of glory and estimation, the more easy he
is to and fro carried by every blast, to accomplish any thing against equity.
To this loathsome vice covetousness, must needs be annexed a property, otherwise
the vain glory of ambition and proud ostentation of the ambitious man, could
not be suggested: whose summu^ decus and chief decoru^ of honor, do consist
in being imperious, and carry a great port, and sway: to the vnderpropting
whereof, his authority must needs be a means to procure him coin, to cure
his care, and uphold his calling, which is contrary both to the law of God and
man, and against the right rule of modesty. Aristotle terms him modest, who
desires honor as he ought, and no otherwise then it becomes him: but he
that desires it more then he ought, by an unlawful means, is ambitious, and
is carried away with the perturbation of intempera^cy. Ambition never suffers
those that have once entertained it, as a ghest, to enjoy their present estate
quietly, but makes them always empty of goods, and needy, it causes them to
contemn that which they have gotten by great pains and travail, and which
not long before they desired very earnestly, by reason of their new
imaginations and conceits of great matters, which they continually practiced,
but have never their minds satisfied and contented: the increase of power and
authority is the cause whereby they are induced, and carried headlong to commit
all kind of injustice, flattering themselves in furious and frantike actions,
that they may have access to the end of their infinite plottes, and enjoy that
proud and tirannicall glory, which contrary to all duty they hau^t after.
Spurius Melius a Senator of Rome was murdered for his ambition, and his house
rased by Ticima^tus the dictator of Rome, because he sought by means of
certain dole or distribution of wheat, to make himself king of Rome. Marcus
Manlius was also for the like occasion, thrown down from the top of a
rock. Therefore it appears sufficiently unto us, how pernicious this vice of
ambition is in the souls of great men, and worthy of perpetual blame.

1 Ambition is a serpent, which pryeth into every man's thoghts, and slily
insinuates her self into the bowels of men.

2 The ambitious man, that endeavors to plunge and depresse another, to enjoy
preferme^t, in stead of superiority, attaineth indignity.

3 Men that are envious, placing their thoughts in the hiest theater of honor,
their fortune being low, must needs live a male-contented life.

4 An ambitious person will always wander astray out of the right way, to
attain to the height that his heart desires.

5 The ambitious is of such unacquainted fittes, and moving spirits tempered,
that he never contents himself in any vocation.

Of Anger. Cap. 43.
ANger is furor brenis, a shortfury, or as Aristotle says, the sudden
inflammation of the blood, causing the motions of the spirits, and alteration of
the heart: it is also a desire of revenge, or a rechlesse care of friendship,
and an enemy to reason; whereby springs such a hurly burly in the mind, that
reason, during this fury, cannot be heard, nor understanding obeyed, no more
then laws or magistrates are regarded in a state torn and rent with evil
dissentio^: but in this trouble, the passions, which do wax most mutinous and
troublesome to the quiet rest of the spirits, do first arise in the appetible
and concupiscible part: that is to say, in that part where the soul does
exercise his faculty of desiring or rejecting things presented unto her, as
being things contrary to her welfare and preservation. Choler knows not how
to be sile^t, but is very rash, unwary and unadvised in all things: whereby it
happens, that those headlong persons ru^ne often into such danger, as they
never get out, by reason of their anger. Clitus and Calisthenes were the
occasion of their own destruction, for that they had been ouerbold in
reproouing Alexander; whereas by modest and humble admonition they might have
reclaimed him, saved themselves, and gotten the grace and favor of their lord
and master. C. Flaminius, and M. Marcellus, two consuls of Rome, both valiant
and hardy soldiers, were notwithstanding surprised and overthrown in the end
by Hannibal, by reason of their overmuch frowardnes, and making too hasty trial
of their fortune: whereas contrariwise, Fabius Maximus being a more sober and
temperate Captain, never enterprised any thing, but with great aduisednesse,
and with such deliberation considered of the circumstance of each thing, that
Hannibal could never entrappe him in his ambushes, though he placed them never
so cunningly. When Hieron king of Sicilia had murdered certain of his
friends, and the report known through the country, Epicharmus, who
understood of the matter, within a while after was bidde^ to supper with the
king, and by reason of his abounda^ce of choler he could not dissemble, but
cried out as soon as he saw the king, and reproved him for his infidelity and
horrible murder, saying, Why did thou not call me to the sacrifice that
thou made of thy friends? which was the cause that he lost his own life
also, and by this means made the tyrant more fearce and cruel then he was
before. Plutarch also reports, that when Dionysius the tyrant asked the wise
men of his Court, which copper was the best, Antiphon answered very readily,
that in his opinion that was the most excellent, whereof the Athenians had made
the pictures of the two tyraunts, Armodius and Aristogito^. This was a quick
answer, and spoken in anger; which notwithstanding so stuck in the mind of
the tirant, that he could never be appeased, but with the life of him that
uttered it: which verifieth the saying of Quintilian, concerning those bitter
and cholerike natures, viz. that had rather lose their lives, then have a
bitter girde.

1 There is no safe counssell to be taken from the mouth of the angry man.

2 He detaineth himself from anger, that remembers his end, and fears GOD:
the one restrains presumption, the other appeaseth impatience.

3 Anger is an inward grief, and vexation of the mind, thirsting after
revenge.

4 With the angry man we must not be importunate in matters of consequence, but
should defer our petition until a convenient time, which might mitigate his
anger.

Of Sedition. Cap. 44.
SEdition is an evil quality, which so much troubles the quiet rest, and
passions of ye soul, and is accompanied with most dangerous effects, and yet
nothing so dangerous as those which follow after. For why? These first motions,
being bred and formed in that part, by means of the object which presents it
self, do pass forth in continently into the irascible part of the mind,
that is to say, to that part, where the soul seeks all means possible of
obtaining or avoiding that which seems unto her good or bad: for the avoiding
hereof we must not imitate nature, which, as Empedocles says, uses no other
means to destroy, ruinate and overthrow her creatures, then discord, and
sedition, and (as Thucidides says) comprehends in it al kind of evils.
Sedition the^ being taken generally, is nothing else but an evil impostume, so
hurtful to al estates and Monarchies, that it is the seed and root of all
kind of evils, even of those that are most execrable, it ingendreth and
nourishes want of reverence toward God, disobedience to magistrates,
corruption of manners, change of laws, contempt of justice, and base estimation
of learning and science. Thucidides speaking of the general dissension amongst
the Grecians, for diversity of gouernme^ts, which they sought to bring in
among themselves, some desiring to be governed in a Democratie, others in an
Oligarchie, rehearses incredible evils that arose of that war. As soon
(says he) as any mutinies, disturba^ces or vprores were known to be committed
in one place, others were encouraged to do worse, as to enterprise some new
Stratageme, to show that they were more froward then others, or more insolent
and hot in reue^ging themselves. This is that which Diamades objected to the
Athenians by way of reproach, that they never entreated of peace, but in
mourning gowns: namely after they had lost many of their kinsfolks in battles
and skirmishes after long sedition.

1 Sedition is a hell to the mind, a horror to the conscience, suppressing
reason, and inciting hatred.

2 There is no greater cruelty then sedition, whereby a man continually
murthereth himself living.

3 A seditious man waxes lean, with the fatnes of his neighbor.

4 Hidden sedition is more dangerous, then open enmity.

Of War. Cap. 45.
War is of two sorts; either civil, or foreign: civil war is the
ouerthrower of all estates and monarchies, and the very root of al evil, which
inge^dreth want of reverence toward God, disobedience to Magistrates, co^te^pt
of justice, being sprung of the diversity of religion; but in effect,
ambition. And foreign war is a more lawful contention, as being ordained
for religion sake, and to procure peace and unity. This civil war stirs up
against himself, both the hatred and weapons of his neighbors, to him that
desires it. For he that vexes his subjects unworthily, seeking rather to
rule over them by violence, then to gain their good will with justice, he quite
overthrows his country, preferring dominion and greatness of his power,
before the benefit of the same: he is brought oftentimes in subjection to his
enemies, and diminishes his own authority, whiles he labors to possess
another man's right by violence. Augustus the Emperor said, That to have
lawful war, it must be commended by the gods, and justified by the
philosophers. And Elius Spartianus affirms, that Traian only of the Romans,
was never overcome in battle, because he undertook no war, except the cause
thereof was very just. But we may well say, that no wars between Christians
a so justified, but that still there remains some cause of scruple. Moreover
we see, that the famine and pestilence most commonly follow war: for the
abundance of all things being wasted, want of victuals must needs follow,
whereupon many diseases do grow. Briefly it brings nothing with it, but a
heap of miseries, and easily draws and allureth the violence and evil
disposition of many, to follow the estate of time: for they that desire a
change, are very glad of such an occasion, to ground their platformes upon,
which they could not do in time of peace, because men are then of better
judgment and affection, as well in public, as also in private matters. It was
for these considerations, that Phocion the great Captain of the Athenians
labored to stop the war, which the people of Athens determined to make
against the Macedonians, at the persuasion of Leosthenes: and being demanded,
when would he counsel the Athenians to war? When I see (quoth he) that the
young men are fully resolved to leave their riot, that rich men contribute
money willingly, and Orators abstain from robbing the Commonwealth.
Nevertheless, the crime was levied against his counsel: and many wondering at
the greatness and beauty thereof, asked him, how he liked that preparation. It
is fair for one brunt, said Phocion: but I fear the return and continuance
of the war, because I do perceive, that the city has no other means to get
money, or other furniture, or men of war besides those. And his foresight was
approved by the event: for although Leosthenes prospered in the beginning of
his enterprise, (whereupon Phocion being demanded, whether he would not gladly
have done al those great and excellent things, answered that he would, but not
have omitted that counsel which he gave) yet in the end he was slain in the
voyage, the Grecian army overthrown by Antipater and Crateres too Macedonians,
and the city of Athens brought to that extremity, that it was constrained to
send a blanke for capitulatio^ of peace, and to receive within it a garrison of
strangers. Thus it falls out commonly to those, that seek for war by all
means, either by right or by wrong.

1 War should be considerately begu^, but speedily ended.

2 The events of war are doubtful, but the damage certain.

3 War by might makes his ancestors who^ he pleseth.

4 Where there is confusion, there is division, and both are the procurers of
war.

A Conclusion to the Magistrates. Cap. 46.
TO further the government of a common wealth, many prouisoes may be invented,
which must be as well noted to the simple, as to the careful magistrate, upon
who^ relieth the charge hereof, not applying himself outwardly to that which
his conscience inwardly reprooueth, lest he should be said, wilfully to resist
the law of God. What greater felicity can happen to any earthly wight, when
he is by the highest Father pressed with care of civil regiment, that wholly
depends upon virtue, and only for the acco^plishment thereof is put in ure,
then as being surcharged with this great burden, or ouerladen with it, to find
a comfort to mitigate his distress, tempered with a mild medicine of hope,
that rooteth out the ca^kred flesh of despair, with the plaster of trust? In
this form of government, and in the floorishing state of all people, by the
reforming of all degrees, it is good to strike the stith whilst the iron is
hot, and amend al faults while they are green and fresh, which may not be but
by the servitude of laws; and also to provide, that in all points, the common
sort be tractable and obedient, and the magistrates diligent and careful to
rule, as conscience and duty binds the^: which being once stained with
injustice, is always tied with a guilty remorse. Otherwise if they practice
discreetly and reverently those things that are godly and lawful, that their
consciences may be clear, and others by their doings not offended, then it
may be said generally, as it was of the great king of Muscouy, (who was
thought to control all the Monarchs of the world, having gotten such
authority over his own subjects, as well ecclesiastical as secular, to whom
it was lawful to dispose, as it were, at his pleasure, of their lives and
goods: no man being willing to gainesay him, they also confessing publikly and
openly his imperial regiment, alleging withal, that the will of their Prince
was the will of God, and all what soever he did, they acknowledging it to be
done by divine providence. He is (said they) The porter of Paradise, The
chamberlain of God, and the executor of his will. By which means he grew so
mighty within a little while, that all his neighbors, which were the
Tartarians, Sueuians, yea and the Turks themselves, canonized him. Where such
love and obedience is wrought in subjects toward their sovereign, and of the
sovereign toward his subjects, there shall virtue enjoy her freedom, and
possess her privilege by the rights of law, and all the people shall flourish
with equity: Justice shall maintain peace, peace shall procure security,
security shall nourish wealth, wealth felicity. Where want hereof breeds a
flat denial or not like sufficiency to all, in respect of this defect, let
none be dismayed, at his small talent, or grudge at an others greater
prosperity: for without doubt, nature has by her secret motion, denied none
some perfect quality to supply that want, which in himself breeds discontent
or mislike: for eue^ as the fish having no ears, has most clear eyes, so
though want of dignity be a disgrace to some, though want of coin discontent
diverse, and though lack of wealth impaires the credit of many, yet nature
has supplied that outward orname^t, with such an internal guerdon, as a
loyal and a loving heart guided with constancy, willingly dies for the good
of the common wealth, or spends all his time in the procuring of the security
thereof. But on the contrariside, if the communalties continue rude, and
stifnecked in behavior, reclaiming against the precepts of virtue; or if
officers or magistrates securely neglect the execution of laws: then will the
want of government breed lice^tious liberty, liberty procure open wrong, wrong
doing escape scotfree: whereby the people, as taking heart at grass, are
encouraged unto lascivious lewdnes, and the most part shall be oppressed with
violence, by lawless practices, robberies, and intolerable oppressions; and
the silly simple shall be quelled with extremities, and pressed with open
wro^gs, and the chiefest of all shall enjoy securely neither life, nor goods,
to the great dishonor of officers, and utter disparagement and scandal of the
Common wealth.

FINIS.

