THE BITTER WATERS OF BABYLON, OR THE MISERABLE Estate of the Citizens of SION:
Considered by the confusion of all things in this world.

PROVE. 22. 3. A prudent man sees the plague, and hides himself: but the
foolish go on still, and are punished.

HIERON: in lib. de hom. perfecto. Omnes sumus in minimis cauti, in maximis
negligentes; hoc itaque fit, quia vbi vera vita sit ignor amus.

LONDON, Printed by Edw. Griffin for Ralph Mab, and are to be sold in Paul's
Churchyard, at the sign of the Greyhound, 1615.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, RIGHT Virtuous, and truly Religious, JOHN, Lord
RAMSEY, Vicount Hadington; and to the true Noble, and very Industrious Lady,
ELIZABETH, the Vicountesse, his most loving Wife: All true happiness in this
life, and eternal glory in the life to come.
Right Honorable:
I Need not be in doubt (as many men be) to choose a fit Personage to patronize
this mine Embrio, or my first Crude, and undigested meditations; seeing that
(under God) I have from your Honors my present earthly being: and therefore
may justly challenge as much interest in me as Paul did in Philemon, both my
self and all my labors: for it has been the gracious splendour of your
Honorable kind favors, that has so bountifully shined upon so base an
object, (not through any deserts of mine obtained) Alas, I am too privy unto
mine own wants, qui rudis and iners: not worthy to be named the same day with
learned men: but that the bright Rays of your Honorable kind favor in this,
are like unto the Royal Sun beams, that shine as bright in the poor man's
cottage, as in the Kings palace. Your worthiness in your Honorable attempts
in promoting learning and religion, is an evident proof of your godly and
religious disposition: without flattery, these I profess, which have had a
more particular experience of your gracious favors: (For they need not false
praises that abound with true,) And I appeal unto al those that have had a
trial of your Honorable favors: which freely have been found amongst a great
number both of inborne and forreiners: whereby your honorable names may be well
registered amongst the worthies in this age, which no doubt, will remain in all
ages, and never be blotted out in your honorable posterity. And lest that I
should incur the censure of ingratitude, (which is a monster by nature) for all
kindnesses received: I have cast this small mite into your treasury: that as I
walk under the the safeguard of your honorable roof I may go in safety
herein under your Honors tuition: beseeching your Honors to accept of it as
our Savior Christ did the poor widows gift, because I give all that I have,
hoping that you will not regard the meannesse of the gift, so much as the mind
of the giver, which if I lovingly find in your gracious acceptance, I shall
think my self most happy in all mine essaies: and shall daily pray (as by
duty obliged) unto the God of mercy, for your Honors happiness in this life,
and everlasting happiness in the life to come.

Your Honors most humble and dutiful

To the Christian Reader.
Marvel not (gentle Reader) that I have diuulged these my mean meditations;
being preched in that Place from whence daily does drop most sweet honny of
divine eloquence: since that most of the learned that repair thither, are
unwilling to publish their works; by reason of the multiplicity of printed
sermons, that proceed from thence. There be two reasons that induce me
heereunto: The one is, the encouragement I had by the Audience, that day
whereon it was delivered: And secondly, the urgent entreaty of many of my
especial friends; unto whom I owe my self and all service. Look not for
eloquence, according to thine expectation; proceeding from such an eminent
place: For I came not with eloquence of words; but evidence of the spirit: to
persuade men and women to lament their lewd-led-life, that by their vnfain
dcontrition; they may prevent Gods visitation in Justice, for their
transgressions, by the example of these Israelites being captiuated for their
offenses. If any thing herein contained, in thy judgment, be too tart and
bitter: Consider with what weapons, I, and all Gods faithful Ministers, do^
come into the field to fight against Gods enemies; the two-edged sword of Gods
Spirit does divide between the Carnal and Spiritual man: the stone that
David took up against Goliath did sink suddenly into his temples. The diseases
of these times wherein we live, require such corrasiues and bitter potions: for
we are like unto Babel that will not be cured. When thou read those things;
gadde not abroad, nor aim thou not at other men: descend into thine own
Conscience, and feeling thy self wounded, apply these warily unto thine own
soul: and so shall thou be healed of thine infirmity. That this consideration
may work some zeal of Gods glory in thee; and that thou may daily increase
more and more in the knowledge of his ways, I shall (as by duty bound, unto
all faithful Christians) daily pray for thy happiness in this life, and
eternal glory in the life to come with Jesus Christ, and his holy Angels. Amen.

Thine in the Lord

IT has been the manner of most of the Anncient, in former time; and at this
day is retained in the Church, as a form, amongst the best D^anes; to choose a
text fitted for the time: and to speak out of the Scripture appointed for the
day. Which order if I had observed, my text should have entreated, of mirth and
melody, both in respect of the season of the year; and occasion of the feast;
for of all seasons, this is most sweet, pleasant, and deliciouse, Iam floridu
aestas, quae spicea serta Ovid. 2. Meta*
gerit, Now it is flourishing summer, which brings forth the fragrant flowers:
Nay this the merry month of May: if the occasion of the feast had led me to
my text, the matter had been me odious, for by the revolution of this time
every year, is specified unto us; the comfort which we receive by that sweet
Comforter, sent down by Jesus Act. 2. 1. 2.
Christ upon the Apostles in visible signs, wherefore the Ancient in their
Lythargie did term it a glorious time: In Missa pr^ a^e.
gloriosum hunc fecists diem, was their Antheme; And we observing the same in
our Church pray the Lord to grant that we may rejoice in his holy comfort, in
the Collect for Collect upon W^mu^day.
the day: either of which, if I had regarded, then my song had been solacious,
or a song of degrees. But, I considering the iniquities of the time, and
knowing that m^nare ready to enlarge their hearts too much with worldly mirth,
and especially about this time of the year, wherefore I have changed my note
into an Elegiacall tune, which sounds nothing but weeping, mourning, and
lamentation for worldly mirth is like unto pure wine, which not being mingled
with some other ^cour, will draw drunkenness upon the receiver, in like manner
earthly melody not being tempered with a meditation of death, or a
consideration of a better life, it will drown the affecter with a greedy
desire thereafter, and ouerwhelme him with an oblivion of his Creator:
wherefore our Savior took up a mournful song in the midst of the peoples
melody, in his journey to Jerusalem; and herefore, it is, that I have chosen a
doleful Luke. 19. 41.
ditty, which I am (by Gods assistance) to read unto your godly audience, which
may restrain our too much pleasure in worldly vanity.

PSALM 137. 1. By the rivers of Babylon we sat, and wept: when we remembered
Syon.


Abraham's servant receiving a message Genesis 24. 15.
from his Master, to go into his fathers house, and choose a wife of his own
kindred for his son Isaacke: did walk along diligently, and sta^ed no where,
until he came unto the Well, whereout the women came to draw water, and there
taken up his rest, found in that place his journey prosperous; to his Masters
great comfort, and Isaac^^ great profit as afterward did appear. Even so I
receiving a commission, from the Diocesan of this Sea, to come to this place:
did pass along by the sweet waters of holy write, willing to find out a fit
place to bathe your souls in, took up my rest no where, until I came to the
bitter waters of Babylon, and there finding the children of God mourning under
captivity for a remembrance of their former happiness; I have addressed my
self to find out the cause of their great misery, in their mournful
behavior, that thereout, I may draw some matter for our great comfort, and
consolation. Nunquid fily sponsi lugerepossunt, quamdiuest M^^h. 9. 15.
cum illis sponsus, says our Savior Christ in an other case, can the children
of the bride chamber mourn as long as the bridegroom is with them; how can
this text fit these times wherein we live, (may some say) seeing we have peace
within our borders there is no leading into captivity, nor no complaining in
our strectes, can this text set forth Psalm 144. 14.
the iniquities of the time, wherein sin does abound every where? yes,
verily: and that very fitly: for although now we have peace and tranquillity,
yet it was the counsel of wise Joseph unto the King of Egypt, that in time of
Genesis 41. ^6.
plenty, he should provide for the famine to come: we read of the Sirens that
in fair weather they weep, and in storm they rejoice, thinking that after
fair weather there will be a turbulent tempest, but after a full storm, a still
caline, sic ut turgidum tran quillum mare, sic pacem bellum sequitur, as a
boisterous sea follows a smooth water, so war commonly succeeds a long
peace, wherefore the 1 Cor. 10 12.
Apostle Saint Peter warns every one that stands to take heed, least he
fall, (...) And it is I ^ain locum and Ag^.
the opinion of some divines that the Prophet David does write this Psalm many
years before their captivity, to give them a sight of their future misery;
Propheta enimres futuras, and praeteritas saepissime tanquam presents narrat,
for a Prophet many times does show things past, and to come, as though they
were present. Again wickedness being the cause of their wretchedness, and
sinae an occasion of their captivity the consideration whereof, will move no
doubt every Christian man's heart with a Remorse for his former lewd led life:
least his impious and wicked behavior draw upon him a greater misery. And
lastly if we will believe the ancient writers, and some of the Modern there
is more mystically meant, then is literally understood, (...) Tresser. 3.
Frange osliterae, and inuenies medullam intelligent^^, break the bone of the
letter, and within thou shall find a marrow of spiritual matter, Puta
lamentationem Ecclesiae militant is in hac terra, namely the lamentation of the
Church militant afflicted in this world, which mourning may be well specified
by their real weeping. Super flumina Babilonis ^llic sedimus and fl^uimus,
etc. By the rivers of Babylon we sat and wept, when we remembered Sion.

The people of Israel being delivered from under the bondage of Egypt, and
tyranny of Pharaoh with a mighty hand, led along by a safe conduct thorough
the wilderness; and at last by the providence of God brought, into that blessed
land that did flow with milk and honnie; where being in rest they built unto
themselves strong holds, forts and cities for their safeguard, and habitation;
for the which benefits the Lord does desire only, that they observe his laws,
and mark his statutes to keep them; that they might inherit that good land:
otherwise, if by their negligence therein, they did move his wrath against
them, then would he utterly destroy them: as afterward came to pass, and at
this day does appear; for being placed in prosperity, and having all things
according to their hearts desire, they following the perswa^ion of their wicked
rulers, such as Jeroboam, Ahab, Ieho^akim, Z^dechi^, and others 1. King. 12.
28. and 18. and 23. 37.
spent their days in van^ie in working wickedness; and worshipping the works
of their own hand; their hearts being fat, and gross with ^atnesse, forgot
God that made Deuteronomy. 15. 32.
them, and the strong God of their salvation. Wherefore the Lord did give them
over into the hands of their enemies many times to be overcome of them. Many
times were 2. King 24. and 25. and Ier. 22. 9.
they beset and some of their tribes taken, as of Ephraim and Nepthalin: the
City of Samaria being by them inhabited, was of the King of Syria environed,
and brought to Esa 8. and Esa. 9. 9.
a great famine: the City of Jerusalem often besieged: as once of Antiochus,
who did ransacke the City, spoil the temple of her ornaments; and brought
many of the inhabitants 1. Macab. 1. (...)
to great misery. But for all this, they did still continue in their crooked
ways, in working wickedness, following the steps of Manasses, and doing
according to all 2. King. 24. 3.
that he did, wherefore at last the Lord did suffer Nebuk^d^noser the King of
Babell with a great army of the Caldaeans to come upon them, and carry them
away captives into Babylon, where they did remain for the space of seventy
years: so that it is the opinion of the most Divines that this Psalm was
composed after their returning from captivity, to put them in mind of their
former misery, which they then did suffer. although some are of the opinion
that it was made long before, as before has been said.

In the Hebrew text we have no tide prefixed unto his Psalm, but in the
Greek copies there is (...), And in the old Latin, Psalma^ David proper
^remiam. Theodoret does reject this as too audacious to be ^anu^. (...).
prefixed, the reason he gives is: because sere^ was never in Babylon; but if
ye mark the title aright, you shall not find any thing, whereby he does allo
word ^a^low his being in Babylon, but only in that this Psalm does agree with
the lam^^nations which Jeremy made of their exp^iuit^e by the spirit of
prophecy, therefore not to be so much rejected. There is something found in an
Hebrew copy which will Ag^
well agree with this title, as, when Nab^z^n, Nebuchadon^ser the king; chief
Steward did b^ng Jeremy along, with the people into the view of Babel: he put
him to his choice, where her he would remain with the people in misery; or
return back again to Jerusalem there to have his liberty, and he choosing
rather to return for to enjoy his liberty, the people for his absence did
take up this mournful song, super ^na Babylonis etc. by the was of Babylon.
But for the title, or the writer it is not so material, as to know that the
spirit of God was the enditer hereof, and that it was written for our
instruction, quae unque 1. Cor. 10. 11.
scripta ad nostr^m aedificationem scripta, says the Apostle Saint Paul,
whatsoever things are written, are for our learning upon whom the ends of the
world are come.

This whole Psalm divided is two fold (...), Narrati^us, a Narration of
Division or parts.
a story, to the seventh verse. (...), Precati^us, or a prayer, against their
enemies, to the end.
This verse being part of the Narratiue part it contains two things Their
Affliction. Their Affection.
In their affliction two things Their Action. The places situation.
The Action two fold Their gesture, sedimus, we sat. Their mournful
behavior, fleuimus, we wept.
The places situation two fold General, Babel. particular, by the rivers of
Babel
Their Affection in two things The manner by introduction, remember. The matter
by description, Sion.

But right honorable, right worshipful, and well-beloved, if you will vouchsafe
to consider the words verbatim or diuisim every one by it self, you shall
find the whole story very patheticall, and full of pity.

1 They were not admitted to dwell in their cities nor towns, but exposde to
the rivers side, therefore pitiful. 2 The place was barbarouse and idolatrouse
where they could have no solace to their soul being Babel, therefore pitiful.
3 The time of their misery not short, but for a long space which is signified
by the word sitting, therefore pitiful. 4 All the time of their captivity,
they have no comfort, for they spend their whole time in Lamentation, therefore
pitiful. 5 It is not the present misery that does afflict them, but a
remembrance of their former happiness, therefore pitiful. 6 Neither any
worldly want, that does grieve them but the defect of the word which they had
formerly that does only vex them, therefore pitiful. So that whether you
dismember them into parts, or collect them into a brief s^mm^, The total
shall be nothing but pity, passion and matter of Lamentation.


And first of their first action, which is set down in (...)od. 12. (...).
their gesture, wherein we have the diutuinitie of the time. If they had stood
upon there feet with their staue, in their hands and their loins gift, like
the Israelites at caring of the Pas^ouer, they might had some hope of their
de^erance. Or if they had made any progress at all, although it had been with
never so slow a pace, by remoouing of their tent every day as they did in the
wilderness* yet after the space of forty years, they might had hope to come
to their wished home; but to be brought to Babel that barbarouse place, and
thither to the bankeside of their Rivers, their recovery is uncertain, for
their deliverance at the soonest is after the space of seventy years
prophesied by the Prophet Jeremy; to go forward they cannot, super s^umina
sedent, they sit by the rivers side, to go backward they Ierem. 25 11.
are not able for they are detained in captivity, if they turn to either
hand, to pass thorough their country, the people is barbarouse, the kingdom
is Caldea, the province Babel, sedere oportet, they must sir down by their
banks, which does signify a diuturnitie of time. A malefactor S^.
being apprehended upon some heinous crime, and brought before a Judge, so long
as he is vnconuicted he will have some hope of his delivery, may after
sentence past, he will think all the way as he goes to the place of torment,
that some friend or other will use some means to repriue him; but when he
comes to the place of execution, seeing all hope past, nec vltra spes est, he
takes up his resolution singing this strange duty of illic sedimus, remembering
his former time which he spent in his wicked ways, which cannot be recalled,
for the sentence is irreuocable, all means fallible, undergo he must for a
just recompense of his evil deeds: sedere oportet does much perplex him as it
does here the ^tes. For the great time that they spent in decking and decoring
of their Idols, after the manner of the heathen round about them, they did
worship the works of their own hands and went a whoring after strange
gods. Now have they time enough ab al^eg^ (...), being freed from all
business, to cry peccaui if that can any way avail them. Much time did they
spend in lasciviousness, rioting, and profaneness, sometime, in pleasing their
palate with dainty rare, sometimes in swilling of their paunch with the
deluge of drunkenness, to stir up their concupi'cible lust to wantonness:
they say down to eat and drink and rosevp to play. Much time did they spend
in pride and vanity; in decking their bodies, and currying of their Carcasses,
according Cor. 1. 10. 7.
to their fantastical humors, for an o^tentation of their Lucifer-like
spirits: We have heard of the pride of Esa. 16. 6.
Moab, of his pride, and arrogantie, for he is very proud. But now they have
time enough to tame their flesh, and to bring their bodies into subjection:
their pride is turned into poverty, their gay* clothing into ^ack-cloth, and
ashes, a fit livery for their mournful habit: sic hi qui noluere per
Prophetas sedari, iam extorres and contempti sedent: so that they that before
would not be ruled by the Prophets and warned of them, now sit in banishment
forsaken, and contemned of all men. This punishment does the Lord threaten to
come upon the people for the pride of the women, and their wickedness, (...) as
erit desolata and in terra sedebit, their city shall be desolate, and the
people shall Esa. 3. 26.
sit solitary upon the ground, the punishment that the spirit does inflict
upon that whore, that has made the whole world drunk with her fornications,
is this, quantum fuit in delicijs tantum date illi tormentum, In a much as she
lived in Apo. 18. 7.
pleasure, in so much give her torment, and sorrow, for the long time that they
spent in plenty, they spend the rest of their time in penury, for taking
their pleasure in full measure; Now are they perplexed with sorrow above
measure, illic sedimus is worthy of observation, and remarkable here in this
place.

Remember this all ye that take so much delight, in pampering your flesh, and
spend so much time in beautifying your bodies: ^o^ qui tamd^^ in delicus i^m
sedetis: you that sit so long in your delights; if you repent not in time, and
take heed unto your ways: olim sed^ in panis, you shall end, and consummate
your days everlastingly in hell torments, Diue^, while he lived, fared
deliciously every Luke. (...)
day: and the text tells us that he was gorgeously apparelled: did he take such
delight in his decking, or did he spend so much time, in trimming of his body,
as the young gallants of these times; surely I think yes, for Abraham does
vpbraid him herewith, Recordare mi silt, tu bona recepists in vit a V^. (...)
tua: Remember my son that thou in thy life time did take thy pleasure, and
Lazarus received pain: wherefore thou art to mented, and he comforted; I have
read in a story of a certain man named Pambo, that on a time (...)
looking out at a window, and perceiving a woman spend a great time in trimming
of her self, fell a weeping; and being demanded the cause, answered, have not
I great cause to weep; to see yonder worm, consuming so long time in decking
of her ugly carkase, to the sight of man: and I spend so small time in
preparing my soul to God. If this man were alive in these days he would do
nothing but weep and lament; for let a man cast his eyes every where, upon
the Clergy and Laytie, Priest and people, and he shall see all men taken in
love with their foul carcasses; but their souls they little regard: women
will spend the whole half day in poudring, painting, and frizling of their
locks to the lustful aspect of the passers by: and our young Gentlemen scorn
that the weaker vessels, should out go them in these tricks; they will rather
spend the whole day in phinifying of their fantastical phisnomies to satisfy
their lustful Mistress eye, and not once a week bestow one smoothing of their
souls: which if they do by coming to the church once a week it is but for a
show only like their spangled roses; and glistering garters; it is ^or no
profit: but let them know that although now they spend their time in pleasure,
the time shall come that illie sedimus the remembrance of it shall torment them
above measure, as it does here in this place the Israelites: and so I proceed
to the second action.

By their second action their misery is much aggrauated, ^ par qu^sium (...).
(...) second (...) a mou^^^ ^our.
for although they had been detained for a long time in captivity; and yet had
had all necessaries to comfort them; their case had not been so miserable: but
being deprived of their bodily sustenance, remaining in captivity: and
abridged of their souls solace, which was the comfort they received in Sion:
they spend their whole days in lamentation: cura dolorque anim^^, alimenta
fuere. Tears were their meat and drink night and day; their estate is most
pitiful; The eye is the minds messenger, whereby we conceive the
imagination thereof: a sorrow bred in the heart, can by no means be better
expressed then by an inundation of tears: dum been se habebant, ne l^^ hryma
quidem ab illis extorqueri poterat: While they lived in prosperity, their
could not one tear be drawn from them: ^gnaui enim, and stolidi est,
lachrymas effundere: it is the sign of a Dastard, to weep like a child: sed
aduersa fortuna, facile ri^ulos emittunt: but now being sent into banishment
they send forth a fountain of tears. Saint Ambrose does very well note the
greatness of Peter's grief; in that he did weep, and utter no words; cur^
l^ues loquuntur, ingentes Ambros: ^n lathrymas Petri.
stupent: The greater our grief is, the more silent we are, they weep
incessantly, but not a word they do utter: to express their fullness of
grief: fleuimus is sufficient to set it forth. There be three sorts of tears
observed of the ancients, which may be well exemplified by the authority of
Scripture.

Deuotionis, Compassionis, Labrymarum (...) gener^.
Et contritionis,
That is Of devotion. Of compassion. And of contrition.

Tears of Devotion we have in David, who out of an 1. (...). Psalm. 6. 6.
holy devotion did water his couch night and day with his tears. Tears of
compassion we have in Jeremy; that does compassionately weep, for the
miseries of other men. 2. (...).
O that mine head were a well of water and my eyes a fountain ^^rem. (...). 1.
2.
of tears, that I might weep day and night for the stain of the daughters of
Sion; Likewise in David, mine eyes gush out with Psalm. 119. 136.
rivers of water because men keep not thy law. Tears of contrition 3. (...).
we have in Peter, who after he had remembered, the error of his imbecility,
went out of the place, and wept bitterly. All which three sorts if we consider
their tears Math. 16. 75.
aright, we shall find them to relish of devotion; I am sure they are for it
was an holy consideration of blessed Sion: that did move them hereunto, dum
recordaremur Sionis, does express it: of compassion no doubt they are, for
they are surely moved by the grief of others according to that of Saint Paul,
weep with those that weep: omnes in vno Romans 12. 15.
peccant, omnes in vno pl^ntur and omnes simul lachrymas emittunt: they all
offend in one transgression; they are all punished with one affliction; and all
together send forth tears of lamentation: fleuimus does show it. And of
contrition doubtless they are remembering their sins to have been the cause
of this their great misery.

But right honorable, right worshipful, and well-beloved if we diue in more
deeply into this river of tears, arising from the deaw of their devotion;
drawn out from the weeds of their offenses; by the fire of contrition: that
we may cause some drops thereof to fall upon our faces, whereby we may shine
gloriously before the lamb that sits upon the throne: the cause thereof we
shall find threefold.

Propter peccati commissionem, Causa ^marum (...). The cause of (...) weep^^
(...).
Propter mundanam afflictionem, Propter virtutum defectionem, That is For their
sin committed which was the cause of their misery. For the punishment
inflicted being in captivity. And for their graces ecclipsed, that before had
not grace to prevent this danger.


And now having not the ability to perform those Christian duties that are
required in releiuing those that are in misery and necessity.

The first cause of their weeping, is a chief cause of sorrow: and always
proper to the children of God; which Prima causa lament ^s The first cause
Tropter (...) com^m. For their sin committed. Cor.
respects more the offending of so gracious a God; then the punishment
inflicted upon them this is that which the Apostle Saint Paul, calls a godly
sorrow, (...): a sorrow toward God: being grieved only that they have offended
so gracious and loving a father; which was the prodigal childs greatest
grief: I have sinned against heaven, and against thee; I am no more worthy to
be called thy son: Estque Luke. 15. 18.
pa^^ paenans quam meruisse minus; To an ingenious nature, it is more grief to
deserve; then to suffer punishment: an instance of this; likewise we have in
David, when the Prophet Nathan came unto him, and did lay before him his sin by
a similitude: the Prophets threatenings did not afflict him; the offense done
against his God, did only vex him. I have sinned against the Lord. And in an
other place, In te solum peccaui: Against thee only have I sinned and done
this 2. Sam. 12. 13. Psalm. 51. 4. Holcoth, in lib. Sap^.
evil in thy sight. Holcoth makes mention of a certain bird, that has the
face and visage of a man; and yet is most fierce, and cruel, against man; and
does only feed upon man's flesh: when it has killed a man being dry, goes to
the brook to quench his thirst: but looking down into the clear water, and
beholding his own countenance, considering what it has done, that it has
destroyed one of his own likeness, and image; returning presently from the
water, neither eats nor drinks afterward; but goes into the wilderness, and
their consumes himself in displeasure, and so ends his days in sorrow: this
is the behavior of every good and godly Christian, considering that by sin
he has destroyed the image of God in him, he does consume away in displeasure,
what heart is so hardened considering how the sin of man has procured the
death of the son of God: would not end his days in sorrow and lamentation.

The second cause of their weeping is, for that wo^dly Se (...) ca^ l^me^s. The
second cause is (...). For their r^ent in^ted.
punishment inflicted that now they are sent into banishment. When the Lord
cannot win man by his mercies: he will turn to his justice: to try if by
affliction he can bring him to acknowledge his s^nne; they being in
prosperity at home, would neither hearken nor obey, but being now in
banishment, and under captivity; they are drawn to lament for their offenses.
The heavy hand of Gods instice, is able to break and bruise the hardest
heart, and crush it in pieces; nay bring the most wicked, and impious man, to
acknowledgement of his sin. Kames heart is ouerqueld herewith, wherefore he
mournes grievously and cries out, my sin is greater then can be forgiven, it
was Genesis 4. 1^.
not his hypocrisy, the murdering of his brother; nor any other sin, that he
had committed: but only the great punishment inflicted upon him: that did
provoke him hereunto. Pharaoh took on greiuously and confessed his Exodus 9 27.
sin, it was not for a detestation thereof, but because of the plagues that
were sent upon him, and upon his land. Saul is very sorrowful, but it is
because of Samuel^ threatening, 1 Samuel 15. 2^.
Sunt quos peccasse paen^tet propter (...) displicet euim, latroni, peccatum;
qu^ ^t August (...)* (...).
vindictareuertitur ad crimma, says S^ Augustine. There be many (says he)
that are greiued for their sin, because of the present affliction upon them.
A theife is so^^ie for his offense, when he feels the punishment, but it being
once over; he falls to stealing again. This no doubt is the second cause of
their weeping, because of the heavy cross laid upon them.

The third cause of their weeping, is the want of grace, both in that they
could not prevent the danger, before it did assault: as also, that now they
cannot perform those duties which they ought unto others in distress; for the
former Peter does weep exceedingly, being so forward a little before, and so
peremptory to stand to his own strength, that now should falter in the
performance and become so weak: he mournes abundantly; Misit legatos, C^prian.
lib. 2.
pro suis doloribus lachrymas: dolorem probantes commissi criminis, and
dolorem. Like Rachel that wept for her children, because they were not, even so
the children of God they weep for their graces because they are not; David
does Psalm. 41. 3.
protest that tears were his meat and drink night and day, because he knew the
want in him, that without his grace he could not stand. And the Apostle Saint
Peter does cry out of this want in him: The good, that I would do, that I do
not, but the evil that I would not do, that I do. Again the defect of the
duties which in performance they owe to their brethren in distress is a great
cause of their weeping, for they seeing the city spoiled; the temple
ransacked: the people carried into captivity; and they no ways able to help
them, they cannot remember these things without great grief, fler^oportet, of
necessity they weep, it is the greatest grief that can come to a kind
soul, to see another man in misery, and not able to help him; this was Jobs
grief, did not I weep with those that were in trouble, was not my soul in
heaviness for the poor. This was Ieremies Job. 30. 25.
sorrow for the people being by the judgment of God destroyed, that I might
weep for the slain of the daughters of Sion: Whether it be for their sins
committed, their I^r. 9. 1.
punishment inflicted; or their graces ecclipsed: weeping I find them, where I
leave them, until I enquire after the place of their abiding, and I find it
to be Babel.

The place is ominous, for if they had been banished into some private place,
where they might have had liberty to 3. locus generalis. The place is (...).
exercise the duties of Religion, and to serve their God: although they had
been detained for a long space; their exile had been the easier: but being
exposed to Babel that barbarous place; their estate is more miserable. Babel
here does signify, the province of Babylon, or country of Caldea: for the
City of Babel, stood upon one river Euphrates only: but here there is mention
of more then one, By the rivers of Babylon. The country was idolatrous: the
people savage: so that, to dwell in such a place was dangerouse. In this place
was Bell and Dragon the two Idols of the Caldeans worshipped: and the chief
metropolitan City Babel accursed. His foundation was laid in Genesis 11. (...).
pride, Come let us build a tower whose top may reach unto heaven to get us a
name. It was finished by Nabuc^zzar Dan. 4 27.
that proud puissant in ambition, Is not this great Babel which I have built to
the gloris of my majesty by the might of my power. And the end thereof was
confusion, for afterward it came to be an habitation of unclean Devils, as
before was prophesied of it.

To dwell in such a place is greiuous to the children of God, David ^^ies out
of this misery, Woe is me, that dwell Psalm. 120. 5.
^n Mesech; or have my habitation so long among the tents of Kedar. A covetous
worldling cares not where he dwelles; omne solum est ills patria; Every
dominion is a dwelling for him: to serve the Market, is all he looks for in
any place; that he may gain by his commodity: although it be to another man's
great loss: but of all grei^es it is the greatest to a godly man to dwell in a
lewd place, where there is no practice of religion, no goodness exercised, but
altogether profaneness and abomination. This does much vex the Prophets
spirit being constrained hereunto: Wo's me that I Esa. 6. 6.
dwell amongst a people of pollutea lips: for the Proverb most commonly
comes to pass in this: aliquid mali, propter vicinum malum; some evil does
happen, by reason of a wicked neighbor, either they are subject to those
plagues which the Lord does threaten upon the disobedient, being always
hanging over the wicked as we see by Lot; that dwelling amongst the wicked
Sodomites, was taken prisoner Genesis 14.
with them in the overthrow. Or else, they are likely to be tainted with them,
dumspectant laesos, oculilaeduntur and ^d.
ipsi, they can hardly escape the wicked without receiving some blemish of
them. Righteous Joseph being amongst the prophaneseruants in Pharaohs court,
learning to swear (...) of Pharaoh, if we then observe the profaneness Genesis
41. 15.
of the place, or the imp^e^ie of the people of that place; we shall find
their case miserable, by reason of their habitation, and so I come to the
fourth circumstance of their (...).
commiseration, that they did dwell by the bankesides, if they had been
received into their Cities or towns where they might had s^er, for their
safeguard, then had they received some comfort; but being expelled from their
Cities, and from thence to the Riuersides to remain without shadow is a great
misery unto them: super slumina sedent: they remain by the river side; in the
country of Caldea, there were sundry r^rs, such as Euphrates, Ne^rd^a, Ahaua,
and Tigris, which does show the place to bevery fruitful; to increase their
grief, because they cannot be received into the Cities with them. The Caldeans
darenot receive them into their fellowshippe: Inimicis fidere, and cum illis
habitare non tutum sentiunt, to trust their enemies, and to dwell with them
they think it not safe enough, therefore are they exposed into the Riuerside,
Io. 4 19.
when the woman of Samaria came to lacobs well, she retained some comfort of
her lourney: for she found the Messiah; the Savior of the world; that was
able to deliver; and did deliver her from all her fornications: but here they
come to the rivers of Bab^l, where they have no hope of deliverer nor comforter
to help them, for the space of seventy years. Although Agar sit sorrowful for
Genesis 16. 9.
a while by the Well in the wilderness, yet at last the Angel came to comfort
her: but here they sit a long space and have no hope of Angel nor man to
comfort nor releive them. These waters may be well called Massah or Meribah of
strife or tentation: Naturae enim repugnat, for it is against their nature, to
be tied into such a barren place, having had such goodly aspects of their own
before. Their goodly Orchards, gallant gardens, delicate fine walks beset with
fruitful trees, and sweet bushes; is now converted into a barren bankeside
ouergrowne with willowes: their pleasant parlors, brave ^^ls, and costly hung
chambers, are now translated into a poor tent, not able to defend them from
the rain nor tempest: hoc miseria plenum: the more I do descend into their
misery, the greater I findetheir grief to be aggrauated, and so much of their
affliction.

In their affection we have first set down the cause of The second part is
their affection.
their conceived sorrow, which was the remembrance of their former happiness.
Dura satis miseris memoratio prisca bonor^: Of all miseries, it is the greatest
to remember the io^litie of our former life, this torment does father Abraham
add unto the rich glutton lying in hell forments, R^cardarem^ sili, remember
my senne that thou in Luke.
thy life time receiuedst thy pleasure, which no doubt did afflict him more
then all his former torments. Whileman is in prosperity he never think; of
his future misery, which when it does assault, of all afflictions it is the
greatest to remember his former happiness, in^cissimum est in fortuny genus,
meminisse fuisse foelicem: of all things it is the most unhappy, to remember
that we were once happy. King Cresus does affirm this by that often
repetition of Solon, when he was going to the place of torment, who Herod.
(...) 1.
did on a time brag of his happiness unto Solon a Sage of Greece, and said
that he thought himself the happiest man that lived, unto whom Solon replying
said, no man can be said to be happy before his death, and being afterward
taken in battle of King Cyrus did utter nothing but Solon, Solon, showing that
the remembrance thereof did only vex, and afflict him: surely the greatest
punishment that the damned shall receive in hell torments will be the remembrance
of their former pleasure, Plungent quia mundum dilexerunt, plangent quia vitam
non correxerunt, plangent quia paenam incurserunt, They shall weep, because
they have loved the world; they shall mourn, because they did not amend, their
life while they lived in the world. They shall lament because they did deserve,
by their wickedness, to come to that place of torment, when they departed out
of the world, the remembrance of their former loss will be their greatest
grief. But to come to the height of their unhappiness, and to take a veiw of
the depth of their misery, it is no earthly thing that does greiue them, only
the comfort which they wanted of S^on, is all that vex, them. When we
remembered Sion, Mary sits Io. 11.
very sorrowful in a mournful habit as long as Christ was absent from her,
but when her sister Martha came and told her that the Master was come and
called for her, O how speedily did she arise and embrace him joyfully, the want
of the comfort of the word of God is the greatest grief that can come to a
godly soul, David accounts in his banishment this his greatest loss, and the
people there in captivity lament for the defect here of, while they were in
their own country they did not account of it, they despised the Prophets quid
nobiscu^cum illis, what have we to do with such as prophecy evil unto us, but
now being deprived of it, o how they weep for their want of it. Demosthenes
being banished Athens, o how he did weep when he looked toward Athens, the
Israclites being banished into Babylon, o how they do weep when they remember
Sion. Sion was an eminent place in Jerusalem, where the Lord had set his name
to be worshipped, and where only, they did receive comfort in the word. Agar
she weeps because Genesis 16. 7.
she is thrust out of her Masters house, they weep, because they are put out
of Sion, and debarred from their Masters presence in his house; Dives being in
prosperity did not regard the word of God, nor take any delight therein, but
in adversity lying in hell torments, he lamented* his carelessenesse thereof,
wherefore he wished Abraham to send Lazarus to his fathers house, to give his
brethren notice Luke. 16.
of their neglect herein, least they should come into that place of torment.

Having spoken of the historical sense, according as it happened unto these
Israelites really, may it please you right honorable, right worshipful, and
well-beloved, that I speak of the my sticall meaning. It is no allegory which I
handle; but only a morality drawn from the true history, according to the
opinion of all the ancient, as S. Augustine, lerome, Chrysostom, Hugo
Cardinalis, Lyra, and others, as also Marlorate and Musculus amongst the mode^
ashrine the same. Saint Augustine has made a great volume which he entitles de
ciuitate Dei, the city of God, where in he comprehends all sorts of people
into two, namely the Citizens of Babel and the Citizens of Ston, both which I
have mentioned in my text, the one in bondage under the tyranny of the other,
and in opposition one to the other, the one in Babel corpore, bodily, but in
S^ animo, spiritually, Anima est vbi amat, non vbi animat, A^g. P^il. 3. 20.
the soul is where it loves, not where it lives. (...) says the Apostle S.
Paul, our rule or government, or as the vulgar has it our conversation is in
heaven. Omnis Catholicus (says Saint Augustine) August. in (...).
debet scire, vnde ciues sumus, vnde peregrinamur. Every Christian ought to
know, to what city we do belong, that sin is the cause of our peregrination,
and our iuslification by grace in the merits of Jesus Christ, the matter of our
deliverance. But to leave mystical moralities and wrested allegories, I will
only make a comparison in this, between the World wherein we live, and this
Babel wherein the people of Israel did live, comparatively.

This world wherein we live may be well compared to (...)
Babel, for sundry reasons.

1 Propter munditiam, for the pomp and glory thereof, Babel was a rich place,
and very fruitful as the historiographers For (...) there of. Stra^ Math. 4.
8. 9
do write of it, The World is fertile and very gorgeouse in show; the Diu^l did
reveal it unto our Savior Christ, Omnia haec d^^o, all these things will I
give thee: is, a description thereof. Dives fares deliciously and goes
gorgeously every day, Dives wants nothing in this world Luk 18. ^9
that his heart can wish.

2. Propter affectionem, for the affection of her inhabitants, For their
affection. August. in (...)
Babel habet suos amatores, pac^ temporali consulentes, nihil vltra sperantes:
says Saint Augustine: the citizens of Babel desire no other dwelling, for
there they have taken up their rest, the world has her lovers, does not the
rich man in the Gospel provide only for this life, Let us eat Luke. 12. 19.
and drink: post mortem nulia voluptas, our life is short and tedious, let us
take our pleasure, that is present, for this is our Wis. 2. 6.
lot and portion.

3. Propter afflictionem, for the affliction which they suffer, 3 For their
affliction. Ioh. 16. 33.
Babel is a place of torment for the Israelites, the World a place of
affliction for the godly, for here they suffer violence of the wicked: in munde
pressuram sustinebitis, in the world you shall suffer affliction, was a
cognizance given by our Savior Christ to know his flock by, The Apostle Saint
Paul does justify it by his often miseries. A certain Philosopher being sent
into banishment, he took it patiently, 2. Cor. 11. 23.
and one day being vpbraided by an other as a disgrace unto him, answered
mildely, sum ciuis mundi, showing that as long as he was in this world he was
subject to the Moler. in lo^.
same affliction.

4. Propter confusionem, for the confusion of things in 4 For the confusion of
all thing.
it, let a man consider the world and all things in the world, the state of
things and manners of men, and he shall find nothing but confusion, as the
word does import. This (...) may be well said to be (...), because of the
confusion of things both in Church and Common wealth, Coelum mari admixtum,
parua magnis confusa, heaven and earth are confused together for virtue is
hated, and vice is embraced, no man is regarded for his gifts; gifts, yes
surely, si nihil attuleris this Homere for as, gifts carries all away In quad.
Hist.
now adays. Amongst the Venetians there were certain magistrates that were
called praegads, because at the first foundation of their City, men were
entreated to take offices, but it is long since that order, it is now clean
worn out of use, and especially in this Land, for now they are not entreated
to enter into offices, but rather entreat, pray, and use all means possible
to have them, and if I mistake not my self, they pay soundly for them, is not
this confusion? what greater confusion can come to the Church, then Judas and
Simon Magus to shake hands together, what will ye give? and what shall I give?
then all must needs come to confusion: truly I think that such a confusion
was never wrought in Babel, as is at this day practiced in this Church, for
they would not rob their gods to beautify themselves as these Latrones
beneficiorum Mal. 3. 8.
the Patrons of Benefices do. Let but a Iack-daw come to these Benefactors that
bestow benefices, only for their own private commodity with a purse in his
mouth, (A bird that never came in at the door; but at the window, or some
little hole above) and he shall carry away the presentation before a man of
worth, is not this confusion? nay it is condemnation upon the delinquents. And
shall I impute this abomination only unto the Patrons: Many of them be
Laymen, and cannot tell how to try their Clerks, but by the sense of feeling:
there be other members in the Church, that are to be blamed for it, Let Elisha
take heed that Gehez^ his man be not the author of this confusion, and so
bring destruction upon his soul.

Is it not a great confusion when Bell and Dragon are worshipped in the Church,
and idolatry erected in the house of God, as it is in the Romish Church, where
they give that worship due and proper only to the Creator to the creature, They
adore the host, kneel at the crucifixe, and invoke Saints departed; which is
a (...) a service due only unto God: distinguish it as they will, to be
imparted to no Creature Ego sum Dominus (says the Lord by the Prophet) I am
the Lord, this is my name, my glory will I give Esaias. 42. 8.
unto none, nor my praise unto graven Images. Like unto the heathen their
Churches gorgeously, they garnish inwardly, and within they sacrifice unto
Devils, where such abomination is wrought, it must needs be Babel, nay that
Apo^.
Whore spoken of in the Revelation that has made the whole world drunk with
her fornications, let us, and all true Christians pray the Lord to turn their
hearts, that they may see this confusion, or else to send a westerly wind and
drive such Caterpillars into the sea.

But to leave them to Gods censure, and come to the common wealth, and you
shall find, that these laws and ordinances, that have been formerly or
deined to good purpose, bear no sway in these days. The law was in ancient
time to be required at the Judges mouth which thing is now greatly in practice,
for the law now does only depend on the Judges voice. And I will not say, that
the hea^^ble Judges of this land do follow the footsteps of Samuels sons
(look after lucre) pervert justice and 1. Sam. 8. 3.
take rewards. I believe that neither cognatus aut argentum, bribe nor brother
will cause them wrong their conscience, neither do I hope to hear of such
confusion wrought by men that fear God Nevertheless look into the intricate
endless enrolling of their proceedings in law, and you shall find a great
confusion in making such demurres, and delays in their proceeding that
oftentimes it comes to pass when the matter long depending is brought to an
issue, that then the sum of expenses shall weigh down the worth of the
sentence; is not this confusion? If the time would permit, I might take a view
of all estates that by their fashion, I should find a fit frame to make up a
Babel, Sycophants and flatteres are daily preferred, but Tom-teltroth little
regarded, Dionisius was often wont to bewail the state of (...) ^ita Dionis.
Princes, and especially in this, that men would not speak freely before them,
whereby the truth was hidden from them, and Jews the eleventh the French King
was wont to say that he had plenty of all things in his court, but of one, and
being demanded what it was, answered, it was truth; if truth be wanting in
King, courts what confusion is this to the common wealth. Sig^ the Emperor was
wont to account those Princes only happy, (...) it would banish proud men out
of their Courts, and being ^n courteous and humble men in their places, he did
not speak of the expelling of Sicophants, ^vers, diss^, and tale-bearers, for
(I think) he thought then that many of their Courts should remain
unfurnished, if you run thorough courts, cities, and countries to observe
them, you shall hardly find any thing but confusion. The servant rides on
horseback, the Master walks on foot; the body is only had in estimation,
for they will be sure to look to the gilding of their goodly carcasses, Pluris
opes nunc sunt quam prisci temporis annis, the body never more regarded, but
for the soul it may starve, before it be restored of them. The Kings daughter
is all glorious within Psalm. 45
(says the Psalmist) but Satan's children are all gorgeous without, like
painted sepulchers, that within are full of rotten bones,; thus ye see that
Babel may be well compared to the world, for the world is Babel, and nothing in
it, almost but confusion, which if it be not redressed in this life will bring
a subversion upon both body and soul in the world to come, and so I proceed
with my comparison.

As the world may very well be compared to Babel, even The things of this life,
like unto the rivers of Babel.
so all the things therein, may be well compared into the Rivers of Babel,
although Babel be a pleasant place, yet it has rivers in it, which carries all
away, all things in the world are vain, momentarie and subject to mutabilitie
like unto the rivers of Babel, both ebb and flow. It is written of Sesostris a
King of the Aegiptians, that he had Herod*
his coach drawn with four Kings, whom before he had conquered and one time
perceiving one of them to look often back did demand the cause thereof, I
do (says he) behold and observe that part of the wheel which was lowest,
becomes by and by highest, and the highest, lowest, cogito de mutatione
fortunae, I note the vnstabilitie of things in this world, such surely is the
estate of all things in this world, that there is nothing stable under th^e.
Consider but the life of man, and you shall perceive i^ pass away like to the
waters in the river as Gregory Nazianzene Greg. lib. 33. M^ral. cap. 7
does well observe it, quae velut a fontis sui origin nascendo surgit, sed ad
ima defluens moriendo pertransit, which from our birth as from a fountain we
arise to the height of our years, but by passing away our days in vanity, in
the end we fall into the gulf of death, as the rivers run into the sea,
which the woman of Tekoah very well notes unto David, omnes morimur, and sicut
aquae dilabimur in terram 2. Sam. 14 14.
quae non reuertuntur: we all die, and like water we are powered out upon the
ground, which does not return. Not only our lives but also all things in this
world which we do possess. Honor, preferment, riches, strength, all are
momentanie, and subject to alteration, they are of no continuance, for either
we are taken from them, or they depart from us, what profit had the rich
wretch in the Gospel of his great substance, when his soul was snatched away
that very night from him in the midst of his wealth, and what gain get many
covetous worldlings of their Luke. 12. 20.
goods, when in the midst of their years they forsake them, to pass away from
us they hauemany euasions. The Prophet Jeremy says that as a partridge does
hatch her young ones, and by her help in relieuing of them they come to Ierem.
17. 11. In (...) m^nto Arlet quod diu ^r^s^ebat ligeu^
some groth, then they forsake her: even so when a rich man has taken great
pains in heaping together riches in the midst of his days they forsake him
and leave him like a foul. It is reported of Saladine the Emperor that mighty
Monarch, that by his conquests obtained great wealth, on a time lying upon his
death bed, considering the vanity and mutabilitie of earthly things, he
commanded a sheet to be tied to a poule, and carried about the City, and cry
behold Saladine that great rich and mighty Prince of Asia, for all his
abundance in worldly things he carries nothing with him but this ragge.
Wherefore the Apostle Saint John did diswade all men and women from the love
thereof, Love not the world neither any thing therein, for in it there is
n^^^ing but vanity, And the world shall pass away with 1. Ioh. 2. 17.
the lust thereof, but he that fulfilleth the will of God abides for ever.

And so from the comparison between the world and Babel I come to observe the
different behavior between 1 The different behavior of the godly and wicked.
the Citizens of Babel, and the Citizens of Sion, and that in three things
specified in my text.

1. The Citizens of Babel they sit in the midst of Babel neither can they
perceive these things sedent in fluminibus, they are so delighted with the
pleasures thereof that they cannot see the confusion of them, but the children
of God: sedent inxta flumina vel super flumina: sit near to the rivers or by
the bankside and discern their abomination, neither will they be overtaken
with them. A man that walks Sim^
in the mist cannot perceive whence it comes nor whether it goes, but if he
betake him aside unto some top of a mountain near adjoining, he shall
discern that it is nothing but a vapor arising from the serines and entrals of
the earth, thickning in the clouds, and vanishing in the air: so long as the
earthly minds of covetous worldlings are ouershaddowed with the darkness of
ignorance, thickened with a greedy desire of worldly things, as gross and
palpable as the dark mist of Egypt, they cannot see, perceive, nor understand:
a worldly man does not understand these things that are of the spirit of God,
as long as they are in the midst of them they cannot perceive the vanity, nor
frailty of them, but if they would take them aside into the consideration of
Sion, and be lifted up in their minds with an holy meditation, they should
perceive that all the things of this life proceed from the bowels of the
earth, and vanish away in the air. The godly man he sees this, and therefore
sits by them, and is not taken in delight with them, but the wicked man
understands not, and therefore like a fool is overtaken with Eccles. 31. (...).
them.

O that the rich wretched worldling would but conceive this, that takes such
pleasure in his riches, and increases his wealth by unlawful means, that
sets his whole delight upon the transitory things of this world, and sits in
the midst of Babel, that as long as he dwells in the delight of these things he
is subject to confusion, surely I think he would be more liberal to the
poor, less hurtful and envious to his neighbors, and put his riches to
better use, then now he does when he puts his money to usury, but because he
knows not, nor perceiues he not in what danger he is, therefore he cannot
shun it as long as he dwells in a greedy desire things coveting worldly he
cannot see, but if he would betake him to a liberal distribution, and by an
heavenly contemplation consider the estate of his present being, he should be
able to discern it.

Matthew sitting at the receipt of custom, following his covetous calling, with
a greedle desire after coin, rose up at Christ's call, and followed him. I
would to God that I could find one soul sitting here, in a greedy desire
after worldly things, that would be moved with contrition of heart for their
covetous behavior, then should I think my self most happy in discharging my
calling and winning one soul unto God, and also that soul saved in Sion
everlastingly.

2 The Citizens of Sion spend not their time in mirth and 2 The second disteren
c^.
melody as the wicked Babilonians do, but rather in sorrow and heaviness; the
wicked says Job (that live in the delights of Babel) nihil vl^ra sperantes,
looking for no other felicity but that which they presently possess, spend
their days in mirth, solace, and feasting, and walk with their kinssolkes,
friends, wives, and children, and suddenly they go down to hell Job. 21. 13.
together, but the godly pass over their days, in sorrow, heaviness and
lamentation, and in the end are carried of the good Angels, after the ending of
their doleful days, into Abraham's bosom, we read in stories of former times,
how that the holy men in the primitive Church did pass over their days in
solitariness, prayer, and fasting, as the Apostle to the Hebrews does very
well observe it, sed tempora mutantur, and nos mutamur in illis, the times are
altered, Heb. 11. 29.
for men and women delight in these days to spend their time in
dissoluteness, rioting, playing and feasting, they did consider the misery of
this present Babel wherein they did live, their frailty to yield unto the
wicked allurements of that cursed Country. But, I think men and women in these
days hope for no more joy nor pleasure hereafter, and therefore they make this
life a recreation for their misery to come, and satisfy themselves herewith,
while they are here, but the wise man Solomon tell us, that it is better
Eccles. 7. 4. (...)
to go into the house of mourning then into the house of feasting, because
(says he) where mirth is, there are the hearts of fools, but where sorrow is,
there are the hearts of wise men, wherefore our Savior pronounces a blessing
upon those that lament in this life, for they shall be comforted. Math. 5. 4.
Aug. de^. (...)
Aut continui dolores cruciabuut paenitentem vitam meam, aut cruciatus aeterni
vexabunt puniendam animam mea^, necesse est peccatorem slerivel hic, vel in
futuro, says Saint Augustine: Either continual sorrows, must afflict a man's
penitent life, or else eternal torments shall vex his damnable soul, and of
necessity a sinner must weep either here in this life, or hereafter. The
hearts of worldly men are so glutted with excess of worldly pleasure that to
be sorrowful for their sins they have no leisure. Peter denies his Master,
and Peter weeps bitterly for his trespass, thou deniest thy Master daily and
howerly by thy swearing, lying^ and thy deceitful actions, and yet thou never
weepest for it, ipsi Petre statim demisit quia amarissime fleuit, Amb. s. Ser.
46.
si tu non sleas Christus non ad terespiciet noc tua culpa recedit, Our Savior
Christ gave Peter a present pardon upon his mourning, if thou weep not for thy
transgression, neither will Christ look toward thee, nor yet remit thy sin,
for that sentence of our Savior is against every one that remains hardened in
sin, except ye repent ye shall all likewise Luke. 13. 3
perish. Mary Magdalene she wept for her adultery and fornication, but the
Gallants of these times make it only a matter of recreation, adolescentem
scortari non est vitiu^, to be wanton is but a trick of youth. If a man durst
ask many of these young Gentlemen that walk gallantly along the streets, and
they would ingeniously answer them, they might as Diogenes did being demanded
whether he went, going from the Lacedaemonians to the Athenians, eo a viris ad
faeminas, I go from men to women, for Diog La^r (...) ^it. Pl^l.
to an harlet, to the stews, or to a tobaco. shop is their furthest journey.
But why should I persuade men or women to a solitary life, seeing there is
nothing in this world but matter of misery, therefore I should rather counsel
them to take their recreation. Beloved, the wicked are too much given to
worldly mirth, and therefore when any solitary fit ouertakes them they will
take them to somelewd company to drive away melancholy: but let us take heed,
when we are most secure in our merry mood, then is Satan most watchful to
winnow us like wheat, while Jobs Job. 1. 19.
children are feasting in their elder brothers house, then the Devil works
their overthrow. Awake therefore all ye that sleep in the security of sin,
and fill up your measure of mirth beyond all measure, rouse up yourselues ye
that rejoice in Babylon, and weep for your transgressions. Awake ye drunkards
and weep, howl all ye drinkers of wine, Joel. 1. 5.
because of the now wine, for it shall be pulled from your mouths. Rouse up your
selves you Adulterers and Fornicators, that stretch your selves upon the bed of
fornication to fulfill your lusts, and lament for your uncleanness, because,
without ye repent, in your pollution ye shall perish. Ye Conetous-worldings 1.
Cor. 6.
arise from greedines, and from getting of unlawful goods, least ye be
punished with Dives in hell Luke. 16.
torments. And finally let us all awake, arise and rouse up our selves from sin
and weep and mourn for our transgressions. Auicen writes that the Country of
Caldea being Auicen. lib 8.
full of rivers, the Heart being wearied in chase, and coming to the riuerside,
which she cannot pass, goes unto the first man she sees, braies and weeps
to him for releife, and so is taken. Which let every Christian man learn, to
follow this example, that seeing himself beset with innumerable enemies,
wearied with the burden of sin, let him turn to the man Iesiu who is able,
and will deliver him from all dangers. O that we had minds to consider our
misdeeds, hearts truly touched with a grief for sin that they might relent,
and eyes of a spongie humor that by the distillation of our tears we might
bedeaw our faces, that as Na^ was clean sed from his leprosy, by washing 2.
Kings. (...).
in the river Jordan; so we being bathed in the pure fountain of tears of a
contrite heart, may be thoroughly purged from the filthiness of sin. There
is a certain river in Cecilia that if black sheep be bathed in it, there
wool (...).
shall turn white immediately, such surely is the true nature of the fountain
of tears, for if thy sins were as red as scarlet, in them if thou bath thy
self, they shall be as white as wool. When Pharaohs daughter did di'cent into
the ^xod. 1.
river, she found a babe lying among the flagges, if thou descend into the
rivers of tears thou shall find the babe Jesus comfortable to thy soul.
Lachryma enim lauat quod (...)
peccatumpolluit, Tears will wash that which our sinne^ has defiled. Tear,
are silent prayers, they crave not and yet they obtain pardon, they plead not
a man's cause, and yet they receive mercy says Saint Ambrose, Peter by weeping
was remitted, Susanna by weeping was delivered from the false accusation,
Ezechias by lamenting was restored to his former health, and his life prolonged
let us weep then with Peter, lament with Mary Magdalene, mourn with Manasses,
that our souls may be cleared from Satan's false accusation, and our lives
prolonged in that celestial kingdom everlastingly.

And lastly I come to the last observation, between the (...) The th^d
difference.
behavior of the godly and wicked. The Citizens of Sion mourn for the want of
it, but the Citizens of Babylon, neither remember Sion, nor regard. The wordly
man may perhaps sometime weep, but his ^e the tears of Esau, only for want of
the blessing, because he cannot get some great bargain to the undoing of his
poor brother.

The carnal man may sometimes be sorry, but it is the 2. Sam 13. 2.
grief of Ammon, because he cannot fulfill his lust with his sister Thamar.

The Envious man may perhaps greiue, but it is because of his brothers
prosperous estate, inuidus alteri^s rebus macrescit opimis, the grief of the
wicked is only that they cannot do mischeife, but the sorrow of a godly soul,
is when he wants some peaceable comfort to his soul, Sion is Nulla pax
improbis sed vis^o Sion^ (...) grata
his solace. The remembrance of Sion in respect of the deprivation thereof is a
great vexation unto them. The comfort that a godly man receives by the word of
God preached unto him cannot be expressed, of which when he is deprived like
these Jews in captivity, what a heaviness brings it to his tender heart,
David being in banishment, Psalm. 84. 3.
accounts this his greatest loss, therefore he esteems the sparrow and
swallow happy, because they had liberty to lay their young near unto the
altar of God, not that he thought the birds did receive any benefit hereby,
but that he out of his compassionate affection, being ravished with a desire
thereafter, does utter this patheticall deprivation, that he did want that
which the birds did enjoy, when the mind of man by an heavenly contemplation
is rapt into the heaven of peace, to consider man's miserable estate in Babel,
and his joyful and happy estate in Sion, he cannot express his grief
without great lamentation, herefore we Bernard. in Ca (...).
sigh and groan desiring to be dissolved, and be with Christ Jesus, da amantem
and sensit quod loquer, every soul that sighs for Sion, and has his
cogitation there does conceive what I say. O sancta Sion vbitotum stat nihil
defluit, O blessed Sion where there is no penury, no leading into captivity,
nor no complaining in her streets, but peace and plenty within her borders for
evermore, happy shall he be that shall be admitted into her gates, to partake of
her solace that he may sing Halelutah unto the lamb that sits upon the throne
for ever and ever.

Having ended my text right honorable, right worshipful, and well-beloved, it
follows in the next place to speak of their iniquity which was the cause of
their misery, and to parallel them with the sins of these times wherein we
live, such as Idolatry, shedding of innocent blood, pride, drunkenness,
lasciniousnesse, and want of charity, as the scripture does set them down unto
us, but because the time has prevented me, I will only leave them to your
godly consideration; first, because, I know these things have been spoken
against out of this place many times, and therefore you are not ignorant of the
heinousnes of them. As also I speak unto Christians, that have the word of God
daily preached unto them, to diswade them from those and the like sins, and
therefore a shame for such to be tainted with them, it shall be easier for
Sodom and Gomorah, nay and Babel in the day of the Lords appearance, then for
this City, because the word of God is so plentifully preached in it.

You right Honorable and worshipful Magistrates of this City qui (...)
Cooperatores dei estis, Gods vicegerents 1. Cor. (...).
or assisters upon earth, weigh diligently the charge that is committed unto
you, remember that you are exalted to that place of dignity to repress
iniquity let not your too mild and meek spirit encourage the wicked to do
evil, for foolish pity may mar the City. Consider that the sword is not
given unto you in vain, but to take vengeance on them that do evil, the days
are dangerous, the people impious, Romans 135
they will hardly obey, but by constraint, let sin be your subject to suppress
it, and the glory of Sion the object of all your labors knowing that you stand
always in Gods sight, from whose presence nothing can be hid. I would to God
that you had the spirit of Elias, and zeal of Phineas to suppress sin in
the action. I would to God that the Magistrates of this City were like unto the
watchmen of Israel to search about the Corners thereof, and find out the
abominations therein; to the oppressed be merciful, to the wicked fierce, and
terrible, that you being faithful in a little, when your Lord and Master does
appear he may make you rulers over great, and exalt you to that blessed Sion
to remain with him for evermore.

And you honorable Judges, that are ordained to determine the cause of the
oppressed; and to releive the poor from wrong: let not the greatness of the
person, nor superiority of place; cause you to have any regard; but only to the
sincerity of the cause. But let all just judges that wish to inhabit blessed
Sion, have only a respect unto the truth of justice, quia, non hominis, sed
deiiudicium exercetis, because, Deuteronomy. 16.
it is not man's cause but Gods which you take in hand; would to God that every.
Iudgo that sits upon the bench of justice would consider, before he did
determine, the charge that is laid upon him; if, but once the rrmembrance of
righteous Sion, would come into his consideration, then would he fear to give
sentence contrary to the right of the cause; the want whereof causes much
confusion to be wrought in the land; let your scarlet robos put you in mind of
righteous Judgment. Remember that one day, (indicata r^iudic abitt Deus) those
things which now you shusle up without dexterity, shall be opened again, and
judged with sincerity, then neither your dialecticall distinctions; nor your
phinicall fine phrases, nor your Mass of graceless coin shall any whit
releive you, for you shall be adjudged without mercy, that had no regard unto
the right of the cause sed si rectam proseratis sententiam, videbitis Sion: but
if you have been conscionable in giving true sentence according to your upright
judgment, you shall enjoy peaceable Sion joyfully for evermore.

And to conclude, You my beloved brethren, that hear me this day; take heed
unto your selves, that you be not inueigled with glorious Babel; and taken with
the delights thereof; least you perish in her confusion: let not the love of
any earthly thing, withdraw you from the love of Sion: Weep and lament for
your sins; whereby you have offended the Majesty of your Maker: take up a
new resolution, to reform your lives, by an holy conversation: in all your
actions possess your souls with a hope of enjoying peaceable Sion, that at
the end of your captivity, you being delivered from all the miseries of this
life, and translated into that happy City, of eternal blessedness to reign
with Christ Jesus for evermore: unto which place, the Lord for his mercy sake,
through the merits of his son our Savior, bring every one of us; to whom;
with his blessed spirit, (the tri-vn-God) be ascribed all glory, dominion, and
power for evermore.

Amen.

