THE APOSTLES CATECHISM CONSISTING OF SIX ARTICLES, plainly expounded:

Very profitable for All, but especially for the benefit of the unlearned and
those that desire more Knowledge.

By JOHN FORTH, Minister of the Word of God.

LONDON, Printed by I. L. for William Sheffard, and are to be sold at his
shop, at the entering in of Popes head Allie out of Lumbard-street. 1623.

To the Reverend Father in GOD, Thomas Morton Doctor in Divinity, and Lord
Bishop of Couentrie and Lietchfield, I. F. wishes grace in this life, and
glory in the world to come.
WHEREAS the holy Ghost has both recorded in the sixth Chapter of the Epistle
to the Hebrews, that short Catechism, which the Apostles in their days
taught those whom they converted to the faith of Christ, and also left the same
to the Churches for all future times: I not doubting but that the evidence of
the text, Heb. 5.12. and 6.1. Will justify this to be the Apostles
Catechism, have presumed to propound and expound the same as the Lord has
enabled me, hoping thereby to whet up their gifts, which are better able to
adorn and enlarge it; to justify other Catechismes, which differing from this
in words, agree with it in substance; and to propound it as a pattern or an
example for imitation, that they which of themselves are already forward, may
be encouraged to proceed, and those which are somewhat slack, may be
provoked diligently to plant the first principles in the hearts of those that
are under their charge, and so young plants may grow up in their youth, and
become worthy instruments in Church or Commonwealth, as God shall appoint.
This small Treatise I have presumed to dedicate to your Lordships for these
reasons. First, because you are able to discern of the matter handled herein.
Secondly, because it has been publicly taught to youth in your Lordships
Dioces. Thirdly, because I have great cause to give some testimony of hearty
thankfulness to your Lordships great favor, which I have lately found at your
hands. And desiring the small testimony may be accepted in good part, I cease
at this present. June 5. 1623.

THE APOSTLES CATECHISM.
Question.

What Principles of Religion will you specially commend to Christians that
they may learn them perfectly.

A. They are those which the Apostle commends to the Churches. Hebr. 6.1.
therefore leaving the doctrine of the beginning of Christ, let us go on unto
perfection, not laying again the foundation of repentance from dead works,
and of faith toward God, of the doctrine of baptismes, and laying on of hands,
and of the resurrection from the dead, and of eternal judgment.

Q. How many are these in number?

A. They are six in number.

First, repentance from dead works.

Secondly, faith toward God.

Thirdly, the doctrine of baptism.

Fourthly, imposition of hands.

Fifthly, resurrection from the dead.

Sixthly, eternal judgment.

The first Article of repentance from dead works.
Question.

DEclare these more particularly in order, and first, what repentance from dead
works means.

A. That this may be understood plainly, there are three things to be
considered.

First, what works are dead works, and what works are not dead works.

Secondly, who must repent from dead works.

Thirdly, how they must repent.

Q. What works call you dead works, and what works are not dead works.

A. For the clearer understanding of the point, we must consider the works of
men at three several times, and according to the three diverse estates, or
conditions of men in these three times.

First, before the fall of man.

Secondly, after the fall of man.

Thirdly, after man's regeneration.

Q. What were the works of man before, and at his fall.

A. The works which Adam did before his fall, were good and righteous
according to Gods will: but that work which he did contrary to the will of God
in eating the forbidden fruit. Genesis 3.6. was a deadly work, and procured death
(that is, separation from God. Ephesians. 4.18.) both to Adam, and to all his
posterity. For first, God told Adam so before hand. Genesis 2.17. Whenever
thou eatest thereof (that is, of the forbidden fruit) thou shall die the
death. Secondly, the Apostle James says, sin when it is finished brings
death. Jam. 1.15. Thirdly, Paul says, Romans 6.23. the wages of sin is death:
And that all Adams posterity both sinned and dyed in Adam. It is manifest.
First, all mankind was created in Adam, as being then in his loins. Genesis 1.28.
When God said to him: multiply and replenish the earth: and therefore all
mankind sinned in Adam. For as Leui being in the loins of Abraham, paid
tithes, Genesis 14.20. Heb. 7. ver. 9, 10. so all mankind being yet in the loins
of Adam, sinned in Adam. Secondly, Paul says, Romans 5.12. By one man sin
entered into the world, and death by sin, and so death passed upon all men,
for that all have sinned: thirdly, it is written. 1. Cor. 15.22. in Adam all
die.

Q. What are the works of man after his fall?

A. They are altogether mere dead works; for man being dead in sin. Ephesians.
2.1. can do no works but dead works, and such as the tree is, such are the
fruits thereof. Mat. 7.17. Wherefore the works of all men fallen in by Adam,
and not reconciled to God again by faith in Christ, are dead works, though
they seem never so glorious; before carnal men as the works of Poets,
Philosophers, Orators, or whatsoever they be that are not regenerate, as the
Apostle shows Ephe. 2. ver. 11, 12. that they are without God in the world.

Q. What are the works of men regenerate and reconciled to God again.

A. Their works are neither dead works, nor deadly works, for he that is
borne of God sins not. 1. John 3.9. and 5.18.

Q. How can that be so?

A. First, the Scripture witnesses that the regenerate sin: for here is no
man that sins not. 1. King. 8.46. Again, it is written: Ecclesiast. 7.20.
there is not a just man upon earth, that does good, and sins not. The
Apostle James says, in many things we offend all. Jam. 3.2. The Apostle John
says: if we say that we have no sin, we deceive our selves, and the truth
is not in us. 1. Ioh. 1.8.

Secondly, it may be showed by the example of Noah, that was drunken. Genesis
9.21. of Abraham that lied twice, Genesis 12. ver. 13.18. Genesis 20.2. of Isaak that
lied also. Genesis 26.7. Of Lot that committed incest in lying with his own
daughters, Genesis 19.33, etc. of the sons of Jacob, who sold their brother
Joseph. Genesis 37.27. of Reuben that lay with Bilhah his fathers Concubine. Genesis
35.22. of Simeon and Leui that treacherously slew the Shechemites, Genesis 34.25.
of Moses that spoke unadvisedly with his lips. Numb. 20.10. Psalm. 106.33. and
was deprived of the land of Canaan. Numh. 20.12. As he complains. Deutr.
1.37. and 4.21. and 32.48. of David that committed adultery and murder. 2.
Sam. 11. of Solomon that loved strange women, and followed after other Gods. 1.
King. 11. of Peter that denied Christ. Mat. 26.70. and of others, that being
regenerate, sin, and that there is no sin, but one or other regenerate person
has fallen into it, (except the sin against the Holy Ghost) and how say you
then, or how says the Apostle John that he which is borne of God sins not.
1. John 3.9. and 5.18.

A. Two answers may be given to this objection.

First, as the Apostle John speaks generally, that whosoever is borne of God
sins not, 1. John 3.9. and 5.18. so the Apostle Paul answers generally.
Romans 6.2. How shall we that are dead to sin, live any longer therein.

Secondly, the answer is more particular, and more directly answering to the
objection, that though the regenerate commit a sin which of it self and in
his own nature is deadly; yet it procures not death to them, and that for
these six reasons.

First, because they are quickened together with Christ. Ephesians. 2.5. Coloss.
2.13. and this new life which the regenerate have is in Christ. 1. Ioh. 5.11.
whereupon Paul says, Coloss. 3.3. your life is hidden with Christ in God.

Seeing then the life of the regenerate is not in themselves, but in Christ
(who dies no more, Romans 6.9.) it cannot be that their sin should be deadly
to procure death unto them.

Secondly, whereas the sting of death is sin, and the strength of sin is
the law. 1. Cor. 15.56. Christ has redeemed us from the curse of the Law,
being made a curse for us. Gal. 3.13. and therefore the works of the
regenerate are not deadly, neither do they procure death, because the curse of
the Law which strengthened sin to procure death is taken away by Christ.
Coloss. 2.14. See Romans 7.5.

Thirdly, although there be a continual fight or combat between the flesh
and the spirit in the regenerate, that they cannot do the things which they
would. Gal. 5.17. yet sin gets not the dominion over them, because they
are not under the Law, but under Grace. Romans 6.14. and therefore sin wounds
them not to death.

Fourthly, whiles the regenerate having sin dwelling in them, do not the
good which they would, but the evil which they would not. Romans 7.15.19. It is
not they that do it, but sin that dwells in them: as the Apostie
confesses of himself. Romans 7.17.20. And therefore he that is borne of God
sins not as the Apostle John says. 1. Ioh. 3.9. and 5.18.

Fifthly, as in the time of the Law, there were expiations from sin by
sacrifices, and purgations from pollutions by water, so it was foretold. Zach.
13.1. that in the time of the Gospel there should be a fountain opened to the
house of Danid, and to the inhabitants of Jerusalem, for sin and for
uncleanness. And in the new Testament (the ratification whereof is largely
declared, Heb. 9.15. etc.) the Apostle John witnesses that Christ the
Mediator of the new Testament, came both by water and also by blood. 1. Ioh.
5.6. who by his blood entered in once into the holy place, having obtained
eternal redemption for us. Heb. 9.12. and cleansed his Church with the washing
of water by the word. Ephesians. 5.26. And therefore we say with the Apostle, Heb.
9.14. that the blood of Christ, who through the eternal spirit offered
himself without spot to God purges our consciences from dead works to serve
the living God. And the blood of Jesus Christ purges us from all sin. 1.
John 1.7.

Sixthly, God having reconciled the elect to himself by the death of Christ,
imputes not their trespasses unto them. 2. Cor. 5.19.

Wherefore we conclude this point with the words of the Apostle. Romans 8.1. that
there is no condemnation to the regenerate which are in Christ Jesus, and which
walk not after the flesh but after the spirit; for the Law of the spirit of
life which is in Christ Jesus has freede them from the law of sin and of
death.

Q. Which of these works then must be repented of?

A. The second sort which were mentioned in the sixth question, and which were
done by men that were dead in sins and trespasses, for when they are
effectually called from death to life in Christ, and regenerate, then they must
repent of their former dead works before they be baptized. As for repentance
for sin after baptism, we may speak thereof at another time.

Q. Secondly, then tell me who those are that must repent from dead works,
whether all Adams posterity, who are all of them dead in sin, or some of them
only.

A. This question may be answered plainly and orderly in this manner.

First, God made this promise for the redemption of mankind after they were
all fallen in Adam, saying, Genesis 3.15. The seed of the woman shall break the
head of the serpent.

Secondly, some men, by faith in Christ to come, embraced this promise
joyfully, and showed their faith as occasion required, as did Abel, and all the
faithful afterward. But some made no reckoning of that gracious promise, but
through unbelief rejected it as did Cain, and all other unbelievers after him.

Thirdly, God received into his fanour again, so many of Adams posterity, as
believed his gracious promise, and showed their faith in the promised seed of
the woman as occasion required, as he received Abel and all the faithful
after him: But God rejected, and left still in their sins, and in the state
of death all those that believed not that his gracious promise, as he left
Cain, and an unbelievers after him.

Hereof it is, that there were always two sorts of people in the world,
believers and unbelievers; the Church of God, and the Synagogue of Satan; and
as Ishmael persecuted Isaak. Genesis 21.9. Galat. 4.29. So the unbelievers have
always hated and persecuted the faithful.

Q. What you have said hitherto, seems to be of the time of the Law, and of
the Church before Christ came in the flesh; what say you of the time of the
Gospel?

A. No other thing then has been said of the time of the Law; and therefore
we will repeat the same things again in the same order.

1. First, John Baptist sent to the Jews only, published generally to all the
Jews, that gracious promise of redemption, saying, Matthew. 3.2. Repent ye, for
the kingdom of heaven is at hand: and a little after, Math. 3.10. And now also
the axe is laid unto the root of the trees: therefore every tree which
brings not forth good fruit, is he wen down, and cast into the fire: and
after his resurrection from the dead, Christ sent his Apostles to publish this
gracious promise of redemption to all people, as well Gentiles as Jews,
saying, Mark. 16.15. Go ye into all the world, and preach the Gospel to every
creature.

2. Secondly, some rejected this glad tidings of salvation, both Jews. Luke
7.30. (But the Pharisees and Lawyers rejected the counsel of God against
themselves, being not baptized of him,) and also Gentiles, as the Philosophers
at Athens, saying of Paul: What will this babbler say, Act. 17.18. but some
believed both of the Jews, and also of the Gentiles, as many as were ordained
to salvation, Act. 13.48.

3. Thirdly, the believers were received into Gods favor, into this new
kingdom of Christ, and the unbelievers were rejected, whether they were Jews
or Gentiles. John the Baptist received the believing Jews, and baptized them.
Matthew. 3.6. and rejected the unbelievers. So did Peter, Acts 2.38. Also Peter
first received into the society of the Church, Cornelius and other believing
Gentiles. Acts 10.47. Acts 11.4. etc. Acts 15.7. Also other believing Gentiles
at Antioch in Syria, were received into the Church of Christ. Acts 11. verse
20, 21. etc. Also at Antioch in Pisidia, ( Acts 13.14.) Paul received the
believers both Jews and Gentiles, and rejected the unbelieving Jews, Acts
13.46. It was necessary that the word of God should first have been spoken to
you: but seeing ye put it from you, and judge your selves unworthy of
everlasting life; Lo, we turn to the Gentiles. So Paul did at Corinthus,
Acts 18.6. and at Ephesus, Acts 19.9.

Q. Who then are they that must repent from dead works?

A. Two sorts of persons. First, those who hearing the promise of redemption by
Christ, believe it, and so are converted and regenerate. Secondly, the children
of the faithful.

Q. Who are they that believe the Gospel, are regenerate, and must repent from
dead works?

A. Though it might suffice to say, as before is said, that it is all that
believe in Christ, and none of the unbelievers, yet having special regard to
the first preaching of the Gospel, it seems good to reduce all the faithful
to these two sorts of men.

First, the remnant of the Jews ( Esa. 10.22. Romans 9.29.) that appertained to
the election of grace, ( Romans 11.5.) and were to be received into the covenant
of the new Testament of Christ's first coming in the flesh and so to be saved,
when the general multitude of the other unbelieving Jews, were to be
rejected, because of their unbelief ( Romans 9.31.) this little remnant of the
believing Jews, first repented of their dead works before they were or could
be baptized by John the Baptist. Matthew. 3.6. or by any other afterward, Act.
2.38.

Secondly, those of the Gentiles, that by the preaching of the Gospel, were
converted to the faith of Christ. For those repented from their dead works
before they were received into the Christian Church by Baptism, as the
believing Jews acknowledged, saying: then has God also to the Gentiles given
repentance unto life. Act. 11.18. And so the Apostle Paul acknowledges them to
be of the Church. Ephesians. 3.6. that the Gentiles should be fellow heirs, and of
the same body, and partakers of his promise in Christ by the Gospel. See
also, Ephesians. 2.11.

Q. You have showed that the believing Jews, and the believing Gentiles
repented from dead works before they were baptized: show me now how the
children of the faithful, being already received into the Church by Baptism,
must repent from dead works.

A. As the remnant of the elect Jews and as the believing Gentiles professed
their repentance before they were baptized: so the children of the faithful
profess their repentance after baptism, for it is requisite that they
receiving baptism (which is the seal of the covenant) in their infancy
(because of the promise of God made to their parents, Genesis 17.7.) should when
they come to years of understanding, learn the conditions of the covenant
contained in the first principles of religion, and then make open profession
thereof in their own person, that so the covenant between God and his Church
may be continued from generation to generation. But of this profession of the
children of the faithful, more shall be said hereafter in the fourth Article.

Q. Now that you have showed who must repent, tell me also how they must
repent, as you promised in answering my third question?

A. Three ways:

First, by lamenting and renouncing their former course of life, and former
dead works wherein they lived.

Secondly, by present breaking off their sins, and entering into a new kind
of holy life without any delay.

Thirdly, by promising faith and holy obedience to God for the rest of their
life.

The second Article of faith toward God.
Question.

What say you of faith toward God, which is the second Article of the Apostles
Catechism?

A. Three things.

First, what faith is.

Secondly, what God promises.

Thirdly, what we must believe.

Q. What is faith, or how describe you it?

A. Faith (resting upon the promises of God declared in his word. Rom 10.17. is
the ground of things hoped for, and the evidence of things not seen. Heb.
11.1. for we look not at the things which are seen, but at the things which
are not seen: for the things which are seen, are temporal, but the things
which are not seen, are eternal. 2 Cor. 4.18. for eye has not seen, care
has not heard, neither have entered into the heart of man, the things which God
has prepared for them that love him. 1. Corinthians 2.9. and therefore it is
said in an other place, we walk by faith and not by sight.

Q. What say you then of the promises which God has made to his Church.

A. Two things.

First, what they are.

Secondly, how God performs them.

Q. What are the promises which God has made to his Church?

A. They are of two sorts.

1. Some to be performed in this life.

2. Some to be performed in the life to come.

Q. What are the promises that belong to this life, and are in this life to be
performed?

A. They are many, but I will mention only four.

1. The first is, that great and gracious promise of man's redemption, made
presently after the fall of Adam. Genesis 3.15. the seed of the woman shall
break the head of the Serpent and when the fullness of time was come,
performed by Christ. Gal. 4.4. but when the fullness of time was come, God sent
forth his Son made of a woman, made under the law, to redeem them that were
under the Law, that we might receive the adoption of sons.

2. The second is, that he will make a special and an everlasting covenant
with the faithful, and with their seed after them to be their God, and the
God of their seed after them. Genesis 17.7.

3. The third is, that he will make the faithful his peculiar people. Exodus
19.5. Now therefore if ye will obey my voice indeed and keep my covenant,
then ye shall be a peculiar treasure unto me above all people, though all the
earth be mine, which Moses repeateth Deuteronomy. 6.7. and 14.2. and 26.18.

4. The fourth is, that God will honor, bless and prosper his faithful
flock above all people in the world, in all things pertaining to this present
life, as Moses shows at large Leuit. 26.3, etc. Deuteronomy. 28.1. etc. which two
chapters are worthy to be often read, and meditated upon continually.

Q. What be promises which God made to his chosen people for the life to come.

A. They are exceeding great and precious, whereby in this life we be made
pertakers of the divine nature. 2. Pet. 1.4. and at the general resurrection
our mortal bodies shall be made immortal. 1. Cor. 15.42. etc. and like to the
glorious body of Christ. Phil. 3.21. we shall be free from all misery. Apoc.
7.16. Apoc. 21.4. We shall be with Christ where he is, Ioh. 14.3. and 17.24.
and see God as he is. 1. Ioh. 3.2. and 1. Cor. 13.12. and shall be ever with
the Lord. 1 Thessalonians. 4.17.

And for this cause Paul says: godliness is profitable unto all things, having
promises of this life that now is, and of that which is to come. 1. Tim. 4.8.

Q. How does God perform his promises?

A. This may be answered two ways. First, more generally God performs all
his promises in Christ, as the Apostle witnesses. 2. Cor. 1.20. for all the
promises of God in him are yea and in him, Amen. For by Christ we have
redemption. Ephesians. 2.13. and interest to the blessings of God, seeing Christ is
heir of all things, Heb. 1.2.

Secondly, by such ordinary means as God has appointed both for temporal
and also for eternal blessings.

Q. What say you in the third place concerning our selves.

A. Three things.

First, we must believe in God almighty, who of his mere mercy has made us
these gracious promises, and not in idols that can do nothing. Deuteronomy. 4.28.
Jerem. 10.5. neither in secondary means, which God has ordained, that we
should use them, but not trust in them. Psalm. 20.7.

Secondly, we must believe the forenamed promises mentioned before in answering
to your fifth and sixth question, that they shall be performed according as the
Lord had promised them.

Thirdly, because without faith we cannot please God, nor obtain his promises,
and because our faith is weak; we must labor to confirm and strengthen our
faith in God and in his promises, that we may enjoy his favor, and receive his
promises.

Q. How may we strengthen our faith?

A. Three ways.

First, by reading and meditating upon the word of God.

Secondly, by meditating upon Gods fidelity.

Thirdly, by considering Gods power.

Q. How does the reading of the Scripture confirm our faith?

A. By considering these three things.

First, that the same word which begets faith. Romans 10.17. is sufficient
also to confirm and strengthen faith.

Secondly, that it is impossible, the word of God should fail. 1. Sam. 3.19.
Romans 9.6.

Thirdly, that heaven and earth shall sooner pass away, then the words of God
fail. Mat. 5.18. and 24.35. Luke 16.17.

Q. How does the consideration of Gods fidelity strengthen our faith?

A. Two ways.

First, the Scripture witnesses, that God is true and faithful in performing
what he speaks, whether he promise mercy, or threatens judgments concerning
his promised mercy, it is said, Psalm. 89.34. that he will not break his
covenant, nor alter the thing that is gone out of his lips: yea he says,
Esa. 54.10. that the mountains shall sooner remove out of their places, then
his covenant made with his Church shall fail, also that the night and the day
shall cease to be, rather then his codenant made to his Church should fail.
Ierem. 33.20. And though the Church fail in performing, yet God for his part
will not fail, Ezekiel. 16.60. Romans 3.3. for the gifts and calling of God are
without repentance. Romans 11.29. Whereupon Paul assures the Corinthians. 1.
Cor. 2.9. and the Thessalonians, 1 Thessalonians. 5.24. of their eternal salvation,
because God who had called them, is faithful.

And concerning the threatened and irreuocable judgments of God against
impenitent sinnets the Lord says thus. Zephan. 2.2.
Though Moses and Samuel stood before me, yet my mind could not be toward this
people. Jerem. 15.2. And in another place: Though these three men Noah, Daniel,
and Job were in it, (that is in Jerusalem) they should deliver but their own
souls by their righteousness. Ezekiel. 14.14. And in this case Samuel told Saul
that the strength (or externity, that is the God) of Israel will not lie, nor
repent. 1. Sam. 15.29.

Secondly, one example shows the faithfulness of God in performing his
promise: for Sara received strength to conceive seed, and was delivered of a
child, when she was past age, because she judged him faithful which had
promised. Heb. 11.11.

Q. How does the consideration of Gods power strengthen our faith?

A. Two ways.

First, the Scripture testifies that God does whatsoever he will, but he is in
one mind, and who can turn him, and what his soul desires, even that he
does. Job 23.13. And again, but our God is in the heaven, he has done
whatsoever he pleased. Psalm. 115.3. and 135.6.

Secondly, the example of Abraham shows it, for he at three several times
considering the omnipotent power of God, was confirmed and encouraged to
believe the promises of God.

First, when God promised to Abraham, that though he was then childlesse, and
without hope of children. Genesis 15.2. yet his seed should be as the stars of
heaven for multitude. Genesis 15.5. then Abraham above hope believed under hope,
that he should be the father of many nations. Romans 4.18.

Secondly, when God promised to Abraham being almost an hundereth years old,
that he should have a son by Sara his wise. Genesis 17.16. and 18.10, etc. then
did not he doubt of the promise of God through unbelief, but was strengthened
in the faith, and gave glory to God, being fully assured that he which had
promised was also able to do it. Romans 4.20.

Thirdly, when God commanded Abraham to offer up his son Isaac. Genesis 22.2.
Then Abraham offered up his only begotten son of whom it was said, that in
Isaak shall thy seed be called. Heb. 11.17. because he considered that God was
able to raise him up even from the dead. Heb. 11.19.

Then faith leaning upon Gods word, truth and power comfort the godly in
this present life at all times, and assures them of resurrection to
immortality at the day of judgment, as Job chap. 19.25. and David Psalm. 16.9.
openly confess.

The third Article of the doctrine of Baptism.
Question.

HOw will you declare this third Article?

A. Three ways.

First, by showing what baptism is.

Secondly, by showing what God does in baptism?

Thirdly, by showing what man does in baptism?

Q. What is Baptism?

A. It is the Sacrament of regeneration ( John 3.5.) by the washing of water
through the word ( Ephesians. 5.26.) and the renewing of the holy Ghost. Tit. 3.5.

Q. What does God in baptism?

A. God baptizeth or washes a man from his sins two ways: for as in the
time of the law there was a twofold circumcision, Romans 4.15. Romans 2. ver. 28.29.
one made inwardly in the heart without hands, ( Deuteronomy. 10.16. Jer. 4.4. Coloss.
2.11.) and another made with hands outwardly in the flesh. ( Genesis 17.11.) so
there is also a twofold baptism, one inward in the heart, and an other outward
in the flesh.

Q. What is the inward Baptism?

A. It is the inward purging, purifying, and cleansing of the heart from sin
by faith in Christ, for when God calls any effectually to sure and certain
hope of salvation by the outward ministry of his word, and by the inward
working of his spirit, then he begets in them a lively faith in Christ, and
so purifieth their hearts by faith, as Peter speaking of Cornelius and other
Gentiles whom he had converted and baptized, Act. 10.44. etc. witnesses, Act.
15.9. saying, And he put no difference between us and them, after that by
faith he had purified their hearts, for whosoever believes shall be saved.
Mark. 16.16. John 3.16. And the blood of Jesus Christ his Son cleanses us
from all sin, 1. John 1.17. And they that are once purged have no more
conscience of sin, Heb. 10.2. And Christ says: Blessed are the pure in
heart. Math. 5.8. for this inward baptism consists not in the putting (or
washing) away of the filth of the flesh, but in that a good conscience makes
request to God. 1. Pet. 3.^1.

This inward baptism is proper to the elect only, for no man knows it, but
he that has it. Apoc. 2.17. and a stranger does not intermeddle with his joy.
Prou. 14.10. The natural man perceives it not. 1. Cor. 2.14.

Q. What is the outward Baptism?

A. The answer may be delivered more fully in these four words.

First, it is the outward purging or washing away of the filth of the flesh
with water, and an outward Sacrament of regeneration, sealing up the faith of
him that before was inwardly baptized in his heart by faith in Christ, for as
the outward Sacrament of circumcision was unto Abraham, a seal of the
righteousness of faith which he had when he was uncircumcised. Romans 4.11.
even so outward baptism, is a seal of the faith of him that before was
inwardly baptized or purified in his heart by faith.

Secondly, outward baptism is common to all that are in the visible Church,
whether they be good corn or tares, wise or foolish virgins, sheep or goats,
true believers or dissembling hypocrites: for Ishmael was circumcised as well
as Isaak, and Esau as well as Jacob: Judas the traitor was baptized as well as
the other Apostles, and Simon Magus as well as the believing Samaritanes.

Thirdly, outward baptism is so necessary to all, and for all in the visible
Church, that the Lord threatens to cut him off from his people that despises
it. Genesis 17.14. because he has broken his covenant; for as the Lord offers
and promises mercy, so has he also ordained the means of mercy, and he that
despises the means, despises also the mercy. Wherefore as they that were
polluted and unclean, washed themselves in water, that they might be clean:
as Naaman the Sirian washed himself in Jordan that he might be cleansed from
his Leprosy: and as the blind man washed his eyes in the poole of Siloam that
he might receive his sight. Ioh. 9.7. so outward baptism must be used that we
may have the inward purification of the heart.

Fourthly, outward baptism is not so absolutely necessary, that whosoever
wants it, should also want the mercy of God for salvation: for it is not the
bare want of outward baptism which depriueth men of Gods mercy, but the
contempt or neglect thereof when God requires it and offers opportunity,
that we may have it. For then is the means of mercy despised, or little
regarded, but when conveniently it cannot be had, no danger comes to them that
want it, for the children which were borne to the Israelites, all those forty
years of their wanderings in the wilderness, were not circumcised, till they
came into the land of Canaan, as it appears. Josh. 5. verse. 2.5. The reason
thereof was, because the Israelites were not certain to rest any time whiles
they were in the wilderness, but whenever the pillar of cloud by day, and
of fire by night, removed then the Israelites, were to follow it as it
appears. Exodus 13.21. and 40.36. Number. 9.29. But if their children had been
circumcised, they could not have been fit and able to remove, or to have
been carried after the pillar of clouds before such time as they had been
whole again, as we may see by example of the Shechemites whom Simeon and Leui
slew when they were newly circumcised, and so unable to fight for their lives.
Genesis 34.25. And God would not have their children circumcised those forty
years in the wilderness, because it might have been dangerous to their lives:
for the Lord will have mercy and not sacrifice. Mat. 12.7. If a Christian woman
be delivered of a child among infidels, the baptizing of the child must be
deferred till there be opportunity.

Q. What does man in Baptism?

A. Man does three things.

First, he joyfully and thankefully receives the outward Sacrament of
baptism, as the seal of Gods covenant, and as the seal of his inward
baptism by faith.

Secondly, he is presently dead to sin, and presently alive, or raised up
unto newnes of life, as it may be showed thus in these two sentences.

First, they that are regenerate, and made new or spiritual men in Christ, are
members of his body, of his flesh, and of his bones. Ephesians. 5.30. and therefore:

1. They are crucified with him. Romans 6.6.

2. They are dead with him. Romans 6.8. Col. 2.20.

3. They are buried with him. Col. 2.12.

4. Quickened together with Christ. Col. 2.13. and 3.1.

Secondly, the Apostle says plainly. Rom 6. verse 3. know ye not that we
which have been baptized into Jesus Christ, have been baptized into his death.

Verse. 4. We are buried then with him by baptism into his death, that like as
Christ was raised up from the dead by the glory of the Father, so we also
should walk in newnes of life.

Verse. 5. For if we be grafted with him to the similitude of his death, even so
shall we be to the similitude of his resurrection. Hereupon, it is that the
Apostlea little after concludes, that we are dead to sin, but alive to God in
Jesus Christ our Lord. Romans 6.11. for they are passed from death to life. John
5.24.

Thirdly, they that are thus presently dead to sin and presently alive to God
in baptism, do for the rest of their life, afterward continually put off the
old man, till the body of sin be destroyed. Romans 6.6. and put on the new
man till they become perfect men in Christ. Ephesians. 4.13. And because the true
life of true religion stands in daily putting off the old man, and putting on
of the new man, it seems requisite to show in a word or twain what the old
man, and what the new man is.

The old man. Ephesians. 4.22. The old man.
called also the natural man. 1. Cor. 2.14. the flesh. Ioh. 3.6. and the body
of sin. Coloss. 2.11. Romans 6.6. consists in these four things.

1. Blindness in understanding. Ephesians. 4.18.

2. Frowardnes in will. 2. Pet. 3.5.

3. Boisterousnes in affection. Romans 1.26. Act. 7. verse. 54.57.

4. Disobedience in actions, Romans 1.29. Romans 1.18. Romans 2.8.

Some parts of the old man are mentioned. Gal. 5. ver. 19. adultery,
fornication; uncleanness, lasciuiousnes.

Verse. 20. Idolatry, witchcraft, hatred, variance, emulation, wrath, strife,
seditions, heresies.

Verse. 21. Envy, murders, drunkenness, gluttony, and such like.

Also these parts of the old man are mentioned. Col. 3. verse. 5. fornication,
uncleanness, inordinate affection, evil concupiscence, and covetousness.

Verse. 8. Wrath, anger, maliciousness, cursed speaking, filthy speaking.

And these. Ephesians. 4.31. bitterness, anger, wrath, crying, and evil speaking.

See more, Rom 1. verse. 29, 30. and 1. Cor. 6. ver. 9, 10. Tit. 3.3.

The mortifying, crucifying, subduing, killing, and forsaking of these and such
like, is the putting off of the old man.

The new man. The new man.
Ephesians. 4.24. called also the spiritual man. 1. Cor. 2.15. has;

1. Clear understanding, 1. Cor. 2. ver. 10.12.15.

2. A ready will Romans 7.18.

3. Sanctified affection. Romans 12.16. Col. 3.12.

4. Holy obedience. Romans 6.17.

Some parts of this new man are mentioned. Gal 5.

Verse 22. Love, joy, peace, long suffering, gentleness, goodness, faith.

Verse 23. Meekenes, temperance, and such like.

Also these parts of the new man are rehearsed. Col. 3.

Verse. 11. Tender mercy, kindness, humblenes of mind, meeknes, long
sufferings.

Verse 13. Forbearing one another, and forgiving one another, and such like.

He that after baptism follows these things, and all other such like,
puts on Christ. Gal. 3.27. and puts on the new man, which after God is
created in righteousness and true holiness. Ephs. 4.24.

And whiles true Christians endeavor daily to put off the old man, and to put
on the new man, there is a continual combat between the flesh and the
spirit, as the Apostle shows. Gal. 5.17.

The combat, which is in the natural man, is between reason guided by the
light of nature, and the will ouerswayed with the violence of affections.

Baptism thus briefly noted, is the very fountain of regeneration. Tit. 3.5.
wherein is the true death of the old man, and the true life of the new man, the
old man daily decaying till he be destroyed, the new man daily growing till he
come to perfection in Christ. For as when the Hen sits upon her eggs and
warmeth them, the egg is daily more and more corrupted, and the chicken formed
and quickened till he has life and perfection; even so when the spirit of God
warmeth the hearts of those that are regenerate and baptized, the old man daily
dies and is destroyed, and the new man is quickened till he become a perfect
man in Christ.

And when the power of baptism was better known and practiced in the purer
times before contentions bred herefies, and before Popish darkness
ouer-shadowed religion, it brought forth much holiness of life in the
Churches with great fear and reverence, which Satan envying sowed these two
sorts of tares in the Church to hinder the growth thereof.

First, some professed so much holiness that they said, that if a man sin
openly after baptism, he may not be received into the visible Church again,
and be counted to be of the society of the Saints.

This heresy partly then was, and yet is held of diverse.

Nouatus at Rome held it about the year after Christ 220.

Meletius maintained the same in Egypt about the year 286.

The Donatist in Afrike favored this opinion about the year 298.

The Luciferians in Sardinia were infected with this opinion.

The Anabaptists at this day differ little from it.

But to answer those men in a word.

1. First, they dream of a present perfection after baptism, for which there
is no warrant.

2. Secondly they consider not that Paul says, Galat. 5.17. there is a
continual combat between the flesh and the spirit in them which are
regenerate and baptized.

3. Thirdly they consider not that there is remission of sin after baptism,
as John says, if any man sin we have an advocate with the Father, etc. 1.
John 2. verse 1.

Secondly, other fearing to sin after baptism, would not be baptized till
they supposed death was at their doors to call them out of this life.

But these consider not:

1. That so they may die unbaptized.

2. That they incur Gods displeasure, Genesis 17.14.

3. That they refuse to be Christian soldiers, to fight Christ's battle till
it be to late.

4. That there is remission of sin after baptism. Zachar. 13.1. and 1. Ioh.
2. ver. 1.2.

5. That they defer and neglect the means of grace.

The fourth Article of imposition of hands.
Question.

HOw will you declare the meaning of this fourth article?

A. Three ways.

First, by showing the diverse use of laying on of hands.

Secondly, by showing what is meant in this place by imposition of hands.

Thirdly, by showing the practice of this imposition of hands.

Q. How has imposition of hands been used?

A. Two ways.

First, men by Gods appointment have used by imposition of hands to remove and
put from themselves to another that which was grievous and burdensome unto
them, as for example, when any man sinned in the time of the Law, and was
separated from God after a sort, and for the time, that he might put away this
burden of sin from himself, and be reconciled to God again, he was to
bring his sacrifice and to lay his hands on the head of the beast, that was to
be sacrificed, and so lay upon the beast the curse of the Law, or the
punishment due to him for his sin as it is generally noted, Leuit. 1.4. and
particularly when sin was committed.

1. By the high Priest. Leuit. 4. ver. 3.4.

2. The whole congregation. Leuit. 4. verse. 13.15.

3. The ruler. Leu. 4. verse 22.24.

4. A private person. Leuit. 4. verse 27.29.

When the first borne sons of the children of Israel being chosen of God.
Exodus 13.2. to minister to him in holy things: Exodus 19.22. and 24.5. were by
Gods appointment to transfer this burdensome function from themselves to the
Levites, they did it by imposing their hands upon them. Number. 8.10. but whether
this example may be referred to this place, or to the second which now
follows, let the wise judge.

Secondly, men by Gods appointment have used by imposition of hands to confer
grace upon others, even the graces of God; for sometimes God himself bestows
his graces upon whom he will, when he will, and how he will.

And sometimes God makes superiors to be as it were his treasurers, or
stewards to confer and bestow his graces upon their inferiors, as he
appoints them. And superiors being Gods treasurers or stewards have by Gods
direction conferred Gods graces upon their inferiors diverse and sundry ways,
by diverse means, of which means it may suffice to mention three only.

First, by annoynting them with that holy oil mentioned. Exodus 30.23.
wherewith were anointed these three persons.

1. Priests: Exodus 30.30. and 29.7. Levy. 8.12.

2. Kings. 1. Samuel: 16. verse. 1.13.

3. Prophets. 1. Kings. 19.16. Psalm. 105.15.

But this anointing with material holy oil was a type of the graces of the
holy Ghost, was used in the time of the Law only, and now cease under the
Gospel, for Christ our only and eternal high Priest, was anointed with the
holy Ghost: Act. 10.38. without measure: John 3.34. and of his fullness all we
receive. John. 1.16.

Secondly, by prayer, superiors have bestowed Gods blessings upon their
inferiors. Thus Isaac bestowed the blessing upon Jacob, Genesis 27.30. etc. and
Jacob blessed his sons, Genesis 49.

And the Priests ordinarily blessed the congregation of Israel at the end of
Gods worship, when they dismissed the assembly, Numb. 6.24,

Thirdly, superiors bestow the grace of the holy Ghost upon their inferiors,
both by prayer and imposition of hands. And where laying on of hands is only
mentioned, there we must also understand that prayer is used.

And this imposition of hands with prayer, is two ways to be considered.

First, as it belongs to some special persons in a peculiar sort.

Secondly, as it belongs to all Christians generally.

The special persons on whom hands have been laid in some special manner,
and for some special cause, are these:

First, the two sons of Joseph, on whom Jacob laid his hands, and blessed them,
Genesis 48.14.

Secondly, Joshua on whom the Lord commanded Moses to lay his hands, Numb.
27.18. when he was to succeed Moses in the government of the Israelites. And
so Moses laid his hands upon him, and gave him a charge, Number. 27.23. And Joshua
the son of Nun was full of the spirit of wisdom, for Moses had laid his
hands upon him, Deuteronomy. 34.9.

Thirdly, those that have been called to any public function in the Church,
have been thereunto appointed by laying on of hands and prayer.

1 When the holy Ghost said, Separate me Barnabas and Saul for the work
whereunto I have called them, Acts 13.2. Then the Church which was at Antioch
fasted and prayed, and laid their hands upon them, and sent them away, Acts
13.3.

2 When the disciples had chosen those seven Deacons, then the Apostles prayed
and laid their hands on them, Acts 6.6.

3 When Paul and Barnabas ordained Elders in the Churches which were at Lystra,
Iconium and Antioch, they prayed with fasting, Acts 14.23. And laid hands on
them, as it is probable: first, because the word here used Cheirotonea
signifies to ordain, by imposition of hands: Secondly, because Ordination was
used with Imposition of hands, as it appears, Acts 6.6. and 1. Tim. 5.22.

4 Timotheus chosen to be an Evangelist, Acts 16.3. and 2. Tim. 4.5. was
ordained with imposition of hands, 1. Tim. 4.14. and 2. Tim. 1.6.

Thus much for imposition of hands upon some special persons.

Secondly, then imposition of hands belongs to all Christians, that after
Baptism hands be laid upon them, as hereafter, now it shall be showed. For
the former, imposition of hands upon some special persons, belongs not to
this place, Heb. 6.2. but that which is common unto all Christians.

Q. You have showed, that imposition of hands has been diversely used, and
that to this fourth Article belongs, that only imposition of hands which is
common to all Christians: proceed therefore, and show what this imposition of
hands is which belongs to all Christians?

A. It is an ordinance of Christ in the new Testament, that al Christians
baptized might by imposition of hands and prayer, receive either the outward
extraordinary gifts, or else the inward ordinary graces of the holy ghost; as
the practice will fully show

Q. Show me then what the practice thereof has been, and is or should be?

A. This may be showed fully in four several times.

First, in the days of the Apostles.

Secondly, in the pure times following for the space of four hundred years,
or thereabouts.

Thirdly, in the time of Popish darkness.

Fourthly, in these last times since God restored to his Churches the light of
the Gospel more gloriously

Q. What was the practice of this imposition of hands in the Apostles days?

A. Those which in the Apostles days were converted, either from Iudaisme, to
Christianisme, or from Gentilisme to the faith of Christ received after
baptism the outward extraordinary gifts of the holy Ghost by prayer and
imposition of hands; as by these four examples following it may plainly
appear.

First, when Peter had converted three thousand at one Sermon, he promised the
extraordinary gifts of the holy Ghost, if they would repent, and be baptized,
saying: Repent and be baptized every one of you, in the name of Jesus Christ,
for the remission of sins, and ye shall receive the gift of the holy Ghost,
Acts 2.38. And that this promise was to be performed by prayer and imposition
of hands, the two following examples do show.

Secondly, when Philip had converted the Samaritans. Act. 8.5. etc. then Peter
and John sent by the Apostles from Jerusalem. Act. 8.14. prayed for them, and
laid their hands upon them, and they received the holy Ghost. Acts 8.15. who
when they were come down, prayed for them, that they might receive the holy
Ghost, ver. 17. then laid they their hands on them, and they received the holy
Ghost.

Thirdly, those twelve disciples at Ephesus, whom Apolloes as it seemed had
baptized a little before, received the extraordinary gifts of the holy Ghost,
when Paul prayed for them and laid his hands upon them. Acts 19.6. And when
Paul had laid his hands upon them, the holy Ghost came on them, and they spoke
with tongues, and prophesied.

Fourthly, the Apostle writes thus to the Galatians, this only would I know
of you, received ye the spirit, by the works of the law, or by the hearing of
faith. Gal. 3.2. In which words it is manifest that the Galatians received the
spirit; that is to say, the extraordinary gifts of the spirit, when the Gospel
was preached unto them, and when they believed in Christ. And though in this
place, there be no mention of prayer and imposition of hands, yet the two
former examples show that the Apostles ordinarily used prayer and imposition of
hands, when they gave those extraordinary gifts of the holy Ghost. Act. 8.18.

And if there be a scruple or question in any man to doubt or demand, how it
came to pass that Cornelius, and his company received the extraordinary gifts
of the holy Ghost, before they were baptized, and without prayer and imposition
of hands. Acts 10.44. the answer is, that though Christ commanded his Apostles
to preach the Gospel to every creature, without distinction of Jews or
Gentiles, Mark. 16.15. yet neither Peter understood this. Act. 10. verse. 14.19,
20. nor the other Apostles and brethren of the Jews at Jerusalem. Act. 11.
verse 1, 2.19. And therefore whiles Peter was preaching to Cornelius and his
company it pleased God to send those extraordinary gifts of the holy Ghost upon
Cornelius and his company, that Peter and all other Jews might know that God
had now received the Gentiles also into his fanour, into his Church as Peter
and other Jews acknowledge. Act. 11.17.

And in this place we must observe and remember, that these extraordinary
gifts of the holy Ghost served (as other works miracles did also,) for these
three purposes especially.

First, to confirm the doctrine of the Gospel, which at the first began to be
spoken by the Lord, and was confirmed to us by them that heard him, God also
bearing them witness, both with signs and wonders, and with diverse miracles,
and gifts of the holy Ghost, according to his own will, Heb. 2. verse. 3, 4.

Secondly, to prove the Apostles to be sent immediately from God to preach
the Gospel and to plant Churches, for by signs Paul proves himself to be an
Apostle. 2. Cor. 12.12. Truly the signs of an Apostle were wrought among you
in all patience in signs and wonders and mighty deeds.

Thirdly, to make it manifest, that those were Gods peculiar people, to whom
he gave those extraordinary gifts of the holy Ghost; thus Peter knew that
Cornelius, and those that were with him, being all of them Gentiles, were
acceptable to God, as he confesses, Act. 15.8. and other believing It was
acknowledge, Act. 11.18.

Q. What was the practice of imposition of hands in those four hundredth years
after the Apostles days?

A. When those extraordinary outward gifts of the holy Ghost ceased, after
that they had confirmed the doctrine, justified the Apostles, and enlarged the
Churches, then those baptized and catechized persons, on whom the Governors of
the Church laid their hands and prayed for them, received the ordinary inward
graces of the holy Ghost, in a greater measure, for if any man have not the
Spirit of Christ, he is none of his, Romans 8.9. See 2. Corint. 13.5. Galat. 6.

And they that are thoroughly acquainted with the story and state of the
Church, can make a full declaration hereof for these four hundred years:
but, as much heat cannot be received from a little fire, nor much water drawn
out of a little fountain: so must I content my self with a few testimonies to
manifest the practice for these four hundred years; and namely with these
five:

1 First, Tertullianus lib. de baptismo says, Ann. 21^
debinc manus imponitur, etc. that is, after baptism there follows
imposition of hands, and prayer is made to GOD, that they may receive the holy
Ghost, that is, more grace; for when the Elect are baptized, they receive the
holy Ghost, but when they have learned their Catechism, hands are laid upon
them, and prayer is made for them, that they may receive increase of grace.

2 Secondly, Ann. 250
Cyprianus writing to Iahacanus says thus of imposition of hands after
baptism: Quod nunc quoque apud nos geritur, etc. that is, Which thing we also
observe at this day, that they which have been baptized before, are afterward
offered by the Governors of the Church, and by our prayers, and laying on of
hands, they receive the holy Ghost.

3 Thirdly, Ann. 390
Hieronymus aduersus Luciferianos. cap. 4. writes thus: An nescis etiam
ecclesiarum hunc esse morem, etc. that is, Know thou not that this is the
custom of the churches, to lay hands on them which were baptized before, and
so prayer is made that they may receive the holy Ghost. Do thou require where
this is written? It is written in the Acts of the Apostles. And i^ there were
no Scripture for it, the general consent of the Churches might suffice.

4 Fourthly, Ann. 39 9.
Augustinus libr. 3. cap. 16. de baptismo contra Donatistas, showing the
difference between the extraordinary gifts of the holy Ghost: which were
given to the baptized in the Apostles days, and the ordinary inward graces
which were given afterward in the ages following, by laying on of hands and
prayer, says thus: Neque enim temporalibus and sensibilibus miraculis, etc.
that is, The holy Ghost is not now adays given extraordinarily, as formerly it
was given by imposition of hands, seeing those extraordinary gifts served then
for confirmation of the Gospel, and for enlargement of the Church. For who
does now expect, that they on whom hands are laid, that they may receive the
holy Ghost, should suddenly begin to speak Languages. But it is understood
by the bond of peace, that divine charity is secretly and inuisibly inspired
into their hearts, that they may say, because the love of God is shed in our
hearts by the holy Ghost which is given us, etc. also Augustinus lib. 15. cap.
26. de Trinitate witnesses the continuance of this cu^^ome of laying on of
hands, ascribing the grace rather to prayer.

5. Fifthly, Eucherius cited by the Centuriators of Magdeburg. Centur. 5 cap. 6.
Col. 657. says thus: the party baptized is offered as a burnt sacrifice, when
by imposition of hands he receives the holy Ghost.

Q. What was thirdly done in the time of Popery?

A. In the ages following, this divine ordinance of confirmation by imposition
of hands and prayer, was diverse ways abused by the Papists, as all other
things were.

First, this imposition of hands was made greater then baptism by Pope John
the third of that name, as Bale writes in his life.

Secondly, the Papists ignorant of inward grace anointed the forehead of him
that was confirmed with their holy oil, as the Centuriators write. Centur. 7.
cap. 6. Col. 148.

Thirdly, Godfathers were required at confirmation, when the children to be
confirmed were able to answer for themselves. Centur. 9. cap. 6. Col. 237.

Fourthly, the Papists made confirmation a sacrament. Petr. Lomb. lib. 4. dict.
7. Bellar. tom. 3. de confirmatione, cap. 2.

Q. What was fourthly done in these last times, when it pleased God to deliver
his Church out of Popish thraldom, and restore the light of the Gospel again?

A. The Lord raised up many worthy men which discovered the false doctrines and
practices of popery, and reduced the ordinances of Christ to their former
integrity, and amongst the rest this also of confirmation: as namely, Calvin.
instit. lib. 4. cap. 19. sect. 4. and in his Commentaries upon Heb. 6.2. Peter
Martyr in his Common Places. Class. 3. cap. 8. sect. 14. and Chemnicius, who in
his second part of the examination of the Tridentine Council. rehearses six
points of this confirmation as they were propounded in the assembly at
Ratisphone in the year. 1541. Of which assembly Sleuian also makes mention in
the latter end of his thirteenth book of Commentaries, and in the beginning of
his fourteenth book, and the six points of confirmation then propounded, and
since rehearsed by Chemnicius, are these.

1. First, the child that was baptized in his infancy, and now having learned
his Catechism, is to ^e confirmed, is admonished how and to what end he was
baptized, how then God sealed up unto him the covenant and promise of peace and
grace, and how he himself renounced Satan, professed his faith, and promised
obedience.

2. Secondly, the child in his own person, and before the whole Church made
public profession of the dectrine, and of his own faith.

3. Thirdly, the child is questioned concerning some chief points of Christian
religion, whereunto he answers, and if he understand them not sufficiently,
he is better instructed therein.

4. Fourthly, the child is further admonished, that in this his profession he
would further declare that he dissenteth from all heathen, heretical and
profane opinions.

5. Fifthly, he is seriously admonished and exhorted out of the word of God, to
persevere in the covenant of baptism in the doctrine, and faith which he has
professed.

6. Sixthly, there are hands laid upon the child, and earnest prayer is made to
God, that he would give him his holy Spirit for his further confirmation in
that doctrine and faith, and this prayer is not made in vain, because it has
the promise of God.

The fifth Article of the resurrection of the dead.
Question.

What say you of this fifth article, of the resurrection from the dead.

A. Two things.

First, what the resurrection from the dead is.

Secondly, what use we may make of it.

Q. What is the resurrection of the dead?

A. Because death goes before the resurrection of the dead, and life before
death, therefore these three things may be observed.

First, what life is.

Secondly, what death is.

Thirdly, what resurrection is.

Q. What is life, or what say you of life?

A. There is a double or a twofold life: one is called a natural life, the
other a spiritual life, whereupon it comes to pass, that there is a
natural and a spiritual man. 1. Cor. 2. verse. 14, 15.

Q. What is that which you call a natural life?

A. It may be perceived best by the effects thereof in the three diverse sorts
of lining creatures.

1. First, it is that which makes grass, herbs, and trees to live, grow, and
flourish.

2. Secondly, it is that which gives life and sense to all brute creatures, as
to fishes in the waters, to the fowls of the air, and to beasts of the earth;
for these do not only live, grow and flourish as the grass, herbs and
plants, with trees do, but they have sense and feeling also, which the grass,
herbs, plants, and trees want.

3. Thirdly, it is that which gives unto man not only life, as unto herbs
and trees, and sense as unto brute creatures, but also reason or understanding,
which the two former sorts of creatures want, and whereby man far excels
them. And it is the soul of man that gives him this natural life. And of
this natural life in these three sorts of creatures, it seems Paul spoke at
Athens. Act. 17. verse. 25. seeing he (that is God) gives to all, life, and
breath, and all things, ver. 28. for in him we live, and move, and have our
being.

Q. What is that which you call a spiritual life?

A. It is a supernatural life which God gave to Adam in his innocence, over
and besides his natural life.

And that Adam in his first creation, and before his fall, had, besides his
natural life, a supernatural and a spiritual life, it may appear by these
four reasons.

First, after his fall he lost immediately this spiritual and supernatural
life, whereas he had his natural life, 930. years afterward. Genesis 5.5.

Secondly, before his fall he had the tree of life for a sign or Sacrament of
this supernatural life, but after his fall he was deprived of it. Genesis 3.22.

Thirdly, all Adams posterity, which are not tegenerate, want this
supernatural and spiritual life, which is called the life of God. Ephesians. 4.18.
being alienated from the life of God, etc.

Fourthly, this spiritual and supernatural life, is restored to Gods elect
again in Christ, (who is our life. Col. 4.3.) when they are effectually called
and regenerate.

Now this supernatural life of man, is the fruition of Gods comfortable and
gracious presence, as David says, Psalm. 36.9. for with thee is the well of
life, and in thy light, shall we see light.

Wherefore, as the soul is the life of the body. Genesis 2.7. even so the gracious
presence of God is the supernatural life of man.

Q. You have showed what life is, tell me also what death is?

A. Death is the deprivation of life, or the separation and taking away of that
thing which gives life: as for example, take the soul from the body, and the
body dies, for the body without the spirit is dead. Jam. 2.26.

And separate the comfortable and gracious presence of God from man, and man
dies, that is, loses his supernatural life.

There is nothing that separateth Gods gracious presence from man but sin, as
Esaias says, your iniquities have separated between you and your God. Esa.
59.2. and Paul says, all have sinned, and are deprived of the glory of God.
Romans 3.23. and in an other place he says, that the unbelieving Gentiles are
without God in the world. Ephesians. 2.12

Now it is manifest hereby that there are two sorts or kinds of death.

The first, is a spiritual death, which is the loss of the supernatural
life, when man is deprived of Gods comfortable and gracious presence. And the
death comes upon men at two several times. First, when Adam sinned all
mankind in him: for then all men dyed, as the Apostle says. In Adam all die.
1. Cor. 15.22. and are alienated from the life of God. Ephesians. 4.18. And this is
the first spiritual death and may so be called. Secondly, at the day of
judgment, when all the reprobate only shall be cast out of Gods gracious
presence, into utter darkness, and further be punished with everlasting
torments. And this is called the second death. Apoc. 21.8.

The second is a natural death, which is the separation of the soul from the
body, when the body dies and returns to the earth again.

Q. Now you have showed what life is, and what death is, show also what the
resurrection of the dead is?

A. Resurrection of the dead is nothing else but restitution to life again.
And man is restored from death to life at two times, and so there are two
resurrections.

The first resurrection is from the spiritual death, unto the supernatural
life again.

And this first resurrection is of the elect only, when they are raised up from
the death of sin, (into which they fell in Adam) unto the life of grace and
righteousness, which is done in this life, at the time of their effectual
calling, conversion, and regeneration according to the words of Christ, John
5.25. Verily, verily, I say unto you, the hour shall come and now is, when the
dead (in sin) shall hear the voice of the Son of God: and they that hear
it shall live. And the Apostle says thus, awake thou that sleep, and arise
from the dead, and Christ shall give thee light. Ephesians. 5.14.

And this is called the first resurrection. Apoc. 20.6.

The second resurrection is of the bodies of all men out of their graves, and
from their natural death, which shall be at the great and general day of
judgment. Dan. 12.2. And many of them that slept in the dust of the earth
shall awake, some to everlasting life, and some to shame and everlasting
contempt, so says Christ, Ioh. 5.28. Marvel not at this: for the hour is
coming in the which all that are in the ground shall hear his voice, and
shall come forth, they that have done good, unto the resurrection of life, and
they that have done evil unto the resurrection of death.

Q. Now that you have showed that there are two resurrections from the dead,
tell me which of them is meant in this fifth Article?

A. In the fifth Article we must understand that the Apostle speaks of the
second resurrection which is of the bodies of all men out of their graves, and
therefore of the bodies of the faithful at the day of judgment. And that this
Article is to be taken and understood of the second resurrection of the Saints,
and not of the first, these three reasons show.

First, the first resurrrection was necessarily understood in the two first
Articles, for there cannot be repentance from dead works, nor faith in God
without effectual calling and regeneration, or rising from the death of sin
to the life of grace.

Secondly, the first resurrection goes always before baptism in conuerts, to
whom this Catechism was more especially at that time directed.

Thirdly, this resurrection in this fifth Article, follows after baptism, and
shall be accomplished at the last day of judgment.

Q. Now that you have spoken of the resurrection from the dead, what use will
you make of it?

A. Because the article is understood as the other articles also are of the
faithful, it may serve to teach them these three things.

1. First, not to fear any thing that may happen to them in this life, as
death, persecution, calamity, etc. Death is not fearful to the faithful
because it is but a sleep, it is written of Steven when he was stoned, that
he fell a sleep. Act. 7.60. Paul says that the faithful being dead do
sleep. 2. These. 4.13. Esaias says they rest in their beds, Esai. 57.2.
wherefore the Graecians called the place of burial (...) coemit erium, or
dormitorium in Latin, that is asleeping place.

Persecution is not to be feared because it touches but the body only Math.
10.28. fear not them which kill the body, etc.

Adversity and calamity which happens to men in this life, is not to be
feared because it is but temporary, and the resurrection will be joyful; thus
Job in the midst of his calamity comforted himself with assured hope of
resurrection from the dead. Job 19.25. for I know my redeemer lives, etc.

2. Secondly to prepare themselves faithfully to discharge the duties of their
calling, and wait continually for the appearing of Christ to judgment. For so
Christ having foretold the time of his second coming exhorts, Math. 24.45.
who then is a faithful and wise servant, etc.

3. Thirdly, to confute the errors of them which first denied the resurrection
of the dead, as did the Saduces, Math. 22.23. Act. 23.8. as did Epicures and
Atheists. Eccles. 3.19. as did Altades the 12. King of Assyria, Berosus lib. 5.
and some at Corinthus, 1. Cor. 15. verse. 12.32. secondly, said the resurrection
was already past, as did Hymeneus and Philetus. 2. Tim. 2.18.

The sixth Article of eternal judgment.
Question.

What will you say concerning this six Article which is of eternal
judgment?

A. Three things.

First, how it is called an eternal judgment.

A. Three things.

First, how it is called an eternal judgment.

Secondly, I will note four things concerning this eternal judgment.

Thirdly, some use to be made of this doctrine.

Q. How or why is this judgment called eternal?

A. The reason hereof will appear, if we consider these three sorts of Gods
judgments and compare them together, even these three.

The first is, a conditional judgment threatened.

The second, is a temporal judgment executed.

The third is, an eternal judgment pronounced, and executed or performed.

The conditional judgment, Condition.
is that which God threateneth with condition of repentance, that except the
people against whom he threateneth judgment do repent, he will power his
threatened judgment upon them, but if the people repent, the Lord will turn
away his judgment from them, so the Lord himself tells us. Ierm. 18.7. At
what instant I shall speak concerning a nation and concerning a kingdom, to
pluck up and to pull down and to destroy it. verse. 8. If that nation against
whom I have pronounced, turn from their evil, I will repent of the evil that
I thought to to do unto them. The judgments which God threatens generally
against the transgressors of His Law. Leuiticus 26. verse 14. etc.
Deuteronomie, 18. verse 15. etc. contain in them a condition of repentance as
every one may see that reads those two chapters.

The Prophet Jonah threatened a conditional judgment against Nineueh that
within forty days it should be destroyed. Temporal.
Jonah 3.4. And that this judgment was denounced conditionally it appears in
that the people repented. Jonah 3.5. And in that the Lord turned away that
judgment. Ion. 3.10. Christ also shows us that some of Gods judgments are
conditional, saying, except ye repent, ye shall all likewise perish. Luke
13.3.

2 The temporal judgment is, that which God executes upon his disobedient
people, when they do not repent at the hearing of his conditional judgments
denounced against them. For then the Lord makes a decree, Zephan. 2.2. that he
will not turn away his threatened judgment, no not if Moses and Samuel should
entreat him by earnest prayer, Iere. 15.1. and if Noah, Daniel, and Job were
among those impenitent sinners, they should deliver but their own souls by
their righteousness, Ezech. 14.14. And yet this irreuocable judgment is but
temporal; for when the Lord has executed it, then does he in mercy return
to his people again with great compassion. When the Prophet Esayas cap. 8. etc.
had generally denounced the captivity of the Jews in Babylon (which
afterward Jeremias cap. 25. described more particularly) and other calamities
which they were to endure afterward til Christ's first coming in the flesh; he
showed that judgment, and those calamities should be but temporal and have an
end, saying, Esaias 40. verse 1. Comfort, comfort ye my people, says your God.
Verse 2. Speak ye comfortably to Jerusalem, and cry unto her, that her
warfare is accomplished, that her iniquity is pardoned, for she has received
of the Lords hand double for all her sins; and in the rest of his prophecy,
from chap. 40. to the end, he comfort the Jews with promises of
deliverance by Cyrus out of Babylon, as chap. 45.1. and by Christ out of
miseries, as chap. 54. The flood in the days of Noah, was but a temporal
judgment, for afterward the Lord restored the world again, Genesis 9.

3 The eternal judgment notes three things; first, Eternal.
the great and last day of judgment; secondly, the eternal sentence that then
shall be pronounced upon the Elect for eternal salvation, and upon the
reprobate for eternal condemnation; thirdly, the eternal execution or
performance of the sentence then pronounced to give everlasting life and
happiness to the godly, and to punish the wicked with everlasting torments.

And this is the eternal judgment mentioned in this sixth Article, and
specially applied to the godly for their everlasting comfort, that whiles they
are in this vale of misery, they should comfort themselves with continual
expectation of this eternal judgment.

Q. What be those four things which you said you would observe concerning this
eternal judgment?

A. First, the certainty thereof which may appear.

1 Because the Scripture says, that God has appointed a day, in the which he
will judge the world in righteousness, Acts 17.31.

2 Because GOD is the Judge of all the earth, Genesis 18.25. and therefore it is
without doubt, that he will certainly judge all the world.

3 Because all men must be judged, we shall all stand before the judgment
seat of Christ, Romans 14.10.

Secondly, the time thereof, which is;

1 Foretold in the Scripture, Matthew. 24.

2 To be searched out and desired.

1 The time of this eternal judgment is foretold, first, by Christ, secondly,
by Paul, thirdly, by John.

1 Christ requested by his disciples, foretold this eternal judgment, which
shall be at his second coming, and that twice over, Matthew. 24.

First, he foretells them of three things which should come to pass, before
his second coming, which are these:

1 Of the beginning of sorrows, as he calls them, verse. 8. that is, of
false Christ's: verse. 5. of watres. verse. 6. of famine. verse. 7.

2. Of the ten persecutions, as it seems which began under Nero, and
continued until the days of Constantinus the great, verse. 9.

3. Of the public and free liberty of the Gospel, that should be under
Constantinus the great. verse. 14.

Secondly he fore tells them again of three other things that should also
come to pass before his second coming, that is, 1. of the destruction of
Jerusalem. ver. 15.2. of false Prophets as it were of those heriticks which
arose in the Church after for along time. verse 23.3. of Popery. verse. 29.
for by the Sun we may understand the word of God, by the Moon the Church; by
the Stars, the Doctors that fell from the truth; and by the powers of
heaven, the truth and life of pure religion.

Thus we presume to show what may be the meaning of the Christ's prophecy in
that Chapter, with submission to the censure of the learned and religious.

And after these things thus foretold are come to pass, then will Christ come
the second time to this eternal judgment. verse. 30.

2. Paul withstanding false teachers, which said that the second coming of
Christ was at hand, tells the Thessalonians of three things that must come to
pass before Christ came to Judgment, 2. These. 2.

First, that there must be an apostasy and falling away. verse. 3.

Secondly, that that wicked man of sin, that is the Pope of Rome, must be
reucaled. verse. 3.8. which was done about 600. years after Christ.

Thirdly, that that man of sin, the Pope of Rome must be consumed with the
spirit of Christ's mouth, verse. 8. that is, by the preaching of the word, as
we now see he is, and has been for these 300. years last past continually.

3. John the Apostle in the book of the revelation. Chap. 4. etc. does
plentifully foretell what shall come to pass before Christ's second coming,
that the diligent reading and true understanding of the prophecy may show how
near we are to this eternal judgment, though we may not search after the
day and hour of his coming, Math. 24.36.

2. This time of Christ's coming to this eternal judgment, thus foretold,
ought to be searched out, and longed for of all true Christians, as Jacob
waiting for the land of Canaan (which was a type of the kingdom of heaven, and
which God had promised to Abraham, after 430. years were expired. Genesis 15.13.
Exodus 12.40. Gal. 3.17.) required of Joseph that he should not bury him in
Egypt, but carry him into the land of Canaan. Genesis 47.29.

As Joseph took an oath of his brethren, that God brought them into the land
of Canaan they should carry his bones with them. Genesis 50.25. As the Jews
waited for their promised deliverance out of 70. years Captivity in Babylon.
Dan. 9. Psalm. 101. As Abraham, Ioh. 8.56. Prophets and Kings, Luke. 10.24.1.
Pet. 1.10. and the Angels. 1. Pet. 1.12. waited for Christ's first coming: so
should we wait for his second coming. Tit. 2.13. looking for that blessed
hope, and the glorious appearing of the great God and our Savior Jesus Christ.

3. Place.
Thirdly, the place thereof which is.

First, where Christ shall judge all the world, that is, in the air, for when
Christ shall so descend, as he ascended. Act. 2.11. then we which are aline,
and remain, shall be caught up together with them (that is the dead) in the
clouds, to meet the Lord in the air. 1 Thessalonians. 4.17.

Secondly, where all persons judged, shall be, that is, some in heaven above,
and some in hell below, for Solomon thus distinguishes these two places.
Prou. 15.24. The way of life is above to the wise, that he may depart from hell
beneath. And heaven every where in the Scripture is said to be above, and it
may suffice to say, hell is beneath, without any further inquire of it, till
we find a more special place of hell noted in the Scripture,

Fourthly, A sentence.
the judgment then to be given, or sentene then to be pronounced, which is set
down. Mat. 25. verse. 34. Come ye blessed of my Father, inherit the kingdom
prepared for you from the foundation of the world. verse. 41. Depart from me ye
cursed into everlasting fire, prepared for the devil and his Angels. Then
shall the godly be ever in glory with Christ where he is. 1 Thessalonians. 4.17. Ioh.
14.3. Apoc. 21, and 22.

Then shall the wicked ever be with the devil where he is, in utter
darkness, where shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth, Math. 22.13. in the
lake which burns with fire and brimstone, Apoc. 21.8. where their worm dies
not, and the fire is not quenched. Mark. 9.44.

Q. You have showed which is the eternal judgment, and four things belonging
to it, what use will you now make of it?

A. Fine instructions for the faithful, to whom this article is properly
applied in this Catechism.

1. First, that the faithful continually wait for the coming of Christ to
his eternal judgment that then they may inherit glory, he that hops for
any earthly benefit of liberty, lands, goods, or such like, waits
continually for the time when he shall enjoy his desire, and counts the
years, months, and days: yea sometimes the son thinks his father lives
too long, because he daily desires to inherit his fathers possessions, and
there is a crown of righteousness laid up for all them that love the
appearing of Christ. 2. Tim. 4.8. then the faithful shall be delivered from
all those miseries of continual labor, of many infirmities of outward
afflictions, and of temporal or natural death, which they are subject to in
this life, then shall they enjoy the kingdom of heaven, the presence of God,
the society of Saints and Angels, the creature waits for this time, Romans
8.19. The faithful wait for this time, Romans 8.23. The holy Angels wait for
this time, for as they waited for Christ's first coming. 1. Pet. 1.12. so we
suppose they look for his second coming. The Saints departed out of this life
long for it. Apoc. 6.10. David waits for it. Psalm. 16.9. and 17.15. Therefore
we ought continually to wait for Christ's coming.

2. Secondly, that the faithful, who are brethren in Christ, and fellow heirs
of the kingdom of heaven, ought to love one another, as the Apostle wills.
Romans 13.8. Owe no man any thing, but to love one another.

3. Thirdly, that the faithful use all good means, which God has ordained to
further them to the attainement of everlasting life, for whatsoever a man
desires, he will endeavor to use all good means whereby he may attain unto
it.

4. Fourthly, that the faithful patiently bear all adversity that happens
to them in this present lise, looking unto Jesus the author and finisher of
our faith, who for the joy that was set before him, endured the cross,
despised the shame, and is set down at the right hand of the throne of God.
Heb. 12.2. And considering that our light affliction which is but for a moment,
works for us a far more exceeding and eternal weight of glory. 2. Cor.
4.17.

5. Fifthly, that the faithful be constant, bold, and courageous, always to
confess and profess this their hope of eternal glory before men, whenever
occasion requires, being ready always to give an answer to every man that
asks a reason of the hope they have in God. 1. Pet. 3.1. and say with the
Apostle. Romans 8.31. If God be for us, who can be against us, etc. then will
Christ also confess them before his Father which is in heaven. Math. 10.32.

FINIS.

