Apophthegmes NEW AND OLD. COLLECTED BY THE RIGHT HONORABLE, Francis LO.
VERVLAM, Viscount St. ALBAN.

LONDON, Printed for Hanna Barret, and Richard Whittaker, and are to be sold at
the Kings Head in Paul's Churchyard. 1625.

Apophthegmes new and old.
IVlius Caesar, did write a Collection of Apophthegmes, as appears in an
Epistle of Cicero. I need say no more, for the worth, of a Writing, of that
nature. It is pity his Book is lost: for I imagine, they were collected, with
Judgment, and Choice: whereas that of Plutarch, and Stobaeus, and much more,
the Modern ones, draw much of the dregs. Certainly, they are of excellent use.
They are, Mucrones Verborum, Pointed Speeches. Cicero prettily calls them,
Salinas, Salt pits; that you may extract salt out of, and sprinkle it, where
you will. They serve, to be interlaced, in continued Speech. They serve, to be
recited, upon occasion of themselves. They serve, if you take out the kernel
of them, and make them your own. I have, for my recreation, in my sickness,
fanned the Old; Not omitting any, because they are vulgar; (for many vulgar
ones are excellent good;) Nor for the meannesse of the Person; but because they
are dull, and flat: And added many New, that otherwise would have died.

1. WHEN Queen Elizabeth had advanced Ralegh, she was one day playing on the
virginalls, and my Lo. of Oxford, and another Nobleman, stood by. It fell out
so, that the Ledge, before the Iacks, was taken away, so as the Iacks were
seen: My Lo. of Oxford, and the other Nobleman smiled, and a little
whispered: The Queen marked it, and would needs know, What the matter was? My
Lo. of Oxford answered; That they smiled, to see, that when Iacks went up,
Heads went down.

2. Henry the fourth of France, his Queen was great with Child. Count
Soi^ons, that had his expectation upon the Crown; when it was twice or thrice
thought, that the Queen was with Child before, said to foam of his Friends;
That it was but with a pillow. This had some ways come to the Kings ear, who
kept it til when the Queen waxed great; called the Count of Soissons to him,
and said, laying his hand upon the Queens belly; Come Cousin, it is no pillow.
Yes, Sir, (answered the Count of Soissons) it is a pillow, for all France to
sleep upon.

3. There was a conference in Parliament, between the Upper House, and the
Lower, about a Bill of Accountants, which came down, from the Lords, to the
Commons: which Bill prayed, that the Lands of Accountants, whereof they were
seized, when they entered upon their Office, might be liable to their
Arreares, to the Queen. But the Commons desired, that the Bill might not
look back, to Accountants that were already, but extend only to Accountanes
hereafter. But the Lo. Threasurer said: Why, I pray, if you had lost your
purse, by the way, would you look forwards, or would you look back? The
Queen has lost her purse.

4. Queen Elizabeth, the morrow of her Coronation, went to the Chapel; and
in the great chamber, Sir John Rainsford, set on by wiser Men, (A Knight that
had the liberty of a Buffone) besought the Queen aloud; That now, this good
time, when prisoners were delivered, four prisoners, amongst the rest, might
likewise have their liberty, who were like enough, to be kept still in hold.
The Queen asked; Who they were? And he said; Matthew, Mark, Luke, and John;
who had long been imprisoned, in the Latin tongue; and now he defired, they
might go abroad, among the people, in English. The Queen answered, with a
grave countenance; It were good (Rainsford) they were spoken with themselves,
to know of them, whether they would be set at liberty?

5. The Lo. Keeper, Sir Nicholas Bacon, was asked his opinion, by Queen
Elizabeth, of one of these Monopoly Licenses; And he answered; Will you have
me speak truth, Madame? Licentia omnes deteriores sumus. We are all the worse
for a License.

6. Pace, the bitter Fool, was not suffered to come at the Queen, because of
his bitter humor. Yet at one time, some persuaded the Queen, that he should
come to her, undertaking for him, that he should keep compass. So he was
brought to her, and the Queen said; Come on Pace, now we shall bear of our
faults. Says Pace; I do not use to talk of that, that all the Town talks
of.

7. My Lo. of Essex, at the succor of Rhoan, made 24. Knights; which at that
time was a great matter. Diverse of those Gentlemen, were of weak and small
means; which when Queen Elizabeth heard, she said; My Lo. might have done
well, to have built his Almes-House, before he made his Knights.

8. A great Officer in France, was in danger to have lost his place. But his
wife, by her suite, and means making, made his peace: whereupon a pleasant
Fellow said; That he had been crushed, but that he saved himself upon his
horns.

9. Queen Anne Bullen, at the time, when she was led to be beheaded, in the
Tower, called one of the Kings Privy Chamber to her, and said to him; Commend
me to the King, and tell him, he is constant in his course of advancing me.
From a private Gentlewoman, he made me a Marquisse; and from a Marquisse, a
Queen; and now he had left no higher degree of earthly honor, he has made
me a Martyr.

10. Bishop Latimer said, in a Sermon, at Court; That he heard great speech,
that the King was poor, and many ways were propounded to make him rich: For
his part, he had thought of one way, which was; That they should help the King
to some good office, for all his Officers were rich.

11. Caesar Borgia, after long division, between him and the Lords of Romagna,
fell to accord with them. In this accord, there was an Article, that he should
not call them, at any time, all together, in person: The meaning was, that
knowing his dangerous nature If he meant them treason, some one might be
free, to revenge the rest. Nevertheless, he did with such art, and fair
usage, win their confidence, that he brought them all together to Counsel at
Sinigalia, where he mur^her'd them all. This Act, when it was related unto
Pope Alexander his Father, by a Cardinal, as a thing happy, but very
persidious, the Pope said; It was they, that had broke their Covenant first, in
coming all together.

12. Pope Julius the third, when he was made Pope, gave his Hat unto a youth,
a Favorite of his, with great scandal. Whereupon, at one time a Cardinal,
tha^ might be fre^ with him, said modestly to him; What did your Holiness
see in that young man, to make him Cardinal? Julius answered, What did you see
in me, to make me Pope?

13. The same Julius, upon like occasion of speech, why he should bear so
great affection to the same young Man, would say; That he had found by
Astrology, that it was the youths Destiny, to be a Great Prelate; which was
impossible, except himself were Pope; And therefore, that he did raise him,
as the Driuer on of his own Fortune.

14 Sir Thomas Moore had only Daughters, at the first; And his Wife did ever
pray for a Boy: At last he had a Boy; which after, at Man's years, proved
simple. Sir Thomas said to his Wife; Thou prayedst so long for a Boy, that he
will be a Boy, as long as he lives.

15. Sir Thomas Moore, the day he was beheaded, had a Barber sent to him,
because his hair was long, which was thought, would make him more
commiserable, with the people. The Barber came to him, and asked him; Whether
he would be pleased to be trimmed? In good faith honest fellow, (said Sir
Thomas) the King and I have a suit for my Head, and till the Title be cleared,
I will do no cost upon it.

16. Stephen Gardener Bishop of Winchester, a great Champion of the Papists,
was wont to say of the Protestants, who ground upon the Scripture; That they
were like Poasts, that bring truth in their Letters, and lies in their Mouths.

17. The Lacedaemonians were besieged by the Athenians, in the Fort of Peile;
which was won, and some slain, and some taken. There was one said, to one of
them that was taken, by way of scorn; Were not they brave men, tha^ lost their
lives at the Fort of Peile? He answered; Certainly a Persian Arrow (...) much
to be set by, if it can choose out a bra^ Man.

18. After the Defeat of Cyrus the younger, Falinus was sent, by the King, to
the Grecians, (who had, for their part, rather Victory, than otherwise,) to
command them, to yield their Arms. Which when it was denied, Falinus said to
Clearchus; Well then, the King lets you know, that if you remove from the
place, where you are now encamped, it is war; if you stay, it is Truce; What
shall I say, you will do? Clearchus answered; It pleases us, as pleases the
King. How is that? says Falinus. Says Clearchus; If we remove, War; if we
stay, Truce. And so would not disclose his purpose.

19. Clodius was acquit by a corrupt Jury, that had palpably taken shares of
money. Before they gave up their verdict, they prayed of the Senate a Guard,
that they might do their Consciences freely; for Clodius was a very seditious
young Nobleman. Whereupon, all the world gave him for condemned. But acquitted
he was. Catulus the next day, seeing some of them, tha^ had acquitted him
together, said to them; What made yo^ to ask of us a Guard Were you afraid you
money should have bee^ taken from you?

20. At the same Judgment, Cicero gave i^ Evidence upon oath And the Jury
(which consisted of 57.) passed against his Evidence. One day in the Senate,
Cicero and Clodius being in altercation, Clodius vpbraided him, and said; The
Jury gave you no credit. Cicero answered; Five and twenty gave me credit;
but there were two and thirty, that gave you no credit, for they had their
money aforehand.

21. Many men, especially such as affect gravity, have a manner, after other
men's speech, to shake their heads. Sir Lionell Cranfield would say; That it
was, as Men shake a Bottle, to see if there were any wit in their Head, or no.

22. Sir Thomas Moore, who was a man, in all his life time, that had an
excellent ^eine in jesting) at ^he very instant of ^s Death, having a ^cttie
long Beard, after his Head was upon the Block, lift it up again, and gently
^rew his Beard aside, and said; This has ^ot offended the King

23. Sir Thomas Moore had sent him, by a Suter in the Chancerie, two silver
Flagons. When they were presented by the Gentleman's servant, he said to one of
his Men; Have him to the Cellar and let him have of my best wine. And turning
to the Servant said; Tell thy Master Friend, if he like it, le^ him not spare it.

24. Diogenes having seen that the Kingdom of Macedon, which before was
contemptible and low, began to come aloft, when he died, was asked; How he
would be buried? He answered; With my face downward; for within a while, the
world will be turned vpside down, and then I shall lie right.

25. Cato the Elder was wont to say; That the Romans were like sheep: A man
were better drive a flock of them, then one of them.

26. Themistocles, in his lower Fortune, was in love with a young Gentleman,
who scorned him. When he grew to his Greatness, which was soon after, he
sought to him: But Themistocles said; We are both grown wise, but too late.

27. Demonax the Philosopher, when he died, was asked touching his burial. He
answered, Never take care for burying me, for stink will bury me. He that
asked him, said again; Why, would you have your body left to Dogs and Ravens
to feed upon? Demonax answered; Why, what great hurt is it, if having sought to
do good, when I lived, to Men; my body do some good to beasts, when I am
dead?

28. Jack Roberts was desired by his Taylour, when the reckoning grew somewhat
high, to have a Bill of his hand. Roberts said; I am content, but you must let
no man know it. When the Tailor brought him the Bill, he tore^t it, as in
choler, and said to him; You use me not well; you promised me no body should
know it, and here you have put in; Be it known to all men by these presents.

29. When Lycurgus was to reform and alter the state of Sparta, in the
Consultation, one advised, That it should be reduced to an absolute Popular
Equality. But Lycurgus said to him; Sir, begin it in your own House.

30. Phocyon, the Athenian, (a Man of great severity, and no ways flexible to
the will of the People) one day, when he spoke to the People, in one part of
his speech, was applauded: Whereupon, he turned to one of his Friends, and
asked; What have I said amiss?

31. Sir Walter Ralegh was wont to say, of the Ladies of Queen Elizabeth's
Priuie-Chamber, and Bedchamber; That they were like Witches; they could do
hurt, but they could do no good.

32. Bion, that was an Atheist, was showed in a Port-Citie, in a Temple of
Neptune, many Tables or Pictures, of such, as had in tempests, made their vows
to Neptune, and were saved from shipwreck; and was asked; How say you now, do
you not acknowledge the power of the Gods? But he said; Yes, but where are
they painted, that have been drowned after their vows?

33. Bias was sailing, and there fell out a great Tempest, and the Mariners,
that were wicked and dissolute Fellows, called upon the Gods But Bias said to
them; Peace, let them not know ye are here.

34. Bion was wont to say; That Socrates, of all the lovers of Alcibiades,
only held him by the ears.

35. There was a Minister deprived for Inconformitie: who said to some of his
Friends; That if they deprived him, it should cost an hundred Men's lives. The
Party understood it, as if, being a turbulent Fellow, he would have moved
sedition, and complained of him. Whereupon, being conuented, and appo sed upon
that speech, he said; His meaning was, that if he lost his Benefice, he would
practice Physic; and then he thought he should kill an hundred Men, in time.

36. Michael Angelo, the famous Painter, painting in the Popes Chapel, the
Portraiture of Hell, and damned Souls, made one of the damned Souls so like a
Cardinal, that was his enemy, as every body, at first sight, knew it:
Whereupon the Cardinal complained to Pope Clement, desiring it might be
defaced; who said to him; Why, you know very well, I have power to deliver a
soul out of Purgatory, but not out of Hell.

37. There was a Philosopher about Tiberius, that looking into the nature of
Caius, said of him; That he was Mire mingled with Blood.

38. Alcibiades came to Pericles, and stayed a while, ere he was admitted.
When he came in, Pericles ciuilly excused it, and said; I was studying, how to
give my account. But Alcibiades said to him; If you will be ruled by me,
study rather, how to give no account.

39. Cicero was at dinner, where there was an ancient Lady, that spoke of her
years, and said; She was but forty years old. One that sat by Cicero,
rounded him in the care, and said; She talks of forty years old, and she
is far more, out of question Cicero answered him again; I must believe her,
for I have heard her say so, any time, these ten years.

40. Pope Adrian the sixth wastalking with the Duke of Sesa, That Pasquill gave
great scandal, and that he would have him thrown into the river. But Sesa
answered; Do it not (holy Father) for then he will turn Frogge; and whereas
now he chaunts but by day, he will then chaunt both by day and night.

41. There was a Soldier, that vaunted before Julius Caesar, of hurts he had
received in his face. Julius Caesar knowing him be a Coward, told him; You
were best take beed, next time you r^nne away, how you look back.

42. There was a Bishop, that was somewhat a delicate Person, and bathed twice
a day. A Friend of his said to him; My Lord, why do you bath twice a day? The
Bishop answered; Because I cannot conveniently bath thrice.

43. Mendoza, that was Viceroy of Peru, was wont to say; That the Government
of Peru, was the best place that the King of Spain gave, save that it was
somewhat too near Madrid.

44. Secretary Bournes son kept a Gentleman's Wife in Shropshire, who lived
from her Husband with him. When he was weary of her, he caused her Husband to
be dealt with, to take her home, and offered him 500. pounds for reparation.
The Gentleman went to Sir Henry Sidney, to take his advice upon this offer;
telling him; That his wife promised now a new life; and to tell him truth, 500.
pounds would come well with him; and besides, that sometimes he wanted a woman
in his bed. By my troth, (said Sir Henry Sidney) take her home, and take the
money, and then, whereas other Cuckolds wear their horns plain, you may wear
yours gilt.

45. There was a Gentleman in Italy, that wrate to a great Friend of his, upon
his Advancement to be Cardinal; That he was very glad of his advancement,
for the Cardinals own sake: but he was sorry, that himself had lost so good
a Friend.

46. When Rablais lay on his Death bed, and they gave him the Extreme Unction,
a familiar Friend of his came to him afterward, and asked him; How he did?
Rablais answered; Even going my journey, they have greased my boots already.

47. There was a King of Hungary took a Bishop in battle, and kept him
prisoner. Whereupon the Pope writ a Monitorie to him, for that he had broken
the Privilege of Holy Church, and taken his Son. The King sent an Embassage
to him, and sen^ withal the Armor, wherein the Bishop was taken, and this
only in writing Vide, number haec sit vestis filij t^?

48. There was a Sutour to Vespasian, who to lay his Suit fairer, said; It was
for his Brother: whereas indeed it was for a piece of money. Some about
Vespasian, to cross him, told the Emperor, That the Party, his Servant spoke
for, was not his Brother, but that it was upon a bargain. Vespasian sent for
the Party interessed, and asked him; Whether his Mean was his Brother, or no?
He durst not tell untruth to the Emperor, and confessed; That he^ was not his
Brother Whereupon, the Emperor said; This do fetch me the money, and you
shall have your sut^ dispatched. Which h^ did. The Courtier which was the.
Mean, solicited Vespasian, soon after, about his Suit: Why (says Vespasian)
I gave it, last day, to a Brother of mine.

49. When Vespasian passed from Jury, to take upon him the Empire, he went by
Alexandria, where remained two famous Philosophers, Apollonius, and Euphrates.
The Emperor heard them discourse, touching matter of State, in the presence of
many. And when he was weary of them, he brake off, and in a secret derision,
finding their Discourses but Speculatiue, and not to be^ put in practice, said;
Oh, that I might govern wise men, and wise men govern me.

50. Cardinal Ximenes, upon a muster which was taken against the Moors, was
spoken to by a Servant of his, to stand a little out of the smoke of the
Harquebuze: But he said again; That that was his Incense.

51. Vespasian asked of Apollonius; What was the cause of Nero's ruin? who
answered; Nero could tune the Harp well; but in Government, he did always
wind up the strings too high, or let them down too low.

52. Mr. Bromley Sollicitour, giving in Evidence for a Deed which was impeached
to be fraudulent, was urged by the Counsel on the other side, with this
presumption: That in two former suites, when Title was made, that Deed was
passed over in silence, and some other Conueyance stood upon. Mr. Justice
Catyline, taking in with that side, asked the Sollicitour; I pray thee, Mr.
Sollicitour, let me ask you a familiar question: I have two Geldings in my
stable, and I have diverse times business of importance, and still I send
forth one of my Geldings, and not the other; would you not think I set him
aside for a Jade? No, my Lord, (says Bromley) I would think you spared him
for your own saddle.

53. Alonso Cartillio was informed by his Steward, of the greatness of his
expense, being such as he could not hold out with. The Bishop asked him;
Wherein it chiefly rose? His Steward told him; In the multitude of his
servants. The Bishop bade him make a note of those that were necessary, and
those that might be put off. Which he did. And the Bishop taking occasion to
read it, before most of his servants, said to his Steward; Well, let these
remain, because I need them; and these other, because they need me.

54. Queen Elizabeth was wont to say upon the Commission of Sales; That the
Commissioners used her like strawberrie wives, that laid two or threo great
strawberries at the mouth of their pot, and all the rest were little ones: So
they made her two or three good prices of the first particulars, but fell
straight-wayes.

55. Queen Elizabeth was wont to say of her instructions to great Officers;
That they were like to garments, straight at the first putting on, but did by
and by wear loose enough.

56. Mr. Marburie the Preacher would say; That God was feign to deal with
wicked men, as men do with frisking jades in a pasture, that cannot take them
up, till they get them at a gate: So wicked men will not be taken up, till the
boure of death.

57. Thales, as he looked upon the stars, fell into the water: Whereupon, it
was after said; That if he had looked into the water, he might have seen the
stars; but looking up to the stars, he could not see the water.

58. The Book of Deposing Richard the second, and the coming in of Henry the
fourth, supposed to be written by Dr. Hayward, who was committed to the Tower
for it, had much incensed Q. Elizabeth. And she asked Mr. Bacon, being then of
her learned Counsel; Whether there were no treason contained in it? Mr. Bacon
intending to do him a pleasure, and to take off the Queens bitterness with a
jest, answered; No Madam, for treason, I cannot deliver opinion, that there is
any, but very much felony. The Queen apprehending it gladly, asked; How, and
wherein? Mr. Bacon answered; Because he had stolen many of his sentences and
conceits, out of Cornelius Tacitus.

59. Mr. Popham, when he was Speaker, and the Lower House had sat long, and
done in effect nothing; coming one day to Queen Elizabeth, she said to him;
Now, Mr. Speaker, what has passed in the Lower House? He answered; If it
please your Majesty, seven weeks.

60. Pope Xystus the fifth, who was a pooremansson, and his fathers house
ill-thatched, so that the Sun came in, in many places, would sport with his
ignobilitie, and say; He was, Nato di Casa illustre: Son of an illustrious
House.

61. When the King of Spain conquered Portugal, he gave special charge to
his Lieutenant, that the Soldiers should not spoil, lest he should alienate
the hearts of the people. The Army also suffered much scarsitie of victual.
Whereupon, the Spanish Soldiers would afterward say: That they had won the
King a Kingdom, ^s the Kingdom of Heaven uses to be won; (...) fasting,
and abstainning from tha^, that is another man's.

62. Cicero married his Daughter to Dolabella; the hold Caesar's pattie: Pompey
had married Iulia, ^at wa^ Caesar's Daughter. After, when Caesar and Pompey
took Arms one against the other; and Pompey had passed the seas, and Caesar
possessed Italy, Cicero stayed somewhat long in Italy, but at last sailed over
to join with Pompey: who when he came unto him, Pompey said; You are welcome;
but where left you your Son in Law? Cicero answered; With your Father in law.

63. Nero was wont to say of his Master Seneca; That his style was like mortar
of sand without lime.

64. Sir Henry Wotton used to say; That Critticks are like Brushers of
Noble-mens clothes.

65. Queen Elizabeth, being to resolve upon a great Officer, and being by
some, that canuassed for others, put in some doubt of that person, who^ she
meant to advance, called for Mr. Bacon, and told him; She was like one with a
lantern, seeking a man: and seemed vnsarisfied, in the choice she had of men
for that place. Mr. Bacon answered her; That he had heard, that in old time,
there was usually painted on the Church walls, the Day of Doom, and God
sitting in judgment, and Saint Michael by him, with apaire, of balance, and
the soul, and the good deeds in the one balance, and the faults and the evil
deeds in the other; and the souls balance went up far too light: Then was
our Lady painted with a great pair of beads, casting them into the light
balance, to make up the weight: So (he said) place and authority, which were
in her hands to give, were like our Ladies beads, which though Men, through
diverse imperfections, were too light before, yet when they were cast in, made
weight competent.

66. Mr. Sauill was asked, by my Lo. of Essex, his opinion touching Poets; who
answered my Lo. He thought them the best writers, next to those that write
prose.

67. Mr. Mason of Trinity College, sent his Pupil to another of the
Fellows, to borrow a book of him: who told him; I am loath to lend my books
out of my chamber; but if it please thy Tutour, to come and read upon it in my
chamber, he shall, as long as he will. It was Winter: and some days after,
the same Fellow sent to Mr. ^son, to borrow his bellows. But Mr. Mason said to
his Pupil; I am loath to lend my bellows out of my chamber; but if thy Tutor
would come, and blow the fire in my chamber, he shall, as long as he will.

68. Nero did cut a youth, as if he would have transformed him into a woman,
and called him Wife. There was a Senator of Rome, that said secretly to his
Friend; It was pity Nero's father had not such a wife.

69. Galba succeeded Nero, and his age being much despised, there was much
license and confusion in Rome. Whereupon, a Senator said in full Senate; It
were better live where nothing is lawful, then where all things are lawful.

70. In Flaunders, by accident, a Flemmish Tiler, fell from the top of a house
upon a Spaniard, and killed him, though he escaped himself. The next of the
blood prosecuted his death with great violence against the Tiler. And when he
was offered pecuniarie recompense, nothing would serve him, but Lex Talionis.
Whereupon the Judge said to him; That if he did urge that kind of sentence,
it must be, that he should go up to the top of the house, and thence fall
down upon the Tiler.

71. Queen Elizabeth was dilatorie enough in suits, of her own nature: And
the Lo. Threasurer Burleigh, to feed her humor, would say to her; Madam, you
do well to let Suitors stay; for I shall tell you, Bis dat, qui cito dat; If
you grant them speedily, they will come again the sooner.

72. They faigne a tale of Sixtus Quintus, that after his death he went to
Hell; And the Porter of Hell said to him; You have some reason to offer your
self to this place; but yet I have order not to receive you: you have a place
of your own, Purgatory, you may go thither. So he went away, and sought
Purgatory a great while, and could find no such place. Upon that he took
heart, and went to Heau^ and knocked, and (...) Peter asked; Who w^ there? He
said; Sixtus Pope. Whereunto St. Peter said; Why do you knock? you have the
keys. Sixtus answered; It is true, but it is so long since they were given, as
I doubt the wards of the lock be altered.

73. Charles King of Swede, a great enemy of the Jesuits, when he took any
of their Colleges, he would hang the old Jesuits, and put the young to his
Mines, saying; That since they wrought so hard above ground, he would try how
they could work underground.

74. In Chancerie, one time, when the Counsel of the Parties set forth the
Bundaries of the land in question, by the Plot: And the Counsel of oue part
said; We lie on this side, my Lo. And the Counsel on the other part said; We
lie on this side: The Lo. Chanceller Hatton stood up, and said; If you lie on
both sides, whom will you have me to believe?

75. Vespasian, and Titus his eldest Son, were both absent from Rome, when
the Empire was cast upon him. Domitian his younger Son was at Rome, who took
upon him the Affairs: And being of a turbulent spirit, made many changes, and
displaced diverse Officers, and Governors of Provinces, sending them
Successors: So when Vespasian came to Rome, and Domitian came into his
presence, Vespasian said to him; Son, I looked when you would have sent me a
Successor.

76. Sir Amice Pawlet, when he saw too much haste made in any matter, was wont
to say; Stay a while, that we may make an end the sooner.

77. The Deputies of the reformed Religion, after the Massacre, which was upon
St. Bartholomewes day, treated with the King and Queene-Mother, and some other
of the Counsel, for a peace. Both sides were agreed upon the Articles. The
Question was, upon the security of performance. After some particulars
propounded and rejected, the Queene-Mother said; Why, is not the word of a King
sufficient security? One of the Deputies answered; No, by St. Bartholomew,
Madam.

78. When the Archduke did raise his siege from Grave, the then Secretary
came to Queen Elizabeth; and the Queen having intelligence first, said to the
Secretary; Wot you what? The Archduke is risen from the Grave. He answered;
What without the Trumpet of the Archangell? The Queen replied; Yes, without
sound of Trumpet.

79. Francis the first, used for his pleasure, sometimes to go disguised. So
walking one day, in the company of the Cardinal of Borbon, near Paris, he
met a Peasant, with a new pair of shoes upon his arm. So he called him to
him, and said; By our Lady, these be good shoes, what did they cost thee?
The Peasant said; Guess. The King said; I think some five Souls. Says the
Peasant; You have lied but a Carolois. What Villain (says the Cardinal of
Burbon) thou art dead: It is the King. The Peasant replied; The Devil take
him, of you and me, that knew so much.

80. There was a conspiracy against the Emperor Claudius, by Scribonianus,
examined in the Senate; where Claudius sa^ in his chair, and one of his
Freed-Seruants stood at the back of his chair. In the examination, that Freed
Servant, who had much power with Claudius, very saucily had almost all the
words; and amongst other things, he asked in scorn, one of the Examinats, who
was likewise Freed Servant of Scribonianus; I pray, Sir, if Scribonianus had
been Emperor, what would you have done? He answered; I would have stood
behind his chair, and held my peace.

81. Dionysius the Tyrant, after he was deposed, and brought to Corinth, kept a
school. Many used to visit him, and amongst others, one, when he came in,
opened his mantle, and shook his clothes, thinking to give Dionysius a gentle
scorn; because it was the manner to do so, for them that came in to him,
while he was Tyrant. But Dionysius said to him; I pray thee do so rather when
thou go out, that we may see thou stealest nothing away.

82. Hannibal said of Fabius Maximus, and of Marcellus (whereof the Former
waited upon him, that he could make no progress; and the Latter had many
sharp fights with him;) That he feared Fabius, like a Tutour; and Marcellus,
like an Enemy.

83. Diogenes, one terrible frostie morning, came into the Market Place, and
stood naked quaking, to show his Tollerancie. Many of the people came about
him, pitying him. Plato passing by, and knowing he did it to be seen, said
to the people, as he went by; If you pity him indeed, leave him alone.

84. Sackford, Master of the Requests to Queen Elizabeth, had diverse times
moved for audience, and been put off. At last he came to the Queen in a
progress, and had on a new pair of boots. When he came in, the Queen said
to him; Fie Slouen, thy new Boots stink. Madam, (said he) it is not my new
Boots that stink, but it is the stale Bills that I have kept so long.

85. One was saying; That his great Grandfather, and Grand father, and Father,
died at sea. Said another that heard him; And I were as you, I would never come
at Sea. Why (says he) where did your great Grandfather, and Grandfather,
and Father die? He answered; Where, but in their Beds? Says the other; And I
were as you, I would ^er come in Bed.

86. Arist ppus was (...) Suitor to Dionysius, for somewhat, who would give no
ear to his Suit. Aristippus fell at his feet: Then Dionysius gra ted it. One
that stood by, said afterward to Aristippus; You a Philosopher, and to be
sabase, as to throw your self at the Tyrants feet, to get a Suit? Aristippus
answered; The fault is not mine, but the fault is in Dionysius, that carries
his cares in his feet.

87. There was a young man in Rome, that was very like Augustus Caesar
Augustus took knowledge of it, and ^enr for the Man, and asked him; Was your
Mother never at Rome? He answered; No, Sir, but my Father was.

88. A Physician advised his Patient, that had sore eyes, that he should
abstain from wine. But the Patient said; I think rather, Sir, from wine and
water; for I have aften marked it; in bleare eyes, and I have seen water come
forth, but never wine.

89. When Sir Thomas Moore was Lo. Chanceller, he did use, at Mass, to sit in
the Chancell; and his Lady in a Pew. And because the Pew stood out of sight,
his Gentleman-usher, ever after Service, came to the Ladies Pew, and said;
Madam, my Lo. is gone. So when the Chancellers place was taken from him, the
next time they went to Church, Sir Thomas himself came to his Ladies Pew, and
said; Madam, my Lo. is gone.

90. At an Act of the Commencement, the Answerer gave for his Question; That an
Aristoaracie was better then a Monarchy. The Replyer, who was a dissolute
Fellow, did tax him; That being a private bred Man, be would give a Question
of State. The Answerer said; That the Replyer did much wrong the priuiledg^ of
Seh^ers; who would be much (...) if they should give Questions of nothing, but
such things wherein they are practiced. And added; We have heard your self
dispute of virtue, which no man will say, you put much its practice.

91. There was a dispute, whether great heads or little heads had the better
wit? And one said; It must needs be the little. For it is a Maxim: Omne maius
continet in se minus.

92. Solon, when he wept for his Sons death, and one said to him; Weeping
will not help: answered, A^s, therefore I weep, because weeping will not help.

93. Solon being asked; Whether be had given the Athenians the best Laws?
answered; Yes, the best of those that they would have received.

94. One said to Aristippus; It is a strange thing, why should men rather give
to the poor, then to Philosophers. He ansvvered; Because, they think
themselves may sooner come to be poor, then to be Philosophers.

95. Alexander used to say of his two Friends, Craterus and Hephestion; That
Hephestion loved Alexander, and Craterus loved the King.

96. It fell out so, that as Liuia went abroad in Rome, there met her naked
young Men, that were sporting in the streets: Which Augustus was about severely
to punish in them: But Liuia spoke for them, and said; It was no more to chaste
women, then so many Statua's.

97. Alonso of Aragon was wont to say, in commendation of Age, that Age
appeared to be best in ^oure things; Old wood best to burn; Old wine to
drink; Old Friends to trust; and Old Authors to read.

98. It was said of Augustus, and afterward the like was said of Septimius
Seuerus: Both which did infinite mischief in their beginnings, and infinite
good toward their ends; That they should either never have been borne, or
never died.

99. Queen Isabell of Spain would say; Whosoever has a good presence, and a
good fashion, carries Letters of Recommendation.

100. Traian would say of the vain jelousie of Princes, that seek to make
away those that aspire to their Succession; That there was never King, that did
put to death his Successor.

101. When it was represented to Alexander, to the advantage of Antipater, who
was a stern and imperious Man, that he only of all his Lieutenants, wore
no Purple, but kept the Macedonian Habit of Black, Alexander said; Yes, but
Antipater is all Purple within.

102. Constantine the Great, in a kind of ^nuie, himself being a great
Builder, as Traian likewise was, would call Traian, Wall-flower, because his
name was upon so many walls.

103. Philip of Macedon was wished to banish one, for speaking ill of him: But
Philip said; Better he speak where we are both known, then where we are both
unknown.

104. A Grecian Captain aduising the Confederares, that were united against
the L^demonians, touching their Enterprise, gave opinion, that they should go
directly upon Sparta, saying; That the state of Sparta was like Rivers; strong
when they had run a great way, and weak toward their Head.

105. Alonso of Aragon was wont to say of himself; That he was a great
Necromancer, for that he used to ask Counsel of the Dead: meaning Books.

106. I ^llus entertained Pompey, in one of ^is magnificent house: Pompey said;
This is a marvelous fair and stately house for the Summer, but, (...)
thinks, it should be (...) (...) for the Winters Lugullus answered; Do you
not thinks me as wise as diverse Foul are, to remove with the season?

107. Plato entertained some of his Friends at a Dinner, and had in the Chamber,
a Bed or Couch, nearly and costly furnished. Diogenes came in, and got up upon
the Bed, and trampled upon it, and said; I trample upon the pride of Plato.
Plato mildly answered; But with greater pride.

108. One was examined, upon certain scandalous words spoken against the King.
He confessed them, and said; It is true, I spoke them, and if the wine had not
failed, I had said much more.

109. Pompey being Commissioner, for sending grain to Rome, in time of Dearth,
when he came to the sea, he found it very tempestuous and dangerous;
Insomuch as those about him, advised him by no means to embarque. But Pompey
said; It is of necessity that I go, not that I live.

110. Traian would say, That the Kings Exchecquer was like the Spleen; for
when that did swell, the whole Body did pine.

111. Charles the Bauld allowed one, whose name was Scottus, to sit at the
Table with him, for his pleasure Scottus sat on the other side of the Table.
One time the King being merry with him, said to him; What is there between
Scot and Sot? Scottus answered; The table only.

112. Ethelwold, Bishop of Winchester, in a famine, sold all the rich Vessels
and Ornaments of the Church, to relieve the poor with bread: and said; There
was no reason, that the dead Temples of God should be sumptuously furnished,
and the living Temples suffer penury.

113. There was a Marriage made between a Widow of great wealth, and a
Gentleman of great House, that had no estate or means. Jack Roberts said; That
Marriage was like a black pudding; the one brought Blo'd, and the other
brought Sewet and Oatmcale.

114. Demosthenes was vpbraided by Aeschines, that his speeches did smell of
the Lamp. But Demosthenes said; Indeed there is a great difference, between
that that you and I do by Lampe-light.

115. Demades the Orator, in his age was talkatiue, and would eat hard.
An^ipater would say of him; That he was like a Sacrifice, that nothing was left
of it, but the Tongue and the Paunch.

116. When King Edward the second was amongst his Torturers, who hurried him
too and fro, that no man should know where he was, they set him down upon a
Bank; And one time the more to disguise his face, shaued him, and washed him,
with cold water of a ditch by: The King said; Well yet, I will have warm water
for my Beard. And so shed abundance of Tears.

117 The Turk made an Expedition into Persia, and because of the strait jaws
of the Mountains of Armenia, the Basha's consulted which way they should get
in. Says a natural Fool that stood by: Here Is much ado how you should get
in, but I hear no Body take care, how you should get out.

118. Sir Thomas Moore, when the Counsel of the Party pressed him for a
longer day, said; Take St. Barnabies day, which is the longest day in the
year. Now St. Barnabies day was within few days following.

119. One of the Fathers says; That there is but this difference between the
death of old men and young men; that old men go to death, and death comes to
young Men.

120. Philo Iudaeus says; That the Sense is like the Sun: Far the Sun seals
up the Globe of Heaven, and opens the Globe of Earth: So the Sense does obscure
heavenly things, and reveal earthly things.

121. Cassius, after the defeat of Crassus, by the Parthians, whose weapons
were chiefly Arrows,, fled to the City of ^rras, where he durst not stay any
(...), doubting to be pursued, and besieged. (...) had with him an Astrologer,
who said to him; Sir, I would not have you go hence, while the Moon is in the
sign of Scorpic. Cassius answered; I am more afraid, of that of Sagittarie.

122. Alexander, after the Battle of Gramcum, had very great Offers made him
by Darius. Consulting with his Captains, concerning them, Parmenio said; Sure,
I would accept of these offers, if I were as Alexander. Alexander answered; So
would I, if I were as Parmenio.

123. Alexander was wont to say; He knew he was mortal by two things, Sleep,
and Lust.

124. Augustus Caesar was invited to supper, by one of his old Friends, that had
conuersed with him, in his less Fortunes, and had but ordinary entertainment.
Whereupon, at his going, he said; I did not know, that you and I were so
familiar.

125. Augustus Caesar would say; That he wondered, that Alexander feared he
should want work, having no more to conquer: As if it were not as hard a
matterto keep, as to conquer.

126. Antigonus, when it was told him, that the enemy had such volleyes of
arrows, that they did hide the Sun, said; That falls out well, for it is hot
wether, and we shall fight in the shade.

127. Augustus Caesar (...) write to Liuia, who was ouer-sensible of some ill
words that had been spoken of them both; Let it not trouble you, my Liuia, if
any man speak ill of us, for we have enough, that no man can do ill unto us.

128. Chilon said; That Kings Friends and Favorites were like Casting Counters,
that sometimes stood for one, sometimes for ten, sometimes for a hundred.

129. Theodosius, when he was pressed by a Sutour, and denied him, the Sutour
said; Why, Sir, you promised it. He answered; I said it, but I did not promise
it, if it be unjust.

130. Agathocles, after he had taken Syracusa, the men whereof, during the
Siege, had in a bravery, spoken of him all the villainy that might be, sold
the Syracusans for slaves, and said; Now if you use such words of me, I will
tell your Masters of you.

131. Dionysius the Elder, when he saw his Son, in many things (...)
inordinate, said to him; Did you ever know me (...) such things (...) His
Sonn^ answered, No, but you had not a Tyrant to your Father: The Father
replied; No, (...) you, if you take these courses, will have (...) Tyrant to
your Son.

132. Callisthenes the Philosopher, that followed Alexanders Court, and hated
the King, was asked by one; How one should (...) the famousest (...) in the
world? And answered; By taking away him that is.

133. Sir Edward Coke was wont to say, when a great Man came to Dinner to him,
and gave him no knowledge of his coming; Well, since you sent me no word of
your coming, you shall dine with me but if I had known of your coming, I
would have dined with you.

134. The Romans, when they spoke to the people, were wont to call them; Ye
Romans. When Commanders in War spoke to their Army, they, called them; My
Soldiers. There was a Mucinie in Caesar's Army, and somewhat the Soldiers
would have had, but they would not declare themselves in it: Only they
demanded, a Dimission or discharge, though with no intention it should be
granted: But knowing that Caesar had, at that time, great need of their
service, thought by that means, to wrench him to their other desires.
Whereupon, with one try, they asked Dimission. But Caesar, after silence made,
said; I, for my (...), ye Romans: which admitied the^ (...) be dismissed:
Which voice they had no sooner heard, but they mutined again, (...) would not
suffer (...) to go on, until (...) had called them by the name of Soldiers.
And so, with (...) word, (...) (...) the (...).

135. Caesar would say of Sylla, for that he did resign his Dictatourship;
That he was ignorant of letters, he could not dictate.

136. Seneca said of Caesar; That he did quickly sheath the sword, but never
laid it off.

137. Diogenes begging as diverse Philosophers then used, did beg more of a
prodi^ll man, then of the test that were present: Whereupon one said (...) him;
See your baseness, that when you ^de a liberal mind, you will take most of.
No, (said Diogenes) but I mean to beg of the rest again.

138. Jason the Thessalian was wont to say; That some things must be done
unjustly, that many things may be done justly.

139. Sir Nicholas Bacon being Keeper of the Seal, when Queen Elizabeth, in
progress, came to his house at Redgraue, and said to him; My Lo. what a little
house have you gotten? said, Madam, my house is well, but it is you that (...)
made me too great (...) (...) house.

140. ^mistocles, when (...) Ambassador from (...) mean State did (...) great
matters, (...) to him; Friend, (...) words would re^ a City.

141. Agesilaus, when one told him there was one did excellently counterfeit a
Nightingale, and would have had him hear him, said; Why, I have heard the
Nightingale her self.

142. A great Nobleman, upon the complaint of a Servant of his, laid a Citizen
by the heels, thinking to bend him to his Servants desire. But the Fellow
being stubborn, the Servant came to his Lo. and told him; Your ^op. I know,
has gone as far as well you may, but it works not, for yonder Fellow is
more perverse then before. Said my Lo Let Us forget him a while, and then he
will remember himself.

143. One came to a Cardinal in Rome, and told him; That he had brought his
LoP a dainty white Palfrey, but he fell lame by the way. Says the Cardinal
to him; ^e tell thee what thou shall do; Go to such a Cardinal, and such a
Cardinal, (naming him some half a dozen Cardinals) and tell them as much;
And so, whereas by thy horse, if he had been found, thou could have pleased
but one, with thy lame borsethou may please half a dozen.

144. Iphicrates the Athenian, in a Treaty that he had with the Lacedaemonians
for peace, in which question was about security for observing the same, said;
The Athenians would not accept of any Security, except the Lacedaemonians did
yield up unto them those things, whereby it might be manifest, that they
could not hurt them, if they would.

145. Euripides would say of persons that were beautiful, and yet in some
years; In fair bodies, not only the Spring is pleasant, but also the Autumn.

146. After a great fight, there came to the Camp of Consaluo the great
Captain, a Gentleman proudly horsed and armed. Diego de Mendoza asked the
great Captain; Who Is this? Who answered; It is St Ermin, that never appears,
but after a storm.

147. There was a Captain sent to an Exploit by his General, with Forces that
were not likely to atchieue the Enterprise. The Captain said to him; Sir,
appoint but half so many. Why? (says the General.) The Captain answered;
Because it is better fewer die then more.

148. They would say of the Duke of Guise Henry, that had sold and
oppignerated all his Patrimony, to suffice the great Donan^ues that he had
made; That he was the greatest Usurer of France, because all his (...) was in
obligations.

149. Croesus said to Cambyses; That Peace was better then war; because in
peace the Sons did bury their Fathers, but in wars, the Fathers did bury
their Sons.

150. There was an Harbinger had lodged a Gentleman in a very ill room, who
expostulated with him somewhat rudely; But the Harbinger carelessly said; You
will take pleasure in it, when you are out of it.

151. There was a cursed ^age, that his Master ^hipt naked: And when he had
been ^hipt, would not put on his Clothes: And when his Master hade him, said
to him; ^ake them you, for they are the Hangmans fees.

152. There was one that died greatly in debt. When it was reported in some
company, where diverse of his Creditors were, that he was dead, one began to
say; In good faith, then he has carried 500. Ducats of mine, with him, into
the other world. And another of them said; And 200. of mine. And some others
spoke of several sums of theirs. Whereupon, one that was amongst them, said;
Well, I see how, that though a man ^not carry any of his ^wne with him into
the (...) world, yet he may carry other men's.

153. Francis Caruajall, that was the great Captain of the Rebels of Peru,
had often given the chase to Diego Centeno, a principal Commander of the
Emperors party. He was afterward taken by the Emperors Licutenant Gasca,
and committed to the custody of Diego Centeno, who used him with all possible
courtesy; Insomuch as Caruajall asked him; I pray, Sir, who are you, that use
me with this curtefie? Centeno said; Do you not know Diego Centeno? ^uajall
answered; (...) good faith, Sir, I ^ue been so used to (...) your back, as I
^ew not your face.

154. Caruajall, when he was drawn to exe^tion, being foure^ore and five
years old, and laid upon the Hurdle, said; What? young in cradle, old in
cradle?

155. There is a Spanish Adage; Love without end, has no end: Meaning, that if
it were begun, not upon particular ends, it would last.

156. Cato the Elder, being aged, buried his Wife, and married a young woman.
His Son came to him, and said; Sir, what have I offended you, that you have
brought Step mother into your (...)? The old Man answered; N^y, quite ^ntrarie,
Son, thou ^easest me so well, as I would be glad to have more such.

157. Crassus the Orator had a Fish, which the Romans called Murena, that he
had made very tame, and fond of him. The Fish died, and Crassus wept for it.
One day falling in contention with Domitius in the Senate, Domitius said;
Foolish Crassus, you wept for your Murena. Crassus replied; That Is more then
you did for both your wives.

158. Philip, Alexanders Father, gave Sentence against a Prisoner, what time
he was drowsy, and seemed (...) give small attenti^; The Prisoner, ^er
sentence was pro^unced, said; I ap^ale. The King somewhat stirred, said; (...)
whom do you ap^ale? The Prisoner answered; From Philip when he gave no ^are,
to Philip when he shall give care.

159. The same Philip maintained Argument with a Musician, in points of his
Art, somewhat peremptorily. But the Musician said to him; God forbid, Sir, your
Fortune were so hard, that you should know these things better then I.

160. There was a Philosopher that disputed with Adrian the Emperor, and did
it but weakly. One of his Friends that had been by, after wards (...) to him;
Me thinks you were no^ like your self, last day, in Argument with the
Emperor, I could have ^swered better my self. Why, said the Philosopher,
would you have me contend (...) him that ^

161. Diogenes was asked in a kind of scorn; What was the matter, that
Philosophers haunted rich men, and not rich men Philosophers? He ansvvered;
Because the one knew what they wanted, the other did not.

162. Demetrius King of Macedon, had a petition offered him diucrse times by an
old Woman, and still answered; He had no ^sure. Whereupon, the woman said
aloud; Why then give over to be King.

163. The same Demetrius would, at times, r^ro himself from business, and
give himself wholly to pleasures. One day of those his retirings, giving out
that he was sick, his Father Antigonus came, on the sudden, to visit him,
and met a fair dainty youth coming out of his Chamber, When Antigonus came
in, Demetrius said; Sir, the fever left me right now. Antigonus replied; I
think it was he that I met at the door.

164. There was a Mer^ far in debt that died. His goods (...) household stuff
(...) set forth to sale. (...) was one that (...) only a pillow, and said;
This pillow sure is good to (...) upon, since be could sleep that owed (...)
many debts.

165. A Lover met his Lady in a close chair, she thinking to go unknown. He
came and spoke to her. She asked him; How did you know me? He said; Because my
wounds bled afresh. Alluding to the commen tradition, That the wounds of a
body slain, in the presence of him that killed him, will bleed afresh.

166. A Gentleman brought Music to his Ladies window, who hated him, and had
warned him often away: And when he persisted, she threw stones at him.
Whereupon, a Friend of his, that was in his company, said to him; What greater
honor can you have to your Music, then that stones come about you, as they
did to Orpheus?

167. Cato Mayor would say.; That wise men learned more by Fools, then Fools
by wise men.

168. When it was said to Anaxagoras; The Athenians have condemned you to die.
He said again; And Nature them.

169. Demosthenes, when (...) from the Bat^, and that it wasre^proached to him,
(...); That he that (...) might fight again.

170. Antalcidas, when an Athenian said to him; Ye Spartans are ^learned: said
again; True, for we, have learned, no evil, nor vice, of you.

171. Alexander, when his Father wished him, to run, for the prize of the
Race, at the Olympia^ Games, (for he was very swift) said; He would, if he
might run with Kings.

172. When Alexander passed into Asia, he gave large Donatiues, to his
Captains, and other principal Men of Virtue: In (...) much, as Parmenio (...)
him; Sir, what do you keep, for your self? He answered; Hope.

173. Antigonus used often ^goe disguised, and listen at the Tents of his
Soldiers: And at a time, heard some that spoke, very ill of him. Whereupon, he
opened the Tent a little, and said to them If you will speak ill of me, you
should go a little further off.

174. Vespasian set a Tribute upon Urine. Titus his Son, emboldned himself;
to speak to his Father of it; and represented it, as a thing indigne, and
sordid. Vespasian said nothing for the time; but a while after, when it was
forgotten, sent for a piece of Silver, out of the Tribute Money, and called to
his Son, ^ding him smell to it; and asked him; Whether he found any offense?
Who said; No. Why lo (says Vespasran again) and yet their comes out of Urine.

175. There were two Gentlemen, otherwise of equal degree, save that the one,
was of the ancienter house. The other, in courtesy, asked his Hand to kiss:
which he gave him: And he kissed it: But said withal, to right himself, by way
of Friendship; Well, I and you, against any two of them: Putting himself first.

176. Nerua the Empe^, succeeded Do^, who was ay^nicall; so as in his (...),
many noble ^ouses, were ouer^rowne, by false Ac^tions; the Instru^ents whereof,
were ^iefly, Marcellus and Regulus. The Emperor, one night, (...), (...), with
some (...) o^ seven: Amongst which, there was one, that was a dangerous Man,
and began to take, the like courses, as Marcellus, and Regulus had done. The
Emperor fell into discourse, of the Injustice, and Tyranny, of the former
time, and by name, of the two Accusers, and said; What should we do with
them, if we had them now? One of them, that were at supper, and was a free
spoken Senator, said; Marry, they should sup with us.

177. There was one that found a great mass of money, dug under ground, in
his Grandfathers house. And being some what doubtful of the case, signified
it to the Emperor, that he had found such Treasure. The Emperor made a
Rescript thus; Use it. He writ back again, that the sum was greater then
his Estate or Condition could use. The Emperor writ a new Rescript, thus;
Abuse it.

178. A Spaniard was censuring to a French Gentleman, the want of devotion
amongst the French: In that, whereas in Spain, when the Sacrament goes to the
sick, any that meets with it, turns back, and waits upon it to the house
whither it goes: But in France, they only do reverence, and pass by. But the
French Gentleman answered him; There is reason for it, for here with us,
Christ is secure amongst his Friends; but in Spain, there be so many Jews and
Marano's, that it is not amiss for him to have a Conuoy.

179. Coranus the Spaniard, at a table at dinner, fell into an extolling of his
own Father, and said; If he should have wished of God, he could not have
chosen amongst men, a better Father. Sir Henry Sauill said; What, not Abraham?
Now Coranus was doubted to descend of a race of Jews.

180. Consaluo would say; The honor of a Soldier ought to be of a good strong
web: Meaning, that it should not be so fine and curious, that every little
disgrace should catch, and stick in it.

181. One of the Seven was wont to say; That Laws were like Copwebs; where the
small Flies were caught, and the great brake through.

182. Bias gave in precept; Love, as if you should hereafter hate; and hate, as
if you should hereafter love.

183. Aristippus being reprehended of Lu^urie, by one that was not rich, for
that he gave six Crowns for a small Fish, answered; Why, what would you have
given? The other said; Some twelve pence. Aristippus said again; And six
Crowns is no more with me.

184. There was a French Gentleman speaking with an English, of the Law
Salique; That women were excluded to inherit the Crown of France. The English
said; Yes, but that was meant of the women themselves, not of such Males as
claimed by women. The French Gentleman said; Where do you find that Gloss?
The English answered; He tell you, Sir, look on the backside of the Record of
the Law Salique, and there you shall find it endorsed. Meaning, there was no
such thing at all, as the Law Salique, but that it was a Fiction.

185. There was a Friar in earnest dispute about the Law Salique, that would
needs prove it by Scripture; citing that verse of the Gospel; Lilia agri non
laborant, neque nent: Which is as much to say, (says he) that the Flower de
luces of France cannot descend, neither to Distaffe, nor Spade: that is, not to
a woman, nor to a Peasant.

186. Julius Caesar, as he passed by, was by acclamation of some that were
suborned, called King; to try how the people would take it. The People showed
great murmur and distaste at it. Caesar finding where the wind stood, slighted
it, and said; I am not King, but Caesar: As if they had mistook his name: For
Rex was a Surname amongst the Romans, as King is with us.

187. When Croesus, for his glory, showed Solon great Treasure of Gold, Solon
said to him; If another come, that has better iron then you, he will be
Master of all this Gold.

188. There was a Gentleman that came to the Tilt, all in Orange tawnie, and
ran very ill. The next day he came all in Green, and ran worse There was
one of the Lookers on asked another; What Is the reason, that this Gentleman
changes his Colors? The other answered; Sure, because it may be reported,
that the Gentleman in the Green ran worse then the Gentleman in the Orange
tawnie.

189. Aristippus said, That those that studied particular Sciences, and
neglected Philosophy, were like Penelopes Wooers, that made love to the
waiting women.

190. Plato reproved severely a young man, for entering into a dissolute house.
The young man said to him; What, for so small a matter? Plato replied; But
Custom is no small matter.

191. There was a Law made by the Romans against the Briberie and Extortion of
the Governors of Provinces. Cicero says, in a Speech of his to the People;
That he thought the Provinces would petition to the State of Rome, to have
that Law repealed. For (says he) before, the Governors did bribe and extort
as much as was sufficient for themselves; but now they bribe and extort as much
as may be enough, not only for themselves, but for the Judges, and Jurors, and
Magistrates.

192. Archidamus King of Lacedemon, having received from Philip King of
Macedon, after Philip had won the victory of Cheronea upon the Athenians,
proud Letters, writ back to him; That if he measured his own shadow, he
should find it no longer now, then it was before his victory.

193. Pyrrhus, when his Friends congratulated to him his victory over the
Romans, under the conduct of Fabricius, but with great slaughter of his own
side, said to them again; Yes, but if we have such another victory, we are
undone.

194. Cineas was an excellent Orator and Statesman, and principal Friend and
Counselor to Pyrrhus; And falling in inward talk with him, and discerning
the Kings endless ambition, Pyrrhus opened himself to him; That he intended
first a war upon Italy, and hoped to atchieue it. Cineas asked him; Sir, what
will you do then? Then (says he) we will attempt Sicily. Cineas said; Well
Sir, what then? Then (says Pyrihus) if the Gods favor us, we may conquer
Asfrick and Carthage. What then, Sir? says Cineas. Nay then (says Pyrrhus)
we may take our rest, and sacrifice, and feast every day, and make merry
withour Friends. Alas Sir (said Cineas) may we not do so now, without all this
ado?

195. The Ambassadors of Asia Minor came to Antonius, after he had imposed
upon them a double tax, and said plainly to him; That if he would have two
Tributes in one year, he must give them two S^ed-times, and two Haruests.

196. Plato was wont to say of his Master Socrates; That he was like the
Apothecaries Galley-pots, that had on the outside Apes, and Owls, and Satyrs,
but within precious drugs.

197. Lamia the Curtisan had all power with Demetrius King of Macedon: And by
her instigation he did many unjust and cruel Acts. Whereupon Lysimachus said;
That it was the first time, that ever he knew a Whore play in a Tragedy.

198. The mistocles would say of himself; That he was like a Plain Tree,
that in Tempests men fled to him, and in fair wether, men were ever cropping
his leanes.

199. The mistocles said of Speech; That it was like Arras, that spread abroad
shows fair Images, but contracted, is but like packs.

200. Brisquet, Iester to Francis the first of France, did keep a Calendar of
Fools; wherewith he did use to make the King sport; telling him ever the
reason, why he put every one into his Calendar. So when Charles the fifth
passed, upon confidence of the noble nature of Francis, through France, for the
appeasing of the rebellion of Gaunt, Brisquet put him into his Calendar. The
King asking the cause, he said; Because you having suffered at the hands of
Charles, the greatest bitterness that ever Prince did from other, he would
trust his person into your hands. Why Brisquet, (said the King) what will thou
say, if thou see him pass in as great safetic, as if it were through the
midst of Spain? Says Brisquet, Why then I will put out him, and put in you.

201. Lewis the cleuenth of France, having much abated the greatness and power
of the Peers, Nobility, and Court of Parliament, would say; That he had
brought the Crown out of Ward.

202. Sir Fulke Greuill, in Parliament, when the Lower House, in a great
Business of the Queens, stood much upon Presidents, said unto them; Why
should you stand so much upon Presidents? the times hereafter will be good or
bad: If good, Presidents will do no harm; if bad, Power will make a way where
it finds none.

203. When Peace was renewed with the French in England, diverse of the great
Counselors were presented from the French with Jewels. The Lo. Henry Ho
ward was omitted. Whereupon the King said to him; My Lo. How hap's it that you
have not a Jewel, as well as the rest? My Lo. Henry answered again,
(alluding to the Fable in Aesope;) Non sum Gallus, itaque non reperi Gemmam.

204. An Orator of Athens said to Demosthenes; The Athenians will kill you, if
they wax mad. Demosthenes replied; And they will kill you, if they be in good
sense.

205. Alexander sent to Phocyon a great Present of money. Phocyon said to the
Messenger; Why does the King send to me, and to none else? The Messenger
answered; Because he takes you to be the only good Man in Athens. Phocyon
replied; If he think so, pray let him suffer me to be good still.

206. Cosmus Duke of Florence was wont to say of perfidious Friends; That we
read, that we ought to forgive our Enemies; but we do not read, that we
ought to forgive our Friends.

207. Aeneas Syluius, that was Pius Secundus, was wont to say; That the former
Popes did wisely, to set the Lawyers on work, to debate, whether the Donation
of Constantine the Great to Syluester, were good and valid in Law, or no? The
better to skip over the matter in fact, whether there were any such thing at
all, or no?

208. At a Banquet, where those that were called the Seven Wise Men of Greece,
were invited by the Ambassador of a Barbarous King, the Ambassador related;
That there was a Neighbor King, mightier then his Master, picked quarrels with
him, by making impossible demands, otherwise threatening war: And now at that
present had demanded of him, to drink up the Sea. Whereunto one of the Wise
Men said; I would have him undertake it. Why (says the Ambassador) how shall
he come off? Thus; (says the Wise Man) Let that King first stop the Rivers
that run into the Sea, which are no part of the Bargain, and then your
Master will perform it.

209. At the same Banquet, the Ambassador desired the Seven, and some other
Wise Men, that were at the Banquet, to deliver every one of them some Sentence
or Parable, that he might report to his King the wisdom of Grecia. Which
they did. Only one was silent. Which the Ambassador perceiving, said to him;
Sir, let it not displease you, why do not you say somewhat, that I may report?
He answered; Report to your Lo. that there are of the Grecians, that can hold
their peace.

210. One of the Romans said to his Friend; What think you of such an one, as
was taken with the manner in adultery? The other answered; Marry, I think,
he was slow at dispatch.

211. Lycurgus would say of diverse of the Heroes of the Heathen; That he
wondered that men should mourn upon their days, for them, as mortal men, and
yet sacrifice to them as Gods.

212. A Papist being opposed by a Protestant, that they had no Scripture for
Images, answered; Yes, for you read, that the People laid their ficke in the
streets, that the shadow of St. Peter might come upon them: And that a shadow
was an Image: And the obscurest of Images.

213. There is an Ecclesiastical Writer of the Papists, to prove Antiquity of
Confessio, in the form that it now is, does note, that in very ancient times,
even in the Primitive times, amongst other foul slanders spread against the
Christians, one was; That they did adore the Genitories of their Priests. Which
(he says) grew from the posture of the Confessant, and the Priest in
Confession: which is, that the Confessant kneeles down, before the Priest
fitting in a raised chair above him.

214. Epaminondas, when his great Friend and Colleague in war, was Sutour to
him, to pardon an Offender, denied him. Afterward, when a Concubine of his
made the same suit, he granted it to her: Which when Pelopidas seemed to take
unkindly, he said; Such suits are to be granted to whores, but not to
Personages of worth.

215. The Lacedaemonians had in custom to speak very short. Which, being in
Empire, they might do at pleasure. But after their Defeat at Leuctra, in an
Assembly of the Grecians, they made a long Inuectiue against Epa^ondas; who
stood up, and said no more, but this; I am glad we have taught you to speak
long,

216. Fabricius, in conference with Pyrrhus, was tempted to revolt to him;
Pyrrhus telling him, that he should be Partner of his Fortunes, and second
Person to him. But Fabricius answered, in a scorn, to such a motion; Sir, that
would not be good for your self: For if the Epyrotes once know me, they will
rather desire to be governed by me, then by you.

217. Fabius Maximus being resolved to draw the war in length, still waited
upon Hannibals progress, to curb him; And for that purpose, he encamped upon
the high Grounds. But Terentius his Colleague fought with Hannibal, and was in
great peril of overthrow. But then Fabius came down the high Grounds, and got
the day: Whereupon Hannibal said; That he did ever think, that that same Cloud
that hanged upon the Hills, would at one time or other, give a Tempest.

218. There was a cowardly Spanish Soldier, that in a Defeat the Moors gave,
ran away with the foremost. Afterward, when the Army generally fled, this
Soldier was missing Whereupon, it was said by some, that he was ^saine. No
sure, (says one) he is alive, for the Moors eat no ^ares flesh.

219. Hanno the Carthaginian was sent Commissioner, by the ^tate, after the
second Carthaginian War, to Rome, to supplicate for peace, and in the end
obtained it. Yet one of the sharper Senators said; You have often broken with
us the Peaces, whereunto you have been sworn, I pray, by what Gods will you
swear? Hanno answered; By the same Gods, that have punished the former
perjury so severely.

220. Thales being asked, when a Man should marry, said; Young Men not yet,
old Men not at all.

221. Thales said; That ^fe and Death were (...) one. One that was ^esent asked
him; Why do not you die then? Thales said again; Because they ^e all one.

222. Caesar, after first he had possessed Rome, Pompey being fled, offered to
enter the sacred Treasury, to take the Moneys that were there stored.
Metellus, Tribune of the People, did forbid him. And when Metellus was violent
in it, and would not desist, Caefar turned to him, and said; Presume no
further, or I will lay you dead. And when Metellus was with those words
somewhat astonished, Caesar added; Young Man, it had been easier ^e to do
this, then (...) speak it.

223. An Egyptian Priest ^uing conference with Solon, said to him; You
Grecians ^e ever children; you ^e no Knowledge of ^quitie, nor Antiqui^ of
Knowledge.

224. The Counsel did make remonstrance to Queen Elizabeth, of the continual
Conspiracies against her Life: And namely, of a late one: And showed her a
Rapier, taken from a Conspiratour, that had a false chape, being of brown
paper, but gilt over, as it could not be known from a chape of Metal; which
was devised, to the end, that without drawing, the Rapier might give a stab;
And, upon this occasion, advised her, that she should go less abroad to take
the air, weakly accompanied, as she used. But the Queen answered; That she
had rather be dead, then put in custody.

225. Chilon would say; That Gold was tried with the Touchstone, and Men with
Gold.

226. Zelim was the first of the Ottomans that did shave his beard, whereas his
Predecessors wore it long. One of his Basha's asked him; Why be altered the
custom of his Predecessors? He answered; Because, you Basha's, shall not
lead me by the beard, as you did them.

227. Diogenes was one day in the Marketplace, with a candle in his hand, And
being asked; What he sought? He said; He sought a Man.

228. Bi^s being asked; How a Man should order his life answered; As if a Man
should live long, or die quickly.

229. Queen Elizabeth was entertained, by my Lo. Burleigh at Theobalds: And at
her going away, my Lo. obtained of the Queen, to make seven Knights. They were
Gentlemen of the Country, of my Lords Friends and Neighbors. They were placed
in a rank, as the Queen should pass by the Hall; And to win Antiquity of
Knight hood, in order, as my Lo. favored; though indeed the more principal
Gentlemen were placed lowest. The Queen was told of it, and said nothing; but
when she went along, she passed them all by, as far as the skreene, as if she
had forgot it: And when she came to the skreene, she seemed to take herself
with the manner, and said; I had almost forgot what I promised. With that she
turned back, and knighted the lowest first, and so upward Whereupon Mr.
Stanhope of the Pri^ Chamber, a while after told her; Your Maiestic was too
fine for my Lo. B^leigh. She answered; I have but fulfilled the Scrip^re; The
first shall be ^st, and the last first.

230. Simonides being ^sked of Hiero; What he thought of God? ^skt a
Seuen-nights time, to consider of it. And at the Seuennights end, he asked a
Forthnights time. At the Forthnights end, (...) Month. At which Hiero
maruelling, Simonides answered; That the longer he thought on it, the more
difficult he found it.

231. Anacharsis would say concerning the Popular Estates of Graecia; That he
wondered, how at Athens, Wise Men did propose, and Fools did dispose.

232. Solon compared the People unto the ^ea, and Orators to ^he Winds; For
that ^he Sea would be calm and quiet, if the Winds did not trouble it.

233. Socrates was pronounced by the Oracle of Delphos, to be the wisest Man of
Greece; which he would put from himself, ironically saying; There could be
nothing in him to verify the Oracle, except this; That he w^ not wise, and
knew it; and others were not wise, and knew it not.

234. Caro the Elder, what time many of the Romans had Statua's crected in
their Honor, was asked by one in a kind of wonder; Why he had (...)? And
answered; ^e had much rather, ^en should ask, and ^onder, why he had no (...),
than why he ^ad a Statua.

235. Sir Fulke Greuill, had much and pri^ate access, to Queen Elizabeth,
which he used honorably, and did many men good, yet he would say merrily of
himself; That he was like Robin Goodfellow; For when the Maids spilt the
Milke-pans, or kept any racket, they would lay it upon Robin: So what tales,
the Ladies about the Queen, told her, or other bad offices, that they did,
they would put it upon him.

236. Socrates, when there was showed him, the Book of Heraclitus the Obscure,
and was asked his opinion of it, answered; Those things, that I understood, were
excellent, I imagine, so were those, that I understood not: But they require a
Diuer of Delos.

237. Bion asked an envious Man, that was very fad; What harm had befallen to
him, or what good had be^en to another Man?

238. Stilpo, the Philosopher, when the people flocked about him, and that one
said to him; The people come wondering about you, as if it were, to see some
strange Beast. No, (says he) it is to see a Man, which Diogenes sought with
his Lantern.

239. Antisthenes, being asked of one; What Learning was most ne^fary for Man's
life? answered; To unlearn that which is naught.

240. There was a politic Sermon, that had no Divinity in it, was preached
before the King. The King, as he came forth, said to Bishop Andrews; Call you
this a Sermon? The Bishop answered; And it please your Majesty, by a charitable
construction, it may be a Sermon.

241. Bishop Andrews, was asked, at the first coming over of the Bishop of
Spalato; Whether he were a Protestant, or no? He answered; Truly, I know not,
but he is a Detestant, of diverse Opinions of Rome.

242. Caius Marius, was General of the Romans, against the Cimbers, who came,
with such a Sea of Multitude, upon Italy. In the fight, there was a Band of the
Cadurcians, of a Thousand, that did notable service. Whereupon, after the
fight, Marius did Denison them all, for Citizens of Rome, though there was no
Law to warrant it. One of his Friends, did represent it unto him, that he had
transgressed the Law, because that privilege, was not to be granted, but by
the People, Whereto Marius answered; That for the noise of Arms, he could not
hear the Laws.

243. Aeneas Syluius would say; That the Christian Faith and Law, though it had
not ^eene confirmed by Miracles, yet was worthy to be received, for the
Honesty thereof.

244 Henry Noel would say; That Courtiers were like Fasting Days; They were
next the Holy Days, but in themselves, they were the most meager Days, of the
week.

245. Mr. Bacon would say; That it was in Business, as it is commonly in
ways; That the next way is commonly the foulest, and that if a Man will go
the fairest way, he must go somewhat about.

246. Augustus Caesar, out of great indignation, against his two Daughters, and
Post^umus Agrippa, his Grandchild; whereof the first two were infamous, and
the last otherwise unworthy, would fay; That they were not his Seed, but some
Impostumes, that ^ad broken from him.

247. Catosaid; The best way, to keep good Acts in memory, was to refresh them
with now.

248. Poni^ey did consum^e the war against. Sertorius, When M^ellus had
brought the Enemi^ some what low. H^ did also consummat the w^ against the
Fugitives, whom Crassus had before defeated in a great B^taile. So when
Lu^llus, had had great and glorious Victo^ies, against Mithri^ates, and
Tigranes, ^er Pompey, by ^eanes his Friends ^ade, was sent, to ^ut an end, to
that ^arre. Whereupon Lucullus, taking indignation, as a disgrace offered to
himself, said; That Pompey was a carrion (...), that when others had strooken
down Bodies, he came to prey upon them.

249. Diogenes, when Mice came about him, as he was eating, said; I see, that
even Diogenes nourishes Parafites.

250. Epictetus used to say; That one of the vulgar, in any ill that happens to
him, blames ^hers: A Nouice in ^hilosophy, blames himself: And a philo^opher,
blames neither the one, nor the other.

251. Hiero, visited by Pythagoras, askthim; Of what condition he was?
Pythagoras answered; Sir, I kno^ you have been at the Olympian Games. Yes,
says Hiero. Thither (faith Pythagoras) come some, to win the Prizes. Some come
to sell their Merchandise, because it is a kind of Mart of all Greece. Some
come, to meet their Friends, and make merry, because of the great confluence of
all sorts. Others come only to look on. I am one of them, that come to look
on. Meaning it of Philosophy, and the Contemplative Life.

252. Mr. Bettenham used to say; That Riches were like Mucke: When it lay, upon
an heap, it gave but a stench, and ill odor; but when it was spread upon the
ground, then it was cause of much fruit.

253. The same Mr. Bettenham said; That tuous Men, were like some Herbs, and
Spices, that give not their sweet smell, till they be broken, and crushed.

254. There was a Painter, became a Physician. Whereupon, one said to him; You
have done well; For before, the faults of your work were seen, but now they
are unseen.

255. One of the Philosophers was asked; What a wise Man differed from a Fool?
He answered; Send them both naked, to those that know them not, and you shall
perceive.

256. Caesar, in his Book, that he made against Cato, (which is lost,) did
write, to show the force of Opinion, and Reverence, of a Man, that had once
obtained, a popular reputation; That there were some, that found Cato drunk,
and they were ashamed, in stead of Cato.

257. Aristippus, sailing in a Tempest, showed signs of Fear. One of the
Seamen said to him, in an insulting manner; We that are Plebeians, are not
troubled, you, that are a Philosopher, are afraid. Aristippus answered; There
is not the like wager upon it, for me to perish, and you,

258. There was an Orator, that defended a cause of Aristippus, and prevailed.
Afterward, he asked Aristippus; Now, in your distress, what did Socrates do
you good? Aristippus answered; Thus; in making true, that good, which you said
of me.

259. Aristippus said; He took money of his Friends, not so much to use it
himself, as to teach them, how to bestow their money.

260. A Strumpet said to Aristippus; That she was with child by him: He
answered; You know that no more, than, if you went through a Hedge of Thorns,
you could say, This Thorn pricked me.

261. The La. Paget, that was very private with Queen Elizabeth, declared her
self much, against her Match, with Monsieur. After Monsieurs Death, the Queen
took extreme grief (at least as she made show) And kept within her
Bedchamber, and one Ante-Chamber, for 3. weeks space, in token of Mourning.
At last, she came forth, into her Priuy-Chamber, and admitted her Ladies, to
have access unto her; And amongst the rest, my La. Paget presented her self,
and came to her, with a smiling countenace The Queen bent her brows, and
seemed to be highly displeased, and said to her; Madam, you are not ignorant,
of my extreme grief, and do you come to me, with a countenance of joy? My
Lady Paget answered; Alas, and it please your Majesty, it is impossible for me,
to be absent from you 3 weeks, but that when I see you, I must look
cheerfully No, no, (said the Queen, not forgetting her former auerlenesse
from the Match) You have some other conceit in it; Tell me plainly. My Lady
answered; I must obey you. It is this. I was thinking, how happy your Majesty
was, in that you married not Monsieur: For seeing, you take such thought, for
his Death, being but your Friend, if he had been your Husband, sure it would
have cost you your life.

262. Sir Edward Dyer, a grave and wise Gentleman, did much believe in Kelley
the Alchymist; That he did indeed the work, and made Gold: Insomuch, as he
went himself into Germany, where Kelly then was, to inform himself fully
thereof. After his return, he dined with my Lord of Canterbury, where, at that
time, was at the Table, Dr. Brown the Phifician. They fell in talk of Kelley.
Sir Edward Dyer, turning to the Archbishop, said; I do assure your Grace,
that, that I shall tell you, is truth. I am an Eie-witnesse thereof, and if I
had not seen it, I should not have believed it. I saw Master Kelly put of the
base Metal into the Chrusible, and after it was set a little upon the fire,
and a very small quantity of the Medicine put in, and ^tirr'd with a stick
of wood, it came forth in great proportion, perfect Gold, to the Touch, to the
Hammer, to the Test. Said the Bishop; You had need take heed, what you say, Sir
Edward Dier, for here is an Infidel at the Board. Sir Edward Dier said again
pleasantly; I would have looked for in Infidel, sooner in any place, than at
your Graces table. What say you Doctor Brown? Says the Bishop. Dr. Brown
answered, after his blunt, and hudling manner; The Gentleman has spoken enough
for me. Why, (^aith the Bishop) What has he said? Marry, (says Doctor
Brown) he said, he would not have believed it, except he bad seen it; And no
more will I.

263. Democritus said; That Truth did lie in profound pits, and when it was
got, it needed much refining.

264. Dr. Johnson said; That in sickness there were three things, that were
material: The Physician; the Disease; and the Patient. And if any two of these
joined, then they have the victory: For, Ne Hercules quidem contra duos. If
the Physician and the Patient join, then down goes the Disease; for the
Patient recouers. If the Physician and the Disease join, then down goes the
Patient; that is, where the Physician mistakes the cure. If the Patient and the
Disease join, then down goes the Physician; for he is discredited.

265. Alexander visited Diogenes in his Tub. And when he asked him; What he
would desire of him? Diogenes answered; That you would stand a little aside,
that the Sun may come to me.

266. Diogenes said of a young Man that danced daintily, and wasmuch commended;
The better, the worse.

267. Diogenes called an ill Musician, Cock. Why? (says he:) Diogenes
answered; Because when you crow, Men use to rise.

268. Heraclitus the Obscure said; The dry Light was the best Soul. Meaning,
when the Faculties Intellectual are in vigor, not wet, nor, as it were,
blouded by the Affections.

269. There was in Oxford a cowardly Fellow, that was a very good Archer. He
was abused grossly by another, and moaned himself to Walter Ralegh, then a
Scholar, and asked his advice; What he should do to repair the wrong had
been offered him? Ralegh answered; Why, challenge him at a match of ^ting.

270. White head, a grave Divine, was much esteemed by Queen Elizabeth, but
not preferred, because he was against the government of Bishops. He was of a
blunt Stoicall Nature. He came one day to the Queen, and the Queen happened
to say to him; I like thee the better, Whitehead, because thouliuest unmarried.
He answered again; In troth, Madam, I like you the worse for the same cause.

271. There was a Nobleman that was lean of visage, but immediately after his
Marriage he grew pretty plumpe and fat. One said to him; Your Lop. does
contrary to other married Men; for they at the first wax lean, and you wax
fat. Sir Walter Ralegh stood by, and said; Why, there is no Beast, that if you
take him from the Common, and put him into the Several, but he will wax fat.

272. Diogenes seeing one that was a Bastard, casting stones among the People,
bade him take heed, He hit not his Father.

27 Dr. Lawd said; That some Hypocrites, and seeming mortified men, that held
down their heads, were like little Images, that they place in the very bowing
of the vaults of Churches, that look, as if they held up the Church, but are
but Puppets.

274. It was said among some of the grave Prelates of the Council of Trent, in
which the Schoole-Diuines bore the sway; That the Schoolmen were like the
Astronomers; who, to save the Phenomena, framed to their conceit Eccentricks,
and Epicycles, and a wonderful Engine of Orbs, though no such things were: So
they, to save the practice of the Church, had devised a number of strange
Positions.

275. It was also said by many, concerning the Canons of that Council; That
we are beholding to Aristotle for many Articles of our Faith.

276. The Lo. Henry Howard, being Lo. Privy Seal, was asked by the King
openly at the Table, (where commonly he entertained the King) upon the sudden.
My Lo, have you not a desire to see Rome? My Lo. Privy Seal answered; Yes
indeed, Sir. The King said; And why? My Lo. answered; Because, and it please
your Majesty, it was once the Seat of the greatest Monarchy: And the
Seminary of the brauest men in the world, amongst the Heathen: And then
again, because after it was the Sea of so many holy Bishops in the Primitive
Church, most of them Martyrs. The King would not give it over, but said; And
for nothing else? My Lo. answered; Yes, and it please your Majesty, for two
things especially. The one, to see him, who they say has such a power, to
forgive other men's sins, to confess his own sins upon his knees, before a
Chaplain or Priest: And the other is, to hear Antichrist say his Creed.

277. There was a Nobleman said of a great Counselor; That he would have
made the worst Farrier in the world, for he never shod horse, but he cloyed
him: so, he never commended any man to the King for service, or upon occasion
of suit, or otherwise, but that he would come in, in the end, with a But, and
drive in a nail to his disadvantage.

278. There was a Lady of the West Country, that gave great Entertainment at
her House to most of the gallant Gentlemen thereabout: And amongst others, Sir
Walter Ralegh was one. This Lady, though otherwise a stately Dame, was a
notable good Huswife; and in the morning betimes, she called to one of her
Maids, that looked to the Swine, and asked; Is the piggy served? Sir Walter
Raleghs Chamber was fast by the Ladies, so as he heard her. A little before
dinner, the Lady came down, in great state, into the great chamber, which was
full of Gentlemen: And as soon as Sir Walter Ralegh set eye upon her; Madam
(says he) is the piggie served? The La. answered; You know best, whether you
have had your Breakefast.

279. There was a Gentleman fell very sick, and a Friend of his said to him;
Surely you are in danger; I pray send for a Physician. But the sick man
answered; It is no matter, for if I die, I will die at leisure.

280. There was an Epicurean vaunted, that diverse of other Sects of
Philosophers, did after turn Epicureans, but there was never any Epicurean,
that turned to any other Sect. Whereupon, a Philosopher, that was of another
Sect, said; The reason was plain, for that Cocks may be made Capons, but
Capons could never be made Cocks.

FINIS.

