A PAIR OF SPECTACLES FOR SIR HVMFREY LINDE TO SEE HIS WAY WITHAL.

OR AN ANSWER TO HIS book called, VIA TVTA, A safe way: wherein the book is
showed to be a labyrinthe of error and the author a blind guide. By I. R.

The children of Israel say the way of our Lord is not right. What are not my
ways right o house of Israel, and not rather your ways crooked? Ezech. 18.29.

Catholicae fidei regula velut via est quae te ducat ad patriam. The rule of
the Catholic faith is as it were the way which may lead thee to thy country.

Qui praetergreditur regulam fidei, non accedit in via sed recedit de via. He
that goes beside the rule of faith (which is the Catholic Church) does not
come in the way, but goes out of the way.

Aug. tract. 98. in Io. PERMISSV SVPERIORVM.

1631.

THE EPISTLE DEDICATORY TO SIR HVMPHREY Linde.
1. SIR some while since, you wrote a book of the Visibility of your Church,
calling it via tuta, a safe way; provoked thereunto, as you say, by the
challenge of a Jesuit: to which now after a long pause, you seem to answer,
though it be not (as you also say) your profession; thereby to vindicate the
cause of your Mother, the Church of England; and maintain your own credit.
And all this you pretend to do out of our own authors. It is true Sir
Humphrey, that a Jesuit made you a challenge, as many have done before, and do
still to all Protestants, to show where their Church was before Luther; and
thereby have putt them to much study and pain, to find her out. And some
finding the task so hard, have been feign to turn about another way, and
tell us it is not needful for the Church to be visible, which they prove,
God's arrow against God's enemies by Hen Smith. Cap. 5. Fulke Apoc. cap. 12.
because in the days of Elias it perished, as they say; for he said he was
left alone; and in the Apocalypse it is said, that the Woman shall fly into the
desert. Which say they is all one, as that the Church must be invisible. But
you now, as it should seem, taking your self to be somewhat a better man then
others that have gone before you, will needs take upon you to show where your
Church was before Luther. Wherein you are so glorious and confident, that you
style your book a safe way leadinge all Christians to the true, ancient, and
Catholic faith, now professed in the Church of England; and this you
undertake to perform by the testimonies and confessions even of your best
learned adversaries.

2. Which book of yours, though it has been long out, and gained you much
fame among some of your own sect, yet among Catholics it has seemed of so
small account as noe man has all this while thought it worth the answearing,
thinking it the best way of answer for such toys to let them dye as they
spring: but since you not conceiving this to be the true reason of our
silence, nor having reguard to your own credit which is less impaired by
silence then writing, stand still printing and reprinting this your wise piece
of work, I have thought good to give it some answer. For though my intention
at first, were only to satisfye a private friend, (which was somewhat stumbled
with it) by gathering some few corruptions, whereby he might guess of the
rest; Yet coming to read your book, and finding the very choice hard in such
abundance of corruptions; and considering that many conceived highly thereof,
the rather because it was not answered, I resolved upon a little more full
answer, which might serve for satisfaction, not only of that one friend, but
of others also, who may have conceived the like opinion of this your book: the
very title and first page especially moving me thereunto, in which are
contained so great promises, or rather so great braggs, that if Sir Humphrey,
you make them good, we may well change your name from Sir Humphrey to Sir
Hercules; for it is more then an Herculian labor which you undertake therein:
if you do not, I presume you will be content to change your surname of Lynde to
another word, not far different in sound, as beginning with the two first
letters the same, and more suitable to your deeds: though (not to vndubbe you)
howsoever the matter fall out, there will still be left for you a title of Sir.
Which title should seem a little by your phrase of speaking, to be the thing
that made you engage your self in this quarrel, as if by the honor of your
Knighthoode you thought your self bound thereunto: which if it were, Sir Fr.
Hastings. Sir Edw. Hobby. Sir Edw. Cook.
you might have remembered, how ill some such Knight venturers as your self have
sped with their zeal. But seeing, you will not be ware by other men's harms,
but be putting your fingar into the fire, you must take your chance as they
did. And for trial of this quarrel you shall give me leave to enter into the
lists with you in the examination of the book it self: here only I shall a
little examine what you say in your dedicatory Epistle.

3. In which, I reflect first, upon the title, which is, to the religious and
well affected Gentry of this Kingdom, what should be the cause, you should
dedicate this your work to the Gentry particularly, the thing yt self
pertaining alike to all sorts of men, who have souls to save; unless it were
that by having specially to do with Ge^tleme^, you would feign seem to have
somewhat of the Gentlemen. For which I blame you not, having need thereof: for
setting your Knighthood a part, it may be your gentry may be questioned, if it
be true that I have heard, of the honest Grocer your father, who dwelt next
door to the George in Kings street: by which your birth as it were by a
natural kind of congruity, you may seem rather ordained to have to do with a
pestel and a mortar, then a sword, or pen. This I do not say Sir Humphrey,
that a man meanly borne, may not by his deserts come into a better rank; for
reason, authority, and example of all sorts teach the contrary; but because, as
nobility of extraction and virtue joined together, add and receive luster
reciprocally one from the other; So meanness of qualities or conditions, such
as you show in your writings, and as (God willing) I shall out of them
manifestly prove, does more show it self, being joined with a mean birth and
education, the one as it were bearing witness of the other. Wherefore me
thinks Sir, you being privy to your own wants of this kind, should have
forborne to proclayme them to the world by this manner of writing; which every
man presently sees, cannot come from an ingenuous disposition, such as a
Gentleman is presumed to have.

4. But now to come to your Epistle it self, you say you have attempted to send
forth this Essay of your poor endeauours, to make the world see, it is noe
difficult matter for a mean Lay man, to prove the ancient Visibility of the
Protestant profession; provoked thereto by a Iesuit's challenge, to show out of
good authors, that the Protestant's church was visible in all ages before
Luther; and this you undertake to do, not only out of the most orthodox
fathers, but also out of the Romish Bishops. Doctors, Cardinals etc. This
essay of your labors Sir Humphrey, is poor indeed, not to stand
complementinge with you, as I shall after show: and for your proofs out of
Fathers, and other writers in the Roman Church, we shall there also see what
ones, they are; that is, either nothing to the purpose, or out of Authors
branded with the marks of heresy, or at least temerity and singularity. For the
challenge it self, wherein consists the state of the question, I say here,
that you do not set it down so truly and fully, as you should. For you
were to show the Visibility of your Church, by naming some who in all ages did
profess the Protestant faith, as it is now taught, and professed in England,
entirely beleiuing all that is here believed, and beleeuinge nothing else that
is contrary unto it. Which you might have done, if it could be done, out of
some good histories, without standing upon proofs of the particular points of
doctrine, out of this or that author, for that was not to the present purpose.

5. Neither were it sufficient, as you say in your next paragraphe, seeing it
is confessed on all sides, that the faith of Christ in the first age had
visible Professors, therefore to prove that the Faith of the Church of England
is that, which was delivered to the Saints by Christ, and his Apostles, without
farther recital of succeeding witnesses: this I say were not sufficient. For
the challenge then which you were now to answer, and controversy which you
were to handle, was not so much of the truth of this or that particular point,
or of the doctrine even in general, but of the Church it self, which was to
deliver the doctrine, and by which we were to come to the knowledge of the
truth, who the men were, that were trusted to keep the depositu^ which S. Paul
gave Timothy charge of, where the Church was, which the same S. Paul calls
the house of God, the pillar and firmament of truth? Which was the seed of
Christ, whereof I say prophecieth, and promises in the person of God the
Father, to his Son, that he would never take away the words of truth from
their mouth? Hoc foedus meum cum eis dicit Dominus. Spiritus meus, Isai. 59.21.
qui est in te, and verba mea, quae posui in ore tuo, non recedent de ore tuo,
and de ore seminis tui, and de ore Seminis Seminis tui, dicit Dominus, amodo
and vsque in sempiternum. This is my covenant with them says our Lord. My
spirit that is in thee, and my words that I have put in thy mouth shall not
depart out of thy mouth, and out of the mouth of thy seed, and out of the
mouth of thy Seed's seed says our Lord from this present and for ever. Who
they be, to whom our blessed Savior himself in person, and with his own
mouth promised, that he would send the Spirit of truth to remain with them for
ever? and that himself would be with them to the consummation of the world? So
as this controversy being of the Church it self, which was to be found out, by
the visibility and succession thereof, not so much by the doctrine, it could
be no way sufficient to prove that the doctrine of the Protestant church, was
taught anciently: though that can never be proved. For as I say the question
is not of the doctrine, but of the persons: Wherein the Jesuit took the right
way, like a wise man and a good scholar, to find out the Doctrine, which is a
thing more spiritual and less subject to the sense, by that which is
corporal and more subject to the view of all sorts of men. For this is the way
that all Scholars, in the teaching of all Sciences take, to wit, to begin
with that which is known and evident, and by it to come to the knowledge of
that which is hidden, according to Aristotel's Doctrine.

6. And this has ever been the way, which the holy fathers have taken, either
in proving the Catholic faith, or disprouinge of heresies. So Tertullian,
praescrip. cap. 32. and lib. 3. car. adu. Marcio.
so Irenaeus, lib. 3. cap. 1.2.3. and lib. 4. cap. 43.45.46.
so Cyprian, ep. 52. and 76.
Optatus, lib. 2. aduer. Parm.
and most of all that great Doctor S. Augustine psalm. 2. part. Don. and ep.
165. and de vtil. credend. cap. 7.
in several places; and particularly in his book de vtilitate credenai: where
writing to his friend Honoratus, whom he labors to draw from the Manichaean
heresy, and putting case that he did doubt what religion to follow, he says
without doubt he were to begin his enquiry from the Catholic Church.
Proculdubio ab Ecclesia Catholica sumendum exordium. For says he, whereas
there be among Christians many heresies, all which desire to seem Catholics,
and call others Haeretiques, there is one Church, as all grant, if you reguard
the whole world refertior multitudine, vt autem qui nouerunt affirmant etiam
veritate sincerior caeteris omnibus, sed de veritate alia quaestio est. More
full of people, and as they that know her for truth more sincere then any
other: but of the truth, it is another question. So as here Saint Augustine
makes the first question of the Church it self: Which he makes to be the
first thing that a man that doubts and seeks to save his soul must enquire
after, leaving the truth of the doctrine to be disputed in the second place.
praescr. cap. 19.
The like also has Tertullian giving withal a good reason thereof: for making
this prescription or exception against Haeretiques, that we are not to admit
them so far as to dispute with them of Scriptures, he says it is first to
be disputed. Quibus competat fides ipsa etc. to whom faith it self belongs,
to the which the Scriptures pertain. From whom, and by whom, and when, and to
whom that discipline was delivered, whereby men are made Christians. For where
it shall appear, that there is the truth of Christian discipline and faith
there shall be the truth of scriptures and expositions, and all Christian
traditions, so Tertullian. In whose judgment it is plain, that we are first
to seek the persons that profess the faith, that is the Church: because there
certainly is the truth to be found. Which is the course we Catholics take,
and persuade other men to take, following the stepps of our Forefathers; to
wit, to seek out the Visible Church: whereas Haeretiques, as appears by
Saint Augustine in the same book, take the clean contrary course just as you
do here Sir Humphrey.

7. This therefore being the thing which you, should have done, and you being
so mistaken in it, what can be expected at your hands, but that by declining
the question, in steed of vindicatinge your Mother's cause, and maintayning
your own credit, you betray the one, and overthrow the other; being not able
to show your pedigree and Succession, and in steed of making men see it is noe
difficult matter to prove your visibility, to make them see it is not only
difficult, but also impossible. For though you pretend facility in words, yet
in deeds you show impossibility. That then which you say in your bravery, that
you will meet the adversary upon his own ground, and deal with him at his
own weapon every man sees how false and vain a flourish it is. For your
adversaries ground that he appoints you, is to show your Succession in all
ages; and his weapon is a catalogue of Bishops and Pastors succeeding one
another; Evangelists, and Doctors, the former to govern, the later to
instruct, such as S. Paul, mentions Ephesians. 4.11. And he gave some Apostles,
and some Prophets, and other some Evangelists, and other some Pastors and
Doctors, to the consummation of the Saints, unto the work of the ministry,
unto the edifying of the body of Christ, until we meet all into the unity of
Faith. Bring such a Succession of Pastors, such a people, living in this or
that City or Country, professing the same faith and belief which Protestants
now do; and you meet your adversary upon the same terms; for of this kind of
weapon he has offered you many, as Genebrard, Gualterus, Bellarmine, Sanders,
and many others. Bring such a catalogue of your own, like one of these, and
then you discharge your creditt, which till then lies engaged. And for this
you should not have needed to take all that pains, nor putt your self to
those straites of proving out of our own Bishops, Cardinals, Doctors etc.
that your Doctrine has been taught in former ages. For to be as liberal with
you again; the Jesuit would have given you the freedom to take all manner of
Writers, whether Catholics or Haeretiques, Pagans, Jews, Turks, or what
profession else soever they were of, to see whether out of all together, you
could patch up a Catalogue, or bring any the least mention of such a goodly
people and commonwealth; as we see suddenly started up in the world, upon
the revolt of Luther. For we Catholics have a public testimony of the
Visibility of our Church, from all sorts of men, all sects and professions
whatsoever, that being a condition and property, whereof the whole world cannot
but take notice, and consequently all manner of men must necessarily witness.

8. And therefore Sir Humhrey while you think you have hitt the bird in the
eye, by proving (though you should prove it as you never can) out of our
Cardinals, Bishops, and Doctors, that your faith was taught in former ages,
you are clean mistaken. For Visibility and antiquity are two different
properties: antiquity properly belongs to the doctrine and belief of the
Church; but Visibility properly belongs to the Church it self, as it is a
Church, to wit, a community, commonwealth, or kingdom consisting of men living
in a certain form of government, and professing a certain outward form or
face of Religion, by Sacrifice, Sacraments, and other rites, tending to the
worship of God and Sanctification of themselves, wherein all that are of that
Community do participate, and thereby are distinguished and differenced from
all such as are not of the same Community and profession. Wherefore you being
challenged to show such a community, and flying from that to prove the antiquity
of your Doctrine, out of our Fathers and Schoolmen, what else do you do, but
confess your Church to want Visibility, and your self honesty, by
endeavoring to deceive men with a specious title of a safe way; intending
indeed to lead them, from the true safe way of the Catholic Church, into
such certain by-ways and corners, as our B. Savior foretold us of, when he
said, that False Prophets should come and tell us, lo here is Christ, or
there, do not believe them. And by this you may perceive, how vnfittly you
join, or rather confound antiquity and Visibility, by saying in the very
beginning of this your Epistle, the ancient visibility of the Protestant
profession, and so in many other places. For Visibility must as well be new,
to follow your manner of speaking, as ancient: that is, it is a thing which
has been without interruption, is, and ever must be to the worlds end, in
the true Church of God; and is noe more tied to these primitiues or ancient
times, then to these later of ours, nor noe more to those times of ours then to
those that shall come after us again. Or if it more belong to one time then
another, it rather belongs more to succeeding times. For as it is clear by
the Prophecies going before our B. Sauiour's coming, and the accomplishment of
the same, after his coming the Church was to begin as all things else in this
world, from a small beginning; and after, by time and continuance, receive a
greater increase; and by little and little come to spread over the whole world;
at which time, it must needs be more visible then in the beginning. So that
little Stone, Dan. 2.36.
which the Prophett Daniel speaks of in figure of the Kingdom of Christ,
which is his Church, grew by little and little to be so great a mountain, as
it filled the whole Earth: at which time certainly, it was more visible then
at first, when it was but beginning. So the Church which began at Jerusalem,
and from thence was spread by degrees to other Countries, and is to go on
increasing to the utmost bounds of the Earth, to the very end of the World,
must needs be more visible and apparent, as it goes more dilating it self in
space of place, and continuance of time.

9. But now you come upon us with a counter challenge, demanding by what
authority of scriptures and ancient Fathers, we have imposed new articles of
Christian belief upon Priests and people: for, as you say, truth denies
antiquity and universality to the principal articles of the new Roman Creed:
and you say our best learned Romanists, profess that most of them were
unknown to antiquity. Wherefore after a digressio^ against implicit faith,
and our altering and changing the ten commandments (as you say very wisely)
you wish, that they that urge a catalogue of such Protestants, as have in all
ages professed your 39. articles, should produce one ancient orthodox father in
every age, for these 1500. years, who has held all our Trent articles de
fide, and that then you will acknowledge our Professors visible in all ages;
our Cardinals, Bishops, and Schoolmen mistaken, and that they are to be
reformed by an Index expurgatorius; you will acknowledge the nouelty of your
Church, and submitt your self with an implicit faith to the Roman Church.
So you: for your counterchalle^ge Sir Humphrey, had you marked the challenge
well, you might have spared it; for the Jesuit required you to perform
nothing, but that which many on the Catholic part have performed ready to
your hand, that is, that you should bring such a Catalogue of succession, for
proof of the Visibility of your Church, as we did many of ours, as Sanders,
Bellarmine, Gualterus, and others. You ask by what authority we impose new
articles of belief upon men? this question is not to the purpose: but I
answer, by denying your suppositio^; for we do not impose new articles upon
men, but defend the old, against new fa^gled fellows, neither is this the
proper place for you to require, or for us to bring proofs out of Fathers and
Scriptures of particular points; whereof you cannot but know, that many great
and learned men in the Catholic Church, have written great volumes; which noe
haeretique has ever yet durst venture to answer, how then can you so
brasenly say, that our own best learned confess, that the articles of the
Trent-Creede as you call them, are unknown to antiquity: what point is there
defined in the Council of Trent, which is not proved by way of authority of
scriptures and fathers by Iudocus Coccius, by way of reason and solution of
arguments by Bell. by way of history by Baronius, to say nothing of others?
some may perhaps say, that some points there defined were not before defined by
any general Council; but to bring any Catholic to say that they are new or
that they were not anciently nor commonly believed I dare say Sir Humphrey, is
more then you can prove: but suppose any one may say, that there is noe proof
extant in any ancient author of this or that point, must it therefore follow
that it is new? noe surely, for all things are not written, as S. John
verifyeth of our Sauiour's own words and deeds: how much less then other
things, which yet are generally taught and practiced in the Catholic Church:
which very practice without farther proof S. Augustine makes to be an
argument of antiquity? Aug cont. Don. lib. 4.24.
but of this newness of faith, whereof you so ignorantly complain, and
likewise of implicit faith, I shall say more afterward.

10. Now for our leauinge out the second commandment wherewith you tax us, and
changing the fourth from sanctify the Sabbath to Sanctify the holidays, it is
pity you are so hard driven, as when you are called upon to prove your
Succession and Visibility of your Church, to fall upon us for the
commandments: a thing of so different nature and so triuiall. For first it
is false, that we leave out that which you call the second commandment, Look
in our bibles and see whether you find it not there in all Editions, and
translations as well English as Latin, or any other language whatsoever. How
then do we leave it out? you will say we leave it out in our catechismes;
true: but to leave a thing out of a catechism, is not absolutely to leave it
out, as long as it is else where. But besides to answer you another way, we
leave out many other things, as that God is a jealous God, that he reuengeth
the Sins of the Father to the 3. and 4. generation and the like, though they
go intermingled with the commandments in the text: and this we do without
blame; because they either pertain not precisely to the commandment, or are
sufficiently expressed in the very words of the commandment it self. So we
say of this, that it is either contained in the first commandment being only
an explication of the same; or if it be a distinct precept as some Deuines say,
then is it ceremonial only, and consequently abrogated with the whole Law.

11. So likewise for the other commandment of Sanctifying the Holidays I
answer that in our bibles or text of scripture we keep the word Sabbath, and
in most and best catechismes also, as for example Canisius, Bellarmines large
catechism, and others but specially in that of the Council of Trent set out
by authority of Pius V. Which were answer enough to show we make noe such
mystery of it, since sometimes we say Sabbath sometimes Holidays: as indeed
we well may, the sense being the same: and we may better use this liberty in
catechismes, where we stand not so much to cite the very words of scripture,
as to declare the meaning of them; though in the text it self we keep
precisely to the very words. Where yet we explicate it in the same sense,
following therein the example of Scripture it self, which uses those words
indifferently as may appear Leuit. cap. 23. Where other Holidays beside the
Saturday or Sabbath are called Sabbata 3. or 4. times in that one chapter: and
in the beginning thereof those days which are called Sabbata, are called twice
Feriae sanctae Holidays. So as you Sir Humfrey in making such a deal of
difference between Sabbath and Holyday show your self to be but shallowly read
in scripture. Besides I may answer to this as to the former objection, that
this commandment was partly ceremonial, to wit, for as much as pertayneth to
that particular day of saturday, and partly natural, to wit, so far as it
obliges to the observing of some day or time holy indeterminately.

12. But if we be such great offenders for changing ^^e word Sabbath in some of
our catechi^mes into Holyday, what are you for changing the very commandment
while you stand working upon Saturday, and rest upon Sunday, so changing the
Sabbath it self? but what stuff is this for you to trouble your gentry Readers
withal in the very beginning of your book, and in your Epistle dedicatory
forsooth, and not only to touch upon it here, but to print the commandments
fair in a leaf by themselves, with a marginal note of Ledaesma's catechism
of 2. or 3. editions, as if you would make your Reader stand at some goodly
gaze? but by this a man may easily guess what matter he is like to find in
the book it self. I could have noted a thing of the same kind of yours in
this Epistle, in the first leaf where you say, truth is justified of her
Children, whereas the text of scripture is Wisdom is justified etc: but that
I did not count it worth speaking of.

13. Touching your great boast, that if we can show one good author in every
age for this 1500. years, who has held our Trent articles, as you call them,
de fide, you will confess our Doctors, Schoolmen, etc. to be mistaken, and to
need an index expurgatorius; and that you will submitt your self to the Roman
Church, acknowledging the nouelty of your own church: Forasmuch as this your
promise seems by the manner, to be but a proud vaunt to delude the simple
reader, to make him more confident by your example in his false belief, I
shall not much reguard it, or any thing else which you shall say in that kind:
for your deeds give me assurance of deep malice, and perverseness so grounded
in your heart, as that they hinder you from beholding the light of truth, for
which cause I cannot but reckon you in the number of them, of whom S. Paul
lamentingly says. 2. Cor. 4.3.
Quod si opertum est euangelium nostrum, in ijs qui pereunt est opertum, in
quibus Deus huius saeculi excoecauit mentes infidelium, vt non fulgeat illis
illuminatio euangelij. If our Ghospel be covered or hidd, in them that perish
it is hidd, in whom the God of this world has blinded the minds of the
unfaithful, that the light of the Ghospel may not shine unto them. For
otherwise how were it possible, that in such great abundance of Catholic
authors, now in this age proving the verity of the Catholic faith, some by
way of controversy, some by way of history, others by way of chronology, others
by way of authority, others by way of school divinity, you should come to ask
for one in every age? what is Gualterus his whole chronology, but to prove
twelve verityes now adays most controuerted by the testimonies of Fathers and
Doctors in every age? Does not Genebrard in his chronology, at the end of
every 100. years, note the antiquity of the Catholic belief, in most of all
these points citinge the places where the Fathers and Doctors their
testimonies and proofs are to be found?

14. But you say, they were not taught de fide as points of Faith; what is that
to say? that they were never defined all in any general Council, I grant you
that; but what then? must they not therefore belong to Faith? how many points
be there that were never so defined? will it not serve your turn, that they
were commonly believed without contradiction of any, as all these were? or if
some one Doctor should be singular in his opinion, yet so as to be ready to
submit his judgment to the definition of the church, what would this hinder?
nay would it not much help to prove the continual Visibility and supereminent
authority of the Church, which is the question now between us? but of this
more afterward. Now for our Doctors, whom you will confess to be mistaken,
in witnessing the antiquity of your doctrine, I will say nothing here, but in
dew place will show how notoriously you falsifye some, impertinently allege
others, and either very maliciously or very ignorantly bring condemned known
Haeretiques against us, for authors of our own.

15. In which reguard I cannot but admire to hear you so hypocritically to
conclude your Epistle, saying that though by the provocation of a Jesuit, you
have putt your sickle into another man's harvest, yet you witness a true
confession before God and Man, that you have neither wilfully not wittingly
falsified any one author, either in citation, or translation in this treatise.
What execrable perjury this is I shall after demonstrate. Prius vos ostendens
fabricatores mendacij. First showing you to be framers of lies, as I may say to
you Sir Humphrey, with so much more reason then Job did to his friends; by how
much they did urge him not with any false doctrines, but only mis-applied
truths. Whereas you offend in all kind of falsehood. For even where you happ to
cite a place truly, for so much as pertains to the words, you do it so
clean kam from the authors meaning, and discourse, that every man may see how
evidently false, and consequently how injurious both to God and Man that
profession of yours is, wherein you call them to witness your truth and
honesty in the citing of authors.

16. And therefore whereas you seem to attribute the slipps, if there be any,
to your own weakness, which you are content ingenuously to confess, if they
be showed you moderately, plainly, and faithfully: I must deal freely with
you Sir Humphrey, and tell you, that indeed I take your weakness or ignorance
to be noe whit less, if not more, then you seem to acknowledge, both by what
I find in this treatise, and by what I hear from some that know you well, and
verily think you scarce skill even of ordinary Latin much less of such other
Learning as is needful for writing books of this nature. Whereupon they
conclude this book to be none of yours, but some Ministers who has borrowed
your name and title to countenance his work withal: and that you being
somewhat greedy of glory were content to lend it, not considering that by so
doing (that is) by fathering such a book, you are to undergo all the
reprehension and shame which shall ensew upon the discovery of the author's
ignorance and weakness whosoever he be. But because this is but a probable
conjecture I will not build upon it, but taking you for author, seeing it
bears your name, I shall discouere not only your great weakness and ignorance
which you acknowledge, but greater obstinacy and malice, so as thereby it may
plainly appear that your faults are not so much to be termed slipps of
ignorance or weakness, as slowes of malice of purpose to plunge your Reader, and
make him stick fast in some mire of mis-beleife and infidelity with your self.

17. Which obstinacy and malice to be the true cause of all your errors,
whatsoever you may pretend to the contrary, does yet farther appear in that
having received a foil or two, and together with them good admonitio^s, A plea
for the real praesence by I. O.

A defense of the appendix by L.D.


you neither take notice of the one in your writings, nor show the fruit of the
other in your manners. And therefore for the answer (which has been
hitherto differred because noe man of learning could think it worth his pains
to make you any, and should still have been differred were it not more for
other men's sakes then your own) you are to expect it as you desire, faithful
and plain, and though it must of necessity be a little round sometimes, yet I
hope to any indifferent man it will also seem moderate, that is much within
the compass of your deserts.

18. Now lastly whereas you crave a favorable acceptance of these your
beginnings promising us some farther fruits of your labors: if you remember
your self well these are not your first fruits: for you translated and
published heretofore with a preface of your own a certain treatise of one
John Bertram an ancient obscure author, whereby you have given to the world
sufficient trial as well of your talent in translating as of your ignorance
and corruption, whereof you were most plainly convinced in a particular
treatise of that matter called A PLEA FOR THE REAL PRESENCE BY I. O. Whereto
you never having replied one word for clearing your self of so foul a tax it
is wonder you could think of publishing any farther fruits of your labors,
and more wonder that you should desire any favorable acceptance of them.
Wherefore it had been then, and is still, fitter for you to lay aside any such
thought, and rather think how you can acquit your self to the world of your
accounts for these that are past, or rather how you shall be able to acquit your
self before the iudgment-seate of Almighty God, where you will find it another
manner of matter then you count of to answer for one soul, much more for so
many as you have labored to pervert: but because you are not capable of any
good advice of this kind I forbear to say more here resting howsoever.

Your welwishing Friend.

THE PREFACE TO THE Protestant Reader.
Gentle and judicious Reader.
THough in my precedent dedicatory or rather answer to Sir Humphrey's
dedicatory Epistle I have had occasion to say what is wont to be delivered by
way of preface concerning the occasion, intention, scope, and manner of
writing, yet because my chief end next to the glory of God is the good of thy
soul I cannot omit to address my self unto thee in a word declaring on my
part the good intention and purpose I have in this writing, and on thine
craving the like acceptance, but especially that for thine own good thou will
come to read and peruse the same not with any preiudicate conceit either of
one side or other but rather with an indifferency of mind ready to incline that
way that the light of truth shall show it self. Sir Humphrey I confess has
some things, which at first sight may draw away an honest minded man who is not
thoroughly acquainted with the fashion of such men of the Ministry as he is
ledd by. For besides a little learning which in a secular man makes a great
show, (as for the increase of his own glory he touches once or twice in his
dedicatory,) the very title of his book being VIA TVTA, A SAFE WAY is a very
pleasing thing to many in these days, wherein men for the most part rather
desire to find security in their own ways, then forsaking them, to seek it
where indeed it is to be found. But the chief thing is this that he
undertakes to prove his intent out of our own authors, calling also both God
and Man to witness his sincerity in the citation and translation of such and
such places as he brings.

Which though it may move a man a little at the first yet is it not sufficient
to praecipitate the discreet Reader's judgment and carry it away wholly to the
full belief of what he says without farther examination especially when he
shall understand that such specious titles and fair promises are the common
baits of Haeretiques. Hilar. de Trin. lib. 6.
Of whom S. Hilarious says that Ingerunt nobis primum nomina veritatis vt virus
falsitatis introeat. They first set before us the names of truth that the
poison of falsehood may enter in with them. And S. Aug. so well acquainted with
their cunning practizes, Aug. contra ep fundam. cap. 11.
says: that the promise of truth which they are continually making is nothing
but a veil to cover their errors, or a goodly fair gate for error to enter
in stealingly into the minds of the unskillful. Which S. Paul himself also
witnesses saying that by sweet speeches and blessings they seduce the hearts
of innocent and harmless people. Now for the learning whereof he makes show,
whether it be his own or not I will not question, though I might, since some
that know him doubt whether he even understand Latin: but presuming that he
has a little because he was once a Scholar of Westminster and after of Christ
Church in Oxford being by his Father deputed and putt into the common rode of
the Ministry though he be since stepped out of it, I know not ho, w into the way
of Knighthood. I only say this that it is far short of what is requisite for
writing of a book of this kind as shall manifestly appear: besides that though
it were a thousand times more, I may say with the Wiseman. Non est Sapientia,
non est prudentia, non est consilium contra Dominum. There is noe wisdom, noe
prudence noe council against our Lord. But of this I shall not here say more,
this being my intent only in this place to advise thee so to come to the
reading of this my answer that thou suffer not thy self so to be wholly
praeoccupated and ouerswayed from that indifferency which is most necessary for
framing a right judgment of any matter in controversy. With which preparation
of mind if thou shall come and with attention read, but most of all crave the
special assistance of Almighty God's grace, I hope thou shall not have cause
to repent thee of thy pains: Whereto without longer delay I shall here leave
thee.

Certain points to be considered for the better answearinge of Sir Humphrey's
chief arguments in this Book. Chap. 1.
CHAPTER I.
1. WHereas Sir Humphrey after his dedicatory Epistle, before he come to the
matter, sets down a part of Pius 4. his bull, which is of the form of
oath, and profession of faith, which according to the Council of Trent such men
are to make, as are to be promoted to any Ecclesiastical dignity or benefice,
which has care of souls joined with it. I purpose likewise in this Chapter by
occasion hereof, to set down some few heads, which may serve for a general
answer to most of his arguments.

2. The first shall be concerning this very Creed as he calls it of the
Council of Trent, which therefore he is pleased according to the common fashion
of his Ministers, by way of derision to divide into 12. points, as it were into
12. articles, which he and they might with as much reason divide into 24. but
only that by this fine conceit, they would feign make some silly people
believe, that we Catholics leave the old Creed of the Apostles, and coin
our selves a new one, according to the faith of the Council of Trent, and this
he and his friends do often charge us with. To which I say, that True it is
we confess it, the points in this form contained were defined and declared
by that Council, and drawn into form of an oath and profession of faith, by
Pope Pius 4. but that it is therefore a new Faith, or that there be new
articles of belief we deny. For proof whereof I demand of him or his fellow
Protestants, who receive the Nicene Creed, as it is set down in their book
of common prayer, what they think of that? whether that be any thing else but a
profession of faith, set down by authority of the Church, gathered together
in a general Council, approved by the Sea Apostolic, by way of a definition
or explication of a point of faith then controuerted by Haeretiques, and
discussed and declared in the Council, and appointed to be publicly
professed by all such as meant to be counted Catholics* Wherein I would
farther know of him what other difference there is, but only that the Creed
of Nice was made, for declaration of the Catholic faith in the point of the
Divinity of our Savior; and this of the Council of Trent, for declaration of
all these points controuerted by the Haeretiques of these times. And yet in one
thing more they agree, that is, that as the Arrians of those times cried out
against that Creed, as being new, and having words not found in Scripture, for
example Consubstantiation: So our Protestants cry out against the Trent
profession of Faith, for the same reasons of nouelty, and words not found in
scripture, as for example Transubstantiation.

3. But to come nearer unto them. They allow of the Nicene Creed; they will
not then I suppose say, the Faith therein taught either now is, or then was
new, though it were then first declared by authority of any Council. Which if
they do not, as indeed they cannot; then say I in like sort, the profession
of Faith set down by the Council of Trent, and Pope Pius 4. is noe new Faith,
but the old Faith of late particularly declared, and defined against the
haeresies of these times. I could also in proof of the same, urge Sir
Humphrey, with the 39. articles appointed by the authority of the Church of
England, to be uniformly taught by all Ministers, and which they are to
swear unto. Which articles, though they be indeed new coined, as the
foundation of a new Church: Yet Sir Humphrey being his Mother's Champion, will
not I suppose yield her or her doctrine to be new: as yet on the other side he
cannot deny, but those articles received some kind of force, whereby
Protestants were more bound to believe and teach them then before. From whence
I might evidently infer, that a new definition or declaration, does not make
the Doctrine new; but that ancient doctrine may be newly defined according as
new springing heresies shall give occasion.

4. Which being so, it is plain that all his insulting speeches against the
Council of Trent and Catholic church are but very smoke, and may be as
easily blown back upon Himself and his church: and that by them he does but
furnish us with weapons against himself, therein also bewraying his ignorance.
For whose better instruction, if he be not too wise to learn, he is to know
two things in this matter. First, that we Catholics do not call all points
of faith howsoever taught, declared or defined articles as he seems to
think, and the ground of this his error may be; in that those great maine
points of his Churches doctrine, called the 39. articles are called by that
name of articles. But we call that only an article, V S. Tho. 2. 2. q. 1. ar.
according to S. Thomas, which contains some special reason of difficulty in
it self; whereby it requires a particular and distinct reuelacion, because it
cannot be inferred or deduced out of any other revealed truth: as for example,
the point of our Sauiour's resurrection, is clean a different point from that
point of his death and passion, and this again from that other of his
Nativity, and so of the rest, because each of them requires a distinct and
several reuelacion from the other. For Christ might have been borne, and yet
not dye upon the cross; and he might have died, and yet not risen the third
day from death to life: but those other truths defined by the Church, as the
unity of Christ's person against Nestorius, the distinction of his two natures
against Sergius, Pirrhus etc. are not to be called articles, because they are
sufficiently contained in others, and deduced out of them. Other Divines give
other definitions of an article of faith, which may also well stand with this
of S. Thomas, which I follow as the more common, but all agree in this, that
though every article be a proposition of Faith, yet every proposition is not
an article of Faith.

5. And heerevpon we teach, that for articles of faith, the Church can make
none, as she cannot write a canonical book of scripture, but that belongs
only to the Prophets and Apostles, or rather has been fully and perfectly
performed by them to whom those articles were immediately revealed by God,
whereof they delivered part by writing and part by word of mouth to their
posterity the Church. So as now there need not any new and particular
reuelacions, but out of those already made to the Apostles and Prophets, which
are all laid up in the treasury of the Church, as a pawn or depositum as S.
Paul calls it, other truths are drawn the holy Church and true spouse of
Christ ever keeping this precious treasure with continual care and vigilancie,
and dispensing the same faithfully to her Children, as need requires.
Whenever any haeretique or other enemy endeavors to corrupt or pervert,
she calling her Pastors and Doctors together to examine the matter, being
infallibly assisted by that Spirit of truth which our Savior promised to be
always with his disciples, that is with his Church; she declares what is
true, and what false, as agreeing or disagreeing with or from that doctrine,
which she has received from her fathers, that is Prophets and Apostles upon
whom as upon a spiritual foundation she is strongly built, according to that of
S. Paul superedificaii supra fundamentum Apostolorum and Prophetarum. Ephesians. 2
20.
Built upon the foundation of the Apostles and Prophets. The very words
Fundamentum foundation also showing, that her doctrine is not of her own
invention or framing, but grounded on them from whom she received it, and that
she has not any which she receives not from them. For as in a house or
building there is not the least stone or piece of timber which rests not
upon the foundation: So in the doctrine of the Catholic Church there is not
the least point which is not grounded or contained in that which was delivered
by the Prophets and Apostles.

Commonit. aduer haer. cap. 27.
Which truth Vincentius Lerinensis in like sort deduceth out of the word
Depositum, used by S. Paul to Timothee. Quid est depositum says he? id est,
quod tibi creditum est, non quod a te inuentum: quod accepisti, non quod
excogitasti: rem non ingenij, sed doctrinae: non vsurpationis priuatae, sed
publica traditionis: rem ad te perductam, non a te prolatam: in qua non auctor
debes esse, sed custos: non institutor, sed Sectator: non ducens, sed sequens.
What is a depositum, it is, that which thou art trusted with, not that which is
found by thee: that which thou have received: not that which thou have sought
out: a thing not of wit, that is, not of thine own inuenting, but of learning,
that is, which is learnt: not of private usurpation, but public tradition: a
thing brought to thee, not brought forth, by thee; wherein thou art not to be
the author, but the keeper; not the institutor but a scholar not leadinge but
followinge.

So as by Timothee the whole Church being understood as the same author says,
or especially the whole body of Pastors it follows that the Church creates
not any new articles of faith, but teaches only that which she has learned
of the Prophets and Apostles.

6. From which follows; that other thing, which I mea^t to tell the Knight
for his learning, which also I touched before in a word, to wit, that when
points of doctrine before in controversy and undefined, come to be defined by
the Church, the doctrine is not therefore new, because it is de fide, or matter
of faith now, which it was not before, as he most falsely and fondly supposes
for an undoubted truth; and upon this his own idle fancy, builds many goodly
arguments, like so many castles in the air. For out of this he thinks it
to follow that we vary in our doctrine; that because forsooth there be many
things now de fide, which were not before, and whereof Doctors did dispute,
which seeing we may not now doubt of, therefore the faith is in his judgment
altered. But this shows nothing but the poorenes of his judgment. For by this
he might prove, that the sun as it rises higher and higher, and by spreading
his beams gives light in some places at noone, where it did not in the
morning, that therefore it is changed in it self: then which what can be more
absurd?

7. And that it is the same of the Church and the Sun, Cant. 6.9
appears by that place of the Canticles. Quae est ista quae progreditur quasi
aurora consurgens, pulchra vt Luna, electa vt sol, terribilis vt castrorum
acies ordinata. Who is she that goes forward as the morning rising, fair as
the moon, chosen as the Sun, terrible as an ordered army of tents? Which
words noe man ever doubted to be literally understood of the Church. Even then
as the Sun may go spreading his beams more and more, with out increase or
change of it own light in it self, so may the Church go more and more
spreading the beams of her divine faith, with out increase or alteration of
the faith in it self. And as the Sun beam may shine in a valley or room of
a house, where it did not shine before, so may the Church spread the light of
her faith, showing such or such a point to be a divine truth, which before was
not so known to be: or which though it were a divine truth in it self, yet
it was not so to us.

8. For more declaracion whereof, I may yet bring another more scholerly
example, which is of the principles of several sciences, which are to be the
premises in demonstratiue arguments of those sciences: in which principles or
premises, are contained diverse truths, which may be drawn out of them by many
several conclusions, one following of another; these conclusions were truths
in themselves before, though they did not so appear unto me, till I saw the
connexio^ they had with the premises; and how they were contained in them. And
by the many several conclusions which are so drawn, the truth of those
principles and premises, does more show it self, but not receive any increase
or change in it self thereby. Even so we say in the prime principles of our
Faith, revealed immediately to the Prophets and Apostles, and by them delivered
unto the Church, are contained all truths which any way belong to our Faith
and whereby the Church, has in succeeding ages destroyed several haeresies as
they have risen, without creating or coining new faith, or altering the old,
but out of the old grounds and premises drawing those conclusions, which
destroy new haeresies, and show them to be contrary to the ancient faith. And
in that manner the Church, has grown and increased in knowledge by degrees,
and shall still go growing and increasing to the end of the world, Greg.
moral. lib. 9. cap 6.
as shows S. Greg. his discourse upon those word of Job. Qui facit Arcturum
and Oriana and Hyadas etc. Where he says thus. Vrgente mundi fine superna
scientia proficit and largius cum te^pore excrescit. As the world draws to an
end the heavenly knowledge profits, and with time increases: Wherein also
she resembles our B. Savior her chief Lord and heavenly Spouse, who though
in grace and knowlegde he never received the least increase from the first
instant of his Conception, Luc 2.52.
yet the Scripture says after proficiebat sapientia and aetate and gratia apud
Deum and homines. To wit, because he showed it more in his words and actions.

9. This is farther, confirmed by the manner and practice, which our Catholic
Doctors and Fathers ever observe, in and out of Counsels in proving or
defining points of faith, to wit by having recourse to the authority of
scripture, and tradition, belief, and practice of the Church; in the searching
whereof the holy Church joins humane industry with God's holy grace and
assistance For when any question or doubt of faith arises, particular Doctors
severally dispute and write thereof: then if farther need require it, the holy
Church gathers together her Pastors and Doctors in a Council, to examine and
discuss the matter more fully; as in that first Council of the Apostles, Act.
15.6.
whereof the Scripture says: Conueneruntque Apostoli and seniores videre de
verbo hoc. The Apostles ad Ancients assembled to consider of this word. The
Pastors coming so together, and having the presence of our Savior according
to his promise, and his holy Spirit out of the Prophetical, and Apostolical
Scriptures and Traditions, joining therewith the authorityes and
interpretations of holy Fathers and Doctors out of praecedent times, she does
infallibly resolve and determine the matter not as new but as ancient orthodox
and derived from her Forefathers: making that which was ever in it self a
divine truth, so to appear unto us, that now we may not make farther question
thereof.

10. Vinc. Lerin. cap. 27.28.29. and seq.
And this being the common doctrine delivered by our Catholic Doctor I
think it not amiss somewhat farther to confirm and authorize the same by an
excellent discourse of that holy and ancient Father Vincentius Lerinensis, not
reciting his very words, because it would be too long, but only the
substance, which is this. Having proved by the word Depositum out of S. Paul,
that a Pastor, Priest, Preacher, or Doctor there meant by Timothee, must
only deliver the doctrine which is deposited with him or in his hands, not
found out by him, which he has received, not invented; whereof he is not to
be author or beginner, but the Keeper or Guardian; he says that if such a
man have abilityes for it he may like another Beseleel adorn set out and
grace the precious jewels of divine faith by expounding more clearly that
which before was believed more obscurely, that posterity may rejoice at the
clear knowledge of that which antiquity did reverence even before it came to
be so known: that in fine he must so theach which he has learned, that
though he deliver it in a new manner, yet he deliver not any new matter. And
then asking a question by way of objection, whether Christia religion do not
receive any increase or profit; he answeareth; yes verily: but in such manner
as it may be truly called increase, not change. For increase imports an
amplification or enlargement of a thing in it self. Change imports a turning
of one thing into an other. And so he says the understanding, knowledge, and
wisdom both of every man in particular, and of the whole Church in general,
may receive increase, but so as to persist in same doctrine, sense, and
judgment which he declares by the similitude of a man's body, which though it
be greater when he comes to be a man, then when he was a chile, yet all the
parts and limbs are the same, so as though it receive increase, yet noe
change: the same he declares by another similitude of a grain of wheat cast
into the ground which though it multiply in the growth, yet it multiplieth
only in the same kind of grain. Whereupon he concludes that the Church being
a dilligent and wary keeper of the doctrines committed to her custody does not
add diminish, or any way change; does not cut of what is necessary, nor add
any thing superfluous, but with all industry so handle all ancient doctrines
as if any have not received their full shape and perfection, to polish and
perfect them, if any be thoroughly searched and expressed, to co^solidate and
strengthen, the^; if any be confirmed and defined to keep them: adding withal
that the Church has never endeavored any thing else by her decrees of
Councels, but only that which was simply, that is without questioning believed
before, should after be more diligently believed; that which before was
preached more slackly, should after be preached more earnestly, that which
before was more securely reverenced, should after be much more carefuly
garnished or adorned: and that the Church being excited by the novelties of
haeretiques has done noe more but consigned to posterity in writing, that
which before she had received from her ancestors by tradition only, and for
more clear understanding thereof many times expressed the ancient sense of
faith by the propriety of a new appellacion, that is by a new word, then
invented to express the ancient belief.

11. This is the discourse of this Holy Father, which I have set down the
more fully, in reguard it contains the clear decision of this whole matter.
For out of it together with what has been hitherto said it may be gathered,
first that the Church creates not any new articles of faith; but only that
she delivers unto us those articles of ancient faith which she has received
from them by whom she was first planted and taught that faith. Much less does
she deliver unto us any new faith. For though she should have new distinct
revelations, yet would it not follow that the faith were new so long as those
(...) it follows that he that denies the explication does deny the article
and consequently frame unto himself a new belief.

12. And that the absurdity of Sir Humphrey's argument may yet appear more
manifestly I add that any haeretique that ever was may by the very same manner
of argument challenge antiquity to himself and accuse us of nouelty. For he may
say such a thing was not de fide before such a Council ergo it is new; and that
he believes only that which was believed before that Council ergo he believes
the ancient Faith. Which argument if it be good in Sir Humphrey is good in them
and consequently he must disallow the decrees of all Councels as novelties and
approve all haeresies for the ancient belief. Which being so great and
manifest an absurdity he will not sure for shame admit and consequently must
allow of Vincentiu's his authority and the answer out of him, to wit, that
Councels in defining matters of faith do not coin a new faith but declare,
explicate, and define the old. Which that Sir Humphrey may the better conceive
I shall here in a word urge him with an example of his own Church thus The
Church of England admits of diverse books of the new testament for canonical
whereof there was doubt for three or four hundred years together in the
Church of God, as the Epistle to the Hebrews, the second Epistle of S. Peter,
the Ep. of S. Jude, the Apocalypse of S. John and some others, which were after
admitted for Canonical. Now I would know of him whether upon the admittance of
them there were any Change of faith in the Church: or whether even those books
have received any change in themselves? he cannot say they did: and there by
he may answer himself, and see plainly that the change which seems to be is
not in the things to be believed but in us that are to believe them because
upon such definition or declaration of the Church we are obliged to believe
them which it may be we were not before. And this may suffice for this matter
of new articles of belief which Sir Humphrey would feign father upon us.

13. Another thing which he much builds upon and whereby he thinks to
prevail against us in the authority of some particular Doctors or Schoolmen
of the Church differing among themselves in some points not defined by the
Church at such time as they did dispute thereof though afterward they were.
But any man of judgment will presently see that this is but to delude the
simpler sort of people of his own side whom he thinks to make believe any
thing. For who does not know that Catholics bind themselves only to defend
the Catholic faith which neither does nor can depend upon the judgment of any
one private Doctor how learned soever, for neither is any thing counted faith
till it be taught by the authority of the Catholic church or common consent
of Doctors, Vinc. Lerin. cap. 4.
for so says Vincentius Lerinensis expressly that we are to believe without
doubt not what one or two Masters teach but what all with common consent hold,
write, and teach planely, frequently, and perseuerantly. Vinc. Lerin. cap. 39.
And this, as he says else where. Non in omnibus diuinae legis questiunculis
sed quidem certe praecipue in fidei regula. Not in all small questions of the
divine Law, but cheifely in the rule of faith. Which Sir Humphrey cannot be
ignorant of, but only that he lifts still to be limping, and wilfully
dissembling the truth. For if he had taken notice of this, he would have had
less to say, though he say not much even now with all the dissembling he can
devise.

14. Neither will it serve his turn to say that we urge him and his Ministers
out of their own authors, and why may not he do the like to us, for the
reason is clean different. They have noe public authority which can define
what is Faith and what not but that is left not only to every private Doctor
or Minister, but to every private Lay man and Woman. And though it be true that
it is noe conuincing proof to urge one particular Protestant Doctor's
authority against another, there being not two among them of one opinion wholly,
much less one bound to answer for the other; Yet we are feign and may with
good reason use it because they have noe certain rule of Faith, wherewith we
may urge them. Authority of Church they have none. Scripture they have indeed,
but so mangled, corrupted, perverted by translation, and misinterpreted
according to their own fancies, that as they have it, it is as good as
nothing. Traditions they have none. Councels they have not any among
themselves, nor will stand to ours. Consent of Fathers or Schoolmen they care
not for. Consent of Doctors they have not among themselves, nor can have
without an head; neither if they had, would any man think himself more bound
by that, then by consent of Fathers: what then is left but to urge them with
the authority of such as they acknowledge for their brethren.

But with us the case is far different, for we have diverse infallible rules
of faith, though all with some reference to one principal rule. As Scripture in
the plain and literal sense which is out of controversy; tradition or common
belief and practice of the whole Church; Councels either general or particular
confirmed by the Sea Apostolic; the authority of that Holy See it self
defining ex cathedra, though without either general or particular Council; the
common and uniform Consent of ancient Fathers, or modern Doctors and
Schoolmen delivering any thing unto us as Matter of Faith.

15. All these six rules of faith we acknowledge; wherewith let this Knight or
any Protestant in the world urge us, we flinch not, we do not deny the
authority, but are ready to make good whatsoever is taught any of these ways.
What folly then is it for a man to stand urging us with the authority of any
one private man who may straggle out from the rest? though to go farther then
we need in such great liberty as we give Protestants, we give them leave to
urge us with the authority of any one single Doctor in a point wherein he is
not contradicted by other Catholic Doctors or which other Catholics do
not wholly disauow. What more can a man desire? And yet again though the Knight
or any other Protestant should bring such a single author for his opinion yet
is there such a maine difference between him and them, that noe Protestant can
justly plead that single Catholic author to be wholly of his opinion or
belief in that point, to say nothing of others wherein they differ. For the
Protestant holds his doctrine stiffly not meaning in any case, or for any
authority to change or leave it, which is it that that makes a man properly an
Haeretique. Whereas the Catholic ever holds it with indifferency, ready to
leave it whenever the Catholic Church shall determine otherwise. Which if
Sir Humphrey will be but content to do we will bear with all his errors,
because then they will be soon amended. What little help then is he like to
have from Catholic authors? or what likelyhoode is there for him to make good
his paradoxes or rather his most absurd heresies out of our own Cardinals,
Bishops, Doctors, Schoolmen etc. whom he puts all in the plural number as
if the number were to be very great, Whereas God knows they come very poor
and single as shall appear, and some be Cardinals of his own creating only,
as I shall after show but this he does for credit of his cause though it be
with loss of his own.

16. And all this which here I say is to be understood supposing that indeed
he cite Catholic authors and cite them truly, as here he promises, which
promise for as much as concerns true citing how he performs I shall
afterward make manifest, here only I shall add a word concerning his
authors, who he promises us shall be Catholics: Whereas indeed for the most
part they are either known Haeretiques or some such men, as though with much
ado they may pass for Catholics, as Erasmus, Cornelius Agrippa, Cassander,
and the like, yet they gave themselves so much liberty in they writings as
they came to be noted for it, and their works forbidden. Of which I will not
therefore make any account as noe other Catholic does. But when I come to
such authorityes as there be many in this book I mean to make noe other
answer but that the author is condemned, or book forbidden in the index
librorum prohibitorum? the table of forbidden books. Wherein I cannot but note
Sir Humphrey's ill favored and dishonest dealing in pretending to cite only
our own Doctors and Schoolmen, and yet afterward obtruding such as he
knows to be subject to so main exception and so to be by us disauowed
and rejected as incompetent Judges or witnesses.

17. But there is noe other to be expected at such a man's hands and therefore
I will neither look for better nor say more of it but by this occasion add a
word or two concerning the Index expurgatorius which so much troubles the
consciences of these men; Which being rightly understood noe man of reason and
judgment can be offended with it. For it is nothing but a continuance of the
same care which has been ever observed in the Church of God for preserving of
the Catholic faith and integrity of life from the corruption of Haeretiques,
and other wicked men, who by books bring great prejudice both to Faith and
manners, unless special care be used for praeuenting thereof. Of the necessity
and iustnes of which course there be whole books written by diverse learned
Catholic Doctors, neither can any body dislike thereof, but only
Haeretiques; who indeed find themselves mightily aggreiued therewith as being
by this course deprived of a chief means of spreading their wicked doctrine
by books; though indeed they have noe more cause to complain then
Necromancers, Judiciary Astrologers, Southsayers, Witches, Magicians, and even
bad Catholics who publish, naughty and lascivious books; for this care of the
Church does extend to all whatsoever may be offensive or hurtful either to
faith or good manners.

18. But because Sir Humphrey will needs have it that the bible is also
forbidden and the Father's writings appointed to be corrected and rased. I
answer that for the Bible indeed it is not permitted in the vulgar language
to every body without any reguard or distinction of persons, as it never was
nor ought to be, as is well proved by authority of Fathers and reason in the
preface of the Rhemes testament. But yet it is not so forbidden, but that it
is in the Bishop's power to grant leave, if upon conference with the
Parish Priest or Confessor of the party that desires leave, he find him to
be such an one, as may not incur danger of faith, but be like to increase in
virtue and devotion by reading thereof. Which with any reasonable man may be
counted sufficient liberty. As for the Fathers it is most grossly false which
the Knight after the ordinary ministerial tune stands canting, that we blot
out and raze them at our pleasure. For though for soemuch as concerns the
late Catholic authors of this last age, (for this our index of which is all
the difficulty begins but from the year 1515.) whatsoever needs
correction is to be mended or blotted out, yet for others going before that
time it is expressly said that nothing may be changed, unless some manifest
error through the fraud of haeretiques or carelessness of the Printer be crept
in but that if any thing worth nothing occur the new editions of the same
author by some notes in the margent or at the later end the author's mind may
be explained; De correct. lib.. 3. and 4.
or the hard place, by comparing other passages of the same author, be made
more clear. Now is here any thing that derogateth from the dignity and
authority of antiquity? What is it then that these men would have? what is it
they can carpe at? nothing but that they themselves are stunge in that, hereby
they are kept either from publishing their own wicked works, or corrupting the
Fathers at their pleasure: and to wipe away this blemish from themselves they
would lay it upon us. And by this that is here said of this matter may be
answered noe little part of Sir Humphrey's book, whereof one whole chapter is
of this matter, beside other bitter inuectiues upon other occasions to fill his
paper: though there also I shall have occasion to say somewhat more hereof.

19. The last thing which here I mean to speak of is a certain distinction
of explicit and implicit faith which the Knight and his Ministers cry out
against and are pleased sometimes to make themselves merry withal as if they
would laugh it out: but it is too well and solidly grounded to be blown away
with the breath of any such Ministerial Knight as he is. I will therefore only
declare it in a word that the Reader may see whether the distinction, or the
Knight be more worthy to be laughed at. The words explicit and implicit are
drawn from the Latin and they signify as much as foulded, and unfolded, or
wrapped up and laid open. And explicit faith signifies a belief directly
and expressly believing a particular point of faith in it self not as it is
inuolued or wrapped up in an other; implicit faith is the belief of any
point of faith, not in it self but in some other general principle wherein it
lies inuolued, or as it were wrapped up; as Catholics believe in many
thingh as the Church believes though they do not know what the Church holds
particularly in this or that point. Now all Catholics being bound to the
belief of the Catholic faith wholly and entirely under pain of damnation, as
says Saint Athanasius in his Creed; and all not being able to know what is
taught in every particular, there must be some means whereby to believe all,
and this by an implicit faith including in it self a promptnes or readiness of
the understanding and Will to obey and rely upon the authority of the holy
Church; wherein noe Catholic that believes any one point can have much
difficulty, seeing the reason why he believes that one point is the authority
of God declared unto us by the mouth of the never erring Church.

20. Neither is this implicit faith for the ignorant alone as the Knight says
but it is for all both learned and unlearned; for there is noe man so learned
but may be ignorant of some one point or other; or at least in matters not yet
defined, he must have that indifferency and readiness of Will and judgment to
believe as the Church shall teach. True it is the unlearned know less of
particular points though all be bound to the express or explicit knowledge of
some articles as of the Apostles Creed, of the Commandments of God and the
Church, Sacrifice of the Mass, of some Sacrements, and every one of so much
as perteyneth both to the common obligation of Christian Dewty and of his own
particular state and vocation. For the rest it is not necessary for any one in
particular to know all, but it suffices that he have a mind so praepared
that when he shall understand more to be needful he be ready to embrace it,
Which a man would think were but reason. And for this disposition and
praeparation of mind wherein the essence of implicit faith consists it is
alike both in the learned and unlearned. The want whereof in Protestants is the
very reason why they have noe true faith at all even in the belief of those
mysteries which they believe: for by this it plainly appears, that even in
those things which they believe they have noe reguard to any authority by which
they are propounded unto them, but only because they think good themselves
and although they should believe all things which Catholics believe but not
for the reason which they believe but because they please themselves yet were
not this faith, and so it is much better to believe a few things expressly with
a resolution to believe whatsoever else shall be propounded by the Catholic
Church, then to believe a great many more with out this mind. For that former
is divine faith, this later only humane self opinion and judgment.

21. Neither is there any cause why this Knight should so cry out against
implicit faith obtruded (as he says) upon the ignorant; for it is not
obtruded upon any man, but rather we desire with Saint Paul that all may be
replenished which the Knowledge of God and heavenly things: but every body
knows that all men are not of capacity and understanding alike. And for such
as are not able to attain higher, we say it is sufficient for them to know
sum few things, and for the rest to believe as others in the Catholic
Church believe. Does not S. Paul speak, Wisdom among the perfect that is,
teach them the greater and higher mysteries of faith, and yet to others he
gives only milk, 1. Cor. 2.
that is, the more easy Mysteries of faith, not meat, for (says he) You were
not yet able. Were it not pretty if every simple man should only believe so
much as his own understanding reaches unto and for that which it cannot reach
to deny it? were not this a notable point of pride? and yet this is that which
the Knight would have every man to do, and derideth us Catholics because we
will not have Men so to do but with humility to believe what they do not
understand so long as they have sufficient ground to believe it, which never
wants in the Catholic Church and out of it is ever wanting. By this any man
may see whether this distinction of explicit and implicit faith do not stand
with very great reason and consequently whether the Knight who laugheth thereat
do not show himself most worthy of laughter?

22. Especially if we add withal that it is not so much this implicit
faith that he speaks against as divine faith in general: for: that he
counts implicit faith when a man is bound by a blind kind of Obedience as he
calls it to submitt his judgment to the Catholic Church: which is the true
property of divine faith: and that is it which he countes simplicity and
calls it implicit faith to believe that whereof we understand not the reason
but herein he destroys the very nature of faith expressly contradicting S.
Paul's definition thereof, which is this: Hebr 11.1.
Faith is the substance of things to be hoped for an argument of things not
appearing: and S. Aug plainly says: that is faith to believe that which thou
do not see and S. Greg. adds: Greg. ho. 36. in Euang.
that faith has noe meritt where humane reason gives experience. So as for a
man to speak against this kind of implicit is plain infidelity and therefore
I shall say noe more of it but only, supposing it as a most certain and
commonly received principle of the Fathers and point of absolutely necessary
Christian humility for a man so to submitt his judgment in what he
understands not, I shall conclude with a word of Vincent. Lerinensis wishing
such men as have suffered themselves out of praesumption to be carried away
with some novel opinions out of the Catholic Church to return thereunto by
this humility of implicit faith in these words. Dediscant been quod didicerunt
non been, cap. 25.
and ex toto ecclesiae dogmate quod intellectu capi potest capiant; quod non
potest credant. Let them unlearn well that which they have learnt not well,
and out of the whole doctrine of the Church Let them conceive what can be
conceived; what cannot let them believe. Which authority alone is sufficient to
warrant our distinction of explicit and implicit faith against all Sir
Humphrey's scornful laughter. Chap. 2.
And so having noted thus much in this place by occasion of his praeambles I
come now to the examination of his sections.

Whether the Church of Rome be with out cause bitter against the reformed
Churches, as the knight affirms. CHAPTER II.
1. THe Knight's first section is to prove, that the Church of Rome is without
cause bitter against the reformed Churches: That she is bitter, he proves,
because we style him and his not only by the common name of Haeretiques, but
also by other special reproachful epithites pertaining to the several Sects
of Zuinglius, Luther, Calvin etc. Secondly because we accurse and excommunicate
them, and will not let them live with us, whereas we admit Jews and
Infidels. That all this is without cause he proves, first by an authority of
Theodoret, which speaks of a contention between two factions in the Church of
Antioch, and the reason to allay it, because (says Theodoret) both parts make
one and the same confession of their faith, for both maintain the Creed of
the Nicene Council. Secondly by the authority of Bellarmine, whom he makes to
say, that the Apostles never propounded as common articles of faith, other
things then the articles of the Apostles Creed, the ten commandments, and
some few of the Sacraments: because these things are simply necessary and
profitable for all men, the rest are such as a man may be saved without them.
Thirdly he makes it an undeniable truth that the reformed Church and the
Roman are two Sisters; and that the Roman Church failing, and becoming an
Harlott: it was well done of his Church to separate her self, least she might
be partaker of her plagues. And so goes on inueighing bitterly against the
Roman Church to the very end of the Section, whereof this is the whole
substance, which I have brought into this method the better to answer it.

2. That we Catholics style the Knight and his Reformers by the common name
of Haeretiques we deny not: that some particular Catholic authors style some
of them that is the Zuinglians, Lutherans, and others by other reproachful
names we also deny not. But why this Knight should complain, as if he were
injured in all the several names, that are given to the several sects of
Haeretiques, I see not; unless it so be that he be of all their several
religions; which yet I see not how he can be they being so many and so
contrary among themselves. But be he of one or other or more, and let him but
go into Germany and profess himself a Caluinist, or a Zuinglian, he shall
find so good entertaynment and such gentle terms at the Lutheran's hands, as
I dare boldly say, he will never complain more of the bitterness of Catholics
against him and his Brethren.

For the word (Haeretique) which is the worst of all other, as containing all
in it self, he cannot but know that it has ever gone with such, as have held
new particular doctrines, different from the common doctrine of the Catholic
Church; and therefore the word according to the etymology is noe word of
contumely, but a word signifying the nature of the thing; and it is only
grown by custom to be contumelious: because the thing it self, to wit,
haeresie, is the most detestable thing in the world. If then the thing ot crime
of haeresie pertain to a man, and that he be notoriously guilty thereof, I
see not what great bitterness it is to give him the name of Haeretique. If I
would I could urge his bitterness much more in the same kind and in this very
section; as for example, where he calls the Catholic Church an harlott the
whore of Babylon, the Pope Antichrist, Catholics Idolaters and a great deal
more: But I let all that pass, making only this answer that we do
nothing in this matter of names which seems to him so great a point of
bitterness but what we can warrant by very good authority and example even of
scripture. Act. 13.11. 2. Cor. 11.15
S. Paul called that enemy of faith Elymas the Magician, Son of the Devil,
Enemy of all justice: and false Apostles in general, that is Haeretiques, he
calls the Ministers of Satan. In an other place; Philip. 3.2. 1. Io. 2.18.
Ep. Iud.
he calls Haeretiques by the name of Dogs. S. John calls them Antichrists.
S. Jude is most vehement against them, giving them many bitter epithetes and
comparing them to Cain, to Balaam, to Core. Our Savior himself said of one of
his Disciples, that he was a Devil, Joan. 6.
which he meant of Judas, who is ordinarily and worthily ranked among
Haeretiques. Which considered; Sir Humphrey you should never have stood
complaining of the word: but freed your self of the matter, and all had been
well.

3. For that other point of bitterness, that we accurse and excommunicate you,
and spare Jews and Infidells, accusing us therein of great cruelty and
bitterness; You should have remembered S. Paul's authority and example. Does not
he excommunicate the incestuous Corinthian, and deliver him to the Devil, and
yet spare Jews and Infidels? He does; and gives the reason why he spares
them, to wit, because he has noe authority over them. Quid mihi de ijs qui
foris sunt iudicare? 1. Cor. 5.12.
what have I to do to judge those that are without? that is, out of my
jurisdiction? but because you Sir Humphrey shall not likewise say, that by
privilege of your haeresie you likewise exempt your self, 1. Timoth. I. 20.
you may remember how S. Paul in an other place, delivers Alexander and
Hymecraeus, Haeretiques, to Satan. Which yet you cannott call bitterness, but
just severity; unless you will also take upon you to condemn S. Paul of
cruelty and bitterness, which I presume you will not. If then you and your
fellow Ministers be Haeretiques, as they were, why should you deny to undergo
the same Doom? Clear your self of the haeresie, but complain not of the
curse and excommunication? it is and has ever been the just censure of the
Church against Haeretiques, Schismatiques, and all enormous and contumacious
sinners? we must not alter Laws for you Sir Hu^phrey, though you alter faith
at your pleasure.

4. Now then let us see whether there be cause for the severity, which the
Catholic Church does use, by calling our Reformers Haeretiques, and
denouncing them subject to Anathema. Sir Humphrey's first reason to the
contrary is, out of Theodoret's history; but that makes nothing for him, but
rather quite contrary; and withal gives a taste in the very beginning, how
truly and conformably to their minds he alleges authors. Theodoret speaks
of a schism, division, or dissension which long troubled the Church of
Antioch, about their Bishop; some taking one to be their lawful Bishop, and
communicating only with him; and such as held with him; Others in like sort
with the other: Which contention dured not only during one Bishop's life, but
more each side choosing a new one, in place of their Bishop deceased; his words
are these, speaking of some Bishops, who gathering together said that the
Churches, were to be brought to concord. Nam constabat etc. For it was plain,
Lib. 3. cap. 4
that they were not only impugned by the favorers of contrary doctrine, but
also that they were pulled insunder by mutual dissension among themselves. For
at Antioch the body of the Church which followed sound Doctrine, was divided
into two parts; for all, who standing for the excellent man Eustathius had
separated themselves, did perpetually make their meeting a part: and they which
stood for that admirable man Meletius, separated from the Arian faction, did
celebrate the holy Mysteries in Palaea: (So the place was called) and yet was
the confession of faith of both one and other the same. For both companies did
defend the doctrine of faith, caught in the Council of Nice, the contention
being only of an other matter, and out of the love which they did bear to
their Bishops neither could the death of the one take away the discord. These
and Theodorets own words, which are enough to show the case to be clean
different: there the contention was not for matter of faith or doctrine, here
it is; there the Catholics of both sides though at variance among themselves
for other matters, yet in reguard of faith they would have nothing to do with
Arrians. So it is now with us Catholics, though there may be contentions for
other matters as for Superiority, extent of jurisdiction, privileges,
exemptions, or the like, yet all jointly detest all haereticall doctrine. There
indeed both sides embraced the Nicene Creed, which was the only point in
controversy at that time, which now our Reformers profess to believe: but they
differ in the profession of faith of the Council of Trent; whereof the reason
is the same now, as it was then of the Creed of Nice. For that was against the
haeresies of those times, and this against the haeresies of these. If then the
knight find Catholics disagreeing among themselves about other matters, yet
agreeing in the profession of faith of the Council of Trent; he may allege
this authority of Theodoret, to allay the contention. But for the matter
between him and us, it is wholly impertinent, and out of season; and a wrong
to Theodoret himself to have his authority alleged, for persuading of concord
with Haeretiques, without their renouncing of their haeresies.

5. But a man may well have patience to see this author's meaning abused, when
he shall see both Bellarmines meaning abused, and his words corrupted, as I
shall now show. His words out of himself are these. Lib. 4. de verb. Dei. cap.
11.
It is to be noted first, that in the Christian Doctrine, as well of faith as
manners, there be some things simply necessary to Salvation for all men; as
the knowledge of the articles of the Apostles Creed, the ten Commandments, and
some Sacraments. Other things are not so necessary, as that without the
explicit knowledge, belief and profession of them, a man may not be saved;
so he have a ready will to receive and believe the^, when they shall be
laufully propounded unto him by the Church. Thus Bellarmine in one place, and
in another a little after again he says. Note secondly, that the Apostles
did preach to all, those things which were necessary for all; but of other
things, not all to all; but some to all, and some only to Praelats, Bishops,
and Priests. So Bellarmine. By which any man may see, how falsely and
cunningly the knighs has dealt in citing this authority: For I would know of
him, where Bellarmine says, that the Apostles never propounded as common
articles of faith, other things then the articles of the Apostles Creed, the
ten commandments, and some few Sacraments? to begin first with the last word;
where does Bellarmine say some few Sacraments: he says some Sacraments
indeed; but (few) he says not. Which though it be not much yet I cannot
think but Sir Humphrey had a meaning in it, to make Bellarmine symbolize, with
him in his paucity of Sacraments. Secondly where, does Bellarmine say, that the
Apostles propounded the ten commandments and some Sacraments, as articles of
faith? where find you that Sir Humphrey? Do not you make more articles of
faith now then ever any man did before? The ten commandments are indeed to be
believed but yet are they not so much matter of belief, as practice; not so
much pertaining to faith, as to charity toward God and our Neighbor and this
Bellarmine saw very well, when he said, that in the Christia doctrine, as wll
of faith as manners, somethings were necessary to salvation for all men As the
articles of the Apostle's Creed and the ten commandments and some Sacraments.
For the Creed belongs to faith, the commandments and Sacraments to manners.
For Bellarmine speaks here, not only what is necessary for all men to
believe, but what is necessary for all men to do, for obtaining of salvation;
according to that commission of our Savior to his Apostles: Go teach all
nations, baptizing them in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the
holy Ghost, teaching them to observe whatsoever I have commanded you.

6. I do not say, that we are not to believe these things also; for we cannot
practice them unless we know them, and some we cannot know otherwise then by
faith. The comma^dements indeed are principles of reason, drawn even from the
very light of nature though taught by divine authority; but the Sacraments are
taught only by faith, yet so as they are ordained principally for practice,
noe less then the Commandments, and therefore not articles of faith, but
sufficiently contained in the article of the Catholic Church, for without
Sacraments there can be noe Church. Thirdly where does Bellarmine say, that
the Apostles never propounded for common articles of faith other then the
things mentioned? I do not find it, but rather the contrary: For besides
these things which he says were simply necessary for all, and without which
men of discretion were not to be admitted to Baptism, he says that For those
other things, which were not simply necessary, that is, without the express
knowledge whereof, they, that is, men of years, might be admitted to Baptism
and saved the Apostles did preach many other things; some of them to all, to
wit, those things which were profitable for all, and some again only to some,
as to Praelats, Bishop's, and Priests. And here also Sir Humphrey you
cunningly join these two things in one; things simply necessary, and
profitable, as if both were meant only of one kind of things: whereas the
Cardinal does distinguish the one from the other. Which though it be but a
less matter, yet it shows your corrupt mind that can relate nothing
sincerely. Fourthly whereas Bellarmine says, that these things by you named
are simply necessary, he says with all that there be other things not so
necessary, as that without the explicit knowledge and profession of them a man
may not be saved, so he have a ready will to receive and believe them, when
they shall be lawfully propounded unto him, by the Church; You were pleased to
leave out the word (explicit) in the former part of the sentence and with it
also to leave out the whole later part; Bellarmine requiring an explicit
faith of same things, and an implicit faith of other that is a readiness of
will to receive and believe the^ when they shall be propounded by the Church
which kind of faith though you like not as being the thing that makes a
Catholic yet you should have let it stand among Bellarmines words, you have
the liberty to confute him if you can, but not to put in or out what you list.

7. Besides these four corruptions of Bellarmine, by putting in some words of
your own, and leaving out some of his, I might tax you with corrupting his
meaning, for your own purpose. For by saying that the explicit belief of
these things is necessary for all, he does not mean as you would have him,
that it was free for any man to choose, whether he will believe any thing else
of those which the Apostles preached: for that were most false. Neither is it
his meaning, though he say those things be necessary, that therefore they alone
are sufficient for all men, and that noe man is bound to know or believe
explicitly also, any thing more. For without question those things which the
Apostles taught to Praelats Bishops and Priests, were to be believed by the^
explicitly. Wherefore the belief of the Apostles Creed, the ten comandments,
and some few Sacraments, is not sufficient for your Ministers, who pretend to
be Bishops and Priests; but they are bound to know and believe more. How then
will you make the belief of those necessary things sufficient, to make concord
and unity in faith, seeing some men are bound to believe, more eue^ explicitly
and all men bound to believe whatsoever the Catholic Church shall propound
implicitly and consequently not to deny any thing else so propounded. For not
only the denial of those but of whatsoever else preached by the Apostles or
Church is enough to make a man an Haeretiq. Thus therefore you have egregiously
abused both Bellarmines words and meaning, and consequently not proved your
intent; that because you retain the Apostles Creed, which you call the
general cognizance of our faith, therefore there is noe cause to rank you with
Haeretiques. For this Cognizance was not sufficient for an Arrian, with out the
explication thereof in the Nicene Creed, as may be gathered out of Theodoret
before cited: and so may I now say it is not sufficient to distinguish a
Catholic from a Lutheran, Caluinist, Protestant, or other Haeretique of these
times, without the explication of the Trent profession of Faith. For this is
now the touchstone to try who believes the Apostles Creed in deed and who in
words only; And this your self must confess, who term some Sects
Haeretiques, and us Catholics, Idolaters, nowithstanding we and they profess
the Apostles Creed which you call the cognizance of our faith.

8. Now to that which you say, that the Roman Church and yours are Sisters,
and that the Roman, playing the harlott, yours went out of her. I answer,
that this is so far from clearing you from the note of haeresy, that it does
rather make you more guilty thereof. Your Church indeed comes out of ours as
all haeretical sects have ever come out of the Catholic Church. For so says
S. John of Haeretiques, ex nobis prodierunt, sed non erant ex nobis; nam si
fuissent ex nobis permansissent vtique nobiscum, sed vt manifesti sint quoniam
non sunt omnes ex nobis. 1. Io. 2.19.
They went out of us, but they were not of us: for if they had been of us,
they would verily have staid with us: but that they may be manifest that they
are not all of us: And among other marks of Haeretiques, S. Jude also
reckons this. Ep. Iud. 19.
Hi sunt, qui segregant semetipsos, these are they that separate themselves. S.
Paul says to the Ephesians, that out of themselves some should rise speaking
perverse things, Actor. 20.
that they might draw Disciples after them. S. Aug. explicateth that place of
the Psalm 30 Qui videbant me for as fugerunt a me. Aug. in Ps. 30.
They that saw me fled forth from me, to be meant of Haeretiques: because
when they saw what the Church was, they went. Forth and made haeresies and
schisms against it. and every where urges this, and nothing more then this,
against the Donatists, who justified themselves as you Sir Knight justify your
Church. Much more of this might be said, but this may serve to show you not to
be in your right wits, that bragg of that which you ought most to be ashamed
of, and account that to make for you which makes most against you.

9. For that which you talk of goeing out of Aegipt and Babylon, which you
would have men understand the Catholic Church, as if you were commanded to
go out from her, Do but once show us that Egypt and Babylon, which the
Sripture speaks of, were ever the true Church, and then you may seem to have
said some what for your Churches departure from the Roman: Which impudence it
self cannot deny to have been once the true Church. You are bold indeed to
say that Babylon was a true Church, wherewith sometimes the faithful did
communicate, but that after it was more depraved, the faithful are commanded
to go out of it. But I may ask you where you read this? what Father, what
Doctor, what man ever took Babylon in scripture to be used for the name of
the true Church? S. Peter in one of his Epistles speaks of Rome by the name
of Babylon: out of which a multitude of Fathers and Doctors prove that Saint
Peter was at Rome, and now you forsooth bring some of them cited by our authors
to that purpose, to prove that by Babylon is understood the true Church.
Abusing all those Fathers most egregiously, among all whom never one meant any
such matter: but only by Babylon understood the temporal state and government
of the City of Rome, as it was subject to those Pagan tyrannizing Emperors,
which persecuted the Church and people of God; wherein it did resemble that
other ancient and true Babylon, which detayned the Jews, then the true Church
and people of God in captivity and oppression. Which also S. Peter's own words
do sufficiently show, distinguishing most plainly Babylon from the true
Church. For he says thus. 1. Pet. 5.13.
Ecclesia quae est in Babylone coelecta. The Church which is in Babylon coelect
saluteth you. Not that Babylon was a true Church as your words are Sir Humphrey.

10. Now whereas you say, that when she was depraved, the faithful were willed
to go out of her, that is, out of her that was once the true Church. You are
extremely mistaken. For if you mean any true Babylon as that City of
Chaldaea, or that other of Egypt, or Babylon by similitude and likeness, as was
Rome in time of the Heathen Emperors and as many Interpreters think toward
the end of the world in time of Antichrist the city or temporal government
thereof shall again become, (of which time that of the Apocalypse is meant,
that the faithful shall fly, for avoiding of the cruelty and tyranny of the
persecutours, which shall then be more cruel then ever,) or if by Babylon you
mean the whole company of wicked men, from the beginning to the end of the
world, as S. Aug. takes it throughout his great work de ciuit. Dei, and other
Fathers and Doctors, and many interpreters understand that place of the
Apocalypse 18. If I say you mean it any of these ways, as noe man of
understanding ever meant or understood it otherwise, then was it never any true
Church, and so the Children and people of God might well be willed to get
out of it, either locally by motion of the body, or spiritually by avoiding the
ma^ners of the people, not having any thing with them in their wicked ways.
But if you mean as you express your self, that by Babylon is understood the
true Church, and that it may be depraved, that is, that the Church of Christ
notwithstanding all his promises for the perpetuity thereof, as That he would
be with it to the worlds end, That it was built upon a rock, That the Gates
of hell should not prevail against it, That he would send the Holy Ghost to
be with it for ever, notwithstanding that the Church is his kingdom, his
inheritance, his mystical body, his Spouse; that notwithstanding all this I
say, it should fail, it shoull be depraved, it should be wiolated, I know
not what to say but to stopp mine ears against that mouth of blasphemy of
yours and heerewith end this sectio^, the rest thereof being nothing but the
bitter froth of a distempered stomach, and unworthy of answer.

Chap. 3.
THE EXAMINATION OF Sir Humphrey's second and third Section. CHAPTER III.
1. IN the second Section Sir Humphrey labors to prove the contention
betwixt the Churches (as he calls them) to proceed originally from us, and
this by the confessions of our own. The third Section is to prove the
corruptions both in faith and manners confessed by some of us, and yet
reformacion denied by the Pope. Both which are easily answered. First by
asking what all this is to his purpose, suppose it were true? Does this show
his Church to have been always visible, or ours to have been at any time not
visible. He was not to stand upon matter of contention, who was cause or not
cause thereof, or who would have mended, who not. For the errors in faith,
which he seems to tax ^s with-all in his third section: if he can prove
them, he says somewhat indeed; though yet not so fully to his purpose. For
though he prove us to have had some errors it does not so presently follow
that they of his side have had none; or that therefore their Church has been
ever visible there is a great deal more required to it then so. And though he
should prove some errors to have been taught by some particular men, or even
in some Country professing the Catholic faith, it does not follow that the
Catholic Church has failed in faith, or ceased to be visible.

2. Secondly I answer to his second Section, which is to prove that the
contention proceeded from us, which he undertakes to prove by our own
confession: that in all this Section, he brings but four authorities to wit.
Cassander, a Canon of his English Church out of the praeface to Jewels works;
Camden citing S. Bid, Plessy Morney citing Michael Caesenas. Of all which
only S. Bid is a Catholic, and even cited by the Protestant Camden, and
only for a story which he tells of one Redwalde king of the East Saxons, who
being first converted to Christianity, and after seduced by his wife had in the
same Church, two altars, one for Christ's religion, another for the Devils out
of which this knight frames to himself a pretty fancy, being desirous hereby
to make men believe, that the like happened in the Roman Church, and that some
adored God only, others fell to adore Saints and images, and the like. Which
fond conceit what answer can it deserve? For it is but the bare saying of one
that does not understand what he says. For otherwise how could he possibly say
such a thing of himself without saying when, where, or how that happed, to us;
or ever saying word in proof that the case is the same. I might with as much
reason out of this story of Redwalde say as much of Sir Humphrey Linde that he
and his Protestants have built a new Church, a new faith, erected an altar
against an altar, etc.

3. But as I was saying of his authors, they are not many as you see, much
less have they any part among Catholics. For Cassander, Michael de Caesenas,
and Philip Morney, are in the Index of forbidden books. Camden and his English
Canon writers are Protestants; but, which is more strange, not a man of these
such as they are, that says any thing of that which he pretends in the
title of his Chapter, but only Cassander; who after the fashion of Haretiques,
speaks of the Pomp and pride of the Clergy, and that they will not hearken
to the admonitions of some godly men aduising reformation: these godly men he
means, such as himself, that is Haeretiques or next door to them, though Sir
Humphrey please often to call him a Learned Romanist. So that all the cause
that even this man alleges of the contention is, because the ecclesiastical
persons will not yield themselves to Haeretiques, and let them have the
ordering and disposing of all things at their pleasures; therefore they break
away and fall into contention with the Church. What cause do Clergy men give
of contention? in not submitting themselves to their inferiors, and to men
that have noe authority over them: or even if the counsel of these people were
good as it is not and that Clergy men think not good to follow it, must they
therefore presently fall to schism and haeresy, tearing and renting the
Church. By what Law are Clergy men bound to obey such fellows? if in a civil
commonwealth, some great man should dislike the government, either because his
enemies have the managing of matters, or that he thimketh he could do it
better then they, and presuming to give counsel to the Prince and his counsel,
they shoull not follow it, and that therefore he should go from court make
head and raise a rebellion in the common wealth; who should be counted cause
of this contention? the Prince and his Counsel or he? if Sir Humphrey be
judge, he must say, the Prince and his Counsel, if he will make good his man
Cassander's discourse.

4. As for Michael de Caesena whom the Knight also calls a learned Friar, it
is true he was a Friar and General of his Order, but for his learning I never
heard any such commendation of it: but we know why the Knight prayseth him:
Well be it so; but the man being excommunicated and deposed by the Pope, for
his disobedience and rebellion, he said that particular man, which was John 22.
was an Apostata, and an Heretic: and therefore noe true Pope. But that he
made two such Churches, one of the wicked under the Pope, another of the good
without any head as Morney makes him make, and this Knight out of him, I find
not in any, good author, but rather that he allowed of the authority of the
Roman Church; for he appealed from the Popes sentence to it; as may be seen
in Coquus his answer to Morney's mystery of iniquity page 205. to. 2. and in
the table verbo Michael de Coesena. Neither was he ever taxed with any such
haeresy.

5. His English Church-Canon commands nothing to be taught as matter of
faith, but what is agreeable to the Old and new testament, and is collected out
of the ancient Fathers and Catholic Bishops but what is that to the purpose?
how does this prove us to give the cause of Contention? he will say, this
proves his men to give none. I answer that if all the rest of their Canons
and proceedings were answearable to the saying of this Canon, there would
perhaps be somewhat less to do. Though it be not any way conformable to the
Scripture and doctrine of fathers for lay authority to make Canons for Clergy
men: and therefore the practice showed in this Canon is contrary to the words.
And so the 2. section is answered.

6. The third section is of corruptions both in faith and manners which the
Knight says we confess and yet deny to reform. He proves it out of the
Council of Pisa where Alexander the 5. Council Pisan. sess. 20.
promised to attend to the reformacion of the Church and out of the Council of
Trent acknowledging many things amiss in matter of indulgences, Mass etc. To
this I answer that for matter of manners we willingly acknowledge reformacion
to be needful: and such it is that these two Councels speak of, and have
performed as is to beseene by their Decrees: though the former be not of any
great authority. Council. Trident. sess. 22. Decret. de reformat.
And for the later, it complains indeed with great reason of the avarice of
such as had the gathering of moneys given in alms by occasion of indulgences.
Whom the Knight calls the Popes Collectors though the Council speak not of
the Pope. But he out of his love to the Pope would feign bring him in upon al
such occasions. This is true: but false it is, which he says: that the Council
complains of indulgences an article of the Roman faith as his words are. For
as it reformeth the corruption of the officers, so does it establish the truth
of the Doctrine, as appears by a particular decree thereof which is also
acknowledged and cited else where by this Knight himself whereby he is
convinced of wilful corruption. The same Council likewise complains of many
things crept in, in the celebration of Mass by the fault of the times, or
carelessness and wickedness of men which are far from the dignity of so
great a sacrifice. The words of the Council are right cited by him in Latin in
the margent, perhaps to save his credit by sincerity so much promised in his
Epistle dedicatory but in the English, which goes in the text he foully
corrupts them they are thus in Latin. Cum multa irrepsisse videantur. Which
in English is this. Seeing many things seem to have crept in: which the Knight
translateth thus, there were many errors and corruptions crept in to the Mass:
which is a gross error and corruption in the Knight the Council speaking only
of abuses which were crept in not of errors in matter of faith. The Council
likewise seems to acknowledge the avarice of Priests making such bargains
for the saying of Mass as was not far from Simony, or at least filthy lucre.
It speaks of the use of music where with some wantonness was mixed as also
of certain Masses or candles used in certain number, that number proceeding
rather from superstition then true religion this is true so far.

7. But that is not true, which the Knight says, that we deny a reformation of
these things for to what other end are they recounted there, but to be reformed
nay they are not named, but by way of forbidding them, and by way of commanding
Bishops to reform such things even as delegats of the sea Apostolic, where
there is need. Which is so apparent, that the Knight is feign to confess it
after in these words. Neither did these men seek reformation in manners only,
but in the doctrine it self. Wherein together with the contradiction of his
own former lie he tells a new one, to wit in saying that we seek a
reformation in the doctrine whereof he names some particular points as private
Mass, Latin service etc. Which is most false for the doctrine, is the same
still, and ever was, that though the fruit were greater when the people did
communicate with the Priest sacramentally, yet the Mass in that case is
neither unlawful, not is to be called private: both because the people
communicate spiritually, and also because the Mass is offered by the Priest,
as the public Minister of the Church. It wishes indeed, that the standers
by did communicate not only spiritually, but also sacramentally: without ever
mentioning the reformed or rather deformed Churches.

8. What error then does the Council here acknowledge? Again the knight says
that though the Council do not allow the celebrating of Mass in the vulgar
tongue, yet it commands Pastors and others that have care of souls, to
explicate and expound to the people some of those things that are read in the
Mass: and asks thus, how near these men do come to our doctrine, who does
not perceive! I answer that do not I Sir Humphrey, nor I think any man else.
That has ordinary, common sense. You condemn all Mass. The Council allows
it: you condemn private Mass. The Council approves that which you call
private Mass, but denies that it is so called Private as you would have it.
The Council speaks of Mass the true and proper Sacrifice of the new Law: you
would make men believe it speaks of your sacrilegious Supper. In our Mass
and Communion as the Council teaches is offered and distributed the true, real
and substantial. Body and Blood of CHRIST JESUS and what it says hereof you
most madly would make me believe were spoken of your empty and imaginary
communion. The Council teaches that the Mass is not generally to be
celebrated in the vulgar tongue: you would all public prayer so made: and
therefore condemn the Catholic Church for celebrating in Latin which the
Council allows. O madness of a man then! to talk thus as if the Council came
near to him when it says yea to his nay, and nay to his yea.

9. But having thus substantially proved the Council, to agree with him and
finding other places of the same so evidently against him he will needs have
the Council contradict it self and for that end brings certain
contradictions as he wisely takes them to be: One is that the Pope in his Bull
of profession of faith, says, that the use of Indulgences is most wholesome
for the people. For which he might have cited also the Council more thou once;
and that yet the Council confessed the scandal that came by them was very
great, with out hope of reformacion: which is not co^tradiction between the
Council and Pope but a flatt corruption of the Knights: the Pope speaking of
one thing, to wit, Indulgences in themselves: the Council in this place
speaking of the men, that had the promulgacion of them, and the gathering of
the alms. For preventing whose avarice and abuses, there had been so many
remedies used formerly in other Councels, but to none effect, that this Council
thought good, to take that office wholly out of such men's hands, and take
another course with it. What seeming contradiction is here? Another of his
co^tradiction is, that the Council approves those Masses, wherein the people
do not communicate, and yet wishes that the people were so devout as to
communicate sacrame^tally. Is not here a stout co^tradiction: as also that the
Council approves Mass in an un known tongue, and yet will have the Priests,
especially upon Sundays and Holidayes, to declare some of that which is read,
or some mystery of the holy Mass? Do not these two agree very well, I do not
see what the Man means.

10. And to conclude this wise section, he talks somewhat of reformacion
hindered by some principal men as one Nicolas Scomberg a Dominican Cardinal.
Citing four or five most haeretical books namely forbidden in the Roman Index
(and among them the history of the Council of Trent not named in the Index,
because it came out since, but written by an Arche-haeretique and noe less
detested by. Catholics then any of the rest.) Which I pass over as of noe
account, nor alleged to any purpose. As for reformacion who can say it is
hindered, but only by Haeretiques. For what else has the Counce^ of Trent
done, but reformed all abuses of manners, where it is or can be received; and
for errors of faith taught by Haeretiques, it has utterly condemned them, and
banished them from the ears of al Catholics. What reformacion then has it
hindered, but the haeretical reformacion whereunto Cardinal Scomberg said well,
if you and your history of Trent say true, that it was noe way to yield a iott
to Haeretiques; for it is not indeed; for the practice of the Church has ever
been to the contrary, showing thereby that the way to overcome haeresy is,
wholly to resist it, and though that thing which the Haeretiques teach or would
have practiced, were before indifferent, yet for their urging the same upon
their haeretical grounds it has been absolutely forbidden least we might
seem to have yielded to them, and so confirm them or draw Others to believe
them or their doctrine who to reprehend and contradict the Catholic Church
many times make things of indifferency to be of necessity that they forsooth
may seem the only Wisemen in the world: and the Church of God subject to
errors. Which I could prove by many examples, if need were. And heerewith I
make an end of this chapter, wherein I have disproued the Knight, and convinced
him of manifest falsehood in both the things by him pretended, showing in the
one that the Council acknowledged not any corruption in matters of faith, but
only by Haeretiques: and in the other, that for corruption of manners which it
acknowledged it has used all possible means to redress them.

Of Sir Humphrey's 4. Section; whereof the title is this. That many learned
Romanist, convicted by the evidence of truth, either in part, or in whole have
renounced Popery before their death. CHAPTER IIII.
1. I Could here before I go farther, ask what this makes for the
Visibility of the Knight his Church. For suppose it were true, and that we did
yield him his saying, that many have fallen from the Catholic faith to be
Protestants as it is clear, that many have; for otherwise there had never
been any Protestants in the world, Does this make his Church visible in former
times? or does this prove Succession of Pastors in his Church, Chap. 4.
without which noe Church can be Visible? Yt is clear it does not. But
because this is a general fault throughout his whole book, I will not stand
noting it in every Section apart, but this general note may serve for all. To
begin here with the title of this Section, if by Popery, he understand, as I
suppose he does, that Faith, which we Catholics profess under the Pope, as
our supreme Pastor then it is foolishly said of him, that some have renounced
the same in part. For noe man can renounce the Catholic Faith in part, it
being indivisible, but he that cease to believe one point cease to believe
any one as he should; that is, by way of true Divine Faith.

2. Now to prove what he pretends he has about again with his reformacion;
and tells us, that were it not for endangering of the Romish religion, we
would come nearer them in all the fundamental points, which their Church
teaches. For example, he says, the Council of Basil did allow the Bohemians
the use of the cupp; Aeneas Syluius afterward Pope Pius 2. says of the
Marriage of Priests, that as upon weighty reasons it was taken away, so upon
weighty consideracions, it were wished to be restored. For private Mass as he
calls it, he says that Doctor Harding says the faithful complain. The
translation of scriptures was as he tells us out of Causabon to Peron, and
Causabon out of those of Doway importunitate Haereticorum. Besides he says,
out of my Lord Cook's reports, that for the first eleven years of Q. Elizabeth
all Catholics did frequent their Church; and which is more he will needs have
Bishop Gardener, Bellarmine, and Albertus Pighius dye Protestants. He has two
more both Bishops to wit Paulus and John Vergerius brothers, which he will
needs have dye of his religion, of whom because I have not heard much; nor does
he cite any author but Sleidan and Osiander most notorious fellows, both for
lying and haeresy, in whom I list not so much as to look what they say of
these two, I give him leave to take them and make the best he can of them:
Sur. comment. rerum in orb. gest. anno. 1567.
only for that Paul Vergerius I find in Surius, that when he came to dye he
did cast forth an horrible stench and roared most fearfully like an ox,
besides other things so strange and fearful that one Venerandus Gablerus a
famous Physician, and then an earnest Protestant who was with him at his death
being stricken into horror and amazement there upon returned to the Catholic
Church again. But because this knight stands so in need of people, as it
seems, to make up number, and so would feign borrow some of ours there be
Apostataes enough and too many of several sorts, and in several countries,
which would make a jolly show, and make his book swell handsomely, I will give
him leave to take them all.

3. And for the rest I answer thus first noting his fundamental points what
they are, to wit, the Cupp; the Marriage of Priest; private Mass as he
calls it; and the translation of Scriptures into the vulgar tongue: Which for
all that if the Knight had well considered, he might have found not to be so
fundamental, being matters more of practice then belief. Secondly, it seems
that, for a man to incline in judgment a little toward the Protestant's side,
in any one of those points, is enough to make him of Sir Humphrey's Church,
though in all others he be of a quite contrary opinion, as we shall see. The
Counsel of Basil, is the first that comes near his Church in matter of the
Cupp, allowing the use thereof to the Bohemians, upon this condition as the
knight himself says out of Genebrarde, that they should not find fault with
the contrary use, nor sever themselves from the Catholic Church. How near
then does the Council come to you Sir Humphrey. You condemn the use of one
kind, the Council will not have it condemned; is this near? the Council will
not have you sever your self from the Catholic Church; you do: is not this
also near? but besides these two conditions the Council requires a third, to
wit that they shall believe that there is noe more received under both kinds,
then under one. You teach the quite contrary: how near then are you. Now over
and above all this, you know the Council of Basil is of little or not with
Catholics, as being reproved by the Sea Apostolic.

4. Your second point is, of the Marriage of Priests, which I see not why you
should make so fundamental, unless it be to gain the good will of the
Ministry with whom I confess it is of great account. You prove it by a saying
of Aeneas Syluius, whom being a Pope, you would be gladd if Iou could make come
near you. But he comes as near as the Council of Basil. For first his
authority as you cite it in this place is, but a saying of his related by
Platina, without citing any work where out it is taken: but you repeating the
same again with some little addition in your eleventh section note in the
margent his books de gestis Concilij Basileensis, which you cannot but know to
have been revoked and condemned by himself, in bulla retractationis: and there
excused by him, in that he writ it in time of that Council, being then a young
man, neither Priest nor Divine, but only a Grammarian and Poet, and coming
then newly from those studies; and therefore he will have those works counted
not Pius his works but the works of Aeneas Syluius, as he says expressly in
the same Bull. Verendum says he, Pius 2. in Bull. retracta (...) 4. Council.
ne talia nostris aliquando successoribus obijciantur, and quae fuerunt Aeneae
dicantur Pij. It is to be feared least sometimes hereafter such things may be
objected to our Successors and those things which were Aeneas his be said to
be Pius his. Which therefore he reuoketh wishing others not to rely upon or
give creditt unto them in those things quae supremam Sedis Apostolicae
authoritatem quouis pacto elidunt, aut aliquid astruunt quod sacrosancta Romana
non amplectitur ecclesia. Which any way dash against the supreme authority of
the Sea Apostolic or affirm any thing which the holy Roman Church does not
embrace. Which yet your conscience can serve you to conceal, taking the
objection which he foresaw but leaving the answer which he made; that thereby
you might better deceive men, with making them believe, as if there had been a
Pope a Protestant: this is good Dealing Sir Humphrey, and like you.

5. Doctor Harding comes next whom in like sort you abuse, notably citing his
words by halfes, and making him to say, the faithful have since the primitive
Church much complained of private Mass, as you call it, whereas he says
only, that the godly and faithful people have complained of the coldness of
Catholics, in that they do not communicate so fervently and frequently as
they did in the primitive Church; not of the Priests saying Mass, when there
be none to communicate. This is therefore also Sir Humphrey-like to say one
thing for another. Now for the translation of Scriptures, you triumph, as if
those of Doway confessed that they did it importunitate Haereticorum; and for
this you are feign to be beholding to Casaubon's epistle to Peron, which you
cite; whereas you might have looked your self in the book better then
Casaubon, who was a French man, and is supposed not to understand English so
well as you; but it may be you looked in the book, and finding Casaubon tell
an untruth; you would tell it after him though you knew it to be such, because
you thought it made against us, and for the disgrace when you should be charged
with it, you meant it should light upon your author but there is shame enough
in store for you both. You should have cited the place, where these of Doway
say so, for I find it not, those of Rhemes indeed, who were the same authors
say quite contrary in their preface, to wit, Rhem. test. Praef. initio.
that they do not translate the scriptures for any of those reasons, which
Haeretiques urge; but for the more speedy abolishing of haereticall
translations and they there, show that there have been some vulgar
translations of scriptures long before Luther's time, and that the reading of
them was neither generally forbidden, nor generally permitted in former times,
noe more then they are now: how near then do they come?

6. As for that which you tell us out of my L. Cook's report's, that our
Catholics did frequent your Churches till the eleventh year of Q. Elizabeth.
I answer that for my Lo: Cook, I have not to meddle with him, Answ. to.
Cook. reports cap. 16.
neither need I; he was so soundly answered by a Catholic Divine and so
exposed to the scorn of the world for his notorious falsehoods, and even in
this particular among others that he never had the heart or face to make
answer for himself. And yet now you are not ashamed to take up his false
tales, and tell them again afresh. Now after this for a leaf together you
talk your ordinary fustion; that many Catholics hold this, and that, and
the other point of your doctrine, though they dare not communicate openly with
you. For why I pray should they not dare here in England, where they are
compelled thereunto? But I let this pass as being all your own discourse:
except only one thing out of C^sterus, who says that a Priest does sin more
grievously in marrying a wife, then keeping a Concubine. Which you seem to
take for a great error. To which I say that in your Ministers who are mere
lay men, and may marry as freely as any body else, it is a greater sin to have
a concubine, then to marry; nay to marry is noe sin. But in Priests, who
cannot marry, it is a greater sin to marry, for it is noe marriage and in
this Sir I would know of you whether it would not be a greater sin, for a
man to marry another man's wife, her husband being alive, then to live loosely
with her at his pleasure? nay whether it be not worse for him to live loosely
with her, with promise to marry her when her husband dies then without such a
promise? sure it is. For a promise in such a case, according to the Canons is
an impediment that they can never marry together. Likewise is it not a greater
sin for a man to marry with a near kinswoman within the degrees forbidden:
in which case it is noe Marriage, then to live loosely with her? Sure it is,
and yet this is it which you condemn in Costerus, but it makes noe matter what
you say.

7. And so I come to Bishop Gardener, who you tell us dyed a Protestant
because when he came to dye he set the Merits of Christ in the gap to stand
between Gods judgment and his sins. I answer Sir Humphrey that if you can
bring a Catholic that does not do so, we will yield Bishop Gardener to have
died a Protestant. And so of Bellarmine whom you make men believe to have died
a Protestant, because he craved pardon at the hands of God, not as a valewer
of meritts, but as a giver of mercy. For by this rule Bellarmine should not
only have died but also lived a Protestant; for as often as he said Mass,
which was every day throughout the year, that he was able, for 40. years
together at least before his death, he said those words and so does every
Catholic Priest as often as he says Mass for they are in the Canon of the
Mass, Cap Signifi^^sti.
which is never changed, but is always the same though the epistles Ghospells
and prayers change, according to the several times and feasts. What a madness
then is it here hence to make Bellarmine a Protestant? but it is like the rest
of your inferences.

8. But you have another thing out of Bellarmine, which is that he says it is
most safe to put trust in the only mercy and goodness of God. It is true
Bellarmine says so, but yet you leave out the former part of the sentence,
which was to be the reason and rule of the later part; which is this, by reason
of the uncertainty of our own justice, and peril of vain glory, it is most
safe etc. Wherein I would feign see what there is to make Bellarmine a
Protestant? For he does not deny that there is any confidence to be placed in
our good works proceeding from God's grace, as you Protestants do for he had
proved in the same Chapter out of Scriptures and Fathers, that there might; but
there he says withal that because we know not whether we have such good
works or not, or though perhaps we know we have, yet for fear of vain glory,
it is the better way to turn away our eyes from them, and look only upon
God's mercy: Which he proves by many prayers which the Church uses in that
manner and among others this very prayer whereby you gather him to be a
Protestant: which as he used in his sickness, so he taught in health how it was
to be used without danger of Protestantisme or any other such error but what?
Does this take away all merit of God works, or all confidence in them? nothing
less good Sir knight as any man may see without farther declaration. Well but
though you cannot make Bishop Gardner or Bellarmine-Protestants, Lib. 2. de
iustif cap. 1.
yet you will make Pighius a Caluinist, in the point of Justification? But
Bellarmine even there where you cite him clears Pighius, though not from all
error, yet from that imputation of Caluinisme in two respects: the one in that
his opinion is not wholly the same with Calvin, for he acknowledges inhaerent
justification, which Calvin denies; though in this he err, that he thinks
that inhaerent justifying form to be imperfect and insufficient of it self
to make men the adoptiue Children of God without, the imputative justice of
Christ. Which also is not so much Caluinisme as Lutheranisme. But be it what
it will Bellarmine excuses Pighius in another respect, to wit, because he did
not obstinately defend the error as Calvin or Luther does, which is the maine
difference. For it is not the error, but the obstinacy that makes an
Haeretique. And so you see Sir Knight you have not one true word in all this
section: But let us now see your next.

Chap. 5.
The Knight's 5. Section. Wherein he undertakes to show, how worldly policy
and profitt hinders the reformation of such things as are inexcusable in
themselves. CHAPTER V.
1. OF this Section there is not much to be said. For there is nothing in it
but a little of the knights own rauing. For he tells us that now he sees
Trentals, Masses, Diriges, Requiem, prayers for the dead, Indulgences,
Purgatory, etc. made articles of faith, he despayreth of reformation. To which
I need make noe other answer, but that it is a good sign that he finds at
last the strength of the Church so built upon a Rock, as noe tempests or
winds can shake it; but rather that by storms and tempests it grows
stronger; the practice of the Catholic Church being strengthened against all
Haeretiques, by the greatest authority on earth, to wit, a general Council
confirmed by the Sea Apostolic. Again he despaires, when he sees Maldonats
saying (as he tells us) practiced by the Church of Rome, against his Church
and Doctrine, to wit, he, that is, Maldonate, interpreting a place of S. John,
allows S. Augustin's explication as most probable, though he rather approve
another of his own, because it more crosses the sense of the Caluinists. This
is it that drives him in to despair. Alas poor Sir Humphrey: is all your
bravery come to this: what your heart fail you so in the beginning? But it is
noe wonder; such a cause may well make you despair. And by your despair you
show your Doctrine to be false; for true doctrine loses nothing by being
impugned, but rather gains, as experience shows in the Catholic faith; of
which is verified the saying of the Prophest. Psalm. 11.7.
Eloquia Domini Eloquia casta: argentu^ igne examinatum probatum terrae
purgatu^ septuplum. Words of our Lord be chaste Words, silver examined by fire,
tried of the earth, purged Seven fold. Fire tries but consumes not gold, but
dross it showed to be dross by consuming it. For Maldonat; he approves and
commends S. Augustin's explicacion, but adds another of his own, not
contrary, nor disagreeing, though different from it. He prefers it, because
it is more against an Haeretique so it is like S. Aug. himself would also have
done, if he had been alive in these times: For it is well known how in
expounding of Scriptures, he still had reguard to the confutation of these
haeresies which then reigned and in one place he advises, Tract. 2. in ep. 1.
Io.
that those passages of Scripture be most carefully observed and remembered
which make most against Haeretiques.

2. After this the Knight has a great deal of foolish stuff which needs noe
answer, being but a bare recital of things: as for example our wresting the
Scriptures; his agreement of doctrine with the Fathers; nothing to the purpose
in this place: and then he cries out against our altering the Commandments;
which is before answered: Communion in both kinds: prayer to Saints: and in an
unknown tongue: Which shall be afterward answered. Only in this place, I
note in a word this wise question of his. What reason (says he) can be
alleged why an ignorant man should pray without understanding? To which I
answer with a contrary demand, to wit, How an ignorant man, that is, one
that wants knowledge or understanding, shall pray with understanding? and so
I leave him.

Of the 6. Section the title whereof is this. Chap. 6.
The common pretense of our adversaries refusing Reformation because we cannot
assign the praecise time, when errors came in, refuted. CHAPTER VI.
1. Here the Knight is up again with his reformacion, and complayneth that
we will not admit thereof, nor acknowledge our doctrine erroneous, unless he
can assign the time, and person, when and by whom the error came in. Which he
seems to acknowledge he cannot do; for he never goes about it; but only
labors to disprove our exception against him; by saying, that a man that is
sick of a consumption, ought not to refuse the help of the Physician, upon
pretense that he can not tell the time and occasion when his body began first
to be distempered: and out of S. Aug. he says that when a man is fallen into a
pit, and calls to a passenger for help, Ep. 19.
the passenger must not refuse to help him out, upon pretense that he sees
not how he should come to fall in. He proves it also as he thinks out of
scripture, because in the parable of the cockle, it is said that the enemy
sowed it when men were a sleep: out of which he infers that they could not
see or know him. Therefore he says that this defection of the Roman Church is
a secret Apostasy; Matthew. 13.
and therein he makes the difference between haeresy and Apostasy; that
haeresy is preached openly, so as the time and person may be named, but not
so this our secret apostasy; haeresy works in the day, apostasy in the
night. And then he reckons up some points, as worshipping of images, Prayer
for the dead, the primacy of S. Peter, and some others which he says were not
so meant a^ first, as they are now practtized and believed in the Roman
Church. This is his jolly discourse, framed in his own brain pan, and
surely grounded as you shall find upon examination thereof, which now I come
unto.

2. He compares the creeping in of error to the growing of a sickness in a
man's body, and presuming that because he says it we must therefore take those
things which he would have us for error; he would presently have us also fall
to correct them without standing to examine farther, noe more then a Physician
should, that comes to a sick man. But his comparison fails exceedingly. For
though there be some little likeness between the creeping in of errors, and
growing of a Disease in a man's body, because both begin little and stelingly
and increase by degrees; Yet to our purpose none at all. For the question is
not, whether we should fall to cure the disease without examining the cause,
(though by your good leave Sir Knight, good Physicians use to enquire of the
causes, effects, and other circumstances of the sickness, which they come to
cure) but whether this that you say is a disease or sickness be so or not. And
therefore all your labor is lost, when by similitudes you labor to prove that
we are not to putt you to the proof of our errors, by naming the authors,
time, and place, for upon these circumstances depends the knowledge whether
it be a disease or not which is our question. Neither is that authority of S.
Aug. to your purpose; for he speaks of a man fallen into a pit; of whom it
is evident, that he is fallen into it. And though you would have it so, that
the Roman Church is fallen into an error, as it were into a pit we say
otherwise, and of this is the question. And this we would have you prove, by
assingning the author, time, and place of this Change, for till you can show
that we say according to S. Aug. rule, that whatsoever the Catholic Church
does generally believe, or practice, so as there can be noe time assigned
when it began, it is to be taken for an Apostolical tradition. Such we say are
all these things, which you are pleased only because they please you not, to
call errors. And it stands you therefore upon, to prove when they began: else
they must pass for Apostolical traditions, not for errors as you would have
them.

Tert. praescrip. cap. 31.
3. Besides it is Tertullians rule for discerning of heresy from truth, to see
which goes before, and which comes after, that which goes before is truth,
that which comes after is error. We say then that in all these things, we
go before; because we have antiquity, they are things that have been ever
taught and practiced, we plead prescription from the beginning and we say and
prove that you come after, we assign you persons, times, and places, who have
begun the Change; it follows the^ that ours is true, till you can show us
time person and place when it began, as we show yours not to be true by the
same rule. Neither is it enough for you to say, we are in error; you must
disprove us, by showing our prescription not to hold good, which you can never
do, without assigning of persons times etc. If you should have a suit against
a man in Westminster Hall, for land which he pleads to have been his and his
ancestors, for so long time as is required by the Law to make prescription,
and that you should go about to disprove it without assigning the time and
manner, but only by your own bare word, would not every man laugh at you? How
much more in this case? and yet you think you have spoken wonderful wisely
and learnedly all this while.

4. Which may yet appear more, by that which follows of your comparison
betwixt heresy and apostasy. In which you attribute this later unto us: but it
seems hereby, you little know what Apostasy is. Wherefore to help you out
Apostasy is a defection or forsaking of the name of Christ, and profession of
Christianity, as all men understand it. Whereof sure you cannot tax us, so
long as we believe the Apostles Creed, which you call the common cognizance of
Christianity, and which you confess us to believe. How then can we be
Apostata'es? In no wise certainly; but if we err, we err as Heretics; and
if we be Heretics, you confess you must assign the person, who first taught
our heresies, the time and place, where and when they were first taught. For
so you say in plain terms, that heresy, because it works openly it may be
discerned, the time and person known: though you be somewhat various in this,
for you say a little before, that when there was any heresy that did enda^ger
the foundation, or openly disturbed the Church, (supposing herein that there
be some secret heresies which do not so,) the Fathers gave warning thereof by
letters. But your supposition is false and foolish. False in that you think
any heresy not to endaunger the foundation of Faith; for the least heresy that
can be imagined overthrows all divine faith: Foolish in that you suppose
some heresies to be so secrett, as not to disturb the Church. For if they be
secret how come you to know them and to know they are heresies, seeing they come
to have the name of heresy only by condemnation of the Church. As for your
last point of the Fathers giving warning by letters, it is true indeed and
thereto you might also have added, if you had so pleased, that the Fathers did
forbear absolutely to condemn things for haeresies, or to censure the authors
for haeretiques, V. Ep. Cyrill. Alex. ad Caelest. P P. in Conc. Ephesians. p. 1.
cap. 14. to. 1. Council. ed. Post. Binii.
and consequently to send such letters till they had acquainted the Bishops of
Rome and had his judgment. As is clear by S. Cyrill of Alexandria in the case
of Nestorius.

5. But we have this at least out of your discourse, that seeing you can produce
noe such letters against any point of those which you condemn us for that they
do not endanger the foundation of faith. If not, what needed you make this
huge breach from us, upon pretense of Reformacion in things of noe more moment
or at least not of necessity in your judgment, but we are not to require more
reason of your doings then your sayings: and therefore to come to the parable
of scripture wherein the enemy is said to have over sowed his cockle in the
night: Which parable you are pleased to expound of Apostasy. I answer that
this parable is understood noe less of haeresy then Apostasy, V. Tert. de
praesor. cap. 31.
nay more. For all the Fathers and Interpreters expound it of haeresy; none
that ever I heard of Apostasy: Which therefore must be verified of all those
which you acknowledge for open haeresyes. 28.

6. And therefore you are much out of the way, when you think by that, that
you are not to be forced to name the person, place, and time; when, where, and
by whom our Doctrine began: because as you say the seed was sown in the night
and the person not known. For in that parable you are to know, that as Christ
is the Goodman of the house who sowed the good seed, so the enemy that sows
his cockle in the night, is the Devil, who indeed works in the night, and
inuisibly; and he is the one singular and principal enemy of Christ, and all
Mankind. And he it is, that sows all the several seeds of diverse haeresyes;
the field wherein he sows it, is the World. Then it grows up and
appears, when that seed of erroneous doctrine being sowed in the hearts of
wicked men, and there taking deep root breaks forth at last by their
preaching and teaching thereof, or this cokle are Filij mali as the Scripture
it self says, evil Children, then the Servants of the Goodman, who are the
Pastors and Doctors of his Church presently begin to complain thereof, and
wonder how it should come, etc. So S. Aug. lib. q. Eua^g. in Math. cap. 11. to
4.
This is the true explicacion of this Parable not according to my private sense
but according to the sense of the holy Fathers; and our Blessed Savior
himself, who voutsafed to explicate this Parable unto us: wherein as you see
the Goodman's servants mark the growing of the cockle; so must you tell us
what Pastors or Doctors did ever note any such thing in any point of our
doctrine. But here Sir Humphrey what is to be thought of you, that take upon
you to interpret Scripture at your own pleasure, and for your own ends even
then where our B. Savior himself does explicate his own parable, and meaning
thereof. What I say may men think by this that you will do else where? and so
your chief gappe or euasio^, for not assigning the person time and place when
our Doctrine began, is stopped, and the exception remains still in full
force, to wit, that you must assign the time place and persons, or else we
acknowledge noe error.

7. But you say it is an undeniable truth, that some things were condemned in
the primitive Church for erroneous and superstitious, which now are established
for articles of Faith: and this you prove by a place of S. Aug. saying that he
knew many worshippers of tombs and pictures, whom the Church condemns and
seeks to amend; Which yet you say is now established for an article of Faith.
But by your leave Sir, this your undeniable truth, is a most deniable untruth.
For first S. Augustine's time, was a good while, that is, about one hundred
years after the primitive church. Secondly, that which S. Aug. condemns, to
wit, the superstitions and heathenish worshipp of dead and perhaps wicked men's
tombs and pictures, used by some badd Christians, is not approved by the
Nicene and Trent Councels; but the religious worshipp of Saint's images, and
relics, which S. Aug. himself practiced, Bell. de reliq. lib. 2. cap. 4.
as you may see in Bellarmine; with who^ also you may find other good
solutions of this place, which I suppose you cannot but have seen, and
consequently you cannot but know that your undeniable truth, is flatly denied
by him, and all Catholics.

8. Diverse other things, as the Primacy of S. Peter, Prayer for the dead,
Justification, Masses, Monasteries, Caeremonies, Feasts, Images. You say are
otherwise now used then at first instituted. Which for these five last, to wit,
Masses Monasteries etc. You prove out of one Ioannes Ferus a friar, a man much
in your books, and the books of all your Ministers; but not in any of ours,
but only the Roman Index of forbid books. And therefore of noe authority or
account with us. For the rest of these points, we have nothing but your bare
word and surmize, which is but a bare proof and not worth the answearing. 9.
After this, the knight thinks to come upon us another way, saying that our
own authors, who have sought the times and beginners of our errors, as he is
pleased to call them, confess an alteration though they do not find when it
began. For restraint of Priests marriage he says that Marius cannot find
when it came in, Yet after he brings Polidore Virgill saying that Priests
marriage was not altogether forbidden, till the time of Gregory the 7. And this
doctrine our knight is pleased to make all one, with that absolute forbiding of
marriage which S. Paul reckons among the doctrines of Devils. For S. Paule's
authority it has been answered more often then the knight has fingars and
toe's; and every child may see the difference between forbidding of Marriage
generally to all sorts, as a thing evil in it self and unlawful, and
forbidding marriage in one particular state or profession, to which noe man is
bound, but is left free whither he will embrace it with this condition or not.
And this not because it is a thing evil in it self, but because it less
agrees with the holiness which is required for the exercize of Priestly
function. For Polydore Virgil it is true he says as the Knight tells us and
eue^ as much more besides as any haeretique can say of that matter: but it
booteth not; that work of his de rerum inu^n ^o^^^^ being a forbidden book,
Conc. Nic. can. 3. Carthag 2. can. 2. V. Bell. lib. 1. de cler. cap. 19.
and the thing which he says most evidently false as appears by infinite
testimonies, but particularly by a Canon of that great Nicene Council 800.
years before Gregory the 7. his time. And the 2. Council of Carthage, which
testifies it, as a thing taught by the Apostles, and observed by antiquity.
The Knight may find more in Bellarmine for proof of this point. Here I only
ask how he makes his authors, hang together, Marius cannot find the
beginning, Polydore finds it, and yet both for the Knights purpose forsooth.
But for Marius his authority it is nothing against us but for us. For it
follows by S. Augustines rule, that because it is practiced and taught in the
Catholic Church, with out being known when it began, that therefore it is
an Apostolical tradition.

10. Another error as he says, is Prayer in an unknown tongue, wherein it is
to be wondered says Erasmus as the Knight cites him, how the Church is
altered. But Erasmus is noe author for us to answer: he is branded in the
Roman Index. Neither need I say more of the matter it self in this place. A
third error of ours as he pretends, is Communion in one kind, for which he
cites Val. twice; once saying it is not known when it first got footing in
the Church; another time, that Communion in one kind began to be generally
received, but a little before the Council of Constance. Which I see not to what
purpose they are, if they were right cited, as the former is not. For Val. has
thus much. When that custom began in some churches, Val. de leg. vsu Euch.
cap. 16.
it appears not: but that there has been some use of one kind ever from
the beginning, I showed before. So Valencia. What does this make for the
knight? nay does it not make against him? why else should he corrupt and mangle
it? Does not Valencia say he made it appear that this kind of Communion was
somewhat used from the beginning? and that which he says, of the not appearing
when it began, is not of the Church in general, but of some particular
Churches. Besides for a final answer I say it is noe matter of doctrine, but
practice, the doctrine having ever been and being still the same of the
lawfulnes of one or both kinds as the Church shall ordain, though upon good
reasons the practice have changed according to the diversity and necessity of
time. With all therefore that ever he can do, he can not refute that argument
which we make against him and his, that our doctrine is not to be taxed of
error, so long as they cannot show, when, where, and by whom it began: as
we can and do every day of them and their doctrine.

11. But because it is ordinary with these men to charge us with this same
secret apostasy and defection, though they cannot tell when nor how it has
come, I shall here put this Knight in mind of two conuincing arguments to the
contrary, brought by the Catholic Divine that answered that part of my Lo:
Answ. to Cooks reports. ep. dedicat n. 22. etc.
Cooke's reports before cited by this knight, to convince the folly and vanity
of a certain similitude of a wedge of gold, that was dissolved and mingled
with other metals brass tin etc brought by Sir Edward to prove the
dissolution of the Roman Church by errors and innouatio^s, just as this knight
talks. One of the arguments is theological; the other moral. The first, that
if the Church of Rome was the true mother Church, which both my Lord Cook, our
Knight, and all the rest of them confess, then were all the predictions and
promises of the Prophets for the greatness, eminency, honor, certainty, and
flourishing perpetuity of the said Church fulfilled in her; and Christ's
peculiar promises in like manner: that he would be to the worlds end with her
that hell gates should never prevail against her etc. Were also performed in
her, for so many hundred years, as they confess her to have continued in her
purity; Whereof ensues that either God is not able to perform his promise, or
else it cannot be conceived without impiety, that this flourishing kingdom and
Queen of the world should be so dissolved and mingled with brass, tin,
copper, should be so corrupted with errors and innouations, as to fall away
by Apostasy; this is the theological argument, which may be read there more at
large.

12. The moral is, that Christ having purchased his Church at so dear a rate
as was the shedding of his blood, and having set over it so many Pastors and
Doctors to keep continual watch, how is it possible that it should fall away
and decay, without any one of all these watchmens once opening his mouth, to
resist or testify this change. To any wise man this may truly seem as it is
a thing wholly impossible. Of this also he may see a large and excellent
discourse in the same place.

13. But not to detain my self longer in it, I will here only represent a
consideration of Tertullian's supposing that this so impossible a thing should
happen. Go too, says he, be it so; let all have erred, praescr. cap. 28.
let the Apostle be deceived in his testimony which he gave of the faith of
some Churches; be it so that the holy Ghost has not regarded any, (Church)
so as to lead it into truth, though sent by Christ for this end, and desired
of the Father to be the teacher of truth; be it so that the Steward of God,
the Vicar of Christ, has neglected his charge, suffering the Churches to
understand otherwise, to believe otherwise then he (that is Christ) preached
by his Apostles; What, is it likely, that so many and so great should err
all in one belief? among many several eue^ts there is not one issue. Mark
here, one Steward of God's household, one Vicar of Christ to whose office it
belongs, to see that particular churches do not teach nor believe otherwise
then they were taught by the preaching of the Apostles. The error of doctrine
of the Churches must have been several, but that which is found one and the
same among or with many, is not error but a thing delivered, therefore may any
man dare to say, that they who delivered it did err? Hitherto are Tertullian's
very words. In which besides that every sentence is a weighty argument of moral
impossibility of the Churches erring, which yet for disputacion sake he lets
pass for possible, he has that strong concluding impossibility, that so many
several Churches in every country, so many several men should all agree in the
same error, out of which Unity, he gathers it to be a truth, noe error.
Therefore let this Knight, and all his babbling Ministers if they do not mean
to be counted wholly out of their wits for evermore hold their peaces, without
accusing the Catholic Church which contains in it self so many Churches,
so many kingdoms, Chap. 7.
so many millions of people all agreeing in the same faith, of error and
apostasy.

Of the 7. Section the title whereof is thus. The pedigree of the Romish faith,
drawn down from the ancient Haeretiques: and the Protestant faith derived
from Christ and his Apostles. CHAPTER VII.
1. IN this Section Sir Humphrey you undertake a great task, which if you
perform according as you promise, eris mihi magnus Apollo If you do not, then
a man may say to you with out offense, magnus es ardelis. You undertake to
derive us by Succession in person and doctrine from ancient Heretics, and
your self from the Apostles. Which how truly you have performed. I am in this
chapter to examine. You begin with Latin Service and Prayer in a strange
tongue, which you say out of one Wolphius a Lutheran Heretic, came into the
Church by Pope Vitalian about the year 666. whereof you make a mystery noting
thus in the margent numerus bestiae Apoc. 13. The number of the beast. From him
you skippe to the Heretics Osseni, who taught as you say out of Epiphanius,
that there was noe need to make a prayer in a known tongue. From them you go
yet higher to the Apostle's time, wherein you say out of S. Ambrose, that there
were certain Jews among the Grecians, as namely the Corinthians, who did
celebrate the divine Service and the Sacrament sometimes in the Syriake, and
most commonly in the Hebrew tongue, which the common people understood not. And
you say that against that the Apostle S. Paul wrote that 14. chap. of the 1. to
the Corinthians, from whom therefore you say your Protestant doctrine is
derived as ours is from haeretiques.

2. For answer of this, and what else you are to say of your Succession it is
to be noted, that it is one thing to prove a thing to have been anciently
taught, another to have been successively taught. For this later, besides
antiquity which it includes, it imports Continuance, and perpetuity without
interruption. So that though it should be true, which you say out of
Wolphius, Epiphanius, and S. Ambrose, yet were not that enough. For there be
some hundreds of years between Pope Vitalian and the Osseni, and more from S.
Paul's time to this of ours, from which notwitstanding, you draw your doctrine
without any body between, now for the space of 1500. years. Besides when we
speak of Succession in person in these matters, it is understood principally
of persons in authority one succeding the other in place and office. For we see
in kingdoms and co^monwealthes, the Succession is to be considers most in
reguard of the Gouerners and rulers, and in the Church the reason is more
special, because the Rulers thereof are Doctors by office. As for Succession
in doctrine to speak properly and clearly the Succession is not to be
considered in the doctrine it self, for that must be always the same; but it
is to be considered in the Men. So that they succeed one another, not only
in place and office, but also in the same Doctrine; that is holding the same
Doctrine which their Predecessors have held, as they hold the same place.

3. This premised, which cannot be denied, I think noe man will be able in all
that the Knight says in this Section, to find so much as a shadow of
Succession either in person or Doctrine, either against us or for himself.
Wherefore I shall endeavor only to discover his falsehood and corruptions, in
charging us with ancient haeresies. For Latin service then, that it should be
first brought in by Vitalian, it is a most strange absurdity for this knight to
auerre such a known falsehood, upon noe other authority then Volphiu's, a
professed haeretique; and who can have noe other ground, but because that Pope
lived about the year 666. which number is the name of the beast in the
Apocalypse, though if he, that is, Wolphius would make a mystery of the year
wherein S. Vitalian lived, I see not why he should take the 666. which was the
eleventh of his Popedom, rather then the year 655. or 669. which were the
first and last years thereof. which being so ridiculously false, I will
forbear to bring proofs against it, least I may give occasion to any man to
think that there is any the least likelihood in it. For during those 600. and
odd years, what other Liturgies were there in the Latin Church but Latin, of
which the very name of Latin Church gives sufficient testimony: if not
Latin, let this Knight or his friend Wolphius say what Language was in use
before.

4. As for the Osseni whom our Knight would place upwards toward the Apostles,
yet after their time, for he goes ascendeing upwards as he says, he is
notably mistaken in the time. For Epiphanius makes them one of the seven
Sects, which were among the Jews before Christ's coming. For thus he says.
Post relatas Samaritarum and superius Graecorum indicatas Sectas septem fuerunt
haereses apud Iudaeos ante Christi in carne aduentum? In principio cap. 14.
Having related and pointed out the Sects of the Samaritans and Graecians there
were seven heresies among the Jews before the coming of Christ in flesh. And
then reckoning and treating of the heresies in order in the 19. chap. he comes
to this of the Osseni the very title being this. Contra Ossenos Sextam Iudaism^
haeresim. Against the Osseni the sixth heresy of Iudaisme. Besides for the
matter I only say, that reading that 19. heresy of Epiphanius, which he
cites, the title whereof is Of the Osseni, twice over, and the second time yet
more attentively then the first, I could not find any such word as the Knight
cites out of him, to wit, that there was no need to make a prayer in a known
tongue. Indeed it was one of Elxais heresies (who lived long after in Traian's
time, and whom S. Epiphanius joins with the Osseni) that men must not pray
toward the East as then was the general custom of the Church. Which error,
is not to be compared with the least of a hundred which our Heretics now
adays maintain, and yet they forsooth make noe matter of, because they are
not fundamental.

5. For the place of S. Ambrose, if a Catholic should urge him or his
Ministers with an authority out of that work, they would make answer it were
not S. Ambrose his, and they would fill their margents with citations taken out
of our authors. Which exception though I might in like sort make, yet I do
not; because the author is ancient, though not known, nor his doctrine in all
things so current. But for this place, the Knight has so mangled and glossed
it, yet putting all in a different letter, as if they were the author's words,
that when I came to read the author, and see him so changed, I began to
think whether that were the place. But finding that there could be noe other,
and that it is like in some words, I concluded that this must be it. The author
then commenting upon the 14. Chap. of the 1. to the Corinthians where S. Paul
speaks of some that did use the gift of tongues for ostentation: says thus.
Hi ex Hebraeis erant qui aliquando Syra lingua, plaerumque Hebraea in
tractatibus aut oblationibus vtebantur ad commendationem: gloriabantur enim se
dici Hebraeos propter meritum Abrahae. These were of the Hebrews who sometimes
used the Syriack but most part the Hebrew in their treatises, that is, (
speeches or exhortations) or Oblations, for ostentation. For they did boast
that they were called Hebrews, for the merit of Abraham. These are the words of
the author truly reported, and truly translated. Whereas the knight put this
praeface, that there were certain Jews among the Graecians, as namely the
Corinthians, which words are not in this author. Then he goes on thus: ( who
did celebrate the divine Service and Sacraments etc. Whereas in the author
there is neither the word (celebrate), nor the word (divine Service) much less
the word (Sacraments); all that has any show of a thing like is, that word
(oblationibus); which signifies offering, whereof some may be made by Lay men
and women, as the Puritan Ministers find full often to their profit, without
any celebration or Sacraments, the word (tractatibus) signifies speeches or
exhortations by word or writing, and so S. Aug. calls the expositors of
Scriptures tractatores. de doct. Chr. Vinc. Lirin. aedu haere. cap. 27.
Lastly whereas the author declared the end for which they used those tongues,
to wit for ostentation bragging that they were Hebrews, for the meritt of
Abraham, this knight leaves all that out, and puts in these words of his
own which the common people understood not, as if they were the author's
words. Now though this authority do not import much either one way or other,
yet a man may by it see the honesty and fidelity of this knight, who in all
this sentence which he makes 9. lines in his book, he has not one word right
cited, but only these (Sometimes in the Syriacke and most commonly in the
Hebrew tongue) which being taken alone what sense can they have, and yet how
many lines a man is feign to write to lay open his naughty dealinge?

6. Another point of our doctrine, to wit, transubstantiation he draws from
the Haeretiques Heliesaitae, which fained a twofold Christ one in heaven
another in earth, out of Theodoret. And from one Marcus an Haeretique who by
his invocation over the Sacramental cupp, as the knight says, caused the wine
to appear like blood, out of S. Irenaeus. And lastly from the Capharnaits in
Christ's time, out of his own brain, and so concludes our Succession in
doctrine and person to be drawn from Idolaters, Haeretiques, and Capharnaits.
Of the first of these three Theodoret says, that those haeretiques made two
Christ's one below, another above; of whom they say that he had dwelt in many
before, and at last came down hither; or as others declare it; that at last he
came and rested in JESUS the Son of MARY. An haeretical fable indeed, which
noe man can tell what to make of? but wherein is it like to our
transubstantiacion? these haeretiques make two Christ's we acknowledge but one;
and the same both in heaven and in the consecrated host. Marcus, as Irenaeus
says, by the help of the Devil through art magique, changed the color of
the wine in the cup or chalice, which the knights is pleased of himself to call
sacramental, into several colors. The Catholic Priest does the clean
contrary; for the color and other accidents remaining, he changes the
substance of the wine into the Blood of Christ, by the Omnipotent power of
almighty God. For the Capharnaits, they thought they should eat Christ's body
piece meal, and after the manner of the flesh whereon they feed; we receive
Christ whole and entire, not in the form and shape of flesh, but of bread;
and in a spiritual, though real manner. What likeness then in all these
doctrines with ours, to a man in his right wits?

7. A third point is of the Supremacy of the Pope, which he fetches from
Phocas Emperor who he says first gave it to the Bishop of Constantinople 600.
years after Christ. But to give us more antiquity, he says the Ge^tils were
our first founders, and benefactors. For which he alleges the saying of our
Savior. The Kings of the Gentiles exercise Lordship over the^, Luc 22.25.
and they that exercise authority upon them are called benefactors. Here he
says we are derived from bloudsuckers and Gentiles, usurping power over kings
in things spiritual and temporal: whereas his doctrine he says is from Christ:
Whosoever will be great among you, let him be your Minister; and whosoever will be
chief among you let him be your servant. This is his discourse. To which I
answer, that the knight is egregiously mistaken in saying that Phocas gave
that authority to the Bishop of Constantinople; though if he should have given
it, or rather attempted to give that which he could not give to the Bishop of
Constantinople, what is that to us? Do we derive our Succession from
Constantinople? was there not a Bishop of Rome, and was he not acknowledged
for head of the Church some hundreds of years before ever there was a Bishop
of Constantinople or a Constantinople, or even a Constantine himself? What then
does he tell us of the Bishop of Constantinople, or Phocas, or any such? rather
the clean contrary: for all true history tells us, that whereas John that
ambitious Bishop of Constantinople, vt habetur in ep. Pelag. to. 1. Conc.
would have had that title of Universal Bishop whereby he might seem to
aequall the Bishop of Rome (though in words he protested never to do any thing
against the Sea Apostolic) wherein he had been supported by Mauritius the
Emperor, and upon whom therefore and all his, V. Cedr. Lonar. and alias ap.
Coqu. cont. progr. 22. page 327.
almighty God showed the severity of his judgments, when Phocas came to be
Emperor, though otherwise a naughty cruel man, he made a constitution,
declaring that the Church of Rome, Plat. in Bonif. 3.
which is head of all Churches should be so called and held by all,
forbidding the Bishop of Constantinople the use of that title, which he took
upon him of himself. Out of which commonly the Protestants object, that the
Bishop of Rome has received his authority from Phocas, which is a most absurd
and foolish conceit. For the Bishop of Rome's authority is far greater then
can be given by any earthly man, and which being given by our B. Savior
himself here upon earth* the Bishops of Rome had possessed and exercized
continually for the space of more then 600. years before Phocas his time. How
then could it come from him? But this shows the knight's ignorance and
absurdity (which is our business in this place) first in saying that Phocas made
such a Decree in behalf of the Bishop of Constantinople, which shows his
ignorance, for that Decree was made by Phocas in favor of Bonifacius Bishop of
Rome against the Bishop of Constantinople. Secondly in alleging that for a
reason or ground of the Bishops of Rome's authority, which is commonly
alleged even by Protestants against it, who by exalting the Bishop of
Constantinople would willingly depresse the Bishop of Rome.

8. As for the knigt's other argument or his place of Scripture of the kings of
the Gentiles. I see not what it is that he would say to the purpose. Our
Savior indeed tells his Disciples, he will not have them imitate the
domineering manner of government of those Kings; but contrariwise, that he
that is chief among them, shall be as a Servant to the rest. Which Council is
and has ever been most observed by the Bishops of that holy See of Rome; who
therefore have used to style themselves. SERVVS SERVORVM DEI. THE SERVANT OF
THE SERVANTS OF GOD, but will this knight therefore have it that by reason of
this humility there must not be any Superiority, that because he must carry
himself like a servant, therefore he must not feed the Lambs and sheep of
Christ? If he mean this, as I see not what else he should mean, I say noe more
but that it is a conceit worthy of him? But besides what a fine line of
Succession is here? Does the Pope succeed either Phocas or any other king or
kings of the Gentiles? to what purpose then are they named?

9. But to go yet on with his toys, he deduceth our worship of Images from
the Basilidians and Carpocratians, who (says he) did worship images; and
professed that they had the image of Christ made by Pilate, for which he
cites S. Irenaeus in the margent. His own doctrine he deriueth from the
second of the ten commandments, according to his own translation, Thou shall
not make to thy self any graven image. Here again the Knight gives yet more
ample testimony of his notorious naughty dealing. For why, when he said that
these Haeretiques had the picture of Christ, made as they said by Pilate, why I
say could not he have gone on with S. Irenaeus, who, speaking of that, and
other pictures both painted and carved, which they had, says. Has coronant,
Iren. lib. 1. cap. 24.
and proponunt eas cum imaginibus mundi Philosophoram; to wit cum imagine
Pythagorae, and Platonis, and Aristotelus, and reliquorum; and reliquam
obseruationem circa eas similiter vt gentes faciunt. They crown them, and
propose them with the images of the Philosophers of the world, to wit,
Pythagoras, Plato, Aristotle, and the rest, and use such other observation
toward them, as the Gentiles do. Does not this answer you Sir Humphrey? Do
you not here find a difference between that worshipp and ours between
idolatry and religion? between their adoring the creature of wood and color,
in place of the creator; and our adoring the creator represented by the
creature? between their adoration of idolatrous damned Philosophers, and our
worshipp of the blessed Saints and Servants of God, living with him in glory?
This is too too gross for such a subtle knight as you are. Now for proof of
your doctrine by Succession from the 2. commandment, it is ridiculous to call
it Succession; though you took the place of scripture in the true sense, as
you do not. For how does your doctrine succeed the commandment, a man may
prove his doctrine out of scripture but not derive the Succession thereof out
of that proof. For this Commandment it is neither the second, but an
explication of the first; nor is it truly translated; for there is not the
word Image in that place of scripture.

9. A fifth point is Communion in one kind, which he says we have from the
Manichees, and from the Nazarites, who it is not like as Bellarmine says, did
drink of the Chalice against their Vow, nor yet like that they did wholly
abstain from the Communion: Out of which he gathers that they did
communicate in one kind only. And here says the Knight, is their best
Succession from Haeretiques, and an uncertain example of the Nazarites.
Whereas his doctrine (he says) is taught by Christ, himself, Drink ye all of
this. This is the Knight's discourse. But to answer him, I say, that before
ever there was Manichee in the world, the B. Sacrament was administered,
sometimes in one kind, sometimes in both. The Manichees abstained indeed from
receiving the chalice, out of one haeretical principle, as now our Haeretiques
stand to have it for another like principle; against which as in that time the
Church forbad the use of one kind, so now it forbids the use of both kinds,
and may again give way when it shall seem convenient for the use of both
kinds, the doctrine ever remaining the same, as upon another occasion I said
before. For that word of our Savior Drink ye all of this, from whence the
Knight draws the Succession of his doctrine, it was spoken only to the
Apostles and in them to Priests not to the Layity. Of which I shall have
occasion to speak again afterward.

10. But to come to an end of this matter, the Knight draws our invocation of
Saints and Angels from the Angelici, our Works of Supererogation from the
Cathari, our Worship of the B. Virgin from the Collyridians, our Forbidding
Priests to marry from Tatianus and the Manichees, who he says Forbad it in
their Priests. Putting down the Latin words in Sacerdotibus. As if those
special words were in S. Epiphanius, whom he cites. But this serves for
nothing, V. Gual. chron.
but to show the man's shamelessness more and more. For the Angelici they were
Heretics, swaruing from the rule of the Catholic faith, by excess, that
is, honoring Angels more then their dew, or more then creatures; as Heretics
of these time do by defect; that is, not honoring them so much as is dew nor
as creatures specially honored and employed by God, for the good of mankind.
The Cathari or Puritans as he interprets the word himself, a man would think
should belong more to him that is either a Puritan or a Brother, or at least a
Reformer, then to us Catholics. But the Cathari were No^atians, who out of
pride and self conceit, as if they were more clean and holy did condemn
Catholics, for admitting men to penance, though they sinned never so often
and so grievously, whereas they, Saints forsooth, if a man did for fear deny
his faith, they would have nothing to do with him any more. Now what is in
this, like our works of Supererogation that is works which a man is not bound
unto? The Collyridians exceeded the measure of honor dew to our B. Lady, for
they did offer sacrifice unto her, as the Antidico Marianitae did err
contrarily denying her dew honor, whom the Knight did forbear to name, lest
he might seem to name his own sect. Now Catholics go in the middle they do
not offer sacrifice unto her, that honor being dew to God alone, but they give
her all the honor that can belong to a pure creature. Tatianus and the
Manichees disallowed all marriage, but that they did disallow it specially in
Priests I do not find in Epiphanius as the Knight would make men believe by
putting the words ( in Sacerdotibus in Latin and in a distinct letter. Though
indeed it be less allowable in Priests then in other men.

11. It being then so, that of these haeresies which here the Knight
reckons, and whereof he would make us guilty, there is not one of them that
any way concerns us, but rather as a man might easily prove that he and his
Church are guilty of almost all of them, how vainly and fondly does he
conclude this Section, by saying these and the like errors taught in the
church of Rome, are either lineally descended from the aforesaid Haeretiques,
or at least have near affinity with them? how vain I say and fond is this
saying of his? how near they come, any man may judge, by what I have here
said; as also of the linealnes of the descent of our Doctrines from former
Haeretiques or of his from the Apostles. For whereas the line should be drawn
along by a continued Succession, from the beginning to the end, he names
sometimes one only man or time for the whole 1500. years, sometimes not so
much as one man, but only a bare place of scripture corrupted or
misinterpreted. Which what Succession it may make, let any indifferent man be
judge. Wherein it seems the very guiltines of his own conscience does make
him misdoubt a little, that he has not sufficiently performed his promise, as
may be gathered out of these words of his. ( If I have failed in calculating
the right nativity of their ancient doctrine, etc.) but for all that, he says,
he is sure, that we are utterly destitute of a right Succession in person and
Doctrine from the Apostles, and ancient Fathers, as he says shall appear by
many testimonies of the best learned among us. But the knight has so ill
performed his promises past, that he cannot look any man should give him
credit for those that are to come. And for that which he is sure of, that we
have noe Succession in person and doctrine, that is so false and so
apparently false, as that it is not to be doubted, but he that shall auerre it
will make noe scruple of any lie how loud soever. For do not our catalogues of
Popes sold and printed in London testify the contrary? for Succession in person
what clearer testimony can there be in the world of personal Succession then to
have two hundred and odd Popes one succeeding the other in place and office,
exercizing the same authority and jurisdiction in the sight of the whole world?
Now out of this personal Succession, we Catholics draw a most firm argument
of Succession in faith and belief as he calls it, as the holy Fathers have
ever done against Heretics of their times. Which so long as it stands
good; it is in vain for Sir Humphrey and such men to cry out that we have noe
Succession in doctrine. Let them show when, where, in what Popes time, and by
whom it was interrupted or broken of, or else they say nothing. And so leaving
him to find that out I pass to another Section.

Chap. 8.
Of the 8. Section, entitled thus. The testimonies of our adversaries touching
the antiquity and Universality of the Protestant faith in general. CHAPTER
VIII.
1. THe title of this Sectio^ promises much, and the beginning of the Section
it self much more. For in it he says, that if the Church of Rome do not
plainly confess the antiquity of his Church, his Tenets, and the nouelty of
her own; if she do not proclaim the Universality of the Protestant faith,
and confess it both more certain and safe, he will neither refuse the name
nor punishment dew to haeresy; Which how bold and unlikely an adventure it is I
presume there is noe man of judgment be he never so much friend even to Sir
Humphrey himself that does not at the very first sight perceive? how shameless
and impudent it is, I doubt not but upon a little examination I halbee able
evidently to declare, and consequently how truly both the name and punishment
of haeresy is dew unto him, even by his own doom. Wherein I shall crave thine
attention Good Reader, that perceiving how well and truelly he performs this
promise so great, and upon so hard conditions Voluntarily undertaken in case
of not performance thou may frame a right judgment of the whole book by this
one chapter. And as thou find him to deal here so to think of his
dealing else where. But not to say more I come to the trial of the matter.

2. He pretends then to bring the testimonies of our authors, or to speak
in his own phrase, the confession of the Church of Rome touching the Antiquity
and Universality, Certainety, and Safety of his faith; which whosoever hears,
would he not expect the man should bring some definition of a Council
approved, or some Decree of the Sea Apostolic, for that only is the
confession of the Church of Rome? would not a man expect, he should bring some
few authors two or three at least, acknowledging all these points, or some one
author for each point; or some one author at lest for some one of them? surely
he would. And yet does the Knight nothing of all this: he brings not one
author, I say not one, for the Universality or a^tiquity, etc. of his Church.
Though if he should have one, two, three, or ten men, it would not be
sufficient for him; unless he have the authority of the Catholic Church, or
Church of Rome. For that is it which he promises. But let us hear what he
says.

3. In all this Section he brings only three Catholic authors; Adrian,
Costerus, and Harding, for the three several points of Transustantiation,
Communion in one kind, and private Mass, as he calls it, in this manner. He
saying of himself, that when Protestants accuse us of adoring the elements of
bread and wine, we excuse it by saying we adore it upon condition: and for that
end brings these words of Adrian. Adoro te si tu es Christus. I adore thee if
thou be Christ. So of Communion in one kind, when they accuse us of taking
away the cupp from the Layity, we excuse it: and thereto he brings Costerus
saying, that Communion under one kind was not taken up by the commandment of
the Bishops, but it crept in, the Bishops winking thereat. Thirdly when they
accuse us for our private Masses contrary to Christ's institution, we excuse
it; and for that end he brings these words of Doctor Harding. It is through
their own fault and negligence; whereof the godly and faithful people, since
the time of the primitive Church, have much complained. These three be all the
authors he has and this all he says out of them, in which any man may see
whether there be a word, or shadow of a word for the antiquity or Universality
of the Protestant faith in general, as the title of his Section goes.

4. I say nothing here of the man's notable cunning and falsehood, in
pretending and making his Reader, believe as if we did excuse our selves in
those things whereof they accuse us: whereby we might seem to acknowledge
some fault, whereas there is noe such matter in the world, nor one word spoken
by any man, by way of excuse as shall appear. For noe Catholic but scorneth
an excuse in matter of his belief though for life, some may have some what
which may need excuse, though in that case, we teach an humble confession to
be the best excuse.

5. But to come now to the matter let us hear what it is these authors say.
Adrian as he tells us excuses our adoration of the elements of bread and
wine, because we adore it upon condition if the consecrated bread be Christ;
the Latin words of Adrian in the marge^t are these Adoro te si tu es Christus.
Which words indeade Adrian has, but they are very different from Sir
Humphrey's English as any man may of himself see, and spoken by Adrian upon a
very different occasion, as I shall now show. He then disputing whether a
Judge may without sin wish he might lawfully give judgment against justice,
and bringing arguments pro and con, (as Divines do), for the affirmative, he
brings this. That the deformity of the sin is taken away and cleared by the
condition which is added: which he farther proves by two arguments: the one
that the Council of Constance does excuse ignorant people adoring an
unconsecrated host, because this condition is tacitly implied if the
consecration be rightly made: the other that all Doctors agree that a man may
avoid perplexity between idolatry and disobedience when the Devil so
transfiguring himself as to seem Christ commands one to adore; if upon
condition he adore thus. I adore thee if thou be Christ. This is what Adrian
has. Wherein first any man may see he speaks nothing of his own opinion but
of others, and that by way of dispute only. Secondly the condition which is
tacitly implied in the adoration of an unconsecrated host according to the
Council of Constance is not that which Sir Humphrey puts, to wit, if the
consecrated bread be Christ, but this other, if it be righty consecrated
which is clean another matter; for his condition ever supposing a right
consecration makes doubt whither Christ be there or not which is most false,
the other condition makes noe doubt of that but only whither this particular
host be rightly consecrated manifestly supposing that if that be, Christ is
truly there. Thirdly that other condition or words. Adoro te si tu es
Christus: which he would make a man believe were spoken by Adrian of the most
B. Sacrament are spoken of the Devil taking upon him the shape of Christ.

6. Now what gross delusion is this? What excuse can you find for it Sir
Humphrey? But suppose Adrian had erred in this or in any other particular
point, either ignorantly as a Catholic may, or wilfully as only Haeretiques
do: Does it follow that he agrees with you in all other or that hee-counteth
your faith ancient, universal, certain, or safe? noe such matter; nay how on
the contrary he abhors and detesteth your doctrine as most wicked and
damnable is plainly to be seen by a Bull which he writ to Frederick Duke of
Saxony against Luther and his Doctrine disprouing every point thereof,
exhorting the said Frederick to forsake it and return to the true Catholic
faith now in the days of Adrian Pope and Charles Emperor as the Saxons did at
first embrace it in the time of the first Pope and Emperor of the same names
and then living together. With a great deal to the same purpose. What madness
then is it to allege a Catholic Divine, a Pope and such a Pope for the
antiquity and Universality of your belief.

7. Now for Costerus you say he excuses the taking away, of the cupp from the
Layity. But if you would give a man leave to be so bold with your worshipp, I
would know what excuse you can find for such a notorious lie? If he excuses it
he acknowledges the thing to need excuse and consequently to be ill; and I
pray you where do you find him do that? nowhere verily. For he has one
special title of this controversy; wherein he proves the truth of the
Catholic faith in this point, by ten several reasons, and solueth sixteen
objections as well of former as later Haeretiques against it. If this be to
excuse, I know not what it is to maintain and make good a thing.

Enchirid.
8. But now to come to Costerus, he by occasion of soluing an objection, says
that the custom of communicating in one kind began from the people; for it
having ever been free to communicate in one kind, or both, as Costerus there
often repeateth, the people for diverse inco^modityes, by little and little
abstained from the chalice, which abstayning of theirs the Bishops for other
reasons also, by silence approved. Whereby you see his meaning is plain and
clear against you. And for his words, whereas you relate them thus. It was not
taken up by the comma^dment of the Bishops, but it crept in the Bishops
winking thereat: They are indeed thus. It is to be diligently noted, that the
communion of one kind crept in, not so much by the commandment of the Bishops
as by the use and practice of the people, yet the Bishops winking thereat.
Wherein though there be but a little difference yet it shows your fidelity
according to our Sauiour's saying: Luc 16.10.
Qui in modico iniquus est, and in maiori iniquus est. He that wicked in a
little is wicked in a greater. For Costerus does not say, that it did not come
in by the commandment of the Bishops, but not so much by that as by the
peoples use and practice.

9. Now what is this to your purpose, where is Costerus his testimony for the
antiquity, universality, certainty, and safety of your Protestant religion? is
not that whole book written Only to maintain the Catholic Roman faith in
the points now adays in controversy, and to condemn the contrary of vanity
folly and error? how then can he think it salfe? But because I will not stand
to deduce it by way of argument. I will only cite one place directly opposite
to the scope of this your section; Where he says that only the children of
the Church, Cost. enchir. cap. 2. n. 3.
(by which Church he means the Catholic Apostolic Roman Church as he
often declares himself) merit increase of grace and aeternal life; that they
only are grateful, and pleasing to God, they only the children and friends
of God; they only have communion with the Saints and merits of Saints, they
only are adorned with true and Christian virtues; they only have the promise
and certain expectation of aeternal life. Which says the are great and most
true privileges, for out of the Church, nothing of all this is found; noe
holiness, noe Christian virtue, noe work pleasing to God, noe merit, noe hope
of Salvation. Thus he. Now good Sir knight is not here good comfort for you?
are you in Costerus his judgment in the more certain and safe way? Do not you
then abuse authors to your own, and other men's perdition? but though you being
become a Sect-Maister or at least a great Master in the Protestant Sect there
is little hope that this laying open of your dealing will make you better but
rather make you more enraged: Yet I trust some well meaning people, deluded by
you may hereby come to understand themselves better, and come to the only
safe way indeed the Catholic Church, and leave you to your Protestant safety.

10. But since you are also so shameless here as to say that we do not
condemn you for receiving in both kinds, look in the Council of Trent and see
whether you do not find an heavy curse, against any that shall say, that all
and every of the faithful ought by the precept of God, Sess. 21. can. 1.
or necessity of salvation, to receive both species or kinds of the most holy
Sacrament of the Eucharist. Si quis dixerit ex Dei praecepto vel necessitate
salutis omnes and singulos Christi fideles vtramque speciem sanctissimi
Eucharistiae Sacramenti sumere debere, anathema sit. The like has the Council
also of Constance so plain, page 174.
that you your self afterward confess that the one does accurse, the other
accuse all for Haeretiques, that deny the lawfulness of one kind, as you do.
If then we not only write against your Doctrine as against an haeresy, as may
appear by all our controversies and school divines, and even by Gerson's
treatise against the haeresy of Lay communion under both kinds. Which treatise
you your self cite elsewhere in the margent; but also condemn it in two
general Councels, how can you have the face to say we do not condemn you.
Good God what shall a man say to such men as you are?

11. But to come to Doctor Harding, the third author of ours, which you bring
to prove the Antiquity, Universality, Certainty, and Safety of your faith, let
us hear how you use him. You say when you accuse us of private Mass contrary
to Christ's institution, and custom of the primitive Church we excuse it, that
it is through their own default and negligence whereof (says Mr. Harding) the
godly and faithful people since the time of the Primitive church have much
complained. So you. Wherein first any man may see there is noe sense. For
here is a relative (their) without an antecedent: which fault if you had
committed in a theme, when you were a schoole-boy, it might perhaps have cost
you somewhat. For you do not express who it is that Doctor Harding speaks
of, when he says it is their own default; neither can it be himself or
Catholics in general, for then he would have expressed it in the first
person: saying it is our own fault: and if it be not himself nor Catholics
in general, then can it be noe excuse; for they be Catholics in general or
the Catholic Church which you accuse; and the accusation and excuse must
answer one the other.

12. Secondly it is noe excuse in reguard of the Mass: for an excuse has noe
place, but where the thing whereof a man is accused is acknowledged for a
fault. Now that is not here: for that whereof you accuse us is, that our
Priests say Mass without any communicants, which thing Dr. Harding is so far
from acknowledging to be blame worthy, that he does expressly and stoutly
maintain it against your Jewel, as a special controversy in that whole chapter
which you cite. How then does he excuse it? Thirdly he does maintain the
doctrine of the Council of Trent in this as in all other points where this
Canon is decreed, Sess. 22. can. 8.
citing also this very Decree. Si quis dixerit Missas in quibus solus Sacerdos
sacramentaliter co^municat illicitas esse, ideoque abrogandas: anathema sit. If
any man say that Masses, wherein the Priest only communicates sacramentally
are unlawful and therefore to be abrogated let him be anathema. Fourthly in
another place he denies your very term of private Mass; and notes, upon the
conference between Luther and the Devil, which he there sets down, that
that term in Luther's sense and your, came first out of the Devils school:
and says that all Mass is public in reguard it is offered by the Priest,
who is the public Minister of the Church, and avails all not only not
communicants, but even not present. Which is also the doctrine of the Council.
Fifthly I answer, that though you set down this authority lamely in this
place, so as noe man can tell what to make of it, yet citing the same else
where, you say out of him, that it is the peoples own fault and want of
devotion that they do not communicate with the Priest: Which is but the same
that the Council of Trent also says: Which is a clean other matter. For you
do not accuse our peoples coldness of devotion; for that would fall much more
upon your own; but our Priests for saying Mass without the people
communicating, which is noe fault: and this Dr. Harding makes good: the other
he excuses, or rather not excuses, but acknowledges and condemns as a
fault.

13. And for his opinion of your religion in general look but in his Epistle
to Jewel before his reioynder to Iewel's reply. And there you shall find he
shows you to have noe antiquity; For that you began with Luther. Which he
proves by your own confessions, more then 7. times in the apology of your
English Synagogue: where you say, that Luther and Zuinglius were the first that
began to set abroad the Ghospel, and that all the light was quite extinct;
and that all the fountains of the pure water of life, were utterly dried up
before they came. He shows you to have noe universality, because you separate
your selves from the unity of the Catholic Church, dispersed over the whole
world. He shows you to have noe charity, because charity cannot consist
without unity; nor even faith, which he proves by the authority of Saint
Augustine, and consequently that you have noe hope of salvation: and so he
refuses even to bidd Mr. Jewel farewell. Have not you then great reason to
have affiance in Mr. Dr. Harding's testimony of the antiquity, universality,
and safety of your Faith? Do not you then herein notoriously abuse all manner
of men both authors and readers! but this is so ordinary with you that there
is noe wondering at it.

14. Well thus much then for these three authors whom you have so egregiously
belyed. Now let us hear what you say of your own or of your self. You say
our best learned (yet you name none) decline those our traditions which you
deny: and that the most ingenious of us are ashamed of those additions which
you deny. (Neither do you name any of these ingenious people.) For example you
say when we are charged with worshipping of images we deny it, or excuse the
manner of adoration, but do not condemn you for not worshipping the^. But
good Sir I pray you what Catholic denies the worshipping of images what?
Catholic does excuse the manner of worshipp. Name the man if you can? Our
Divines declare adoration to be dew, and the manner how it is dew: but to
excuse this, or deny that, noe man does, noe man (I mean a Catholic) ever
did; noe man can ever do. Now for you can you have the face, to say that noe
man of ours condemns you for not adoring them? this is to Sir Humphrey. Does
none of our writers condemn you? noe Bellarmine, noe Baronius, noe Sanders,
noe Alanus Copus, noe Costerus, noe Vazquez to omit the more ancient Writers
against the Iconomachi? Does noe Council of Trent say anathema to you, for
denying dew honor and veneration to the Images of Christ and his Saints? Sess.
25. decr. develiq. and Sanctoris imaginib. Conc. Nicaen 2 act. 7.
Does noe Council of Nice say anathema to such as do not salute holy and
venerable images? His qui non salutant sanctas and venerabiles imagines
anathema. Was the acclamation of the whole Council, consisting of 350. Bishops
and yet noe man condemns you? What shall a man say to you? What answer may
a man make but only to say that all this is your own.

15. The like I may say of all the rest of your fond accusations, and more fond
excused; which you heap together which it would be too long to stand
answearing one by one. Only the last I cannot omit; which is, that you accuse
us of flat idolatry (not knowing that the Council of Nice in the place last
cited has a special anathema for you, for that very word;) and you take
comfort that we cannot charge you with the least suspicion thereof, in your
positive points. To which I answer Sir Humphrey, that if you mark the matter
well, you will have little cause to take such comfort. For it is a far greater
evil for you to be truly charged with haeresy, then for us to be charged
falsely with idolatry. And though the charge of idolatry against us were as
true, as that of haeresy is against you; yet would you not have any such
special cause of comfort, haeresy coming not much short of idolatry. For
Tertull: doubts not to aequal them. Nec dubitare quis debet, neque ab
idolatria distare haereses; Tertul. de praeser. cap. 40.
quum and auctoris and operis eiusdem sint, cuius and idolatria. Neither ought
any man to doubt, that heresies do not differ from idolatry, since their
author and work is the same, which idolatry. Nay in some respects haeresy
goes beyond idolatry as S. Thomas well shows and S. Hierome says absolutely
and without limitation. 2.2 q. lib. 7. in Esai.
Nemo tam impius est quem Haereticus impietate non vincat. There is noe man so
impious whom an Heretic does not surpass in impiety. Therefore your comfort
is vanity, since your profession is impiety. And so much for that matter.

16. Now if any man will but lend an ear he shall hear a fine conceit of
yours, whereby to prove your Faith ancient universal and what not. That is by
answearing our question where your Church was before Luther in this manner. Of
the four Creeds, to wit, of the Apostles of Nice, of Athanasius and Pius 4.
You believe 3. which were believed before Luther: of the 7. Sacraments you
believe 2. which we confess also to have been instituted by Christ, of
Scriptures you acknowledge 22. books. For canonical, which we allow, and which
were so believed before Luther's time. why rather 7. Councels then 17. or 19.
Of the 7. general Councels 4. are confirmed by Parliament in England, not
called by Luther. The traditions universally received and which we confess to
be Apostolical, are derived from the Apostles to you, as you say, not from
Luther. The prayers in your common prayer book, are the same, Say you in
substance with our ancient liturgies, not broached by Luther; the ordination of
Ministers is from the Apostles, not from Luther. If therefore say you the 3.
creeds, the two principal Sacraments, the 22. books of canonical scripture,
the four first general Councels, the Apostolic traditions, the ancient
Liturgies, the ordination of Pastors were anciently and universally received in
all ages, in the bosom of the Roman Church, even by the testimonies of our
adversaries, is it not a silly and senseless question to demand where our
Church was before Luther? all this is your discourse Sir Knight, and most part
your very words: wherein you seem to think you have so satisfied our
question that in your judgment it is silly and senseless to demand it any
more. But it will easily appear on the contrary side, what a silly and
senseless thing it was for you to frame such a discourse to your self, and
much more so to publish it to other men, as if any body else had so little
wit as to be pleased therewith. For be it so, that these points of doctrine
were ancie^tly taught, as they are now taught by the Roman Church, what
follows? that you had a Church before Luther? nothing less. For a Church
consists not of points of Doctrine or faith only, but much more of men
professing such and such Sacraments and rites, such a faith and religion. If
therefore you will show us a Church you must show us such a company of men
which till you can show, the question remains vnansweared. If you say, they
were the same men of which the Roman Church did then consist, which you seem
to say in that you tell us your Church was in the bosom of the Roman Church,
I answer, that is not to the purpose* For as now since Luther's time, you are
a distinct company making a Church such as it is by your selves, so you must
show a company of men in like manner distinct in former times from ours, and
your antiquity is only to begin from such a time as you began to be a
distinct company from us: You must not think to stand and contend with us for
antiquity, and then pretend our antiquity to be yours. But you must show a
distinct Succession of Bishops, a distinct common wealth or people, professing
that Faith only which you believe, and practizing those rites, ceremonies and
Sacraments only which you have; when you have done this you may better demand
what a silly and senseless question it is to ask where your Church was before
Luther.

17. But because you mention your being in former ages in the bosom of the
Roman church, not only here but else where often in this your treatise; as if
thereby you would make your Church seem one and the same with ours, or at
least to descend from ours, Tertull. de praes^r. cap. 36.
and so to participate of our Visibility and Universality, I will allege you
a saying of Tertullians, which does so fully answer the matter, that you
will take but little comfort in the manner of your descent. Thus it is
Tertullian having alleged for his eight prescription against Haeretiques the
authority of the Apostolic churches, which then kept the very authentical
letters written. To them by the Apostles, and especially of the Roman Church,
which he calls happy for that to it the Apostles powered forth all their whole
doctrine, together with their blood, and there putting down a brief sum of
some special points thereof concludes in these words. Haec est institutio non
dico iam quae futuras haereses praenunciabat, sed de qua haereses prodierunt.
Sed non fuerunt ex illa ex quo factae sunt aduersus illum. Etiam de oliua
nucleo mitis and opimae, and necessariae, asper oleaster exoritur. Etiam de
papauere fici gratissimae and suauissimae, ventosa and vana caprificus exurgit.
Ita and haereses de nostro fructificauerunt, non nostrae: degeneres veritatis
grano, and mendacio siluestres. This is the institution I do not say now,
which did foretell Haeresies to come, but out of which haeresies have come. But
they were not of it from the time that they became against it. Even out of the
kernel of the mild, fatt, and necessary (or profitable) olive, the sower
bastard olive grows. From the seed also of the most pleasant and sweet
figtree arises the windy and vain or empty wild figtree. And so have
haeresies fructified out of ours but they not ours degenerating from the grain
of truth, and becoming wild by untruth or lying. Thus far Tertullian.
Acknowledging indeed that haeresies have their beginning from us that is that
the men that broach them come out of our Church, but that they are noe more
ours when they begin once to be against us. And that the dishonor thereof
redoundeth not to us, but to themselves he declares by the two similitudes of
the olive and figgetree, comparing us to the true and fruitful trees, and them
to the bastard vain, and wild trees, issuing out of the former. All which if
you consider well Sir Humphrey you will find it but a small honor for you to
have come out of the Roman Church, though you have layen never so long in the
very bosom thereof as you brag for from the time you have begun to be
against it you are not of it. And so much for that.

18. Now for these points of Doctrine by you named, wherein you agree with us,
and which you having no Succession of your own, you cannot have it by any
other means but by and from us, which therefore are ours and not yours we do
not question you for your antiquity and universality: but for these other
points wherein you disagree; as when you deny the doctrine declared by the
Council of Trent when you deny our seven Sacraments, deny the truth of one of
these two Sacraments, to wit the real presence of our Sauiour's body and blood,
and necessity and efficacy of the other, to wit, Baptism. Deny our canon of
scripture, our number of Councels, our traditions etc. For this is your faith
properly, as you are a distinct company or Church. Show your doctrine in all
these points that is your denial of them to have been anciently and
universally taught, or even before Luther's time, and you have said something;
which you not doing; I cannot but wonder to see you so silly and senseless
(to use your own words) as to think you have said something to the purpose.
We ask you the antiquity of your doctrine that is wherein you disagree from
us, and you answer us with the antiquity of so much as agrees with ours
which is to answer us with the antiquity of our own. You have been pleased
to shape your selves a religion out of ours, and you plead the antiquity of
ours. But that will not serve your turn: that shape which you give it, is the
form and essence of your religion; so long then as that is new, your religion
is new. Neither can you say the same of our points defined in the Council of
Trent, as you seem to say by asking. Where our Church was^ where our Trent
doctrine and articles of the Roman Creed, were received de fide before
Luther? this you cannot likewise say to us for the defining made not the
Doctrine new, but bound men by authority of a Council to believe what they did
believe plainly by tradition, Vinc. Lerin. cap. 32.
as Vincentius Lerinensis says that the Church by the decrees of her Councels
has done nothing else but that what she had before received by tradition only,
she should also by writing consigne to posterity. Nec quicquam Conciliorum
suorum decretis Catholica perfecit ecclesia nisi vt quod prius a maioribus sola
traditione susceperat, hoc deinde posteris etiam per scripturae chirographum
consignaret. Of which see more in the first chapter here.

19. After this you ask again if your doctrine lay inuolued in the bosom of
the Roman Church, (which say you no Romanist can deny,) if it became hidden as
good corn covered with chafe, or as fine gold ouerlayed with a greater
quantity of dross, whether it must be therefore new and unknown because the
corn was not severed from the chafe, the gold from the dross before Luther's
time? and then you bid us because we call your Doctrine nouelty, to remove the
three Creeds the two Sacraments the 22. canonical books the 4. first general
Councels, apostolical traditions, and see whether our Church will not prove a
poor and senseless carcass. This is your learned discourse Sir Humphrey, to
which I answer asking: First what Romanist does acknowledge your doctrine to
have layen inuolued in the bosom of the Roman Church? Did ever any man write
so, did ever any man say so unto you? nay what Romanist has ever forborne
upon occasion offered to deny and deny it again? you teach not only those be
two but that there be but two Sacraments, which what Romanist ever acknowledged
to have been taught in the Roman Church? one of your Sacraments is an empty
piece of bread and a supp of wine which what Catholic will ever say was
Taught in the Roman Church? you allow 4. Councels and but 4. you allow 22.
books of canonical Scripture and but 22. will any Catholic ever allow this to
have been Catholic doctrine? take away your (but) and then it may pass; but
then you take away your religion. But here is one thing that gives me much
cause of wonder, which is that you talk of traditions as distinct from
Scripture, which is a thing that I did little expect from a man of your
profession: and I ever took you to be so fallen out with them, that you made
the denial of them, a fundamental point of your Religion; and that therefore
you would not endure the word traditions; even in holy Scriptures where it
might be taken in a good sense, but always translated or rather falsified it
into ordinances, though both the Latin and Greek word did signify traditions
most expressly. But this your allowing of traditions is not a thing that I
reprehend in you: (though some Puritan Ministers may perhaps not let you pass
so gently with it): but that that follows, to wit that you should be so
unadvised as to acknowledge your Church or Doctrine, (which you simply and
confusedly take for the same being very different as I have often said) to have
been inuolued in the bosom of the Roman Church, and to have become hidden
like good corn covered with chafe, and like gold covered with dross till
Luther's time, and yet to say that it was visible before that time? is the
corn seen when it is covered with chafe, the gold when it is covered with
dross?

Answ: to Cooks rep. ep. dedicat. nu. 20.
20. My Lord Cook showed himself somewhat wiser when asking himself the
question which we ask you, to wit, where your Church was before Luther, he
answered, it made no great matter where it was, so he were certain it was;
confessing thereby that his Church was indeed invisible; but yet in being;
which because it seemed hard to persuade any man, he brought a fine similitude
of a wedge of gold, dissolved and mixed with brass, tin, and other mettalls,
which he said did not therefore loose his nature, but remained gold though we
could not determine in what part of the mass it was contained. This was
somewhat more like for a man, by such a similitude to go about to prove that a
Church might subsist inuisibly, (for the which nevertheless a Catholic
Divine told him his own very soundly,) but for you Sir Knight to prove the
Visibility of your Church by such a Similitude, it were not to be believed
unless a man did see it in print. You labor to prove your Church to have
been visible before Luther's times, and yet you confess her to have begun
her Visibility by Luther: for thus you ask, was there noe good corn in the
granary of the Church, because for many years space till Luther's days it was
not severed from the chafe? to sever the corn from the chafe wherewith it
was covered, is to make it visible: if then Luther did first sever it, he first
made her visible, which is that we desire. And so Sir you have spunne a fair
thread. You would feign make your Church visible before Luther, and you make it
invisible; you look well about you mean while. Now that which you say next of
taking away the 3. Creeds which you profess, two Sacraments, 4. Councels and
22. book of Scripture, without which our Church would be a poor senseless
carcass, is most foolish, for who does speak of taking them away: who does
say they are yours? you will not say your self, but you had them from us? What
then do you talk of taking them away? and whereas you are bold to say that
we now style them chafe and new haeresies, it is to shameless an untruth for
any man to tell but your self: and therefore deserves noe other answer but
that it is SIR HVMPHREY LIND'S, you understand my meaning Sir.

21. One little thing more there is in this Section, which is, that whereas
some of ours have termed your religion negative, in reguard it consists most
in denial of such things as we teach, as they may well call it, you would
retort that term upon us; because we deny many things which you affirm. But
this is not a matter of any moment. For they who call your religion negative,
do not mean that you do not teach any positive erroneous point, but that
most of your doctrine I mean that which is properly yours, not taken from us,
is negative; and even those affirmative propositions which you teach, if you
teach any, are but contradictions of other things, which we teach are not, or
may not be done. In which respect, they may be also called negative. But for
ours it is nothing so, for it consists of positive points, delivered not by
way of opposition or denial; for it was before all haeresy; though it is true
that it has many negative propositio^s and praecepts. Besides out of every
positive point a man may infer the contrary negative: Which yet makes not
that a negative, as you do in some of those propositions which you allege;
for example you make this a negative point, that we deny the substance of bread
to remain after consecration, whereas that is only a negative inferred out of
this positive, that the substance of the bread and wine is changed into the
body and blood of our Blessed Savior, which is our doctrine, and ever was
before any haeresy arose: but an haeresy arising to the contrary, as that the
substance of bread remains after consecration: the Church out of that
positive point deduceth this negative, that the substance of bread does not
remain, for destruction of that haeresy. But of this there is enough, and of
this whole Sectio^, wherein the Gentle Reader may see whether you Sir knight
do not deserve the name and punishment of an Haeretique, by your own Doom
not having proved either the antiquity, or universality, or certainty, or
safety of your Protestant faith, out of any author of ours, or even of your
own, or any show of reason, or said any thing to the purpose, though you have
taken more liberty to abuse those three authors which you allege and utter
such gross falsityes then I do not say honesty but eue^ shame would give a
man leave: but which is most to be wondered you have labored to prove the
visibility of your Church, by such similitudes as prove the contrary; Which is
not any praise of goodness, for you intended it not but an argument of the
necessity whereto you were driven by the badnes of your cause, and a dispraise
of your judgment in that you see not what you say.

Of the 9. Section. The title whereof is this The testimonies of our
Adversaries touching the Protestant and the Roman faith in the particular.
CHAPTER IX.
1. OUR Knight having promised to prove the antiquity and universality of his
faith, and nouelty of ours in general by the testimony of our own authors and
Church and performed it bravely forsooth as has been showed in the former
chapter, he professes now in this ninth Section, Chap. 9.
to prove the same in like sort out of our authors in diverse particular points;
as justification by faith only, the Sacrament of the Supper, and Doctrine of
transubstantiation, Private Mass etc. treating every one here ex professo and
severally in distinct paragraphes, whose method I shall also follow in
answearing of him.

. 1. Of Justification by faith only, examined.
1. This point of his Protestant justification by faith only the Knight
proves, as he says, out of a book published in Anselmes time, which is
called Ordo baptizandi and visitandi etc. Of which he cites two or three
several editions to fill up the margents with quotations: and to authorize the
book more, he tells us that Cassander says it is obuious every where in
libraries. Out of this book he cites a whole page and a half, which I list
not here stand writeing out, but only I will take the worst word in it all,
that is, which may seem to make most against us and for the Knight which is
this, the Priest is appointed to ask the sick man whether he believe to come
to glory, not by his own merits but by the merits of Christ's passion, and
that none can be saved by his own merits; or by any other means but by the
merits of his Passion: to which the sick man was to answer, I believe.
Whereupon the Priest gave him council to putt his confidence in noe other
thing. This is the utmost he can say out of this book: and what is all this to
the purpose? For first the knight does not show us any authority for this
book, or that S. Anselme had any thing to do with it; nor tells us of any
ancient edition before the year. 1556. but only a mention thereof by
Cass^^der (a classical author indeed and of the first class in the index
librorum prohibitorum) in an appendix also to a forbidden book falsely called
Io. Roffensis de fiducia and misericordia Dei, then which he could have said
nothing more to disgrace it.

2. Besides he tells us that the Index expurgatorius of the Spanish
Inquisition, wills those words of comfort (as he calls them) spoken by the
Priest, to be blotted out, which were answer enough, seeing the knight is to
bring us authority, which we may not except against, as I told him in the first
Chapter. And this very alleging of the Index expurgatorius, is a manifest
proof that it is set out and corrupted by Haeretiques, in favor of their
own doctrine. De corr^ct. lib.. 3. and 4
For otherwise the Inquisitors can not meddle with it, or any other author set
out before the year 1515. to change or blott out any thing therein but only
where a manifest error is crept in by fraud of Haeretiques, or carelesnes of
the Printer. Thirdly and principally I answer that there is nothing in this
that does not stand very well, being rightly understood, with the Catholic
faith which we now profess. For here is nothing but what I showed before out
of Bellarmine, Lib. 5. de iustif. cap. 7. prop. 3.
to wit, that in reguard of the uncertainty of our own justice, that is
whether we be just or not, and for the peril of vain glory, it is most safe to
putt our whole confidence in the Sole mercy and benignity of GOD. Which word
Sole does import confidence in that, and in nothing else. With which it may
stand very well, that men in the favor and grace of God, may do works
meritorious of increase of grace and glory, which is the controversy between
Us and Haeretiques. For men may be in grace and not know it, they may do
those good works and yet not know that their works have that supernatural
goodness, purity of intention, and other perfection which is necessary to make
it meritorious, all which makes us uncertain whether we merit or not, though
we be never so certain that if our Works be such as they should be, they
are meritorious. And to this purpose is the discourse of the Council of Trent
in the end of the 16. Chapter of the 6. Session, where having explicated the
meritt of good works and reward dew unto them, it has these memorable words to
stopp the mouths of all insulting Haeretiques. Absit tamen vt homo Christianus
in seipso vel confidat vel glorietur, and non in Domino. God forbid that any
Christian man should trust or glory in himself and not in our Lord. What more
then is there Sir Humphrey in that book which you allege, then here is in
Bellarmine and the Council of Trent, or which may not be easily explicated to
this sense? And all this answer is, supposing you cite your author true, for
I have not seen him: nor does it so much import to see him. But if it be not
against us why will you say does the Inquisition correct it. I answer not for
the doctrine but for the doubtfulnes and ambiguity of the words which being not
rightly understood might endaunger the less wary Reader's fall into your
Lutheran error of denial of all meritt of good works, which was never
intended by the author, though it may be he might speak securely in those
days where there was no thought of any such haeresy. But how soever the book
is not of any known good author and it has been printed and reprinted now in
this time of haeresy and by Haeretiques and therefore may well fall under the
Inquisition's correction as giving just cause of suspicion that they thrust
words in for their own purposes. What poor authority is this then for you to
build upon? Wherefore to begin well, you have wholly failled in the proof of
your first point of justification, producing but one only place and that of
noe special good authority as you allege it out of Cassander, and even
nothing against us: If then you begin so well with justification, how are you
like to justify your self in the rest of your points which follow; to which I
now pass.

The Knight's 2.. Of the Sacrament of the Lord's super (as he speaks) and the
Doctrine of transubstantiation examined.. 2.
1. HE begins this. with a praeamble concerning his Churches Baptism, which
he says noe man will deny to be the same substa^tially, with that of the
Primitive Church, and that our salt, spittle, and other caeremonies do not
transsubstantiate the element, nor want of them enforce rebaptization. Which
serves for nothing else but to show the man's folly and vanity; for what
Catholic did he ever hear speak against the Validity of the Sacrament of
Baptism administered in dew matter and form, and with intention of doing what
the Church does though the Minister were never so much Haeretique, Jew,
Turque, or Infidel or affirm that the caeremonies therein used did cause any
transubstantiation of the water? or that for the want of them the party were to
be rebaptized? noe we say none of these things; but only, that they that
administer this Sacrament without these caeremonies ever used in the Church
from the Apostles time, unless in case of necessity, do co^mitt a great
sin, as Protestants do; and the more because they omit them, out of an
haeretical contempt. Which notwithstanding the Baptism is available.

2. But letting this pass the knight comes to the Sacrament of the Eucharist,
wherein he triumphs mightily about a certain Homily of one Aelfricke an
Abbot here in England, about the year 996. Which he says was approved by
diverse Bishops at their Synods, and appointed to be read publicly to the
people on Easter Day, and two other writings or Epistles of the same authors,
one to the Bishop of Sherborne, the other to the Bishop of York. The words of
the Homily are these, as he cites them out of D. Usher. There is a great
difference betwixt the body, wherein Christ suffered and the body which is
received of the, faithful. The body truly that Christ suffered in, it was
borne of the flesh of Mary with blood and with bone with skin and with sinews
in humane limbs with a reasonable Soul living: and his Spiritual body which
nourishes the faithful Spiritually is gathered of many corns without blood
and bone without limbs without soul and therefore there is nothing to be
understood bodily but Spiritually etc. Thus far the authority or words of
this author: wherewith Sir Humphrey makes much ado spending 2. or 3. leaves in
it.

3. To which I answer first for his Synods, that it is strange he names not
any Synod nor any author or place where any such is extant, For the Councels I
have examined them, and yet do not find any Synod held in England about that
time or any thing of that nature handled. Let him name the Synod, and bring
the words, I doubt not but we shall find a sufficient answer: therefore to
let his Synods alone for the present, we come to Aelfrike whom I have not also
seen, nor can find so much as named in those books which have most of our
Catholic authors, both modern and ancient (save only by Harpsfield in his
history where I find also noe more but that the Berengarian haeresy began
some what to be taught and maintained out of certain writings falsely
attributed to Aelfricke this is all) and therefore cannot say so much in
confutation of this place, as it is like might be said if a man did see the
author himself and not set out or translated only by Haeretiques, but yet I
trust I shall say enough even out of Dr. Usher who cites the Latin in the
margent to show Sir Humphrey's bad dealing and to satisfy any indifferent
Reader.

4. First you Sir Humphrey to turn my speech to you I say, that Aelfrick was a
Catholic author and delivers nothing but Catholic doctrine in this Homily
or place by you cited: which a man may prove even out of your self. For you
confess that transubstantiation is suggested in that Homily, by two miracles,
which you say are feigned, contrary to the author's meaning, but your common
fashion is to call all Miracles feigned because you can work none your selves:
besides if they go alo^g in the narration as the rest of the text (as if they
did not I suppose you would note being a good proof against them) what color
is there that we should suggest them and not the author write them himself? or
why should you take the other words here rehearsed to be the author's and deny
the miracles which go along with them, in the same narration? You will say
they are against his meaning and scope: that were somewhat indeed Sir
Humphrey, but it is but your misunderstanding of the author, for even in those
words which Mr. Usher cites in Latin and which he culleth out as making most
for his own purpose I find the author to speak very well and plainly of
transubstantiation as I shall now show, Vshers disp. page 78. and cap. 3.
the words are these. Multa differentia separantur corpus in quo passus est
Christus, and hoc corpus, quod in mysterio passionis Christi quotidie a
fidelibus celebratur, illa namque caro quae crucifixa est, de Virginis carne
facta est, ossibus and neruis compacta, and humanorum membrorum lineamentis
distincta, rationalis animae spiritu viuificata in propriam vitam and
congruentes motus. At vero caro spiritualis; quae populum credentem
spiritualiter pascit, secundum speciem quam gerit exterius, frumenti granis
manu artificis confistet, nullis neruis ossibusque compacta, nulla membrorum
varietate distincta, nulla rationali substantia vegetata, nullos proprios
potens motus exercere. Quicquid enim in ea vitae praebet substantiam,
spiritualis est potentiae, and inuisibilis efficientiae, diuinaeque virtutis.

5. These are the Latin words cited in the margent by D. Usher, which he
translated far otherwise in his English text whom you also follow, taking his
English words, either because you understood not the Latin, or perhaps because
you would be loath but to follow any error or corruption that comes in your
way. I will therefore truly translate them; and then observe your Doctor's
corruption and yours the true translation is this. The body in which Christ
suffered, and this body which is celebrated every day by the faithful in
mystery (that is, as a mystery, or mystical representation and commemoration)
of the passion are separated by much difference (that is, are very different,
or do much differ) for that flesh which was crucified was made of the flesh of
the Virgin, compacted with bones and nerves (or sinews) and distinguished by
lineaments of humane limbs lived (or made living) by the spirit of a reasonable
Soul unto proper life and congruent (or agreeable) motions; but the Spiritual
flesh, which Spiritually feeds the believing people, according to the show
which it carries outwardly, consists of grains of corn, by the hand of the
artificer, not compact (or knit together) with any finewes and bones, not
distinguished by any variety of members, not vegetated or lived by any
reasonable substance, not able to exercise any proper motions. For whatsoever
in it gives the Substance of life, is of Spiritual power, invisible working,
and divine virtue. Now let any man compare Dr. Usher's and Sir Humphrey Lind's
English, and see whether agree better with the Latin theirs or this, though
they differ somewhat between themselves; but I will chiefly follow my own
chase of the Knight's translation. He shall find first in these words, (Hoc
corpus quod in mysterio passionis Christi quotidie a fidelibus celebratur. This
body which is daily celebrated by the faithful in mystery of the passion) the
word (hoc) left out. And all the other words, save only the word (Corpus) the
rest (because there is mention made of daily celebration as a mystery of the
Passion of Christ, as is practiced in the Catholic Church) they change in the
translation. The Knight thus, the body which is received of the faithful; the
Dr. a little otherwise, but I let him alone, wherein any man may see the
knight's bad meaning.

6. Secondly the knight says the body that Christ suffered in was borne of the
flesh of Mary, etc. Whereas the true English is this. The flesh which was
crucified was made of the flesh of the Virgin. Wherein though to the Vulgar
Reader there may appear but small difference between (borne) and (made:) yet
there is a great deal: for Aelfrick's opposition does not consist in this,
that the flesh crucified was borne of the Virgin, and the other not; as the
knight would make a man believe; but it consists in the matter whereof the
body on the cross, and the body in the Sacrament are made. For as it is in the
Sacrament, it is made of bread, tanquam materia transeunte as Divines speak:
and not of the Flesh of the Virgin, but that flesh is the terminus ad quem of
the transubstantiating action or that whereinto the substance ob bread is
changed, though it be the same body that was borne of her. And this shows the
knight's cunning corruption, how great it may be in matter and substance,
though the word be never so like, or little.

7. Thirdly whereas the knight says with blood and with bone, with skin, and
with Sinews, in humane limbs with a reasonable soul. The Latin has not the
word blood, nor the word skin. And the Knight on the other side leaves the
word (compacta.) Compacted with bones and sinews. And those words (in humane
limbs) are far otherwise in the Latin, as any man may see to wit thus
distinguished by humane limbs. All which putting in and putting out chopping
and changing though it may seem not to make much either way, yet it is very
like it is used by this Knight to obscure the author's meaning and drift; which
is by all these particulars to show the difference between Christ upon the
cross, and Christ in the B. Sacrament; that is the difference in his manner of
being, not in his being it self; nor denying him to be really in both; which
is that the knight would obscure and make seem as if this author meant, it
were not the same Christ that were in both. Which is very false; which his bad
meaning is farther discovered in that which follows. For having putt down
these words (with a reasonable soul living) which yet do not altogether so
well answer to the Latin words (rationalis animae spiritu viuificata) he
leaves out these other immediately following, in propriam vitam and
congruentes motus. By which it is signified that Christ's flesh crucified upon
the cross, had a reasonable soul, whereby not only to live, but to be able
to show this life by action, and motion agreeable thereunto, which words explane
the former, and are very pertinent to declare the meaning of what is said on
the contrary of Christ's body in the B. Sacrament, as by and by shall appear.

8. Fourthly whereas the Latin says, Caro spiritualis, spiritual flesh, the
knight translateth it the spiritual body: which I only note without standing
upon it, for it is noe great matter. But that which comes next is the maine
corruption of all: For whereas Aelfricke says that this spiritual flesh, which
is as much to say as our Sauiour's flesh in the B. Sacrament, according to the
outward show which it carries, does consist of grains of corn, has noe
bones nor sinews, noe distinction of limbs, noe life or motion of it self the
knight leaves out those words (Secundum speciem quam gerit exterius, according
to the show which it carries outwardly) which are the very life of all that
which follows, to wit, that to see to, it consists of corn; to see to, it
has noe bones, and sinews; to see to, it has noe distinction of parts; to
see to, it has noe soul, nor power to exercise any motion of it self, the
knight making his Reader think, that Aelfricke says our Sauiour's flesh in
the B. Sacrement has noe bones, noe parts, noe soul, etc. which is a
notorious falsehood. Lastly whereas the knight makes this inference in the same
place, as if they were Aelfrick's words, therefore there is nothing to be
understood bodily but spiritually. Aelfrick says not so, though that might
be said in a good sense but thus he says. For whatsoever therein gives the
substance of life, is of spiritual power, invisible working and divine virtue.
In which there is a great deal of difference between Aelfrick's (for), which
gives a reason for that which goes before, and the knight's (therefore) which
makes an inference upon that which was said, which a learned man will easily
perceive to make a great deal of difference in the sense, nay any man may see
the difference between a reason and an inference. Aelfricke therefore plainly
teaches in these words that that flesh does live, but with all that that life
proceeds from a spiritual power and invisible working. Which agrees very
well with what he had said before, that according to the outward show, that
flesh has neither bones, nor sinews, nor limbs, nor life, nor motion, but
that all these things are not seen, and that the life which it has proceeds
from a spiritual power, and working which is not seen.

9. Now let any man see whither this Knight have not egregiously abused this
ancient author, corrupting this little sentence of his, by five great
corruptions besides other more of less moment, which I have been somewhat
longer in discovering, because it is the man's maine proof in this place and
one of his two records as he calls them, wherewith as it were with two
special and ancient evidences he presents his Reader in the very beginning
of this Section. 1. and wherein therefore he has used all the cunning he could
devise, to make this author speak his Protestant language, and consequently
also the Bishops and other learned men of that time, who approved this Homily,
if they did approve it; as he says, but in vain as you may see by this that
is said, and by one place more which I will bring even out of this Knight's
master Dr. Usher, which shall plainly show this Aelfrick's perfect Catholic
belief in this point. The words are these. Sicut ergo paulo antequam
pateretur, panis substantiam and vini creaturam conuertere potuit in proprium
corpus, quod passurum erat, and in suum sanguinem qui post fundendus extabat,
sic etiam in deserto manna and aquam de petra in suam carnem and sanguinem
conuertere praeualuit etc. as therefore a little before he suffered, he could
change the substance of bread and the creature of wine into his proper body
which was to suffer, and into his blood which was extant to be after shed. So
in the desert, he was able to change manna and water into his own flesh and
blood, etc. Where he shows plainly a conversion of bread and wine into that
own body of Christ, and blood which was a little after to suffer and be shed
which is nothing more then that which we call transubstantiation. And out of
this as a certain truth he gathers that Christ had also the power to turn
manna and water into his body and blood, as well as bread and wine. And so it
is, in reguard of the power it is all one; but in reguard that Christ was not
then in being, according to his humane nature, the manna could not be changed
into his body and water into his blood. Which place as plain as it is, it is a
strange and almost incredible thing to see how D. Usher (which I only note by
the way for my quarrel here is not so properly against him) does pervert by
his interpretation. For thus he puts the English in the text. So he turned
through invisible virtue the bread to his own body, and that wine to his
blood, as he before did in the wilderness before that he was borne to men,
when he turned that heavenly meat to his flesh, and the flowing water from
that stone to his blood. Wherein there is scarce one word truly translated,
which I will not stand to show particularly, but not only the maine
corruption: that whereas Aelfricke says that as Christ was able to turn the
bread and wine, so he was able to turn the manna and water. This man turns
it quite contrary, that as he turned the manna and water, so he turned the
bread and wine: which is a foul corruption. But D. Usher I hear is
sufficiently answered, and his corruptions laid open to the world if the books
might be as freely printed and sold as his. But therein they have the advantage
of us Catholics that they have free use of libraries and prints and public
allowance for the sale. All which we want and therefore noe marvel if books
be not answered as freely as they are written. But this is but by the way.

10. Now then if thus much may be said out of what D. Usher picketh out for his
own purpose, what may a man think might be said, if a man saw the author
himself, who though he were printed in London as Sir Humphrey notes. 1623.
yet is he not now to be heard of. But as I was saying all this shows this
Aelfricke to have been a Catholic and that his doctrine was none other then
the Doctrine of the Catholic Church at this day. Wherefore Sir Knight,
Campian's saying (which you account a vain flourish) stands good still that
you cannot espy so much as one town, one village, one house, for 1500. years
that sauoured of your Doctrine, and should still be true, though you might find
some one man or two or more, that did agree with you in your Berengarian
haeresy; (though also one man do not make either town Village or house:) For
your faith does not consist of this point alone. Nor did Campian mean, that
there was never any man that did agree with you in any one of your erroneous
points, but that there was never any house village or city that did agree with
you in your whole faith and religion or made the same Church with you. And for
the mangling and razing one of Aelfrick's latin epistles, wherewith you charge
us first Sir it is not like by this that he says in his Homily, wherewith you
say the Epistles agree, that there is any thing against us; and if there were
know you Sir it is not our fashion to deal so with authors; but if there be
any thing contrary to the Catholic faith, we do what is to be done
publicly, as having authority; and knowing what we do: correcting modern
authors in what they err, and for ancient authors, noting only what is
amiss, V. reg. indi de correct. lib.. 4.
but not razing or blotting out any thing, that corner correcting we leave for
such corner companions as shun the light. And so your principal argument
being answered, I go on to the rest.

11. First, you tell us we are divided among our selves touching the antiquity
and Universality of transubstantiation: some deriuing it as you say from the
words of Christ, some from his benediction before the words, some from the
exposition of the Fathers, some from the Council of Lateran, some from
Scriptures, some from the determination of the Church: where to fill paper and
make a show, you repeat again the same things. For what difference, for as
much as pertayneth to this matter, is there between the determination of the
Church, and the Council of Lateran? between Scriptures and the words of
Christ? But to let that go I say, first, your phrase of deriuing is improper,
as you use it. For we derive our Doctrine by Succession from those men that
have gone before us by degrees to the Apostles time, showing that in all ages
and times it has been taught and believed, but to speak properly we not
derive but prove the truth of our doctrine, out of Scriptures, Councels,
Fathers, etc. though the deriuation be also a proof, but yet different from
that of Scriptures and Councels. Secondly you speak very generally and
confusedly. For whereas there be diverse things in question between you and
us, as the realnes of Christ's presence in the Blessed Sacrament and
Transubstantiation: others among Catholics themselves, as whither or how far
these points may be proved out of Scripture, Tradition etc. or by what words
or actions this change is made, you make no distinction at all of any of these
things, nor speak any thing certainly, or constantly of any of them, but
run hopping up and down from one to another; now forward, now backward,
that noe man can tell where to find you but though this confusion of yours,
cause a little more trouble and length in answearing, yet in the end it will
discover your ignorance and vanity the more.

12. To begin then with you, I would know to what purpose you allege our
authors in things controuerted among themselves only, either now because they
are not defined, or heertofore when other things then controuerted were not
defined, though they be since, and consequently out of controversy? Does this
difference of our authors make any thing for you? noe verily but much against
you: for their modest manner of disputeing of these things with dew submission
to the Catholic Church, to whose censure they leave themselves, their
opinions, and writings, and their silence as soon as She does speak, is a
manifest condemnation of your haeretical pride that will stand to noe judgment
but your own: and even those opinions of theirs which you take hold of, they
virtually retract, so far as either they may be any way against the
authority of the Catholic Church, or in favor of Haeretiques, which are the
only things you seek. Therefore in any thing wherein they may dissent from
the common belief, as they do not bind us, so they do not favor you. But
of this I said enough in the first Chapter. Though in the authorityes which you
here allege, there be not much need of this: for either they say nothing
against us, or you corrupt them as I shall show.

13. And to begin with Caietan in matter of the real presence, you say out of
Suarez he taught that these words (THIS IS MY BODY) do not of them selves
sufficiently prove transubstantiation, without the supposed authority of the
Church, and that therefore by command of Pius V. that part of his commentary is
left out of the Romish edition. Thus you. Where first according to your usual
liberty of falsifying, you put in the word (supposed) of your own, to make the
speech sound somewhat contemptibly of the Church. Whereas there is noe such
word in Suarez his Latin text which you cite in the margent. Secondly you putt
in the word (Transubstantiation) which Suarez there speaks not of, as is
evident, but only of the real presence, which is a distinct thing, though you
confound them. And in that Suarez indeed, and the whole School of Deuines do
worthily condemn Caietane, for saying that those words (THIS IS MY BODY) do
not sufficiently prove the real presence of our Sauiour's body. For singularity
whereof Caietan is often noted, in matters of such moment, is very much to be
condemned in a Divine, and therefore Pius V. with great reason commanded that
to be blotted out, agreeably to the rules praescribed in the Roman index, for
correcting of books. Whereof you complain much, as thinking Caietane somewhat
to favor your side, yet you are extremely mistaken and by alleging
Caietanes authority in this, you give your self a wound. For though he do
not give so much to the bare words of the Scripture, as to be sufficient of
themselves to prove the Reality of Christ's presence, yet he says that
joining the authority of the Churches exposition of them, they are sufficient:
as he says in express words which your self after cite and yet you can
allege him for you as you think here, and which is more impudency, you are
not ashamed to say that Caietan denies the bread to be transubstantiated by
those words: For where has Caietan such a word or even shadow of a word. You
think perhaps because in his opinion those words do not sufficiently of
themselves prove the verity of Christ's presence, that therefore they do not
sufficiently cause it: but if you think so as you seem, you are much
mistake^, for those are two different things. For example in Baptism the words
I baptize thee etc. besides the clensing of the soul from sin original and
actual, cause also the remission of the temporal punishment and imprint a
spiritual character in the Soul though these effects cannot be proved out of
the signification of the words: and so also a man might say of the form of
the Eucharist, the proof depending upon the speculatiue signification of the
words, the presence of Christ depe^ding upon their efficacy, which they have by
the institution of Christ as they are the form of this Sacrament, which might
be separated from the signification though de facto it be not. Caiet in com.
3. p. q. 75. a. 1.
And so Caietane though he think not the bare signification of the words
without the authority of the Church sufficient to prove the presence of
Christ's body in the Sacrament; yet he doubts not to affirm with the
Council of Florence alleging the very words thereof, quod ipsorum verborum
virtute substantia panis in corpus Christi, and substantia vini in sanguinem
conuertuntur. That by the power of the very words the substance of the Bread is
turned into the body of Christ, and the substance of the wine into his blood.
So as Caietan is nothing for you, but very much against you.

14. But yet you go on confidently telling us that you will produce Cardinals,
Bishops, and Schoolmen to testify that there are noe words in scripture to
prove transubstantiation. Secondly that those words This is my Body, are not of
the essence of the Sacrament. Thirdly that the ancient Fathers did not believe
the substance of the Sacramental bread to be converted into Christ's real
flesh. Fourthly that transubstantiation was not believed de fide above 1000.
years after Christ. Which four points how well you prove I must now see Sir
Humphrey. First noting by the way that though you set them down severally as
if you meant to prove them in order one after another bringing one Cardinal,
one Bishop and one Schooleman at least for every one, yet you neither observe
order, nor so allege authors as shall appear. Though for the first of your
4. points you need not many authors, if you add the word (expressly) thus,
that there be no words in scripture to prove transubstantiation expressly:
Which word if you putt in, your proposition may pass for true; if not, it is
false, and without author. For though all Catholics save only Caietan agree,
that the words of consecration of themselves, prove the reality of Christ's
presence, yet all do not so agree that of themselves they prove
Transubstantiation. For some think they might be verified, though the
substance of bread should remain together with Christ's body. Yet all agree
that out of the words as they are understood by the Church, transubstantiation
is also proved. You might therefore have spared Gabriel's authority, which you
begin with in these words. How the body of Christ is in the Sacrament is not
expressed in the canon of the bible. Which I would have spared also, but
because I mean to lay open your falsehood in alleging the same by halfes.
Cab. lect. 40.
For thus he says. Notandum quod quamuis express tradatur in scriptura quod
corpus Christi veraciter sub speciebus panis continetur, and a fidelibus
sumitur, tamen quomodo sit ibi corpus Christi, an per conuersionem alicuius in
ipsum, an sine conuersione incipiat esse corpus Christi cum pane, manentibus
substantia and accidentibus panis, non inuenitur. It is to be noted, that
though it be expressly delivered in Scripture, that the body of Christ is
truly contained under the species of bread, and received by the faithful, yet
is it not so expressed how the body of Christ is there, whither by conversion
of any thing into it, or whither it begins to be there without conversion
or turning, the substance and accidents of bread remaining. In which saying of
Gabriels as you left out the former part, because it made clearly against you,
so you might also have left out the later as making nothing against us, as is
evident of it self without farther declaration.

15. Your next author is Cardinal de Aliaco. who you tell us thinks it
possible that the bread might remain with Christ's body and that it is more
easy and more reasonable to conceive. Whereto I answer, what then? what is
this to your purpose? if you were a Lutheran you might have a little color:
but seeing you are a Caluinist, or Protestant, or some such I know not what, it
makes nothing at all for you, not even in show. But be you Caluinist,
Protestant, Lutheran, or what you will, it makes not for you. Suppose that may
be possible, more easy etc. What is that to our purpose: that is not matter of
faith; for Faith does not stand teaching metaphysicall possibilityes or
impossibilityes, what may be or not be, but what is or is not: and which is
chiefly to be considered, though this author think that way more possible and
more easy to be conceived according to humane capacity, yet even herein he
prefers the judgment of the Church, before his own, as his very words by
you cited do testify. For he says, that it is more easy and more reasonable
to conceive if it could accord which the determination of the Church. But what
is this authority to you Sir Humphrey. Which of your 4. points does it prove?
Does it say that transubstantiation is not proved out of Scripture? or that the
words THIS IS MY BODY is not of the essence of the Sacrament? and so of the
rest; not a word of all these. By which it is plain you only look to say
somewhat, but care not what.

16. After this Cardinal, you bring Bishop Fisher, whom you might better have
called Cardinal Fisher, then some others whom in this book you call Cardinals.
For he was created Cardinal indeed, though he had the happiness to receive the
Laurel and purple Robes of Martyrdom in heaven, before he could come to
receive the honor of his capp and Scarlet robes of his Cardinalship here on
earth. But you say out of him, that there be noe words written, whereby it may
be proved that in the Mass is made the very presence of the body and blood of
Christ. You cite him in English, and though in the margent you put the Latin a
little more truly, whereas you say in the English in the Mass, the Latin is
(in nostra Missa) in our Mass, wherein you shall find some difference in this
place, yet you putt the whole sentence so lamely, that a man would think the
Bishop by your citing him, to be quite of another mind then he is. For you
would make one think he did not believe the real presence could be proved out
of scripture. Io. Roffen. cont. captiu Babylo. c. 4.
Whereas the 4. Chapter of the Book here cited is wholly employed in proof
thereof against Luther, out of the very words (hoc est corpus meum: this is my
body) by which he destroys Lutheran companation, and consequently
establishes our transubstantiation: and teaches plainly both there, and
throughout this whole book, that Christ himself did change the bread into his
own body, and this out of the very words of scripture: but in this 10. chapter
which you cite, he proves that the true sense of the Ghospel is rather to be
had by the interpretation of the Fathers, and use of the Church, then the bare
words of scripture, and proves it by this, that if we lay aside the
interpretation of Fathers and use of the Church, noe man can be able to prove
that any Priest now in these times does consecrate the true body and blood of
Christ. Which is the same that he says after in other words in nostra Missa in
our Mass, that is Mass in these times. Not, says he, that this matter is
now doubtful, but that the certainty thereof is had not so much out of the
words of the Ghospel, as of the interpretation of the Fathers and use of so
long time, which they have left to posterity. For, says he again, though
Christ of bread made his body, and of wine his blood, it does not follow by
force of any word there set down, that we as often as we shall attempt any
such thing, shall do it which unless it be so said we cannot he certain
thereof. These are his very words, where you see how together he delivers two
points of Catholic doctrine, the one of the real presence, the other of
tradition for understanding of the Scriptures. Neither does he say, that the
real presence in our Mass now a days is not proved out of Scripture, but not
out of it alone without the interpretation of the Fathers, which we
acknowledge generally necessary in the exposition of Scriptures, neither do
you therefore rightly argue the real presence is not proved so much out of the
bare words of Scripture, as out of the interpretation of Fathers and Tradition
of the Church, ergo not out of scripture. This I say is an idle argument. For
the Father's interpretation and Tradition of the Church, Does but deliver us
the sense of the Scripture.

17. What then have you here out of Bishop Fisher, to prove any of your 4.
points? not one word. For if his words did prove any thing, they should prove
against the real presence not against transubstantiation: which is your
co^trouersy. And for those other words which you bring out of this same holy
Bishop and Martyr for a conclusion thus, non potest igitur per vllam Scripturam
probari, it cannot be proved by any scripture, they discover your dishonesty
most of all. For by breaking of the sentence there, you would make your Reader
believe, they had relation to the words next before by you cited; as if the
Bishop did say that it could not be proved by any scripture, that Christ is
really present in our Mass; whereas there is a whole leaf between these two
places: but the only bare recital of the Bishops words, shall serve for a
co^futation, which are these. Non potest igitur per vllam Scriptura^ probari,
quod aut Laicus aut Sacerdos, quoties id negotij tentauerit, pari modo
conficiet ex pane vinoque Christi corpus and sanguine^, atque Christus ipse
confecit, quum nec^stud in scripturis contineatur. It cannot therefore be
proved by any Scripture that either Lay man or Priest, as often as he shall
go about that busynes, shall in like manner, of bread and wine make the body
and blood of Christ, as Christ himself did, seeing that neither that is
contained in Scriptures. By which it is plain that his drift is only to prove
that there is noe express words in scripture, whereby it is promised that
either Priest or Lay man shall have power to consecrate: and that though Christ
did himself consecrate and commanded his Apostles so to do in remembrance of
him, that yet he did not add any express promise that the same effect should
always follow, whensoever any man should offer to consecrate. Which is not
against us. For we gather that power to pertain to the Apostles Successors in
Priesthood out of the words. Council. Trid. Sess. 22. q. 1.
Hoc facite in meam commemorationem not barely, but as they have been ever
understood by the Church which is so far from being against us that we might
rather urge it against you upon the same occasion that Bishop Fisher does, to
wit, for proof of the necessity of traditions and authority of the Church for
understanding of scriptures. And so by this it is manifest how much you have
abused this holy Bishop's meaning, as you do other two Bishops that follow.

18. The one is Gul. Durandus, Bishop of Maunde, out of whom it seems you
would prove the words, This is my body not to be of the essence of this
Sacrament. For what else you would have with him I see not, but specially
because having cited him thus in English. Christ blessed the bread by his
heavenly benediction, and by virtue of that word the bread was turned unto the
substance of Christ's body. Then you putt these words in Latin, tunc confecit
cum benedixit, them he made it when he blessed it. Whereby you seem to put
the force of this testimony in those words, as if by them you would prove out
of Durandus, that Christ did not consecrate by the words, (this is my body) but
by that blessing. But Durand himself shall disprove you Sir Knight. For thus he
says. Benedixit benedictione caelesti, and virtute verbi, qua conuertitur
panis in substantiam corporis Christi, to wit, (HOC EST CORPUS MEVM.) He
blessed it by the heavenly blessing, and power of the word, by which the bread
is turned into the substance of the body of Christ, Durand. rat. cap. 41. n. 14.
to wit, THIS IS MY BODY (Hoc est corpus meum.) Which last words I would gladly
know Sir Humphrey why you cut of? but I need not ask, for any man may see it
was because you would not have that powerful benediction whereof this authors
speaks to consist in those sacred words but Durand both in this very sentence
and often in the same place attributes most plainly that power to those very
words, not to any other blessing, as may appear in that he says that we do
bless ex illa virtute quam Christus indidit verbis. By that power which Christ
has given to the words.

19. Odo Caemeracensis is the other Bishop that follows whom for the same
purpose you cite, and as much to the purpose: his words are these, as you bring
them. Christ blessed the bread, and then made that his body, which was first
bread and so by blessing it became flesh for otherwise he would not have
said, after he had blessed it, this is my body, unless by blessing it, he had
made it his body. Which words you putt in the margent in Latin imperfectly,
and translate even them corruptly. Benedixit suum corpus. You translate Christ
blessed bread; qui prius erat panis benedictione factus est caro: which in true
English is thus. That which was bread before, by blessing is made flesh. You
translate otherwise as may appear by your words, though I see not to what end,
you should so translate them. But because your intent in this place is to
prove out of this Doctor, that the consecration is performed not by the words
of Christ, but by his blessing: for else I see not what you should aim at, I
will bring you a place out of himself expressly to the contrary; which is
this. Toll verba Christi non fiunt Sacramenta Christi. Odo Came. exp. in can.
Miss. did. 3.
Vis fieri corpus and sanguinem? appone Christi sermonem. Take away the words
of Christ and take away the Sacraments of Christ. Will thou have the Body and
blood of Christ made, put thereto the word of Christ. In which words he shows
that all the Sacraments of Christ are performed by words, so as without words
they are not Sacraments as the Catholic Church teaches. And in particular
that in the Sacrament of the Eucharist, the word of Christ is that whereby the
bread and wine is changed in to his body. Of which change and matter he
speaks most plainly a little before, in this manner. In specie panis and
vini manducamus and bibimus ipsam substantiam corporis and sanguinis, subijsdem
qualitatibus, mutata: substantia, vt sub figura and sapore prioris substantiae
facta sit vera substantia Christi corporis and sanguinis. In show of bread and
wine we eat and drink the very substance of the body and blood, under the
same qualities the substance being changed, that under the shape and taste of
the former substance, the true substance of Christ's body and blood be made.
Which words are no less evident for proof of the reality of Christ's
presence, and change of the bread and wine into his Body and Blood or
transubstantiation then the other are for proof that the change is made by
force of the words. Which declare what his meaning is in those words which you
allege for the blessing, as if that did cause this change. For he as many
other Fathers and Doctors call the very form of consecration a benediction,
both because they are blessed words appointed by Christ for so holy an end;
and because they produce so noble an effect, or because they are joined
always with that benediction, and thanksgiving used both by your B. Savior
in the institution of this holy Sacrament, and now by the Priests in the
Catholic Church, in the consecration of the same. You have then Sir Humphrey
gotten as little by. Odo, as by any of the rest.

20. But after all these authors you putt one in the rere who must make amends
for all that the rest have failed you in; and that is one Christophorus de
Capite fontium, Arch Bishop of Caesarea in his book de correctione theologiae.
Who indeed speaks plainly for you in behalf of the blessing against the
words of consecration, if you cite him truly, as a man might well make doubt
if the author were otherwise allowable; but because he is not, I do not so
much as look in him; but remitt you to the Roman Index, where you shall find
his book by you here cited forbidden; which may be answer enough for you;
and even the arrogance of the title shows it to deserve noe better a place,
for it is entitled de necessaria correctione Theologiae scholasticae. As if he
alone were wiser then all others Schoolmen putt together. Besides in the words
cited out of him by you in this place there is a gross historical error which
every man may perceive at the very first sight, to let pass his theological
errors: and it is in this, that he says, that in that opinion of his, both
the Council of Trent and all writers did agree, till the late times of Caietan;
as if Caietan were since the time of the Council of Trent. Whereas indeed he
died above a Dozen years before the first beginning thereof. And withal you
do not mark how in citing this place you are against your self. For whereas
you make Cardinal Caietan and this Archbishop of Caesarea your two champions
against the words of consecration as if they did both agree in the same, here
this Archbishop says quite contrary that all are for him, but only Caietane.
Whom then shall we believe you Sir knight, or your author?

21. Now though you thought to conclude with this Christopherus a capite
fontium as being a sure card, yet cannot I omit though after him to answer
here a certain authority which you bring before somewhat out of season, out
of Salmeron, telling us that he speaking in the person of the Graecians,
delivers their opinion in this manner. For as much as the benediction of the
Lord is not superfluous or vain, neither gave he simply bread, it follows,
that when he gave it, the transmutation was already made, and these words (this
is my body) did demonstrate what was contained in the bread, not what was made
by them. Whereto I answer first; that you mistake your terms when you call
this an Opinion, which is an error of the Graecians. Secondly I might
answer, that this is not Salmeron's authority, whom you seem to cite, but
do not indeed; you citing only for author a french Huguenot called Daniel
Chamier, who also cites those words out of Salmeron, but without any the least
mention of the place, where they may be found. So as Salmeron's works making
7. or 8. good volumes, to look for such a place as this without any light or
direction, is almost as good as to look for a needle in a bottle of hay. Yet I
did look in that part of his works, which treats of the B. Sacrament where
I thought it most likely to find this place but found it not. Which
notwihstanding, I will not say but it may be there, for it is true that there
have been some Latin authors that have held that our Savior himself did
consecrate not by those words, but either by other words, V. Suar. 3. p. to. 3.
disp. 58. Sect. 1. and seq.
or by the power of his own will, without any outward sign; or by some
outward sign other then words; or by these very words twice spoken. Into some
of which Doctrines it is like some Graecians might fall being so prone to
err, as they have been these later ages: V. Aund.
though in other authors I do not find this error of theirs of the
benediction, before the words, but rather the contrary, Suar. 3. p. to. 3.
disp. 58. Sect. 3.
that these words (this is my body) wherewith Christ did consecrate, are not
now sufficient to consecrate, without certain prayers coming after in the
Canon of the Mass. appointed by the Church. But of this it makes not much
matter; and it may be some of them so think, and therefore, I answer
thirdly for Salmeron, this is noe opinion by him allowed (as you would seem by
your manner of citing him to insinuate,) but by him condemned of error, as
your friend Chamier says expressly, citing to that purpose Salmeron's own
words also, even there where he brings these: which you could not but see.
Wherefore in this you come short of the very Minister's honesty. How little
then must you needs have? Lastly I answer this very authority is against you
in the two things in controversy between us, to wit, the real presence and
transubstantiation; both which it allows; and is against us only in one, not
so properly in controversy: to wit, in that it says this change is wrought
not by the words (this is my body) but by the benediction that goes before.
Which benediction it does not say whether it were a word or a deed; and it is
as like to be some word as otherwise but whether word, or deed, it is as easy
to consecrate by these words (this is my body)) as by any other words; or
outward deed. So as herein Sir Humphrey you have noe help from any man,
either Salmeron, or the Graecians, or even your friend Chamier for he
discovers your bad dealing.

22. After this matter of the Blessing, you come back again to the proof of
transubstantiation out of Scriptures, telling us that Bellarmine says it is
not altogether improbable, that there is noe express place of Scripture to
prove it, without the declaration of the Church, as Scotus said: for though,
says Bellarmine, that place which we brought seem so plain that it may
compel a man not refractory, yet it may justly be doubted whether it be so
or not: seeing the most learned and acute men as Scotus have thought the
contrary. In which words Bellarmine says but what we granted before, to wit,
that though the words of consecration in the plain connatural and obuious
sense infer transubstantiation, yet because in the judgment of some learned
men they may have another sense which proves only the real presence without
transubstantiation, it is not altogether improbable that without the authority
of the Church, they cannot enforce a man to believe transubstantiation out of
them. What of all this? nothing to your purpose Sir Knight: though in
translating this saying of Bellarmines you have corrupted it in two places. The
one, that whereas Bellarmine said one scripture, or place of scripture which he
brought to prove transubstantiation, was so plain as to enforce a man not
refractory. You change the singular number into the plural, as if Bellarmine
had said the Scriptures were so plain etc. Which is a corruption of yours
thereby insinuating, as if Bellarmine taught the Scriptures to be plain and
with out difficulty so as every body may understand them, which indeed is an
ordinary saying of you Protestants, but as ordinarily denied by us Catholics.
The other is, that whereas Bellarmine says men most learned and acute as
Scotus was. You say the most learned and acute men such as Scotus. Which word
(the) you cannot but know alters the sense much. For it imports as if the
better part of learned and acute men went that way; which is false and contrary
to the Cardinal's words and meaning.

23. You tell us now in the next place, that you will proceed from Scriptures
to Fathers, as if you had said mighty matters out of scripture, not having
indeed said one word out of it, either for your self or against us. Well, let
us see what you say out of the Fathers. Alfonsus a Castro, say you, was a
diligent reader of the Fathers, yet after great study and search returns this
answer; of the conversion of the body and blood of Christ there is seldom
mention in the Fathers. But Sir you are noe diligent reader nor faithful
interpreter of Alfonsus a Castro. For his words as you your self putt them
down in Latin in the margent are thus. Alphon a Castro lib. 8. verbo
Indulgent.
De transubstantiatione panis in corpus Christi rara est in antiquis
scriptoribus mentio. That is. Of the transubstantiation of the bread into the
body of Christ, there is sedome mention in ancient writers. Wherein he says
true and you most false. For though of transubstantiation there be rare
mention, yet of the conversion of bread into the body of Christ there is most
frequent mention, as Bellarmine shows at large And herein it is that you show
your self a faithless interpreter. de Euchar. l. 3. cap. 20.
But if a man consider Castro his meaning, he shall find you to have abused
that much more then his words. For his drift in that place is to show, that
though there be not much mention in ancient Writes of a thing, or plain
testimony of scripture that yet the use and practice of the Church is
sufficient; bringing for an example this point of transubstantiation whereof he
says there is seldom mention, and the procession of the holy Ghost from the
Son, whereof says he there is more seldom mention, and then makes his
inference upon it thus, yet who but an Haeretique will deny these things? you
might then as well Sir Humphrey and better too in Castro his judgment have
denied the holy Ghost to proceed from the Son, then the bread to be
transubstantiated into Christ's body. And herein it is that you show your self
noe diligent nor understanding reader of Castro.

24. After him comes one Yribarne a disciple of Scotus, whose words you also
corrupt in the translation, which it is enough to tell you of. For the matter
he says it was of the substance of faith in the primitive Church, that Christ
was really present under the forms of bread and wine, yet was it not so of
transubstantiation wherein he seems to hold with his Master Scotus. Who was
of opinion, that transubstantiation was not a point of faith till the Council
of Lateran. For which you your self confess he is censured by Bellarmine and
Suarez which were answer enough. For as I told you in the beginning we do
not bind our selves to defend every singular opinion of one or two Doctors
contrary to the common opinion of others. But besides, I answer that Scotus
plainly auerreth transubstantiation and proves it out of the ancient Fathers
who use the very word of conversion, which is all one with transubstantiation.
For thus he says in a certain place Respondeo quod nec panis manet, contra
primam opinionem; nec annihilatur vel resoluitur in materiam primam, S^^t. 4.
did. 1^.9.3.
contra secundam opinionem; sed conuertitur in corpus Christi. Et ad hoc multum
express videtur loqui Ambrosius, cuius vndecim authoritates supra adductae
sunt; and plures habentur de consecrat; did. 2. I answer that neither the
bread remains, against the first opinion; nor is annihilated or resolved in
to materia prima, against the second opinion; but is changed into the body of
Christ. And to this purpose S. Ambrose seems to speak very expressly out of
whom 11. authorityes are brought before and more are to be had de consecr.
did. 2. S. Amb. de iis qui mist. initiant. cap. 9 and de Sacrament. lib. 4.
cap. 3. and 4. lib. 6. cap. 1.
Thus Scotus; not only teaching transubstantiation himself, but proving it out
of S. Ambrose who makes most frequent mention of the change, and conversion of
the very nature of bread; Which is the thing expressed by the word
transubstantiation. By which it is plain, that Scotus must have held this
Doctrine for the substance thereof, to be as ancient as S. Ambrose at the
least and if so ancient then even from the beginning His meaning therefore in
saying it was determined of late in the Council of Lateran is only this, that
whereas the words of consecration may be understood of the real presence of our
Blessed Sauiour's body either by transubstantiation, that is, by change, of the
bread into his body or otherwise so that the substance of the bread do
remain the Church has determined that the words are to be understood in the
former sense as may be gathered by his manner of speaking of the Churches
expounding of Scriptures which he says she does by the same Spirit wherewith
the faith was delivered to Us, to wit, by the Spirit of truth. V. Scot. in 4.
Sent. did. 11.9.3.
Which is nothing against the antiquity of transubstantiation. And though it
were also the common belief of the Church from the beginning, yet it might
well be said not to have been de substantia fidei, Yribarne, speaks; because
it had not been so plainly delivered, nor determined in any Council till
Greg. the 7. his time, wherein it was first defined against Berengarius, and
that but by a particular or prouincial Roman Council. Which notwithstanding
the article in it self might be ancient, though not so expressly delivered;
as I declared more amply in the first chapter.

25. You have little help then Sir Humphrey from Alfonsus a Castro, Scotus,
and Yribarne; which although you had, yet were not that sufficient for
discharge of your credit, you having promised us acient Fathers against
transubstantiation: which these three are not; for one of them, to wit,
Yribarne is perhaps now alive: another, to wit, Alfonsus a Castro lived not
past 100. years ago; the third, to wit, Scotus about 300. years since; which
is far from the antiquity of Fathers, as we ordinarily speak of them:
Wherefore bethinking your self at last; you bring us a Father or two, to wit
S. Aug. and Theodoret, telling us that S. Aug. is so wholly yours that Maldonat
expounding a place in the 6. of S. John says that he is persuaded that if S.
Aug. had lived in these times, and seen that Calvin expounded the same place
as he did, he would have changed his mind: and for Theodoret you say, that
Valentia observing him to say that the consecrated elements did remain, in
their proper substance and shape, and figure, he makes the like answer, that
it is noe marvel if one or more of the ancient fathers, before the question
was debated, did think less considerately and truly of transubstantiation.
This is all that ever you have out of the Fathers. Which how little it is, and
how much to your shame shall upon examination appear.

Aug er. 26. in Io.
26. For S. Augustine then what is it that he says in favor of you in
expounding that verse of the 6. of S. John where our Savior says. Your
Fathers have eaten Manna and are dead, he that eats this Bread, shall live
for ever. He says that their Fathers, that is the naughty and unbelieving
people of the Jews dyed, to wit, spiritually in their souls, because they in
eating Manna, did consider only what it presented to their outward senses, and
not what it represented unto their minds by faith; whereas the good men among
them, as Moses, Aaron, Phinees, and others, who he says were our Fathers and
not theirs, did not dye, to wit spiritually, because they did not consider it
only according to the sense, but according to faith, remembering that it was
but a figure: and a figure of this heavenly bread which we have; as the same
holy Father says expressly in the same place Hunc panem significauit manna.
Manna signified this Bread: and he says it is the same of Judas, and other bad
Christians which receive of the Altar and by receiving dye, because they
receive it ill. Does not this make much for you now Sir Humphrey? Do not you
see how wholly S. Aug. is yours. How he says that Manna was a figure of this
our heavenly bread? that we receive it from the altar? Does not all this make
finely for you? but you will say then if it make nothing for us, why does
Maldonate say that if S. Aug. had lived in these times, he would have
interpreted otherwise. I answer not that this interpretation is for you, but
because the other is more against you, to wit thus. Whereas S. Augustine gives
the reason why they that did eat Manna dyed, to be, because they did not eat
it with faith, Maldonate makes the difference to be not so much between the
persons which did eat, as between the food which they did eat saying, that
our Savior makes this a special prerogative of the B. Sacrament far above
the Manna, that this holy Sacrament gives life to them that eat it, which the
Manna did not give of it self. And indeed with dew reverence be it spoken to
S. Augustine's authority, this interpretation is more suitable to the text and
discourse of our Savior in that whole chapter, which is to compare and
prefer that true bread which he said his heavenly Father did give before that
of Manna which Moses gave their Fathers. It is more also against the
Haeretiques of these times in reguard it is more for the honor of the Blessed
Sacrament, which they labor might and maine to depresse: and that is the very
reason why Calvin rather follows the former interpretation, not for any love
to Truth, or reverence which he bears to S. Augustines authority.

27. How false then and absurd is that scoffing speech of yours Sir Humphrey in
the next leaf of your book, where you say ironically thus. S. Augustine did
not rightly understand the corporal presence: For he would have changed his
opinion, if he had lived in these days, as if forsooth Maldonate did say that
S. Augustine did not rightly understand the real presence, and that he would
have changed his Opinion concerning the same if he had lived now in these
times: You hereby insinuating as if S. Augustine thought otherwise thereof
then we now teach. But how grossly false this is may appear plainly; by what I
have here said, to wit, that it is not the real presence whereof either S.
Aug. or Maldonate speaks, but how they that eat Manna have dyed, and they
that eat the body of our Lord shall live according to our Sauiour's saying,
which is clean a different thing. Wherein Sir HVMPHREY you be- LINDE S. Aug.
somewhat, but Maldonate you be- Linde much more, by making as if he
acknowledged S. Augustine to be against the real presence, and that he should
therefore correct him with one of your scorneful taunts, and say he understood
it not; whereas Maldonate speaks only of S. Aug. his exposition of that
place of Scripture, which he does not also condemn, though he bring another
more agreeable as he thinks to the true meaning of our Savior in that place;
which truly a man may do without any such arrogance and scoffing as you are
pleased out of your ingenuity and gentlemanly breeding to fasten upon Maldonate.

28. And so having cleared the matter of S. Aug. I come now to Theodoret, who
indeed has a place in show a little hard, to such as want will to understand
him, as it seems you do Sir knight. For it has been often clearly and
several ways answered by many and even by Valencia; Val. de Transub. lib. 2.
cap. 7.
of one of whose answeares, you think to make your advantage: but it will
prove to your disadvantage. For he having brought two or three several and
substa^tial answeares, at last concludes somewhat roundly with the Haeretiques
in this manner. That if noe other a^sweare will serve the turn; but that they
will still stand wrangling, it is no marvel that one or two (he means
Theodoret and Gelasius, who both speak in the same manner) might err in this
point before it was discussed Which last answer you only take hold of, as if
that were the only answer not taking notice of any of the rest, which as in
the one side it shows your badd dealing, so does it on the other show the
goodness of his solutions to be such as you could not tell what to reply against
them. b. Bell. lib. 2. de Euch. cap. 27. Suar. 3. p. to. 3. disp. 46. sect. 4.
fine.
Bellarmine, Suarez and others answer it in like manner diverse ways, to whom
therefore. I remitt you, only for the Reader's sake, not to leave him in
suspense, I shall here make one plain and brief answer, and as I conceive
out of the very words which you here object against us, Dialog. 2.
which are these. Neque enim signa mystica post Sanctificationem recedunt, a
sua natura, manent enim in propria substantia, and figura and forma and videri
and tangi possunt sicut prius, intelliguntur autem ea esse quae facta sunt, and
creduntur and adorantur, vt quae illa sint, quae creduntur. For neither do the
mystical signs depart from their own nature after the sanctification; for
they remain in their proper substance, figure, and form: and they may be
seen and touched as before; but they are understood to be that which they are
made, and they are believed, and adored as being that which they are believed
to be. These are the words of Theodoret which Sir Humphrey you partly cite by
halfes? and partly corrupt by mis-translation. For thus you cite him only. The
consecrated elements remain in their proper substance and shape and figure
leaving out all the later part of believing and adoring, and all words which
might signify any change, as there be many. As first in that he says; the
mystical signs do not change their nature by Sanctification, which why
should he deny, unless the Sanctification did work some change: or why should
he make such a special matter of that, that the (mystical signs that is)
accidents as I shall by and by show, should not change their nature, unless
the substance whereto they did belong, did change it own nature. For it were a
ridiculous thing for any man to make a wonder of that, that the color, figure,
and taste of bread should remain, the substance it self of the bread remaining;
but this being changed for them to remain is a wonder, which may beseem a
wise man to speak of. Secondly whereas he says these mystical signs may be
seen, and touched, as before, you leave that out, because it plainly shows
there is some change; for a thing cannot be otherwise then it was before,
without some change. Now the change he says is not in the accidents
themselves, or in their own nature, for that remains, therefore it must
necessarily be in that their subject, as Philosophers speak, or substance, in
which they did inhere, or rest, is changed. Thirdly Theodoret speaks of
something which is wrought or made by sanctification, and which is understood,
and adored. What is this, that is made here? not the accidents, for they
remain the same, not the substance of the bread, for that was before. Neither
is that said to be understood or believed, but seen and felt, much less is
it or can it be said to be adored. All this then you leave out Sir Humphrey,
we need not ask you why, for every man sees the reason. Thus much of your
mangling of this authority.

29. Now to come to your mis-translation. Whereas you translate (Signa mystica)
consecrated elements. I would be glad to know in what Dictionary you find
(Signa) to signify elements and (mystica) to signify consecrated? For though
the holy Fathers many times use the word, mystical, when they speak of the
Blessed Sacrament as being a Mystery, and which indeed cannot be so without
consecration, yet mystical, and consecrated, are two several things, and they
have several relations or respects, and consequently several Significations.
For consecrated has relation to the words and action of the Priest, whereby it
is sanctified and changed mystical has relation to the secrecy or hiddennesse
of it, as far surpassing the knowledge or comprehension of man; or as being
another thing then it seems outwardly to be. But for the word (Signa) I see
not what color any man can have to translate it elements: being two such
different things without any connection. For elements pertain to the very
substance of a thing, they being the prime principles of which any thing is
made, and consists. Signum or a Sign properly pertains to the accidents of
a thing which are the proper objects of our senses, and which do notify or
signify unto us the substance of the thing, bringing it so to our knowledge,
and every thing is called a Sign so far as it is apt to cause in us this
knowledge. Wherefore this is a notable cunning trick of yours Sir Knight by
changing Signs into elements, to make all that Theodoret says of the
accidents of bread, to be understood of the elements or substance of the
bread, as if that did remain, whereas he only says that the accidents
remain in their own substance: that is their own entity nature or being,
which to them is not accidental and therefore may be termed their substance.
For it is plain that accidents have a certain being of their own, different
from that of their subject wherein they inhere or rest. And this is that nature
or substance which Theodoret says does remain. For as for the change of the
substance of bread besides that there is enough in this very place to convince
it, I could bring diverse other plain places out of him, as that: Ap. Suar. 3.
p. to. 3. disp. 49. Sect. 2.
Non est attendendum ad naturam eorum quae videntur, sed credendum mutationi
quae hic fit ex gratia. We must not consider the nature of those things which
are seen, but believe the change which is here made by grace, as also that
other place where he notes it for an haeresy springing up among the Grecians,
of some, that did deny the Eucharist to be the flesh of our Savior Christ.
Eucharistiam and oblationes non admittunt quod non confiteantur Eucharistiam
esse carnem Saluatoris nostri IESV CHRISTI. But not to stand longer upon it,
Dialog 3. vt. habeatur ap. Suar. 3. p. to. 3. disp. 46. sect. 1.
here is enough I trow to make it evident, that Theodoret in this point
agrees with other Fathers and the whole Catholic Church.

30. And so much for these two fathers S. Aug. and Theodoret, which are the
only ancient authors it seems you can find of your self. But because you
would make your Reader think there be more for you. And that our authors
acknowledge so much, I must examine what you say out of Cusanus for that
purpose, for he is the only author which you here bring. Thus then you say
Their learned Cusanus is not so reserved in his opinion of the Fathers he
speakeht plainly and openly, that certain of the ancient Divines are found of
this mind, that the bread in the Sacrament is not transubstantiated or changed
in nature, but remains still, and is clothed with another substance more
noble then it self. So Cusanus as you cite him. Whereby you would make it
seem as if Cusanus taught the Fathers to be against transubstantiation, and
even as if it were Cusanus his own opinion: For though you do not say it
expressly, yet you allege, him in such manner, that any man would think it.
But in this you play your part as you are wont to do. For first where does
Cusanus speak one word of the Fathers? he speaks indeed of some ancient
Divines, but of Fathers not a word? this then is false which you say that
Cusanus is not so reserved in his opinion of the Fathers, seeing he is so
reserved as not once to name them. Secondly for that which you say of certain
ancient Divines, it is true Cusanus has somewhat to that purpose, but not just
as you say. For these are his words. Si quis intelligeret panem non
transubstantiari sed superuestiri nobiliori substantia, prout quidam veteres
Theologi intellexisse reperiuntur, qui dicebant non solum panem sed and corpus
Christi esse in Sacramento etc. If any man should understand the bread not to
be transubstantiated, but to be ouerclothed with a more noble substance, as
some ancient Divines are found to have understood, who said that not only
bread but the body of Christ is in the Sacrament etc. Which last words of
Christ's real presence in the Sacrament you leave out, because they make as
much, or more against your self, then the former of the remaining of bread,
against us. But for the ancient Divines you needed not have gone so far as
Cusanus, you might have their names and errors in our late Schoolmen. Suar.
disp. 49. sect. 2 3 4.
Thirdly concerning Cusanus his own opinion, there can be nothing more
manifest then his true and constant belief of transubsta^tiation: Excit. lib.
6. edit. Bas^^ 1565. page 522. lib. 4. p. 446.
in this very place he says, ita manent accidentia vt prius, sed substantia
conuersa est. The accidents remain as before but the substance is changed. And
in another place. Huius sacramenti institutio ita facta est per Christum, quod
panis in corpus Christi, and vinum in sanguinem conuertitur, pro esca
spirituali sub speciebus sensibilibus. The institution of this Sacrament was
so made by Christ, that the bread is changed into the body of Christ, and wine
into his blood for spiritual food under the sensible species or accidents. And
there he goes on with a large and excellent discourse, expressing all things
now in controversy, as transubstantiation, I mean the very word, Concomitancy,
the efficacy of the very words, Christ's manner of presence whole in the whole
host, and whole in every part thereof, illustrating and proving all by reasons
and examples of natural things, and this not briefly, or in one place only,
but so largely and in so many places, as a man by only opening the book
without an index may presently find enough, to show his Catholic belief, and
confute your errors. What strange malice and boldness then is this Sir Humphrey
so to lead your reader into tentation, by making him believe Cusanus is for
you. I omit to note your ignorance in citing Cusanus his book Exercit: that
is either Exercitiorum or Exercitationum, whereas he has noe such work but
Excitationum? Which by your great ignorance every where showed I have good
reason to think not to be the Printers fault, but yours. But here is an end
with Cusanus in whom you have noe refuge more then you had in the Fathers.

31. Now then having done with Scriptures and Fathers you come to the
Schoolmen, telling us that Scotus taught that before the Council of Lateran,
transubstantiation was not believed as a point of faith: Which Bellarmine
disalloweth in him: and Suarez says that the Schoolmen which teach that the
doctrine of Transubstantiation is not very ancient are to be corrected such as
Scotus was. Of Durand you say that in like manner he and some of his fellow
Schoolmen after him professed openly, that the material part (or substance) of
the Sacramental bread was not converted: but that Bellarmine condemns this
doctrine for heretical, yet excusing Durand from being an Haeretique because he
was ready to submitt to the judgment of the Church. Then letting pass
Wickliffe and the Waldenses you say our own Proctours Osiensis and Gaufridus
tell you that there were others in those days, who taught that the substance
of bread did remain, and this opinion say they, (as you cite them) was not to
be rejected. Lastly to come to this last age you say Tonstall thinks it had
been better to leave every man to his own conjecture for the manner of the
real presence whether it be by transubstantiation or otherwise as it was
before the Council of Lateran: And Erasmus says it was defined but of late by
the Church These are all your authors and your whole discourse out of
Schoolmen.

32. To which I say first for Scotus that I have sufficiently answered that of
him before in answearing the testimony of Yribarre his Scholar, Sup. hoc. n.
24.
where I showed that he meant not so much of the substance of the doctrine,
for he acknowledges the antiquity of the conversion of the substance of bread
and wine into the substance of Christ's body and blood as either of the word
tra^substantiatio^ or of the proof thereof by determining the sense of
scripture. And this it may be is it wherein Tonstall also follows him. If they
mean otherwise the matter is not great; for one single author or two
contradicted by others carry noe credit with us in matter of belief though to
say truly Tonstall was noe Schooleman but a Canonist, as Cardinal Pole
answeareth him very well by letter upon another certain occasion, wherein he
did swerve from the rules of true Divinity: as I have seen by the letters of
both, in both their own hands. Erasmus is noe author to be answered nor named
as you know I have often told you.

33. For the Waldenses and Wickliffe you do well to let them pass. But the
very naming of them shows you had a good mind to fill out your number of
Schoolmen with the^: though for the Waldenses I do not find that they agree
with you much in this point of the Blessed Sacrament. For they had Mass but
once a year, and that upon Maundy thursday neither would they use the words
Hoc est Corpus meum. This is my body but 7. Pater nosters with a blessing over
the bread. Whereas you may have your Communion oftener, and you use the words
This is my body. Not 7. Paters as they did. But what need I say more of them
or the Wickliffists either, being known condemned Haeretiques.

34. Now for Durand he is a Schoolman indeed and a learned one, but yet not
wholly free from error in some points, and particularly in this, of the change
of the bread and wine into the Body and Blood of Christ. For he is of opinion
that the change in this Sacrament is noe other then as the natural changes of
other substances one into another; Durand. 4. did. 11. q. 3.
and that it is supernatural only for the manner because it is done in an
instant and without the concurrence of natural causes. And that as in these
natural changes of the elements one into another or other mixed bodies the
form only is changed the material part or subject as Philosophers speak
remaining still the same, so also that here the form of bread is changed
only the matter or material part of bread and wine remaining. Which yet he
thought to be sufficient to verify not only the realnes of Christ's presence,
but also the conversion of bread into the body of Christ. For to that purpose
he has these two express conclusions. 4. did. 10. q. 1.
Dicendum says he quod verum corpus Christi natum de Virgin and passum in
cruce est realiter in hoc Sacramento. I say that the true body of Christ which
was borne of the Virgin and suffered on the cross is really in this Sacrament.
The other conclusion is this. Dicendum quod substantia panis and vini
conuertuntur in substantiam corporis Christi. Dur. 4. did. 11. q. 1.
It is to be said that the substance of bread and wine are turned into the
substance of Christ's Body. Whereby it is plain he held a true and real
presence by a true and real conversion of the bread or substance of the bread
into the body of Christ discovering also therein your cunning and deluding
corruption whereby you would make it seem to your Reader that these two be
all one (the material part of bread, and substance of bread) for so in the
citation of Durand's sentence you gloss the words material part with this
parenthesis of your own (or substance) whereas the material part of bread and
substance of bread are two things. For the matter in every compound is but a
part of the substance and the absolute denomination of such a specificall
substance does not belong even to the form it self alone though it be the more
noble and more essential part, much less to the matter or material part. For
we do not say the form of fire or water is fire or water but it is that which
gives the being of fire or water to the material part or matter which of it
self is so far from having any such denomination as some Philosophers do
scarce give it any proper being of it own or even the common name of ens. And
all agree that it has noe quality noe active power nor force of it self to do
any thing as being but a mere passive power.

35. Wherefore though the matter of bread should remain in this conversion or
change yet could not the substance of bread be said to remain so long as the
form is changed noe more then all the bread and meat which you eat may be
said to remain because the material part of all the bread, beef, mutton,
capon, pheazant, and whatsoever else you eat, remains unconverted which as it
were a great absurdity in any man to affirm, so is it as great an one in you
to affirm that the substance of bread in this Sacrament should not be
converted though the material part should remain, for as the only change of
the form in all natural conuersions is sufficient to verify that this thing is
changed into that, for example Fire into Water, so might it be in this: For
as much as pertains to the truth of that manner of speaking. Which I only
urge in Durand's defense not that I allow his doctrine. For this was his very
reason why he did hold that opinion because he thought it sufficient to verify
not only the real presence but even transubstantiation also. Which very word
he uses in another place, for making answer to a certain objection drawn
out of the words of S. John Damascen wherein that Father said that the nature
of bread was assumed by Christ. As if by that manner of speaking he should
seem to insinuate that the bread remaining the same in nature was
Hypostatically united to Christ, Durand says thus. Durand. in 4. did. 10^ q.
1.
Sicut in baptismate aqua assumitur vt materia Sacramenti permanens sic panis
and vinum assumuntur vt materia Sacramenti tranfiens quia materia Sacramenti
conuertitur in corpus Christi and per consequens dicitur aliquo modo vniri
diuinitati non per assumptionem manente natura panis aut vini sed per
transubstantiationem in humanitatem prius assumptam. As in baptism water is
assumed as the permanent matter of the Sacrament so bread and wine are assumed
as the transient or passing matter of the Sacrament, because the matter of the
Sacrament is turned into the body of Christ. And by consequence is said in some
sort to be united to the Divinity not by assumption or hypostaticall union, the
nature of the bread or wine remaining; but by transubstantiation into the
Humanity before assumpted Which words declare his opinion both fully and
plainly of the change of the matter of this Sacrament into the body of Christ
by Transubstantiation.

36. But howsoever he fail in declaring this transubstantiation in that he
takes not the whole substance of the bread to be changed into the whole body
of Christ he does not say it confidently and certainly but doubtfully and with
dew submission to better judgment, and especially to the Church. Saluo meliori
iudicio existimari potest etc. are his words. 4. did. 11. q. 3
Saving better judgment it may be thought etc. and in answer of an argument
to the contrary wherein was objected the common consent of others against him,
he says that that notwithstanding yet so long as their saying is not
confirmed by the Church it is lawful to think the contrary. In which words he
shows two things; one, that his Opinion was contrary to the common current of
the Catholic Doctors of his own time. Which is contrary to that which you
said that he and his fellow Schoolmen professed that doctrine openly; for you
see he acknowledges all others to be against him, neither does he himself
profess it so openly, for he speaks it doubtfully and with submission to
better judgment: The other thing is that he plainly acknowledges the
authority of the Church to be such as that it is not lawful for any man to
hold opinion against it. But though he should have said nothing thereof in
this place it is sufficient that in the praeface of his Commentary upon the
Master of the Sentences, he submits all his works to the correction of the
holy Roman and Catholic Church to which he acknowledges the interpretation
of all doubts of the holy Scripture to belong: Which profession without more
may serve to excuse and free him from the crime of haeresy either in this or
any other point wherein he may have chanced to err as Bellarmine does
therefore justly excuse him.

37. Now for Gaufridus and Ostiensis our own Proctors as you call them, as you
have the objection so you shall have the answer also out of Durand. Durand.
in 4. did. 10. q. 1.
Thus then he obiecteth against the praesence of Christ in the Blessed
Sacrament. Ostiensis and Gaufridus note 3. opinions concerning the manner of
being of the body of Christ upon the altar: of which one says that the bread
is the body, of Christ: another says that the bread does not remain but is
changed; and that the accidents alone do remain; Which seems to be approved
by that text of Cap. firm^ter. The third opinion says that the substance of
bread does remain and is together with the body of Christ upon the altar.
Behold that they call it an Opinion of the remanency of the substance of bread
neither do they say it is reproved nay rather they refer it to the
confession of Berengarius which was approved by the Council. Thus the objection
set down and urged by Durand, not cited out of them. Now his answer is
this. For that which is afterward said of Gaufrid, Ber. and Hostiens. Glossers
upon the Chap. firmiter it is to be answered, that though they recount three
opinions they approve none for true but only that of the body of Christ's
being upon the altar by transubstantiation of the bread and wine. And if they
do not expressly call any of them erroneous, it follows not therefore that it
is not erroneous. For they did not know all the passages of holy Scripture from
which the fore said opinion does differ. Thus the objection and answer in the
very words as they lie in Durand. Out of which first it is clear, these men
are only Canonists noe School Divines; such as you pretend here to allege.
Though you also insinuate the same somewhat, in as much as you call them our
Proctors. Wherein yet you mistake your terms, the word Proctor being not so
fit for so great Doctors of the Canons as they were: for how think you vould
your Civil or Canon Doctors of the Arches take it at your hands to be called
Proctors? or your great Lord Sir Edoward Cook and Doctor as I may say of your
common Law to be called an Attorney at Law? Secondly hereby appears also
your corruption in saying that they taught that this opinion, was not to be
rejected; for thus you putt it in a different letter. (This opinion say they
was not to be rejected) whereas they say noe such thing. But only Durand
enforcing the objection to the utmost as Divines are wont to do the more fully
to answer; takes hold that they call it an opinion, and likewise takes hold
that they do not say it was reproved or that it ought to be held for an error.
Thirdly hence it appears that both they themselves did not allow of it in
that they held only that middle opinion of tra^substantiation for true; and
that though they did not so expressly condemn it of error yet it does not
follow but that it was error for they knew not all the passages of scripture:
Scripture being not their study. Thus then all your Schoolmen are answered
and consequently this whole. of Transubstantiation.

PARAGRAPH. 3. OF PRIVATE MASS.
1. In this third Sir Hu^phrey prete^deth to make good the doctrine and
practice of his Church, and overthrow outs in point of private Mass as he
calls it: beginning with the curse of the Council of Trent, against such as
condemn it for unlawful. And then bring an article of Ireland to the
contrary, which says, that for the Priest to receive the Eucharist without a
co^petent number of Communicants, is against the institution of Christ, and
practice of the primitive Church. For proof of this his doctrine he brings
the words of Christ; 1. Cor. 11.1.
Take ye, eat ye. And those of S. Paul. Be ye followers of me, even as I
am also of Christ. As likewise those other. When you come together tarry one
for another. And the cup of blessing which we bless is it not the Communion of
the blood of Christ? and here the knight says out of Hugo de S. Victo. (whom
he of his own free goodness is pleased to create a Cardinal, both here and
else where, to make up the number of his Cardinals Bishops etc.) that it is
called a Communion, because the People in the primitive Church did communicate
together. And he says of himself, that it is so called because the Priest and
people communicate together. After this he brings a Canon of the Council of
Nantes, forbidding Priest to say Mass alone. For to who^, says the Canon,
does the Priest say The Lord be with you to which he adds 12. or 13. of our
authors in proof that anciently the people did communicate every day,
witnessing therein as he says the antiquity of his Doctrine and intimating the
nouelty of ours and he tells us also that the Council of Trent concludes
with a well-wishing to his Doctrine, in saying that it wishes that the people
would communicate not only spiritually but also sacramentally, adiudging his
communion to be more fruitful. This is the sum of this whole

2. To which I answer, beginning with this last of the Council of Trent, that
the Rearder seeing the Man's abominable Lying by this one thing, may give a
guess of the rest. The Council as he confesses in the beginning accurseth him
and his Doctrine, and here he says it concludes with a well wishing
thereunto. Is it even so good Sir your Communion is allowed by the Council of
Trent? you tell us News; I pray you what Canon, what Chapter, what Session is
your Communion once named in? there you will say, where the Council wishes
that the people that hear Mass would communicate, not only spiritually but
also sacramentally? is this your Communion? what? have you Mass Sir Humphrey?
take heed id may cost you money. An informer that should hear this might
catch you by the back, and bring you in for so many hundred marks, as you
have received bytts of bread, in your Church; Which truly might prove a dear
ordinary for you. And this you must either confess, or let alone the Council
of Trent, which acknowledges noe Communion without Mass. For if you deny your
Service to be Mass, we deny your Communion to be Communion, for no Mass, noe
communion: therefore bethink your self, whither you will be content to have a
Mass or not Trent-Communion? and while you stand studying of this, I will putt
you another thing to consider of. Which is this, that it is one thing for the
Council to wish that the people would communicate; because to hear Mass and
receive withal would be more profitable; another, to say that if there be
nobody to communicate, or that such Mass is unlawful as Haeretiques say;
the Priest must not say Mass: what think you Sir are not these two things?
study the matter a while and tell us. Do not you then speak wondrous wittily,
when you say that there comes blessing and cursing out of the same mouth, as
if the Council did approve and condemn the same thing when it commends
sacramental communion of the people together with the Priest, and yet
condemns not those Masses as unlawful, wherein the people do not
communicate: yea approves them? the like wit and less honesty you show also
in that you say, that from the Confession of a general Council your Communion
is concluded to be more fruitful; what affinity between your empty communion
which is but a morsel of bread, and a supp of wine, and the true real and
substantial Body and Blood of CHRIST JESUS which the faithful Catholic
receives: the Council commends daily receiving of the Blessed Sacrament as
more profitable therefore say you it commends your Communion which you use,
once, twice, thrice, or 4. times a year. It wishes that the people would
receive sacramentally as the Priest does, you make it say noe; but that the
Priest must do as the people does, that is, not celebrate but when they are
disposed to receive: is it not mere madness for you Sir Humphrey thus plainly
to abuse the Council so contrary to the plain meaning thereof?

3. Like to this is your folly, in alleging so many authorityes in favor of
your Communion, as you think. Which whither you cite them true or not I do
not stand to examine, for it makes noe matter. They say it was the practice of
the primitive Church to communicate every day with the Priest; I grant it. What
then? therefore the Priest now must say Mass but once in two or three months,
or once in a twelve month, or not once in seven year, unless the people be
so devout as to come and receive with him? this follows of your doctrine: is
not this wise arguing? but to answer you another way Sir Humphrey, you cannot
be ignorant that there is not one of these authors which you cite for the
peoples daily communion that says that either it is or was of necessity so to
do, but only bear witness of the practice: Bell. lib. 2. de Mis. cap. 9. and
10. Durant. de ritib. lib. 2. cap. 4. n. 5.
Whereas some of them as Bellarmine and Durantus do prove most manifestly that
there was noe such necessity, or dependency of the Priest's celebrating upon
the peoples communicating, that they might not celebrate unless the people did
communicate. Nay they prove clearly that it was ordinary for Priests to
celebrate, though nobody did communicate. Do they not prove by manifest
authorities that in the Eastern Church, in the time of S. Ambrose, S. Aug. and
S. Chrisost. the people did communicate but once a year, and yet S. Chrysostom.
even there where he complains of the peoples coldness, says of himself, that
he celebrated every day though there were nobody to participate with him? but
because these Fathers lived after the Primitive Church, though not long, and
that your authors speak most of the Primitive Church it is manifest that even
in that time the people did not still communicate every day as they had done in
the beginning for whereas people did communicate before without command, only
of their own devotion, they were grown so cold by Pope Fabian's time, Fab.
epi. 3.
which was about the year 240. being but the one and twe^tith Pope, that he
was feign to make a Decree to compel the people to communicate at least thrice
a year, and this was almost one hundred years before the end of the Primitive
Church, the like decree I might also bring out of Soter about the year 175.
which was 60. years before Fabian. Whereas notwithstanding then Priests and
Bishops did celebrate every day as appears by S. Cypr. Ambr. Aug. Hierome,
Lib. 2. cap. 4.
etc. cited by Durantus. And which is more those Fathers, S. Aug by name, says
he does neither commend nor discommend the daily Communion of the people; but
wishes that at least upon Sundays they would communicate, but with a mind
free from desire of sinning, whereas he together with other Fathers make
frequent mention of daily sacrifice. But what is all this to your purpose, or
to your communion? as of all that is said by the Fathers of the holy Communion
were meant of your sacrilegious communion?

4. Now for your proofs out of Scripture, as that, that our Savior said to
his Disciples, (take ye, eat ye). I answer that as our Savior there spoke
to all his Apostles who did all eat, so out of this place a man might even as
well say, that all must communicate that are in the Church at the same time,
and that the Priest must not say Mass, unless not only one 2. or 3.
communicate, but all that are there, which I do not believe you will grant.
For I do not think that when any one man among you receives your communion,
all receive it. Solue this objection then of mine, and you answer your own.
For S. Paul's words where he inuiteth Christians to imitate him, as he did
imitate Christ, out of which you would gather that Priests must not say Mass,
unless there be some body to communicate, if a man should tell your Ministers
and your self too Sir Humphrey of many things which S. Paul did, and wherein
he did desire to be followed, as the chastizing of his body, his fasting and
praying, his chastity, his labors, and the like. Both you and they would have
wit enough to find a solution for your selves, and would easily find something
else wherein to imitate him: neither would you be so well able to prove your
selves followers of him in those things, as we can do our selves in this. For
first the thing wherein S. Paul desires the Corinthians to imitate him cannot
be the distributing of the communion, which belonged only to the office of
Priests, whereas S. Paul^s imitation is directed to all. Secondly the thing,
that he desires to be imitated in, 1. Cor. 10.31
is that which goes next before in these words. Whither you eat or drink, or
do any thing else, do all to the glory of God. Be without offense to Jews
and Gentiles, and to the Church of God, as I please all in all things, not
seeking what is profitable for my self, but for many that they may be saved.
Then come very fitly, and consequently these words. Be imitators of me, as I
also of Christ in this therefore as Christ did seek not his own pleasure but
the good of many, wherein S. Paul did imitate him so he would have the
Corinthians, and in them all Christians to imitate him. Now that which
follows is a new matter; for he goes from exhorting them, to praise them
thus. I praise you my bretherem, that you are mindful of me in all things,
and Keep my praecepts as I have delivered unto you. And there also delivers
a great many good praecepts of other matters, before he come to the B.
Sacrament. Thirdly in this matter of Mass we imitate him: for our Priests are
ready to communicate such as come worthily to receive, but you must prove that
S. Paul would not say Mass or communicate himself, unless others would
communicate with him; or that he did teach that other Priests must not. But
that you will never be able to do.

5. That other place of staying one for another, is spoken to the people; who
made the suppers called agape, as is plain by the text. Wherein he reprehends
the abuses that were committed as that some did exceed, others did want; some
were drunk, some went away hungry which could not pertain to the blessed
Sacrament, as every man knows besides the distribution of that belonged to
the Priests, not to the people, who are here instructed and reprehended for
their manner of making their suppers; for he speaks to the same people here,
that he does in all the epistle, and to whom he had a little before in the
beginning of the chapter given such praecepts as noe way belong to Priests but
are common to all. As for example that men must not pray or prophecy with their
hats on, and that women must not contrariwise pray or prophecy bare headed:
that a man may not nourish his hair, that a woman may etc. And then speaks
of this matter of their suppers, without any change of person: besides that
there were not many Priests then in that church and at that time: For I do not
find much mention of any Bishop or Priest at that time among the Corinthia^s,
but only of Sosthenes who also was with S. Paul at that time when he writ
that epistle to the Corinthians and joined with him in the writing, as
appears by the beginning, and indeed he is most like to have come to S.
Paul, to acquaint him with those disorders, and to desire his authority and
help for redress of them. It is true S. Paul speaks also immediately after
of the B. Sacrament which went always with those suppers which he teaches
them, with what praeparation and examination of themselves they are to receive,
which is nothing for our purpose in this place.

6. Your last place of S. Paul is, where the chalice is called the cup of
Communion; the reason of which name you say is because the Priest and people
must communicate together; or as Hugo de S. Vict. says because the people in
the Primitive Church, did communicate every day. What of that which Hugo de S.
Vict. says? nothing to the purpose. For we acknowledge that this holy
Sacrament is called the communion because it unites us to Christ our head, and
unites us among our selves as members of the same body. And though it do this
most perfectly, when it is also received sacramentally, yet not only so but
it does the same also in some measure, being spiritually received: and as this
union may remain among us members, though every one do not receive every day,
so it may also be or remain between us and the Priest, though he say Mass
and we not receive. And if this argument of yours be good, it will follow that
not only some but all the people must receive together with the Priest for if
because it is the communion, the Priest must not receive without the people, it
follows that the people also must not receive one without another: for it
has the name of Communion as well in reguard of uniting us one to another, as
to the Priest, and indeed not to the Priest but as he is one of them. For as
he is Priest he does offerr it as a sacrifice, and therein excels the
people, but as he receives it sacramentally or formally as a Sacrament,
therein he is but as one of the rest or participateth thereof but as others
do, though his receiving be more necessary, in reguard of finishing the
Sacrifice.

7. Now to come to your authority of the Council of Nant's, (which you have not
reading enough to cite out of any original, or any good author your self, but
out of Cassander only, beyond whom, and one or two more such fellows it
seems your learning does not streatch. I answer that, there is such a
Decree cited by Bell. and others out of Burchard and therefore I allow of it:
though it be not extant among our Councels now. I mean that decree is nor now
extant in any Council of Nants that we have: but the matter is not great, for
there be many such decrees in other Councels, which although there were ten
for one, yet were it not one iott the better for you Sir for this and the like
Canons speak only of not saying Mass all alone, without one or two to
answer, and to whom the Priest may seem to speak when he says Dominus
vobiscum. Our Lord with you, and the like: but what is this to saying Mass
without some body to communicate with him? Where is there any one word in this
Canon, or any other, any Father, any Council, any authority of an approved
author of not saying Mass without communicants? who did ever hear that the
Priest must go first and ask his parishioners, whether any will communicate
with him, before he will go to Mass, as it is praescribed in your book of
common prayer published by Parliament-authority, that you must do before your
communion, Annotat. after the order of administringe the communion.
neither will it serve the turn to have one or two to bear the Minister
company, but there must be a competent number: for example says your book if
the Parish consist of 20. persons, there must be 3. or 4. at least otherwise
the Minister must not communion it. And by this rule a man may say
proportionably if the parish have twenty hundred or 20000. there should be 3.
or 4. thousand to communicate at once. And if a sick body would receive he may
not receive alone, but he must have some body to bear him company, and not
only one or two, but many, or a competent number, as your book says, which
therefore is to be considered according to the number of Parishioners. This
and much more may be said of the prettines of your service and good fellow
communion: but here is enough of such an idle subject, and so having
answered your third Paragraph of private Mass as you call it I come to the 4.

PARAGRAPH. 4. OF THE SEVEN Sacraments.
1. In this 4. paragraph which is of our Seven Sacraments, the Knight hoyseth
up all the sails of his eloquence, and puts to all the force of his wit
as if both by wind and oar he would go quite beyond us in this point of our
faith: wherein for that cause he does enlarge himself beyond the ordinary
measure of his paragraphs, and fills his margents with citations of Fathers
and of Schoolmen laying first for a foundation a wise discourse of his own.
Which I will also begin with without longer prefacing with him. He sets
down first the Canon of the Council of Trent accursing whosoever shall say the
Seven Sacraments of the new Law were not instituted by Christ, Sess. 7. ca^.
1. de Sacr. in genesis
or that there be more or fewer then Seven; or that any of them is not
properly and truly a Sacrament. Which decree says Bellarmine, ought to
suffice though we had noe other. For if we take away the authority of the
present Church and present Council, the decrees of all other Councels, and the
whole Christian Faith may be brought into doubt. Which canon of the Council,
and authority of Bellarmine he cries out against; and says it is a foundation
of Atheism, for in his judgment the word of Christ alone is sufficient for all
Christians: which he proves by those words of S. Paul. I have not shunned to
declare unto you all the counsel of God. Act. 20.
And that we may know he speaks of the written Word, he brings Bellarmines
authority saying, that those things are written which were by the Apostles
preached generally to all. And he is so confident against this point of the
Seven Sacraments, that he is content the curse shall light upon him, if any
learned man shall show it out of any Father of the Primitive Church, or any
known author for about a thousand years after Christ. This is his beginning;
whereat I will make a stay and answer, not to take too much at once. He
thinks it then a foundation of Atheism, to say that if we take away the
authority of the present Church, and present Council we may call in question
the whole Christian Faith. And why so good Sir Humphrey? What Atheism is it
to say that there is one Faith: that that Faith is to be found only in the
Church? that, that Church cannot fail or err at any time: and consequently
that that Faith which it teaches cannot fail or err? and especially that
then the Church can least err, when it is gathered together in a General
Council, and defines matters of Faith with approbation of the Supreme Pastor
of God's church and that if such a Council may err, the Church, may err? that
if the Church may err, the Faith which that Church teaches may fail, and
consequently that there can be noe certainty? is this the way to Atheism to
teach that there must be some certain means to learn true faith, and belief
in God? and that if there be none such there can be noe certainty? would a
man think that it should ever enter into any man's mind to say that the
affirming of this infallibility were the way to Atheism. Whereas the denial
thereof is the most direct way that can be imagined unto Atheism. For take
this infallibility away and there is noe rule of faith, if noe rule, noe faith,
if noe faith, noe right belief in God, which is the height of Atheism.

2. But because you Sir Humphrey are not capable of this Discourse, as evident
and demonstratiue as it is, I will go about with you another way. I would know
of you whither if we should take away the holy Scripture or written word, it
would not follow in you judgment, that the whole Christian faith might be
called in question? I say in your judgment: for whether it would or would not
in mine I do not say any thing here: certainly it would. For some rule men
must have, and that is your only rule. Now again do not you know that S.
Gregory the great did often say and write, that he did hold the four first
Councels in the same honor, that he did the 4. Ghospels, which was the same as
to say, they could as little err as the 4. Ghospels. Why may it not then
follow that upon denial of the authority of those 4. Councels, the authority
of the Christian faith may be shaken, as well as by denial of the Gospel? V.
B^ll. lib. 2. de Council. cap. 3.
and this which I say of S. Gregory I may say of many other Fathers in reguard
of all or some of those 4. Councels, and particularly of that of Nice which
whosoever should have denied, was noe less to have been counted an Haeretique
then if he should have denied the Gospel. 1. Eliz 1.
and you your selves in your Parliament Laws give great authority to those 4.
first Councels, and even as much if you understand your selves well, and speak
consequently as S. Gregory does: for you are co^te^t to acknowledge for heresy
whatsoever is condemned for such, by any of them. Which is in other words to
acknowledge them for a rule of faith, and consequently of infallible authority?
you join the^ in the same rank with the canonical Scriptures. You give also
the like authority to other general Councels; but with this lymitatio^, that
these later must have express scripture, whereby to condemn a thing for
heresy: but which is most of all to be noted, in the same statute you give
power to the Court of Parliament, with the assent of the Clergy in their
Convocation, to adiudge or determine a matter to be heresy: Which is the very
same as to give it power to declare faith, or to be a rule thereof: which if
it may agree to such an assembly or Court of a temporal Prince and Kingdom I
see not why it may not agree to a General Council, as being the Parliament of
Christ his Church, to which he has promised his special assistance. But this
is by the way.

3. Now out of this authority which you grant to those ancient Councels, I go
a little farther with you, and ask what you can say more against the present
Church, and present Council of Trent, then against the Church of that time and
Councels of those times? whatsoever you can say of the Church now, that it may
err, may as well be said of the Church of that time. For our Sauiour's promise
for the perpetuity and infallibility thereof is as much for one time, as
another; for our time now, as for those then. What you say now of the Council
of Trent that it is disclaymed by a great part of the Christian world, may be
said much more of the Council of Nice: which was gain said both by more, and
other manner of men then the Council of Trent. and the same may be also said
of some of the rest. and so forth of any thing else, that you can object.
Wherefore to conclude, if it were not atheism to say then, that by questioning
the authority of the Nicene Decrees, the authority of the whole Christian faith
might be questioned, I see not why it should be Atheism to say the same of
the Council of Trent. But you think it is Atheism to deny the Scriptures
alone to be sufficient? For that is the sense of your inference. But it is
far otherwise. For all Catholics say they are not so; and yet they believe
that there is a God, and honor and worshipp him as their God. But this of the
alone sufficiency of Scriptures is a several matter of it self. Only for
your place of S. Paul, it is plain you pervert it. For he speaks not of the
written word but of the doctrine of Christ by him preached, as is manifest by
his own very words there. Which are these. Act. 20.20.
Vos scitis quomodo nihil subtraxerim vtilium quominus annunciarem vobis, and
docerem vos public and per domos testificans etc. You know how I have
withdrawn nothing that was profitable but that I preached it unto you, and
taught you openly and from house to house testifying to Jews and Gentiles
penance toward God, and faith in our Lord JESUS CHRIST. For neither had S.
Paul then written his Epistle to the Ephesians, to whom he there spoke. For he
wrote it out of prison from Rome, and even the second time of his imprisonment,
which was many years after this speech. Whereas at the time of this speech he
was but going to Jerusalem where being taken, after some time of imprisonment,
he was sent to Rome. And you might as well have aleadged those words of our
Savior to his Disciples All that I have heard from my Father, I have made
known to you. Io. 15.15.
As these of S. Paul; and yet is well known our Savior did not deliver any
one word in writing to his Apostles. Neither does Bellarmines saying help you
any thing: for though those things which are necessary for all in general to
know, which are but few, be written; there be yet many more not written which
are necessary to be known by some in the Church, though not by all. Now for
the curse, which you are content shall light ypon you if we show the number of
Seven Sacraments to have been the belief of the Church for a thousand years
after Christ, be not too forward to draw malediction upon your self; it will
come fast enough to your cost. It is an heavier thing then you are aware of, to
have the curse of a Mother; and such a Mother as the Church, which does not
curse without cause nor out of passion. For as the Scripture says: Maledictio
Matris eradicat fundamenta. Eccle. 3.11.
The malediction of a Mother does root out the foundatio^s. 4. Having thus
praefaced against the authority of the Council of Trent, you come nearer to the
matter, giving us a new definition of a Sacrament, to wit, that it is a seal
witnessing to our consciences that God's promises are true. For as you say, God
by his word declares his mercy, and seals and assures it by his
Sacraments, and in the word we hear his promises, in the Sacraments we see
them. Out of which you infer Baptism and the Lord's Supper, to be proper
Sacraments, because in them the element is joined to the word, and they take
their ordinance from Christ, and are visible signs of an invisible saving
grace. In which words is contained another far different definition of a
Sacrament having noe manner of connection or dependence upon the former. Out of
which again you infer that the other 5. beside Baptism and the Eucharist
are noe Sacrements; not Confirmation; because it was not instituted by Christ;
not Penance and Order; because they have noe outward element; not Matrimony
because it was before Christ's time, and is common to, Turks and infidells;
neither do you see forsoothe how it can be a holy thing, and yet forbidden, as
it is to Priests. And from this you tell us that if the curse of the Council
take place, then Woe to all the ancient Fathers: of whom you name these
following, Ambrose, Austin, Chrysostom, Bid, Isidore, Alexander of Hales,
Cyprian, Durand, and Bessarion. This is your discourse.

5. To which I answer. That for your formet definition it is a senseless
one, without ground in any father, Lib. 1. de S^t^r. in genesis cap. 14. and 16.
or other author but only Kemnitius and Calvin, and which is largely refuted
and proved most absurd by Bellarmine to whom I remit you. For how can the
Sacraments be seals, or give us a^^urance of his words, when all the assurance
we have of the Sacraments is his word: this is idem per idem. Besides what
promises are these that are sealed; or if they be seals what need we more
seals or Sacraments then one: or if there may be more why not seven as well
as two? Again how do we see the promises of God in the Sacraments? when a man
has received the Sacrament of Baptism, what other assurance has he that his
sins are forgiven or that he is the Child of God and heir of his kingdom,
then the word of God promising that virtue to the Sacrament, or how can any man
see by the Sacrament that he is so? these are but foolish fancies bredd in
haeretical brains; and so to be contemned. For your other definition it is
not much better, being Melancthons; Vbi supra*
related and refuted by Bellarm. which therefore I leave, and answer only
that which you say, that two Sacraments have the word and element and ordinance
of Christ. The other 5. not. For Confirmation and Extreme Unction you cannot
deny the element and word to wit oil and the form: but you deny the ordinance
of Christ. For proof of which and other particulars, it will be too long to
stand upon it in this place, you may see Bellarmine and others namely Suar. who
beside scriptures brings irrefragable proofs of ancient Popes of the
Primitive Church, Councels, 3. p. to. 3. disp. 32.
and ancient Fathers. And for Halensis and one Divine or 2. more which may say
somewhat to the contrary they are not to be heard against the whole torrent of
Fathers and Doctors. Though even these acknowledge them true Sacraments and
instituted by Christ, for as much as pertaynes to the effect or promise of
grace annexed to them, though not for the outward ceremony and words; which
they think was afterward appointed, of which I shall say more by and by.

6. For Order and Penance, you deny not the institution of Christ but you deny
them to have any outward element joined to the word. This is strange is not the
paten with an host and chalice with wine in it, which is the matter in
ordayning of a Priest, as much an outward element as is the host and wine
alone, in the Sacrament of the Eucharist? a man would think So, and a little
more too: and so of Penance, is not the true sorrow of heart declared by
humble confession together with Prayer Fasting or alms deeds enjoined for
satisfaction, an outward eleme^t or thing to be perceived by our outward
senses? Why not then matter for a Sacrament? so also the bodies of man and
woman, are they not as much an outward element in the Sacrament of Matrimony as
water in Baptism? but you say it was before Christ. What then? might it not
be a natural contract before and yet after be exalted to the dignity of a
Sacrament by Christ. Water had the use of washing from the beginning, might not
Christ therefore give power unto it to cleanse our souls, and exalt it to the
dignity of a Sacrament? the same I say also of bread and wine: but say you
again if it be a holy thing, why is it forbidden to some men? I ask you
again wheter Order be not an holy thing? You will not deny it. If it be why
then is it forbidden to all women? which shows the ridiculousnesse of your
discourse. You must know then all good is not for every body: and in good there
be degrees of comparison as well as in other things; Marriage is good but of an
inferior rank, and not so agreeable to the high state of Priesthood, or
religious Life. And so to offer Sacrifice is a good thing indeed, and too
good for Lay men to exercise, as we see by the reprobation of Saul, for
presuming to do it, and Ozias his Leprosy wherewith he was stricken by the
hand of God for presuming to offer incense in the Temple. 1. Reg 15.2. Paralip.
26.19.
Why then may not these be Sacraments? by the way you note in the margent that
Vazquez acknowledges Matrimony to be noe Sacrament properly, citing a place
after in this your own book, which I shall answer there, and discover your
notorious falshoode.

7. Now to the curse whereof you will make the Fathers guilty, as well as your
self. I answer first, that of these Fathers which you name, two, to wit
Halensis and Durand are ordinarily counted among the Schoolmen, not among the
Fathers, as also Bessarion, who lived little more then 150. years since.
Secondly that though it be true that the Fathers upon several occasions
mention the Sacraments severally, sometimes they mention two, sometimes three,
sometimes 4.5. or 6. more or less, as the particular matter which they handle
gives occasion: yet never did any man say there was only 2.3.4 etc. Show this
if you can Sir Knight, and you say something: else all is but babbling that you
talk of the Father's mentioning 2.3. or 4. etc. And this answer has been
often made, and cannot be impugned; to which yet you stand still repeating
your frivolous objections over and over again, without replying upon the
answer, or even taking notice thereof. For a chief part of your discourse in
this. is but taken out of Chemnitius, Bell. lib. 1. de Sacram in genesis cap. 14.
as may appear by Bellarmine in his controversy de Sacramentis in genere,
where he answeareth all the arguments fully, which shall therefore save me some
labor; so as I shall not need to do more then point at somethings briefly,
and discover your own proper corruptions.

8. Well then you tell us the Saints Ambrose, Augustine, Chrysostom, and Bid
teach, that out of the side of our Savior when the blood and water issued upon
the cross, there came out the Sacraments, Baptism and Eucharist. Which I do
not see to what other purpose you bring but only to insinuate thereby as if in
their opinions, there were but two Sacraments. To which I answer that true it
is, that some Fathers interprett the blood and water issueing out of our
Sauiour's side to signify those two Sacraments: but yet you are best look in
your friend Chemnitius from whom you borrow this argument whether he cite all
these Fathers for this explication: I do not think you will find S. Ambrose
and Bid there, for S. Aug. it is true he explicateth it so in some places;
and otherwise also in others, as I shall show after. But for that place which
you cite here I am sure he has nothing of two Sacraments only, or of any
number of Sacraments at all, but only thus in general. Aug. in Io. tra. 15.
De latere Christi in cruce pendentis Lancea percusso Sacramenta Ecclesiae
profluxerunt. Out of the side of Christ hanging upon the cross smitten with a
spear issued the Sacraments of the Church. Which words may as well be verified
of seven as of two Sacraments. But be it as you say, that all the Fathers
explicate that scripture of the two Sacraments Baptism and Eucharist. What
then? Do they say that they were then instituted, or that there were noe more
Sacraments instituted, or that other Sacraments did not issue from thence also?
noe such matter. All they say is only, that those two Sacraments came from our
Sauiour's side simbolically or significatiuely, to wit the water signifying
Baptism, the blood the Eucharist. But now other Fathers as I touched before to
wit Saint Ambrose, Saint Hierome, Saint Cyril, S. Leo, Bid, and even S.
Augustine in another place say that both blood and water did signify but one
Sacrament only, to wit Baptism, either of blood by Martyrdom or water: or
rather that they did signify but only the Baptism of water. The water of our
Sauiour^s side signifying the Sacrament it self, and the blood signifying the
origin or well spring from whence the Sacrament has all his force and
efficacy. Which explication Bellarmine well shows out of scripture it self
to be more literal: Bell. lib. 2 cap. 27.
Shall a man therefore say there is but one sacrament? he might truly as well
say so and better too, then to say from thence that there be but two.

9. And whereas you say a little after again, that S. Ambrose writing a
treatise of Sacraments divided into six books, makes mention but of two. I
would wish you to see what answer Bellarmine makes to Chemnitius, making the
same objection; you shall find there that he tells him flatly it is false,
as it is indeed. For S. Ambrose makes express mention of the Sacrament of
Confirmation both in that book de Sacramentis, and in the other, de ijs qui
mysterijs initiantur. And withal gives the reason why S. Ambrose mentions
noe more but three Sacraments, to wit, because his intent in that work, is
only to instruct the Catechumens in those things which are to be done, at the
time of Baptism, for to them he writes those books, as the very title of
the one and matter of the other shows. For one is written to the persons that
are initiated, that is begun or are entered into Christianity by the mysteries
or Sacraments, the other of the Sacraments whereby they were so initiated,
which are those three Baptism, Confirmation, and Eucharist, which to people
that are come to years of discretion before they are made Christians, were and
are still to be administered together. Whereby is also discovered your gross
corruption in saying that S. Ambrose proclaims to the believers of his age.
Ambr. de Sacram lib. 1. cap. 1.
De Sacramentis quae accepistis sermonem adorior: Which say you is as much to
say, as I speak of those Sacraments which the Church has taught and declared
unto you. For he neither writes to the believers of his age, but only to some
beginners as I say is manifest by the very title of one of the books; Neither
does he speak of the Sacraments which the Church has taught and declared, but
of the Sacraments, which those beginners that he spoke to had newly received,
as these very words which you bring testify: wherein there is not the least
mention of the Church, nor of any general doctrine of Sacraments; but only of
those which as I said they that he spoke unto had received. Which to be so may
yet more plainly appear in that Bellarmine brings a most express authority
for the Sacrament of Penance out of this same holy Father. Bell. lib. 2. de
Sacr. cap. 24


10. Now for S. Aug. it is noe less clear, that he never meant, in any of
those places where he speaks of two Sacraments, to restrain them to two
only, for thus he says in one. Conc. 1. in Psalm. 103.
Respice ad munera ecclesiae, munus Sacramentorum in Baptismo, in Eucharistia,
and in caeteris sanctis Sacrame^tis. Cast thine eye to the gifts of the
Church, the gift of the Sacraments in Baptism in the Eucharist, and in the
rest of the holy Sacraments By which words it is clear, that in S. Augustines
judgment there were more holy Sacraments besides Baptism and Eucharist and not
only one or two more, for they had been easily added, but more; as that
general clause of the rest of the Sacraments does import: and not Sacraments in
a large sense, but Sacraments in that very sense, wherein those two by him
named are called Sacraments as the word caeteris does show. Neither does that
place which you cite out of the same Father, lib. 3. de doctrina Christiana
avail you, where speaking of the Sacraments of the new Law as you tell us he
says that they are but few in number, easy in performance, excellent in
signification, naming only the two Sacraments of Baptism and Eucharist. Ep.
118.
For it is plain by the words sicuti, that he brings those two for example
only which does noe way restrain the number. Besides this holy Father
repeating the very same saying almost word for word in another place when he
had brought those two Sacraments for example as he does here he adds this
general clause and siquid aliud in scripturis canonicis commendatur, and if
there be any thing else commended in the canonical Scriptures. Which shows
also that he did not mean to restrain his speech to those two only. Neither
is his intent in either of those places, to number the Sacraments, or even to
speak of Sacraments as Sacraments but as they are only Signs; co^paring the
signs of the new testament with those of the old; and preferring them for
fewness in number, and excellency in signification: And therefore S. Aug. his
word in this place is not Sacramenta, Sacraments, as you cite him, but Signa,
panca pro multis and Signs, which therefore is a corruption of yours.

11. This may then serve for all such testimonies either out of S. Aug. or any
other Father. Only that it may not seem strange why there should be such
frequent mention of these two above the rest, which might give suspicion as if
they were the only Sacraments. I add this reason thereof: to wit, because
they are the first, most common and most necessary Sacraments. The first
because Baptism is called the gate of all the Sacraments, and by it men enter
into the Church, and become Christians. With which the Eucharist was also wont
to be given. And though Confirmation be next in order after Baptism, yet was
it not so frequently given, because it is ordinarily administered only by a
Bishop, who is not always so ready at hand; whereas the other two are
administered by Priests. They are the most common, because they pertain to all:
as also Confirmation does; and therefore in that respect goes often with them.
They are most necessary because. Baptism is absolutely necessary or as Divines
say necessary necessitate medij; that is a necessary mean, without which a man
cannot be saved, the Eucharist is necessary by another kind of necessity, to
wit, of praecept or command given by our B. Savior all which considerations
together are not so easily found in any other of the Sacraments. Confirmation
also was in those times necessary by force of an ecclesiastical praecept or at
least custom.

12. Another of the Fathers which you bring is S. Cyprian reckoning but five
Sacraments: Ser. de ablut. ped.
and among them our Sauiour's washing of his Disciples feet for one. Whereto I
answer that he reckons but 5. not that he thought there were no more, but
that it pertained not to his purpose to speak of more in that place: his scope
being only to speak of such Sacraments as had relation to our Sauiour's last
supper, by way of institution, blessing of the matter, or some connection at
least with some thing which was then done. As the Sacraments of Eucharist and
Order which were then instituted; of Confirmation, because the matter thereof
that is Chrisme, was then blessed; of Baptism and Penance by occasion of our
Sauiour's washing of his Disciples feet. Which washing in what sense it is
called a Sacrament by this author, Lib. 2. de Sacr. cap. 24.
(be he S. Cyprian or whosoever else) you may see in Bellarmine and there find
sufficient answer. He saying that it is called a Sacrament not in a proper
and strict but a large sense only: wherein as I agree with him, for so much
as perteyneth to the washing it self, so do I think that if a man read the
place attentively, he shall find that author by that washing to mean the
Sacrament of Penance, in a strict and proper sense. For he gives unto it the
same power of remitting of sins, as to Baptism. He says it was instituted
for such sins, as men should fall into after Baptism; which he says cannot
be iterated; which are the proper attributes which we teach to belong to the
Sacrament of Penance. Whereof that author making a long discourse I cite only
these words following for a sign of his meaning. Propter hoc benignissime
Domine pedes lauas discipulis quia post Baptismum quem sui reuerentia iterari
non patitur, aliud lauacrum procurasti quod nunquam debeat intermitti. For this
most benign Lord thou do wash thy disciples seete because after Baptism
which may not be iterated for reverence thereof, thou hat procured another
lauer which must never be intermitted. By which it seems plain he does not
mean that that washing was a proper Sacrament it self, but that it did
signify another thing which was to take away sins after Baptism, which was
to be a sacrament, because it was to be instituted by our Savior; it was to
be a lauer, and to have like force as Baptism, all which shows it to be a
true Sacrement.

13. Besides S. Cyprian you will needs bring S. Isidore, with in compass of the
curse for say you he accounted of 3. Sacraments, to wit Baptism, Chrisme, and
the body and blood of Christ. citing his 6. book of Etymologies. chap. 18.
wherein Sir Humphrey according to your usual custom you do notably abuse this
holy Father. For in that place he does not so much as intend to speak of any
Sacrament at all: but his only intent is to treat of the names of certain
feasts, as the title of the chapter shows which is this De festiuitatibus and
eorum nominibus. Of Feasts and their names; among which he putted Coena
Dominica. Our Lord's supper. Which (says he) is so called because upon that
day our Savior did make the Pasch with his Disciples which is celebrated even
to this day, as has been delivered; and the holy Chrysme is made therein.
These are S. Isidor's very words, neither has he one word more in all the
chapter of any Sacrament. Where then is there any mention of Baptism? nay
where is there any mention of our Sauiour's institution or celebration of the
B. Sacrament but only that S. Isidore says that the celebration of the Pasch
is observed to this day. Which because it cannot be understood of the Paschal
Lamb, gives us cause to think that by our Sauiour's celebration of the
Paschal, he understands the institution of the B. Sacrament which is now
daily co^memorated in the Sacrifice of the Mass. The chief or most clear
mention here is of Confirmation, by the name of Chrisme, as it is ordinarily
signified by ancient authors. But all this that is said, is not said by way of
delivering any doctrine concerning Sacraments, but as they have relation to
such a feast. Is not this the^ a notorious abuse of S. Isidor's authority? But
because you shall see plainly that if he accidentally or for some special
reason make mention of those. 3. Sacraments as it is like he may do as other
Fathers, Isid. de offi. Eccles. lib. 2. cap. 16. and cap. 23. cap. 19.
are also wont, that therefore he does not mean to limit the whole number of
Sacraments to three, I will putt you down one place where he mentions two
more, of which there may be most doubt, to wit Penance and Matrimony For
Penance, he makes it a Sacrament and compares it with Baptism in these
words. Sicut in Baptismo omnes iniquitates remitti, ita poenitentiae
compunctione fructuosa vniuersa fateamur deleri peccata: vt hoc tegat fructuosa
confessio quod temerarius appetitus aut ignorantiae notatur contraxisse
neglectus. Let us confess that as in Baptism all iniquities are forgiven,
so all sins are blotted out by the fruitful compunction of Penance: that
fruitful confession may cover what temerarious desire or ignorant neglect has
contracted. Where you see how to compunction and confession joined together in
this Sacrement he gives the like power of blotting out sins as to Baptism.
And for Matrimony he says the three goods or perfections thereof are fides,
proles, Sacramentum. Fidelity, offspring, Sacrament. Where beside the fidelity
or mutual obligation which has ever belonged to Marriage before our Sauiour's
time, and still belongs among Infidels, though the obligation be not so
perfect among them, he puts down that special perfection of a Sacrament,
though for this word Sacrament perhapps you may wrangle; but it is but
wrangling, as I shall by and by show by occasion of S. Austines like use of the
same word. But by this that has been said of the Fathers, it is plain that
noe words can be sufficient to declare your exorbitant bad dealing in citing
the Fathers in this place, and drawing them with in compass of the Councel's
curse; they being so far from it. For it does not command that whenever a
man names one Sacrament he shall name all or that he shall say they are seven
in number nor more nor less, or that he shall say they were instituted by
Christ. But that noe man shall say against this, as indeed not one does. For
not one of all those you name says that there be not Seven or that there be
more then Seven, which is the thing that you dare So boldly say contrary to
the most sacred authority of so great a Council as that of Trent, then which
greater is not to be found or imagined upon earth. And this might serve for
the Fathers.

14. But before I have done with them in this point, I must in a word take
notice of one frivolous thing whereof you make a great matter and whereby you
think to avoid all that can be said out of the Fathers, for the proof of 7.
Sacraments; which is, that they use the word Sacrament in a general
signification for any sacred sign, or for a mystery, and such like: Wherein
you are very copious to noe purpose. For we deny it not: but only we deny that
which you would build thereupon to wit that therefore they do not at any time
use the word Sacrament in the strict and proper sense when they speak of our
other 5. Sacraments which you deny. This I say we deny, as a false fiction of
yours and your Ministers whereas you confess the Fathers to use the word
Sacrament strictly and properly, when they speak of Baptism and Eucharist, we
show that they use the same word and in the same sense when they speak of the
other Sacraments joining them with these two, as I showed before out of S.
Augustine where he having spoken of those 2. Sacraments adds and the rest of
the holy Sacraments: Where any man of common sense may see he means
Sacraments in the same sense: neither do we ever gather any of them to be a
Sacrament out of the general word alone, unless there be something to limite
the signification thereof, or that there be something added which shows the
proper effect of a Sacrament and which cannot be done without it. And in this
manner Sir Humphrey you shall find plain and express proofs for every one of
these Sacraments out of S. Augustine in Bell. which S. Aug. you cannot deny to
be a good and undoubted author. Bell. de sacr. in genere cap. 24.
Wherefore I cannot but dread to think of that fearful curse which you draw
upon your self in the beginning of this Paragraph: Where you are content the
anathema shall fall upon your head if any man alive shall prove out of any
ancient Father or good author within a 1000. years after Christ that there be
noe more nor noe fewer then 7. Sacraments. For though S. Aug. do not say there
be 7. in actu signato, as Scholars speak: that is saying there be 7. and noe
more, yet he does it in actu exercito, as by saying this is a Sacrament, and
that is a Sacrament, and of one in this place, of another in that place, (as
the holy scripture does of the 9. quires of Angels,) which all make up seven
and noe more. Which manner of reckoning you are content with and allow for
good. And indeed cannot disallow, (for as Bellarmine says well, that is the
Fathers manner of writing such things. page 149. edit. 3.
) So long as we show the word Sacrament to be taken in a strict sense, or that
some other circumstance does show they speak of a Sacrament properly.

15. Now because you love malediction so well, that you may be sure of it, I
will cite you two places out of S. Aug. for two Sacraments which you most doubt
of, and one specially wherein there may be most difficulty. These two are
Confirmation and Matrimony. lib. 2. cont. liter. Petelia. cap. 104.
Of the former he says thus. Sacramentum Chrismatis in genere visibilium
signaculorum sacrosanctum est sicut ipse Baptismus. The Sacrament of Chrisme in
the kind of visible signs is holy, as Baptism it self. By which words it is
most plain that Confirmation is a visible sign holy in the same kind as
Baptism. And therefore leaving noe place of doubt they need noe further
explication. Of Matrimony the same Saint speaks in one place thus. In
nostrorum nuptijs plus valet sanctitas Sacramenti quam foecunditas vteri. De
bon. Coniug. cap. 18.
In our marriages or in the marriages of ours, that is of Christians, the
holiness of the Sacrament is more worth then the fruitfulnes of the womb. And
in another thus. cap. 24.
Bonum nuptiarum per omnes gentes and omnes homines in causa generandi est, and
in fide castitatis; quod autem ad populum Dei attinet, etiam in sanctitate
Sacramenti, per quam nefas est etia^ intercedente repudio alteri nubere. The
good of marriage among all nations and all men is, or consists in generation,
and fidelity of chastity; but for as much as pertains to the people of God,
also in the holiness of the Sacrament; whereby it is utterly unlawful even
upon bill of divorce to marry to another. Which two places do evidently
convince marriage in Christians to be a Sacrament not only because he uses
the word Sacrament (which though it be general, yet considering the particular
circumstances, and that the common use was most to take it for a Sacrament
properly, might be some argument) but by reason of the sanctity, and by reason
of the signification and insolubility; insoemuch as this Saint makes the
proper difference between our marriages and those of others, to be by reason
of the insolubility of our marriages, which this Saint attributes properly
thereunto. For the sanctity or holiness then it is manifest out of S.
Augustine against you Sir Humphrey that marriage among Christians is an holy
thing, and that it has some perfection in the new Law instituted by Christ,
which it had not before, both which things you deny, to belong thereunto and
therefore exclude it from the number of the Sacraments, but falsely as you, see
which is enough against you.

16. Now this sanctity cannot consist only in the signification of the
conjunction between Christ and his Church. For it had that from the beginning,
Genes. 2.24.
when it was first said erunt duo in carne vna. They shall be two in one flesh.
Which because it is verified by the carnal copulation of man and woman bound
together by the band of mutual society, may be found in all marriages, though
nothing so perfectly as in Christian marriage. But this shows that seeing
this signification might be in other marriages, the sanctity which S. Aug.
says is proper to our marriages, cannot consist in that signification only,
but there must be another sanctity; and a sanctity which may have relation to
the persons, which cannot consist wholly in that absolute insolubility which in
Christian marriages as Divines say, is an effect of the Sacrament. For our
Savior by his own words Math. 19.9. shows that that was in some sort
natural and belonged to marriage even from the very beginning of the world.
Wherefore it follows clearly out of S. Aug. that there is some sanctity
belonging to this Sacrament and sanctifying it, in as much as pertains to
this conjunction of man and woman by the bond of Marriage: and here in this
saying of S. Aug may be noted those three goods, which I spoke before out of S.
Isidore; and which Catholics commonly attribute to marriage. Proles, Fides,
Sacramentum. Whereof the former two may pertain as S. Augustine says to other
marriages: the third only to Christians. And so all being cleared which you
have out of the Fathers, I come to the Schoolmen and other authors.

17. And first I begin with Bessarion, whom you will needs have accursed by the
Council of Trent, together with the Fathers. For saying we read of two only.
(Or as you say in another place) of only two Sacraments which were delivered
us plainly in the Ghospel. But I must tell you Sir Humphrey that in the
alleging or translating of these words you are bold to use your ordinary
tricks of legerdemaine, as I shall show. Bessarion's words in Latin as you
your self cite them in the margent are these. Haec duo sola Sacramenta in
Euangelijs manifest tradita legimus. These two Sacraments alone, or only, we
read manifestly in scripture. Which is a very true saying: for it is nothing
more but this, that we find these two Sacraments expressly delivered, and that
we find none other or none of the rest so delivered; that is plainly. Whereas
the meaning of it as you translate is far otherwise, to wit that there be but
only two Sacraments in all. For first you leave out the demonstratiue pronoune
(haec) making the speech more general, as if Bessarion did say there were but
two Sacraments; whereas he does not speak any thing that way in these words,
of the number of Sacraments in general; but restrains his speech to these two
in particular; which rather imports, that there be other Sacraments. For if
one should say these two men came this way, or these two horses belong to me;
would not any man gather that there were more men besides those two that came
this way, and more horses besides those two that I say belong to me. For
otherwise it were needless to add this determining or distinguishing pronoune
(these) unless, there were other things of the same kind, from which they are
to be distinguished. Secondly the word (Sola) you place in a certain odd and
crafty manner, to make the sentence sound as if there were two Sacraments, and
no more. For you put it before the word (Sacraments) whereof it follows that
the negation included in the word (Sola) falls upon the word (Sacraments) as
if there were but two Sacraments or two and noe more; whereas it is to fall
upon the words (express tradita) expressly delivered; that is to say, that
these two Sacraments and none other are expressly delivered, which is another
thing. Neither will it serve your turn to say, you place it in English as it
is placed in the Latin: for the placing of words just so in English as they
are in Latin may many times alter, and many times also make noe sense at all:
and in translation the sense is chiefly to be reguarded. Thirdly you putt in
the pronoune relative (which) of your self, and change the participle
(tradita) in to the verb (traduntur) whereby of one proposition, you make two,
in this manner we read of two only Sacraments, that is of two and noe more;
which two are expressly delivered in the Gospel. Whereas Bessarion makes but
one proposition: in which one also, his intention is not so much to affirm
these two Sacraments to be expressly delivered, as you make it, as to deny the
other Sacraments to be expressly delivered; as shall farther appear by his own
words. Here then in this little sentence of not past a line in length, you
co^mitt 4. faults: besides one which I pass over as not so much altering the
sense. One, in leaving out (haec). Another in putting in (quae). a third in
changing the word (tradita) into (traduntur) thereby making 2. propositions of
one. A fourth in so placing (sola) in the English, as quite to alter the
sense; thereby making affirmatiues of negatiues, and negatiues of affirmatiues.
The least of which in as much as it alteres the sense, cannot be excused from
corruption: especially seeing it is by you expressly intended: for you say that
Bessarion concludes with the Protestants, and for proof you bring his words
thus translated, which shows that you intended his authority should sound
so, as if there were but two Sacraments as you teach, whereby you would lead
your Reader into an error. Which yet you do in such a manner, that I cannot
say but that a wary and careful Reader, may pick out, or at least guess at
Bessarion's true meaning. But that is your cunning to have a double sense, the
one to deceive the simple, and another to excuse your self against the
obiectio^s of the learned. But you should remember Sir Hum. there is a Woe in
store for such cunning men. Eccles. 2 14.
Vae duplici cord, and labijs scelestis et manibus malefacientibus, and
peccatori terra^ ingredienti duabus vijs. Woe to the double of heart and wicked
lips and hand ill doing, and to a Sinner going on the earth two ways. In
which last word of going two ways is touched this your cunning in this place.
Though if you examine your conscience well, you may find your self guilty of
all the particulars of this sentence.

18. But now to Bessarion I answer, that in saying that the two Sacraments of
Baptism and Eucharist, are the only Sacraments expressly delivered in
scripture, he comes not near the curse of the Council. For that canon does not
command us to believe that these two, or more or less, are delivered plainly
or not plainly in Scripture: it leaves that to the disputation of Divines:
only it will have us believe there be 7. Sacraments that they were instituted
by Christ, that they are all properly Sacraments against which Bessarion has
not a word: but rather much for it. For writing that Oration in defense of the
Roman Church to show that the consecration in the Eucharist, is performed by
words; he proves it by the example of other Sacraments thus. Bessar. de verb.
conse.
Hunc modum and Apostoli a Saluatore vt cr^dendum est, and ab Apostolis Sanct:
Patres postea sumentes, in singulis ecclesiae Sacramentis, quemadmodu^ materiam
propria^ sine qua nullo modo fieret quod proponitur ita etiam propriam formam
statuerunt. Quod manifestum est si quis ad Chrismatis Sacramentu^ mentem
conuerterit. This manner the Apostles receiving from our Savior as it is to
be believed, and our holy Fathers from them, as in each Sacrament they have
appointed a proper matter, without which that cannot be done which is purposed,
so also a certain form. Which is manifest, if a man turn his mind to the
Sacrament of Chrisme. By which words it is manifest, that besides the two
Sacraments which you speak of he acknowledges not only the Sacrament of
Confirmation in express terms, but the other Sacraments of the Church which
you cannot but know to be the same 7. which now we hold. But what need any
man more argument for Bessarion's belief in this point, then the Council of
Florence, wherein he was a great man; and wherein was delivered that Decree of
Eugenius the 4. to the Armenians, wherein the Seven Sacraments are precisely
and distinctly taught with the uniform consent both of the Latin and Greek
Church; so as impiety it self cannot find what to object against it.

19. Thus then having delivered Bessarion also from your Worship's imaginary
curse I come to the Schoolmen among whom you are not ashamed to promise your
Reader that he shall find as little unity as among the Fathers; which as you
say in an evil sense, as though there were not unity among the Fathers: so
do I yield to you in a good sense, to wit that as there is unity among the
Fathers in this point, noe less then in others of our faith, so also the
School Divines their children succeeding them have maintained this point noe
less then others, with the same unity and consent; as I shall show by
answearing your fond cauills. Though some Schoolmen out of the common
ignorance and infirmity of mankind, in some poi^ts not thoroughly discussed nor
defined by the Church, did swerve from the common belief of the rest, but
still with dew submission to the Church.

20. I begin then with Halensis, of whom you say two things: one, that he
says there are only 4. which are in any sort properly to be called Sacraments
of the new Law; and that the other three supposed Sacraments had their
beginning before. The other thing which you say out of him is, that the
Sacrament of Confirmation, as it is a Sacrament was not ordained by Christ or
his Apostles, but by the Council of Melda. This last place is cited in a
different letter as the author's own words, the former not, which to any man
may be a sufficient argument that it is but a false charge of your own Sir
Knight. For where there is a word for you, you putt it down, or where there is
but any little shadow that either by corrupting, or mistranslating you can
draw it toward your purpose: therefore any man for this very reason may take
this to be your own, and then noe doubt but it is as true as touch? For my
part I have looked in Hales in the place here by you cited, but can find noe
such thing, but rather the contrary: for he speaking of the 7. Sacraments (as
other Divines did) without the least show of doubt, and putting that question
whither Christ did institute them all, his resolution is this. Omnia profecto
authoritatiue, sed non omnia dispensatiue (vz. institutione^ a Christo
habuerunt. Hal.. 4 q 5. m 2 art. 1. deinde ar. 2.
) All indeed had their institution from Christ authentatiuely, but not
dispensatiuely. Which is as much to say, as that he did not institute them all
by himself, but that he gave the authority whereby some were instituted.
Which is clean an other matter, the^ to say they are not Sacraments, it is one
thing to enquire whither a thing be a Sacrament, and another who immediately
made it a Sacrament, though you make noe difference* For that matter whither
Hales said well or not in saying that Christ did not dispensatiuely or by
himself institute all, I shall speak now in his second place by you objected
which is of Confirmation. But before I leave this, though in the place by you
cited I find but as I tell you, yet in another not far of, where this Dr.
puts the question precisely and directly of the number of the Sacraments, I
find him give this resolution. Nec plura, nec pauciora, qua^ septe^ numero
Sacramenta Euangelica sunt. There be neither more nor fewer in number then
seven Euangelical Sacraments. Hal. par. 4. q. 5. mem. 7. ar. 2.
Which is noe less clear and plain then true and Catholic a resolution.
How then can you say Sir Humphrey that Hales makes account but of four? but
this is like the rest. But now come to the other place of Confirmation.

21. Well now to Confirmation; it is true I confess Hales is of opinion (as I
said before,) that our Savior did not appoint the matter and form of
Confirmation, but gave the grace or effect thereof in a higher manner, which he
thought like wise of the Apostles, and that the form and matter which we now
use, was appointed by the Church in the Council of Melda: which as it was an
opinion of his somewhat different from the common of his time, so he
propounded it whith doubt, and with that humility which befitteth a good
Catholic to do. For thus he says, Sine praeiudicio dicendum quod Dominus
neque hoc Sacramentum vt est Sacramentum instituit neque dispensauit, neque
Apostoli etc. institutum fuit in Conc. Meldenti, Hal p. 4. q. 9. m. 1.
quantum ad formam verborum and materiam elementarem cui etiam Spiritus sanctus
contulit virtutem sanctificandi. Without praeiudice I say that neither our Lord
nor his Apostles did institute or dispense this Sacrament, it was instituted
after in the Council of Melda for as much as concerns the form of words and
elementary matter, whereto the Holy Ghost also gave the force of Sanctifying.
This Hales says without praeiudice, that is with leave: not stiffly not
arroga^tly not maintayningly. Sir Humphrey, let us hear but such a word from
your mouth; and you shall see the matter will soon be ended. In this one word
consists the difference between a Catholic and an Haeretique: but Sir
mark the matter well and you shall find Hales more against you then for you.
For he confesses Confirmation a Sacrament which is against you, though he
thought it not instituted by Christ, because he thought a Sacrament might be
instituted only by authority from Christ; and it is plain he would sooner
have denied this later then the former. For he holds this later but
doubtfully, whereas he holds the former resolutely, and without doubt. Which
is the thing in question properly between you and us.

22. The next Divine is Hugo de S. Vict. whom you make a Cardinal out of your
ignorance, for because there is one Hugo a Cardinal you think all Hugo's are
so. But it is not for any good reason, either of love to Hugo, or honor to
the dignity but hate of religion, against which you think if you can bring the
name of a Cardinal, you may quite overthrow it. But you are as much deceived in
this, and in Hugo's doctrine as you are in his Cardinalship. You say then of
him that he excludes Penance from the number of the Sacraments, and admits
holy water. For both which Sir Humphrey a man may hold up his fingar to you,
and wagg it, you know what I mean. But your author for this your saying is
Perkins in his Problemes whom you cite in the margent, and he it seems cites
Hugo whereby you may perhaps excuse your self: but that excuse will little
avail you for every man sees how easy a matter it had been for you having
such abundance and freedom of books to look in the author himself but
only that you were willing either to be deceived or to deceive. Well I have
looked for you and found Hugo to say thus. Hug. Vict. in Spe^ul. de mist. eccl.
cap. 12.
Septem sunt principalia ecclesiae Sacramenta, quorum qumque generalia
dicuntur, quia omnibus conueniunt; nimirum Baptismus, Confirmatio, Eucharistia,
Paenitentia, Extrema vnctio, duo vero specialia, nimirum Matrimonium and Ordo:
There be Seven principal Sacraments of the Church whereof five are called
general, because they belong to all, to wit Baptism, Confirmation, Eucharist,
Penance, Extreme unction; and two special, to wit Matrimony and Order. And
because you may less doubt of Penance whereof for thus abusing your author and
Reader you deserve noe small part, he has a particular chapter; cap. 23. vbi
sup.
wherein he calls it as we do with S. Hierome, the second board after
shipwreck. Because if any man says Hugo endanger his clensing, which he has
received by Baptism, he may rise and escape by Penance. How say you to this Sir
Humphrey? have I not just cause here to tell you your own? but I forbear you.

23. Extreme unction is next, of which you tell us that Bellarmine says that,
that anoyling which the Apostles used Mar. 6. was not Extreme vnctio^, and
that Caietane says the same of the anoyling which S. James speaks of. p.
Iacq. 5.
Likewise of Hugo, Peter Lombard, Bonauenture, and Altisiodorensis; You say
that they held it was not instituted by Christ. Well what of all this? be it
so that one think it not to be mentioned in S. Mark, another not in S.
James, others not to have been instituted by Christ. What then? Does therefore
any one of all these deny it to be a Sacrament? nay do they not all say and
maintain the contrary most expressly? and which is more, do not you your self
out of your friend Cassander acknowledge that in Peter Lombard's time the
number of seven Sacraments was determined, though not before, as out of the
same Cassander you wisely say? For Hugo Vict. as I showed before determines the
number of seven Sacraments somewhat before, Peter Lombard's time; but to let
that go: if in Peter Lombard's time there were seven Sacraments acknowledged,
then was Extreme unction one. But you will say that out of that which those 5.
ancient Divines say, to wit, that it was not instituted by Christ, it follows
that it is noe Sacrament? I answer, had you lived in their times, they would
have denied your consequence. But had they lived now in yours, they would have
said that Christ did institute it. For that is now defined, which then was not:
and so for them you are answered. Now for Bellarmine he says well, it is not
deduced out of that place of S. Mark, what then? out of noe place else? or if
out of noe place else but by tradition should it be noe Sacrament? What
arguments are these Sir Knight to convince a Catholic, or any man of learning
withal? but Catetan you tell us says it is not that which S. James speaks
of? what then? Suppose he say well and truly? Does he therefore say it is noe
Sacrament? noe surely noe more then he denied the Sacrament of the Eucharist to
be the true body and blood of Christ, though he thaught the real presence not
to be sufficiently proved out of the very words of Consecration, without the
interpretation of the Church: but as both in one and other he did err for as
much as pertaines to the proof of those articles out of scripture, which is
not so much the matter between you and us, so did he not err for the things
themselves. But had he lived to see this sense of the scripture declared, and
this verity of Extreme unction defined out of: hat place of S. James by the
interpretation of the Council of Trent, Conc. Trid Sess. 14. de extr. vnct. c.
1.
he would have submitted his judgment.

24. As for the Sacrament of Order, you say that Soto tells us, that
Ordination of Bishops is not cruely and properly a Sacrament. Well be it so,
let Soto say so; Does he deny the Sacrament of Order in the Church? others
deny the four lesser orders to be Sacraments and some deny Sub-deaconship to
be so: what then? Do they deny the Sacrament of Order in the Church, to be
properly and truly a Sacrament as you do? this is boys play Sir Humphrey.
There is a question among Catholics concerning the Episcopal power and
character, whither as it is distinct from Priesthood it be a Sacrament of it
self, whether there be a new: character or the same extended and the like: some
say I some say noe: what is this to you? it is not matter of faith, whereof we
are not to dispute with you but keep you off at the staffes end, or rather out
of doors. When you are once received into the Catholic Church we may admit
you to speak of a School point: not till then.

25. Lastly about Matrimony you make much ado. First you tell us Durand
denies it to be a Sacrament strictly and properly. To which I answer that
he says indeed it is not a Sacrament univocally agreeing with the other six,
which comes much to one, with what you say, neither will I stand with you for a
small matter: but look in Bell. for answer, Bell. lib. 1. de Matr. cap. 5.
who handles that matter of Durand largely lib. 1. de Matr. c. 5. I only say
briefly that all acknowledge an error in him and Divines of his own time did
note it for such, though then the matter were not so clearly defined.
Secondly you say Caietan says the prudent Reader cannot infer out of the
words of S. Paul Ephesians. 5. Sacramentum hoc magnum est; that Matrimony is a
Sacrament, he does not; be it so Neither do we infer it upon that word
Sacramentum, but does Caietan deny it to be a Sacrament because it is not
inferred from that word? Noe surely: What then do you bring him? for though it
be not inferred from this place may it not be inferred from another; or if
neither from this nor the other may it not be deduced out of Tradition? Thirdly
you say that for a conclusion our own Canus tells us that the Divines speak
so uncertainly of the matter and form of Matrimony, that he should be
accounted a fool who in so great difference of opinions would take upon him
to establish a certain and known doctrine: Canus says rem aliquam certam.
Which you translate a certain and known doctrine. Which you might as well and
as easily, have translated any thing certain, and more truly; though this be
but a small matter to stand upon: only I note it because I see your drift is
from the diversity of opinions; which is among Catholic Divines in assigning
the matter and form of Matrimony, wherein Canus says it were a foolish thing
for a man to take upon him to determine any thing for certain and clear; Your
drift I say is to make your Reader believe that Canus says the doctrine of
Matrimony's being a Sacrament or not, is uncertain and unknown, but this is
but one of your ordinary tricks. Well to come to Canus. He says true that
there is difference among Divines concerning the matter and form of this
Sacrament but he himself makes the chieffe difference by bringing, V. Bell.
lib. 1. de Matr. cap. 7.
in a new and singular opinion of his own. By which he says that the words
which the Priest speaks are the form of this Sacrament: and consequently
that if there be a Marriage made without a Priest it is noe Sacrament in his
opinion. But whither it be true that, you Sir knight would make us think, that
in his judgment Matrimony is noe Sacrament, he shall bear witness himself.
Can. loc. lib. 8. cap. 5.
Sieve nostra opinio vera sit, sieve falsa, nihil moror. Si Lutherani de hoc
matrimonioru^ genere disceptare voluerint, intelligant se in scholae
disceptationem incidisse. Nec oportere Catholicu^ ad eoru^ argumenta
respondere. Sin vero argumententur matrimonium cum sacris caeremonijs, cum
sacra materia, cum sacra forma, a sacro Ministro administratum, quemad modum in
ecclesia Romana semper vsque ab Apostolis administratum est, si hoc inquam
argumententur Sacramentum ecclesiae non esse, tunc Catholicus respondeat
fidenter, animose defendat, secure contra pugnet. Whither our opinion (that is
his own) be true or false, I stand not. If the Lutherans will dispute of this
kind of Marriages, let the^ know they fall upon a school disputation, and that
a Catholic is not to answer to their arguments. But if they argue that
Marriage administered with sacred caeremonies, sacred matter, sacred form, and
by a sacred Minister as it has ever been administered in the Roman church,
even from the Apostles time, if I say they argue that this is not a Sacrament
of the Church, then let a Catholic answer confidently, let him defend
stoutly, let him gain say securely. So he.

26. Now Sir knight with what face could you allege Canus against Matrimony;
and that for a conclusion as you say? though I say noe; for you have reserved
yet a far louder lie to conclude with all. Which is concerning Vazquez whom
here you honor with an epithet, calling him Our learned Jesuit. You say then,
he knew well that neither modern Divines, nor ancient Fathers did conclude
Matrimony for a true and proper Sacrament of the Church; and then you say he
makes a profession to his Disciples, that having read and considered S. Aug he
found that when he called it a Sacrament, he spoke not of a Sacrament in a
proper sense; and that therefore he does not allege S. Aug. his authority
against the Haeretiques in this controversy; this you say here, whereto I will
putt your marginall note which you have page 145. which has relation to this
place, and it is this. Vazquez acknowledges Matrimony to be no Sacrament
properly. Now to sever the true from the false. Vazquez indeed says that S.
Aug. speaking of Matrimony does use the word Sacrament, but in a large sense;
This is true but it is but Vazquez his private and singular opinion not in a
point of faith, nor any thing near it: but only of the meaning of one Father
in the use of a word; which if it be taken in such a sense is a good proof for
a point of Doctrine, if not it is noe proof against it; but there may be other
proofs in the same Fathers, and other Fathers may hane that very word, in in
the proper sense. But even this opinion of Vazquez concerning this word of S.
Aug. is contradicted by all other Catholic Divines, Bell lib. 1. de Matr.
cap. ^^.
and Bellar. particularly by diverse good reasons shows S. Aug. to use this
word properly when he speaks of Matrimony. This is all that is true in your
saying of Vazquez.

27. Now I come to the false; first asking you a question, if Vazquez say
Matrimony is noe Sacrament, as your marginal note which I spoke of before
says, I would know what controversy that is that Vazquez says he has with
Haeretiques; and for proof whereof he does not bring S. Aug his authority of
the word Sacrament; because in his judgment it is not effectual? what think
you Sir Humphrey? is it not of Matrimony? and what controversy is it but
whither Matrimony be properly a Sacrament or not? Which Haeretiques deny, and
Vazquez affirms, else he can have noe controversy with them about it. See Sir
Humphrey how you look about you, for in this very place and words which you
bring to show Vazquez for you, he shows himself against you, besides Sir
Humphrey look again in Vazquez to. 4. in 3. p. and so whether he have not
one whole disputation expressly for the proof of Matrimony, calling it a
Sacrament truly and properly, proving it by the definition of the Church, and
by the authority of other Fathers, (though he forbear to use the authority of
S. Augustine for the reason a fore said) and reproving Durand's error for
saying that it was not a Sacrament univocally with the rest. Nay his express
conclusion concerning the same is this. Vazque de Matr. disp. 2. cap. 3.
Matrimonium est Sacramentum non solum latiori significatione, pront est signum
coniunctionis Christi and ecclesiae, fed press and proprie prout est signum
gratiae sanctificantis suscipientes, sicut reliqua sex. Matrimony is a
Sacrament not only in a larger signification, as it is a sign of the
conjunction of Christ and the Church, but precisely and properly, as it is a
sign of grace sanctifying the receivers as the other six. And because you tell
us, that he knew well that neither ancient nor modern Divines did conclude it
for a true and proper Sacrament of the Church, I will add his other words in
the same chapter, which are these. De Sacramento in hac significatione, semper
hucusque loquuti sumtis; and Scholastici loquuti sunt; etc. quam veritatem
Graeci semper crediderunt, and nunc etiam credunt. And of a Sacrament in this
signification always hitherto we have spoken, and other Divines have spoken;
which truth the Graecians have ever believed and still believe. So as not
himself only but other Divines also, and even the Greeks or Greek Church, not
only do believe and speak, but have believed and spoken of Matrimony's being
a Sacrament in the proper and strict sense. Which considered what intolerable
impudency is it in you to tell us, that Vazque should say that neither modern
Divines nor ancient Fathers did conclude Matrimony for a true and proper
Sacrament? it were not to be believed of any man but that we see it. And with
this I was thinking to end this. Thereby to leave a good relish in the
Reader's mind of your honest and faithful dealing. The rest being nothing but
such foolish stuff, as you are wont to talk without rhyme or reason but only
that there occurred a place of Bellarmine, which you abuse so strangely, as
that I could not pass it over without noting. It is thus.

26. You say touching your two Sacraments they are known and certain, because
they were primarily ordained by Christ, touching the other five, they had not
that immediate institution from Christ. Whereupon say you the learned Card.
noting Bellarmine in the margent is forced to confess. The sacred things which
the Sacraments of the new Law signify are threefold the grace of justification;
the passion of Christ, and aeternall life. Touching Baptism and the Eucharist,
the thing is most evident concerning the other five it is not so certain. So
say you: where in a few lines you have so much falsehood so patched up
together, that a man knows not well what to begin with. But to begin, you say
your two Sacraments are known and certain, you mean known and certain that
they are Sacraments, because ordained by Christ primarily, the other 5. not.
And for proof you bring the Cardinal, as if he said the same. But in this
place the Cardinal speaks not one word, either of their being or not being
Sacraments, or being or not being instituted by Christ; as these very words
themselves do show, and any man may see more plainly in Bellarmine himself
both here, and elsewhere, where he handles those matters: teaching the
contrary expressly and of purpose. What madness then is it for a man to say the
Cardinal is enforced upon a thing that he dreameth not of to confess clean
another matter? Now Bellarmines meaning in that place, is only of the
signification of the Sacraments, that is, what thing they signify: because they
are sacred signs of something. And he says they signify three things, one
thing past; to wit, the passion of Christ: another present, to wit, sanctifying
grace which they work in our souls: another thing to come, to wit, aeternal
life, which is the effect of grace; which three things he says, every
Sacrament does signify. And he says it is certain that they do so signify.
But withal that the signification of these three is not so express and alike
apparent or known in all. But most apparent in Baptism and the Eucharist, not
so apparent in the rest. Which last words being in Latin thus. De alijs
Sacramentis non estita notu^. Of the other Sacraments it is not so known, (to
wit that they signify all these thing;) you translate or rather corrupt them
thus. Of the other 5. it is not so certain. Notum, with you, is certain. And
whereas the oppositio^ in Bellarmines saying is between known and not known,
Bell. de sacr. in genesis lib. 1. cap. 9.
you make it between known or appare^t; and certain, which are not opposite.
For a thing may be certain though not manifest, as all matters of faith are.
And then you leave out that which Bellarmine says of the certainty thus. Tamen
certum est saltem implicit illa omnia significare; quia cum omnia significent
gratiam, consequenter etiam significa^t principium and finem eiusdem gratiae.
But it is certain that they signify all these things at least implicitly.
Because seeing they signify grace, they consequently also signify the beginning
and end of the same grace. That is the passion of Christ, which is the cause,
and aeternal life which is the effect of grace. Whereby it is evident how
shamefully you abuse this good Cardinal and so I end this.

Communion in both kinds.. 5.
1. In this. Sir Humphrey begins with the 6. article as he calls it of the
Roman Creed. I confess that under one kind only, all and whole Christ, and
the true Sacrament is received. And the Decree of the Council of Consta^ce
which says, that notwithstanding Christ did institute in both kinds yet the
Laity are to communicate in one kind. Which word notwithstanding the Knight is
pleased to gloss thus. As it were in despite of God and Man. with which he
joins the Council of Trent saying thus. Although our Savior did exhibit in
both kinds, yet if any man shall say, the holy Catholic Church was not
induced for just causes to communicate the lay people, and the non-Conficient
Priest under one kind to wit of bread only, and shall say they erred in so
doing, let him be accursed. Against this he brings two places of scripture
and the practice of the primitive Church, and so concludes the antiquity and
universality of his Church. This goes round with a fiddle Sir Humphrey. But
now you must take us along with you, and give us leave to comin with you a
little upon the matter.

2. This you say is the 6. article of our Creed: by which a man may see I said
true in the beginning, when I told you (if it had been your good pleasure so
to do) you might have divided this Creed into 24. articles as well as into
12. for this is but a little libbet in the very later end of that article, as
you have put it down in the beginning of your book. Which piece also you
translate out of the Latin falsely, and absurdly the Latin being thus, Fateor
etiam sub altera specie totum atque integrum Christum verumque Sacramentu^
sumi. I confess also under one kind only to be received Christ whole and
entire, and a true Sacrament. Whereas you say all and whole Christ; as if the
Council had said omnis and totus Christus: where the word all is improper; for
who speaks thus: all Peter, all Paul: and it importes as if Christ had many
things pertaining to him, which were himself; but yet did not make one and the
same thing with him: which is not imaginable how it can be; whereas totus
Christus does signify One whole Christ. And Omnis Christus, and totus Christus,
to any man that understands Latin, are two weary different things. And in
your translation you confound totus and integer; making them both to signify
the same; whereas in the Council they have a several signification; totus
pertains to the integrity of Christ, as consisting of essential parts of body
and soul, and of his personality and Divinity; and integer pertains to the
integrity of all the parts of his body, as head, hands, feet etc. which the
Philosophers call parts integrantes. By this then you see how a man that were
disposed to stand about you might trouble you, when in such a small thing as
this there may be found so many faults.

3. For the Council of Constance which you are so displeased withal, for
contradicting the word of Christ as you conceive; me thinks there might be
found a means to appease your displeasure, if you would but remember that at
the same time, and in the same decree it was also declared, that
notwithstanding that Christ, did institute the Bl. Sacrament after supper, yet
men should now receive it fasting: which decree I presume you will not
condemn. Neither will you (I dare say) gloss the words notwithstanding so
favorably in your own behalf, as you did in ours; as in despite of God and
Man you would receive your communion fasting, though Christ did receive it not
fasting, but even after supper and bid us do, what he did in remembrance of
him: and notwithstanding also that it is not to be doubted as you tell us out
of Bellarmine, but that is best and fittest to be practiced which Christ
himself has done? Do you not then see Sir Humphrey how you may be made
friends with the Council of Constance, seeing it has done you as good a turn
as it has done to us. But because I see not how you could but know this
before, and therefore have erred as I may well say wittingly this is too
freindly language to talk to you, therefore I answer you plainly in
bringing this Decree this you have brought a staff to beat your self withal.
For the non obstante, which you would join with Christ's institution in both
kinds, as if the Council did forbid it in both kinds notwithstanding that
Christ did so institute, is not so joined by the Council: but otherwise, thus
though Christ did institute this venerable Sacrament after supper, Conc. Constable.
sess. 13.
and administer the same to his Disciples under both kinds of bread and wine,
yet this notwithstanding the authority of the holy canons and approved custom
of the Church has observed, and does observe, that this Sacrament is not to be
consecrated after supper; nor to be received by the faithful but fasting;
Unless in case of infirmity or other necessity allowed by the law or Church.
These being the very words of the Council. By which it is plain that the
Council speaks not in this place of the institution of this Sacrament in one
or both kinds; but only of the time of the institution thereof or manner, to
wit after supper, or not fasting, and of the administration thereof to his
Disciples in both kinds at the same time. So as I see not how you can be
excused from a notable and wilful corruption in citing the words of the Council
often and upon several occasions thus. Though Christ did institute in both
kinds the Council having noe such word, and it being likewise noted by
Bellarmine for a flat corruption in Luther, V Bell de Euch lib. 4. cap. 26.
Illyricus, and Che^nitius. Though if the Council had said so, it had said
truly, but nothing to your purpose. For it is one thing to say that Christ did
institute the Blessed Sacrament under both kinds and another to say that he did
institute and co^ma^d all should receive under both kinds. For this later is a
command against which noe man may do. The former is only the Example of
Christ which every man is not always bound to follow. And which even you your
selves do not follow in the time and manner of your receiving.

4. Now for us you must know, this was noe new thing begun by that Council,
(in which respect you might temper your choler against it,) but it being
grown the general practice which from the beginning also was somewhat
practiced, and certain Haeretiques arising and condemning the practice and
belief of the whole Church this Council condemned them and commanded the
former custom to be still retained. This is the truth of the matter against
which I do not see that you say a word, but only chafe and say this Council
was approved for so much as pertains to the Doctrine againct Haeretiques,
but not for that that pertayneth to the power of a Council over a Pope. Which
is all against your self, and shows you are in a vehement passion and know
not what you say. But since you are so out with this Council which yet makes
as well for you as for us in the point of receiving fasting and not after
supper as Christ did, noe wonder if you be wholly out with the Council of Trent:
which therefore you cite in a strange manner to disgrace it.

5. The sentence as you cite it, is this. Although our Savior did exhibit in
both kinds, yet if any shall say the holy Catholic church was not induced for
just causes, to communicate the Lay people and the non-Conficient Priest under
one kind, to wit of bread only, and shall say they erred in so doing, let
him be accursed. Which sentence is peeced out of two several places of the
Council, the former part contained in these words. (Althouhg our Savior did
exhibit in both kinds yet.) is taken out of the 3. chap. of the 21. Sess. the
later part or rest, is the 2. canon of the same Sess. which canon as it is set
down in the Council has neither a (Yet) in it, nor an (Althought): and the
(Yet) in the said 3. chapter infers another thing, thus. Though Christ did
institute and deliver the Bl. Sacrament to his Apostles in both kinds, in the
last Supper, Yet is Christ contained whole and entire under one kind, and a
true Sacrament received. Which is another matter, then that which is commanded
in the Canon. For in this is only taught, that Christ is wholly and entirely
contained under one kind: in the Canon, there is a curse denounced against such
as shall condemn the practice of communicating under one kind, as wanting just
cause or being erroneous. Where besides the difference in the matter, there is
great difference in the manner. The one being a plain definition of a
speculatiue truth; the other being a command pertaining to practice, or a
declaration of the Lawfulnes of the Churches practice, condemning whosoever
shall say against it. So as here you piece two several matters out of the
Council together without any connection, just as you are wont to do, in your
own arguments and discourses. But in this a man may see your ill dealing for
you would feign make it seem as if the Council did decree something in
opposition to Christ, and accurse all such as should do as he did. But this
device of yours, is as silly as it is malicious. For it is plain to any man
that shall but look in the Council, that there is noe such matter intended or
said but all the contrary; for the Council says but this, in the one place.
That though Christ did institute this Sacrament in both kinds and so give it
in his last supper to his Disciples, that yet he is whole under each kind.
Wherein I would feign see what opposition the subtility of your wit can find?
what reason can you give, why it may not stand with Christ's institution in
both kinds, that he be whole under both? and if whole why not also a true
Sacrament? This is a point worthy of such a wit as your to work upon: So as
in this the Council decrees nothing against Christ. Noe nor in the other part
neither, it being only a defense of the Catholic Churches practice, against
Haeretiques; without reference to Christ's institution or command, which is
neither for, nor against that practice.

6. So as when I consider how in this place you first mention Christ's
institution, and then bring the Canon of the Council, as it were contrary unto
it, I cannot but wonder what it is you mean, or what absurdity it is that you
would make the Council guilty of thereby. For though the Council should say
thus, as it does not. Though Christ did institute in both kinds yet it is
lawful to receive in one: what absurdity were there in this so long as Christ
does not command us to receive in both, as he did institute, which you will
never be able to prove. For Christ may institute a thing without commanding it.
For example he did institute Marriage yet commanded not every man to marry, so
he might do also in his manner of institution and our manner of receiving this
Sacrament. But besides this your abusing the Council by patching up one
sentence out of several places you offend in another kind. For whereas the
Council says that though Christ in his last supper did institute the Sacrament
in both kinds, and so give it to his Apostles, you leave out that of the last
supper and that of the Apostles both which were putt down there for very good
reasons, and to our purpose. That determining of the time of the last supper
leaves it free for us to think, that Christ might at some other time after
his resurrection, communicate some of his Disciples in one kind, as some
Fathers think he did his two Disciples at Emmaus, or at least thereby did
foreshew the lawfulnes of Communion in one kind, as Suarez shows out of S.
Aug. and others. Suar. 3. p. to 3. disp. 71 sect. 1.
That word of the Apostles is likewise put down to show that, that particular
fact of Christ and command, did pertain only to the Apostles, who were then
ordained Priests; and in them to such as should succeed them in that office;
whereas you by leaving out that word, would feign have it seem as if that of
both kinds did pertain to all. Thus much then for the Council of Trent.

7. Now let us hear what you say against this Communion in one kind. First
observing your strange folly in saying that one that shall hear two Councels,
one accursing, another condemning for Haeretiques, such as shall deny the
lawfulnes of one kind, would gladly know the reasons: whereas you your self
note in the margent a treatise of Gersons against the haeresy of the Lay
communion in both kinds acknowledging that he shows the causes. For if he show
cause why do you call for (...), as if there were none given? if he do not
why do you say he does? But to let that pass with the rest of your non
sequiturs. You bring the two places of scripture before cited. Drink ye all
of this: and do this in remembrance of me. Which places you may see answered
in Bellarmine with all the enforcement and urging that Luther, Calvin,
Kemnitius, Melancthon, Bell. de Euch. lib. 4. cap. 24.
Brentius, and all the rabble of them can bring: The answer in a word is this,
that the former words were spoken only to the Apostles, and in them to
Priests, as appears more plainly by S. Mark who shows all which our
Savior meant of, Mar. 14.23
when he said Drink ye all of this. For says S. Mark and they did drink all
thereof. The later words import only the distribution in one kind, being
spoken as appears by S. Luke immediately after the consecration of the bread,
Luc. 22 19.
before the consecration of the Chalice. And though they should have been
spoken after both, How will you prove to which action of our Saviors (for he
did more then one at that time) that pronowne (Hoc) had relation, or which it
did demonstrate? The sense therefore and explication thereof, is to be taken
from the Fathers and Church who understand noe such precept in those words, as
is the giving of both kinds.

8. Another argument of yours is the practice of the Primitive Church; for
which you bring ten or eleven authors, which needed not. For we would have
granted you that, without all that labor, but what proue^^ out that? that all
must do so now? You must first prove it a practice grounded upon some divine
praecept indispensable, or else it follows not, but that it is in the power of
the Church to alter the practice in the use and administration of the
Sacraments: as it was to change the Sabbath into the Sunday; though the
observing of the Sabbath were a divine praecept; Nay you must prove that it was
general, so as none did or might do otherwise; but that you cannot do. For
Bellarmine even in the place here cited by you teaches that even then all did
not receive in both kinds; and here by the way I note two things: One is that
whereas Bell. in the place here cited, says he proved before, that all did
not receive in both kinds; that of the proving you leave out, putteing a little
line, which might give a man some notice of something wanting; which yet is a
little better dealing, then commonly you use, though not so good as you
promised us at first. Another that whereas Bell. brings six maine reasons
deduced out of scriptures, partly out of the figures of the old testament, and
partly out of the doctrine and examples of our Savior and his Apostles in the
new; and in one of those reasons which is deduced out of the practice of the
Primitive Church, he brings six several rites or practices, which our
adversaries cannot deny, evidently conuincing the frequent use of one kind, you
in your 7. Sect. here before bring but one coniectural place (which I there
promised to answer) as if Bellarmine had noe more, nor noe better proofs:
even which conjecture you neither do nor can impugn. For it is grounded upon
two places of scripture, thus Bellarmine says it is a probable conjecture that
the Nazarites among the first Christians in Jerusalem did communicate in one
kind: Bell. lib. 4. de Euch. cap. 24.
He proves it thus one scripture says of these first Christians in
Jerusalem, that they were all perseuering in the doctrine of the Apostles, and
breaking of bread, which is the receiving of the Eucharist as all agree. Among
these, there were many Nazarites, as it is most probable, for there were many
continually among the Jews. Which being so, there was another scripture that
did forbid a Nazarite to drink wine, or even eat a grape, raisin, or so much
as the stone; it was not like then that they did receive in both kinds. For
either they must make the former scripture false, if they did not communicate
at all; or they must break the command of the later, by communicating in both
kinds. This Bellarmine does not say is a conuincing proof, for such he has a
great many others; but only probable and such noe man can deny it to be. Why
then should you stand geering at it, without once saying what is false or
improbable.

9. Touching the rest of your authors which you bring for proof that it was
the common practice of the Primitive church for the Layty to communicate in
both kinds, I allow of their authority they affirming only that it was the
practice, not any command. But for as much as you bring one authority to prove
the more conueniency of Communion in both kinds quite contrary to the author's
meaning, I mean here to have a saying unto you for it: this author is Ruardus
Tapperus whom you cite thus. It were more convenient the communion were
administered under both kinds, then under one alone, for this were more
agreeable to the institution, and fullness thereof; and to the example of
Christ, and the Fathers of the Primitive church; R^ar. Tapp. (...) 15.
the Latin being thus habito respectu ad Sacramentum eiusque perfectionem,
magis conueniret sub vtraque specie fieri communionem, quam sub altera tantum,
hoc enim magis consonum est eius institutioni, and integritati, and refectioni
corporali, and exemplo Christi etc. that is. If we reguard the Sacrament, and
the perfection thereof, it were more convenient to have the communion under
both kinds, then under one. For this is more agreeable to the institution
thereof and the integrity and corporal resection, and the example of Christ
etc. Where first you leave out in your English translation, those words habito
respectu ad Sacramentum though you put them in Latin in the margent. Which
words are the life of the sentence, and plainly show that Tapper does not
speak of the conueniency absolutely, and all things considered, but in some
respect, to wit, in respect of the Sacrament, or in respect of the
signification of our Sauiour's passion, which is more express in both kinds
then in one; and in respect of the institution, which was in both, and in
respect of the integrity, because as the Divines say, both the Species, are
parts integrantes, as two pieces of bread in one loaf though both together
have noe more essential perfection then one alone. And in respect of corporal
refectio^, which as it requires meat and drink, so the spiritual refection
is more expressly signified by both; though noe less effectually performed by
one. So that this while Tapper speaks not of the absolute conuenie^cy, but
only in some respects: wherein I appeal to the Reader whether you have kept
your promise of not wilfully or wittingly mis-citing or mistranslating any
author. For here it appears how you have mis-tra^slated, leaving out as a
man may say the principal verb: which shall yet more appear by that which
follows immediately in the same author, which is this. Alia tamen
consideratione reuerentia vz. Quae huic Sacramento dbetur, vtque in eius vsu
vitemus omne^ ^^reuerentia^, minus conuenit, atque etiam malun est, nulloque
mod^ expediens ecclesiae vt populus Christianus sub vtraque specie
communicaret. B^^ in another consideration, to wit, of the reverence which is
dew to this Sacrament, and to the end we may avoid all irreuerence, it is less
convenient and even it is ill and noe way expedient for the Church, that the
Christian people should communicate under both kinds. Lo you Sir Humphrey, was
it honestly done of you to leave out this being the other half of the
sentence, answearing to the former which of it self was imperfect, and which
was the authors absolute judgment and determination. Can any man ever give you
credit more? but because Sir I will not leave any scruple in any man's mind
concerning this authors meaning, and that by the perfection and integrity which
he spoke of in the former part of the sentence, he did not mean the want of
any spiritual fruit, I will add one word more out of him, which is this. In
omissione calicis nullu^ interuenit peccatum, aut periculum nec aliquod gratiae
spiritualis iactum, in the omitting or leaving of the Chalice, there is noe
sin, or danger, or loss of any spiritual grace. What could he say, or we
desire more?

10. Wherefore to come to your conclusion which you draw out of that, that
because many Fathers and learned men do agree in saying, that the Communion in
both kinds was most frequent in the Primitive Church, therefore they give
testimony of your doctrine, it is most foolish, for we also agree with them in
the former, and yet deny your doctrine which is, that all men are bound to
receive in both kinds, and consequently that it is not lawful for the^ to
receive it in one kind and that so to receive it, is to receive but an half
Communion, and such like absurdityes. This is your doctrine for proof whereof
you have not brought one word out of any author, but brought some that say
absolutely and expressly the contrary, as Val. Tapper, Bell. etc. Nay what will
you say, if a man shall show you out of your own statute Laws made now in
this your time of Reformation, some approbatio^ or allowance of the Communion
in one kind, 1. Edw. 6. cap. 1.
which is the thing you exclaim so against us for. See in the Laws of K.
Edw. 6. revived and confirmed by Q. Elizabeth. whether they do not say only
that the Communion is to be commonly delivered and ministered to the people,
under both kinds; 1. Eliz. ca. 1.
and vith this exception also, unless necessity otherwise require. Look you
Sir Humphrey, is it not here allowed upon necessity, though the necessity be
not expressed, what or how great it must be; but hence it follows that if
particular necessity may excuse in a particular case, if the necessity shall
prove great and universal it may be also sufficient, for abstayning from one
kind universally or generally: and howsoever it shows Communion in both kinds
not to be so strictly commanded by Christ. For if it were noe necessity could
excuse it in one Kind.

11. And so this might serve for this matter; but that I am loath to let pass
a worthy saying of yours in the very end of this. Which is this. And as
concerning the half Communion which is received in the Roman Church for an
article of faith, as it wants antiquity and consent of Fathers by their own
confession, so likewise it wants a right foundation in the Scriptures, which
an article of Faith ought to have. Thus you: where with your worships good
leave, a man may tell you, you have as many faults as words; we teach all the
contrary, to wit, that it is not half communion, but that Christ is received
whole and entire, and a true Sacrament, and as much spiritual fruit necessary
to salvation in one kind as both, as the Council of Trent by your confession
defines. We say it neither wants antiquity, nor consent of Fathers as you
may see in Bellarmine and many others. We say it does not want a right
foundation in the Scriptures; for as I said before, we prove it out of the
scriptures, V. Bell. lib. 4. de Euch. cap. 24.
both of the old and new testament, the doctrine and example of our Savior.
And his Apostles, expressed in scripture. We say also to conclude therewith,
that it is most false of all which you take every where for a very truth, as if
it were agreed upon on all sides, to wit, that an article of faith must have
sufficient and express proof of scripture. Whereas the clean contrary is
truth: and as generally concluded among all Divines and Fathers, as you boldly
affirm yours which assertion therefore of yours I here absolutely deny, once
for all, and though I need not stand proving it being every where in all our
authors, yet for the Readers sake I will cite one place of S. Jerome coming
first to my memory, who having proved a point of faith against the Luciferian
Haeretiques out of scripture which they stood upon, he answeareth thus. Et
etiam si sacrae scripturae authoritas non subesset, Dialog. 2. con. Lucifer.
totius orbis in hanc partem consensus instar praecepti obtineret. And although
the authority of holy Scripture were wanting, the consent of the whole world on
this side should have the force of a praecept. And so there is an end of this
5..

Of Prayer and service in a known tongue.. 6.
1. In this. the Knight speaks against the practice and doctrine of the
Catholic Church in two things. One is for using the public service in a
tongue not known to the vulgar people, another for saying some part of the
Mass with a loud voice, so as the people cannot hear. The practice of which
two things (though the Knight confound them into one) was severally and
distinctly approved by the Council of Trent, and anathema pronounced against
whosoever should condemn either of them. Against which notwithstanding he
begins with the Councel's own authority, thinking also even by it to make
good the contrary practice of his Church. For says he, the Council in saying
that the Mass does contain great instruction of the faithful people, or as
he translateth the words of the Council in the beginning of this. great
instruction for the common people. And that it is to be interpreted unto them,
does consequently affirm that the service and prayer in the reformed Churches
in the vulgar tongue, was better for the aedification of the Church: and this
he co^firmes with an argument of his own thus. And without doubt (says he)
the Apostles being commanded to show forth the Lord's death till his coming, it
was not intended to show it to the walls, or in a silent and unknown voice, as
it is now used in the Roman Church, but to pronounce it openly to be heard
and understood of the hearers. So far our Knight. Now to reckon with him.

2. Because the Council of Trent says, that the Mass contains great
instruction of the people, and that for that end it is to be interpreted unto
them, he says it consequently affirms the practice of the reformed Churches
to be better for aedificatio^ of the Church. Does it so Sir Humphrey? by what
Logic does this co^seque^ce follow, or by what figure of Rhethoricke do You
take one thing for another? the Council says that though the Mass contain
great instruction, yet it does not follow, that it should be in the vulgar
tongue, you tell us the Council by consequence does affirm it to follow; the
Council thinks it better to retain the general and long continued practice
of the Church, of not using the vulgar tongues in the Sacrifice of the Mass,
but for instruction of the people to interpret something of what is read: you
say it approves the contrary custom of your Church? if it had so, had it not
been an easier matter to have appointed it to be read in the vulgar tongue:
but the Council knew well that course was not so fit, neither in respect of
the public good of the Church, nor in reguard of the private good of the
faith-full people: for many reasons.

3. First, for the general practice and custom which has been observed in
the Church of God, of having the Mass and public office in Latin all over
the Latin or Western Church, both in Italy, Spain, France, Germany, England,
Afric, and all other places: and so likewise in Greek in the Grecian or
Eastern Church, though it were as large in extent, and had as much variety of
vulgar languages in it, as the Latin Church has. Which custom is not to be
forsaken, especially for Haeretiques, and out of that their false persuasion,
that it is noe good or lawful practice. Secondly for the uniformity, which is
fit to be used in such things, and unity of the Catholic Church, which is
excellently declared, and also much maintained by this Unity of Langage in the
Church-office. For as language is a thing most necessary for co^merce among men
in civil matters, so also in ecclesiastical: and without this use of Latin in
this manner, there could not be that communication between men of learning:
neither would me^ of one country be the better for the writings of others
there would be little meeting of men of several nations in Councels, little
study of Councels, of Fathers, and others, who have all written in Latin, or
some learned language: whereas the use of the Latin tongue in the Church is
the cause of all the contrary effects, as we see by experience. Thirdly, the
use of vulgar tongues in the Mass and Church-office would cause not only
great confusion but breed an infinite number of errors by so many several
translations, not only in several countries, but by several translations in
every country of any small extent, even in the same place upon a little change
of time: for as we see in every age the vulgar language reciueth a great
alternation; of which translations the Church would not be able any way to
judge, scripture being the hardest thing to translate of all other, and which
therefore for the well tra^slating thereof, requires the special assistance of
the holy Ghost, which noe private man can promise himself. Lastly the use of a
vulgar language in such things, would breed a great contempt of sacred things,
with prophanes and irreligiosity; besides the danger of haeresy, which comes
noe way sooner, then by misunderstanding of holy scripture. Neither are any
more apt to mis-vndersta^d it, then the simpler sort of people if they once
take upon them to understand. These reasons then among others, but most of all
the tradition of the Church, drawn even from the Apostles by perpetual
Succession and practice, might persuade the Council to think that though some
benefitt might come to some few particular men by understanding what is
written, yet it was absolutely better to retain the same custom still: and
even to remedy that inconvenience another way, to wit, by explaning something
of what is read in the Mass, which the Council declares by a similitude very
proper for the purpose, to wit, by breaking of bread to little ones: fort it is
even as necessary for ordinary people to have the Scriptures so declared, as
for children to have their bread broken, and as unfit to give such men the
Scripture it self whole to read, or to read it so unto them, as to give a
little child a whole great loaf. Neither if a man mark the Council of Trent's
words well, does it say that the Mass does contain instruction in that sense,
as if the only reading of things in the vulgar language would be an
instruction, but only that it contains great instruction, that is many
things, which might be good for the people to learn being explicated, which a
man might truly say, though even when it is in the vulgar language it cannot
be understood without help of an expositor, how then Sir Humphrey does the
Council acknowledge your practice, to be more for aedification of the people.
Nay does it not in the Canon expressly condemn it? saying anathema to whosoever
shall condemn the practice of the Roman Church in reading some part of the
Canon softly, or to whosoever shall say that the Mass ought to be celebrated
in the vulgar tongue?

4. Now for the place of Scripture which you bring, to wit, that we must show
forth the Lord's death, till his Coming; which you say is not intended to the
walls, as we do, it shows sufficiently how well you understand Scripture;
and consequently how well the common people, between whom and your self, you I
dare say think there is a great deal of difference, would understand them,
when you being even a writer so little understand them. For that place of
announcing our Lord's death, is not understood by words, as you understand it,
but by deeds, as it is most plain by the circumstances wherein they were
spoken, to wit, by consecrating and changing the bread and wine into the body
and blood of our Lord; as we do daily in the Mass, in memory of our Saviors
passion. For so S. Paul, having spoken of the institution and manner to be
observed in the consecration expressly says, as often as you shall do this,
you shall announce the death of our Lord. The doing therefore is the
announcing, not the Saving. Besides these words, at least in the manner of
speaking, do not import any command: For you shall find the word annuntiabitis
is the indicative mood, and future te^se, if you look well into your
Accidence Sir Humphrey. And withal it is somewhat conditional, to wit, that as
often as we shall do that, we shall announce the death of our Lord. Besides
Sir Humphrey I never heard before, that it was, all one to speak Latin, and
to speak to the walls: if a man should speak a word of Latin to you, were
that to speak to a wall? You see then you do not mark what you say.

5. But now you have spoken so well of your self, let us hear what you can
say out of other men. And first for Haymo, whom you cite for your purpose,
asking this vnanswearable question as you call it. If a man that knows only
his Mother's tongue stand by, or make a Sermon, or give a Blessing, how shall
he say Amen, since he does not know what thou say? So you. To which I
answer, it is true, Haymo has a question to this purpose, but not so much
to yours, if you mark him well, nor so vnanswearable, if you take him
altogether, with what he says before and after your question. For so you
shall find he does not require, that all that are by shall understand, but that
he that supplieth the place of the Idiot, or lay man in answearing for the
people shall understand: for before that Question of yours, he makes this
other first, quis supplebit vel quis adimplebit locum illius, qui te audit and
non intelligit verba tua? who shall supply or who shall fulfill the place of
him, that hears thee and does not understand thy words? Which shows that he
does not speak of the idiot or ordinary bystander, but of one that is to
supply his place, or make answer for him; which appears yet more by that
which follows immediately after your question, thus, Si non aderit alius pro
illo, sciens quid tu dicas, qui respondeat Amen. 1. Verum est, quod tu dixisti,
vel fiat ita. If there shall be none other for him (that is in place of the
ignorant man) who knowing what thou say, may answer Amen. That is to say;
it is true which thou have said, or be it so done. Which plainly shows
that in Haymo his judgment, it is sufficient if there be one understander to
answer for the rest, or for him that does not understand. Nay he does not
seem to require so much, as that this answearer shall understand all so
perfectly, but only so far as to be able to answer Amen. for this is the
inconvenience which he makes to follow thereupon, if the answearer do not
understand the language, that he does not know where the prayer ends for him
to answer. Nescit quippe, says he, vbi sermonis clausula firmatur. For he
knows not where the conclusion of the speech is ended. For which truly,
there does not need any such great understanding of Latin. So that though
Haymo think, that the Apostle speaks in that place of the public prayers
of the Church offered by the Priest, as some few other Doctors do, though not
so rightly nor so conformably to the true intent and drift of the Apostle,
yet he requires noe more but that there be one to answer Amen; which surely
may be more easily had, then for want thereof to be feign to change the whole
office of the Church in to English. And so Haymo his vnanswearable question is
without any such great ado answered. Now for S. Paul's meaning, though your
objection require it not and that it require also a longer disputation, yet not
to leave the Reader wholly unsatisfied thereof, I say in a word that S. Paul his
meaning in that place where he asks how he that understands not the prayer
shall say Amen, is not of the public prayers of the Church offered by the
Priest, which noe man can doubt of, either for the truth or goodness, and
therefore he may confidently say Amen to them, but of private prayers or
prayers made by private and Lay men ex tempore, and on the sudden not in
Latin, Greek, or any ordinary known tongue, but in an extraordinary unknown
tongue, such as men spoke by the gift of tongues, which gift was given in
those beginnings not only to the Apostles, and Preachers, but even to Lay
people and to many among the Corinthians, which they it seems grew proud of,
and used for ostentation. For correcting of which abuse the Apostle writes
here unto them preferring Prophecy, that is exhortation before tongues, and
giving many reasons therefore: among which this is one, that others that hear
that prayer in a strange Language, are not the better, nor can say Amen to it.
And this to be the Apostles drift the circumstances of the text and persons to
whom he writes plainly show.

6. After Haymo comes Justinian the Emperor, who (say you) made a
constitution that Bishops and Priests should celebrate the Lord's supper and
prayers in Baptism, not in secret, but with a Loud and clear voice; to this
Bellarmine makes two answeares: Bell. lib. 2 (...) Miss. cap. 12
one that Justinian being a mere secular man had nothing to do to make Laws
in such matters as it is most true; and you cannot but know he is ordinarily
taxed, for too much taking upon him in that kind. The other that even that Law
does command nothing more, but only that Bishops and Priests shall pronounce
distinctly and clearly, that which according to the custom of the Eastern
Church was to be spoken aloud. For says Bell. there were many as may be
gathered out the very constitution it self, who to hide their own ignorance,
did contrary to the received custom pronounce those things softly, which
should have been pronounced alowd. And this to be so may appear plainly by
the Law it self which you do not seem to have read, for you cite it only
out of your Cassander* who serves you to great steed for most of your
citations.

7. You have in the next place a text out of the Canon law, the former being
out of the Civil, to show your learning in all sciences: Cap. Quonia^ in
plaerisque de off. iud. Ord.
you cite it thus. We command that the Bishops of such Cittyes and Diocesses,
(where nations are mingled together) provide meet men to minister the holy
service, according to the diversity of manners and languages. The words are
these in Latin. Pontifices huiusmodi ciuitatem sieve dioceseon prouideant
viros, qui secundu^ diuersitates rituum and linguaru^, diuina illis officia
celebre^t, and ecclesiastica Sacrame^ta ministrent, instruendo eos pariter
verbo and exemplo: in English thus, Let^ the Bishops of such cittyes
ordiocesses, provide meet men, who according to the diversity of rites and
languages, may celebrate unto them the divine offices and administer unto them
the ecclesiastical Sacraments, instructing them both by word and example.
Whereby you see Sir Humphrey, you might have cited the place more truly,
though that be not so much the matter I cite it fully for, but for another
purpose, as you shall see, when I have told you Bellarmines answer to this
objection, which is this: that this decree speaks only of the 2. languages
Greek and Latin: for it was made by Inno. 3. in the Council of Lateran,
because Constantinople having been taken not long before by the Latins and
then there being a Latin Emperor and Patriarch and many Latins by that
occasion being mingled with the Gr^cians in the same city, they made a
proposition in the Council, that they might have 2. Bishops one Latin another
Greek; to this the Pope and Council make answer, that it is not fit to have
2. Bishops, of one city, but that the Bishops of the city should substitute
another in his room, to celebrate the divine office and administer the
Sacraments according to their own rites and language* and this Bellarm.
proves to be the true meaning of this decree, not only out of the story, but
also by the effect. For if this decree had concerned the Latin Church any way,
it should have been put in practice in some place thereof, and most of all in
Italy, in the Popes sight, but there is noe sign of any such thing, but plain
proof to the contrary. Which answer is clear and solid. But besides this
answer of Bellarmines, a man may answer also, that the Council speaks of
two things here, to wit, of celebrating the divine offices, and administering
Sacraments, and then puts two things more answearing unto those two, to wit,
rites and languages, rites answearing to divine offices, and languages to
Sacraments, as if it had said, let such Bishops provide men who may celebrate
the divine offices according to the diversity of their rites, and administer
the Sacraments according to the diversity of their languages. For indeed it is
a matter of necessity in administration of some Sacraments to use the vulgar
language, as in marriage and Penance; but it is not so of other things. For
this reason then I cited the place as it is: and though you may cavil at this
answer, yet I see not though there were noe other why it might not serve for
as good an objection as yours.

8. But now you say you will not stand proving this point any more, by citing
the particular Fathers, but you will bring our own men confessing, that Prayer
and Service in the vulgar tongue was used in the first and best ages, according
to the praecept of the Apostles; and practice of the Fathers. And then you
bring Lyra, Ioannes Belethus, Gretzerus, Harding, Cassand. and 2. or 3. more.
To which I answer that it is true, as these authors say, that in the
beginning it was so: but what think you was the reason? even because those
three holy Languages Hebrew, Greek, and Latin were most vulgar, and common:
the Hebrew in Jerusalem and the parts adjoining, the Greek in Greece where S.
Paul preached most, and Latin at Rome and other parts subject to the Roman
Empire. For if you mark it Sir Humphrey, most of your authors which you bring
speak this of prayers and benedictions being wont to be made in the vulgar
language, by occasion of that 14. Chap. of the 1. to the Corinthians where
Greek was the vulgar. And indeed that it was the vulgarnes or commonesse of
the tongue, that the Apostles reguarded most in their writing of scriptures,
and the like, it is plain, by that, that S. Paul of his 14. epistles which he
writ to so many several Nations and persons he writ only one in Hebrew to
wit that to the Hebrews; the other thirteen in Greek even that to the
Romans though Greek were not their vulgar or natural Language: and so did
all the rest of the Apostles and Evangelists, save only S. Matthew who writ his
Ghospel in Hebrew, and as some say S. Mark who writ his in Latin, though many
doubt of that, and say rather, that he writ it in Greek. Whereof what other
reason could there be, but the uniformity which the Apostles, would have to be
observed in the Church, by using for scriptures and divine Offices those
languages, which were more universal, and common to most nations, thereby to
draw all to unity. Which though it could not be so absolute, as to come to the
use of one only language, yet they restrained it to those few most universal
languages, Hebrew, Greek, S. Hillar. ap Bell. lib. 2. de verb. D^i. c. 15.
and Latin; Which were dedicated upon the cross, our Saviors title being
written in those three languages by mystery, as holy Fathers, note, to signify
that by them Christ his name and faith was to be most published and preached
over the whole world. And for proof hereof, we say it has not been ever
heard of, that any part of scripture was originally written in other language:
or that there was any Liturgy of the Apostles, or near their times, or any
translation of Scriptures in other language: much less was it ever heard, that
the Scriptures were read in the meetings of Christians, or celebration of the
divine Mysteries in other language, then that wherein they were ordinarily had
and read, to wit, in some one of those languages. Of later times we confess
there has been use of other languages, as Arabic, Chaldaick, and the like,
but yet so as that the Church has ever made choice of some one language which
has been very common to many kingdoms and Nations; not proper to any
particular province or country.

9. And here it is to be noted further, for answer of your authorityes in
this point Sir Humphrey that whereas some of our authors are of opinion, that
S. Paul, in that 14. Chap. of the 1. to Corinth. where he speaks of prayers
in a known tongue is to be understood of the public prayers of the Church
that explication is contradicted by most of our other authors; and there be
many reasons out of the very text and circumstances against it; as namely that
the men which are here reprehended for their ostentation of languages are the
People not the Priests: as appears by the whole epistle, as I noted here
before. 3. n. 5. upon another occasion; as also because this pertains to
women also, who it seems did use to speak among the rest, which S. Paul,
therefore reprehendeth as an abuse and forbids. Thirdly S. Paul, speaks of
the infidells coming in and being present at those their meetings and
conferences: Which therefore could not be of the Church office and Sacrifice
of the Mass to which Infidells were not admitted. Wherefore it cannot be of
the public prayers of the Church which belonged only to Priests to make
publicly for others in the Church: But though it were so and that some do
put themselves to more straits then they need, in interpreting S. Paul, of
public prayers, yet does it not avail you Sir Humphrey. For even those men
give a reason of difference, why now it needs not; to wit because now as S.
Thomas of Aquine, says, People are sufficiently acquainted with the
ecclesiastical rites, and men know very well what is done by being present, and
seeing, though they do not understand the particular epistles and Ghospels,
which are several according to the Sundays and holy days; but the rest of the
Mass being the same continually they understand it sufficiently for exercise
of their devotion, though not to satisfy the vain curiosity of such people, as
you breed up in the pride of an heretical spirit, to believe nothing but what
they see, and contemning whatsoever they do not see or understand: our people
know sufficiently, what the Priest means by turning to them and saying
Dominus Vobiscum, Oremus, Orate Fratres, and the like; I say sufficiently to
lift up their minds to Almighty God, to join in their hearts and minds with
the Priests in that prayer, which he makes public for them, as well as any
learned Clarke that understands the English of the words. So as our authors
by you cited help you not a whit in this matter.

10. But now because you say this prayer in the vulgar tongue was used by the
praecept of the Apostles, and practice of the ancient Fathers, I would know of
you, where this precept is expressed, either in scripture, or out of scripture,
in any author of credit? I do not find so much as any shadow of a praecept
in scripture. S. Paul in that epistle to the Corinthians which your men for the
most part stand upon, does not condemn that Prayer in an unknown tongue, as
you do; for he both says it is good, though he prefer the gift of Prophecy
before it: and also he allows the use of it, but wishing withal that some
other should interpret it; as you see the Council of Trent wishes Pastors and
Curats to do of the Mass, and mysteries therein contained. Where then is the
precept commanding a known tongue or forbidding an unknown tongue? and this I
say supposing for disputations sake two things, which are neither of them so:
to wit, that S. Paul there speaks of public prayer of the Church-office;
and that the Latin Greek or Hebrew tongues are rightly called unknown
tongues, or any way comprehended under that appellation in S. Paul.

11. Now for the practice of the Fathers which you speak of but name none I
would gladly know Sir Humphrey what Father you have whose authority or example
you can bring for your self in this matter? name him if you can. We show you
Fathers and learned men of many several nations and of different times using
the Scriptures only in some one of these 3. holy languages. For example
Italians, Spaniards, French, German, English, Polish, Africans, and others
using the Latin: and diverse ancient Fathers of several countries, as S.
Cyprian, S. August. in Afrik. S. Ambrose in Italy S. Prosper in France. Others
in other countries, citing the very words which we to this day use in our
Mass: Duran. de ritib. lib 2. cap 31. and Bell. lib. 2. de verb. Dei. cap. 15.
and 16.
as Sursum corda Habemus ad Dominum, and the like, whereof you may see more in
our authors. And yet being so destitute of all proof for your self, and so
ignorant of ours which we have in abundance, you can talk so co^fidently of
the praecept of Apostles and practice of Fathers. But you will say you bring
Lyra, Belethus, Gretzerus, etc. to prove what you say. Whereto I answer noe
such matter: for first they speak not a word of any praecept. Secondly some
witness only the practice of that time yet withal giving the reason why it
need not be so now: others speak nothing that way: for example Io. Belethus,
even as you cite him says only that in the Primitive Church noe man was to
speak in tongues unless some body were to interpret; from whence he says is
grown our custom when the Gospel is read to expound it: which is quite
against you; for he acknowledges speaking of languages which you deny, and
expounding, which according to you will not be needful. Others again speak
but doubtfully as S. Thomas of Aquine, Dicendum forte says he It is to be
said that it may be that in the Primitive Church Benedictions were used in the
vulgar language: whom yet you make to speak absolutely and certainly. Thirdly
though some say the prayers of the Church were used in a language understood by
the people yet noe man says that, that language was any of the ordinary vulgar
languages or indeed other then Hebrew Greek or Latin. Wherefore all the
authors you can bring though you should bring ten for one in this manner will
nothing avail you.

12. Now for your citation and translation of such authors as you bring I
could find many faults but I pass them over only Bellarmine I cannot let
pass because you abuse him somewhat more grossly; for you bring an objection of
his out of one place, and an answer out of another there being noe connection
or correspondence between the answer and objection as you make it, thus. It
may be objected, say you out of him, that in the time of the Apostles all the
people in divine service did answer one Amen. And this custom continued long
in the East and West Churches, as appear, etc. Which is true, but nothing to
the present purpose: for men may answer Amen, to the public prayers of the
Church without their being in a vulgar language. Neither is it the thing which,
Bellarmine obiecteth against and answeareth: but he having proved that those
prayers and spiritual canticles which the Apostles, would have to be made in
the Church in the vulgar tongue, that the people might understand and answer,
Amen, were not the public prayers of the Church but private exte^porary
devotions though in the Church with others: he obiecteth in behalf of an
Haeretique thus; you will say that as the Apostle would have those prayers to
be made in a vulgar tongue, to the end the people might answare Amen, so he
ought in like sort to wish, that the divine Office might be celebrated in the
vulgar tongue, that the people might answer, Amen. To this he answeareth
denying the consequence: because the divine Office was celebrated, in Greek,
which was understood by many though perhaps not by all, and this was enough,
for the Apostle did not desire that all should answer, whereas the other
languages which they spoke by the gift of tongues, were such many times, as
not one man there understood them, not even the speaker himself: and this was
Bell. First answer which you leaped over Sir Humphrey, Lib 2. de Ver. Dei
cap. 16.
because you saw it was a good and proper for our case: for it is the same of
our Latin and their Greek; for though all do not understand Latin yet many
do and almost every body enough to answer, Amen. Bellarmines second answer
is that which you make or rather mar by mistranslation: besides says he
because then the Christians were few all did sing together and answer in the
divine Offices: (which is a reason why it was more necessary for the people to
understand the language): but afterward the people increasing the Offices were
more divided, and it was only left to Clarks to perform the common prayers
and praises in the Church: so as though it might be then more needful for
the people to understand because they were to answer yet now it is not
because they are not to answer and sing but that belongs to Clarks. Now in
Englishing Bellarmines words besides other smaller faults, you have these two,
which I note. You say the office of public service was divided: whereas
Bellarmine says not so, but that offices were more divided, that is, the
several functions in the Church, to wit, that which belonged to Priests and
Clarks was left to them, and that which belonged to the people was left to the
people or they to it: for to them it did not so properly belong to sing and
answer, but only for that time of necessity, when the number both of Clarks
and people was but small, the other fault is, that you translate Solis
Clericis: only to the Church: whereas it is to the Clarcks alone, or by
themselves: which though it may be the same in sense, I see not why you should
take that liberty, to alter at you pleasure in the translations of other men's
words? And so much for your authors.

Honor. gemma anime lib. 1. cap. 103. Innoc. 3. lib. 3 de M^ss. cap. 1.
13. Now to come to your conclusion of this. you tell your Reader, that you will
let him understand one special cause of the alteration of the office in the
Roman Church: which is a story out of one Honorius, of certain Shepherds who
having learned the words of consecration, because in the primitive times say
you the Canon of the Mass was publicly read and understood of all, Io
Beleth. de diu. offi. cap. 44.
and pronouncing the words of consecration over their bread and wine in the
fields, the bread and wine were suddenly transubsta^tiated into flesh and
blood; and themselves stricken dead by the hand of God. Whereupon you say that
by Honorius his confession the canon of the Mass was anciently read alowd, and
which is strange say you, also, that Shepherds did transubstantiate bread and
wine, by which you tell us farther, it seems the alteration of the Church
service into the Latin and unknown tongue was occasioned: the same story you
say is told by Innoc. 3. and Io. Belethus: adding a reason withal out of them
why the words of consecration are pronounced secretly, to wit, ne Sacrosancta
verba vilescerent. Least the holy words should grow contemptible. Thus you
talk freely Sir Humphrey as if all were Ghospel you say.

14. But you must give other men for all that, a little leave to make doubt
thereof: and first you run here from one thing to another, to wit, from
service in a known or unknown tongue, to soft or loud pronouncing of the
words of consecration, or of the Canon of the Mass. Secondly you say that by
occasion of this Story which you tell us, the Church altered the service in to
the Latin, and unknown tongue: wherein Sir Humphrey you forgett your self
much: for you told us before that, that alteration was brought in by Pope
Vitalian, about the year. 666. which cannot well agree with this story of
yours: for if it were a late story near Honorius his time, that relates it,
that was near 500. years after Vitalian's time, if the story be an ancient
one as there is one some what like, which I shall by and by speak of, in the
book called Pratum spirituale then that was a good while before Vitalian's
time: for the man that writes it lived in Honorius, 1. his time which was the
6. Pope before Vitalian, and that author writes it by the relation of a grave
ancient man who knew one of the persons that were actours in this business, now
an old man, the thing having happened when he was but a boy, so that there
might very well be 80. or 100. years between the time of this story and Pope
Vitalian. Thirdly I see not why this story should cause so great an
alteration, as to change the Church-Office or Mass into another tongue: for it
might have served the turn very well to read the Canon or speak the words of
consecration softly, that others might not hear or learn them. Or if they
must be changed into an other tongue, not to be known, why into Latin the
most known tongue in the whole world: besides where this thing happened the
Church-language was Greek, which was not so common to the vulgar, which if it
did not hinder the irreuerence committed there, how should it be likely that
changing it into Latin only would hinder it here? Moreover if it did not
cause any change in the Eastern Church where it happened, why should it cause
any in the Western Church where perhaps this story was not heard of for a long
time after? And indeed let the language be what it will, any man may learn
some few words and abuse them if he will, therefore that will help little.
Lastly me thinks it had been meet for you Sir Humphrey, to have said somewhat
when this change was made, or what language it was that was used before: or
bring some author for your self; for of these 3. which you say mention the
story, there is not one that makes any mention of changing the Church-Office
into Latin upon it, but only they allege it by occasion of the secret
reading of the Canon of the Mass, which was the thing they had in hand.

15. Now for the story it self you cannot but know that it is answered by
Bellarmine it being objected formerly by Kemnitius: Bell lib. 2. de Miss. cap.
12
his answer then is, that there is such a story related by good authority in
Pratum spirituale: but there, neither the bread nor wine were transubstantiated
but consumed by fire from heaven; nor the shepherds stricken dead; but only
laid for dead 24. hours; after which they came to themselves again, which is
neither impossible nor improbable. Now for these three authors, that you cite,
none of them does relate it out of any author or with any special credit, but
only out of a report which they express by the word Fertur and therefore some
of them as Honorius and Belethus, might be mistaken in some of the
circumstance, though Innocentius be not: Innoc. 3 lib. 3. de Miss. cap. 1.
for he says noe more of it, but this, that it is reported that when certain
shepherds did sing the words in the fields, they were stricken from heaven:
which is true. Now this supposed as the story does not make any way against us,
for we grant that the words were anciently pronounced alowd in some place; So
it makes against you, who deny that any where they were spoken softly: for the
author of this story giving a reason, how the boys came to learn the words
says thus. Prat. Spirit. cap. 196.
Quoniam vero quibusdam in locis alta voce consueuerant presbyteri sancti
sacrificij orationes pronunciare, pueri vt propius astantes saepius eas
audiendo didicerant. Because in some places the Priests were wont to pronounce
the prayers of the holy sacrifice with a loud voice, the boys as standing
nearer by often hearing had learned them. Lo Sir Humphrey it was but in some
places; that they did say those prayers alowd. So that withal this labor you
have proved nothing but against your self. Well then you have failed in the
proof of your doctrine in this as in the rest withal the corruption and
tricks you can use; let us see what you do in the next.

. 7. Worship of Images.
1. This 7.. of Image-worshipp our Knight begins after his ordinary manner
with an article as he calls it of our Roman Creed, wherein we profess that
the Images of Christ, our Lady, and the Saints are to be had and retained, and
that dew honor and Veneration is to be yielded unto them; and then brings the
Decree of the Council of Trent, Sess. 25.
for the same point, in these words. We teach that the images of Christ the
Virgin mother of God, and other Saints, are chiefly in Churches to be had and
retained, and that dew honor and worshipp is to be given them. Which Decree he
might have translated a little better, and more clearly, by saying that those
images are to be had and retained especially in Churches: the Latin word being
(praesertim) and his translating thereof chiefly and placing it so oddly,
gives cause to think he had an evil meaning therein, as if he would have his
Reader think that the Council taught that these Images were the chief things
to be had in Churches, which is not the Councel's meaning, as is plain the
words being very clear in Latin. But this is but a note by the way not as a
thing that I stand upon.

2. This our Doctrine of image worship he does absolutely deny and condemn, as
a wicked and blasphemous opinion: first because it not only wants authority of
scripture, (which he says an article of faith ought to have) but because the
scripture does flatly and plainly forbid it: and in the margent cites Leuit.
26. Ex. 20. Deuteronomy. 4. Esaias. 40. This censure is somewhat deep Sir Humphrey,
upon such slight ground, because forsooth we have noe proof of scripture; for
though you think it necessary to have express proof of scripture to make a
matter of faith, yet as I said before you are much mistaken; wherefore you
ought not to stand still urging it in such manner as if it were a certain and
undoubted principle; yet this I grant you that though express Scripture be
not necessary to make a matter of faith, yet if you have express scripture
against it, it is true, it can be noe matter of faith: but by your leave none
of those places which you note, make any mention of image worship but
idol-worship which you cannot but know to be a different thing having been so
often told it, as you have been by us: therefore your first proof failing all
failleth, for though you put a First, yet I see noe second. and so much for
that.

3. But because here had been an end too soon of so good a matter: you tell
us Vazq. says, all images were forbidden so far forth as they were dedicated
to adoration, and Cornelius Agrippa, says the Jews, did abhor nothing more
then images: to the same purpose you allege Philo the Jew, speaking of the
Jews, of those times: and Sir Edwin sands of the Jews that are now adays.
Whereupon you conclude that it is agreed upon on both sides that the Jews,
never allowed adoration of images for 4000. years and from thence you descend
to the new Testament wherein you say the same law remains, because it was
moral; for though some Catholics, teach that it was a positive caeremonial
law, yet others say it was natural; and for that you allege Bellar. wherefore
the law being not abrogated, you would have some example or precept in the
Ghospel for adoration: of which you say, Mr. Fisher, acknowledges there is not
any express, but that there be principles, which the light of nature supposed,
convince adoration to be lawful. So as from the light of nature say you, an
article of faith must be declared. Well this is your discourse Sir Humphrey,
which in a word is but this. The Jews might not have nor adore images, ergo,
we may not. For asweare whereof I might say in like sort the Jews might not
eat blood nor swines flesh nor many other things ergo, we may not: but because
you may say these precepts are caeremonial and therefore not now in force the
other natural and therefore in force, for the present, I will only make this
argument to show the connection of your antecedent and consequent: the Jews
might not make any similitude or likeness of any thing in heaven or earth to
adore it for a God, ergo, we may not make or have the images of Christ and
Saints to reverence and honor them, as the pictures of Saints only, and not
Gods: is not here a good and a substantial argument trow you? and yet it is
yours Sir Humphrey.

4. But say you there was such a command of not making any images in the old
Testament which is still. True: I grant there was such a command then, but
whether it be still in force or not or how far it is in force there is the
question: for resolving whereof it is to be considered that there be two
opinions among our Divines as you take notice; of which some say it is moral:
others caeremonial: and according to both I answer you two ways; one
according to Vazq. and his authors: who say that there was such a command
indeed but that it was but for that time only, and is now expired being but
temporal and caeremonial, made and observed then in reguard of the pronesse of
the Jews to idolatry. Which if it were not so then, but that it were yet in
force as you would have it, then could not you how have your wives picture nor
she yours without breach of that command: therefore in that sense you cannot
urge it more against our pictures then we against yours. Neither can you save
your self by saying that your pictures are not dedicated to adoration as ours
are. For in Vazq. his sense they are every iott as much: as is plain by his
very words which are these that follow. Lib. 2. de ^dor. disp. 4. cap. 3. n. 76
and cap. 6. n. 98. and ^q.
Modus accommodatus adorationi est cum imago depicta aut sculpta est per se,
non veluti appendix and additamentum alterius rei in ornatum illius, etc. The
manner accommodated or fitted for adoration is when a Picture is painted or
carved by it self not as an appe^dix or addition to another thing by way of
orname^t By which rule your pictures are in state of adoration, or so that they
may be adored because they are whole and complete pictures of themselves, not
additions, ornaments or appurtenances joined or belonging to another thing: as
the Cherubins in the temple were, which he says therefore were not in state to
be adored because they were not there as complete of themselves, but only by
way of appendix or appurtenance for ornament of the arc: for hence he
infers, that all manner of pictures were forbidden even out of the Temple:
Wherefore even in Vazq. his opinion whose authority you allege you must
acknowledge this commandment to be only caeremonial, and but for that time of
the old law. For by it in this sense all making or having any image or picture
whatsoever was forbidden, which certainly is not now in force and so not
against us any way.

5. Now according to the other opinion also I may answer that the praecept
was moral; and therefore does bind still, but that by it were not forbidden all
images, but such as were made to represent false Gods, and were to be so
adored: and that therefore it is noe distinct praecept or commandment but only
an explication of the first of the ten commandments which is that we should
have noe other Gods but him; to wit, that we should not make a God to our
selves of any thing else, either in heaven or earth, making any Idol or
likeness of any of all those things to adore it. So that whether with Vazq. we
deny the very making or having of pictures or whether with Bell. we allow the
making and having them and deny only the adoring them with divine honor the
diversity of opinions helps you not one whit. Both standing very well with
the Catholic faith and both against yours: for even Vazq. though he deny the
making of pictures and consequently all adoration of them yet he grants and
proves even out of the old testament that honor and reverence might and was
given to things insensible and as little deserving reverence in themselves as
pictures so it were with reference to almighty God: as for example the arc
and Temple understanding that place of the Psalm adorabimus in loco vbi
steterunt pedes eius, Psalm. 131.7.
We will adore in the place where his feet stood, Psalm. 5. v. 8.
of the arc; as it is indeed to be understood: and that other of the Temple,
adorabo ad templum Sanctum iuum in timore tuo. I will adore at thy holy temple
in thy fear; Vazq. de ador. disp. 4. cap. 4.
and proves that ad, which I interpret, at, to be a spare particle according
to the Hebrew phrase, and that the true meaning is I will adore thy Temple. You
may find his proofs out of the hebrew if you have wherewithal to understand
him. Whereby it is clear his authority is nothing for you.

6. Now for Philo his authority it makes not against us; for he says nothing,
but that the Jews were not wont to admit any image into their Temple: and
that their ancestors did account it a wickedness to paint the invisib^e God,
or feign a representation of him, and that the work of Painters and Caruers
are the images of material Gods: this I say is not against us, for neither do
we paint the invisible God, or feign a representation of him: that is, any
picture representing his nature or deity? What is this to the decree of the
Council of Trent, allowing the pictures of Christ and his Saints: we may not
make a picture of the invisible God therefore not of a visible man? a good
consequence Sir Humphrey and fit for so good a Scholar and so wise a man as
you are: the former part of the same sentence is as much to the purpose. You
say they were not to have images in their temple; I say also not in their
howses, therefore must you have none? or if you deny the consequence, I infer
upon you again. If notwithstanding that practice, command, or be it what you
will of the Jews, you have your freind's picture in your house, may not I have
the picture of God's friend in mine? may not a man by being Gods friend, have a
much privilege as by being yours? beside what pictures could the Jews have in
their Temple? not the picture of God for he cannot be painted, not of any
Saint: for there was none as yet might have that honor to have their pictures
in the temple, themselves being not yet admitted into the heavenly temple of
God. all other pictures are profane and unfit for such a place: the people
withal were gross, carnal, and prone to idolatry, none of which reasons have
place with us. Touching the last part of Philo his saying, that the works of
Painters and Caruers are the images of material Gods: it is true, if it be
understood that the material Gods are the work of men's hands: but if he say
that all the works of Painters and Caruers are material Gods, it cannot be
true. For suppose Sir Humphrey some of your Ministers or other your devoted
Clie^ts out of the opinion they have of your worth and great desert in writing
this book of your should erect you a statua in the corner of two high ways,
pointing out your fingar to show a trauailler the way, would you think they
made you a material God? Philo's authority then is not to the purpose.

7. For the Jews now adays who, Sir Edwin Sands says, are auerted from the
Christian faith, by having the Crucifix showed unto them. I answer it is noe
wonder: they that cannot endure Christ how should they endure his cross? S.
Paul preached Christ crucified though he were a scandal or stumbling block to
their ancestors, and must we leave to preach him though their children stumble
at the same block? noe Sir Humphrey we must not cease to preach Christ nor can
we preach him without his cross. They go both together, noe man can love him
and hate his cross, nor hate his cross and love him. Wherefore you in
alleging their hate of the Cross, as an argument why you should also hate
the same, you tacitly confess you love Christ as well as they do.

8. But now for your conclusion which you infer heerevpon, that it is agreed
upon on all sides, that the Jews in the old law for 4000. years never allowed
adoration of images and (this say you) was concerning the Images of God the
Father. I see not what premises you infer it upon: nor who agrees with you
in it: you name four authors, one Catholic, one Jew, one Magician, one
Protestant; the Protestant, to wit, Sir Edwin Sands speaks not of any picture
of God the Father, as you say you mean, but of the Crucifix or image of Christ
upon the cross: the Magician to wit Cornelius Agrippa says the Jews did
abhor images; but he is noe man to build upon: be it true or false which he
says: all is one coming out of such a fellows mouth. The Jew, to wit, Philo
says that the invisible God is not painted, which we grant, as I said before,
according to his own nature. The Catholic indeed, to wit, Vazq. says that
Images in state of adoration were altogether forbidden: but yet grants the
adoration of other things of the same kind as the arc and temple, neither does
his opinion avail you for even according to it you must confess that the
example of the Jews in that is noe President for our times: but besides others
say adoration of images was somewhat allowed even then and they prove their
saying by the example of the Cherubins in the Temple, which were adored: how
then is it agreed upon on both sides? but much more I may ask how you come to
say the Jews never allowed adoration of images for almost 4000. years, when
as the people of the Jews were not such a people above 2000. years? V. Bell.
in chronolog. Moses lived about the year 2403. Christ was borne anno mundi.
3984
nay Moses lived not past 1500. before our Savior so that of your own
liberality, and skill in chronology, you have added 2500. years to make your
doctrine seem ancient. Lastly you do not mark your own impertinency and
contradiction in all this, which you have said. Your contradiction in that you
say that this which you have said is concerning the images of God the Father,
whereas your authorityes are to the contrary, to wit, of other images: your
impertinency, in that you stand bringing these things against the Decree of the
Council of Trent which speaks not of God the Father his pictures, but only
of Christ and his Saints pictures, against which they make nothing.

8. But bethinking your self a little after, you say, you will descend to see
what order was taken by Christ and his Apostles in the new Testament for
representation of him and his Saints; and all the order that you find taken, or
that you your self take, is to say, that this law of the old Testament was
moral, which though Vazq. and other Divines contradict, yet you say Bellarmine
is of that opinion. Well be it so, let it be moral, as you would have it, what
are you the better? Does Christ or his Apostles say so, or is this the order
that they have taken? if it be not, you are never the nearer? For it is but a
matter of opinion, between Divines in the Catholic Church, far from any
such authority as you promise. By which a man would have expected some evident
clear place, either of the Ghospel, or Apostolical writings, to prove that
Images were not to be adored at all, or not more then in the old law of the
Jews. But whereas this was to be expected at your hands, you put us upon it,
to bring some example or precept out of the Gospel for adoration of images:
but we say that needs not: for as in the old law notwithstanding that
command, be it moral or caeremonial, men did adore the Cherubins in the
Temple, the arc in the Temple, and the Temple it self, so may we much more
in the new adore the pictures of Christ and Saints: and this is enough without
any new precept or example.

9. Moreover we are not to be urged to this, considering we teach many things
out of unwritten traditions; and therefore there may be some precept and
example both of our Savior and his Apostles, Io. 20.30. and 21.25.
though not written in Scripture, because as S. John says, all is not written,
or rather, a very small part is written, as his words import. Thirdly we say we
have the example of our Savior and his Apostles testified both by good
authentical histories, and the perpetual practice of the Church, against which
it is insolent madness to dispute as S. Aug. says. Many great: and grave
authors make mention of 3. several images made miraculously by our B. Savior
himself: V. Durant. de rit. lib. 1. cap 5. Eusebius Eua. Procop. Adr. 1. Damasc.
Constable. Porphyragenitus. ^onar. Nicep. Pho. Niceph. Call.
one was that which he sent to Abgarus king of Edessa, who had desired to see
him: which request of his, our Savior did in some sort satisfy, by sending him
his picture: another was that of Veronica, which he made with wiping his face
as he was carrying his Cross, and gave to that devout woman that took so
much pity of him, as to give him a handkerchife at that time to wipe his face
all bedewed with blood and sweat. A third was one which Nicodemus gave to
Gamaliel; all which are testified not only by grave and learned authors but I
may say even by God himself; though not inscripture, yet by great and
wonderful miracles; whereof there can be noe doubt in reguard both of the
number and credit of the authors which report them. We have the example also
of S. Lukes painting our B. Lady, which very pictures are kept to this day, and
authorized likewise by God himself by many and wonderful miracles. Which
though you perhapps may make your self merry withal with your Ministers, yet
I hope the judicious Reader will more reguard the authority of the lest of
these authors who are not in number so few as 20. I mean for ancient
authors, then the impious scorns of a hundred such yesterday people as you
and they are.

10. As for that which you say out of Mr. Fisher that though there be noe
express practice or praecept of worshipping the image of Christ, yet there be
principles which, the light of nature supposed, convince adoration to be
lawful, it is as well and truly said by him, as that is falsely, foolishly
and impertinently which you say thereupon, that from the law of God and grace
we are come to the law of nature, and to declare an article of faith by the
light thereof. Mr. Fisher says the light of nature shows it to be lawful,
which is true: you say he declares it an article of faith from the light of
nature, which is false: there is great difference between those two; to be
lawful, and to be an article of faith; the light of nature may reach to show a
thing to be lawful, but not to make an article of faith: for that must be
grounded upon the supernatural light of divine revelation which is far above
the natural light of humane reason: though by your favor Sir Knight as
scornefully as you speak of the light of nature, it have somewhat more to do
also in matters of faith, then you are aware of. For out of one premisse
revealed, and another evident by the light of nature, there may be drawn a
conclusion of faith, or at least such as may sufficiently ground a definition
of a Council and practice of the Church: and likewise the light of nature has
place also in all the mysteries of our faith; in some showing the reasons or
congruences; in all showing that there is noe falsehood, or impossibility. And
the light of nature is the gift and law also of God. Why then should you
speak so contemptibly of it, but only that you want it in great part and
consequently know not the worth thereof.

11. But it is strange here to see how, though you cannot find in your heart to
allow the light of nature alleged for adoration of images, you can allege
it against them; but even as wisely as you deny it for them You say Varro an
heathen Philosopher by the instinct of nature professed the contrary by saying
the Gods are better served without images. The Latin is, castius Dij
obseruantur sine simulachris. Aug. 4. de Ciuit. ca. 31.
Which saying you tell us S. Aug. comendeth: and so he does indeed, but
understands him far otherwise then you do. For he does take Simulachrum not
for an image as you do falsely, but for an idol, as it is indeed, and so
commends Varro for coming nearer to the knowledge of the true God, and going
farther from idolatry, in that he neither acknowledges any Deity in those
material idols nor that multiplicity of Gods but rather allows the opinion of
them that held that God was the soul of the world: which though it were also
an error in him, yet S. Augustine says it comes nearer to truth in that it
teaches but one God and him not a material or corporal but a spiritual and
invisible substance: for proof whereof Varro alleges that for above an
hundred years the Romans had worshipped their Gods without those material
idols, which whosoever brought in, says he, did take a way the fear and
added or increased the error: he means that they that brought in those idols
took away all fear of the Gods, because men seeing those idols proposed for
Gods contemned them: and this is that which he says castius dij obseruantur
sine simulachris: The Gods are more chastely or purely observed or feared
without those idols. Now what is this against us. do not we say the same thing
much more amply, and more fully? I see not then why you should bring it,
unless it were to usher in a thing which you have out of Eusebius, to give the
reason, as you say, why these Fathers condemned the worshippers of images for
Haeretiques and Idolaters in these words. Because, says Eusebius, the men of
old, of an heathenish custom were wont after that manner to honor such as
they counted Saviors. Whereupon you say that after images had got footing
among Christians, the Bishops and Emperors by Councels and commands took
special care to prevent, both the making and worshipping them: and thereto you
bring a Canon of the Council of Eliberis, that noe pictures should be in
Churches least that which was worshipped should be painted on the walls. And
an authority out of the Civil law of a Decree made against adoration of images
which I shall cite when I come to answer it. This is your discourse Sir
Humphrey. Wherein you have given so sufficient testimony of notorious bad
dealing, especially in the 2. places of Eusebius and of the Civil law: that if
there were nothing else falsified or corrupted in your whole book, this were
enough utterly to deface all memory of you, from among honest men.

12. The matter is this, having brought only S. Aug commending Varro his
saying against Idols you say in the plural number, these Fathers as if you had
brought some great number of Fathers: and withal you say these Fathers
condemned the worhippers of images for Haeretiques and Idolaters: what words
have you brought out of any father one or other to this purpose, from the very
beginning of this. either condemning the woship of images in us Christians, or
calling us Haeretiques or idolaters for it? how then can you have the face to
say it so boldly? but we must not ask you reason for any thing you say, but
take it as you say it. Well you tell us Eusebius gives the reason why the
Fathers condemned us for Haeretiques and idolaters, which imports that
Eusebius concurreth with those Fathers in judgment, whose fact he gives a
reason for. But what if Eusebius do not condemn it, can you desire to be
counted an honest man? I presume you cannot: Well let us then see whether he
do so or not. Making mention of the City of Caesarea Philippi by occasion
thereof he relates a story of the Woman which was cured by touching the hemme
of our Saviors garment, Eus. hist. lib. 7. cap. 14.
and how coming home after her cure to Caesarea Philippi where she lived, she
made her self a brazen statua set upon a high stone before her own door as
if she were kneeling upon her knees and holding up her hands like one praying
and looking toward another statua of a man standing straight up, with long
garments down to the foot, stretching out his hand to the Woman: which statua
the people said was the Statua of JESUS. Upon the very basis or foot of this
statua, they said there grew a certain strange and vnvsual kind of herb,
which as soon as it grew up so high as to touch the hemme of the brazen
garment, it had virtue to cure diseases of every kind: Which statua Eusebius
says continued to his time and that he saw it himself. Neither is it to be
wondered, says he, going on with his discourse, that those that were sprung
of the Gentiles, and received benefits of our Savior while he lived here on
earth, did thus; seeing we also have seen the pictures of Peter and Paul
Apostles, and of our Savior himself, expressed in variety of colors, and
kept: and that, as it is like, because our ancestors ( maiores nostri which
you Sir Humphrey translate the men of old you know best why your self) would
come as near as might be to the fashion of their own people or kindred, who
were wont to honor such as had done them any benefitt or help in that manner:
by way of parenthesis I note the Latin word of heathenish custom as you Sir
Humphrey translate it, is Gentilis consuetudinis. For which you are best look
in your dictionary of Thomas Thomasius whether among all the Englishes of
Gentilis which are there set down you can find heathenish? Which I dare say
you cannot. The Greek word in Eusebius his text is (...) which signifies the
same that Gentilis in Latin, to wit, belonging to a Country, people, nation,
Stock, or family: though Scapula do add in his Lexicon that by ecclesiastical
Writers it is used to signify heathenish or auerse from Christian religion:
but it is clear that in this place the sense requires the plain and native
signification which I have expressed in the translation: though you be pleased
to draw it violently to the worse sense. But to go on with Eusebius, he says
following on the same discourse, that the Bishops of Jerusalem had
successively kept and highly esteemed the Chair of S. James the Apostle, and
first Bishop of Jerusalem. Whereby says he they plainly declare how the
ancient Fathers even to our times have given, and do still give dew veneration
to holy men, for their true piety toward God. Thus Eusebius: wherein for my
fidelity in citing and translating I referr my self to the judgment of what
Aristarchus soever you your self Sir Humphrey shall choose. And if this be true
which I say out of Eusebius, then does your creditt lie a bleeding. For does
not Eusebius relate this story of the Woman's statua with approbation? does he
not relate a continual miracle wrought by God, showing his approbation also
thereby? does he not acknowledge the use of pictures of our Savior and his
Apostles, as a thing coming from our ancestors? does not he approve that
custom of the Gentiles in keeping the statues and thereby honoring the memory
of their benefactours? does he not acknowledge the ancient fathers were wont to
honor the memory of holy men, by reuerencing those things that belonged unto
them? What say you to all this Sir Humphrey? Look now into your own
conscience, and see whether it can flatter you so much as to say you are an
honest man? Or that you have dealt truly in this citation of Eusebius?

13. Now for the Council of Eliberis, it is a triuial objection, and has been
answered an hundred times over. 3. or 4. several ways. First the authority
of the Council is little, being an obscure prouincial Council of, 19. Bishops
only, without any certainty of the time, when it was held. Neither does it
appear that it was ever approved: to which we oppose one of Constantinople:
another at Rome under Greg. 3. of 3. Bishops: a third at Nice general of 350.
Bishops whereof you may see more in Duran. de rit. lib. 1. cap. 5. Secondly it
might perhapps seem convenient at that time to forbid the use of images, in
that part of Spain, when the people being but newly converted from their
heathenish superstition, were not thoroughly weaned from it, and did not
understand the use of Images: so it may be they were forbidden for a time
only till the people were better instructed. Thirdly that Canon forbids not
pictures absolutely but only painting them on the walls: whereof there be two
reasons ordinarily given, but both drawn from the honor and veneration dew to
pictures: one is because that being a time of persecution when the Christians
were feign to fly many times they could not carry away or hide them being
painted on the walls, as they did other sacred things; but were forced to leave
them to the fury and scorn of the Gentiles another least the plaster breaking
of in some places, they might become deformed and so contemptible. Lastly it
seems plainly by the Council that it was out of honor to Images, that they
did forbid it, because they thought not the walls a place convenient. For so
it seems to say, Least that which is adored should be painted on the walls.
In which words it expressly acknowledges the adoration of images and because
they are to be adored therefore not to be painted on the walls. More you may
find in others Sir Humphrey which you if you had dealt honestly should have
replied upon, and not stood still repeating your thread bare objections as if
they were new.

14. But now for your authority out of the Civil Law there be so many foul
fauts committed by you in it that I know not where to begin, but begin I must:
your words of it are these. The good Emperors Valens and Theodosius made
proclamation to all Christians against the images of Christ in this manner.
Forasmuch as we have a diligent care in all things to maintain the religion of
the most high God, therefore we suffer not man to fashion, to grave, or paint
the image of our Savior eitherin colors, or in stone, or in any other kind of
metal or matter: but wheresoever any such image shall be found, we command it to
be taken down, assuring our Subjects, that we will most strictly punish all
such as shall presume to attempt any thing contrary to our Decrees and
commandments. Thus you praeface and cite the place. Where first you call Valens
a good Emperor; whereas he was a man far from all goodness: for he persecuted
good Catholics in most cruel manner, being him self a wicked Arrian
Haeretique, Socr. lib. 4. cap. vl^. Soz. lib. 6. cap. vlt. Theodor. lib. 4.
cap. 3. Cod. Theod. lib. 1. tit. 8. Nemini licere.
upon whom almighty God also did show his iudments by a disastrous end.
Secondly this Valens and Theodosius whom you join together in making this Law,
were not alive together Valens being killed 23. years before Theod. was borne.
For this was Theod. the younger, grand child to Theodosius the elder who came
to be Emperor in Valens his place, when he was gone. Thirdly the Law it self
is most fowly corrupted, and the meaning wholly perverted, for the Law was made
in honor of the Cross, to wit, thus. We command that it shall not be lawful
for any man to carue or paint the sign of our Savior Christ either on the
ground, or in any stone or marble lying on the ground: which to have been
meant in honor of our Sauiour's Cross and picture, appears by a Canon of
the Council called Trullanum in these words. Con^. Constable. in Trull. cap. 37.
We command that all the figures of the cross, that are made upon pauements be
taken away or defaced, to the end that the triumphant Sign of our Victory, be
not unworthily defiled by men's feet. And the very title of the Imperial Law is
this. Nemini licere signum Saluatoris Christi humi vel in Silice vel in
marmore, aut insculpere aut pingere. That it is not lawful for any man to paint
the sign of or Savior upon the ground in flint or marble. Now your leaving
out the two words humi and in solo upon the ground, is it not a manifest
corruption, both of the words and meaning of the Law? but which is more this
was a corruption of which Plessy Mourney was convinced by the Bishop of Eureux,
in that public assembly of France. And he laboring to excuse himself as
perhapps you will do, said that he did not look in the law it self, but had
it out of one Petrus Crinitus: whom you also cite here for author; which was
shame enough for him, and will be for you also, professing so much
Schollership as even to write books: and yet not to be able to take such an
authority out of the original but borrow it of another or take it upon trust,
in a matter of such moment: but withal it was urged against him that Crinitus
had been noted by diverse learned men, to be but a bold and rash Gramarian of
later times. So as Plessys was foiled on all sides, not knowing which way to
turn himself. And Suthcliffe after him again undertaking the defense of the
same cause, was worse foiled: and yet after all this Sir Hum. you are not
ashamed to take up this notorious corruption again and vent it to the world,
as if it had never been excepted against but were so authentical and good,
so free from exception, as nothing could be more. May not you then bear away
the bell from all lying and corrupting fellows that have ever gone before you?
where is your great promise of sincerity? nay where is your shame? but I say
noe more this is enough I suppose. Now by this any man may see whither I have
not discharged my self of my promise, and whither I may not henceforward when
I take you tripping tell you, you Lind it?

15. Having then thus notoriously discovered your falsehood Sir Humphrey I hope
it will not be hard to persuade the Reader the same in other places hereafter
which I must pass over more briefly, for it will be to long to stand upon all,
there being not that place in the whole book, that is not either falsely, or
impertinently alleged. But to go on with you; you say you forbear to cite
the particular Fathers, that opposed and condemned the worship of images in the
Primitive Church only you will make it appear by the confession of our
learned Romanists, that we want Visibility of the ancient Church. You forbear
to cite the particular Fathers, Sir Humphrey? I cannot blame you there is good
cause why? to wit, because you cannot; for if you could, it had been as easy a
matter to have cited one Father or two, as 8. or 10. obscure and unknown
authors: filling two whole leaves with their authorityes partly false, and
partly impertinent: as I shall show, but what Romanists are these trow you,
whose confessions you bring? you have 10. authors whereof there be only two
free from exception, V. Bell. de scrip. verb. Hincmarus Rhemansis.
to wit, Agobardus and Peresius who are not against us. Hincmarus is a
Catholic indeed but that place by you cited is noted of manifest error, not
in matter of Doctrine, but in matter of fact, which he relates of the Council
of Francfort falsely; being mistaken, as our authors show: and as I shall
after declare more. See Exam of Fox his Calender.
Nicolaus Clemangis and Polydor Virgil his work by you cited, marked in the
Roman Index: though I shall show you to abuse Polydore egregiously: besides
Clemangis himself is a Wickleffian haeretique. Cassa^der, Erasmus, Cornelius
Agrippa, Wicelius, every man knows what goodly and learned Romanists they
are, and of what account. The last of your Romanists is Chemnitius in his
Examen of the Council of Trent, as good a Romanist as your self: who tells
us it is not to be found that any of the Patriarchs and Prophets for Fathers
did adore images but that the scriptures cry out to worship one God and him
only to adore and glorify: and that the Fathers of the Primitive Church did
forbid the adoration of Images, as he says, appears by Epiphanius and
Augustine who reckon the Worshippers of images among the Symonians and the
Carpocratian Haeretiques. Wherein you are also pleased to show us a trick of
your wit: for in the text you put these words (the Council of Francfort) in
the beginning, as you do your other authors, as if the text following against
Images were the very words of the Council: but in the margent you putt
Chemnitius; which is wicked dealing to make the less careful Reader fall into
error, by taking the Haeretiques words for the words of the Council; whereas
the Council has not one word of that, that is there set down, nor indeed at
all of images: all that we have is by relation of some histories; whereof 3. or
4. have erred in the relation of a matter of fact concerning the same Councels
condemning the 2. Council of Nice as is most manifest not only by contrary
authorityes of greater weight, but by the very contradiction which out of
ignorance, they show in their own narration for they say that the false
Council of Constantinople under Constantine and Irene, was condemned at
Francfort. Which is manifestly false, there having never been any such Council
at Constantinople in their two times, Binius in annot. ad Conc. Francfor. 794.
but because this requires a longer dispute, I turn you Sir Humphrey to
Binius, Bell, and others with them. Only here I tell you, that whereas you
bring Hincmarus his authority and the Council of Francfords out of Chemnitius;
Bellarmine shows by testimony of the same Hincmarus, the Magdeburgian's, Lib.
2. de Imag. cap. 14.
and other your own authors, that that very Council did say Anathema to all
such as deface images: is not this then abominable falsehood in your friend
Chemnitius, to cite nay forge it against images and in you follow him in it.

16. Polydore Virgil shall be next: out of whom you say. Poly. Vir. de rerum
inuentor. lib. 6. cap. 13.
The worshipping of images not only those who knew not our religion but as S.
Hierome witnesses almost all the ancient Fathers condemned, for fear of
idolatry. This place was brought by Dr. White in his reply to Mr. Fisher's 9.
points and so answered again in the Reioynder to his reply, as if you Sir
Humphrey had had any reguard to Dr. Whites credit you would never have given
occasion to renew the memory thereof again. The answer is that Polydore
speaks not of the ancient Fathers of the new Testament, but of those of the
old whom therefore he names veteres patres, the old Fathers and in particular
names Moses and Ezechias, the reason indeed why they did condemn the
worship of images, was fear of idolatry; but the reason of that fear was as
he says because noe man having seen God they knew not what shape to give
thim? and discoursing of the brazen serpent which was a figure of Christ upon
the cross, he says, a long time after God put on humane sharp and being made
man was seen and known by mortal men: and in that humble shape by his own
power, wrought miracles beyond credit: the same whereof made men come flocking
unto him, who did so behold and reverence his face without doubt shining with
the brightness of divine light, that they the^ first began to paint and carue
his effigies, now already imprinted in their minds. And there telling to that
purpose the story out of Eusebius of the hemorrhoisse and 2. pictures of our
Savior made by himself one sent to Abagarus, the other given to Veronica he
also says thus: it is a constant opinion that S. Luke did paint in certain
tables the figure of our Lady, which to this day are in some places kept most
holily and worshipped most religiously, Then relating out of Eusebius, how the
images of the Apostles were framed and kept by Christians cites the words
following out of him. Insignia etenim veterum reseruari ad posteroru^ memoriam,
illorum honoris, horu^ vero amoris iudiciu^ est. For the reserving of the
signs, marks, or thing belonging to the auncie^ts to the memory of posterity
is a sign of honor to the^ and love in these. Hence, says Polydore, is grown
worthily a custom of placing in the Churches and reuerencing the statues as
well of our Savior as his SS. But because by the memory of Saints, as it were
an example or sample set before our eyes which the images represent, men are
stirred up to virtue and imitatio^, and the honor of the image passes to the
honor, of the original as S. Basil says; therefore the Fathers have not only
admitted that custom, but by the authority of the 6. Synod at Constantinople
under Constantine and Justinian the 2. his son, it was decreed as may appear
by the canonical decrees, that the holy images of SS. should be had in
Churches, and worshipped with great veneration: being to ignorant people in
place of the holy Scripture: whereto also Frankincense is offered and tapers
are lighted: and there adding 2. or 3. Councels more decreeing the same again,
he concludes thus. Ecquis igitur tam dissolutus tantaque audacia praeditus est
qui velit possitue dubitare, seu aliter somniare, ne dicam sentire vel cogitare
de imaginum cultu, ac demum sit tot long sanctissimorum patrum decreto
constitutum? What man is there therefore so disolute and endewed with so much
boldness, who will or can doubt, or otherwise dream, that I may not say judge
or think of the worship of images, then at last has been approved by the
Decree of so many most holy Fathers. Thus far Polydore: to whose demand why
may not I answer that Sir Humphrey Linde is the man so dissolute and
audacious, that dares not only dream but waking with all his wits and senses
that he has about him, and speaking and writing dares I say not only doubt
of, but absolutely deny the lawfulnes of the worship of images. And not only
this, but even to bring thee o Polydore Virgil to witness with him against the
Roman Church, that all the ancient Fathers of the Primitive Church condemned
the same. What would this author say to you Sir Humphrey if he were alive, to
see himself abused by you? and which is yet more even after Dr. White was
convict of this dissolutenes, and audaciousnes, yet you would be at it again.
Hereby a man may see there needs noe other confutation but only right citing
of your own authors.

17. For Peresius; his words are nothing against us, for they touch only upon
a school point whether the picture be to be adored with the same worship as
the prototype or thing represented, or with an inferior worship: the former
opinion only he denies, because says he there is neither proof out of
scripture, tradition of the Church, common consent of Fathers, or determination
of a general Council? which very saying of his is enough to condemn you, who
will not acknowledge sufficient authority in tradition, Fathers, or Council to
believe a thing which you like not. But to make it plainly appear how much
you wrong Peresius in bringing him against the worship of images I will bring a
place 2. leaves before that which you cite out of him it is this. Manifest
habes, etc. Peers. de tradit. cap. de imag.
It is manifest that the use and worship of images has been universally in
the Church from the time of the Apostles and that the dis-esteeme of them began
from forlorn and infamous men 500. years after the Church was planted: and
truly if the worship and reverence be done devoutly and sincerely, this
institution is holy and profitable, which both Apostolic tradition has
introduced, the use of the universal Church affirmed, the consent of very
famous and general Councels both in the East and West being added thereto:
which also even natural reason does dictate. Thus far are Peresius his own
words: whereby any man may see whether Sir Humphrey you deal well with him or
not, to pretend his authority against our use and worship of images.

Agobard. de pict. and imaginib. in bibl PP.
18. Now for Agobardus who^ you seem to make great acount of, if you consider
him a little, better, you will find little cause: he writes indeed a book de
picturis and imaginibus, the whole drift whereof is only against the
idolatrical use or abuse of images, against which he speaks very much by
occasion of some abuses in his time as it is meet he and every good man
should. And for the same end, he brings many authorityes of the ancient
Fathers all which speak plainly against idolatry: and likewise he brings
that canon of the Council of Eliberis which you bring out of him, that noe
picture should be painted on the walls, understanding it in the same sense
which I alleged in my second answer to that Canon before, to wit, for
avoiding superstition in some young and unexperienced Christians, converted
from gentility. But for those words which follow in your citation of him, to
wit, these. There is noe example in all the scriptures or Fathers, for
adoration of images: I do not find them in him: this I am sure of, that they
are not joined with the former as you here join them. Thus indeed he says
in a certain place: habuerunt antiqui Sanctorum imagines vel pictas vel
sculptas sed causa historiae ad recordandum non ad colendum. The ancients had
the pictures of Saints painted or carved for history to remember not to be
worshipped: this it may be is it you would be at; but I answer that both
these and those of yours if there, be any such are to be understood in the
sense of his whole discourse, to wit, that there is noe example in the
Scriptures or Fathers of such idolatrial adoration as he speaks against
there: which is true. Which to be his meaning I shall by and by demo^strate
more plainly. Now for the last words; to wit, that images ought to be taken
for an ornament to please the sight, not to instruct the people. I do not also
find them, but these. Aspiciamus picturam quasi pictura sensu and ratione
carentem: pascatur hac visione oculus Deu^ vero veneretur animus. Let us behold
the picture as a picture wanting sense and reason. Let the eye be sedd which
this sight but let the mind worship God: which is very true Catholic
doctrine: for we teach men to make a difference between the wood and color of
the picture or the picture in it self, and the thing which is by it
represented: but here is not that which you say out of him, that images are
not to be used to instruct the people: but the contrary for in the words here
next before cited he says they are to be used for history which is all one as
to say for instruction. Wherefore I wonder how it should come into your head to
father so fond and senseless a thing upon so wise and learned a man? and so
contrary to the light of nature and even to your own practice. For if pictures
may not be used for instruction of the people, why do your painters draw the
King, Prince, and Lords in the parliament house, the siege of Rochel, Berghen
op Zoome, Bolduc, Breda. and the like, but for instruction (...) relics of S.
Polycarpe: and withal he relates with applause and commendation, how the
people of Alexandria having destroyed their idols, and being converted to
Christ so great fervor of Christianity inflamed their hearts, that every one
painted the sign of the Cross on their posts, doors, windows, walls, and
pillards: and to conclude tells of S. Gregory the great how he reprehended
the Bishop of Frioly; for beating down out of his Curch the images of the
Apostles, Peter and Paul, in reguard of the superstition of the vulgar sort,
adoring them contrary to the rule of faith, as also for that he did not rather
by his authority correct their error, letting the pictures stand for the memory
of posterity then by indiscreete zeal beat them down: wherein then is
Agobardus different from S. Gregory, and other Fathers? nothing at all: but
rather his authority joined here together with S. Gregory's in the last place
may serve for answer to all the rest of your frivolous objections which you
bring to the paragraph, of the abuse and danger of images.

20. As for the abuse it is not such as you talk of; but suppose it were; that
is to be taken away, as the Council of Trent, and in it the whole Catholic
Church does teach: the good must not. For if every thing should be presently
taken away, because it is ill used by me^, what would become of this world? You
must therefore learn an axiom of the Law, De reg. iur. n 6.
Vtile per inutile non vitiatur: the profitable is not vitiated or spoiled by
the unprofitable. Separate that which is unprofitable from the profitable, and
keep, the later that is the profitable or good. Which I dare boldly say is
far better to counsel, the^ that which you give, to wit, that images should
be absolutely forbidden, till some conditions set down by Bellar. or rather
by the Council of Trent (for they are the same), be performed; which as you
think (though falsely) are not performed, to wit, that images be honored
only for them whom they represent, without placing confidence in the^, or
requesting any thing of them, or co^ceiuing any divinity in the^. For where
shall you find so simple a soul one among 10000. in the Catholic Church,
that does not perform the forenamed conditions? or if there should be one
such, silly old woman, must the other 10000. be debarred of all that fruit,
and God and his Saints of all that honor: that comes by having, seeing, and
adoring them in their images as we all do? this Council I say of mine, or not
mine, but of the holy Catholic Church, you shall find to be better, by the
very testimony of Gabriel, whom you bring in reprehending the blockishnesse of
some people, for not observing the foresaid conditions in the worshipping of
images, in his 49. lect. which is the place by you cited though you Sir Humph.
falsely cite it lect. 14. but that may be your printers fault the title whereof
is: Of the veneration of the most divine Sacrament of the Eucharist. In which
he treats largely of three kinds of worship, Latria, Hyperdulia, and Dulia,
as our Divine do; Which he says belong properly to a rational nature,
improperly to irrational; either in reguard of representation, or connection
which may have with the rational or reasonable nature: and then reprehending
the foolishness of some, who neither know themselves, nor will with humility
learn of others, the true nature of adoration, concludes at last thus. Nec
tamen propter hoc imagines proiiciendae sunt etc. Neither for this are images
to be thrown away, or thrust out of oratories by occasion or pretense of
avoiding idolatry, or pilgrimages to certain pictures or certain places
either consecrate, or not consecrated to be reproved. So Gabriel which words
you could not but see; if you saw the other which you cite, for they follow
immediately: and therefore it had been more honesty for you, to have forborne
the citing of the former, if you did not mean to cite the later, as it seems
you did not. For that which you conclude with comparing us to Demetrius in the
scripture, that made a living of making silver shrines for Diana's temple, as
if we maintained images to bring money to our purses, it is Lindinge Sir
Humphrey, you know my meaning: you and such as you that perhaps have had your
shares in pulling down of images and silver shrines this last hundred years:
are more like to be drawn with the love of gain, to the pulling down of
images then we that loose all for maintaining and setting them up: for what we
and our ancestors have parted with from our selves and out of our own purses
for the honor of God and his Saints you or men of your religion pull back
from God and his Saints, to bestow upon your backs and bellyes and upon you
Ministers, their wives, and bratts. Werefore you might have held your peace of
that matter. And so now I conclude this. where I hope I have made it appear
that all your great words against Images are but wind.

INDVLGENCES.. 8.
1. We are now come to the last. of this chapter which is Indulgences; which
you Sir Humphrey begin after your wonted manner with the tenth article of our
Creed as you call it, and the Decree of the Council of Trent teaching that
Christ has left that power of granting Indulgences in his Church: and that the
Church has used the same from most ancient times, and that therefore they are
to be retained in the Church, condemning also whosoever shall term them
unprofitable, or deny authority in the Church to grant them. Which doctrine you
allow not of as not being agreeable to Christ institution, nor the practice of
the primitive Fathers. You confess indeed that in the Primitive Church there
was a power in the Bishops, to remit or mitigate the severity of the
punishment, which by the Canons men were to undergo for certain great crimes:
which mitigation you allow to have been called by the name of Indulgence; and
in that sense you take that relaxation of the incestuous Corithian by S Paul.
Thus far you go well with us: but now you say the Indulgence of the Roman
Church is an absolution from the guilt of temporal punishment, by application
of the merits of Christ and his Saints, termed the treasure of the Church.
Which treasure you say is applied to the souls in Purgatory: and that which
was formerly used for mitigation of punishment, is now reduced to private
satisfaction, and that which was formerly left to the discretion of every
Bishop in his Diocese, is transferred wholly to the Pope; and this not only
for some few years in this life, but for many thousa^ds in Purgatory after
death. 2. This is your discourse Sir Humphrey. Which though you seem to take
to be a very good and substantial one: yet is it nothing so. For first it
neither proves any thing, nor overthrows our doctrine of Indulgences, though
that were true which you say of the difference between our Indulgence of these
times and those of the primitive Church, for the use of those times is not our
only ground for this point of doctrine: but we have others both of scripture,
tradition, and undoubted practice of the Church for above a thousand years at
least: and this of the practice of the Primitive church in relaxation of the
punishment of the poenitential canons is not urged by us at lest by some of our
Divines as an evident conuincing proof but only as coniectural and probable,
Suar. to. 3. in 3. pars. disp. 49 sect. 2. n. 4.5. and s^. q.
it is not then to the purpose for you to stand so much urging the difference
between the Indulgences of our times and those of other former times, as if by
doing that you had done all that was to be done.

3. But besides to answer Secondly, you have not done even that: for you do
but only make show as if you would have men think they were different without
showing wherein the difference consists. Nay even out of that which you
grant of those ancient Indulge^ces you may be disproued in what you deny of
ours for to begin with the very word (Indulgence) you grant it to have been
in use in those times. But you say ours is an absolution from the guilt of
temporal punishment, by application of the merits of Christ. Which though
alleged as a difference yet do I not see wherein the difference is. For
theirs was an absolution, because it was an unloosing or untying. For whereas
by the Canons for certain great crimes men were bound or tied to undergo such
penance, for example to fast with bread and water so many days in a week,
for so many months, or years not to be admitted to the Sacraments, and
Sacrifice of the Mass and the like, By this indulgence or pardon which you
grant they were untied or loosed from so much, or so little as by that pardon
they were freed from: and so is it in our Indulgence, wherefore the difference
is not in the absolution, which is nothing but loosing or untying. It can not
be also in the guilt, which must needs be remitted in your indulge^ce as well
as in ours. For a man is not free, so long as he is guilty; if then they were
freed by that pardon, the guilt was taken away thereby. It is not likewise in
the temporal punishment, which is alike remitted in the one and other. For it
was temporal punishment or penance, which men were freed from in those times by
indulgence and so it is temporal punishment which we are now adays freed
from by our indulgence. Wherefore I do not understand what you mean Sir
Humphrey when you seem to make a difference in this; saying that Indulgences
which were first used for mitigation of punishments, are now reduced to
private, satisfactio^s. For what? were not those Indulgences given to private
men, for satisfaction: or in lieu of that satisfaction which they were to make
by the Canons? and are not ours mitigation of the same? unless you put the
force in this that there the punishment was only mitigated or lessened, and
that in our Indulgence all is taken away; which yet is false on both sides; for
neither in ours, is all the punishment taken always away; and in those,
sometimes all was taken away, as we see by the example of the Corinthian, whom
S. Paul does forgive without limitation: besides this I do not imagine what you
ca^ mean in these words.

4. The difference also is not in the authority or power, whereby this pardon
is granted: for then it was granted by the Bishops: and so it is also now.
For every Bishop in the Catholic Church has this power. But you will say
Humphrey not so much now as then be it so? that is against your self for
that is your complaint, that it is more used now then in those times. But you
say again the Pope has more now then he had then; and that all is transferred
wholly to him. To which I answer that this later part is false: all is not so
wholly transferred but that every Bishop: has his part of this power, over his
own subjects; though with some limitation: and though the Pope should take it
wholly to himself and from other Bishops, what is this against Indulgences? does
it alter the nature of them because the Pope gives them either more by
himself, or more liberally then he did heretofore by others? The power was in
many before, now it is in one that one then has more power then he had before,
but is it not the same kind of power? wherefore the difference cannot consist
in this? but think not Sir that I grant you the Popes power to be more now
then at that time it was, nor less then the^ now it is. It was the same of
this power, as of all other his power of binding and loosing, whereof this is
one branch; which did ever extend over the whole Church over all pastors, and
all and every one of their subjects, though he did permit the use thereof to
others some times more, sometimes less according to the difference of times,
places, and persons. But this of the extent of the Popes power in this kind, is
not a matter for this place, but it pertains to that disputation of the Popes
authority in general. It is enough here, if we prove the same power and use of
giving Indulgences now, as was in most ancient times, as the Council of Trent
declares and you your self confess in as much as you grant that Indulgence
and Pardon was granted by the Bishops then; Which we prove to be the same now:
for neither does the Council of Trent, stand saying who has more, or who has
less of that power, for that was needless; the question being with
Haeretiques, who denied the power wholly to be in God's Church.

5. The difference then between our Indulgence, and that of the primitive
Church, is not in this: that is in the power of granting it: Wherein the^? you
may say as you seem indeed to say that it consists in this, that ours is by
application of the merits of Christ and his Saints, which we term the treasure
of the Church. And that their was a free relaxation without any such reguard to
this treasure. But the difference cannot also be in this: for the Bishop's
power whereby he did pardon then, was grounded in the merits of Christ; for
what he did, he did in the person of Christ, as S. Paul says of himself, in
forgiving the Corinthian. Neither did he forgive the guilt of the temporal
punishment wholly gratis, or freely without any manner of satisfaction to the
justice of Almighty God, in as much at lest as these penances were imposed for
satisfaction for the fault in the sight of God also: this I say the Bishop
neither did, nor could do for Christ himself did not forgive sin so: but by
shedding of his blood. For as S. Paul says in lege sine sanguine non fit
remissio. In the Law there is no forgiveness without blood. Heb. 9.22.
Whereby the holy Apostle proves that without the shedding of Christ's blood,
there is noe remission of sin, and all forgiveness of sin, as well for the
guilt, as punishment, is dependent thereof. Wherefore what the Bishops did
forgive in this manner, they did forgive by application of Christ his merits.
Now these merits were not new, but the former merits of his life and passion:
for Christ did consummate all by one entire oblation of himself as S. Paul
says: Heb. 10.14.
if then it were by virtue of those merits, then must they needs lie in store
ready to be applied to men, as they did dispose themselves to receive the fruit
of them, and the Pastors pleased to dispense them; and why then may not
Christ's merits lying thus in store for the need of all men, be compared to a
common treasure and be called by that name? So far forth then as those
Pardons were grounded in Christ's merits or granted by application of them to
the penitent, there is noe difference between theirs and ours.

6. Now for the merits of the Saints: you seem to say that they had noe part
in those indulgences; that is, those Indulgences were not given by application
of the merits of the Saints. But therein you are also mistaken Sir Humphrey.
For even in that place of Saint Paul, wherein you allow him to speak of
Indulce, he says he does forgive the Corithian, not only in the person of
Christ, but for their sakes also: which imports the prayers and deserts of
Saints, to have some place in the bestowing of that indulgence, and so
likewise it was the practice of the Primitive Church, as you cannot but know,
for Martyrs that had made a good confession of their faith, and endured
torments for the same, to make intercession to the Bishops, for releasing part
of the punishment dew to others, who out of weakness failed therein: and what
was this but by applying the superaboundant merits of the one, to supply the
want of the other: and that this was not by way of impetration or favor only
at the Bishop's hand, but by application of the very Martyr's merits, appears
by Tertullian, Tertull. lib. de pud. cap. 12.
who being become now an Haeretique did reprehend that custom saying, that a
Martyr's merits were little enough for himself, without having any surplusage
to help others withal: wherein yet he does not seem to deny this
application, if men have to spare of their own satisfactions, as noe question
many and almost all great Saints have. For though they may continually as long
as they are in this world increase in grace and merits for so much as
pertains to essential merit, without having to spare but rather still
needing: which kind of merit, they cannot part with to others, yet for that
other fruit of their works and sufferings, which pertains to satisfaction and
temporal punishment dew for their own sins, they may have sufficient for
themselves and to spare also to help others. For example a man falls into
some one sin, for which he comes to be so sorry after, that he betaketh
himself to a state of penance during his whole life, leading the same in great
austerity of fasting, watching, praying, and in the exercise of all Virtues:
and it may be having first obtained pardon of the fault it self by hearty
contrition and humble confession, by those good works obtains also remission
of the temporal punishment within the space of 1. 2. 3. 7. 10. or 12. years
for examples sake: he then leading the same life still 20. 30. 40. 50. 60.
years more as many have done what shall become of all that satisfaction, which
is over and above for that sin or sins, which he committed before? it does
not perish nor pass without fruit, though not of him, yet of others at least,
who are members of the same mistical body with him? so then some men have
merits superaboundant to this effect, and these merits may be communicated to
other members of the same body, and these merits are not lost nor forgotten by
almighty God, though they be not applied presently; why may not they then be
said to lie in deposito as money in a treasury?

7. In this therefore is not the difference between our Indulgence and those
which you allow; wherein then? I see not unless it be, that we extend our
indulgence to the dead as indeed you seem to make it in part. To this I may
answer first that it is another controversy, or another point at least of the
same controversy. For Indulgences are applied in a different manner to the
living and the dead: and that definition which you give that Indulgence is an
absolution from the guilt of temporal punishment does not pertain to the
dead: for absolution is a iuridical act to be performed by a Superior and
judge toward an inferior and a subject being under his power: which the
souls in Purgatory are not in respect of the Pope. Wherefore you in going to
indulgence for the dead seem to allow them for the living, or rather show you
cannot say against them. Now for applying indulgences to the dead though the
manner of application be different and that we do not find examples altogether
so ancient as of the former, yet the things is in some sort the same,
supposing you grant the power of applying Indulgences to the living, as you
cannot deny, your own ground being laid; thus therefore I show the matter to
be the same, supposing another point also of faith, which is not here to be
disputed of, to wit, the communion of Saints, or communication which is
between the Saints living and dead, either reigning in heaven or suffering in
satisfaction of their sins in Purgatory. This I say supposed the punishment
which was dew here by the poenitential canons may be taken away as you
confess; which being not taken away by indulgence, nor suffered here
according to the Canons, must be suffered there? why may it not then be taken
away by applying indulgences to them there, as well as by works which other men
may do for them here on earth. Which according to the Catholic faith are
available for them there in Purgatory. Which communion, or communication among
themselves being grounded in the society and unity which they have with Christ,
why may not the same Unity and society be sufficient for them to partake of the
merits and satisfactions of Christ and his Saints, who have gone before, and
left that treasure of their merits, as well, as by the merits and sufferings of
men living here upon earth? there is noe difference then, nor reason why you
should grant that ancient manner of indulgence and deny ours now a days; or
why you should grant indulgences for the living, and not for the dead, so long
as they pertain to the communion of Saints, and have need thereof.

8. Now for that which you add here to make our Indulgences applied to the
souls in Purgatory ridiculous, by saying we grant them for many thousand of
years after death, thereto citing an old Sarum book of the hours of our
Lady: it is false and idle. False both because your authority which you cite
does not mention Purgatory, but only says that whosoever shall say these and
these prayers, shall gain so many thousand years of pardon. Which is noe
more for the dead then for the living, but only that you do not understand
the matter either of the one or other; or rather they are for the living only.
For Indulgences are not to be applied to the dead, unless that be expressed in
the grant, which is not so expressed in this grant of yours. It is also false
because the very thing which you say, and would prove by your authority is
false, to wit, that we give Pardons for thousand of years in Purgatory after
death. For we do not so, neither do we understand those Pardons wherein are
mentioned such numbers of years so, as if men were without those Pardons to
remain so long in Purgatory. But we understand those years according to the
poenitential canons, by which many years penance were dew for one sin. And
many men's sins being both very grievous, and a man may say without number
according to the account of the ancient poenitential canons, they may soon
amount to thousands of years; which though a man cannot live to perform here
in this world, nor even in Purgatory for the length of time, yet he may in
Purgatory in few years space, nay few months or few weeks space suffer so
much punishment, as is answearable to all that penance of many thousands of
years, which a man should have performed here if he could have lived so
long: in which case a man may have a pardon of so many thousand years as well
as a plenary, both coming to one. What strangeness then or impossibility is
therein this discourse if you did understand it that you should think only by
a scorneful laugh to disgrace or disprove it? It is also idle for you to urge
any thing that you find in any old book, as if that were presently of
uncontrollable authority, being nothing so. For we defend nothing but what
has sufficient approbation or allowance of the Catholic Church, which many
such old books as you cite want: you should therefore have added that withal if
you had meant to prove any thing thereby.

9. Now after this, you tell us, that long before Luther's days by relation of
Thomas Aquinas, whom yet you cite not but only out of Valencia, some whereof
opinion that ecclesiastical Indulgence of it self could remitt noe punishment,
neither in the Court of God, nor of the Church, but that they were a pious kind
of fraud to draw men to do good works, but this opinion you say the Jesuit
condemns for erroneous? and why I pray you Sir could you not as well say that
S. Thomas did condemn the same not only for erroneous, but impious also; but
only because you would make your Reader think it was condemned only by the
Jesuit, and not by S. Thomas, or rather that he did as it were wink at it:
but how far S. Thomas was from that, and how free on the other side any man
may see, by this, that putting the question in the 1. ar. of his ^5. q. of the
Suppl. whither indulgences avail any thing, he makes answer, that all grant
that they avail something, because it were impious says he, to say that the
Church did do any thing in vain: and in the 2. art. asking how much they
avail, he says that some say they avail to every one but according to their
faith and devotion he himsef says, it is very perilous to say that they do
not avail so much as they sound: that is, to so much effect or pardon, as
they are given for. Wherefore the antiquity of this opinion nothing avails
you but rather does you harm it being then condemned for an error: as
likewise it avails you not, that you bring half a dozen of our authors,
witnessing that there is noe express proof of Scripture nor of some ancient
Fathers, as S. Aug. Hilary, Ambrose, etc. for Indulgences. For we grant there
is not so express mention of them as of many other points, because there was
not so much use of them, though out of some Fathers also much more ancient
then S. Aug. Hilary Ambrose, etc. we prove the use of them, to wit, out of S.
Cyprian and Tertullian as you may see in Bell. the one above 100. Lib. 1. de
indulg. cap. 3.
the other above 200. before any of these Fathers, and besides them the
authority of certain Councels as that of Nice, Ancyra and Laodicea though if
we had not either of these Fathers, nor any else, nor of these Councels yet
would not that follow which you ground thereupon, to wit, that we want
antiquity and consent of Fathers. For it is a most strong argument of
antiquity, that it is the practice of the Catholic Church, time out of mind;
and of consent that noe man is found to have spoken against it, but only
known Haeretiques such as the Waldenses who were the first impugners of
Indulgences: Bell. lib. 1. de indulg. cap. 1
therefore you are still out of your bias, when you think to prove the nouelty
of our doctrine, by our want of testimony of antiquity. For though we have such
testimony for superaboundant proof, yet it is enough that such a thing is
thaught and practiced in Catholic Church, without any memory when it began,
for that is S. Augustines rule continually to prove a thing not only ancient,
but even Apostolical.

10. But now to come to your authors in particular you bring Durand in the
first place saying that there can be little said of certainty concerning
Indulgences. ap. Bell. lib. 1. de indulg. cap. 2.
Whereto I answer that it is true, Durand does not speak so constantly and
resolutely of the threasure of the Church, in as much as it consists of the
satisfaction of Saints, whereon Indulgences are partly grounded; but he is far
from any haeretical and pertinacious denial thereof, much less of Indulgences;
for, supposing them as a thing most certain, he disputes Theological
questions of them as other Divines of his time did: and making this the first
question: Dur. in 4. did. 20. q. 3.
an aliquid valiant indulgentiae: whether Indulgences avail any thing, after
the manner of Schools he puts two arguments against them in the first place
and then comes with his argument, Sed contra agreeing for the most part with
his conclusion and agreeing expressly in this place, he says thus. In
contrarium est generalis consuetudo and doctrina ecclesiae quae contineret
falsitatem nisi per indulgentias dimitteretur aliquid de poena peccatori
debita. On the contrary is the general custom and doctrine of the Church which
would contain falsehood if some thing of the punishment dew to a sinner should
not be forgiven by indulgences; and then having set down his resolution that
there cannot be much said of certain because neither the Scripture makes
mention of them nor some holy Fathers, whom he there names, yet he concludes
that in speaking of Indulgences; the common manner is to be followed: and so
goes on with other questions, per quem modum valiant, ex qua causa vaeleant,
quis eas possit concedere: in what manner they avail, out of what cause, who
ca^ grant the^, etc. nay and for the treasure of the Church though by way of
theological dispute in one place he make some doubt of it, yet in others he
speaks plainly and clearly in these words. Dur. 4. did. 20. q. 3.
Est in ecclesia, etc. There is in the Church a spiritual Treasure of the
Passion of Christ and the Saints who endured much greater torments then their
sins deserved and therefore the Church may out of this treasure communicate
to one or more what may be sufficient to satisfy for their sins either in
part or in whole according as shall please the Church to communicate this
treasure more or less which are nothing else but the communication of the pain
of Christ and the Saints to us to satisfy for our sins. Wherefore indulgences
avail by way of solucion or payment in as much as by Christ and his Saints the
pain dew to us is paid. So far this author most clearly, truly, and
Catholiquely; though after again he somewhat doubt of this treasure, as I said
before, in as much as it consists of the satisfactions of Saints. Now for
the very place which you allege you committ a fault in making it seem as if
he said the ancient Fathers in general did not make any mention of Indulgences,
and that he did name S. Ambrose S. Hilar. S. Aug. and S. Hierome only for
examples sake: whereas it is far otherwise. For presently after he names S.
Greg. and says of him that he did institute indulgences at the Stations in
Rome. So as it is plain he spoke only of those 4. not of all the Fathers in
general. And so much for Durand.

11. As for Alpho^sus a Castro another of your authors, he denies not all
testimony of Scripture, as none of the rest do, but only plain and express
testimony; and though he also confess the use of Indulgences not to have been
so much in those ancient times, as since, yet he allows of them so far, as
to condemn any man for an Haeretique that shall deny them: these are his
words. Alph. a Castr. de haeres. lib. 8. verb. Indulgent.
Verum etsi pro indulgentiarum approbatione, S. Scripturae testimonium apertum
desit, non tamen ideo contemnendae erant, quoniam ecclesiae. Catholicae vsus a
multis annorum centurijs, tantae est authoritatis, vt qui illum contemnat
haereticus merito censeatur. But though there want open testimony of Scripture
for approbation of Indulgences, they are not therefore to be contemned,
because the use of the Catholic church for many hundreds of years, is of so
great authority, that whosoever contemned the same is worthily esteemed an
haeretique. And again in the same place. Apud Romanos vetustissimus
praedicatur illarum (to wit, indulgentiarum) vsus vt ex Stationibus Romae
frequentissimis vtrumque colligi potest. Among the Romans this use of
Indulgences is said to be most ancient as may be somewhat gathered by the most
frequent Statio^s at Rome Look you Sir Humphrey what a witness you have
brought for your self? Do you not see how new he makes this Doctrine of
Indulgences; Confessing even the use of them to be most ancient and of many
hundred years standing? nay does he not in the same place acknowledge that S.
Gregory the great and first Pope of that name did grant some Indulgences,
which is above a thousand years? Do you not hear how much he gives to the
Church acknowledging the practice thereof to be of so great authority that
whosoever denies the truth of a thing so practiced is worthily to be counted
an Haeretique? What think you now of your self? to be called haeretique out
of your own mouth as it were, that is out of your author's mouth whom you
bring for you? For Castro his authority then though it had been more for you
then it is in this matter of Indulgences yet you had been better have let it
alone then to have it with such a condition. The like a man may say of every
author you bring here for the same purpose but that it is needless to stand
so long upon examining every one in particular.

12. Now after such good authorityes as you bring against Indulgences you
think you may with authority prate very freely of the Popes selling of
Indulgences, and bringing money to his own coffers by them, but to that I
need make noe other answer but that it is such riffe raffe stuff as your
Ministers are wont to eeke out their books and sermons, without being able to
show any bull of Pope, or testimony of good author of any Indulgence so
granted, which though you or they could, yet were is not to the purpose, noe
more then your profane jest out of Guiciardin of playing a game at tables for
an Indulgence? For what? suppose that were true, might not a man think you
tell as good a tale of some Protestants, who in their potts have made so bold
with almighty God himself, as to drink an health unto him? and were not this a
fine argument to prove that there is noe God? besides Guiciardin's history
translated by Coelius Secundus Curio which I suppose you to cite, for it is
most like you are noe Italian, is forbidden in the Roman Index: that Curio
being an Haeretique of the first class. But passing from your merriments you
tell us seriously that you will not say it was a strange presumption for a
Council to determine an uncertain Doctrine, upon the Popes infallibility and
opinion of Schoolmen? but you venture to say it is a weak and senseless
faith that gives assent to it without authority of Scriptures, and consent of
Fathers. Your meaning is by a fine rhetorical figure, to say it is presumption,
by saying you will not say so: but Sir Humphrey I will go the plain way to
work with you; and tell you it is intolerable presumption for you, suppose you
were a man of learning, to take upon you to censure of presumption so great a
Council as that of Trent, wherein the whole flower of the Catholic Church for
learning and sanctity was gathered together, the splendor whereof was so great
that your night owl Haeretiques durst not once appear, though they were
invited and promised to go and come freely with all the security they could
wish: and for such a fellow as you, to make your self judge thereof what
intolerable presumption is it? it is presumption with you forsooth for a
Council to define a point of faith upon the perpetual and constant belief and
practice of the Catholic Church and upon the common consent of Doctors,
being both of them sufficient rules of faith of themselves, there being withal
sufficient testimony of Scripture in the sense which it has ever been
understood by Catholic interpreters: and yet it is not presumption for you,
without Doctor, without Father, without Council, without Scripture, without
any manner of authority to go against all this authority.

13. Now whereas you say it is a senseless and weak faith that gives assent
to doctrine as necessary to be believed, which wants authority of Scriptures
and consent of Fathers. I answer, you do not know what you say: it shows
plainly you have not read one of those Fathers of whom you so much bragg, who
all agree, that there be many things which men are bound to believe upon
unwritten tradition, whose authorities you may see in great number in
Bellarmine: De verbo Dei. lib. 4. cap. 7.
but for consent of Fathers: it is true, it is requisite because we have not
the tradition but by consent of Fathers: but this consent of Fathers is noe
more required to be by their express testimonies in writing, then in the
Scripture it self. For where do you find that the holy Fathers did know,
believe, or practice noe more but what they did write? or that any one did
write in particular all the whole belief of the Catholic Church? the Fathers
did in their writings as the Apostles did in theirs, that is write of this or
that particular matter, as the particular occasion of answearing some
Haeretique or instructing some Catholic did require, and therefore mentioned
noe more then was needful for that end. But the consent of Fathers is most of
all proved, by the practice of the Catholic Church, of the present time,
seeing that practice being without beginning cannot otherwise have been but
from those that have gone before from time to time: and though you make a
difference, yet certainly it is the same of the consent of Catholic Doctors
in the present time, as it was of holy Fathers in former times who were the
Doctors of those times; and as they were Fathers not so properly in respect of
those times wherein they lived, as of succeeding ages, so the Doctors of these
times are Fathers in respect of those that shall come after them. Neither can
the consent of Doctors in the Catholic Church more err in one time then
another; the auctority of the Church and assistance of the Holy Ghost being
always the same, noe less in one time then another. Tert. de praescr. cap. 28.
And Tertullian's rule having still place as well in one age as another, to
wit: Quod apud multos vnum inuenitur, non est erratum sed traditum. That which
is the same amongst many is noe error but a tradition. The common consent
therefore of Doctors and particular Churches is always a sufficient argument
of tradition, and antiquity; and consequently a sufficient ground for a Council
to define a matter of faith against whatsoever nouel fancy of any Haeretique,
that shall take upon him to control the same. This I do not say, that we
want sufficient proof of antiquity for any point; but to show that we need it
not so express in ancient authors but that the very practice of the
Catholic Church is sufficient to stopp the mouth of any contentious
Haeretique, noe less then in ancient times, when that proof of foregoing
Writers could have noe place. For so S. Paul thought he answered sufficiently
for defense of himself and offense of his contentious enemy, 1. Cor. 11.
when he said: Si quis videtur contentiosus esse nos talem consuetudinem non
habemus neque ecclesia Dei. If any man seem to be contentious we have noe such
custom, nor the Church of God. And so much more may we now say of our long
continued customs of many hundreds of years. Wherefore your exception Sir
Humphrey against the Council of Trent for defining this matter of Indulgences,
without such testimony of scripture and antiquity as you require, is vain; as
that is also false which you here again repeat, that an article of faith
cannot be warrantable without authority of scriptures. For faith is more
ancient then Scripture: for to say nothing of the times before Christ, faith
was taught by Christ himself without writing, as also by his Apostles after him
for many years without any word written, and so it has been ever the common
consent of all holy and learned men that as noe less credit was to be given to
the Apostolical preaching, then Writing; so noe less creditt is still to be
given to their words delivered us by tradition, then by their writings, the
credit and sense even of their writings depending upon the same tradition,
among whom the clean contrary principle is as certain and undoubted, as this
of yours is with you and yours Ministers.

14. See Tert. de praescr. cap. 21. Epiph. Chrisost. Basil.
The particular testimonies you may see in Bellarmine to whom I remitt you
only for S. Aug. I cannot omit to make more particular mention of him in this
place, by reason of a certain sentence which you have brought in the end of
this. as also of every one of the 6. Damascen. and alios. ap. Bell. de verb.
Dei. lib. 4. cap. 7.
foregoing. still co^cluding with this saying of that holy Father. Sieve de
Christo, five etc. Whether concerning Christ, or concerning the Church, or
concerning any other thing that pertayneth to our faith, I will not say we, who
are noe way to be compared to him that said, but if an Angel from heaven shall
preach unto you beside what you have received in the legal and euangelical
scriptures, let him be anathema. And in the end of every one for the most part
adding the particular controversy of that. as for example in this of
Indulgences you say, if we or an Angel from heaven preach unto you any thing
concerning the faith of Indulgences, besides that you have received etc. and so
in every of the other particular points. Whereby you would persuade your Reader
that Saint Aug. would have nothing believed but what can be proved by express
words of Scripture. Wherein I appeal to your own conscience as bad as it is,
whither this be not damnable dishonest dealing both toward S. Aug. and toward
your Reader. For if you have read S. Aug. as you pretend, how can you be
ignorant how many points of faith he does defend against several Haeretiques
either only or chiefly by the tradition and Practice of the Catholic Church:
De Bap. c^nt Donat. lib. 2. cap. 7. and lib. 5. cap. 23.
as single Baptism against the Donatists, Consubstantiality of the son,
Divinity of the Holy Ghost, and even vnbegottenesse of the Father the first
person in Trinity against the Arrians: and the Baptism of Children against
Pelagius? to say nothing of prayer for the Dead. Cont. Maxi. lib. 3. cap. 3.
and ep. 174. de Genes. ad literam lib. 10. cap. 23. De cura pro mortuis. ep.
118.
Observation of the Feasts of Easter, Ascension, Whitsuntide and the like; nay
this truth was so grounded with him, that he counted it most insole^t madness
to dispute against the common opinion and practice of the Catholic Church.
Which is of so great authority with him as that he says in one place that
when we follow it, we follow the truth of the Scriptures; these are his words.
Scripturarum a nobis tenetur veritas cum id facimus etc. Lib. 1. cont. Crescon.
cap. 33.
The truth of the Scripture is held by us when we do that which seems good
to the whole Church: which Church the authority of the Scriptures themselves
do commend, that because the holy Scripture cannot deceive whosoever is afraid
to be deceived by the obscurity of this question may have recourse to the
Church, the which the holy Scripture without any ambiguity does demonstrate
unto us: so he there: and, that it may farther appear that to deny this
authority and practice of the Church is not only to deny the authority of
Scripture but even of Christ himself. I cannot here omit to note a place of
the same Saint his book de unit. ecclesiae. Where he treats this very point
very particularly and excellently so as to take away all doubt of his opinion
therein. For here he does of purpose intend to show that where plain proof
of Scripture is wanting we must have recourse to the Church: proving it thus,
by occasion of the question of rebaptization and supposing that there is noe
proof of Scripture either way. Puto si aliquis sapiens etc. I think (says
he) if there were any wise man of whom our Savior had given testimony (to
wit, Aug. de Unit. eccles. cap 22.
of his wisdom) and that he should be asked in this question we should not
doubt to do what he should say lest we should seem to gainesay not him so
much as Christ by whose testimony he was commended. Now Christ bears
witness of his Church. And a little after again he says, that Whosoever
refuses to follow the practice of the Church does resist our Savior himself.
Who by his testimony commends the Church. By which discourse and comparison
any man may see that in S. Augustines judgment the Churches word is warranted
by Christ as much as if he should have named any one man in particular whose
words he would make good and whom consequently we should follow and that by
refusing or leaving him: we should leave Christ himself. So as nothing can be
more plain and evident to declare this holy Fathers opinion in this point of
the Churches authority in the belief and practice even of things not expressed
in Scripture. And this may sufficiently convince you Sir Humphrey of malicious
deceit, in alleging that other place of this holy Father so contrary to his
meaning, declared in so many places, and so plainly.

15. But because you may yet make difficulty in this testimony, which you
allege as though it alone should stand against all other that can be
alleged out of him, and that noe interpretation of any man else, can be able
to satisfy you, I will allege his own words interpreting the meaning of S.
Paul's words, which he alleges and uses in this testimony to show that the
word (beside) does not import, that a man must not believe any thing but that
which is expressed in Scripture, but that a man must not believe any thing
contrary. For thus he says. The Apostle did not say if any man eua^gelize to
you more then you have received, Aug. to. 98. in Io.
but beside that which you have received. For if he should say that, he should
praeiudicate (that is go against) himself, who coueted to come to the
Thessalonians that he might supply that which was wanting to their faith. But
he that supplieth adds that which was lacking takes not away that which was
etc. These are the Saint's very words in that place. By which it is plain that
he takes the word (praeter) beside not in that sense as to signify more then
is written as you would understand it; but to signify the same that (contra)
against or contrary to what is written. For otherwise there would be noe sense
in his saying or opposition consisting of two members with difference of the
one from the other. Which to be his meaning is yet more plain by his whole
discourse, which is to show what manner of knowledge or private revelation is
to be admitted: and indeed there he allows of such as it not against the
rule of the Catholic faith contra regulam Catholicae fidei: and reprehends
only in Haeretiques such kind of knowledge as is also contrary or against the
rule of faith, and then obiecting this very place which you so often repeat
out of S. Paul to himself, he answeareth it by expounding the word praeter in
the same sense with contra. Which stands very well also with the propriety of
the Latin word: and for the Greek it the same both here Gal. v. 8. and Romans
16.17. Where there is a like sentence of S. Paul's wishing the Romans to mark
and avoid such as putt scandals and stumbling blocks contrary to the doctrine,
which they had received. The word I say is the same; (1) (...) with an
accusative case which does signify as well if not better contra then praeter;
and in your own bibles you translate it in that place to the Romans contrary
to the doctrine. I see not therefore why you should not understand it alike in
both places? But to return to S. Augustine, the thing being so; I may justly
ask of you Sir Humphrey whether you have not so often affronted this holy
Father as you have repeated this sentence so contrary to his meaning, in your
own most false and absurd sense, to the subversion of your Readers, drawing
his words from their true Catholic sense which he has so often and so
seriously inculcated upon several occasions, to the establishing of your
perverse and haeretical principles, so much by him ever detested. But there is
a countinge day Sir Humphrey, as little as you think of it, for this and all
other matters, wherein also this Saint will reckon with you in particular and
you are like to feel the heavy doom of him and all others whom you have so
freely affronted in this kind. But mean while I trust in the goodness of God by
the prayers of this holy Saint that those well meaning people that shall take
the pains for their own souls good to peruse this answer, will be able
thereby to discover, and proclaim to others so much of your dealing, as that
any thing you have said, or shall ever say will be able to do little harm to
any, but such as shall wilfully run upon their own ruin. And so Sir
Humphrey I shall make an end of this. and Section wherein is contained the
chief matter of your whole book so as I hope there will be less to do with
that which follows.

Chap. 10.
Of the 10. Section entitled thus. The testimonies of our adversaries touching
the infallible certainty of the Protestant faith and the uncertainty of the
Romish. CHAPTER X.
1. SIr Humphrey having in the two former Sections proved the antiquity and
Universality of his faith both in general and in particular, (as he would have
us think;) comes now to prove the certainty thereof and uncertainty of ours.
Where a man would expect he should bring some new thing either reason or
authority, but he does neither, but only upon the rotten ground which he
supposes he has laid very soundly in the precedent Sections, he goes on very
confidently with the certainty of his faith, and making a short preface, how he
has out of our own authors proved, that the faith and doctrine now taught in
the Church of Rome was not known informer ages: and that though the Priests,
especially Jesuits are bound by oath to maintain the Papacy, yet that it can
not be denied, but that we have testified against our selves in behalf of his
doctrine, and howsoever we excuse the matter, yet we are divided among our
selves, and so want unity of faith. After this preface I say, he makes a
short reuiew of our confessions for him, in matter of Justification,
transubstantiation, private Mass, Sacraments, Communion in one kind, prayer
in an unknown tongue, Worshipping of Images and Indulgences. Upon which he
calls men and Angels to witness, that we have noe antiquity, and
universality, and that consequently we have resolved the grand question
touching their Church before Luther, to wit, that it was in Christ, in the
Apostles, in the Fathers, in the bosom of the ancient Church before Luther's
time. This is the sum of almost half this Sectio^, in all which I must
appeal, gentle Reader, to thy indifferent judgment. Whether there be a true
word or not? For supposing that thou have read what is gone before, thou will
easily see, that though it were not my task here to prove the antiquity of
the points of our Faith, or universality, or any thing else; but only to
answer the fond objections of Sir Humphrey; Yet I have accidentally and by
the way proved the same in most points, and by the same authors, and places,
which he brings against us; and his failing in his proofs of our nouelty, is
sufficient proof of our antiquity, and his own nouelty.

2. What a shameful boast then is it for him to say, that most of our points
now taught were unknown to antiquity: For though some might perchance not have
been so anciently defined, and consequently doubted of by some, yet to say
they were not commonly believed and much more to say they were not known,
cannot come from any man but such a blind but bold Bayard as Sir Humphrey
Linde. For if one man or two doubt of a thing, must it therefore be unknown?
when not only one or two on the other side, but two for one, or rather ten,
nay a hundred for one say the contrary. Now let him name that one of his
points of faith here by him disputed, wherein not only since it was defined,
which is enough for our purpose, but even before that; we shall not bring him a
great many, that held that way, which it was defined, for every one of those
that held the other way. How then could it be unknown? The next thing in his
praeface is of an Oath, which our Priests, especially Jesuits take, to defend
the Papacy and doctrine of the Church of Rome. But if a man should ask him
where he finds this Oath, he would not be able so readily to tell us; though
if he could, I see not why any man should be ashamed of it: nay why he should
not glory of so heroical an act, as is an oath: whereby he binds himself to
the defense of the authority, whereon the weight and frame of the whole
Catholic Church, and salvation of all souls from Christ his own time to the
very end of the world, has, does, and still shall depend. But this I only
note for the Knight's ignorance; for I believe the thing he would be at, is the
fourth vow of the Jesuits, Whereby they specially bind themselves in Obedience
to the Sea Apostolic, to go in Mission to any part of the world, whether
infidel or haeretique; which is a little different at least from that which he
talks of an oath to defend the Papacy.

3. The third thing in his praeface is want of Unity wherewith he charge us.
Whereof I only say that as we confess there may be difference of judgments
before a definition of faith, so let him show the division after such
definition. Let him name that man, and we will give him leave to take him for
his own, to increase his Church and make up his number of learned men: for
noe man but an haeretique can dispute against what is once defined. Catholic
Doctors may indeed differ in opinion so long as a thing is undefined. For so
long it is not faith, but when it is once defined they must be silent and
concur all in one, because then it is matter of faith. Which agreement and
concurrence of opinion in such a case shows there was still before a kind of
radical union, that is, a praeparation of mind or promptnes to submitt to
Authority of the Church when it should show it self: Wherefore whatsoever he
or any man else shall say of our differences are but arguments for the unity and
certainty of our belief.

4. Now for his reuiew of all his. 8. points, it is but a reuiew indeed;
wherein he takes all that he said before for true, as if he had carried all
smooth before him, which proving quite contrary, all this reuiew and discourse
builded thereon, falls to the ground. Neither will I stand examining them all
here again, but remitt the Reader to what is said particularly of each one in
his own place. Only here I will reflect upon his conclusion, which is a
witnessing of men and Angels, that we have noe antiquity and Universality for
proof of our articles. For his protestations and witnessings, there are many
examples gone before which show how foolish, false, and hypocritical they are:
of this therefore I say noe more, but that it may go with the rest. But I ask
him how he proves, we have noe antiquity? For his first point, he labors to
prove against our Justification by words out of a Ritual in S. Anselmes days
some five hundred years since, that the sick party was to putt all his trust
in Christ's merits. Which thing I showed to be nothing against us. Wherein then
has he derogated from the antiquity and Universality of our Doctrine? and
though that proof had been good, that is to say, against what we teach of
justification, what could the bare authority of so late a work have
prejudiced our antiquity, which we maintain 1000. years before that time? Or
what could that doctrine taught in such an obscure book of I know not whose
writing, nor of what authority and but in a corner of the world, praeiudice the
Universality of our doctrine taught in all times, in all countries, by Fathers
and Doctors in their several times, and in general Councels? or does it show
his doctrine to be ancient because it was taught 500. since, or Universal
because it was taught in England? noe such matter. In his second point of
transubstantiation he brings one man saying the words of consecration do not
of themselves without the explication of the Church prove the realnes of
Christ's praesence in the Sacrament, another man saying they do not prove
transubstantiation, or that it was defined but in the Council of Lateran about
500. years ago, to which: We answer again that those one or two say
nothing against us, in the points of controversy with haeretiques, and even in
that which they teach contrary to the common consent of Divines, though in
matters not defined, we say they are reproved not by one or two, but by all the
whole current of Catholic Divines, what is this then against the antiquity of
our Doctrine? or does it prove his Doctrine to be ancient or universal? nay
does it prove it any Doctrine at all? For what can any man tell by this what he
believes, much less whither it be true or not which he believes? may not
another man that denies the Protestant-Lord's-Supper prove the antiquity and
universality of his doctrine or rather his denial of doctrine as the Knight
does his, and by the same argument: Because a man denies one point of ours,
does he presently allow all his? may not he find a third way of his own
different from both: and if the Reader please to mark it, all the knights
proof of antiquity is the denial or doubt made by some one of our Writers
though that one of ours be much more against him in other things, as a man may
see both in Caietane, Scotus, and the rest as I said before. His discourse then
in this is as deuoyd of reason, as his Doctrine is of antiquity.

5. In his ^. point, he brings a great many authorityes to prove that
anciently the people did communicate every day with the Priest, which we grant:
and ask again what this derogateth from the antiquity of our Doctrine or how
it proves that a Priest is bound to forbear saying Mass, if there be nobody to communicate or that it is ill and unlawful for him to say Mass in
that case? or how it proves the antiquity or universality of his doctrine,
that denies all Mass? nay do not we moreover ex abundanti prove, that the
custom of the peoples daily Communion did cease, even in the Primitive Church,
and yet that some Priests did say Mass daily? Do not we then prove our
antiquity not only by disproofe of his erroneous nouelty, but even by positive
proofs drawn from antiquity? Concerning the number of Sacraments he says,
some teach there be 3. some 4. some 5. some 6; that some say of this Sacrament
it was not instituted by Christ, others of that, some say this Sacrament is not
proved out of this place of Scripture, another not out of the other. Now
suppose all this were true, as I have disproued him almost in every word he
says, and showed his folly, Does this prove the antiquity or universality of
his Doctrine? is not the number of 5. or 6. as far from his number of two, as
from ours of 7. and the number of 3. or 4. as incompatible with his number of
two as with ours of seven? What madness is it then in a man, to think by this
disprouing of our number, to think his own to be so presently proved, as if
a man could not deny 7. but he must affirm only two? For as for his proof
out of some Fathers, naming of two, he confesses others name three, others 5.
some more some less: which he brings to disprove our seven: but how does it
stand with his two? So of his Communion in one Kind he says out of many of
our authors it was anciently used in both, and we grant it; but we say it was
also used in One many times, and might have been more and may also be now in
One or both, as it shall seem good to the Church, according to diverse
circumstances, in whose power is the administration of the Sacraments. How does
the affirming of the former part, or denying of the later prove the antiquity
of his doctrine which is, that it is not lawful to administer in one kind. For
public Prayer he says out of some of our authors, it was used in a known
tongue in the Primitive Church. We grant it and say it is so still. For as
Hebrew, Greek and Latin were then the most known tongues in which only the
Scriptures were written and publicly read, so the same languages are still
used partly because they are sacred and partly because they are most known.
What then makes that against our Latin Mass? or rather is it not a proof of
our antiquity and disproofe of his nouelty? Against image worship he talks of
the 2. Commandment, and the hate of the Jews against Images. He brings
the testimonies of some Haeretiques against them, and the saying of some one
Divine of the manner of worshipp, and the reprehe^sion of others against the
abuses committed in the adoration of them: out of all which setting the
testimonies of Haeretiques a part, I ask what he would conclude? Or how he
disproueth our Worship which we allow? or how the reprehension of abuses in
some of the simpler sort of Catholics, suppose there be some such abuses,
proves the lawfulnes of his Image breaking, or the truth and antiquity of his
doctrine? though his Doctrine, in this point be but only the denial of ours.
Now we prove over and above out of ancient Fathers and Councels the antiquity
of our Worshipping of Saints and their pictures. Lastly of Indulgences he says
out of some of our Divines, that there is noe express testimony of Scripture
and Fathers for the antiquity of them. To which we answer that as, this
notwithstanding these very men do not deny the antiquity of Indulgences for
want of such proof, so others also prove the ancient use of them, even out of
other most ancient Fathers of the primitive Church. Howsoever the controversy
amongst those Divines is not of the Indulgences themselves, or doctrine, but
only of the Use of them: or suppose it were so that one or two Divines did
think amiss of them, does that prove the antiquity of his Doctrine? may not
those very Divines, be against him in other things. What ancient author of
authority has he brought to prove his Doctrine? not Durand, nor any man else
whosoever is by him pretended to think hardest of them: and though he had
Durand wholly for him, how could his bare authority or saying make the denying
doctrine ancient being but 400. years ago, or universal being but one man and
contradicted by others.

6. And thus having made a reuiew opposite to his, I would feign see what any
man can find should move Men, much less Angels to witness the antiquity or
universality of his Doctrine? nay does not his manner of proof rather show the
sleightnes and nouelty thereof together with the strange vanity of a brauing
Knight that braggeth his Church before Luther was in Christ, in the Apostles,
in the Fathers, in the bosom of the ancient Church: praetending right to the
Fathers, Apostles, and CHRIST without showing any shadow of Succession, that
being the only thing which he was to have done here, and indeed the only
proper proof for a man that will profess right to such ancestors. And this
was indeed the proof which Tertullian did exact at the hands of some
Haeretiques who claymed antiquity and would needs have their Doctrine pass for
Apostolic because they were in the Apostles times. Tert. de praescr. cap. 32.
Edant ergo, says he, origines ecclesiarum suarum, euoluant ordinem
Episcoporum suorum, ita per Successiones ab initio decurrentem, vt primus ille
Episcopus aliquem ex Apostolis etc. Let them show the beginnings of their
Churches, let them vnroull or lay open the order or Catalogues of their Bishops
so running by Successions from the beginning, that that first Bishop had for
author or Praedessor some one of the Apostles, or Apostolical men, who yet have
perseuered with the Apostles. For in this manner the Apostolic Churches draw
down their pedigrees, as the Church of Smyrna recounteth Polycarpe placed by
John, the Roman church Clement ordained by Peter: and so other Churches show
whom they have had placed Bishops by the Apostles, as it were branches of the
Apostolical seed. Let the Haeretiques faigne any such thing. So he. Do you
hear Tertullian Sir Humphrey? bragg then if you think good still, we give you
leave, that your Church was anciently in Christ, in the Apostles, Fathers, and
bosom of the ancient Church, without showing any such Succession of Bishops
drawn down from the Apostles.

7. Now then that you have spoken so well of the certainty of your own
belief, let us hear what you say of the uncertainty of ours, wherewith you
begin thus. That for farther proof of your cause, you will give another
summons to the prime men even of our grand inquest, who without partiality will
testify on your behalf, that your Church is built upon a more stable and sure
foundation, then the now Roman Church; and that your doctrine is more
fruiteful and profitable, and every way more safe and comfortable for the
belief of every Christian, and salvation of the believer. Which you prove
laying way for a ground what Bellarmine says, that noe man can be certain by
the certainty of faith, that he does receive a true Sacrament; because that
depends upon the intention of the Minister, whereof noe man can be certain. By
which one tenet (you say,) we overthrow all certainty of true faith. Which you
exemplify in Baptism wherein if there want the intention of the Baptizer, the
Baptized is still an heathen, and in state of damnation: So of Order if the
intention of the Ordainer fail, it is noe Sacrament; and consequenty, if this
intention were wanting in the ordination of Popes, all succeeding Ordinations
would be void so also. Of Matrimony if the intention of the Minister want, it
is but Fornication, etc. Thus you roll on Sir Humphrey in your discourse, but
you must give us leave to have a word or two with you, before you go farther.
You give another summo^s to the prime men of our grand inquest, wherein
notwithstanding I do not find that you observe any order or number of your
Jurors, as is wont to be observed in a Jury: Whereupon I began to think that
you used this phrase of summons, and grand inquest, for the ever honored
memory of your dear deceased Father who was one of the most famous grand jury
men of Middlesex in his time, from whom it seems you have learned only the
name of a grand inquest, but not the right order of impanelling your jury, nor
even the right number of your Jurors. The foreman of your jury (though you
call him not so) is Bellarmine; whom you make to give up his verdict against
the certainty of our faith, because he says noe man can be certain he
receives a true Sacrament. Which you say overthrows all certainty of faith.
But I pray you good Sir Humphrey say truly, are you in earnest or in jest? me
thinks by the matter you should mean only in jest it is so idle: but though
this were your best excuse, yet because you may take that ill I take you in
earnest, as you seem to mean it, and ask what certainty you or any
Protestant has, or can have that you are Christians, if you think that your
Christianity depends upon the Sacrament of Baptism. If you think it do
not, (as it is the doctrine of the Puritans indeed;) that Baptism is not any
cause of grace, but only a sign or seal of the adoption, which they receive
by carnal propagation from their faithful parents; and it seems also yours,
by what you say both here and before in your 4.. of Sacraments in the
definition of a Sacrament; if, I say, you think so, then I confess you need
not fear the Minister's want of intention, but that pertains to another
disputation: but yet you have as little certainty or less of your christendom
still, for what know you whither your Parents were of the faithful, or not;
that is, whither they did believe there was a God, or what they did believe of
him: and so of your own Children if their christendom depend upon yours or
your wives faith, it may be they may be much more uncertain thereof, then we
are by depending upon our Priests intention; for noe man can know your inward
belief: but find you what you will, we shall still find some man's intention
or other that shall make your faith or Christendom uncertain, unless you can
prove you were Christened by God himself: which sure you will not go about to
do.

8. But howsoever you extenuate the force and necessity of Baptism, for
Matrimony, I suppose you will not wholly abrogate it, though you put it out from
among the Sacraments; and of it I ask what certainty you can have of the
lawfulnes of your own Marriage, or legitimation of you children? You cannot
say but the validity of that contract depends upon the intention and consent
of the parties, though not of your Minister; as we also say it depends not
upon the intention of our Priest, but of the parties which marry, which we say
commonly are the Ministers in this Sacrament. Wherefore if (for example) your
wife had no intention when she spoke the words of Marriage, it is noe Marriage
but fornication and consequently your Children are bastards, nay though the
matter should have depended wholly upon your own intention in your marriage and
that you be a great deal more sure of it then you can be as it is now
depending upon your wives intention also, yet is that surety far from the
certainty of divine faith, and so you are in noe better case for that matter
then we. For Order I might likewise instance the same among you but a small
deal of Order serves your turns, for I see not any thing done by virtue of
your Ordination; which any man or woman may not do without it. Therefore for
us I answer, it is clean a different thing of the certainty of the
Catholic faith, which we maintain, and of every man's private or particular
belief of his own justification, or salvation which we deny to be so
certain, the one being grounded upon the authority of God's divine truth and
revelation, the other upon humane knowledge, or rather conjecture; it is one
thing to say there be 7. Sacraments, and that these Sacraments, do give grace,
where they are duly administered, with all things requisite on the part both of
the giver and receiver; and another to say they are so to me: that is that in
my receiving of any one of them, all things have concurred both on the Priests
part and mine; the former is revealed by God, and propounded by his Church; the
later is not revealed in any scripture, and therefore by your own rule can be
noe matter of faith. For the inconvenience therefore which you say may follow
(though any way that you can invent, I do not think but there will be two for
one, and far greater) I answer, that though in matter of Baptism,
Ordination etc. there may happen some defect in this, or that particular case
for want of intention, matter, form, or the like, yet it belongs to the
providence of almighty God, not to permit any universal or even great defect
to happen and so though we be not certain by certainty of divine faith, that
this or that man in particular is truly baptized, and ordained a Priest, yet
we are certain by the certainty of divine faith, that not only there be such
Sacraments but that they are also truly administered in the Catholic Church
so as there can be noe danger of the failing of either, or of any danger which
may ensue thereupon, to the notable praeiudice of faith and salvation of
souls; and withal though we be not certain by certainty of faith of every
particular, yet we have moral certainty, that is as much certainty as there
can be of any humane thing, which depends of the action or intention of any
man; which as we see it is enough for men to rest themselves secure in all
worldy matters, concerning their lives, and goods, which most men prize above
their souls, so it may also give a man sufficient security in matters of his
soul, especially since as we say, if he be not wanting to himself, almighty
God will not of his goodness suffer him through another man's fault to want any
thing necessary for his salvation: but will incite him to contrition for
forgiveness of his sins, or to make doubt and seek whether he have those
necessary things or not? But yet with this security there remains a place
for an holy fear which may keep down our pride and make us shake of all
torpour exercizing our selves in good works and working our salvation with
fear and trembling. But of this kind of faith it is not that we mean when
we dispute with haeretiques of the certainty of true faith, but of faith as it
is a belief and doctrine delivered in general abstracting from this or that
man, whether he believe aright or be certain of his belief, that is, that he
believes; wherefore Sir Humphrey in changing the question, herein, you committ
a notable gross aequiuocation of terms which is a foul fault in a Scholar
as you are forsooth.

9. But from this you pass to another point of uncertainty, or rather an other
kind of proof of our uncertainty thus. You say we are uncertain whether the
Saints hear our prayers or not: and whither some that we pray unto be Saints
in heaven or devils in hell: the later you prove out of Caiet. because he says
that the miracles whereon the Church groundeth the canonization of Saints,
cannot be infallibly known, and out of Saint August. and Sulpitius, the one
saying some were tormented in hell, which were worshipped on earth, the other
saying that the common people worshipped for a Martyr one that was damned, and
who appeared and told them so: the former uncertainty to wit whether the
Saints hear our prayers, Gab. in can. lect. 31. Mag. in 4. d. 45.
you prove out of Gabr. and Pet. Lomb. the one saying it is not certain, but
it may seem probable that God reuealeth unto Saints all those suits which men
present unto them. The other that it is not incredible that the Souls of
Saints hear the prayers of their suppliants. Well be it so Sir Hum. let it be
uncertain as you say it is whether the Saints hear our prayers or not: yet it
follows not for all that, that our doctrine of invocation of Saints is
uncertain. For as Bellar. well notes, it might be good and profitable to
inuoke the Saints though they themselves should not hear us but only almighty
God for them, what are you the better then? But besides it is not uncertain
whether the Saints hear us or not, that is, it is not uncertain whether they
know our prayers or not. For though there be question of the manner how they
know them; yet there is noe question but that they do know them. Neither is
Gabriel's authority or Peter Lombard's by you alleged any thing to the
contrary. For they only make doubt of the manner without any doubt of the
thing it self, as is most manifest by their very discourse and words, in those
very places where you took out your; for thus, says Gabriel. Non inuocantur
Sancti tanqua^ datores bonorum pro quibus oramus, sed tanquam intercessores
apud Deum bonorum omnium largitorem. The Saints are inuocated not as the giuers
of good things for which we pray; but as intercessours to God the giver of all
good. Where you see he speaks not doubtfully, but certainly of invocation:
and so goes on with his discourse proving, that notwithstanding that almighty
God be of himself most propitious and merciful, yet that does not hinder but
that the Saints may pray for us; and after that falls to discourse of the
manner how the Saints hear our prayers. The like, I may say of Peter Lombard.
Who though he say only in those words which you bring, that it is not
incredible that the Saints hear our prayers, yet for their hearing or seeing
our prayers in the word of God as the Angels do, he makes noe doubt. Sicut
enim Angelisit, a etiam Sanctis qui Deo assistunt, petitiones nostrae
innotescunt in verbo Dei quod contemplantur, says he: For as our prayers
become known to the Angels in the word of God which they behold so also to the
Saints who stand before God. So as here is something more Sir Humphrey with
your good leave then probability and uncertainty, in the judgment of these
Doctors, though you be pleased to conclude out of them that there is nothing
but probability and uncertainty: though if there were but probability only it
were more then you have for any point of your faith as it is yours.

10. For Caietan's authority concerning the miracles whereon the canonization
of Saints is grounded, it is true as he says, the authority of them is but
humane as relying upon the testimony of man. But what then? ergo we are
uncertain whether the canonized Saint be in heaven or not? this is your
conclusion, and it is like one of yours indeed. But I answer that it
follows not; for the certainty of canonizatio^ depends upon a more certain
ground, to wit, the authority of the Sea Apostolic, and continual assistance
and direction of the Holy Ghost the Spirit of truth, to whom it belongs not
to suffer Christ's Vicar using humane diligence, and proceeding prudently in a
matter of that moment to err: and the proof of miracles is only used, that
he may proceed prudently, and upon good ground, and in that sense Miracles are
said to ground the canonization of Saints, not that the certainty of the one
does wholly depend on the certainty of the other. So as Caietan helps you not
a jot to prove the uncertainty of our canonization of Saints, noe more then
does S. Aug. and Sulpitius in those authorityes which you bring out of them.
For they speak not a word of any canonized Saint. And as for the place of S.
Aug. Bellarm. answeareth that perhaps it is not his, which word perhaps you
take hold of, as if you would make your Reader think it is but a slender
answer, or rather a grant of the authority: whereas it is far otherwise. For
Bell. uses that word out of modesty, because as he says he could never find
it in any work of S. Aug. Which notwithstanding, he will not say peremptorily
it is not there, but if you will needs have it S. Augustin's, Sir Humfrey tell
us where out of your great reading, and then you shall find 3. or 4. several
answeares ready in Bellarmine, without any peraduentures: and indeed any man
of ordinary wit will presently see the place does not urge a whit. For who
does doubt but many dead men are mightily honored by some men here upon
earth, whose souls are buried full low in hell: another answer of
Bellarmines is; that if there be any such place in S. Aug. it may be very well
understood of the Martyrs of the Donatists, who were honored by those
haeretiques for Martyrs whose souls were tormented in Hell: as the same B.
Saint says of them elsewhere. Aug. ep. 68
Viuebant vt latrones, honorabantur vt Martyrs. They lived as thieves and were
honored as Martyrs: But what is this to our canonized Saints? is here any the
least shadow thereof? For that story of Sulpitius, it is true, that there was
one worshipped by the people for a Martyr indeed, but he was far from any
canonization of the Church. For as the Story says, S. Martin seeing the people
worship a dead man, and not knowing what he was, nor having any certainety from
those that went before, of him, he misliked their devotion, and prayed to God
that he might know what Man that was, and so by the appointement of God the
man appeared, and confessed himself to have been an high way theife that was
put to death by the hand of justice for his wickedness. This is the story and
this we allege as a reason among others why the judgment of the Church is
necessary in the canonization of Saints, that people may not be deceived in
worshipping wicked me^ for Saints, giving the honor, dew to almighty God's
friends, to his enemies. It is therefore good sport to so a right learned
knight as you are forsooth by a new strain of wit to bring it to prove the
uncertainty of our canonization, wherein you must argue thus. Some people in S.
Martin's time did err in worshipping a dead theife for a Saint, without any
sufficient reason or approbation of the Church, ergo Catholics may err in
worshipping of Saints canonized and authorized by the Church, upon great and
evident proofs of their holy lives and deaths, and upon many and manifest
miracles. Is not this a trim argument to be printed and reprinted?

11. In the next place you come with the uncertainty of Purgatory whereof you
say S. Aug. says thus. It is not incredible that some such thing should be
after this life, but whether it be so or not it may be a question. You say
also for the place, where it is, or how long souls continue there, whither
there be fire or water, or whither material fire or not, there is nothing
certain among us: You cite Sir Thomas More, Bishop Fisher, and Bellarmine,
whose words I pass over as needless; and then you tell us that S. Greg. who
gave the first credo to Purgatory says some are purged by fire, some by hott
bathes? and upon certain apparitions and revelations related by him and S.
Bid you say it is come to be an article of faith: but you conclude with a
place of S. Aug. quite against Purgatory, Lib. de va^it. Saecul. ^ap. 1.
where he says that when the Soul is separated from the body, presently it is
either placed in paradise for its good works, or cast into hell for its sins.
I answer that you still go abusing S. Aug. who is so plain for Purgatory
that noe Catholic now living can be more plain: and in this very book of
his Enchiridi^n and place by you cited he is so plain, that one Mr. Anthony
Alcocke, a zealous disciple as it seems translating it into English, is feign
to write certain animaduersions upon the 110. chapter wherein he confesses S.
Aug. his opinion here for Purgatory, but he labors to obscure his meaning
or reconcile him by fetching other places, as wisely and well to the purpose,
as you are wont to do: but to be brief with you, that which S. Aug. says may
be a question is not of purgatory, or the being of Purgatory as you say most
Linde like, but of the manner of pain: as whether even as men are here
troubled in this world more or less with the loss of worldly things as they
more or less loved them, which trouble or tribulation S. Aug. explicateth to
be that fire, whereof S. Paul speaks saying, that those that build hay, straw,
stubble etc. shall be Saved as it were by fire; whether, I say, men be so
punished in Purgatory, this S. Aug. does not determine, but whether there be a
Purgatory or not, Enchir. cap. 110.
let any man judge since he says there. Neque negandum est defunctorum animas
etc. Neither is it to be denied that the Souls of the dead are relieved by
the piety of their friends living when the Sacrifice of our Mediator is offered
for them, or alms given in the Church: Note here 3. or 4. controversies
decided in this one sentence of S. Aug. Satisfactions, Mass, Purgatory,
Prayers for the dead.
and there he also distinguishes 3. sorts of dead people, some in heaven that
need noe such help, others in hell that cannot be helped by them, a third of
those that are not so well, as not to need them, nor so ill but that they
may be the better for these helps. This S. Aug. speaks certainly and more
we do not say certainly of Purgatory, the particulars of place, manner of
punishment, durance etc. are things disputable among Divines, which you have
nothing to do with: and if for such uncertainties you will reject the belief
of Purgatory, by the same reason you may deny that there is an hell, as it is
like you do in your heart, for else you could not say and write as you do. Now
for S. Greg. who you say gave the first Credo to Purgatory, that is answer
enough which I alleged last out of S. Aug. by which it appears he gave it
an undoubted Credo, long before: for he died near 200. years before S. Greg.
but for founding the belief thereof upon apparitions of dead men and
reuelatio^s of this Saint, and S. Bedes relation, it is most false by the same
argument still: For how could the faith of S. Aug. his time be grounded upon
the revelations of men living two or three hundred years after? or indeed
upon any revelation of any man: faith is grounded upon the revelation of God
alone, delivered unto us by his Church. Therefore to the last place of S. Aug.
I say it is understood that presently as soon as the soul departs, it
receives the doom either of Paradise or hell, that is, whether it is to go
finally and that is both true, and his meaning, as appears by what he says
of the same matter else where thus. Tempus quod inter hominis mortem etc. The
time between the death of a man and the general resurrection contains the
souls in hidden receptacles as each is worthy either of ease or pain
according as it deserved whiles it lived. For it is not to be denied that the
souls of the dead are helped by the piety of their living friends. This place
is so plain as not only not to admit any tergiuersation but also to
explain any other that may seem obscure.

12. A third point of uncertain doctrine as you object is Indulgences, for
which you allege Durand and Gerson. For Durand, look in the of Indulgences,
and in Bellarmine, Lib. 1. de Indulg. cap. 2.
and there you shall find him not to doubt of Indulgences, but of that which
we call thesaurus ecclesiae, for as much as it consists of the satisfactions
of the Saints. And as for Gerson, who says that whether the power of the keys
extend only to such as are on earth, or also to those in Purgatory the
opinions of men are contrary and uncertain, it is most frivolous to object
him. For what does this pertain to faith? or does it pertain only to
Indulgences? is not the question common to other acts of jurisdiction
understood by the power of the keys? this is your argument. Divines dispute
whether the Popes power extend to the souls in Purgatory, ergo the doctrine of
Indulgences is uncertain? This might be answer enough: but to display you a
little more I will say a word or two more of Gerson: and first even in this
point of extending the Popes power over those that are in Purgatory even to the
remission of pain, absolution from venial sin or excommunication before
incurred, he is so favorable in this place by you cited as to grant the
opinions on both sides probable: which is more the^ other Divines grant and is
more then needs for applying Indulgences to the dead. So as in granting
that probable he makes this certain: and this for Indulgences; in as much as
they pertain to the dead. Now for the living or power of Indulgences in
general thus he says: ^rs 2. p. de ^^ulg. con ^. 11. and 12
Indulgentiarum concessio non est parui pendenda seu contemnenda, sed
amplectenda in fide, spe, and charitate Domini nostri IESV CHRISTI, qui
potestatem talium claurum ecclesiasticam dedit hominibus. The granting of
Indulgences is not to be little esteemed or contemned but to be embraced in the
faith, hope, and Charity of our Lord JESUS CHRIST who has given the
ecclesiastical power of such keys to men. So as it is plain that Gerson
holds the doctrine of Indulgences certain noe less then Dura^d and the
whole School of Divines and even the Catholic church.

13. The fourth point of uncertainty is of adoration of images, to which you
say we are uncertain what worshipp we may give. For say you the 2. Nicene
Council allows a civil kind of worship without any corporal submission: but
many of our Divines allow them a higher kind of worshipp: that is, the very
same which is given to their Samplers: Which Bellarmine you say, is against,
and says it is not fit to preach that opinion to the people,, because it
requires such subtle distinctions as the learned cannot well conceive, much
less the ignorant people, and then you bring a place of Valencia allowing
idol-worship as you say by a necessary consequence, these being his words. It
is noe absurdity to this (...) that S. Peter did intimate that some worship of
images was right or lawful, namely of holy images. When as he deterreth the
faithful from the unlawful worship of Images: for to what end should he
determinately point out the unlawful worship of Images, if he had thought
altogether that noe image worship had been lawful. To which I answer that
the doctrine which we teach of faith is not uncertain, that is, only that
images are to be worshipped, not as God, nor as placing any confidence in them.
Now whether they be to be worshipped with the same act and honor which we give
the prototype directly, indirectly to the image, as our act of honor te^deth
directly to the Kings person, and indirectly to his purple, or with an
inferior kind of worship tending directly to the picture it self, but yet as
it is the representation of such a person, or with reference to the person
represented, is a theological speculation out of your element, nor to be
disputed of with an haeretique. Both may stand with faith, as many things more
of which Tertull. says they may Salua regula fidei in quaestionem deuenire. de
praesc. cap. 12.
Come into question the rule of faith being safe. Faith is certain not to be
touched, other things may but you have nothing to do with them till you have
faith. But because you speak of the 2. Council of Nice, as if it were for you,
I cannot here omit to set down what it says of you and your doctrine, for
your comfort: to those that use the words spoken in scripture against idols,
against venerable images, Anathema or be they accursed: to those that do not
salut holy and venerable images Anathema: to those that call holy images idols
Anathema; to those that say that Christians come to images as to Gods Anathema;
to those that say the Catholic Church has at some time received idolatry
Anathema. These are all the Councels words and curses. Of all which you cannot
but confess your self guilty; and you can insinuate as if the Council were
rather for you then us; would a man think it possible? But besides whereas you
say the Council pretends nothing but a civil kind of embracing or kissing
without any corporal submission unto the Images, I would know of you what it
means when speaking of images it says they are to be worshipped so far. ad
osculum, and ad honorariam his adorationem tribuendam: to give a Kiss and
honoring adoration. Does not adoration include corporal submission and
specially honorary adoration? Neither does the Council mean only a civil kind
of embracing or kissing, as you call it, but a religious worshipp. For it
continually adds some one or more of these epithets, Sancta, sacra,
veneranda, or venerabilis. Holy; sacred, venerable to the word imago image.
When it speaks of images. But because you seem not to think corporal
submission to be sufficiently employed by the Council either in those epithets
or in the words colo, suscipio, veneror, and adoro, which go together for the
most part in the subscriptions of the Bishops in the Council, (though among men
it would be counted a poor kind of worship or respect which should want all
corporal submission). I will bring you most plain and express proof both of
prostration and kneeling by 2. several relations or histories. One is this. It
is there related how when the Relics of S. Anastasius a Moncke and Martyr
were brought to Cesarea the people received the^ with great devotion and honor
only one great Lady would not, but in her own heart slighted them. Whereupon
the Saint appearing to her in her sleep she was taken with a very vehement
pain in her back for 4. days together till the same Saint appearing to her
again in the same manner, willed her to go to S. Anastasius in such a place
of the town where his Relics and picture were kept, she not knowing all this
while who it was that appeared unto her: and so awaking she was carried
thither, and as soon as she came in the sight of the picture, she cried out
that, that was the man that in her sleep foretold her the misery which she was
fallen into: and when she had prostrated her self upon the ground before his
picture and wept, and thereby appeased the Saint, she was restored to her
former health. The other story is of S. Mary Aegyptiaca her conversion and the
occasion thereof, and how she came into the Church, adored the cross, and
picture of our B. Lady whereof there is a large relation, only this I bring
for my purpose that she says of her self that upon her knees she prayed
before the picture of our B. Lady and there spoke unto it as if she had our B.
Lady present in her picture. Which her miraculous conversion and other effects
which followed did show to be pleasing to almighty God. These 2. stories with
many more are there not only related but publicly allowed and approved by the
whole Council. How then can you Sir Humphrey say that the Council pretends
nothing but a civil embracing or kissing without any corporal submission to
images? What greater submission can there be then kneeling and prostrating
ones self upon the ground before a picture and speaking and praying thereto?
but this is like the rest of your sayings.

14. Now for Valentia his words which you bring as if he did allow some
idol-worship, it is manifest by them that he does not allow any such; but out
of the words illicitis simulachrorum cultibus in S. Peter, taking the word
Simulachrum in a good sense, that is for the same as imago, as some ancient
authors do, and withal explicating his meaning in the use thereof, he says
it may seem to be gathered out of S. Peter's determining the word Simulachrum
by the words illicitis cultibus that there is some good image-worshipp. Which
argument be it good or bad, or be his use of the word Simulachra for images
good or badd, it is all one for the matter, as long as you see his meaning to
be absolutely to condemn idol-worship and approve image worship. Neither does
your noting of the greek word in the margent in proof that S. Peter speaks
of idol-worship avail you. For Val. speaks only of the Latin word, which
is more indifferent and in some authors signifies the same that imago and even
the word (...) though it be now by the use of Fathers, Councels, and Doctors
determined to signify an empty or vain image, of a thing which is not,
according to that of S. Paul idolum nihil est in mundo: an idol is nothing in
the world, Cor. 7.4.
yet if a man respect the primitive signification or etymology, it might
perhaps be taken more indifferently, for it comes from the word (...) which
signifies species or forma. the seeming shape or beauty of a thing or person;
but it is true that in the signification of words we must follow the
ecclesiastical rule. Neither do I allow Valencia his use of the word
Simulachrum, and explication of S. Peter's text, or even his argument drawn
from thence though the point of doctrine which he defends be true, to wit,
image worship. But this is to show you how he might use the word harmelesly,
especially declaring himself plainly by other words; though for you to stand
trifling and co^te^ding about words when you see his meaning, is a sign of
your want of matter. But here by the way I cannot but note how, to urge the
matter more against Valentia you run your self upon the rocks: for you
observe that the word used by Saint Peter in that place signifies idol-worship
not image worship. Wherein you seem plainly to confess that image worship
and idol-worship, and consequently an image and an idol are not all one.
Whereby as you think to advantage you self in this place against the Jesuit,
so you do not mark that herein you contradict your self and the whole
current of your own Doctors, whose chief arguments against images are
certain places of Scriptures against idols which you also bring before. For if
an image and an idol be not all one then are all your arguments nothing worth,
or if they be, then is Valentia's argument good: choose which you will. And
therefore if you cast up your counts aright you will find you have lost more
then you have gained by this citation of Valencia.

15. A fifth point of uncertainty you deliver in these words. Concerning the two
Sacraments of Baptism and the Eucharist it is most evident says Bellarmine,
but concerning the rest of the Sacraments it is not so certain. And out of
Canus you say the Divines speak so uncertainly of the matter and form of
Matrimony that they do not resolve whether it gives grace or not: thus you
Sir Humphrey: to which I answer that for the place of Bellarm. you are
convinced before of manifest corruption. For whereas Bellarm. says it is
certain, Cap. 9.. 4. in fine.
but not so manifest you leave out not manifest, and change certain into not
certain: besides what is that which Bellarmine says is not manifest but
certain? that these two are Sacraments the rest not? noe such matter Sir
Knight, it is their signification, which he speaks of, and yet not their
signification of grace, which they cause, but their signifying of the passion
of Christ which is the beginning, and aeternal life which is the end of the
grace given by the Sacraments: this signification he says is certain, but not
so evident in the rest of the Sacraments. For Canus you corrupt him as fowly
also. For first you join two several places together as if they were but one
in Canus himself, and then make him say that the Divines do not resolve
whether it (that is Matrimony) gives grace or not which is most flatly false.
For as I showed before he grants it with all Divines to be properly a
Sacrament: his two places severally are thus; the Divines speak so diversely
of the matter and form of Matrimony that it were folly for a man to resolve
any thing certain; this is one whereof I spoke more before and showed that his
meaning is not to say that it is not certain whither it be a Sacrament or not
or whither it have a matter and form: Cap. 9.. 4.
for that I showed to be most certain and by most express words of his own:
but that noe man can say determinately which is the matter and which the form.
Which as Bellarmine says well is not so necessary for us to know, but that
without it we may and ought to acknowledge a true Sacrament: it is enough to
know what is requisite for celebrating a true Sacrament and what those things
are without which it is not a Sacrament, though we do not know which of those
things is the matter and which the form, For example if a Priest in baptism
use true water and the right words he does administer a true Sacrament though
he should not know which is the matter, and which the form, nay though he
should think the words to be the matter, and water the form though the clean
contrary be truth. The other place of Canus is that he says that Matrimony
contracted without a Priest is noe Sacrament, because in his opinion the words
which the Priest speaks are the form: and of that kind of Matrimony he
consequently denies it to give grace: but of Matrimony absolutely and as it is
used in the Catholic church he never made doubt. See before his words.

16. The last matter of uncertainty is of our traditions which you say you are
uncertain whereas the Scripture is written to give us certainty. For this
saying you allege noe Catholic, truly nor falsely, and therefore it is not
to be counted of being so manifestly false, For whence have we the certainty
of the very Scriptures themselves, but by tradition, and much more of the sense
and meaning of the Scriptures? Besides as I have often said and showed, this
your prime principle is not only false, but contrary to express Scripture,
and contrary to the common consent of all Fathers, which the Reader may see in
whole treatises written hereof. Wherefore to come to an end of this your
Section of certainty, we find nothing in matter of faith uncertain in the
Catholic church, nothing certain on your side but only that you are always
and every where Sir Humphrey Linde.

Of the 11. Sect. entitled thus. Chap. 11.
The testimonies of our adversaries touching the greater Safety, comfort, and
benefit of the Soul in the Protestant faith, then in the Romish. CHAPTER XI.
1. FROM certainty you come to Safety, whereof you needed not have made so
distinct mention and proof it following necessarily and manifestly that, that
faith which is most certain in it self, is also most safe for men to follow
as also it cannot be Safe without certainty: Wherefore as you were not able to
prove it certain in your former section, so are you not able to prove it Safe
in this. Wherein notwitsta^ding we must hear a little what you say. And first
I wonder you talk still so much of proving the Safety and Comfort of your
faith out of our authors, when you cannot name that man that says any such
word. For suppose you find one author or two of ours, that says something
different from the common opinion in this or that particular point of doctrine,
does he presently say the Protestant faith is Safe. For example one says
communion in both kinds of it self gives more gtace, does he therefore say
your faith is safe? noe verily, but the same man does condemn your doctrine
for most unsafe, and dangerous, and leading to the very pit of hell. For even
those, things which of themselves might perhaps seem indifferent, your
disobedience and spirit of contradiction makes them damnable: to eat is a
thing indifferent, but yet to eat with offense of our neighbor is ill as S.
Paul says. Rom 14.20.
Malum est homini qui manducat per offendiculum. It is ill for a man that
eats by giving offense: and if the offending and scandalizing of one of the
little ones, which our Savior showed, speaking of this matter of Scandal, be
able to make a thing indifferent to become so ill, how much more is
Scandalizing of the whole Church, and rebellious stifnes able to make a thing
otherwise indifferent, or perhaps in some respect good, to become not only ill
but damnable? But leaving that, I come to the point.

2. You prove the Safety of your doctrine above ours, because Bellarmine says
of the Scripture, that it is a most certain and safe rule of believing: and
so also say we: but what then? wherein is your faith more safe then ours? we
rely upon the same ground of Safety as much, and more then you, how then are we
less safe? You say we rely upon the Pope and Church, which is but the
authority of Man. Well grant for disputation sake it be but the authority of
man? if it were so that we did leave the authority of Scripture, and stick
only to the Pope, and Church, it were somewhat: then you might with some
color at least say your way is more safe but now that we acknowledge and
reverence the authority of Scripture as much, nay much more then you, and join
therewith the authority of the Pope and Church, for exposition of the same,
though it should be but humane, how does that diminish the authority of the
Scripture, or make it less safe? A man in his right wits would think it
would rather help then hinder. But what if this authority be more then
humane, as indeed it is, are we not then much more safe? I say nothing of
unwritten traditions which come not short for authority even of the written
word it self, and which in two resspects seem even to surpass it. One respect
is that traditions extend themselves to more things then the written word, and
even to the authorizing and expounding of the same. For by tradition we receive
both the books of Scripture, and understand the sense thereof. The other, that
they are less subject to the cutting knives of haeretiques, which makes them
so mad at them. For they cannot so corrupt them, by putting in and out at
their pleasure as they can do the written Word. And this indeed seemed the
Safest way in Vincentius Lerinensis his days: for he being desirous to learn
how he might discern Catholic truth from haeretical falsehood received this
answer from every body as he says: that if he would avoid the deceits and
snares of Haeretiques and remain sound in faith, he should strengthen his
faith, two ways, to wit, by the authority of the divine Law and then by the
Tradition of the Catholic Church. Whereby you see the judgment of antiquity
concerning your Safety and Ours.

3. Again, you say it is safer to adore Christ sitting at the right hand of
his Father, then to adore the Sacramental bread. I ask how you prove it? for
say I again it is as dangerous to deny adoration to Christ in the Sacrament,
as to Christ in heaven. For he is as surely in the Sacrament as in heaven: the
same Catholic faith teaching us both verityes: and to make you study a
little, I may say in some sort more sure. For a man that would be contentious
might deny Christ to sit at the right hand of his Father, because his Father
has neither right nor left hand. Wherein for answer you must fall to expound
the Scripture and declare the meaning of that article which says it: and
therein you shall find as much to do, as we do in expounding the words HOC
EST CORPUS MEVM. Besides do not we adore him in heaven too, as well as you. How
are you more safe then we? Yea but you will say that we adore him on the altar
too. It is true we do indeed: and to suppose it doubtful for the present,
whether he be there or not, I ask wherein are you more safe then we? if he
be not there, we are in danger of adoring him where he is not; if he be there,
then are you in danger by not adoring him where he is: and it is as much
danger not to adore him there; if he be there, as not to adore him in heaven.
Wherein I say then are you more safe, though there were noe more certainty of
belief on our side then yours?

4. Thirdly you tell us out of S. Aug. it is more safe to trust wholly in God,
then partly in God, partly in our selves. So we say also, and so we do.
Wherein then are you more, or we less safe? you say we trust in our good
works: it is true thus far, that we teach that men by good work may
cooperate to justification, meriting grace and glory, but that is but
conditionally if a man do such good works: but yet we are far from
nourishing your confidence which you speak of, which is not grounded so much
in that general principle of good works, as in the particular, that I for
example do these and these good works. Wherefore I say it is false in your
sense. For we do not teach any man to persuade himself, that he is just and
holy, but teach him to fear and doubt himself continually, and in all his
works according to the example of Job. Verebar omnia opera mea. I did fear all
my works: and if a man do good works we teach that he cannot be sure, that
they are good as they are done by him: that is that he does them with such a
right intention and by help of supernatural grace, and that therefore noe man
can be sure of his own justification according to that also of Job. Job 9.28.
Etsi fuero simplex, hoc ipsum ignorabit anima mea. Although I shall be simple
(that is good) the self same shall my soul be ignorant of. Job 9.21.
Again we say that, suppose he do know the^ to be good, yet they have not
that goodness from him, or as they are his, but as they are from almighty God,
and by his grace. And yet more we teach that he may fall again, and loose all
his labor, which does exceedingly diminish confidence of a man's self: so as
we leave nothing for a man to trust to of himself, but that he must give all
to God, as S. Paul did in saying: 1. Cor. 15.10.
non ego sed gratia Dei mecum: not I but the grace of God with me: and qui
gloriatur in Domino glorietur. That he that does glory may glory in God: and to
show that we have nothing of our selves we say again with the same Saint, quid
habes quod non accepisti. What have thou which thou have not received. Now on
the other side examine you your own doctrine a little better and see whither
it does not teach the contrary vain confidence in most of these points: as
that a man must assure himself, that his sins are forgiven; that he must
assure himself of his salvation; that he cannot fall from grace and the like.
Which ground supposed, how can he work his salvation with fear and trembling
as S. Peter teaches? And so we have answered 3. points of Safety which you
begin withal out of your own invention. Now you come to other points of
Safety which you prove by authority of other men.

5. The first of these and fourth in order is Communion in both kinds, which
you say is better then in one kind alone; you prove it out of Cassander, Vazq.
Hales, and Valencia. I answer that for Cassander you know he is noe author to
be alleged against a Catholic. For Vazq. it seems you are not so well
skilled in him, as to cite him out of his own works, but out of the french
Minister Chamier, who is another great man with you. But for the matter it is
true, some few Catholics as Vazq. Hales, p. 4. q. 11. m. 2. ar. 4. 3.
(for Valencia I shall tell you more anon) are of opinion, that it is of
greater merit and fruit to receive in both kinds, then in one. But I ask you
why it should be more safe to follow those two, then 10. 20. 30. or 40. Other
Divines to the contrary. For my part I do not see any reason for it, if you
weigh the matter by reason, or by number, and authority of Doctors. Secondly
neither of these two does acknowledge any danger in our practice of one kind,
but allow it for good and lawful. For so says Hales, quia Christus integre
sumitur sub vtraque specie, been licet sumere corpus Christi sub specie panis
tantum, sicut fere vbique fit a laicis in ecclesia. Because Christ is received
entirely under each kind, it is very lawful to receive the body of Christ under
the kind of bread only, as it is used almost every where by the Layity in the
Church. And Vazq. employeth a whole disputation in the proof of the same Truth
out of Scripture, and tradition, showing withal that the Latin Church did
with very good reason forbid Communion in both kinds; and soluing all the
arguments of the Haeretiques against it. So as he acknowledges not your
doctrine to be either safe or the same with his but a clean different haeresy.
For his is a School opinion, not of the safety, but of the fruitfulnes of
Communion in One or both kinds. Yours is an haeresy denying the sufficiency of
one kind, and urging both, as a matter of necessity for the integrity of the
Sacrament, and fulfilling of Christ's praecept, and denying also the authority
of the Church, for dispensing therein. And though in speculation Vazq. rather
allow both kinds to be more fruitful, yet all circumstances considered he
deemeth Communion in one kind absolutely better, for many great reasons
pertaining to the reverence of the Sacrament and common good, which do not
only counteruaile but far surpass the want of that fruit which is given
more by the other kind, all necessary grace being given by one alone as he
teaches. And for Hales, besides that he holds it very lawful to communicate
in one kind only which is directly against you: I think a man that would go
about it might easily puzle you out of him: even for so much as pertains to
the perfection of the spiritual fruit. p. 4. q. 10. m. 3. ar. 1.
For thus he says, to that which is said, that he that receives under the
form of bread only receives the Sacrament perfectly and entirely I answer,
that this Sacrament is received two ways spiritually and sacrame^taly.
Wherefore I say that quantum ad spirituale^ sumptione^ perfect accipit; for as
much as pertains to the spiritual receiving, he receives it perfectly, but
not so for the Sacrame^tal receiving. Now this perfection of a Sacrament he
explicateth before to consist in the representation which, says he, is not so
perfect in one kind, as both. Which we also grant though we say the fruit to be
the same in One and both kinds. See Sir Humphrey how you can get out of this
brake? Now for Valencia your third author whom you cite in the margent saying
that he affirms the same, to wit, with Hales and Vazq. let any man see
whether you do not play him a Lindy-tricke. For these are his words, in the
very same chapter by you cited. Val de leg. us. Euchar. cap. 6.
Hoc sacramentum tam est per se fructuosum and efficax in altera specie, quam
in vtraque specie. This sacrament is of it self as fruitful and effectual in
one kind as in both: and so your doctrine in this point is as safe and
comfortable as your citation of this author is true.

6. The fifth of your safe and profitable points is, of your communion of Priest
and people together. the safety you prove not by any thing but your own bare
word. For the profitablenes of the Sacrifice indeed, you prove it is more when
the people communicate with the Priest, out of the Council of Trent, Harding,
and Bellarmine: but Sir that is not the controversy between you and v^; but
this whether the Priest may not say, Mass, unless he have some to communicate
with him; or even whether it be more profitablenes for the Priest, that he have
some to communicate with him, or even whether the Sacrifice be less perfect in
it self in that case or not? Of this you say not a word: as neither do your
authors which you bring: for they speak only of the fruit which would redound
to the people, which we grant to be greater when they communicate with the
Priest then when not. But of the form, or matter of controversy, they all
determine absolutely against you: their whole drift in those places being none
other but to disprove you as may easily appear to any man that will look in
them, and I have partly showed before in the. of private Mass and else where.

7. A sixth point of your safe doctrine is the Marriage of Priests, whereof you
say it is better to live chastely in Matrimony, then by single life to hazard
their souls by incontinency. This you prove by the authority of Aeneas
Syluius, Panormitan, and Cassander. Of which three, the last is noe author to
be reguarded: the first is answered before. The second only remains to be
answered here, to wit, Panormitane whom indeed I find inclined in opinion
for the Marriage of Clergymen; Panor. cap. Cum Plini. de Cler. coning.
yet far otherwise, then you. For first he puts the question, whether the
Church can give way, that a Clarke may marry, as the Graecians do: to which he
answeareth affirmatively: and this he says is out of doubt with him, for so
much as pertayneth to them that are not obliged by tacit or express vow. And
then he proves it by reason, and shows that it is not de iure diuino, as we
also grant. And thereupon says, that he does not only believe it to be in the
Churches power; but he thinks it would be a wholesome statute for the good
and safety of Souls, to let such as will, contain themselves; and such as
cannot, to marry since experience (says he) teaches the contrary effect to
follow of that Law of continency, seeing men do not now live spiritually, nor
are clean but are spotted with uncleanness to their grievous sin. This is
Panormitanes discourse: wherein first he acknowledges this whole matter to
depend upon the Churches authority; and plainly shows by his discourse that
the law of continency does bind: and that it is a grievous sin to go against
it. For which cause though his opinion indeed be, that they should have
liberty to marry, yet he would not have the^ marry against the Law standing in
force: but he would have the Law taken away, which is a far different
doctrine from yours. Secondly he allows the obligation of a Vow tacit or
express, and seems not indeed to speak of such as are so tied: now with
you and your Ministers, that is all one, wheter Chastity be vowed or not vowed:
nay you disallow all such vows. Thirdly he says that where a man is bound by
express or tacit vow the Pope cannot dispense without a great and urgent
cause: which is against you, who require noe dispensation nor any such cause.
Fourthly he does not speak of such as are already ordained: for they have a
Vow either express or tacit: but of those that are to be ordained, whereas
you would have it as free for one as for another. Lastly this opinion of
Panormitane pertains not to the point of doctrine but only to the point of
prudence or conueniency wherein he differs from the common judgment of
Catholics and is therefore worthily noted by other Catholic Doctors. So as
he concurreth not with you in opinion of the lawfulnes of the Marriage of
Priests against the laws of the Church but only in this, that he would have
it made lawful by taking away the contrary law. But now though it be his
opinion, that it is better to let such men marry, why should you think it
safer to follow his judgment being but one single man against the judgment of
all the other Doctors of the Catholic Church against all Fathers, against all
authority of Councels, against the continual practice of the Church from the
very beginning, Bell. lib. 1. de Cler. c. 18. 19. 20. etc. and lib. 2. de mona.
cap. 21. 22. etc.
(Of all which you have abundant proof in Bellarmine,) and which was never
contradicted by any but known wicked men? Why I say should you think it
safer? What reason or color have you? But perhapps you will strengthen
Panormitane by S. Paul who says. It is better to marry, then to burn. but
that gives no strength; for it is not safety of doctrine, which S. Paul
speaks of, but practical safety for matters of life or manners, 1. Cor. 7.9.
of this or that particular man, supposing his disposition, occasions, and
dangers: and so it is free for every man to choose what he will do. Noe man
is forced to it at first in the Catholic Church; but if he take upon him the
office of a Priest, or obligation of a religious state he is then forced to
make good what he has promised, and to render his Vows to God, which the law
of nature and moral honesty requires. Neither is it so out of question, that
it is always safer, even in that kind of safety for a man to marry. For there
is noe less difficulty perhapps and consequently danger for married men to
contain themselves with in the bounds of wedlock, then for Priests to contain
themselves within the bounds of perfect chastity: as both reason and experience
teach; besides that though Saint Paul say it is better to marry then burn, yet
he says it is better not to marry supposing evidently that a man may forbear
Marriage and yet not be forced to burn. Lastly in our case, though the
difficulty may be greater. For as the proverb says difficilia quae pulchra,
high things are hard. Yet considering the helps of almighty God's grace, which
are proportionable and I may also say superaboundant to the dangers of an
office, or state, being undertaken for his sake, it becomes more easy, and
more safe. For so it is that the euangelical Law is more easy, safe, and
comfortable then the old law of Moses, though the things that are required
therein, be far more hard then those in the other. For it is the unction of
the holy Ghost, which God has powered forth abounda^tly in the new Law, that
makes our Saviors yoke sweet, and his burden light, which because your
Ministers want Chastity, seems unto them an intolerable burden. Your way Sir
Humphrey then is not more safe, even in this kind of safety, nor more easy, nor
more comfortable. Let us see whether it be so in the next point, which is of
Prayer in a known tongue.

8. Of this you say S. Thomas of Aquin says, it is manifest that he receives
more benefit which prays and understands what he says: for the mind of him
that understands not is without fruit. You bring also Lyra to the same
purpose, saying that people are better brought to the knowledge of God, and
answer Amen with greater devotion, when they understand the Priest, as also
Caietan saying that it is better by S. Paul's doctrine for the edifying of the
Church, that public prayers were made in a vulgar tongue, to be understood
indifferently by Priests and people, then in Latin With two authorityes more,
one of Gabriel, another out of the Rhemes testament. To all which I answer,
that first you are mistaken in the whole matter. For the question between you
and us is not so much, whither public prayers in Latin be more or less
profitable, as whither they be lawful or not lawful: we affirm them lawful
you deny them to be so. Now show me one author of these which you bring
here, that says as you do, and then I will confess you bring them to some
purpose, otherwise not. But these authors are quite against you, for that
matter and even Caietan himself, 1. Cor. 14.
who speaks most in favor of you says expressly near about the place where
you cite him, that such Prayer is not only lawful, but good and fruitful, and
Saint Thomas also in the Latin cited by you in the margent says as much,
though you corrupt him by your translation which is this. 1. Cor. 14. lect. 3.
Constat quod plus lucratur qui orat and intelligit quae dicit: nam ille qui
intelligit, reficitur and quantum ad intellectum and quantum ad affectum, sed
men's eius qui non intelligit est sine fructu refectionis. It is manifest that
he gains more, who prays and understands what he says: For he that
understands is refreshed, both for as much as pertains to his
understanding, and as much as pertains to his affection: but the mind of him
that understands not, is without the fruit of refection. In which place I
forbear to note your imperfect manner of citing this authority. For who
hearing Saint Thomas to make a comparison between prayer understood and not
understood and to speak of a double fruit or refection, to wit, both of the
affection and mind giving that for a reason why the former is to be preferred.
Who I say hearing this will not expect that Saint Thomas should say something
also of the later as indeed he does. For thus it follows in him. Vnde cum
melius sit refici quantum ad affectum and intellectum, quam quantum ad affectum
solum, constat quod in oratione plus valet prophetiae donum, quam solum donum
linguarum. Wherefore seeing it is better to be refreshed and fedd both in the
affection and understanding then in the affection alone, it is plain that in
prayer the gift of prophecy (or interpretation) is more worth, then the gift
of tongues only. which though it follow so connaturally that a man might
presently suppose it to be there without ever looking in the book, yet you
thought best to leave it out because it was not for your purpose.

9. But having cited the Latin thus lamely you translate even that which you
have cited as lamely. For you take the first and last part of S. Thomas his
sentence and put them in to English leaving out the middle in which he speaks
of the double refection or fruit of both mind and Will and so join them
together with the causal conjunction (for) of your own placing not of S.
Thomas his and putting in an And instead of an (Of) thus; fruit and refection
instead of fruit of refection; which makes a very great alteration of sense.
For you make it thereby seem to your Reader as if S. Thomas meant that he that
understands not his own prayer, were without fruit and refection, that is,
without any fruit; Whereas Saint Thomas his Latin words say only, that he is
without the fruit of refection, to wit, of the understanding, but not of the
affection, and your sense is also helped by your changing S. Thomas his sed
(but) in to your (nam). (for). It is true that Saint Thomas has a (for) but
not as you have it; but joined with that which you left out in the middle of
your sentence thus. For he that understands has a double refection or fruit.
Now between sed and Nam, but and for there is great difference. Sed being a
discretiue or seuering conjunction, whose office is to make a separation or
difference between the things which it joins: and Nam being a causal
conjunction which joins two sentences together with dependancy one of the
other. Lastly you do not mark that you would make S. Thomas co^tradict
himself. For he having said only in the first part of the sentence, that he,
that understood receives more benefit, in the last part you would make him
say that he, that understands not receives noe benefitt. Which two if you
look well into the matter you will find to be co^tradictories; which yet you
would make to be both true, and one to be the reason of the other by joining
them together with your (for) which is most absurd I could also have a saying
to you for the Latin. Wherein you putt the word effectum for affectum: effect
for affection. For the word (effectu^) being more fit to obscure the sense, or
make it rather none, I have just reason by the rest of your good carriage to
think it to be your doing; but because it is but the change of a letter, I
will be content to lay it upon your Printer, and excuse you all I can: and thus
much only for the very citation of the place though in that consist almost
all. For as for the matter it is plain S. Thomas does not disallow or
discommend Prayer in a tongue which the party that prays does not understand;
but acknowledges some fruit therein. Neither does any author you bring say
the contrary. Whereby all your argument is answered.

10. But yet gratis. (The lawfulnes of prayer in a tongue not known to the
party being noe way disproued). I say farther our co^trouersy is not, whether
it be better for men to say, their private devotions in a language which they
understand, then otherwise. For as for that we grant that it is better, as that
note which you have out of the Rhemes Testament acknowledges, but saying
withal that the other is good: because as S. Thomas says, it is better to
refresh or feed both the understanding and will, then the will alone. For
though the refection of the will be the principal fruit, the will being the
principal power in the exercize of prayer: and whereon the fruit of prayer does
necessarily and essentially depend, yet the other helps; but not so, but
that without it the prayer may be good and fruitful: and therefore S. Thomas
puts the will before the understanding in this his sentence. For if the will
or desire be good, the prayer has his fruit, though the understanding be
distracted: as when a man is distracted unwillingly as it happens most
frequently, and with the best men: in which case it were hard a man should be
deprived of the whole fruit of his prayer, without any fault of his. Now a
distracted understanding, is all one with a mind that understands not the
words which he prays. So also with some proportion, or in some respect we
say of public prayer, that the people perhaps might reap some more fruit
that way if they did understand the public prayers: but the question then is
whether that fruit which may come that way, can counteruaile the tenth part of
the inconuenie^ces which may happen by having public prayers in a vulgar
tongue: which are well noted in the Rhemes Testament there where you took out
your note. All which annotation if you had read well and understood, Annot. in
cap. 14. 1. Cor.
you could never have said more of this matter: the inconveniences are much
vanity, curiosity, contempt of Superiors, disputes, emulations, contentions,
schisms, horrible errors, profanations, and diuulgation of the secret
mysteries of the dreadful Sacraments, which of purpose were hidden from the
vulgar, as S. Denis. Eccl. Hier. cap. 1. and S. Basil. de Sp. Sancto cap. 27.
testify: thus that note. Besides the very ignorance of the Latin tongue, and
consequently of all sacred learning, which would follow thereof only in Clergy
men, is ten hundred times more harm, then that fruit in the Layity is good:
to say nothing of the unity of the Catholic Church excellently represented
and maintained hereby, whereof and of other reasons also I spoke before: the
Church therefore which is to reguard the public good; and what is best and
fittest all things considered, might most prudently have ordained the use of
the Latin tongue, although it had not been in use from the beginning; as it
has been, and for the common good even with loss of some fruit to some
private men: though indeed that fruit be noe necessary or needful fruit nor
even fruit at all, the inconvenience being well waighed and compared with the
fruit. Now of this controversy in this manner also none of your authorityes do
urge, but only Caietans; who though he were a good and a learned man, yet in
him the proverb is verified: quand^que bonus dormitat Homerus. He is noted to
be often mistaken, in matters of Divinity which was his proper profession, but
much more in scripture, wherein he was not so well skilled, and so committed
many faults: and in this particular he is greatly mistaken, for he expounds
that chapter of S. Paul to the Corinthians to be of public prayer of the
Church, wherein being so plainly deceived, noe wonder he might say it were
better to have it in a vulgar tongue: and so also for that end he wishes there
were not Organs nor Singing in the Church, that men might understand the words
the better. Wherein if his judgment be good, and to be followed, why have you
Organs and singing in your church? neither were you so well advised in
alleging his authority, for a Puritan may also make use thereof against you
and whereas Caietans reason is the aedification of the Church: he is mistaken
in the very end of prayer, which is not aedification or instruction of the
people but the honor of God immediately. For in prayer the Priest does not
speak to the people but to God in behalf of the people wherein the people
does only join with him. For which understanding of the Priest's prayers is
noe way necessary.

11. But now I come to Gabriel, who you say was so far from approving vocal
prayer in an unknown tongue, that on the contrary he gives 7. special reasons
why it should be understood by the people. But this is most false Sir Humphrey
for Gabriel does not speak of prayer in a known or unknown tongue, nor of
public prayer: but only of private prayer, and of vocal prayer, as it is
compared with mental prayer, and gives these 7. reasons which you allege but
not for proof of what you say, but only to show that beside mental prayer, it
is also convenient to use vocal prayer; some of which reasons indeed have noe
place but where the words are understood, but yet other some have. For thus he
says. Gab. in can. lect. 62.
Sufficit oration mentalis quoad Deum, qui inspector est cordis; vtilis tamen
est priuata vocalis, propter plures causas quas assignant Doctores Alexander,
Thomas, and caeteri. Mental prayer is sufficient for as much pertains to God,
who is the beholder of the heart, yet private vocal prayer is profitable for
many causes which the Doctors Alexander, Thomas, and others assign: and the^
assigns those 7. reasons. So as it is plain he says nothing in this, but
what others say, and that his question is not of prayer in a known or unknown
tongue: but of vocal prayer in general.

12. Your 7. and 8. points of Safe doctrine of not Worshipping images and
praying to Saints I putt together, being short; and not needing much answer.
For reason you allege none, nor authority hut only Erasmus, Cassander, and
Chemnitius. Who are all of as good authority as your self. For as for a word
which you allege out of S. Aug. though you note not the place, I say it is
not to purpose, for it is but this: tutius and iucundius loqu^^ ad meum IESVM.
I speak more safely and more sweetly to my JESUS. You do not say then to
whom: and from hence you might as well infer, that while S. Aug. was upon the
earth he should not so much as speak to any man or desire their prayers: as
well as infer there upon that he should not pray to any Saint.

13. Your last point is our doctrine of Meritts; whereto not having said
sufficiently at first, you think to say more now; but the truth is, you have
more words but not more matter. For here you prove it only out of a word of
S. Bernard's saying, Ser. 1. in Psalm. Qui habitat.
dangerous is the habitation of those that trust in their own merits: and so
say we, but we say withal that to acknowledge that Almighty God, rendereth a
crown of justice to good works done by his grace, and hyre to those that
labor in his vineyard, is not to trust in a man's own merits: but to
acknowledge the mercy, justice, and fidelity of God. For this, not only a man
may acknowledge that has good works, but also a man that has none, nor
thinks he has any, and consequently noe whit confideth in his own merits.
Ser. 61. in c^nt.
Another place is out of the same Saint, but out of an other of his works,
where he asks, what safe rest or security can the weak Soul find but in the
wounds of our Savior. And so say we too: but what does this hinder but a man
may say, as I said before, that God rewards the good works of his Servants
out of his justice and fidelity, which out of his Mercy he gave them grace to
do? but here I note, that in the citing of this place, in the text you putt
the two first words in Latin, thus Vbi tuta? as if you would make one think
S. Bernard pointed at your Safe way: may not a man without wrong to your wit,
think such a conceit might come into your head? though S. Bernard were dead
many ages ago? I will not say so of you Sir Humphrey but yet thought is free,
as they say. Well your next author is Waldensis, who as you tell us thinks
him the sounder Divine, Suar. to. 3. de gr. lib. 12. cap. 1. n. 2.
that simply denies such Merit: but you say not what merit? but it is true
Walden. as Suarez well notes though he speak not of this controversy, but
against the Pelagians. is somewhat too strict, V. Bell. lib. 5 de iustif. cap.
16.
and though he acknowledge the thing, yet he does not so well like the manner
of speaking of merit, as also some other Divines do not so approve the word
meritum de condigno, though in the thing it self they all agree, to wit, that
aeternal life is given to men as the reward of their good works, which is all
that others mean by condign merit. Your last authority is a place of Bell.
which has been answered before, to wit, that it is most safe to trust wholly
in the merits of Christ. Which I wonder why you should allege for your
doctrine against ours. For it is ours as well or more then yours neither do we
condemn you for not trusting in your works, Chap. 12.
or trusting wholly in Christ, if so be you do not deny the necessity and
efficacy of good works; for purchasing grace and glory. And that is your
doctrine which you should show to be Safe, but that you cannot, nor do not so
much as go about. Wherefore to come to an end of this Chapter all your proofs
sailing in every point, your vaunting conclusion of the Safety, profitt, and
Comfort of your belief vanishes into smoke, as the rest does.

Of the 12. Sect. the title whereof is this. Our adversaries convicted by the
evident testimonies of the Ancient Fathers either ridiculously elude them, or
plainly reject them. CHAPTER XII.
1. IT cannot be unknown to any man of learning or that has but any the lest
acquaintance with the controversies of this age, what great advantage we
Catholics have by the writings of the ancient Fathers, how highly we esteem
them, what confidence, we place in them, and how we appeal to them for
decision of our controversies, and how small respect on the other side
Haeretiques show either to their persons or writings, as being in their
opinions but men and subject to error or rather how contemptibly they speak
of them. For proof whereof a man need not go farther then that little
treatise of Campians 10. reasons: the 5. of which is of the Fathers. Where a
man may see what the Haeretiques say of them they call one an old doting man:
another they call a childish writer; a third they call a dolt and forsaken of
God; a fourth they call a fabler that knows not what he says: a fifth they
say is bewitched by the Devil: a sixth they say is as damned as the Devil,
injurious to the Apostle, blasphemous, wicked, impious? and what Fathers are
these think you that they name thus? who but Denis the Areopagite,
Hippolitus, Cyprian, Gregory Nazianzene, Ambrose, and Hierome: and for the
writings of the Fathers they say this man's are like dreams and most
pernicious, another has foul wennes, another writes like a madd or frantique
man, another brings forth darnel and dreggs, others have left blasphemies to
posterity: and the like. One haeretique prefers one Calvin before an 100.
Augustines, another cares not for a thousand Augustines, Cyprians, Churches,
whose very words and places are quoted by F. Campian. And yet here is a Knight
of the same brood that undertakes forsooth in a particular Section to prove
that we establish the antiquity of his doctrine, and decline the certainty and
safety of our own: by saying that we avoid the proof of Fathers? wherein he
shows himself more and more impertinent, the farther he goes. For whereas
there has been sometimes one father, that has erred, or held some singular
opinion different from the common, of other Fathers and one or two ancient
writers that have even become Haeretiques: because our authors note those
things so, as noe Haeretique can but acknowledge that to be true which we say,
nay and he himself cannot tell what to say against us, he accounts this
forsooth to be eluding of the Fathers or rejecting their evident testimonies.
Neither does he in all this Section bring one argument, or one word of
authority to disprove any thing that any author of ours has said; nor does
he allege even the reasons which our authors give of their saying, whereas
they give very many and solid reasons: So that for my part I cannot tell what
the man means in this manner of dealing nor what to say to him: for even the
words of our authors which he brings are very sufficient answeares, so as I
see not well what more he need to have: but because in the fashion or slight
manner of speaking he may delude some of his Readers and make them think the
answeares insufficient: I must a little more discover his impertinency in
leaving out some of the answeares and extenuating others, and even in bringing
some nothing at all to this purpose.

2. And so to begin with him: he says in the first place that touching the
all sufficie^cy of Scriptures S. Chrysostom says the Church is known,
tantu^modo only by the Scriptures: and heerevpon he asks this question, what
say the Romanist to this authority? Bell. says he, answeareth, it is probable
the author was a Catholic, but it seems to be none of Chrysostom. thus he.
To which I answer first that I find not this place objected in Bellar.
whereto to give any answer at all: but there is another place not much
unlike; and to that he answeareth that the work out of which it is taken is
not Chrysostom. but another's, commonly cited by the name of author. imperfecti, who
Bell. says was either an Arrian himself, or his work was corrupted by Arrians
and this he does not barely say, neither in his controversies nor in his book
de Scripto eccles. De verb. Dei. lib. 4. cap. 11.
Which is the book here cited by Sir Humphrey where Bellarmine says the
thing, but not by way of answer, (as he makes him) I say he does not only
say it, but also prove it by a plain example or two of Arianisme: Verb. Io.
Chrysostom.
but because he finds Catholic doctrine in other places of the same work,
and in the same points, he rather thinks the author to be a Catholic, and
his work only to have been corrupted: and this is most true and evident.
Which had the Knight but set down thus plainly, what had there been more to
be objected or answered? but he curtails it, as if Bell. had said only it is
none of Chrysostom. Which is also so true and plain, as he himself cannot
gainesay it and yet he is not ashamed for the creditt of his objection, to call
it Chrysostomes. But the place it self, is so far from proving the all
sufficiency of Scripture, as it proves nothing at all but the insufficiency of
Sir Humphreys wit. For how many ways may it be answered, even supposing that
the words were S. Chrysostomes or some other good author's being but these
that the Church is known only by scriptures? For I ask him what then, what
is this to many other points which we say cannot be known by only scripture?
Were this a good consequence the Church is known by only Scripture, ergo all
things else and even Scripture it self is known only by scripture? surely
noe: and yet this consequence must be good or else Sir Humphrey your argument is
not good. Besides these words may be understood of the Scriptures compared with
other Writings, that is, that the Church is known to us only by Scriptures
not by other Writings, whereof either none speak so clearly of the Church,
or none are like thereunto for authority: which yet does not exclude other
proofs or marks of the Church. And indeed the Church is most known and best
proved out of Scripture, of any point of our faith as may appear by this that
S. Aug. proves the same so notably out of Scriptures only against the
Donatists, in a particular book of that matter, De unit. eccles. Aug. in Psalm.
30.
and in another place he says the Scriptures speak more plainly of the
Church, then of Christ himself; because the holy Ghost foresaw it was more to
be contradicted: and what? might not these words be taken somewhat in the same
sense? but this shall serve for that place.

3. You come next with two places of Saint Aug. whereof one was answered
before, and it is only where you tell us he says that many are tormented with
the Devil, who are worshipped by man on earth: to this Bellarmine say you,
answeareth that perhaps it is not S. Augustines making you Reader believe as if
Bell. neither gave other answer, nor any reason of this answer. Whereas he
does both, his reason why he thinks it not Saint Augustines is both because
he could never find any such place in him, and it is like he should find it if
it were there; he having been so diligent a reader of S. Augu. as appears
by his works he was, Bell. de Sanct. beat. lib. 1. cap. 9.
as also because noe Haeretique that obiecteth it does note the place where it
is to be found, as they are wo^t to do in their other objections; and it is
like would do in this, if they could find it: but because Sir Humphrey you are
a man so well read in S. Aug. and stand so upon answer of this place. Do
you but tell us where it is, and you shall then see what we will say unto you;
mean while look a little better in Bellar. again and tell us whether there
be not 3. or 4. other answeares. See also before cap. 10. The other place of
Saint Augu. is as you say, touching the Popes supremacy, because S. Augu. in
those words of our Savior. Thou art Peter and upon this rock will I build my
Church, takes not Peter and this rock to be all one: but the Rock to be our
Savior himself, and Petrus to be a deriuatiue only of Petra, to which you
tell us Stapleton makes answer, that it was lapsus humanus, for want of
knowledge of the Greek and caused by the diversity of the two languages Latin
and Greek. Which answer though you relate in a slight fashion as if you
took it to be in sufficient yet you neither do nor indeed can say against
it, if you know Greek and Latin: or if you do not, go but to some of your
Ministers, and get them to look in their own Greek Lexicons I mean set out
by Haeretiques: and see whether (...) be an adjective and a deriuatiue of (...)
or whether it be not a substantive signifying the very same thing: and let them
look yet farther into the original tongue it self, to wit, the Syriake wherein
our Savior spoke, Lib. 1. To: Pontif cap. 25.
and see whither they be not more the same; to wit, the only word Cephas in
both places. On the other side it is well known Saint Augu. professed noe
great skill in Greek as he witnesses of himself in many places. Aug. in
Psalm. cont. Partem Donat. and ep. 165.
Besides Saint Augu. does not bring this exposition to derogate from Saint
Peter's primacy, which he confesses in 20. places as may be seen in
Bellarmine and where for proof thereof he uses the very word Petra which
here he distinguishes from Petrus calling the Seat of Peter this rooke.
Numerate Sacerdotes ab ipsa sede Petri, ipsa est petra quam non vincunt
superbae inferorum portae. Reckon, says he to the Donatists, the Priests from
even the seat of Peter, that is the rock which the proud gates of hell do not
overcome. How then does he deny S. Peter's primacy and perpetuity of his Sea?
Again Sir Humphrey you might find other answeares; for Saint Augu. himself
in his retractations puts both the explications wherein the word Petrae is
spoken of Christ and of Peter, leaving the choice to the Reader: allowing both
interpretations, which you do not, because one is flat against you: Whereas we
do not reject either, as being against us; but only we show the one not to be
so good; because it stands not so with the original tongues (which that
Saint was not so well skilled in,) and literal sense of scripture which noe
Haeretique can deny.

4. The 3. place is out of S. Ignatius for proof of Communion in both kinds.
Bellar. de Euchar. lib. 4. cap. 26
One cupp is distributed to all to which you say Bellarmine makes answer that
in the Latin books it is not found, that one cupp is given to all, but for
all: against which you can say nothing: but give me cause to say much against
you. For first Bellarmine does not say one cupp is given for all: but says
vnus calix totius ecclesiae. One cupp of the whole Church. Which is the true
reading, and indeed another thing. Secondly though you make as if Bellarmine
did only barely say this without farther reason or proof: yet is it far
otherwise for as for the reading he says that though the Greek have it as the
Haeretiques commonly cite, that is as you do here, yet the true reading is as
the Latin translation which we follow has it, whereto he says there is more
trust to be had then to the Greek books of S. Ignatius, which we have now.
Whereof he brings this proof that the testimonies cited out of him, as we
find in the works of S. Anastasius and Theodoret, agree better with our Latin
translation then the Greek which is now extant. Which is a plain proof of
the betternes and greater pureness thereof as being taken out of the ancient
Greek editions. Besides that Bellarmine proves this even out of the
Magdeburgians, because they cite this very place at we do. Neither does he
answer this authority only by the variety of the reading, but withal he
gives 2. answeares more: one that S. Ignatius puts all the force in the
unity of the bread and cupp. thus, that though many eat and many drink yet
the bread and cupp is but one, and the same, from whence it follows not, that
all must drink thereof but only that: all that drink, drink but of one and
the same cup. Thirdly he answeareth that at most, take the words how you will,
they can signify noe more but only the practice of that time. All this does
Bell. say which you could craftlly dissemble, and make your Reader believe, as
if he shuffled over the matter only with a different reading without farther
reason: but in this you Linde it as you do every where else.

5. A 4. author is Origin out of whom you have these words touching the
Sacrament of Christ's body. Thus much be spoken of the typical and symbolical
body: to which you say Sixtus Senensis makes answer that he suspecteth the
place to be corrupted: thus you here: and a little after you come about with
Origin again, and say; if we produce Origin, Ribera the Jesuit says he was
full of errors, which the church always detested. To the first place I
answer that beside that answer of Sixtus Senensis; which I do not see you
disprove, V. Bell. de Euch lib. 2. cap. 8.
you know other Catholic authors give other answeares. Some say not only
that place to be corrupted; but that whole work of his to be dubiae fidei of
uncertain auctority. Others explicate that, and other places brought out of
the same work by Peter Martyr against Gardener not of the Sacrament of
Christ's body, but of a certain holy bread, which was want to be given to such
as did not communicate, in place of the Eucharist; whereof there is frequent
mention in antiquity: but Bellarmine has a plain and substantial answer,
that these words are spoken of the Eucharist, and that they are nothing against
the real presence; neither do I see any cause in the world, why a man should
decline the authority, or try any other way of answer. For is it not most
true, that it is the typical and symbolical body of Christ, in as much as it is
representative of Christ himself upon the cross or even as he is now in
heaven in as much as it is a pledge of aeternal life: especially seeing Origin
in many other places alleged by Bellarmine speaks most plainly of the
real praesence. Now for the later place I see not why you should be troubled
at Ribera's words of Origin. For he does not speak them by way of answer to
any objection (though you please to say so, for your words are these: if we
produce Origin; as if you did object some place out of him which you do not:)
or weakening his authority for his own advantage, for he writes noe
co^trouersy, but only by way of general advice: he himself as he says having
anciently been well inclined toward Origin, for the fame of his learning; but
finding him so deeply censured by many holy Fathers and general judgment of
the Church, he altered his opinion of him: this I say he speaks only by way
of advice being to comment upon Malachias the Prophet and being there to treat
which were the best interpreters of scripture without any reguard to any
objection or controversy. Now what is this to your purpose, or what can you
except against it? I see not, nor any man else nor even your self I think, if
you mark what you say. But why should you allege Ribera the Jesuit, as if he
were the only man that did condemn him. See in Bellarm. de Script. Eccles.
whether he be not censured of error by S. Basil, and condemned of haeresy and
reckoned among Haeretiques by S. Epiphanius, as for S. Hierome, it is well
known how deeply he condemns him: Who also translated one of Origen's works
full of errors to that end, to desplay them: and even in the 5. General
Council to say nothing of particular men, there is anathema said to him, and
his writings, even as to Arius, Macedonius, Eunomius, Nestorius, and Eutyches:
and yet you could find nobody that should tax Origin of error but one poor
Jesuit: though almost all this be mentioned by the same Jesuit and in the same
place which you cite so as you could not choose but see it. What then shall a
man say to this your manner of dealing?

6. A fifth Father is Theodoret: touching transubstantiation. Who, say you,
says the substance of bread and wine cease not in the Sacrament: to which
you tell us Valencia makes answer that he erred in the Council of Ephesus,
though afterward he repented him, as if this were all the answer, that either
he or any man else gives; or as if even that were not true which Valencia says
of Theodoret's erring in the Council of Ephesus: Chap. 9. 3
but to this place I answered before showing it neither to be against us, nor
that to be Valencia his only answer but the last only of 3. or 4. besides
other men's answeares.

7. The 6. is Epiphanius touching images: of whom you say out of a certain
Epistle of his, he found a veil at the entrance of the church representing the
image of Christ, or some Saint which he cut in pieces, and withal commanded
that none such should be hereafter suffered to hang there: to this you say
Sanders and Baronius make answer, that they are not S. Epiphanius his words
but the words of some counterfaict, and image-breaker: as if these two were the
only men that said so, or as if they said so only, because it was against
the worship of images, without farther reason of their saying, or as if that
were their only answer: but in all these you fail fowly. For it is not the
answer of these two alone, but the common of almost all learned men; nor the
only answer, nor upon any one or more man's bare word. That it is not the
only answer, may be seen in Bellarmine who brings two more, Bell. lib. 2.
de imag. cap. 9.
one out of Waldensis who supposes it to have been so done by Epiphanius, in
reguard of the Anthropomorphit haeretiques reigning at that time, the other is
of Marianus Victorius and some others saying that, that was not the image of
Christ, or any Saint, but of some profane man hung there in the Church as if it
had been the picture of some Saint, that being noe fit place for it: by
occasion whereof I cannot but note your corrupt citing of this testimony as you
call it of Epiphanius: for whereas the pretended words are these. Cum
inuenissem imaginem hominus pendentem in ecclesia tanquam Christi aut alicuius
Sancti, nescio enim cuius erat. When I had found the image of a man hanging in
the Church as if it were the image of Christ or some Saint, for I know not
whose it was. You say thus that he found a veil representing the image of
Christ, or some Saint: which is plain corruption. For S. Epiphanius says in
plain manner, it was neither the image of Christ or any Saint, but that it was
the image of a man he knows not who. Which if it had been Christ's or any
Saint's he would have known whose it was: neither would he have called the
image of Christ or any Saint the image of a man: and then he makes a
comparison or likeness between the hanging of that picture, and the picture
of Christ or some Saint. Which shows plainly both, that it was not Christ's
nor any Saint's: and also that it was the custom to hang the images of Christ
and his Saints in the Church. It is also an idle senseless expression of
yours, when you say a veil representing the image of Christ. For the veil was
not the picture of a picture, and therefore did not represent the image but
represented the man: You leave also out those words nescio cuius erat. I know
not whose it was. By all which is discovered both your corruption, and the
probability of this answer, suppose these words were Epiphanius his: whereas
indeed they are not: and this is the third answer, which you only take
notice of: but without taking notice or answearing any of the reasons alleged
by any man for the same; Whereas Bellarmine alleges noe less then 9. all
very good, and substantial ones: and some of them moral demonstrations, as
that those words are a piece added at the end of the epistle, put to noe man
knows how, nor with what connection; another is that S. Hierome having
translated that Epistle, whereto these words are added, makes noe mention at
all of them, or any such veil; a third is, that in the 7. general Council
where the Iconoclasts or image-breakers alleged all that ever they could out
of any author, they never mentioned any such authority as this of Epiphanius;
which shows that either the words were not there or at lest that they had not
any shadow of probability against the images of Christ: and Epiphanius the
Deacon in that Council proves two such places to have been corrupted by
Haeretiques, and inserted in the works of S. Epiphanius; more may be seen in
other authors; for this shall serve to discover your honest and upright dealing
with Epiphanius, Sir Humphrey, and show what cause you have to complain of our
eluding or rejecting the Fathers.

8. But yet I shall discover the same more going through with the rest of the
Father's testimonies the next of which is S. Cyprian's touching tradition thus.
From whence is this tradition? for the Lord commanded us to do those things,
which are written, to which you say Bellarmine makes answer that S. Cyprian
wrote thus, when he thought to defend his own error, and therefore it is noe
marvel if he erred in so reasoning: it is true Sir Humphrey, Bellarmine
makes this answer, and it is a very good one and of it self does serve the
turn. For it is most true, that S. Cyprian there writ in defense of
rebaptization which he maintained, and because he saw it could not be impugned
by the written word; but only by unwritten tradition which S. Stephen Pope
then urged against him, he rejected that tradition and fled to Scripture
wherein the badnes of his cause put him to that hard shift. For proof whereof
I will but only ask you whether you think S. Cyprian was then in an error or
not? I presume you will not deny but he was, otherwise you must grant that we
may baptize such as have been baptized in your Church; and are converted to
ours, or that you must baptize such of ours as fall to yours, because you may
say yours is noe haeresy, but rather ours. But whether soever you say of these
two, you I suppose will not, nor indeed can grant rebaptization: for it is
contrary to your belief and practice. Well then, it is an error: Likewise this
error is not otherwise maintained, but by denial of unwritten tradition, and
cannot be overthrown but by holding them: and therefore it must follow of
necessity that it is an error to deny tradition. Or thus, if this rebaptization
be an error and that it follow of that principle of holding to the written word
only, then is that principle false. For it is an ordinary rule in Logic,
that if a conclusion be false or impossible, the premisse or principle from
whence it follows must of necessity be false or impossible: and this rule is
grounded upon a certain axiom, that ex vero nihil sequitur nisi verum. Of
truth there follows nothing but truth: So rebaptization being an error as
you cannot deny, that principle of the only written word from whence it
follows, and whereupon it depends must needs be false. Whereby you may see
Bellarmines argument to be good, and your own to be of noe force. Bell. de
verb. Dei. lib. 4. cap. 11.
But besides Bellarmine added some authority to his reason, thereby giving it a
great deal of credit; which is that S. Aug. does answer and confute that
whole Epistle of S. Cyprian's out of which these words are taken. So that you
might have said, that S. Augustine does elude and reject S. Cyprian's authority
as well as Bellarmine, but that for shame me you could not be so bold with S.
Augustine as you might be with Bellarmine though both said but the same thing.

9. The 8. testimony is S. Chrysostomes touching private Mass in these words.
It is better not to be present at the Sacrifice then to be present and not to
communicate. Bellarm. say you, makes this answer that Chrysostom spoke this
as at other times, by exceeding the truth, when he would only incite men
frequently and worthily to communicate. Where first you wrong Bellarmine, in
strayning his words to the worst sense, and as I may say truly mis-translating
them. For whereas he says that S. Chrysostom spoke this by excess per
excessum are his words, you say by exceeding the truth, which is false. For it
is not all one to say, that a man speaks by excess, and by exceeding the
truth. For there is a figure in Rhetorique called hyperbole or excess. Which
whosoever uses is not said presently to exceed the truth, or speak vntruelly
as you would make Bellar. say of S. Chrysostom. but only to speak by hyperbole
or excess wherein the intent of the speaker is not to be taken so precisely
to the utmost of his words, but with a grain of salt, as we say, because by
that manner of speech, a man intends only to signify the greatness of the
matter, of which he speaks; whither it be commending or discommending. And it
is certain some men use this figure more then others, and specially those who
are more eloquent and who are to frame their discourse to the moving of a
popular or vulgar auditory such as S. Chrysostom. was, therefore for answer of
the matter, Bell. says well, that this Saint being greatly moved with his
peoples coldness in devotion and backwardnes in coming to the holy mysteries,
spoke by excess to make them more apprehend the illnes thereof as we are wont
also to say, a man were better not hear Mass at all, then not to hear it
devoutly, or a man is better not to do such, or such a thing, then not to do
it well, or willingly, and the like; though indeed in our judgment we think
it better the thing be done though with some imperfection, then not at all. But
this we say to signify the desire we have to see it well done, or that we do
not receive that content by the slender or slight manner of doing it. And this
is the very truth of S. Chrysostom. saying, Bell. de Miss. lib. 2. cap. 10
as Bell. makes it to appear plainly: both by an example out of scripture
and by other argument's out of S. Chrysostom. himself which you may look better
upon again, and consider well with your self, whether you have dealt well
with Bell. in alleging his bare words, so as if he had given noe reason for
his saying. Besides I do not find that S. Chrysostom. speak the very words which
you allege so crudely and harshly as you make him. For he does not say
plainly that it is better not to be present at the Sacrifice, then not to
communicate: but to show the indignity of it, brings a similitude of a man
that should inuit a friend to a feast, and that friend coming should only
sit there, and not eat a bitt of meat, Chrysostom. hom. 3. in ep. ad Ephesians.
he asks whether in so doing he do not putt an affront upon his friend that
invited him? and were it not better says he that he had not appeared at all?
wherein he says most truly. Which for all that being but a similitude, does
not hold so rigourously in every particular. Lastly I see not what color
there is in this place, to disprove that which you call private Mass. For if
Saint Chrysostom had said it had been better for the Priest not to say Mass,
then not to have some to communicate with him, it had been something but to
say of the people, that it was better for them not to be there, then not to
communicate I do not see by what consequence it can be drawn against the
Priests saying Mass without communicants: especially seeing it is evident, V.
Durant. de rit. lib. 2. cap. 4. n. 5.
that this Saint did say Mass every day and many of his people did not
communicate past twice or thrice and many also not past once in a twelve month.

10. The 9. ancient author is Prudentius, whose words you cite not, but only
say thus, if we cite Prudentius, Bellarmine answeares I say noe more of him,
but that he plays the Poet, but what I pray you Sir is the reason you
forbear to cite Prudentius his words or sense? any man may easily guess there
is something in the wind; something that you think better concealed then
discovered: but I shall for once supply your want herein. First putting you in
mind that in the beginning of this section you told us you would show how we
elude or reject the testimonies of the Fathers, or to use your own words the
records and real proofs in Fathers and other learned authors touching the
chief points in controversy betwixt us. Now let us see whither that for which
Prudentius is objected in Bellarmine be such or not. The question in Bellarmine
is whether the damned souls in hell feel any benefitt by the suffrages of the
living or not. For the affirmative he brings some sayings of Fathers, which
may seem to insinuate as much, and among others two verses out of Prudentius
thus.

Sunt and spiritibus saepe nocentibus
Paenarum celebres sub styge feriae.
The English whereof is, that the wicked spirits have often times holidays,
that is some ease of their pains, to which Bell. makes noe other answer
indeed, but that he played after the manner of Poets, now I ask you whither
this be a chief point of controversy betwixt you and us? it should seem you
take it so: because you seem in all this Section, as if you alleged only
such as make for you in your controuersyes against us: and your very words
which you use here thus, if we cite Prudentius etc. import, as if you did cite
Prudentius for your self in that matter, whereto Bellarmine answeareth: yet it
is plain on the other side that there is not any difference betwixt you and us
in that matter. For I never heard that any haeretique of this time said any
such thing as that the damned find any release or ease of their pains by the
prayers of the living. What say you then Sir Humphrey do not you allege
Prudentius to very good purpose? does not this show a strange contentious
spirit in you that care not what you say whether it be to the purpose or not,
so it may seem somewhat against us, though indeed it be not. But now for
Bellarmines answer, it is true and good: and it is well known that Poet's
words are not allwaies to be so strictly interpreted, nor truth to be
altogether so exacted at their hands, as at other men's: the restraint which
they are feign to use in the number of their verse, giving them a little more
liberty in the matter.

11. The 10. Tertullian, Bell. de Eccl. lib. 3. cap. 6.
whose words you do not also cite, but only say that if you object him
Bellarmine answeares his authority is of noe great account when he
contradicts other Fathers, and when it appears he was noe man of the
Church. His words I say you do not cite, but yet in saying, if we object him,
and indeed in naming him, you seem as if you had some controversy with us in
that point for which he is cited, which is of the Virginity of our B. Lady in
our Sauiour's birth: that is, whether she were a Virgin in the birth also or
not. But though the haeretiques of this age generally speak very meanly and
contemptibly of this most sacred Virgin, yet I do not find that your
Protestants are so earnest against her Virginity, as to make the contrary a
point of your belief, much less a chief point as you make all that you bring
ancient authors for in this place. But for the matter it is this: Bellarmine
speaking of an authority of S. Ambrose his, which might seem at first sight to
make against the same, then says that Origin and Tertull. have something like
also; and so answearing altogether he shows of Origin and S. Ambrose, that
they are not against us by expounding those places, which seem against it by
other plain places out of them. For Tertullian he says his words are obscure,
nor much to be reguarded when he contradicts other Fathers; and when it
appears he was noe man of the Church. Which last words you translate falsely,
and withal leave out an authority of special moment: the words falsely
translated are these. (Cum constet) since it appears. Whereas you say when it
appears. Which is a different sense; for ask any schoole-boy whether cum
with the subiunctiue and indicative mood be all one: the thing which you left
out is S. Hierom's authority which Bellarmine alleges thus. Seeing says he
it is evident as Saint Hiero. speaks, that he was noe man of the Church:
these being Saint Hierom's very words: here then you see again that it is
Saint Hierome not Bellarmine alone that does reject Tertullian: nor is Saint
Hierome alone of the ancient Fathers in this opinion of him, but almost all the
Fathers: Vincentius Lerinensis says he was by his fall a great temptation to
many, Vinc. Lerin. cap. 24. Hilar. in comment. in Math. cap. 5.
and Saint Hilarious says there, that Tertullian's later errors, did detract a
great deal of authority from his approved writings. So then it is noe wonder
if Bellarmine make small account of him where he contradicts other Fathers.
And so you may say that S. Hierome, Vincentius Lerinensis and S. Hilarious
reject and elude the Fathers as well as Bellarmine.

12. The 11. is Saint Hierome of whom you say that if you cite him, Canus makes
answer Hierome is noe rule of faith: Can. de locis. lib. 2. cap. 11.
but you tell us not where, or upon what occasion you cite Saint Hierome, noe
more then you do the three former Fathers: though it be true that in that
matter that Canus speaks of, which is the Canon of Scripture, you have Saint
Hierome a little more fore you in show then in any thing else, or more then you
have any other of the Fathers: yet I dare say you will be loath to stand to his
judgment even in that very matter for though this Saint reckon the books of the
old testament, according to the Canon of the Jews, which you also follow, if a
man should urge you with S. Hieromes authority even in this point, I believe
you would say the same, or more then Canus does, to wit, that he is noe rule of
faith, for S. Hierosme allows the book of Judith to be canonical Scripture,
Proef. in Judith.
though it be not in the Jews canon, which yet you reject; and on the
contrary he says of Saint Peter's second epistle, a plaerisque reijcitur: it
is rejected by most: Descript. eccles. Verb. Petrus Apost.
wherein yet you do not follow him: this is for the matter. Now for the words
you do not cite Canus right, for he does not say that Saint Hierome is noe
rule of faith, (though that be true as I shall show presently) but thus: having
alleged Caietan's saying that the Church did follow S. Hierome in reckoning
the books of Scripture he denies it thus. For neither is it true, says Canus,
that S. Hier. is the rule of the Church in determining the canonical books.
Which is most true. S. Hierome is not the rule of the Church, but the Church is
his rule, Hier. praef. in Judith.
as appears in that he reckons Judith among the Canonical books, upon the
authority of the Church. Neither is it all one to say S. Hierome is noe rule of
the Church for determining which books be Scripture, which not, and to say he
is noe rule of faith. Besides if Canus had said S. Hierome is noe rule of
faith, he had said most true, and nothing but what holy S. Aug. says in other
words, in an Epistle to this same S. Hierome, and speaking even of his writings
thus: Aug. ep. 19
Solis eis scripturaru^ libris, etc. I have learned to give that fear and
honor to those only books of scripture, which are now called canonical, as
to believe most firmly that noe author (or writer) of them has erred any
thing in writing: but others I read so that though they excel never so much
in any holiness and learning, I do not therefore think it true, because they
thought so, but because they have been able to persuade either by those
canonical authors or by probable reason, that they say true: and there he goes
on specifying even S. Hierome himself, and saying unto him that he presumes
he would not have him so wholly approve of his writings, as to think there is
no error at all in them. The like he has in another place showing plainly
that any private Doctor may err, Lib. 2. de Bap. cont. Donat. cap. 3
and consequently can be noe rule of faith. Yet for all that, the authority of
any such is very great in any thing wherein he agrees with others, or is not
by them gain said. For that is a token that what he says is the common
tradition and belief of the Church, which is a sufficient rule. Is this then
to reject and elude the Fathers, to say that one is noe rule of faith? if it
be, then does S. Aug. reject and elude them: it is plain therefore you do but
cavil: for why may not Canus say the same of S. Hierome that S. Aug. does?

13. After S. Hierome you come to Justin, Irenaeus, Epiphanius, and Oecumenius,
whom say you if you cite, Bellarmine answeares I see not how we can defend the
sentence of these men from error. Bell. lib. 1. de Sanct. cap. 6
Here again as else where you forbear to tell us the matter, for which you
cite them or who of your authors cite them: For this would have discovered your
falsehood and vanity. The matter then is concerning the damned spirits, whether
they suffer any punishment for the present time before the day of judgment or
not, these fathers think not: the common consent of all other fathers, and of
the whole Catholic Church is against them in it. How then shall Bellarmine
excuse it from an error: but I pray you Sir Humphrey bethink your self well,
and tell us again whether this be any point controuerted between you and us?
I know it is a thing which you might better maintain, then most or perhaps any
one point of your faith, having these 3. or 4. Fathers for you therein, but yet
I do not find by your 39. articles or any other sufficient authority, that you
hold that error much less as a chief point of your faith. Wherefore it is
false that you say (when you cite these Fathers.) For you do not cite them,
neither is their error in a matter of controversy between us, I note here
also in a word, that whereas Bellarmine says only he does not see how he can
defend the opinion of Justin, Irenaeus etc. from error you make him say, the
opinion of these men, as if he did speak but slightly of the Fathers which is
a great wrong. For though he do not in all things and always approve the
opinion of every particular man yet does he allwaies speak with great
reverence of the holy Fathers as all Catholics do.

14. Lastly you come with Salmeron saying that if you produce the uniform
consent of Fathers against the immaculate Conception of the Blessed Virgin;
Salmeron the Jesuit makes answer, weak is the place which is drawn from
authority for pauperis est numerare pecus. It is the sign of a poor man to
number his Cattle. Thus you say of Salmeron in a few lines discovering a great
deal of fals-hood. For first it is false that you produce Fathers against the
Conception of our Lady. That being noe controversy between you and us but
only among our selves: wherefore if there be any such consent of Fathers it is
not you that produce them but our own authors, you only out of the great good
affection you bear forsooth to our B. Savior are ready to embrace any opinion
that may more derogate from the dignity of his blessed Mother: but what do
crows look for but carren? Secondly it is false that Salmeron acknowledges
any such uniform consent of Fathers against him, or that he makes any such
answer to them. It is true indeed he says the contrary part allege for
themselves the testimonies of the ancient Fathers and specially of Saint
Augustine. Which he answeareth another way: but for those which he answeareth
as you say here, they are only later authors or Doctors: as shall after
appear. Thirdly it is false that he acknowledges any uniform consent even
of these later Doctors against himself: for he opposes a far greater
multitude of Doctors against them using that saying of Elizaeus the Prophet:
4. Reg. 6.16.
plures nobiscum sunt quam cum illis: there be more with us then with them.
Where then is the consent? Fourthly it is a cunning trick if not a false for
you to make this answer seem Salmeron's only, whereas he professes to have
it out of Saint Augustine and Saint Thomas of Aquine citing two or three
several places of Saint Augustine but it is well at lest that, though you
contemn their authority; yet you do not do it so openly but covertly only
under the shadow of a IESVIT. This therefore might be answer enough for you
to show that we do not reject or elude the Fathers: seeing we have our
answeares out of them: but to explain the meaning of Salmeron's saying that
the place of authority is weak, a little more, I will allege S. Thomas of
Aquine his objection and answer: he obiecteth that the science of Divinity
cannot be argumentatiue: 1. p q. 1. ar. 8. and 2.
because says he it must argue out of authority or reason; not out of
authority because according to Boethius the place of authority is most weak:
not out of reason because then faith has noe merit: to this he answeareth that
it argues out of Divine authority; and says that Boethius is to be understood
of human authority, which he also says is the weakest kind of proof. So as
by this Salmeron's meaning is plain not to reject authority, but only to
prefer reason before human authority: as it is most plain that it ought to
be preferred. Besides Salmeron gives other answeares as that he opposes also a
contrary multitude of Doctors; he opposes the force of reason; he opposes
the consent in a manner of the whole Church: concluding therefore that though
some of the contrary part number a great many authors some 200. some 300. some
but 15. yet the very nu^bering shows them to be few according to that saying
Pauperis est numerare pecus, it is only for a poor man to number his cattle:
whereas a rich man's cattle or other wealth is not so soon counted:
insinuating thereby that his authors are so many that they are not to be
numbered: and indeed he has almost as many Universities, kingdoms,
commonwealths, religious orders and other communityes for him as the other side
has single authors: By all which it is apparent that there is noe such
absurdity in his saying as you would have it seem: for he slighteth not
authority but prefers only greater authority before less, and reason
before both: which noe man in his right wits can deny to be very good reason;
where then was your reason Sir Humphrey when you read Salmeron? it was straying
after some haereticall fancy.

15. By this then that has been said in this whole chapter it may appear how
like your self you make that vaunting conclusion to your reader, that by what
you have here said, he has heard the proof of the Romish witnesses in the
chief points, made good by the testimonies of the Fathers themselves. For
disproofe whereof I should vrong my Reader's judgment, if I should stand
bringing other arguments then those, which I have done already in answearing
every particular place which you bring. Wherein I have showed not one Father of
all these to be against us, unless it be in some one or two points, wherein
they are as much against you, and in things which both you acknowledge for
errors, and are contradicted by the common consent of other fathers, wherein I
hope my deeds will weigh more with any man of judgment then your words: Chap.
13.
and so I pass to another section.

Of the 13. Sect. which is thus entitled by the Knight. Our adversaries
convinced of a bad cause, and an evil conscience by razing of our records and
clipping their own authors tongues. CHAPTER XIII.
1. IN the later end of the former section, the Knight says that many in our
own Church have spoken freely and truly in particular points of doctrine with
his, and against our tenets. For which the Inquisitours have passed their
censure upon them, blotting out such lines or leaves as make against us: and
now in this section he names some authors in particular. To which I say that
for the former part the Knight says very true, there be and ever have been
some light new fangled people, who give too much liberty to their wandering
thoughts and penns, suffering themselves like chafe as they are, to be blown
hither and thither with the wind of inconstancy. And such people they are for
the most part that become haeretiques, though some also remain in the unity of
the Catholic church, yet so as they suffer some things to escape, which
deserve censure. Wherefore the Catholic church to prevent the danger and
harm, which may come by such books, takes the best order that can be in
Catholic countries, that noe such books be printed till they be reuiewed,
and approved not to contain any thing contrary to faith and good manners: but
because there have been many such writings published this last age, by
occasion of heresy and liberty which came therewith, to the great prejudice of
the Catholic faith there has been a course taken for the restraint of all
such, not only writings of Haeretiques, but even of Catholics which have any
tange of haeresy, either utterly forbidding them or correcting them, so as
they may be safely read without danger of faith and good life. And this kind
of care has ever been used in the Catholic church, though more or less, as
the necessity of times has been greater or less. Act. 19.18.
So we see in scripture it self, some that followed curiosities, becoming
Christians confessed their deeds, and burnt their books. So we see afterward
the books of Arius were commanded to be burnt and men forbidden to keep them
under pain of death, Socrat. hist. lib. 1. cap. 6.
and so of others which I will not here stand upon, only contenting my self
with one example of this kind, which for the antiquity and authority may be
both proof and warrant for the practice of the Catholic Church now at this
time, wherein the Haeretiques do so much cry out against the Inquisition, and
index expurgatorius.

2. This example is that of Gelasius 1. Pope about the year 490. who in a
Council at Rome gathered for that end, made a Decree to declare what Scriptures
were canonical, what Fathers and Doctors might be safely read, and what not:
whereof having made a catalogue he adds these words in the end. Item opuscula
atque tractatus omnium orthodoxorum etc. Also we decree to be read the works
and treatises of all the orthodox Fathers, who in nothing have strayed from the
company of the holy Roman Church, nor have been separated from the faith and
preaching thereof, but by the grace of God have held with the same even to the
last day of their life; and then before he come to make a catalogue of the
haereticall books, which he forbids, he says thus. Coetera quae
abhaereticis etc. Other things which have been written or preached by
Haeretiques or Schismatiques the Catholic and Apostolic Roman Church does
noe way receive, of which some few that come to mind and are to be shunned by
Catholics, we think good to set down here: and so there sets them
down. Now I would know of the Knight or any man else that cries out so
bitterly against our Index expurgatorius, what he can say against it, that he
may not say against this decree and Council of Gelasius? and against which we
may not defend our selves by opposing it as a buckler against all their darts.

3. But of this matter therefore I need not say more it being evident by the
light of nature that supposing there be a certain rule of faith, to which all
men must conform their thoughts, sayings, and writings, and that the swaruing
from it is a declining to haeresy, it pertains to the Catholic Roman
Church (which must of necessity be this rule of faith. For it has neither spot
nor wrinckle as Gelasius says, which cannot be said of any Church else what
soever) to prevent the danger that may come by such books forbidding the use of
them; and a more dangerous and unnatural part it would be in her, not to use
this care, then it were in a Mother that should see sugar and ratts-baine lie
together, and seeing her child going to taste thereof should forbear to warn
it; but leave the choice thereof to the child. But of this matter I said
somewhat in the beginning, and there being diverse learned treatises of this
subject particularly, I need say noe more: but remitt such as desire
satisfaction to them or even to the very rules set down in the beginning of
the Index expurgatorius which are grounded upon so good reason as I presume
noe indifferent man that reads them can disallow of them: I will not
therefore stand particularly to examine every particular author and justify
the Inquisition, for it would be both a long and needless labor. Only I
cannot omit one author called Bertram whom, to turn my speech to you Sir
Humphrey, me thinks you among all men living should never so much as name,
considering how much disgrace you have sustained by translating his book and
venturing your own credit, and the credit of your Church upon the faith
thereof: and for him I answer that though his book were proved plainly to
contain good Catholic doctrine in the matter of transubstantiation: yet
because it was obscure in many places and thereby gave occasion of erring: and
indeed was of uncertain authority, this only being certain that it has
been in this last age published by Haeretiques, we know not out of what
records with some errors of their own inserted, therefore it might well be
forbidden by the Inquisition? but I say you should of all men living most
labor to have the memory thereof blotted out, therewith to obliterate your
own shame.

4. Another thing which I am also to note is, concerning your coting of a Canon
of the Council of Laodicea, in this section; whereat I wonder, that the
inquisition having said nothing to it, why you should reckon it here among
such authors, as you say are razed or clipped by the inquisition. But let us
hear what it is that you say to it? you cite the Canon thus in English only.
We ought not to leave the Church of God, and invoke Angels: saying withal
that in the same Council published by Merlin and Crabbe, by change of a letter,
Angelos is turned into Angulos, Angels into Angles and Corners, thus, that we
must not leave the Church of God and have recourse to Angles or Corners. and
this say you, lest so fair an evidence of an ancient Council should be
produced against invocation of Angels, V. Bin. to. 1. Council.
thus you, Sir Humphrey: wherein first is to be noted your error in chronology,
concerning the time of this Council which you make to be the year 368. which
was 43. Con. Laodien. can. 35.
years after the 1. Council of Nice, whereas it was celebrated before that
Council. Secondly your corruption in the translation and cutting of of the
Canon, which is thus. Non oportet relicta ecclesia ad Angelos abominandae
idolatriae congregrationes facere, quicunque autem inuentus fuerit occultae
huic idololaetriae vacans Anathema sit, quoniam relinquens Dominum (IESVM
Christum) filium Dei accessit ad idola. Noe man must, leaving the Church of
God, make congregations to the Angels of abominable idolatry: and whosoever
shall be found exercizing this secret idolatry, let him be anathema, because
leaving JESUS Christ the Son of God, he has come to idols. Now where in this
Canon do you find the word invocation of Angels; Which is the thing that you
pretend to be forbidden: and much less do you find such invocation of Angels
as we use? For in this Canon is only forbidden such idolatrical invocation as
the Simonian and other haeretiques did use, praeferring the Angels before
Christ, and making them the creatours of the world and the only or chief
mediators, without whose help there was noe access to be had to God, which
is the same wicked haeresy which Saint Paul speaks against Coloss. 2. as all
interpreters understand him. By whose words it is plain that those Haeretiques
left Christ and had recourse to Angels in this sense. Nemo vos seducat non
tenens caput, etc. Let noe man seduce you, not holding the head, that is, not
holding by Christ. Now where do you find that we by invocation of Angels
forsake Christ? this place then makes nothing against us. Thirdly there is noe
reason why you should charge us with changing the word Angelos into angulos.
For though some may read it Angulos yet others read it Angelos and even two
for one. For whereas Binius out of whom you your self cite this Canon, in his
last edition of the Councels has the Greek text and three several Latin
translations thereof; all these have Angelos and not Angulos, and Bellarmine,
Baronius, and almost all other authors read it angelos and according to that
reading answer that triuiall objection which your people ordinarily draw from
thence against our adoration of Angels and Saints noe way excepting against the
word, angelos, as if that were not the right reading, but showing the sense not
to be any way against us.

5. Is it not then shameless dealing in you, to make your Reader believe that
we corrupt the reading, left so fair an evidence, to use your words, should
be brought against us; whereas we keep the evidence so fair and entire, in
our best editions that were it not for them, you would not know what the true
reading were; you knowing withal, that there is noe cause why we should go
about to change the word, which is nothing against us: for we forsake not
Christ; we acknowledge noe angels to be the framers of the world, nor chief
mediators, nor that with out them we cannot have access to God. These are all
haereticall devices, which we together with S. Paul and the Council of Laodicea
detest. But as I said before seeing you would needs bring this impertinent
objection, I wonder why you did not bring it before, but here in this place,
as if the inquisition had commanded something to be blotted out, or the word
angeli to be changed into anguli. But you wanted matter to fill out your
section; and therefore you put that in here, and withal to help it out yet a
little more you tell us of one Henry Boxhorn a learned professor of Louaine, as
you term him, and who as you say in your English text, being commanded to put
the Decree of the Inquisition in execution, his heart was smitten, and his eyes
opened to see the abomination of the Papacy; an idol in the temple, tyranny in
the commonwealth, poison and infection in religion: and thereupon became a
convert to the Protestant faith: thus you Sir Humphrey: but if such matter as
this will serve your turn, you may have enough; neither need you search
corners to find out such obscure: fellows as this Boxhorne whose hearts have
been smitten, and their eyes opened; you might bring the Fathers of your
religion for examples as Luther, Calvin, Zuinglius, Beza, Carolstadius, and who
not: for though they might pretend several causes, yet there was one principal
one, which consisted indeed in the smitting of their hearts, with a fiery dart
of carnal love. And when they found an Eve to give them an apple, then their
eyes were opened; and so it proved also with your friend Boxhorne, as I shall
here show you by a brief story of his life most authentically related by that
grave and holy man Oliuerius Manaraeus of the Society of JESUS, in a certain
written treatise, wherein he recounteth only the examples of his own time,
and such as he himself knew had become Apostatas from the said Society: thus
then he writes.

6. Henry Buxhornich Licentiate of Divinity and Deane of the church of Tielmond
not far from Louaine, did often confess himself to be so certainly called
to the Society, that he has been heard many times to say, that he did think
he should prove a reprobate and be aeternally damned, unless he did enter
there into: and he was wont to say it with so great feeling that there was noe
doubt but he spoke it enflamed with heavenly fire. But his Mother endeavored
by all means to withdraw her son from so good a purpose, and indeed
prevailed so far as to make him differ it from month to month and from
year to year. After some years falling sick he was heard by some that even
told it me again says F. Oliuerius Manaraeus, to repeat and renew his vow
but being recovered he went on as before, yiedling to his Mothers enticements
and concupiscences of the flesh, gave the raines to his sensuality. In that
time the haeretiques sacked and spoiled the town of Tielmond, and killed all
that did not either fly or hide themselves: here then the poor Licentiate
hidd himself in a certain cave or den the enemy running round about him on
every side, and almost lighting upon him. But being in this danger he had
recourse as he was wont to God and our Blessed Lady, renewing his vow nine
times together, and craving pardon that he had not accomplished the same
before: which almighty God hearing delivered him, and he magnifying the
benefit, resolved presently to fulfill his Vow: but being again ensnared by
the allurements of his Dalila he did so long differr it till he became
publicly a sacrilegious concubinary giving himself so over to his lust, that
he kept a nest of women in his house. Being then questioned by the Bishop's
Vicar. he sent away all his women, and gave his oath that he would keep
himself within his own doors as in a prison. But he breaking his faith, stole
away the next night with a great sum of money whereof most did belong to the
Church, carrying his concubine with him, and marrying her afterward according
to the custom of Haeretiques became a Preacher and Minister in Holland. A
little after endeavoring to reconcile the Lutherans and Caluinists he writ a
book which he called Concord. in which he speaks very bitterly of the Society
of JESUS, calling the religious thereof Esauits: he became presently extreme
wicked who seemed before endewed with angelical virtues and adorned with
admirable sweetness of manners so as by word and example he drew many to
virtuous courses; but now he is become so ugly to behold as is related and his
life so execrable in Holland that noe man can endure him. His mother through
the just judgment of God having been cause of his perdition was feign to leave
him, not being able to endure his cruelty and wicked manners: and whereas
before she lived in great abundance, she is now become so poor as to live
upon alms all crooked and as it were double at Louaine getting what she can by
washing and spinning, every man wondering at her, and admiring the just revenge
of almighty God upon her: thus far this most true and faithful relation.
Whereto I may add one word more which is this that a certain Apostata
Franciscan running away to Breda when it was in the hands of the Hollanders and
where this Boxhorne was at that time chief Preacher and being lodged in his
house and in the next chamber to him and his Woman, he heard such kind greeting
between them that night the one cursing the other and imputing their apostasy
and future damnation to each other, this poor Friar repented himself, and
therevppon came back to his monastery and did penance, rather choosing to
suffer a little outward austerity then to carry about in the bottom of his
soul such an inward assured testimony and belief of his aeternall damnation
as he saw these two did. I might say more of the man's fine feats but there be
books in dutch particularly of them as I hear: and so I say noe more but
that in this your learned Buxhorne whom you Sir Humphrey of Licentiate make a
Doctor, as in all your other learned men that blessed Martyr F. Edmund Campian
hit the right vein and discovered the true cause of their apostasy, when he
told the University men, it was not any Charks or Hammers that held them back:
(as I may say also it was not any razing of evidences that made Boxhorne fall
from his faith) but that there were certain Lutheran baits, wherewith many
of them were catched, which were. Aurum, gloria, delitiae, veneres. Gold,
glory, delights, and Venus: of which some are catched with one, some with
another: and so you see this your learned Professor had so deeply swallowed
the last of the four baits that it made his stomach turn at the Catholic
faith, which exhorted him to contemn some of them as gold, and glory, and
forced him to forbear others, as his base and bestial delights: and so
forsaking all obedience to humane and divine laws, at one clapp became a
rebel to his Prince, an Apostata to religion, and enemy to the Catholic
faith: therefore of such fellows there is noe other account to be made, but
let them go, as the Scripture says of one of their chief Leaders. Act. 2.25.
Vt abiret in locum suum: That he might go into his own place.

Of the 14. Sect. the title whereof is this* Chap. 14.
Our adversaries convicted of their defense of a desperate cause by their
blasphemous exceptions against the Scripture it self. CHAPTER XIV.
1. TO this section the Knight gives a beginning by occasion of Boxhornes
words in the last section, of an idol in the temple. Whereupon he very wittily
tells us, that when we see the abomination of desolation standing in the holy
place, we must fly to the mountains of the Scriptures, as S. Chrysostom
says: but yet he thinks we will not come to trial of scriptures, because
says he, are we not all eye witnesses, that Christ and his Apostles are called
in question at the Popes assizes? and there arraigned and condemned of
obscurity and insufficiency in their ghospel? is not the sacred bible says he
ranked inter libros prohibitos, in the first place, in the catalogue of
forbidden books? and then he brings Corn. Agrippa complaining of the
Inquisitors that they will not admit men to prove their opinions by
scriptures. This is the Knight's discourse which upon examination will prove as
foolish, as he thinks it witty. I answer therefore that though Catholics
hold for most certain, that the Scripture is not the sole rule of faith, nor
that out of it alone all controversies can be decided: as for example that in
particular which books be canonical Scripture which not; Yet for most things
now a days in controversy, many Catholics have offered to try the matter by
only scripture, some having also written books of good volume, Anchor of Faith.
to show the Scripture in the plain and obuious sense, to make positiuely for
us, and our Doctrine in most points, and against us in none. Whereof a man may
also have a brief taste in the defense of the ce^sure, in the praeface, in
these points following of Supremacy, real presence, justification, absolutio^,
Vows, traditions, observance of the commandments, satisfaction, prayer for
the dead, prayer to Saints etc. in which respect therefore I may ask you Sir
Humphrey how you come to be so sure that we will not come to the trial of
Scriptures? for though we ground many points upon tradition and practice of the
Church, yet do not we ground others upon plain and express authority of
Scripture? from which you are feign to fly running into this or that corner, of
I know not what figurative or tropical interpretation, or even denying the very
books of Scripture: nay what point is there that we do not bring better
proofs out of Scripture for it, which yet we need not, then you can bring
against it, which yet is absolutely needful on your part, you standing so
upon Scripture as you do.

2. As for that which you say of the Popes questioning Christ and his Apostles
at his Assizes for obscurity and insufficiency this is a speech uttered I
suppose by you only in the feruor of an haereticall spirit: wherein therefore
a man is not to look for much truth? but yet I may ask wherein I pray you
does the Pope question, or condemn Christ of obscurity and insufficie^cy? what
has Christ left written to be questioned or condemned? his Apostles and
Evangelists indeed have left some things in writing: of which some are hard
even by the judgment of Scripture it self? 2. Pet. 3.16.
for so says S. Peter of the Epistles of S. Paul, which (says he) the
unlearned and inconstant do abuse as they do others Scriptures, to their own
perdition: Aug. Conf. lib. 12. c. 14.
and S. Augustine finds so much difficulty in the first verse of the whole
Scripture which to a man seeming is as easy, as any other verse what soever,
that he is feign to acknowledge the wonderful profoundnes thereof: it is S.
Peter and S. Aug. therefore that call to their assizes if you will needs have
it so) and there arraigne and condemn S. Paul and Moses of obscurity, not
the Pope: and so for insufficie^cy if any body condemn it, it is S. John in
saying that: 2 Thessalonians. 2.14.
all things are not written: and S. Paul in willing the Thessalonia^s to hold
the traditions, which they had learned whither by speech or letter: by word of
mouth or writing: they are the Apostles and Doctors of the Church that
acknowledge that hardness of Scripture, or what soever it is, which your Worship
is pleased to call insufficiency. What impertinent flaunting is this then in
you Sir Humphrey, to tell us the Pope questioneth Christ and his Apostles. To
talk thus of Assizes and arraigning, as if you would have us know you are the
Son of a Grand-Iuror: whom it is pity, you did not succeed in the place,
since you have the terms so ready in your mouth.

3. But to let that pass I likewise answer you for our ranking the bible in
the first place of prohibited books, as you say we do, that it is false and
false again. For it is not in the catalogue of such books; only in the rules
which concern the index there is mention how the free use of vulgar
translations is not to be permitted, Reg. 4.
but for the Latin vulgar translation there is noe manner of restraint: though
if there had been, we might very well have warranted it by the authority of S.
Hierome who did noe way admit such free use even of the Latin bibles; for
having spoken largely and learnedly out of Scripture of the hardness and
obscurity of scripture, Ep. ad Paulin.
he complains that every body did presume to take, read, and teach it before
they learned it themselves, disallowing that even such as himself should go
from saecular learning presently to the holy Scriptures, and interpret them at
their pleasure. S. Hierome then thought them hard, and was not so free in
allowing the reading of Scriptures as you are. For if he do not allow the
reading thereof in Latin to men and Scholars, how much less would he have
allowed it in English to women and Children? Besides it is noe such crime to
forbid the reading of scripture to some sorts of people, as may appear by this
testimony of this holy Father, who in the same place also says moreover that
the beginning of Genesis, with the beginning and end of Ezechiel were not to be
read by the Jews, till they came to 30. years of age; which kind of
forbidding is noe derogation but a great commendation of the holy scripture.
And I call it but a kind of forbidding; for it is far different, though you
make it all one, from the forbidding of haereticall books. For these are
forbidden as wicked, detestable, and of themselves dangerous; the other out of
reverence and honor dew unto them and in reguard of the danger which may come
by them not of themselves, but in reguard of the weakness of the Reader, for
want of necessary learning and humility: both which a man that is to handle the
Scriptures must come well provided of.

4. For Cornelius Agrippa it makes noe more matter what he says, then what
you say: for it is but ask my brother if I be a theife? but it is fine that
these fellows cannot be invited by a general Council with promise of all
security that can be desired to come and propound what they can say out of
scripture, or any way else, and yet when they come before a Judge they will
dispute forsooth and by disputing avoid the rigor of the Law. Indeed I
cannot blame them; but if this seem reason to you, why do you deny Catholic
Priests the like liberty of Disputation? How often and earnestly have they
desired it but could never obtain it? But neither even in that case with us
are people denied any convenient liberty: neither is there any credit to be
given to Cornelius Agrippa. For being a Magitian he may very well be said to
have shaked hands with the Devil the father of lies. Which you your self it
seems knowing and suspecting that his testimony would not pass for current,
you tell us we shall hear our own authors how they speak of the Scriptures.
For you tremble to speak it as your words are. You tell us some say they are
dead characters, a shell without a kernel, a leaden rule, a wood of thieves, a
shop of Haeretiques, imperfect, doubtful, obscure, full of perplexities, with
many more epithets, which I let pass, these being of the very worst and
especially the last 4. for which you allege Lessius, alleging likewise for
every one of the rest a several author. Whereto not to stand answearing every
one severally, the matter being the same of one and all; I say in general,
that these things are spoken not of the Scripture, as it is in it self that is
consisting of both words and meaning, as it were life and soul together, but
of the bare words and letters only which Haeretiques still do and even have
abused as the Devil himself did to our Savior and in this sense it is a wood
of thieves. For as thieves run into a wood to escape thereby, so do
Haeretiques run in all controversies to the letter of the Scripture, leaving
the true sense and framing a false one according to their own fancy. Tert. de
praes. cap. 17
Which is that that Tertullian says that there is noe good to be done with
haeretiques by Scriptures for that either they deny the book or pervert the
sense, and whatsoever we say they deny or what we deny they defend: and so a
wood of thieves, and shop of haeretiques, dead characters, and the like are all
one: the meaning of all being so as these speeches are not meant of the
Scripture properly in it self, as I said before, but as it is yours or as it
is made by you and other Haeretiques, and yet alas good man you tremble to
hear the words that do but express your own deeds. Alac for you that your
stomach is so queasy, that it cannot endure to hear that, which you are bold
and hardy enough to do by your daily practice.

5. But because you are so dainty that your stomach turns at what our
modern authors say of you, let us see whether it will brook any better what
that ancient and learned Father S. Hierome says. Let us see whether your
tender conscience will be so scandalized at his words as you seem to be now at
ours. Hierom. 1. Gal.
Marcion and Basilides says he, and caeterae haereticorum pestes no^ habent
Dei Euangelium, quia non habent Spiritu^ Sanctum, sine quo humanum fit
Euangelium quod docetur. Nec putemus in verbis Scripturarum esse Eua^gelium,
sed in sensu, non in superficie, sed in medulla; non in sermonum folijs, sed in
radice rationis. Dicitur in Propheta de Deo. Michae. 2.
Sermones eius boni sunt cum eo. Tunc Scriptura vtilis est audientibus cum
absque Christo non dicitur, cum absque Patre non profertur, cum sine spiritu
non eam insinuat ille qui praedicat, alioquin and diabolus qui loquitur de
scripturis, and omnes haereses secundum Ezechiel inde sibi consuunt ceruicalia
quae ponant sub cubito vniuersae aetatis etc. Grande periculum est in ecclesia
loqui, ne forte interpretatione peruersa de euangelio Christi hominis fiat
euangelium aut quod peius est Diaboli. Marcion Basilides and other plagues of
Haeretiques have not the Ghospel of God, because they have not the Holy Ghost:
without whom it becomes the ghospel of man which is taught. Nor let us think
that the ghospel is (or consists) in the words of scripture but in the sense,
not in the superficies (or bark) but in the pith; not in the leaves of speech
(or word) but in the root of reason. It is said in the Prophet of God. His
speeches are good with him: then the Scripture is profitable to the hearers
when it is not spoken without Christ, when it is not brought without the
Father, when he that preaches does not insinuate it without the Holy Ghost,
otherwise both the Devil who speaks out of Scripture and all haeresies
according to Ezechiel make themselves pillowes out of it to put under the
elbowes of all ages. It is a great danger to speak in the Church lest perchance
by perverse interpretation of the ghospel of Christ there be made the ghospel
of man or which is worse the Ghospel of the Devil. Thus far Saint Hieromes
words, which me thinks without more ado may easily answer your whole
argument for in them this holy Father says as much or more as all those
Epithets which you bring out of our several authors put together and withal
shows in what sense they are to be taken. So as if you will say any more of
this matter you must undertake the quarrel against Saint Hierome. You may do
well also to note the very first words: Marcion, Basilides and caeterae
haereticorum pestes: among whom you have your part.

6. Now for the 4. last epithets which you bring out of Lessius, though they
seem not such strange terms, as some of the rest, yet they are far worse and
more derogatory from the holy Scripture if they be there as you say. I have
therefore more particularly examined him, whither he say so or not: Less.
Consul. Quae sit fides etc. rat. 11.
and whereas the words being all put down by you here as it were several
epithets, a man would have thought they had been all so together in the
author himself, I say first that there be neither any such words lying
together, nor any such a part, nor any one word of those, that I can find in
that whole place or reason which I may call a chapter, for it is in manner of a
chapter, much less any of them uttered of the holy Scripture, though the whole
Chapter or discourse in that place be only of the Scripture, and to prove that
it alone and of it self can not be a rule of faith. Which he proves by many
reasons, one is because by it we can not judge of the Scripture it self, and
so the very rule shall remain uncertain, which ought to be most certain.
And in this place he has the word incerta, which though it signify the same
with some of the words here alleged, yet is it not the same word. But yet
here Lessius is far from saying that the Scripture is uncertain in it self,
that is, that the doctrine thereof is doubtful: but only that our rule will be
uncertain to us or rather we uncertain of the rule, because we cannot know
the Scripture by it self. For example that this book is true scripture, not
suppositions, or feigned; or that this is the true meaning and sense thereof.
And this kind of uncertainty is noe derogation to the Scripture. Lessius his
second reason is that, that cannot be a certain rule which may be accommodated
or fitted to contrary doctrines, as he says, Scripture is by several
Haeretiques for establishment of quite different opinions. His 3. reason is
this: that cannot be a judge, that cannot clearly determine on which side
sentence is given, but leaves it so, that the parties may still contend one
affirming the sentence to be for him, another for him. And so he says is the
scripture laying aside the exposition of the Church, and Fathers. Whereto he
there brings also an example of two men, who going to law would admit noe
other judge but the Law book; one bringing one Law clearly for him, as he
thinks; the other another Law as clearly for him in his judgment, of which
suite there could never be an end so. Fourthly he shows by experience, that
this rule of Scripture is not sufficient for ending of Controversies: because
the Lutherans Caluinists and Anabaptists are altogether by the ears, yet
every one alleging Scripture for himself. Lastly he says that the Scripture
it self in noe place sends private men to seach the Scriptures in doubtful
matters, but to the Church and Pastors praesiding therein.

7. This is the whole substance of Lessius his discourse in that place, wherein
I would gladly hear what word there is derogating from the dignity of holy
Scripture or any way condemning it of imperfection, doubtfulnes, ambiguity, and
perplexity? some of these things might be truly said and in a good sense, as
the doubtfulnes or ambiguity in the same sense that I spoke of the uncertainty,
not in it self but to usward. But for the imperfection, because that is a
great matter with you, I absolutely deny it: for neither does any Catholic
say either that, or any thing else from whence it may be gathered. For it is not
all one to say, that it alone is noe sufficient rule, and to say it is
imperfect: for though you imagine that the all sufficiency, or containing of
all things expressly, is a necessary point of perfection, you are deceived; for
then would it follow, that the ghospel of S. Matthew S. Mark and other
particular books should be imperfect, and specially that of S. John, wherein he
says expressly that all things are not written; neither if all the Scripture
did contain all things in that manner as you would have it, and so were
perfect in your sense, yet would it not even then be a sufficient rule of faith
of it self alone: for it would still be a book or vriting, the very nature
whereof does not suffer it to be the sole rule of faith or judge of
controversies; for a Iugde must be able to speak, to hear, answer etc.
whereas the nature of a book or writing is as it were to leave it self to be
read, and expounded by men; for in case two men should expound it differently,
the nature thereof does not require that it should say whether of the two
expounds it right. The perfection therefore of it does rather consist in the
truth, fullness of wisdom, profoundnes, majesty, gravity, efficacy,
authority, and certainty, then in containing all things expressly as you require
and so long as it has those perfections co^taining withal the principal
matters pertaining to faith, and teaching us a certain and infallible way,
whereby we may come to the knowledge of the rest which is the Church, it cannot
be said to be imperfect or to want any perfection dew thereunto. And this may
be answer sufficient to the rest of this Section which is nothing but a little
more of such wise stuff: for you tell us we decline Scriptures as imperfect,
the fathers as counterfect, the Protestants as haeretiques, our own authors as
erroneous. Of which there is not one true word but this that we decline
Protestants as haeretiques: for so we do indeed; but for the rest it is most
false. For what Catholic did ever decline the authority of our School
Divines or ancient fathers much less call the one erroneous or the other
counterfect. Some one may have strayed a little from the common opinion of the
rest in some one particular point or perhaps have been corrupted by
haeretiques, and so we may decline that particular author in that particular
point, but call him erroneous or counterfect we do not: nay we give you leave
to name that Father or Catholic Doctor, to whose judgment we will not stand
for trial of the controversies between you and us: and if he be for you in
one, I will undertake he shall be against you in 5. or 10. others for that one.
With what face then can you say we decline them? but because I imagine you
reflect most in this saying upon this worthy work of your own* I leave it to
the consideration of the indifferent Reader whether I have so declined one
author either modern or ancient; or whether I have not showed every one which
you have brought to be quite against you. Now for the Scripture because you say
we decline it as imperfect I challe^ge you to name the man that says it is
imperfect and for that reason declineth it. You fathered indeed that term
upon Lessius but I showed it to be most false, for that he has not the word at
all in that chapter much less does he say it of Scripture, and less again
does he decline the trial thereof in reguard of the imperfection but only in
reguard that it being a written word noe haeretique can be convinced by it, as
I showed also even now out of Tertullian, who says it is but lost labor to
dispute with an haeretique out of scripture. But because I see your drift in
the often repetition of the word imperfect is only to beget in men's minds an
hard conceit of us, De pr^^. cap. ^
as if we made small account of scripture, I would know of you who they be that
have preserved the Scripture with such care for so many ages? who they be
that have translated, commentend, and expounded them? who they be that have
made so many decrees in particular and general Councels for the preservation,
authority, reverence, and dew use of them? who they be that have filled
libraries with learned works not only expounding the particular passages, but
frequently and largely declaring their necessity, dignity, vtility, and other
perfections? Veu. B. 2. ^p. Sr. ^p.
Let any man by these effects judge who reuerenceth them most Catholics or
Protestants? Let him compare the labors of the one with the labors of the
other and then he shall soon find the truth of this matter.

8. But because you still talk of our declining of Scripture, besides that it
is false, as I said before, for we are content to admit any kind of trial
with you, to take that also out of your mouth. I answer you farther, that in
this we co^descend more unto your infirmity being willing to try all ways to
gain you, then we need, or you can of right challenge. For we acknowledge
that saying of Tertullian's most true, Whereby he as it were stops this
gapp against you. Hunc igitur potissimum gradum obstruimus, non admittendos eos
ad vllam de scripturis disputationem sihae sunt vires eorum, anne eas habere
possint dispici debet cui competat possessio Scripturarum, ne is admittatur ad
eas cui nullo modo competit. We stopp up this entrance chiefly that they (that
is haeretiques) are not to be admitted to the disputation of Scriptures if in
these their force consist, we must see whether they may have them to whom the
possession belongs, lest he be admitted thereunto to whom it in noe wise
belongs: as also that other place wherein conformably to the question which
here he makes this being an important point) he defines. de praesc. cap.
15. and 37.
Non esse admittendos haereticos ad incundam de Scripturis prouocationem, quos
sine Scripturis probamus ad Scripturas non pertinere. That haeretiques are not
to be admitted to the challenge of Scriptures, whom without Scriptures we prove
not to pertain to Scriptures: that is not to have any thing to do with them.
For, says he, if they be haeretiques they cannot be Christians, and not being
Christians they can have noe right to Christian writings. Wherefore Sir
Humphrey while you stand bragging of Scriptures and chalenging us, we may say
unto you as the same Tertullian says consequently in the same place. Qui
estis? qua^do and vnde venistis? quid in meo agitis non mei? quo denique
Marcion iure siluam meam caedis, etc. Who are you? when and whence have you
come? what do you in my ground, you that are not mine? by what right o Marcion
do thou fell my wood? by what leave o Valentine do thou turn my
fountains? by what authority o Apelles do thou remove my bounds? It is my
possession what do you others here sowing and feeding at your pleasure? It is
my possession. I possess it of old, I possess it first: I have the Originals
from the owners whose the thing was. I am the heir of the Apostles, as they
have bequeathed unto me by will, as they have committed to my custody, as they
have adjured me, so I hold. For you truly they have ever dis-inherited you
and cast you of as strangers and enemies. This is Tertullian's discourse and
words: wherein it is but changing, the names Marcion, Valentine and Apelles
into Luther, Calvin, Beza or if you will into Sir Hum. Linde and it will fit
as well as if it were made for you, or spoken in answer of what you say
here, that if you bring Scripture we decline it for hereby you may see how
much you are mistaken. We do not decline it: but we decline you from it,
telling you it is none of yours, you have nothing to do with it: the
Scriptures were committed to the Church by the Apostles, to be kept; they are
the Churches evidences therefore noe man out of the Church as you are has to
do with them as Tertullian tells you here, ep. dedic. n. 6.
and as I told you in my dedicatory epistle, out of another place of his; that
we must first seek out where that faith is, to which the Scriptures belong,
where the men to whom Christian discipline was delivered. You must first show
your selves to be these men, to have this faith before we can admit you to the
Scriptures. You must first show your selves owners of the land, before you can
claim the writings and evidences which belong unto it, and which make good the
title. Therefore Sir Humphrey I cannot less admire your impudency in this
which you say of Scriptures then in any thing else which in all this Lindy
treatise you have said: though indeed as you go drawing toward an end you
show you self still more like your self in this kind as shall appear by the
following Sections.

Chap. 15.
Of the 15. Sect. the title being this. Our chiefest adversary Cardinal
Bellarmine testifies the truth of our doctrine in the principal points of
controversy betwixt us. CHAPTER XV.
1. IN this Section your drift is to prove the truth of your doctrine out of
Bellar. who you say is enforced to confess the antiquity and Safety of your
doctrine, and plainly to acknowledge the Uncertainty and nouelty of his own.
For which end you produce 8. several places, six whereof I have answered
before, and there also showed that some are nothing in the world to the
purpose, others most grossly falsified. The 1. place, to wit, that noe man can
be certain of his faith, because he cannot be certain he receives a true
Sacrament, because that depends upon the Ministers intention, is answered
and proved most foolish chap. 10. n. 7.8. etc. the second place which is of
transubstantiation as if Bellarmine confessed it probable that it could not be
proved out of scripture, is answered in Cap. 9.. 2. n. 22. concerning which I
only note that in this place you have a new corruption. For whereas Bellar.
says only that yt may be doubted whether there be any place of Scripture so
plain as without the declaration of the Church, to enforce transubstantiation,
because some learned me^ as Scotus did doubt thereof, though Bell. says to him
the Scripture seems so plain as to enforce it, here you make him say it
may be doubted whether the Scripture will bear it, which is clean another
thing, for to enforce a sense, and bear a sense, are two Several things,
neither did Scotus or any Divine else ever make question, but that the scripture
would bear that sense; but whither that were so clear and obuious a sense as
of it self, to enforce the belief of transubsta^tiation. The 3. Bell. lib. 2.
de Miss. cap. 9. and 10.
place which is of Mass without co^municants I passed over before as
impertinent to the purpose; and so I might do here, but for the Reader's
fuller satisfaction I answer. Bellarmine says that Mass is ordained both to
offer sacrifice to God, and to nourish the people with spiritual food: in which
respect as it is not unlawful to offer it to God, though there be none to
communicate, but very lawful, good, and holy; so is it more perfect and as I
may say in a certain sort more lawful, where be some to communicate. For then
it has both the ends for which it was ordained. Now what does this make for
you Sir Knight, or against us? as also that which follows here, to wit, that
there is not any express mention among the ancien^s, where none did
communicate but the Priest alone, but only conjectures: For noe more is there
any express mention to the contrary, that noe Priest might, nor ever did say
Mass without communicants, which unless you can show in Bellarmine, you say
nothing against us: neither if you could show it, should you therefore say any
thing for your own sacrificelesse communion; which has noe affinity with our
Mass: the essence whereof consists in being a Sacrifice and communion in
being a participation of the same Sacrifice. Your Protestant communion, being
but a bitt of unblessed bread and noe participation of Sacrifice, for you
absolutely deny all manner of visible Sacrifice in the Church. Now for
Bellarmines conjectures, it is true he gives them noe other name but of
conjectures, but they are such as may with great probability persuade any
indifferent man to conclude, that many times and I may say much more frequently
the Priest said Mass without communicants, then with them. And the lest of
them is such, that if you had but half such an one for any point you hold, you
would vaunt it and triumph as if you had an vnanswearable demonstration. But be
it so or be it not of some of the peoples communicating whenever the Priest
said Mass: what makes it to our purpose, which is whether it be lawful to say
Mass without communicants or not? they did not will you say, in the primitive
Church: I ask what then? may not we now? the people did communicate every day
then, must every body communicate now therefore every day? all gave their goods
away and lived in common, must every body do so now? I believe Sir Knight you
will not like that so well. If the peoples devotion grow so cold as not to
participate sacramentally of the sacrifice, must the Priests grow so cold also
as not even to offer Sacrifice, for his own and the peoples sins. This is
noe good council Sir Humphrey, almighty God reprehendeth it by his Prophet,
Isay. 24.2.
that the Priest were grown like the people. Sicut populus sic Sacerdos. We
could be glad Sir if you could help to mend the people, but not mar the
Priest, which you would do; enkindle their devotion, not destroy their faith,
nor take away the holy Sacrifice of the Mass, which affords many benefits
even to not communicants, though not so much as to them that do communicate
sacramentally. But what do I in this discourse here? it is enough to show
that Bellarmine does not patronize you, nor weaken us. The two places following
touching prayer in a known tongue and Communion under both kinds in the
primitive Church are also answered before, and are only of the same kind of
argument with this: the 6. place which is as if Bell. taught your two
Sacraments is answered in two places upon several occasions; Chap. 9.. 4 fine.
and chapter 10. fine.
and in both is showed your notorious corruption both of words and sense.

2. Now for your two last testimonies, which you brought not before, I shall
here examine. One you tell us is touching faith and good works; of which say
you it is Bellarmines confession, Bell lib. 3. de ^ustif. cap. 6.
that the Protestants do not deny but that faith and repentance are requisite,
that is a lively faith and earnest repentance: and that without them noe man
can be justified. To this I answer first that you propound the matter very
imperfectly and ignorantly, in saying thus touching faith and good works it is
Bellarmines confession, etc. not telling us the particular controversy, for
which you bring this saying of Bellarmines, there being more controversies then
one between you and us, as whither any thing be needful to justification
beside faith? or what faith it is that justifies? and how and whither good
works be necessary or not? and how they concur? for there be all these
things and more in question between you and us. And a man would have thought
by your general title of faith and Works it had been in proof of some of
these, that you had brought Bellarm. But it is for noe such matter, Bellarmine
in the place cited handling a clean different question, to wit, whether a man
can be certain of his own grace and justice, that is whether he be in the
grace and favor of almighty God, or not: and for proof that a man cannot be
certain thereof, he brings diverse places of Scripture, which imply a
condition on our part; in our justification as if we turn to God, if we seek
him in our whole heart, if we do penance, if we believe, if we do his will
etc. God will turn to us, forgive our sins and the like. Which condition
says Bellarmine, we cannot be certain whether we fulfill or not, and
consequently we cannot be certain of our grace and justice. And he says
these places are so manifest, that our adversaries cannot deny something to be
requisite on our parts. For though, says he, they deny the remission of Sins
to depend upon the condition of works: or our penance, faith or other act to
be the cause or merit of justification, yet they grant them to be requisite,
and that without them a man cannot be justified. This is Bellarmines discourse
wherein he does neither confess any good of your haeretiques nor any way allow
or approve your saying, as you would make one think, but brings your own
confessions against you and even by so much as you confess, though that be
far from enough, overthrows another error of yours, to wit, your vain
confidence and certainty of your justification. Now then Sir Humphrey is not
this honest dealing in you, to take a word spoken by Bellarmine for one
purpose, and to transfer it to another far different? and again in favor
of your self to allege those words out of Bellarmine as his confession which
he alleges only for yours, and to take it so as if his allegation were an
approbation or allowance of them whereas he brings them but in the nature of
an objection against your selves, and there withal plainly declares the
difference between your error and our faith that you will not have faith or
works to be any cause, or merit of justification, nor justification to depend
upon works as upon a condition, whereas we teach all the contrary. Which though
Bellarmine do not stand to prove there, because that was not a place for it,
yet he plainly shows that to be his belief.

3. The second place of Bellarmine you say is touching justification by faith
only; wherein you tell us he concludes with the reformed churches: saying
that either a man has true merits or he has not. If he have not, he is
dangerously deceived; if he have true merits he loses nothing by not
respecting them, but putting his trust in God only. But in this again as
before, and every where else, you still Linde it egregiously. For here you make
as if Bellarmine did allow of your justification by faith only, whereas he
confuteth the same largely and learnedly for 13. Lib. 1. de iustif. cap. 1.
whole chapters together beginning his disputation thus. Hominem non sola fide
iustificari 5. argumentis principalibus demonstrare conabimur. We will
endeavor by 5. principal arguments to demonstrate that a man is not justified
by faith only. How then does he conclude with your reformed churches? He
concludes against them: and you tell us he concludes with them. And this
place which you bring out of him is above 50. leaves, from that where he
begins to treat of justification by faith, and is an argument for a far
different matter; to wit, that it is most safe for a man, though he may put
some trust in his own good works, yet in reguard of the uncertainty he has of
his own justice, and danger of vain glory; not to put any trust in them, but
all in God. This later part, whereof there is noe controversy between us and
Protestants, Bellarmine proves by the reason here brought. Because if he have
not true merits, he deceives himself: but if he have, and yet trust not in
them, he loses nothing by not trusting in them. And what is all this good Sir
Humphrey to your justification by faith only? and consequently all that you
have said out of Bellarmine in this section, to the antiquity, and safety of
your doctrine, or the contrary of ours? not one word to any such purpose on
either side; and therefore all is, but vain bragging wherewith you conclude
heerevpon, that our best learned confess that many principal points of their
own religion, yea many articles of faith are neither ancient, safe, nor
Catholic. Wherein you speak ignorantly in distinguishing principal points of
religion, from articles of faith, for though every proposition which is de fide
be not an article of faith, yet every principal point is, and therefore some
give that for the reason why we call a point an article, to wit, because it is
a principal point: but this is but to show that you cannot speak two words
soundly without faltering: And yet you must be showing men the WAY forsooth.

4. Having then said all you can out of Bellarmine, you tell us it is not the
name of Catholic which we assume, that makes good the Catholic doctrine,
neither the opinion of learning or multitude of our side, that must outface the
truth. For say your our Savior does specially note the members of his body, by
the name of a little flock; as if the paucity of true believers, were the
special character of the true Church. And for our learned you bring a saying of
S. Paul to the Corinthians. 1. Cor. 1.26.
Not many wise according to the flesh; not many mighty, Mat. 11 25.
not many noble. And another out of S. Matthew. I thank thee Father, because
thou have hid these things from the wise and prudent, and have revealed them to
babes: and then you will us to reflect upon our own church, and we shall find
the marks of a false church foretold, that it should be after the working of
Satan, with all power and signs, and lying wonders, and after a little of this
rauing talk, you conclude with S. Augustine that miracles are not now to be
expected: thus you trowle it out Sir Humphrey. Where first to begin with, I
might ask what all this is to that which the title of your Section promises,
to wit, of the truth of your doctrine out of Bellarmine? But that it seems
proving but dry matter you take your self the freedom, without reguard to the
consequence of your discourse, to talk of the Church, of Miracles, strong
delusions, and other such stuff good for nothing but to fill paper. But this
very discourse for the matter it self shows your wit: for you could have
said nothing more to the advantage of our cause nor more to the disadvantage of
your own. For you show ours to be the true Church your own a false one. Which
to be so I shall show not in mine own words, but in S. Augustines who giving
account what it was that kept him in the bosom of the Church reckons these
very things, which you make so little account of as Miracles, multitude of
people, and the very name of Catholic: and I may say also learning. Aug.
cont. ep. fundam. cap. 4.
For answearing that epistle of the Manichees called Epistola fundamenti. He
begins his discourse thus. In Catholica ecclesia vt omittam sincerissimam
sapientiam etc. In the Catholic Church to say nothing of the most sincere
wisdom. (Wherein by mentioning this Wisdom in such manner every man sees
that to him it was a motive, though he did not so much urge it against the
Haeretiques which denied it.) And a little after again he goes on thus: to
say nothing of this Wisdom which you do not believe to be in the Catholic
Church, there be many things else which may most justly hold me in the bosom
thereof. There holds me the consent of people and nations, there holds me,
authority begun by miracles, nourished by hope, increased by charity,
strengthened by antiquity; There holds me the succession of Priests from the
very seat of Peter, to whom our Lord after his resurrection committed the
feeding of his flock to the present Bishoprique. Lastly the very name of
Catholic holds me. And after again. These therefore so many and so great
most dear chains of the Christian name do rightly hold a man believing in
the Catholic church, though for the slownesse of our understanding or merit
of our life, truth do not show it self so very clearly. But with you (that
is, Manichees, and I may say, Protestants or any other sect whatsoever) where
there is nothing of all these to inuit and hold me, there sounds only a
promise of truth. Thus far Saint Augustines very words, by which any man will
perceive that he made so much account of the learning, of the multitude of
people and nations, of miracles, of antiquity, of Succession, of the name of
Catholic in our Church (which you account nothing) as by them to hold himself
in the bosom of that Church insinuating withal that the want of them in
haereticall congregations is sufficient to deter any man from them how much
soever they prate of Truth, Safety, Certainty, and I know not what.

5. In granting us therefore these things and acknowledging the want of them
in your selves in the judgment of Saint Augustine you confess ours to be the
true Church and your own a false and haereticall conuenticle. As likewise you
do in that you make the smalnes of number to be a note of the true Church
Saint Augustine showing it to be none. For whereas the Donatists did brag
thereof, he confuteth them thus. De unit. eccl. cap. 7.
Quid est haeretici quod de paucitate gloriamini, si propterea Dominus noster
JESUS CHRISTVS traditus est ad mortem, vt haereditate multos possideret. What
is it o ye Haeretiques that you brag of the smalnes of your number, if
Christ were therefore delivered up to death that he might by inhaeritance
possess many. And there he goes on proving the same farther out of diverse
places of Scripture and namely by 9. or 10. most plain places out of Esaias the
Prophet, and then concludes again vbi est inquam quod de paucitate
gloriamini? Where I say is it that you brag of your fewnes? are not these the
many of whom it was said a little before that he should possess many by
heritage: but of this the Scriptures are so full and so clear as I may well
deny him the name of a Christian that denies it: Wherefore for that place of a
little flock which you bring in show only to the contrary, Aug. ep. 50. ad
Bonif. and ep. 48. ad Vinc.
S. Aug. explicateth it not of the Church in general but of the good who are
small in number in comparison of the wicked, or of Christ's flock or church at
that time in the beginning. lib. 4. cap. 54 in Luc 12.
And S. Bid expounds it two ways: one of the small number of the elect in
comparison of the reprobate; the other of the Church in general, in reguard of
the humility wherein Christ will have it to excel and increase to the end of
the world how much soever it be dilated in number quia videlicet ecclesiam suam
quantalibet numerositate iam dilatatam tamen vsque ad finem mundi humilitate
vult crescere. For that place of S. Paul it patronizeth not your ignorance one
iott. For it is only mean of those whom our Savior at first made choice of
to preach his faith, and make known his name unto the world: who indeed were
not many in number being but 12. nor great in wisdom according to the flesh,
not having been brought up in learning but to meant trades, as fishing and the
like, nor mighty, nor noble, being but poor and obscure for wealth and
parentage: and this for a special reason as S. Ambrose declares in these
words. Aduerte caeleste consilium, non sapientes aliquos, non diuites, Lib. 5.
comment. in Luc.
non nobiles, sed piscatores and publicanos quos dirigeret elegit, ne
traduxisse prudentia, ne redemisse diuitijs, ne potentiae nobilitatisue
authoritate traxisse aliquos ad suam gratiam videretur; vt veritatis ratio non
disputationis gratia praeualeret. Mark the heavenly Wisdom he did not choose
some wise, or rich, or noble, but Fishers and publicans to send, lest he might
seem to have brought any to his grace by wile, redeemed them by riches, or
drawn them by authority of power or nobility; that reason of truth and not the
grace of disputation might prevail.

6. And so Christ made choice of a few simple men to convert the world that
thereby it might appear that the conversion thereof was not a work of any
wordly or humane but of divine power and virtue. But if they should not convert
the world, that is great multitudes and several nations, kingdoms, and
countries, wise, powerful, and learned men, but only some such small handful
as you would have your little flock to be, some weak, unlearned and poor
people as you will have your Church to consist of, it had been noe wonder at
all. For we see many Sect-maisters draw great multitudes after them, far
greater every way then your Church of England. This place therefore which you
bring for defense of the smalnes of your number and want of learning in your
Church, shows it not to be the true Church, which for number is to be
numberless and for extent to be spread over the world. Psalm. 18.
In omnem terram exiuit sonus eorum (says holy David) their sound went all
over the earth. Whereas you acknowledge the contrary a mark of your Church:
the true Church is to consist of many wise, mighty, and noble personages
gathered and drawn to the true Catholic faith by those few unlearned, weak,
and ignoble people: For so S. Paul after in the same place seems to
insinuate saying. Quae stulia sunt mundi etc. The foolish things of the world
has God chosen that he may confound the wise, and the weak things of the
world has God chosen, that he may confound the strong, and the base things of
the world and the contemptible has God chosen, and those things which are not
that he might destroy those things which are. So as you see these few weak
and ignorant men were to subdue the learning, might, and wisdom of the world
to Christ, and draw it to his Church; and this is that which David says that
he shall send forth the rodd of his power to rule in the midst of his
enemies; Psalm. 109.
that is, of worldly wisdom and power otherwise it had been noe wonder:
besides that though these men were at first weak and unlearned in worldly
learning, yet by the holy Ghost they were replenished with all knowledge of
heavenly wisdom, and indewed with power from heaven. Of which their learning
S. Hierome has a large and excellent discourse, Hier. ad Paulin.
which not to be too long, I refer you unto. Now by this is also answered
your other place of S. Matthew, of hiding things from the wise, and revealing
them to little ones. For it is understood of little ones by humility for only
such are apt to receive heavenly wisdom: and such can noe haeretique be, that
prowdly prefers his own judgment before the judgment of the whole
Catholic church, as if God had forsaken his Church and enlightened him alone,
which is as much to say as that the funne does not shine to the whole world else
but shines in only at his window, but here is enough of this matter.

7. Now for Miracles, which you say we make a character of the Church, it is
true we do indeed, but whereas you call them the working of Satan. I
answer, it is a saying that can come from none, but a child of Satan, to
attribute the works of God to Satan: but our comfort is that our Savior
foretold us of it, and armed us against it by his own words and example: Si
patrem familias Beelzebub vocauerunt, Mat. 10.25
quanto magis domesticos eius. If they called the Father of the family
Beelzebub, how much more his family? and if the Pharisees attributed our
Sauiour's miracles to Beelzebub, is it to be thought that Haeretiques who far
surpass the impiety of the Pharisees will not do the same of the miraculous
works, which his Servants do in his name, that is for his honor and by his
power? this you do Sir Humphrey or rather would feign do, making our Miracles
to seem the working of Satan: and you would also prove it to be a mark of a
false Church, and foretold by Christ and his Apostles. For proof whereof you
bring something out of S. Paul's 2. ep. to the Thessal. of a strong delusion
and deceiuablenes of unrighteous which God should send, 3. Reg. 22. v. 22.
because we did not receive the Love of truth: but remember Sir Humphrey there
is one in scripture that started up and said ere spiritus mendax in ore omnium
Prophetarum. I will be a lying Spirit in the mouth of all the Prophets. This your
discourse shows him not to have been far of when you writ this: for mark
Sir Humphrey how many lies here be in a few lines. You say out Savior and his
Apostles discovered the marks of a false church? and where I pray you good Sir
does our Savior speak of such a false church, or where does he set down the
marks thereof? and this among the rest? For my part I find it not. And as for
the Apostles though they speak many times of Haeretiques, yet do I not find
them to do them so much honor as to call them a Church. Unless it be in
that sense that holy David says the Church of the malignant or S. John the
synagogue of Satan: Psalm. 24. Apoc. 2.9.
but yet even there I do not find the working of Miracles to be a token of
such a Church. From whence then do you prove it? Out of that place of S. Paul
which you bring? well supposing the proof to be good that is but one Apostle,
not Apostles in the plural number. But beside Sir Humphrey here I convent you
before your own conscience, whether it be true that S. Paul speak there of
any Church, or company of men? or whether he do not speak of one only man,
to wit, Antichrist? you cannot deny but he speaks of him alone, and that most
plainly. How then do you make men believe he speaks of a Church? was it not
that lying Spirit that put this into your head? and who are those that the same
Apostle says that God shall send them strong delusions, and that they should
believe lies because they received not the love the truth? these you say are
Catholics: but you may say any though never so absurd and false by the
privilege of your spirit, how else could you say a thing so evidently false,
it being most clear by the Apostles phrase, and discourse, the persons also to
whom he writes considered, that he means that of the same kind of people of
whom and to whom our Savior spoke in a manner the same words. Ego venio in
nomine Patris mei, and non accipitis me: Io. 5.43.
si alius venerit in nomine suo illum accipietis. I come in the name of my
Father, and you do not receive me: if another shall come in his own name,
you will receive him. These are the Jews who rejecting Christ shall receive
Antichrist: neither can it belong any way to Catholics who though you may
say they have forsaken the faith of Christ, yet you cannot deny but they once
received him: whereas both our Savior and S. Paul speak of them that would
not receive him. It is the Spirit you wot of that suggested this unto you: as
that also which follows next, where you say that the Spirit of God foresaw
that our doctrine would consist in forging not only of Fathers, of Councels,
of Schoolmen, but of daily miracles. For where does the Spirit foretell our
forging of Fathers Schoolmen Councels etc. You charged us before though falsely
of eluding or rejecting and counter fayting the Fathers, but not a word of
forging Schoolmen or Councels till now. Whereof if you could have alleged any
example or shadow, I presume we should have had it before now. I take this
therefore to be but an hott fit of your Spirit which transporteth you beyond
your self; and surely unless you had some such help, it were not possible
for you so to over- Linde it as you do here. As for that which you bring
here out of Lyra of feigned miracles wrought either by Priests, or by their
companions for lucre sake, it shows you would say something if you knew what:
1. Cor. 14.
be it so that some naughty Priests, or their companions work Feigned
Miracles for lucre sake, what then? be there noe true Miracles therefore? a
proper argument, like this: there is tinn and copper in the world ergo noe
silver or gold, some bad men ergo none good: a trim argument Sir Humphrey.

8. But to conclude this section you come with a saying of Saint Augustine
which will make all sure: which is this, that as miracles were necessary before
the world believed to induce it to believe, so he that seeks to be confirmed
by wonders now, is to be wondered at most of all himself in refusing to
believe what all the world beleiues besides himself. Out of which you would
have your Reader gather, that in that Father's judgment, Miracles have ceased:
and that whatsoever Catholics speak now of Miracles it but feigned: is not
this your meaning Sir Humphrey? sure it is, for what else it should be I cannot
imagine. Now to this I answer, that it is far from Saint Augustines meaning
as shall appear. For he in this place reasons with the Pagan, who did not
believe the Miracles wrought by the first preachers of our faith: because he
saw not the like in his time: to which Saint Augustine answeares that they were
not so needful then as in the beginning, but yet proves that there were such
wrought then: For how else says he came the world to believe? and now the
world beleiuing there needs noe miracle to make a man believe, the conversion
of the world being argument enough; and that therefore he were to be wondered
at, that would stand upon Miracles for his belief: and this is for us. For so
say we, a man that should stand upon miracles to become a Catholic, the whole
world of this age and for so many foregoing ages, beleiuing and professing
that faith, were to be wondered at himself: and we say again that he is as
much to be wondered at, that shall believe a new haereticall religion not known
before to the world, and contrary to the common belief thereof such as
Luther's or Caluin's is without Miracles. For all true religion must have some
testimony of Miracles from God in the beginning, till men believe: but men
beleiuing, they are not so necessary. So as thus much as you have set down
of Saint Augustine his discourse, is not against us, but rather against your
self. But now seeing you will needs speak against Miracles and that out of
Saint Augustine. Let us see what else there is in this place against or for
Miracles. And to begin with the very title of that chapter, out of the very
beginning whereof you take your place, it is this. Aug. de ciuit. lib. 22. cap.
8.
De miraculis quae vt mundus in Christum crederet facta sunt, and fieri mundo
credente non desinunt. Of the miracles which were wrought that the world might
believe in Christ, and do not cease to be wrought now, that the world does
believe. Look you Sir Humphrey is not here comfort for you to begin
withal? Miracles wrought not only in the beginning, but afterward in S. Aug.
his time? well, in the chapter it self, whereas he said that he that would not
believe without Miracles would be a wonder himself, he expounds his meaning
not to be so, as if Miracles were ceased as our Haeretiques and you for one
Sir Humphrey say. Nam, says he, etiam nunc fiunt miracula in eius nomine etc.
For even now Miracles are wrought in his name, either by the Sacraments or by
prayers or memories of Martyrs. And then he spends that whole and long
Chapter in recounting of such Miracles, as happened then in his time, and even
in his own sight or hard by: and so also in another place, whereas he had
made himself an objection, why such Miracles as our Savior wrought were not
then wrought, and answered because they would not move unless they were
strange, Retract. lib. 1. cap. 14.
nor would be strange if they were ordinary: he expounds himself thus. Haec
dixi quia non tanta nec omnia modo, non quia nulla fiunt etiam modo. This I
said because not so great nor all now, not because none are wrought even now.
By which it is most clear that you have not S. Aug. with you against Miracles
but as plain as may be against you. So as I do not see what you can say for
your self but by laying the blame upon the Spirit I spoke of before who ought
you a shame and therefore put you upon writing such matter as cannot be
otherwise maintained then by such means as you are here feign to use.

Of the 16. Sect. entitled. Our Adversaries objection drawn from the
testimonies of pretended Martyrs of their religion answered. CHAPTER XVI.
1. THE blessed Martyr F. Edmund Campian in his tenth reason bringing all sorts
of witnesses for proof of the Catholic faith begins with Martyrs, those
particularly who being Pastors of the Roman Church suffered Martyrdom
successively one after the other to the number of 33. these says Campian were
ours, and names some of them as Telesphorus, Victor, Sixtus, Cornelius, with
the particular points which they held conformably with us against Protestants:
Chap. 16.
as the fast of Lent, the Sacrifice of the Mass, power of the Pope and the
like this our Knight takes hold of confessing Martyrdom to carry some show of
honor in our Church but denying them to be ours because they neither suffered
for our faith, nor professed it while they lived: which he proves by asking
whether ever any Martyr died upon confidence of his own merits, and whether
any Romanist dare dye in justification of his own righteousness? and whether
any of those 33. died and were canonized for adoration given to Images? and
many more such wise demands: to whom I answer that those Martyrs suffered
death not for the points now in controversy with Haeretiques; but for the
profession of Christianity at the hands of the enemies of Christ: but that not
only such as dye for Christ himself by the hand of the Pagans are Martyrs, but
such as dye for his Church at the hands of Haeretiques; or for any one
particular point even the lest of them that are defined by the Council of
Trent; for which every Catholic is bound rather to dye then deny any of them.
Now that these Martyrs are ours notwithstanding they died not for any of these
points, it is plain because they professed the same Catholic faith which we
do, which we also prove by the faith of their Successor Vrbanus 8. who as he
holds their seat, so also their faith, (...). 1. Council.
for Peter's chair and faith go together, as the very haeretique Pelagius
confesses to Lozimus Pope; saying to him qui Petri fidem and sedem tenes: not
to stand here upon the most effectual and infallible prayer of our Savior
himself oraui pro te Petre vt non deficiat fides tua. Which proof must stand
firm till Sir Humphrey can tell us, what Pope began to vary from his
Praedecessors.

2. Now for the particular points it is plain even by those which F. Campian
cites, that they were ours: but much more by their own decretal epistles
which are all so full of those things, that the Haeretiques have noe other
shift but to deny the authority of the same Epistles therefore they are idle
dema^ds which the Knight makes whether any have died upon confidence of his
own merits or whether any Catholic dare dye for justification of his
righteousness? For these are noe matters of faith, but of praesumption: but for
the doctrine of justification and doctrine of merits, as they are delivered in
the Council of Trent, every Catholic is bound to give his life, as occasion
is offered. For adoration of images whereas he asks whether any of these 33.
were canonized for it: it is an idle question: for men are canonized not for
matters of belief only, but for practice of Faith, Hope, Charity, and all
virtues together which belong to an holy and Christian life in general and to
their own particular State and vocation: and though there be noe special
mention of any of those 33. their adoration of images yet (...) defined, which
before was not, and which then men were not so certain of, nor so bound to
believe as after, so consequently men might be less bound to suffer death for
it then, then afterward; and yet be of the same faith with those that came
after. So long as they acknowledged the same Church and lived in the unity
thereof, acknowledged the same power and authority to determine matters of
faith, as it is certain those ancient Martyrs did, as appears both by their
own writings yet extant, and their deeds recorded by other men in good
authentical history. These holy Martyrs therefore are truly ours which if this
Knight will disprove; he must show which of them did teach otherwise, that is,
against that vhich we now believe. Which till he can do we shall still be in
possession of our Martyrs and of their faith, our faith testifying that we are
their Children, and their blood giving testimony to the truth of our faith.

Of the 17. Sect. entitled thus. Chap. 17.
Our adversaries common objection drawn from the charitable opinion of
Protestants touching the salvation of professed Romanists living and dying in
their Church: answered. CHAPTER XVII.
1. THis section is nothing but a little of the Knight's own natural language;
and therefore will soon be answered. He begins with a saying of Costerus,
that a man dying a Lutheran cannot be saved: Whereupon he falls in to a great
rage against the Roman Church, and tells us there is a Woman, a Church, a
City, which reigns over the Kings of the earth, and has multitudes of
nations at her Command, but he thanks God his Church is not such an one:
Neither do Protestans as he says account Universality of nations, and people
to be a mark of their Church, and from thence he falls to reckon up diverse
particular points of his Churches doctrine, as disclayming of merits, Communion
in both Kinds, reading of Scriptures, and bringing a place of Scriptures for
each of these, he asks very rhetorically after every one whether they be
accursed for holding them: and on the other side asks whether we can be
blessed that forbid marriage, and meats, that have prayer in an unknown
tongue, adore images, adore Saints, adore the elements of bread and wine, we
that add traditions to the Scriptures, and detract from God's commandments and
Christ's institution in the Sacrament. Which discourse of his being so foolish
as it is, a man may think it folly for me to stand answearing particularly;
therefore I answer briefly and in general, first that though it take up half
his section yet it is wholly from his purpose which he pretends by the title of
his chapter, which is to answer our objection. Secondly I answer, that for
those things which he obiecteth unto us, they are all answered before, and
proved some false for the things wherewith he charge us; all absurd if we
consider the proofs of Scripture, which he brings: for example he tells us
we forbid marriage and meats, both which are most grossly false. For how many
Catholics be there in England men and women married? and what meat is there
that Catholics are forbidden to eat in dew time and season? is it all one to
forbid marriage to some men, to wit, such as have voluntarily promised the
contrary, and some meats at some times; all one I say as to forbid marriage
and meats, neither marriage nor meats being forbidden in these cases as ill in
themselves, in which sense only Saint Paul terms it the doctrine of Devils,
but for higher ends. But to make him yet a little more capable of this answer
I will urge him with one ordinary instance, which is this. I presume his Father
had some apprentice bound not to marry during his apprenticeship I would then
know of him whither his father in that case did forbid marriage and teach the
doctrine of Devils?

2. Against prayer in an unknown tongue he says, it is written: with men of
other tongues and other lips will I speak unto this people, and so they
shall not hear me: and in the margent says, it was a curse at the building
of Babel for them that understand not what was spoken. But by this alleging
of Scripture a man may see what a good thing it is to have it in the vulgar
tongue for every man to read and abuse it at his pleasure, when such a right
learned man as this Knight does so strangely apply it. He would make men
believe Esaias the Prophet spoke against Latin in this place but the man is
quite wide of his mark: but it is enough for him that there is mention of a
strange tongue there: for as for the sense he cares not, or rather his reading
reaches not to the meaning of the place, which is but this: that whereas the
people laughed at the Prophets that came to them with commands from God
repeating their words scoffingly manda, remanda, Isa. 28.11.
expecta, reexpecta etc. God sends them word by the Prophet that because they
would not hear those words nor follow the good counsel which he gave, he would
speak another word unto them, that they should fall and be catched, crushed
and carried into captivity and there hear a language which they did not
understand: this is the plain and literal sense of the Prophet. S. Paul
indeed uses it in another sense to persuade the Corinthians, that prophecy is
to be preferred before tongues: because as he says the gift of tongues is a
sign for infidels: that is, to speak to infidels, for their conversion; but
prophecy, that is exhortation or interpretation, is for the faithful or those
that believe already. Wherein I would know according to either explication what
any man can find against prayer in the Latin tongue: and for the tower of
Babel the Knight surely speaks by contraries. For whereas at Babel men fell
from unity of language to speak every man a several language. So, as noe one
man understood one another and by that means they were all dispersed into
several nations, the Catholic Church does quite contrary drawing several
nations to unity of language making all to speak one and the some tongue.
Whereas haeretiques in several places; by use of other languages, understand
not one the other and therein most perfectly resemble the Babel-builders as
well in the very diversity of tongues as in the diversity of doctrines.

3. For traditions, adoration of images, Saints, etc. all is answered before.
So likewise his Communion in both kind and merit of good works. But for that
which he says, that he acknowledges universality of nations and people not to
be a mark of his Church, I cannot but wonder at it. For what is this but even
in plain terms to confess his Church not to be the Church of Christ. Isa. 2.
Isay the Prophet describing the Church under the type of a mountain says
that all nations shall flow unto it. Psalm. 71.
Psalm. 2.
The Prophet David describing the Kingdom of Christ says that he shall bear
sway from sea to sea: Dan. 2.3.^
that God will give him nations for his inhaeritance and the bounds of the
Earth for his possession. Apoc. 7.9^
Daniel describes the Kingdom of Christ like a mountain growing from a
little stone and filling the whole earth. S. John sees a multitude which noe
man could reckon of all nations and tribes and people and tongues: this being
also the thing wherein the Church of Christ is specially distinguished from the
Synagogue of the Jews, that that pertained but to one nation, this to all the
nations of the earth; and all the Fathers proclaim nothing more, particularly
S. Augustine in a whole book of this argument against the Donatists. And a
Knight to come and tell us he does not account this as a mark of his Church?
What is this but in plain terms to acknowledge that his Church is not the
Church of Christ? Beside I would know what he has meant all this while by
Universality, which he has labored to prove to belong to his Doctrine? the
principal thing understood by Universality when we take it for a note of the
Church is the Universality of place to wit, Mar. 16.15.
diverse kingdoms and countries, as it is used by our Savior himself, euntes
in mundum vniuersum praedicate euangelium omni creaturae: and now in denying
this mark to belong to his Church, does he not deny it to belong to his
doctrine? for how can that doctrine be universal that is taught by a few, and
in a corner of the world? and in acknowledging his Church not to be universal,
does he not acknowledge it not to be Catholic? for is not Catholic and
universal all one, as all men know? in this word then, he has granted enough
to overthrow all that ever he has said or can say of his Church.

4. But now to come to the matter which he purposes in this section which is
to answer our argument, that it is safer for a man to take the way of the
Catholic Church, then the Protestant, because even Protestants agree with
Catholics in this that they may be saved in their religion, and Catholics
deny that Protestants can be saved: this argument the Knight denies, being
sorry for his part that a charitable opinion on the Protestants part, should
give any Romanist occasion to live and dye in the bosom of that Church;
therefore he interprets that saying to be meant only of such as by
invincible ignorance, resign their eysight to their Priests and Pastors:
which men if they hold the articles of Christian belief, without opposition to
any ground of religion, and live for outward things in the unity of the Church,
such men he says living Papists and dying Protestants in the principal
foundation of Faith, may find mercy; because they did it ignorantly. But such
Papists he says, as live in States and Kingdoms, where they may come to
knowledge of the truth, and will not; these men dye in their sins; though yet
again he a little temper the rigor of this doom, in saying he will not judge
their persons though he pronounce their doctrine so damnable, as that if he
had 10000. souls, he would not venture one of them in the Roman Faith and
Church. For which he takes God and his holy Angels to witness: and then
concludes very pathetically thus. Far be it from the thoughts of good men to
think the points in controversy betwixt them and us, to be of an inferior
alloy, as that a man may resolve this way or that, without peril of his
salvation. And then tells us the fresh bleeding wounds and sufferings of holy
men and Martyrs in his Church, do sufficiently witness the great danger in
our religion, and difference betwixt us: and that we may know that the best
learned of his Church, were far from granting salvation to any Papist, living
and dying in the profession of the now Roman Faith, he brings a saying of
Whitaker who would have us take it upon his word, that in heaven there is not
one Jesuit, nor one Papist to be found: this is the Knight's whole discourse in
the second part of his section.

5. Whereby upon examination it will appear, he is as well redd in his own
authors, as in our Schoolmen and Fathers. And to begin with him, he is sorry
the Protestants charitable opinion should give any man encouradgment to dye a
Papist. But by his leave, this opinion does not proceed from charity; but from
evidence of truth as all testimony from an enemy does. But whether it be
charity or not, this Knight will none of this charity: and therefore he says
that this is meant only of some ignorant people, whose ignorance may excuse
them; but yet even these men though they live Papists, they must dye
Protestants in the principal foundation of that Faith. This is good stuff
Papists may be saved in their religion; but yet they must dye Protestants? very
right Sir Humphrey where have you learned this theology that a man may be saved
in one religion, yet so as he must dye in another: this is a new conceit never
heard of before that a man may be saved in a religion but so as not to dye of
it: and here a man might ask at great many pretty questions as what
foundation of Faith that is, that they must dye in, what articles of
Apostolic and Christian belief, what grounds these are that may not be
opposed? all these had been necessary things to be expressed in such a
singular treatise as this of yours: which must forsooth bear the name of a
SAFE WAY leading men to true Faith. And why also a man that holds the
Apostles Creed and other things common to Catholics and Protestants, not
forsaking the Catholic church and indeed not knowing any thing else (for here
you speak of a Catholic in a Catholic country where it is to be supposed,
the name of a Protestant or other heretic is unknown:) why I say such a man
should be said to dye a Protestant, in the principal points of his faith I see
not. For why? does the Apostles Creed belong more to you then to us? had we it
from you or you from us? nay if I would stand upon it, I could show you not to
believe a right in any one article thereof. Whereof he that lists to know
more may look in Poss. bibl. select. lib. 8. cap. 32. Nor do I see what that
means that you say of men that live for outward things in the unity of the
Church, where they dwell. For if it be so that they may make show of one thing
outwardly, and mean an other inwardly, as I see not what you ca^ mean else,
then I say it is the most damnable and dangerous dissimulation of all other and
the most sure way not to be saved in any religion. For neither the outward
profession of a religion without the inward belief, nor inward belief with an
outward contrary profession can save a man. What then is it you would say? a
man may see you are in straights: feign you would not go absolutely against
that, which many Protestants say, that a Catholic may be saved in his
religion, yet that will not stand neither with your own judgment as it
seems nor bitter speeches which you have spoken of the Catholic church as
calling it Babylon, the Seat of Antichrist and such like; nor drift of your
book which is wholly to draw men away from the Catholic faith: and therefore
you would feign find some ignorant people who should be Catholics and noe
Catholics, live Catholics and dye Protestants, in outward show Catholics,
in inward belief Protestants. Which are two great and gross absurdities and
withal do not serve the turn. For in neither of these two cases is that
proposition verified, that a man dying a Papist may be saved, for he does not
dye a Papist. Neither can that ignorance which you speak of, alleging the
place of saint Paul save men, noe more then it could do him, who doubtless
should never have found such mercy as to be saved, had he not first found the
mercy, to be drawn out of that his ignorance, wherein he was. This I do not
say, that it is absolutely impossible to find one so inuincibly ignorant as
may not be saved without a distinct and particular profession of the Catholic
Faith and abrenunciation of the Protestant, but I say it is a metaphysical and
morally impossible case. For how shall a man receive pardon of his sins, be
enabled to walk the way of God's commandments while he lives, or be armed
against the combats of the Devil at his death, without receiving the Sacraments
of the Church, which is a sufficient profession of faith, wholly distinguishing
him from the Protestant or any other sect. Therefore the Knight's chief
answer to the argument is a plain denial that a Papist can be saved,
especially in England or in any Protestant State, where there is a course taken
to bring him to the knowledge of the contrary; though yet he do not pronounce
damnation on our persons, as he says we do on his. But wherein do we
pronounce damnation upon their persons more then he on ours: he and others of
his opinion say our doctrine is damnable, and consequently that noe man can be
saved by it; we say the same of his doctrine, and that noe man can be saved by
it for this or that particular man we do not take upon us to give any absolute
judgment, but that we leave to God.

6. But now for that which he says of us, that we cannot be saved, and that it
is far from the thoughts of good men, to think the points of controversy
between Catholics and Protestant to be of an inferior alloy so as a man
may hold either way without peril of salvation, I will appeal only to his
own men, and to such as I presume he will not deny to be good men, at lest
chief men of his own Church. For the points therefore in controversy as
frewill, prayer for the dead, honoring of relics, real presence,
transubstantiation, communion in one or both kinds, worshipping of images, the
Popes primacy, his being Vicar of Christ and head of the Church, auricular
Confession, and the like they are all acknowledged some by one, some by
another, not to be material points, so as a man may without peril believe
either way and one maine point, to wit, the real praesence is said by some to
be but as it were the grudging of a little ague. The several authors are
Perkins, Cartwright, Whitgift, Fulke, Penry, Some, Spark, Reynolds, Bunny,
Whitaker, John Frith in Fox in his acts and other English writers, beside
Melancthon, Luther, and other Latin writers whose names may be seen in the
Protestants apology where their very words are set down, Protest. apolog. tr.
2. cap. 2. Sect. 14.
and places of their works exactly cited: which therefore for breuityes sake I
omit here to do and shall only content my self with citing some for the
other point which the Knight denies, to wit, that we may be saved. First
noting by the way, that here is a full jury of good men and true in the
judgment of any Protestant, who give up their verdict against our good Knight
Sir Humphrey (as honest a Middlessex Iuror as his father was, and as great a
friend of Iuryes as he is) confessing the points in controversy to be of an
inferior alloy (to keep his own word of art). And which is specially to be
noted, whereas a main reason why our Knight is loath to yield the points in
controversy to be matters of indifferency, is because the fresh bleeding
wounds of the Martyrs of his Church witness the danger of our religion; among
these authors there is one John Frith a famous Foxian martyr who acknowledges
that the matter touching the substance of the Sacrament binds noe man of
necessity to salvation or damnation whether he believe it or not; and the like
the same man also says of prayer for the dead, which Mr. John Fox relating and
not disapprouing he is to be presumed to approve and so both the Martyr Frith
and Fox the martyr-maker, whose authority me thinks should be more worth then
an hundred of his Martyrs, are against our Knight; and notwithstanding all
their bleeding wounds and sufferings will give him leave to think his points
of controversy to be of an inferior alloy: and many of them not only so but
even absolutely condemn his very belief and doctrine, as a man may see fully
proved in the examen of John Fox his Calender to which I remit him contenting
my self with one only Martyr whom I presume our Knight will acknowledge for a
great one, to wit, V. Protest. apolog. tr. 2. cap sect. 5.
John Husse: this man Luther says did not depart one fingars breadth from the
Papacy. John Fox says he held Mass, transubstantiation, vows, freewill,
praedestination, informed faith, justification, merit of good works, images of
Saints. And indeed of the haeresies now in controversy between us and
Protestants he held only one, to wit, Communion in both kinds, in all the rest
he held with us: this Martyr then must needs sooner allow us to be saved then
Protestants: but here is enough of this idle matter.

7. Now therefore to the other point whether we living and dying in our present
Roman faith may be saved or not. Wherein though the Knight be verily persuaded
we cannot, alleging Whitaker's authority for the same and saying that the
best learned of his Church have been far from granting salvation to any
Papist. being withal so zealous and earnest in this belief as he wishes it
far from the thoughts of good men to think so, yet by his Worship's leave it
is the judgment of many great men of his Church, nothing inferiors in that
which he takes for learning and goodness to Mr. Whitaker, or any man else of his
opinion: for example Mr. D. Barrow says, he dares not deny the name of
Christians to the Romanists, since the learneder writers do aknowledge the
Church, of Rome, to be the Church of God. If the Church of God, then certainly
Sir Humphrey a man may be saved therein. Mr. Hooker says the Church of Rome is
to be reputed a part of the house of God, a lymme of the Visible Church of
Christ, and you in the beginning of your book bring this Hooker's authority
acknowledging us to be of the family of JESUS CHRIST, in as much as we believe
the articles of the Apostles Creed, which are the maine parts of the Christian
faith wherein we still persist as he confesses believing then the maine points
and being of the family of JESUS CHRIST there can be question in his judgment
but we may be saved. Mr. Bunny says we are noe several Church from them nor
they from us: and that neither can one of us justly account the other to be
none of the Church of God. We may then as well be saved as you, and we are as
much of the Church as you. D. Some says the Papists are not altogether aliens
from God's covenant for in the judgment of all learned men and all reformed
Churches there is in Popery a Church a Ministry a true Christ etc. and says
he if you think that all the Popish sort which dyed in the Popish Church are
damned you think absurdly and dissent from the judgment of the learned
Protestants. Lo you Sir Humphrey do not you think absurdly and dissent from
the learned Protestants in denying us salvation. Doct. Couel says thus. We
affirm them of the Church of Rome to be parts of the church of Christ and that
those that live and dye in that Church may notwithstanding be saved.

8. I could bring others to the same purpose as D. Field and Dr. Morton saying
that we are to be accounted the Church of God whose words may be seen in the
Protestants apology: tract. 1. Sect. 6. Sub. 1. 2. 3.
but these may serve the turn I hope fully to disprove your assertion Sir
Knight: for here be 7. authors alleged whom your Church of England has ever
held for good and learned men. From whose thoughts it was not so far as you
would have it to think we might be saved; but rather so deeply grounded that
they auerre it constantly; and say also that it is the judgment of all learned
Protestants: and that it is absurd to think otherwise. Do you not then see
Sir Humphrey what a Linder you show your self upon one Witakers authority to
determine a matter so peremptorily against the judgment of so many great
Doctors of your own side? and to say that it is the judgment of the best
learned Protestants? and that it is far from the thoughts of goodmen to
think otherwise? what may a man think by this you do with our Catholic
authors and fathers, whom you neither have so much to do with, nor understand
so well, nor care so much for, as you do for these Sage men forsooth of your
own the pillars of your Church, and writing in your own Mother tongue,
whereof it is to be presumed you can skill a little more, then of Latin. But
now for the maine matter or argument which you intended to answer, how is it
answered? You see so many learned Protestants think we may be saved living
and dying in our faith, without your limitation of invincible ignorance; and
merely in reguard we are a true Church, the family of Christ, the house of
God, holding the foundation of faith and that the points of controversy are not
of such necessary consequence: whose number and authority though perhaps it be
not sufficient to reform your judgment, yet to us it is sufficient to ground
this argument, that since Protestant Doctors make noe doubt but we may be saved
in our faith, and noe Doctor of ours says so of your faith, it is out of
doubt the Safer way to embrace ours: the force of which argument you go not
about to avoid otherwise then by denying that to be the opinion of learned
Protestants: which being proved to be so manifestly, the argument still has
his force and the more because you cannot answer it. And so I come to your
last Section.

Chap. 18.
Of the 18. Section, the title being this. Proving according to the title of the
book by the confession of all sides that the Protestant religion is safer,
because in all positive points of our doctrine the Romanists themselves agree
with us, but in their additions they stand single by themselves. CHAPTER XVIII.
THE substance of this section is contained in the title, and in nothing but to
turn the Catholics argument mentioned in the former section, the other way
for the Protestant side: but yet so ill fauouredly that it may be turned back
again with much more disadvantage of the Protestant cause. For by it a man may
prove any haeresy that ever was, nay Iudaisme and Turcisme to be a Safer way
then the Catholic faith, or even the Knight's Protestant faith. He begins
then with putting the case we may be saved, and then laying for a ground that
it is Safer to persist in that Church where both sides agree, then where one
part stands single in opinion; adding withal, that if he make not good the
title of his book, to wit, that he is in the Safer way, he will reconcile
himself to the Roman Church, and creep upon all four to his Holiness for a
pardon. And then falls to prove it in this manner, that because Both agree
says he in the belief of heaven and hell, and that we stand single in the
belief of Purgatory and Limbus puerorum, we are not therefore in so Safe a
way: so of the merits and Satisfactions of Christ all agree, that men are to
be saved by them, but we stand single in the addition of the Saints merits and
our own satisfaction: and so forward of the number of Sacraments, images
prayer to Saints, and the like: Which is the whole discourse of this Section.

2. Whereto I answer first that, that his ground of Safety, which he thinks
he takes from Catholics, is folish, impertinent, and without sense, as se
sets it down. For thus he says it is the Safer way to persist in that
Church, where both sides agree, then where one part stands single by themselves
in opinion. For I would know what Church is that wherein there be two sides to
agree or disagree? or what Church that is that does not stand single in opinion
by it self, if it be a Church of a different faith as we speak here of a
Church, a Church must have unity, it being a company of men all professing the
same faith and religion: therefore it is plain there is no sense in this
principle of his, as it is his, or as he puts it down: but as the
Catholics put it, it has very good sense, thus: that whereas there be
several professions and churches, the question being which of these is the
safer way, we Catholics say the Catholic church is the safer way and this
we prove because not only we our selves say it, adding withal that all our
ancestors have been saved therein and that therefore we may doubtless be
saved in it as they were; but also for that our very enemies who are of a
different profession grant we may be saved therein. But as for the Protestants
noe man says they can be saved in that faith, but only themselves. Whereby it
is plain that our is the safer way; for both sides agree in the possibility of
salvation among us, and both sides do not so agree in possibility of
salvation among them. But though his principle have no sense as he puts it,
yet because I see by his ensuing discourse what he would be at, I come to that
also. His meaning then is this, that it is safer to hold those points of
doctrine only which both sides hold then those wherein they differ; because in
them both sides agree, and in these one side stands single by it self: and
the holding of those former points, our Knight counts all one, as to persist
in a Church where both sides agree. But he is much deceived for the holding of
those points alone, does not make a man of any Church at al. For a man to be of
any Church, he must hold all the points that are taught of Faith in that
Church, and be united with those of the same profession in Sacrifice also and
Sacraments, which are things essential to a Church. Wherefore the holding of
those points wherein both sides agree precisely, neither make a man Catholic,
nor Protestant. But to be a Catholic a man must believe all thing else,
whatsoever the Catholic church teaches as necessary to salvation: and to be
a Protestant besides the belief of those things wherein we agree, he must
stand to the denial of those which are in controversy between us.

3. In which case I would ask him whether he do not stand single as well as
we, by affirming of what we deny, or denying what we affirm, or rather
whether he and his church be not so much more single then we, as they have not
one on their sides for every millio^ which we have, and have had on ours. In
this singlenes of opinions the^ the question remains the same still as
before; whither of these single sides is to be embraced: for of the rest there
is not any doubt. So as in this Sir Humphrey has also altered the question;
for whereas the question was of the matters in controversy which side was truer
he has altered it thus; whether the things in controversy or out of
controversy be safer. Which is but a slippery cunning trick of his, and which
will not serve his turn to make good the title of his book. For we by holding
the points which are out of doubt are as safe as he: for we hold them as much
as he, and for the rest we are upon even terms with him, thus far that he is
as well single in those things wherein he dissenteth from us, as we in those
wherein we dissent from him; though in this we be Safer that his men confess
we may be saved holding those things wherein we differ from them; and noe man
of ours holds that they can be saved holding obstinately whatsoever they
differ from us in. So as even by this is answered all this maine argument
whereof the Knight was so confident as thereupon to ventute his reconciliation
with the Church of Rome, and creeping upon all four to his Holiness for a
pardon; to creep upon all four indeed, is a very fit gate for men so
deuoid of reason as to make such discourses and use such malicious
insinuations, as if men used to creep upon all four to the Pope. But good Sir
Humphrey since you talk so much of creeping, and like it so well you may
remember that it is the proper punishment of pride as you may see in
Nabuchedonozor whose Pride which he took in his great city Babylon seems
far short of that which you take, Dan. 4.
not only in this great work of your Safe Way counterposing and preferring it
before the known way of the Catholic Church, but even in this contemptuous
and sacrilegious gest of God's holy anointed and contempt of his Church. And
for Pardon as light as you make of it, it were penance little enough for you
indeed to creep on all four to Rome: holy men have done very near as great
penance for far less faults: and for your reconcilement to the Church though
we be glad of the salvation of any poor soul whosoever he be, yet we would
not have you mistake you self so far as to think that we make any such
special account of your particular person above other men.

4. Now that this rule of yours as you propound it may lead and Secure a man
in any haeresy or even in Iudaisme and Turcisme as well as in your Protestant
faith I prove thus. Arius may say he agrees with us Catholics in all things
save only in the Divinity of the second person of Trinity whom he
acknowledges with us to be an holy man and that we stand single by our selves
in the assertion of his Divinity. Macedonius may say the same of the Holy
Ghost. Nestorius of the plurality of persons in Christ. Eutyches of the
Singularity of Natures; Sergius, Pyrrus and the Monothelytes of the unity of
Will in Christ; Ebion, Cerinthus, Marcion and almost all Haeretiques in their
several heresies as Anabaptists, Brownists, and who soever else may say as you
do of the points controuerted that we stand single by our selves in them and
so that it is the safer way to believe only that wherein they and we agree.
Nay as I said he Jews may make the same argument thus that they agree with us
that there is One God creator of heaven and earth, that there be 22. books of
canonical Scriptures the Law and Prophets just as you do, for the rest we
stand single: and the Turk may say he agrees with us that Christ is an holy
man and a Prophet for the rest we stand single: and that therefore he is in the
Safer way. What can you say Sir Humphrey for defense of your argument? for
though Jews and Turks do not agree with us in the profession of the Christian
Faith yet I see not why that should be necessary by this your argument: and
thereby a man may see what a good guide you are and how Safe a way you go: and
whether the saying of Solomon be not truly verified of your Safe way. Prou.
14.12
Est via quae videtur homini recta and nouissima eius deducunt ad mortem. There
is a Way which seems to a man straight and the end of it leads to Death:
and consequently to Hell. For what other is the end of Haeresy, Iudaisme, and
Turcisme whereto your rule does lead all such as will be ruled thereby.

THE CONCLUSION.
Having therefore thus demonstrated the period of your Safety to be death and
hell which is the lot and portion of all wicked Sectaries as Arrians,
Eunomians, Macedonians, Eutychians, Monothelites, Wickliffians, Hussits,
Anabaptists as also Jews and Turks: all which in the last section I have
proved by your own rule to be in as safe a way as you are. I may now for a
conclusion demand what all this that you have hitherto said is to the Iesuit's
challenge which you here pretend to answer: he having required at your hands
that you should show as I said in the beginning a visible Church and Succession
in all ages from the Apostles time to this of ours, a Succession I say or
catalogue of Doctors and Pastors teaching your 39. articles and of people
professing the same faith which now you profess: this being the thing which
was required at your hands; I would gladly know where it is that you have
performed it in this your book in what section or in what number? In the first
7. sections you talk of the causeless bitterness of the Roman Church
against yours, of the causes of contention, of reformation, of corruptions in
faith and manners, of many Catholics that have come to dye Protestants, of
the deriuation of our Doctrine from ancient Haeretiques and yours from Christ
and his Apostles? all which supposing you say true, I would know what it is to
the purpose? For where be the men here named in whom the profession of your
doctrine has continued, and by whom it has been derived from the times of
the Apostles to those of Luther and Calvin? Likewise in the 8. 9. 10. and 11.
sections you stand proving the Antiquity, Universality, Certainty and Safety of
your Faith in general and in particular as you say with as little order or
method truth or substance as it is little to the purpose though you should
have proved those things never so well and substantially. For let your
Doctrine be never so ancient, universal, certain, and safe: if you name not
the men that professed it for so many ages as are from the Apostles to Luther
you are but where you were at first? For a man may still ask Where your Church
was before Luther? that is where the men were that professed your Faith. For it
is not the Faith but the men that we look after in this place. From the 12.
section to the end you tell us of our rejecting and eluding the ancient
Father's, of correcting and purging other authors, of our excepting against
Scripture, of Bellarmines testification in favor of your Doctrine in some
principal points, of our Martyrs, of the salvation or damnation of professed
Romanists, and lastly of the Safety of your Faith and belief. All which as I
have before showed to be most false, so do I here say it is nothing to the
purpose. For where here is any man named that you can say was yours, that is,
did believe and profess the same faith with you? nay where is there one such
man named in your whole book before Luther's time or even almost since Unless
it be a Chamier a Riuett, or a Chemnitius that you can say did any way agree
with you? it is evident there is not; and therefore you your self are forced in
the very last page of your book to confess as much of a great many of your
authors. For you say that having brought your Reader into a safe way you
commend him briefly to CHRIST and his Apostles for his Leaders: the ancient
Fathers for his Associats and Assistants, and the Blessed Spirit for his guide
and Conduct. but for the other passengers as Cardinals, Bishops, and Schoolmen
which you say accompany you but part of your Way because they are Strangers you
will have him be wary of them. Whereby it is plain you profess not to agree
in belief with any one except Christ, his Apostles and ancient Fathers. So as
from their times to Luther which was 900. or 1000. years. ( The antiquity of
Fathers ending by the ordinary account of your Protestants about S. Gregory the
great his time or before.) You have not a man all that time that you can say
was yours, or of the same belief and Church with you. How then can you think
you have showed us a Safe way when you cannot name us a man now for the space
of near a 1000. years who as may be gathered our of your own discourse has
walked therein? It has been unknown then all this time: and therefore for a
man to leave the Known way of the Catholic Church, wherein it is evident
that all sorts of men have continually in all ages walked and to go into your
by-ways never trodde^ by the foot of any one learned or holy man. What were
it but to turn out of a common beaten high way leading directly from one City
or country to another: and to go into some vast or wild desert where there is
noe path or sign of any man that has ever gone that way, noe house or other
thing to give light and direction: in which case nothing else is to be expected
but that after a great deal of toil and labor a man shall wholly loose
himself without ever being able to arrive at his iourneys end. Which as it
cannot be counted other then a kind of madness in a Trauailer here in this
world, so can it not also be counted otherwise in a man that professes to
travel to heauen-ward: and therefore it is mentioned in Scripture together
with other great crimes for which almighty God professes to forsake his people
and bring their land into desolation and aeternall ignominy. Quia oblitus est
mei populus meus frustra libantes and impingentes in vijs suis in semitis
saculi vt ambularent per eas in itinere non trito. Ier. 18.15.
Because my people has forgotten me in vain sacrificing and stumbling in
their ways in the paths of this world that they might walk in them in a way
not beaten. Wherefore it is in vain for you Sir Humphrey to talk of Safety,
Certainty, and I know not what else, till you can show us such a path as the
Catholic Church, so trodden and beaten by the continual and never interrupted
Succession of travelers therein. So plain and straight that noe fool can
miss it as Esaias the Prophet foretold that the way of Salvation should be upon
the coming of our B. Savior: which because it is most evident that neither you
nor any man else can do out of the Catholic church, I could heartily wish that
you Sir Humphrey would consider the matter a little more seriously with your
self and laying aside all vain and worldly respects, should betake your self
to the only true Safe and beaten Way of the Catholic Church: but because you
I fear are so far gone and have as I may say lost your self in your
heretical fancies as that you are more like to laugh at me for my pains for
presuming to tell such a Doctor as you are the right way, then follow my
Council I will here leave to say more unto you: and conclude only in a word
to the judicious Reader who I hope upon consideration of what has been
hitherto said will be better advised then to follow you farther and will rather
leave you to your own Way saying to you much in the same manner as did that
famous Emperor Constantine to a certain Nouatian haeretique called Acesius,
upon the knowledge of whose heresy he said thus to him. Acesi, Socrat lib. 1.
cap. 21.
erigito tibi Scalam and solus in caelum ascendito, o Acesius, raise thy self
a ladder and ascend alone into heaven. For so may a man in like sort well say
to Sir Humphrey Linde o Sir Humfrey find your self a way, and go to heaven
alone by it. For I will not go that way with you which to speak with the
learned and holy man Vincentius Lerinensis, Vincen. Lerin in commonit. cap. 33.
If it be to be followed then must the faith of our holy Fathers be violated
either wholly or in great part; it must of necessity be said that all the
faithful of all nations, all the holy, all the chaste, all the continent, all
Virgins, all clerks, Levites, and Priests, so many thowsands of Confessors,
so many armies of Martyrs, so many cittyes and peoples so great for renown
and multitude, so many Islands, Provinces, Kings, Nations, Kingdoms,
Countries. Lastly almost all the whole world incorporated to Christ the head of
the Catholic faith have for so many ages been ignorant, erred, blasphemed
not knowing what they believed. Which being so fair and clear a testimony of
so holy a man I hope it will be far from the heart of any indifferent and well
minded man ever to condemn all our Forefathers for so many foregoing ages of
ignorance error and blasphemy: o what ignorance error and blasphemy were it
so to do, and yet into such do they fall whosoever approve this new found way
of the poor errant Knight Sir Humphrey Linde. And with this I end commending
the success of my Labors to him for whose love I undertook them, which is
Almighty God, and submitting my self and all I have here said to the
judgment of the most holy Catholic Roman Church which neither has, ever
had, nor ever shall have any spot of haeresy, nor even the least wrinckle of
error.

AN APPENDIX TO the Reader.
GENTLE READER.
AS this treatise was under the print, I came to understand of some few
things, whereof I could not omit here to give thee notice. One is of another
answer newly come forth to this book of Sir Humphrey Lind's which at first
made me demurre whither I should go forward with this of mine or not, as well
for sauinge of charge, as also because it might now seem needless.
Notwithstanding by the advice of friends I resolved to go thorough with it:
for as they told me, it being brought so near an end, the charge would be
little more, and as for the needlednesse they said it was neither needless nor
new, to have several answeares to the same book: for that the same thing might
be answered several ways, and the judgments and affections of men being very
diverse, one answer might be more for one man's gust, and another for
another's. Besides that this knight having so triumphed with his several
editions, it could not seem altogether needless for him, to have several
answeares: that men might see there have not wanted many that could have
answered him if they had thought him worthy of answer. For these reasons
therefore I have been induced notwithstanding that other answer to let this
of mine see light.

Another thing is concerning a fourth edition of Sir Humphrey's SAFE WAY, which
I never heard of, till now that this answer of mine was more then half
printed; at the hearing whereof, I was in mind again to let all alone. For
having used only the third edition, and a fourth coming out, reuised at it
says by the author, I presumed there would be some remarkable change or
addition, the examination and answer whereof, would require longer time then
I was now willing to spare, and a fitter place then the end of a book. But
finding means to get this 4. edition and examining it, I found by the number
of the pages of the whole book, (there being but one only more in the new
then the old and the very lines of every page in a manner agreeing) that there
could be nothing of moment more in the later then in the former. Wherefore I
resolved here to add the answer of whatsoever was added or changed, lest he
might except that his last corrected edition was not answered, or perhaps that
he was falsely charged, if there were someting left out of the fourth which was
in the third editio^.

The whole difference then of the two editions is in these places following:
first whereas in the third edition in his 9. sect. he had made 8. paragraphes,
treating 8. particular points of doctrine in this 4. edition he has made nine,
dividing the second, which was of the Sacrament of the Lord's supper (these are
the words of his title) and the doctrine of transubstantiation into two. making
this the title of the second. The Sacrament of Baptism and the Lord's supper;
and this the title of the third Transubstantiation, though he have not one word
either more, or otherwise, in these two new. then he had before in that one
wherein he plays much like a man, that would change a shilling into two
six-pences only to seem to have more money, because he had more pieces. And
as for his Baptism why he should put it in the title at all I see not: for all
that he says of it in either place is only this that he thinks noe man so
blind or stupid as to deny it to be the same substa^tially with that of the
Primitive church, which is a goodly catch to make so fair a title for.

The second place is page 174. in the 5.. of the third, and 6.. of the fourth
edition which is of communion in both kinds: where having said that a man would
gladly know what the reasons were, why the Roman church did forbid communion
in both kinds, and withal cited Gerson's treatise in the margent, which as he
there acknowledges shows the causes, I there reprehended him for it, as may
be seen here chap. 9.. 5. n. 7. Now as it seems reflecting upon his own
absurdnes therein, in his 4. edition he does not say that Gerson shows the
causes as he said before but declares them himself out of Gerson, saying they
were these, to wit, The length of lay men's beards; the lothsomnesse to drink
after others; the costlinesse and difficulty of getting wine; the frosts in
winter; the flies in summer; the burden of bearing; the danger of spilling,
and the peoples unworthiness to equal the Priests in receiving in both kinds.
Thus far are Gerson's words as he cites them in a different letter,
continuing the discourse himself in this manner. And thus for long beards and
unsweet breathes, for a little pains and noe great charges, for frosts in
winter and flies in summer, I say for these and the like Catholic
considerations pretended in the Council of Constance, the church of Rome
abolished Christ's institution, and laid Anathema upon all that at this day
maintain the contrary. So Sir Humphrey proving himself as impertinent in
setting down Gerson's discourse lamely and ridiculously, as he did before in
not setting it down at all: for better declaration whereof I shall here put
down Gerson's words as they lie, Gers. tract. de com. laico. sub vtraque spe.
which are these. Vnde dicunt plurimi Theologi etc. Wherefore very many divines
say, that the custom of not communicating the layity under both kinds,
especially since the multiplication of the faithful has been lawfully and
reasonably introduced, and this for the auoidind of manifold danger of
irreuerence, and scandal in the receiving of this most blessed Sacrament. The
first danger is in spilling; the second in carriage from place to place; the
third in the fowling of the vessels which ought to be hallowed, and not
handled or touched ordinarily by lay people, and much less ought the
consecrated wine to be sold in shops as it is said to be with such men (that is
the Bohemians who stood for the use of the chalice;) the fourth is in the
long beards of laymen, the fifth in the keeping thereof for the sick,
because in the vessel it may become vinager, and so the blood of Christ would
cease to be there, being neither to be received nor to be consecrated a new
without Mass, and so it might come to pass that pure vinager may come to be
given in steed of the blood of Christ: besides that in summer flies would
breed, how close soever the vessel should be shut: some times also it would
putrify, or become as it were noisome to drink, and this reason is very
efficacious; as also for an other reason, when many had drunk before. And we
may ask in what vessel so great a quantity of wine should be consecrated at
Easter, for ten or twenty thousand persons? the sixth harm is in the
costlinesse of wine, at lest in many places where there is scarce wine found to
celebrate withal, and in other places where it is not to be had but at a dear
rate: beside there would be danger of congeling or turning to ^ee. Again
there would be danger of credulity; and this many ways. First that the
dignity of the layity is as great in the receiving of this Sacrament as that of
Priests. Secondly that so to do was ever, and is a matter of necessity, and
so all that have done, and do think, practice or teach otherwise have
perished and do perish; and generally all, as well clarks, Doctors and Prelates
who have not opposed themselves against such a custom by word and writing,
and that they have perverted the scripture: Thirdly that the virtue and force
of this Sacrament is not more principally in the consecration then in the
receiving. Fourthly that the church of Rome does not think rightly of the
Sacraments, nor is herein to be imitated. Fifthly that general Councels and
particularly this of Constance have erred in faith and good manners. Sixthly it
would many ways be occasion of sedition and shismes in our part of
Christendom, as experience shows in Bohemia. Hitherto are the words of
Gerson: by the only reading and comparing whereof, it will easily appear how
badly Sir Humphrey has dealt as well in culling out some few reasons of least
force, as also in delivering them not in the author's phrase as they lie, but
in a certain ridiculous fashion of his own: for first he mentions not the
two maine heads which contain all the rest and are chiefly to be reguarded in
the administration of Sacraments to wit, irreuerence and scandal: then among
the dangers of irreuerence he leaves that, which may most easily happen, and
cannot indeed be well avoided, to wit, that with long keeping as when it is
kept for the sick, the species of wine would turn into vinager; that it would
otherwise corrupt, and become noisome, which Gerson seems to count his chief
reason for he says of it that it is a very efficacious one Sir Humphrey also
leaves out that other reason, that either the vessels wherein it is kept must
be let to grow very foul, or be touched and handled by lay people: both which
are contrary to the reverence dew to this holy Sacrament: he leaves out that
point of scandal in selling of the consecrated wine, to save the credit of his
brethren of Bohemia, who used so to do. He leaves out the manifold
dangers of scandal by mis-beleif, to wit, that hereby men might come to
believe that it were a matter of necessity; that hereby they might come to
condemn all that have taught, or practiced the contrary or not opposed it,
that hereby they might come to condemn the practice of the Roman church, and
condemn general Councels of error in faith; all which the Knight was pleased
to pass over, putting down only those other, which he thought he might make
better sport withal: for which purpose he also alters Gerson's words: for
whereas he speaks of a little pains, and noe great charges Gerson says
nothing of pains and for charges he says the quite contrary; to wit, that
the charge is very great in some places, and in others that there is not wine
to be had sufficient for the people, but only very little for the Priest to
say Mass, withal and for altering Christ's institution Gerson says the
express contrary, to wit, that it is an error to say that there is any such
institution; and that there is noe more necessary by divine institution, but
that we do not contemn it as, says he, Doctors teach of Confirmation and
Extreme Unction which are said to be Sacraments not of necessity. Which truth
being supposed, I see not but Gerson's reasons may be good and sufficient to
prove his intent, which was to show the manifold irreuerence and scandal which
might come by the use of both kinds: for example is it not an indecent thing to
see the long hair of a man's upper lip hang in the chalice, and to come
out with a great quantity of the sacred blood hanging and dropping from it?
likewise be there not many men and women in london, after whom Sir Humphrey
himself might perhaps be unwilling to drink, not only for niceness, but for
fear also of something else, which besides lothsomnesse may bring danger of
health? and why then for a great many such reasons concurring may not the
church decree the ordinary use of one kind only, in such case as Christ
leaves it in her power? for this authority therefore of Gerson's I see not
that the Knight has any whit mended but rather made his matters worse. V. sup.
cap. 9. 7. n. 14.


The third place is page 204. in his. of images, where citing an authority of
the civil law, he says that the good Emperors Valens and Theodosius made
proclamation etc. in the answer of which place, beside other errors I taxed
him for calling Valens a good Emperor; now in this 4. edition he leaves out
the word (good) whether by chance or upon better consideration I know not:
howsoever I thought fit to note it as a thing wherein the edition differs.

The fourth and last place is page 319. in his 17. section where explicating
what manner of Papist it is that many be saved, he says out of Hooker it must
not be a Pope with the neck of an Emperor under his feet, nor a Cardinal
riding his horse to the bridle in the blood of saints, but a Pope, a Cardinal
sorrowful, poenitent, disrobed, stripped, not only of usurped power, but also
reclaimed and recalled from his error, whose proselytes must abjure all their
heresies wherewith they have any way perverted the truth etc. All this and
somewhat more of the same kind is added; which I do not recite to answer: for
I have done that fully before, besides that any man may see the absurdity of it:
for he may as well say any Jew, Turk, or heretic may be saved, to wit, by
abiuring his errors, and being sorry for his sins, and so we say Sir Humphrey
Linde himself may be saved in this manner. I do not therefore note this to
answer but only as I said before to show the difference of the editions and
how with the number of them the measure of the Knight's malice increases: and
so much for that matter.

Now the third thing whereof I am to take notice here, is another wise piece
of work of Sir Humphrey's called VIA DEVIA, which I also never saw till this
answer was vnderprint which now having seen, I find it to be in a manner
the same with his VIA TVTA, and indeed so like as I see not why he should
call the one VIA TVTA or DEVIA rather then the other: and therefore I presume
there will be noe farther answer expected thereunto: besides that whosoever
shall attentively peruse this answer to his VIA TVTA, will soon see that
there will never need more answer to any thing, that he says. And so I end
once more with him.

FINIS.
Faults escaped in the Epistle dedicatory.
page 7. lin. 24. of the Gentlemen. cor. of the Gentleman. page 14. lin. 7. her
for. cor. her. say for. page 20. lin. 12. these cor. those page 22. lin. 14.
those cor. these page 34 lin. 9. some mire cor. the same mire

Faults escaped in the book it self.
page 2. lin. 12. there cor. these page 5. lin. 5. against Sergius. cor.
against Eutiches; the difference of his two wills against Sergius. page 6. lin.
1. whenever cor. which whenever page 6 lin. 15. words cor. word page 11.
lin. 3. out of dele out page 11. lin. 11. Doctor cor. Doctors page 11. lin.
32. theach which cor. teach that which page 13 lin. 3. that cor. that that page
15. lin. 17. before cor. before; page 17. lin. 17. in cor. is page 17. lin. 19.
points cor. point page 17. lin. 21. they were cor. it were page 2^^ (...) 23.
that that cor. that page 24. lin. 7. nothing cor. notinge page 24. lin. 7.
occur the cor. occur in the page 29 lin 12. implicit cor. implicit faith
page 35 lin. 25. and cor. are page 37. lin. 12 knighs cor. knight page 39. lin.
30 sum cor. some page 42. lin. 18. went. For the cor. went for the p. 45. lin.
1. thing which cor. thing to do which page 45. lin. 15. wiolated cor.
violated page 48. lin. 26. osten cor. often page 49. lin. 13. thimketh cor.
thinks page 50. lin. 9. Coquus cor. Coquaeus page 54 lin. 16. would all cor.
would have all page 55. lin 1. not cor. noe page 55. lin. 13. contradiction
cor. contradictions page 58. lin. 17. about cor. a bout page 61. lin. 10. Iou
cor. you p. 61 lin. 21. it cor. them page 69. lin. 17. Prophest cor. Prophet
page 69 lin. 22. showed cor. shows page 84. lin. 8. great cor. great
churches. page 84. lin. 9. Mark here etc. unto those words of the Apostles.
cor. making it a marginall note. page 85. lin. 15. ardelis cor. ardelio page
87. lin. 1 considers cor. considered page 87. lin. 31. the 666 cor. the year
666. page 91. lin. 11. he has dele he page 91. lin. 19. Heliesaitae cor.
Helcesaitae page 92. lin. 19. the flesh cor. other flesh page 96. lin. 8 to wit
cor. videlicet page 102. lin. 11. Church, his Tenets cor. Churches tenets page
106. lin. 8. to adore; cor. to adore him; page 109 lin. 20. says the cor.
says he page 112. lin. 19. your cor. yours page 114. lin. 11. and 13.
ingenious cor. ingenuous page 114 lin. 27 to cor. to to page 115 lin. 13 and 14
excused cor excuses page 116 lin. 6 which cor. with page 116 lin. 26. 22. books.
For cannonical, cor 22 books for canonical page 119 lin. 4 eight cor. eighth
page 122 lin. 29 those be cor. there be page 134. lin. 21. you cor. then page
136 lin. 2. translated cor. translateth page 142 l. 30 not cor. note page 145
lin. 12 we not cor. we do not page 152. lin. 22 whereas cor. for whereas page
156 lin. 16 to wit cor. videlicet p. 158 lin 27. your cor. our p. 159 lin. 18
others cor. other p. 159 lin. 27. aboud cor. about p. 167. lin. 12 vribarne
cor. as vribarne page 167 lin. 24 acient cor. ancient p. 172 lin. 3 in cor. on
p. 176 lin. 17 speaks cor. speaks p. 185 lin. 26 see cor. so p. 188 lin. 3
bring cor. brings p. 188 lin. 24 priest cor. priests p. 189 lin. 12 sir cor.
sir? p. 189. l. 12 is allowed dele is p. 189 l. 20 id cor. it p 193. lin 4 as
of cor. as if p. 194 lin 9. imitation cor. inuitation p. 197 lin. 30 nor cor.
not p. 198 lin. 29. 3. or 4. thousand cor. 3 or 4 hundred or 3. or 4. thousand.
p. 205 lin. 3 is cor. it is page 212 lin. 32. and. dele and. page 215 lin. 10.
hat cor. have p. 216 lin 1. putted cor. puts p. 218 lin. 28 whereas cor. for
whereas p. 228 lin. 25. anthentatiuely cor. authoritatiuely p. 233 lin. 16 hat^
cor. that p. 235 lin. 1 he does not cor. he cannot, p. 238 lin. 2. Fathers
cor. Father p. 244 lin. 24 words cor. word p. 244. lin. 26 as in cor. as if in
p. 251 lin. 13 all which cor. which (all) p. 255 lin. 12 this cor. all this p.
256 lin. 12 aliquod cor. aliqua p. 256 lin. 13 iactum cor. iactura p. 258 lin.
23 wherein cor. where proved in page 259 lin. 8 loud cor. low page 265 lin 32
firmatur cor. finiatur page 269 lin. 5. Bishops cor. Bishop page 276 lin. 24
appear cor appears page 277. lin. 21. a good cor. a good one p 282. lin. 4.
circumstance cor. circumstances. page 283 lin. 26 as a thing dele as page 290
lin. 14 your cor. yours p. 303 lin. 10 not cor. noe page 305. lin. 3 plessys
cor. plessy p. 308 lin. 5 own cor. own p. 309 lin. 19. thing cor. things page
310 lin. ^1 disolute cor. dissolute page 313. lin. 15. which cor. with page 514.
lin. 9 iudment cor. judgment page 315 lin 13. it is cor. this page 316 lin. 7.
pillards cor. pillars p. 316 lin. 22. to the paragraph cor. to the end of this
paragraph page 317. lin. 32 divine cor. divines page 318 lin. 4 may cor. it may
page 319 lin. 4 you cor. yours page 319. lin. 11 is indulgences cor. is of
indulgences page 321 lin. 15. alleged cor. you allege page 324. lin. 19
their cor. theirs page 326 lin. 1. Indulce cor. Indulgence page 325 lin. 2
Corithian cor Corinthian page 328 lin. 18 things cor. thing page 330 lin. 11
thousand cor. thowsands page 331. lin. 17 where cor. were page 333 lin. 11
thaught cor. taught page 334 lin 9 vtrumque cor. vtrunque page 335 lin 11
sermons cor. sermons with page 335 lin. 14. is cor. it page 344. lin. 4 the
cor. is the page 351 lin. 26 it any dele it page 357 lin 21 way for dele way
page 357 lin. 32 consequenty cor. consequently page 364 lin. 17 your cor. yours
page 365 lin. 4 Angelis it a cor. angelis ita p 374 lin. 8 and you cor. and yet
you p. 380 lin 12 which you say you cor. which say you p. 384 lin. 28 How are
cor. How then are p 385 lin. 15 work cor. works p. 390 lin. 6 form cor.
former p. 409 lin. 7 man cor. men p. 412 lin. 26 craftily cor. craftily p. 416
lin. 12 man's cor. men's p. 422 lin. 10 speak cor. speaks p. 425 lin. 6
Tertullian cor. is Tertullian p. 425 lin. 30 and 31 altogether cor. all
together p. 449 l. 3 this is cor. it is p 4^9 lin. 18 man cor. man's p 456 lin.
16 suppositions cor. supposititious p. 458 lin. 9 vriting cor. writing p. 467
lin. 8. priests cor. priest p. 467 lin 12 priest cor. priests p. 478 lin. 25
son cor. sun p. 466 lin. 33 Lozimus cor. Zozimus p. 487 lin. 1 Lozimus cor.
Zozimus p. 487 lin. 15 and 16 confidence cor. confidence p. 495 lin 3. kind cor
kinds p 498 lin. 30 at cor. a p. 504 lin. 19. inferiors cor. inferior p. 510
lin. 18 our cor ours p. 513 lin. 26 he cor. the p. 519 lin. 19. Council cor.
Counsel p. 524 lin. 32 auoidind cor. avoiding.


