TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE FRANCIS Lord VERVLAM, Lord high Chancellor of England,
and one of his MAJESTY'S most Honorable privy Counsel: Grace and peace from
God the Father, in the mediation of his Son Jesus Christ, and by the operation
of the blessed Spirit for ever. Amen.
Right Honorable,
WHen Paul and Barnabas did preach the word of God at Antioch, Act. 13.14
the people seemed to give such attendance unto their words of exhortation,
next Sabboath day. When I preached this Sermon at Court, the auditors did seem
to give such attention unto what was spoken, (although unworthy of their
meanest attention) that they did earnestly desire to see in writing what that
day they had heard by preaching, Visus enim est perfectior sensus: so that my
weak labors, through Gods blessing, passed along the Court, like plain
honesty, with every man's good leave and liking: and if this place had been
the furthest period, ^ had been eased of some future pains. But then it
pleased some, Honorable and worthy friends, to impose upon me this second
view: and surely pruritus scribendi, the disease of our age, had almost
hindered me; for I know litera scripta manet, and is more subject to censure,
then quod auribus auditur: for which cause I did not at the first yield. Yet
at last, upon more serious deliberation, (least I should have encurred the
breach of love of some worthy and much respected friends: as also the
censorious conceit of some supercilious Stoickes:) I resolved prodere in
vulgus, to lie Noah-like, in the Tent door, that every scoffing Cham may smile
at my nakedness: And because that a servant of mean birth and quality is
many times preferred above his worth, for his Lord and Masters sake; I have
therefore made choice of your Honorable Patronage, being at that time when it
was delivered, one of my most Noble Auditors. Vtinam esset possibile me vnum
esse ex principibus offerre genimas ad ornamentum Pontificis; sed quia haec
supra me sunt, certe vel pilos caprarum habere merear in Tabernaculo Dei, as
Origin elegantly; I wish that I could speak any thing worthy of this Text, or
your Honors Dedication. A day it is, and that a great one, when not only all
criminal causes will be heard, as in the Court of the Kings Bench; as also
every man's case shall be adjudged, as at the Common Pleas bar: but when, and
where the just Judge of all the world, will according to the evidence of every
man's conscience, distribute righteous Judgment; and therefore more properly I
call it The great day of Chancery: plain it is, that the rudest and most
Ignorant, may understand it: yet (as I think) profitable, that the most wise
and learned may reap some instruction by it: the best Remembrancer that Judges
can have about them, is to remember the day of Judgment; Summus enim iudex
iudicata reiudicabit: and unto whom much is given, of him much shall be
required in that day: wherefore I beseech the Lord of heaven and earth, to
assist your Honor with his grace and holy Spirit, that you may Honorably long
continue, as hitherto a good Iusticiar, in that place whereunto you are
worthily called, to his glory, and your eternal comfort, that you may stand
boldly before the Tribunal in that day. Amen.

Your Honors in all service, in the Lord, JAMES FORSITH.

TO THE READER.
EXpect not (courteous and gentle READER,) Critical conceits, nec ipsum
Ciceronem, not any Rhetorical fine phrases, in this plain Sermon: for we
ought to come to the people, as Saint Paul speaks; not with the wisdom of
words, 1. Cor. 2.4.
but plain evidence of the Spirit; to benefit and not to fit the humor, is my
desire: not to please, but to displease rather do I seek: that their sorrow
might be godly against sin to cause repentance not to be repented of. The
dangerous security and damnable Impiety of these last and perilous times,
which every true judicious eye discerns, and every good Christian lamenteth,
did cause me to choose this Text; that hereby I might rouse up all careless
sleepers and sluggish slumberers from their secured safety. for some there be
(I pray God not too many) that hardly entertain at any time, so much as any
show of desire or care how they shall appear in that day; as if they had made
a covenant with death and hell, Esa. 28.15.
or rather (I think) they believe that false Axiom of Atheism, that there is
neither heaven nor hell; nor yet such a day as is spoken of here: for their
actions seem such, as these in Job bidding the Almighty to depart from them,
Job. 21.14.
for they desire not the knowledge of his ways, and stand scoffing like these
Mockers in Peter, ^. Pet. 3.4.
that ask, Where is the promise of his coming? Such monsters there be under
the habit of men, worse then the very devils themselves: Ia. 2.19.
for the devils believe this day, and tremble in remembrance of it: for whose
prosperity (I think charitably of all: Psalm. 122.8.
de viuo sperandum) as for my brethren and companions sake, I am bound to pray,
and he that is the searcher of the heart knows, To. 10.1.
that mine heart desires their conversion, that all men and women that have
heard of the truth, may truly receive this true doctrine concerning Christ,
and his coming to Judgment: that we all being in our lives reformed, in our
consciences cleared, by true repentance of our sins, and that every day we
may be ready, Luc. 1.17.
as a people prepared for the Lord; and my prayer daily shall be unto Almighty
God, with the blessed Apostle for my self and all Christians, that he may
grant us, according to the riches of his glory, that we may be strengthened
in the Inner man, that Christ may dwell in our hearts by faith in this life. so
that in that day we may be freed from Judgment, and after that day
continually dwell with Christ in glory. Unto that God, that brought Jesus
Christ again from the dead, and made him Judge of quick and dead: Ephesians. 3.20.
that is able to do exceeding abundantly above all that we ask or think,
according to the power that works in us, be praise in the Church by Christ
Jesus throughout all generations. Amen.

Thine in the Lord JAMES FORSITH.
S. Michaels in the Quern, London, 20. Nouemb. 1619.
THE GREAT DAY of Chancery.
2. COR. 5.10. We must all appear (or be manifested) before the Tribunal seat
of Christ.


A Text (as I think) fit to be preached at all times, and to all persons:
Recordare nouissima, and non peccabis in aeternu^, says the Son of Syrach,
Ecclus. 7.36.
Let any man or woman of what degree soever, always remember their last end,
and it will bridle them in their courses, and curb them in their ways: the
remembrance of death is the way to life; and for a man discreetly to consider
the day of Judgment, will cause him Iudiciously to prepare his accounts
against his Masters coming: Amb. ad Virgin. laps. Cap. 8.
Si mente cornerent peccatores quale Iudicium imminet mundo, says Saint
Ambrose, if sinners did consider what great Judgment is to come upon the
world, they would not hunt so much after worldly vanities, and plunge
themselves so deep into earthly dirt as they do. Hierom. in Reg. Mona. Cap. 30.
Saint Hierome, says of himself, that he was very careful over his ways,
and fearful in his carriage; for (says he) whether I eat or drink, or
whatsoever I do I continually think, that I hear this sound in mine ear;
Rise up, ye dead, and come unto Judgment. It was Origens conceit, that the
Priest had bells in the lower parts of his garment, to put the people in mind
of Judgment: The consideration of which many times is a terror to the godly;
Psalm. 119.120.
My flesh trembles for fear of thee, and I am afraid of thy Judgments, says
the sweet singer of Israel: and the wicked often are curbed by it, Oderuut
peccare mali formidine poenae. The Psalmist tells us that this is a cause, why
the wicked man does so much delight in sin, and make such a progress in
Iniquity; because Gods Judgments are far out of his sight; Psalm. 10.5.
the remembrance of the Tribunal, the fear of execution, the consideration of
the dungeon, the darkness and blackness of the bottomless pit, the weeping,
wailing, and gnashing of teeth, are able to reclaim the most wicked, and make
them refrain their evil ways, knowing that they must come to Judgment.
Considering then the terror of the day, we persuade men, as it is in the next
verse, That we may covet, that both dwelling at home, and removing from home,
we may be acceptable to him, as it is in the verse precedent.

Thus I have made way to the Tribunal, where I intend to take up my standing,
that I may take a full view of the great Assembly cited before the seat of
Justice, and there orderly observe this general appearance: and first observe
the persons cited to appear, and you shall find them all we. 2. mark the
manner of their appearance, which is well set forth in the word manifested. 3.
the necessity of appearance in the word oportet, must. 4. the place where it
shall be, and it is said, before the Tribunal. 5. the Judge, what he is, or
who he is before whom, and he is Christ. In the first you may see a
generality, for number; in the second a plain evidence, or Charity of
evidence in the manner; in the third, an ineuitabilitie, and no resistance of
the matter; in the fourth, the glory or majesty of the place, being a
Tribunal: and lastly, in the Judge, equity and humanity, for he is Christ.

In the first place, The persons summoned. (...).
the persons are set down in general to be all we, without exception,
Clergy, Laity, King, Priest, and People; it will not be such an Assembly as
that of king Ahashuerosh, of his Nobles, Princes, and Captains only: Ester.
1.3.
nor such as the biddings of rich men to their feasts, of their rich
neighbors, Luke 14.12.
kinsfolk, and acquaintance: but like the inuitation of that householder in the
Gospel, that sent his servants at supper time, to compel all to come in.
Ibidem. 23.
In like manner shall it be in that great day, that all of what degree soever,
sort, or sex, high, or low, rich or poor, old or young: that have been, that
are, that shall be, must generally appear: The hour shall come, Ioh. 5.28.29.
(says our blessed Savior) in the which all that are in the graves shall
hear his voice, and they shall come forth that have done good unto the
resurrection of life, and they that have done evil, unto the resurrection of
condemnation. Behold he comes with clouds, and every eye shall see him, yea,
Apoc. 1.7.
even they which pierced him, and all the kinreds of the earth shall wail
before him.

Pliny reports of the Lioness, that she brings forth her whelps dead, and
so remain for the space of three days, until the Lion (coming near to the
place where they lie) lift up his voice, and roar so fiercely, that presently
they are raised from death to life: The Prophet Jeremy tells us the like of the
Lion of the Tribe of Judah, Ier. 25.30.31.
That he shall roar from above, and thrust out his voice from his holy
habitation, he shall cry aloud as they that press the Grapes, his sound shall
come to the ends of the earth, and he will enter into Judgment with all flesh:
so that with his voice all that are dead shall be raised to life, and shall
come and stand before him. In that day none shall answer by a proxy, no
neighbor or friend answer for another, no excuse nor pretense shall prevail;
Apoc. 6.15.16
The Kings of the earth, the great men, the rich men, the chief Captains, and
the mighty men, every bondsman, and every free man hid themselves in dens,
among the rocks of the mountains, and said unto the hills, fall on us, and to
the rocks, cover us from the presence of the Lamb that sits on the Throne.
These, you see, would be covered, but cannot, they would have others to stand
for them, but it will not be; their authority (although great in the world
while they lived) will not serve, riches will not help, nor honor avail;
neither bribes nor friends can save them from their appearance before that
irefull Judge; that Judge will admit no man to make way for malefactors, that
they should not be brought forth into Judgment, neither shall their be any
standing by, that dare for Money excuse any man's appearance, or free him from
the seat of Justice. I read (says Chrysostom) that the man that had not on
a wedding garment, Hom. 22. ad popul. Antioch.
was thrust out from the feast: but I read not (says he) that any made
request for him: I hear that he that hid his talent in the earth, was bound
hand and foot, and cast into utter darkness, and none to speak for him: I see
the five foolish virgins shut out of the wedding chamber, and none to make
intercession for them. Huius diei terror crit inexplicabilis, and veniet Iudex
inexorabilis: The terror and dread of this day is inexplicable, and the Judge
will come inexorable. The Angels themselves will come out in fear: and if in
that day the Just shall hardly be saved, Where or how shall the sinner and
ungodly appear. etc?

But before I pass further, Scripture says, That he that believes has
everlasting life, Ioh. 5.24.
and shall not come to Judgment, but shall pass from death unto life: and
that the wicked shall not rise up, Psalm. 1.6.
nor stand in Judgment, Hilar. in Psa. 1. Orig. in Job l. 3. page 272.
for he that believes not, is judged already. Some of the Ancients did think,
by these places, that neither the godly faithful, nor wicked infidel, should
come to Judgment, but they that are, inter Impios piosque medij, of the middle
sort which are in the faith, and yet live not thereafter: this opinion is
plainly confuted in my text, Ambr. sermon. 20. in Psalm. 119.
nam oportet nos omnes, for we must all appear. S. Ambr. thought that the
godly only should come to Judgment, quia festinant innoxij ad Iudicium, for
they that are innocent make have to Judgment, because they do not fear it,
but the ungodly do so tremble at it, that they dare not come near it: but our
blessed Apostle, says plainly, Romans 2.3.
that the wicked man above all other shall not escape the judgment of God. But
Saint Augustine does very well expound these places thus, The godly shall not
come in iudicium condemnationis, unto Judgment of condemnation, as it is in
the Gospel, nor the wicked shall not come in Iudicium Electionis, unto
judgment of Election with the godly. Saint Chrysostom upon that place, that
the wicked are adjudged already, does say thus; He that has committed murder,
although he be not by the Judge condemned, actu prolationis, by sentence
given, yet by the Law he is condemned: for the Law says, Thou shall not kill.
He that believes not, has the cause of condemnation in himself, although
the sentence be not pronounced against him until the day of Judgment. The
Lord said unto Adam, In what day soever thou eatest of the fruit thou shall de
the death. The Lord spoke not this, meaning presently to destroy Adam, but to
show that Adam immediately upon tasting thereof, had the cause of death in
himself. But to conclude this point, neither godly, nor godless, although the
one cleared in his own conscience, the other condemned, having the cause of
condemnation in himself, shall escape this Judgment seat. For we must all
appear, etc.

upon this text, concerning little children, whether they that have miscarried
before the birth, or after birth, that have died without Baptism, or after
Baptism, that have departed before they come to knowledge, shall come to
Judgment. It is but a Popish conceit to imagine that such shall stand on the
Judges left hand in that day. Thom. Aquinas 4. did. 7. q. 1. art. 3.
Thomas Aquinas thinks that little children shall appear in that day not to
be judged, but to see the glory of the Judge: but my text is plain, that all,
both old and young, great and small, shall appear. And surely in that day, all
shall go either under the sentence of Go ye cursed, or Come ye blessed. Let
this doctrine convince the Heathen, Vie.
that expect not such a time: and likewise let it condemn the Wicked, that put
off this day from them, thinking (as they show in their actions) that they
shall not come to Judgment. Let us that profess Christ stand in awe of his
coming, and expect this day; knowing the terror of the day, we persuade men.
Aug. in Psa. 93.
St. Augustine compares all Christians unto scholars, that come to render an
account unto their masters, of that which they have received, they do it not
without fear; so should we tremble to remember this day, Sine metu Plagarum.
when we shall give account of all things given to us in charge. Know this,
that the Giants before the floode could not deliver themselves from the deluge
by their strength; that Pharaoh, for all his power and forces, could not save
himself from the overthrow in the red Sea; that the rich glutton in the
Gospel, could not with all his wealth, free himself from hell torments.
Neither shall Kings nor Potentates; Judges, nor Magistrates; poor, nor rich,
deliver themselves from this Judgment: some shall judge, others be judged,
but all must appear. God grant we may be found worthy of the Judges coming.
Amen.

evidence, The manner how we shall appear. (...).
or the manner of our appearing, or rather the condition of those that appear
in that great day. Our blessed Apostle repeating the same words in his Epistle
to the Romans does use another word (...), Romans 14.10.
stabimus, we shall stand, and Saint Ambrose seems to favor that word
better, because (says he) the Psalmist says, Psalm. 1.5.
the wicked shall not stand in Judgment. and St. Augustine enclineth rather to
stand in this sense, but Theoph. Theodor. and all the modern do read it
rather (...), and not (...), to be manifested, and not to stand: and I think
the word is more Emphaticall and does express better the manner of our
appearing in that day: for many stand before a Judge, that are not manifested,
or well known unto the Judge. Genesis 39.18.
Joseph and Putiphars wife stood before Putiphar; she accused Joseph, and he
did cast him into prison; but Putiphar knew neither the hypocrisy of the one,
nor the integrity of the other. But it shall not be so with this Judge
concerning those that stand before him: he is (...) the searcher of the heart;
Thou hastryed me, and known me, says the Prophet David: Psalm. 139.1.
thou know my thoughts long before, there is not a word in my tongue but
thou know it altogether. Quid in Babilone tutum si Jerusalem manet scrut
mium, says holy Bernard. Bern. Ser. 55. in Cant.
If he does so narrowly mark the actions of the godly, for which they shall
not come to judgment, how much more does he observe the abominations of the
wicked, Hebr. 4.13.
for which they shall be condemned in judgment; Omnia illi nuda and manifesta
erunt, all things shall appear plainly unto him, when we shall stand naked
before him, not unto him alone, but unto the whole world: 1. Cor. 4.5.
cunctaque cunctorum cunctis arcana patebunt. Judge nothing before the time,
until the Lord come, who will lighten things that be hid in darkness, and
make the counsels of the heart manifest, says the Apostle. Ecce homo and opera
eius, will the Lord say, (says St. Jerome upon that text) Behold the man and
his works, when he does give unto every man according to his works, there is
nothing now hid, which, then, shall not be manifested. Whatsoever has bin
done in darkness shall then be brought unto the light: and whatsoever men have
spoken in the ear, shall then be preached on the house top. As the Lord
spoke unto David, by the mouth of Nathan, 2. Sam. 12.12.
so shall it be then done to every one; thou did it secretly, but I will do
this thing before all Israel, and before the Sun. The Sun, ye know, does
shine into every cranie and hole, neither can there any thing be hid from the
heat thereof: when the Sun of righteousness does appear, can there any thing
be hid from the heat of his fury, or the bright beams of his piercing sight?
Then Apices Iuris, your quirkes, and nice distinctions of the law will not
help; neither Judges nor witnesses can be deluded; corruption, smooth
persuasion, and favor shall be altogether banished; thy whole life, and all
the actions of thy life shall be there read, and manifested unto the whole
world; there shall not be a confused capitulation of thy crimes bound up in a
gross sum and delivered in the total; which if it might be granted to the
wicked, they would not much regard their standing in judgment: but that the
Judge of all the world, may make appear unto the whole world, his Justice and
righteous judgment; the sins of the wicked shall particularly be manifested
in that day, as St. Basil well notes. Lib. de vera virgin.
As the liniaments of a picture, are every one by themselves known; so shall
every man's actions there be manifested; This our blessed Savior does intimate
unto us, when he says, there is nothing hid which shall not be manifested,
what is spoken in the ear, shall be preached on the house top. The Lord does
likewise affirm this speaking in these words of the Psalm, When thou saw a
thief, Psalm. 50.18, 21.
thourunnest after him, thou art partaker with the adulterers; these things
have thou done, and I held my tongue, and thou thoughtest wickedly, that I was
like unto thy self, but I will reproone thee and set them in order before thee.

The blessed Apostle St. John, speaking in the Apocalypse, Reutl. 20.12.
concerning our appearing in that day, says, That the books were opened,
Liber vitae and liber conscientiae.
and the dead were judged of those things which were written in the books,
according to their works. There shall be two books opened in that day; the
book of life, and the book of every man's conscience, the book of the
conscience is a true copy of the book of life: here a man may find how it is
written there. The record of a man's conscience, if it be truly observed, is a
certain and infallible evidence of the record in heaven. If thou be written
in the book of life, thou shall have some assurance hereof in thine own
conscience. Thus Saint Paul found it written, in the book of his own
conscience; that because he had fought a good fight, and kept the faith, 2.
Tim. 4.8.
he doubted not, but that a crown of righteousness was laid up for him in
heaven, which the Lord, the righteous Judge would give him in that day. It is
between God and man, as between Creditor and Debtor, both keeps books, and
when they are about to reckon, they both bring forth their books, and examine
the one by the other. When the Pharisees brought the woman taken in adultery,
before our Savior Christ, he said nothing, but stouped down, and with his
finger, Ioh. 8.6.
wrote on the ground. While we live in sensuality, and take our pleasure, our
al-seeing God observes it, he holds his peace, and seems to us not to
hear or see, which causes us to be secure in our actions, but in the mean
time he writes up all our faults, and seals them up in a bag, Job. 14.17.
as Job speaks, and one day will lay them open before us. Whatsoever is
written with the juice of a Limmon at the first appears not, but hold it a
little to the fire, and then ye may read it plainly. The Lord does now write
all our sins, as if it were with Limons juice, that almost they appear not
unto us to be sins. Who is privy to his secret faults, or who knows how
often he does offend? But in that great day of Christ's appearance, when all our
works shall be tried with fire, then shall they appear what they are: there
need no witnesses to accuse any man in that day, omnia palam fient, all shall
be laid open; the book of every man's conscience will manifest his faults;
conscientia mill testes, a man's own conscience will be unto him as a thousand
witnesses; quid prodest non habere conscium, habenti conscientiam, thou need
no witness to come against thee, thine own conscience will condemn thee: and
if our own hearts condemn us, God is greater then our hearts, and knows all
things: Bern. Med. c. 13
Peccata mea celare non possum, quoniam quocunque vado conscientia mea mecum,
says holy Bernard; I cannot hide my sins, for whithersoeuer I go, my
conscience is with me, it carries with it whatsoever I have laid up in it, be
it good or evil: it keeps for me while I live, and will restore unto me
when I am dead; if I do amiss it is present, Accusat constientia, testis
memoria, etc.
and privy to it. Thus have I in mine own bosom, my Judges, my witnesses, my
accusers and my tormentors. The conscience is the accuser, the memory witness,
reason the Judge, delight torment, and fear the prison; thus our consciences
shall make manifest our deeds, when our book is examined with the book of
life: so that to conclude, in the presence of the Judge, in open view of all
the world, we shall be manifested. For we must appear.

Observation. Manifestatio Hypocritatum.
in that day men and women shall be manifested two manner of ways. 1. Some
shall be revealed to be that which they did not seem to be in the world. A
prophanis scriptoribus sic vocati, vt refert Caluinus in sua, Harmonia.
2. Others shall appear to be that which they were in the world. And for the
further manifestation of these two, consider all men and women as they are
Actors upon the Theator of this world; and you know that Actors upon a Stage,
are of two sorts; either they be Hypocrites, so they were named in former
times, because they did represent the persons of those, that they were not: one
plays the part of a King and is no King, another acts the Merchant and is
no Merchant, etc. Others again, act the persons of such as they are, one
plays the drunkard, another the whoremaster, a third the fool, the fourth
the Devil, and the fifth the part of a rogue, nihil valent omnes, and so they
are. In like manner, In that day many that have seemed unto men to be honest,
civil, charitable, and religious, when the vizards shall be pulled from their
faces, Tit. 1.16.
shall appear to have been plain hypocrites; they have had a show of
godliness, but in their actions, they have denied the power of it; as the
cruel King, the wicked Judge, the unjust steward, the oppressing officer, the
griping landlord, the complementall courtier, the racking rake-shame of the
Commonwealth, that ploddeth among the commons to lay imposition upon the
subject, for to benefit the King as he pretends, but his intent is like that
of the unjust stewards in the Gospel, for to get unto himself some means of
living: all such shall be manifested in that day. The cunning parishioner,
that has a trick to cozen his Pastor in Tithes, with two leases, or else by
way of fine seek to defeat the Lord of his due, in that day cannot deceive
the great Pastor of our souls; 1. Pet. 2.25.
for there he shall appear to be a sacrilegious robber, and all such as have
intus linum subtilitatis, extra lanam simplicitatis, a linsey-wolsey garment,
the outside lambs wool, and the inside foxes furre, shall be manifested in
that day. Again, Vera manifestatio impiorum
as Basil well notes; The whoremaster in his affectation, the drunkard in his
abomination, the blasphemous swearer in his execration; the proud man, the
liar, robber, and the deboascht man in that day shall appear in their perfect
pictures, and be thoroughly manifested to the Judge, and to the whole world,
and bound hand and foot, and cast into utter darkness, from whence they shall
never be delivered; for if they should break the chains through their
strength, yet they shall see no light whereby to escape, for the place is,
(...) utter darkness; and thus much of the wicked man's appearance in that
day. For all must appear.

Lastly, Manifestatio piorum.
the godly that are now reviled, slandered, hated, and persecuted of the
wicked, shall then appear how falsely they are accused, and unworthily used in
this present world, when their causes shall be known, the word of the Lord
shall try them: Psalm. 105.19.
they shall be exalted in the sight of the world and shine like stars, in
regard of their purity and sincerity, before the Judgment seat; Joseph, that
was accused falsely, by his Mistress condemned, and cast into prison wrongfully,
was not more glad, when he was exalted by Pharaoh in the sight of the people,
then these; when they shall stand before the Judge with dignity, and be
honored in the sight of the whole world. In regard whereof, that day will be
pleasant and glorious unto that little flock of Gods children; for here we see
in a glass, 1. Cor. 13.12.
(says the Apostle) but there we shall know as we are known; here we are
persecuted there shall we be glorified; Luke 12.32.
Fear not little flock, it is my fathers pleasure to give you a kingdom: Now
we are accounted the scumme of the earth, then shall we be preferred above
the lords of the earth. Matthew. 5.3.
Blessed are the poor in spirit, for theirs is the kingdom of God; this is
our joy and comfort, that in that day we shall be manifested.

Io. 3.19.
that now love darkness rather then light, because their deeds are evil:
when every thing comes forth into the light, it shall be judged by the
light. Matthew. 12.36.
Our blessed Savior tells us. that of every idle word that men shall speak,
they shall give account thereof at the day of Judgment. Let no filthy
communication, no idle and vain oath proceed out of your mouths, you that are
profane, obscoene and wicked: Nay our very thoughts shall be called in
question: Why think ye evil in your hearts you hypocrites?

And let it be as a spur unto the godly, to stir them up to an holy and
godly conversation, that they may walk in a good conscience before God, and in
the sight of men, knowing, that in that day they must be manifested. I will
conclude this point, with a story out of Damascen; Damasc. Hist. inter Barlaam
and Iosaphat. Cap. 13.
A man had three friends, two of them he loved dearly and regarded much, but
on the third he looked with a squint eye, little respecting him: it happened on
a time, that this man was arrested; and upon the sudden, being taken tarde,
and not knowing what to do, he made his way to his best beloved friend, to
entreat him, by all the bonds of love, to go before the judge with him: which
he denying, said that he durst not look the Judge in the face, but all the
favor that he could do, was, to give him so much as to bear his charges in
his journey: Unto the second he made haste, who answered him so likewise: At
last he came to the third, whom he least of all respected, and told him how
it was with him; unto whom he answered with great comfort, that although
(says he) thou have little regarded me, yet I will go to the Judge with thee,
and clear thee immediately. So it is with every man in this world that has
these three friends: The first which a man most regards, is his money and
wealth which he dearly loves: the second his friends, kinsfolk and
acquaintance, whom he next respects: but the last is the least that he
looks upon, and it is his own conscience: this man is arrested with the
Sergeant of death to stand before the Judge of heaven and earth; at which time,
his money nor his wealth cannot help him: to buy a wynding-sheet, a coffin, to
give a penny dole or the like, is the furthest they can go: His friends
likewise can do no more but accompany him to the burial, there remains
nothing, in that day, but a clear conscience to quite him before the Judge;
let us, therefore, respect our conscience more then all things besides in the
earth, for it must only help us in that day, when we shall be manifested;
For we must all appear.

The necessity of our appearing. (...).
things that are driven by force, are most violent; therefore to set forth the
terror of this Judgment, our blessed Apostle adds an oportet, The reasons
why there must be such a day.
necessitate coacta, to show that there be no means to escape, no ways to
avoid it; and that for many reasons. Oportet, it must be so.

Propter decratum Dei; because it has been so decreed of God from the
beginning: and whatsoever the Lord has appointed from the beginning must
stand. Tit. 1.2. Heb. 6.18.
God is not like man; to lie, or dye, nor like the Son of man, that he should
repent: he has appointed a day wherein he will judge the world in
righteousness, by that man whom he has appointed, Acts. 17.31. Math. 11.22.
says the Apostle in one of his sermons: it shall be better for Tyrus and
Sidon in the day of Judgment then for this city, says our blessed Savior:
the Prophets before the Law did prophecy of it, our Savior affirms it in
the Gospel; and all the Apostles bear witness of the same in their several
writings: Oportet ergo, Luke. 21.33.
Heaven and earth shall pass, but one word or title that is spoken out of the
mouth of God shall not fall to the ground vneffected: For it must be.

Propter Iustitiam Dei; because it stands with Gods Justice. All the wicked
are not punished in this life; for, although Caine, Pharaoh, Saul, and Judas,
Job. 21.23.
received some temporal punishment in this life; yet Job tells us, that many
wicked men spend their days in iollitie, and suddenly go down to their
graves, without any punishment at all. 1. King. 21.29.
Wicked Ahab did not see the evil threatened upon his house in his days.
Again, the godly, for the most part, receive no great comfort in this life;
That I have fought at Ephesus with beasts after the manner of men, 1. Cor.
15.32.
What adnantageth it me if the dead rise not at all, says our blessed Apostle;
therefore it stands with the Justice of God, to summon a day wherein every
one may receive according to their actions. And it must be so: Nam oportet.

Propter nostram corruptionem, because of our corruption: for, flesh and blood
cannot inherit the kingdom of God; 1. Cor. 15.50.
neither can corruption inherit incorruption. There must be a day of purging;
Apoc. 21.27.
for, no unclean thing can enter into the kingdom of heaven; a day, when the
fire must be put to the metal, the fan to the corn, that the dross and
chafe being done away, the pure metal may appear more glorious, and the
corn finer on the floor; 1 Cor. 15.54.
When mortality is swallowed up of immortality, and that which was sown a
natural body, shall be made a spiritual body, Ibidem 44.
then shall be brought to pass this faying that is written by him that is
able to bring all things topasse, Nam oportet, for it must be.

Propter nostram manifestationem, as it is in my text, because of our
manifestation, to show publikly what we are, and what we have been. A man
cannot judge of a thing until he see the end of it, Exitus acta probat, no
man can judge of a man's life to be good or evil as long as he lives, but by
the outward appearance.

Dicique beatus ante obitum nemo, supremaque iudicia debet. Nabal dyed like a
lamb, 1. Sam. 25.37.38.
had no reluctation, no bands in death; and yet the Scripture points him out
for a wicked man. Many of Gods children are stricken suddenly with death, so
was old father Eli, who is accounted to be a godly old man in Scripture:
Therefore there must be a day wherein the Judge of all the world will show his
righteous judgments to the world; and give unto every one according to that
which they have done in their body, whether it be good or bad, as it follows
in my text, For we must all appear.

must, seems to be so strict a charge, I^ (...)
that (I doubt) will not sound well in a young man's ^are, that lives in
pleasure, and runs up and down after his delight. An heathen Author does
tell us that this age (meaning youth) will endure no admonition, much less
this, to tell them that they must come to judgment. 1. Sam. 14.29.
Jonathan will needs taste of the honey, although his father has forbidden it.
We read of purple sins and crimson sins in Scripture, colors that will
not lightly fade, for they are both dyed in the wool and in the cloth. Young
men will be sure not to forsake their wicked ways when they are old, they will
be so perfect in them while they are young: but let them rejoice never so much
in their youth, Eccles. 11.9.
although their hearts cheer them with delight, and they walk in the ways of
their heart, and after the lust of their eyes, whereby they may swim in
pleasure by the Devils persuasions; yet let me tell them, Ibidem 12.1.
That for all these things God will bring them to Judgment. Remember thy
Creator now in the days of thy youth, whilst the evil days come not,
wherein thou shall say thou have no pleasure in them: for in that day of
Christ's appearance thou shall be brought forth into Indgement. Oportet enim:
It must be so.

Again, I believe, it will not sound well in a covetous rich man's ear, In
(...).
that takes pleasure in his riches, and sets his mind upon the world. No
doubt, that speech which the Spirit of God spoke unto the rich man in the
Gospel; Hac nocte, Luke 12.20.
that he should suddenly depart from his riches which he so much loved, was
terrible unto him: and this will be as grievous unto any wretched worldling, to
tell him he must come to Judgment: I think this sound never does enter into
his ears, there is maius sensibile, another thing gives a greater sound: Pro.
30.14.
it is the voice of the Horseleach, give, give. It is no marvel that they cry
unto the Mountains in that day to fall on them; for it is readiest in their
hearts and mouths; they think of nothing, speak of nothing, nor dream of
nothing else all their life long but mountains of gold and silver. Concerning
his temporal estate, and the provision belonging thereunto, he is wise and
politic enough, (witness that rich man in the Gospel) he can have his bills
and bonds well noted in a book, and make all his accounts ready for his
worldly estate. But concerning his spiritual estate, he is altogether
ignorant; neither does he expect any day of account, and to learn he will not
frame himself, nor yet will be instructed: Let God do to himso, and more
also: for he will not give to the poor, feed the hungry, nor clothe the naked:
he will rather have good security for ten in the hundred for the present, then
have an hundred for ten in expectation. But let al such earthly Muckwormes
know, that they must be manifested before the seat of Judgment; Oportet enim,
For we must appear, etc.

Thirdly, Insacrilegos.
it will not ^ound in the ear of a sacrilegious Church-Robber, that takes
away succum Pastori, maintenance from the Minister. Whereupon it follows,
that lac subducitur agnis, there the people must needs perish for want of
milk; such as would have the Kings daughter all glorious within, Psalm. 45.13.
but would not have her outward garments of wrought gold, nor of needle work,
such as would allow but Michas wages to the Clergy, for so it is that the fat
Bulls of Basin would beat out of the manger the oxen that tread out the corn:
but let all such know, that they shall be manifested in Judgment.

And finally, let all the wicked in the land know this, that oportet illos
omnes, they must all appear, to receive according to their deeds. I will
conclude this with an Ode which I found, an ancient singing concerning this
last Judgment. Quis orabit pro delicto? Quis spondebit pro conuicto? Quis in
iudicio tam stricto, fiet in praesidium? Quid sum miser tum dicturus? quem
patronum rogaturus; dum vix iustus est securus, cum veniet in iudicium? Which I
English thus according to the letter; Who shall pray for his offense? Who shall
answer after sentence? or who shall bring any pretense in this strict
arraignement? What then shall I catiue say? What advocate can I pray, seeing
the just can hardly stay, when he comes unto Judgment? We must all appear,
etc.

I have by this time, rushed through this great Assembly, and compassed this
Judgment seat, where I have taken notice of the persons cited, the manner of
their enditement, and the special motives urging. Now follows, to stand
before the seat, and then to take view of it, and the Judge that sits upon
it: and first I will speak of the Tribunal.

Tribunal, (...). Tribunal.
among the Romans, was a place where the Judge sat, so called, Quia tres
tribuni ibi sedebant ad iudicandum populum: Because three Tribunes sat there
to judge the people. Or, quia dabant iura tribubus, because they gave Judgment
to the Nations. The Greek word (...) a (...) gradior, to go up on steps;
which both do well set forth the eminency, majesty, and glory of the place.
When the Son of man comes in his Majesty, Math. 25.31.
and all his holy Angels with him, then shall he sit upon the Throne of his
glory. At his first coming he came in humility and poverty: Phil. 2.7.
In forma serui, says our blessed Apostle, In form of a Servant: Non serui
solum vt subesset, sed vt mali serui vt vapularet; Not only as a Servant to
undergo subjection, but as an evil servant to suffer correction. But at his
second coming, he will show himself as a King, to be served and ministered
unto, in glory and Majesty: I saw a great white Throne, Apoc. 20.11.
and one that sat on it, from whose face sled away both earth and heaven,
says the Apostle Saint John. Some have gone about to describe this Throne or
Tribunal more curiously then profitably. They do describe it what it is, and
where it will be placed, or seated; which opinions I will briefly relate unto
you. We find (say they) three attributes given to it inscripture. First,
Quomodo dicitur. Math. 25.31. Apoc. 20.11.
it is described by our blessed Savior, to be a Throne of glory, The Son of
man shall sit upon the Throne of his glory: and it is so called because of his
Maiesticall and glorious coming in that day. S. John says thus, I saw a white
Throne, because of the innocence of him that sits on it. And thirdly, Dan.
7.9.
the Prophet Daniel says; His Throne is said to be of fire for five reasons.
That this Throne was like a fiery flame, and his wheels like burning fire:
and that is spoken in respect of five reasons, which are taken from the fire.
clearenesse, for in his presence there shall be no darkness, but all clear
light; every thing shall be manifested. every eye shall see him, and he shall
appear unto all.

Tribunal shall be. Materia ex qua. Apoc. 14 4.
Nothing in heaven, Cherubim nor Seraphin, Sun nor Star, nor in earth Gold
nor precious stone, but, as I read, a cloud shall be his Tribunal. I looked
(says Saint John) and behold a white cloud, and upon the cloud one sitting
like to the Son of man, having on his head a golden Crown, and in his hand a
sharp Sickle. Which is spoken of Christ, and this seems to be confirmed by
the speech of the Angel unto those that looked upon Christ, when he was taken
up. Why stand ye gazing into heaven? this Jesus which is taken up from you,
Acts. 1.11.
shall so come as ye have seen him go into heaven. And it is said in the
verse going before, That a cloud took him up out of their sight. Likewise at
his transfiguration, which is a type of his second coming, It is said, That a
cloud did compass him. Math. 17.5.
Concerning the form of this Tribunal, we have no warrant, and therefore will
leave all supposed conjectures unto the curious.

There be many opinions concerning the place where this Tribunal should be
seated, Locus in qu^.
and where the Lord will appear to judge his people. It shall not be in
Heaven, for thither cannot the wicked come to behold him: nor yet in Hell, for
thither shall not the godly come to Judgment: on the earth, I cannot see how
it should be, seeing there is no place so large of earth to contain so many
Myriades of people as shall appear in that day: Joel. 3.2.
that opinion of some, grounded on the words of Joel, has no sure foundation;
that it shall be in the valley of Iehoshaphat, that is only an allusion unto
Iehoshaphats victory, that as he got the victory in that place over his
enemies, so shall the Lord get the victory, and victoriously triumph over his
enemies in that day: but (I think) his Tribunal shall be in the air, where
every eye may see him, according to that of the Apostle Saint Paul: 1 Thessalonians.
4.27.
We which remain shall be caught up also with them in the clouds to meet the
Lord in the air, and so shall we be ever with the Lord.

But there can be no Material nor local seat prescribed unto Christ truly at
his coming, do signify by Tribunal, Iudiciariam potestatem, Math. 28.18.
a iudiciarie power which is given unto him of the Father ( All power is given
unto me in heaven and in earth, says our blessed Savior) potestatem regendi,
potestatem iudicandi, power both to govern and to judge: so that by Tribunal
is set forth his dignity, his authority, his Majesty, and also the
certainty of his coming: and that we must all appear.

I will now pass from the Throne, Iudex.
to him that sits on the Throne, and here in my Text he is said to be
Christ, by whom we shall be judged: and here I will passover many objections,
and draw briefly toward a conclusion. John. 5.22.
The Father is not our Judge; for the Father judges no man: nor yet the holy
Ghost, for the holy Ghost would rebuke the world of sin, of righteousness,
and of Judgment. All Judgment is committed to the Son. S. Paul in his Sermon
says, That the Lord has commanded us to preach unto the people, and to
testify that it is he that is ordained of God, to be the Judge of quick and
dead. This Judge must be Christ for sundry reasons. Cur Christus Iudex.


First, because of his affinity with us, in that he has taken our nature upon
him, for in the same flesh and form that he was adjudged by Pontius Pilate, in
the same manner shall he come to judge Pontius Pilate: Heb. 4.15.16.
We have not an high Priest (says the Apostle to the Hebrews) that cannot be
touched with the feeling of our infirmities, but was in all things tempted in
like sort, yet without sin; therefore let us go to the Throne of grace.

2 Because, 1. Cor. 15.22.
As by Adam all dye, so by Christ all are made alive, says the blessed
Apostle: I am the resurrection and life, Ioh. 11.25.
says our blessed Savior.

3 Because,

That he shall come to Judgment, this word, Christ, in my Text does verify,
for he was anointed for this purpose to undergo this office, and does daily
anoint us to prepare us for it: he took our flesh with him into heaven, as a
pawn of his coming, and left with us his Spirit, to make us fit for his
coming. Then the certainty of our resurrection, and Christ's coming to
Judgment, is firmly testified in my Text; For we must all appear before the
Tribunal seat of Christ.

Comfort to the godly.
both in regard that there shall be such a day: as also that Christ Jesus
shall be their Judge in that day. Now their eyes are full of tears, and their
hearts full of grief, because of the many crosses and afflictions which they
suffer in the valley of this misery. The Israelites were never more gladder of
their departure out of Egypt, then the children of God of the coming of the
day of Judgment: then they will lift up their heads, For their redemption
draws nigh. Again, it will be comfortable unto them that Christ Jesus their
elder Brother shall be their Judge, because of his equity and humanity. Abel
went willingly into the field with Caine, expecting no hard measure at his
hand, because he was his brother. Isaac went freely to the Mount with Abraham,
looking for no severity of him, because he was his father. The children of God,
with a cheerful countenance, will come out to Judgment, because their elder
Brother is there.

A terror to the wicked.
so it is a terror to the wicked; that there shall be such a judgment, and
that Christ shall be the Judge: The Scripture makes mention of some that do
not believe the Lords coming to judgment, because he does delay his coming;
others there be that put off the terror of this day from them. It is
reported, that the Italians do use to ring their bells and discharge their
cannons in a thunderclap; that the noise of the one may lessen the terror of
the other: In like manner, Satan (I think) does hang tinkling cymbals at the
ears of earthly men, and delights them so with the music of the world;
that, thereby they may forget the sound of the last trumpe. I doubt that day
will be seen of many, before it be foreseen of any. It will prove more
terrible unto them then that day of the promulgating of the Law did unto the
Israelites; Exodus 19.18.
for if the promulgation of the Law was fearful, how much more will the
execution be more fearful? if his voice was terrible to those that came to
apprehend him; in so much, Ioh. 18.6.
that they fell backward to the ground when they heard it, how shall the wicked
stand before his wrathful voice in that day? Genesis 3.10.
If Adam did hide himself for fear of the Lords fury after his
transgression; how much more would the wicked hide themselves, if they had any
place to hide them in, from the voice of the Lamb that sits on the throne?
Genesis 45.3.
If Joseph's brethren were mightily amazed, and so daunted that they could not
speak, when he told them that he was their brother Joseph, because of the
evil that they had committed against him: how much more will the wicked be
astonished, when they shall see their brother Christ in such glory and great
Majesty, whom they have pierced and persecuted with their wicked life? Apo.
1.7.
Every eye shall see him, yea even they that pierced him; and all the Nations
of the earth shall wail before him. Plangent quia mundum dilexerunt, plangent
quia vitam in mundo non correxerunt, plangent quia fidem non habuerunt: the
covetous man shall wail, because he loved the world more then God and
godliness; the lascivious man shall wail, because, for a little pleasure he
has purchased everlasting pain; the unbelieving wretch shall wail, because
he did not believe in Christ, nor in the truth of the Gospel; the proud man
shall wail, because he did contemn the base humility of the cross of
Christ; and all the wicked men and women shall weep and wail, because they
did not weep nor wail in time, while they lived in the world. Remember these
things now, all ye that forget God, least the Lord come in his fury against
you, and there be none to deliver you; let the fear of judgment persuade you
from your wicked courses.

Thou that blasphemest the name of God with execrable oaths, filling up every
sentence with an oath or a curse; remember the gnashing of teeth after
judgment. Let the thief, robber and cousener think on them that shall be
bound hand and foot and cast into utter darkness in that day. Let the drunkard
look upon the glutton scorched in the flame, and cannot have one drop to
cool his tongue withal. Thou that take thy pleasure, consider the damned
crew of the wicked that shall be grievously aflicted in that day. Thou that
live idly on the sweat of other men's brows, call him to mind that hid his
talent in the earth, was bound hand and foot and cast into utter darkness in
that day. Thou that art covetous in griping other men's goods, and grinding the
faces of the poor with thine own goods, Consider the gnawing worm that shall
continually gnaw and grind thee in hell torments in that day. We read that he
that had not upon him a wedding garment was put out, and he that did defer
his masters coming was not accepted. In that day shall the godly look upon
him with great joy and comfort, but the wicked shall behold him with great
fear and torment. In that day shall he separate the sheep from the Goats:
the sheep he will place on his right hand, and take them up with him into
theayre, (as St. Paul speaks) that all the world may know them, and honor
them as Saints; but the wicked he will place on his left hand, leaving them on
the earth which they have so much loved, that all may behold them and despise
them as sinners. The Judge shall sit above them, to their great terror:
Beneath them, Hell shall be open ready to receive them: Before them the devils
and damned crew ready to execute Gods wrath upon them: Behind them the Saints
and all their dearest friend, forsaking them: On their left hand their sins
accusing them: On their right hand Justice threatening them: On all sides the
whole world burning and flaming about them. It is no marvel that they seek
death; but death flies from them, they call unto the mountains and rocks,
and they refuse to cover them; they shall dry up and consume away for the very
disquietnesse of their souls. To go forward it is intolerable, to go
backward impossible, to go to either side unavailable. Thus at the worlds
end, men shall be at their wits end; but happy shall that servant be, whom the
Master, when he comes, shall find ready prepared and looking for his coming;
such shall be sung in with that sweet harvest song, Come ye blessed children
of my father, receive the kingdom prepared for you before the beginning of the
world: To the which kingdom, that he may bring us, let us daily pray, for
Jesus Christ his sake, that has dearly bought us; to whom with the Father and
the holy Ghost, be all honor, glory and dominion for ever and ever.

FINIS.

