A LETTER First written and sent by Io. FORBES, Pastor of the English Church
at MIDDELBVRGH, unto certain of the company of Marchands Adventurers at STOADE,
at their earnest desire, for resolving this Question: How a Christian man may
discern the testimony of Gods spirit, from the testimony of his own spirit,
in witnessing his Adoption.

And now again renewed and enlarged by the Author, at the desire of diverse
good Christians* for the comfort of their troubled consciences* and published
by those of his flock, to whom he did dedicate it for the public use of the
Church.

Thy Rod and thy Staff they comfort me,

Psalm. 23. 4. AT MIDDELBVRGH, Printed by Richard Schilders, 1616.

To Mr Edw. Bennet, Mr. John Turner, and Mr Ed. Kay, the Author wishes
increase of all Spiritual blessing in Christ.
RECEYVE (beloved in the Lord) a certain Letter, which above eight years ago, I
first did write at the desire of Mr Io. Scharpuls, now with God, and others of
the company then at Stoade, and now again have revewed and somewhat enlarged
the same, upon occasion of the trouble of conscience wherein I did perceyve
many good Christians to be cast for want of sufficient light in the same
question which is here handled, desiring to minister some comfort unto them,
if it shall please God to bless this my endeavor, in that measure of light
which he has given me: use it, and if ye find any fruit in it, impart it to
such as have need. The spirit of comfort and true peace be with you to the
end. Iuli 20. 1616.

Yours in the Lord Io. Forbes.

A short Discourse, showing how a Christian may discern the testimony of Gods
spirit from the testimony of his own spirit, in witnessing his Adoption.
The same spirit bears witness also together with our spirit, that we are
the sons of God, Romans 8. 16.
BELOVED in the Lord, you desired by your Letter at my departure from Stoad,
that I would resolve you, in that saying of the Apostle to the Romans chap. 8.
The spirit of God bears witness with our spirits, that we are the sons of
God. How a man may know when that spirit, does bear witness also with our
spirit. The occasion moving you to inquire this, being ministered by some speech
uttered by me in preaching: saying it was not enough for a man, that his own
spirit do bear witness alone.

First, I will show you the occasion wherefore I did say so: and next, I will
do my best to satisfy your question, as the Lord has given me to understand.

It is most certain, that a man's own heart (being a thing, as says Jeremy,
Chap. 17. deceitful above all things) will often times deceyve man him self, and
yield him a false Testimony of him self, as also of his actions and estate.
Is it not said of the Angel of the Church of Laodicea: that he said of him
self: I am rich and increased with goods, Reve. 3. 17*
and have need of nothing. This doubtless was his own testimony of him self.
But what does the spirit of God witness of him: Thou art wretched, and
miserable, and poor, and blind, and naked. And moreover does affirm that this
Angel did not know he was so.

Does not Christ also teach us in the Gospel, Luke. 18.
that there be some whose hearts deceyve them, making them trust in themselves
that they are just, and yet are not, and cleares it by the example of the
Pharisee, giving thanks unto God, That he was not as other men, extortioner,
unjust, etc. who notwithstanding is accounted of God unjust. And to be short,
in this point the Lord Jesus shows us that many men at his second coming,
shall be miserably deceived by the foolish testimony of their own hearts: some
being confident because of the outward fellowship and familiarity they have
had with Christ, both in Word and Sacraments, and therefore pleading thus: Luc.
13. 22*
We have eaten and drunk in thy presence, and thou has taught in our streets,
shall nevertheless receyve this answer: I tell you, I know you not whence you
are, depart from me. Others also upon the confidence of gifts bestowed upon
them by Christ for the good of his Church, pleading with him and saying: Mat.
7. 22.
Lord, Lord, have we not by thy Name prophesied, and by thy Name cast out
Devils, and by thy Name done many great works? shall receyve the same answer.

Hereby it is evident, that the testimony of a man's own heart being alone
may be deceitful, eve^ when it is builded upon profession and outward
participation of the holy things of GOD. Yea even when it is builded upon some
rare special gifts of the holy ghost, which although they be necessary for
the body or Church in general, yet are not requisite in every member to
salvation, such as is the gift of Prophesying, etc. and therefore may both be
wanting without prejudice, and also had without enjoying of salvation.

Thus have we reason not to trust our Adoption and certainty of our
salvation, to the naked testimony of our own hearts, least we be found like
the foolish Virgins. It is true, the testimony of our own hearts is needful
hereunto, because says the Apostle, If our hearts condemn us, 1 Ioh. 3.
20*
God is greater then our hearts: and if our hearts condemn us not, then have
we boldness toward God. But it must not be alone, for so it shall never be sure,
but having the spirit witnessing with it, then it is sure.

Now yet before I speak of the discerning of the spirits testimony, I must
forewarne you of this one thing, to wit, that there be many effects of the
spirit in the Saints often times, which at the first the Saints know not to be
from the spirit, and that both in their first calling, and after they be
called* and therefore we must not measure the working of the spirit in us by
our discerning, neither must we judge our selves destitute of the spirit,
albeit we do not discern the effects wrought in us, to be from the spirit:
for the Saints will feel strange effects wrought in their minds, which they
will neither know whence they come, nor whereunto they tend. This is verified
by Jesus Christ him self, speaking of the very working of the spirit in our
spiritual birth, whereby we are made the children of God, comparinge it to the
wind: The wind (says he) blows where it lists, Io. 3. 8.
and thou hear the sound thereof, but can not tell whence it comes, nor
whether it goes: so is every man (says Christ) that is borne of the spirit.

This shall not seem strange to us if we mark what is said of the Disciples
at Ephesus, who were baptized as appears by Apollos, Acts. 19. 2
and yet they confess to Paul that they had not so much as heard whether there
were an H. ghost. It may be also very apparantlie thought, that Peter when he
did witness of Christ, that he was the Christ the Son of the living God,
Mat. 16. 16*
did not know that testimony to have been from the spirit of God, and
therefore Christ (to teach him that that testimony was not the testimony of
his own heart, but by the spirit of God) did tell him that flesh and blood had
not reveyled that to him, but his Father that is in heaven.

This I speak not to make men careless in trying whether they have the spirit
or no, but to comfort weak Christians, who although they have the livelie
effects of the spirit, yet have not come so far as to be able to discern
them to be from the spirit, as sometimes they will be taught to understand,
and can not tell how at the first, and to repent, and can not tell how, and to
rejoice, and can not tell how, and to love God and his Saints, and can not tell
how, and to believe, and cannot tell how, which all notwithstanding are the
proper works of the spirit.

Neither speak I this to shun the answering of your question touching the
discerning of the spirits testimony, which I pray the Lord to teach us all,
seeing there can indeed no solid joy possess our minds, till we feel the
spirit of Adoption sealing up the certainty of our election in our hearts: for
if we be sons (as says the Apostle) the Lord has sent forth the spirit of
his son in our hearts, Galat 4. 6.
which cries Abba, Romans 8. 10
Father: and therefore if any man has not the spirit of Christ, the same is
not his.

Seeing then it is even by the spirit which he has give^ us, that we know our
selves to be the sons of God, and that God as our Father abides in us, 1
Ioh. 3. 24.
as says John: It is a most necessary study, and most commendable in a
Christian, to try if he has the spirit.

Now therefore to come to your question, I will speak of it in all sobriety
according to that measure of faith which the Lord has given me.

First in general, it shall not be amiss to know what is the Testimony of
the spirit.

Secondly, after what manner the spirit does give testimony.

And lastly, we shall cleerlie see how to discern it from the testimony of
our own spirit.

In general, the whole word of God is the testimony of the spirit. For
whatsoever is therein contained, the spirit does witness it, and nothing else
does the spirit witness, but that which is contained in the word: therefore is
the word of God called his Testimon. Psalm. 19.
The testimony of the Lord is sure. And again: God established a Testimony
in Jacob. Psalm. 79.
And often times in the 119. Psalm, the Lords words are called his Testimonies,
because every sentence of the word, is a testimony of Gods will: Therefore is
it that the Prophet commands us to go to the Law and to the Testimony. Esa.
8.
For nothing can we know of Gods mind toward us, except we hearken what the
spirit speaks in his word. and therefore, Christ wills us to search the
Scriptures, Ioh. 5. 39.
because they witness of him. So, whatsoever the word does persuade our hearts
touching GOD and his love in Christ, that is the Testimony of the spirit: and
therefore when hearing the word of God, our hearts receyves any assurance or
persuasion of redemption, remission of sins, etc. that same is and must be
the spirits testimony. As for example, when by the word a man is made to know
Christ to be the Lord, the Redeemer, etc. doubtless that is a testimony of
Gods spirit, by the word witnessing to the heart that truth and causing the
heart to beleve it. But here we must carefully take heed, that our hearts
be not deceyved touching that which you most disire to know, that is, touching
our Adoption, by mistaking the spirits testimony. For eschewing this danger we
have to understand that the spirit by the word persuades two manner of ways,
to wit, generally and specially, generally when that which is reveyled out
of the word is generally believed as Gods truth: specially when it is
specially believed. The general is no warrant of adoption. For in that sort
the very Devils believe and tremble, Iam. 2. 19.
says James: a reprobate may believe generally all to be true which is in the
word of God, and yet never have any testimony of the spirit, of his
particular adoption, he may believe that Christ is a Savior of sinners, and
yet not believe that he is a Savior unto him: he may believe that God in
Christ will forgive sinners: and yet no ways have assurance of the remission
of his own sins: yea he may be a Preacher, and be witness of all the
promises of God in Christ to others, and yet have no part in them him self.
Therefore leaving this general testimony of the spirit, I come to the
special testimony, which we must discern before our Adoption be sealed to
us. And in discerning this, there is also great wisdom required: for therein
also may a man be deceyved. For there is some sort of special testificatio^
that witnesses not adoption. For understanding hereof, we must consider that
the spirits testimony in special manner is of two sorts.

The first is, when he witnesses and reveiles grace particularly to a man,
but imprints not the thing reveiled in the heart, neither seals it in his
soul.

The second is, when not only he reveyles and witnesses the promises in
special manner to a man, but also writes them in his heart, and seals them
in his soul. Now to make this more plain, we must consider what are the
words of Gods covenant in Christ with the elect. After these days (says the
Lord) I will put my Laws in their mind, Ier. 31. Heb. 8.
and in their heart I will write them. If we way these words aright, we shall
see that which I have spoken, clear. GOD in giving his Law spoke to his
people, and by his spirit witnessed his will to them: but this word which was
spoken, was not written in their hearts, but in tables of stone: therefore the
Jews did not abide in that covenant. The peculiar promise of God to the elect
in Christ is, Hebr. 8. 9.
that he shall write his words in their hearts. When the^ the Lords spirit,
witnesses, and in witnessing writes the thing witnessed, in the heart, it is
an assurance of Gods effectual speaking: but when he witnesses to the heart,
and yet writes not that testimony in the heart, it is no testimony of
adoption. To make this plain: it is certain, there can be no true faith in
the heart, where the word of GOD abides not. Christ shows this in the fifth
chap. of John, Ioh. 5. 38.
speakinge to the Jews, His word (says he) have ye not abiding in you,
because ye believe not in him whom he has sent: declaring that the abiding of
the word in man, and believing, do still acco^panie one the other. And if we
will consider his speech in the sixth chap. of John, we shall see that the
cause why his word did not abide in them, Ioh. 6. 45.
was, because they were not taught of God, that is, they had not hard nor
learned of the Father, according to his promise, I will put my laws in their
mind; and in their heart will I write them: therefore it is that Moses
speakinge of the estate of the chosen children of God under grace, says, that
this commandment which I command thee this day (meaning thereby the word of
the Father) is not hid from thee, neither is it far from thee, Deuteronomy. 30. 12.
it is not in the heaven, that thou should say, who shall go up for us to
heaven, and bring it us, and cause us to hear it, that we may do it: neither
is it beyond the sea, that thou should say, who shall go over the sea for
us, and bring it us and cause us to hear it, that we may do it: but the word
is very near unto thee, even in thy mouth, and in thy heart for to do it.
Romans 10. 68.
The Apostle expounds the same to the Romans and shows that this is the word of
the Father which they did preach. For this is the promise of God to his Church
under the Gospel, by the mouth of his Prophet: Esaias. 54. 13.
All thy children shall be taught of the Lord: and this is the Lords teaching,
eve^ the writing of his word in the heart by his spirit. Ioh. 8. 30.
Of the first sort of this special receyving the word, you may read in John:
it is said of the Jews, many believed in Christ, and yet these same does
Christ declare to be the servants of sin, and children of the devil, and
murderers. and in the 37. verse he shows why they were such, because his word
had no place in the^: therefore does he warn the^ in the 31. ver. that if they
did continue in his word, they were verily his discipl. teaching thereby that
it is not the receyving of his word simply, that makes us disciples: but the
abydiug in it, which none can do that has it not written in their heart by
the spirit. Of the second sort of the special receyving the word, you may
read in the 17. chap. of John, in the words of Christ concerning his
Disciples: I have given them the words which thou gave me, Ioh 17. 8.
and they have receyved them, etc. Of both these sorts of receyving the
spirits testimony, you may read in the Gospel of Saint Math. in the Parable
of the Sower, the one is like the ground which receyveth seed, Mat. 13. 18.
but yields no fruit again: the other is like the ground which receives the
seed, and brings forth fruit in abundance: because God the Father is the
Husband man thereof: as Christ says in the 15. chapter of John. But you may
ask, how I can call this sort of witnessinge which is fruitless, to be the
spirits testimony? Remember I pray you what the Apostle says to the
Corinthians, No man can call Jesus Lord but by the H. ghost. 1 Cor. 12. 3.
Whereby it is plain that there is no possibility in man of receyving or
acknowledging any part of that mystery of godlynes, without the spirits
working. And yet, albeit this be the work of the spirit, yet does it not prove
him in whom it is, to be the child of God. For Christ says plainly, Mat. 7.
21.
Not every one that call me Lord, Lord, shall enter into the kingdom of
heaven.

And because this same effect in the very reprobate, 1 Cor. 2. 14.
is the work of the spirit (for the natural man can not perceyve the things of
the spirit) therefore are the very reprobate thus illuminate after this manner
said, to have been made partakers of the H. ghost, Heb. 6. 4.
not that ever that spirit of Adoption, which God sendes forth in the hearts
of his sons to seal them unto the day of redemption, was ever sent into
their hearts. But because even that light and taste of heave^ly things which
they received, was by the working of the H. ghost: although he never did give
the^ full possession of them by imprinting them in their hearts, and sealing the^
in their souls. For that which Christ says to his discip. (when he promises
to send the^ the spirit of truth) remains still true, that the world can not
receive him, Ioh. 14. 17
because it sees him not neither knows him: and therefore we may justly say,
that they who receive this taste of Christ and of the good word of god, do not
discern the spirit to work these things, because they neither see him nor
know him, neither ca^ they receive him, but are like unto natural men, who
albeit they have their being, Act. 17. 28*
and life, and moving in God, yet still remain without God in this world. Ephe.
2. 12.
But it may the^ be demanded how it is that they are said to be made partakers
of the H. ghost? and what difference is there betwixt them and the elect in the
participatio^ of the spirit? To understand this, we must remember that there
must be a certain participatio^ of the spirit whersoever any effect of the
spirit is found in whatsoever measure or manner. But we are to mark a difference
both of measure and manner. For as a man that has an excellent piece of wine to
sell, will give to all that com, so much as is sufficient to make the^ know the
taste of it, yet he gives not to every one such a quantity as is sufficient to
bring nourishment and refreshment to their bodies and spirits. And as a
physician that has prepared a comfortable potio^ for the health of a beloved
patient, he will give to others a little of it to make them apprehende the
taste of it: but not so, as to have any strength to make any operation in
their stomach: for that quantity he gives only to the patient for whose
health it is prepared.

Now they who tasted of this wine or potion, can discern the goodness of it,
albeit they never did drink it, nor ever be partakers of the refreshing power
of it.

So is it with the Lord in his dispensation: he uses sometimes only to give
a naked sight and knowledge of Christ, and his mercy in him, to men: and this
I called before a general persuasion of the spirit, when men are made to know
Christ in general, but without all sense of feelinge of him.

Sometimes the spirit comes nearer, and touches the heart with Christ and with
the powers of the world to come, even so far, as the heart receives a taste
of the love of God, and of the mercies of God in Christ, in such sort, that
they receive the word incontinently with joy: Math. 13. 20.
as says Christ. The spirit havinge in that measure testified the word to
them, as is sufficient to make them to taste the sweetness of it: albeeit he
never fill their heart with it, nor imprint it in their minds, that they may
find the power of it unto life. The last degree of the spirits witnessinge,
is, when not only he touches the lips with grace to make the taste of it
felt: but when he poures in the love of God, and all the graces reveyled in
the word, and shedds them abroad in the heart: as says the Apostle to the
Romans, Romans 5. 5.
and so makes the heart to enjoy, receyve and possess the promise by printing
it therein. So that the working and witnessing of the spirit, in the wicked, is
like the smell of an Apothecaris shop: which one that passes by, receyveth,
although he never carry any of these odoriferous things with him But the
witnessing of the spirit, to the elect, is by imparting the thing witnessed to
the soul, and making it reallie to possess it. So that if a man could see the
soul of a true child of God, he should see engraven in it, mercy, peace,
love, righteousness, life, joy, and Christ himself. all the promises of God in
Christ, being written therein, by the spirit, according to the covenant of God.
Conform to this, does the Apostle speak of the spirits witnessing to the
hearts of the Corinthians, when he says, ye are manifest to be the Epistle
of Christ, ministered by us, and written, not with inck, but with the spirit of
the livinge GOD: not in Tables of stone, but in fleshly tables of the heart.

Now therefore we come to speak of this witnessinge of the spirit which is
proper to the elect: And to the end we may cleerelie discern, the testimony
of the spirit, which witnesses with our spirits, that we are the sons of
GOD: we must yet more deeply mark and consider this testimony.

The work of the spirit in assuring us of Adoption, is twoofolde.

The first, for distinction, we shall call this first writing of the word
reveyled, in our hearts, and so making us to believe in God, Ephesians. 1. 13.
as our God and Father in Christ.

The second, is our sealling, after we have believed. That it is so, ye may see
in the words of the Apostle to the Ephesians. In whom also (says he) ye have
trusted after that ye heard the word of truth, Ephesians. 1. 13.
even the Gospel of your salvation, wherein also after ye believed, ye were
sealed with the holy spirit of promise.

Mark first this work of the spirit, in causing us to believe in God, by the
effectual revelation of the word: next, mark that other work of the spirit,
after we have believed, in sealing us. The first of these two, although it be
felt by us, yet at the first, we can not discern it to be the work of the
spirit, till afterward. For, before we be made spiritual, we can discern
nothing of the spirit: because the things of the spirit are spiritually
discerned. 1 Cor. 2.
But when we receyve the spirit which is of God, then are we able to know the
things which are given to us of God. Therefore that testimony whereof the
Apostle speaks to the Romans which witnesses with our spirits: is to be
understood of the second work of the spirit, which is our sealing.

That we may understand this aright, we must consider that there is something
that comes in in us betwixt the first work of the spirit and the second. And
that is the testimony of our own spirit, bearing witness, that we are the
sons of God. For when God by his spirit, has imprinted in our hearts, the
word of promise, then begins our hearts to say, we are the children of God:
being persuaded by the spirit, secretly insinuating the word in our hearts to
believe, Psalm. 116. 10.
and believing to speak: 1 Cor. 4. 13.
according as it is said, I beleved and therefore did speak.

Now it might seem there needed no more. but let us remember what Christ says
to Peter, Luc. 22. 31.
Simon, Simon, behold Satan has desired to sift you as wheat, but I have
prayed for thee that thy faith fail not. So we have need that our hearts be
established in that work of the spirit, otherwise we should be in danger to
make shipwreck of faith and of a good conscience: which is nothing else but
this testimony of our own hearts. Therefore does the Church pray in the
Psalm: Psalm. 68. 28.
Establish O God that which thou have wrought in us. And the Apostle, after he
has given thanks unto God for the Thessalonians effectual calling, he prays
to GOD, That he who had given them this good hope through grace, would also
establish them in every word and good work. Therefore is it that our God, for
stablishing us in faith, and in the assurance of our Adoption, seals us by the
holy spirit of promise. This is manifest out of the former place to the Ephesians.
where he says, That after they believed, they were sealed with the holy
spirit of promise. This same does the Apostle to the Gallat. confirm, when he
shows that Christ was sent to this end, Gal. 4. 6.
to redeem us: That we might receyve the Adoption of the sons: and then he
adds, and because ye are sons, GOD has sent forth the spirit of his
son into your hearts, that cries Abba, Father. And that this sealing of us,
by sendinge forth the spirit of Adoption in our hearts, is the mean whereby
God establishes us, it is manifest by the Apostle to the Corinthians. 2 Cor.
1. 21.
For when first he has showed, that it is God which establishes, saying, It
is God which establishes us with you in Christ: then adds he the mean
whereby God did stablish them, saying: and has anointed us, who has also
sealed us, and has given the earnest of the spirit in our hearts. Which three
sayings are all one thing in substance. Therefore does John, from this
anointing, confirm and assure these to whom he did write, against the fearing
to fall away: but (says he) The anointing which ye receyved of him, 1 Ioh. 2.
27.
dwells in you: and as it taught you, ye shall abide in him. And the Apostle
to the Corinthians takes the Argument of his confidence from this, 2 Cor. 5. 5.
that God has given us the earnest of the spirit. And the same Apostle from
this giving of us the spirit of liberty which cries Abba Father, proves us
to be the sons of God in that eight chap. to the Romans. Rom 8. 15* 16.
Whereby it is plain, that by these three, the selfsame thing is meant: albeit
diverslie expressed: according to the three sorts of confirmation, the one by
anointing, so were Kings, Priests and Prophets confirmed in their calling:
the other by an earnest, which is a confirmation of the bargain, and of the
payement of the full sum: Dan. 6. ^.
and the last, by sealing, which in all writes, contractes, and obligations, is
a confirmation of all therein contained and promised. According to which,
amongst the Persians, whatsoever was sealed with the Kings Ring, could not be
changed nor revoked. Therefore, whomsoever God seals unto life, as his child:
he is made most sure of eternal life. For this cause is it, that in the
Revelatio^, Revel. 7. 3
God first will have his children sealed before the enemies can have power to
execute their malice, Ma. 16. 18
and of these thus sealed, it is, that Christ says, that the gates of hell
shall not prevayle against them. And that they shall never perish, neither
shall any pluck them out of his hand. Ioh. 10. 28


Now, this same sending forth of the spirit of Adoption in our hearts, is our
sealinge. Therefore says the Apost. to the Ephesians, ye were sealed with the
holy spirit of promise. And this same is also our anointing, poured out upon
us, as that oil on Aaron: Joel 2. 28.
therefore are we said to have this anointing from him which is holy, Act. 2.
17.
and that it teaches us, 1 Ioh. 2. 2.
and that it is true, and not lying: according to that which is said by Christ
of the spirit: I will pray the Father, Io. 14.
and he will give you another comforter, that he may abide with you for ever,
even the spirit of truth, he shall teach you all things; And the same also is
our earnest: 2 Cor. 5. 5
therefore it is called the earnest of the spirit: and also the first fruits
of the spirit. So by the same spirit, as by oil, as by earnest, as by a seal,
does God stablish our hearts, in that which they do witness to us, touching our
Adoption. And that does the Apostle signify when he says, Romans 8. 16.
the same spirit bears witness with our spirits, that we are the sons of
God.

Mark then the order of Gods working. First he speaks the word of truth to
the heart, and in speaking, writes it in the heart: heerevpon the heart is made
to believe that which it has heard and receyved, from the spirit: and when it
believes, it speaks, and the thing it speaks, is that same, which is engrave^
in it, by the spirit: to wit, that God is his God, and he his child. For never
can the heart of a man speak one word of mercy to him, nor of Adoption, till
the spirit of God have spoken first mercy to it. Now when the spirit of man
has spoken, and given testimony to him, of his election, he^ the Lord for
establishing the heart in this, and confirming man in the testimony of his
heart, he adds his spirit: and by the testimony thereof, seals this promise
in the heart, and makes Adoption and eternal life, most certain and sure to
the soul, that he dare be bold with the Apostle to say, Ro^. 8. 33.
Who shall lay any thing to my charge? who shall condemn me? who shall
separate me from the love of Christ: I am persuaded that neither death nor
life, nor anguish, etc. shall be able to separate me from the love of God
which is in Jesus Christ my Lord.

And that we may yet more evidentlie see the necessity of this testimony of
Gods spirit: we are to consider that albeit our own hearts have in them a power
to witness unto us what we are both by nature and by grace, yet the testimony
of our hearts touching our estate by grace, is not so fully and confidentlie
to be reposed upon and trusted, as the testimony thereof touching our estate
by nature. For we may assuredly trust our hearts and consciences, Deuteronomy. 27. 21.
when upon any guiltines they condemn us, seeing he is cursed who abydes not
in every jo^ of the Law to fulfill it: Gal. 3. 10.
and he that tra^sgresseth one commandment, Iam. 2. 10.
is guilty of all: but we are not always to give absolut credit to our
consciences, when upon conceit of innoce^cie they justify us. For although our
consciences accuse us of nothing, yet thereby we are not justified, as is
plain by the saying of the Apost. touching himself 1. Cor. 4. 4. the reason
hereof is, because our consciences do not so cleerlie see our estate which is
from God, neither can they of them selves so truly judge of it, as they may do
of their estate by nature, when they are illuminate by God: for then they are
made to know and clearly to see that in us there is no goodness, and therefore
there is just reason why they should condemn us. And we are verily to believe
our hearts upon this sight and knowledge condempning us. but on the other part,
although we see the mind of God toward us in Christ, yet we can not so
thoroughly apprehende his promises upon any sight we receive, that we dar trust
our felicity absolutely to the testimony of our own hearts. First, because
our hearts may be deceyved, as is evident by scripture, that many shall be.
Secondly, because we may mistake the working of God in us, and lay hold on a
wrong ground. Thirdly, because our hearts are more prone to speak good nor
evil of our selves, even when they have never so small occsion to do so, and
when they have much more occasion to do the contrary. And lastly, because all
men are liars, and only God is true, and therefore we must never give so much
credit to our consciences, speaking good of us, as when they speak evil:
specially when the question is of being the sons of God, or not: so that
even when they witness that we are the sons of God, we are not to rest
hereupon except God, who only knows whom he has chosen, do by his spirit
confirm the testimony of our spirit. For we may much more surely trust our
hearts in that which is in our selves and from our selves, then in that which
is neither from our selves nor in our selves, but is the free gift of God in
Christ. Therefore that we should not be deceyved by our deceitful hearts, God
secou^deth our own testimony touching his taking of us for his children, by
his spirit, witnessinge the same: even as by his own mouth co^firming our
adoption. For by the mouth of two or three witnesses shall every word be
stablished.

Thus I have shown you what is the spirits testimony, and in what manner he
gives it, and how necessary it is. Now I come to that which you desired to
know: that is, how we discern the testimony of the spirit which seals our
Adoption from the testimony of our own spirit. For knowledge of this, First,
let us consider, that there be three things, whereby we discern our Election
and Adoption from the spirit of God. The first is his presence with us. The
second is his work in us. The third is his voice unto us.

Touching the first: the very presence of the spirit of Adoption, is a
witness of our Adoption. For the spirit is the earnest of the inheritance of
God, as we have shown before: therefore whosoever has the spirit, the very
having of him, is a sure testimony to that man, that he is the son of God:
For he that has the spirit of Christ, Romans 8. 9.
he is Christ's: as by the contrary, he that has not the spirit of Christ,
is not Christ's. Now the having of the spirit is discerned by the other two,
that is, by the work, and by the voice: therefore those two are chiefly to be
considered: first his work in us, which must go before his voice: I mean this
voice which seals Adoption: For otherwise his voice always goes before his
work: for it is by the word, that he works, all things in us.

For understanding of this work and voice of the spirit which seals adoption,
mark the words of the Apostle in that same eight chap. of the Rom, touching
the spirit, Ye have not receyved (says he) the spirit of bondage to fear
again, Romans 8. 15*
but ye have receyved the spirit of Adoption, whereby we cry, Abba Father.
Here Adoption (under which is understood liberty) is opponed to bondage, as
the effect of the spirit. Next, the voice following heerevpon, is manifest in
the words following: (whereby we cry, Abba, Father). Which cry, more
plainly is said by the Apostle to the Galathians, to be the cry of the
spirit, saying: and because ye are sons, Gal. 4. 6.
God has sent forth the spirit of his son in your hearts which cries Abba,
Father. And therefore is it that the Apostle to the Romans says, that the
same spirit bears witness with our spirit, that we are the children of God.
What then is this work of the spirit in us, that witnesses Adoption? This
special work, is, liberty, or freedom: accompanied ever with peace,
boldness, confidence, and rejoicing. This is plain by these places of
scripture. First, the Apostle to the Corinthians, speaking of this first great
effect of the spirit, 2. Cor. 3. 17.
says: Now the Lord is the spirit, and where the spirit of the Lord is, there
is liberty: and of the peace that acco^panies this liberty, Ephesians. 2. 13.
the Apostle speaks plainly to the Ephesians, where, after he has shewe^,
that by Christ we are delivered from the Law of commandments and hatred, that
thereby did lie upon us, and has spoken of the peace followinge thereupon, he
proves this peace by these words: for through him we both have an entrance
unto the Father by one spirit. Ephesians. 2. 18
Therefore the same Apostle to the Romans, says, Romans 5. 1.
That being justified by faith, we have peace toward God. Of this boldness
and confidence, the Apostle speaks to the Ephesians, saying: Ephesians. 3. 12
By whom we have boldness and access with confidence by faith in him.
Therefore is it that the Apostle to the Romans, says: That we have not
receyved the spirit of bondage unto fear, but the spirit that is without
fear, that is, of boldness and confidence. Touching rejoicing, the Apostle
Peter speaks, 1 Pet. 1. 8.
saying: In whom believing, ye rejoice with joy unspeakable and glorious.
The same also affirms the Apostle to the Romans saying and we rejoice under the
hope of the glory of God, Romans 5. 2.
neither so only, but we rejoice also in tribulations, and he adds the
reason, because the love of God is shed abroad in our hearts by the holy ghost
which is given unto us. This I call the special working of the spirit, for
sealing our Adoption: because these effects cannot possibly be in us, except
the spirit of adoption work them. and therefore whosoever has them, he has
an undoubted testimony of his adoption, from the very spirit of adoption. For
this liberty, and effects of it, are not the work of a man's own heart: but
the work of Gods spirit, in the heart: making it free, and causing it to
rejoice, and making it confident toward God, that this may be clear, we have
to consider the estate of man, first, in ignorance and blindness, before he
knew either God, or him self. Secondly, his estate under the Law. And
lastly, his estate under grace thorough the Gospel.

In the two former cases, there is nothing in man's heart, but blindness, or the
spirit of bondage, unto fear: yea even in the very elect, before they receyve
this spirit of Adoption and grace, by the Gospel.

In man by nature, as he is borne, there is nothing but blindness, I say
nothing, not that I exclude bondage: for in both the first two estates of man,
blindness and bondage do accompany each other: but in the first estate,
blindness so reigns, that bondage is not perceyved nor felt. In the second,
although blindness be so far taken away, as man see and feel his bondage: yet
it is not so taken away, that it hide not from him his liberty and freedom.
Therefore in the first he is the slave of blindness and darkness: because the
power thereof is predominant in him: holding him in ignorance of God, of him
self, of sin, and of true righteousness. Therefore does the scripture say,
Romans 3. 11
There is none that understands, there is none that seeks God. And the
Apost. to the Ephesians, showing the natural estate of man, Ephesians. 2. 12.
declares that he is without Christ, an aliant from the common wealth of
Israel, a stranger from the covenant of promise, without hope, and without God
in the world. And therefore speakinge of the vain conversation of men
natural, he shows the causes of it to be this, because they have their
understanding darkened, Ep. 4. 8.
being strangers from the life of God, through the ignora^re that is in them.
And most cleerlie in the fifth chapter, Cha. 5. 8.
for ye were once darkness, meaning by nature: and therefore they who are
effectually called to grace, are in that same place said, to be light in the
Lord. And by the Apostle Peter, 1. Pet. 2. 9.
are said, to be called of God out of darkness to his marveylous light. 1. These.
5. 5.
And to the Thessalonians, they that are called, are said, to be of the day
and of the light. And they which are not called, are said, to be of the night,
and of darkness. And the Apostle to the Colossians (willing to show the force
of darkness in holding men in bondage) expresses their calling by GOD, in these
words: Colos. 1. 13.
who has drawn us out under the power of darkness. So it is manifest, that in
our estate natural, wherein (as says the Apostle to the Galathians) we know
not God. Gal. 4. 8.
darkness has power and dominion over us in such sort, that we have no
liberty of mind, nor body, to serve God: the mind being kept in ignorance of
God, of righteousness and of sin. And so consequently, man in this estate, is
without fear. Not because he is not in danger, but because he sees not his
danger. Therefore also may he be secure, because he is senseless: but
confident he can not be, because he has no knowledge. It is true, men in
this case are commonly most peart in sin, and bold in wickedness, against
GOD: because they know neither him, nor them selves. And therefore, often times,
as foolish flies, they rush upon the candle: or blind horses do run against
the wall: but bold and confident in him, they can not be, who knows him not
in Christ. Therefore does the Apostle declare that the cause why such men give
themselves to wantonness, Ephesians. 4. 19.
is, because they have no feeling.

Now in the second estate, under the Law, we are further from liberty, and
the remaynant blessings of the spirit of Adoption. For albeit that some light
arise in the heart, by the Law: as the knowledge of sin (conform to that of
the Apostle, Romans 7. 7
I knew not sin but by the Law) yet this light, does only reveyle to man his
bondage: but does not remove nor remedy it: because that was impossible to the
Law, in as much as it was weak because of the flesh, as says the same
Apostle. Romans 8. 3.
Therefore this light of the Law, although it be necessary, yet it is
comfortless. For it shows first to man, Ro^. 7. 14.
that he is sold under sin, Gal. 3. 10.
and that no good dwells in him. Ro^. 7. 10.
Heerevpon, it reveiles unto him, that he is under the curse of God, and so
that he is dead. Whereupon it comes to pass, that God therein is so terrible
to man, that he cannot abide him, nor hear him, but is compelled to run
from him: as is clear by the 12. chapt. of the Hebrews, verse 19. 20. 21.
compared with Exodus chapt. 20. verse 18. 19. 20. 21. Thus our former blindness,
is turned into bondage, and the fruit of blindness, that is security: is turned
in the fruit of bondage, which is fear. Therefore the ministry of the Law,
is called, the ministry of death and condempnatio^. 2 Cor. 3.
And in the first act of Gods calling, the spirit that speaks in the Law,
and is given by the ministry of the Law, is called the spirit of bondage,
unto fear. Because the sight and knowledge of our selves, and of God, which
the spirit gives us by the Law, Romans 8. 15
works these effects. And therefore by that name is distinguished, from the
spirit of Adoption, which is given by the Gospel. and this will the Apostle
signify to the Galathians, when he (comparinge the two Testaments to the two,
by whom Abraham begot Ismael and Isaac) does show, Gal. 4. 24.
that the one, which is from Mount Sinai, does beget unto bondage.

This being the estate of man, both by nature and by the Law: it is manifest,
that these effects of the spirit, which witness adoption, are not in man,
neither by nature, neither by the Law. But when the free spirit of the Lord
comes, then comes liberty to the heart. And this spirit of the Lord
(otherwise called the spirit of promise) comes to us by the preaching of
faith, and not of the works of the Law: as witnesses the Apostle to the
Galathians, Gal. 3. 2. and 14.
and the history of the Acts of the Apostles. Act. 10. 44.


Now then, when the man, (who first by nature, was under blindness: and next,
by the Law, was under sin and death, kept in bondage and fear) finds him
self, first delivered from that blindness and ignorance of mind: and next,
from that bondage of sin and death: and so consequently from his fear,
which was wrought in him by his bondage, then may he know, that the spirit of
adoption, grace, and liberty, has spoken to his heart, and has taken
possession of it: because he finds, that promise accomplished in him, whereof
Zacharias speaks, in the Gospel, according to Luke: to wit; that God would
grant to us, that we being delivered out of the hands of our enemies, Luke 1.
74
should serve him without fear, all the days of our life, in holiness and
righteousness before him. For this was the end of Christ's death, says the
Apostle to the Hebrews, to wit, that he might deliver all them, Heb. 2. 15
who for fear of death, Heb. 2. 15
were all their life time subject to bondage. Thus therefore, the man, who can
discern in his heart, which once was filled with the spirit of bondage unto
fear, the joyful liberty of the sons of God: whereby he that was the
bondsman and servant of sin, by the Law, is now by the Gospel, made the free
man of Christ, (the bands of iniquity being broken) and so freed, both from
the guiltines, and also from the power of sin: (being justified by faith in
Jesus Christ, and having grace, in the superabondance thereof; reigning through
righteousness unto eternal life through Jesus Christ our Lord: Romans 5. 1. and
21.
even in the soul, wherein sin in the abou^dance thereof, had reigned through
unrighteousness unto death): this man I say, may easily discern, the spirit,
witnessing his adoption, by this his liberty from the slavery of sin First
in his justification, next in his sanctification: and so consequently from the
fear of death following thereon. In place whereof, succeeds, a joy
unspeakable and glorious: the heart justified, rejoicing in the hope of the
glory of God. For this cause is it, Pet. 1. 8.
that the Apostle Peter, wills us by joining virtue to our faith, Romans 5. 2.
and to virtue knowledge, and to knowledge temperance, 2 Pet. 1. 10
etc. to make our calling and election sure. Because our sanctification (being
the work of the spirit of adoption) is a sure seal of our election. And
therefore does the Apostle Peter give this reason of his threatening and rebuke
against Simon Magus, to wit, that albeit he was baptized, yet the Apostle did
see, that he was in the gale of bitterness, and in the band of iniquity:
wherein, Simon being still captive, could have no assurance of adoption: albeit
he had outwardly embraced the Gospel: and therefore is said, to have
believed. And because this work, is the great work of Christ, in the elect,
and chief end of his coming: Therefore does the Prophet Esaie describe the
work of his coming, and effect of the spirit of the Lord in him, in these
words: Esa. 61. 1.
The spirit of the Lord is upon me, the Lord has anointed me, that I should
preach the Gospel to the poor: that I should heal the broken hearted: that I
should preach deliverie to the captives, and receyvinge of sight to the blind:
that I should set at liberty them that are bruised, and that I should preach
the acceptable year of the Lord: to appoint unto them that murne in Zion, and
to give unto them beauty for ashes, the oil of joy for mourning, the
garments of gladness for the spirit of heavines, that they might be called
trees of righteousness, the planting of the Lord. Which Prophecy, Christ
shows to be fulfilled by him self in the Gospel according to Luc. in the
which it is manifest, that the work of the spirit, Luke 4. 18.
in preaching the Gospel, is, to work knowledge and liberty, in making us
trees of righteousness, planted by God: and by liberty, to work joy and
gladness, in place of mourning and heavines.

Therefore is it by good reason, that the Apostle forbiddes us, to let sin
reign in our mortal bodies, Romans 6. 12
that we should obey it in the lusts thereof: in respect we are made free from
sin, in Christ: and are made the servants of God: having our fruit in
holiness. And also bids us rejoice always in the Lord: Phil. 4. 4.
for there is no condempnation to us, that are in Christ, Romans 8. 1. 2.
seeing we are freed from the law of sin and death, by the law of the
spirit of life which is in Christ Jesus. This is then that great effect of the
spirit of Adoption, in our hearts, whereby, as by a most sure testimony, we
discern, the spirit sealing our Adoption. Because this spirit of adoption,
which is given us by the preaching of the Gospel, takes away, both these
miseries: to wit, the blindness, wherein we are by nature, and next the
bondage, reveiled by the law, and fear caused thereby.

Havinge thus spoken, of the work of the spirit, it follows that we consider
the voice of the spirit.

This voice of the spirit, is of two sorts. The first is, when the spirit
within us, speaks to God for us. The second is, when the spirit in us,
speaks from God unto us. The voice of the spirit to God, is, when we by the
spirit, call upon God as our Father. And this voice of the spirit, is not only
an evide^ce that we have the spirit, but also a witness of our Adoption: making
manifest unto us, that the spirit has wrought in us, that work of liberty,
whereof we have already spoken.

Touching the first, it is manifest, in that, without the spirit, we can not
pray unto God: as testifies the Apostle to the Romans, Romans 8. 26
saying: The spirit also helps our infirmities: for we know not what to
pray as we cought: but the spirit it self, makes request for us with sighs
that can not be expressed. Conform to this also does the same Apostle say in
that same place, Romans 8. 23
We also who have the first fruits of the spirit, even we do sigh in our
selves, waitinge for the Adoption.

And this is clearly confirmed by the words of the Prophet Zachary: Zacha. 12.
10.
In that day, says the Lord, I will pour upon the house of David, and upon
the inhabitanes of Jerusalem, the spirit of grace and of compassion, and they
shall look upon me who^ they have pearched, and they shall lament for him,
etc. The verity of this point may be showed by the nature of prayer: in which
first it is required, that it be made unto God. Secondly, that it be made in
the Name of Christ. Thirdly, that it be made according to the will of God.

Concerning the first, it cannot be without the spirit: because we have no
entrance nor access to God in Christ, but by the spirit. This is manifest by
the Apostle, saying: Ephesians. 2* 18.
For through him, we both have access to tbe Father, by one spirit. Secondly,
we can not pray in the Name of Christ, except we acknowledge God his Father,
and in him our Father: which we can never do, except we be taught by the
spirit. For (as says the Apostle) The spirit bears witness with our
spirit, Romans 8. 16.
that we are the sons of God. Thirdly, no prayer can be made according to
the will of God, but by the spirit: because, None knows the mind of God, 1
Cor. 2 1^
but the spirit of GOD. Romans 8. 27.
According to which the same Apostle says: That he that searceth the hearts,
knows what is the meaning of the spirit. For he makes intercession for the
Saints, according to the will of God. By all these it is plain, that none can
pray which have not the spirit. For the babbling of hypocrites, is no prayer:
seeing it proceeds not from the spirit. And this is to be understood of all
manner of prayer. For all manner of prayer, be it confession, petition,
supplication, or giving of thanks, must still be by the spirit. According to
the saying of the Apostle. And pray always in all manner of prayer and
supplication in the spirit. Ephe. 6. 18.


Moreover, this voice of the spirit is the witness of our adoption: and of the
work of our freedom in Christ. Which is evident by the Apostle, First, in
that he says, That by this spirit we cry Abba Father. And the same Apostle,
to witness the same truth, says in another place: Because ye are sons,
God has sent forth the spirit of his son into your hearts, Gal. 4. 6.
crying Abba Father. Which cry of the spirit can not be in us, until first
we be the sons of God: seeing this cry contains in it, a plain profession
of our Adoption, while the spirit in us, does call upon God, as our Father: and
makes us call upon him, as our Father.

Secondly, this is manifest by the description, which the Apostle sets
down, of the spirit, whereby we cry Abba Father: Romans 8. 15
That it is not the spirit of bondage unto fear, but the spirit of adoption.
Which by the contrary, may be understood, to comprehend freedom and liberty.
According to the saying of of the Apostle, 2 Cor. 3. 17.
Where the spirit of the Lord is, there is liberty For they who live in
darkness, and in the bands of iniquity, not yet made partakers of the
joyful liberty of the sons of God, can never with boldness approach to the
throne of grace, to call upon GOD as their Father Heerevpon it is that the
Scriptures absolutely conclude, Joel. 2. 32.
That whosoever shall call upon the Name of the Lord shall be saved. Romans 10.
13.


Because no man can call upon God, until he believe, that God is his God, and
he his son in Christ: according to the saying of the Apostle, Romans 10.
How shall they call upon him, in whom they have not believed? This shows
plainly, that the spirits cry, or our calling upon God by the spirit, as
out Father, is a sure testimony of our Adoption, and seal of our effectual
calling. Therefore, under the calling upon the Name of the Lord, is often set
down, the true and infallible description of Gods children: as namely, to the
Corinthians, Unto the Church of GOD which is at Corinth, 1. Cor. 1. 2
with all that call upon the Name of the Lord JESUS Christ in every place. And
the same Apostle shows, that the foundation of God which remains sure (that
is, the election of God) has this seal, Let every one that calls upon the
Name of the Lord, 2. Tim. 2. ^. 19.
depart from iniquity. Declaring plainly, that to call upon the Name of the
Lord, is as much as to be one of Gods elect children: which in that same place
is made manifest, 2. Tim. 2. 22.
by this other sentence, Follow after righteousness faith, love and peace with
them that call upon the Name of the Lord with pure hearts.

Thus we are to take our calling or cryinge on the Name of the Lord, with
boldness, in that confidence, and assruance which faith brings, for a sure
testimony of the spirit of Adoption, possessing our hearts, and so of our
Adoption.

The other voice of the spirit, to wit, when the spirit speaks from God to
us, is likewise a most solid, firm, and infallible testimony of our
Adoption. And this sort of voice, is that whereof the Prophet speaks, Esaias.
30. 21.
And thine ear shall hear the voice of one behind thee, saying: This is the
way, etc. Of the same does the Lord speak in another place, saying: I will
allure her and bring her in the wilderness, Hos. 2. 14
and speak kindly unto her. Which places, are not only to be referred, to
the Lords speaking to his Church, in the external ministry of his word: but
are specially to be understood, of the inward working of God in the heart,
by his spirit. Of which sort of voice David speaks, when he says to the
Lord, Psalm. 51. 8.
Let me hear joy and gladness, that the bones which thou have broken, may
rejoice. And this sort of voice is three fold, for it consists either in
Gods teaching, or in his confirminge of that which he teaches: or then in his
conforting of his children in their afflictions. Of the first, that is his
teaching voice, we have spoken before.

For God by his spirit, speaks to us, when inwardly he opens our hearts,
and makes us hear his word of grace, and to understand it, and to receyve
it. Of this work Christ speaks, when he says: Io. 14. 26.
But the Comforter which is the holy spirit, whom the Father will send in my
Name, he shall teach you all things. Secondly, God is said to speak unto us,
by his spirit, when he confirms to us, the thing which he has spoken: and
of this we have also spoken in general. And of this kind of voice speaks
the Apostle in that place to the Romans, Ro^. 8. 15.
saying: The same spirit hears witness with our spirit, that we are the
sons of God. Of this confirmation, the same Apostle, speaks to the Corinht.
when he says, 1. Cor. 1. 6
As the testimony of Jesus Christ was confirmed in you. Which words show the
clear evidence of that two fould testimony of the spirit, whereof we did
speak before: The one, when God writes his word in our hearts: which here is
understood by the testimony of Christ. The other, when he seals that which
he has spoken, and in speaking has written in our hearts: and that is here
understood, by the co^firming of the testimony of Jesus in us. And for this
work of confirmation, the spirit is called the earnest and seal of God

And as God by his spirit seals and confirms all the promises in Christ,
and also all what he himself has wrought in us according to the promise. So
among other things, he specially confirms our Adoption, when the spirit
bears witness to us, that we are the sons of God. After that first he has
effectually called us by teaching us and working faith in our hearts, and also
has made our hearts (now believing) speak to us that we are sons.

Thirdly, God is said to speak unto us by his spirit, when he comforted us in
our troubles: removing by his spirit, the anguish and grief of our hearts, and
restoring us to our wonted joys in him again. Of which voice of the spirit,
David speaks when he prays, Make me hear joy and gladness. Psalm. 51. 8.
12.
And a^aine, Restore me to the joy of thy salvation, and establish me with
thy free spirit. For this work the spirit is called the Comforter.

Now we come to the last point: which is the principal thing which ye
demand: and that is, How we shall discern this Testimony of the Lords
spirit, from the testimony of our own spirit. And this is to be done, either
in the time of peace, or trouble: although it is more difficile in prosperity,
to distinguish them.

There is two voices of the spirit, as we have said, which both witness our
Adoption. The first, when the spirit in us, speaks to God.

This testimony of the spirit, is discerned three ways: The first thing
whereby we discern, it is the great heavines of heart and sorrow which the
conscience of sin breeds in us, when (as says the Prophet) God having
poured upon us the spirit of grace and compassion, We look upon him whom we
have pea^sed, Zach. 12. 10.
and lament for him, as men mourn for their only begotten son: and are
sorry for him, as men are for their first begotten child. Of this nature was
the mourning of Peter, after his denial, when (as says the holy scripture)
he went out, and weeped bitterly: and because this is a sure ^oken of saving
grace, therefore they that mourn are compted blessed. This mourning has
always joined with it an hunger and thirst for righteousness. For there can be
no true mourning for sin, where there is no desire of righteousness. And
because this is the proper effect of the spirit of grace in all and every one
of those who receyve him. Therefore does the Lord by his Prophet declare what
shall be the work of the spirit of grace and compassion in that day when God
shall pour him out upon his children, saying: Math. 26. 75.
Then shall there be great mourning at Jerusalem: like as the lamentation of
Adadrimmon in the valey of Megiddon, Math. 5. 4*
etc. In which place mourning is attributed to every family, Zach. 12. 11.
to every state, and every person, and that apart by them selves, to show
that it is a common effect wrought by the spirit in all Gods children, and that
unfeignedly.

The second thing whereby we discern this testimony of the spirit, is the
earnest longing with vehement groans and sighs in our selves for to be with
Christ.

Of this voice of the spirit the Apostle speaks, when he says, We also who
have the first fruit of the spirit, Romans 8. 23
even we sigh in our selves, waiting for the adoption. And in an other place
to the same effect he says, That we sigh, desiring to be clothed upon with
our house which is from heaven. 2. Cor. 5. 2
For certainly, the natural disposition of a man, can never bring forth this
strong desire of heaven, neither yet could the renewed heart, being yet
burdened with infirmity and love of this life, have so strong a desire of
removing from it, of it self, if the spirit did not work it: and therefore
the Apostle attributes these sighs for righteousness and heaven, to the spirit:
and does show us, that the spirit (in these cries and sighs) helps our
infirmities. Romans 8. 26


Thirdly, this testimony of the spirit is discerned, by the confident
requests and petitions it makes to God in us, in the full assurance of faith,
without doubting: when with boldness, we draw near unto the Throne of grace,
crying upon God, Phil. 4. 6.
Abba Father: and in all things making our petitions manifest to God, as says
the Apostle. For this confident boldness of the heart, toward God, still
accompanied with reverence and fear, cannot be in the heart, except the spirit
did work it. For the boldness of a blind heart, wants both assurance of Gods
love, and reverence of his majesty.

But leaving this, we come to the discerning of the other voice, which more
properly is called the testimony of the spirit: specially in that place to
the Romans. And that is, when God in us, speaks by his spirit unto us.

This testimony is to be discerned, from the testimony of our heart, three
manner of ways. First, in our first beleevinge. Secondly, after we have
believed. Thirdly, in the eclipses of our faith, and in our troubles.

In our first believing, we may discern the testimony of Gods spirit, from
our own, touching our Adoption: because our first believing, is ever by the
testimony of the spirit, and not by the testimony of our own heart. For our
heart can never bear witness to us, that we are the sons of God, until
first our hearts have believed, that we are his sons. and this our hearts
can not do, except the spirit, have first wrought this faith, by the word, in
our hearts. Therefore, my first belief and assurace of my Adoption, is always
the testimony of the spirit of God, and my own hearts testimony, must still
follow upon this: so that in man's heart, the voice that makes it first
co^ceyve Gods love, and believe it, is the spirits testimony: which, when the
heart of man has receyved, then it speaks. For till it believe, it can not
speak: according as it is written: Psalm. 116. 10.
I have believed, and therefore I have spoken. 2. Cor. 4. 13.
Thus then is this testimony first discerned: when I discern, the voice of
the spirit, which I believe, from the voice of my spirit, now beleving, and
bearing witness to me, of that, which first, the spirit of God did witness to it.

Secondly, after we have believed, we may also discern the testimony of
Gods spirit, from the testimony of our own spirit, by a plain contrary
order. For in the former, the spirits testimony did go before, the
testimony of our spirit: but here, it follows after it: and is the
confirmation of it. So that, when after we have believed the spirit, speakinge
the word unto us, and after that believing, we have spoken with our own
spirit: if then we hear a new voice, co^firming that which we believed, and
which our spirit did speak: that co^firming, sealing, and stablishing voice,
is the testimony of Gods spirit. Thus we must learn to discern, betwixt our
believing, and the confirmation of our belief: and so shall we know, the
testimony of Gods spirit, from the testimony of our own spirit. Therefore
still the holy Scriptures of God, distinguish betwixt the work of God, in
making us receyve the testimony of his spirit, and his work, in confirming in
us, that testimony now receyved. And also teaches us, to know the
testimony of our own spirit (which comes in betwixt these two) to be
different, from them both. According to this working of God, the Saints pray,
Stablish O God, Psalm. 68. 28*
that which thou have wrought in us.

To speak more plainly of this point, there is a three fold voice in the
heart that has the testimony of Jesus confirmed in it. The first is the voice
of God by his spirit in the word speaking unto our hearts, and persuading them
to believe that the promise belongs unto us.

The second voice is the voice of our hearts receyving the word whereby it
speaks that which the spirit has persuaded, and this in effect is nothing
but the very faith of the heart now actually working in us. Whereas the first
was the work of the spirit working this faith in us: so that in this first act
we are patients, in the other we are agentes: in the first we are spoken too by
the spirit of God, in the second, our own hearts speaks in us. The third
voice is the voice of Gods spirit following the voice of our hearts ratifying
it: and this is nothing else but the confirmation of our faith. So we may see
that the Lord performs two works in us for our comfort: the first is, the
working of faith and belief: the other is the confirmation of the faith, which
he him self did work. But before his last work, our hearts having faith
wrought in them, do work by it, or we with our hearts work: and this is
nothing but believing with the heart, or the hearts beleevinge. Whereupon
follows the sealing of us in that which it believes, that is, in the
testimony which the believing heart gives of him in whom it is.

Thirdly, we discern this testimony of the spirit, in our trouble: when we
find any comfort, or peace wrought in our hearts, when they are troubled: or
any joy, upon the assurance of Gods love. If we find a quiet calmnesse of
mind, with patience, meeknes, and rejoicing in tribulation, upon any sight or
knowledge of our Adoption: all these are the undoubted testimonies of the
spirit: who shedding abroad the love of God in our hearts, makes us to rejoice
in affliction: as the Apost. speaks of the Hebrews, Heb. 10.
and ye suffered with gladness the spoiling of your goods, knowing in your
selves that ye have in heaven a better, and an enduring substance. And
touching the Apostles, Act. 5. 41.
it is said, They departed rejoicing that they were compted worthy to suffer
for his Name. That this joy, is the work of the spirit, upon the testimony of
Gods love, is manifest by the Apost. to the Romans, where showing the cause,
why we rejoice in afflictions, says, Because of the love of God which is shed
abroad in our hearts, by the holy spirit which is given us. According to this
ground it is, that the Saints are brought in, waiting what God will speak to
them in trouble: as namely in the Psalm 85. verse. 8. I will hearken what the
Lord will say, concerning me: for he shall speak peace unto his people, and
to his saints. And the Prophet Habacuk in like manner is brought in saying
thus: I will stand upon my watch, and set me upon the Tower, and will look
and see what he will say unto me. Thus when God speaks peace to the Saints
in affliction, and quieteth their thoughts, and makes them hear joy and
gladness, that is the testimony of the spirit of the Lord, who is our only
Comforter. For as says the Prophet David, Psalm. 73. 25.
My flesh and my heart fails: but God is the strength of my heart. And
therefore Moses prays: O satisfy us with thy mercy, so shall we rejoice
and be glad all our days, Psalm. 90. 14. 15.
comfort us again, etc. We may hold it for a most certain truth, that our
patient enduring of grievous trialls joyfully, the constant peace of God in our
hearts, in the time when we endure the enimitie of the world: the
co^solations, wherewith we are comforted, in all our afflictions, are undoubted
testimonies of our Adoption, proceeding all from Gods spirit.

But all this is most cleerlie discerned, when the testimony of Gods spirit,
and the testimony of our spirit, are separate the one from the other: and when
they are found to speak one against the other: and to give two contrary
testimonies. For while these two go together, and are not severed or
disagreeing: it is often times hard to discern the one from the other. But if we
can find them separate, so that the one fail us, and the other uphold us,
then may they clearly be discerned. And this comes to pass, either when God
upon the carnal presumption of our hearts, suffers us to fall in some
dangerous trial. or then, when God him self seems to become our enemy: so
that the heart has to wrestle with GOD him self, under the sense of his
wrath, all former feeling of his mercy then ceasing.

Of the first, we have example in Peter, whose heart said unto him, that no
danger could make him forsake Christ the Lord, to make him know, that this was
not the testimony of Gods spirit: but a carnal confidence of his own heart,
suffered him to be tried, and in the trial to fall: and so to find, it was
but his own carnal heart, that did bear witness to him. God often times for
this cause tries his own children: to make them discern, betwixt the
confidence and assurance which their own hearts gives them, and that
confidence and comfort which the spirit of God works in them: that they may
not trust in them selves, or in their own hearts, but in the living God. This
the Apostle witnesses to the Corinthians, saying: 2 Cor. 1. 9
He maekth us to receyve the sentence of death in our selves, because we should
not trust in our selves but in God which raises the dead.

Of the second, we have example in David and Job. And this discerning of the
spirits testimony is two fold, one is by the voice of the spirit in us, unto
God, when our hearts speak the contrary. The other is, by the voice of the
spirit unto us, when our own hearts says otherwise.

Of the first David is an example: who in his prosperity said, he should
never be moved: Psalm. 31. 2.
Yet when God did hyde his face, his heart failed him: and he said in his
haste, I am cast out of thy sight. and yet he presently adds these words:
nevertheless thou heardest the voice of my prayer. Here we may perceyve
David's own heart, saying, he was cast out of Gods sight: but yet the spirit
of GOD, makes request unto God for him, and makes him pray to God in faith,
as not rejected of God: and the Lord did hear him. This him self shows
plainly, in an other place, Psalm. 116. 10.
when he says: I believed, and therefore I spoke: but I was sore troubled, I
said in my haste, All men are liers. At this time, David compassed with the
snares of death, and holden by the griefs of the grave, finding trouble and
heavines, declares the estate of his own heart: that it said, that all men are
liers: and therefore he gathers this conclusion, that albeit his own heart did
say, that Gods promise should not be accomplished: yet doubtless he behoved
to have faith: because he prayed. For except he had believed, he had not
spoken. And what can be more clear, to let us see, Gods spirit bearing
witness, that God has not forsaken us, when our own hearts say the
contrary. Then when by witnessing this, the spirit causes us, against the
distrust of our own hearts, to pray to God: eve^ above hope, yet under hope,
trusting in the Lord, as did Abraham. If we examine our selves, what has been
the estate of our hearts, in the like (or at least in our greatest temptations)
we shall find, that many times, when our hearts has spoken no comfort unto
us: yet the spirit of God, has drawn sighs and cries to God, out of our
hearts: which also our God has heard most graciously. These cries are
testimonies of the spirit, witnessing to us, that we are the sons of God:
when as they proceed from us, our hearts saying the contrary.

Of the second kind of the spirits voice, in speaking from God unto us: we
have likewise example in David, when his own heart said unto God, Psalm. 42.
Why have thou forgotten me? Behold an other voice speakinge unto his heart in
that same time, Why art thou vexed O my soul, and why art thou so disquieted
within me? O put thy trust in God, for I will yet give him thanks, he is my
help and my God. Here the heart speaking no comfort, but being wholly
discouraged, and cast down: the spirit of God in that same heart, speaks to
the heart, and comfort it, with this, that God was his God. Now, that these
consolations are the work and testimony of Gods spirit, it appears by that
reason, which David gives, when he boasts in strong confidence, that
although he should walk through the valey of the shadow of death, yet would
he fear none evil, saying: Psalm. 23.
For thou art with me, thy rod and thy staff they comfort me. By these
words declaring, that the experience he had of the comfort, which Gods spirit
did minister unto him, in his most desperate troubles past, even then when his
own spirit did fail him, was the ground of al his confidence against all
future trialls.

We have an example also of this in Job. Who when his own heart reasoned,
that God had hid his face from him, and taken him for his enemy: yet he
says, Although he slaye me, yet will I trust in him, he shall be my
salvation. Here two different speeces in one heart: the one from the spirit of
Job: the other from the spirit of the Lord in Job. The one, persuading that God
was his salvation, when the other said, God had hid his face from him.

Thus if we would cleerlie discern, the testimony of Gods spirit, from the
testimony of our own spirit, let us behold our selves, when God tries us,
rather then when he makes our mountain to stand strong. or when he does
wrestle with us himself, as he did with Jacob: and in seeminge to fight
against us, yet does sustain us, by his own strength in us, when our
strength fails us.

Thus I have as distinctlie as I could, and therefore somewhat more largely,
then an epistle perhaps requires, given you such satisfaction to your
question, as it has pleased the Lord to grant me light. If you find any
comfort thereby, you shall thank God for it: And what is wanting in it, for
your full satisfaction in this matter, the Lord shall supply it by his own
spirit: or by that sufficiency of grace, which he has given unto others his
servants, who^ he shall raise up to write more fully of this matter: for the
edification of his Saints, in this and all other things, I pray the Lord to
give you and us all, his everlasting peace through Christ JESUS our Savior,
reveyling more and more the mystery of godliness in your hearts, and making
you abound in all knowledge with faith, feeling, and joy of the holy Ghost. The
grace of the Lord JESUS be with you, and all the Brethren, AMEN.

Io. Forbes.


