Imprinted for Edward White, and Thomas Man.

A Wonderful, strange and miraculous Astrologicall Prognostication for this
year 1591.

Discovering such wonders to happen this year, as never chanced since Noes
flood.

Wherein if there be found one lie, the Author will loose his credit for ever.

Newly corrected.

By Adam Fouleweather, Student in Astronomy.

Imprinted at London by Thomas Scarlet.

To the Readers health.
SItting Gentlemen upon Dover cliffes, to quaint my self with the art of
Navigations, and know the course of the Tides, as the Danske Crows gather on
the Sands against a storm: so there appeared on the downs such a flock of
knaves, that by Astrological conjectures I began to gather, that this year
would prove intemperate by an extreme heat in So^mer, insomuch that the stones
in Cheap side should be so hot, that diverse persons should fear to go from
Poules to the Counter in the Poultrye: whereupon I betook me to my Ephimerides,
and erecting a figure, have found strange accidents to fall out this year,
Mercurye being Lord and predominate in the house of Fortune, that many fools
shall have full cofers, and wise men walk up and down with empty pursses:
that if Jupiter were not joined with him in a favorable aspect, the Butchers
of East-cheape should do little or nothing all Lent but make pricks: seeing
therefore the wonders that are like to fall out this present year, I have for
the benefit of my Countrymen taken in hand to make this Prognostication,
discoursing breefelye of the Eclipses both of Sun and Moon, with their
dangerous effects like to follow, which if God prevent not: many poor men
are like to fast on Sondaies for want of food, and such as have no shoes to
go barefoot, if certain devout Cobblers prove not the more courteous: but yet
Astrology is not so certain, but it may fail: and therefore diverse Hostesses
shall chaulke more this year then their Guests will wipe out: so that I
conclude, whatsoever is said by art. Sapiens dominalitur astris.

Your friend and Student in Astrology. Adam Fouleweather.

Of the Eclipses that shall happen this present year, to the great and
fearful terrifying of the beholders.
IF we may credit the authentical censures of Albumazar and Ptolomey, about
the motions of celestial bodies, whose influence does exitat and procure
continual mutability in the lower region: we shall find that the Moon this
year shall be eclipsed, which shall happen in one of the twelve months, and
some of the four quarters of the year, whose points as they shall be totally
durkened, so the effects shall be wondrous and strange.

For Cancer being the sole house of the Moon, does presage that this year
fruits shall be greatly eaten with Catterpillers, as Brokers, Farmers, and
Flatterers, which feeding on the sweat of other men's brows, shall greatly
hinder the beauty of the spring, and disparage the growth of all hot herbs,
unless some northerlye wind of Gods vengeance clear the trees of such
Catterpillers, with a hot plague and the pestilence.

But Cancer being a watery sign and chief governor of floods and streams, it
foresheweth that fish-mongers if they be not well looked to, shall go down as
far as Graves end in Wherries, and forestall the market, to the great
prejudice of the poor, that all Lent ground their fare on the benefit of Salt
fish and red Herring.

Besides it signifies, that Brewers shall make havoc of Theames water, and
put more liquour then they were accustomed amongst their Maulte: to the
overthrow of certain crased Ale knights, whose morning draughtes of strong
Beer is a great stay to their stomachs: a lamentable case if it be not looked
into and prevented by some speedy supplication to the woorshipfull order of ale
cunners. But in this we have great hope that because the effects cannot
surprise the cause, diverse Tapsters shall trust out more then they can get in:
and although they fill their Pots but half full: yet for want of true dealing
dye in the Brewers debt.

Thus much for the watery sign of Cancer, and because this Eclipse is little
visible in our horison, I pass it over with this prouiso to all seafaring men,
to carry more shirts then one with them a ship board, lest to their great labor
they spend many hours in murdering their vermin on the hatches.

The Eclipse of the Sun.
THe Eclipse of the Sun according to Proclus opinion, is like to produce many
hot and pestilent infirmities, especially amongst Sunmers and Pettyfoggers,
whose faces being combust with many fierye inflammations, shall show the
dearth that by their devout drinking is like to ensue of Barley, if violent
death take not away such consuming maultwoormes.

Diverse are like to be troubled with such hot rewmes in their heads, that their
hair shall fall off: and such hot agues shall reign this year, with strange
fevers and calamities, that if the Sun were not placed in a cold sign,
Renishe Wine would rise to ten pence a quart before the latter end of August.

But diverse good planets being retrograde, foretells that Lemmans this year
shall be plenty, insomuch that many shall use them to bedward, for the
quallifying of their hot and inflamed stomachs.

And Mars being placed near the Sun, shows that there shall be a great
death among people, old women that can live no longer shall dye for age: and
young men that have Usurers to their father, shall this year have great cause
to laugh, for the Devil has made a decree, that after they are once in hell,
they shall never rise again to trouble their executors.

Beside that by all coniecturall arguments the influence of Mars shall be so
violent, that diverse soldiers in parts beyond the seas, shall fall out for
want of their pay, and here in our meridionall clime, great quarrels shall be
raised between man and man, especially in cases of Law: gentry shall go check
mate with Justice, and coin out-countenance often times equity: the poor
sitting on pennylesse benche, shall sell their Coats to strive for a straw,
and Lawyers laugh such fools to scorn as cannot keep their crowns in their
purses.

Further there is like to be great falling out amongst Church men, and certain
fond sects of religion like to trouble the commons: self conceipters and over
holy counterfeites that delight in singularity, shall rise up and despise
authority, presuming even to abuse the higher powers, if Saturn with a
frowning influence, did not threaten them with Tibornes consequence.

But whereas the Sun is darkened but by digits, and that upon the south points,
it presageth great miseries to Spain and those Southerlye Countries, Friars
and Monks shall heat them so this year with confessing of harlots, that their
crowns shall wax balde of their own accord, to the great impouerishing of the
Spanish Barbers: Surgeons in Spain shall wax rich, and their Hospitals poor:
such a pestilent mortallitye is like to fall amongst those hipocriticall
Masse-mongers. The dukes, Marquesses and Counties, shall have their dublets
closed with such Spanish buttons, that they shall never prove good quiresters,
for the hot and inflamed rewms fallen down into their throats.

It is further to be feared that because the Eclipse happens in Iulye, there
will through the extreme heat grow such abundance of Fleas, that women shall
not go to bed before twelve a clock at night, for the great murders and
stratagems they are like to commit upon those little animalls.

And whereas this Eclipse falls out at three of the clock in the afternoon,
it foresheweth that many shall go soberer into Tauernes then they shall come
out: and that he which drinks hard and lies cold, shall never dye of the sweat.

Item, Gemini combust and retrograde, shows that some shall have so sore a
sweating, that they may sell their hair by the pound to stuff Tennice balls:
but if the Beadles of Bride well be careful this Summer, it may be hoped that
Peticote lane may be less pestered with ill aires then it was wont: and the
houses there so clear cleansed, that honest women may dwell there without any
dread of the whip and the carte.

And I find that the altitude of that place and of Shordich are al one
elevated, and two degrees, and under ye zenith or vertical point of venus,
which presageth that sundry sorts of men and women shall be there resident: some
shall be so short heelde and so quesie stomackt, that they shall lie in their
beds while noon, by which means they shall grow so full of gross humors, that
they shall be troubled with strange timpanies and swellings in their bellies,
incurable for forty weeks until they be helped by the advice of some skillful
Midwife.

Besides, other of the same sex and faction, shall learn to cousin young
nouices, and fetch in young Gentlemen, to the great overthrow of youth, if some
sharp and speedye redress be not fetched from the woorshipfull College of
Physicians in the parrish of S. Brides.

But here by the way gentle Reader, note that this Eclipse shows, that this
year shall be some strange birthes of Children produced in some monstrous
form, to the grief of the Parents, and fearful spectackle of the
beholders: but because the Eclipse chaunseth Southerlye, it is little to be
feared that the effects shall fall in England: yet some what it is to be
doubted, that diverse Children shall be borne, that when they come to age shall
not know their own Fathers: others shall have their fingers of the nature of
Lyme twigges, to get most part of their living with five and a reach: some
shall be born with feet like unto Hares, that they shall run so swift, that they
shall never tarry with master, but trudge from post to pillar, till they take
up beggars bush for their lodging: Others shall have Noses like Swine, that
there shall not be a feast within a mile, but they shall smell it out: But
especially it is to be doubted, that diverse women this year shall be borne
with two tungs, to the terrible grief of such as shall marry them, uttering in
their furye such rough cast eloquence, that knave and slave shall be but holyday
words to their husbands.

And whereas this fearful Eclipse does continue but an hour and a half, it
signifies that this year women's loves to their husbands shall be very short,
some so momentary, that it shall scarce continue from the church door to the
wedding house: and that hens, capons, Geese, and other pullin shall little
haunt poor men's tables, but fly away with spits in their bellies to fat
Churls houses, yt pamper themselves up with delicates and dainties.

And although very few other effects are to be prognosticated, yet let me
give this caveat to my Countrymen, as a clause to this wonderful Eclipse. Let
such as have clothes enough, keep themselves warm from taking of coldes and I
would wish rich men all this winter to sit by a good fire, and hardlye to go
to bed without a Cup of Sack, and that so quallified with Sugar, that they
prove not rewmatick: let them feed daintilye and take ease enough, and no
doubt according to the judgment of Albumazar, they are like to live as long as
they can, and not to dye one hour before their time.

Thus much for this strange Eclipse of the Sun.

Of the second Eclipse of the Moon, which is like to fall out when it
chaunseth either before the 31. of December or else not at all, this present
year, 1591.
THe second Eclipse of the Moon shall be but little seen in England, whereupon
the effects shall be nothing prejudicial to our clyme: yet as the body of
the Moon is never obscure in part or in whole, but some dangerous events do
follow: so I mean to set down breefely what is to be lookte for in these
western parts of the world.

First therefore it is to be feared, that the Danes shall this year be
greatly given to drink, insomuch that English Beer shall there be worth
five pence a stoape, that their Hoffes and tappehouses shall be more
frequented, then Parish Churches, and many shall have more Spruce Beer in
their bellies, then wit in their heads: whereupon shall grow Apoplexies and
cold palsies in their legs, that they shall diverse times not be able to
stand on their feet.

Upon this shall grow great commodity to the Potters and Glass makers, for it
is like there shall be a great overthrow of them, if there be not some act
made for drinking in black Iackes.

But if the weather prove seasonable, and the Harvest great, and the Barnes
full of Corn: Rye is like to be cheap in Denmark, and bread to be of a
reasonable size, for the releeuing of the poor.

Marty, France is like to have a great dearth of honest men, if the King
prevail not against these mutenous rebels of ye League, and Papists in diverse
places to be plenty, if God or the King route them not out with a sharp
overthrow: But this hope we have against that rascal rabble of those
shauelinges, that there was found in an old book this Prophecy spoken about
Jerusalem long since by a Jew: The tree that God has not planted shall be
pulled up by the roots.

Some curious Astronomers of late days that are more Prophetical then
Judicial, affirm that Martin the kill-hog for his devout drincking (by the
Pope canonized a Saint) shall rise again in the apparel of a Minister, and
tickle some of the baser sort with such fond humors in their brains, that
diverse self conceited fools shall become his disciples, and grounding their
witless opinion on an heriticall foundation, shall seek to ruinate
authority, and pervert all good orders established in the Church, to the great
prejudice of unity and religion, tituling themselves by the names of
Martinistes as the Donatistes grew from Donatus.

Were it not that the Moon being in Taurus, which gouernes the neck and
throat, shows that the Squinancye shall reign amongst them, and diverse for
want of breath dye of the strangling.

Now for that Capricornus is a sign wherein Luna is often resident, it
prognosticateth a great death amongst hornde beasts. The Butchers shall commit
wilful murder upon Sheep and Oxen, and diverse Keepers kill store of Buckes,
and reserve no other fees to their selves but the horns, insomuche that if the
Parson of Horne-Church in Essex take not heed, there may hap to prove this
year some Cuckoldes in his Parrish.

But there is like to be concluded by an act set down in Graves end Barge,
that he that wypes his Nose and has it not, shall forfeite his whole face.

And that all such as are Jealous over their wives without cause, are worthy
to be punished with the horn plague for their labor.

And whereas this Eclipse is far from the sign Pisces, it shows that there
shall be much stinking fish this year at Billings gate, and that Quinborowe
oyster boats shall often times carry knaves as well as honest men.

But let the Fish-wiues take heed, for if most of hem prove not scoldes,
because Pisces is a sign that gouernes the feet, they shall wear out more
shoes in Lent then in any two months beside through the whole year, and get
their living by walking and crying, because they slaundered Ram alley with such
a tragical infamy. The rest I conceal as frivolous, and little necessary to
be touched in this Prognostication.

A declaration of the general disposition of sundry conceited qualities
incident unto men's minds and natures throughout these four quarters of the
year, by the merry influence of the Planets, with some other tragical events
and observations worthy the noting, contained under each separated revolution.
And first of the inclination of the Winter quarter.
Winter the first Astronomicall quarter of the year, according to my usual
account, whatsoever Ptolomie says begins sooner with poor men than with
rich, granted so by the malignant influence of Saturn, whose constellation is
that such as have no money nor credit, shall want coals and wood and be feign
to stand and starve for cold, while old pennifathers sit and toast them
selves by the fire.

The winter beginning at that instant, when the Sun makes his entrance into
the first degree of Capricornus, that Hiemall solstitial sign shows that by
natural inclination this quarter is generally fleugmatike, and that Ale shall
be of so great authority, that the Bakers basket shall give the wall unto
the Brewers barrel, and a half pennye dry do homage unto a half pennye wet.

The weather and season will be so cold that diverse for fear of the frost shall
sit all day at Tables and Cards, while their poor wives and familes fast at
home for their folies.

And in respect that I find three of the seven Planetes to be in waterie
signs as Iuppiter, Mars, and the Moon, it signifies that diverse persons
both men and women for want of wine or strong drink shall go to bed sober
against their wills.

That Seafaring men shall have ill luck if either their ships hit against
rocks or stick in the sands.

That there shall be such great hoarie frosts, that men and women shall creep to
bed together, and some of them liee so long, till they be fetched out with a
Basin.

Here Saturn retrograde in Gemini shows that there shall this Winter fall
such great fogges and mistes, that diverse rich men shall loose their purses
by the high way side, and poor men be so weather beaten by the craft of
usurers, that they shall beg their bread by the extremity of such extortion.
But Mercury and Uenus co^gregated in Sagitarie, prognosticateth yt for want of
fair weather, such as have but one shirt shall go woolward till that be a
washing, and that watermen that want fares shall sit and blow their fingers
till their fellows row betwixt the old Swan and Westminster.

And by reason that Mars that malignant Planet, has nothing to do in that
Hiemall revolution, soldiers this Winter for the most part, shall lie still
in garrisons, and shall not be troubled with more money than is necessary.

Being also greatly to be feared, yt through extreme cold poor men shall die
at rich men's doors: pity shall be exiled, good works trust over the
sea with Jack a lent and Hospitality banished as a sign of popish religion:
and were it not that some moist shoures shall moderate the hardness of the frost,
Charity should for want of house rome lie and freeze to death in ye streets.

Diverse great storms are this year to be feared, especially in houses where
the wives wear the breeches, with such loud winds, that the women shall
scolde their husbands quight out of doors, whereupon is like to fall great
hailestones as big as joined stools, that some shall have their heads broken,
and all through the froward disposition of Uenus.

But Mars comes in and plays the man, who being placed in Gemini, that
gouernes the arms and shoulders, presageth that sundry tall fellows shall
take heart at grass, who being armed with good cudgels, shall so lambeake
these stubborn huswiues, that the wind shall turn into another quarter, and
so the weather ware more calm and quiet. Such great flods are like to ensue,
through this hiemall distemperature, yt diverse men shall be drowned on dry
hills, and fish if they could not swim, were utterly like to perish.

Eeles are like to be dear if there be few or none taken, and plenty of
poutes to be had in all places, especially in those coasts and Countries
where weomen have not their own wills. Now gentle reader in respect of diverse
particular circumstances drawn from the daily motions, progressions, stations,
retrogradations, aspects and other appointments of fixed and wandering stars, I
am induced to set down that such as have no fire, shall feel most cold and
that wierdrawers, if they plye not their work, shall feel no great heat,
that they in Russia shall suffer more prejudice by the sharpness of Winter
than the Spaniards,

And one thing is to be hoped for at the hands of Mercury, that this winter
money shall have a fall, for Philip and Mary shillings that heretofore went for
12. d. shall now pass from man to man for 6.d. a piece.

The distemperance of this quarter, is like to breed many sickenesses and
sundry diseases as well in young as in old, proceeding either of corrupt and
vicious blood or of superabundance of crude and raw fleugmatike humors. As
Cephalagies or pains in the head which shall make men dizzy that some shall
stagger and stumble up and down the streets till they have stolen a nappe to
quiet their brains.

Ache in the shoulders shall rain aamongest diverse women that have shrewes to
their husbands, and diverse drunken men shall be pestured with surfets.

Maidens this winter shall have strange stitches and gripings of the colic,
which diseses proceed by to much lying upright.

Men shall be troubled with such pain in the eyes, that they shall not know
their own wives from other women, with coughes, ruins and itchings, which I
omit.

Of the Spring time.
Winter being finished with the last grade of the watery sign Pisces, at the
Suns joyful progress into the first degree of Aries. The second quarter of our
usual year commonly called the spring comes next, which begins when
grass begins to sproute, and trees to bud. But to treat of this present
season, forasmuch as I find the planets to be contradictorily disposed, in
signs and mansio^s of diverse repugnaunt qualities, I gather that this spring
will be very il for scholars, for they shall study much and gain little, they
shall have more wit in their heads then money in their purses.

Dunces shall prove more welthie then diverse doctors, insomuch that sundry
unlettered fools should creep into the ministry, if the provident care of
good Bishops did not prevent them.

And by the opinion of Proclus, women are like to grow wilful, and so variable,
that they shall laugh and weep, and all with a wind: Butchers shall sell their
meat as dear as they can, and if they be not careful, horn beasts shall
be hurtful unto them.

Some shall be so wedded to swines flesh, that they shall never be without a
sow in their house as long as they live.

This spring or vernall resolution being naturally hot and moist, is like to
be very forward for sprouting fields blooming trees, and because Saturn is
in his proper mansion, old men are like to be froard, and crafty knaves shall
need no Brokers, usury shall be called good husbandry, and men shall be
counted honest by their wealth, not by their virtues.

And because Aquarius has something to do with this quarter, it is to be doubted
yt diverse springs of water will rise up in vintners sellers, to the great
weakening of their Bascon wine, and the utter ruin of the ancient order of the
red noses. March Beer shall be more esteemed than ale.

Out of the old stock of heresy, this spring it is to be feared, will bloome
new scismaticall opinions and strange sects, as Brownists, Barowists, and such
balductum devises to the great hinderance of the unity of the Church and
confusion of the true faith, if the learned doctor sir T. Tiburne be not taskte
to confute such vpstart companions, with his plain and dunstable philosophy.
Cancer is busy in this spring tide, and therefore it is like that flourishing
bloomes of young gentlemen's youth shall be greatly anoid with caterpillars, who
shall entangle the^ in such statutes and recognances, that they shall cry out
against brokers, as Jeremy did against false prophets.

Besides, though this last winter nipt up diverse masterlesse men and cut purses,
yet this spring is like to afford one every term this ten year in Westminster
hall. Barbers if they have no work are like to grow poor, and for that
Mercury is co^bust and many quarelles like to grow amongst men, lawiers shall
prove rich and wear side gowns and large consciences, having their mouths open
to call for fees, and their purses shut when they should bestow alms.

But take heed O you generation of wicked Ostlers, that steal haie in the
night from gentlemen's horses, and rub their teth with tallow, that they may
eat little when they stand at livery, this I prognosticate against you, that
this spring, which so ever of you dies, shall leave a knaves carcass in the
grave behind him, and that they which live shall hop a harlot in his cloths al
ye year after

But above all let me not hide this secret from my countrymen, that Jupiter
being in aspect with Luna, discovers that diverse men shall drink more the^
they bleed, and Tailers shall steal nothing but what is brought unto them,
that poulters shall be pestered with rotten eggs, and Butchers dogs make libels
against Lent, that affoordes no food but herring cobs for their diet.

Diseases incident to this quarter, as by Astrologicall and philosophical
conjectures I can gather, are these following: Prentises that have been sore
beaten, shall be troubled with ach in their arms, and it shall be ill for such
as have sore eyes, to look against the Sun.

The plague shall reign mortally amongst poor men, that diverse of them shall
not be able to change a man a groate.

Old women yt have taken great cold, may perhaps be trobled with the cough, and
such as have pain in their teeth, shall be grieuouslie troubled with the
tooth ach. Sick folk shall have worse stomachs then they which be whole, and
men that cannot sleep, shall take very little rest: with other accidental
infirmities, which I ouerpasse.

A declaration of the disposition and inclination of the Summer quarter.
When the Sun has made his course through the vernal signs, Aries, Taurus
and Gemini at his passage unto the solsticiall estiuall sign Cancer. The third
part of an English year called Summer, takes his beginning this year, as
Ptolomie says, the twelfch of June but as my skill does conjecture, it
begins when the wether waxes so hot, that beggars scorn barnes and lie in
the field for heat, and the worms of Saint Pancredge Church build their
bowers under the shadow of Colman hedge.

The predominant qualities of this quarter is heat and dryness, whereby I do
gather, that through the influence of Cancer, bottle Ale shall be in great
authority, and wheat shall do knights service unto malt.

Tapsters this quarter shall be in greater credit than Cobblers, and many shall
drink more then they can yearne.

And yet because Mercury is a sign that is now predominant, women shall be
more troubled with fleas then men, and such as want meat shall go supperlesse
to bed.

Besides, this quarter great hurly burlies are like to be feared, and great
stratagems like to be performed, through the opposition of Mars and Saturn.

Butchers are like to make great hauock amongst flies: beggars on Sun shine
days to commit great murders upon their rebellious vermin.


