THE FANCIES Chaste and Noble:

PRESENTED BY THE QUEENS Majesty's Servants, At the PHOENIX in Drury Lane.

FIDE HONOR.

LONDON, Printed by E. P. for Henry Seile, and are to be sold at his shop, at
the Tigers Head in Fleetstreet, over against Saint Dunstans Church. 1638.

ACT. I.
Enter TROYLO SAVELLI, and LIVIO. TROYLO. Do, do, be wilful, desperate, it is
manly,
Build on your reputation, such a Fortune
May furnish out your Tables, trim your liveries,
Enrich your heirs, with purchase of a Patrimony
Which shall hold out beyond the waste of riot,
Stick Honors on your Heraldry, with titles
As swelling and as numerous, as may likely
Grow to a pretty volume, here is eternity,
All this can reputation, marry can it,
Indeed what not?

Livio. Such language from a Gentleman
So noble in his quality as you are
Deserves in my weak Judgment rather pity
Then a contempt.

Troylo. Could thou consider Livio
The fashion of the times, their study, practice,
Nay, their ambitions, thou would soon distinguish
Betwixt the abject lowness of a poverty,
And the applauded triumph of abundance,
Though compast by the meanest service, wherein
Shall you betray your guilt to common censure,
Waiving the private charge of your opinion
By rising up to greatness, or at least
To plenty which now buys it.

Livio Troylo-Savelli,
Plays merrily on my wants,

Troy. Troylo-Savelli.
Speaks to the friend he loves, to his own Livio,
Look prithee through the great Dukes Court in Florence,
Number his favorites, and then examine
By what steps some chief Officers in state
Have reached the heigh they stand in.

Livio By their merrits.

Troylo Right, by their merrits, well he merited
Th'Intendments over the Galleys at Ligorne,
Made grand collector of the customs there,
Who led the Prince unto his Wives chastebed,
And stood himself by, in his night gown, fearing
The jest might be discovered: waste not handsome?
The Lady knows not yet on it.

Livio. Most impossible.

Troy. He merited well to wear a roabe of Chamlet,
Who trained his Brothers daughter (scarce a girl)
Into the Arms of Mont-Angentorato,
Whiles the young Lord of Telaxton her husband.
Was packetted to France, to study courtship,
Underforsooth a color of employment,
Employment, yea of honor,

Live. You Are well read
In mysteries of state,

Troy. Here in Sienna.
Bold Iulio de Varana Lord of Camerine.
Held it no blemish to his blood and greatness,
From a plain Merchant with a thousand Ducats
To buy his wife, nay justify the purchase,
Procured it by a dispensation
From Rome, allowed and warranted: it was thought
By his Physicians, that she was a creature,
Agreed best with the cure of the disease,
His present new infirmity then labored in.
Yet these are things in prospect of the world,
Advanced imploi'd, and eminent.

Live. at best It Is but a goodly pandarisme.

Troy. Shrewd business.
Thou child in thrist, thou fool of honesty,
Is It a disparagement for gentlemen,
For friends of lower rank to do the offices
Of necessary kindness without see,
For one another, courtesies of course,
Mirthes of society, when petty mushroomes,
Transplanted from their dunghils spread on mountains.
And pass for Cedars by their servile flatteries
On great men's vices? -- P ander -- thou art deceived,
The word includes preferment, it is a title
Of dignity, I could add somewhat more else,

Livio. Add any thing of reason.

Troylo. Castamela.
Thy beauteous sister like a precious Tissue,
Not shapt into a garment fit for wearing,
Wants the adornments of the Workemans cunning
To set the richness of the piece at view,
Though in her self all wonder. Come I Will tell thee,
Away there may be (know I love thee Livio)
To fix this Jewel in a Ring of gold,
Yet lodge it in a Cabanet of Ivory,
White pure, unspotted Ivorie, put case
Livio himself shall keep the key on it?

Livio Oh Sir,
Create me what you please of yours, do this,
You are another Nature,

Troy. Be then pliable.

Enter Octavo, and Nitido. Troylo. Be then pliable
To my first rules of your advancement -- See,
Octavio my good Uncle, the great Marquess
Of our Siena comes as we could wish
In private -- Noble Sir

Oct. My bosoms Secretary,
My dearest, best loved Nephew.

Troylo. We have been thirsty
In our pursuit -- Sir here is a gentleman
Desertfull of your knowledge, and as covetous
Of entertainment from it, you shall honor
Your judgment, to entrust him to your favors,
His merits will commend it.

Oct. Gladly welcome.
Your own worth is a herald to proclaim it:
For taste of your preferment, we admit you
The chief provisor of our Horse.

Livio. Your bounty
Styles me your ever servant.

Troyo. He Is our own,
Surely, nay most perswadedly -- my thanks Sir
Owes to this just engagement.

Oct. Slack no time
To enter on your fortunes -- thou art careful
My Troylo in the study of a duty,
His name is Livio!

Li. Livio my good Lord.

Oct. Again you are welcome to us, be as speedy
Dear Nephew as thou art constant -- men of parts,
Fit parts and sound are rarely to be met with,
But being met with, therefore to be cherished,
With love and with supportance, while I stand,
Livio can no way fall --
Yet once more welcome.
Exit. Oct. Page.
Troy. An honorable liberality,
Timely disposed without delay or question,
Commands a gratitude, is not this better
Then waiting three or four months at livory,
With cup and knee unto this chair of state,
And to their painted Arras for a need
From Goodman Usher, or the formal Secretary
Especially the Iugler with the purse,
That paies some shares, in all a younger brother
Sometimes an elder, not well trimmed in the headpiece,
May spend what his friends left in expectation,
Of being turned out of service for attendance
Or marry a waiting woman, and be damb'd for it
To open laughter, (and what is worth) old beggerie,
What thinks my Livio of this rise at first?
Is It not miraculous.

Livio. It seems the bargain,
Was driven before between ye.

Troy. 'Twas, and nothing
Could void it, but the peevish resolution
Of your dissent from goodness, as you call it,
A Thin, a threadbare honesty, a virtue
Without a living to it.

Live. I must resolve
To turn my sister whore, speak a homeword,
For my old Bachelor -- Lord, so, is it not so?
A trifle in respect of present means,
Here Is all --

Troy. Be yet more confident, the flaverie
Of such an abject office, shall not tempt
The freedom of my spirit, stand ingenious
To thine own fate, and we will practice wisely
Without the charge of scandal.

Live. May it prove so.
Exeunt.
Enter SECCO with a Castingbottle, sprinckling his Hatte and Face, and a little
lookeing glass at his Girdle, setting his Countenance. Secco. Admirable
incomparably admirable! to be the minion, the darling, the delight of love,
it is a very tickling to the marrow, a kissing in the blood, a bosoming the
ecstasy, the rapture of virginity, soul and paradise of perfection -- ah --
pity of generation Secco, there are no more such men.


Spa. O yes, if any man, woman, or beast, have found, stolen, or taken up a
fine, very fine male Barber, of the age of above or under eighteen more or
less.


Sec. Spadone, hold, what is the noise?


Spa. Umh -- pay the crier, I have bin almost Iost my self in seeking you,
here is a letter from --


Sec. Whom, whom my dear Spadoue, whom?


Spa. Soft and fair, and you be so brief, I Will return it whence it came, or
look out a new owner, O yes.


Sa. Low, low, what do mean, is it from the glory of beauty, Morosa the
fairest fair, be gentle to me, here is a duccat, peake low prithee.


Spa. Give me one, and take the other, it is from tho party, Golden news believe
it.


Sec. Honest Spadone divine Morosa.


Spa. Fairest fair, quoth a, so is an old rotten Codled mungrell, parcel
Bawd, parcel midwife, all the marks are quite out of her mouth, not the
stumpe of a tooth left in her head, to mumble the curd of a Posset -- Seignior
it is as I told ye, all is right,


Sec. Right, just as thon tould'st me, all is right,


Spa. To a very hair Seignior mio.


Sec. For which Sirrah Spadone, I will make thee a man, a man, do hear? I
say a man.


Spa. Thou Art a prickeard foyst, a citterne headed gew, gaw, a knacke, a
snipper-snapper, twit me with the decrements of my pendants, though I am made
a gelding, and like a tame Buck have lost my Dowsets, more a monster then a
Cuckold with his horns seen, yet I scorn to be jeered by any checker,
aproved Barbarian of ye all, make me a man, I defy thee.


Sec. How now fellow, how now, roaring ripe indeed?


Spa. Indeed? Thou Art worse, a dry shaver, a copper basand-suds-monger.


Sec. Nay, nay, by my Mistress fair eyes I meant no such thing.


Spa. Eyes in thy belly, the reverend Madam shall know how I have been used, I
will blow my nose in thy casting bottle, break the teeth of thy combs, poison
thy camphire Balls, slice out thy towels with thine own razor, betallow thy
tweezes, and urine in thy basin, make me a man?


Sec. Hold take another Duccat, as I love new cloathe;


Spa. Or cast old ones.


Sec. Yes or cast old ones, I intended no injury.


Spa. Good, we are piec'd again, reputation, Seignior, is precious.


Sec. I know it is.


Spa. Old sores would not be rubbed.


Sec. For me never.


Spa. The Lady guardianesse, the mother of the Fancies, is resolved to draw
with ye, in the wholesome of matrimony, suddenly.


Sec. She writes as much, and Spadone, when we are married.


Spa. You will to bed no doubt.


Sec. We will revell in such variety of delights.


Spa. Do miracles and get Babies.


Sec. Liveso sumptuously.


Spa. In feather and old furs.


Sec. Feed so deliciously.


Spa. On Pap and Bulbeese.


Sec. Enjoy the sweetness of our years.


Spa. Eighteen and threescore with advantage,


Sec. Tumble and wallow in abundance.


Spa. The pure crystal puddle of pleasures.


Sec. That all the world should wonder.


Spa. A pox on them that envy ye.


Sec. How do the beauties (my dainty knave) live, wish, think, and dream,
sirrah ha.


Spa. Fumble one with an other, on the gambos of imagination between their
legs, eat they do, and sleep, game, laugh, and lie down, as beauties ought
to do, there is all.


Sec. Commend me to my choicest, and tell her, the minute of her appointment
shall be waited on, say to her, she shall find me a man at all points.


Enter NITIDO. Spa. Why, there is another quarrel, man, once more in spite of
my nose.


Nit. Away Secco away, my Lord calls, a' has a loose hair started from his
fellows, a clip of your art is commanded.


Sec. I fly Nitido, Spadone remember me.

Exit.
Nit. Trudging between an old moyle, and a young Calfe, my numble
intelligeneer, what, thou fatten'st apace on Capon still?


Spa. Yes, crimpe, it is a gallant life to be an old Lords pimpe whiskin, but
beware of the porters lodge, for carrying tales out of the school.


Nit. What a terrible sight to a lib'd breech is a sow gelder?


Spa. Not so terrible as a cross tree that never grows, to a wag-halter-Page.


Nit. Good! witty rascal, thou art a Satire I protest, but that the Nimphs need
not fear the evidence of thy mortality, go put on a clean bib, and spinne
amongst the Nuns, sing'em a bawdy song, all the children thou ge'tst, shall be
christened in wassaile bowls, and turned into a college of men Midwives,
farewell nightmare.


Spa. Very, very well, if I dye in thy debt for this crackrope) let me be
buried in a cole-sacke, I Will fit ye, (apes face) look for it.


Nit. And still the Vrchin would, but could not do.

sing.
Spa. Mark the end on it, and laugh at last.

Exeunt.
Enter Romanello and Castamela. Romans Tell me you cannot love me,

Chaste. You importune
Too strict a resolution, as a gentleman
Of commendable parts, and fair deserts,
In every sweet condition that becomes
A hopeful expectation, I do honor
The Example of your youth, but Sir our fortunes
Concluded on both sides in narrow bands,
Move you to conster gently my forbearance,
In argument of fit consideration.

Romans Why Castamela, I have shapt thy virtues
(Even from our childish years) into a dowry
Of richer estimation, then thy portion,
Doubled an hundred times, can equal: now
I clearly find, thy current of affection
Labors to fall into the guilt of riot,
Not the free ocean of a soft content.
You Would marry pomp and plenty, it is the Idol
(I must confess) that creatures of the time,
Bend their devotions to, But I have fashioned
Thoughts much more excellent of you.

Cast. Enjoy your own prosperity, I am resolved,
Never by any charge with me, to force
A poverty upon ye, want of love.
It Is rarely cherished with the love of want.
I Will not be your undoing.

Romans Sure some dotage
Of living stately, richly, lend a cunning
To Eloquence. How is this piece of goodness
Changed to ambition? oh you are most miserable
In your desires, the female curse has caught ye.

Cast. Fie, fie, how il this suits.

Romans A Devil of pride,
Ranges in airy thoughts to catch a star,
Whiles ye graspe mole-hils.

Cast. Worse and worse I vow.

Romans But that some remnant of an honest sense,
Ebbes a full tide of blood to shame, all women
Would prostitute al honor to the luxury of ease and titles.

Cast. Romanello, know
You have forgot the nobleness of truth,
And sixth on scandal now.

Romans A Dog, a Parrot,
A Monkey, a Caroach, a guarded lackey,
A waiting woman with her lips sealed up,
Are pretty toys to please my Mistress wonton:
So is a siddle too, 'twill make it dance,
Or else be sick and whine.

Cast. This is uncivil.
I am not Sir your charge.

Romans My grief you are,
For all my services are lost and ruined.

Chaste. So is my chief opinion of your worthiness,
When such distractions tempt ye, you would prove
A cruel Lord, who dare, being yet a servant,
As you profess, to bait my best respects
Of duty to your welfare, it is madness
I have not often observed, possess your freedom.
You have no right in me, let this suffice:
I wish your joys much comfort.

Enter LIVIO fresh suited. Live. Sister, look ye,
How by a new creation off my Tailors,
I Have shook off old mortality, the rags
Of home spun Gentry (prithee sister mark it)
Are cast by, and I now appear in fashion
Unto men, and received, observe me sister,
The consequence concerns you.

Cast. True good Brother,
For my well doing must consist in yours.

Li. Here Is Romanello, a fine tempered gallant,
Of decent carriage, of indifferent means,
Considering that his sister, new hoist up,
From a lost merchants warehouse, to the titles
Of a great Lords-bed, may supply his wants
Not sunck in his acquaintance, for a scholar
Able enough, and one who may subsist
Without the help of friends, provided always,
He fly not upon wedlock without certainty
Of an advancement, else a bachelor
May thrive by observation on a little.
As single life's no burden, but to draw
In yoakes is chargeable, and will require
A double maintenance, why I can live
Without a wife, and purchase.

Romans Is It a mystery?
You Have lately found out Livio, or a cunning
Concealed, till now for wonder?

Livio. Pish, believe it,
Endeavors and an active brain, are better
Then patrimonies left by parents. Prove it,
One thrives by cheating; shallow fools and unthrifts,
Are game knaves only sly at: then a fellow
Presumes on his hair, and that his back can toil
For fodder from the City, lies: another
Reputed valiant, lives by the sword, and takes up
Quarrels or braves them, as the novice likes,
To guild his reputation, most improbable.
A wor'd of desperate undertakings, possibly,
Procures some hungry meals, some tavern surfets,
Some frippery to hide nakedness: perhaps
The scambling half a duccat now and then
To rore and noise it with the tatling hostess,
For a weeks lodging: these are pretty shifts,
Souls bankerupt of their royalty submit to.
Give me a man, whose practice and experience,
Conceives not barely the Philosophers stone,
But indeed has it, one whose wit's his Indies.
The poor is most ridiculous.

Romans You Are pleasant
In new discoveries of fortune; use them
With moderation, Livio.

Cast. Such wild language
Was wont to be a stranger to your custom;
How ever, Brother, you are pleased to vent it,
I hope for recreation.

Li. Name and honor.
What are they? a mere sound without supportance,
A begging chastity, youth, beauty, hansomnesse,
Discourse, behavior which might charm attention,
And curse the gazers eyes into amazement;
Are Natures common bounties. So are Diamonds
Uncut, so flowers unworne, so silke-wormes webs
Unwrought, gold unrefin'd, then all those glories
are of esteem, when used and set at price,
There Is no dark sense in this.

Romans I understand not
The drist on it, nor how meant, nor yet to whom.

Cast. Pray Brother be more plain.

Live. First Romanello,
This for your satisfaction: if you waste
More hours in courtship to this maid, my sister,
Weighing her competency with your own,
You go about to build without foundation;
So that care will prove void.

Romans A sure acquittance,
If I must be discharged.

Live. Next Castamela,
To thee (my own loved Sister) let me say
I have not been so bountiful, in showing
To Fame, the treasure, which this age has opened,
As thy true value merits.

Cast. You are merry.

Live. My jealousy of thy fresh blooming years,
Prompted a fear of husbanding too charily
Thy growth to such perfection, as no flattery
Of are can perish now.

Cast. Here Is talk in riddles.
Brother, th'exposition?

Live. I Will no longer
Chamber thy freedom, we have been already
Thrifty enough in our low fortunes, henceforth
Command thy liberty, with that thy pleasures.

Romans Is It come to this?

Cast. You Are wondrous full of courtesy.

Livio. Ladies of birth an I quality are suitors
For being known to you, I have promised, sister,
They shall partake your company.

Cast. What Lady es,
Where, when, how, who?

Live. A day, a week, a month
Sported amongst such beauties, is a gain
On time, they are young, wife, noble, fair, and chaste.

Cast. Chaste?

Livio. Castamela chaste, I would not hazard
My hopes, my joys of thee, on dangerous trial.
Yet if (as it may chance) a neat clothed merriment
Pass without blush in tatling to the words,
Fall not too broad, it is but a pastime smiled at
Amongst your selves in counsel, but beware
Of being overheard.

Cast. This is pretty.

Romans I doubt I know not what yet must be silent.

Enter TROYLO, FLORIA, CLARELLA, SILUIA and NITIDO. Li. They come as soon as
spoke of -- sweetest faire-ones
My sister cannot but conceive this honor
Particular in your respects: Dear sir
You grace us in your favors.

Troy. Virtuous Lady.

Flo. We are your servants.

Clar. Your sure friends.

Sil. Society,
May fix us in a league.

Cast. All fitly welcome.
I find not reason (gentle Ladies) whereon
To cast this debt of mine, but my acknowledgement
Shall study to pay thankfulness.

Troy. Sweet beauty,
Your Brother has indeed been too much churl
In this concealment from us all, who love him,
Of such desired a presence.

Sil. Please to enrich us
With your wished amity.

Flo. Our coach attends;
We cannot be denied:

Clar. Command it Nitido.

Nit. Ladies, I shall, now for a lusty harvest.
'Twill prove a cheap year, should these barnes be filled once,

Cast. Brother one word in private.

Livio. Phew -- anon
I shall instruct at large. -- we are prepared
And easily entreated; it is good manners
Not to be troublesome.

Troy. Thou art perfect Livio.

Cast. Whether -- but -- he is my brother.

Troy. Fair, your arm.
I am your Usher Lady.

Cast. As you please sir.

Live. I wait you to your coach,
Some two hours hence.
I shall return again.
Exeunt.
Romans Troylo-Savelli,
Next heir unto the marquess? and the Page too?
The Marquesses own page, Livio transformed
Into a sudden bravery, and altered
In Nature, or I dream? amongst the Ladies,
I not remember I have seen one face.
There Is cunning in these changes, I am resolute,
Or to pursue the trick on it, or lose labor.
Exeunt.
Actus II.
Enter FLAVIO supported by CAMILLO, and VESPUCI. Flavia. Not yet returned.

Came. Madam.

Fla. The Lord our husband,
We mean, unkind! four hours are almost past,
(But twelve short minutes wanting by the glass)
Since we broke company, was never (gentlemen)
Poor Princess used so?

Ves. With your gracious favor,
Peers great in rank and place, ought of necessity
To attend on state employments.

Came. For such duties,
Are all their toil and labor, but their pleasures
Flow in the beauties they enjoy, which conquers
All sense of other travail.

Fla. Trimly spoken.
When we were common, mortal, and a subject,
As other creatures of heavens making are,
(the more the pity) bless us! how we waited
For the huge play day when the Pageants fluttered
About the City, for we then were certain,
The Madam courtiers, would vouchsafe to visit us,
And call us by our names, and eat our viands:
Nay give us leave to sit at the upper end
of our own Tables, telling us how welcome
They Would make us, when we came to Court: full little
Dreamed I at that time of the wind that blew me
Up to the Weathercocke of th'honours, now
Are thrust upon me, but we bear the burden,
Were It twice as much as it is, the next great feast,
We Will grace the City wives (poor souls) and see
How they will behave themselves, before our presence.
You two shall wait on us.

Ves. With best observance,
And glory in our service.

Came. We are creatures
Made proud in your commands.

Fla. Beleeve't you are so
And you shall find Us readier in your pleasures,
Then you in your obedience, fie methinks
I have an excellent humor to be pettish;
A little toysome, it is a pretty sign
Of breeding, is it not fit? I (...) indeed (...)
Long for some strange good things now.

Came. Such news, Madam.
Would over-joy my Lord your husband.

Ves. Cause
Bonfires and bell ringings

Fla. I must be with child then,
And't be but for the public Iollity,
Or lose my longings, which were mighty pity.

Came. Sweet fates forbid it.

Enter Fabricio. Fab. Noblest Lady --

Ves. rudeness
Keep off, or I shall -- saucy groom, learn manners,
Go swab amongst your Goblins.

Fla. Let him stay,
The fellow I have seen, and now remember
His name, Fabricio.

Fab. Your poor Creature Lady;
Out of your gentleness, please you to consider
The brief of this petition, which contains
All hope of my last fortunes.

Fla. Give it from him.

Came. Here Madam -- mark Vespuci, how the
Wittol stares on his sometime wife! sure he imagines
To be a cuckold, by consent, is purchase
Of appprobation in a state.

Ves. Good reason.
The gain reprieved him from bankerours statute,
And filled him in the charter of his freedom.
She had seen the fellow, did observe.

Came. Most punctually.
Could calhim by his name too, why it is possible,
She has not yet forgot a' was her husband.

Ves. That were strange, oh it is a precious trincket.
Was ever puppet so slipped up?

Came. The tale
Of Venus Cat (man) changed into a woman,
Was emblem but to this, she turns.

Vef 'A stands just like Action in the painted cloth

Came. No more.

Fla. Friend we have read, and weighed the sum
Of what your Scrivener, which in effect
Is meant your counsel learned, has drawn for ye:
It Is a fair hand insooth, but the contents
Somewhat unseasonable, for let us tell ye,
You Have been a spender, a vain spender, wasted
Your stock of credit, and of Wares unthristily.
You are a faulty man, and should we urge
Our Lord as often for supplies, as shame,
Or wants drive you to ask, it might be construed
An impudence, which we desie, an Impudence,
Base in base Women, but in Noble sinful.
Are ye not ashamed yet of your self?

Fab. Great Lady,
Of my misfortunes I am ashamed.

Came. So, so,
This jeere twangs roundly, does it not Vespuci?

Ves. Why here is a Lady worshipful.

Fla. Pray gentlemen,
Retire awhile; this fellow shall resolve
Some doubts that stick about me.

Ambo. As you please.
Exeunt.
Fla. To thee Fabricto, oh the change is cruel
Since I find some small leisure, I must justify,
Thou art unworthy of the name of man.
These holy vows, which we by bonds of Faith,
Recorded in the register of Truth,
Were kept by me unbroken, no assaults
Of guists of courtship from the great and wanton,
No threats, nor sense of poverty (to which
Thy riots had betrayed me) could betray
My warrantable thoughts, to impure folly.
Why would thou force me miserable?

Fab. The scorn
Of rumor, is reward enough, to brand
My lewder actions, 'twas I thought impossible,
A beauty fresh as was your youth, could brook
The last of my decays,

Fla. Did I complain?
My sleeps between thine arms, were even as sound,
My dreams as harmless, my contents as free,
As when the best of plenty crowned our bride bed.
Amongst some of a mean, but quiet fortune,
Distrust of what they call their own, or Jealousy
Of those whom in their bosoms they possess
Without control, begets a self unworthiness;
For which fear, or what is worst desire,
Or paultry gain, they practice art, and labor to
Pander their own wives: those wives whose innocence
Stranger to language, spoke obedience only,
And such a wife was Flavia to Fabritio.

Fab. My loss is irrecoverable.

Fla. Call not
Thy wickedness thy loss; without my knowledge
Thou souldst me, and in open court protestodst
A precontract unto another, falsely
To justify a separation, wherein
Could I offend to be believed thy Strumpet,
In best sense an Adulteress? so conceav'd
In all opinions, that I am shook off,
Even from mine own blood, which although I boast
Not Noble, yet 'twas not mean, for Romanello
Mine only brother, shunnes me, and abhors
To own me for his sister.

Fab. It Is confessed,
I am the shame of mankind.

Fla. I live happy
In this great Lords love, now, but could his cunning
Have trained me to dishonor, we had never
Been sunder'd by the temptation of his purchase.
In Troth Fabritio, I am little proud of
My unsought honors, and so far from triumph,
That I am not more fool, to such as honor me,
Then to my self, who hate this antique carriage!

Fab. You are an Angel rather to be worshipped,
Then grossly to be talked with.

Fla. Keep those Duccats;
I shall provide you better: 'twere a bravery,
Could you forget the place wherein you have rendered
Your name for ever hateful.

Fab. I will do it,
Do It excellentest goodness, and conclude
My days in silent goodness.

Fla. You may prosper
In Spain, in France, or elsewhere, as in Italy.
Besides, you are a scholar bred, however
You interrupted study with commerce,
I Will think of your supplies, mean time, pray, storm not
At my behavior to you, I have forgot acquaintance
With mine own -- keep your first distance --

Enter Iulio, Camillo, Vespuci Camillo, who is near, Vespuci. Iul. What, Our
Ladies cast familier.

Fla. Oh my stomach
Wambles at fight of -- sick, sick, I am sick --
I saint at heart -- kiss me, nay prithee quickly,
Or I shall sown -- you have staid a sweet while from me.
And this companion to -- beshrew him.

Iu. Dearest,
Thou art my health, my blessing -- turn the banquerout
out of my doors -- sirrah, I Will have thee whipped.
If thou comst here again.

Came. Hence, hence you vermin.

Exit Fa. Iu. How is it my best of joys?

Fla. Prettily mended.
Now we have our own Lord here: I shall never
Endure to spare you long out of my sight.
See what the thing presented.

Iu. A petition,
Belike for some new charity.

Fla. We must not
Be troubled with his needs, a wanting creature
Is monstrous, is as ominous -- fie, upon it.
Dispatch the silly Mushroome once for all,
And send him with some pittance out o'th country,
Where we may hear no more of him.

Iu. Thy will shall stand a law, my Flavia,

Flav. You have been
In private with our fellow Peers now: shanot we
Know how the business stands, sure in some country,
Ladies are privy Counselors, I warrant ye:
Are they not think ye? there the land is (doubtless)
Most politickly governed; all the women
We are swords and Breeches, I have heard most certainly,
Such sights were exc'lent.

Iul. Thou Art a matchless pleasure:
Noe life is sweet without thee, in my heart
Reign Empress, and be styled thy Iulio's Sovereign.
My only, precious dear:

Fla. We Will prove no less to you.
Exeunt.
Enter Troylo and Livio. Troy. Sea sick a shore still? thou could rarely
escape
A Calenture in a long voyage, Livio,
Who in a short one, and at home art subject
To such faint stomach qualmes, no cordials comfort
The business of thy thoughts, for ought I see:
What ails thee (man) be merry, hang up Iealousies.

Live. Who, I, I jealous? no, no, here is no cause
In this place it is a nunnerie, a retirement
For meditation, all the difference extant
But puzzles, only bar belief, not grounds it,
Rich services in place! soft and fair lodgings,
Varieties of recreations, exercise
Of music in all changes? neat attendance?
Princely, nay royal furniture of garments?
Saciety of gardens, orchards, water works,
Pictures so ravishing, that ranging eyes,
Might dwell upon a dotage of conceit,
Without a single wish for livelier substance?
The great world in a little world of Fancy,
Is here abstracted: noe temptation profer'd
But such as fools and mad folks can invite to?
And yet --

Troy. And yet your reason cannot answer
The objections of your fears, which argue danger.

Liu. Danger? dishonor, Troylo: were my sister
In safety from those charms, I must confess
I could live here for ever.

Troy. But you could not.
I can assure ye, for it were then scarce possible,
A door might opent'ee, hardly a loope-hole,

Live. My presence then is usher to her ruin,
And loss of her, the fruit of my preferment.

Troy. Briefly partake a secret, but be sure
To lodge it in the inmost of thy bosom,
Where memory may not find it for discovery;
By our firm truth of friendship, I require thee.

Live. By our firm truth of friendship, I subscribe
To just conditions.

Troy. Our great Uncle Marquess,
Disabled from his Cradle, by an impotence
In nature first, that impotence, since seconded
And rendered more infirm, by a fatal breach
Received in fight against the Turkish Galleys
Is made incapable of any faculty,
Of active manhood, more then what affections
Proper unto his Sex, must else distinguish:
So that no helps of art can warrant life,
Should he transcend the bounds his weakness limits.

Li. On, I attend with eagerness.

Troy. It Is strange,
Such natural defects at no time checks
A full and free sufficiency of spirit;
Which flows, both in so clear and fixed a strength,
That to confirm belief (it seems) where nature
Is in the body lame, she is supplied
In fine proportion of the mind, a word
Concludes all; to a man his enemy,
He is a dangerous threatening: but to women,
How ever pleasurable, no way cunning
To show abilities of friendship, other
Then what his outward senses can delight in,
Or charge and bounty court with.

Live. Good, good -- Troylo,
Oh that I had a lusty Faith to credit it,
Though none of all this wonder should be possible.

Troy. As I love honor, and an honest name,
I faulter not (my Livio) in one syllable,

Live. News admirable, it is, it is so -- pish I know it,
Yet 'a has a kind heart of his own to girls,
Young, handsome Girls; yes, yes, so a' may,
It Is granted -- a' wod now and then be pidling,
And play the wanton, like a fly that dallies
About a candles flame: then scorch his wings,
Drop down, and creep away, ha?

Troy. Hardly that too;
To look upon fresh beauties, to discourse
In an unblushing merriment of words,
To hear them play or sing, and see them dance,
To pass the time in pretty amorous questions,
Read a chaste verse, of love, or prattle riddles,
Is the height of his temptations.

Live. Send him joy on it.

Troy. His choices are not of the courtly train;
Nor Cities practice; but the countries innocence,
Such as are gentle-borne, not meanly; such,
To whom both gawdinesse and apelike fashions
Are monstrous; such as cleanelinesse and decency,
Prompt to a virtuous envy, such as study
A knowledge of no danger, but themselves.

Live. Well, I have lived in ignorance: the ancients,
Who chatted of the golden age, feigned trisles.
Had they dreamed this, they would have truth'd it heaven.
I mean an earthly heaven, less it is not.

Troy. Yet is this Bachelor miracle not free
From the epidemical headache.

Live. The Yellowes.

Troy. Huge jealous fits, admitting none to enter
But me, his page, and Barber, with an Eunuch,
And an old guardianesse, it is a favor
Not common, that the license of your visits,
To your own sister, now and then is wink't at.

Live. But why are you his instrument, his Nephew?
It Is ominous in nature.

Troy. Not in policy.
Being his heir, I may take truce a little,
With mine own fortunes.

Live. Knowing how things stand too.

Troy. At certain seasons, as the humor takes him,
A set of music are permitted peaceably,
To cheer their solitariness, provided
Tu'are strangers, not acquainted near the city,
But never the same twice, pardon him that;
Nor must their stay exceed an hour, or two
At farthest; as at this wise wedding, wherefore
His Barber is the master to instruct
The lasses both in Song and Dance, by him
Trained up in either quality.

Live. A caution happily studied.

Troy. Farther to prevent
Suspicion, a'has married his young Barber
To the old Matron, and withal is pleased,
Report should mutter him a mighty man
For th'game, to take off all suspicion
Of insufficiency, and this strickt company
A'cals his bower of Fancies.

Live. Yes and properly,
Since all his recreations are in Fancy.
I Am infinitely taken -- sister? marry
Would I had sisters in a plenty, Troylo,
So to bestow them all, and turn them Fancies.
Fancies? Why it is a pretty name methinks.

Troy. Something remains, which in conclusion shortly.
Song. Shall take thee fuller -- Hark, the wedding jollity!
With a Bride-cake on my life, to grace the nuptials!
Perhaps the Ladies will turn Songsters.

Live. Silence.

Enter Secco, Castamela, Floria, Clarella, Silvia, Morosa, and Spadone. Sec.
Passing neat and exquisite, I protest fair creatures; These honors to our
solemnity, are liberal and uncommon; my spouse and my self with our
posterity, shall prostitute our services, to your bounties, shals not duckling?


Mor. Yes honey suckle, and do as much for them one day, if things stand right
as they should stand, Bill, Pigeon do; thou'st be my Cattamountaine, and I thy
sweet bryer, Honey, we will lead you to kind examples (pretty ones) believe it,
and you shall find us, one in one, whiles hearts do last.


Sec. Ever mine own, and ever.

Spa. Well said old Touch hole.

Live. All happiness, all joy.

Troy. A plenteous issue,
A fruitful womb -- Thou have a blessing Secco.

Mor. Indeed a' has Sir, if ye know all, as I conceive you know enough, if
not the whole: for you have (I may say) tried me to the quick, through and
through, and most of my carriage, from time to time.


Spa. 'Twould wind-break a moyle, or a ring'd mare, to vie burdens with her.


Mor. What Is that you mumble, Gelding, shey.


Spa. Nothing forsooth, but that you are bouncing couple well met, and 'twere
pity to part ye, though you hung together in a smoakie chimney.


Mor. 'Twere eene pity indeed, Spadone, nay tha'st a foolish loving nature of
thine own, and withest well to plain dealings of my conscience.


Spa. Thank your Brideship -- your Bawdship.

Flo. Our sister is not merry.

Cla. Sadness cannot
Become a Bridal harmony.

Sil. At a wedding, free spirits are required.

Troy. You should dispense
With serious thoughts, now Lady.

Mor. Well said Gentlefolks.

Live. Fie Castamela sie,

Om. A dance, a dance.

Troy. By any means, the day is not complete else.

Cast. Indeed He be excused,

Troy. By no means, Lady.

Sec. We are all suitors.

Cast. With your pardons, spare me
For this time, grant me license to look on.
Command your pleasures, Lady, -- every one hand
Your Partner -- nay, Spadone, must make one.
These merriments are free.

Spa. With all my heart, I Am sure I am not the heaviest
In the company.
Strike up for the honor of the Bride and Bridegroom.

Dance. Troy. So, so, here is art in motion: on all parts,
Ye have bestir'd ye nimbly,

Mor. I could dance now,
Ecne till I dropped again; but want of practice
Denies the scope of breath or so, yet sirrah,
My Cattamountaine, do not I trip quickly,
And with a grace too, sirrah.

Sec. Light as a feather.

Spa. Sure you are not without a stick of Licorice in your pocket forsooth; you
have I believe stout lungs of your own, you swim about so roundly without
rubs; it is a tickling sight to be young still.


Enter NITIDO. Nit. Madam Morosa?


Mor. Child.


Nit. To you in secret.


Spa. That eare-wig scatters the troop now, I Will go near to fit'em.


Live. My Lord upon my life.


Troy. Then we must sever.


Mor. Ladies and gentlemen, your ears.


Spa. Oh 'twas ever a wanton monkey -- a' will wriggle into a starting hole so
cleanely -- and it had bin on my wedding day, -- I know what I know.


Sec. Say so Spadone?


Spa. Nothing, nothing, I prate sometimes beside the purpose, whoreson
lecherous weezill?


Sec. Look, look, look how officious the little knave is -- but --


Spa. Why? there is the business, Buts on ones forehead, are but scurvie Buts.


Mor. Spadone, discharge the fiddlers instantly.


Spa. Yes, I know my postures-oh monstrous Buts.

Exit.
Mor. Attend within, Sweeting, -- your pardons
Gentlemen; to your recreations dear virgins:
Page have a care,

Nit. My duty reverend Madam.

Troy. Livio away -- sweet beauties.

Cast. Brother.

Live. Suddenly I shall return, 'now for a round temptation.

Mor. One gentle word in private with your Ladyship. I shall
Not hold you long.
Ex. severally Morosa stays Castamela.
Cast. What means this huddle
Of flying several ways thus? who has frighted 'em?
They live not at devotion here, or pension!
Pray quit me of distrust.

Mor. May it please your Goodness,
You Will find him even in every point as honorable,
As flesh and blood can vouch him:

Cast. Ha, him? whom?
What him?

Mor. He will not press beyond his bounds.
He will but chat and toy, and feel your --

Cast. Guard me,
A powerful Genius! feel --

Mor. Your hands to kiss them.
Your fair, pure, white hands, what strange business is it?
These melting twins of Ivory, but softer
Then down of Turtles, shall but feed the appetite --

Cast. A rape upon my ears.

Mor. The appetite
Of his poor ravished eye; should he swell higher
In his desires, and soar upon ambition
Of rising in humility, by degrees;
Perhaps a' might crave leave to clap --

Cast. Fond woman,
In thy grave sinful,

Mor. Clap or pat the dimples,
Where Loves tomb stands erected on your cheeks.
Else pardon those slight exercises, pretty one,
His Lordship is as harmless a weak implement,
As ere young Lady trembled under.

Cast. Lordship!
(Stead me my modest anger) it is belike then
Religious matron) some great man's prison,
Where Virgins honors suffer Martyrdom.
And you are their tormentor; let us lay down
Our ruined names to the insulters mercy!
Let Us sport and smile on scandal (rare calamity,
What have thou toiled me in?) you named his Lordship,
Some gallant youth and fiery?

Mor. No, no deed la.
A very grave stale Bachelor (my dainty one)
There Is the conceit: He Is none of your hot rovers,
Who ruffle at first dash, and so disfigure
Your Dresses, and your sets of blush at once.
He Is wise in years, and of a temperate warmth;
Mighty in means and power: and withal liberal.
A wanton in his wishes, but else, farther,
A' cannot -- cause -- a' cannot.

Cast. Cannot, prithee,
Be plainer: I begin to like thee strangely.
What cannot?

Mor. You urge timely, and to purpose,
A' cannot do -- the truth is truth -- do, any thing,
(As one should say) that is any thing, put case
(I do but put the case forsooth) a' find ye.

Cast. My stars I thank ye, for being ignorant,
Of what this old in mischief can intend.
And so we might be merry, bravely merry.

Mor. You hit it -- what else -- she is cunning -- look ye,
Pray lend your hand forsooth.

Cast. Why prithee take it.

Mor. You have a delicate moist palm -- umh -- can ye relish that tickle?
there.


Cast. And laugh if need were.

Mor. And laugh, why now you have it, what hurt pray
Perceive ye? there is all, all, go to, you want tutoring,
Are an apt scholar, I Will neglect no pains
For your instruction.

Cast. Do not, but his Lordship,
What may his Lordship be?

Mor. No worse man
Then marquess of Siena, the great Master
Of this small family, your master found him,
A bounteous benefactor, has advanced him,
The gentleman o'th horse, in a shot time
He means to visit you himself in person,
As kind, as loving, an old man.

Cast. We Will meet him
With a full flame of welcome, is it the Marquess?
No worse?

Mor. No worse I can assure your Ladyship,
The only free maintainer of the Fancies.

Cast. Fancies? How mean ye that.

Mor. The pretty souls
Who are companions in the house, all daughters
To honest virtuous parents, and right worshipful.
A kind of chaste collapsed Ladies.

Cast. Chaste too, and yet collapsed?

Mor. Only in their fortunes.

Cast. Sure I must be a Fancy in the number.

Mor. A Fancy principal, I hope you will fashion
Your entertainment, when the Marquess courts you,
As that I may stand blameless.

Cast. Free suspicion. My Brothers rayser?

Mor. Merely.

Cast. My supporter?

Mor. Undoubtedly.

Cast. An old man and a lover?

Mor. True, there is the Music, the content, the harmony.

Cast. And I my self a Fancy?

Mor. You are pregnant.

Cast. The chance is thrown, I now am fortunes minion,
I will be bold and resolute.

Mor. Blessing on thee.
Exeunt.
Actus III.
Enter ROMANELLO. Romans Prosper me now my fate; some better genius
Then such a one, as waits on troubled passions,
Direct my courses to a noble issue.
My thoughts have wandered in a labyrinth,
But if the clew I have laid hold on, fail not,
I shall tred out the toil of these dark paths
In spite of politic reaches -- I am punished
In mine own hopes, by her unluckie fortunes,
Whose same is ruined; Flavia, my lost sister!
Lost to report, by her unworthy husband,
Enter Nitido. Though hightned by a greatness, in whose mixtures,
I hate to claim a part -- Oh welcome, welcome,
Dear boy! thou keep'st time with my expectations
As justly, as the promise of my bounties
Shall reckon with thy service.

Nit. I have fashioned the means of your admitance.

Romans Precious Nitido.

Nit. More, have bethought me of a shape, a quaint one,
You may appear in, safe and unsuspected.

Romans Thou Art an ingenious boy.

Nit. Beyond all this;
Have so contrived the feate, that at first sight,
Troylo himself shall court your entertainment:
Nay, force you to vouchsafe it.

Romans Thou Have out done all counsel, and all cunning.

Nit. True, I have sir
Fadg'd nimbly in my practices: but surely,
There are some certain clogs, some roguish staggers,
Somewhat shall I call em in the business?

Romans Nitido,
What faint now? dear heart bear up, what staggers,
What clogs? let me romove 'em.

Nit. Am I honest
In this discovery?

Romans Honest, pish is that all?
By this rich purse, and by the twenty ducats
Which line it, I will answer for thy honesty,
Against all Italy, and prove it perfect,
Besides, remember, I am bound to secrefie.
Thou't not betray thy self.

Nit. All fears are cleared then.
But if --

Romans If what? out with it.

Nit. If we are discovered,
You Will answer I am honest still?

Romans Do doubt it?

Nit. Not much; I have your purse in pawn fort.
Now to the shape, and know the wits in Florence,
Who in the great Dukes court, buffoones his complement,
According to the change of meats in season,
At every free Lords table,

Romans Or free meetings
In Tavernes, there a' sits at the upper end,
And eats, and prates, a' cares not how nor what.
The very quaik of fashions, the very he that
Wears a Steletto on his chinne.

Nit. You have him.
Like such a thing must you appear, and study
Amongst the Ladies in a formal soppery,
To vent some curiosity of language,
Above their appehensions, or your own,
Indeed beyond sense, you are the more the person.
Now amorous, then scurvie, sometimes bawdy,
The same man still, but evermore fantastical,
As being the suppositor to laughter:
It has saved charge in physic.

Romans When occasion
Offers it self (forwhere it does or not,
I will be bold to take it) I may turn
To some one in the company; and changing
My Method talk of state, and rail against
Th'imployment of the time, mislike the carriage
Of places, and mislike that men of parts,
Of merit, such as my self am, are not
Thrust into public action: 'twill set off
A privilege I challenge from opinion,
With a more lively current.

Nit. On my Modesty,
You are some kin to him -- Seignior Prugnioli!
Seignior Mushrumpo!
Leap but into his anticke garb, and trust me
You Will fit it to a thought.

Romans The time?

Nit. As suddenly
As you can be transformed, -- for the event,
It Is pregnant.

Romans Yet my pretty knave, thou have not
Discovered where fair Castamela lives;
Nor how, nor amongst whom.

Nit. Pish, it more Queres,?
Till your own eyes inform, be silent, else
Take back your earnest, what, turn woman? fie;
Be idle and inquisitive?

Romans No more.
I shall be speedily provided, ask for
A note at mine own lodging.
Exit.
Nit. I Will not fail ye,
Assuredly, I will not fail you Seignior;
My fine in amorato -- twenty duccats?
They Are half his quarters incombe -- love, oh love,
What a pure madness art thou? I shall fit him,
Fit, quit and split him too -- most bounteous sir.

Enter Troylo. Troy. Boy, thou art quick and trusty,
Be withal close and silent, and thy pains
Shall meet a liberal addition.

Nit. Though sir,
I Am but a child, yet you shall find me --

Troy. man
In the contrivements; I will speak for thee.
Well 'adoes relish the disguise!

Nit. Most greedily
Swallows it with a licourish delight:
Will instantly be shaped in it instantly,
And on my conscience, sir, the supposition
Strengthened by supposition, will trans form him
Into the beast it self 'a does resemble.

Troy. Spend that, and look for more boy.

Nit. Sir, it needs not:
I have already twenty Ducats pursed
In a gay case, alas sir, to you, my service
Is but my duty.

Troy. Modesty in Pages
Shows not a virtue, boy, when it exceeds
Good manners. Where must we meet?

Nit. Sir at's lodging,
Or near about: he will make haste believe it.

Troy. Wait th'opportunity, and give me notice.
I shall attend.

Nit. If I miss my part, hang me.
Exit.
Enter Vospuci and Camillo. Ves. Come thou art caught Camillo.

Came. Away, away,
That were a jest indeed; I caught?

Ves. The Lady
Does scatter glances, wheels her round, and smiles;
Steals an occasion to ask how the minutes
Each hour have run in progress; then, thou kissest
All thy four fingers, crowchest and sighst faintly:
Dear beauty, if my watch keep fair decorum,
Three quarters have near past the figure X.
Or as the time of day goes --

Came. So Vespuci,
This will not do, I read it on thy forehead,
The grain of thy complexion is quite altered.
Once 'twas a comely brown, it is now of late
A perfect green and yellow; sure prognosticates
Of th'over flux o'th gall, and melancholy,
Symptoms of love and jealousy, poor soul.
Quoth she, the she, why hang thy looks like bel-ropes
Out of the wheels? thou flinging down thy eyes
Low at her feet, replid'st, because, oh Sovereign
The great bell of my heart is cracked, and never
Can ring in tune again, till't be new cast
By one only skillful Foundresse. -- hereat
She turned aside, winked, thou stood'st still and stard'st
I did observ't, be plain, what hope?

Vesp. She loves thee;
Doates on thee: in my hearing told her Lord
Camillo was the Piramus and Thisbe
Of Courtship, and of complement: ah ha!
She nicked it there. I envy not thy fortunes;
For to say truth, thou art hansome, and deserve her,
Were she as great again as she is.

Came. I hansome?
Alas, alas, a creature of heavens making,
There Is all! but sirrah, prithee let us be sociable;
I do confess, I think the goodee-madame
May possibly be compast; I resolve too,
To put in for a share; come what can come on it.

Vesp. A pretty toy it is, since thou art open brested,
Camillo I presume she is wanton,
And therefore mean to give the sowse, when ever
I find the game on wing.

Came. Let us consider,
She Is but a merchants leavings.

Ves. Hatched in the country,
And fledged in the City.

Came. It Is a common custom
Amongst friends (they are not friends else) chiefly gallants,
To trade by turns in such like frail commodities.
The one is but reversioner to the other.

Ves. Why it is the fashion man.

Came. Most free and proper,
One Surgeon, one apothecarie.

Ves. Thus then;
When I am absent, use the gentlest memory
Of my endowments, my unblemish't services
To Ladies favors: with what Faith and secrecy.
I live in her commands, whose special courtesies,
Oblige me to particular engagements.
I Will do as much for thee.

Came. With this addition
Camillo (best of faires) a man so bashful,
So simply harmless, and withal so constant,
Yet resolute in all! true rights of honor;
That to deliver him in perfect character,
Wereto detract from such a solid virtue
As reigns not in another soul -- he is

Ves. The thing a Mistress ought to wish her servant;
Are we agreed?

Came. Most readily on the other side,
Unto the Lord her husband, talk as coursely
Of one another as we can.

Ves. I like it, so shall we sift her love, and his opinion.

Enter Iulio, Flavia, and Fabritio. Iulio Be thankful (fellow) to a noble
Mistress;
Two hundred ducats are no trifling sum,
Nor common alms.

Fla. You must not loyter lazily,
And speak about the town my friend in tavernes,
In gaming houses, nor sneake after dinner
To public shows, to interludes, in riot,
To some lewd painted baggage, trick't up gawdily,
Like one of us; oh fie upon 'em giblets!
I have bin told they ride in coaches, flaunt it
In brave ries, so rich, that it is scarce possible
How to distinguish one of these vile naughty packs,
From true and arrant Ladies -- they will inveigle
Your substance and your body, think on that,
I say your body, look to it,
Is It not sound counsel?

Iu. It Is more, it is heavenly.

Ves. What hope Camillo now if this tune hold?

Came. Hope fair enough, Vespuci, now as ever:
Why any Woman in her husbands presence
Can say no less.

Ves. It Is true, and she has leave here.

Fab. Madam, your care and charity at once,
Have so new molded my resolves,
That henceforth when e're my mention
Falls into report,
It shall requite this bounty, I am traveling
To a new world.

Iu. I like your undertakings.

Fla. New world, where is that I pray? good, if you light on
A Parrot or a Monkey that has qualities
Of a new fashion, think on me.

Fab. Yes, Lady
I, I shall think on you; and my devotions
Tendered where they are due in single meekenes,
With purer flames will mount with free increase
Of plenty, honors, full contents, full blessings,
Truth and affection twixt your Lord and you.
So with my humblest best leave, I turn from you,
Never as now I am to appear before ye.
All joys dwell here and lasting.
Exit.
Fla. Prithee sweetest
Hark in your ear -- beshrew't, the brim of your hat
Struck in mine eye -- Dissemble honest tears
The griefs my heart does labor in -- smarts
Vnmeasurably.

Iul. A chance, a chance, 'twill off;
Suddenly off, forbear, this handkercher
But makes it worse.

Came. Wincke madam with that eye.
The pain will quickly pass.

Vesp. Immediately,
I know it by experience.

Fla. Yes, I find it.

Iul. Spare us a little Gentlemen: speak freely.
Ex. Ca. Ve. What were thou saying dearest?

Fla. Do you love me?
Answer in sober sadness, I Am your wife now;
I know my place and power.

Iul. What Is this riddle?
Thou have thy self replied to thine own question,
In being married to me, a sure argument
Of more then protestation.

Fla. Such it should be
Were you as other husbands: it is granted,
A woman of my state may like good clothes,
Choice diet, many servants, change of merriments,
All these I do enjoy; and wherefore not?
Great Ladies should command their own delights,
And yet for all this, I am used but homely,
But I am served even well enough.

Iul. My Flavia
I understand not what thou would

Fla. Pray pardon me;
I do confess I Am foolish, very foolish;
Trust me indeed I am, for I could cry
Mine eyes out, being in the weeping humor:
You know I have a Brother.

Iv. Romanello,
An unkind Brother.

Fla. Right, right, since you bosomed
My latter youth, he never would vouchsafe
As much as to come near me. Oh, it mads me,
Being but two, that we should live at distance;
As if I were a Castaway, and you
For your part take no care on it nor attempted
To draw him hither.

Iu. Say the man be peevish,
Must I petition him?

Fla. Yea marry must ye,
Or else you love not me; not see my Brother?
Yes I will see him, so I will, will see him.
You hear't, -- oh my good Lord, dear gentle, prithee,
You shall not be angry; alas I know poor Gentleman,
A bears a troubled mind: but let us meet
And talk a little, we perhaps may chide
At first, shed some few tears, and then be quiet;
There Is all.

Iu. Write to him, and invite him hither,
Or go to him thy self. Come, no more sadness,
I Will do what thou can wish.

Fla. And in requital,
Believe I shall say something that may settle
A constancy of peace, for which thou wilt thank me.
Exit.
Enter SECCO and SPADONE. Secco. The rarest fellow, Spadone, so full of
gamballs, a talks so humorously, does a not, so carelessely? Oh rich! o, my
hope of posterity! I could be in love with him.


Spadone. His tongue troules like a Mill-clack: a towzes the Lady sisters, as a
tumbling Dog does young Rabets; hey here, dab there, your Madona; a has a catch
at her too: There Is a trick in the business; I am a dunce, else I say a
shrewd one.


Sec. Iumpe with me, I smell a trick too, if I could tell what.


Spa. Who brought him in? that would be known?


Sec. That did signior Troylo; I saw the Page part at the door; some trick
still, go to Wife, I must and I will have an eye to this geere.


Spa. A plain case, Roguery, Brokage and Roguery, or call me Bulchin. Fancies,
quoth a? rather Frenzies. We shall all rore shortly: turn madcaps, lie open to
what comes first I may stand to it. That boy Page, is a naughty boy Page; let me
feel your forehead, ha, oh, hum, -- yes -- there, -- there again; I Am sorry
for ye, a hand-saw cannot cure ye, monstrous and apparent.


Sec. What, what, what, what, what Spadone?


Spa. What what what what, nothing but Velvet tips you are of the first head
yet: have a good heart man, a Cuckold though a be a Beast, wears invisible
horns; else we might know a City Bull from a Country Calfe, -- villainous Boy
still.


Sec. My Razer shall be my weapon, my Razer.


Spa. Why? he is not come to the honor of a Beard yet, he needs no shaving.


Sec. I will trim him and tram him.


Spa. Nay she may do well enoughs for one.


Sec. One, ten, a hundred, a thousand; ten thousand: do beyond Arithmetic
Spadone, I speak it with some passion, I am a notorious Cuckold.


Spa. Gross and ridiculous, -- look ye, point blanck I dare not swear that
this same Mountbancking newcome foyst, is at least a procurer in the business;
if not a pretender himself: but I think what I think.


Sec. He, Troylo, Livio, the Page, that hole-creeping Page; all horn me
sirrah; I Will forgive thee from my heart: Do not thou drive a trade too in my
bottom.


Spa. A likely matter, alas I Am Metamorphosed I, be patient you will mar all
else.


Within. Ha ha ha ha.


Sec. Now, now, now, now, the games rampant, rampant.


Spa. Leave your wild fegaries, and learn to be a tame Antic, or I Will observe
no longer.


Within. Ha ha ha ha.


Enter Troylo, Castamela, Floria, Clarella Silvia, Morosa, and Romanello, like
a Courtly Mountebanck. Sil. You are extremely busy signior.

Flo. Courtly,
Without a fellow.

Cla. Have a stabbing wit.

Cast. But are you always, whenyou press on Ladies
Of mild and easy nature, so much satyr;
So tart and keen as we do taste ye now?
It argues a lean brain.

Romans Gip to your beauties,
You would be fair forsooth, you would be Monsters;
Fair Women are such, Monsters to be seen
Are rare, and so are they.

Troy. Bear with him Ladies.

Mor. He is a foul-mouthed man.

Sec. Whore, bitch -- Fox, treedle -- fa la la la --

Mor. How Is that my Cat a Mountain?

Spa. Hold her there Boy.

Cla. Were you ere in love fine Signior?

Romans Yes for sports sake;
But soon forgot it. He that rides a gallop
Is quickly weary. I esteem of Love
As of a man in some huge place; it puzzles
Reason, distracts the freedom of the soul;
Renders a wise man fool, and a fool wise
In's own conceit, not else it yields effects
Of pleasure travail, bitter, sweet; war, peace;
Thorns, roses; prayers, curses; longings, surfets;
Despair, and then a rope: oh my trim lover,
Yes, I have loved a score at once.

Spa. Out stallion, as I am a man and no man, the Baboon lies I dare swear
abominably.


Sec. Inhumanly, -- keep your bow close, vixen.

Mor. Beshrew your fingers if you be in earnest:
You pinch too hard, go to, I Will pare your nails for it.

Spa. She means your horns, there is a bob for you.

Cla. Spruice Signior, if a man may love so many,
Why may not a fair Lady have like privilege
Of several servants?

Troy. Answer that, the reason
Holds the same weight.

Mor. Marry and so it does,
Tho he would spit his gall out.

Spa. Mark that Secc0.

Sil. De'e pumpe for a reply?

R. The learned differ
In that point; grand and famous Scholars often
Have argued pro and con, and left it doubtful;
Volumes have been writ on it. If then great Clerks
Suspend their resolutions, it is a modesty
For me to silence mine.

Fla. Dull and phlegmatic.

Cla. Yet Women sure in such a case are ever
More secret then men are.

Sil. Yea and talk less.

Romans That is a truth much fabled, never found
You secret? when your Dresses blab your vanities;
Carnation for your Points? there is a gross babbler:
Tawny, hey ho, the pretty heart is wounded.
A knot of Willow Ribbands she is forsaken?
Another rides the Cock-horse, green and azure,
Wince and cry we he like a Colt unbroken:
But desperate black puts em in mind of fish days;
When Lent spurs on Devotion, there is a famine:
Yet love and judgment may help all this pudder.
Where are they? not in females?

Flo. In all sorts of men no doubt.

Sil. Else they were sots to choose.

Cla. To swear and flatter, sometimes ly for profit.

To. Not so forsooth, should love and judgment meet,
The old, the fool; the ugly and deformed
Could never be beloved; for example,
Behold these two; this Madam and this shaver.

Mor. I do defy thee; am I old or ugly?

Sec. Tricks, knacks, devices, now it troules about.

Romans Troule let it stripling, thou have yet firm footing
And needst not fear the Cuckolds livory.
There Is good Philosophy fort, take this for comfort,
No horned Beasts have teeth in either gummes:
But thou art toothed on both sides, tho she fail in it.

Mor. He Is not jealous Sirrah.

Romans That Is his Fortune,
Women indeed more jealous are then Men;
But men have more cause.

Spa. There a rubbed your forehead, 'twas a tough blow.

Sec. It smarts.

Mor. Pox on him, let him
Put's finger into any Gums of mine,
He shall find I have teeth about me, sound ones.

Sec. You are a scurvie fellow, and I am made a Cokes, an Ass; and this same
filthy Cron's a flirt. Whope do me no harm good Woman.

Exit Secco and Spadane.
Spa. Now now he is in, I must not leave him so.

Troy. Morosa, what means this?

Mor. I know not I,
He pinched me, called me names, most filthy names.
Will ye part hence Sir, I will set ye packing.
Exit.
Cla. You were indeed too broad, too violent.

Flo. Here Is nothing meant but mirth.

Sil. The Gentleman
Has been a little pleasant.

Cla. Somewhat bitter
Against our sex.

Cast. For which I promise him
A nere proves choice of mine.

Romans Not I your choice.

Troy. So she protested Signior.

Romans Indeed.

Enters MOROSA. Cla. Why you are moved Sir?

Mor. Hence, there enters
A civiller companion for fair Ladies
Then such a sloven.

To. Beauties.

Troy. Time prevents us,
Love and sweet thoughts accompany this presence.

Enter Octavio, Secco whispering him, Livio and Nitido. Octa. Enough, slip off,
and on your life be secret.
Exit Secco. A lovely day, young creatures. To you Floria;
To you Clarella, Silvia, to all service:
But who is this fair stranger?

Li. Castamela,
My Sister, noble Lord.

Oct. Let ignorance
Of what you were, plead my neglect of manners,
And this soft touch excuse it, you have enriched
This little family (most excellent Virgin)
With the honor of your company.

Cast. I find them
Worthily graceful Sir.

Li. Are ye so taken?

Oct. Here are no public sights nor Courtly visitants,
Which youth and active blood might stray in thought for:
The companies are few, the pleasures single,
And rarely to be brook'd, perhaps by any;
Not perfectly acquainted with this custom,
Are they not lovely one?

Li. Sir, I dare answer
My sisters resolution. Free converse
Amongst so many of her Sex, so virtuous,
She ever has preferred before the surquedry
Of protestation, or the vainer giddiness
Of popular attendants.

Music. Cast. Well played Brother.

Oct. The meaning of this Music.

Mor. Please your Lordship,
It is the Ladies hour for exercise
In Song and Dance.

Oct. I dare not be the Author
Of trewanting the time then, neither will I.

Mor. Walk on dear Ladies.

Oct. It Is a task of pleasure.

Li. Be now my Sister, stand a trial bravely:

Mor. Remember my instructions, or --

Exit. Manet Octa. and Castamela. Oct. With pardon.
You are not of the number I presume yet,
To be enjoined to hours. If you please,
We for a little while may sit as Judges
Of their proficience, pray vouchsafe the favor.

Cast. I am Sir in a place to be commanded,
As now the present urges.

Oct. No compulsion,
That were too hard a word; where you are Sovereign
Your yea and nay is Law: I have a suit tee.

Cast. For what Sir?

Oct. For your love.

Cast. To whom? I am not
So weary of the authority I hold
Over mine own contents in sleeps and wakings;
That I Would resign my liberty to any
Who should control it.

Oct. Neither I intend so,
Grant me an entertainment.

Cast. Of what nature?

Oct. To aknowledge me your creature.

Cast. Oh my Lord.
You are too wise in years, too full of counsel
For my green inexperience.

Oct. Love dear Maid,
Is but desire of beauty, and it is proper
For beauty to desire to be beloved.
I am not free from passion, tho the current
Of a more lively heat runs slowly through me,
My heart is gentle, and believe fresh Girl:
Thou shall not wish for any full addition,
Which may adorn thy rarities to boast em;
That bounty can, withhold this Academy.
Of silent pleasures is maintained, but only
To such a constant use.

Cast. You have belike then
A Patent for concealing Virgins, otherwise
Make plainer your intentions.

Oct. To be pleasant
In practice of some outward senses only
No more.

Cast. No, worse you dare not to imagine;
Where such an awful Innocence, as mine is,
Out-faces every wickedness, your dotage
Has lul'd you in. I scent your cruel mercies,
Your factresse has been tampering for my misery;
Your old temptation; your shee-Devill -- bear with
A language which this place, and none but this, has
Infected my tongue with. The time will come too,
When he (unhappy man) whom your advancement
Has ruined by being Spannell to your fortunes,
Will curse a trained me hither -- Livio,
I must not call him Brother; this one act
Has rent him off the ancestry he sprung from.

Oct. The proffer of a noble courtesy
Is checked it seems.

Cast. A courtesy? a bondage;
You are a great man vicious, much more vicious,
Because you hold a seeming league with charity
Of pestilent nature, keeping hospitality
For sensualists in your own Sepulcher,
Even by your life time: yet are dead already.

Oct. How Is this, come be more mild.

Cast. You chide me soberly,
Then Sir I tune my voice to other Music;
You are an eminent statist, be a Father
To such unfriended Virgins, as your bounty
Has drawn into a scandal, you are powerful
In means. A Batchelour, freed from the jelousies
Of wants, convert this privacie of maintenance
Into your own Court: let this (as you call it)
Your Academy have a residence there;
And there survey your charity your self:
That when you shall bestow on worthy husbands
With fitting portions, such as you know worthy;
You may yield to the present age example,
And to posterity a glorious Chronicle:
There were a work of piety: the other is
A scorn upon your Tombe-stone; where the Reader
Will but expound, that when you lived you pander'd
Your own purse and your same. I am too bold Sir,
Some anger and some pity has directed
A wandering trouble.

Oct. Be not known what passages
The time has lent, for once I can bear with ye.

Cast. I Will countenance the hazard of suspicion.
And be your guest a while.

Oct. Be -- but hereafter --
I know not what -- Livio.

Enter LIVIO and MOROSA. Li. My Lord.

Cast. Indeed Sir
I cannot part we'e yet.

Oct. Well then thou shall not,
My precious Castamela -- thou have a Sister,
A prefect Sister Livio.

Mor. All is inck'd here
Good soul indeed.

Li. I Would speak with you anon.

Cast. It may be so.

Oct. Come fair one.

Li. Oh I am cheated.

Exeunt omnes. ACT. IIII.
Enter LIVIO and CASTAMELA. Li. PRithee be serious.

Cast. Prithee interupt not
The Paradise of my becharming thoughts,
Which mount my knowledge to the sphere I move in,
Above this useless tattle.

Li. Tattle? Sister,
Dee know to whom you talk this?

Cast. To the Gentleman
Of my Lords Horse, new stepped into the Office:
It Is a good place Sir, if you can be thankful.
Demean your carriage in it, so that negligence
Or pride of your preferment oversway not
The grace you hold in his esteem. Such fortunes
Drop not down every day; observe the favor
That raised you to this fortune.

Li. Thou mistak'st sure
What person thou holdst speech with.

Cast. Strange and idle.

Li. Is It possible? why? you are turned a Mistress,
A Mistress of the trim; beshrew me Lady
You keep a stately Port, but it becomes you not:
Our Fathers Daughter, if I err not rarely,
Delighted in a softer humbler sweetness:
Not in a hey-de-gay of scurvey Gallantry.
You do not brave it like a thing oth' fashion;
You Ape the humor faintly.

Cast. Love dear Maid
Is but desire of beauty, and it is proper
For beauty to desire to be beloved.

Li. Fine sport, you mind not me; will you yet hear me Madam?

Cast. Thou shall not wish for any full addition,
Which may adorn thy rarities to boast em:
That bounty can withold -- I know I shall not.

Li. And so you clapped the bargain, the conceit on it
Tickles your contemplation. It Is come out now,
A Woman's tongue I see, some time or other
Will prove her Traitor: This was all I sifted,
And here have found thee wretched.

Cast. We shall flourish.
Feed high henceforth, man, and no more be streightend
Within the limits of an empty patience:
Nor tire our feeble eyes with gazing only
On greatness, which enjoyes the swindge of pleasures.
But be our selves the object of their envy,
To whom a service would have seemed ambition.
It was thy cunning Livio, I applaud it,
Fear nothing; I Will be thrifty in thy projects:
Want misery? may all such want as think on it;
Our footing shall stand firm.

Li. You are much witty.
Why Caestamcla, this to me? you counterfeit
Most palpablie. I am too well acquainted
With thy condition Sister; if the Marquess
Has uttered one unchaste, one wanton syllable,
Provoking thy contempt: not all the flatteries
Of his assurance to our hopes of rising,
Can or shall slave our souls.

Cast. Indeed not so Sir,
You are beside the point, most gentle Signior,
I Will be no more your ward, no longer chamber'd,
Nor mewed up to the lure of your Devotion:
Trust me, I must not, will not, dare not; surely
I cannot for my promise past; and sufferance
Of former trialls has too strongly armed me:
You may take this for answer.

Li. In such earnest?
Has goodness left thee quite? fool thou art wandering
In dangerous fogges, which will corrupt the purity
Of every noble virtue dwelt within thee.
Come home again, home Castamela Sister;
Home to thine own simplicity, and rather
Then yield thy memory up to the Witchcraft
Of an abused confidence; be courted
For Romanello.

Cast. Romanello.

Li. Scornst thou
The name? thy thoughts I find then are changed rebels
To all that is honest, that is to truth and honor.

Cast. So Sir, and in good time.

Li. Thou art fallen suddenly
Into a plurisie of faithless impudence;
A whorish itch infects thy blood; a leprosy
Of raging lust, and thou art mad to prostitute
The glory of thy Virgin dower basely
For common sale. This foulness must be purged,
Or thy disease will ranckle to a pestilence,
Which can even taint the very air about thee:
But I shall study Physic.

Cast. Learn good manners:
I take it you are saucy.

Li. Saucy? strumpet
In thy desires: it is in my power to cut off
The twist thy life is spunne by.

Cast. Phew, you rave now:
But if you have not perished all your reason,
Know I will use my freedom; you (forsooth)
For change of fresh apparel, and the pocketting
Of some well looking Duccats, were contented,
Passinglie pleased, yes marry were you (mark it)
To expose me to the danger now you rail at.
Brought me, nay forced me hither, without question
Of what might follow, here you find the issue:
And I distrust not but it was the appointment
Of some succeeding fate that more concerned me
Then widdowed virginity.

Li. You are a gallant
One of my old Lord Fancies. Peevish girl
Was It ever heard that youth could doat on sickness,
A gray beard, wrinckled face, a dried up marrow,
A toothlesse head, -- a -- this is but a merriment,
Merely but trial. Romanello loves thee,
Has not abundance, true, yet cannot want.
Return with me, and I will leave these fortunes,
Good Maid, of gentle nature.

Cast. By my hopes,
I never placed affection on that Gentleman,
Tho a deserved well; I have told him often
My resolution.

Li. Will you hence, and trust to
My care of settling you a peace.

Cast. No surely,
Such treaty may break off.

Li. Off be it broken,
I Will do what thou shall rue.

Cast. You cannot Livio.

Li. So confident? young Mistress mine, I Will do it.
Exit.
Enter TROYLO. Troy. Incomparable Maid.

Cast. You have been Counselor
To a strange Dialogue.

Troy. If there be constancy
In protestation of a virtuous nature;
You are secure, as the effects shall witness.

Cast. Be noble, I am credulous, my language
Has prejudiced my heart; I and my Brother
Nere parted at such distance; yet I glory
In the fair race he runs: but fear the violence
Of his disorder.

Troy. Little time shall quit him.

Enter Secco leading Nitido in a Garter with one hand, a Rod in his other;
followed by Morosa, Silvia, Floria, Clarella; Spadone behind laughing. Sec. The
young Whelp is mad, I must slice the worm out of his breech: I have noos'd his
neck in the Collar; and I will once turn Dog-leech. Stand from about me, or
you will find me terrible and furious.


Nit. Ladies good Ladies, dear Madam Morosa.


Flo. Honest Secco.


Sil. What was the cause? what wrong has he done to thee?


Cla. Why do thou fright us so, and art so peremptory where we are present
fellow?


Mor. Honey-bird, Spouse, Catamountaine; ah the Child, the pretty poor Child;
the sweet faced Child.


Spa. That very word halters the eare-wig.


Sec. Off I say, or I shall lay bare all the naked truth to your faces: his
foreparts have been so lusty, and his posterions must do penance for it:
Untruss Whiskin untrusse; away burres, out Mare-hagge moyle; avaunt, thy turn
comes next, avaunt thy turn comes next; avaunt the Horns of my rage are
advanced; hence or I shall gore ye.


Spa. Lash him soundly, let the little Ape show tricks.


Nie. Help, or I shall be throtled.


Mor. Yes, I will help thee pretty heart, if my tongue cannot prevail; my
nails shall. Barbarous minded man, let go, or I shall use my tallons.


Spa. Well played Dog, well played Bear, sa, sa, sa; to it to it.


Sec. Fury, whore, baud, my Wife and the Devil.


Mor. Tospot, stinckard, pander, my husband and a rascal.


Spa. Scould Coxcombe, baggage, Cuckold.
Crabed Age and Youth
Cannot jumpe together:
One is like good luck,
The Other like foul weather.

Troy. Let us fall in now: What uncivil rudeness
Dares offer a disturbance to this company.
Peace and delights dwell here, not brawles and outrage:
Sirrah be sure you show some reasons why
You so forget your duty? quickly show it,
Or I shall tame your choler; what is the ground on it?

Spa. Humh how is that? how is that? is he there with a Wanion? Then do I begin
to dwindle, -- O oh, the fit, the fit; the fits upon me now, now now now.


Sec. It shall out. First then know all Christian people Jews and Infidels,
he is and she is, by these presents, that I am a beast; see what I say, I say a
very beast.


Troy. It Is granted.


Sec. Go to then, a horned beast: a goodly tall horned beast in pure verity a
Cuckold: nay I will tickle their Trangdidoes.


Mor. Ah thou base fellow! would thou confess it and it were so: but it is
not so, and thou lie and lowdly.


Troy. Patience Morosa, you are you say a Cuckold.


Sec. He justify my words; I scorn to eat em: this sucking Ferret has been
wrigling in my old Coney borough.


Mor. The Boy, the Babe, the Infant; I spit at thee.


Cast. Fie Secco fie.


Sec. Appear Spadone, my proofs are pregnant and gross: truth is the truth;
I must and I will be divorced. speak Spadone and exalt thy voice.


Spa. Who I speak, alas I cannot speak I.


Nit. As I hope to live to be a man.


Sec. Dambe the prick of thy weason Pipe: where but two lie in a bed you must
be Bodkin bitch-baby must ye. Spadone, am I a Cuckold or no Cuckold?


Spa. Why? you know I an ignorant unable trifle in such business; an Oafe, a
simple Alcatote; an Innocent.


Sec. Nay nay nay, no matter for that; this Ramkin has tup'd my old rotten
carrion Mutton.


Mor. Rotten in thy maw, thy guts and garbage.


Sec. Spadone speak alowd what I am.


Spa. I do not know.


Sec. What have thou seen em doing together? doing.


Spa. Nothing.


Mor. Are thy mad brains in thy mazar now, thou jealous Bedlam?


Sec. Did not thou from time to time tell me as much?


Spa. Never.


Sec. Hoyday, Ladies and Signior I am abused, they are agreed to scorn jeere
and run me out of my wits; by consent this gelded hobet a hoy is a corrupted
Pander: the page a milk liverd Dildo; my Wife a Whore confessed; and I my self
a Cuckold arrant.


Spa. Truly Secco for the ancient good Woman; I dare swear point-blanck; and
the Boy surely, I ever said was to any man's thinking, a very Chrisome in the
thing you wot, that is my opinion clearly.


Cla. What a wise goose-cap have thou showed thy self?


Sec. Here in my forehead it sticks, and stick it shall. law I will have; I
will never more tumble in sheets with thee; I will father no mis-begotten of
thine; the Court shall trounce thee, the City casheere thee, diseases devour
thee, and the Spittle confound thee.

Exit.
Cast. The man has dreamed himself into a lunacie.


Sil. Alas poor Nitido.


Nit. Truly I am innocent.


Mor. Marry art thou, so thou art; the World says how virtuously I have
carried my good name in every part about me, these threescore years and odd;
and at last to slip with a child; there are men, men enough, tough and lusty
(I hope) if one would give their mind to the iniquity of the flesh, but this
is the life I ha'led with him a while since when a lies by me as cold as a dry
stone.


Troy. This only (Ladies) is a fit of noveltie,
All will be reconciled, I doubt, Spadone;
Here is your hand in this how ere denied.

Spa. Faithfully in truth forsooth.


Troy. Well, well enough -- Morosa, be less troubled;
This little jarre is argument of love,
It will prove lasting; Beauties, I attend ye.
Ex. Troy. La.
Spa. Youngling, a word youngling: have not you escaped the lash hansomly?
thank me for it


Nit. I fear thy roguery, and I shall find it.


Spa. Is It possible, give me thy little fist, we are friends; have a care
henceforth, remember this whilst you live. And still the Vrehin would, but
could not do: Pretty knave, and so forth: Come, truce on all hands.


Nit. Beshrew your fools head; this was jest in earnest.

Exeunt.
Enter ROMANELLO. Romans I will converse with beasts; there is in mankind
No sound society, but in woman (bless me)
Nor faith nor reason: I may justly wonder
What trust was in my Mother.

Enter a Servant. Ser. A Caroch, sir,
Stand at the Gate.

Romans Stand let it still, and freeze there:
Make sure the socks.

Ser. Too late, you are prevented.

Enter Flavia, Camilla, and Vespuci. Fla. Brother, I come --

Romans Unlooked for; -- I but sojourne
My self; I keep nor house, nor entertainments,
French Cooks composed, Italian Collations;
Rich Persian surfets, with a train of services,
Befitting exquisite Ladies, such as you are,
Perfume not our low Roofes; -- the way lies open
That there. -- Good day, great Madam.

Fla. Why do you slight me?
For what one act of mine, even from my Childhood,
Which may deliver my deserts inferior
Or to our Births or Family; is Nature
Become, in your contempt of me, a Monster?

Ves. What Is this Camillo!

Came. Not the strain in ordinary.

Romans I Am out of tune to chop discourses -- however,
You are a Woman.

Fla. Pensive and unfortunate,
Wanting a Brothers bosom to dis-burthen
More griefs, then female weakness can keep league with;
Let worst of malice, voye'd in loud report,
Spit what le dares invent against my actions;
And it shall never find a power to blemish
My mention, other then beseemes a patient:
I not repine at lownesses; and the Fortunes
Which I attend on now, are as I value them,
No new creation to a looser liberty:
Your strangenes only may beget a change
In wild opinion.

Came. Here Is another tang of sense, Vespuci.

Ves. Listen and observe,

Romans Are not you pray ye, (nay, we will be contented
In presence of your Vshers, once to prattle.
Some idle minutes) are you not inthroan'd
The Lady Regent, by whose special influence
Iulie the Count of Camerine is ordered?

Fla. His Wife it is known I am; and in that title,
Obedient to a service; else, of greatness
The quiet of my wish was nere ambitious.

Romans He loves you?

Fla. As worthily, as dearly.

Romans And it is believed how practice quickly fashioned
A port of humorous anticknesse in carriage,
Discourse, demeanor, gestures.

Came. Put home roundly.

Ves. A ward for that blow.

Fla. Safety, of mine Honor,
Instructed such deceit.

Romans Your Honor?

Fla. Witness
This brace of sprightly Gallants, whose confederacy
Presumed to plot a siege.

Came. Ves. We, Madam I

Romans On, on,
Some leisure serves us now.

Fla. Still as Lord Iulio
Pursued his Contract with the man (oh pardon
If I forget to name him) by whose poverty
Of honest truth, I was renounced in Marriage.
These two, entrusted for a secret (...),
By tokens, letters, message, in their (...),
Profferd their own devotions, as they (...) them,
Almost unto an impudence; regardlesse
Of him, on whose supportance they (...).

Romans Dare not for both your lives to interrupt her.

Fla. Bayted thus to vexation, I assumed
A dullness of simplicity; till afterward
Lost to my City, Freedom, and now entered
Into this present state of my Condition;
(Concluding henceforth absolute security
From their lascivious Villainies) I continued
My former custom of ridiculous lightness,
As they did their pursuit; t'acquaint my Lord, were
To Have ruined their best certainty of living:
But that might yield suspicion in my nature;
And woman may be virtuous without mischief,
To such as tempt them.

Romans You are much to blame sirs,
Should all be truth is utterd.

Fla. For that Justice
I did command them hither, for a privacie
In conference 'twixt Flavia and her brother
Needed no Secretaries such as these are:
Now Romanello, thou art every refuge
I sly for right to; if I be thy Sister,
And not a Bastard, answer their confession,
Or threaten vengeance, with perpetual silence.

Came. My follies are acknowledged; you are a Lady
Who have outdone example: when I trespass
In ought but duty, and respects of service,
May hopes of joys forsake me.

Ves. To like penance
I join a constant votarie.

Romans Peace then
Is ratified, -- my Sister thou have wakened
Intranc'd affection from its steep to knowledge
Of once more who thou art; no jealous frenzy
Shall hazard a distrust: reign in thy sweetness,
Thou only worthy Woman; these two Converts
Record our hearty union, I have shook off
My thraldom, Lady, and have made discoveries
Of famous Novels; but of those hereafter;
Thus we seal love, you shall know all and wonder.

Enter LIVIO. Live. Health and his hearts desire to Romanello;
My welcome I bring with me; noblest Lady,
Excuse an ignorance of your fair presence;
This may be bold intrusion.

Fla. Not by me, Sir.

Romans You are not frequent here as I remember;
But since you bring your welcome with you, Livio,
Be bold to use it; to the point.

Live. This Lady,
With both these Gentlemen, in happy hour
May be partakers of the long lived amity,
Our souls must liuke in.

Romans So belike the Marquess
Stores some new grace, some special close employment,
For whom your kind commends by deputation
Please think on to oblige, and Livio's charity
Descends on Romanello liberally, above my means to thank.

Live. Siena sometimes
Has been informed how gladly there did pass
A treaty of chaste loves with Castamela;
From this good heart, it was in me an error
Wilful and causeless, it is confessed, that hindered
Such honorable prosecution,
Even and equal; better thoughts consider,
How much I wronged the gentle course which led ye
To vows of true affection; us of friendship.

Romans Sits the wind there boy; leaving formal circumstance, proceed; you dally
yet.


Live. Then without plea,
For countenancing what has been injurious
On my part, I am come to tender really
My Sister a loved Wife t'yee; freely take her
Right honest man, and as ye live together,
May your increase of years prove but one spring,
One lasting flourishing youth; she is your own,
My hands shall perfect what is required to ceremony.

Fla. Brother, this day was meant a holyday,
For feast on every side.

Romans The new-turn'd Courtier
Proffers most franckly; but withal leaves out
A due consideration of the narrowness
Our short estate is bounded in, some Politics
As they rise up (like Livio) to perfection
In their own competencies, gather also
Grave supplement of providence and wisdom;
Yet he abates in his -- you use a triumph
In your advantages, it smells of state:
We know you are no fool.

Fla. Sooth I believe him.

Came. Else 'twere imposture.

Ves. Folly rank, and sense less.

Live. Enjoyne an oath at large.

Romans Since you mean earnest,
Receive in satisfaction; I am resolved
For single life; there was a time (was Livio)
When indiscretion blinded forecast in me;
But recollection, with your rules of thriftinesse,
Prevaild against all passion.

Live. You Would be courted,
Courtship's the child of coyness Romanello;
And for the Rules it is possible to name them.

Romans A single life's no burden; but to draw
In yoakes is chargeable, and does require
A double maintenance; Livios very words,
For he can live without a wife and purchase,
By'r Lady so you do Sir, send you joy on it;
These rules you see are possible, and answered.

Live. Full, -- answer was late mate to this already,
My Sister's only thine.

Romans Where lives the Creature
Your pity stoopes to pin upon your servant?
Not in a Nunn'ry for a years probation?
Fie on such coldness, there are BOVVRDS OF FANCIES
Ravished from troops of Fairy Nymphs, and Virgins
Cul'd from the downie breasts of Queens their Mothers,
In the Titanian Empire, far from Mortals:
But these are tales; troth I have quite abandoned
All loving humor.

Live. Here is scorn in Riddles,

Romans Were there another Marquess in Sienna
More potent then the same who is vicegerent
To the great Duke of Florence, our grand Master:
Were the great Duke himself here, and would lift up
My head to fellow pomp amongst his Nobles,
By falsehood to the honor of a Sister,
Urging me instrument in his Seraglio;
I Would tear the Wardrobe of an outside from him
Rather then live a Pandar to his bribery.

Live. So would the he you talk to, Romanello,
Without a noise that is singular.

Romans She Is a Countess
Flavia, she; but she has an Earl her Husband,
Though far from our procurement.

Live. Castamela
Is refused then.

Romans Never designed my Choice,
You know and I know (Livio) more I tell thee,
A noble honesty ought to give allowance,
When reason intercedes; by all that is manly,
I range not in derision but compassion.

Live. Intelligence flies swiftly.

Romans Pretty swiftly;
We have compared the Copy with the Original,
And find no disagreement.

Live. So my Sister
Can be no wife for Romanello?

Romans No, no,
One noe once more and ever; -- this your courtesy
Foild me a second; -- Sir, you brought a welcome,
You must not part without it; scan with pity
My plainness, I intend nor gall, nor quarrel.

Live. Far be it from me to press a blame, great Lady;
I kiss your noble hands, and to these Gentlemen
Present a civil parting; Romanello,
By the next foot-Post thou will hear some news
Of alteration; if I send, come to me.

Romans Questionless, yea.

Live. My thanks may quit the favor.
Exit.
Fla. Brother his intercourse of conference,
Appears at once perplexed, but withal sensible.

Romans Doubts easily resolved; upon your virtues
The whole foundation of my peace is grounded:
I Will guard ye to your home, lost in one comfort
Here I have found another.

Fla. Goodness prosper it.
Exeunt.
ACT. V.
Enter OCTAVIO, TROYLO, SECCO, and NITIDO. Oct. NO more of these complaints and
clamors;
Have we nor enemies abroad,
Nor waking Sycophants,
Who peering through our actions, wait occasion
By which they watch to lay advantage open
To vulgar descant, but amongst our selves
Some whom we call our own must practice scandal
(Out of a liberty of ease and fullness)
Against our honor, we shall quickly order
Strange reformation Sirs, and you will find it.

Troy. When Servants servants, slaves, once relish license
Of good opinion from a noble nature,
They take upon them boldness to abuse
Such interest, and Lord it ore their fellows,
As if they were exempt from that condition.

Oct. He is unfit to manage public matters
Who knows not how to rule at home his hoshould;
You must be jealous (puppie) of a Boy too;
Raise uprores, (bandie noise) amongst young Maidens;
Keep revels in your madness, use authority
Of giving punishment; a fool must fool ye;
And this is all but pastime, as you think it.

Nit. With your good Lordships favor, since, Spadone
Confessed it was a gullery put on Secco,
For some revenge meant me.

Troy. He vowed it truth
Before the Ladies in my hearing.

Oct. Sirrah,
I Will turn you to your shop again and trinkets,
Your suds and pan of small-cole; take your damzell
The grand old ragge, of beauty; your deaths head;
Try then what custom reverence can trade in;
Fiddle, and play your pranks amongst your neighbors;
That all the town may roar ye; now ye simper
And look like a shaved skull.

Nit. This comes of prating.

Sec. I am my Lord a worm, pray my Lord tread on
me, I will not turn again; alas I shall never venture
To hang my Pole out; on my knees I begges it,
My bare knees, I will down unto my wife
And do what she will have me, all I can do;
Nay more, (if she will have it) ask forgivenes,
Be an obedient Husband; never cross her,
Unless sometimes in kindness: Seignior Troylo,
Speak one sweet word; I Will swear 'twas in my madness,
I said I knew not what, and that no creature
Was brought by you amongst the Ladies, Nitido
I Will forswear thee too.

Oct. Wait a while our pleasure;
You shall know more anon.

Sec. Remember me now.
Exeunt.
Oct. Troylo, thou art my brothers son, and nereest
In blood to me; thou have been next in counsels.
Those ties of nature (if thou can consider
How much they do engage) work by instinct
In every worthy or ignoble mention
Which can concern me.

Troy. Sir, they have and shall
As long as I bear life.

Oct. Henceforth the Stewardship
My carefulnes, for the honor of our Family
Has undertook, must yield the world account,
And make clear reckonings; yet we stand suspected
In our even courses.

Troy. But when time shall wonder
How much it was mistaken in the issue
Of honorable, and secure contrivements.
Your wisdom crowned with laurels of a Justice
Deserving approbation will quite foil
The ignorance of popular opinion.

Oct. Report is merry with my feats; my dotage
Undoubtedly the Vulgar voice does caroll it.

Troy. True Sir, but Romanello's late admission
Warrants that giddy confidence of rumor
Without all contradiction; now it is Oracle,
And so received; I am confirmed, the Lady
By this time proves his scorn as well as laughter.

Oct. And we with her his table-talke -- she stands not
In any firm affection to him.

Troy. None Sir,
More then her wonted Nobleness afforded
Out of a civil custom.

Oct. We are resolute
In our determination, meaning quickly
To cause these clouds fly off; the ordering of it
Nephew is thine.

Enter Livio. Troy. Your care and love commands me.

Live. I come, my Lord, a Suitor.

Oct. Honest Livio,
Perfectly honest, reallie; no fallacies
No flawes are in thy truth: I shall promote thee
To place more eminent.

Troy. Livio deserves it.

Oct. What suit? speak boldly.

Live. Pray discharge my office,
My mastership; 'twere better live a yeoman
And live with men, then over-eye your houses,
Whiles I my self am ridden like a jade.

Oct. Such breath sounds but ill manners; know young man,
Old as we are, our Soul retains a fire
Active and quick in motion, which shall equal
The daringst boys ambition of true manhood
That wears a pride to brave us.

Troy. He is my friend, Sir.

Oct. You are weary of our service, and may leave it.
We can court no man's duty.

Live. Without passion,
My Lord, do you think your Nephew here, your Troylo
Parts in your spirit as freely as your blood;
It Is no rude question.

Oct. Had you known his Mother
You might have sworn her honest; let him justify
Himself not base borne: for thy Sisters sake
I do conceive the like of thee; be wiser,
But prate to me no more thus; -- if the gallant
Resolve on my attendance, ere he leave me,
Acquaint him with the present service, Nephew,
I meant to employ him in.
Exit.
Troy. Fie Livio, wherefore
Turned wild upon the sudden.

Live. Pretty Gentleman,
How modestly you move your doubts? how tamely?
Ask Romanello, he has without leave
Surveigh'd your Bowres of FANCIES, has discovered
The mystery of those pure Nuns; those chaste ones,
Untouched forsooth; the holy Academie:
Has found a Mothers daughter there of mine too,
And one who called my Father Father, talks out,
Ruffles in mirth on it; baffel'd to my face
The glory of her greatness by it.

Troy. Truly.

Live. Death to my sufferance, can thou hear this misery,
And answer't with a truly? 'twas thy wickedness
False as thine own heart tempted my credulity,
That, her to ruin; she was once an innocent,
As free from spot, as the blew face of heaven
Without a cloud in it; she is now as fully'd
As is that Canopie, when mists and vapors
Divide it from our sight, and threaten pestilence.

Troy. Says he so, Livio.

Live. Yes, and't like your noblenes;
He truly does so say; your breach of friendship
With me, must borrow courage from your Uncle,
Whiles your sword talks an answer; there is no remedy,
I will have satisfaction, though thy life
Come short of such demand.

Troy. Then satisfaction
Much worthier then your sword can force, you shall have,
Yet mine shall keep the peace; I can be angry
And brave alow'd in my reply; but honor
Schools me to fitter grounds, this as a gentleman
I promise ere the minutes of the night
Warn us to rest, such satisfaction (hear me
And credit it) as more you cannot wish for,
So much not think of.

Live. Not? the time is short,
Before our sleeping hour: you vow.

Troy. I do,
Before we ought to sleep.

Live. So I intend to,
On confidence of which, what left the Marquessa
In charge for me? I Will do it.

Troy. Invite Count Iulio
His Lady, and her brother, with their company
To my Lords Court at Supper.

Live. Easy business,
And then. --

Troy. And then soon after, the performance
Of my past vow waits on ye, but be certain
You bring them with y'e.

Live. Yet your servant.

Troy. Nearer my friend, you will find no less.

Live. It Is strange, is it possible.
Exeunt.
Enter Castamela, Clarella, Floria, and Silvia. Cast. You have discourst to me
a lovely story,
My heart does dance toth' music; 'twere a sin
Should I in any tittle stand distrustful
Where such a people such as you are, innocent
Even by the Patent of your years and language,
Inform a truth; O talk it ore again;
Ye are ye say three daughters of one mother,
That Mother only Sister to the Marquess,
Whose charge has since her death (being left a widow)
Here in this place preferred your education:
Is It so?

Cla. It is even so, and howsoever
Report may wander loosely in some scandal
Against our privacies; yet we have wanted
No graceful means fit for our births and qualities,
To train us up into a virtuous knowledge
Of what, and who we ought to be.

Flo. Our Uncle
Has often told us, how it more concerned him
Before he showed us to the world, to render
Our youths and our demeanors in each action
Approved by his experience, then too early
Adventure on the follies of the age,
By prone temptations fatal.

Sil. In good deed la,
We mean no harm.

Cast. Deceit must want a shelter
Under a roof, that is covering to souls
So white as breaths beneath it, such as these are;
My happiness shares largely in this blessing,
And I must thank direction of the providence
Which led me hither.

Cla. Aptly have you styled it,
A providence for ever in chaste loves,
Such majesty has power, -- our Kinsman Troylo
Was herein his own factor; he will prove,
Believe him Lady, every way as constant,
As noble, we can bail him from the cruelty
Of misconstruction.

Flo. You will find his tongue
But a just Secretary to his heart.

Cast. The Guardianesse
(Dear Creatures) now and then, it seems
Makes bold to talk.

Cla. She Has waited on us
From all our Cradles, will prate sometimes odly,
However means but sport; I am unwilling
Our household should break up, but must obey
His wisdom, under whose command we live:
Sever our companies I Am sure we shall not;
Yet it is a pretty life this and a quiet.

Enter Morosa, Secco, his apron on, Basin of water, Scissers, Comb, Towels,
Razor, etc. Sec. Chuck, duckling, honye, mouse, monkey all and every thing; I
am thine ever and only, will never offend again, as I hope to shave clean and
get honor by it, heartily I ask forgiveness; be gracious to thine own flesh
and blood, and kiss me home.


Mor. Look you provoke us no more, for this time you shall find mercy; --
was it that hedgehog set thy brains a crowing? be quits with him, but do not
hurt the great male-baby.


Sec. Enough, I am wise, and will be merry, -- have Beauties, the Caroches will
sudden receive ye; a night of pleasure is toward, pray for good husbands a
piece, that may trim you featly, (dainty ones) and let me alone to trim them.


Mor. Loving hearts be quick as soon as ye can, time runs apace; what you must
do, do nimbly, and give your minds to it; young bloods stand fumbling? fie
away, be ready for shame beforehand; hisband, stand to thy tackling hisband,
like a man of metal: go, go, go.

Exit Morosa and Ladies.
Sec. Will ye come away loyterers? shall I wait all day? Am I at livery do you
think.


Enter Spadone ready to be trimmed, and Nitido. Spa. Here and ready; what a
mouthing thou keep'st, I have but scoured my hands, and curried my head to save
time, honest Secco, neat Secco, precious barbarian, now thou lookst like a
worshipful Tooth-drawer, would I might see thee on horseback, in the pomp
once.


Sec. A Chair, a Chair, quick, quick.


Nit. Here Is a chair, a chair politic, my fine boy, sit thee down in
triumph, and rise one of the nine Worthies; thou wilt be a sweet youth anon
sirrah.


Spa. So, to work with a grace now, I cannot but highly be in love with the
fashion of Gentry, which is never complete, till the snip snap of dexterity,
has mowed off the excrements of slovenry.


Sec. Very commodiously delivered I protest.


Nit. Nay, the thing under your fingers is a whelpe of the wits I can assure
you.


Spa. I a whelpe of the wits? no, no, I cannot bark impudently, and ignorantly
enough; -- oh, and a man of this Art had now and then Soveraigntie over fair
Ladies, you would tickle their upper and their lower lips, you would so smouch and
belaver their chopps.


Sec. We light on some offices for Ladies too, as occasion serves.


Nit. Yes, frizzle or powder their hair, plane their eyebrows, set a napp on
their cheeks, keep secrets, and tell news; that is all.


Sec. Wink fast with both your eyes, the ingredients to the composition of
this ball, are most odorous Camphire, pure soap of Venice, oil of sweet
Almonds, with the spirit of Allome; they will search and smart shrewdly, if you
keep not the shop-windowes of your head close.


Spa. News? well remembered, that is part of your trade too (prithee do not
rub so roughly) and how goes the tattle oth' town? what novelties stirring, ha?


Sec. Strange, and scarce to be credited; a gelding was lately seen to leap
an old Mare; and an old man of one hundred and twelve stood in a white sheet
for getting a wench of fifteen with child, here hard by, most admirable and
portentous.


Spa. I Will never believe it, it is impossible.


Nit. Most certain, some Doctor Farriers are of opinion that the Mare may cast
a Foale, which the Master of their Hall conclude in spite of all lockies and
their familiars, will carry every race before him, without spur or switch.


Spa. O rare, a man might venture ten or twenty to one safely then, and nere be
in danger of the cheat; -- this water me thinks is none of the sweetest;
Camphire and soape of Venice say ye.


Sec. With a little grecum album for mundification.


Nit. Grecum album is a kind of white persum'd powder, which plain Country
people, I believe, call dog-muske.


Spa. Dog-muske, pox of the dog-muske, what do mean to bleach my nose, thou
giv'st such twitches to it? set me at liberty as soon as thou can, gentle
Secco


Sec. Only pare off a little superfluous down from your chin, and all is done.


Spa. Pish, no matter for that; dispatch, I entreat thee.


Nit. Have patience man, it is for his credit to be neat.


Spa. What Is that so cold at my throat; and scrubs so hard?


Sec. A kind of steel instrument yeleped a Razor, a sharp tool and a keen,
it has a certain virtue of cutting a throat, if a man please to give his mind
to it; -- hold up your muzzle Signior, -- when did you talk baudily to my wife
last? tell me for your own good (Signior) I advise you.


Spa. I talk baudily to thy wife? hang baudry; good now mind thy business, lest
thy hand slip.


Nit. Give him kind words you were best, for a toy that I know.


Sec. Confess, or I shall mar your grace in whissing Tobacco or squirting of
sweet wines down your gullet; -- you have been offering to play the gelding
we told ye of I suppose; -- speak truth, (move the semicircle of your
countenance to my left hand file) out with the truth; would you have had a leap.


Nit. Spadone, thou art in a lamentable pickle, have a good heart and pray if
thou can, I pity thee.


Spa. I protest and vow friend Secco, I know no leaps, I.


Sec. Let cherously goatish and an Eunuch? this cut, and then --


Spa. Confound thee, thy leaps and thy cuts, I am no Eunuch, you finicall ass,
I am no Eunuch; but at all points as well provided, as any he in Italy, and
that thy Wife could have told thee: this your conspiracy, to thrust my head
into a brazen tub of Kitchin-see, hudwinke mine eyes in mud-soape, and then
offer to cut my throat in the dark like a Coward? I may live to be revenged on
both of ye.


Nit. Oh scurvy! thou art angry, feel man whether thy weason be not cracked
first.


Sec. You must fiddle my brains into a jealousy, rub my temples with saffron,
and burnish my forehead with the juice of yellowes: have I fitted ye now sir?


Enter Morosa. Spa. All Is whole yet I hope?


Mor. Yes, sirrah; all is whole yet; but if ever thou do speak treason
against my sweeting and me once more, thou wilt find a roguy bargain on it;
dear, this was handled like one of spirit and discretion: Nitido has pag'd it
trimly too; no wording, but make ready and attend at Court.


Sec. Now we know thou art a man; we forget what has past, and are fellows
and friends again.


Nit. Wipe your face clean; and take heed of a Razor.


Spa. The fear put me into a sweat; I cannot help it; I am glad I have my
throat mine own, and must laugh for Company, or be laughed at.
Exit.
Enter Livio, and Troylo. Live. You find Sir, I have proved a ready servant,
And brought the expected guests, amidst these feastings,
These costly entertainments; you must pardon
My incivility that here sequesters
Your ears from choice of music, or discourse
To a less pleasant parley; night draws on,
And quickly will grow old; it were unmanly
For any Gentleman, who loves his honor,
To put it on the rack; here is small comfort
Of such a satisfaction as was promised,
Though certainly it must be had; pray tell me
What can appear about me to be used thus?
My soul is free from injuries.

Troy. My tongue from serious untruths, I never wronged you,
Love you too well to mean it now.

Live. Not wronged me?
(Blessed Heaven!) this is the bandie of a patience
Beyond all sufferance.

Troy. If your own acknowledgement
Quit me not fairly ere the hours of rest
Shall shut our eyes up, say I made a forfeit
Of what no length of years can once redeem.

Live. Fine whirles in tame imagination; on sir,
It is scarce mannerly at such a season,
Such a solemnity (the place and prefence
Considered) with delights, to mix combustions.

Troy. Prepare for free contents, and give em welcome.

Flourish. Enter Octavio, Iulio, Flavia, Romanello, Camillo and Vespuoi. Oct. I
dare not study words, or hold a complement
For this particular; this special favor.

Iul. Your bounty and your love, my Lord, must justly
Engage a thankfulness.

Fla. Indeed
Varieties of entertainment here
Have so exceeded all account of plenty,
That you have left (great Sir) no rarities
Except an equal welcome which may purchase
Opinion of a common Hospitality.

Oct. But for this grace (Madam) I will lay open
Before your judgments which I know can rate 'em
A Cabinet of Jewels, rich and lively,
The world can show none goodlier; those I prize
Dear as my life -- Nephew --

Troy. Sir, I obey you. --
Exit.
Fla. Jewels, my Lord.

Oct. No strangers eye ere viewed them,
Unless your Brother Romanello happily
Was would unto a sight for his approvement:
No more.

Romans Not I, I do protest; I hope Sir
You cannot think I am a lapidarie;
I skill in Jewels?

Oct. It Is a proper quality
For any Gentleman; your other friends
May be are not so coy.

Iul. Who they, they know not
A Topaze from an Opall.

Came. We are ignorant
In gems which are not common.

Ves. But his Lordship
Is pleased (it seems) to try our ignorance.
For passage of the time, till they are brought,
Pray look upon a Letter lately sent me,
Lord Iulio, (Madam) Romanello, read
A noveltie; it is written from Bonony
Fabricio once a Merchant in this City
Is entered into orders, and received
Amongst the Capuchins a fellow, news
Which ought not any way to be unpleasant,
Certain I can assure it.

Iul. He at last has
Bestowed himself upon a glorious service.

Romans Most happy man, I now forgive the injuries
Thy former life exposed thee to.

Live. Turn Capuchine,
He, whiles I stand a Cipher and fill up
Only an useless sum to be laid out
In an unthristy lewdness, that must buy
Both name and riot; Oh my sickle destiny!

Romans Sister, you cannot taste this course but bravely,
But thankfully.

Fla. He Is now dead to the world
And lives to heaven, a Saints reward him;
My only loved Lord, all your fears are henceforth
Confined unto a sweet and happy penance.

Enter Troylo, Castamela, Clarella, Floria, Silvia, and Morosa. Oct. Behold, I
keep my word, these are the Jewels
Deserve a treasury; I can be prodigal
Amongst my friends; examine well their luster
Does it not sparkle? wherefore dwells your silence
In such amazement?

Live. Patience keep within me,
Leap not yet rudely into scorn of anger.

Fla. Beauties incomparable.

Oct. Romanello,
I have been only Steward to your pleasures;
You loved this Lady once, what say you now to her?

Cast. I must not court you Sir.

Romans By no means fair one,
Enjoy your life of greatness; sure the spring
Is past, the BOVVERS OF FANCIES is quite withes'd
And offered like a lottery to be drawn;
I dare not venture for a blanke, excuse me, --
Exquisite Jewels.

Live. Hark ye Troylo.

Troy. Spare me.

Oct. You then renounce all right in Castamela,
Say Romanello.

Romans Gladly.

Troy. Then I must not;
Thus I embrace mine own, my wife; confirm it.
Thus when I fail (my dearest) to deserve thee
Comforts and life shall fail me.

Cast. Like vow I, for my part.

Troy. Livio, now my Brother, justly
I have given satisfaction.

Cast. Oh excuse
Our secrecy, I have been --

Live. Much more worthy
A better Brother, he a better Friend
Then my dull brains could fashion.

Romans Am I cosen'd.

Oct. You are not Romanello; we examined
On what conditions your affections fixed,
And found them merely Courtship; but my Nephew
Loved with a faith resolved, and used his policy
To draw the Lady into this society,
More freely to discover his sincerity
Even without Livio's knowledge, thus succeeded
And prospered, he is my heir and she deserved him.

Iul. Storm not at what is past.

Fla. A fate as happy
May crown you with a full content.

Oct. What ever
Report has talked of me abroad, and these
Know they are all my neeces, are the daughters
To my dead only Sister, this their Guardianesse
Since they first saw the World; indeed my Mistresses
They are, I have none other; how brought up
Their qualities may speak; now Romanello,
And Gentlemen, for such I know ye all,
Portions they shall not want both sit and worthy;
Nor will I look on fortune, if you like
Court them and win them, here is free access,
In mine own Court henceforth; only for thee

Livio I wish Clarella were allotted.

Live. Most noble Lord, I am struck silent.

Fla. Brother, here is noble choice.

Romans Frenzy, how did thou seize me!

Cla. We knew you Sir, in Prugniolo's posture.

Flo. Were merry at the sight.

Sil And gave you welcome.

Mor. Indeed forsooth, and so we did an't like ye.

Oct. Enough, enough; now to shut up the night,
Some meniall servants of mine own are ready
For to present a merriment; they intend
Acording to the occasion of the meeting,
In several shapes to show how love oreswayes
All men of several conditions; Soldier,
Gentry, fool, scholar, Merchant man, and Clown:
A harmless recreation; take your places. --
Dance. Your duties are performed henceforth, Spadone,
Cast off thy borrowed title: Nephew Troylo,
His Mother gave thee suck; esteem him honestly.
Lights for the Lodgings, it is high time for rest;
Great men may be mistook when they mean best.

FINIS.
EPILOGVE.
MOR. A while suspected (Gentlemen) I look
For no new Law, being quitted by the Book.

CLA. Our harmless pleasure's, free in every sort
Actions of scandal; may they free report.

CAST. Distrust is base, presumption urges wrongs;
But noble thoughts must prompt as noble tongues.

FLA. Fancy and Judgment are a Plays full matter:
If we have er'd in one, right you the latter.


