A LETTER SENT FROM SARIENT MAYOR FORBES FROM THE KING of Swethens army to his
reverend father Mr. John Forbes, minister to the worshipful Company of Merchant
Adventurers residing in Delft, touching the great Battle fought by Lypsick
between the King of Swethen, the Duke of Saxons Army, and the Emperors Army,
and that commanded by General Tilly, of the Catholic League the 7. of
September, 1631.
HOnored, and Loving father upon the fourth of this month of September, it
pleased God that the Kings Army, and the Duke of Saxons joined together, near
unto a Town called Dieben and marched forward toward Lypsick, which General
Tilly, had taken in, and lay with his Army about half a mile from it, where
he met us, with his army, and took up the best advantage of ground for his
men, and planted his ordinance upon the places, which he thought fittest. The
Kings Army marched on the right hand of the Battle, and the Dukes on the left,
and so advanced in Battleray against out Ennemy, who begann to play
d^spitfully with his Ordinance upon us, which we cared not much for, but
advanced forward with our ordidinance likewise playing before us. They seeing us
marching toward them, they advanced likewise toward us, and came so close one
to an other, that joining battalions together, we came to pushe of the pike,
and disputed the buysinesse so long, till it pleased God, that we routed
them, and gave us the victory, by putting the Ennemy to a retreat with the
Kings own Army, but the Dukes Army was vily beaten back, and begann to make a
shameful flight, so that we were forced to send our horse men after these that
were beaten, and to relieve the Dukes men with our foot, which doing, we putt
all the Ennemy at last to flight, and followed the execution very hotely till
it was dark night, and till we could not see to pursue them any further, for
which victory immortal thanks be given to God. The Ennemy was at least 40000.
allfighting men, and our Army, and the Dukes cold make not above 36000 men
horse and foot. The next day there was found dead on both sides slain upon
the place of battle 10000 bodies, whereof the most of them were the Ennemies,
besides these that were slain upon their flight and execution which were
connted to be as great a number. There were taken in all about 8000.
prisonners, the most of them having taken entertaynment of the King, and
marches with our Army. There were diverse Collonells of note slain, on both
sides. General Tilly was shot and hurt three times, the Lord Marshall
Schoonburck slain, and five other Collonells. The Duke of Holsteyne taken
prisonner, who afterward dyed of his wounds, besides diverse other Lieutenants,
Colonels, Captains, and Officers, which would be too long to relate, of our
side there were slain Collonell Devil, Collonele Hall, Colonele Cullenburck,
and Lieutenant Colonele Adercus. Colonele Turnill hurt, and my Colonele hurt,
besides diverse Captains, Lieutenants, and Ensigns: We have taken two and
twenty pieces of Canon, whereof there are seve^ which were the King of
Bohemias, lost at the Battle of Prage. Besides great store of powder, Bullets,
match, and munition of war, 52 Coullours of foot, and 37. Cornetts of horse
this is the truth of the great victory which God has given us which you may
report for a certain, for I write noe more unto you but that which I saw with my
own eyes. I would have written to diverse others, but I pray you let this
letter suffice for all, and when any other occasion shall offer yt self, you
shall hear further from me. Noe more at this time, but my duty remembered to
your felfe my mother, and my love to my brethren and sisters, and al other my
friends. I commit you to the protection of him that has given us this glorious
victory and rest.

Your Loving Son. I. F.
From the Kings Army at Hall the tenth of September 1631. The rest of the Kings
proceeding in the Countries and Towns which he has taken in since that battle
as they follow in time.



I take it this generation do live in that age this prophecy shall be fulfilled
Revelation, 18: 20.
O heavens rejoice of her, and ye holy Apostles and Prophets, for God has
given your judgment on her for your sakes.

Here the Holy Ghost does describe the joy and rejoicing of all the faithful
for the destruction of the Romish superstition, and hunane inventions.

By heaven here is meant, the faithful Professors of the truth, because they
belong to heaven, and have their meditations in heaven. By Apostels and
Prophets are not meant those famous preachers which lived in former ages, but
are to be taken for those faithful teachers which witness Gods truth on earth
in his millitant Church.

As for our matters on earth they belong not to those blessed souls which are
and have been resting so long blessedly in heaven, for dead men (says the
Scripture) know nothing any more here Eccles. 9:5. and therefore says the
Prophet, that Abraham is ignorant of us, and that Israel knows us not Isay.
63:16. Therefore this is the rejoicing of all Gods people at the abolishing of
all humane inventions in Gods Worship, and they rejoice at the advancing of all
the institutions of Christ, that he may reign as King in his church by his own
laws and ordinances as the Apostle testifyeth 1. Timo. 3:14. 15. and this he
is commanded to observe till the appearing of Jesus Christ to judgment the
6:14. therefore not in the liberty of earthly potentates to alter, for Christ
shall reign, Amen


