Doctor FLVDDS Answer unto M. FOSTER OR, THE SQVESING OF Parson FOSTERS SPONGE,
ordained by him for the wiping away of the WEAPON-SALVE.

Wherein the Sponge-bearers immodest carriage and behavior toward his
brethren is detected; the bitter flames of his slanderous reports, are by the
sharp vinegar of Truth corrected and quite extinguished: and lastly, the
virtuous validity of his Sponge, in wiping away of the Weapon-Salue, is crushed
out and clean abolished.

Bilis acutissima aceto correcta acerrimo redditur dulcior.

PSALM. 92.7.

Opera Dei, vir brutus and stultus non intelligit.

The Assertion of Parson Foster and his Faction or Cabale, is this:

The wonderful manner of healing by the weapen-salue, is diaholicall, or
effected only by the invention and power of the Devil;

But, the royal Psalmist guided by the spirit of God, says:

Psalm. 71.18. Blessed be the Lord God of Israel, who only works wonders!
Therefore, The Prophet points thus, at these and such like enemies of the
Truth.

Esa. 5.20. Woe unto them that speak good of evil, and evil of good; which
put darkness for light, and light for darkness; that put bitter for sweet,
and sweet for bitter; Woe unto them that are wise in their own eyes, and
prudent in their own sight.

LONDON, Printed for Nathanael Butter, 1631.

The Contents of this Treatise.
This small Treatise is divided into 3 Members, whereof the
1. Takes away and utterly disannulleth those scandalous reports which Master
Foster has in his writing most falsely and irreligiously diuulged and laid unto
my charge, and withal expresses unto the world, how unseemly a thing it is,
for a man of his calling to accuse and censure his brother unjustly. 2. Is
divided into 3 Parts or Chapters: of the which the
One, does answer particularly unto every objection, that Master Foster does
make in a generality for the abolishing of the Weapon-Salues usage: Other, does
maintain Theologically the Cure of the Weapon-Salue, to be good and lawful,
and proves it by the authority of holy Writ, to be the Gift of God; and not of
the Devil. Lastly, demonstrateth the mystery of the weapon-salues cure, by a
Theophilosophicall discourse, and shows how it is grafted or planted by God
in the Treasury of Nature.
Last, does answer unto each particular objection, which our Spongy Adversary
makes against acertaine Treatise, expressed by me in my mystical Anatomy,
for the proving and maintaining of the cure by the weapon-Salue to be natural;
and no way Cacomagicall.
Courteous Reader,
In the absence of the Author these faults are committed, wherefore I desire
you to have recourse to this following Errata, by which you may correct them.

In the 2. first Members:

PAge 25. line 11. for had been read be p. 41. l. 20. r. Crollius l. 21. r.
Gocleni' p. 53. l. 18. f. Art r. Act p. 55. l. 13. r. Demonio l. 24. Instrument
p. 62. l. 20. r. Recreantur p. 73. l. 31. r. become p. 77. l. 9. r. mare p. 78.
l. 24. r. effects p. 79. l. 25. r. suam l. 26. exspiraret p. 87. l. 22. r.
sprightfull p. 88. l. 10 r. testify p. 91 In the margent against line the 11.
ad Eccl. 48. 14. p. 93. l., (...). f. wings r. winds p. 94. l. 7. f. he r. the
p. 100. l. 23. f. subtilitate r. subtiliate p. 105. l. 2. r. discover p. 109.
l. 9 r. Pepper p. 110. l. 4. r. struck p. 111. l. 20. r of Gods p. 135. l. 16.
r. heavenly p. 136 l. 19. r. laxatiue p. 137. l. 18. r. And l. 15 r. et te l.
16. r. diuurno p. 139. l 19. r. add so 144. l. 11. r. better

In the third Member

p. 4. l. 15. f. contract r. contact p. 25. l. 4. asf. and l. 8. r. doef. does
p. 38. l. 7. r. continued.

Other litterall faults the ingenious Reader w^ hope will bear withal:

TO THE WELL MINDED and impartial READER.
I Did not think (Courteous and learned Reader) to have stirred up the puddle
of this mine Adversaries turbulent Spirit, for a 3. fold reason, whereof the
first is his insufficiency to undergo a task of so high a nature and so
far beyond his reach or capacity, namely; to diue into this profound Mystery
of curing by the weapon-salue: and then because my learned friends, observing
his inclination unto immorality and malice (as appearing indeed more skillful
to Cavil and calumniat, then to decide with gravity so weighty a controversy)
gave me counsel to have patience and to answer such a manner of man with
Silence: and lastly, by reason of that reverence which I bear unto his
vocation, namely; as he is a minister of Gods word, professing unto the world
that I would endure much rather then to have the least opposition with any of
that profession. But since I have perceived his indiscreete importunity to
extend it self so far as to urge me beyond the bounds of patience by setting
up in the night time two of the frontispices or Titles of his book, as a
Challenge, one each post of my door, and understanding of his many other
indecent actions, as well by hear say, as in his public writing, wherein he
has in a Scornful and opprobrious manner laid disgraceful matters unto my
charge: I have been forced, against my will, to take the person (set^ing with
my best respect aside the Parson and his habit) into my better consideration,
and to examine in this my small Pamphlet the misdemeanors of his Book
entitled; The Sponge to wipe away the Weapon-Salue expressed both in his
erroneous doctrine touching the maine subject of that manner of curing, as also
his rude and unseemly carriage toward his brethren, that thereby I may as
well clear my self from such immodest and unjust imputations, which with an
evil Conscience he has laid upon me, as also expresfe the Shallowness of
the person in this business, which he so vain gloriously has undertaken.

I doubt not but as there are many who in every degree can discern an evident
difference between this satirical gentleman and my self, so because I know
that there are diverse of the common sort of people, who in their zeal without
understanding are apter to conceive and judge amiss, then in their charity to
ponder the truth of the business; I am the willinger to cope with this
unsavory Philosopher, whom I find (and I make no doubt, shall prove) fuller of
windy verbosity then of solid Philosophy, or any thing else that is grounded
upon firm reason.

What shall I say unto the man, whom, unto my best remembrance, I never saw nor
knew, save only by a bragging smoke of rumor, which pronounced me a far
off an Anathema? The thunder which long smoothered in the gloomy Cloud of
report, is now broke forth the flame of his lightning affaileth me: What then
is more convenient and requisite then sharp vinegar to quench it? yea, he
shall find it so acute and peircing (though not with railing and calumniating
edge, according unto his bitter custom, but reserving it self within the
bounds of Christian modesty) that his Sponge shall not be able to drink it up
or wipe it away. It shall quell the insatiable appetite of his Salue-deuouring
Sponge, and squeeze or crush it so, that it shall be constrained to vomit up
again that wholesome Child of nature and gentle friend unto mankind (I mean
the weapon-salue) which it has drunk or sucked up, and leave it in it is wonted
Splendour and reputation amongst men. And lastly, it shall examine the
quintessence of the Sponge-bearers selfe-conceited wit, and tell him, that what
sometimes appears great, is not always the same it seems, but rather a
shadow or blast of empty air. This is all (judicious Reader) that I will say
at this time, as for the rest, I refer it to the proof in the pondering whereof
I most heartily pray you that all partiality or peculiar affection being laid
aside, you will be pleased faithfully to judge of this our cont ouersie, and
weigh every passage thereof in the just and equal balance of your best
discretion.

Your Scruant in a greater matter.

RO^. FLVDD.

THE SQVEESING OF PARSON FOSTERS SPONGE.
The first Member.
Wherein the Slanderous and Scandalous Reports, with the unchristianlike
behavior of Master Foster toward the Author, are expressed and confuted.

CHAP. 1.
Here it is proved out of Holy writ, that M. Foster has done ill, in
proclaiming publicly his Brothers disgrace, though it were deservedly, much
more being undeservedly.

I Esteem it no point of indiscretion in me, first to abolish and take away
all such reproachful imputations as have been wrongfully laid to my charge,
that with the greater courage unto my self, and better acceptance and
satisfaction unto my countrymen, I may proceed unto the maine business or
question which is proposed by this mine Adversary.

Unto him therefore I must in the first place turn the edge of my pen and file
of speech, for as much as he, forgetting that I am his Brother in Christ, and
his Countryman, yea, and not differing from him in Religion, should so far
neglect the Precepts of the Prophet David, our Savior Christ, his Spiritual
Master, and his Apostolical followers, as slande-rously and void of Christian
modesty (most requisite unto a person of his divine calling) to publish unto
the world (although it were deservedly, much less against the grounds of Truth
and rules of Justice) the weakness and imperfection of his Brother.

The Kingly David therefore says: Thou give thy Plalm. 49.
mouth to evil, and with thy tongue thou forgest deceit, thou speak against
thy brother, and obiectest slander unto him, therefore art thou in darkness
because thou hate thy brother; whereby the Psalmist does in express terms
argue, that the man who calumniates his brother, and accuses him spightfully,
is a child of this world, an impe of darkness and not of God, the Creator of
us all.

This is also evidently expressed by the Apostle ^ame 3.
James, when he makes a difference between that wisdom, which is from
above, and that which is from beneath, in these words: If ye hau^ bitter
envying and strife in your hearts, rejoice not: neither be liars against the
Truth, for this wisdom descends not from above, but is earthly, sensual
and deuillish: For where envying and strife is, there is sedition and all
manner of evil works: But the wisdom that is from above, is first pure,
then peaceable, gentle, easy to be entreated, not judging, and without
hypocrisy, etc. Here the Apostle shows, that the bitterness of heart, and
envy, and lying against the Truth, is earthly, sensual and diabolical. Now I
leave it unto your upright consideration (impartial Reader) to judge whether
this our brother be not in his writing bitter against me and many other of his
brethren (I will not say envious and contentious) I pray God he be not proved
also a Liar against the Truth, in holding this proposed question affirmatively:
I fear that in the end it will prove so: for Verity her self, frowning at
the action, is ready to enter the listes in her own def^nce. Nam fruetur in
aeternum Veritas Trophaeo quod fixit ipsa: Verity in spite of all worldly
opposition will for ever enjoy the Trophee of her victory, which from all
beginnings she has erected and established.

But perchance Master Foster will deny and renounce all brotherhood, that may
be between us: But he shall find that these our Savior Christ his Words do
expressly confute such his Assertion: Fratrum vestrum quisque quare despicit,
cum vnus sit Pater Marth. 13.
and Conditor? Why do every one of you despise his Brother, since there is
but one Father and maker of all. And the Prophet speaking to the same purpose
says: Ab eadem Petra excisi estis: All of you are cut out of one and Isai, 51.
the same Rock.

Thus far I have spoken with the mouth of the Prophets, our Savior, and his
Apostles. But mine Adversary will reply and say, that Doctor Fludd is a
Magitian, and has maintained a damnable and diabolical action, namely, the
Curing by the Weapon-Salue to be good and lawful, and therefore by warrant of
Scripture he ought sharply to be told of it, etc. I answer, That from this
objection may arise a double question; whereof the first is, Whether the
assertion of our adversary be true or false? and then, whether it be a
brotherly part, first to diuulge it, though it were true indeed, unto the
ears of the people, before he has admonished his brother in private of his
error. Touching the ground or scope of the first, namely, whether, according
unto his assertion, I am a Magitian or no, it shall be fully discussed in the
third Chapter of this present Member, where I make no doubt to prove to each
welminded person (and that to the burden of my rash accusers conscience, if he
have any) that he is justly ranked and numbered amongst those, at whom the
Prophet David, our Savior CHRIST, and the Apostle James have aimed in the
places above mentioned. As for the second, our Lord JESUS resolves it in these
words: Si peccauerit in te frater tuus, vade and corripe eum inter te and ipsum
solum; si te audiverit, Marth. 18.25.
lucratus es fratrem tuum: If thy brother has trespassed against thee, go and
tell him his fault between thee and him alone: if he hear thee, thou have
won thy brother, etc. whereby it is apparent, that mine Adversary has not
dealt with me as one Christian ought to deal with another, for as much as he
has violated the Precepts of his Master JESUS CHRIST in this point, and
therefore this his misbehauiour can no way be excused.

CHAP. II.
Here the Author answers to some extrauagant passages which his Adversary
does, partly in his merry mood, and partly in a Calumniating manner, object
against him.

MY reputation does a little engage me to answer certain extrauagant
passages, which our Sponge-bearing Author makes against me; As for Example.

Doctor Fludd (says he) has writ in the defense of Foster p. 38;
the Weapon-Salue, well he may, he is called, by Franciscus Lanouius,
Medico-miles, a Souldier-Physitian, and being a Weapon-bearing Doctor, may well
teach the Weapon-curing medicine, especially setting the Armiger before the
Doctor, the Gunne before the Gown, the Pike before the Pen.

(Good Reader) observe this unreasonable jest; rather Fludd.
than sit out, the Gentleman will pick strawes, or play with a feather. What?
Not one word with reason, nor yet any Syllable in good Rhyme, but all upon the
Letters G. and P? An excellent argument of a simple wit.

But touching that which seems most material in this pretty discourse, I
will answer with the like objection unto that of our conceited Master of Arts:
He would seem to teach me that the Armiger or Esquier ought to be set before
the Doctor being that there is a question, whether a Knight or a Doctor should
challenge the first place, and therefore (says he) the Esquier was ill placed
before the Doctor, being that the Doctor is the better man; verily I think
that it ought to be so, and yet nevertheless, it is certain that now adays a
reasonable Esquier thinks much to yield place unto a Doctor: But this is not
to our question. He seems to accuse me because I say, Robertus Fluddus
Armiger and in Medicina Doctor: Robert Fludd Esquier and Doctor of Physic. I
will answer and pay him with his own Coin. Why does he put the Master of
Arts before the Parson or Minister, being that the Minister is the better man,
by reason of the Sanctity of his Vocation. Hereupon it is that a Doctor of
Divinity, though of a latter standing, takes place of a Doctor of Physic
who had his degree before him. Again, Why does Master Foster in his Dedicatory
Epistle put the Baron of Wing before the Viscount of Ascot, and the Viscount of
Ascot before the Earl of Carnaruon? And lastly, why does he Page 38. term me
Master Doctor, setting the Master before the Doctor? Verily, our wise brother
finds a mote in mine eye, but will not look upon the beam in his own. And
now I will express the cause, why I put the Esquier before the Doctor. It is
for two considerations: first, because I was an Esquier, and gave arms before
I was a Doctor, as being a Knights son: next because, though a Doctor adds
gentilitie to the person, who by descent is ignoble; yet it is the opinion of
most men, and especially of Heralds, that a Gentleman of Antiquity, is to be
preferred before any one of the first Head or Degree: And verily for mine own
part I had rather be without any degree in University, than lose the honor
was left me by my Ancestors. Thus far I have thought fit to satisfy the
Gentleman in his humor, wondering at nothing more, than that he should leave
the maine matter, to snarle at my gentilitie. Would he think it decent in me
to revile him for his lowness of birth or ignobilitie? For I know what he is:
God forbid such an absurdity should come from my pen, much less to vpbraid
him with his gentilitie, if he were a Gentleman indeed.

In another place he inueigheth bitterly against me in this manner:

The Doctor, who impiously attributes composition unto Foster p. 48.
God, dares falsely to attribute corporalitie unto Devils; the contrary of
which, that they have no manner of bodies, is the tenent of the Church.

I see that our Master in Arts is scarce in this matter Fludd.
his Arts master: he talks with Mersennus the Friar his tongue, and therefore
is but Mersennus his Parrat; wherefore as I have answered him in Latin, so
will I partly in the same sense satisfy this importunate Author in English;
not with impious terms, according to his custom, but modestly. Mersennus
makes it an impiety in me to say, that God fills the heavenly Spirit of
the World: whereupon he concludes and says, Facit proinde Deum compositionem
cum hoc spiritu aethereo; he therefore makes God a composition with this
aethereall spirit. My answer to him is this, that the incorruptible spirit of
the Lord is in all things, as Solomon au^rreth. And Saint John says; All
things were made by the Word, and without it nothing was made; in it was life,
etc. And again, Wisd. 12-1.
He fills the heavens and viuifieth all things. What? And must I therefore
attribute composition unto God, or do I make God part of composition? No
verily; forasmuch as God in his essence is indivisible, and therefore he
cannot be a part in composition; but he is said to be in all, and over all,
as he is the Catholic Actor of life, whereupon the Apostle teaches us, that
he viuifieth all things, and therefore he is said to be in the spirit of the
world, and also without it, no division of his divine Essence being made. So
also it is said, that in God we live, move, and have our being: and yet God is
not in us as a part in composition, but as an eternal Actor in compositions;
not mixed, but mingling the composition, in number, weight, and measure: that
is, tempering and uniting every particle, as it were with the glue of perfect
love and harmony. And to this purpose it is said in Job, Sicut argillam
fecisti me. Nonne sicut lac fudisti me, and tanquam caseum coagulasti me, cute
and carne induisti me, ossibusque and Job. 10.9.
neruis texisti me, cum vita benignitatem exercuisti erga me, and visitatio tua
conseruauit spiritum meum? whereby it is evident, that God is the compounder in
man's composition, but not a part of it.

To conclude: I have answered this point more at large in that Reply I made to
Gassendus his Retection of my Philosophy, where I prove that the virtue of God
is in every thing, as it composeth all things. But if I had said that God
entered into composition, was it so impious a thing, when the Scripture auerreth
that the Word was incarnated? I am too long in proving that, which Master
Foster takes barely out of the Friars mouth, but knows not, what either he,
or I mean thereby; as for the devils corporalitie, I will prove it elsewhere.

CHAP. III.
Wherein the Author is wrongfully accused, by his discourteous homebred
Adversary of Magic, and afterward by his foreign opposites, though of a
contrary Religion, is excused and cleared from that crime.

IT is no marvel, though mine Adversary does rashly and unjustly wound a
man's Reputation, who differs from him in Profession or Vocation, being that
his Satyricall or Cynicke passion will not spare such learned men, as are of
his own calling or habit: for if you will be pleased to read and observe his
Dedicatorie Epistle, you shall find there, that he (partly, as it seems,
being moved thereto by En^ie at such as are in a better way of preferment than
himself, and partly to insinuate and beget a better opinion and liking in his
Patron) inueigheth in these very words against some of his own Coat; nor am
I (says he) of their mind, which to become great by being accounted good
Preachers, preach not above twice, or thrice a year, and then lay all their
strength on their Sermon; my resolution is otherwise, I will read much, write
somewhat, and preach often.

Lo, how he condemns others, and prayseth himself; yea, he does not
stick in his Epistle to the Reader, to snarle against his Superiors in the
Church, because they do not stop his mouth with a good Benefice or
Church-liuing, considering his great deserts: yea, and seem to calumniate
them, and lay Simony unto their charges, his words are these:

Shall any man for my boldness think to sit upon my skirts? Let those know, I
esteem my self infra inuidiam, I cannot have less in the Church, unless
nothing; and if they shall endeavor to keep me still low, let them know I
look for no good from them, that envy at my end^auours to do good: if I sit
panting on the ground, I will not refuse to be fed with Ravens to keep me
alive with Elias, but I look not to be lifted up by any, but by Eagles;
Heroicke spirits, Men fearing God and hating Simoniacall couetoustnesse.

He scorneth to be raised by his Superiors in the Church, and expects only to
be raised by Eagles, Heroicke Spirits, namely, by such as his noble Patron is,
in whom is no Simoniacall covetousness, as who should say, that in others
there is Simonia-call covetousness, etc. What therefore can I expect from his
outrageous pen, bnt slanders of witchcraft, Magic, and such like
abominations? What less can I appear in his sight than an anathema, one (I
say) abandoned and accursed unto the Devil. His scandalous texts are these:

Doctor Fludd has had the same censure passed on him, ^
and has been writ against for a Magitian, and I suppose this to be one
cause, why he has printed his Book beyond the Seas: Our University and
Bishops are more cautelous (God be thanked) than to allow the printing of
Magical Books here.

Surely, D. Fludds very defense of the Weapon-Salue Again
is enough to make it suspected, himself being accused for 2. Page 38.
a Magitian by Marinus Mersennus, with a wonder that King JAMES (of blessed
memory) would suffer such a man to live and write in his Kingdom. But if to
be accused were to be guilty, who could be innocent? Master Doctor has
excused himself in his Book entitled, Sophiae cum Moria certamen (cuius
contrarium verum est, says Lanouius) etc.

Here (Gentle Reader) you may see him pull off Fludd.
his hood of simplicity or feined veil of sanctity, which he professed in
his Epistles, and discover ^he malice and envy of his heart against me: In the
first place therefore, for the better satisfaction of my Countrymen and
friends, I will express the cause, why I touched the superstitious Magia, or
Magic of the ancient Ethnickes. My scope was and ha^h been to write as well
the natural discourse of the great world and little world, which we call Man,
as also to touch by way of an Encyclophy or Epitome all Arts, as well lawful,
which I did commend, as those which are esteemed unlawful, which I did utterly
condemn, as superstitious and of little or no probability at all; among the
rest where I came to speak of the Arts, which belong unto the little world or
Man; I mention the Science of Genethlialogie, which treats of the Judgment
of Natiuities, wherein I produce the great dispute which did arise between the
two famous Philosophers Porphyrie and Iamblicus, whereof the first did hold
that a man might come to the knowledge of his own Genius or good Angel by the
Art of Astrology, namely, by finding out the Planet and Nature of his spirit,
that was Lord of the eleventh house, the which by the Astrologians was for that
cause called Bonus Demon or the good Angel. But Iamblicus his opinion was,
that a man had need of the Assistance and Knowledge of a higher Spirit, than
was any of those which were Governors of Fatalitie, namely, of such
Intelligences as were ascribed to the rule and direction of the seven Planets:
wherefore I did thereupon express the superstition of the Ancients with the
Impossibility thereof, that thereby I might the better descry it and make it
the more ridiculous to wise men. I then suspecting the captious Natures of some
envious persons, did there make an Apology, to excuse my self and to show the
vanity of the thing, and how full of idle superstition it was, and to show it
to be only Imaginary. But I seemed there to consent with Iamblicus, auerring
with him, that without the Revelation of that high and heavenly Spirit, which
was granted unto the Elect, none could come to the familiarity or knowledge of
his good Angel. I prove it out of many places of Scripture: Lo, this is all!
Now judge (all ye that are impartial and truly learned) what an offense was
here to decide according unto my power, that great Controversy of these two
notable and eminent Philosophers, which has stuck and been undecided even
unto this day, being that I in the conclusion ascribed the whole Glory unto
that sole and only Spirit, which is the Prince and Lord of Angels and Spirits:
I professed to write generally of all, but as I went along, I distinguished the
good from the evil, that men might the better beware of, and refuse the one,
and make choice of the other. Now therefore, that I have expressed unto you the
ground, why this our Critic and his CynickeMaster the Friar Mersennus have
slandered me with the Title of a Magitian: I will proceed to the answer of
every member of his frivolous objections.

Doctor Fludds defense of the Weapon-salue is enough Foster.
to make it suspected.

And why I pray you? Fludd.


Marry because he himself is accused for a magitian by Foster.
Marinus Mersennus.

The conclusion is much like the capacity of the Fludd.
concluder: Doctor Fludd is suspected for a Magitian: Ergo the purge of Rubarbe
which he prescribes, or rather any point in Philosophy or Physic, by him
maintained in writings, is Magical. Non sequitur argumentum: So Roger Bacon is
accused for a Conjurer, and a Magitian Ergo the Perspectiue or Opticke Science,
he writes of, is deuilish and Magical, or at least wise to be suspected.

I but this Salve has a Caco-magicall property in it, Foster.
for it heals a far off, and not per contactum.

So does Bacons Opticke make us to see the Images Flud.
of live men to walk in the Air, and it is said, that by his Art he made an
Apparition of a man to walk from the top of Alhollows steeple in Oxford, to
the top of S. Mary's: Surely these Opticall conclusions must be Magical, and
not by natural reflection of glasses, because these are utterly unknown to M.
Foster and his adherents, and consequently are to be condemned as diabolical.
But to come to the purpose; M. Foster if his eyes had been so favorable, and
his will so charitable, as to have looked on my answer to Mersennus in the
defense of that point, before he had judged, he would without doubt, as well as
hundreds of other men, whereof some are Churchmen, of no mean rank, and many
Doctors of Physic of excellent learning, have auerred, that D. Flud had
answered Mersennus so fully, as well in that accusation, as all other points
laid by him unto his charge, that he could not be able any way to reply
against it. And it is well known here in England to such as have been
conversant beyond the Seas, that the sufficiency of my answer has so
satisfied the learned, as well in Germany as in France, that he has been by
them much condemned for his slanderous writing, and esteemed of but meanly for
his small learning and indiscretion. Now the ground of his malice unto me was,
for that he having written of the Harmony of the World, and finding that a
Book of that subject set out by me, was very acceptable to his Contrymen,
he invented this slander against me and my Harmony, that thereby he might
bring his own into the better reputation. But what did I say? That he was
accused and condemned for that his slander by some in France, yea, verily his
dearest companion, who by reason of his insufficiency, was easily persuaded to
take his cause in hand, and to answer for him, I mean Peter Gassendus, his
friend and Champion, chideth his Mersennus, for such his uncivil and
scandalous reports against me in these very words: Ac Zelus quidem quo tu
Mersenne euectus es Gassendus fol. 9.
commendari cum debeat, attamen telatere non potest, quin admodum durum sit
viuenti in Christiano orb appellari Cacomagum, Haeretico-magum, foetidae, and
horrendae Magiae Doctorem, and propagatorem, audire, non esse ferendum
huiusmodi Doctorem impune, prouocato Principe, vti de illo poenas sumat,
minisque etiam adhibitis, eundem propterea breui submergendum fluctibus
aeternis, etc. vt nihil dicam de Atheismo atque haeresi quam tu quoqne obijcis
Fluddo. Haec nempe sunt, quae Rufini, aut D. Hieronymi irritare patientiam
potuissent. Alter enim cum patientiam requirat in caeteris: qui vel tamen vnius
Haereseos crimen ferat, aut dissimulet, hunc clamitat non esse Christianum;
Alter vero, nolo (inquit) nolo in suspitione Haeresios quenquam esse patientem.
Quid fecissent in crimine, seu suspitione, aut Atheismi, aut Cacomagiae?

These are the very words of Mersennus his chief friend, which I interpret
thus: And although (my Mersennus) the zeal wherewith you are moved against
Fludd is to be commended, nevertheless you cannot be ignorant, how grievous
and intolerable a thing it is unto any man that lives in the Christian world,
to be called a Witch, or evil Magitian, a Hereticke-Magitian, or a teacher, or
divulger of foul and horrible Magic: and that such a teacher is not to be
suffered unpunished, also to provoke the King or Prince to punish him, and
besides all this to threaten him; saying, that for that cause he should be
drowned or drenched in the eternal, Lake and so forth. Besides the Atheism
and Heresy, which also you object and lay to Fludds charge. Verily, these are
things which would stir up the patience of Ruffinus or S. ^erome, whereof the
one when he requires patience in other things, yet he concludes, that he
which can bear or dissemble with the offense of one heresy, he cries that
such a man is no Christian: The other says, I will not that any man should be
patient in the suspicion of Heresy; much less to be accused or suspected of
Atheism or naughty magic.

In which words our English world may discern first, how this my honest
dealing and moral foreign Adversary does check his uncivil friend, whose
part he undergoes, for his immodestie and small discretion: and next does
teach my homebred Adversary a great deal of manners or behavior in writing
against an Adversary; namely, not to contend with foul and scandalous
language, but with acute arguments, and those to the purpose, armed with the
truest reasons of Philosophy: Does not Master Foster blush now to see his
mighty and magnanimous Author Marinus Mersennus checked by his judicious
friend, whom he himself has elected, as well for Vmpeere as Stickler in his
cause? Yea, and a chief Champion to defend it, for calling me unjustly a
Magitian and other misbeseeming names? Yea, is he not ashamed, if he has
any, to choose out a lying and false Author for the propagating of his Brothers
slander? If this be not so, ask Gassendus.

But he will no doubt reply, that this speech of Gassendus to Mersennus does
not take away for all that the suspicion of Magic from Doctor Fludd, though
he reproves his friend for using him with so rough terms: To which, for his
better satisfaction, I produce this other place out of Gassendus his Reply
against me, in his friend Mersennus his behalf:

This is the Title of his Chapter, Gassendus fol. 144.
being the 20.

Adlibri tertij Caput primum. Depulsa Fluddo Atheismi, Haeresios, and
praesertim Cacomagiae suspicio: (that is) To the first Chapter of the third
Book, wherein Fludd is cleared from the suspicion of Atheism, Heresy, and
especially of Deuillish Magic.

He speaks thus by way of Counsel to Mersennus.

Restat suspicio Cacomagiae, de qua praesertim quaestio haec est, veruntamen
non vti ipsum Diabolicis illis artibus, argumento mihi est, quod Diabolos esse
non credit (aut non videatur credere) quales nos vulgo intelligimus a Cacomagis
vsurpari. (that is) There rests now the suspicion of Euill-magicke, of which
especially the question is made, but this is an evident argument unto me, that
he is no such Magitian, because he does not believe (or at least wise makes
semblance not to believe) that there are such Devils as we imagine to be
familiar with Witches.

Let Master Foster therefore see, upon what ficke foundation he has laid the
false and malignant slander of an Euill-Magitian on me. But alas! I smell a
Rat (for I will use his own witty phrase) he cares not how he may disgrace
any one, so that he might thereby the better serve his own turn. Because I
have produced in my Mystical Anatomy a natural reason for the Weapon-Salue,
which he neither can, nor, for all his poor reasons expressed in his Book,
shall be able to refell, therefore, forsooth, I must be numbered amongst the
Magitians. And wherefore? Marry because Mersennus has given the same censure
on me. And who is Mersennus? A railing Satyricall Babbler, not able to make a
reply in his own defense, and therefore being put to a Non plus, he went like
a second Job in his greatest vexation to ask Counsel of the learned Doctors
in Paris: And at last for all that, he fearing his cause, and finding himself
insufficient, procured by much Entreaty his friend Peter Gassendus to help
him, and called another of his friends unto his assistance; namely, one Doctor
Lanouius a seminary Priest, as immorall as himself, and one that professes
in his Judiciary Letter much, but performs little. And in good faith, I may
boldly say, that for three roaring, bragging, and fresh water
Pseudophilosophers, I cannot parallel any in Europe, that are so like of a
condition, as are Mersennus, Lanouius, and Foster: all three exceeding terrible
in their bumbasting words, imagining to quell and make subject unto their
thundering braues the stoutest Scholars of Europe, if they cared for them, and
did esteem them more than Bugbeares to skare away Crows or frighten little
Children. As for Peter Gassendus I find him a good Philosopher, and an honest
and well conditioned Gentleman, just as well unto his Adversary as friend, not
passing beyond the bounds of Christian modesty, but striking home with his
Philosophical arguments, when he sees his occasion.

Mersennus his words in his Epistle to his Patron (wherein he seeks aid of
this his friend Peter Gassendus) are these, translated in English as near as I
can.

After I had communicated with the Counsel of all my learned friends, they
being heard, I would also ask counsel of my friend Gassendus, who departed
into Germany a while since, I did pray and beseech him, that he would
seriously write back unto me, what he thought of Fludds works: for I did
conjecture that he by reason of the curiosity, which he had to attain unto
every kind of Philosophy, would for a certain penetrate also into this
Philosophy, under which, Fludd does hide his impieties, etc. Thus you see,
that this good Friar confesses that he understood not Fludds Philosophy, and
therefore was feign to pray Gassendus to assist him, which when Gassendus to
his power had performed, with unspeakable joy he utters these words:

Behold, when Fludd in answering me would hide himself under senses of
Scripture, as lurking holes; my Gassendus has so brought him out of them, and
so discovered his Cabal, that I think my self satisfied with this discovery
only.

See here Master Foster, the crauenly and cowardly Friar, whom you take for
your Author and Master: And well you may, for like Master, like scholar. Judge
you therefore (worthy Reader) whether this man's slanderous reports be not
propped up with a sound piece of flesh. A worthy Philosopher to challenge the
field, and request other men to fight for him. As for Lanouius, he
acknowledges that Mersennus has earnestly sought his assistance also in these
words: Out of Lanouius his Epistle to Mersennus.

I cannot but approve your counsel in taking the Judgment of other men, which
is, that you should not rashly precipitate your self in your own cause; you
have also esteemed me to be fitly numbered amongst those which you have made
choice of for this business. And verily your case is to be lamented; the which
for your dignities cause I cannot suffer: I will not suffer my suffrage to be
wanting unto you, etc.



These therefore are two Champions, that are come into the Philosophers Camp
or field with their friend Mersennus to tug and wrestle with me: I have (I
thank my God) fully answered them already, and mine answer is at the Print,
and I would that Master Foster had a better pate and capacity than he has,
to make a fourth in the Reply: The more the merrie^ For as truth conquereth all
things, if she be with me I fear no colors, But to proceed with our Text.

Marinus M^rsennus ( says Master Foster) does wonder, that King JAMES of
blessed memory would suffer such a man to live and write in his Kingdom.

To this I answer that King James of everlasting memory for his Justice,
Piety, and great Learning, was by some Envious persons moved against me,
touching the same subject; but when I came unto him, and he in his great
wisdom had examined the truth and circumstance of every point, touching this
scandalous report, which irregularly and untruly was related of me, he found
me so clear in my answer, and I him so regally learned and gracious in
himself, and so excellent and subtle in his inquisitiue Objections, as well
touching other points as this, that in stead of a check (I thank my God) I
had much grace and honor from him, and received from that time forward many
gracious favors of him: And I found him my just and kingly Patron all the
days of his life. And must I now after so regal a Judge have such an vpstart
Inquisitor as is Master Foster, to Judge and censure me again, and that by
the ridiculous authority of an ignorant Friar, whose friend does justly
condemn him, and check him for his slanders, and clear me from all such
crimes as he obiecteth against me?

Then he makes a very shrewd objection, saying, Because Mersennus writ against
Doctor Fludd for a Magitian, therefore I suppose that this is the cause, why he
has printed his Books beyond the Seas, our University and reverend Bishops,
etc: as before.

Though I need not answer, in this point, a man of Fludd.
so envious a condition; yet, for Charities sake, which bids me not offend my
brother, I will at this time satisfy him. I sent them beyond the Seas, because
our home-borne Printers demanded of me five hundred pounds to Print the first
Volume, and to find the cuts in copper; but beyond the Seas it was printed at
no cost of mine, and that as I would wish: And I had 16. coppies sent me over
with 40. pounds in Gold, as an unexpected gratuitie for it. How now Master
Foster, have I not made you a lawful answer? As for the University: I wonder
my works should seem so male-gracious unto it, when they are registered in two
of her Libraries. And surely, if my conscience had persuaded me, that there
had been any thing in them, which had been so heinous or displeasant, either
to the Kings Majesty, or the Reverend Bishops, I would not have presumed, to
have made first our late King James of blessed memory, and next three of the
Reverend Bishops of the Land the Patrons of them; being that I, electing them
my Patrons, must present them with the first fruits, and therefore must know,
that if any thing had happened amiss in them, it could not be hidden from
them, whom in verity I would be afraid to displease, as being such as with my
heart I reverence.

His friend Ioachimus Frisius ( or rather his own Foster p. Fos^
self, as says Lanouius, in a Book called Summum Bonum) excuses Roger
Bacon, Tritemius, Cornelius Agrippa, Marsilius Ficinus, and Fratres Roseae
crucis from being Caco-magitians, I wonder at nothing more than that Beelzebub
was not in the number.

A singular Diabolical Conceit! Fludd.


For the first, whether that Book be mine or no: I have satisfied Gassendus,
whose only ape Lanouius is: For he obiecteth nothing, but what he takes out
of Gassendus his Book, To make Master Fosters worship an account I am not
minded at this time, only thus much I will say for Ioachimus Frisius, that
what he has produced out of their own works, in their own defense, excuses
them, and accuses such calumniatours as Master Foster is, who are so apt to
condemn a person for that they are altogether ignorant in: Let the Readers
observe the proofs in Frisius his Book to clear them; and then if any will
afterward accuse them, I shall deem them partial. But we must note by the
way, that our Sponge-bearer must make election of Jesuits (as in his Epistle
he confesses) and Friars and Seminary Priests to be his instructors and
teachers, to reply both against the Weapon-Salue and me, when he knows that
they are such as can afford neither him nor me (as being esteemed among them
for Heretics) one good word. Nay, I will tell him for his greater shame, that
their only spite unto me is, because they discern my works to be well
esteemed abroad in the world, my self being (as exorbitant unto their Church)
esteemed by them an heretic. All that the greatest Adversary I have, even
Marinus Mersennus himself aymeth at, is to have me change my Religion, and to
gain me to their side, and for that intent he promises me, if I will leave my
Heresy (as he terms it) many rewards and courtesies. But I find here at
home even amongst our own Religion, some men less friendly and greater
enemies unto me and mine honest endeauours than abroad. Mersennus his words are
these, after he had thought with great terms to terrify me.

Marinus Mersennus out of the 1744. Column^ of his Commentary upon Genesis.

But if you Robert Fludd will leave your Heresy, I with my friend will
heartily embrace you, and will either face to face speak with you, or by
Letters confer with you about certain Sciences, and I will desire him not to
write against you; but that you may be received by the Grace of the divine
power amongst the Children of the Catholic Church, that you together with us
may eternally celebrate the Divine praises in the place of bliss; if not, thou will be tormented with eternal flames; as it is certain that Heretics
shall, and those that go from the Catholic Religion, which your Ancestors
did embrace: especially such, as persist obstinately in their Heresy, will
certainly be damned: For Gods Word is true and infallible, wherefore examine
seriously your conscience.

In another place he wishes, that leaving my Heresy, I would join with them
in the correcting of Arts, telling me, what an applause I should have for so
doing, of every Commonwealth.

This I speak to some of my Countrymens shame, who in stead of encouraging me
in my labors (as by Letters from many out of Polonia, Sueuia, Prussia,
Germany, Transyluania, France and Italy I have been) do prosecute me with
malice and ill speeches, which some learned Germans hearing of, remember me in
their letters of this our Savior CHRIST his speech: N^ est Propheta in sua
patria, No man is a Prophet in hi^ o^ Country. It was not for naught the wise
man s^: Qui scientiam addit, addit and dolorem; and quod in multa scientia
multa sit indignatio: he that adds unto himself Science, contracteth unto
himself much pain and vexation, because that in much science is much
indignation. As for my part (without any bragging of my knowledge be it
spoken) I speak this feelingly; but the sincerity of my guiltless conscience
bids me have patience. And now to the last Member of the Text.

I wonder at nothing more (says he) then that Beelzebub Foster.
was not in the number, etc.

Marry I will tell him why, If it had been true that Fludd.
thevse of the Weapon-salue is witchcraft, and the users thereof Witches and
Coniurers, (as he boldly says) how I pray you should Beelzebub be missing from
our company? But being that it appears false before God and man, it should
seem he was busy in the animating of his Ministers; namely of those
calum-niators and slanderers, which abuse and scandalize publicly, not only
Gods good creatures, but their brethren also. He is busy (I say) to instruct
and incite such his worldly children, true imps of darkness, to judge false
judgments, and to accuse the innocent: And this is the reason that M. Foster
and his likehaue, missed to find Beelzebub or the Devil in this number;
forasmuch as he is nearer them then they are aware of.

The Second Member.
In which, the virtuous validity of M. Fosters Sponge, in wiping away of the
Weapon-Salue, is squeesed out and quite abolished, that thereby the wounded
reputation of the Weapon-Salue may be restored again unto his wonted splendour
and glory amongst men.

CHAP. I.
In which all Objections touching the Question proposed by the Sponge-hearer,
are answered.

THe maine scope of the whole business is contained in this Question, which he
propo^h thus:

Question.

Whether the curing of wounds by the Weapon-Salue, be Witchcraft, and
unlawful to be used?

M. Foster confidently affirms it; and for my part I must as earnestly deny
it. He offers to prove it 2. manner of ways: First Naturally, and by
Natural Philosophy: Secondly, Supernaturally, namely, by Theological and
Ecclesiastical testimony. Let us see therefore how he can prove it to be
witchcraft by the Rules of Theology and Reasons of Nature.

His maine Arguments in his first Article. All lawful Medicines produce their
effect, either by For (...) p. 4.
Divine Institution, as Naamans washing himself in the River of Jordan to cure
his leprosy. The Poole of Bethesda's curing such as entered in after the Angels
stirring it; or else by natural Operation, according to such virtues as God in
the Creation endued such Creatures with, whereof the same Medicines are
composed, as the lump of figgs to cure the Impostume of the King Ezekiah, as
the Wine and Oil, with the which the wounded man was cured by the Samaritan.

But this Weapon-Salue works none of these ways:

Ergo the Cures done by it are not lawful; but prestigious, Magical and
Diabolical.

The minor is denied Fludd.


I prove it two manner of ways. First, it is not by divine Foster.
Institution, because it is no where registered in Scripture. Secondly, it
works not naturally, because it works after a different manner from all
natural Agents: For it is a Rule amongst Divines and Philosophers, that nullum
agens agit ad distans: whosoever works na^urally, works either by vertuall
or natural Contact; But this Weapon-Salue works by neither, therefore it
works not Naturally. It works not by corporal Contact, for the bodies are
disioyned some 20. miles or more, wherefore (if lawful) it must needs be
performed by a vertuall Contact. But not so neither, because all Agents working
after this manner, work within a certain distant and limited sphaere of
Actiuity. The Loadstone does work but at a small distance.

Unto your first reason I answer, that it does not follow, that because it is
no where registered in Scripture, therefore it is not of divine Institution:
what? because figgs, wine and oil, yea, and clay tempered with Spittle, are
noted in Scripture, for external Medicines, therefore must the use of
causticke, vesicatory, healing, fluxing, and such like other external
Medicines daily used by christian Physicians, be reputed for unlawful Magical
and Diabolical, because they are not registered in Scripture? Or is nothing
instituted by God, but what Scripture makes mention of how then can that
saying of the Apostle be true, that God works all and in all? If all and in
all, ^
then works he also all Acts and operations, as well occult and mystical,
as those which are manifest and apparent unto sense: and therefore all Acts are
instituted by God. Because according to Scripture, Quod Deus non vult, non
facit; what he will not he does not; but when he list, and according unto his
will he works in Heaven and in Earth. As therefore he instituteth nothing,
but what must be effected; so nothing is in the whole world effected, which
he does not will, institute and decree. Whereupon the said Apostle
concludingly says: Of him, by him, and in him are all things. But I will Romans
(...).
show this more at large, where I will handle this very Question negatiuely,
namely, where I prove the weapon-oyntment lawful and not cacomagicall.

Unto your second I say, that it is of no more validity then the first. The
maine Axiom of the vulgar Philosophers, upon which you ground your proof for
the excluding of this Salve out of the list of nature is this: Nullum agens
agit ad distans. Upon this you frame out this Argument.

Whatsoever works Naturally, works by corporal Foster.
or vertuall Contact; But this works by neither: Ergo it works not
naturally.

First, concerning that Axiom in Philosophy, I Fludd.
know and can prove it by experience to be false. For the fire heateth ad
distans: The lightning out of the cloud blasteth ad distans. The Bay tree
operateth against the power of thunder and lightning ad distans. The force of
the canons bullet kills without touching ad distans. The sun and fire do
act in illuminating ad distans. The Loadstone does operate upon the Iron ad
distans. The plague, Dysenterie, small pocks, infect ad distans, etc. But to
make all this good you add to the Axiom and say: agit vel per corporalem vel
virtualem contactum, instead of Agit ad distans: I will answer first, that the
Mayor is vnfirme. For I would have you know, that lightning may move the Air
violently, and the Air moved by contact of the Agent, which is Lightning may
stupifie, and strike dead: so that in this case, there is neither vertuall or
corporal contact of the Agent, but an Accidental coming between the
vertuall Agent and the Patient. The like is evident in the Canons bullet, which
flying by a person, without any vertuall or corporal contact, does cast the
person on the ground; for the Agent being the bullet, moves the Medium or the
Air violently, and the Air being so moved casts down the person: But
though I let the Mayor pass for current; yet nevertheless the Minor is
altogether halting. For I affirm, and it is evident to every man's capacity,
that this medicine does cure by a vertual contact, namely, by a Simpathetical
property, which does operate inter terminum a quo and (...) ad quem, between
the beginning and end magnetically and occultly or mystically.

The Minor or Assu^ption is proved thus. Foster.


All Agents working by a vertuall Contact work within a certain distance, and
limited sphere of Actiuity. The Loadstone works upon Iron by a vertuall
Contact, but it works but at a small distance. Fire is the most raging Agent
of all, but a fire of 10. miles compass cannot burn, heat or warm a man 2.
miles distant from it. The Planets excel in virtuall operation all sublunarie
Agents. The Suns light goes through the whole world; but yet a little cloud
obscureth the light, and abateth the heat. The Earth keeps the light from
the Antipodes. The body of the Moon eclipseth the Sun. Now then shall
terrestrial Agents by distance or Interposition be totally, and celestial
partly hindered, and shall this weaponSalue work from the weapon to the wound
at all distances? Shall the interposition of neither air, woods, fire, water,
walls, houses, castells, cities, mountains, heat, cold: shall nothing hinder
or stay the deriuation of the virtue of it?

What a do we have about little or nothing to Fludd.
the purpose. I thought you would have proceeded Syllogistically to the period
of your proofs as you begun; but I see that you find such blocks in the way
to prove your proposition, that like a tired Jade you give over that manner of
demonstration in the midway, wherefore I must tear this your long reply into
textes, the more peculiarly to answer by piece-meale every particular thereof.

All Agents working by vertuall contact, work within Foster.
a certain distance and limited sphaere of Actiuity; The Loadstone works
upon Iron by a vertuall contact, but it works but at a small distance.

Who says that any vertuall Contact can work in (...)
infinitum, when the very world it self is limited? But by your eaue, Sr, the
self same specifical virtue works her operation either further or nearer, as
it is exalted in her actual power and essence. As for example: one kin^ of
gunne powder carries to a further mark then another: one lightning from above
penetrateth deeper then another: In so much that it has been observed, that
by his subtility in p^cing, and force in multiplication, it has entered not
only deep into the hard rock; but also struck through the solidity of the
sword in the scabord and melted it, whereas other fires or lightnings from
above have come short of their vertuall Contact. Also we find that one Loadst
one is of a greater power and agi^ity in working then an other: and therefore it
draws Iron unto it, both at a further distance, and with a stronger force.
Does not the Scripture teach us, that God has given his gifts to some men more
and to some less? As also some inferior Creatures he has made in the very
same kind, more virtuous in working then another? For we ought to observe
evermore (because you speak of a sphere of Actiuity) that the more virtuous
the centrall Agent is in any thing, the larger will his semidiameters be, and
consequently his circumference. As for example; the more powerful the fire is,
the further will it cast it is heat Circularly: So that the sphere of
actiuity, of the very same agent in kind, will be no way certain; but further
or shorter, according unto the power of the same Agent: And consequently
observes no certain limited sphere of Actiuity. To conclude, little does
Master Foster know the admirable power of man's vital spirits being dilated or
emitted; neither can it any way be compared with the weak power of common
Creatures or the Elementarie fire. It is a subtle influence in purity and
penetration, as piercing, yea and rather more then the influence of any star in
Heaven, it is not hindered by clouds, or stopped by walls or mountains, it is
a power essential proceeding radically from God who animateth it, moving
always in an airey medium; Do not you acknowledge so much when with the
Apostle you say: In ^od we li^e, mo^e and have our being. But to proceed.

The fire is the most raging agent of all; but a fire of 10. Fofter.
miles compass cannot burn, heat, or warm a man at two miles distance.

Truly, Master Foster, I can scarce believe you Fl^.
For I am sure, you would find a larger sphere of Actiuity in such a
proportion of fire, then your body would be able to endure without roasting.
For if, Vis vnita sit fortio^r, if (I say) force added to force produces a
greater force, will you have a fire of ten miles compass, not to heat, nay,
not to scortch and burn two miles ^ff? Again, pardon me, Sir, for I say,
your artificial fire is not the most ragingest Agent of all. For the lightning
of heaven is more forcible in it is operation then our artificial fire, for
though it be a of lesser compass then the hundred part of 10 miles; yet, it
so inflameth the air for many miles compass, that it makes the Creature to
sweat again with heat. Moreover the Olympicke and starrie fire excels this
so far, that it pierces many degrees further then the Elementall fire can
do: for though the Elementall fire be full of Actiuity; yet, it is clothed
with so thick a spirit, in which it is carried, that though it be subtle, and
of the fountain of celestial Fire in it self, yet by reason it cannot move
but in his medium or thick vehicle, namely, the artificial fire beneath,
without the thick fume or smoke of the thing combustible, and natural, and
elementall without the clouds and air, in which it is carried, it is for that
cause impedited or hindered for making so great a sphere or Diameter in his
Actiuity, because the vehicle, being thick, cannot without some resistance of
the Air penetrate into the same. But the celestial fire which is the
fountain of the fire of life, by reason of his subtle spirit, which is his
Aetheriall vehicle, pierces all things, being nothing else but a subtle
influence, which according to the best Philosophers advice, does pierce without
any resistance, through rocks and stones, even to the very center of the earth,
as experience it self does witness. For else (say the Philosophers) this
Influence could not by little and little produce in the bowels of the earth the
forms of metalls and precious stones more or less noble, according to the
worthiness of that starrie spirit, which sent down that influence and
pureness of that mercuriall vapor which it animateth. But yet the life of
man, I mean, that refined spirit by which man lives, is more subtle, pure,
and exalted then it: And therefore of a greater Actiuity, as shall be
manifested hereafter.

The Stars celestial excel all sublunarie Agents: the Foster.
Sunns light goes through the world; but yet a little cloud obscureth the
light and abateth the heat. The earth keeps the light from the Antipodes:
The body of the Moon eclipseth the sun, etc.

If the stars celestial excel the sublunarie Agents, Fludd.
then was Master Foster to blame, to say before, that the terrestrial fire,
was the most ragingest and powerfullest Agent of all. But in this he comes
to me: for if the celestial Agents be more potent then the sublunarie, it
argues that it has a greater sphere of Actiuity, and can send out his
Diametrall beams, further then either Loadstone, fire, or such like sublunarie
things, in which, though the agent celestial be, yet it is so cloied and
encombred with a gross spirit, or compacted body, that it cannot operat, as in
the grain of corn it appears, whose internal and centrall fire, except it
be set at liberty, will not move from the superficies of the Earth up toward
heaven and multiply. But to the purpose: what a story does our Author tell us
of the Sun, the Sunns light, the Eclipse, the Interposition of the Earth
betwixt the Sun in our Horizon, and the Antipodes, the impediting of the
Sunns light by the interposition of a cloud? Verily, it is more to show his
small skill in Astronomy and Philosophy, then to touch truly any thing that
is material to our argument. For, I am sure, he is not ignorant, that there are
two things more besides light which are exactly by Philosophers to be
considered (to wit) motion and influence. If he will say that influence can be
stoped by clouds, by interposition of stars, by air, by water, or by earth,
he erreth and knows no Philosophy: motu, lumine, and influentia operantur
stellae, and non solo lumine; The stars operate by motion, light, and
Influence, not by light only. The visible light may be obscured to us, but
the Influence will flow without resistance. And to this purpose speak the
wisest Philosophers. Foster.


Now then shall terrestrial agents by distance or interposition be totally,
and celestial be partly hindered, and shall this Weapon-salue work from the
weapon to the wound at all distances? Shall the interposition (I say) neither
of air, woods, fire, water, walls, houses, castles cities, mountain, etc:
hinder the deriuation of the virtue of it.

First, I say that the original act in this cure issues Fludd.
from the wounded person to the ointment, and not (as he says) from the
ointment to the wound. Next, I told this busy Gentleman before, that makes so
much ado now about nothing; that for as much as this spirit proceeds from a
celestial influence animated by God, therefore it has no such stopps and
rubbes; neither is this subtle of all subtle creatures any way impedited in
his descent to feed and nourish that species, unto which, from the creation of
the species it was ordained; but we must know thus much, that before it came
down it was Catholic and general; but after it did penetrate into bodies,
it endueth a specificall and particular nature, and has an especial Sympathy
with a nature like it self, and for this reason, the wounded man's spirit
penetrateth through the vehicle of Air, in which the blood is conuayed unto
the ointment, and naturally affects the ointment: so much the rather, because
that blood was air, and air is dilated blood in his internal, and that I can
ocularly demonstrate: and also the principal ingredient of the ointment was of
the blood; wherefore as we see the Sun by his beams does send out his spirit
into a grain of corn in the Earth, and has his lively influence or
essential beams of Emission continuate^d with his like; nay, the very same
that lurketh in the dead and corrupted grain, and so by little and little
reuiueth, that which was as it were dead and buried in corruption, making it to
thrive and vegetate with multiplication: even so and no otherwise the Sun of
life in man living and moving yet in man, as the Sun in the great world, has
his lively beam of influence continued unto the spiritual spark in the dead
blood, which is all one with the influe^ce emitting, but buried in a dead
bloody corporal grain, namely, the dead blood conveyed to the ointment, the
which ointment we compare unto a good, a wholesome or a comfortable earth, most
proper for the nourishing of such a hidden spirit as lurketh in the blood,
being that they, namely, the ointment and the blood transferred or committed
unto it, are no strangers to one an other, but as homogeneall, or rather as
well acquainted as one specificall body is unto a Spirit of the same degree in
nature, for as much as the body of the ointment is compounded (according unto
my receipt) ofbloud, fat-flesh and the moss or excresence of the bones of the
same Microcosmicall Species, though not indiuiduum, all which are animated from
that Spirit of life which abides in man's blood: The Influence therefore of
life issuing from the Microcosmicall or humane Son and assisting reuiuifying
and multiplying by little and little the hidden grain of life in the amputated
blood now in the ointment, and also exciting the potentiall or sopified Spirit
in the ointment, no otherwise then we see the Sun of Heaven to stir up, in
the spring time, the Spirits of the earth which the cold winter had stupefied
and benumbed, leaves not to operate between both extremes, until the party
does recover.

This is the true Mystery of the Question, and I will stand to it, that the use
of the earth to rott, raise up, and multiply the grain of wheat is Magical,
Diabolical and unlawful, if it can be truly demonstrated, that the use of
this ointment is witchcraft and insufferable; for their mystery of
multiplication, reviuification and conjunction of the viuifying spirit of the
one, with the viuified spirit of the other, is all one and the same. It was a
type by which St. Paul does teach us the Resurrection, namely, by the dying and
rotting of corn in the earth; and as for the operation of the Sun in the
grains multiplication, every plowman will instruct you in it. Now for a
conclusion unto this, we see that sometimes the Sun is further off, and
sometimes nearer, and yet more or less, he does not cease to operate by
vegetating and multiplying in Animals, vegetables, and mettalls: I must now
hear his conclusion.

O Agent above all Agents, certainly the Angels of Foster.
Heaven cannot work at such a distance, only God whose Essence is infinite,
who is omnia in omnibus, All in all, can work thus, because from him nothing
is distant at all, (...) in him we live, move and have our being, Acts 17.

Leave your admiration! It is nothing to this (...).
our text; you have opened your own Absurdity, I would have you now abandon
the abolishing of our Weapon-Salue, and make use of your Sponge, to wipe away
the stains of your own error, which you have fully expressed in this your
assertion; for by it you have overthrown your tenent: you say after your
admiration above admiration, that the Angels of heaven cannot work at such a
distance: Therefore I conclude thus; Ergo much less the Angels of hell, for
they are darker, and therefore of a less extension; Now you said before, that
a cloud will take away the Suns Light, therefore surely the Devil being an
Angel of darkness, must be more impedited in his vertuall operations, and
consequently in the extension of his power then the Angels of light. But (say
you) it is the power of the Devil that makes this ointment to do such feats
at so far a distance, for else it were not witchcraft nor diabolical: Then
you conclude thus for me, only God whose Essence is infinite, and is all in
all, can work thus, etc: And can he so indeed? And will Master Foster then
attribute this act unto the Devil, the worst of Angels; and so commit worse
then ordinary Idolatry, to arrogate that to the Creature, nay to the Devil,
which by his own confession belongs to God? Will you confess that he is all
and in all, and will you make the goodness more All in the goodness of
healing then God himself? Will you acknowledge with the Apostle, that God
operats all and in all, and will you attribute his work (the fruits whereof is
goodness) unto the Devil, whom he predestined and ordained to punish,
destroy, and mar, and not to make and heal. Do not you absolutely conclude
for the Weapon Salve, in saying: In him we live, move, etc. Proh Deum atque
hominu^ fidem! What an error is this, in so eminent an appearing Philosopher,
nay, in a Theosopher? The world may perceive by this, that Quaedam videntur and
non sunt: But to proceed unto the period.

Let the judicious and Religious Reader judge then if Foster.
the weapon-curing mediciners make not a God of their unguent, and commit not
Idolatry in attributing that to a little smearing ointment of their own
making, which is proper to God only, the Maker of all things

You are deceived, Sir, they make not a God of Fludd.
the unguent, but give hearty thanks unto him for that blessed gift of
miraculous healing, he has bestowed on the unguent. Neither did the Jews
attribute the curing property unto the Poole of Bethesdaes, but unto Gods
curing or salutiferous Angel, which imparted that gift unto it. Wherefore I
would have you (good Sir) and all the world besides to know that all suspicion
of Idolatry is in this case taken away from the mediciners, for as much as due
acknowledgment and veneration is ascribed by them unto God only, for his grace
in healing, manifested by this ointment: Yea verily, rather the style of an
Idolater ought rightly to be imputed to your self (Sir) who so impiously dare
to attribut these good healing blessings of God unto the Devil, the worst of
creatures.

Again, we deny that it is the artificial composition, made with man's hands,
that cures, but the natural ingredients of the composition, which God has
originally endued with such an occult and mystical virtue in ^uring: To
conclude this point, if the judicious Reader will well ponder the words of M.
Fosters Text, he shall find him to be in it an A^stat or Heriticke unto his
own tenent or Doctrine; for his assertion, which he seems so Giant-like to
maintain, is, that the Weapon-Salues cure is diabolical, or effected by the
subtle art of the Devil: but in this Text he dotingly says, that the
mediciners attribute that unto the Salve or little Smearing ointment which is
proper to God only which if it be true, (as true it is) then is Master Foster
in an abominable error, to affirm this cure to be only the act and operation
of the Devil.

Thus (Gentle Reader) you see the efficacy of this man's reasons, as well
Philosophical as Theological, whereby he seems, through the Ignorance of
the cause, to mask Gods Goodness with a prestigious visard of the Devil: you
see the improbability of it. But as penitent sinners, at the last do convert
themselves, from the Devil to God, so (God be thanked) this Weapon-Salue his
Adversary, led rather by a good Spirit then his own will, concludes truly
and says, that it is not the good Angels, and therefore much less the Devil,
that can do such a feate; but God only: I rejoice at his conversion, though
against his will. Lo, how he accords with his great enemy, that damned
Magitian Paracelsus (as he terms him) who affirmed that it was Donum Dei: As
concerning his authors which he cites against it, I esteem them not; there are
as many for it of a better authority and Judgment. For they are neither your
Schoolmen, who deal only in imaginary speculatiue Philosophy; nor Ioan^es
Roberti the Jesuit, and such like fantastical Theorickes; but learned
Physicians, great Philosophers, both theorically and practically profound in
the mysteries of nature, and therefore the fitter persons to discuss a
business of this physical nature: Amongst the which I nominat, in the first
place, the Bishop Anselme, who for his integrity, deep learning and hol^nesse
of life, is canonized a Saint: and then amongst the deep Philosophers and
Physicians, which have been conversant in the Mysteries of God and nature,
Theophrastus Paracelsus, who terms it justly Donum Dei, Cardanus, Ioannes
Bapista Porta, Oswaldus Collius, Ioannes Ernestus, Burgrauius, Rodulphus
Goclinius, Ioannes Baptista ab Helmont, and many other excellent and well
experimented Philosophers and Physicians, who as well by the practical art of
Alchymy (then which there is no Science in the world that does more ocularly
bewray and discover the hidden mysteries of Nature) as other assiduall
observations grounded upon proof, and not on imaginary contemplation only,
have like true philosophers, diued into this mystery of healing: Men (I say)
who have been as subtle to eschew, and wary to foresee the Devils craft, yea,
and to distinguish his act from that of God in Nature, as Master Foster or any
other of his paedagogicall Rabbis: And although some superstitious Physicians
of this kingdom (such, I mean as are apter rashly to judge this business
then to ponder it with due consideration) may seem to be adverse unto it,
yet, they cannot choose but know, that Plura latent quam quae patent, there are
many thousand things more that are hidden in the secret closet of nature, then
commonly man does know; or can at the first discern.

And therefore, if they are ignorant in this my^ery, it will prove an effect
of their highest wise-dome to hold their peace and not meddle in the censuring
of it, as being assured that there are many things hidden in Nature, which fall
not in the sphere of their capacity, verbum Sapienti.

Again, I esteem it a thing fit for freshwater Soldiers in Philosophy, and
not for a settled person in the secrets of nature, to say Ipse dixit: this man,
or that man says or writes thus and thus, Ergo it is so: because, humanum est
errare. It Is most familiar even in the wisest men to err, but it is the best
wisdom in a Philosopher first to diue wisely into the Mysteries of God in
Nature, and then, being confident to conclude demostratiuely; and not according
to other men's sayings, but on his own knowledge.

Now seeing Master Foster has done his worst for the vilifying and
calumniating of this excellent Medicine, unto which by manner of opposition I
have, as yet, but superficially, and by way of solution of his objections
answered, I hope you will give me leave to do my best, to squeese out of his
formidable Sponge, the Weapon-Salues reputation, which like a cormorant it has
devoured and sucked up.

The Question.

Whether the cure of wounds by the Weapon-Salue, be witchcraft and unlawful
to be used?

I deny it, and maintain it two manner of ways: First, Theologically. Lastly,
Theophilosophically, or by the purest natural Philosophy.

CHAP. II.
Herein the virtue and good operation of the Weapon-Oyntment is proved to be
the Gift of God; and not any act of the Devil.

MAster Foster says, that Paracelsus affirms Page 10.
the virtue of this medicine to be Donum Dei, the Gift of God: wherefore he
is very angry with him, and called him a witch, a Coniurer and a Magitian; He
is well served that will preach goodness, either to a mad man, or an
unthankful person, or to one that is zealous without understanding: But
whereas Master Foster has done his best to prove the use of this ointment to
be Magical, prestigious and Diabolical; I hope I shall demonstrate the
contrary upon the same foundations, ascribing the due and right belonging unto
God, unto the right owner, and depriving the Devil of that, which by his
instruments he has falsely usurped.

As before we presume to build any stately Palace, we must lay a strong
foundation, to uphold the whole fabric thereof: even so before we enterprise
to establish or rear a strong Castle of defense to serve as a firmer Negative
opposition against mine Adversaries affirmation; I think it fit to collect
some firm grounds or spiritual arguments, which, in lieu of corner stones may
statuminate and prop up the whole truth of the proposed Question, and express
the true resolution of it, to be clean adverse and different from that which
he makes show of. I will therefore imitate him in making my entrance into this
enquiry with this Sillogistical argument grounded on his own confession which
he makes Page 7. The Angels of Heaven, says he, cannot work at such a
distance only God whose Essence is infinite, and is, omnia in omnibus, all in
all, can work thus:

If God therefore works all in all, by himself without the essential
Assistance of any created spirit or body, then the Devil is no Actor in the
Weapon Salve; but God works all in all of himself, without the essential
Assistance of any creature: Therefore the Devil operateth nothing of or by
himself, although he in his office is evil and destructive, much less in
doing good, as is supposed by the curing through the Weapon-Salue, which is
utterly against his condition, being created or ordained after his fall for
another use.

The Mayor is evident; because a General comprehends every particular: And
therefore if God operateth all in all, then the Devil operateth nothing; but
curing is an operation, and therefore a work only of God.

The Minor or the assumption is justified by the Apostle in these words: There
are diversity of gifts, 1 Cor. 1. 12.
but the same spirit; and there are diversity of Administrations, but one
Lord, and there are diversity of operations, but one God; and the same works
all in all: It is by one and the same spirit, that the gifts of healing are
given. Whereby it is apparent, that first God by his Spirit operateth all in
all, and among those operati-ons, the excellent act and gift of healing is
numbered: Therefore it is not the Devil; but God who only heals. Again, the
prophet says, He sent Psalm. 107.(...).
his Word and healed them: And the wise man says, Thy W^rd (O Lord) heals
all things: And Saint Wisd. 16. John 1.
John has it, that In the Word was life, etc. Ergo all healing and viuifying
power comes from him, as ordained by him the speaker or Creator from the
beginning, to inform, viuifie and create all things. Whereas contrariewise in
the Devil is Death and Destruction; for the Prophet does testify that he was
created to destroy, Ergo nothing but affliction and wounding with sickness,
death and destruction are to be expected of him in his created property, and
that especially after his fall.

But I know Master Foster will reply, that it is true, he is Causa primaria and
principalis, the prime and principal cause of all things; but there are many
s^balternate efficient causes, which operat by themselves, and that according
to their own inclinations, some to good, and some to evil.

To this I ^swer, that it is granted, if he means organicall causes, and not
Essentially Efficients; for such are the Angels, the stars, the winds, the
Elements, the meteors or imperfect bodies, and the perfect or compounded
Creatures; But it is most evident, that only God works essentially in them,
and by them all: And I prove it by many places of holy writ harmonically
agreeing in one sense. As for example: Ego Dominus (says the Lord by the
Prophet) faciens omnia solus, and (...). 14.24.
nullus mecum. I am the Lord who operate and act all things alone, not having
any one to help or assist me in mine action or operation. And again: Iuxta
voluntatem suam facit, tam coeli virtutibus, quam etc. He Daniel 4.
does what he list, as well with the virtues and powers of Heaven, as with the
dwellers on the earth, and there is not any that can resist his hand. Whereby
it is most evident, that only God alone, without any Coassisting Creature,
does essentially work in each organicall Subject, as in an Instrument created
for him to operate his will and pleasure by, as well in Heaven as in Earth, and
that the creature without that act, is as a dead stock, a plain inane and
vacuum without all virtue, act and operation, being unable to do more then the
pipe without the blast of the piper. And to this effect speaks the Esa. 46.10.
Prophet thus: Consilium meum stabit, and omnis voluntas mea flet, etc. My
counsel shall stand, and my will shall be accomplished, calling a bird from
the East Quarter of the world, and a man of my will from a remote Country, I
have said it, and I will bring it to pass. I have created it, and I will do
it, whereby it is evident, that as the Spirit of his mouth, which he has sent
out for the animating of every Creature, moves which way the will of the
Creator or inspirer pleases: So the Spirit of the Creature, which is partaker
of his Power and Will, is immediately obedient, and brings his bodily case or
instrument along with it, to perform his Creators Will, which is irresistible
according to that other place: Deus quodcunque voluit hoc facit. Job 23.
what God would have done that he effects.

And this operation of God, as well by himself, as in his created Organs, does
extend it self; not only unto vulgar and manifest actions and effects; but
also unto arcane or hidden; yea, and to such as are miraculous and wonderful,
even as this cure by the weapon-salue appears to be unto the fantasies o^
worldly men, making them to admire and wonder at it, as a company of birds do
at an Owl in an Iuie bush, censuring after the wisdom of this world
diversely, and that according to every man's imagination. Some boldly and
presumptuously proclaiming it to be the work of the Devil; Some auerre it to
be a maine fopperie and vain imagination in too credulous persons who by
having only a good opinion of the thing, are cured: Some condemn it, as a
superstitious and abominable manner of healing, for as much as the election of
ingredients, must be done by an Astrological observation: And others, approac^
nearer the truth, term it a Natural Magia, or a Magneticall or secret act of
Nature: And some more essentially grounded, and religiously observing the
prescribed order of holy writ, do (as true Christians are bound to do)
refer, both this miraculous and wondrous act in curing, and every other
wondrous work besides, unto that glorious God, who has made both heaven and
earth, and assigned to them by his spirit, as well those virtues which work in
the eyes of worldlings miraculously or wonderfully, as others which appear
more familiar unto their sense: according unto that of David, Psalm 33.
verbo Domini firmati sunt coeli and spiritu ab ore eius omnis virtus little: by
the Word of the Lord the heavens were established, and by the breath of his
mouth, each virtue or power thereof. And their maine ground and foundation, for
the maintenance of Gods right and the abolishing or taking away of all such
miraculous and wonderful power, as is falsely by blind worldlings ascribed
unto the Devil, is prescribed them, out of this divine and truth-telling hymn
of the Royal Prophet.

Blessed be the Lord God of Israel, who only and by Psalm. 71. 18.
himself, works m^ruailes! Or as he has it in another place:

Praise the Lord, for his mercy endures for ever, who Psalm 135. 3.
only does great meruailes!

And consequently, not any Devil; nor Angel; nor man; nor medicine; but God
only performs it: by that spiritual Gift of healing, he has imparted unto
man and his creatures in their creation and continued it in them from
generation to generation.

It is manifest, therefore, that only God operateth all in all essentially,
and not any created organ, be it spiritual or corporal: and consequently,
not the Devil (who is the organ of darkness, ordained and animated or
agitated to effect only deeds of darkness, as are sickness and destruction,
and not to be conversant in goodness, and especially about deeds of light, as
are life (healing and preserving). As who should say, that God acting and
operating essentially in all and over all, had not created good Angels or
spiritual Organs to bring to pass and effect the gifts of life and health,
which he has of his mercy imparted unto his creatures; but he must make
election of that spiritual Organ, to perform such good deeds, whom he
created for a clean contrary purpose, as shall be forthwith proved:

Gods purpose and will, as well in his Creation as after it, cannot be
withstood: that is, there cannot be produced an effect, contrary to his will
or decree.

But Gods will and purpose was to make the Devil his instrument or minister to
punish and afflict with diseases, sickness, and death.

Ergo, this his purpose as well in the Devils creation as by ordination after
his fall cannot be withstood, or contradicted by any effect which is contrary
unto that first will and decree of God.

Now for the confirmation of the Major we find it thus written: Deus iuxta
voluntatem suam facit, etc. Dani. 4.
(as before) God does his will and pleasure, as well with the celestial
virtues and powers, as with the dwellers on the earth, and there is not any
that can resist his hand. And again: Quodcunque voluit hoc facit, what God
would (...).
have, that does he. And again, as touching his will (...). 46. 10.
in the creation (as before) Consilium meum stabit and omnis voluntas mea fiet,
My Counsel shall stand, and my will shall be established. And hence it is
written in Genesis, Voluntati Dci number possumus resistere? Can Genesis 50.
we resist the Will of God? And the Apostle has it; Voluntati Dei quis
resistat? Who can resist the Will Romans 9.
of God? Not any creature: and a reason is given by the wise Solomon, because
volunt as Domini in aeternum permanebit. The will of the Lord shall endure for
ever. (...). 19.
And by whom, I pray now, does he operat and bring to effect this his Will and
decree to goodness and healing? What by the Devil? Contrary to his original
ordinance, even by him who is a rebel unto all goodness? Is it possible that
he, that has not a lot of goodness in him, could produce and bring to pass
such a gift of goodness and charity, as is that of healing? No, this is
performed by Jesus the Catholic Savior, who is the head of potestats and
powers, who alters not one Tittle, in effecting Gods Will in heaven and in
earth: as it i said, Voluntatem vt faciam eius qui misit me, de coelo descendi,
I came down from heaven to do his ^n 6.
will that sent me. It is therefore only our Spiritual Lord Jesus (unto whom
power is given from his Father) who brings all things to that absolute
effect, which without all contradicton was decreed by the Father: And not false
gods; nor Angels; nor Devils; nor men; according unto that before Corinth. 8.
mentioned. Though there be that are called Gods, as well in heaven as in
earth, yet unto us there is but one God the Father, of whom are all things, and
one Jesus Christ, by whom are all things. Whereby it is argued, that God the
Father decrees, as the father and root of all things, in whom complicitly and
ideally they were before all beginning; but the Son essentially effects his
will, and makes every Ideal thing to appear explicitly and really: and
therefore neither Angels nor devils, nor stars, nor any thing else, but only
our Lord Jesus Christ, moving in his Ministers, as well spiritual as
corporal, effects, both in and after the creation, all things, that exist,
and consequently the art of curing. And hereupon by Scripture (as it is said
before) we are taught, that it is the Word that cures all those dolorous
effects of sickness, which the devil brings to pass: For first the Psalmist
says, Immisit in eos iram indignationis Psalm. 78. 49.
suae, iram and tribulationem, per malos Angelos. He sent out amongst them the
anger of his indignation, anger and tribulation by evil angels, etc. Here
therefore you see the effects of the ministry of Satan and his angels, which
is to strike and wound with sickness. And then in another place he shows
the immediate curer of these devilish effects, in these words: Misit verbum
and sanauit^eos, He sent his Word and healed them. And the Wise man says: Non
herba, Psalm. 107. 20.
aut malagmate; sed verbo tuo, quod sanat omnia, curasti eos: verily, I say
unto you also, that it is not the herb or animal or mineral medicine; but
the gift of healing, in the said creatures, assigned unto them in their
creation, by the word that heals.

As for the Minor, it is confirmed by the express Esaias 54. 10.
words of the Prophet, (speaking in the person of God himself) Ecce ego creaui
fabrum sufflantem in igne prunas, and proferentem vas in opus suum, and ego
creaui interfectorem ad disper dendum. Behold, I have created a Smith to blow
the coals in the fire, and to produce a vessel in his work, and I created
the Destroyer to destroy, whereby we may see, that the will of God was not
that he should be created, or at the least ordained after his fall for a
healer, preserver, or maker; but for a Wounder and Destroyer, yea, his nature
was made so cancrous and malicious, that he does not only envy at man's
prosperity (and therefore cannot against the nature of the office which God
assigned to him in his creation, or after his fall be his curing angel) but
also he repineth at the excellency of God his Creator, as may appear by the
third of Genesis. Whereupon Solomon says: Diaboli inuidia mors introiuit in
orbem terrarum: Death and destruction Wisdom 2.
entered into the world by the malice of the devil: and therefore he is far
from doing the office of healing and preserving. It is Christ which has the
office of life, preservation and health, who for this cause was sent by his
Father to withstand the bad acts of the devil. Diabolum habentem mortis
imperium (says S. Paul) Christus sua morte destruxit. Christ by Hebr. 2.
his death destroyed the devil, having the power of death under him. It is
that salutiferous emanation of God the Father of life, which was from all
beginnings ordained to quell the devil and his malicious intents or effects.
Forasmuch as Diabolus aduersarius tanquam Leo rugiens ^uit quaerens quem
deuoret: 1 Peter 5.
The common adversary the devil, does compass about, seeking whom he may
de^oure; and now is he become a physician and a turne-coat unto that office,
for the which by Gods will he was created? Did he kill so many when he was a
young physician, and has he invented now, after his long experience the
weapon-salue to cure some? A pretty, witty conclusion of Master Foster, and the
Jesuitical Ioannes Roberti his foster father, in this blind conceit.

But now I will be so bold as to produce an argument for this ointment, not
unlike to that which Master Foster has framed:

If there be no divine institution or authority out of holy writ, to warrant
any curing effect or Art by the devil, either by supernatural or natural
means, then is there no reason to believe, that the cure done by the
weapon-salue is effected by the work of the devil.

But in holy writ, there is not found any such warrant for the curing of wounds
by the devil, through the help either of Supernatural or Natural means.

Therefore it is not to be credited, that the curing by the weapon-salue can be
effected by the Art or act of the devil.

The Mayor is of the selfsame effect with that of M. Fosters argument, where
he seems to aver, that because the use of this weapon-salue is not effected
by divine institution, nor yet has any testimony or example to confirm it out
of holy writ, therefore it is prestigious. And again (as is said before) what
God has originally decreed in the archetypicall Idaea, that cannot be altered;
but the devil was ordained for another use, quite contrary unto the pious and
merciful act of healing.

The Minor is proved by that which is said already; as also the words of our
Savior are very efficacious Man. 12.22
for this our purpose: For when he had cured one that was both blind and
dumb, and possessed with an evil spirit, so that (as the Text says) He that
was blind and dumb, could see and speak: The Pharisees said, This man casts
out devils, no otherwise then by Beelzebub, the prince of devils; But Christ
answered, Every kingdom divided against it self, is brought to naught, and
every house or city divided against it self, shall not stand; so if Satan
cast out Satan, he is divided against himself. Whereby it is clear, that
being all diseases, as well internal as external, are by Gods decree
inflicted by the devil and his angels, as being created ministers, by which
and in which, God uses to execute vengeance, and to punish mortal creatures.
It were a wrong unto the Office assigned unto him, in, or immediately after his
creation, to work violence against his own subjects by casting them out, or
curing the harms they have effected. We have many places in holy writ to
confirm, that Satan and his angels are contrary to the Art of curing, and are
always ready to hurt with sicknesses, and afflict with death; but we c^not
find one to testify any curing faculty in him. As for example: It is said that
there was power assigned ^
unto the four Angels, which were by God made presidents of the sour Winds,
to hurt the earth, the Sea and the trees: Now every one of these were Princes
of many Legions of evil and wounding spirits. Again, the Prophet says, God
comes from the South, the heavens were covered with his glory, and the earth
was full of his praise, at his feet was death, or (as S. Jeremy ha^h it)
Egredietur diabolus ante pedes eius, the devil ^ill go forth before his feet;
but other interpreters say, the pestilence went before him, and the contagion
raging Aba. 3.3. Psalm 91.
and destroying in the South. And David says, Do not fear the plague raging
in the South (as some interpreters have it.) But S. Jerome says, a Daemonia
meridiano, from the D^on, or spirit of the South. We find that it was Satan,
that was Gods Instrument or Organ by which he wrought his will on Job, and Job
1.2.
thereupon he said to his Creator, Lay thou but thy hand upon him, etc. by
which words it may be signified, that he used more reverence unto his Creator
in that his acknowledgement, then Mr. Foster does, in making this; Organ of
sickness, a peremptory and absolute actor, as well in the effect of healing,
as destroying: namely of himself, and not as he is only the Organ, or
Instrument, by which God does essentially work his own ends of vengeance
against offenders. This therefore was he that wounded patient Job with a foul
botch or ulcer, and incited in his spirits a fiery fever, which made him thus
to cry out in his anguish: The arrows of the Omnipotent are grievous against
me, their poison drinks up my spirits, and the troubles of God, which are
sharply set against me, do oppose me, where he attributed all Job 6
unto God, and not unto Satan, who is his wounding Organ. Also David saw the
destroying angel of the Lord betwixt heaven and earth, with a naked sword in
his hand, extended against Jerusalem, who struck a great many 1 Chronicles 2^.
with the pestilence. Also Iehoua sent the killing angel into the camp of the
Assyrians, who destroyed every 2 Chro. 32.21.
valiant man at arms in one nights space: Also Moses, by the destroying Organ
of God (using in steed of the weapon-curing-salue, which was contrary to his
office, art, and skill, the aspersion of an infectious powder) afflicted the
Egyptians with ulcers and pustules. ^odus 9.
Now that it is not the Angelical Organ; but God himself in the Organ, which
does essentially act and strike, it apppeareth by this place, where Ieho^a
says: Circa mediam noctem, ego egressurus ero in ^
medium Aegypti, and morietur omnis primogenitus: about midnight I will go out
into the midst of Egypt, and every first borne shall die. But in the next
Chapter it is said: Iehoua transibit praeter portam illam, and non sinet
interfectorem seu percussorem, seu vastatorem, domos vestras vastare. God will
pass over that door, and ^.
will not suffer the destroyer to strike or hurt your houses.

Whereby it is apparent, that the essential Act of God is present with the
organicall destroyer, and does act in it. Lastly, to show you that it was
wicked spirits, which, by the agitation of their Creator, did cause these
diseases in Egypt: the Kingly Prophet argues in these words before mentioned,
Immisit in eos iram in dignationis suae, iram and tribulatinem per malos
angelos, He sent amongst them the fierceness of ^is anger, wrath, and
indignation by evil angels. I can prove this by many more examples of holy
Text, namely, how God does punish and plague with sickness, diseases and
death, by these his destroying ministers, or organicall causes, which he
created of set purpose, to perform his will in this afflicting manner; but it
cannot be proved that he did employ them in the contrary office, namely, in
that of healing and curing: For, when he is pleased to cure or heal, he has
an infinity of good Angels to perform that office, all which are concluded
under the dominion of the Archangel, Raphael, which therefore has that name,
Quasi medicina Dei, as who should say, the medicine of God.

I must therefore conclude, that as the only act of God, is as well to wound
as to cure, so has he ordained Instruments or Organs to serve his turn in the
execution ofboth these operations: which are so contrary one to the other in
condition, as light is to darkness, or good to evil. Now, that it is the act
only of God, as well to heal by his good Organs, as to strike and wound by
his destroying Organs; we learn out of many places of Scripture. Si plaga
afficiet Iehoua Aegyptum, qui plagis afsecit, Isa. 17.22
sanat cum conuersi fuerint ad Iehouam, If God will afftict Egypt with plagues,
he that ^leth with diseases, can again heal the afflicted, when they turn
unto him; And, yet, David confesses, that he did afflict them with evil
angels: and Job says, Deusest qui Job 5.
vulnerat and medetur, percutit and sanat. It is God that wounds and cures,
he strikes and heals, and yet it was Satan, which was Gods hand to act Jobs
misery. And in another place; Ego occidam, and viuere facia^, percutiam and
sanabo, and non est qui de manu mea possit cruere: I will kill, and I will make
to live, I will strike, Deuteronomy. 32.
and I will heal, and there is not one that can escape my hand. And Solomon;
Tu vitae and mortis potestatem habes, Wisd. 16. 13.
deducis ad portas inf^ni, and reducis, and manum tuam nihil potest effugere:
Thou hatst the power of life and death in thine hand, thou bring into the
mouth of the grave, and deliuerest, or bring back again. Whereby it is
manifest, that it is only God, who either miraculously, or by virtue of his
creatures, which he has instituted for this, or that wholesome purpose, that
cures, and again wounds, by the means of his organicall ministers, be they
angelical or humane. As for example: he causes his Angel Raphiel, to make
use of the fish his Liver and Gall, for the chasing away of the destroying
Fiend, and to heal the blind Tobias. Also the Angel did give the virtue of
healing unto the Lake Bethesdas. And again, the Psalmist says, Plag a non
appropinquabit tentorium Psalm 91.
tuum, nam Angelis suis praecipiet de te; but that by any authority of Text he
made use of Satan, or any of his dark angels, to accomplish any such deed of
light, or to employ any of Gods creatures, as are the Fat, Blood, or Flesh, to
cure a wounded or vlcerous creature, when I can find it in Scripture, I will
in some sort believe it; but because that will prove too long a search for
Master Foster, and again, I find the precedent places of Scripture to be
generally against it; therefore I conclude, that the mystical curing by the
Weapon-Salue is the merciful gift of God only. Wherefore unto him wholly, and
unto no devil in hell, be ascribed all virtue, power and glory, for his
mercies in general, and for this virtue and property of healing by the
weapon-salue in particular, for ever, Amen. Blessed (I Psalm 71.
say with the Prophet David) be the Lord God of Israel, who only works all
wonders, and therefore effects this wonderful manner of curing, which
passes man's understanding. To him therefore be ascribed, for it, all praise
and honor for evermore.

CHAP. III.
How by an abstruse inquisition made into the mystery of Sacred Philosophy, the
question proposed, concerning the lawfulness or unlawfulness of the
Weapon-salues usage, is resolved, and Mr. Fosters Sponge well squeesed.

IN this precedent Chapter, I have proved Thelogically, and that by pure
examples out of Scripture, that the devil was the spiritual Organ, ordained
by God in the creation for an use clean opposite unto that of curing and
healing: and therefore it is unlikely, that now in his latter days after so
many destructions committed by him, in his former age, he can become a sauer
and healer of diseases.

Now will I prove in a more evident manner, and that by Sacred Philosophy, that
Gods viuifying Spirit, moving in the ayry Organ of the World, does by his
virtuous application or aspect to the weapon-salue, effect the cure of such as
are wounded. And I call this manner of proving Theo-philosophicall, or
belonging unto Sacred Philosophy; because it respects the nature of this
manner of curing, as it receives his essential act and being from God, moving
and acting in and by his created Spiri^uall Organs, in and over all. Of this
manner of Philosophy, St. Paul speaks thus, Videte ne Colos. 2.9.
quis vos decipiat per philosophiam, and inanem fallaciam, secundu^ traditionem
h^minum, secundum element a mundi, non secundum Christum, quia in ipso habitat
omnis plenitudo diuinitatis corporaliter, and estis in illo repleti, qui est
Caput omnis principatus and potestatis. Beware, lest there be any man that
deceive you through philosophy and vain deceit, according to the traditions of
men, according to the rudiments of the world, and not after Christ, for in him
dwells the fullness of the Godhead bodily, and (...) are complete in him,
who is the head of Principalities and Powers. By which words he seems to
term the Ethnic philosophy vain and deceitful, forasmuch as it is framed
out, according to the rudiments of this world, which do ordain many
essential subalternate Agents acting and operating absolutely and simply of
themselves without any consideration had unto the Catholic and supreme Power
of God the Father of all things, from whom radically all essential actions
proceed, which are afteward effected by our Lord Jesus Christ, by whom all
things have their being, and not from any subalternat agent, or efficient
creature. For though they ferue as organicall ministers; yet they are but dead,
except God apeareth and opperateth in them by his Spirit, and therefore is all
act and operation attributed unto God, as it is proved before by the Apostle,
saying, One God operateth all in all: And again ^
he says: Though there be, that are called Gods in heaven 1 Co. 8.
and in earth; yet, unto us there is but one God, who is the Father, of whom
are all things, and we in him; and one Lord Jesus Christ, by whom are all
things, and we by him: For this cause is God called Alpha and Ome^a, Apo^. 1.
the beginning and the end, namely, as in himself he decrees all, and by his
Word he essentially operateth and effects all, and that immediately. Now Sap.
12.1. Psalm. 33, 6.
that his very Spirit is in all things, the wise Solomon does intimate
expressly, saying, that the incorruptible Spirit of the Lord is in all things,
and that from the Spirit of Gods mouth proceeds the virtues of all things, as
the Prophet David tells us: which being so, it must consequently follow, that
the essential form or life of every Creature in this world, must depend on
this Spirit, and have his centrall seat of Actiuity in proportion more or
less from this Agent of Agents, who as it acts in the Center of all things;
so is it even continuat unto the circumference, that is, from Alpha or the
Center, unto Omega or the Circumference: for else would there be a division of
the divine Essence, which is impossible. And for this cause is God said to fill
all, and to operate all in all; wherefore the Apostle concludes (as before)
that the Ethnic Philosophy framed out by the tradition and invention of man's
wisdom, is false and deceitful; but that which is founded only upon Christ,
is to be embraced; because, that in him dwells the fullnes of Divinity,
which operateth all in all, according unto the will and decree of his Father:
who is the head of all Potestates and principalities, and consequently of all
Angels; And therefore Angels can effect nothing, but as he acts in them and
by them as his spiritual Organs. Lo, this is therefore that Theosophicall
subject, whereby I make my strickt Inquisition into the mystery of this manner
of healing by the Weapon-Salue, And thus much for a preamble to the discourse.
Now to the purpose:

We must observe in the cure done by this Weapon-Salue three principal
things, namely, the party wounded, the Ointment curing, and lastly, the
occulte actiuity, which reigns in the blood and issues from the blood unto
the Ointment.

The party wounded may rightly be compared to the world, and therefore is
called a little world: he is composed of heaven and earth; namely, of spirit
and body, and as the Creator did send out his Spirit, which moved upon the
waters, and did inform, animate and viuifie them; so that (as St. Peter says)
of them and by them were the heavens and the earth framed, and by this
spiritual Word established unto this day: even so man's heaven and his earth
are fashioned out by the same eternal spirit of life, on which it relyeth and
continues in his specificall succession, even unto this very day. And therefore
is it said, Ye are carved out of one and the same Spiritual Rock, and that In
him we line, we move and have our Being: and that we are the Temples ^
of the Holy Ghost, and the Members of Christ, and that We are in God the
Father, and by our Lord Jesus Christ, (as it is rehearsed before) and that
Regnum Dei sit intra nos, The Kingdom of God is within us: Neither let us
ascribe this Gods goodness to our selves alone, since that it extends it
self to every Creature John 1. (...). 16.
besides, though not so abundantly. For, in Verbo erat vita, in the Word was
life, and Judith says in her prayer: Seruiat Dc^omnis omnis Creatura, quia
dixisti and factae sunt, misisti Spiritum tuum and creatae sunt: Let every
Creature ser^e thee O Lord, because thou spakest the Word, and they were made,
thou did send forth thy spirit and they were created. And the Prophet says:
Esa. 42. 50.
Haec dicit Deus creans coelos, extendens eos firmans terram and quae germinant
in ea, dans flatum popul^ qui est supraeam and spiritum calcantibus eam: Thus
says the Lord, who has created the heavens and extended them, and fastened the
earth and all things that grow out of it; who gives breath unto the people
that is upon it, and spirit to those Creatures that tread upon it. And King
David; Psalm. 104.9.
Deo dante Creaturis colligu^; abscondente faciemsuam, perturbantur; recipiente
spiritum eorum, exspirant; emittente spiritum suum, receantur: God giving to
the Creatures, they receive it; hiding his face from them, they are troubled;
taking back again from them their spirit, they dye; and sending forth his
spirit, they are recreated or revived. And Job, homin^m constituit Job. 34.
(...).
Deus super terram, apponens ad ^am animam suam; si spiritum seu flatum eius
adse reciperet, deficeret and exspiraret omnis ca^: simul and ^omo in cinerem
reverteretur: God made man upon earth, giving unto him his soul or life. If he
should receive or draw unto himself his spirit or breath of life, all flesh
would dye, and also man would return to ashes. By all these authorities we are
taught, that the life, form, and nature of every Creature, does essentially
spring and proceed from God, and therefore what gift of healing is found to
proceed either from compounded or simple medicines, be they Angelical,
Celestial, Elementall, or of an Animal, Vegetable, or mineral composition,
it proceeds from their Creator, as being either bestowed upon them in their
Creation for that wholesome purpose, or else miraculously and beyond the common
course of Nature imparted unto some Creatures to effect. And therefore man
ought not rashly to condemn a medicine, because it works after an other
manner then the vulgar does: For God has allotted unto some medicines, occult
and hidden properties; and therefore work they not by an external and evident
elementarie quality. And this occult virtue is called by some wise men:
Angelicus actus, Re^elin. de Art. cab.
qui est tanquam inter Deum and Naturam virtus media, a qua fiunt operationes
in rebus qu^s natura earum vel non faceret vel sic faceret, quas alij dicuut
prouenire a proprietate occulta, and alij quia tales: An Angelical act, which
is, as it were, a middle virtue between God and nature; whereby operations are
effected in things, which the elementarie Nature of them, could not perform,
or would so bring to pass, as they which are said by some to proceed of an
occult quality, and others quia sunt tales: And such was the effect in curing
by the water of the poole of Bethesdas; not that the manifest elementary
quality of the water did it; But the Act of the Angel which moved it: In like
manner can no man express any natural reason that is manifest, for the
attraction of the Iron by the Loadstone, or of straw by Amber, or why the
Loadstone looks toward the North, or why the Laurel or Baytree preserves
from the harms of lightning and thunder, and likewise how directly this cure
is effected, etc. The causes of these things are occult and hidden unto the
common philosopher; but to come a little nearer to the point.

It is apparent, then, that the incorruptible Spirit Wisd. 1.
is in all things, but most abundantly (next unto the great world) in the
little world called man: For as in the great world, God is said rightly by
Jerome his translations (leaving the corruption of others) to have put, his
Tabernacle in the Sun, from whence by a perpetual, and never dying motion,
he sends forth life and multiplication, to every member and creature of the
great world, and by the agility of his Spirit, (for Solomon says) It is omni
Wisd. 7.
re mobilior, the most moveable of all things, he moves and gives life unto
the whole Spirit of the world; which also the same wise man does justify in
these words: Sol gyrans a meridie flectitur ad Aquilonem: lustrans vniuersain
circuitu pergit spiritus. The Sun moving from the South, bends toward the
North, illuminating the whole world, the spirit or air of it does E^cl. 1.
move circularly. Whereby he argues, that the spirit in the Sun animateth
and gives motion, life and spirit unto the ayrall spirit of the whole world (
for without his assiduall motion and act, as Aristotle and all other
Philosophers confess, the air would soon be corrupt, and be as it were dead,
and of no validity) for the reason hereof, the holy Text concludes, that the
Holy spirit of discipline fills the whole world. So also, and in the very
like manner, the same incorruptible spirit fills the little world (est enim
Templum Spiritus Sancti it is the Temple of the Holy Ghost) (...) Timoth. 6.
and has put his Tabernacle in the heart of man, in which it moves, as in
this proper macrocosmicall Sun in Systole, and Diastole, namely, by
contraction and dilatation without ceasing, and sends his beams of life over
all the whole frame of man, to illuminate, give life, and circular motion unto
his spirit. And thereupon the Apostle reciprocally says of this little world,
as in another place of the great one, In Deo viuimus, mouemur, and sumus; In
God we live, move, and have our being: also as this abstruse spirit does give
heat by his actiuity and essential motion unto the great world, the very same
it does effect in the little world, and all things else, when it does not
quiescere, or in se delitescere, that is, not rest or withdraw his own act
within it self, as shall be expressed forthwith. This therefore being well
considered in the first place, we proceed thus:

As this Principal and centrall mouer in the spirit of each world, does
radically, and soly act and move essentially in and over all, namely, from the
center to the circumference, his Primum mobile, or first moved in the great
world, is the principal Aetheriall region or sphere, by the circumrotation
whereof, the Sun (which as David says, is a vessel full of the Glory of
God) is wafted about the earth in 24. hours, that thereby the whole spirit of
the world may be recreated with life, vegetation, and multiplication. And
therefore this Spirits first, and most worthy sphere, in which it centrally
does move, is the Quintessentiall or Aetheriall spirit of life, which by his
presence is viuified and animated: and this Aetheriall spirit being the
immediate vehicle of that incorruptible spirit of life, is carried in the
grosser elementary or sublunary air, by which medium it penetrateth, into
animal, vegetable and mineral bodies by inspiration or exspiration in animals
partly occult, as by the pores of the body, and partly manifest, as by the
lungs, and in vegetables and minerals occultly, and only to be perceived with
intellectual eyes, and so gives life and multiplication to every thing. As
this emanation came from God, into the world, the Prophet said, Vestitur lumine
Psalm. 104. (...).
quasi vestimento, he is clothed with light, as with a garment, and so Verbo
Domini facti sunt Coeli, and spiritu Psalm. 33. 6.
ab ore eius omnis virtus eorum: by the Word of the Lord the heavens were made,
and by his spirit, all the virtues thereof, among the which virtues, life,
form, vegetation and multiplication were the chiefest. As he took possession
of the Etheriall, or starry heaven, Psalm (...).
the same Prophet says, Posuit Tabernaculum suum in Sole; he made the Sun
his Tabernacle. Again, as he endued the grosser vestiment of the air, so the
Prophet says, Densa Nubes tigurium Psalm 104.
eius, qui vehitur super alas venti: He made the thick and dark cloud his
dwelling place, who is carried on the wings of the wind: Again, he spoke in
thunder, and 2 Reg. 22.
lightning went from his nostrills: as he entered into the little world, or
man, so the Apostle says, Vos estis Templum spiritus sancti, Ye are the
Temples of the holy Ghost; Vos estis membra Christi, Ye are the members of
Christ. And again, Aperiatur terra, and pariet Saluatorem; Let the earth open,
and it shall bring forth a Savior; as he penetrated into the earth, so the
Isai 45.8.
Wise man says, Spiritus sapientiae implet orbem terra. rum. To conclude; as
to create, viuifie, and sustain Wisd 1.
each creature, he put on all things, so he says: Spiritus incorruptibilis
inest ^nibus; and again, Spiritus Wisd 12.
Dei implet omnia: whereby it is evident, that this divine and incorruptible
spirit, by which we live, move, and have our being, is in man, for without it
he is dead, a snuff, a nothing: his place therefore, or the heaven wherein it
moves, is out Ether, or heavenly spirit, which acts inuisibly in our
ayeriall vehicle: the grosser and courser part whereof, is blood, as well
vital or arteriall, as natural and venall. Hence came those especial
ordinances, or legal precepts, which were given by God, touching the blood,
not only of man, but also of beast: For as much as it was the seat of the (...)
9.5.
spirit oflife, Sanguinem (says God) sedem vestrarum animarum requiram, I will
require your blood, which is the seat of your lives or souls; and again,
Sanguinem hominis qui effuderit, per hominem sanguis (...) effundatur, quoniam
in imagine^ suam fecit Deus hominem; whosoever sheddeth the blood of man, by
man let his blood be shed, because God made him after his own Image; whereby
is argued, that by reason of the divine spirit, which dwells in man's blood,
by the which we are fashioned after the Image of God. God himself has given
an especial charge, to have a respect unto the blood. For this reason
therefore did the (...) of the blood of Abel, cry out for vengeance against the
homicide Cain: Yea, so precious was the Genesis 9.
Blood, even of common Animals or unreasonable Creatures that their blood was
prohibited to be eaten Leuit. 3.17.
with their Flesh. And again: He that eats the blood of the creature shall
die the death. And in another Leuit. 17.
place he shows the reason. Qui comedcrit sanguinem, obfirmabo faciem meam
aduersus animam illius, quia anima carnis in sanguine est, and ego dedi illam
vobis, vt super altar in eo expietis pro animabus vestris, and s^nguis pro
animae piaculo sit: Whosoever shall eat the blood of the Creature, I will set
my face against his Soul, because the life of the flesh is in the blood, and I
have given it unto you that by it you may expiat on the Altar for your selves,
and that the blood may serve for an Oblation for your souls. And for that
cause man is by God commanded, that if he in the chase Leuit. 17.
or otherwise kill a wild beast, he should power out his blood on the earth.
And again: Sanguinem omnis Animalis Ibid.
non sumetis in cibo; Thou shall not eat of the blood of any living Creature.

Sanguis cum Carne non edendus: The Blood is not to Cron. 9.
be eaten with the Flesh.

Sanguis hominis etiam a bestia requiritur: The blood Ibid.
of the man is required of the beast.

Sanguinem and Adipem omnino non comedetis: You Leuit. 3.
shall wholly abstain from eating the Blood and Fat.

Sanguinem non comedat omnis anima evobis: Let Leuit. 17. 19.
not any man amongst you eat of blood.

Sanguis animalium pro anima est minime comedendus: Deuteronomy. 12.
The blood of all beasts or animalls, in General, are not to be eaten for
their souls or lives c^se.

Sanguinem (...) Animalis tam ^ndi quam immundi Deuteronomy. (...).
non comedes, sed effundas super terram q^asi aquam: Deuteronomy. ib.
Thou shall not eat the blood of any living Creature, be it clean or
unclean; but shall power it out as water upon the earth.

And the reason is, because the Blood is the seat of the Soul or vital
Spirit, which is inspired by God, and therefore it is said. Cron. 9 5. (...)


Sanguinem, Sedem animarum vestrarum, requiram: I will require of you that shed
blood, your Blood; F r as much as it is the Seat of your Souls or Lives: As
who should say, I have animated the internal Spirit of your Blood with my
Spirit of Life, and therefore be careful of it.

By all these places therefore, we may easily discern, how the vital spirit
of man, not only of man^ but of beast also, is contained in that ruddie
vehicle of the blood, as the Etheriall Spirit in the Airy, and that the
essential mouer and guider of the stern in this Spiritual bark of man, is
the incorruptible Spirit of God; by whom we live, move, and exist. All this
Mercurius Tresmegistus (that divine Pim. 12.
Philosopher) seems to confirm in these words: Anima hominis in hunc vehitur
modum; men's in anima, anima in spiritu, spiritus in corpore; Spiritus per venas
arteriasque sanguinemque diffusus, animal vndique ciet. Man's soul is carried
in this manner; the mental beam is carried in the soul, the soul in the
spirit or air, the spirit in the body: The Spirit being dispersed through the
veins and arteryes, does stir up and move the living creature in every part.

These things being thus evidently proved out of holy writ, we will now proceed
unto a greater mystery, concerning the double property of this Spirit of life
in both worlds, that thereby we may demonstratiuely come by little and little
unto the very point or perfect resolution of the question in hand.

That eternal Lord God (who is all one and the same Spirit, because of an
indivisible Essence) is he that viuifieth the Creature; and again takes away
the life of it at his pleasure, as has been proved already, for that he
operateth all in all, according to the Apostles words: and marvel not, though
I say, he works contrary effects, although he be but one indivisible
Essence, for these are the words of Solomon: Spiritus Disciplinae sanctus Wisd.
7. (...).
est vnicus seu simplex, multiplex, etc. The Spirit of Wisdom is one and
simple, and yet manifold; simple in himself, but manifold in operation: And
does not David acknowledge so much when he says; Deo Psalm. 104.
emittente spiritum suum, recreantur Creaturae; abscondente faciem suam
conturbantur, recipiente Spiritum eorum exspi^ant, etc: God sending forth his
Spirit, recreateth the Creatures; but at the hiding of his face, they are
troubled: and when he receives or takes unto him their spirit, they dye, etc.
Touching the first member of this axiom of David, he proves it elsewhere
thus: Vita aaes^ beneuolentia Ieho^; Life proceeds Psalm. 30. 6.
from the benignity of Iehoua. Vitae restaurator est Iehoua, Psalm. 41.3.
Iehoua is the Giver of life. Vitae meae Fontes omnes a Psalm. 87.7. Psalm.
90.17.
Deo, all the Fountains of my Life are from God. Vitae prolongatio est
Benignitas^ Iehouae; the prolongation of of Life is the Benignity of Iehoua.
Whereupon it is evident, that the Spirit of God is the immediate Creator,
Actor, Preserver, and Multiplier of Life.

As for the second Member, thus much: Deus D^t. 31. 17.
malos relinquit, and abscondit faciem s^am ab i^ys, vt obveniant ^s mala multa
and angustiae: God leaves the wicked, and hides his face from the impious,
that evil and necessity may encomber them. Sic increpare solet mortales in
lectulo: thus does he chide and punish mortals in their beds, as Job has it.
Thus did he send ^od 9. ^ing 4. ^b. Sam. 6. King 10.
his plagues upon the Egyptians; Thus made he Ieroboams hand to wither; Thus
did he strike with leprosy Miriam Arons Sister; Thus did he afflict with the
Hemorrhoides the Ashdedomans; Thus laid he the plague on Ezekias; namely, by
hiding or withholding his Spirit: And again, by emitting his beams of life,
he recovered him. And therefore says David: Vitae hominis spatium est miserum
absque benignitate Iehouae: The space of a man's life is miserable without the
benign Presence of God. For, he that is sick, seems to be still dying.

Now to the last clause of the aforesaid text of David: God said when he
perceived the wickedness ^n. 6. 3.
of men; Non permanebit spiritus meus in homine in aeternum, quia caro est,
eruntque dies illius centum viginti annorum: My Spirit shall not remain
perpetually (...). 13.
in man, because he is flesh, and his days shall be an hundred years and
twenty. And Job says (as before) Hominem constable ituit Deus super terram,
apponens ad ^m animam suam, si spiritum seu flatum eius ad se reciperet vel
traheret, deficeret and exspiraret omnis Caro, simul and homo in cinere^
reuertetur: God made man upon earth, giving unto him his soul or life, if he
should receive or draw to himself his spirit or breath of life, all flesh
would fail and dye, and man also together with them, would return unto ashes.
And again, Spiritus Job 9.
Dei fecit me, and inspiratio omnipotentis ^ficauit me; The Spirit of God made
me, and the breath of the omnipotent did viuifie me.

For this reason therefore, the aforesaid action of David shall be the maine
foundation, on which I will rely, as well in my proof, as also to show the
various properties of this divine and incorruptible essence in the spirit of
both the worlds; and I will prove unto you evidently, that as this spirit
works in the greater world, so also in every respect it brings forth the
like effects in the lesser.

We find that it is but one spirit in the great world, though in a contrary
property that animateth foueefoldly the four winds, which are sent from the
four corners of the earth to blow, and thus I prove it: Deus edit glaciem
flatu suo, flante Deo Job 21.
concrescit gelu, seu glacies, and coarctatur superficies aquarum: God by his
breath procures Ice, when he blows from the North, he makes the Ice to
congeale and grow together, and does contract, or straighten the superficies of
the waters into Ice. And the Kingly Prophet more pertinently; Deo imittente
sermonem suum in terram, Psalm (...).
quam celerime excurrit verbum, qui niues dispergit sicut lanam, and pruinam
quasi cineres, de^cit gelu suum tanquam frusta, coram frigore eius quis consist
at: Emittit verbum suum liquefacit ista, simul ac (...) ventum suum
effluuntaqu^: God sending forth his Word upon earth, it runs swiftly, which
spreads the snow as wool upon the earth, and the fro^t like ashes, and
casts down the Ice as gobbets, who is able to resist his cold; he sends
forth his Word, and mel^eth these congealed bodies again, so soon as he
blows forth his Wind, the congealed waters move and flow again. Here it is
evident, that the divine Spirit is the essential actor in this Northern blast,
which is an enemy to the act of life: For, as God did emit and send forth the
beams of his light, from the infinite fountain of his being, to chase away
cold, by dilatation of spirits, and to breed a hot humidity in the spirit of
the world, thereby to inact it with life and motion, and to make those spirits
fluent and active, which before were congealed with the power of his
contracting property, that is opposite unto the other: so again, by the
privative Agent, or his Boreall attribute and property, which is cold, he
contracts dilated spirits, and makes them of moveable, fix; of light and
transparent, dark and opack; of lively spirits, substances without life; of
liquid and fluid, immovable and congealed; and in conclusion, motus is so
turned into quies, motion (I say) into rest; actus into potentiam, act into
puissence; positio into priuationem, position into privation: But contrariwise,
when he means to reuiuifie, and, as it were, cause the dead spirit of the
world to rise, or revive again, he sends out a Southern spirit or blast, of
a clean contrary property, namely, a wind, whose nature is hot and moist, and
therefore in the consequence of the foresaid Text, it is said, he sends out
his word, and melts all these: so soon as he blows forth his wind, the
waters and spirits which were made dead, spisse, fix, congealed and opack, are
beocme alive, moveable, fluent, subtle and diaphanous or transparent.

If Mr. Foster like none of these testimonies; I will yet go a little further,
and make an ocular demonstration to prove it, thereby the better to persuade
him; if he will be pliable unto her who is the mother of fools, namely,
experience: Let him but look therefore upon the Kalander glass (an Instrument
commonly known amongst us here in England, called by others the weather
glass) and he shall see, that the air contained in it, will be contracted
and thickened by cold: and to prove thus much, he shall find the water to be
drawn up by so many degrees in the neck of the glass, as the external cold
has dominion in the air, which proves evidently, that cold does contract the
dilated air in the glass, from a larger room into a straighter; and
consequently that the air is thicker and nearer to congelation, fixation and
rest, then it was before. Contrariwise, he shall find, that the air
included; feeling the heat of the external air, by little and little, to get
dominion over the cold, will dilate it self, and by dilatation is made more
mobill, subtle and lively; and therefore requires a larger capacity, as is
ocularly proved thus; namely, because the water is struck down by so many
degrees lower, by how many the external heat does vanquish the cold in the
air. But perchance my adversary will say, What have we to do with this? These
are natural conclusions, and not belonging to Gods act or property: And how
prove you that the other winds are the essential acts of God? To this I say,
That if God operateth all, and in all, then this operation in the glass, much
more that in the winds, is the act of God, and as we find that the
incorruptible spirit does move and operate two manner of contrary ways,
namely, from the center, to the circumference, by ^manation and dilatation, by
the which means it stirs of it self, who is the center of all things,
whose circumference is no where; but comprehends all circumferences or
bodies, and makes them to exist and live, so also this universal center,
contracting it self in it self, maketh' all things in act potentiall, of a
living creature, a dead carcass, of an agill and mobill thing, a stupid and
immovable one: Lastly, of an actual positive something, a potentiall
privative nothing. We see it plainly persormed according unto the precedent
Text of David, in the spirit of the world, for as much as it is altered from
one form to his opposite, according unto the variety, of the property or will
of him, which is the internal agent of all the world. The incorruptible spirit
of (...)
the Lord (says Solomon) is in all things; If in all things, then as it is the
most worthy, and of the highest digty, and the most mobill and operative spirit
of all spirits, it works centrally, and moves all the external wheels of
the whole machine of the creature in which it is, and consequently operateth a
centro ad circumferentiam. If it do quiescere in centro, rest in the center,
all the external wheels have lost their life: For it is, in him it lives, in
him it moves, and in him it existeth. And therefore, without he act, all is
stupid and dead like a senseless stone, as David and Job have taught us. Now
to prove that it is this spirit of God which does agitate and animate the
winds, we have many other express Texts of Scripture to confirm it. The
whirle wind ( says Job) comes Job 36. (...)
out of the South, and the cold from the North wind; at the breath of God the
frost is given, and the breadth of (...)
the waters is contracted. Again, Ventus profectus a Iehoua abreptas
coturnices a mari disseuit ad castra, etc. A wind proceeding from Iehona did
scatter the Quails which it brought from the sea in the camp. Again, Vento
Exodus 15. 10.
tuo flauisti and operuit eos mara; Thou did blow with thy breath or wind,
and the sea covered them. Again, flatunarium Exodus 18. 8.
tuarum coaceruatae sunt aquae; The waters are accumulated and heaped together,
by the blast of thy nostrills. And again, Iehoua adduxit ventum Eurum, se^
Orientalem, and God brought an Easterly wind. Again, Exodus 10.
ventum Occidentalem vehementem immisit, etc. he sent Exodus 10.
out a vehement Westerly wind. Again, ventus procellosus (...) 144.
efficiens Verbum Dei, the stormy wind does effect the Word of God. We do not
say that the wind is the real breath of God; but a created spirit or air,
animated by the increated spirit of the Lord, who according unto the will of
him that sent it foo^th, does sometimes contract his virtue in himself, from
the circumference of the creatures spirit, and then the creature is dead and
immovable, and stark cold, for want of the warm and comfortable act of this
spirits emanation, from the center to the circumference, according to the words
of Da^ids, former Text, Deo abscondente faciem suam, a creaturis, conturbantur,
recipiente spiritum coru^ expirant. God hiding his face from the creatures,
they are troubled, and resuming, his spirit again they dye, that is, if in
part he contracts himself, or hides the viuifying be^s of his countenance,
they are sick and troubled; but if he withdraw the spirit of life wholly from
the circumference of the the creatures spirit, into it self, who is in the
center, and every where unto the circumference, they dye, or expire.

Master Foster may reply; what is all this to the purpose of man, who is the
maine subject we have in hand, or what have we to do, though God by his
Spirit works a privative property in the spirit of the world by congealation
or contracting it from the spirits circumference unto the center, leaving the
spirit cold, destitute of heat, congealed, immobile, and as it were dead and
without life, and that in his Northern nature? what does this concern our
matter; or what is this to the nature in man? or how can it touch the act of
curing in our WeaponSalue.

I answer, that as the selfsame spirit is the cause of a fourfold nature
in the spirit of the great world, and as it causes death and privation by his
Northern and congealing blasts, and contrariwise, life and position by the
opposite, or the relenting nature of his Southern property; even the selfsame
operation it affects, in the created spirit of the lesser world, or man: For,
the selfsame spirit that viuifieth the air in the great world after a
fourfold fashion, brings forth the very same effects in the lesser, which I
prove in this manner.

The Prophet says, A quatuor ventis adueni o spiritus, ^zek. 37.(...).
and perflato interfectos istos, vt reuiuiscant, etc. Come, O spirit, from the
four winds, and breath upon these flaughtered persons, that they may live
again, and the breath came into them, and they lived, and they stood on their
feet. By which words we may gather these four things: First, that it was one
only Spirit, which was endued with the property of the four winds, according
to whose variety in properties, the four winds were animated with contrary
natures, that they might work after a fourfold manner in the Catholic
element, of the world, to effect the will of the Creator in any manner
whatsoever. Next that, this Spirit which is the essential actor, and mouer in
the winds, was that incorruptible spirit of the Lord, by the which he uses
(according to that of the Apostle) to viuifie all things, 1 Cor.
and unto that of the Prophet, dare ^atum populo, and spiritum calcantibus
terram; to give breath unto the people, and a spirit to all that trace on the
earth: or unto that of Judith, emittere spiritum, and creare omnes Judith 16.
creaturas, to send forth his spirit, and to create by it all creatures: or
according to that of Esdras: 1 Esdr. 16.
Spiramine suo facere omnia, and serutinare ^mnia in absconditis terrae: to
make all things by his breath, and to search out by it all things that are in
the bowels of the earth; or according unto that of Job: Apponere homini Job
34.13.
animam suum, and cuilibet creaturae, nam fi spiritu^, seuflatum suu^ ad se
reciperet, veltraheret, omnis caro expirato give man his spirit of life, and to
every creature: for, if God should receive, or draw unto himself his spirit,
all flesh would expire. And therefore in this place, when the dead bodies
should arise again, he commanded the Prophet to say, Come spirit from the
four winds, as if he should say, Come, O thou Catholic and Universal spirit
of life of the world, and do thy office in viuifying and making the dead to
live again. Thirdly, that this same spirit is it by which the Apostle does
acknowledge that God Cor. 12.
works all in all; sometimes giving life by taking away the killing Northern
cold, and dissoluing the deadly or immobil congelation of spirits, which did
stupifie them, as it were, with the sleepy and restfull enchantment of
Morphaeus by his Southern or Easternely properties, which is to liquifie,
resolve, and give a new motion and life to spirits congealed and stupefied by
the Northern property: and therefore David says in the foresaid Text, Emittit
verbun^, and liquefacit ista; simul ac efflat ventum suu^ effluunt aquae: He
sends forth his Word and melts them; as soon as he blows forth his
wind, the congealed, and as it were dead waters, ^oue and flow again: whereby
we ought to observe that it is Gods Word, or his incorrupble spirit which
animateth the winds. Fourthly, that the very selfsame spirit, which viuifieht
and gives life and motion unto the great worlds spirit, and at his pleasure,
by a contrary property, kills, stupifieth, cease to act by life and motion,
congealing mortally, does perform the very selfsame office, when the will of
the Father is in the Catholic spirit of the little world, or man, yea, in
every creature. And therefore Job says, It is God that woun^eth or strikes,
and it is he that cures; the reason here, (...) 5.
he shows in the place before mentiened, as also we may find in
Deuteronomy: I will kill and I will make alive again; and Solomon says, Thou
have the power of ^fe and death in thine hand; Thou bring unto the grave,
and bring back again: and the Son of Syrach, Vita and mors, bonum and
malum a Deo sunt. Life and death, good and evil are from God. Wherefore,
Eecles (...). (...)
as this secret and mystical spirit, has breathed into the dead a blast of
life, so that very blast or breath is essentially of the nature, property, and
Will of the Breather, which was to make alive, by a quickening, and not a
stupifying spirit: and thereupon created spirits, which were before congealed
and mortified, became now quickened and lively, and were closed in an external
body, and in an ayery or bloody vehicle, which by virtue of this quickening
blast, his spirit did move in the channels or veins and arteries, being
animated by the virtue of that spirit of life. And this is the reason that God
did ordain so strict precepts, touching the blood of the creatures (as is said
before) namely, that it should not be eaten, as is above related, because, in
it is the spirit of life, or the soul of the creature, in which is the
spiritual virtue of the four winds: For in this action of life, he
exercises the very same property in the heart of the creature, or little
world, as he does in the heavenly sun of the great world. For, as the Sun
is hot, operating by rarefaction, and exciting unto motion, and therefore
reviving and multiplying, as well in vegetation, as in generation, grains,
plants, and other animated things of the earth, pouring down from above the
beams of life, and light unto the inferior creatures, even so this
incorruptible spirit, or blast of life, thus infused into man, is the
spiritual Sun of the little world, who makes the heart (which represents
the body of the celestial Sun) his Tabernacle, from which, by the arteries
and veins, he sends forth his beams, and animateth the universal spirit of
man's fabric, and makes the blood, agill, fluent and lively, ever moving and
operating, unto the nourishment and preservation of the members, as well with
natural as vital spirits, cau^ng both corporal and spiritual vegetation and
multiplication of parts in every specificall body.

But now, that I may in this place touch in few words, though somewhat
allaterally, Master Fosters Aristotelicall limited sphere of Actiuity, which
the old Schoolmen have so tumbled and tossed in their external Fantasies,
without any centrall regard unto this true and essential viuifying and
vegetating spirits dilatiue or contractiue power: I would feign know, whether
any worldly philosophical Axiom can conclude or limit this princely spirit of
the four Winds, which blows and breaths, as well in the great world, as
little; when, where, how far, and at what distance it pleases. I will first
give an example of his action from each wind in the great world, and show you
how it commands, carries and dilateth the spirit of the vegetable Creature.
We can gather and collect the virtuall operation of the vegetable ad distans,
by no means, but by the scent; as for example, Rosemary and Sassaphras, etc:
Do emitt their spirit into the Air, at a proportionated distance more or
less, according unto the viuacity of the acting Spirit, which is in it; and
yet nevertheless we see, that, if the blast of any strong wind, does
encounter the emitted spirit of the Creature, it dilateth it mightily from his
center or plant, and makes a wonderful large sphere of actiuity; and that
greater or le^er, according unto the power of the wind. The case is apparent
and found most true, by such as travail by sea near Spain: For, when the
wind is Easterly, they can discern the Air thirty Leagues off the shore, to
be filled with the sweet odor of Rosemary, which grows abundantly in those
parts of Spain: And even in the very like manner about Guiana and Virginea, at
the same or greater distance, the odoriferous scent of the Sassaphras, with
other fweet woods, is scented by the nauigatours upon those shores; and that
sometimes before they can discern any land. What shall we then say of the same
spirit, which a cteth in the little world or man, when his insensible breath or
emanation tends affectionally toward the homogeniall place of his own
nature? I mean unto the ointment, inwhich the self same indivisible nature,
either in the blood, adhering to the weapon, or having penetrated in the
weapon, without any sign of external blood, is bathed? Shall we not believe,
that by his emanation, it can carry along with it in the Air, the occult
spirit of the vegetating nature of the wounded person, included secretly in a
volatile salt, to act in the ointment, unto the reuiuifying of the sopified
spirit in the ointment? No mary, says Master Foster! For, the Sassaphras woods
odoriferous spirit, and that of the Rosemaries are known by sense, and so
cannot the breath of such an emanating spirit, with his volatile vehicle of
vegetation, be perceived. An excellent Argument in an external and sensible
Philosopher, who with Saint Thomas will believe nothing, but what he touches,
smells, or tastes: But intellectual men may easily gather, that there is
nothing that is external and visible; but was first internal and invisible.
Neither can it be conuertibly said, that, what was internal, was external.
For, there are an infinity of invisible and internal actions performed by God,
in the closet of Nature; which falls not into the sphere, or capacity of the
sensual or natural man; but are only by faith to be believed. And for this
reason, the Apostle says; Through Faith we ^
understand, that the world was ordained by the Word of God, so that the things
that we see, are not made of things which did appear. By which it is
evidently proved, that all things were first invisible, before they were by
sense to be discerned: And consequently, it is the property of an external
and carnal man, to believe nothing, but what he perceives by sense, and to
say, that if any thing appear to sense, which was not known before, it is
diabolical and not of God; when the aforesaid text does attribute all,
reducing of invisible actions, to the visible sense by the Word, not of the
Devil; but of God. All Philosophers therefore have accorded, that it is one
spirit of life, which only operateth in man's body: But this spirit, according
unto his diversity of distinct offices, indueth a diverse appellatio^: and
therefore it is termed by them, in one respect Rational; in an other
Concupiscible; and in a third Irascible. By the first, it is apt to be
illuminated, to understand things that are above it, beneath it, and in it, and
with it self. For, by this his property or faculty, it knows God above it
self; the Angels which are ranked with it self, and whatsoever is
comprehended in the whole circle of the heavens, beneath it self; such is his
spiritual act of centrall emanation, by reason of that powerful virtue,
allotted her by God. By the second and the third it is inclined, either to
desire and affect a thing, or to eschew and fly from it; that is, either to
love or hate, etc: And by this property of hers, she does exercise herself
about the Sympathy or Antipathy of those things, which are either proper or
dissonant unto her specific nature. And therefore in this her office, she
works mightily, in and about the effects of this Weapon-Salue, being that
from these two later operations in her, proceeds every affection. For, as of
Concupiscibility proceeds all joy and hope, because Natura laetatur in sua
natura, etc: and therefore by the union of the lively emanation, the dead or
congealed spirit in the Salve, is quickened and viuified: So contrariwise, the
living soul or natural Spirit, in which the supernatural Spirit does act, is
of it is own nature obnoxious unto a kind of spiritual dolor and fear, by
reason of the Weapon that used violence unto it, the which passions belong to,
and are affected by the Irascible spirit; for as much as it either greiueth, or
is made dolorous already at the violence offered, or seareth to be greiued or
made dolorous by it. These four affections of the spirit of man, are the
beginners; and as it were the common subject of all virtuous and vicious
actions, which befall unto man. Now to express the large extension of that
centrall spirit, which does radically operate in the vital spirit; the wisest
Philosophers affirm, that it sees it self in it self to the end, that it
may rightly understand it self in it self. And when it will know God, it
eleuateth it self above it self, by it is mentallbeame; it penetrats all
things, it beholds all things, as well present as absent; it is, when it
pleases beyond the seas, and searches out things that are hidden: yea, and in
one moment, it directs and sends forth his beams unto the farthest limits
of the whole world, and searches out the secrets of it: it descends down
unto the deep, and mounteth up again from thence unto heaven, and cleaves
fast to Christ, and is made all one with Christ. And must the infinite virtue
of this all penetrating spirit, according unto Master Fosters tenent, be
limited by any imaginary sphere of actiuity, assigned by the vain Philosophy
of the Ethnicks, which as the Apostle says, is framed out after the tradition
of man and the world, and not by God? Does he not warn us to beware that we
be not deceived by such philosophical doctrine, which does disagree from the
rules of Christ, in whom is the plenitude of the Godhood bodily? And must we
now to obey Master Fosters fantastical Idaea, break the Laws of the
Apostle, to be deluded by his false Philosophy? But to return unto our purpose.

All this which is above mentioned, being well considered, namely, the
Catholic Nature of the Spirit, which breathed life into the creatures, the
indiuisibility and indiuiduality of the giver, and the gift which is given, nam
Essentia diuina est indiuidua: The divine Essence is in diuisible and
undivided; and therefore the divine Spirit imparted unto the creature, is
continuated and undivided, from him that gives it: his infinity of extension,
for as much as it is bounded with no limits: (and for this reason it is said,
the Spirit blows where it lists, and that without resistance) that this
spirit can convert it self from an active and lively power, into a potentiall,
congealing, etc: deadly property in the Creature, by withdrawing his actual
beams from the circumference of the Creature whither it did emit them for
lively actiuities sake, into the center that is within it self, where it does
(in respect of the Creature) rest, and so depriueth the Creatures spirit by
congealation of the motion, act and life, which by his spightfull Actiuity, it
did impart unto the natural spirits, to make blood, fat, flesh and bones. For,
this reason therefore (I say) namely, because of the presence of this
incorruptible spirit, in the blood of the creature, God in any case forbids the
Israelites to eat of blood: because (says the Text) the life of the flesh ^
is in the blood. Here therefore observe, that the Spirit of life is from God,
who viuifieth all things: the life of the blood and fat is in this spirit and
of this Spirit, wherefore it is written in another place, Sanguinem and adi^em
omnino non comedetis, you shall by no means eat the blood and the fat, for
the life of the flesh is in the blood, and the life of the bones is in the L^
3. Acts 17. 24
flesh. It is easily therefore to be discerned, what a concatenation here is
of members in succession, which derive their lives from one and the same
radical essence or spirit, and are made by it to sympathise with one and the
same harmony in the creatures composition; being that he has made of one blood
all mankind, as S. Paul does fitly, and consequently being all flesh and
bones, are made of one blood, there must be a great relation between them and
man's blood in general, and consequently between the blood and the ointment
which is made of them.

These things therefore being rightly pondered, as infallible grounds, we
conclude thus: In the Question proposed, we are to observe these five objects:
namely, first the wound, secondly, the blood which issues from the wound,
thirdly, the manner of conueyance from the ointment, to the wound, at any
reasonable distance, fourthly, the nature of the ointment, and lastly, the
manner of operation, whereby the cure is effected.

First, therefore concerning the wound, it is a violation of the work, which
the spirit of life did effect, namely, an effusion of blood, in which the
spirit of life is carried and moves, a hinderance and d^erting of the course
of the natural humors, a division, and solution of the fat, flesh, and other
such like parts from their integrity and continuity, an offense unto that
peaceable act of life, effected by that incorruptible spirit of God, which by
this his property, or attribute, is apt to viuifie all in all. For, this cause
therefore is this radical, acting spirit interessed in this business, or
unnatural action; as finding his work hindered, and his essential action
disturbed by the wound or violence offered: For, whereas the blood is the
vehicle of it, and his viuifying act was to circulate in the organicall blood,
and to cause transmutation of it into flesh, and other parts for vegetation and
multiplications sake, and for the preservation of the induiduum; Now is the
same blood slused out at the mouth of the wound, and made inutill and of none
effect; the body (for the animating of the which this secret spirit is ever
diligently inclined) is debilitated and made drooping. Wherefore as the
incorruptible and viuifying nature, has intended to rectify his humane spirit
by her lively actiuity, so verily is she ready to oppose all violence offered,
and to correct and repair again, all that which violent irruption has
caused; much like the wise Spider, who when her web is made imperfect, and in
part broken, does her diligence to bring it again to its wonted perfection.

Secondly, the blood, as it is the vehicle of the spirit of life, though it be
by the wound voided out; yet retains in it this spirit of life; but in
another property: for, it does not now act to live, that is to say, it does not
send forth his beams from the center to the circumference to cause life; but
contrarily, being as it were displeased with the violence of the act,
contracteth it self from the circumference into the center, that is, from
action in the circumference of the creature, into it self, being contracted
into the center thereof, where it seems to rest, and so leaves his bodily,
and ayery vehicle as congealed, stupfied and dead; and here is that mystery
discovered, namely, the reason, why the murderer being brought before the
murdered, the spirit centrally resting in the blood, does miraculously emanate
and flow forth, and make fluent again, the blood, as being stirred up by the
like spirit antipathetically, acting and agitating from the blood of the
murderer: For (as I said before) this spirit in his irascible property is as
apt to hate, as in his concupiscible to love: For this reason, the Text
teaches us, that the blood of a slain man is required Gen 9.
not only of the murdering man, but of the beast, if it be shed by it: And
again, the blood of any thing must not be eaten; which were but superficial,
if the spirit of life did not after the effusion of the blood, rest in the
blood, as also the reason; that the blood of such Leuit. 17.
animalls as were slain in hunting or hawking, should be buried in the earth
would prove of little validity. For this cause it is said in another place,
Sanguine insontium Numb. 35.
commaculata terra; expiari non potest nisi per eius sanguinem, qui alterius
sanguinem fuderit: The earth being commaculated with the blood of the innocent,
cannot be expiated, but by blood of the other. To conclude, Why should it be
said, that the blood is the seat of the spirit of life, if it did not
participate with it, after it is effused out of the wound, congealed, and as it
were dead, and rest in the center of it? yea, this spirit does entirely leave,
and forsake the flesh of the dead, being that his life (as it is said) is in
the blood; nor yet the very bones, forasmuch as they participate of the nature
of the most earthly part of the flesh. Hence was it, that when certain thieves
had cast the body of one whom they ^ad murdered (...). 48.
into the Tomb of Eliseus, the murdered person did with the only touch of
the Prophets bones rise again to life, which could not have been effected, if
as well his divine as viuifying nature had not participated with his bones; and
upon this it is said, that after death Eliseus his body prophesied and 4 King.
13.
that he did wonders in his life, and in death were his works marvelous. To
conclude, the learned and wise Philosophers (speaking Enigmatically of this
spirit) say that in the body there is a little bone called Luz, which will
remain with man till the latter day, and cause him to rise again; but we
must understand this after their own sense, and not vulgarly. Let this, I
beseech you be remembered, that the touch of Eliseus his bones, caused the dead
to rise from death to life.

In the third place, I come to the manner of conueying of the blood from the
wound unto the ointment. The blood is taken from the living fountain of blood
in the wounded, either as it is smeared on the weapon that did the deed, or as
it is fastened on some stick, Iron, or other thing, and so conveyed unto the
ointment, at any reasonable distance. Now a reason is to be showed, how it is
possible that there can be any certain relation between the wound and the
ointment: For (as Mr. Foster says) there may be Castles, hills, walls, and
gross air between the ointment and the wounded, which may hinder the cure.

First, we must remember, that we have expressed in our precedent discourse,
the excellency of the animating spirit, in whom is all the virtue, and each
property of the four winds, and being it is the spirit of spirits, Et spiritus
spirat vbi vult, What (I pray you) can hinder his act or operation? And with
what distance can his actiuity be limited, being that it is the spirit of the
winds, and the soul of the lightnings, and the essence of the Sun and
stars of heaven, which by his animation do cast their beams periferically
unto every angle of the Horison, or Hemispheare? Can this spirir, because
contained in man's blood, not penatrate many hundred miles by emanation out of
his bloody vehicle, as it does out of his cloudy Tabernacle in the form, or
rather vehicle, oflightning or, out from his Phoebean Palace in golden beams,
whereupon it is said, In lumine numen, and in numine lumen, In light is
divinity, and in divinity is light: so says the Psalmist: Psalm 104.
Amictus lumine, quasi vestimento, He is clothed with light, as with a
garment. I tell you this is all one spirit which is in man, and that which
operateth in the wings; and therefore it was said, Come, O spirit from the
four winds. This spirit cannot be divided into parts; It fills (as Solomon
says) the whole earth, and has his seat in heaven, and therefore Sap 1
resideth in man's body and spirit, as is said, Esdras (...) Esdr. 16.
speaking of this spirit, says, as before, The spirit of God Omnipotent has
made all things, and searches out all things in the bowels or secret places
of the earth. Whereby it appears, that this very spirit by which man
breathed, cannot be limited in his penetrating and extensiue dimension; nor yet
hindered in his passage, by any intermediate obstacle.

To conclude, that man that believes and relyeth on this spirit, may effect
what he desires: For, even by the true knowledge and use of it, the Prophets
and Apostles did wonders, as well in curing as effecting matters of greater
admiration. This spirit therefore, which is called intellectual, as he makes
to understand; Inspiratio omnipotentis, says Job 9. 6.
Job, facit intelligere: Vital in respect of his vivification, Spiritus Dei
fortis fecit me, says he, and spiraculum omnipotentis viuificauit me; And
natural in respect of Job 9.
vegetation and multiplication, visitatio tua (says he else where)
conseruauit spiritum meum, does act Job 11.
and shine forth by secret beams, v to that object of the dead blood, which is
carried from it unto the ointment, in which amputated blood, lurketh a portion
of spirit, resting without action. Now the nature of the one, is rejoiced in
the nature of the other, forasmuch as both do sympathise together, being that
they are all of one consonance or degree, or unison in vital love: as for
example, I take two Lutes or Vialls, or any other such like instruments, I set
one of them at one end of the table, and set the other at the other end, I put
a small straw upon one of the strings, of the one Lute, which imports
Ala-mi-re, or De-la-sol-re, and then stri^ the Gam-vt of the other Lute, and
the straw will not once stir, because theydoe not sympathise in one sound and
proportion of wauing air, therefore have they not a relation one unto another:
so also, if the blood be carried unto an ointment heterogeneall in nature unto
the party wounded, it will do nothing in this cure; but if you put a straw on
the Gam-vt, or A-re, of the one, and strike the other on Gam-vt, or Are, being
unisons, you shall perceive, the straw presently to leap of the other string,
by reason of the over great vibration or loving actiuity, and like formal
proportion, which he sympatheticall harmony, betwixt each strings, causes to
other in the air, yea, this effect will happen, though there be put boords, or
other such like obstacles, as may hinder the direct line of the vibration in
the air or medium betwixt the two Lutes; In which experiment you may note,
that the string struck, is aptly compared unto the blood of the wounded, being
still animated in his body, who does by a secret emanation or emission, and that
by a natural inclination, and sympathy, cause in the selfsame tone a secret
communication between the still and occult spirit in the congealed blood, which
is in the ointment, which I compare to the string, which the straw has on it:
so that the string though it be of it self still, yet at the acting of that
other chord, which is really moved with the actual spirit, of the chord
stricken, by mere concent, stirs up the still chord to act also, and by
action to send back again a salutiferous harmony, unto the acting spirit,
which is as near unto his own still or potentiall nature, as the tone of one
Lute acting or struck, unto that of the other not struck. For as both are but
one spirit, though they seem to differ in distance, as do the chord of both
Lutes, so likewise are those two tones but one tone; though they seem to
differ: and therefore make but one vnisone. But because the one spirit cannot
essentially be separated from the other, no more then can divinity effentially
be divided into parts, as also the one tone cannot be essentially distinguished
from the other: therefore it does lively extend it self, a termino a quo, ad
terminum ad quem: from the wound unto the ointment, as being all one spirit
continuated, even as we see one thread extended from one end of a Chamber unto
the other. Now being this spirit requires a spiritual vehicle like it self,
it is carried, quasi super alas venti, as it were upon the wings of the wind,
in the hidden spirit of the blood, which seems as a vehicle: no otherwise
then the essential spirit of the wind is carried by the air, and observes no
limited distance, neither is hindered by mountains, woods, or walls, to work
his effect: as we see the Northwind does produce in Lumbardy frost, Ice, snow,
etc. Although the high Alpin mountains, piercing the very clouds, are
interposed. But I will bring a more familiar example of the grain of Corn,
which being considered in himself, without his mother earth, seems no way to
act; for his vital spirit does lurk in the center, and not operate to the
circumserence, either by way of vegetation, or multiplication. The fountain
from whence the vegetable soul comes by multiplication, is the sun of
heaven, which works life in all vegetable things, by the virtue of the
foresaid Catholic spirit of life, which did put his Tabernacle in the Sun,
giving a natural increase of life and vegetation to every thing: For, though
this spirit in it self be Catholic, yet as it enters into any specificall
creature, it conuerteth his property unto the vivification, mul^plication, and
generation of that very species, yea, even unto mankind. Whereupon Aristotle
says, that Sol and homo generant hominem, the Sun and a man, do engender a
man. As for example, it has multiplied by the successiue influence of this
piercing spirit in a grain of Wheat, being resuscitated (as S. Paul says)
after death and putrefaction in his proper earth, from one to twenty, and
afterward moves upwards in his ayery vehicle, with his strawie stalk, toward
the fountain of his being, and draws by a sympatheticall, or magnetike
virtue, his like from above, by the medium of the Carholike air. But it is
observed by husbandmen, that the better the ground is in temperature, wherein
the grain is sowed, and the nearer unto the nature of the grain, the better
does the grain prosper and multiply in virtue. Now the fountain of the
grains life, namely, the Catholic spirit of vegetation, does chiefly reside
in the Sun of the great world, compared unto the heart in man or the little
world, which is vit^ principium, the beginning of life. the grain is fitly
compared unto the little blood, which is gathered from the bloody tree of life,
moving in the veins and arteries, as in the strawy stalk or husk; the stalk
growing still with the other grains on it, is refer unto the whole mass of
blood in the veins, which does remain in manifest act. The amputed gr^ine to
the amputed blood, for which although they both do remain without any
manifest act or life, yet nevertheless, they have the spirit of life and
multiplication in them centrally contracted, and therefore it remains in them
only in potentia agendi, able to act; but as yet acting nothing except it be
euocated and put in action by his like acting and viuifying nature, or rather
by the same continued spirit emanating unto the grain from the Sun, or unto
the amputated blood from the spir^t in the wounded body. The in ward invisible
spirit of the blood, in which the Spirit of lise does mo^e to the ointment from
the wounded, is compared unto the Etheriall or heavenly Spirit, in which, the
incorruptible spirits influence does move, from the Sun down unto the
grain, by the common medium or vehicle of them both: in which, the Etheriall
Sprit moves also from the Sun downward unto it is like, or rather it self,
in the grain being now buried in the earth, or from the fountain of life unto
the dead grain or blood in the ointment, the which medium is the common
Element of Air. The ointment is the good ground, in which the bloody grain
does dye and rise again, which I will now speak of.

The fourth to be considered, is the ointment and his nature. Who, but a meare
Idiot can deny, that like does desire his like, or that one Nature being
stronger does cherish, foster and releive an other that is weaker, and the
weaker rejoices in the aid and comfort it brings? The ancient Physicians
and Philosophers have observed, that lungs nourish lungs, and brains nourish
brains that are weak, the spleen helps to fortify the spleen, and for weak
gutts we make Glysters of boiled gutts, the stomach of a cock helps
digestion, the very spittle voided by the Phtisic all lungs, are said to cure
the lungs, worms mortified, and dried to powder, destroy worms. The stone of
the Kidney or blather, rightly prepared, cures the stone. In conclusion it is
certain, that simile agit naturali inclinatione in suum simile, like works
in his like. Natura enim laetatur sua natura, natura natura gaudet: Nature
rejoices in his nature, Nature is glad at the presence of his nature. Now if
we look into the composition of this medicince, we shall find, that it is of
a wonderful consonance with the blood of man, for ^s before I have signified
unto you, That the blood is the seat of the spirit of life, and that the life
of the flesh is in the blood, and also that the spirit of life is immediately,
as well in the fat, as in the blood, and therefore these two are forbidden to
be eaten; but are to be reserved, a part for a sacrifice due unto God; and
being that the life of the bones is in the blood and flesh, and therefore do
communicate with the spirit of life, and consequently have in them a balsamic
marrow, which is full of spirits, and affects wholesomely the other parts.
Therefore without doubt, there is the selfsame relation of unison betwixt
this ointment with the blood in it and the wounded man's nature; as is between
the string of one lute, that is proportioned unto the other in the same tone:
And for this cause will be apt to euibrate and quauer forth one mutual consent
of simpatheticall harmony, if that the spirits of both, by the vertuall contact
of one another nature, be made by conueying the individual spirit of the one
into the body of the other, that the lively balsamic virtue of the one, may
comfort and stir up the dull and deadly languishment of the other, no otherwise
then the actiuity of one lute string struck, does stir up the other to move,
which was before still and without life: or as we see the grain of corn,
being put into the earth, which has been well manu^ed with the dung of
horses, that have fed on the same grain is quickly animated by the Sun beams,
and made to move, and ascend toward the fountain of his acting Spirit. For
every spirit does by a natural instinct or inclination tend upwards unto his
native Country.

To conclude: I must now come to the reaping up of this mystical operation of
curing; Master Foster says; it cannot be accomplished by any vertuall contact,
being it is out of the limited sphere of actiuity. Does he, or his sharpest
witted Masters know the certain limits of actiuity in every thing that he
concludes thus boldly? Foelix qui potuit rerum talium cognoscere causas. But I
am sure, I can discern no such felicity in his revelations or prescriptions of
limits unto natural agents, much less unto that spirit, which acts and
operateth all in all, and over all. Qui quicquid vult facit, tam in virtutibus
Coeli, quam in habitatoribus terrae; which effects, what it pleases: and
therefore, at what distance it lists: as well with the virtues of heaven, as
with the dwellers on the earth. If this great Adversary to the
Weapon-Salue-Salue, would but consider the wonderful operation, that this
Catholic spirit produces in this cold and contracting faculty, as when he
moves from the North and makes snow, frost and Ice, by the contracting of the
thin spirit of the world into a thick body, and sucketh up the fountains of
the earth on high; all which is done by contracting his action from the
circumference unto the center, or emission from the center to the
circumference, causing the common element to alter from a dilated spirit to a
contracted body: And again from a contracted body, to a dilated one; for by an
alteration, quite opposite to his Boreall act or Northern disposition, it
undoes in his dilating property, and resolves all, that it did effect by his
cold condition, in moving and making alive again the waters that were
congealed, rendering them diaphanous or transparent, and spiritual or invisible
things, though they were before thick, opack, dark, corporal and visible. And
again: if he with discretion would consider, how it does depresse and strike
down into the earth, the fountains by his presence, in his Sunny tabernacle,
which by his cold property were raised out of the eart^: If I say, he would
well ponder with himself, how the ^unne being now in the South beyond the
Equinoctial does subtilitate there the thick Air, and dissolve the frosty,
snowy, and Icy effects, which the cold did make in that Hemispheare, whilst
the Suns presence, in the Northern world did work ^ere contrary effects;
and how on this side the Equinoctial, by his contractiue faculty, it partly
sucketh up the fountains of the Southern world out of the earth, and partly
by his dilatiue action depresseth on that side the said fountains, appearing
in the Northern Climats: Then would he not call the action of this most potent
spirit in question, or limit it (according to the fantastic opinion of some
men) within an imaginary sphere of actiuity, being that this spirit, is from
him who fills all, and operateth all, and in all: and therefore consequently
effects the great works of contraction and dilatation, which are so apparent
in every Angle of the world. Will he circumscribe this action of eleuating
fountains, and again depressing them, within any sphere or orb, except it
be that of the round world? Will he think, that this action made between
the potentiall habit of privation or cold, and that of life and position which
is heat, requires a small interuall, to make the two extremes so far
distant from each other, as the North is from the South, to meet and concur
in a Symphoniacall proportion? The hotter and more intemperate, and
consequently the more dilatiue the one Hemispheare is, the colder and more
contractiue is the opposite: And therefore the more depression of fountains
there is by extreme heat in the one Hemispheare, the more are they sucked and
drawn up out of the earth, by the att^actiue virtue of the extreme cold of the
other. This I can, and will be ready to demonstrate, to any one that doubts
of this point, by an ocular conclusion or demonstration.

It is evident therefore by this, which we have produced, that this magneticall
kind of cure is Donum Dei, the Gift of God, according unto Paracelsus his
opinion, and not the act of the Devil, as Master Foster, most unchristianly
has published; attributing against reason and conscience, that unto the
Devil, the worst and foulest of spirits (whose office is only destructive and
wounding, and not constructiue or healing) which is the only property of this
best, fairest or purest of all spirits, on whom attend all good Angels, to do
his will, as the Devil has his bad angels to destroy.

You may therefore see by this (Gentle Reader) how life is breathed into the
creature by Gods good Spirit of life: how his seat or vehicle, in which he
moves, is the blood, how that fat, flesh and bones have their life and
vegetation from the spirit, that moves in the blood, how this spirit
operateth, priuatiuely by contracting his beams of life, from the
circumference unto the center of the Creature where it rests, or rather
cease to operate the effects of his office of life, as it is made manifest in
the dead and congealed blood or graineof wheat; and again, it operateth
positiuely to life, by which it reuiueth that which was dead, by sending out
his act from the center to the circumference of the creature, as it does in the
grain of Wheat, buried in the ground, or the congealed blood, cleaving either
to stick or weapon, conveyed to the ointment, as his most naturalest earth. I
showed you how the spirit is all one, and vndiuisible, and therefore that this
which resideth in the salve, and that which operateth in the body, are
concatenated, or continuated essentially one to another, as being all one
spirit, though it comes from the four winds: not divided, I say, in essence,
but only differing in property, for it works contractingly by eold, and
dilatingly by heat: also that there is but one common vehicle, which carries
this spirit in the Etheriall substance of the blood. And lastly, that because
the ointment is made of man's blood, man's fat, man's flesh, or mummy, and the
fumous excrescence of man's bones, called vznie or the moss that grows on the
skull, according unto my receipt, and for that the nature of the Catholic
spirit thus specified, is in the ointment, though not working, and is stirred
up to operate by the union which it has now from the beams of the li^ely and
operating spirit of the wounded; no otherwise then the Sun does operate on
the earth, in which the dead grain of Wheat lies, and with it calls, or
stirs up the centrall spirit, occult in the dead blood, to operate as the
Sun beam does the atome of life, which is in the grain. Therefore the
mixtion of these two spirits now operating, in one viuifying union, makes them
to tend unto the fountain of life, as the grain rifing out of the earth,
would carry also his like, which was clad in earth, upward toward his native
home, did not the heavy coats of the elements hinder his further ascent. But
because this earth or salve is more spiritual, it sends out his power unto
the blood, by that harmony, which the continuation of spirit does effect,
namely, as it were by an unison, by reason of the uniformity of the specific
spirit belonging unto man, by the union whereof the four discordant elements,
and every member of man's body are united unto a fympatheticall harmony, adopted
to the use of life in the creature, yea, also forasmuch, as the blood, flesh,
fat, and bones in all other unreasonable creatures, are framed out of one kind
of elementary form, and fashioned alike, by the same operating spirit; it is
no marvel, if his blood being brought unto the same ointment, do also cause
health in the wounded creature, being it does generally tend to life, which is
proper to all bloody creatures, no exceptions had unto each specific
difference. Whether this therefore (being well conceived and pondered even by
the very zealous, with little understanding) can appear an act of the devil,
and not the blessed gift of God; I leave it to the scanning of such as can
better judge of this matter then my self.

But now (Courteous Readers) that I may conclude this Theo-philosophicall
member, with a better taste or relish unto the pallats of your riper judgments,
and well seasoned conceptions; I purpose to fall from this Theoricall, or
speculatiue course of demonstation, and betake my self a while unto a more
practical, or experimental way of direction: whereby you may the better enter
into the plain and direct trace of truth, touching the resolution of the
foresaid question; and I will divide this my practical discourse into three
several chapters: whereof the first, or fourth shall teach you by an evident
experience, that the agent or internal principle in this cure, is in the
blood, or body of the living man that is wounded, and consequently the devil
must needs be excluded from being any agent or actor in it. The second or fifth
shall express diverse true histories touching this cure, as they have been
acted here at home amongst us in England. The third or sixth shall disco or the
true ground why our adversary wrote this book. And the last shall tell
certain manner of sympatheticall cures, which will appear sarre more strange,
and more surpassing the capacity of our Sponge-carrier, then that of the
weapon-salue. Of these therefore in order thus.

CHAP. IIII.
Here are expressed certain practical observations, concerning this cure;
whereby it is made apparent, that the internal agent in this cure, is centrall
contained in the blood, and consequently Master Fosters devil must be excluded
out of this wholesome business for a wrangler.

IF it were indeed (as Mr. Foster would have it) that the devil is the sole
author and actor in this cure, and that he performs it craftily and
sophistically by other medicines to delude the simple Mountebanks, then is it
not likely that there can be any agent ^in the blood that could resist or
hinder this his cure, which also appears to be the more probable, because
that the nature of the wounded person, is apt and inclined by all means
possible, to put off all languishment, and desires to have her Tabernacle in a
wholesome and sound estate. And for this reason we see, that by the
application of salues, balsames or inward physic, the natural spirits, and
internal actor of life does help and assist the medicines in their cure, or
else they would not effect any such matter. For this reason is the Physician
called, Adiutor naturae, The helper of nature.

Now, that the principal agent of this cure, is comprehended in the body of
the wounded, I prove it in this manner: It has been auerred, and will be
ma^ntained by persons of great knowledge, no Babies, but of a far greater
maturity, both in learning and judgment, then our Sponge-carryer, that in
their manifold experience they have observed, and found it most true, that when
the wounded person has sent his blood on a stick, iron, or weapon, to the
place of the ointment, and that thereupon he has been in a good way of
healing, if in the time of his cure, he has to do with a menstruous woman,
immediately the curatiue power in the ointment is lost, and it will do him no
good: also they have oftentimes observed, that if the wounded person happen in
the mean season to have an issue of blood out of his nose, the curatiue
property will be quite taken away, and it will profit nothing after this;
whereby it is apparent that this happens, because the act, and secret
emanation of the internal spirit of life in the wounded, is diuerred from his
application or aspect unto the weaponsalue. And therefore leaves the one to
operate in the other, which are so immediate unto it and the body, even as in
heaven we see, that agreater aspect, or more potent application, of one planet
unto another, does drown and take away the lesser.

There is another admirable experiment, tried by a noble personage, of whom I
will make mention more at large in the sixth chapter of this member: for one of
his men having deeply cut his finger, and that about the joint, with a since, as
he was mowing of grass; his finger bled still, and could not easily be
staunched. Wherefore this Earl, wished them to knoke off the Sith from the
handle, and to bring it unto him, that he might anoint it: the wounded fellow
went about it himself, and at the very first knock that he gave the weapon
that had wounded him, the blood stanched, and he bled not one drop more. And
verily he acknowledged, that though there were not a jot of blood to be
discerned on the weapon; yet if he anointed the place of the instrument that
made the wound (which oftentimes he confessed, he was forced to do by guess)
he did perform as well the cure, as if the blood had stuck upon it. Out of
which revelation or derection I gather, that all the mystery of this cure,
consists in the secret and invisible spirit, which is within the blood, as
well remaining still, and operating in the wounded body, as that which has
penetrated inuisibly into the weapon: for, else, without the presence of the
visible blood, it could not operate, yea, and out of that observation, namely,
that the Sith, or weapon being struck, the blood did forthwith stanch; there
is as great a mystery opened, as when the presench of the murderer, does cause
the congealed blood in the murthre^ to flow and run again; all which is
effected, partly by the contracting property of the occult spirit in the blood,
and partly by his dilatation, as is said before.

Hereby it is made clear, that it is not the devil, that by external
application works any thing in this cure, but it is by the centrall emanation
of that spirit in the wounded, that gives him life, which operateth ab
interno, as by these experiments it is made evident. I come to the next Chapter
of experimented cures.

CHAP. V.
Wherein certain Histories, touching the effecting of this Cure are expressed.

NOw will I relate unto you the stories of certain homebred cures, which have
been effected by this Weapon-Salue, that thereby wise men may deem or guess
uprightly, whether the Devil has a finger in this cure, yea, or no.

There is a Knight dwelling in Kent, a man judicious, religious and learned,
called Sr. Nichol^ Gilbourne, one (I say) with whom I both am, and have been
long familiar. For he married my Sister. This Knight having good acquaintance
with one Captain Styles, for as much as in times past he was his tenant, was
with the said Captain in the Company of very good and learned Divines, at the
making of the said Ointment, who saw all the ingrediences apart, and after
beheld an Apothecary to compound them together without any kind of
superstitious action, where it was generally adjudged to be a lawful medicine,
and no way superstitious or diabolical. A box of this ointment was bestowed on
this my brother in law; what wholesome effects it has wrought, I will in a word
relate unto you, and that verbatim as I have it under his own hand.

The first (says he) was at Chatam in Kent, where the servant of one Poppee a
ship wright, was cut with his axe into the instep, so deep as it could pass,
and not cut it off; upon the hurt (which was in the after noone) he was
brought unto me; but I refused to meddle with it, only I advised him, to wash
his wound with his own urine, which he did. The next morning early I did
dress the axe, and after dressing it, I did send to know, how the fellow did?
Answer was made that he had been in great pain all the night; but now lately
was at ease. The next morning coming into my study, I struck my Rapier down
upon the Axe, the hilt whereof struck the ointment off from the axe, which
when I found, I sent to understand how he did? and had answer, that he had
been exceeding well that night; but this morning he was in great pain, and so
continued: I therefore anointed the axe again, and then sent again unto him,
and heard that he was then at great ease: and within seven days was
perfectly well.

These are his very words, which by letter he ^ent unto me. By which it is
manifest, that the cure is (contrary to Master Fosters assertion) performed by
the Weapon-Salue; and not by other secret medicine applied by the Devil; but
rather this invention of Master Fosters is deuillish, and the cure of the
ointment natural. For else, why should the ointment on the axe, being
discovered or stuck off by the sword hilts, be an occasion of the sudden
alteration in the wound from better to worse? And why should the wound return
again from his dolorous distemper unto his wonted ease, after the re-anointing
and covering anew of the Weapon?

His second History of this manner of curing was this: I (says Sr. Nicholas
Gilbourne) having given unto me the sewing of a pond at Charing; after I had
done, the boys of the town went into it to seek for fish. Among the rest
Brent Deering (the Son of Master Finsh Deering) did go into it for that
purpose, and there had a Reed run into the calfe of his leg: This bled much,
and put him to great pain, which caufed his mother to send unto one John Heart
a Surgeon of Charing to search and dress the wound; but he continued after
dressing full of pain, and apt to faint. Whereupon his Sister was sent unto
me, to do my best for his ease. I answered that I could do no good, because
he was already drefled by the Chirurgio^. But that would not satisfy them: and
therefore upon their importunity, I advised them (because they informed me that
the orifice was very narrow) to wash away all the Chirugions work, and to put a
knitting needle into the wound, so far as it would go, and to tie a thread
where it would pass no further: they did so, and found that it went quite
through to the very ^kin on the other side. This knitting needle I did anoint,
and in four or five days, it was well in appearance, saving that upon the top
of the orifice, there was a dry scale. I was nothing well satisfied, to find
that it was not perfectly well, but had still a scale remaining upon it. And
therefore I did newly anoint the knitting needle over night, and the next
morrow, there came out of the orifice, a small splinter of the Reed, and after
that, it was in two or three days perfectly whole,

These are the very words of Sr. Nicholas Gilborns letter: What will Mr. Foster
say to this cure? What? Was it the devil did this cure by other medicines, and
not by this magnetike or sympatheticall ointment? verily, the case is plain,
that all the curatiue power did consist in the salve: For, the effects in
curing did testify so much; but the principal agent issued or rather did
emanate from the wounded boy.

And alas, what could the devil get against the poor child, in performing
secretly this cure, who expected nothing else, but the assistance Gods blessing
and mercy for his relief? An innocent child (I say) and therefore in the
protection of the Almighty, Iusto refugium (says David) Deus and
propugnaculum, Psalm 9.10.
What? was the tutelar Angel of this child (which Christ says, does always
behold the face of his Matthew 18.11.
father which is in heaven) so negligent, as to lose the special charge
committed unto him by God, through so poor a slight of the devil?
Castramet^tur Angeli (says the Psalmist) circa timentes cum, and Psalm 34.
recipit eos. And would they also be so easily deluded, which are more vigilant
to preserve Gods Elect, then Argos with his hundred eyes?

You may by this, discern our (...) foppery and imaginary fictions, touching
the profound mystery of this cure. I come to the third.

By Windsor, there was one, who had somewhat to do in the Chase or Forest,
who, as he was mowing of a piece of meadow, fell backward upon the edge of his
Sith, and cut all his back so dangeroussly, that his life was greatly to be
feared; the Sith forthwith sent to London to Captain Styles, who was anointed
it, wrapped it up, and laid it aside. Not long after, there came one to demand
for Doctor Styles, and he was sent unto Do. Styles; The Minister, who
understanding that it was about a thanksgiving for a cure done by the
weapon-salue, sent him unto the Captain; he desires to speak with him: The
Captain being at dinner, or supper, with diverse of his friends, sent for the
fellow into the dining room, and there he told the Captain, that the wounded
man, did acknowledge of him his life under God, assuring him that the dangerous
wound did heal a pace, after he had sent his Sith unto him, and was thoroughly
cured without any other application. And for a part of recompense, and to
express his thankfulness, he presented him with a side of Red Dear.

Here you may see, that this cure was performed at a distance of 20, miles
between the wound and the ointment.

CHAP. VI.
Here our Spongy Authors worldly plot or policy, in decrying the weapon-salue,
covered over with the smooth veil of sanctity is discovered.

But for as much as the experiments cited and proved by Captain Styles and Sir
Nicholas Gilbourne, are but two or three, and according unto the old maxim,
Vnum, vel aliud exemplum non probat ar^gumentu^, I think it not amiss to
certify each reader, that there is a certain noble Personage of this
kingdom, very religious, judicious and learned, who at the first scoffed at
this kind of cure, as a thing impossible: And after that he perceived that it
was true indeed, he was terrified by such scare-crowes as Mr. Foster is, to put
it in practice: forasmuch as he was made believe, that there was a prestigious
deceit or cacomagical virtue and operation in it. For which cause he did
abstain from the use and practice thereof; although he did acknowledge the act
of it to be wonderful. And yet nevertheless, beause his curiosity did incite
him, to diue a little further into the truth of this mystery; he did at the
last, desire to speak with one Captain Styles (a man well known by his
acquaintance, to be both wise and religious, as also adverse unto all
superstitious actions, or ceremonies) because he was noted to be a great
practitioner in this manner of cure. His earnest desire of him, was first to
see with his own eyes, for his better satisfaction, every particular
ingredient apart, which went into the composition of this salve, and afterward
to observe each ingredients preparation, and lastly, to behold their mixtion or
union in composition, that thereby he might the better discern, whether any
unlawful act, or diabolical superstition, did concur with the making
thereof; the Captain consents, whereupon this Noble man, to be the better
informed in this matter, called unto this composition a learned Divine, and a
well esteemed Doctor of Physic, who with one consent, after the complement of
the business, did affirm, that there was neither any damnable superstition in
the making of this ointment, as was falsely suggested; nor yet any Cacomagicall
disposition in the ingredients, as was vainly surmised by some precise
persons. And for that reason, they did jointly conclude, that both the
medicine, in it self, and the practice of this cure were natural, and
consequently lawful for any good Christian to use. Hereupon this Honorable
Personage, did for a twelve months space, with happy and fortunate success,
practice this manner of cure, on many that were wounded; and yet for all this,
it should appear, that some busy Buzzards, or rather buzzing flies of this
nature, did put into his head, new suspicions, insinuating unto him, that the
Captain might use some secret superstitious means, or unknown charms in the
collecting, or preparing of the principal ingredients, which he could not
discern, and that without this, those mystical effects could not be wrought,
whereupon one twelve month being past, he undertook for his more assurance,
to make the composition himself, and to have the ingredients, gotten and
prepared by his own direction, namely, the moss of man's bones, etc. And for
this cause, he makes Mr. Cook, the Apothecary, to beat into fine powder,
such of the ingrediences, as were to be powdered, and afterward to compound it
and to make it up, which when he had effected, he found, that this his own
composition, had the selfsame healing virtue, and prosperous success in
curing that the other had; by reason whereof, he rests ever since, so
confident in the safety, and lawfulness of this cure, that not one of these
fantastical Butterflies, by their painted shows without any solid
substance, can alter his mind from this practice; which when our valiant
Sponge-carrier perceives, and seeing that all the vain persuasions of his too
too scrupulous and suspicious faction, could not effect, he as a Praeco, or
crying Orator, for the rest, utters forth these fragments of his outward and
counterfeit zeal, for as much as it is stuffed internally, with an
hypocritical, and politic intent; as shall be more at large expressed
hereafter.

His words in his dedicatory Epistle are these.

That which moved me to write this book, was a commiseration of the case of
some Persons of quality, reputed religious, which use the weapon-salue; I pity
these; I presume they imagine no harm in it: I pray for them in our Savior
Christ his own words, Father, forgive them, for they know not what they do.
Is not this a pretty hood of zeal and religion, besmeared over with the fard
of dissimulation; a smooth faced veil (I say) of hypocrisy, to cover and
conceal the nakedness of a private worldly policy, namely, to apply unjustly,
and make a wrong use of the righteous words, of our blessed Savior lesus
Christ, for the decrying and abolishing of that good gift of healing, which by
his viuifying spirit is effected, upon his wounded and infirm creatures', (and
that which is worse) by attributing it falsely unto the devil, an enemy both to
God and man; and thereby to defraud the Creator and actor in all things of his
right, and that before the face of all his reasonable creatures, whom he
created after his own Image, persuading them to believe, that all mystical
and occult healing, in these latter days, is the virtuous operation of the
Father of lies, and enemy of goodness? And that chiefly for the company of
Chirurgions cause, as shall forthwith be more plainly expressed. As who
should say, that God had in this last age of the world, lost all his operative
virtue and power in mystical and hidden workings, as well in his creatures, as
by miracles: that good God (I say) the Creator both of heaven and earth, and
therefore he that works wonders everlastingly, as well occultly as
manifestly, has lost his operative virtue, or assigned it, as it were by
succession, over unto the devil. May not that Noble man, and many other
religious persons, at which Master Foster in the precedent Text aymeth, with a
better conscience, retort his foresaid speech, upon him, and say, I am moved
with a commiseration of the cause of this person, or Parson reputed, by reason
of his profession religious, who condemns, and attempteth with his Sponge to
wipe away the weapon-salue, and to abolish the reputation of that virtue, which
God has bestowed on it for man's good, and for the relief of distressed
wounded creatures. I pity him, if he do it of ignorance; for then I presume,
he imagines no harm, and therefore I will pray for him in Luke 22.
our Savior Christ his own words, Father, forgive him, for he knows not
what he does. But if he does it wittingly, and makes use of these holy words
of Christ, for policies sake, or to procure the worldly gain of others, I must
speak unto him in these very words, which Christ spoke unto Peter, Get thee
behind me, Satan, for thou vnderstandst Mark 8.22.
not the things that are of God, but the things that are of men!

Now verily, I will make it appear, that he hides his worldly craft under
the cloak of sanctity, and consequently he walloweth the deeper in the puddle
of sin, wherefore his reward must needs correspond with his desert: For, God
who searches the heart and reins of every man, is just and righteous. I would
have each obseruant Reader therefore to note, that there is a double reason, in
this Mr. Fosters endeavor, to wipe away the weapon-salue, whereof the first is
the weakest, namely, a witting ignorance, or an entire unbelief in those
invisible virtues of Gods creatures, though they appear evidently by effect,
and that unto Gods glory, and distressed men's comforts. Hence springs the
captious disposition of some pr^sions, or rather pure seeming persons, which
have no belief in the occult or hidden operations, either of medicines, or any
thing else, which is made manifest in these latter days: because, say they,
miracles are ceased, and therefore, what now appears miraculous or worthy of
marvel, is prestigious, cacomagicall, diabolical, and consequently not of
God. This manner of persons forget the words of the wise man, which does tell
us, that the Works of the Eccl. 11. 4.
Lord are wonderful and glorious: secret and unknown are his Works amongst
men, etc: And will these false judges of Gods actions presume to condemn them,
and attribute them unto the devil, because they are secret and unknown unto
them? Will they censure things, which are so far beyond their reach? May not
I justly say, unto such a person, that spurneth in his writing against the
truth, as Peter did to Ananias, why has Satan filled thine heart, that thou
Acts 3. and 5.
should lie unto the Holy Ghost, and apply unrighteously Gods virtue to the
Devil?

But if he shall reply and say, that he knows assuredly, that this secret
and occult virtue in curing, is not from God, but from the Devil: Let us be so
bold, as to ask him, how he came by that knowledge? or by what means got he
that familiarity with the devil, that he is so much beholding unto him, to
know his secrets? As for those of God, I know them to be far enough from the
reach of such men, to scan the reason of them: and therefore Solomon says:
Intellexi quod omnium Eccl. 8. 17.
Operum Dei nullam possit homo inuenire rationem, eorum quae fiunt sub Sole;
and quanto plus laborauerit id quaerendum, tanto minus inueniet: I understand
(says he) that man can find no reason of those Works of God, which are
effected under the Sun, and that by how much more he labors to find it
out, by so much the less can he be able to find it. And will this bold kind
of people, like blind Bayards, presume to auerre, that the occult or hidden
virtue in Gods Creatures is effected by the Devil.

All which being thus, namely, that it is impossible; but by guess to judge of
these occult mysteries and hidden actions of God; I would feign know, whether
any learned Reader can be so impartial, as to affirm that Master Foster and
his associats or helpers, have done better in attributing the reason of the
secret manner of the Weapon-Salues healing unto the Devil, not having any
assured testimony for it out of holy Writ; then Doctor Fludd, who does only
ascribe all goodness, and amongst the rest, the acting of healing in general,
unto God and his blessed Word.

Of this kind of sharp and nimble witted persons, and bold judges, that give
their counsel against Gods cause at random, yea, and so peremptorily, would
make the common sort of people to believe, that they are partakers of all Gods
secret Mysteries; which are not revealed unto mankind, but by event. Of those,
I say, who assist Master Foster in this glorious enterprise, and as it were
even with the Titanean Giants are ready to withstand and assail Jupiter for
Saturnes, or rather Satan's cause, even of those, who with the Spurs of their
best encouragments egg him forward, to inueigh against Gods virtue in the
weapon-salue, and slander me and many others, for maintaining the right of God
and his created nature: of these (I say) he makes mention and gives in his
dedicatory Epistle this touch.

We of the Church of England detest superstitious magical cures: we have
many poor parish Priests amongst us (whereof my self is the meanest) which
dare handle an argument, and write and preach against such practices, etc.

Here you see the bed, of this too precise and over pure, scrupulous, and too
too busy Cabale eiu sdem (dico) cum Fostero farinae hominum, is broken and
laid open. And truly Master Foster says but rightly, that the Church of
England detesteth superstitious magical cures, as by right it ought, and so
do I also from mine heart. But I would feign see him demonstratiuely prove,
that the virtue of the weapon-salue is magical or superstitious; and not
natural. As for the Arguments and proofs, which he has hitherto produced, to
disanull this kind of mystical healing, I find them before God and man so
weak and faint, that they had need to have a draught of strong aqua vitae, to
keep them from fainting at the aspect of verity: they are so poorly armed,
that a small fillip of truth will knock them on the head, and make them
breathless. If he with all the assistance, his associats shall lend him, can
prove it better; perchance we may be induced to believe it. But:

When the Sky fall^th, we shall catch larkes.

The second reason or worldly intent, which he vaileth and hides with a hood
of simplicity and pure sanctity, is for a private policy, namely, to curry
favor, and to do a covert ^ruice unto the company of Chirurgians, from whose
race he is descended. For, when he perceived those his brethren much to repine
at the continual good, that this magnetic cure performs daily, to many of
Gods infirm and wounded Creatures, andthat not without a wondrous prejudice
unto their practice and profit; he thought it would be a worthy and meritorious
service unto them, to undertake the disgracing and putting down, so great an
eyesore unto that little common wealth; and they, no doubt, perceiving him to
be impudently bold by nature, as also of a small estate (as it appears by his
Epistle unto the Reader, where he says; that he is infra i^idiam, and has but
small Church revenue) and therefore the more careless, desperate, and
consequently the apter to rail, and use unseemly language unto his betters
(for, who would be so foolish, as to cast away his money in the StarreChamber,
for a libeller or rather slanderer, that is worth little or nothing) and rashly
to condemn, without any modesty or conscience, the things which are already
adjudged by God; were very glad to make choice of this man, as a perdue in the
forlorn band of their troops, to venture rashly, and to undergo without
modesty or wit, this burden, namely, as well to take away this WeaponSalues
reputation amongst men, as to vpbraide me, with false and scandalous
imputations, for maintaining it to be only naturally magical, and therefore
lawful and no way diabolical. Now that this is so, the case is made apparent
by four manifest observations: whereof the first is; because this business
touches chiefly, and that unto the quick, the Chirurgians freehold: and
therefore it is most likely, that these are his friends he means in his
dedicatory Epistle, where he speaks thus:

I had rather hazard mine own reputation, then men should their salvation. My
friends, at whose entreaty I I. S. E. C.
condescended to this undertaking, etc.

Here you see his religious veil: and again, he discovers his hidden
policy. He pretends zeal for the salvation of many; and afterward he says,
that he condescended unto it, at the entreaty of some of his friends, whereof
some in plain great Letters he quotes in the margent, namely, I. S. and E. C.
now who these are explicitly, the title of his Latin Epistle expresses: You
will find them (no doubt) when you know them stout judicious persons and of a
deep reach, to determine so great a doubt as this which we have in hand:
Stout Iury-men (I say) to give their verdit on so profound a Philosophical
Mystery. God preserve their demure worships, Amicis meis (says he) Ioanni
Scot^ and Edwardo Chalaeo, etc. Now this task concerns none more (as I said)
then theChirurgians, and that he esteems them his especial friends, the
consequence will confirm. The second observation is, because this our adverse
Author was a Barber Chirurgians son. Hence came that mighty reverence, that
he bears them, in giving them the title of Esquires. The third is made
manifest, by that stately and unusual Latin Epistle in an English book, that
he has dedicated unto them. Lastly, because some of them (as I am advertised)
did go along with him to grace him, and to procure him the licensing of his
book to be printed, as well against the weaponsalue, as my self by name,
whereas more modesty and discretion might have guided them, then so earnestly
to have moved and pressed the licensing of a scandalousPamphlet, a part whereof
(I say) does in an ignominious and infamous manner, point at my self by name,
of purpose to prejudice and wound (as far as in it lay) my untainted
reputation, and that immediately after the immodest and rash composer thereof
had been reprehended, and repulsed by two discreet and learned personages for
the very same, slanderous and immorall insolences. I am much beholding unto
these favorers, of mine adversary, and so much the more, for as much also as
unto one or two of my fellow Colleagues; some of them geered and scoffed at me,
for those slanders, which he vauntingly had expressed in his book against me,
both before the licensing of it, and afterward. But as I neglect their scorn,
as being too shallow to drown my reputation, so I pray God forgive them their
follies, and abate their malice; I accuse not all, but some: For, I know there
are amongst them of a more learned, discreet, and modest carriage; Unto such
therefore, because I deem them free from this malignant action: I wish all
happiness, and desire their pardon, if I speak justly, and that unto the
matter, when I find my self so spightfully netled, by some of their society,
if I cared for them, or it. Wherefore, by their good leaves, I will proceed
thus in my History.

The above mentioned Noble Personage, and Captain Styles, with Sir Beuis
Thelwell (who had his ointment from that Noble Personage, and has performed by
it, many strange and desperate cures) and Mr. Wells of Dedford (a learned, and
honest Gentleman, have cured (as they will make good) at the least a thousand
persons by this manner of cure, and now there are many other, as well men, as
women, which have got of this weapon-salue, and do daily an infinity of good
in this kingdom. Hinc dolor, hinc lacrimae: From hence (I say) comes the
grief unto the Chirurgians, as well of this City of London, as of every
Country about. And have they not good reason for it, when they lose such a
mass of practice aswould well have stuffed their Pouches; Was not (I beseech
you) this the Siluersmiths of Ephesus case, who when they perceived, Act. 19.
that their gains, which in their Trade they got by Dianas Image, was likely
to perish through S. Paul's miraculous virtue, as well in healing, as otherwise
(for it is in the same Chapter said, that God wrought no small miracles by the
hands of Paul, so that from his body were brought unto the sick Kirchiefes, or
hand-kirchiefes, and the diseases departed from them, and the evil spirit went
'out of them) and salutiferous preaching of Jesus Christ, they put the whole
city in an vproare, by the persuasion and Oration of a certain man, named
Demetrius, a Siluer-smith, that thereby they might decry and put down those
preachings, and miraculous operations of St. Paul, as well in healing, as
otherwise, which he did effect, not only in that City, but over all Asia,
crying out against all truth and reason, Great is Diana of the Ephesians!
inferring thereby, falsely, that Paul's Doctrine and curing was erroneous, and
his miracles diabolical? Does not this Champion for the Chirurgians, I mean
Mr. Foster, resemble in every point the Ephesian Demetrius, for as much as he
conspireth with the Artists of his fathers Trade, to move the whole City, yea,
and country, to murmur and repine at the virtuous act of that gift, which God
has imparted unto the weapon-falue, and exclaim against such as use it, unto
Gods glory, and the good of mankind; because it does derogate, and takes away
the profit and gain from the Trade of Chirurgians? Did not Demetrius under
pretense of zeal and Religion unto the false and Ethnic Goddess Diana,
derogate all he could from the honor and glory of Jesus Christ, and that
chiefly for the Company of Siluer-smiths profit and gains sake? And does not
Foster in the very same manner, under an hypocritical shadow or veil of
sincerity, ascribe the power of healing by the weapon-salue unto the devil,
the falfe god of this world, and in so doing, does derogate from the divine
honor and virtue of the true God, who made heaven and earth, thereby to poison
and intoxicate the opinions of virtuous or well minded men, and to distract
them from the truth, by his false persuasions, as Demetrius attempted to do
with the honest Ephesians: For as much as he with his Chirurgicall faction,
seems to cry out like another Demetrius, Great is our Esculapius, the god of
Chirurgians, and his inventions of balmes, emplasters, and salues: and
consequently diabolical is the Weapon-Salue, which cures all wounds
miraculously at a distance, and not by Contact? Did not Galen in the like
manner rail and scoff at Christ and his Disciples, for their curing so
strangly at distance, and that without any ocular demonstration. And the reason
why? was, because he could not cure spiritually at distance; but only grossly
and by an immediate contact.

If I therefore like the Ephesian towne-Clarke, shall with words of reason and
truth, seek to appease the unjust rumors and needless iealousies, stirred up
by this our Sponge-bearing Demetrius, and ascribe with the words of verity,
that unto God the Father, and his Son Jesus Christ, which belongs to him,
and tell the Devil and his minister unto his face, that all goodness, and
therefore each healing property belongs unto God the Creator of all things,
and not to any vile creature, much less unto the Devil. Do I (think you)
do amiss? Was it not (I pray you) for these very words of Paul, that in his
Sermon at Athens Demetrius and his crafts men were so much offended with him.

The Lord (says he) who has made heaven and Acts 17.24.
earth, dwells not in Temples made with hands, netther is worshipped with
men's hands, as though he needed any thing, seeing he gives to all, life, and
breath and all things: and has made of one blood all mankind etc: For in him
we live, and move, and have our Being, for we are also his generation. For as
much then as we are the Generation of God, we ought not to think that the
Godhead is like unto gold or silver, or ston^ graven by art and the invention
of man, etc. This angered Demetrius and his company, namely to say, that the
Godhead is not like unto gold or silver graven by art, which if they had
suffered, no body would have bought the images of Diana, framed by them: In
like manner, this Chirurgicall faction decryes the Weapon-Salue, fearing that
few wounded persons would trouble them for their cure, being that frustra fit
per plura, quod potest fieri per pauciora: it would be but vain for a wounded
man, to be tormented by flashing, eating corrosiues, incisions, and dolorous
tentings of Chirurgions, besides great bargains and compacts for the cures,
and perchance also little attendance, when the immediate Act of God does
operate the ^ure gratis, gently, without dolorous tents or grievous incision,
and that honestly without an ill conscience, seeing that it is Gods Spirit;
which does operate as well in the blood as salve. For (I beseech you) observe
the words of Saint Paul (which if they move in some degree the Ephesian
siluersmiths, they will much more nettle such covetous Chirurgians, as would
suffocate and smoother, this excellent and divine virtue in the WeaponSalue,
whose original is ofblood:) The which words that you may with the better
solidity conceive, you must gather or collect out of them, these three several
things: First, that the Lord of Lords is he, who has made heaven and earth,
whereupon we collect, tha the which has made heaven and earth, is the guider
and operatour, both in the spirit and body, of both the great and little world
called man: and therefore neither Hag nor devil can work to the health,
sustentation or preservation of either: as the consequence shall confirm; For
the Text says: He gives life, breath, and all things. Next, he has made
all mankind of one blood and spirit: And therefore he operateth all in all in
man's blood in general, as well to life as health. And again: the spirit of
the dead man's bones, and consequently their excrescence, which issued
originally out of man's blood, in the which in part lurketh Gods Spirit of life,
has an homogeniall reference, unto the lively blood of man, for as much as the
Text says, that all mankind is made of one blood only: and therefore this
union of symphoniacall or sympatheticall harmony, is not easily to be limited,
by Master Fosters fantastical sphere of actiuity. For the text following
unto the Athenians is: In him we live. and move, and have our Being. And
lastly, that we are the Generation of God: and for that cause, Christ did not
disdain, to call us his Brethren and the Sons of God. Neither is it
sufficient to say (as these precisians do) that this is meant only of the
Believers; and not of the Infidels. For Saint Paul, at that very time, when he
preached this doctrine, spoke unto the Idolaters, and such as worshipped
unknown gods: and he did let them to know th^s much; namely, that they lived,
moved, and had their being in the true God, and that this Lord of Lords gives
life and breath, and being, and that they were all of Gods Generation. All this
he truly taught, that thereby they might leave their false gods, and betake
themselves unto their right Lord and only God, from whom, by whom, and in whom
they exist, and Romans 12.32.
persist in their being, as he declares elsewhere. Let therefore Demetrius,
his Goddess Diana be forgotten, and let Fosters healing devil be deprived
from all his imaginary power and practice in curing of wounds. And lastly, let
all couetuous Chirurgians expectations be thoroughly quashed, and disanulled, by
this inviolable assertion of the Apostle.

Though there be that are called Gods, whether in heaven or in earth, (as there
be many gods and many lords) 1 Cor. 8.5.
yet unto us there is but one God, which is that Father of whom are all things,
and we in him, and one Lord, Jesus Christ, by whom are all things, and we by
him: but every man has not that knowledge. Let M. Foster mark this: as who
shouldsay, though the Ephesian Demetrius with his accomplices, did attribute all
power unto the false Goddess Diana, and Foster, the secret and marvelous
power of healing by the weapon-salue unto the devil, as the prince of this
world, without any consideration unto this Text; yet it is certain, that it is
God the Father, of whom are al things: and consequently, this act in curing and
by our Lord Jesus Christ, by whom are all things, and therefore each blessed
gift of healing. For, Solomon auerreth, that it is the Word that cures all
things. But, says the Text, Every man has not this knowledge, etc. Wherefore
Mr. Foster is the more to be blamed, to profess the name of Gods Minister, and
to be ignorant in this point. Or at the leastwise, if he knew it, he is to be
blamed both before God and man, to speak so bluntly, and against his
conscience, for any pruiuate companies cause, or worldly affection, yea, it may
appear, that he was troubled in his conscience, when he writ so
staggeringly, and unadvisedly, touching the original cause of this cure. For,
first of all, page 8. he says, that it is not the salve that cures, but the
devil, by the secret applications of other medicines: In another place,
namely, page 17. he acknowledges, that the act of curing, is the salve but
concludes it to be magical, by reason of the superstitious observations in
the collection or gathering of the ingrediences, and in the anointing of the
weapon. Then page 39. he seems to auerre, that it is the bathing of the
wound with Vrin, and the keeping it clean, which does effect this cure;
whereby he takes away all virtue from the salve, and acting power from the
devil. But page 7. he says, that it is only God that cures at such a
distance, for as much as his essence is infinite, and is omnia in omnibus, and
not any Angel. The Gentleman you see is in many minds, God amend him, and make
his headpiece more settled, and of a more solid consistence, and constant
nature, or we shall be troubled hereafter with many words; but little
substance appertaining to the right matter. I hear he threatens me with a
volume of some impieties, and I know not what, which he has found in my
works: I am sure he will prove but Mersennus and Gassendus his Ape or
Parroket. For he professes them his Masters, and therefore I will quickly
serve and afford him the same sauce, or answer I have bestowed ont hem. Let him
appear when he dares, and take the best assistance, his homebred setters on
can afford him; I fear neither him nor them, nor Mersennus, nor Lanouius, nor
Gassendus, his papisticall Masters: For, I have (I hope) the buckler oftruth
for my defense.

I will now pass unto the next Chapter, wherein I will express certain
histories, of certain magical cures, which in mine opinion, are far more
admirable then this of the weapon-salue.

CHAP. VII.
In this Chapter, certain Magneticall, or Sympatheticall affects are
expressed, which appear far more admirable, then this of the weapon-salue.

SIr Nicholas Gilbourn relates in his letter unto me these words: The last
time (says he) the Lady Ralegh was at Eastwell at the Countess of Winchelsey
her house, we falling into some discourse, concerning the Sympatheticall
ointment, she told me, that her late husband, Sir Walter Ralegh, would
suddenly stop the bleeding of any person (albeit he were far and remote from
the party) if he had a handkirchers, or some other piece of linen dipped in
some of the blood of the party sent unto him. If this were done by the devil,
I presume, that so wise a Personage, as was Sir Walter Ralegh, would have lest,
or at leastwise not have used that Trade of curing or stopping of blood.

There are four histories more, that I will tell you, whereof the two first are
foreign, and the two last were acted at home namely here in England.

The first of the foreign Stories was acted in Italy, and has been there so
famous and remarkable, that unto this present, it is as well in the native
countrey-mans mouth, as in the report of such travelers as have passed through
the country; yea, and there are authors of credit, that have enrolled it in
their written monuments. It was thus: There was a certain Lord, or Nobleman of
Italy, that by chance lost his nose in a fight or combat, this party was
counseled by his Physicians to take one of his slaves, and make a wound in his
arm, and immediately to join his wounded nose to the wounded arm of the
slave, and to bind it fast, for a season, until the flesh of the one was
united and assimulated unto the other. The Noble Gentleman got one of his
slaves to consent, for a large promise of liberty and reward; the double flesh
was made all one, and a collop or gobbet of flesh was cut out of the slaves
arm, and fashioned like a nose unto the Lord, and so handled by the
Surgeon, that it served for a natural nose. The slave being healed and
rewarded, was manumitted, or set at liberty, and away he went to Naples. It
happened, that the slave fell sick and dyed, at which instant, the Lords nose
did gangrenate and rot; whereupon the part of the nose which he had of the
dead man, was by the Doctors advice cut away, and he being animated by the
foresaid experience, followed the advice of the same Phisician, which was to
wound in like manner his own arm, and to apply it to his wounded and
mutilated nose, and to endure with patience, till all was complete as before.
He with animofity and patience, did undergo the brunt, and so his nose
continued with him until his death.

What? Must we esteem this work the act of Gods spirit in man, or a
deceitful and prestigious operation and trumpery of the devil? Verily, it
must needs by wise men be adjudged to proceed from that good act of Gods
viuifying spirit, which did operate by way of life and vegetation in them both.
Is it not strange therefore (the one living about Bolongnia in Italy, and the
other being in Naples) that according to Master Fosters tenent, neither the
tall Hills of Hetruria; nor yet the high Appenine mountains could stop the
concourse and motion of these two spirits, or rather one spirit continuated in
two bodies, as a line being stretched out from two extremes, of so far a
distance. Surely M. Foster will say, this is Magical and diabolical.

The second foreign Story was this.

I was, whilst I did soiourne in Rome, acquainted with a very learned and
skillful personage, called Master Gruter, he was by birth of Swisserland: and
for his excellency in the Mathematick, and in the Art of motions and inventions
of Machins, he was much esteemed by the Cardinal Saint George: This Gentleman
taught me the best of my skill in those practices: and amongst the rest, he
delivered this magneticall experiment unto me, as a great secret, assuring me
that it was tried in his Country, upon many with good success. When (said he)
any one has a withered and consumed member, as a dried arm, leg, foot, or
such like, which physicians call an Atrophie of the lims, you must cut from
that member, be it foot or arm, the nails, hair, or some part of the skin,
then you must pierce a willow tree with an Auger or wimble unto the pith, and
afterward put into the hole the pared nails and skin, and with a peg made of
the same wood, you must stop it close: Observing that in this action the
Moon be increasing, and the good Planets in such a multiplying Sign, as is
Gemini, and fortunate and powerful over Saturn, which is a great dryer. The
selfsame effect (said he) you shall find in you, take the nails and hair,
which is cut off the member, and close them in the root of an hasle tree, and
shut up the hole, with the bark of the tree, and after cover it with the
earth, and (said he) it has been tried, that as the tree daily grows and
flourishes, so also by little and little, will the patient recover his health.
But you must with diligence observe, the motion of the heanenly bodies, and
especially the places of the Sun and Moon, when this is effected. And to
this intent, he did disclose unto me, the time and seasons when the preparion
unto such a cure should be effected. But alas! What have I done? Now has Mr.
Foster enough to cry out that this is Magic indeed; here is superstition in
the highest degree: For did not he say page 17. that it is an astrologicall,
and therefore superstitigus observation to collect any ingredient, or to do
any thing by attending and expecting, when the Moon should be in such or such
a house of heaven, and that by Scriptures, Astrologers, Magitians and
Sorcerers, like birds of a feather, are linked together? A worshipful exploit
in in this demure Gentleman! His blindness leads him in this as in the rest.
For first he concludes, that all Magic in general is damnable and
diabolical, because one species or member of it, is justly to be banished from
Christian men's remembrance: as if there were not a natural magic, by which
Solomon did know all the mysteries in nature, and the operations thereof; yea,
as if the three wise Kings of the East, did discover, that the true King of the
Jews was borne, by diabolical Magic. How now Master Foster, were these three
wise men Cacomagicall Magitians, or such as the Scripture did allow of, and we
Christians keep a holy day in their remembrance? Right Friar Mersennus his
ape! For he condemns all Magia without exceptions of kinds; not remembering,
that Magus is in the Persian tongue interpreted a wise man or a priest. And in
the very same manner, this Gentleman, after his Masters custom condemns all
Astrology, for that members sake, which is truly superstitious and unlawful;
not considering, that the verity in both, the true Magic and Astrology has
been falsely contaminated and abused by superstitious worldlings, and thereupon
made the good, in the eyes of the ignorant, to be abolished and condemned with
the bad, for the bad sake: and so goodness by vile men is swallowed, without
any difference, by darkness.

I would therefore have our Sponge-bearing adversary know, that there are four
parts or kinds of Astrology in general. The first is conversant about the
mutation of the air, and foretelling of tempests, diseases, famine, or plenty,
etc. The second foretells the alterations of states, as also wars, or a
pacifick dispotion in the minds of men. The third entreats of the election of
times, and of natiuities. The last is directed unto the fabricating of
characters, seals and Images, the which, because it mingleth it self with
superstitious actions, and is made an instrument for the abuses of impious
persons; and especially, because a diabolical insinuation unto vice and
impiety, may easily be perceived in it, is of all good Christians to be
repudiated and condemned for unlawful What? Is the Almanac makers Science for
this Mr. Fosters exceptions, to be put down, or must Physicians be forced to
forsake or neglect their hours of election, ingathering of simples, or letting
blood, or cutting the hair and nails, or stopping laxes, or making the belly
lubricke for this man's caveat? Does not Amicus medicorum auerre, that the
influence of heaven, may help the working of medicines? For (says he)
Oftentimes medicines laxatiue, are by unskillful Phisicians, given under an
influence of heaven, that works a contrary or stiptick effect, and so are
hindered. Also says he, Sometimes medicine is given to stop, when the
disposition of the heavens are lubrick and laxactiue, and then the medicine
loses his effect. And for this cause, Haly says, the Physician that is
ignorant in Astrology, is as a blind man, searching out his way without a
staff, groping and reeling this way and that way. And Ptolomeus, that a good
Astrologian may auert many effects of the stars which are to come. Does not
Galene and Hipocrates speak much in their critical treatises, of the necessity
of observing the Moons motion? But letting this pass: What say we to the
husbandmans observation of times and seasons, as well in sowing as in reaping?
If this will not serve to stop our Adversaries violence, we will comevnto the
testimony of Scriptures: for the confirmation as well of election of seasons,
as to prove that the influence of the heavens does operate as well good as
evil effects. For the first it is said, Eccl 3.
Est tempus plantandi, and tempus exstirpandi quod fuit plantatum: Est tempus
belli, and est tempus pacis, etc. There is a time to plant, and a time to pull
up what is planted: there is a time of war, and a time of peace; And the Son of
Syrach: in the good day, enjoy that which is good, and beware of Eccl 7.
the evil day, as God made the one, so also (...) ordained the other: An S.
Paul wishes us, to put on the armor of Ephesians. 6.
God, that we may resist the devil in the unfortunate day. Now, if the
stars be the distinguisher and guider of times, as Moses tells us, surely
the influence either good or bad for them, makes good or bad Angels, to have
more or less dominion over creatures. That there are bad influences from
above, these words of David do testify: Deus est custos tuus, Sol and non
percutiet dierno tempore; nec Luna nocte: God is thy preserver, the Sun shall
not strike or wound thee by day, nor the Moon by night, etc. And is it not
acknowledged, that the Moon is the procurer of the Epilepticke disease? Where
it is said in the Evangelist in plain terms, that the possessed was Lunatic?
Also that there are good influences from above, it is argued by this Job 38. 21.
Text of Job, Can thou restrain the sweet influences of the Pleiades, or
loose the bands of Orion? Can thou bring forth Mazzaroth in their time? Can
thou also guide Arcturus with his sons? Know thou the course of heaven? or
can thou set the rule thereof on the earth, etc? For in this Text, we find
the good influences of the stars are mentioned: and here also it is
expressly noted, that the heavens have their powers on the earth.

I boldly affirm therefore, that all Astrology is not forbidden for as much as
there is an especial observation to be had by wise men, of the influence of
the stars. And for that purpose, there are hours of election, duly to be
observed according unto this or that influence, which is most proper and
convenient for our work. Again, whereas Mr. Foster seems to make so slight
account of the 12. Signs, and their essential operations on the earth; he may
see, that such as have made their allaterall notes upon the Text, do interpret
the word Mazzaroth, to signify the 12. signs, which do possess the 12.
houses of the Zodiac, which being so, mark the Texts conclusion: Can thou
set the rule thereof on the earth? whereby it is evident, that the 12. signs,
have an especial rule over the earth, and the creatures thereof, and that by
Gods ordinance and appointment.

By this it is made manifest, that there is no Cacomagicall superstition, in
observing times, days, or hours, in which this or that star has dominion,
for the collecting of ingrediences, or preparation and adaption of medicines,
or other matters, proper for the cure of man, as Mr. Foster does unjustly
auerre.

To conclude, therefore this point, we may discern by the foresaid experiment,
how the vegetative force of the plant operateth, in the excrementitious parts
of the withered member, no otherwise then the ointment in the amputed blood,
and how the spirit of those nails and hair, and skin, do participate with
that of the withered member, no otherwise then that of the blood in the
ointment, does with the bloody spirits of the wounded, or as the vrinall
excrements, with the blood in^ected with the ^aunders, as shall be told you
hereafter, or else they could not confer or exspire the vegetating spirit of
the plant, unto the decayed member; neither could the spirit in the decayed
member, magnetically draw the vegetating spirit of the plant unto it, that by
the addition of its power, it might with the more speed prosper and recover.

It is commonly observed amongst us, yea, and familiar in old wives practice,
that if a piece of fresh beef be rubbed well on warts, either in the hand or
other member, and buried in the ground, the warts have bin accustomed to fade
by little and little, as the beef does rot and putrify in the ground: and
that if the party that has the warts be at a far distance from the place,
where the beef is buried. Must this kind of cure also be cacomagicall, or
diabolical? yea, verily, as well as the rest, if that be true which M. Foster
and his associates do auerre.

I could remember each reader of many of these usual conclusions in natural
Magic, which being well pondered, would, I imagine, proue^farre enough in
every wise man's judgment, from any diabolical practice or commerce; but
because I fear, I should be in doing, more tedious then delectable, unto each
curious, I will come briefly unto the two homebred histories, which I did
promise unto you before.

The first of our homebred histories is this: There is at this present, an
honest religious Gentlewoman about London, that takes an herb, called the
Rose of the Sun, which has small husks about it, which will open and shut,
and she puts it in plantain-water, and it shuts and closes up. She
therefore, when a woman with child begins her labor, gives her a little
plantain-water, and though the laboring woman, appears to the Midwife never
so ready to be delivered; yet if the Gentlewoman see the vegetable closed, she
concludes, that they are deceived, and that there is no such matter, and so it
proves indeed. Again, when the Midwife doubts of her delivery, and yet she
is indeed near it; The flower will open by little and little as the Matrix
does, and then the Gentlewoman bids the Midwife look to it, assuring her, that
she is ready for it, and it proves so. This story was related very lately unto
me, by a Noble man of worth, and confirmed by a reverent Doctor and his
Apothecary, who ^erre, that certain Midwiues do at this day, make (...) of
this natural conclusion.

Now I know, that M. Foster will say, that this also is diabolical and
superstitious. Good God, what will this man leave to be ascribed and
attributed, to the only actor in all operations, as well vulgar as mystical,
when there is nothing hidden, or rare in this world, which this greater agent
for the devil, then I am a witch, as he terms me, does not attribute to his
Master, the devil, so that God forsooth must be granted to act only in vulgar
and sensible things, but as for all hidden mysteries, the actiuity of those
must proceed from the devil, and be only attributed unto him. To conclude, we
see an admirable sympathy, betwixt the vegetable, mineral and Animal, and the
parts of man's body, as the coultsfoot, which is framed like the lungs, is good
for the lungs: herniaria for the rupture, liuerwort for the liver, eyebright
for the eyes; and again, among minerals, Gold for the heart, and Silver for
the brain, brimstone for the lungs, iron for the spleen, as also the
spleenstone cures the spleen, if it be worn on the wrest. And why may not
the herb have the like relation and correspondence in nature with the matrix;
And that by reason of the vehicle of plantainwater, which did communicate, the
nature of the one with the other, the air being the common medium.

The last hom ebred story is this: There is a Noble Personage in this kingdom
of no mean descent, Title and rank, among the English Nobility, a most wise,
grave, aged, and religious Gentleman, I say, who has cured a hundred in his
time, of the yellow Iaunders, the patient being 10. 20. 30. 40. (yea, and as he
and others have reported) almost 100. miles off from him: and many of them,
that he has so cured, have lain long drooping under the burden of this
disease, before they came to him, in so much that the use of common receipts of
physicians could not overcome it. He has both performed it by his servants at
home, and has communicated the secret unto some of his friends abroad, amongst
whom he has bin pleased to rank my self. The vrin therefore of the patient,
is sent unto this great Lord. His manner of cure is this, he takes the ashes
of a wood, commonly known and growing here amongst us in England, he makes a
past of this wood with the vrin, reserving a little of the vrin a part for
another purpose, this past so molded and made up with vrin, is divided into 7.
or 9 lumps or balls, and in the top of each of these, he makes a small hole,
and puts in it a little of the vrin remaining, and into those parts of vrin,
he puts a blade of saphron. And so without further doing, he puts the
lumps in a secret place, where they must not be stirred, left the cure be
hindered. And experience has taught the world, many a score of icteritiall men,
or infected with the yellow Iaunders, have by this simple means been cured:
and this is well known unto a 1000. persons. Lord! What a diabolical medicine
will this appear in the chaste eyes of Mr. Foster? ^e will straight way cry
out, This is abominable and diabolical witchcraft, and they are witches and
coniurers that do use it! But beware Mr. Foster of railing, or calumniating
this personage; for he is such a one, as will endure no coals, but will
chastise any of your unmannerly brauadoes. What, I say? Is the devil in the
sick man's water, or is it in the burnt ashes of the wood? (They say, that
witches implements being burnt, causes all magical power to vannish) or is it
in the poor blades of saphron, that are drenched in the vrin; No truly, but
rather in their conceits that dream so. For it is most certain, that the
plant and the saphron have hidden properties in them, to cure the Iaunders. All
the mystery therefore of this cure, belongth unto the respect or relation,
which is between the blood of the infected, and the whay of the blood, which
carries with it partly some of the natural salt and tincture of the blood,
and partly some of the relics of the I cteritious humor, which makes the vrin
of so high a yellow. The spirit of blood therefore with his agent lurking in
the tincture, and salt, which is in the watery serous, or whaiey excrement, and
being buried in that medicinable earth, or ashes, in which the salt of the
plant dwells, or stirred up by the continuation which it has with that
spirit of life, which yet dwells in the sick man's veins. Therefore the water
being inhumed and mingled, with that medicinal earth, and mixed with saphron,
the viuifying spirit of the sick, tending to the preservation of life, does aid
the like in the vrin, and also exuscitate and revive that in the salt of the
ashes, to act and fight against the Icteritious humor in the vrin, which fading
and being by little and little conquered, makes his like in the sick body to
dye and vanish. Besides all this, the spirit lurking in the salt, and
exuscitated partly, by the excited spirit of the plant, and partly by the
emanating spirit of the sick body, does send, or carry back a curatiue
property, unto the whole bulk of the blood. I leave this unto the more serious
consideration of the learned, who can better judge of the hidden and abstruse
operations of Gods incorruptible spirit, closing up a-l in these very words of
the Apostle: Deus operatur omnia in omnibus, God works all in all, and 1 Corinthians. 12
ex eo, per eum, and in eo, sunt omnia, of him, by him, in him are all things,
and Deus viuificat omnia, God viuifieth all things. Romans 11.
And finally, Dij sunt, qui dicuntur in coelis and in terra; nobis autem vnus
Pater a quo omnia, and nos in illo, and vnus 1 Timoth. 6.
Dominus Jesus Christus, per quem omnia, and nos per illum. There are in the
estimation of some men, gods in heaven and 1 Corinthians. 8.
in earth; but unto us there are no more then one God, the Father, from whom
do proceed all things, and we are in him: and ^ne Lord Jesus Christ, by whom
are all things, and we by him. Ergo, it is vainly, and presumptuously said of
Mr. Foster, that the cure of the weapon-salue is effected by the devil, the
enemy of Jesus Christ, and not by Christ himself, being that Jesus is the only
Savior, and curer or healer both of soul and body, who, as he has all powers
and potestates under his dominion, uses his good Angels to work his goodness,
and not the bad Angels, which he did ordain for a clean contrary office. I
will not say, that this assertion of his is a kind of blasphemy; but it is
little better. At the leastwise it is the grossest sort of Idolatry, to ascribe
the good works of God, unto the essential act of the worst and most wickedest
of all his creatures, whom God instituted for a clean contraryvse, namely, to
be his punishing and destroying minister or angel.

Now, I will proceed unto the particular defense, of mine own doctrine,
expressed in my mystical Anatomy, Against the which Master Foster does enueigh
so bitterly, and with so great a confidence. He crows there like a Cock on
his own dunghill, before he has occasion, and challenges gloriously the
palm, and proclaims the trophey of his own praises, before he has got the
victory. The end crowns all: for truth is not boulstered up with high and
braging terms. It had been best for Master Foster to have heard me speak,
before he had publicly slandered me, and set up the Titles of his book on
the posts of my door in my disgrace: whether it was discreetly done of him, or
not; I leave it to the censure of the world: and so I move to the last Member
of this Treatise.

The Third Member:
Wherein the Author does disannull all those Arguments and Objections, which M.
Foster with such invincible confidence has produced, for the refelling of his
opinion; expressed in his mystical Anatomy, where he proves, that the action
of curing by the WeaponSalue, is merely Natural; and no way Magical or
Diabolical.

The Prelude to this Member:
Wherein the Author does express, that his Adversaries slanders of him, are
grounded on malice, and not on any ^ust desert of his. Here also he shows the
method of his proceeding in this Member, with the Reason thereof.

EAch discreet Reader may discern by M. Fosters scandalous vehemence against
me, for composing in my mystical Anatomy, the subject of this Member, that it
is more of envy and malice, then for any desert in me, or offense committed by
me, either against him, (for as much as I know him not) or any other person
else: For out of doubt, he would not else upon so slight an occasion, as was
this short chapter expressed in the foresaid place, have so slandered me, with
the title ofa Magician, as he has; and alleged his wise Master the Friar
Mersennus his authority for it, as profound an Author for railing and false
slander as himself. But why (I beseech you) should he induce Mersennus his
scandalous words against me in this his writing, when he sees, that the Friar
is so taunted by his friend and champion Gassendus for it, that in his Reply,
which he makes with Gassendus and Lanouius against me, after that I had
thoroughly nettled and gauled him for his follies, he dared not to utter or
repeat one word against me, touching the precedent slanders of Magic, which
in his Book on Genesis, upon little or no ground he laid unto my charge; but
grafted all his spite and malice in that Reply, upon certain Impieties, (as
he terms them) which he most weakly lays unto my charge? Again: whereas
this our homebred Adversary says, that I have excused my self from Magic,
in a Book entitled, Sophiae cum Moria certamen, and that Lanouius says,
Cuius contrarium verum est; I must tell him, that it does ill become a man of
his Profession, to utter such a falsehood. For Lanouius, (though in as malicious
a manner as he could) does clear me of that crime, alleging that mine
unskillfulness or insufficiency in such things, made him to think the
contrary. And therefore I must tell this my English calumniatour, that there is
a Star Chamber to punish such abuses, and consequently, he may perchance
hear of me sooner then he does expect, unless he bridleth his slanderous
tongue the better hereafter. It is an Argument of little Philosophy, and less
Divinity, to rail unreasonably, and scandalize with immorality. For
Philosophy is Sapientiae amor, the love of Wisdom: and the Wise man says,
It is the part of a fool to rail. Again: all Divinity is founded on Love and
Charity; and Christ his chiefest preaching, wasto love our Brethren, and to
affect our Neighbors as our selves, and to admonish us, that we judge not our
Brethren rashly. But to come unto our business; Has this Chapter of mine,
(judicious Reader) in which our diligent Inquisitor has made so strict a
search, and against which he has framed so punctual a confutation, any
Cacomagicall business in it, that I should so hardly be censured, by our
quick-witted Confuter, at the very entrance into it? Do you discern in it any
thing, that should cause our Adversary to make such a scandalous, and
vnchristian-like ingression into the inquiry of it, that thereby the simpler
sort of men may deem me a Witch or Magician? As for such as are of the wiser
sort, I am sure they laugh at it. But is not this an argument of envy, founded
on no solid foundation? And is not he, as well for his unreasonable spite, as
some things else, of each good Christian to be pitied? For what has he in him
should deserve envy, being that he confesses in his Epistle to the Reader,
that he is infra inuidiam? As for my self, I must ingenuously concur with
the opinion of all the world, and say, that I had rather be envied then
pitied. But to our purpose: The subject of this Chapter cited by me in my
mystical Anatomy, is only a discourse of the natural reference, and
Magnetic or attractiue and sympatheticall relation, which is observed to be,
betwixt two distinct substances of the like nature; but differing in the
distance of place; as between the Loadstone and the Iron, betwixt the blood,
and the salt of the same nature; in which the vegetating spirit, common unto
them both, does occultly abide. And you must note also (courteous Reader) that
in this particular Book of my mystical Anatomy, I did handle the secret and
hidden properties of the spiritual or internal blood in the external, citing
therewithal, as near as my small capacity would give me leave, the
harmonicall effects which it works, as well by contract or immediate touch,
as at a distance. I would feign know now, wherein I have offended in so doing?
or how I have deserved M. Fosters slanderous ingression into his examination of
this business? or whether in my natural discourse upon this subject, I
mention Diabolical Charms, Circles, Witchcraft, or unlawful and forbidden
Characters, or such like? If you find nothing appertaining unto any such
deuilish Magic, then give your sentence, whether such a Prelude unto this
business was honest, decent, or any thing appertaining unto the matter in
handling. As for the usage of the Weapon-Salue in it self, I protest before
God and man, I never of my self did practice it unto this very day; but in my
conscience, and by reason of a more strict inquiry, which for this cause I have
made into it, I find it so free from any Diabolical superstition, (which, God
is my witness, I have ever hated, as I do the Devil and all his works) and
have heard so much of the virtuous operation thereof, that from henceforward,
malegree the demeure writers or speakers against it, I will both practice it,
and defend the lawfulness of it, as being more assured now then ever, that it
is the blessed virtue of God; and not any act of the Devil, which operateth in
it unto the health and alledgement of Gods afflicted creatures.

But to come unto our matter.

I will make but few words, for I have already been too long in my precedent
discourse. But before I begin, I pray you observe (gentle and judicious Reader)
how that our Sponge-carrier, is very halting and imperfect in the
interpretation of my text, straining it much from its true nature, to serve his
own sense rather, then justly to express mine intention; (as indeed he
ought:) I will therefore in the first place express unto you, in naked English
terms, the full and exact purpose of my Latin text, which I call mine
Assertion; and then in the next place, I will express his exposition or
collection: After that I will set down the virtuous validity of his Sponge in
drinking up, devouring, or wiping away the strength of my Assertion: and then
in the last place, I will crush and squeese his Sponge, and make it by force to
vomit up again the truth, which it has deuo^ed, or rather covered with his
veil of ignorance. And this shall be my manner of proceeding in combat
against this Lernian Monster, and his Tr^th-(...) Sponge.

CHAP. I.
Here it is proved against our Adversaries Assertion,
First, that the Blood, Fat, Flesh, and Bones of a dead Man do participate
with that Balsamicke nature or humidum radicule which is in the living Man.
Secondly, that a Horse has a Balsam sympathising with that of a Man.
My naked text Englished.
We see that this Ointment is compounded of things passing well agreeing unto
man's nature; and consequently, that it has a great respect to his health and
preservation, for as much as unto the composition thereof, we have in the
chiefest place or rank Blood, in which the power of life is placed. Here, I
say, is the essence of man's Bones growing out of them, in form of Moss,
termed Vsnea: here is his Flesh in the Mummy, which is compounded of Flesh and
Balsame; here is the Fat of Man's Body, which concurreth with the rest unto the
perfection of this Ointment. And with all these (as is said) the Blood is
mingled, which was the beginning and food of them all, for as much as in it is
the spirit of life, and with it the bright soul does abide, and operateth
after a hidden manner. So that the whole perfection of Man's Body, does seem to
concur unto the confection of this precious ointment. And this is the reason,
why there is so great a respect and consent, between this Ointment, and the
Blood of the wounded person. For it is most necessary, that some of the Blood
of the wounded, be drawn out from the depth of the ^und, etc. This is the
exact interpretation of my text.

Now ye shall see what he makes of it.

M. Fosters Collection.
Scull-mosse, or Bones, (says Doctor Fludd,) Mummy, and the Fat of Man (the
especial ingredience) comprehend the corpor all perfection of man, and so are
apt to heal, by reason of a natural Balsam resting in them, sympathising with
the hypostaticall Balsam refiding in the living Man.

You see here, that first he leaves out the blood, which is the prime
ingredient; and then whereas I speak of that enbalming ingredient, which the
Nobles of Egypt were wont to make of the natural Balsam, and such like
Bituminous and unctuous things, as were enemies to Corruption, he nominates and
interprets after his fashion, and to serve his turn, saying; that I speak of
the natural Balsam in Man, residing in the Ointment, etc. But I will let him
have his scope, being it cannot much vary from my purpose.

M. Fosters Sponge to wipe away this mine Assertion.
I deny that Scull-mosse, or Bones, Mummy, and Man's Foster.
Fat have, though they be medicinable, any natural Balsam, or radical humor,
(for so some call natural Balsam) residing in them, sympathising with the
hypostaticall Balsam, remaining in the living Man: unless a Horse have a
Balsam sympathising with Man's. For (says D. Fludd, which I advise him to
remember) if a nail which pricketh a Horse, be put into the Oyntment-pot, the
Horse shall be cured. I say there is no such sympathy between Horse and man;
and if there be no cause at all to bele^ue the one, there is but little to
bele^ue the other.

Here the Sponge is Squeesed.
Observe in the first place, that our Opposite forgets, Fludd.
that Blood is one of the ingrediences. And then he disputes ex non concessis,
as is before said; and yet nevertheless I will give him his way, and prove
that all which his Spongy tongue has uttered, for the wiping away of that
truth, which has been here expressed by me, is of no validity, nor yet of any
appearance or probability. I will therefore divide this Confutation of his into
two Branches or Members: whereof the first shall produce this question: namely,
Whether Blood, Flesh, Fat, and Bones, have any natural Balsam, or radical
moisture residing in them, sympathising with the Hypostaticall Balsam remaining
with the living Man? The later contains this: Whether a Horse have a Balsam
sympathising with the Balsam of Man?

The first of these two, is flatly held by M. Foster negatiuely, and I in a
surer confidence do hold it affirmatively, and will prove it: first, by
Natural Reason: secondly, by the Authority of Holy writ: and lastly, by Common
Experience.

In the first place therefore, I would have M. Foster to learn, what a
Balsamicke nature is, before he thus rashly seeks to censure the creatures
to have it, or to be without it. I must therefore let him know, that it is
naught else, but a volatill, and essential salt, that is full of vegetating
and multiplying virtue, which it receives from above, as a precious soul to
viuifie and animate it, the which virtue is that Calidum innatum, or Natural
heat, by whose virtue every creature does exist, and the volatile vehicle, in
which it is carried, is that Humidum Radicale, or Radical Moisture, or
Humidity, by which, and in which, the foresaid virtue does immediately move,
and act unto life, vegetation and multiplication. By the operation therefore of
these essential active and passive, Vegetables and Animals do manifestly, and
Minerals occultly vegetate and multiply: and that as well in their form or
natural fire, as in their substance. And for this cause the true Alchymists do
call this mystical Salt, Sal Sapientum, the Salt of Wise men, for as much as in
it consists the mystery of Nature. And others term it the true Balsamum
Naturae, or Balsam of Nature, in which all the Mystery of Nature does consist.
Whereupon the wise Philosophers affirm: Quod sit in sale isto quicquid
quaerunt Sapientes: That all that Wise men seek after, is in salt. Touching
the aeriall part, it is the volatile salt, which is every where expansed in the
open air, and it is the purest essence of and in the air, in which the grain
of life is: and therefore other Wise men say, Est in aere occultus vitae cibus:
The hidden food of life is in the air, etc.

It is not without a very mystical and secret cause also, that our Savior
Christ took an especial notice of Salt. In one place he says: Sal Terrae
estis vos, Mat. 5.
Ye are the Salt of the Earth; where he means the spiritual man, in which
is the breath of life. And again: Sal si euaneurit, in quo salietur? ad
nihilum valet Ibidem.
vltra, nisi vt mittatur for as, and conculcetur ab homini^us. If the Salt
shall vanish away, with what shall it be seasoned? It will be of no further
value, save only to be cast cut of doors, and to be trodden on by men.
Whereby it is evident, that nothing can exist, or be of any reckoning or
estimation, without this Mystical Salt, or Glue of Life, but will be quite
dead and corrupt. There is Salt in the very dunghill, that gives life and
heart unto the ground, whereby it multiplieth the Grain in a greater
proportion, and sucketh unto it more plentifully the Celestial influence of
life.

To conclude: the very essence of the Animal creatures blood in general,
consists in this Balsamicke Salt. By it the body is animated: by it the flesh
through apposition, union, and agglutination of parts is viuified, multiplied,
and successively preserved. By this in the bread, and the flesh of creatures,
the blood in man is daily increased: in this therefore is the incorruptible
spirit of life, which keeps man alive, and defends him from corruption: and
unless it acts his viuifying office, man is quickly rotten or corrupted. Do
not Scriptures confirm thus much in many places^ namely, that, Anima ominis
est insanguine: That the ^
life of man is in his blood: and, Anima carnis est in sanguine, The life of
the flesh is in the blood? Now it is certain, that this viuifying Spirit,
which is, Donum Dei cuilibet Creaturae, The Gift of God unto every Creature:
(as is proved before) is the true operator, in this his Radical moist
Tabernacle, to heal, mend, and agglutinate wounds, being assisted with any
application, made either by a Real, or Virtuall Contact. It follows
therefore, that this Spirit being in the Blood, Fat, Bones, and Flesh of Man,
for as much as they do subsist by it, and were first animated, and engendered,
and multiplied by it, do participate of this Spirit, which the Scripture
says, does animate and heal all things. Spiritus seu Verbum Dei, says
SOLOMON, sanat omnia: The Spirit Wisd. 16. (...).
and Word of God heals all things.

But M. Foster will say, that this Spirit of life is in the Blood, Fat, and
Flesh, when it is not separated from the live Man; but after it is separated,
it has no more life or being. I have told him, and proved the contrary, in my
Philosophical Demonstration. For without this Salt, and living Spirit in it,
neither Blood, Fat, Bones, nor Flesh could subsist; but according unto that of
Christ before mentioned, it would be of no use. Again, it is intimated in Holy
Writ, that the Spirit of life is in their centrall or inward parts, though it
does not act or operate; but quiescere in Centro, rest in the Center, as I have
before expressed plainly. For else why should it be said: Thou shall
altogether forbear to eat the Blood Leuit. 3.
and the Fat: And again, Thou shall not take in thy Leuit. 7. Leuit. 17.
meat the blood of the creature. And again, The blood of the Beast or Fo^le
killed in hunting, must be powered on the ground: and the reason is there given:
namely, Because the Spirit of life is in the blood. And again it is said: The
Soul of the flesh is in the blood. Now if the Spirit of life did vanish out of
the Blood, Flesh, Fat, and Bones, immediately after their separation from the
living creature, what needed all these words, or strict precepts, for the not
eating of the Blood and Fat, after the death of the creatures? Or why should
that reason be given, Because the soul or life is in the blood, or the blood
is the see^e of the soul or life? The text does not say, The Blood was the
seat of the soul or life; but, It is: namely, the subsistence of these parts,
though separated from the living body, do yet participate with the Spirit of
life; therefore beware, that you eat it not.

I will not here remember you, of the viuifying virtue, remaining with Elias
his Bones, which (...) King. 13.
made the murdered body, that was by the thieves cast into the Grave of the
Prophet, rise again; nor ^poc. 6. 9.
that the souls of such as were slain for the Words sake, did cry unto the
Lord from under the Altar for vengeance; nor that the voice of the murdered
^en. 4. 10.
Abels blood did cry out to God from the earth; nor the sudden reviving of the
dead blood in the murdered, at the presence of the murderer: which could not
happen, without this Viuifying Spirit did participate with, and lurk in the
blood, though without action, till by the murdering spirit, it was excited
unto action, etc. But I will bring you to an ocular experience: It is most
certain, unto such who have applied themselves unto the art of distilling,
that man's Blood and Bones do contain an admirable deal of volatile Salt, in
which there is so excellent a Balsamic di^position, that it does, by reason of
the propinquity of nature, suddenly appease dolours of the Gout, and
intolerable Aches, cures Wounds, heals such as are affected with the Mother
and Falling Sickness: and in fine, experience has made manifest, that the
Volatile Salt and Oil of the Blood, is an excellent Cordial. Again, that the
Oil of Man's Fat is a great appeaser of the Gout and other Dolours, and a
healer of Wounds, and a present dryer up of all manner of Excoriations; often
experience has taught, as well my Masters as my self. Do we not see, that
the dropping of a Candle will in one night heal up an Excoriation? And every
Ostler will certify you, that a Horses heel being wounded or cut with a stone
or shoo, with the anointing of a Candles end; that Hog's Grease, Deeressuet, are
esteemed good and necessary ingredients for a healing Salve; there is not a
Surgeon but will confess. And whence does this sanatiue property in them
proceed? what? from the benign act of God, or from the Devil? If from, it is
from that curing and viuifying Spirit, which first made those Members, and gave
them that virtue, or it could have no healing property. Spiritu ab ore Dei
Psalm. 33.
(says David) omnis procedit virtus: From the Spirit of the mouth of God
proceeds all virtue. Ergo, from that Spirit had the Fat, Flesh, Blood, and
Bones, that virtue of healing, or not at all: and by the presence they hold
still that virtue of it, even after their separation or amputation from the
living body, that it received from it, whilst they were Members in the living
Body: only this is the difference, that when they were in the living Body,
their virtue was actual; but being separated, it is only potentiall, and will
not be reduced unto act, unless it be incited by the (...) viuifying and
actuating Spirit, even as we see, that Grease or Tallow is fixed with the cold,
and will not flow, but with the act of natural heat or fire, it will
forthwith melt and flow. What of all this may our Sponge-bearing Author say?
Must therefore the Spirit of life be in this? for without it there can be no
sympathising betwixt this and the Hypostaticall Balsam, residing in the living
Man. I must have this Inquisitor know, that as it was but one Spirit, that was
called by the Prophet from the four Winds, to Er. k. 37.
breathe life unto the slain; so there is but one Spirit that gives virtue,
as well to the living Blood, Flesh, Fat, and Bones, as to the other, that seem
to us to be without life, or in puissance to act. It is but one Spirit, but in
diverse properties, that congealeth, and as it were, kills the Spirit of the
moveable Element of Air, and fixes it by his Northern blast into Snow,
Frost, Ice, and Hail; and again reuiuifieth it by a Southern blast. Neither
will it serve our Opposites turn, to exclude this Spirit from the Fat, Blood,
Flesh, and Moss of Bones, that are in the Ointment; for the Wise man says;
That the incorruptible Spirit is in all things: Ergo, (...). 12. 1.
in this Ointment. We have therefore the Balsamic Salt in all of these
ingrediences, and in that Salt lurketh the active Virtue, which being stirred
by his fountain of action, flowing and acting a termino a quo, does reagere,
or act again, a termino ad quem, that is, from the end to the beginning. This
is the reason that this Ointment cures not only by a Real; but also Virtuall
Contact: namely, by reason of that virtue, which it holds from his first
Creator: As who should say, that an herb or root should lose all their
sanatiue virtue, because they are gathered from the plant: namely, a Grain of
Wheat, or an Apple, gathered from the Straw or Tree, should have no Balsamic
nourishment in it, because they are now past growing; and yet the contrary is
manifested, in that they have still in them their vegetating and multiplying
Spirit. For being put into the Earth, the very Atom of life lurking in them,
does manifest it self, and makes them grow again and multiply in their
kind. Neither are the flesh of Beasts destitute of their nourishing property;
though they seem dead, and are severed from the living Creature. For the
Scripture says; Anima carnis est in sanguine: The life of the flesh is in the
blood, which if it were not so; it would not nourish, or be converted into
man's bodily substance: namely, Blood, Flesh, Fat, and Bones: as also, if the
viuifying Spirit did not lurk in the flesh of the dead Carkas, it were
impossible that it should be converted into worms by the exposition of it unto
the beams of the Sun, as shall be told hereafter.

Lastly, I could show this deep Philosopher, that this viuifying Spirit, in
the volatile Salt, is abundantly inbred. I could show him ocularly, how it
sucketh down the form of life from the Sun; insomuch that of a clear
aeriall volatile Salt, as white as Snow, or chrystalling unctuous fluent
liquor, it will in few hours become as red as a Ruby, by exposing it to the
Sunne-beames. Such is the sympathy betwixt it and the form of the Sun: and
in the selfsame kind is their reciprocal appetite; as is between the
Patient and the Agent, or the Female and the Male. I could show him also in a
short space, the admirable power this vegetable Spirit has, to cause
vegetation in all things. And I have proved it to be a sovereign Balsam to
cure wounds, and to take away aches: and therefore it sympathiseth with the
Hypostaticall Balsam of man. For else it would not be converted into the same
Image: namely, into Blood, and Flesh, and Fat, and Bones; and much more
therefore the very Blood, Flesh, Fat, and Bones, of the selfsame species,
being that simile magis nutritur a suo simili, like is nourished more by his
like. Do we not see man's blood; yea, the blood of every creature, to consist
of such a volatile Salt? If it were nothing but the urine, which is the whayie
excrement of the blood, it would witness so much, being that it is passing
full of salt Armoniak, or volatile Animal Salt: and by reason of the Balsamic
nature thereof, man's urine is so proper to mundifie and cure a slight green
wound; as also the Yellow-Iaunders is cured at such a distance from the
patient, as is already declared. You see therefore, with what ease, and that by
a triple consideration, this dull Sponge of M. Fosters is squeesed: and how
unreasonable and improbable is his foresaid proposition. I come therefore to
the examination of the second question which arises from it.

Touching the second question, which is, Whether a Horse have a Balsam
sympathising with that of man? Master Foster says, There is no such sympathy
between Horse and Man. He says much; but proved little or nothing. As who
should say, M. Fosters will is so, and therefore stet pro ratione voluntas, his
will must stand for a law. He imitateth exactly in this, his bragging M.
Mersennus. But I will be so bold as to instruct him better in this matter, and
show him that the bodily nature of the one, does easily sympathise and
communicate with that of the other. For the Flesh, Fat, and Bones of the one
and the other, are of blood in a natural generality; yea, and in speciality of
bloods, though in number they vary. For (I beseech you) does not the selfsame
Flesh, Fat, and Blood of the Beast nourish the like in man? Is not the one
transmuted into the other? Nay, does not the Scripture speak this in a
general sense, meaning all blood; namely, that the soul or life of the
creature is in the blood, and that the life of all flesh is in the blood, and
that for a divine respect of that Spirit of life in the blood, we are
commanded, not to eat of the blood of any creature? And again: the blood of
man, in a reciprocal respect, is to be demanded of the Beast that shed it. All
which being rightly considered, who of wisdom can make any doubt, and not
absolutely conclude, that the Beasts bodily nature does sympathise and
correspond with the parts of man's body? I confess, that the Intellectual
nature of man, makes it to differ from that of a Horse, for as much as he is
said to be Animal rationale, and the Beast Animal irrationale; but these
properties are only seen in the specifying spirit, and do neither concern
or touch any action of life, or vegetation, or multiplication, or healing. I
will therefore discourse in this manner: God has endued man with a double
gift, whereof the first is the spirit of life, which he has imparted not only
unto him, but also to all other creatures; and again, he has bestowed on him
more then on any other living creature: for he has given him understanding;
and yet the Giver of this double gift, is but only one Spirit. And thereupon
Job says: Spiritus Deifecit me, and inspiratio Omnipotentis viuificauit Job
33.4.
me: The Spirit of God made me, and the inspiration of the Everlasting gave me
life. Now (as I have said) this very same benefit was given unto all other
creatures, in all one property and office: whereby it is said: Deus viuificat
omnia, God viuifieth all things. And Judith: Misit Spiritum, and creauit omnia,
He sends Judith 16.
forth his Spirit, and creates all things: and the Prophet Isaias: Deus dat
flatum populo, and spiritum calcantibus ^aias 42. 5.
terram, God gives breath unto the people, and spirit to every creature that
marches on the earth. Whereby it is plain, that the same spirit of life is
proportionably, though diversely, in number, measure, and proportion, powered out
on every specific Animal: and therefore there must be an admirable sympathy of
nature, between the parts of each Animal, which are by vegetation and
multiplication produced, through the operation of the same spirit of life,
infused into the blood; and so by the way of animation unto the Fat, Flesh, and
Bones. And this is the reason, and no other, that like is converted into his
like; namely, blood into blood, flesh into blood and flesh, and fat into his
like, and bones and marrow is made of both. Is it not most palpable, that any
flesh, or blood, or fat of dead Beasts will be converted, by mutation of
concoction, into the substance of man? which it could never do; but that they
egregiously do sympathise in nature together, and do unite the Balsamic
nature, or calidum innatum and humidum radicale of the one with the other, and
transmute the substance of the one, into that of the other, which originally is
the blood, as well manifest as occult. But touching the other extraordinary
gift, it is said by Job in another place: In homine est spiritus; sed
inspiratio Job 9.
Omnipotentis facit eum intelligere: In man is the spirit of life; but the
breath of the Omnipotent makes him to understand. Understanding therefore is a
gift, a part which makes man to differ from the Beast; but not the spirit of
life.

What then rests more to be done? Marry, the Page 39.
Doctor must remember, etc. says M. Foster.

And what must he remember? For so strict an admonition of a wise man, must
import some thing of weight. He must (says he) remember his Horseleechery.
And what Horse-leechery? Namely, that a Horse pricked with a nail, may
likewise be cured. A wondrous piece of work! And was it for this mighty
business, that the same memorial should be repeated, in this his glorious
Spongy piece of service, to wipe that Assertion away? Let us therefore see the
maine subject of his commenforation, which is this: For says the Doctor,
(which I advised him to remember) Page 42.
if the nail which pricked a Horse, be put into the Oyntment-pot, the Horse
shall be cured. I say, There is no such sympathy betwixt Horse and Man.

Ha, ha, he! Risum teneatis amici? Because he says so, therefore it is so:
stat pro ratione voluntas. He says it, and though he proves nothing, yet he
must be believed. But this man's Assertion shall be proved ridiculous, as well by
a common and vulgar observation, as the manifold practical experience of the
Nobleman or Earl, which I mentioned in the 6. chapter of the 2. Member of this
Treatise.

Touching the common vulgar observation, we see, that the flesh of all
creatures (as I said before) be they Birds, or foure-footed Beasts, and
therefore of a Horse, is easily converted, after it is digested in man's
stomach, into his blood, flesh, fat, and bones: which is an evident Argument,
that there is a manifest sympathy between a Horse his flesh and blood, and
that of a man: yea, and that there resideth in a Horse the like Balsamic
nature, or Radical moisture, which is in a man: and that consequently, the
same Balsamic nature does sympathise with the hypostaticall Balsam remaining
in man. The case is apparent; for quod facit tale, est magis tale: and
therefore if the blood or flesh of a Horse were not of such a nature as that of
man, it would never be converted and made one in union, with the blood and
flesh of man. But that it is so, every Sot does perceive practically. Whereby
it is evident, that the Balsamic nature of the one, does most exactly agree
with the other; or else they would never prove so homogeneall, as to include
one nature. Again, if they did not sympathise; but Antipathise; the nature of
the one would abhor the nature of the other; which experience proves false.
Again, that there is a Balsamic nature in a Horse, sympathising with that in
a man, the effect proves. For the effect of a Balsamic nature, is to
agglutinate wounds, and to incarnate and breed flesh, and that by a secret
virtue of vegetation. But the flesh of a Horse does render his Balsamic suck
or juice unto the liver of a man, where it so sympathiseth with the nature
thereof, that it condenseth it self, by a homogeneall transmutation into
blood, and becomes as fibrous and well compacted, as the other humane blood:
and in conclusion, is made all one with it: and after that by apposition,
union, and assimulation (that I may use Galen his own words) it becomes man's
flesh. An infallible argument, that the Balsamic nature of these two creatures
do consent and sympathise: for else they could not make one union. Thus our
sharp-witted Remembrancer may see, that I do not only say, after his fashion;
but also prove and demonstrate my case so palpably, that every simple person
may feelingly perceive it.

I come now to such private experiments, as the Noble Earl aboue-mentioned
has made upon Horses: whereof some have been pricked, and some wounded, or
hurt otherwise. He was pleased to tell me of many of his Cures, as well on his
own Horses, as on others, which by the virtue of this Ointment, he had
performed. Now would I feign know, whether any person of worth or discretion,
would rather believe that, which this Nobleman affirms, and auowed upon his
own knowledge, and manifold experience, or else the threedbare assertion of M.
Foster, who would persuade the world, and that by his mere asseueration only,
without any other proof or practice, that Castles may be builded in the Air.
What shall we say then? shall we call a convocation of these turbulent,
incredulous, and all-iudging persons, to have it decided: whether the Devil
did this Cure to gain the Horses soul, or no? Alas! their demure worships
will, after the due pleading and scanning of the cause, find that his black
Lordship would not bestow the pains for a soul, which is so fading,
transitory, and not immortal, as is that of a man, after which he so eagerly
thirsts and gapeth. But if they reply that he does it to delude the credulous
Mediciner, and by that covert means to gain his soul: I answer, that,
Frustra fit per plur^, quod fieri potest per pauciora. The Mediciner cured many
reasonable persons before, and would not that suffice the Devils turn to gain
him; but he must assist him also, in curing unreasonable creatures, to make
the Obligation for the Practitioners soul the surer? I would perchance give
more credit to these bold and high thundering Judges or condemners, and
vilifiers of Iehouah's power, by attributing that unto the Devil, which
appertains unto him, if one man had many souls to lose: but who is so
foolish to cast the Dice twice, for that he has surely won at once?

By this therefore, each wise and judicious Reader may plainly discern, that
M. Fosters Sponge is herein also squeesed, for as much as it is most certain,
that the natural Balsam of one Animal, does sympathise with his like in the
other, by reason that they have both but one and the same acting virtue, and
one general Balsamic spirit in nature and condition, which is common unto
every specific.

CHAP. II.
Wherein is proved contrary, unto the Sponge-carriers Tenent, that man's Bones
proceed originally from Blood.

The naked Assertion of D. Fludds text.
The Blood is mingled with the Mummy, or Flesh, the Fat, or the Vsnaea, or
Moss of the Bones, which Blood was the beginning and food of them all.

M. Fosters Collection.
These ingredients have their beginning and aliment from the Blood.

The act of his mundifying Sponge.

Secondly, I deny that Man's Bones have their beginning Foster.
and aliment from Blood. For Physicians and Philosophers s^y, that they have
their beginning from the grosser seminaryparts, and their aliment from Blood,
or Marrow, or both.

Here the Sponge is squeesed.
I wonder that my Confuter, like the Comediant Fludd.
parasi^, sometimes denies; and again with the same breath affirms. For
first, he denies that Bones have their aliment from Blood; and then he
concludes that they have. Well, we will pass this staggering error, and come
to the point. Man's Bones (says he) have their beginning of the grosser
seminary parts, ergo, not of Blood. The consequence is erroneous. For if he
will, ^ucly look into the nature of the Sperme, he shall find it to be
nothing else originally; but the purest part of Blood, strained from a double
kind of vessel: whereof the purer or internal part issues from the
arteriall vessel; the grosser and external from the venall vessel. What
needs M. Foster to look on Bauhines Notes, or Galens Opinions, and those of
many other differing from them, and so make Ipse dixit his whole strength, when
his eyes will teach him, (if he ever knew Anatomy, as perchance his Father did)
that the fountain of sperme is the Blood, of two natures, namely, Arteriall
and venall? for the preparing seminary vessels, that alter it, and purify it,
have their issues and heads out of the great artery, and vena Caua. Which being
so, I would feign know of M. Foster, whether he thinks that the spearme does
not proceed from the Blood as original thereof, for as much as the vessels,
from which it flows, be full of nothing else but Blood? I care not for ipse
dixit, when in every man's ocular experience it appears the contrary. For some
men will have the substance of the seed to come from the brain; and other some
from the subtle parts of the whole body; and some will have it spring from the
purest part of the four humors, which is all one to say, that it proceeds
from the Blood, which is composed of the four humors, though the element of
air has the dominion. But most sure it is, that the Blood is his fountain,
and appears by ocular demonstration. Which being so, I pray you good M.
Foster, what error is it in me to say, that Blood is the beginner of Bones,
when your self does confess, that their immediate being is of sperme, whose
immediate existence is of Blood? Again, we are taught that the ^eat of life is
in the Blood: if therefore sperme does bring forth life, it receives that gift
of life from the Blood.

To conclude: it is evident by this, that the viuifying Spirit of the Lord
(which is the animater of the four Winds, from whence the Prophet Ezechiel
called it to animate the slain) moves and operateth radically in the
spiritual Blood, and that the sperme is animated and moved by this spiritual
Blood, which is the spermes internum, which Philosophers call semen; in whose
Center the viuifying Spirit of the Lord acts: and then this Spirit in the
seed, framed Skin, Flesh, Bones, and Nerves, and gives them Life, Action, and
Motion: all which the patient ^ob expresses thus: Thou have powered me out
like Milk, (that is, in the form of sperme) thou have coagulated me like
Cheese, thou have endued me with Skin and Flesh, thou have compacted me
together with Bones and Sinnews, thou have given me life by thy mercy, and by
thy visitation thou have preserved my spirit; but all this thou have hidden in
thy mind; but I know all this to be from thee. Whereupon it is evident, that
God operateth all, beginning radically in the blood: and for this reason the
Apostle says rightly: In him we live, we move and have our being. Acts 17.


I conclude therefore; that here again is all the Sponges validity so squeesed
out, as hereafter (I hope) it shall not be able to digest any great matter; nor
yet to bite any longer upon the Marble Rock of Truth.

CHAP. III.
In the which it is proved, contrary unto our Spongy Authors opinion, that
spirits do reside in the separated Blood.

Doctor Fludds naked Text.
In the Blood is the spirit of life, and with the bright soul does abide, and
operateth after an hidden manner.

Master Fosters Collection.
In the Blood reside the vital spirits: in the vital spirits the soul, in an
hidden manner.

The act of his mundifying Sponge.

Thirdly, I deny that any spirits reside in separated Foster.
Blood, and Casman is so confident in this, that in parts separated from the
body, remain no spirits, and says, that the very Devil cannot beget or
conserve any in them.

The Sponge squeesed.
Here you see that this fresh water Soldier has Fludd.
nothing to maintain his Tenent, but Ipse dixit. If that fail, farewell all
further expectation. But I will prove, that this his and his Masters assertion
is erroneous, by three manner of ways: namely, first, by Philosophical
reason: for being that every amputated creature, even from the lively stock of
his growth, is filled with a Balsamic Salt of the nature of the Tree or Plant,
from which it sprung, by which it does exist, such as indeed it is, it is not
possible, but that it should have of the spirit of his wonted life in it,
although it does not act, but rest in its Center.

Next, by Holy Scriptures, for (as is proved abundantly before) the blood
spilled, and flesh killed, is full of lively spirits, though they remain
potentially in them; or else why should the Israelites be commanded, not to
eat the fat and blood? For it is said: because the blood is the seat of the
soul or spirit of life. For if that spirit of life were fled from it, what
sin had it been to have eaten it? But the text says, for it is the seat of
life, and therefore it is commanded, that they should power it out on the
Earth. Again; let Parson Foster answer this: The incorruptible Sap. 12. (...).
pirit of the Lord is in all things: Ergo, in the effused blood, flesh, fat,
and bones, separated from the whole. And lastly, by common experience; for we
find that fat, and blood, and mummy, have singular properties of healing,
which they could not have, if all the spirits which they did receive from the
living body, were exhaled; but it is the office 1. Cor. 12. Wisd. 16. 10.
only of the incorruptible Spirit and Word to heal: and therefore, being
these ingredients have an healing property, they must needs in this their
existence participate or communicate with this good Spirit, whose nature is to
expel and take away all corruption and sickness, and other unnatural
impediments. (...). 16.
Verbum tuum (says Solomon) curat omnia: thy Word cures all: for in it only
is life, Ergo, the ^ohn 1.
viuifying spirit. Moreover I know, and with mine eyes have seen abundance of
spirits, which by the a^ of the least fire, have been excited, out of the
essence of corrupted blood and fat, in so much that with the natural heat of
the hand, they, in form of little Atoms, have been observed to dance and
caper in the air, which is an evident token, that there is the spirit of life,
lurking in the dead blood; though it appears but potentially in the essence of
the dead thing in respect of us. Again; if this were not, is it possible that
dead blood, flesh, and fat, could nourish the living, being that like is
nourished by his like? which could not be, if in the blood, flesh, and fat,
there did not lurk natural and viuifying spirits, to maintain their like in
the living creature: and therefore will one kind of flesh nourish both a Man,
a Beast, a Fish, and a Foul; because all those natural spirits are of one
kind and condition. Is it not, I pray you, apparent to the vulgar, that flesh
and fat, hung up in the Sun, will be quickly converted into live Worms or
Magats? Which were impossible, except the spirit of life did lurk in the flesh
and fat, after the creature was dead; yea, I have seen a whole dead Crow,
which I hung up in the Sun, for a certain purpose, to be wholly (saving
bones) converted into verminous animals. An evident argument of the viuifying
spirits presence in the dead flesh, blood, and fat. Yea verily, I have
observed, that the Balsam of Wheat so abounds in it, that if it be put into
Raine-water, in a short space it produces long Worms of a white color. The
same effect produces flesh after putrefaction. It is most certain therefore,
that the spirit oflife is in the dead flesh and fat; yea, and in the grain,
which though it operateth not, except it be stirred up by the viuifying spirits
acting property, working in such an organicall body as is the Sun, the fire,
the living creature, and such like; yet is it most certain, that it is in the
amputed blood, fat, flesh, and bones, etc. You may discern by this (gentle
Reader) how Casman, and his complete disciple Foster have erred. But we must
excuse them modestly, seeing that Humanum est errare. Why, I pray you, should I
esteem these men more Catholic in knowledge then Bernard? But Bernardus non
videt omnta. And yet blind Bayard is subject to judge and censure any thing,
though unto himself unknown. Wherefore let Master Foster put up his authority
in his Pouch, for I esteem it not, having natural reason, the testimony of
Holy Writ, and lastly, vulgar experience, or ocular demonstration to prove the
contrary. And whereas his Master Casman teaches him, that the very Devil
cannot beget or conserve any spirit in them, I wonder how the Devil then can
work this Weapon-Salue Cure, being that the Ointment has no spirits of it
self; nor yet the Devil can beget or conserve any in the ingredients thereof?
And if he says, that the Devil is of great experience, and does this Page 8.
with other herbs or simples, I would have him to tell me, why should herbs or
other simples, being also, after they are gathered, but d^ad as it were, and
without spirits, by Master Fosters own rule, serve as means unto the Devil,
for the working of this feate of occult curing; and not rather such ingredients
as are collected out of man's body, being that they are nearer and more familiar
unto their kind: and therefore more benign and affable unto it, then stranger
Medicines, as are vegetables or such like? If the Reader will well ponder this,
he will perceive, all that our Sponge-carrier speaks, Page 8. is but foppery.

The Devil (says he) makes the Mediciner believe, it is spent by a virtue
going to the wound, whilst he (skillful by long experience in all Arts, and so
in the Art of Medicine) does himself secretly apply some other vertuall
operative Medicine to cure the wound, to delude his credulous Mountebankes, and
makes them believe, that this Salve, which dropped out of the Hangmans bouget,
has performed it. O wondrous miracle! and what gets the Devil by that?
namely, to cure a man in that sort, whose body and soul is in the hands of the
Almighty? In man Iehouae (says Job) est anima omnis (...) 12. 11.
(...), and spiritus (...) carnis; In the hand of God is the soul of every
creature, and the spirit of all flesh. Thinks he that God will leese his own
by so weak and poor a slight? Nay more: to give or grant unto the Devil his
Word, which (as Solomon says) (...) all things, to deceive himself of his
(...). 16.
own heritage. What? The Devil do good, where no profit unto him is to be
expected? And why not then, by the virtuall contact of this Medicine, being of
a nearer consanguinity with man, and therefore a more easy Curer, then any
other Medicine that can work by any virtuall contact? A goodly tale! As if a
man would persuade me, that it is not the Lodestone that draws the Iron; but
the Devil uses some other creature to do the deed, to coozen and deceive the
Philosopher or Mariner. These are but fabulae: Inventions (I say) of a
fantastic brain, who to persuade us unto his imaginary and no way probable
will, would make us believe that Castles are built in the Air, and that we are
in all our good actions deluded by the Devil, and that flying with the wings
of Master Fosters wit, we must needs be wafted on the clouds of error, and so
in a mist of ignorance forget the blessed works of our good God and Savior;
and by Master Fosters palpable delusions, to acknowledge them to be effected
craftily by Gods enemy. And how in Gods name happens it, that the Devil is
become so great a Student in Physic, and does prove so expert in the art of
curing, who has employed his whole cunning, and bestowed the best fruits of
his industry, to play the Kill-cow, and to destroy? A very wondrous thing!
Master Foster said it: ergo, must we believe it? No, God forbid. But blessed be
our Lord God, who by emitting forth the benignity of his countenance, sends
only health, where, how, and unto whom he list. But to proceed.

CHAP. IIII.
This Chapter shows Master Fosters error, in saying that the soul does not
reside after an hidden manner in the spirits.

The second attempt of the Sponge against the same Text.
Fourthly, I deny that the soul resideth after any hidden Foster.
manner in the spirits. The Stoics indeed held that the spirits were vincula
animae and corporis; but the Peripatetick and Divines deem this as needless,
seeing the body is generated for the soul, and the soul created for the body,
and both make the totum compositum. What needs there any bonds to fasten them
together? There is a reciprocal desire to come together at the first, and an
endeavor after the union to keep together. The soul cannot in any kind
depend on, or reside in the spirits her instruments, but the spirits in the
soul, etc.

We squeese once again in this Argument, this swelling and full-gorged Sponge
after this manner:
Though in the precedent, I answered sufficiently Fludd.
that point; yet must I wring this Sponge a little harder, or it will keep
some of the juice of verity in his porous paunch.

I said before, that animaesedes was in sanguine, and her chiefest vehicle, was
the humidum radicale, as we see, that the Spirit of life in the great world,
did place His Tabernacle in the Sun of Heaven; And again Psalm. 19. Sap. 12.
1.
it is said, that the incorruptible Spirit is in all things, but this is that
spirit which viuifyeth all things; and therefore it resideth in the blood, and
consequently in the spirits, which are contained therein, after a hidden and
mystical manner.

As touching the Peripateticks and some (...) opinion, who hold that it is
needless, there should be a tie between the soul and body: verily that
doctrine is most erroneous and false. First, because the soul and body are so
contrary in complexion unto one another, that except an union were made
between the two extremes, it were impossible that they should meet together,
or if they should or could meet; yet the pure and heavenly light of the soul,
would suddenly forsake the impure and earthly darkness of the body. For how
can duo contraria conuenire in vnum? Do we not see that all influences from
above must have an ayrie Chariot, vehicle or medium, to convey them into
bodies, and to unite them together? Why did God ordain and place the Air
between the Heaven and Earth; but to serve as a vehicle to unite celestial
things with terrestrial ones, quasi amoris vinculo, as it were with the band
of love? Can we have a better proof hereof in this typical world, then that
of the Archetypicall? Is not the Father united to the Son by the Holy Spirit,
which Saint Augustine calls, and many others, Diuinum amoris vinculum: The
Divine tie, or union of love? Now after the Archetypicall image were all things
effected, both in the little and great world. For the Prophet says: By the
Word of the Lord the Psalm. (...).
Heavens were fashioned, and by the Spirit of his mouth all the virtues of
them: So that the virtuous union or link, which is made between the effects
of the Word in whom is life, and the creature to be viuified, is the Good and
Incorruptible Spirit, by which tie God has his essential relation unto the
creature. By this Spirit all the discordant elements are tied in an union and
loving consent, whereupon it is called Peace, and Love, and Concord, which
bears (as the Apostle says) and sustaineth all things Heb. 1 Job 26. 9.
by the Word of his virtue. By it, weight and proportion is assigned unto the
air, and the clouds are fastened or hung up in measure, and the waters are
tied so fast in the thick Job 28. 25.
clouds, that they cleave not. To conclude, in the great World, the Earth and
the Heavens are established and linked together by the Word of God, as the
Apostle Peter 2 Pet. 3.
tells us, or else the elements would be continually at war. And by the
same reason the soul and the body, or Heaven and Earth in the little World are
linked together, by this intermediate eternal tie, or else the body and soul
would never abide together, but war against one another, being that they are
as contrary in nature, as fire and water. But unless the spirit of air were
put between these two contrary elements, to join them together, they would
never agree, nor abide in their spheres: no more would the soul and body,
without a spiritual mean. Now as we see, that the Heaven of the great World
is composed of light and spirit proportioned, and as it were glewed together,
by the eternal Spirit, which is the Infuser of life in them both; so also is
the spirit in man so firmly united unto the soul by the spiritual Word,
which is the tie or glue of life, that it is not possible to be separated the
one from the other, except it be by that Spirit, which did join them together:
And this may easily be gathered out of these words of the Apostle: Viuus est
sermo Dei and (...) 4. 12.
efficax, and (...) omni gladio ancipiti, and pertingens vsque ad diuisionem
animae (...): The Word of God is lively and effectual, and more piercing then
a ^edged Sword, and attaineth even to the division of the soul from the
spirit. Whereby it argues, that the life consists of soul and spirit, and
that these two are so united together, by the tie of the Word, that nothing but
the composer or binder can make any separation of them. And for this reason we
may see, that there is a strong tie, as well between the spirit and the soul,
as between the soul and the body. And therefore as the soul is more worthy
then the spirit, so the spirit excels in dignity the body, and consequently,
the spirit is by proportion interposed between the soul and the body, no
otherwise then the Air between the Sun and Earth. Wherefore it is an
absurdity in the Peripateticks, to deny this tie and union, and more absurd for
Master Foster to make such a poor excuse, as to say, that the body was
generated for the soul, and the soul created for the body, and therefore that
there needs no bands to faften them. A poor conclusion (I say) of so
eminently appearing a Philosopher and Theosopher: as who fhould say, two
extremes could more be joined together, without a medium or middle tie or
intermediate spirit, to conioyne and unite them; then the two extremes of a
Diameter in a Circle, without a middle point or Center. And more absurd it is
in him to say, that there can be a reciprocal desire of two extremes and
contrary opposites to come and dwell together at the (...), when they are so
contrary, that the Wise man says, Corpus infestum corruptioni aggrauat animam,
(...). 9.
and terrena habitatio deprimit mentem multis curis plenam: The body which is
subject to corruption, does ouerburthen and aggrauate the soul, and the
earthly habitation does depresse and keep under the mind that is full of
cares. Is it not strange and unnatural, that any captive spirit should not
desire his freedom and liberty, especially the bright soul, which is captiued
in her dark bodily prison? For this reason therefore Iamblicus says, that
Anima dormiat in corpore humano: The soul sleeps in man's body. And Porphyrie
has it, That it is always (...) in the body. And Mercury Trismegistus, That
the body is unto the soul a veil of ignorance. Whereupon it is certain, that
there is a spirit which keeps it in this his dark prison. By this therefore
you may see, what goodly doctrine this is of Master Fosters! But to mend the
matter, he proceeds thus: And they endeavor after union so to keep
together, etc. It is true, if he speaks in the behalf of the dark body, who
is ^oth to leave the bright soul, which is his treasure. But as for the soul,
we see how many there are, that to escape the fetter of this prison, do sluice
out their own blood, or destroy themselves, and many as well amongst the Elect
(as by Scriptures we find it) as among the common Worldlings, desire earnestly
of God, as being weary of this World, to be dissolved and to pass out of this
life: Cupio dissolui and Philip. 1. 23.
esse cum Christo, says the one, etc. Whereby it is apparent, that the soul
does not desire to live in the body, or with the body, as Master Foster
concludes. And when she departs, she cannot leave her body without the
spirit, so firm is their union, as the Apostle shows, in the text before
mentioned; neither can the spirit wholly forsake that relation it has to the
body, as is said. I conclude therefore ^at against Master Fosters assertion,
that the soul does, with a strict union, depend and rely on the spirit, and
reciprocally the spirits rely on the soul, no otherwise then the Agent can not
be esteemed as an Agent without the Patient, nor the Patient without the Agent.
And therefore they must both of them be united in one. And consequently, as an
essential Agent does act from the Center unto the Circumference: even so it is
to be conceived, that the agile soul is contained in the spirits, as the Agent
in the Patient, or soul in the body, or lightning in the cloud.

And thus far have we proceeded, to squeese out all Master Fosters Sponges
validity, touching this matter: I come unto the next.

CHAP. V.
The Authors essential Carrier of sympathetical virtue, gives in this
Chapter, unto our Sponge-bearer but Jack Drums entertainment, for calling him
Tom Long the Carrier: Read, and you shall see the manner.

The naked assertion of D. Fludds Text.
VVHereupon it is manifest, that (...) spiritual Line, being inuisibly
protracted or extended in the Air, between the places of the wounded person,
and the Box or Pot of Ointment, does carry along with it his animal form, the
which soul or spirit of life, is no less to be divided from his whole or
integrality, contained in the body of the ^unded; then the beam of the Sun
is from the Sun. Therefore as the beam of the Sun, swimming in the (...)
of the world, is as it were a Messenger between Heaven and Earth: even so this
animal beam is the faithful conductor of the healing nature, from the Box of
the Balsam unto the wounded body: and this medium, or directing, and carrying
Line; namely, that which conueyeth the wholesome and salutiferous spirit, by
means of the soul or spirit of life, is that spirit, which is inuisibly
extended, or drawn out in the air; the which, unless it had been in a
hidden manner figured and fashioned forth, the virtue of the Ointment would
euaporate or sluice out this way, or that way, and so would bring no benefit
unto the wounded.

Master Fosters Collection.
The spirit of the bloodshed, is carried by the air (which is the carrier of
the spirit of every thing) unto his body: this spirit, going by this air, in a
direct invisible Line, carries the sanatiue virtue, from the anointed Weapon,
to the wounded party. For the Weapon communicates it to the blood fixed on it,
the blood to the spirits, the spirits conducted by the air, communicate it to
the body, and so the Patient is (without application of plaster) healed
naturally, etc.

It is plainly and evidently here to be discerned, how he corrupts my text,
to make it serve his own ends. For first, I make no mention of a straight or
direct Line, only I speak of carrying and direction of the vital spirits,
from the body wounded, unto the Box of Ointment, and then of the magneticall
attraction of the sanatiue virtue back again, by an invisible Line protracted
in the air. Then he says, as from my text, that the Weapon does communicate
the virtue of the Ointment, unto the blood fixed on it; But I neither said or
meant any such matter; for there is a nearer consanguinity betwixt the Ointment
and the blood, then between the Weapon and the Ointment. But I care so little
for him and his devices, as that I will let him have his will.

The act of his cleansing Sponge upon this.
Fifthly, ^deny Master Doctors Carrier, viz. his direct Foster.
invisible Line, carrying the sanatiue virtue, so many miles, from the Weapon
unto the Wound. Surely this is Tom Long the Carrier, who will never do his
arrant. But the Sun with his beams is a true Messenger between Heaven and
Earth, and so this Salve (...) the Weapon and the Wound. (O incomparable
comparison!) The Sun is called quasi solus, as having no pecre, no creature
working like it. But the Doctor like another Archimedes, can make one working
by sending forth beams like it.

Though you call this my Messenger Tom Long Fludd.
the Carrier; yet shall it do his a^ant so surely, and return so suddenly
upon you his slanderer, (being carried on the swift wings of verity) that in
the conclusion of this text, it shall give you but Jack Drums entertainment
for your reward. I do not say (good Sir) that as the Sunne-beame is a true
Messenger betwixt Heaven and Earth; so the Salve is a Messenger betwixt the
Weapon and the Wound; (O admirable capacity of so learned a Gentleman, in his
own conceit to imagine things that are not!) but I say, that as the
Sunne-beame is a Messenger betwixt Heaven and Earth, so is the beam of the
viuifying and incorruptible Spirit, in the inward man, which is his Heaven,
unto the blood, which lies hid in the Ointment; no otherwise then the grain
of Corn in a good and fertile earth, receives the viuifying comfort of the
Sunnebeames, by which, after putrefaction of the grain, it does, by a
magnetic power, draw the little soul, now at liberty, upward toward his
Fountain of life, from whence it descended the year before, for the
multiplying of the grain. But because it is hindered by his elementary body, it
remains houering in the air, and by sucking down from above more of his like,
it multiplyeth from one grain unto a great many. Is it therefore impossible,
that the like might happen between the beam issuing from the body, and the
corrupted blood in the Ointment, the small Atome of life, by (...) of the dead
blood arising, and without impediment of his unctuous earth, sucked by little
and little unto his Fountain of life? But because all this is lively expressed
in mine answer unto the very selfsame objection, made in the first and second
Chapter of the second Member of this Treatise, I will refer the Reader unto
those places, where he shall find all the Contents of this his insufficient
Confutation answered, his Sponge thoroughly squeesed, and all his rancor and
venom pretended against this my Text, quite crushed out, and annihilated.

Then he proceeds thus: The Sun is called quasi solus, as bauing no peer,
no creature working like it; but the Doctor like another Archimedes, etc. Good
Master Parson, semper excipio Platonem. That incorruptible Spirit, which (as
the Son of Syrach tells Ecclesiastic, 1.
us) was created before all things, must be excepted. Do you mark this, Sir?
For I told you, that your Sponge, in the inquisition of this text, would have
but Jack Drums entertainment. I hope you will not prefer the visible Sun,
either in glory or actiuity, before this Divine Spirit, which gives it glory
and actiuity. What? The creature before the Creator? The matter before the
form? The Patient before the Agent? Is this Master Parsons good divinity? Or
does Philosophy teach him thus much? Whatsoever Tully tells us, that this is
reuer a solus in mundo actor. It is certain, that it Psalm 19.
was this Spirit, which put his Tabernacle in the Sun of Heaven, and by it
only the Sun lives, moves, and operateth, here below, and there above; and
it is one and the same Spirit, which imparteth unto all creatures, and
consequently unto us men, the spirit of life, by which we live, move, and have
our being. Acts 17.
It is he, that has reciprocally put his Tabernacle in man, as well as in the
Sun: and therefore are we termed the Members of Christ, and Temples of the 1
Cor. 6. 19. 1 Cor. 12. 27.
Holy Ghost. Whereby the wisdom of Master Foster, nay, of a Christian Divine,
may be well skanned and discerned, in saying in his text: But D. Fludd, like
another Archimedes, can make one working, by sending forth beams like it, etc.
No verily, I will not be so bold, to ascribe unto my self, that which
belongs only unto God my Creator: howsoever Master Foster would ascribe it
to the Devil.

Concerning the full answer unto this his Confutation, I refer you (as is
said) unto the second Member of this Treatise.

I will proceed now unto the greatest assault, wherein his Sponge rubbeth very
hard against my Text, but prevails no more then they which go about to wash
away the color of a Black-moore: It will prove, I hope, a mere labor in
vain.

CHAP. VI.
How, contrary unto our Spongy Cabalists intention, it is proved first, that
evil spirits may contaminate and alter into their nature the aerie spirit of
man: as also that Devils have aerie bodies allotted unto them in their creation:
Lastly, the mutability and inconstancy of the Consutor in his main Argument is
discovered.

Doctor Fludds Text.
FRom hence therefore arises that secret combination and union, which is made
between the evil spirit and the Cacomagicians or Witches, by the which
foolish men (...) filthily deceived by the Devil, whereupon the Devil or
malignant spirit, by the alluerment of such a reward, does accomplish the will
or desire of the witch. And hereupon a compact is made between them, namely,
that the spirit, in what shape soever, may suck daily a portion of blood,
whereby the spirit lurking in the blood of the Magician, may be made of one
nature and condition, with that of the malignant spirit; and so his spirit was
converted into a (...) condition, whereby it is impossible for him to depart
from the worship of the Devil.

Master Fosters Collection from the Text.
That there is such a sympathy betwixt the blood in the body, and the blood
drawn from the body, it is most evident by the example of witches. The Devil
sucketh blood from them; this blood remaining with the Devil, participates of
his malign nature, and having recourse by the spirits thereof, unto the
Witches body, makes all their blood sympathise with that the Devil has, and
so the blood changes the Witches nature, and they become malign and Diabolic
all.

Here again you may see, that he wresteth my Text beyond his true intended
sense. But I will yield him his desire: and will please the Gentleman in his
humor.

The act of his neat wiping Sponge upon this Text.
The Doctor proves it by the example of blood, sucked Foster.
by the Devil from Witches; which remaining with the Devil, and sympathising
with the blood in Witches bodies, changes their nature, and mak^s them become
malign and Diabolical. O profound example! Here Master Doctor, (...) a ground
of his Argument, which neither true philosophy, nor orthodox Divinity will give
us leave to assent unto. The Witches blood remaining with the blood-sucker the
Devil, sympathiseth with the blood of the witches body. How can this be? How
can blood, a substance corporeal, remain with the Devil incorporeall, etc?

Here this his Sponges validity is squeesed out.
O wondrous wit of our Sponge-bearer! O light Fludd.
and spongy understanding of so weighty a conception! But if indeed Angels (as
he says) were incorporeall, how could meat and drink, a substance corporeal,
remain with the Angels which Abraham entertained? if they were incorporeall,
or if they assumed bodies accidentally, could they ear and drink with them
naturally? or was Abraham so senseless to offer counterfeit shapes, meat and
drink? Surely a man so profound in divine mysteries, would not have been so
absurd, as to have offered them his food, if he had known that it would not
naturally have nourished them. The same absurdity might justly have been
imputed unto Lot. Verily, it is above the reach of Worldlings to scan rightly,
or discover justly this doubt. But suppose it be granted, that Angels and
Devils be not corporeal, but spiritual creatures; yet he confesses
elsewhere, that the Devil can indue and put on an organicall body: namely, of
a man, a Dog, or Cat, and consequently those Angels endued humane shapes. I
pray you, when a squirt, or syrynge, or boxing glass draws, is it the organ,
or the spirit in the organ that draws? Man operateth not with his body, but
with the inward spirit; neither does blood act any thing of it self; but by
the occult viuifying spirit, which acts in it. Man's throat and tongue serve
as organs of voice; but it is the Spirit that acts. If the Devil enter into
a body, as he did into the Swine, and humane bodies; did he not make use of the
organicall voice of the Beast, and those men to speak unto Christ? But it was
the spiritual act of the Devil, which did mingle it self with the aerie
spirit of the Beast, and man possessed and made it to answer, according to the
will of the Agent; so, I say, that by the aid of the creatures mouth and
spirit, which it endued, it did suck the blood; not that the blood in his
gross nature did abide with the Devil in his spiritual substance; but I say
that the spiritual substance in the blood, which participates of air, is
easy to join and make an union, by the contract with that of the Devil: even
as we see, that Amber, when it is burnt, sends forth his spirit, which
uniting or mingling it self with the air, infects it with his odoriferous
nature, and so there is an actual communication made between the air and the
fume, between the spirit of the one and the other, between a Priuy-house, or
plaguey Botch infecting, and the spirit of the air infected, the which air
communicates also that infection unto the spirit of the smeller. Again, do
we not see in one infected with the plague, that first it was a corrupt spirit,
which by the virtuall contact ofit, did infect not the blood only; but the
invisible spirits in the blood? And do we not see also, that the same
invisible spirit so infecting, does inuisibly also infect the invisible air
about it; and though it be in part exspired out of the body and blood; yet it
has such communication with the blood; that for all that the invisible fume
infecteth abroad, not leaving nevertheless his persecution at home. If
therefore the Botch of the Plague in one man (which the Prophet Abaku' terms
the Daemonium, or Devil of the South) does infect the spiritual blood of
another, it is not the bodily Botch that does it; but the infected spirit in
it: The corporeal Bo^ch therefore we compare to the body assumed by the
Devil, and the corrupting spirit unto the Devil. Wherefore as we see, that
after the Botch of the one has touched the person of another, the spirit
easily, by reason of the reciprocal similitude of them, communicate with one
another: so, that although the party that has the Botch, departs never so
far; yet nevertheless the malignant spirit (...) with the blood of the last
infected, and conuerteth it absolutely into his malignant nature. Is it then
impossible that the spiritual maligni^y of the Devil, by a contactuall
sucking of the blood, should contaminate with the malignity of his spirit, the
spirit of the blood of the party sucked, and leave it so infected and changed
unto his own nature, as the venomous spirit of the Plague into a plaguey
disposition? Did not the Devil work the very same feate with Judas his
spirit, when it was said: (...) Diabolus (...) 13.
in cor (...) vt traderet Christum, he sent or put it into the heart of ludas
to betray Christ? That is, he infecteth his spirit first, and those spirits
corrupted his thoughts or understanding: for without the help of a medium, the
Devil being expelled from Heaven, can not attempt the heaven of man's
understanding.

But to answer Master Foster at his own weapon, I mean that quick-sented
Gentleman, that so soon can smell a Rat; What does he think, that Devils have
not tenuia corpora? Yea verily: for he has for it (as he says) authorities
of Scripture, Counsels, Fathers, and Schoolmen to confirm so much. But by the
way he says: The Doctor, who impiously attributes composition in God, dare^
falsely attribute corporeity to Devils. In the first place, M. Foster has the
Devil the father of lies for his Foster-father, who can both foster and father
untruth upon any one. But as I have said before, the simple Friar Marinus
Mersennus says so, namely, because I auerred, that the Spirit of the Lord
filled and animated the heavenly Spirit, Ergo, (says he) Fludd makes God a
part of Composition, and therefore Master Parson, holding the Friars words as
an Oracle, without pondering the sense of the business, blundereth out like a
Parrat these very words of the Friar: The Doctor does impiously attribute
Composition unto God. But if I say that God is in composition, I mean it not
as a part compounding; but as the sole Compounder in composition. Again; if he
were absent from composition, the word could not be said to be incarnated; nor
the Incorruptible Spirit to be in all things; neither could God by the Apostle
be said, to be over all, and in all.

But leaving this paratticall or parasiticall garb: He brings the authorities
of Scripture. And what are they? Saint Paul has this: We wrestle not against
flesh and blood, but against spiritual wickedness, Foster.
or evil spirits in high places. And therefore Christ said: Handle me and
touch me, for a spirit has not flesh, nor bones, as ye see me have; But
Devils can not be handled:
Therefore they have no bodies.


Here is a stout Argument, because Devils as (...).
they are in their thin aeriall bodies, cannot be handled: Ergo, they have
not any corpulency. I would feign know of this acute Arguer, what organicall
body for speech this spirit had, when he in reciprocal words and speech did
tempt our Savior? Does he think that the very air (which is the external of
the Devil as shall be proved) is not a spiritual body, when it may be felt,
heard, or understood, though not as flesh and bones? Does not the Apostle make
mention of a spiritual or heavenly and thin body, and an earthly or gross and
thick body?

It is most true, that there are some of the Fathers and Schoolmen, who are of
opinion, that the Angels are absolutely incorporeal, as Damascene, Thomas
Aquin, Denis, and so forth; But there are as many; yea, and more of the
learneder sort, who give a contrary sentence, touching the bodily existence of
these spirits, and say flatly, that an Angel is a corporeal substance, and
consequently, that Angels may without any error be termed bodily creatures and
amongst this number of the Fathers, are ranked Basil, Origin, Gregory,
Augustine, Isidorus, Peter Lombard: and of Philosophers, Mercurius
Trismegistus, with all the School of the Academicks. And as for S. Augustine,
he says in his Book upon Genesis in express words; quod Daemones sunt aerea
and ignea animalia: that the Demons or Angelical spirits are aerie and fiery
Animals, and consequently assigns unto them aerie bodies. Again, he affirms
in another place, that the Angels had in their creation aerie bodies, to wit,
framed and fashioned out of the purer part of the superior air, made more apt
and proper to act, then to suffer, and he auerreth that the evil angels were,
by reason of their fall, changed, as touching their bodies or external being,
into the nature of the grosser air, that they might be the rather made to
suffer the torments of fire. And Fetrus Lombardus says: Angeli corpora, in
quibus hominibus apparent, de summo aere sumunt, solidamque speciem ex coelesti
elemento induunt, vt humanis obtutibus manifestius demonstrentur: So that it is
evident, that Augustine and he agree in one. Also Basil does teach us, what
manner of bodies the Angels have, when he says: they are thin, aerie, and
pure Spirits. Again, Arteplius that wise man says, in his great Key of
wisdom, That the external of the Devil is air, but his internal is fire.
For the which reason he shows, that it is easy for him, namely, in regard of
his external or body, to insinuate and communicate with the aerie and bloody
spirit in man, and consequently to engender in him hot and fiery diseases.

But why should we rely only (as Master Foster does) on bare Authorities? I
will come unto plain Philosophical proofs, to show and demonstrate, that
Angels have souls and bodies, or external and internal. First, you must
know, that if they were Identity, that is, of all one simple formal being,
they would be all one in essence with God their Creator, who is called
Identitas, or absolute and simple unity; but for as much as they are compounded
of two: namely, of light, which is the beam of God, which they receive, to
inform them and make them creatures, and spirit, which as polished
Looking-glass, receives the glory of that divine light, they are called
Alteritas or Alterity, that is, composed of two. And this is most lively
expressed by Saint Denis, when he terms them Algamatha, that is, most clear
Mirrours, or Looking-glasses, receiving the light of God. And therefore he
defines an Angel to be the Image of God, the showing forth of bid light, a
mirror pure and most bright. And Damascen says: That they are intellectual
spirits, having light (as their souls) from the first Light. And Solomon
describing the Prince of all Angels (which (...) 7.
as Ecclesiasticus says, was ante omnia creatus) that it was candor lucis
aeternae, and speculum sine macula Mai^slatis Dei: or the brightness of
eternal light, and a glass without spot of the Majesty of God. Whereby it is
evident, that the Angels internal, and as it were his soul, is the
brightness of Gods emanation: his polished or pure aerie internal, is his
(...) body, which receives this light. For we must note, That in the beginning
Heaven and Earth were made of water, (...) 3.
and by water consisting by the Word, as S. Peter speaks. And therefore the
whole World was composed of an internal or invisible, which is the soul or
spirit, animated by Gods Word, and an external and visible earth and water,
which is the body: So every creature must needs be compounded of an internal
or active soul, and an external or organicall receptacle of that soul, which
is the body. Is it not apparent, That when the Spirit of the Lord did Genes.
(...)
move upon the waters, the water was the Catholic Patient, and the spirit the
internal Agent? For Saint Augustine, super Genesim, says: Spiritus ferebatur
super aquas, igneum ^s vigorem impertiens, The Spirit moved on the waters,
imparting unto them a fiery vigor or virtue, that is, a viuifying nature; So
that the spiritual created Catholic waters, were animated by the spiritual
increated Catholic breath, and light of life, whose Spirit in every creature
is the Spirit of life, and therefore their centrall soul: and the creature
animated, is the body. Wherefore as the purest, and most spiritual part of
water or air, is the external of the Angel; so his internal is the lucid
act of Gods Spirit.

Now I conclude thus: If the external substance of the Angel be air (for
either it must be of spiritual water, or else of the substance of God, which
is merely formal, and not material) then we know by the rules of
Philosophy, that air subtiliated is fire, and again air inspissated is a
vapor, a mist, a cloud, and so by inspissation, air invisible becomes a
visible substance; yea, and a bodily vocal organ too, as it appears by
lightning, the which soul of the cloud, except it have his cloudy organ, or
bodily instrument, will not speak in thunder. We find therefore out of Holy
Writ, that God is said to speak out of his organic all cloud. And 2 King. 22.
Job. 22. 15. Psalm. 104. Psalm. 105. 37. Numb. 11. 25.
for that very cause, the Text calls it in one place, latibulum Dei, in
another, tigurium Dei, and in another, vehiculum and currus ^ehoua: so that if
leb^ua makes this organicall Tabernacle of air, to utter unto mortal ears
his voice (as Scriptures in many places do testify) it is no sin to say,
that his inferior spirits have for their external bodies, aerie substances,
which being granted, what should hinder spirits, by contraction of this their
external substances, to appear when they please visibly, and organically to
talk with a person, as the tempting spirit did to Christ? and again, by an
immediate dilatation of the same external aerie spirit, to become invisible, no
otherwise then a smoke by dilatation vanishes, or a cloud, or mist made of a
compacted, and thickened air, does oftentimes, without the appearance of any
drop of rain pass away inuisibly? Was it not strange, that Christ himself
that had flesh and bones, should appear etiam clausis ian^is, and then
immediately to vanish? And yet if we consider, that after he was risen, he did
put on a spiritual body, even that body for that cause, could deponere
Tabernaculum suum visibile and tangibile, and become by subtiliation and
dilatation, as subtle and impalpable, as the voluntie of him, who has the
spiritual body, pleases: and so can appear and vanishat an instant. It is an
admirable speculation, to ponder and consider duly, how God works in this
world by contraction and dilatation, by privation and position, by darkness
and light, by apparition and disparition, as we see, when his Spirit moves
from the North; the common air is by the contractiue nature of that spirit,
turned from inuisibility to visibility, from transparency to opacity, from air
to Snow, Hail, Frost, Ice: from leuity to ponderosity, from agility and
mobility to fixation and immobility. Contrariwise, by his blast from the East
or South, the said bodies are altered again into water, and water into air,
and air into fire, by dilatation, and in conclusion; corporeity terrestrial,
into corporeity aeriall or celestial, hardness into saltness, grossness
into subtility, opacity into transparency, fixation into mobility, rest into
action, darkness into light: And to conclude, contraction caused by this
Spirit of God, into dilatation, visibility into inuisibility. What shall I say
more? If Angels of all kinds have their external from the aerie spirit of the
World, and their internal act, from this external viuifying spirit, in whom
is the property of the four Winds (and therefore the Prophet said, Come, O
Spirit, from the four Winds; Ezekiel. 36.
whereby he did argue, that this one Spirit, as being the essential actor in
the four Winds, had the properties of the four Winds in himself, by the
which he acted all things, whereupon the Prophet called it from the four
Winds) we ought not to make any question; but that by virtue of that
internal act, and the substance of that their external air, they may
contract themselves from a spiritual fiery and aerie inuisibility, unto a
nebulous or watery, yea, and earthly visibility, or snowie or Icie nature:
especially the gross, malignant, and dark spirits: which by their fall, have
endued the grosser air, (as Augustine says:) and therefore is Satan called by
the Apostle, The Prince of the air. And this is the reason, that the Devil,
or evil spirits do in their contraction convert themselves into solid or firm
shapes of man or beast, and appear in touch to be so excessue cold (according
to Master Fosters confession) namely, because the spirit by which they live,
contracting it self from the Circumference of dilated air, into the Center of
contracted earth, leaves the external or aerie compacted composition chill and
cold like Ice. For it is by his emanation or dilatation from the Center unto
the Circumference, that kindles natural heat in the external of every
creature. To conclude against those that affirm that spirits have no
corporeity: It is most certain, that where there is rarum and densum, thin and
thick, there consequently is corporeity either thin or thick. For whatsoever
is in his substance transmutable unto a thinner or thicker body, must needs be
bodily, though not a visible body. So is a Star of Heaven called Densior pars
sui orbis, that is, The invisible ^thereall spirit or thin body of Heaven,
thickened into the visible body of a Star. So also may fire be condensed into
air, and air into water, and water into earth. And again, that earth may be
rarefied into water, and water into air, and air into fire. For such is the
natural rotation of elements. Now the external of Angels, must be created of
the spiritual substance of the higher world, or not at all: according unto
Basils tenor, and consequently it is bodily, though of a thinner or thicker
consistence, according unto the dignity of the Angel. Does not also David
acknowledge thus much in these words: Qui facit Angelos spiritus seu era
(...), Psalm. 104.
and Ministros ignem vrentem, who makes his Angels spirits or windy air, and
his Ministers flames of fire? And therefore it is a shame, that such mysteries
as these, which are most apparent to the considerant, should by the ignorant
be derided, and esteemed not works and operations of the Spirit of God, in
the common element of the world, but of the Devil, and so through their
blindness mistake evil for good, darkness for light: of which sort of people
Esaias (...). (...).
the Prophet means in these words: Woe unto them that speak good of evil,
and evil of good, which put darkness for light, and light for darkness, that
put bitter for sweet, and sweet for bitter. Woe unto them that are wise in
their own eyes, and prudent in their own sight.

Thus, judicious and impartial Reader, you may perceive by that which has
been expressed in this Member, how unable mine Adversaries Sponge has been to
wipe away the least tittle of that natural value and divine virtue, which in
my mystical Anatomy, I have ascribed unto the WeaponSalue. And therefore for
all I can see, he may invent some more substantial means, then is this
windy Sponge (an express argument of a light brain or fantastic wit) to
subvert a Medicine of so weighty an importance, and admirable power in working.
He must have, I say, strong Cable-ropes, in stead of a light Sponge, to remove
the foundation of verity; and yet, I fear, they will crack too, before they
will be able to draw wise men to believe, that the good gifts of healing in
this Weapon-Salue, should proceed from the Devil, and not from God and his
benign mercies, which is the only giver of health and goodness.

And now I must remember you by the way of one absurdity in our Sponge-bearing
Author. For he says first, that this manner of cure is Diabolical, and
afterward he seems to attribute the effect of it unto the urine of man. His
words are these:

Doctor Fludds directions are, that the Weapon be left Page 8.
in the Vnguent-pot, till the Patient be cured, and that the wound be kept
clean, with a linen cloth, wet every morning in his urine. Whether this be a
fallacy or no, I commend it to the judgment of those, who are expert in
Surgery. For let the Doctor be sure to keep a wound clean, and I suppose
they will tell him, that it will cicatrize without his Weapon-Salue.

To this I answer, that Oportet mendacem esse memorem: it behooves a liar to
have a good memory. For Master Foster must remember, that in another place he
says, The Devil does secretly apply some other virtuall operative Medicine,
to cure the wound, and delude the incredulous M^untebancks, etc. And here he
opens, that the cause of the cure, is the keeping of the wound clean with
the clout dipped in urine, and applied not by the Devil, but by man; saying,
That therein alone consists the cure, without the Weapon-Salue, and he
calls all the cunning Chirurgic all Artists to witness, and verify his
words to be true: which being so, what a Gods blessing is become of the Devils
cunning in this Physical cure? or wherein can it appear Diabolical? or how
does he apply any thing craftily to delude the incredulous Mountebanks? Oh the
wavering of a tottering brain, to forget his argument, and unawares to eat
his own words!

CHAP. VII.
In which this whole Subject is in few words contracted and abbreuiated.

Ye may perceive (courteous and well minded Reader) by this which is already
told you, that although our Adversary has attempted, as the Jews did unto our
Savior, to crucify, or rather smoother in oblivion the truth, as well of the
Weapon-Salues operating virtue, as of mine honest endeauours, on the
Cacomagicall cross of slander, and does offer unto us in our Agony, namely,
when our reputation lies a bleeding, a destructive or abolishing Sponge,
swelling with vinegar and gall; I mean, with the sharp sauce of calumniation,
and the bitter taste of his uncharitable indignation, in stead of a
Christian-like consolation: yea, although (I say) the tempestuous blast of his
harsh spirit, has done his best, to make the reputation of us both, as it were
to suffer shipwreck, and to be cast, like another Jonas, into the troubled
seas of this worlds censure, where the sourging billows of various affections,
do stormingly iustle, and as it were, shoulder and withstand one another. (For
since the maxim is: Quot homines, tot sentontiae, how is it possible to please
and content every man in his humor?) And though the spongie Leuiathan, or
proudly swelling and infulting Whale of Master Foster, did swallow for a time,
into his paunch of oblivion, the honor and credit of both this Salve, and me
for a season; yet (I thank my God) he has imparted unto me the grace, so to
squeese and crush this his prestigious Whale, or devouring Sponge, which is
also an offspring of the Sea, that now it is forced even so to vomit up again
that truth, upon this our coast, not a little infected with the incredulity of
this manner of curing, as the true Whale did in times past, the Prophet Jonas,
upon the shore of the misbeleeuing Ninevites; that the infidelity and suspicion
of such icalous persons, as have been seduced by our Adversaries Leuiathan, or
spongie Monster, may the easier be abolished, by making the devoured truth to
be revived, and as it were, to shine forth, and rise again, that by the light
thereof, all those dark clouds, which have begot and fostered such
incredulity, namely, the religious veil of Master Fosters worldly policy, the
error of his doctrine, and the healing power, which he erroneously ascribes
unto the Devil, may be discovered unto the eyes of each wise and judicious
Reader, and that the misbeleeuers may with the Ninevites repent their error,
and turn from such Idolatrous inducements, as have persuaded them, to ascribe
the pious and charitable gifts of healing by the Weapon-Salue, unto the false
Prince of darkness, who through man's error, does usurp unto himself, the
title of Prince or Lord of this World, which of right, and that from all
eternity, belongs unto the true God of Light, who has made both Heaven and
Earth, and enriched them with all manner of virtues whatsoever. But if it shall
happen hereafter, that some silly incredulous persons (the appearingly zealous,
I mean, without understanding, of which Saint Paul speaks) shall, like Dogs,
return unto their vomit: I must then say and confess, that they do but
according unto their kind; and therefore are rather to be pitied then envied:
and consequently our Saviors Words so unfitly applied by our Adversary in his
Dedicatory Epistle, are most aptly to be powered out unto God for these men:
Father, forgive them, for they know not what they Luke 22.
do. For this cause therefore, I chiefly direct this my small Pamphlet, unto
all such, as are understandingly zealous, and iudiciously learned, beseeching
them earnestly, to take this short model of our disputation, into their more
mature or riper considerations, and to ponder every parcel thereof truly (all
partiality being laid apart) in the balance of their most honest and pious
discretions.

Let them examine, I say, in their choycest thoughts, and that seriously,
whether this Cure proceeds from that virtuous gift, which God has imparted
in the creation, unto these his natural creatures, and continued it in them,
by succession of generation and multiplication, through his all-sufficient
Word, even unto this day, or else from the mere act and assistance of the
Devil, whose property soon after his creation, by his fall became to strike,
plague, and destroy, and not to cure, and prove so great a Benefactor unto
mankind. Let them consider the words of the Apostle, affirming, that God
operateth all in all: and therefore he acts when he pleases, in and by the
Devil, only to sickness, death, and destruction; but not unto health and
conservation. Observe the text of David, auerring, that God by his Word did
heal Psalm. 107. 20.
such as were struck with diseases, when they turned unto him; and does he not
by the said Word cure all? yes verily. For Solomon says: He extended his
misericord Wisd. 16. 10.
unto the afflicted with Serpents, and sent forth his Word to cure them, even
his Word that health all things. But the Devil is neither God, nor Gods Word;
wherefore I will conclude with this in^iolable Argument: If our merciful God
cures all things in his benignity, and that by his Word, then the Devil can
cure nothing;

But our God, in his mercy and benignity, cures all things by his Word: Ergo,
the Devil can cure nothing: and consequently, cannot prestigiously make a show
of curing, under the shadow and pretense of the Weapon-Salue.



The Mayor is evident, because if the Word cures all, then that superior
generality concludes all inferior particularities: and therefore all absolute
faculty of curing is exempted from the Devil.

The Minor also is confirmed and strengthened by the foresaid words: first, of
the Prophet David: He (...). 107. 20, 21.
sends his Word and heals them, and delivers them from their graves, let
them confess before the Lord his loving kindness, etc. Whereby it appears,
that it was his loving kindness, and not his severity and vengeance, which by
his Word did heal and cure: For he operateth vengeance in his severity or
destructive will, by the organ of the Devil. And then, of Solomon; But the
teeth of the venomous Dragons Wisd. 16. 10.
could not overcome thy Children: for thy mercy came to help them, and healed
them; for neither herb, nor plaster healed them; but thy Word, O Lord, which
heals all things, for thou have the power of life and death, and leadest
down into the gates of Hell, and bring up again, etc.

Now I would know, whether it ought to be any true Christians opinion, that the
Devil can command the misericord of God, and so be Master of his word at his
pleasure, as to heal Gods creatures, nay, one framed after his own Image, for
any wicked stratagems cause: I mean, for the gaining of both body and soul of
man, from God to himself? Job 12. 11.
Does not Job say: In the hand of God is the life of every living creature, and
the spirit of all flesh? To conclude as Saint John does truly auerre, that in
the Word was life; So it is certain, that all healing and restoring power, is
from this viuifying virtue in the Word, and not from the privative power of the
Devil, in whom contrary wise is death and destruction. Moreover, I would have
you to note these words of the Apostle: Now there are diverse 1 Cor. 12.
gifts, but the same Spirit, and there are diversities of operations; but God
is the same which works all in all; but to one is given by the Spirit the
Word of wisdom, to another the word of knowledge, to another is given faith,
and to another the gift of healing by the same Spirit, etc.

Can any good Christian think, that this one Spirit, that only works these
things, is the Devil? No verily. For in the third verse, the Apostle terms it
the Holy Ghost. What shall we say then? That the Devil does heal by the gift
of the Holy Ghost? or that the holy Spirit will grant the evil spirit his good
gift of healing, to deceive mankind, and to rob God of his right? God forbid:
But with justice give that unto God, which belongs unto God, and assign unto
the Devil that property, which was allotted him by his Creator from the
beginning: the first Spirit, from all creations, was ordained in his office to
be a good, viuifying, and a quickening Spirit; the latter, a bad, a killing, and
a mortifying spirit. For it is said by the Prophet in the person of God: Ego
creaui destructorem Isaias 54. 16.
ad disperdendum: I have created the destroyer to destroy.

I will boldly therefore conclude and finish my Pamphlet, or petty discourse,
as I began it, namely, with this religious verse, mentioned in the divine Hymn
of the Royal Psalmist, to the honor of God, and disabling of either Devil,
or any other creature, to work essentially wonders of himself, or by
himself: Benedictus Dominus Deus Israel, qui facit mirabilia Psalm. 71. 18.
solus: Blessed be the Lord God of Israel, who only works wonders. Or as he
has it in another place: Confitemini Domino Dominorum, quoniam in aeternum
Psalm. 135. 3.
miser^or dia^ius, qui facit mirabilia magna solus: Praise the Lord, for his
mercy endures for ever, who only does great wonders.

And therefore, if the Lord of Lords only, or alone; then has he not any
mortal man to help him: if he alone; then not any Angel of Heaven: and
lastly, if it be God alone, and only; then not any Devil of Hell; nor Demon
or spirit of the fiery, or aerie, or watery, or earthly element to assist him.
For the text says: It is the Lord of Lords alone; and therefore not any
creature to help him, or that is able to do this without him: it is he (I
say) only; and consequently not the Devil, who performs wonders; But by
every man's acknowledgement, this manner of cure is wonderful, for as much as
the manner of working in it, passes the capacity of worldly men's
understanding: Therefore with David I will say: Benedictus Deus, qui facit tale
mirabile solus: and consequently, I may infer thereupon (and that justly)
Maledictus homo qui diuina falso attribuit Diabolo.

Wherefore I wish every zealous and religious person, to have this inviolable
Motto engraven in his heart, that by the virtue thereof, he may fright away and
banish from his thoughts, all such irreligious persuasions, as would move him
to derogate one Iota or tittle from Gods power, who is Alpha and Omega, the
beginning and the end of all things, to arrogate falsely unto the vilest of
creatures, who in himself is nothing but what God is pleased that he shall be:
of himself has nothing, but what God pleases to bestow on him: and by
himself can do nothing: but what God is pleased to act in him, and by him,
that he does, and not any thing else: and therefore, what God will not, that he
cannot do. Let this then be your Motto: (...)
Finis omnium and principium Deus.
God is the end and beginning of all things.


And for this reason, Reuchlin in his Book de verbo m^risico says: Omne
hominis miraculum, cuius vera and non imaginaria deprehenditur substantia, tum
grande, tum mediocre, tum minimum, si ordo sacrorum prascriptus obseruetur,
referendum est semper in Deum gloriosum, cuius nomen est benedictum in
aeternum. Is enim solus est, qui vel seipso, vel delegato, non sine seipso,
velper substitutum exseipso, talia facit, qualia demiramur: quorum causam
adaequatam scire non possumus, vel quod fiant, vel quod hoc modo fiant.

Every miracle of man, whose substance is certain, and not imaginary or
prestigious, be it great, or mean, or little, if the prescribed order of Holy
Writ be observed, is always to be referred and ascribed unto one glorious
God, whose Name be ever blessed! For it is he alone, who either of himself,
or by a delegat, with whom he is present, or by a substitute of his own, and
from himself, that effects such things, the true or plain grounds whereof,
and by what means they are brought to pass, we neither can discern, nor
comprehend. Thus far John Reuchlin.



And therefore in the period of this Treatise I may justly put home, and allude
unto Master Foster and his Accomplices, the woe of Isaias, against such persons,
which I did mention in the beginning of it, for as much as they presuming too
too much on their worldly wisdom, do mistakingly, and through their
blindness, ascribe the things of God, unto the Devil; the deeds of goodness,
unto evil; and the effects of light, unto darkness.

ISAIAS 5.20, 21. Woe unto them that speak good of evil; and evil of good:
which put darkness for light, and light for darkness: that put bitter for
sweet; and sweet for sour. Woe unto them that are wise in their own eyes, and
prudent in their own sight.

I leave this (worthy and learned Reader,) as I have said before, unto thy best
consideration, to judge of seriously and maturely, wishing that in thy
judgment the balance of equity may be truly proportioned, and not made
unequal by corrupt and ungodly partiality.

THE EPILOGVE.
ANd now for a farewell unto this my small Pamphlet, I would have my
well-minded Countrymen to know, that, had not this rude and uncivil Adversary
of mine, most untruly and disgracefully calumniated me, and laid without any
just occasion unto my charge, the un sufferable crime of Witchcraft, or
Magic, which is odious both to God and man; I would not thus far have
hindered my greater business, and more weighty occasions, to have satisfied his
v^reafonable and immodest appetite. And yet, I protest before God and the
World, that I am so far from envying at his good qualities, (if he have any)
that in the first place. I pity his indiscretion, and want of that modest and
moral wit and behavior in his writing, which becomes a true Philosopher,
for as much as in them he appears more puffed up externally with the empty
blasts of self-conceit, begirt on every side, with the blasted fruit of
scandalous detraction and envy at other men's endeauours, then stuffed
internally with any solid validity: Gay things (I say) to breed delight in
Babyes, or such as by reason of their darkness in understanding, can not well
discern or distinguish the colors of Truth: But unto the wiser sort (such, I
mean, as regard with intellectual eyes) they seem as Bables, or things which
prestigiously appear unto dull eyes, but in verity, are plain nothing: and
then in the second place, I wish him with all mine heart, more money in his
purse, or else some good Benefice or Church-liuing to stop his mouth, the want
whereof, (as it appears by his Epistle unto the Reader) makes him in his
writing; first, so forgetful of his Creators Omnipotency, that he
presumptuously attributes that, namely, the sovereign gift of healing, unto
the Devil, which from all eternity belonged unto God: next, he most
irreligiously and unjustly does scandalize his Brethren, for ascribing that
justly unto God, which only appertains unto him; and consequently, not to any
Devil in Hell: and lastly, he seems to inueigh against some men of his own
Profession, yea, and also to murmur against his Superiors in the Church, as
you may collect, partly out of his Dedicatory Epistle, and partly out of that
unto the Reader.

I know his humor so well, and his Pen has made me so perfectly acquainted
with his railing and Satyricall disposition, that I expect nothing less from
him, then a reply full of unreasonable brauadoes, and thundering exclamations.
But although he should rail and rore at me, as a Bull of Basan, or puff forth
the fire of his spite, and rage like one of the Bulls of Colchus, yet shall my
still patience serve in stead of another Jason, to charm his tongue, or dull
the biting edge of his Pen, and to extinguish the bitter flames of his malice
against me. Let him therefore hereafter thunder forth, cry, and proclaim what
he please (for such is his uncivil nature) I will from henceforth answer him
(as a railing and Cynick Writer ought to be,) with silence: for as much as I am
assured, that neither by true Divinity, or authentical Philosophy, he will be
able to untwist that web of Truth, which this my small Pamphlet has wouen unto
him: But if he have some other business or subject that sticks in his
stomach against me (as I have heard he threatens me with Mountains, and I am
assured they will prove in the end but Mole-hills, as well as the precedent)
perchance if I find him in his writing more modest and mannerly, as well
become^ one that professes the name of a Philosopher, and as a Master of Arts
ought to behave himself toward a Doctor, who is his Superior, that is, if he
strike hard and defend himself closely from being repayed with Theological
and Philosophical arguments, and not with misbeseeming terms, foule-mouthed
language, and false slanders, as his custom is; he shall find that I will not
refuse or fail him, but will be ready to cope with him in the Philosophical
Camp of Minerua, when and how he dare; and let him if he will beseech (as
Mersennus his Fryerly Master has done) all his Associats and Cabalists, or
Birds of one feather, to assist him in his quarrel: But if he persevere in his
immorall and slanderous vein of writing, I will keep silence, and either
smile at, or rather pity his folly, and answer all his objections in mine
accustomed Latin style unto Peter Gassendus, who is his chief Master, and a
man that is to be preferred by many degrees, not only in Learning, and
Philosophical knowledge, before this my homebred Adversary: but also in
civil morality, honest justice, and freedom from envious malice. I wish that
Master Foster would imitate him, and be his Scholar in these his virtues, and
then I should with the like true Christian affection bestow on him, being my
homebred Adversary, the same commendations, which reason and virtue incite me
to impart unto Gassendus, although my foreign Opposite.

Verbum Sapienti.

FINIS.

