EUBULUS, OR A DIALOGVE,

Where-in a rugged Romish Ryme, (inscrybed, Catholic Questions, to the
Protestant) is confuted, and the Questions thereof answered.

BY P. A.

Answer a Fool to his foolishness, lest he be wise in his own conceit.
Proverbs, 26. 5. ABERDENE, PRINTED BY EDWARD RABAN, Dwelling upon the
Marketplace, At the Towns Arms, 1627.

WITH PRIVILEGE.

TO THE MOST HONORABLE, VIRTUOUS, and Christian Lady, ANNA, LADY GORDON, etc.
OF this DIALOGVE, (MADAME) written, now, thirteen Years a-goe, no more was,
at that time, intended, but a few Manuscripts, for satisfying some Godly
Minds, and obviating the insolency of some ignorant, and idle Humors;
foolishlie glorying of nothing: Yet, even so, was it bold, then, to betake it
self to the shadow of Your most Honorable NAME, though it never had yet the
Cowrage, to present it self, to a Kiss of Your Hands: and, perhaps, had lain
buried in this its Shamefastness, for ever, if, upon the renewed impudent
Importunity, of the same sort of Men, at the instant desire of some
well-affected Christians, it did not now come out, to a more public view of
the World.

In which case, if it should either neglect, or disclayme, so Noble (an Ones
acclaymed) Patrocinie; al-be-it there-by could be no imparement to Your
Honor, (to whose great worth many such Dedications can add no luster:) yet,
were it some Disgrace, to the Treatise it self, and, discredit, al-so, to the
Author thereof; who yet lives no less affected, than ever, to serve Your
Ladyship in the LORD.

Receive, then, that which is Your own; as a poor, but an upright Token, how
far the Author, and all of his Calling, account themselves obliedged, to
give Your Honor, all Heartening, and Encowragement, for cleaving, so
constantly, (against manyfolde assaults and temptations) to that Truth,
which, herein, is defended.

The GOD of all Truth, still more and more, stablish, strengthen, and confirm
You there-in: bless Your most Honorable Lord, and You, with all Happiness,
here; and, bring You both, in end, to Eternal Blessedness, with HIMSELF,
in the Heavens.

YOUR LADYSHIPS Humble Servant, P. A.

TO THE READER.
IT may, perhaps, (Christian Reader) appear strange to thee, and little
beseeming my Place and Age, that I deigne, so ridiculous a Ryme, with so large
an Answer, yea, with any Answer at all. But, so it fell out, that, now,
above thirteen years a-goe, the perverse Sedulitie, of seducing Priests, and
the foolish Insolency, of ignoran^ Souls, seduced by them, and vaynlie
glorying of this their Ballad, which numbers of them had continually in their
mouths, who never had either read, or gotten by heart, any one Psalm of
David, did work, in a certain very honorable, and worthy Noble Man, such
holy Indignation against the one, and pitiful Compassion of the other, as
made him seriously solicit me, to make some Answer there-to. Which to do, I
was induced by his Entreaty, though much against mine own Disposition. Who,
as I love, and commend the accurate Inquisition, and clearing of Truth, by
calm, and Christian Conference, and sober, and sedulous Indagation: So, from
mine Heart, I ever abborred all litigious Contestation, in what-so-ever
Argument; but, most of all, in matters of Religion, And yet, such is the
miserable mishap of our time, or rather, of mad Humors in our-time, that
nothing is so bitterly, and with so great Heat, Passion, and damnable spyte,
debated, as are points of Divinity. And, this intemperie, has so far, in
common, taken all minds, as that all Christianity, is now turned in odious,
and humourous Disputation: and all, both Men and Women, will be, for-sooth, of
a party; all-be-it most part of them so ignorant, as they know neither what
they hold, or what they impugn: no more understanding what they speak of,
than do Pyo^s, or Parockets, those words which they are taught to prattle.
And, withal, so carrying in all their other Conversation, as it is both shame,
and sin, that they should be so and acious, as to take any such. Argument in
their mouths, who hate to be reformed; and, in all their ways make not
Conscience of any Sin. Yet, they are incessantly hold, to move Questions
of Religion: who, being posed again, can not answer to the simple questions
of the Childrens Catechism. Thus, be at of Disputation, has not only cooled,
but even, all-most, extinguished all Devotion: and, not only breeds Strife;
but even, all-where, breaks out to more ungodliness. You shall hardly fall
now in any fellowship, where you shall not hear some one, or other, question
of Religion, egarlie, prophanelie, and miserably torn, and tossed, amongst
such and acious, and impure mouths, as neither inwardly in their Souls, (...)
any sense, or outwardly in their carriage, any practice of true Religion.
Will you talk with these Questioners, of true Piety, of Faith, of
Regeneration, of Christian life, of Mortification, and subduing our affections,
of Christian patience, of the work of GOD'S Spirit in our Souls, for those
effects, of the joys of the holy Ghost; or, finally, of any case of
Conscience: they shall stand as dumb, as Fishes: you shall be to them a
Barbarian, and a^ strange, as one speaking Ethiopian, to an Yrish. With whom,
though I* have no delight to deal in this sort, yet the mouthers of perverse
men, must be stopped: Baal's Priests must be checked, with holy scorn; and
Fools must be some-tymes answered to their folly, lest they should appear
wise in their own conceits. Now, as for these Reasons, I (having my service
then assigned me in those Quarters, where this Folli^ brake forth) was at that
time stirred to write this Treatise, and, even then, to give out some one, or
two, Manuscripts thereof; where-by to calm, somewhat, those insolent
Insulters; and, to confirm godly, though weak, Mynds: and, it having,
accordingly, in some measure, wrought that effect then: I, there-vpon, did
cast it by hand, as, in mine own Estimation, no more useful, or to be
regarded. But, while now again, our Adversaries, of late, (through too great
indulgence, and connivence granted them) have risen to greater insolency than
before, and, impudentlie, repone to us, not only the same Matter, but, al-so,
in the same manner, shamelessly, and senseleslie, still blazing, al-where
abroad, this their Proper Ballad, a^ if never any thing had been said
thereunto: diverse well affected Brethren, (knowing that I had a Copy thereof
by me) dealt instantly with me, that this Treatise might be put to the PRESS.
For whose satisfaction, I have given way to the Printing of it: wishing,
heartily, it may both please thee, and be profitable unto thee, and all honest
Hearts, seeking, in singleness, for Confirmation, and stablishment in Truth:
and praying GOD, that all of us may seriously study, not so much to Idle, and
unprofitable Wranglings, as both to learn ourselves, and to teach others, that
Doctrine, which is according to godliness* Farewell.

THINE, IN CHRIST, P. A.

TO PHILADELPHUS.
LO, PHILADELPHVS, how Thy love has led me,
To penning of this PAMPHLET, for Thy pleasure:
Where-of, with Reason, well I could have fred me,
If this I durst, with Thy Contentment measure.
It may seem strange, that of my little leisure,
I any part waste on such Wares, so vaynlie:
Where-in, all-bee-it vveake Women place a Treasure;
Yet has their Poet playde the Fool so playnlie,
As, if my Motives be not well esteemed,
For answering, I shall a Fool be deemeed.
Thine Own, EUBULUS.

The Interlocutors.
PROTESTANTS.
PHILADELPHVS, EUBULUS, THERIOMACHVS,
PAPISTS.
PHILOMATHES, ERIPHILVS,
EVBVLVS, OR, A DIALOGVE, Where-in a rugged Romish Ryme (inscribed, A proper
Ballad, containing Catholic Questions to the Protestant) is confuted, and the
Questions thereof answered.
CHAPTER I.
SOme personages of good quality, not long ago, were in a Progress, partly
for recreation, and partly for some necessary Duties, both toward GOD and
Men: Amongst whom PHILADELPHUS and EUBULUS (refreshed each greatly with others
fellowship) did, ordinarily, drive over the tediousness of the way, with
diverse, not unprofitable, Discourses. A midst which, one day, at a certain
part of the Country, Philadelphus thus spoke to Eubulus.

Al-be-it it be much against my mind, to part from yo^ any minute of time,
yet here I must control mine own affection, and crave you pardon, to divert
a little, a side of our way, for saluting a tender Kins-woman; where-in I shall
use such haste, as, GOD willing, in short space I shall be with you.

Eubulus. Sir, you have reason, not to over-see her: and I I.
will here attend your return upon the way.

Now, in little more than an hours space, Philadelphus, returning, had this
Speech: How-so-ever I have taken short time, yet in it, have I learned
somewhat, which I can not but regrate unto you. I have been visiting a
Gentlewoman (I may say) of good parts other-wayes, but that, by the deceit of
Seducers, her Heart is alienated from the Verity of GOD HIS true Worship:
Which, through the love I bear her, so pierces me, as I could not choose,
but, in the little Conference we had, to ask her, why she did so
obstinately obfirme her mind against Truth? She answered me, That she
could obtain no Resolution to her Soul, of such Scruples, as chiefelie moved
her to abhor our Communion; al-be-it she had so far sought for it, that
she had delivered her Doubts, in writ, to their Minister, Theriomachus: who
receiving them of her hand, with covenant of an Answer, yet had done nothing
for his acquytall there-in. And, verily, if you were acquaynted with her, you
would think, that all pains were carefully to be employed, where-by she
might be reclaymed from Error.


Eubulus. I can not, but greatly wonder at this you tell II.
me: for I know Theriomachus to be learned, in such measure, as he might well
anough have acquyted himself in ought she had, in that matter, either
required of him, or he promised unto her. But it is well, that you have made
me foreseen heere-with; for I look, that even here Theriomachus shall set
himself to meet us; and so we may there-by know of him the whole Case. Lo
where he comes, exceeding opportunity. GOD save you, Brother Theriomachus.


Theriomachus. The LORD bless you both: and I am glad ^o see you in these
Quarters.


Philadelphus. How do you like ( Theriomachus) of your Station here?


Theriomachus. A Soldier must obey his Captain, and acquiesce in
what-so-ever Station he pleases to assign him: for He is wysest, and well
knows, what best fitteth every one of us. My Station has taught me, so
experimentallie, what the Apostle meaned, by his fighting with 1. Cor. 15. 32
Beasts at Ephesus, and I have acquyred such both an active, and a passive
understanding thereof, as I may be bold to say, I could write a large
Commentary upon that place.


Philadelphus. I take you well ( Theriomachus:) you must have patience: For,
how-so-ever no part is so barren, but that it produces some fine Spirits; yet,
in such a nature of Climate and Soil as this is, it is no marvel, though the
people, in common, have some inbred feritie, which, yet, Time and Travel may
reduce to some more mansuetude.


Theriomachus. You have, Sir, in a part, but not thorowlie, taken up my Case:
For besides any inbred feritie, they are, most part of them, inchaunted.


Philadelphus. What! has the Rod of Cyrce touched them? or has any
Thessalonian cunning converted their shapes, and made them Asses of Men, as was
Lucius Apuleius? that it may seem the foresight of this Fatalitie, has made
this your Parochin to be named (...): and you, accordingly, do find, that,
in effect, they are (...). Yet, Theriomachus, you know, that Asses are
peaceable and obsequious Beasts, ready to receive Burdens, wherethrough your
fight may be the more easy.


Theriomachus. But they are wild Asses, and hear not the voice of the Dryver:
and are like to those Horses and Mules, whose Mouths must be bound up with
Bit and Bridle, lest they come near us. Yea, their Inchaunters have so
'bewitched them, as they are maniable only to them, and wayward toward all
others. And they are even so contentedlie miserable, as they have no desire to
be disinchaunted.


Philadelphus, You tell us wonders: For, thus, these Inchaunters should far
exceed all Cyrcees cunning, who, though she turned the bodily shape, yet
could not bereave the Inchaunted of their Minds and Memories, but that they
remembered still their proper state, and regrated, inwardly, their present
condition. And the Thessalonian Magicians, could work no more on Lucius
Apuleius.


Theriomachus. You, yet, in a part, missconceiue me. I mean not of any
turning of their bodily shapes, which they retain still, of Men, whiles yet
their Mynds are miserably metamorphosed.

Haec venena potentius
Detrahunt hominem sibi,
Quae arcem penitus petunt,
Nec nocentia corpori
Mentis vulnere seviunt.

Eubulus. Brother Theriomachus, you know, that, for making III.
any, who have drunken Poison, to vomit it again, sweet Milk, especially,
must be given them to drink: and, for a Child, which has been misfostered,
by sucking in corrupted Milk, you know, that healthsome green Milk is the
best Restoratiue. And thus only, in my judgment, you must labor, first, to
disinchaunt this people, till, by consuetude, their feritie be mittigated, and
their Stomachs brought to bear more solid Nowrishment. And, as Philadelphus,
even now, alluded, very prettily, to the name of (...); so may the name of
one most special place, here, warn us, by Notation, what, both for it self,
and for the rest, is requisite: even (...). It is our Lot, Brother, to be
amongst Briers and Thorns, and to dwell in the mids of Scorpions: and our
LORD warned us of our Condition, when He sent His Apostles, as Sheep, in the
^atth. 1^. 16.
mids of Wolves. There is none of our Calling, and truly called, but, in
some measure, has this Battle with Beasts: For, as the fear of the LORD, and
the keeping ^lesiast. 1^. 13*
of His Commandments, is all the Man; so a Man, even in honor, if he
understand not, is but l^ke the Beasts that ^sal. 49. (...).
perish. I must, indeed, confess, that you (Brother) are more exercised than
many others: where-through we are holden in a singular care, to comfort you,
and in-call GOD, for your vp-holding; who is sufficiently able to bear you
out in that Service He has put you in, and to furnish you Strength, according
to the Burden He has laid on you. But this our Digression upon your
Theriomachie, has set us a-side of that which principally we had to impart
unto you, and for which we are specially glad, that we are so convenientlie
conveaned. Then, turning Eye to Philadelphus; Sir, you can best make relation,
of that which you did lately hear, and wherewith, there-vpon, you did
immediately acquaynt me.


Philadelphus. You know, Theriomachus, that the Lady of yonder Place, is my
tender Kins-woman, and is commended, for both Natural and Civil Gifts; for
zeal also in Religion, but without knowledge. I asking her, this same day,
why she did remain so refractarie against the Truth? She answered, That
she could find no Resolution to her Soul, of such Doubts, as chiefelie moved
her to abhor our Communion; al-be-it she had so far sought for it, that
she had delivered them to you, in writ: and that you, receiving them of her
hand, upon covenant of an Answer, yet had done nothing for your acquytall
there-in* So as this is not only an imputation to you, of failing promise;
but it strengthens her also the more in Error, while your ceasing makes her
think her Questions so strong, that you can find nothing to answer to them.


Theriomachus. The Commendation which that Lady carries, for those parts you
mention of her, I acknowledge to be most just. It is true, she delivered to
me some Questions, in writ; to all which, in conference with her self, I
answered, as far, as in my judgment, might have satisfied any Soul, set
singlie for Resolution. As for any answer in writ, I neither promised, and
asking advise of my Brethren, of our Presbytery, if it were expedient, and, in
that case, offering there-to my pains, they thought it no ways convenient, to
write any thing against so ridiculous, and oft-times confuted, Cavillations.


Eubulus. Have you those Questions by you, that we IV.
may see them?


Theriomachus. Here they are. So taking out a sheet of paper, he gave it in
Eubulus hands: who, unfolding it, What, Brother, this is a Ryme?


Theriomachus. So it is.


Philadelphus. I pray you, Eubulus, let us hear it.

Then Eubulus, having read it over, with a sober Smyle, looked to Philadelphus,
and said, What do you think, Sir, of these VVares? Is there in them any
such matter of high boasting to our Adversaries, as that we should be stirred,
to make them answer? Then, turning to Theriomachus, Truly, Brother, I both
reverence the wise judgment of the Presbytery, and approve your acquiescing
there-to. And, verily, I both marvel, and greatly pity, that a person,
other-wayes so well endewed, should be misscarried with such foolish things:
which, al-be-it they have been many times answered, by diverse, and that I
have lately answered each of them particularly, in my Defense of our
Callinges, and Discovery of the Adversaries Dotage, in the very self
Demands, in substance, sent to my self; yet simple Souls are still borne in
hand, That these, forsooth, are insoluble Knots. And it is, indeed, no
marvel, that they delude so securely, when, first, they have brought their
Disciples heere-to, That they neither will read what we write, nor hear what
we teach. And if, perhaps, upon any such motion, as this is, from any of
them, we fall to write ought, it is, immediately (without any either reading
or pondering what we speak) put in their Ghostly Fathers hands: whose word
syne, they take for the estimation it is to be had in; as I have lately
learned, even by mine own experience.


Philadelphus. I can not deny, Eubulus, but you have great reason to speak
so: yet, in any Case, I would, that one of you should say somewhat to these
Questions; where-by, if the misscarried party may not be converted, (as mine
hearts desire were) yet at least the Questioner his bragging may be calmed
somewhat.


Eubulus. For my part, I mind not to answer ought, V.
both because in mine other Treatises, I have already said, what I esteemed
needful, (whence any, who in singleness seeks Resolution, will not weary
to search it) and because I ever abhorred such kind of contestation: for that,
what, or how often so-ever we answer, yet still the same things shall be of
new, and impudentlie, obtruded. If you, Brother Theriomachus, think it good,
you may satisfy Philadelphus here-in: and the Adversarie's insolency shall so
answer for you, to your Brethren, as you need not fear to find them such
severe Judges, as was Manlius to his valiant Son.


Theriomachus. What you judge, were idle labor for you: how can I be there-in
laudablie occupied? if any expediencie were of an Answer, it lies now most
on you; for mine imputation is past, and the next, undoubtedly, will be
yours. And as it can not escape their knowledge, that you have both craved, and
gotten, a sight of their Questions; so this will be their glorying, That from
man to man, we have all spitted at them, and given them over.


Eubulus. I am glad, Brother, that in this your daily Combat VI.
with Beasts, you are not yet so mated, but that you are cheerfully disposed
to jest with your Friends. If such motives as these did always stir us, as
our Adversaries are disposed, there should never be any end of jangling.
Always, if it please you, I will retain this Rhyme some days, and there-after
send it unto you.


Theriomachus. So that you send it back, with what-so-ever children you shall
beget upon it, that I may have mine own, with increase: and now, with this
condition, I must take my leave of you both, for such instant necessities as
force me, against my will, to break you company: and I perceive some others
casting themselves in the way to meet you. The Blessing of the LORD be with
you.

Philadelphus, and Eubulus, The Grace of GOD accompany, comfort, and
strengthen you.


Eubulus. You see ( Philadelphus) upon how light and small VII.
grounds, our Adversaries build up to themselves, matter of glorying against
us: but, I pray you, what two Gentlemen are these, who, as seems, are drawing
toward us?


Philadelphus. If I take them rightly up, the one is Eriphilus, and the other
is Philomathes; both two Papists, but of a much-different disposition: for this
Eriphilus, is of a bitter, and contentious humor; the other, Philomathes, of a
sweet, modest, natural, and, other-wayes, as towardlie a Gentleman, as I know
any; but that he is not, yet, well lightened in the true way of GOD His
fear: and, I think, they be coming to salute me. These same are the Men.


Philomathes. Do you know ( Eriphilus) what Gentleman this is, which
accompanies Philadelphus?


Eriphilus. What? ( Philomathes) have you not, as yet, known Eubulus? whom, I
can not tell, what phreneticke Fancies, or melancholious Mi^contentmentes,
have, of late years, driven of a private Gentleman, to become a Preacher:
and, he has so bewitched the miscarried fancy of Philadelphus, that he
makes no small account of his fellowship: yea, even my Lord, his Father, and
my Lady, his Mother, carry him no less reverence, and love, than if he were,
forsooth, a person of some worth.


Philomathes. And is this, indeed, Eubulus? verily, I am glad I have the
occasion to see him; for he has the report of a discreet Gentleman, and that
he has some good Gift in teaching; and I have much longed to hear him.


Eriphilus. What! Philomathes, do you account it a lawful thing to hear any
of these Heretics? This Eubulus, I tell you, is an Orator, and can persuade
foolish people, to wiene much of him. And I will not deny, but he has some
piece of prudent and fair Carriage: but Catholics ought so much the more to
shun his fellowship, lest they be deceived with Shows.


Philomathes. Verelie, ( Eriphilus) I can not altogether allow of your
judgment in this: for al-be-it I mislike their Church, yet I have heard some
of their Preachers speak, both powerfullie, and holilie; so as I can not
deny, but I have been sometimes both instructed, and edified by them. And,
if we will lay aside Passion and Praejudice, we must acknowledge, that there
be some of them, who are both excellently learned, and exemplarlie holy men.
And thus much have I gained by hearing of them, that certainly, I perceive our
Writers to lay against them, many unjust imputations, so to make their
doctrine odious: as if they did maintain things, where-of I have often heard
them teach the contrary. And, for me, I never can approve, that a good Cause
be defended with Calumnies.


Eriphilus. To speak plainly to you, ( Philomathes) I think you are little
from halting betwixt two: and I can not account him a true Catholic, who will
either hear, or in any thing approve such Heretics; or will so much as
once call in question, what-so-ever the Church enjoyneth.


Philomathes. I will bear with you, to judge of me as you please: but I both
am a true Catholic, and do reverence the Church; yet without light,
indifferently, to embrace all things, I think it not only brutish, but also
unlawful for Christians, who have to try what they hold. And verily, (saving
the judgment of holy Church) that opinion of implicit Faith, has both much
disgraced the Catholic Cause, and has made our Doctrine to be suspected of
mani^. But it is high time for us, to salute these Gentlemen.


CHAPTER II.
Philomathes. GOD save you, Masters.


Philadelphus. GOD save you, Philomathes, and you Eriphilus. Do your Effaires
lie this way?


Eriphilus. This same is our way: and though it were not, yet we had reason to
offer you the duty of Convoy; so, as if it be not displeasant unto you, we
will, for a space, keep you company.


Philadelphus. Your company is to us very acceptable.


Eriphilus. But, I pray you, good Sir, was it not the Minister, Theriomachus,
who, a little hence, did part from you?


Philadelphus. You have judged rightly.


Eriphilus. And how falls it, for all his Clergy, that, now in almost half
a year, he cannot find an Answer to one Sheet of Paper? which yet he
received, with no small presumption, that, how-so-ever Pitch was defiling, yet
he re^mbled an hot Tongs, which could contract no Contagion there-by.


Philadelphus. By what Logic will you infer, ( Eriphilus) because he has
made no Answer there-to, that, therefore, he could find none to give it?
Know you not, that by the holy Ghost His own Testimony, it is sometimes
foolishness to make answer? And yet how are you bold to affirm, he has
not answered it? Have you heard all the Conference he ever had, with the
partie-presenter of that Sheet of Paper, since the time he received it? He
has written nothing there-to (you will say.) But from the defect of a written
Answer, to conclude of no answer at all, it is an halting argumentation. And
ha^ honest men, think you, who are busied in their public Callings, nothing
else a-doe, but to waste time and travel, in intertaining Plea with
Contentions, and idle humors, upon every pievish Pamphlet, put out by them,
of things a thousand times refuted?

To answer ought, is but a labor bootlesse.
When curious Questions are in pride proposed.
On Souls fore-stall'd, all travel taken is fruitless:
For Light is but to lowly minds exposed.
Many protest, them vprightlie disposed,
Singlie to search, and receive Institution:
Who, yet, keep that with-in their Breasts enclosed,
Which barreth out all better Resolution.
Who with himself concludes, sine counsel craveth,
According to his Idols he receives.

Philomathes. You have set down, in your Sonnet, a most certain truth. For
my self, I protest, I ever abhorred all contention, and bitterness in
disputing. And, who for any other end maintain Argument, but in an upright
and calm care, to find out Truth, they are both displeasant to others, and
unprofitable to themselves. But seeing that Eriphilus has casten in this
matter, and we have so convenient occasion of Eubulus company, and the time
shall be, so well spent; I would entreat Eubulus, that, if he has ought to
answer to these Questions, he will vouchsafe to speak it: and this, I
protest, I require, in uprightness; because I do think, there be diverse of
them, to which, hardly, shall he find any good answer.


Eubulus. I never refused to confer calmlie with any, but I.
I hate contention: and if you ( Philomathes) jumpe with me in this humor, I
will obey your request the more gladly; and, I hope, our Conference shall not
be altogether fruitless. Have you, then, these Questions by you? and, if not,
I can, perhaps, supply your want.


Philomathes. I have them here, and will read them to yo^ in order: yet I am
glad, that you have already seen them, for you may answer the more
resolutelie to each. This, then, is the Inscription:


A proper new Ballad, where-in is contained Catholic Questions, to the
Protestant.

Eriphilus. I perceive that you are already acquainted with it. How say you
then, ( Philadelphus) is it not, indeed, a proper Ballad?


Philadelhpus. How proper his Ballad is, let poets judge. Out of my little
skill, I may boldly affirm, that, for any, either grace it brings to his
Art, or credit to his Cause, he might right well have contented himself to
speak in Prose: but his form is good aneugh for his matter; and he is, I
warrant you, no worse Poet than he prooveth, evidentlie, a weak Divine.

Reason and Ryme, if sweetly they be sembled,
Implant in Men the pleasanter Impression:
Quick Arguments, with Eloquence enaembled,
Draw contrare Minds, more quickly to Confession.
But, of true Faith, if under false Profession,
Songs be made Syropes, but to sweeten Errors,
Prudence will spy, and keep of Truth possession,
Vnsnar'd with Sirens, or yet tossed with Terrors.
But that is soon seen, which wants both Sause and Season:
Your raving Man has neither Ryme nor Reason.

Eriphilus. It is by evincing Syllogismes, I trow, and not by invectiue
Sonnets, ( Philadelphus) that you must answer to these Questions.


Eubulus. By a Sonnet one may very convenientlie give II.
sentence of a Song: and Philadelpbus will but let you see, ( Eriphilus) that
we are not so far borne in despite of all the Muses, but that we could
render you as compact Verses, as any your proper Ballad has in it. Yet, let
it be as you desire: we will leave Sonnets a little, and come to Syllogismes.
Philomathes, read on.


Philomathes. Gladly. Thus then he begins.

I pray thee, Protestant, bear with me,
To ask thee Questions, two or three:
And if an answer thou can make,
More of thy counsel I will take.
Many and sundry Sects appear,
Now in the World, far and near:
The Protestant, the Puritan,
The Calvinist, the Zvvingliane,
The Brovvnists, and the Fam'lie of Love,
And many more, which I can prove:
And the Roman Faith, truly,
Which you do call Papistrie.
All these, in very deed,
Rehearse all Articles in the Creed:
And every one of them says,
That their's is the Catholic Faith.
How should I, amongst all these,
Know the Truth, from feigned Lies?
For every one confess JESUS;
Saying, that their Faith is true.
But this is it that I do seek,
To know the Church Catholic;
The Communion, or the company,
Of bolie Men, in unity.

Eubulus. This has been the Question, which in all III.
times perverse and ignorant men, have pretended for them, as is clear by
these words of Chrysostom, Homil. 33. in Act. Tom. 3. The Heathen man says*
I would be a Christian, but I know not to whom I should clean: Many Debates
are amongst you* I know not what Doctrine to choose; seeing on both sides they
pretend Scripture. Answer him, This makes much for us: For if we did say,
that our Faith were grounded upon natural reasons, thou had reason to be
troubled: but when we betake us to the Scriptures, which are plain and true,
thou may easily discern. If any man agree with Them, he is a Christian:
and who so oppugneth Them, he is far from this Rule.

This same Chrysostom, in 2. ad Thessal. 2. All things are clear and plain
in divine Scriptures: what-so-ever things are necessary, are manifest in them.

Again, the same Chrysostom, in Ioann. cap. 10. Homil. 58. The Scriptures
lead us to GOD, and open to us the knowledge of Him: they both make, and keep
the Sheep: neither suffer they Wol^es to break in: For, as a most strong
Door, they debar Heretics, and place the Godly in surety. Neither (so
being we be willing) shall they ever suffer us to fall away in Error.

Now, al-be-it I well might, for all answer, oppose to your Poet, these
Passages; yet, lest you complain, ( Philomathes) that I pass him too
slenderly, I take up the sum of your Man his main Question, to be this:
Amongst so many diverse Sects, all rehearsing the common Creed, and each
acclayming the Title of the Church, how, and by what Marks, we may discern
the true Church of CHRIST, from such as falselie do usurp that Title?


Philomathes. You have exceeding well taken up the state of the Question. And,
I pray you, is it not a necessary Question, and worthy of a careful
consideration?


Eubulus. Yea, verily: but in proponing where-of, and IV.
in answering there-to, your Questione^ bewrays, either want of Care, or want
of Skill, or (which is worse) want of Conscience. For, if he could prove more
Sects than he proponeth, (as both he professes, and I confess he might)
why would he not rather produce them, than, for malicious vp-making of a
number, where no number is, make them diverse, who are but one? For every
difference of Opinion, makes not a diverse Sect: much less do diverse names
of men, who disagree in no material point.


Philadelphus. You miss-take the matter, ( Eubulus) it is not maliciously done
of him, but for Metres sake, to make up his Verses, which, other-wayes, would
not have run well.


Eubulus. Well: this is his least, al-be-it even a lourd-Errour. V.
But next, ( Philomathes) for resolution of his Question, if he had not
willingly set himself to wander out of a right and plain way, so to draw
others after him, in the dark Mist of drumblie Disputations, he might have
taken the only sure, and infallible Mark, from CHRIST His own Mouth: Who, as
he is the only LORD of the House, great Shepherd of the Sheep, and
Bridegroom of the Bryde; so can He, best of any, lead us to know them
rightly.


Philomathes. That must be of all other the most certain Note: and I long to
hear it.


Eubulus. CHRIST gives His Sheep this Mark, That VI.
they know the voice of the great Shepherd, and follow it; and John 1^.
that they will not follow the voice of a Stranger, for they know it not.
Where-by that is undoubtedly the true Church, where the voice of CHRIST, and
His voice only, is purelie preached, and religiously received. If any man
love John 14. 2^.
Me, be will keep My Word; and My Father will love him; and We will come to
him, and will dwell with him. He that loves Me not, keeps not My Words,
etc.


Philomathes. This is most true: but the Question remains still, as doubtful
as before: for, what-so-ever Company does acclaime to it self, the Title of
the Church, they no less boldly affirm, that they do hear the voice of
CHRIST; so, as you have, but cast us in a new dispute, what i^ CHRIST His
voice, which his true Sheep do hear; and by hearing where-of, they may be
discerned to be of His Sheepe-folde.


Eubulus. Neither CHRIST, nor His Apostles, nor the VII:
succeeding Orthodox Fathers, have left place, to make question heere-of, to
any, who wilfully winketh not: for He John. 5. ^9. and ^7. (...).
has left us His holy Scriptures, and commands to search them, for a
Witness of Him. Now, the way to know Him, and, to know His true Church, (which
is his fullness) must of necessity be one. More-over, that which makes the
man of GOD wise, absolute, and perfect to every good 2. Tim. 3. 17.
work, must make him wise, to discern the true Church also. But the
Scriptures make the man of GOD wise, absolute, and perfect to every good
work; therefore, they make him wise, to discern the true Church also. So
then, the Scriptures are CHRIST His voice, and they only are now to be held
for His voice: for, In vain do men worship, (says the LORD) teaching for
Doctrines, the Traditions of men. Matthew. 15. 9.
And, when-so-ever any Church falls to hear any other Voice, or follow
any other Speaker, then She looks aside, Cant. 1. 6.
to the Flocks of his Companions, and of a faithful City, begins to
become an Harlor. And, as Jerome pertinentlie speaks, Egredietur e finibus
suis; She transgresses her own Limits. In Mich.
Your men, Philomathes, darken all disputation, by deceit of Aequivocations,
and confounding of distinct Considerations, and Cases. It is a much different
thing, to discern the Church of CHRIST, in common, from Infidels and
Forraigners. And, again, in that community of the Church, to discern betwixt
the true worshippers, and the false; betwixt the true Church, and the Synagogue
of Satan, calling themselves Jews, and yet are not. And, who, for concluding
of this, would bring the common notes of that, he were a doting Divine, and a
no less ridiculous Logician, than he, who for discerning a man from a beast,
would bring the common properties of a living creature: for, how-so-ever the
common notes of Christians, good, or bad, of Orthodox, or Heretics, of
CHRIST, or Antichrist, will distinguish the common body (in which all these
are) from Forraigners: yet, to discern betwixt the true body, and the
inherent evil; betwixt lawful, and adulterous worship; betwixt the Bryde, and
the pretending Whore; (both of them in, though not both of the body) there is
none other sure note, or mark of discretion, but the Scriptures only. When
you shall see (says Chrysostom) ungodly Heresy, In Matthew. H^mil. 49.
which i^ the Army of Antichrist, standing in the holy places of the Church,
then let them who are in Judea, flee to the Mountainest that is, they who are
of Christianity, dress themselves to the Scriptures: because, from that
Heresy has once obtained place in the Churches, there can be no trial of
true Christianity; neither any other refuge for Christians, willing to know
the verity of the Faith, but the divine Scriptures. And in that same place:
Before, many ways were showed, which was the Church of CHRIST; but now, no
manner of way, hut by the Scriptures. For, (says the same In Matthew. H^mil.
^49.
Chrysostom, or who-so-ever was the Author of that imperfect work upon
Matthew) if men look to ought else, they shall stumble, and perish, not
understanding which is the true Church: and shall fall, there-by, in the
abomination of desolation, which stands in the holy places of the Church.
We think it not equitable, (says Ep. 80. ad E^ sta. Medic.
Basilius) that such custom of speech, as has taken place with them, should
be held for a Law, and Canon of right Doctrine: for, if custom were of force
anough to prove right Doctrine, we might also imitate them heere-in. Let us
stand, therefore, to the decision of Scripture, inspyred from GOD, and with
whom are found heads of Doctrine, consonant to the divine Oracles; let
Verity be al-to-gether adjudged unto them. Non oportet (says Ireneus)
quaerere apud Lib. 3. cap. 4.
alios veritatem, cum Apostoli quasi in dives promptuarium plenissime
contulerint omnia quae sunt veritatis: that is, We must not seek Truth
elsewhere, seeing the Apostles have most plentifully, as in a rich
Storehouse, put together all things that belong to Truth. Non haec autilla.
(says Augustine) alteri parti suspecta objiciantur, Ad Maximin. lib. 3. cap.
13.
sed communia arma sumantur Scripturae: that is, Let not such things be
objected, as are suspected of either party; but let the common Armor, the
Scriptures be taken. I might bring many more such Testimonies of the Fathers,
where-by your man his unnecessary nycenesse, ( Philomathes) in making so great
a Question, how Truth, and the true Church, may be discerned, from Lies, and
heretical companies, bewrays evidentlie, what upright affection he has,
either to find the true way himself, or to lead others there-in.


Philomathes. When all that you have said is granted, (so as not only those
be the true Sheep, which hear CHRIST His voice, but that His voice also be
determined to be the holy Scriptures) yet the Question remains vnsolved.
For as all Sects acclaime the Title of the Church, and profess the hearing of
CHRIST His voice; so do they all allege Scripture for them. And this was,
not obscurelie, employed in the Question, in that all rehearse the common
Creed: so as nothing appears to be yet brought of you, which will rid the
Debate.


Eubulus. To this I answer: First, al-be-it all pretend VIII.
Scripture, yet all pretend not Scripture only, (which, both by Scripture,
and by clear Testimony of Orthodox Antiquity, I have prooved, in the Case
here questioned, to be the only Rule:) for your Church of Rome joyneth, and
equalleth with Scripture, her own Canons, and Traditions; and there-by
declares evidentlie, all her worship to be vain. Hoc nimis doleo (says
Augustine) quia multa quae in divinis libris saluberrime scripta sunt, minus
curantur and tam multis Ep. 119. ad lanuar.
praesumptionibus plena sunt omnia, ut gravius corripiatur qui humanas illas
traditiones negligit, quam qui mentem vinolentia sepeliverit: that is, I much
lament, for that many things, which in the holy Scriptures are most
healthsomlie written, are little regarded; and all things are so full of
manifold presumptions, as he is more grievouslie punished, who neglects
those humane Traditions, than who has buried his mind in Drunkenness. If
that holy Father did find such matter of lamentation, for those small
beginnings, (in comparison) which the mystery of your Antichristian Iniquity,
at that time not so far as yet advanced, had come to; what had been the
measure of his grief, if he had seen it in the top of Presumptuous
Impiety?


Eriphilus. What, Eubulus, will you make us, therefore, to hear another voice
than CHRIST'S, because we hear the voice of the Church? Is not the voice of
the Church, CHRIST'S own voice? says He not in Scripture. He who hears
you; hears Me; and be who despyseth you, despyseth Me?


Eubulus. Too great heat ( Eriphilus) makes you to overreach IX.
your self, and so to stumble, both in Logic, and in Divinity. Your Error
in Logic, is, that you take that for an Argument, which is the very Point in
Question. All our Dispute, is, what Company, of so many Acclaimers, is the
true Church of CHRIST. In this Question, proponed to us by your Poet, we are
come thus far, That who hear CHRIST'S voice, and His voice only. We have
laid also this ground, That the Scriptures are only to be held for His
voice. Upon which ground, I challenged your Church, as adding to her own. Now
here for your defense, that your Decrees must be counted CHRIST'S voice; and
that even by Scripture, you assume, that you are the Church; and, where the
Sheep are to be tried, by the voice which they do hear, you will,
therefore, justify the voice, because you, forsooth, do hear it. And by such
Logic as this, what may you not conclude? You might, with more credit, tell
us in plain Terms, That you will not have it put in question, but that you
are the Church: than appear to put that point in trial, and incontinent, to
take it for a Principle, which is the very Point controverted. Now, as this is
your fault in Logic, and that exceeding chyldish; so, in Divinity, you
miss, and more dangerously. Because the LORD affirms, That who hears the
Church, hears Him; and who despyseth them, despyseth Him; if Pastors, under
the pretext of this Power, should presume, absolutely, to impose on
Consciences, what they please; binding Christians, indifferently, without
proving, to admit all; it were an impudent, yea, an impious usurpation: For
these speeches of CHRIST have always this employed Condition, That Pastors
speak nothing, but the words of the Great Shepherd: For, the words of the
Wise, Eccles. 12. 11.
are like Goades, and like Nails, etc. which are given by one Pastor. Were
they not, I pray you, the ordinary Churchmen, whom the LORD rebuked, for
burdening Consciences, with Traditions, even of Fathers? And were not those
Traditions, where-of Augustine so much lamented the imposition, the Traditions
of the Church? Does not the same Father affirm, That Ne Catholicis Episcopis
ascentiendum, sicubi De Unitat. Eccl. cont. ^il. Ep. 166. cap. ^.
falluntur ut contra canonic as Scripturas aliquid sentiant: that is, We ought
not consent, no, not with Catholic Bishops, if they hold a^e opinion
contrary to the canonicke Scriptures. For (as Cyprian Ad (...), cont. Ep.
(...).
says) Consuetudo sine veritate, vetustas est erroris: Custom without Truth,
is but Antiquity of Error. And the Saying of Ruffinus, on the Creed, is
notable: Non dicimus, Credo in Ecclesiam, sed, Credo Ecclesiam: ne eadem vis
and authoritas videatur Creatoris, and creaturae; Domini and Ministrorum* that
is, We say not, I believe in the Church, but, I believe the Church: lest one
and the same, might appear to be the power and auth^ritie of the Creator, and
the creature, of the LORD, and of His Servantes. Augustine affirms, ^ib. 2.
d^ Bapt. cont. Do^t cap. ^.
Licere quaslibet liter as Episcoporum, and ipsa consilia reprehendere, si qua
in ^e a veritate devient: That it is lawful to repr^oue what-so-ever Letters
of bishops, yea, and the Councels themselves, if in any thing they decly^e
from the ^rueth. Because he who hears the King his Ambassador, or Herald,
hears the King; and who despyseth them, despyseth the King; have either
Ambassadors or Heralds an^ libe^tle, heere-vpon, to exceed the bounds of
then Commissions and Warrandes? Or, have not the parties, who other-wayes, are
holde^ to hear either of them; yet place le^t them (without any diminution of
the Sovereign Majesty, and Royal Authority) both to ask for, and to
examine their Warrandes? We have but one LORD, and one Lawgiver: and so only
does the contempt of our voice touch Him, if our voice be the Echo of His
voice, and we speak not out of our own imaginations. Other-wayes, the many
sad, and serious Warninges, given us to try spirits, were vain.

Then, turning speech to Philomathes. Eriphilus heat for your Church, (
Philomathes) has al-most haled me quyte from our Question. You objected, That
all Sects pretend Scripture. I answered, That all pretended not Scripture
only; for that your Church joyneth, and aequalleth with Scripture, her own
Devyses. Now, to divert here farther to the Question of the Churches power in
this point, and whether she may err, or not, it were to slide away from our
present point: and I have disputed that matter at length, in my Defense of our
Callinges. I give the Case, then, that your Church, and all others, acclayming
the Title, did pretend Scripture only: yet, it is one thing to pretend
Scripture, and another to have Scripture truly for them: It is one thing to
rehearse the common Creed, and another thing to hold the points thereof:
Yea, and one thing to hold them falselie, and but in show, and another to
hold them truly. One may in word and profession, hold JESUS to have come
in the flesh; and yet, in effect, deny it, and so be an Antichrist. None can
call JESUS LORD, but 1. John, 4. 3.
by the Spirit of GOD, (says the Scripture:) and yet the 1. Cor. 12. 3.
same Scripture witnesses, That not al who call Him LORD, Matthew. 7. 21.
shall enter into the Kingdom of Heaven. If Heretics did not pretend
Scripture, they could not greatly deceive; no more than the Philistims had
declared Samsons Riddle, if Judge. 14. 18.
they had not plowed with his Heyfer. And this, indeed, were to yield Satan
an easy victory: if, because (for more effectual deceit) he makes to
cloathe himself with our Weapons, we should, therefore, fayntlie forsake
them, and for-g^e that which by our LORD is left us, for our only Armor,
Rule of our Ways, and Sole Ground, and Pillar of our Faith, (as says
Ireneus) so to wander, and perish, Lib. 31 cap. 3.
in the Wilderness of Men's Inventions.


Philadelphus. Verily, ( Philomathes) it is exceeding strange, that your
Teachers have so far persuaded their Disciples; that reading of Scripture, to
Laike persons, (as they call them) is not only unprofitable for resolution,
but also dangerous for breeding Errors: Thus verifying of themselves, that
saying of Ireneus, speaking of Heretics, Cum Lib. 3. cap. 2.
ex Scripturis arguuntur, in accusationem convertuntur ipsarum Scripturarum:
that is, When they are argued by Scriptures, they turn then to the accusation
of the Scriptures themselves: Al-be-it, we see the Bereans are highly
praised, for searching Scripture, Acts, 17. 11.
and examining there-by, what was offered unto them; and their example is
registrated by the holy Ghost, for a permanent instruction, in such case, to
all succeeding Ages. And it is even monstrous to consider, how far your
guydes have brought their followers, not only to neglect, but even to
contemn; yea, and condemn, in Laike men, the reading of holy Scripture. So,
as I can not tell, whether with greater horror, I have often heard their
disdainful speeches, against Scripture: or, with dolor, and compassion, I have
perceived, how some of them, presuming much of Knowledge; and, other-wayes,
prowdlie, peart to prattle, in Controversies of Religion, and to talk at
Tables, of some cunned, and dismembered Testimonies of the Fathers; yet, in the
Sacred BIBLE, were as great strangers, as in the Alcoran.


Philomathes. If any man, either speak vnreverentlie of Scripture, or
condemn the reading thereof, by Laike persons, I am not to make good for
that; for my self, I both reverence them, and esteem the reading of them, in
Soberness, and Humility, to all sorts of men, not only lawful, but also
profitable, and necessary. Neither did that, which I objected to Eubulus,
tend to draw men al-to-gether from Scripture: but, seeing that not only all
Heretics pretend Scripture, each drawing out thereof, a Sense, for
corroboration of their own Opinions: but that there is also a manifold, and
great diversity of interpretation amongst all men, (where-through it is
clear, how doubtful and obscure the meaning of Scripture is.) It would
appear, that al-be-it we have not to forsake, or despise Scripture; yet, for
Resolution, which is the true Sense, that we must seek some other Rule. And
what can that be else, but that, leaving all other Interpretations, we hold
that which the Catholic Church avoucheth.


Eubulus. Do you not perceive, ( Philomathes) how, X.
against all Logic Laws, you reduce our Disputation, to a Circle: and, so,
not only you take that for a granted ground, which is the very point in
question; but also fall, sensibly, in that same imputation, which you would
appear so much to shun. We are disputing, Which is the true Church: and
have evinced, That the only sure way to know Her, is by Scripture. So as of
necessity, first Scripture must lead us to know (amongst common Acclaymers)
which is She, before we can resolve to follow Her interpretation. I heartily
yield, that Her interpretation be taken: but, in such Dispute, Who She is,
we must first be assured, that it is the Bryde which speaks, and not a
masked Harlot, under that name. As for your Objection, of Scriptures
obscurity, whereupon, by accusing Scripture, you would build an excuse, of
seeking some other Rule, it both contumeliouslie taxes GOD, and is also, in it
self, sophistical. It is clearlie contumelious against GOD, in that CHRIST,
commanding to search Scripture, for a clear John, 5. ^9. 2. Pet. 1. 19.
witnessing of Him; the holy Ghost affirming by Peter, that the word of
Scripture, is a sure and shyning word; by Paul, 2. Tim. 3. 16.
that it is able to make the man of GOD wise, to every good work; and
exhorting all men, and praising in all men, the diligent reading, and
meditation thereof, there-by to discern spirits, and to prove what is
propounded unto them: that David, al-most all-where, speaking so divinelie
Psalm. 119. ^.
of the playnnesse, and power thereof, as where-by even a Child may learn to
address his ways: Yet some of your men ( Philomathes) are not ashamed,
disdaynfullie to call it a Leaden Rule, and a Nose of Wax: as if the
Almighty, and only wise GOD, had not either wisely anough, or lovinglie,
provided for the direction of His House: and that men, forsooth, will, or can,
find out a more clear and certain way. But, what-so-ever obscurity had
appeared to be in Scripture; or, how uncertain so-ever the vain and running
Humors of men, might appear to make it, by their diversity of
Interpretations; yet this should ever have religiouslietyed us there-to, that
our LORD has left it us, for a Lantern to our Feet, and sole and perpetual
Ground of our Faith: studying, therefore, with all humility, cleanness of
heart, and earnest prayer, to attain the knowledge thereof: and not proudly,
and rebelliouslie, to take such counsel, as did Israel in the Wilderness:
We know not what Exodus 32. ^.
is become of this Moses; make us, therefore, gods to go before us. The advyse
of Augustine, is much more both sound and sober, De Doctrine. Christian. Lib. 1.
Cap. 37.
than is that of your Churchmen: That in reading of Scripture, if we can not
take up the very genuine sense, and meaning of the place, at least, let us not
expound that place of Scripture, in a sense repugning to the Analogy of Faith:
So shall we be like to a man, who how-so-ever he has aberred from the
direct way, yet he wandreth in the Fields, leading to the Town where-at he
would be. I affirmed, ( Philomathes) that your Objection, of Scriptures
obscurity, was also Sophistical; and thus I clear it: All reason of
obscurity, must be either in the matter it self, or in the manner of
delyverie, or in the weakness of their perception, to whom it is delyvered.
Of divine things, we acknowledge, that, how-so-ever, for most real and
constant existence, they be, of all things, the most certain: yet, that, for
their retired eminency, to all creatures, of all things, the most obscure.
But, for the manner of deliverie, as GOD, in holy Scripture, has revealed
them, we affirm, that all the wisdom, and eloquence of all creatures, (even
in a conceived matter) could never have found out so plain a manner; or, so
far, and lovinglie, have attempered it, to the capacity of man, (as in so
high mysteries, and a constant remaining Rule of Faith, was possible.) And yet,
howso-ever they be thus delivered, we acknowledge, that no natural man, (and
natural only) is capable of them: For they are spirituallie discerned: But
the spiritual man, by the 1. Cor. 2. 14.
Spirit of GOD in him, will discern the things of GOD.

To reason, then, from the natural obscurity, or retired eminency of the
matter, to the manner of deliverie: or, from the weakness of man's perception,
to conclude of the manner of deliverie: or, from the perception of the natural
man, to conclude of the perception of the spiritual man, it were al-wayes
absurd Sophistication. We are bold to say, with the holy Ghost, That
how-so-ever to most part Matthew. 13. 11.
of men, the Mysteries of the Kingdom be spoken in parables; that hearing,
they may hear, and not understand; and seeing, they may see, and not perceive:
Yet, That Whoso-ever John, ^. 17.
does the will of the FATHER, they will know the Doctrine, whether it be of
GOD, or whether men speak of themselves: That CHRIST HIS true Sheep, know
John, 10.
His Voice, and know the voice of a Stranger: We avouch, That the words of
Wisdom, are all plain to him that will understand* Proverb. ^. ^.
and straight, to him that will find Knowledge: That Scorner, seeks Wisdom,
and finds it not; but Knowledge is easy Prove. 13. 6.
to him, that will understand. So, as if the Truth be hid, it is 2. Cor. 4. 4.
hid to them, whose eyes the Prince of this World has picked out: and whom
GOD, justly, either for misregard, or pride of mind, has given over to the
efficacy of Error, to groape even at noone day. Neither makes your
Sophistical Objection, of diversity of Interpretation, against this: for,
how-so-ever, many particular places in Scripture, appear still difficill, and
doubtful to us, which but know in part, and prophecy in part: yet we
affirm, (with Augustine) De doct. Chr^ lib. 2. cap. 6. and ^.
That even in those things which are playnlie set down in Scripture, are all
things to be found, which contain Faith, and Rules of living; and that
nothing, almost, is ripped out of the most obscure parts, which will not be
found in some other place most playnlie spoken.


Philomathes. To grant you even all that you have said, either of the
plainness, or plentiful^esse of holy Scripture; yet what shall you gain
there-by, against our Questioner? or, how shall you justify the imputations,
of want of Care. Skill, or Conscience, laid on him by you? seeing both our
Church confesses, that the Scripture shows which be the true Marks of the
Church; and such Notes as are here brought by our man, he prooveth them all
from Scripture.


Eubulus. How either proper, or pertinent, your Poet's XI.
Marks are, which he brings, and how well he prooveth them from Scripture,
or other-wayes, we shall see, GOD willing, in the particular examination of
each; where-by all his Corn shall be found but Chafe; and that carelessie,
skillessie, or fraudfullie, he has fled the only demonstratiue Mark, to
seduce the simple, with Topicall shows. You say, your Church acknowledges,
that by Scripture, the true Marks of the Church are known. But ( Philomathes)
they fall never to say so, but when they are reduced to such straits, as either
they must say it, or be snared, For their common Doctrine is well anough
known, which can so little consist with this, which you have now granted, as
the one, evidentlie, over-throweth the other. For, do not your men make all
the authority of Scripture to depend so far on the Church her suffrage, as
that therefore only you are sure, such and such to be canonicke Scriptures,
because the Church has so determined? Thus, monstrouslie, you make one, and
the same, to be both the Mother and the Daughter, and of one.


Philomathes. But, thus, you tax Augustine no less than us, Cont. Epist.
Fundam^.
who affirms, that he would not believe Scripture, if the authority of the
Churh did not move him.


Eubulus. You deceive, ( Philomathes) by concluding Theticallie, XII.
and absolutely, upon that which Augustine Hypotheticallie propounds: and,
so, you, vnskilfullie, confound diverse Cases. For, first, inducing of an
Infidel, to believe Scripture, the Authority of the Church, is a great
Motive; or rather, (as Augustine calls it) a Commotiue, and Opportanum
inquirendi exordium: that is, A commodious entry, to Lib. de vtilit^.
inquire by. Now, from this special Case, and quality of Case, to infer,
That the man by this Commotiue, first induced, had still there-after no other,
or greater Warrant, for his Belief of Scripture, but the Authority of the
Church, which first induced him: it were no better Logic, than to conclude of
the Samaritanes, That they never had any better Foundation of their Faith,
than the Report of their Woman from the Well.

The Authority of the Church, may, and will often, induce an Infidel, to
reverence, and believe Scripture: but so, as having come thus farte, then, in
the community of that Church, to discern lawful, from unlawful worship;
and, orthodox, from heretical professors, the Scriptures only must have
place: as in a case, where-in to allege the Churches authority, were
extremely ridiculous, it being the very point in question, what company is
the Church. And I showed you before, how your men are always deceived, or at
least, labor to deceive others, by confounding the case of the Church
considered, absolutely, and in relation to Forraigners, and Infidels, and
reasoning from it, (so considered) to the decyding of debate, (...) (...) in
the Church. In the first, the common notes are discretiue, and the common
authority, a commotiue to induce; but in the other, there is no manner of way,
but the Scriptures, as out of the Fathers I have cleared. And, now, (
^lomathes) to return to our poyn^ whence this your ^hreedbare Objection, from
Augustine, has driven ^ee. I pray you, if your men are forced to confess,
That the Marks of the Church, are known by Scripture; why flee they from
having all, both their Doctrine and Dealing, examined by that same Rule? What a
shameless Sophistry is this, to ^ject Scripture, in the particular trial of
every: Article of Faith; and yet, for a few wrested, and perv^ed Sentences,
where-by to prove some bastard* and beg^yling Notes, therefore, impudentlie, to
all eadge, That they, for sooth, do clear their Church, by Scripture? As if
in all Scripture, the holy Ghost had but given some Notes, of a Company,
where to seek our Faith; and no^ clearlie set down the Faith, which we have
to hold, and where-by to discern the Company which we have to cleave unto.

Your Cardinal Bellarmine, in aunswering to some clear Places of the Fathers,
nearlie pintching him, (namely, of Augustine) is forced to flee to this, which
you, also, (...) taken De (...) ^el. cap. 1.
for your last Refuge: That the Scripture, indeed, teaches what are the Notes
of the Church. And I have, verily, reason, to thank both you, and him for it:
If (as I presume of you) so he, also, had either willingly, or ingenuouslie
yielded it. And, though you had forgotten this piece of your Armor, yet I was
presently to have put you in mind thereof; for the clear advantage I have
in it, to conclude, against your (...) all this point of our Dispueation. I am
sure, that (...) ^o is so (...) (...) ^ Scho^Man, will not (against Na^re, and
all Schools) affirm of GOD, the most perfect Doctor* The He (...), (
Obseuru^ p^r obscurius) that which is obscure, by any thing which is more
obscure. For all knowledge proceeds Ex natura noturibus: that is, of things
which are, by nature, more notore* than are those things, which they are
brought to notify. Thus, then, I conclude, upon your own Position: That which
clears any thing, must it self be more clear* But the Scripture clears,
which are the Notes of the Church. There-fore, as the Notes, where-by the
Church is known, must be more clear, than the Church, which is known by
them: So, the Scripture, which teaches those Notes, must be more clear than
both. The Scripture, which is the Voice of the LORD of the House, and Great
Shepherd of the Sheep, truly taught, and reverentlie received, is the
only, sure, and evident Ensign of the House, and Flock. And, who is it that
knows not this* That the Company is al-wayes discerned by the Colors, and
not the Colors by the Company? Now, consider, ( Philomathes) whether your
men's Objections, Of Scriptures obscurity, do fall, and in what uprightness
they are propounded: And, whether your Questioner be sincerely set, to find
that which he seems to seek for: or, rather, fraudfullie, to divert the
Simple, from the only Light, which leads to it?

And, some of your own Writers, convinced by clear Truth, are forced to
confess, what the more impudent sort so much oppugn.

Andreas Fricius, thus speaks:

DEVS Author est Verbi Sui, quod tanti facit, ut Coelum and Terra facilius
transitura sint, quam Verba Ipsius pessum itura. Ille est qui tuetur Verbum
Suum, qui authoritatem tribuit, qui illud in dignitatem vindicat: qui per
Spiritum S. obsignat in cordibus hominum. Testimonium quidem Ecclesia, Spiritu
DEI aff^ata dare potest Verbo and Doctrinae: hanc scilicet quam ^am inde ab
Apostolis quafi per manus ac^pisset, and non ali^m esse a DEO prolitam:
Authoritatem ver^ Illi ^ribuere nemo potest praeter DEVM ipsum, qui est Author
illius, Illustrator, Defensor, Propug^ator.

Again, the same Author, Lib. 4. de Ecclesia, Cap. 7. Ecclesiam necesse est
accommodari ad Verbum non Verbum ad Ecclesiam; Verbum Fundamentum est, Ecclesia
aedificium in illo collocatum.



Gabriel Biel, Lib. 3. Sentent. Distinct. 26. Scripturae canonicae, absque omni
approbatione Ecclesiae, ex natura ^ei sunt immutabiles, and immutabiliter
verae.

Hosius, in Confess. Cap. 16. Non aliter nos credimus Evangelio, nisi propter
Vocem DEI intus loquentis, et nos docentis.



So as ( Philomathes) if you will not believe us, yet your own men may tell
you, Whether your Poet has wandered himself, and would draw others, with
him, in Darkness.


Philadelphus. He will have us, to seek after the Church, as Children, at
Chacke-blynd-man, groape after their Fellows. For, first, he would pick out
our Eyes, or syle us from seeing: and, then, forsooth, set us a-searching. But
they who do evil, hate the Light: and the Church of Rome, had rather choose,
That this Debate were never decided, than that the clear convincing Mark were
brought, where-by they might be found out, who they are.

Through open Street, with lighted Lamp in hand,
A vain surveyning Sophist walked at Noone:
Where-of, when one the Motive did demand,
His rugged Reason thus he rendered soon:
Amongst Men, more mad than Mamacks, by the Moon,
I search (said he) if I can find one wise.
Ass (the other said) thine Head is out of tune:
Can thou discern one, though thou sawst him thryse?
But (more) your man is jumpe set in his matter,
As he who sought his drowned Wife up the Water.

Eriphilus. Your Sonnets ( Philadelphus) are very sarcasticke: but where-by
(if our man's Questions be not better answered, than by such cutting Checks)
the Scorn, in end, will turn to be your own.


Eubulus. Do you well ( Eriphilus) to be angry? is only XIII.
your man privileged to be a Poet? and is he so ( haeres ex ass) universal
Heir to all the Muses, as that we have no part, nor portion, in them? Et nos
quoque la^rum momordimus. But, let us see which of us shall fall to pack up
the Scorn: and having already cleared, what is the only sure Note of the
Church, let us now more nearlie tread your man's traces, in these his metricke
Marks, and try what weight they carry. First, ( Philomathes) read the
Inscriptions of his Sections, for vp-taking his whole Drift. Then will we (God
willing) examine each of them severallie, and shortly.


Philomathes. These are the capital words of all his Sections, 1. Catholic,
2. Continuance, 3. Visible, 4. Unity, 5. Holy, 6. Heretics.


Eubulus. His whole Ryme (as I remember) ^unneth on XIV.
two maine points: the one, to prove, that the Church of Rome, is the true
Church of CHRIST: the other, to show, that our Churches are heretical. The
first, he would conclude thus:

To what-so-ever company, the notes of Catholic, (or Universality)
Continuance, Visibilitie, Unity, and Holiness, do properly conveane, that
is the only true Church of CHRIST. But, to the Church of Rome, all these do
properly conveane. Therefore, the Church of Rome, is the only true Church of
CHRIST.




Eriphilus. If you can clearlie loose me that K^ot, ( Eubulus) you may,
perhaps, induce me* to take more of your counsel. But, I suspect, you are
once snared: for, of the proposition, none can make question: the assumption
will bear out it self; and so, I hope, the Conclusion shall stand steadfast.


Eubulus. And, if I shall clear the proposition, to be so XV.
vain, and Sophistical, as, though the propounder were here present, to
plead for it, yet I would, GOD willing, breed him such Business, to mayntayn
it, as should run him quyte out of all his ryming humor. And, if I show his
Assumption also to be evidentlie false, what will you make ( Eriphilus) of your
man's miserable Conclusion? The vanity, and sophistical deceit of his
Proposition, I will best discover, as I shall answer to each of these his
Marks severallie; according as he brings them in order, so by an Induction,
to strengthen his false Assumption. And yet, even thus I fear, ( Eriphilus)
that you shall recall your liberal Offer, and be never a whit the more subject
to my counsel. But Wisdom will be justified of her own Children.
Philomathes, read on.


Philomathes. Then hearken what he says of the first Mark, Catholic.


CHAPTER III.
CATHOLIC.
INTO your Bible I have read,
The Church must through the World be spread: Boni Cath^ci sunt, qui fidem
integram and bor^ mores servant. August to^. 4. in Qu^stion. super Ma^th. Idem
Augustine Tom. 1. lib. d^ v^ra religion. cap. 7. Co^endar Ecclesia cath^lica
soci^tatem, qua lumen Christian Religionis and Scripturar^, Regul^que Veritatis
(...).

For CHRIST His Apostles sent,
With Power, and Commandment,
That to all Nations they should go,
To preach, and to baptize also.
Who has done this, to know I wished?
For that is, sure, the Church of CHRIST.
And, for Exemple, let m^e know:
And, if thou can, I pray thee show,
What Company did take in hand,
The first Conversion of our Land? (...) (...) in (...) non abol^tur, seips^
and postcritat^ cogi, Papa^ pr^ Antichristo, and Roman pro vera Babylonia
agnoscere. Bernardus, super Psalm. 91. lib. 4. ad Euge^m.

And of our Countries everie-where,
Throughout the World, far and near?
If this was not the Church of Rome,
Then will I be converted soon.
Saynct Paul, in his Epistle says,
The Romans had the Catholic Faith:
Saying, It was renowned,
Spoken of, and published,
Through-out the World, over all,
Catholic, Universal.
If yours were ever so,
Then to your Churches will I go.
So says the Prophet Malachie,
There shall be offered, far and nie,
A clean Oblation, and Sacrifice,
From the place the Sun does rise,
To the going down of the same.
And what is that? I pray thee name.
If it be not the Holy Mass,
I Will be a Protestant, as I was.
In the eighteenth Psalm I find,
The whole World should hear their sound.
If these Marks you do not want,
Then, presently, I shall recant.
Eubulus. For mine acquytall, in that where-of I gave to ^
Eriphilus, some more hope, than, I think, he either did conceive, or would
be willing, I should make good: and to show the vain sophistry of the
Proposition of your man's main Argument, so far as concerns this his first
Mark, of Universality, till I come lyke-wayes upon the rest. I say, (
Philomathes) that Universality can be no proper Mark of the Church: yea,
that it can not be any Mark at all. And, that, therefore, your man's main
Proposition is, in this point, vain, and sophistical.


Eriphilus. Indeed, Sir, b^ this your Assertion, you make me hope so little,
that you shall make your word good, as I am assuredly persuaded, that you are
worthy to be burned, for a most detestable Heretic: who dare, so peartlie,
deny, that which, I think, never one of your Sect durst ever openly
gayne-say, to this hour. Will you draw me, think you, to follow your
counsel, in ought, who thus denies a special Article of our Creed; and is
so audacious, as to affirm, that the Church is not Catholic?


Eubulus. I did suspect, ( Eriphilus) that you would kindle at my Position:
and, therefore, (for a more gentle Recept) II.
I, even of purpose, turned my talk to Philomathes. But, I will calmlie cool
your heat, if I can. I deny no Article of the Creed. I both confess, and
believe, the Catholic Church. But, (that I may, yet once, make you more
aghast) in that, I do believe it, I, even therefore, deny Catholic, or
Universality, to be a proper Mark of the Church; yea, or any Mark at all:
For, Faith is the evidence of things, which are seen: but, the universality
of the Church, is apprehended Heb. ^1. 1*
by Faith: therefore, the universality of the Church, is not seen. Now, if it
be of things, which are not seen, but are believed, it can not be a mark,
where-by, here to discern the true Church. And, because, ( Eriphilus) you
sought for Syllogismes, I thus reason: All Marks are seen, or fall, under some
Sense* but Universality is not seen, neither falls under any Sense:
There-fore, Universality can be no Mark. The Proposition of this Argument,
as it is most certain, so is it confessed by your Cardinal Bellarmine, in
his second chapter, De notis Eccles. The Assumption, none will deny, who have
any Sense: For all Schools hold this for an undoubted Principle, That no
Universal, as it is Universal, is (...), or falls under Sense; because it
is properly the Object of Reason. Much less, then, does the Object of Faith,
(which transcendeth both Sense and Reason) fall under Sense* And, so, can never
be any discerning Mark, betwixt Acclaymers.

Thus, ( Eriphilus) except you have ought, where-by to infrindge mine Argument,
your Man his main Proposition, in so far, as concerns this his Mark of
Universality, is both vain, and sophistical. Vain, because he brings that
for a discerning Mark, which falls not under Sense; and, so, can be no
Mark at all. Sophistical, for that, of that which we confess, to be a true
Attribute of the Church, he would conclude, a discerning Mark. But all
Attributes, are not Marks. Now ( Eriphilus) refell mine Argument, or grant
me, I pray you, some respite from burning: for, without merit, you have
al-readie burned too many, upon humor.


Philadelphus. You could not away ( Eriphilus) with my Sonnets: but, as I
think, Eubulus Syllogismes are no less pricking.


Philomathes. But, I pray you, Eubulus, how-so-ever your Reasons are subtle,
and, I can not deny, but builded upon confessed Grounds: and, how-so-ever that
Catholic is an Attribute (as you call it) of the Church, and is apprehended
by Faith: yet, seeing that the most approoved Fathers, in their Disputations,
against the Heretics of their times, do press them sore, with the
Authority of the Catholic Church, which they ordinarily oppose unto them;
it would appear, that they had some reason to do so: and, that even
Universality is, in some respect, a Mark of the true Church. Neither see I,
how you can disapprooue our Men's Argument, against you, brought from this
Note, except you will condemn those Famous, and Ancient Fathers also, as
having vaynlie, and sophisticallie, reasoned for the Truth.


Eubulus. To clear you ( Philomathes) of all doubt herein, III.
and, to free our selves, from any, either conscience of our own guiltiness,
where-fore we would reject this Reason; or, of any vnreverend Opinion, of
those Fathers, who, as you truly affirm, in some Cases, and Respects, did
use it; the aequivocation of this word [ Catholicke] must be opened up,
where-by your Doctors, willingly, illude, and where-by your simple ones are,
unwittingly, deceived. For the Catholic Church, is of the Fathers so called,
either properly, and absolutely, or improperlie, and but in some special
Respect, and Relation. Absolutely, and most properly, the Catholic Church,
is the whole number, of what-so-ever time or place, who have been, are, or
shall be united unto CHRIST, their Head, and live in Him, by His Spirit;
whether here, on Earth, fighting; or hence, in Heaven, triumphing.
Absolutely, and less properly, the Catholic Church, is the whole militant
company here on Earth, of what-so-ever Kindred, Tongue, or Nation, under one,
and the same common Ensign, of Christian Profession; whether Hypocrites, or
true Professors; whether pure, or corrupt, Worshippers; whether Orthodox, or
Heretical; as even Bellarmine argues, Cap. 7. De Notis Eccles. In any of
which Cases, she is believed, and (in her Universality) falls not under
Sense. Improperlie, again, and in opposite Relation, the Church is called
CATHOLIC, for two Respects: The one, In opposite Relation to the Church of
the Jews, which was limited within the compass of one People, and of one
Region: the Christian Church, no more so confined, but spread, indifferently,
over all, is called the CATHOLIC CHVRCH. Neither thus, because that either
al-wayes all Peoples Universally, or most part of Men, embrace the Gospel:
but, because the Entry is opened, and offered, indifferently, unto all. The
other Respect, was the opposite Relation, to heretical Companies, separating
themselves, by Error, from the common Body of the Church, and Truth
mayntayned there-in. And in this last Respect, it is, that al-most the Fathers
co^monlie speak of it; calling the Co^munitie of the Visible Church, retayning
Truth, (in relation to particular heretical Companies) the CATHOLIC CHVRCH.
And, in this Sense, opposing, ordinarily, to arrogant men, the Authority,
Multitude, Consent, Succession, etc. of the Catholic Church, as you have
alleged, Philomathes. But in this manner of the Fathers reasoning, two things
are carefully to be marked, whereby the Fathers shall be found both
pertinentlie, and prudentlie, to have used this Argument; and where by, your
men now, shall be seen evidentlie, and impudentlie, to abuse it. The first,
is that state and condition of the Church, wherein this Argument has place,
according as it was when the Fathers used it. The second, is, what weight, or
moment, the Fathers placed in it. The state of the Church, then, was in common,
pure, holding Truth, and by the force thereof, purging, or expelling all
inbred, or accressing evils, or Heresies. So, as then, though by an improper
Speech, yet the Communalitie of the Church, keeping Truth, in relation to a
few Declyners, might not impertinentlie be called the Catholic Church, and
her authority, might well have been opposed unto them. But, who, in a plain
contrary state, and condition of the Church, when Error obtains in common,
and Truth is afflicted, and borne down; yet, without consideration of the
altered State and Condition, would still use the same reason, from Multitude,
and what-so-ever, or how-so-ever an obtaining State; he were a ridiculous
Sophister, confounding diverse, and distinct times, and cases. To reason from
the state of the Church in Ephesus, (where-in evil was not tolerated) to
Revel. 2.
the state of the Church in Smirna, (where-in Heretics waxed proud, and
despised the abject state of true Professors) it were sophistical: but much
more sophistical, to reason from the state in Ephesus, to the state in
Pergamus; when Rev. 12.
the true Church dwelt, even where Satan's Throne was; known to GOD, though
hid from the worldly sort. To reason from the Woman clothed with the Sun,
treading the Moon, and crowned with twelve Stars; to the same Woman, lurking
in the Wilderness, it concludes not: for, as, in the first Case, the Fathers
had reason, and did wyselie, to convince by all Advantages; so, while the Case
is clearlie altered, (according as by Scripture was fore-tolde) ^. Thessalonians. 2.
and Antichrist has obtained a Throne, even in the Temple; when the Evil, or
Gangrene, in the body, and having even over-gone the Body, in common, will
contend against the healthsome remnant; then are we both to leave improper
Speeches, and, wyselie, to distinguish, deceitfullie-confounded Times, and
Cases: and properly to plead, That the Gangrene in the Body, and even
affecting, and over-going the Body, in common, yet is but an Adherent, or
accressing Evil, in, but not of, the Body: and, That the healthsome remnant,
retayning the Life of the Head, and, by virtue thereof, resisting the
over-going Gangrene, is the true Catholic Church.

And, this altered Condition, of Time, and of the Church, in time, which makes
the Argument, some-tyme, pertinentlie, used, to be now ridiculous: besides,
that both SCRIPTVRE has fore-tolde it, the FATHERS did see the working on of
it, and, we have, abundantly often, prooved, and still offer, to prove it.
It is clear, also, by that other Point, which I propounded, to be observed,
in this reasoning of the FATHERS: namely, What Weight, or Moment, they placed
in that same Argument. VVhere-in, they even profess, That they used it not, as
an infallible demonstratiue Mark, but as a Motive: which, being joined with
clear TRVETH, was worthy to be regarded: but, which, either without TRVETH,
or against TRVETH, should carry no Credit.

This is evident, by Augustine, using this same Argument, Contr. Ep* fund.
against Faustus Manichaeus, and opposing the Authority of the Catholic
Church, Multitude, Antiquity, Succession, etc. to his bare bragging of the
TRVETH. Which TRVETH, notwith-standing, (says that Father) if you can show,
so clearlie, as it can not be gayne-sayde, it is to be praeferred to all
these things, where-by I am holden within the Catholic Church. If the name
of the Catholic Church, were, in this place, properly to be taken; then
should Augustine's supposed Case, be ridiculous. For Truth can never be found
any-where else, but within the Catholic Church, taken properly. Where-by it
is clear, that the Catholic Church, in this, and such other places, is taken
for the Communalitie of the visible Church: which, having Truth, should be
regarded. But to whose Authority, not the less, the clear Truth, found with
never so few Holders, is to be preferred. For, We ought not to consent, no,
not to Catholic Bishops, (says the same Father) if they hold any De
Vnitat. Eccl. contr. Pa^l.
Opinion contrary to Canonicke Scriptures. Where-by is manifest, both in what
Sense the Fathers reasoned, from the Authority of the Catholic Church, and
what force they placed in that Argument: and that, how-so-ever by them, and in
that time, and case of a Church, it was not inconvenientlie used; yet that now,
in so far different a state, still to usurp it in a like manner, were
extreme impudency. This Chrysostom did both foresee, and gave warning of
it: that the altered In Math. homil. 49.
state of the Church, behooved to bring men to a more near and proper Rule of
Examination, (as in his Testimonies, above cited, is clear.) In that,
how-so-ever, before that Heresy obtained place in the Church, and the
abomination of desolation stood also ( in sanctis Ecclesiae locis) in the
holy places of the Church, many ways were to discern the Church: (as, while
Truth held place in common, was Universality improperlie taken, Multitude,
Consent, Succession, etc) yet now, after that heretical contagion has
infected the Body in common, no manner of way is to discern the true Church,
(amidst the corrupted community of the Church) but only the Scriptures. You
are greatly deceived, ( Philomathes) if you esteem the Church, therefore, to
be called CATHOLIC; either because al-wayes the most part of men shall
come in to her, and embrace the Profession: or yet, That of such as come in to
her, the most part shall al-wayes hold the Truth. But, She is CATHOLIC,
because her Gates that are now casten open, to all Kinreds, Tongues, and
Nations; that the righteous Nation may enter in. And, how-so-ever, that neither
most part come in, neither of such as are in her, is the most part of her, or
saved: yet all, universally, who are saved, must both be in her, and of her.
And, how-so-ever, in her, most part keep not Truth, yet no Truth is, but in
her. If (as your Men are al-readie perceiving, and, there-vpon, are gnawing
their Tongues, for sorrow) the Truth preached by us, take* in short time,
such success, as the Waters of your Euphrates shall be dried up: and if
Multitude, and Consent of Nations, shall be with Revel. 16. 12.
us; will you, there-fore, yield us the Title of the Catholic Church? If
multitude of Holders, be al-wayes a sure Mark of the true Church, how says
the Scripture, That All shall follow the Beast? And you confess, That
Antichrist, when he comes, shall obtain Universally. Now, if in Antichrist
his usurpation, Universality shall be no Note of the Church, how see you not,
That very vnjustlie you lay it al-wayes against us? and, That what-so-ever
Universality you can allege for your Pope, it exeemeth him not from being
that Antichrist, except he clear himself, by better Defenses? Thus, I hope,
I have cleared, That we neither disprooue the Fathers, reasoning against
Heretics, in opposing to them, the Authority of the Catholic Church: and
yet, that you have not, there-fore, any, either Right in their Argument, or
Ground there-vpon, to make CATHOLIC a discerning Mark of the Church. So, as
your man's main Proposition, (so far as concerns this Note of
Universality) is still sophistical, and vain. But, now, if it were even a
discerning Mark, as your Men would make it, yet let us try, how justly your
Church does vindicate it, to her self: and let us examine your Man's main
Assumption in that part.


Philadelphus. As you have dressed his Proposition, in that part, I think all
labor against his Assumption were idle: IV.
For, if CATHOLIC can be no discerning Mark of the Church, no, not any
Mark at all, (as you have, at length, and evidentlie, evinced) how can it be
Romes Mark?


Eubulus. Yet ( Philadelphus) I will omit no-thing, where-by I may possibly
induce Eriphilus, to take more of my counsel. But, in refelling this your
Man's Assumption of his main Argument, where-by he appropriateth to Rome, the
Title of the Catholic Church, I must protest, ( Eriphilus) that it be no
praejudice to my matter, that you do so confidentlie call your selves
Catholics, and your Company, the Catholic Church: else, if you will have
this your usurping of that name, to carry any weight; and, that, therefore,
you will have us to account so of you; I desire of you the same
aequitablenesse, in our Case. That, because we both esteem, and call our
selves, The Catholic Church, and Catholic Men; that, therefore, you will
hold us for such. Or, if you consider, that an Argument, a dici ad esse,
concludes not; and that, there-fore, pertinentlie, the Logicians place, before
their Categories, the Distinction ((...)) of things that are said, and of
things that are. Then, let us lay aside, what either you, of your selves, or
we, of our selves, do partiallie speak, or arrogantlie arrogate; and let us
try, what is true of us both.


Philomathes. Your Protestation is most aequitable: For, a bare Claim, except
it be instructed, can make no Title.


Eubulus. Then, ( Philomathes) in that part of your Poet's V.
Ryme, which is inscrybed, CATHOLIC, and which you did lastly read; besides
the Proposition, which I have refelled, he assumeth, That the Note of
Catholic, or Universality, conveaneth properly, to the Church of Rome.
Which false Assumption, he seeks to sustain, by four Reasons; the first of
which, he concludes thus:

What Company did take in hand, and, accordingly, first performed, the
publishing of the Gospel, through the World, and converted all Nations, to the
Faith; that must be the Company, to which the Title of CATHOLIC, or
UNIVERSALITY, properly, belongs: and that Company, is the Catholic
Church.

But, the Church of Rome, only, did both undertake, and perform this.
There-fore, the Church of Rome is the Catholic Church; and, to her,
properly, that Note belongs.

Now, here, some Poetical inspiration has transported your man, to give us
such, whether a definition, or description, of Catholic, as till now, none
ever heard of. We esteemed, (as I have showed) that the Catholic Church had
been that company of what-so-ever Time, Place, or Nation, which, in the
communion of one, and the same Spirit, joined to their Head CHRIST, do make up
the fullness of His mystical Body; whether in the Heavens, triumphing, or, as
yet, here, in their course, fighting; or, in another consideration, we call
the Catholic Church, all of all Kinreds, Tongues, and Nations, who under one,
and the same common Ensign, of Christian Profession, give their names to
CHRIST, and are in the count of His House here; whether they be only in it,
or also of it: or, to speak improperlie, as, in some Cases, the Fathers do,
the Catholic Church is the community of the Church, holding Truth in
relation, to Declyners therefrom. But your Poet, appropriating this Title, to
the first Converters, has forfaulted from this Dignity, all the Converted by
them: And, thus, his Proposition, is not only false, but even ridiculous. For,
how-so-ever the Converters of others, by an improper Speech, may be called
Catholics; as any particular Church, holding Truth, is called a Catholic
Church; or any faithful Man, a Catholic man, because they are true parts
of the Catholic Church, in which only is Truth, Life, and Salvation: yet,
to call any particular, either person, order of persons, or company, the
Catholic man, persons, or Church, it is an insolentlie arrogant Speech. His
Assumption I distinguish. If he affirm, That Rome first converted all Nations
to the Faith, and was the first publisher of the Gospel, it is so shamelessly
false, as, I think, Satan might blush, to broach out such a Lie. How did Paul
glory in the Romans 15. 1^.
LORD, (and that before he did see Rome) that from Arabia, to Illyricum, he
had filled all with the Gospel of CHRIST; and that, most part, where CHRIST
had not been named, not building on any other man's foundation? Have all the
other eleven Apostles, besides Peter, forgotten, think you, their LORD's
Commission; of whom, we have no certain record, that ever any did see Rome?
If, converting Nations to the Faith, might appropriate to any Church,(...)

down of the same.

But, no Company offers to GOD, a clean Sacrifice, from the rising of the
Sun, to the setting of the same, but the Church of Rome.

There-fore, the Church of Rome, is only, and properly, the Catholic Church.

The Proposition, of this his Syllogism, he takes from the Prophet Malachie.
His Assumption, he prooveth, strongly, for-sooth, by an undeniable Truth;
That, Only, the Church of Rome, offers all-where, the holy Sacrifice of
the Mess. Which, he makes no question, but that is the only clean
Sacrifice, offered to GOD, all-where, from the rising, to the setting, of the
Sun. And, thus, he thinks, his Conclusion can not fail him.


Eriphilus. And so I think, also, ( Eubulus) and, I hope, shall think so
still, for any Answer you are able to make thereunto: how-so-ever you would
seem, for-sooth, to make a very light account of it; and would, according to
your manner, laugh-over those Arguments, which most pintch you.


Eubulus. Then, advert what I have to say, and think, XII.
syne, what you please. The Condition of CHRIST His Church, set down by
Malachie, (whence the Poet brings his Proposition) I acknowledge, according
to the Prophet his sense, and words; which your man ( Eriphilus) resumeth
deceitfullie. The words are these; From the ^sing of the Sun, to the going
down thereof, My Name Malach. 1. 11.
shall be great amongst the Gentiles, and, in all places, Incense shall be
brought to My Name, and a clean Gift. These clear, and distinct words,
either ignorantly, or fraudfullie, your man obscureth, perverteth, and
involveth, to darken the difference betwixt expiatorie Sacrifices, or,
Sacrifices for sin, and other Oblations, of Praise, or due Worship: which,
both, in their diverse Types, are most distinctlie put; and, in the Anagogicke
Verity, must be diverselie considered. And, this, your man does, to bring
some Color to his Assumption, which is impudentlie false. Neither will the
Offering of your Mess, (which is neither clean, holy, nor a Sacrifice, but a
most sacrilegious profanation, of an holy Sacrament, and the most detestable
Idolatry, that ever was defended for good Worship) appropriate to Rome, the
Offering, all-where, of Incense, and a clean Gift, to the LORD. Rev. 1. 6.


Are you so shallow a Man, in Scripture, ( Eriphilus) that you know not, how
all true Christians, anie-where, being made Kings, and Priests, to GOD, in
CHRIST, do offer Hosca. 14. 3. Romans 1^. 1.
up to Him, the Sacrifices of Praise; even the Calves of the Lips? Do we
not offer up our selves, an holy, living, acceptable Sacrifice; even our
reasonable Service? What-so-ever works of Charity we, in the fear and love
of GOD, perform; are they not Sacrifices? and, accepted in CHRIST? To do
good, and to distribute, forget Heb. 13. 16.
not; for with such Sacrifices, GOD is well pleased, says the Apostle. Is not
the Liberality of the Philippians, Philip. 4. 18.
by the same Apostle, called, A Sacrifice of sweet Savor, and acceptable to
GOD? Your Man his whole Senses have been drowned in his Challice, when, so
doltishlie, he forgot himself, as, to leave no clean Offering in the
Church, but his monstrous Mess. As for any other Sacrifice for Heb. 7. 27.
sin, but that one, and once for all, offered, we acknowledge not: So, as
your Mess may be well relegated, to sick Swyne, for whom (upon conveaned
price) your Men have mumbled out a million.

Now, as your Questioner plays the Cavillatour, both in that he confounds
diverse kinds of Sacrifices, and, also, that he acknowledges not, (with
clear Scripture) any other clean Oblation, in the Christian Church, but the
Mischief of the Mess: So, he illudeth, more-over, by reasoning from
Sacrifice, and Oblation, figuratiuelie, and allegoricallie, spoken of* to
Sacrifice, and Oblation, in propriety of signification: from typical
speeches, concluding not allegoricallie, but properly; and, that, most
ignorantly* and foolishlie. The Prophets, fore-speaking of CHRIST His
Kingdom, do, ordinarily, express the Condition thereof, under Legal Types,
where-by it was fore-shadowed. Which is so evident, in all their manner of
Dispensation, as it is marvel, if any dare pretend, to misknow it. Speaking
of the Conversion of Nations, and, of their Association to the Church, they
prophecy, That all Nations shall come yearlie, and worship at JERUSALEM.
Which, to understand properly, it were to be a proper Ass in Divinity. For,
expressing of the great measure, of Light, and Knowledge, under the Gospel,
they prophecy, That all men shall see Visions, and dream Dreams: to declare,
that ^el, 2. 28.
the Worship of GOD, shall be no more tied to any one place; but that
all-where, who worship Him, in Spirit, and Truth, shall be accepted. Isaia
tells of three Altars, to ^, 19. 19.
be erected; one in Judea, one in Assyria, and one in Egypt. And thus, to
show how the worship of GOD, should be no more confined within the Jewish
nation, or precinct of Canaan, Malacbie fore-telleth, That Incense, and a
clean Gift, shall be offered in all places, and, that the Name of the LORD
shall be great, from the rising of the Sun, to the going-downe thereof.
And, how will you, out of this, make your monstrous Mess? or, out of your
Mess, make the miserable Mongers thereof, to be the Catholic Church,
except, first, you make Mules of Men? Or, is there any, either Shame, or
Sincerity in disputing, when, upon typical Praedictions, Conclusions are
inferred, in propriety of Signification?


Philadelphus. You have ( Eubulus) made this their Sacrifice so vnsavourie,
that I long to be from it. I pray you, what is his fourth Reason?


Eubulus. Because ( Philadelphus) the smell of the Romish Incense, XIII.
I perceive, is to you somewhat loathsome; for your Refreshment, you shall now
have an Argument, to laugh at; if this may not move Eripbilus, to count it in
vincible. Advert, then, a deadly Demonstration. David says, in the
eyghteenth Psalm, And their sound went through all the Earth: There-fore, the
Church of Rome, is the Catholic Church. If one were set, in scorn, to play a
part, to the Partie's disgrace, whom he represents; could he have fished out,
think you, a fyner Argument, than this is? David, in the nynteenth Psalm,
(which some make the eyghteenth) shows, how GOD has, in His works, so
playnlie manifested Himself, as no Nation in the world, can pretend any
excuse of ignorance. Paul, in his Epistle to the Romans, for taking from
obstinate Jews, all excuse, of their induration against Romans 10. 1^.
the Gospel, because the same was so playnlie, largely, and powerfullie
preached; he, to this end, cites, and very pertinentlie, the words of
David. But, I pray you, by what Logic will it follow here-vpon, that the
Church of Rome, is the Catholic Church; more than the Devil, and his angels,
who Job. 1. 7. and 1. Pet. 5. 8.
compass the Earth, continually, roaring, and seeking whom they may devour?
or, then, the busy Emissaries of Satan, who compass Sea and Land, to make a
Proselyte, and make Matthew. 23. 1^*
him doubly the child of the Devil? We affirm, That the Gospel, at first,
was so playnlie, and plentifully, offered to the World, as, that, most
justly, for the contempt thereof, and because men loved Lies, better than the
Truth; therefore GOD gave men over, to strong delusion, and effectualnes of
error: whereby Satan obtained a throne in the Temple, all the Earth following
the Beast. And, that now again, that man of Sin, by the revived light of the
Gospel, is so clearlie revealed, as, who will not come out of Babylon, are
willingly blinded, and worthily part-takers of her judgments. And now, (
Philomathes) as I think, I have answered to all your Rymer's four Reasons,
where-by he would conclude CATHOLIC, to be a Mark of the Church, and
proper to Rome. If you have ought to reply, speak it: other-wayes, let us
hear more of your Man his Music.


Philadelphus. No: but, by your leave ( Eubulus) my Song was first tabled. And
you shall have it short: For it is in honor of the Church of Rome, which is
daily shortening.

If Catholic, can not a Mark be counted,
And shamleslie, as if it be assumed:
If vaynlie Rome, vaunts now of Virtues wonted,
When she is but a Carrion consumed:
If over the Sayncts she proudly has presumed:
Her Sacrifices, if they be but sin:
That Mother-Whoore, if duly She be doomed:
If all Her Silver, turned be in Tin:
If Apostaticke, more than Apostolic:
She claymes, vnkyndlie, to be called Catholic.

Philomathes. What-so-ever might be replied to you, ( Eubulus) yet I will not
insist farther, at this time. But, seeing that Philadelphus is so poeticallie
disposed, as he must vent his Verses; I will sharpen him, with a new Subject,
where-on to meditate his next Sonnet. Thus, then, our Man speaks, of
CONTINVANCE.


CHAPTER IV.
CONTINUANCE.
THis is another Mark, most sure, ^ut yet, in it ^l be^ a tenth, it shall
re^e, and shall eaten, as a ^-tree, and as Oak, whose stance is in ^, when
they ^ their leaves: ^he holy seed, ^ll be the sub^ce thereof. ^sai. 6. 13.
^onsuetudo ^tre non debet, ^ minus veritas consuet^ (...) veritate vetu^ est
error^, (...) propter (...) errore sequ^ veritatem. Cyprian, ad Pompe^. Nova et
p^grina censenda sunt qu^ Christ^ non doc^it* nec omnia qua vetera sunt admit^s
debent. Ibid^.

The Church of CHRIST must still endure;
According as our Savior said,
When for Saynct Peter He had prayed:
Simon, thy Faith shall never fail:
The Gates of Hell shall not prevayle.
The holy Ghost, your Comforter,
Shall remain with you ever-more:
And I, My Self, your surest Friend,
Will be with you, unto the end.
Saynct Paul says the same Speech;
There shall be al-wayes Men to preach:
Apostles, Doctors, and the like,
Into the Church Catholic.
If these be not the Church of Rome,
Then will I be converted soon.
Eubulus. You must not expect of me, ( Philomathes) that I will, so*
unprofitably, spend time, as to sift out, narrowly, I.
all your Man's gross Over-sightes; because I eye but the main point: and,
there-fore, you have not to think, that either I spy no^, or do approve,
what in him I pass over, vntaxed. For, as, here, he vaynlie, and ydlie,
payneth himself, to prove a point, which no man will deny, ( That the
Church continues al-wayes:) So, for prooving heere-of, to allege, the
particular Promise, made to Peter, That his Faith should not fail, he is
ridiculous, and sophistical. For, in that place, the LORD speaks of Peter's
particular Faith, that Spiritual Virtue, begotten in him, by the holy Ghost,
which was his Victory, where-by he over-came, in that his temptation: and not
the Doctrine of Faith, as your Man has, now, twyse, dotingly, expounded. As if
the Falling, or Standing, of the Church, did hang on any one particular Man
his Apostasy, or Stabilitie. He, no less audaciouslie, fathereth a Lie, on
the Apostle Paul, (That, al-wayes, there shall remain Apostles in the Church:)
For, except he escape, by aequivocation, it is most certain, that, in the
most proper, and strict Signification of Apostleship, as it was an
extraordinary Function, but for a time, till the Foundation of the Church
should be laid, and the Canon closed: So, how-so-ever others, succeeding in
Pastoral, and ordinary Offices of the Church, and teaching the same Doctrine,
and so keeping the Foundation laid by them, are, truly, the Successors of
the Apostles: Yet, that any did succeed to the Apostleship, it is extremely
false. For, the Church being constituted, extraordinary Offices ceased; as did
the extraordinary Gift, and manner of Calling, which makes the Office. And, I
even muze, if your own Men, will not judge, this your Poet, worthy of
punishment, that will have Apostles continuing, al-wayes, plurallie, in the
Church: seeing you all do account this Dignity singular to the Pope; who
only, now, in all the World, takes to himself, the Monopoly of Apostolical
Benedictio^.


Philomathes. It is the main point, where-in we would be resolved. For these
other things, I am not to make Argument. Can you, al-wayes, deny, but that
CONTINVANCE, is a proper Mark of the Church?


Eubulus. It is no more a proper Note of the Church, than II.
Color and Stature, are proper Notes of a Man. And, (that I forget not my
promise, as I come on them, one by one, to show, the vain sophistry of your
man's main Proposition, in all) I affirm, That, as Universality was
foolishlie brought by him, for a discerning Mark, betwixt Acclaimers; so,
also, is this, of Continuance: not, that I deny it, to be an attribute, and
common accident: for, certaynlie, since her first beginning, the Church both
has continued, and shall continue al-wayes. But, do you hold this good
Logic, in your man, ( Philomathes) of common accidents, to conclude, that
they are proper Notes, and discerning Marks? you know, that Proprium, is but
one of diverse kynds of Predication: and, that what-so-ever, is proper to any
thing, it conveaneth (as Schools speak) Omni soli, and semper: that is, To
all, to only, and al-wayes. But, Continuance, could not be said of the
Church, Semper: that is, at all times. For, at the first moment of Adam and
Evaes Creation, (who were the Church) Continuance, of them then, had been no
true Predication, when as yet, no time had run. Besides, what-so-ever is a
proper Note, it is so converted with the subject, where-of it is the property;
as that, if Continuance were a proper Note of the Church; then, as none could
be the Church, but which had continued, and did still continue: so,
what-so-ever did continue, behooved to be the Church, which you see, were
extremely absurd. For, Heaven, and Earth, continue to this day: Satan,
continues a Liar, and a Murderer, from the beginning; and his Children
continue Liars, and Murderers, like their Father: and, the evil Seed
continues, even amidst the good Seed, in the Lord's own Field, till the
last day of separation. So, as if with any probable show, your man would had
CONTINVANCE, counted a concluding Mark of the Church, he should have added
there-to, this Modification, That, what company has continued in the true
Faith, and Worship of CHRIST, that is His true Church. But, then, if he should
assume, that the Church of Rome, has only continued in the true Faith, and
lawful Worship of CHRIST, we will deny it, as extremely false: and, tell
him, that he continues impudent, to assume the Question. And, thus, you may
perceive, ( Philomathes) that your man's most lykelie Marks, yet are no proper
Marks, till they be modified, by that one, and only demonstratiue, and
truly discretiue Mark, which at first I laid down unto you.


Philomathes. But, ( Eubulus) you must not escape us at so cheap a rate. For,
even upon CONTINVANCE, a common accident, as you call it, I will establish our
man's conclusion, for the Church of Rome. You will confess, that the Church of
CHRIST, has continued al-wayes, since her first beginning, and must al-wayes
continue, till her LORD'S return: so, as she can never fall away,
absolutely, from His Light, and Life. III.



Eubulus. This, I heartily yield you.


Philomathes. You will yield me this also, That no company can be said, to
continue in the Truth, Light, and Life of CHRIST, which continues not, in
any profession of His Name, or worship thereof, at all. For, to use your own
comparison, al-be-it Color, and Stature will not conclude, of the thing
colored, and quantified, that it is a man: yet this will be a sure Position,
That what has neither Color, nor Stature at all, it can be no man. IV.



Eubulus. This, I yield you also: but whereupon, you may see, that your
conclusion, shall be but negative, to exclude upon defects, and not
affirmative, to argue upon demonstratiue Marks.


Philomathes. Then, advert, how I will, even affirmatiuelie, conclude, for the
Church of Rome:


That Company has only continued, in the true Light, and Life of CHRIST,
(and so is His Church) which, only, of all others, has retained HIS Name, or
any Worship thereof.

But, for many Ages, the Church of Rome has only, of all Companies in the
World, retained the Name of CHRIST, or any Worship thereof.

There-fore, the Church of Rome, has only continued in the true Light, and
Life of CHRIST: and so, only, is His true Church.

Eriphilus. You find, perhaps, Eubulus, that our Syllogismes, are poynted also.


Eubulus. I will presently prove, what either Point, or V.
Edge, it has; and, how piercing so-ever you presume it to be, ( Eriphilus)
yet make it to be found as phlegmatic, as you are choleric. Of your
Syllogism then, Philomathes, (where-by you conclude no thing to Romes
advantage, if any other Churches may be showed, to have continued in any
Profession, or Worship of the Name of CHRIST) I grant the Proposition to be
true: for, no question, but that only with-in the compass of the visible
Church, and under the common Ensign of Profession, the true Church, and all
true Christians, are, and have continued, al-wayes. And, as wherever the
Ensign is, and the Name of CHRIST professed, how corruptedlie so-ever it be
in common, yet, there, possibly, yea, probably, (I durst say assuredly) are
some true, though weak, Christians: So, where that Name is not at all named,
nor any worship thereof, there no Church can be said to be at all. Your
Assumption is both false, and deceitful. And, to show it evidentlie to be
such, if I should but oppose to you, the Ethiopian, and Indian Churches, which
have continued, and not only without any Communion, but al-most without any
knowledge of the Church of Rome; what could you find, to say, against these
Instances? but, I will be so indulgent, unto you, as not to urge them on you:
I will, other-wayes, sufficiently, so discover the deceit of your Assumption,
as the falsehood of it may be clearlie seen: for it contains a double
fallacy; one in the name of the Church of Rome; the other, in that which is
affirmed of it. For, if by the Church of Rome, be understood, the whole body
of the visible Church, on which, for some Ages, by craft and ambitious
usurpation of Antichrist, in-throned in the Temple, the Character, Name, or
Number of Revel. 13.
the Beast, were imposed in common: how-so-ever thousands, ever were in that
community, who, rejecting, and detesting them, retained the Name of the Lamb
His Father, and Character thereof; and were of the 144000 sealed Revel. 1^ and
^
ones: and, many, who, in simplicity, received the Name, or Number of the
Beast, yet never received his Character. Then, sophisticallie, and
deceitfullie, you reason from the accressing Sore, and Gangrene in the body,
(and of which Sore, the name is but improperlie and tyrannically imposed on
the body) to the body affected therewith. When we plead against the Church
of Rome, we plead not against that body absolutely, where-in that evil
was, and that so far obtaining, as it named the body after it self, (while
Revel. 2. 13.
the Church of GOD dwelt, even where Satan's Throne was) but we plead against
the evil, in, but not of, the body: not against all, who were called the
Roman Church, or Papists, or were counted of that number: But against
Papalitie, or Antichristianisme. Not against all, who were, through common
Contagion, perhaps, lightly touched, or taynted with the Evil: But against
the Characterized company, Antichrist his mancipated Slaves, and in whom the
pestilent Evil, had eaten up all true life, and sense. So, as in this Case,
for arrogating any point, to the Mischief which we oppugn, to oppose unto
us, the common body, even heavilie affected, and, in common, over-gone with
it; it is no less absurd sophistication, than if one should confound the
Dropsy, Iaundies, or Gangrene in the Body, with the Body in which they are,
and draw Conclusions from the one, to the other. If all the Body, were the
Evil, then were there no Body. But, even a sick Body, is yet a Body: and,
how-so-ever so affected, in common, and, no part appears to be fully free,
but, that the Sore possesses all: yet, so long as the Body lives, and
mooveth, performing natural Functions; it evinceth, that some Noble parts yet
resist the Disease; so as the Body, al-be-it heavilie affected, yet dies not:
yea, getting the true Medicine, and Divine Purgation of the Word and Spirit,
will expel the Evil, and notiue Humor, and recover Health; as Experience
has prooved clearlie, in many Reformed, both Churches and Persons.

Thus, ( Philomathes) if in your Assumption, you mean, by the Church, that
whole Body, absolutely, on which that Name was fraudfullie, and
tyrannically, imposed: then you conclude not your Point, but deceive, by
Aequivocation, ( A dici, ad esse) from So called, and, wronglie called, to So
is; confounding that known Distinction of Logic, (...), where-of I spoke
before. And if, by the Church of Rome, you signify the Papalitie, and Evil in
the Body, which we impugn, (as you must, if you evince ought against us)
then is your Assumption clearlie false. For, both before that Evil invaded the
Body, the Body was: and, even at the time of the waxing Sore, yet still
continued, brooking some healthsome remnant of Spiritual Sense, and Life: and,
now, at last, by the Medicinal Virtue of the Word, and Spirit, is recovering
Health, and destroying the, formerlie, destroying Disease.

This will be yet more clear, by the discovery of that other Fallacy,
where-by, in this Case, of the Churches continuance, your Men partly illude,
and partly are illuded. For, because the Church continues al-wayes, they
esteem, and conclude falselie, That, there-fore, she continues still in one,
and the same Condition of Light, and Life: that is, That Truth, and lawful
Worship, has al-wayes held place, and borne swey there-in, in common: so as
what-soever Company, or Doctrine, most, in common, obtained, and carried
Vogue, that was the true Church of CHRIST, and the true and Orthodox Faith. And
this is most absurdly false, and evinced to be so, not only by evident
Experience, but also by clear Scripture. For, all (...) Church, and Truth in
her, has continued always; (...) (...) she been subject to many Wrestlings,
Victories, Kything (...) Eclypses: She is some-tyme darkened, (says
Augustine) and is, as it were, over-clowded, ad vinc^. (...). 48.
with multitude of Offenses: some-tyme, by tranquillity of time, quiet and
free she shows her self: some-tyme is covered, and troubled with the waves
of tribulations, and tentations. We confess, that the Church has continued
always: but not as the presuming Whore boasts, I sit, being a Queen, and
shall see no mourning: but, oft-tymes, Revel. 18. 7. Isai. 54. 1^.
afflicted, and tossed with tempest, and having no comforter. She has still
continued, but, as a Woman, (even at first, while she was yet clothed with
the Sun) traveling, and crying out, with pain: Revel. 12.
next, persecuted cruelly: thirdly, fleeing to the Wilderness: fourthly,
Revel. 13.
lurking, and fed there, while the beast of Satan's power makes the Earth to
follow him, by false pretense of the Lambe's Revel. 8. and
horns. She has continued always: yet so, as sometime (while the Earth, Sea,
Fountayns and Rivers, Stars, Sun and Moon, Revel. 14. and
are either, first, in a great part, burnt, corrupted, made bitter, eclypsed,
or totally, at last, darkened) she consisted of a few secret sealed ones,
exempted, in GOD'S merciful care, from a common evil. Sometime, again, she is
of a number innumerable, Revel. 7. 9. Revel. 11.
with Palms in hand. Her state has been, sometime, as the temple closed, in
relation to all the holy city, and court of the temple, trodden under foot of
the Heathen: her Pastors, some-time, few, secret, ministering within the
Temple, in sorrow, for prevayling Evils; yet long without bloodshed, as being
vnperceived. Sometime, again, upon application of the true measuring Reed,
(for discerning the true Church, within the compass of so importable an
impiety) cruelly murdered, and barbarously entreated, eve^ with applause of
the World. Sometime, again, in greater vigor, terrifying their enemies; and,
in open view, Revel. 14. Revel. 1^. 12. Revel. 18. ^.
flying through the midst of Heaven, with the ever-lasting Gospel; and
separated from incurable Contagion, to come up hither. Sometime, as now at
last, coming so down on the earth, as it is all lightened, with the glorious
shyning of the Gospel. We know, that the true Church has continued al-wayes:
Yet so, as, in a common Apostasy, where-by Antichrist obtained a Throne, even
in the Temple of GOD; and all the ^es. 2.
Earth followed the Beast, receiving his Character, Name, or Number, (while to
the Beast his wondering Sectators, and ^l. 13.
charactized Slaves, it appeared impossible, that any such Company could be)
she consisted of 144000 secret, sealed, ^l. 14.
and chaste ones, following the Lamb; and having a powerful, and plentiful
Dispensation of Grace, and a sweet sound of well-tuned Harps; al-be-it none
could either hear, or learn, their Song, but themselves.

Finally, we acknowledge, That the Gates of Hell never prevayled, or shall
prevayle, against the Church: but yet, they have often assailed her,
strangely. And thus, in what-so-ever sense, your Assumption, Philomathes,
(That the Church of Rome, has only, of all Companies in the World, for
many Ages, retained the name of CHRIST, and any Worship thereof) is either
deceitfullie sophistical, or evidentlie false. And so your Conclusion comes
to naught.


Philadelphus. This poynted Syllogism of yours, ( Eriphilus) E^bulus has so
blunted, as it will scarce serve to prick a Pudding. And if neither
CONTINVANCE can be a proper Mark of the Church; and being modified, so as it
may best seem to be one, yet is falselie assumed of Rome; I see no better
Conclusion, but that we let her continue the Mother of Whoordomes, and that
we seek the BRYDE, where She may be better found out.

Of Propers, it is a Property, that ever
Of their own Subjectes, they are surely said:
Satan shall never CHRIST from His Church dissever.
Continuance yet can not, tho, be made
Her proper Mark: let see how she it had
The very moment of her first Creation.
Some tract of Time must be, of force, fore-layde,
Where it is made a proper Praedication.
This Point is als accorded amongst Clerks,
No Common Cases can be Proper Marks.

Philomathes. Well, ( Eubulus) giving you, that the Church continued not
al-wayes in one, and the same Condition, of obtaining Truth; and, that,
possibly, Error might have prevayled in the whole Church, in common, but not
universally, in each within it: yet, except some visible, and seen Company,
(how small so-ever) may be produced by you, who have professed your Faith, and
Doctrine; to whom you may, with any show of Reason, acclayme the Title of the
true Body; and so, lay over, on us, the name, and blame, of the Sore: what is
all your reasoning, but a poor, and very improbable Paralogisme, A posse, ad
esse, as Schools speak? And the point of our Syllogism, is not yet so far
blunted, as Philadelphus would make it.


Eubulus. To evince the possibility, it sufficiently meets VI.
all your Men: who, against our Demonstrations, of GOD His Truth with us, and
the Apostasy of the Church of Rome, oppose, al-wayes, and only, to us, the
impossibility, that any such Case should befall the Church. So as mine
Argument is not, as you speak, A posse, ad esse: but, of that where-of we
evidentlie evince the Esse, and you deny the Posse, to clear the certayntie
of both. But I see whither you tend: for you come, now, to vnder-proppe your
declyning CONTINVANCE, with as weak a Warrant, of VISIBILITIE; which is your
Man's next Mark, and which I have, all-readie, so marred, with that which has
been said to CONTINVANCE, as I shall have but small a do to hogh the Proppe;
that, so, both may tumble down, in the Dust, to-gether.


Eriphilus. I pray you, ( Philomathes) go forward, to the Mark of
VISIBILITIE: which, in the Continuance of the Church, comes most fitly to
be considered. And, this Mark shall best clear our Church, and make Eubulus
to be seen, in all his Subtilties: For, so shall a Church be found to have
continued, if she has continued visible: And you will perceive Eubulus so
pintched, with this Note, as he will vanish away, in his Invisibilitie; and
will give us a Church. continuing, for-sooth, a thousand years, by miere
imagination.


Eubulus. If I did so far distrust our Cause, ( Eriphilus) VII.
as that I would, there-fore, seek to escape by Subtilties, why would I have
suffered my self, (and that vnnecessarilie) to be drawn a-side, by you, to
so idle a Disputation, about that, where-of it is shame, for any resolved
Christian, once to make question? For, how-so-ever, that, for Philomathes
better satisfaction, I was, and am, contented to deal thus; yet, what a
senseless thing, in effect, is this, That the Truth of GOD, (so clearlie
revealed, and, which, by any, having Spiritual Eyes, is as easily discerned
from Error, as Light is from Darkness) for Man's vain humor, should be put
to this form, and Rule of Trial; That, except it may be cleared, where, and
with whom, it has visiblie continued, we will prowdlie, and rebelliouslie,
reject it? Which is no less, yea, much more, both ridiculous, and unjust;
than, if the Sun, long lapped up, under Clouds, and, there-after, breaking
forth, brightlie, should, therefore, by Dolts, be denied, to be the true
Sun; and, that it were but some Counterfey^, and never-before-seene Comet:
Because, for-sooth, their weak Eyes had not continually perceived, all the
particular progress of it. Whereas, in any true Sparkle of a Godly, and
Christian Disposition, and right Spiritual Wisdom, we should thus reason:
This is, evidentlie, the Truth of GOD; and, there-fore, how-so-ever it has
not appeared, to continue, or keep place; yet, I am certain, that it has
never, all-to-gether, failed, from amongst GOD His Children. Andt, his is
Haeresie. There-fore, how great place so-ever it has had, or, how long
so-ever it has borne swey, even in the Holy ^vel. 11. ^.
City, and Court of the Temple, yet it is clearlie to be casten out.

And, in the beginning of our Dispute, I laid such Grounds, of the Evidencie,
and Sufficiency of Holy Scripture, for full Resolution, in these Points; as
I might, well anough, have excused my self, from diverting, thus vaynlie, with
you, to these Questions, either of Continuance, or Visibilitie; if I were in
any such peril, by your Praerogatiues in them, as you praesume. But, this
clears you, ( Eriphilus) that you are, now, come to your strongest piece: for
any fear where-of, I will not yet so far vanish, as you wiene: But, even
dismasking your Man, of this vain, and so-much-vaunted-of Visard, of
Visibilitie, I will, GOD willing, show him, in discerning of GOD His Church, to
be visiblie blind: and, will not give you a Church, by imagination, but,
continuing, all-wayes, reallie, and visible, though not to Mules.


Philomathes. Verily, you make me though not to vanish, yet to wonder at a
little; That you confess, the true Church, to have been all-wayes visible:
and, will make me wonder, yet more, if you perform what you promise. For, I
ever imagined, that all your Defense, in this Point, had been, to claim unto
the Invisibilitie of the Church. But, you have sharpened mine Appetite, to
hear you of this Matter. Thus, then, our Poet speaks of this Mark.


CHAPTER V.
VISIBLE.
THis is another Mark most clear, Neque (...) (...) res^e (...) non potest
(...) Christian^: ^ (...) (...) v^ra, si (...) (...) (...) p^ times, and (...)
tati^ ab (...) bus s^pscrit. (...) ill^ (...) (...) (...). Arn^ius, 3. adversus
^tes. ^reger. Na^n. orat. 21. d^ ^d. Ath^nasii. ^ee who pro^eth one, and ^ same
Do^ne of Faith, ^ fellow-part^er of the same ^ayre: but who maintains a
^trarie ^eth, is to be ^ounted an ^versarie, al^it even sitting the Chair. ^d
this, in^de, has the ^ne, but that ^er has the ^e matter, and ^eth of
Succes^n.

The Church of God must still appear,
As a City upon an Hill,
Shine, and continue still,
As a light, on a Candle-sticke,
Such is the Church Catholic.
Our Savior says, If one offend,
And will not be ruled by his Friend,
Tell the Church, without delay.
And if he will not then obey,
Do thou esteem such a man,
An Heathen, or a Publicane.
Is not this the Church, where-in we see,
Two hundredth Bishops, thirty three,
To have succeeded each other,
Since the time of Saynct Peter?
Show me this Mark in you,
And I will say, your Faith is true.
If it be not the Church of Rome,
Then will I be converted soon.
Eubulus. This is your Man's third Mark, and which you have brought, to bear
up your decaying CONTINVANCE. I.
But, I say, ( Philomathes) that no more can VISIBILITIE be a proper Mark of
the Church, than could CONTINVANCE; for, it is a common accident, of all
visible creatures: So as, al-be-it I should yield as much of Visibilitie, as I
confessed of Continuance, yet would it but serve for a Negative Conclusion,
against others; but for no Affirmative Demonstration of your own Church: And,
thus, still, through all, your Man's main Proposition prooveth vain.


Philomathes. I must confess, that Visibilitie, no more than Continuance, is a
proper Note of the Church: For you have clearlie evinced it. Yet, as, out of
our Man, I framed an Argument, before, upon Continuance; so, now, I will, from
Visibilitie, (even a common Accident, as you call it) conclude, not only
negatiuelie, against your Church; but; affirmatiuelie, of the Church of Rome.
And, I reason thus:


The Church of CHRIST is al-wayes visible. But, for many Ages, no Church was
visible, but the Church of Rome. There-fore, the Church of Rome, is the only
Church of CHRIST.

Eubulus. Such an affirmative Conclusion, jumpe, as was II.
your former, upon CONTINVANCE; by a deceiving consequence, upon the presumed
Defectes of others. Which, as it beguiled you, in your CONTINVANCE, so will it
fail you here also, for it is the very same. And, as I so over-threw your
Argument, from CONTINVANCE, that you were feign to flee to Visibilitie, for
succor: so will I make, now, the weakness of this your Reason, from
Visibilitie, not only visible, but even palpable also. Where-in, yet, I will
not waste time, to show, how ridiculouslie, vainlie, and impertinentlie, he
labors, to prove the Proposition, of this his Syllogism. That has been
oftener showed, than he has syllables in his Proper Ballad: neither will I
insist, to expose his folly, in bringing bare personal Succession, (and not
that which all orthodox Fathers call the principal, and proper succession) and
but of one particular Church, (as if it had failed in all other Churches) for
stablishing of his Assumption. What is true Succession, and who are true
Successors, and how vnjustlie either are appropriated, or attributed to Rome,
I have cleared elsewhere. I come to the point it Defe^e of Sect. 4. Defense of
Sect. ^3. and
self: whereof, al-be-it I have already written at such length, as I might
be well excused, to refer you wholly there-to, (my Books passing so
commonly in the Country) yet, because in this Mark, as in the top of your
strength, you glory most, I will, GOD willing, in few words, unfold your
Error. This then, ( Philomathes) is the Major, or Proposition of your
Argument: The Church of CHRIST is always visible.


Philomathes. And you have, al-readie, as I think, granted it: neither see I,
(though you would recall your word) what, goodly, you can say against it.


Eubulus. I am to recall nothing of that I have said: but III.
yet I must clear, in what sense this your Position is to be admitted, for
pulling your men from their ordinary Starting-Hole of Aequivocation. For,
how-so-ever, I will still grant, that, in some respects, the Church of CHRIST
is always visible: yet, I will deny your Proposition, if, from a restrict
Case, you draw it to an absolute Assertion, because, in some consideration, the
Church is invisible. And, to clear this: In respect of the matter of the
Church, (which is Men) and, in respect of the common outward form, (in the
public and common Ensign of Profession, and worship) we confess, the Church
to be, and, al-wayes to have been, visible. But, in respect of her inward
form, and the purpose of Grace, (where-on chiefelie the Truth of the Church
hangs) she is invisible. And, the LORD knows, who are His. Schools do
call the one, Ratione^ Signi; and, the other, Ratione^ Beneplaciti. And, seeing
it is an Article of our Faith, to believe the Church; and, that Faith, is of
things, which are not seen; it follows, of necessity, that in some (and
that a most principal) respect, the Church is invisible. For, to be believed,
and to be seen, can not consist. Yea, this is so evident a truth, as
Bellarmine is forced to confess it: these are his words, Melius dico in
Ecclesia aliquid videri, Eccles. lib. 3. cap. 15.
and aliquid credi; videmus enim eum coetum qui est Ecclesia; sed quod ille
coetus sit ipsa vera CHRISTI Ecclesia non videmus, sed credimus: that is, I
say, better that in the Church some thing is seen, and some thing is believed;
for we see that Company which is the Church; but, that that Company is the
self true Church of CHRIST, we see not, but believe it. The one consideration,
discerns Christians, true or false, from open Idolaters, and Heathen men: the
other, distinguishes true Christians, from outward professors only, and
common worshippers. Now, as these distinct Considerations should be
sophisticallie confounded; so you see, ( Philomathes) that your Proposition,
taken absolutely, were deceitfullie false.


Philomathes. Even so much as you grant, will serve me for concluding of mine
Argument; so, as I need not impugn your Distinction, or disadvow ought that
Bellarmine says* I plead, but that the Church is ever visible, Ratione
Signi, (as you speak) that is, that the true, and Orthodox external worship,
and worshippers, have been al-wayes visible. For, it must be some external
Sign, falling under Sense, and outward perception, which must be a Mark of
the Church, as you have evinced against us, eve^ by our Bellarmine's suffrage:
and, there-vpon, did bereave us of our first Mark of CATHOLIC, or
UNIVERSALITY.


Eubulus. As you even modifie your Proposition, ( Philomathes) IV.
yet it implies a deceit, which you bewray, by your own Gloss: That is, (say
you) that the true, and Orthodox Worship, and Worshippers, have al-wayes been
visible. Which, if you do mean in this Sense, that, al-wayes, by the common
Ensign of public Profession, ( Ratione Signi) it might ever have been
discerned, where the true Worship, and true Worshippers were, and might have
been seen; I will heartily yield you it. But, if he^e-by, (as your Men
plead) you would signify, that, all-wayes, and in common, lawful, and true
Worship, and, lawful, and true Worshippers, have so far obtained, and borne
swey, as whatso-ever, in common, held place in the Church, that was to be
esteemed Truth: then, I still deny, even your modified Proposition. And, it is
still one, and the same Fallacy, wherein, before, in the Mark of Continuance,
you did fall; and which, at length, I elided there. In my Distinction, Signi,
and Beneplaciti, I told you, even now, That by the visible Ensign,
Christians, in common, good, or bad; or Orthodox, or otherwise, were discerned
from Forraigners, and Heathen men. Now, heere-vpon, to infer, That, by the
common, visible Ensign, (in the co^munitie of Christians) true, and Orthodox
Worshippers; or, true, and Orthodox Worship, are discerned, from false, and
adulterous, both under the same common Ensign; you may see, how chyldish
Sophistry it were. If Satan had but one way, of assayling the Church, namely,
by open, and avowed Hostility: and, if none, but lawful, and Orthodox
Worshippers, were under it; then, had you reason, to make the common Ensign,
of Visible Profession, a sure Mark, not only of Christians, in common, but
even of true Christians al-so; at least, of lawful outward worship. But,
seeing, that, both, by Scripture, and many fold Experience, we know, that, by
no mean, he has, so effectually prevayled, as, by transforming himself, in
an Angel of Light; and, under pretense of the common Ensign, to adulterate all
lawful worship; of necessity, for discerning the true Church, or approoved
lawful Worship, from the Abomination of Desolation, (both of them ( in
sanctis Ecclesiae locis) under one, and the same Ensign, of Christian
Profession) we must advert, ^l. 13. 11.
not only whose Horns are pretended; but also, whose Mouth speaks. So as,
still, you may see, that even Visibilitie must be reduced unto, and examined,
by our only demonstratiue Mark, which, in the beginning of our Disputation,
I laid down.


Philomathes. I love so greatly to be resolved, especially in this so main,
and maynlie controverted a Point, as I will come farther with you, than, I know,
our Church will allow me: and, give you this, That even Error, might
possibly have taken place, in the whole Church, in common: (which Case I did,
not obscurelie, put, at the beginning of our Conference, about this Mark) yet,
seeing we accord in this, That CHRIST has ever had a true Church: and, seeing
that you yield me this, al-so, That the same is al-wayes visible, in respect
of the matter thereof, [MEN] and external form of Profession: (which is, of
necessity, a certain truth; in so far, as not only with the Heart we
believe to Righteousness, but also, with the Mouth, we confess unto
Salvation.) How-so-ever, it either has, or might have fallen, that most part
were misscarried, and that Adulterous worship, and Worshippers, have had chief
Rowme, and been most conspicuous, and visible: Yet, how can you deny, but
some number, at least, behooved to be, al-wayes, of lawful Worshippers, and
holding the Orthodox Faith: who, both in their persons, and in their Worship,
were visible, even in time of greatest Corruption?


Eubulus. Your upright Dealing, and desire of Resolution, V.
( Philomathes) makes me to let that freely with you, which, with others, I
would, perhaps, have longer stuck unto. For bringing you, then, to your
Wishes, I grant your Proposition, in your last declared Sense, to be true. But
then, I say, of your Assumption, ( No Church has remained visible, but the
Church of Rome) that it has the same fallacy in it, which I opened, and
refelled at length, in the same Assumption of Continuance. For, if by the
Church of Rome, you mean the common body, of the whole visible Church, albeit
even affected, with the over-going Evil; and on which, for more effectual
deceit, tyrannically the name of the beast sitting there-in, was by him
imposed: then is your Assumption sophisticallie deceitful, in reasoning, A
dici, (from, So called) ad esse, (to, So is) and, concluding, from the Body
absolutely, to the Gangrene, or Sore in it, or, contrary-wayes, from the Evil
in the Body, to the Body affected therewith, in common, but not
universally; as before I showed. And, upon your Assumption, thus understood,
your Conclusion will not follow. But, if by the Church of Rome, your Assumption
means the Evil, and Sore, against which only it is that we plead, and not
against the common Body, where-of we are; then, is it manifestly false: and,
so, your Conclusion fails.


Philomathes. But, except you clear to me, how, in that Body, besides that
which you do call the over-going Sore, there were some visible parts,
brooking Health, and that visiblie; I must still think, that your subtle
Distinction, of the Body, from the Sore, is but vain. For, I pray you, for
many Ages, who were seen, or known, to have any differing Profession? or,
to have resisted, and condemned, the Church of Rome?


Eubulus. Now, consider, ( Philomathes) how aequitablie VI.
you require that of me. For, first, How-so-ever it may be easily seen, and
shown, in a Body, but contracting a Disease, while, as yet, all Members are
not much infected, or affected therewith: or, again, in a Body,
convalescing, while either all the Body is al-most freed from the Sickness,
or, at least, the strongest, and noblest parts, have expelled the Disease;
al-be-it, perhaps, the D^egges thereof rest, a space, in the extremities of
Hands, or Feet, and keep them swollen. Yet, ( Philomathes) it shall be
hardly shown in a Body, in the prevayling height, and main Fit of the
Sickness, when it has so far obtained, as all parts of that Body, in
common, are, either infected, or, at least, heavilie affected, yea, and even
much afflicted there-by; so, as no part can be separablie shown, brooking,
apart, perfect health, without either Infection, or Affection. And, yet, even
in such a Case, a Skillful man, beholding, and considering, will perceive,
evidentlie, that it is a living, al-be-it a sick Body: yea, that such
Strength, of natural Vigor, yet remains there-in, al-be-it nowhere
unaffected, which, both, resists the wasting Disease, even in the very
Paroxisme, and, in end, by prevailing vital power, and help of right
Medicine, expels it. For, as in such a Body, if no remnant were of vital
Vigor, all Sense, and Motion, should be quyte extinguished: So, in a Body,
totallie affected, and afflicted, al-be-it not universally infected, it were a
monstrous, and unnatural thing, in such a Case, to see any part of the Body,
apart, no-thing affected; al-be-it there will, even in that Body, be parts,
not infected: where-in, as in a citadle life, and health residing, they from
thence, both fight against the over-going Evil, and, at last, become
victorious over it. Of the Church of Sardis, it it said, ^vel. 3. 1.
That, having a name, that she lived, yet she was dead; and, notwith-standing,
is exhorted, to strengthen the parts which remained, and were ready to die.
And, even in this miserable Case, the LORD witnesses, That even there, He had
a few names, which had not defiled their garments: and, these yet still lived,
in the communion of that same Church, and were not known by any visible
separation, from the rest of that Body. For, separation is neither requisite,
nor lawful, till all hope of Cure be past. And, thus, neither were the
faithful ones under Antichristian tyranny, till, after long tolleration, and
much heaviness, for the waxing Evil, at last, laboring to have cured it,
they were cruelly murdered, and, lay, barbarously, unburied, and, insolentlie
mocked, in the streets of Babell, which neither would, nor could be cured.
And, then, leaving her, as a burnt Mountain, being, by divine warrant,
commanded, to Come up hither, they did separate themselves, not from the
Church, but from the Contagions, and incurable Evil, in the Church, but not of
it. For, we would feign have cured Babell, but she would not. Next, (
Philomathes) how-so-ever lightened men, each in their own times, even in most
desperate state, and condition, both might, and did see, some pure remnant,
which were well known to the godly, then; yet, how absurdlie is any account
of them required of succeeding Ages, to whose knowledge (through repressing and
suppressing tyranny, of such as disposed of all Records at their pleasure)
nothing did come, but what obtained commonly in that time? In despite of all
which, notwith-standing, so much testimony has remained, as may satisfy, and
certify, any upright mind, That still Truth was in the Church, and in all
Ages had its own Assertours; al-be-it not all, in a like degree of
contestation, even in most corrupt times; as the Gatalogues of them, drawn up
by our Men, for meeting this your Objection, make manifest, if you please with
an impartial Heart to read them.

More-over, here, again, ( Philomathes) you stumble, at a double Deceit, in
the word VISIBLE: in that, not only, you conclude, That, what-so-ever is
visible, is, al-so, seen: but, therewith, al-so, upon no open resisting, you
infer no being, most absurdlie. All men know, that from Tolleration, to
Approbation, you can never stablish a Conclusion. Many will, and, for many
Respects, tolerate that, which they are so far from approoving, as they will
utterly abhor it. And, (to keep our former similitude) how many have you
seen, subject to great, and dangerous Diseases, and having their Bodies
repleat with vicious Humors; who, yet, while they could retain any
reasonable condition of Health, would not adventure, to move the Body; by
expelling, with perilous Medicaments, the nociue Humors? The Church of
Pergamus, tolerated what she neither approoved, Reve^ ^
nor communicated therewith: but lurked, even where Satan's Throne was;
keeping the Name of GOD, who knew her Dwelling, and Case. Physicians come not
to Burning, and Cutting, till the Evil be, not only desperate, but, al-so,
that the Life of the Body is in danger there-by. Your Romish Evil, (
Philomathes) did grow on slowly, and by Degrees; and came not to the top of
Impiety at once: so, as the Degrees of Contestation, in difference of time,
and diverse degrees of a waxing Evil, behooved to be much diverse. And,
neither could the Case admit, or was it the LORD His will, that Contestation
should be, in the highest degree, till the Impiety came to the highest:
though, even in the Growth, and subtle Success, of that Mystery of
Iniquity, many, both mislyked it, and mourned for it: keeping, themselves,
the Name of GOD, and uttering, in their own times, not obscure Signs of their
Miscontentment.

The other Point, where-in you are deceived, and which, in the first rowme, I
propounded, is; That upon Visibilitie, you conclude Sight. But, many things,
and many times, will be visible, which yet are not al-wayes seen. Does not
Experience teach us, how hardly one Man will be found out amongst a
thousand, eve^ by such as do both know him, and search after him? how long,
then, may he lurk unseen, of such as neither know him, nor think of him?
And, in the midst of so great Repressing and Suppressing Tyranny, what
marvel, though they were, in common, unseen, as not only being few, but
forced also to lurk, and by GOD His Gracious Providence, covered from their
Enemies fury? This beguyleth you, ( Philomathes) that you account, no worship
either to be at all, or to be visible, but which is separatelie openly, and
avowedlie practiced, in the common view of all men. Which, manifold
Experience, and clear Scripture, teaches us, to be an absurd Conception:
and, which Case, neither that course of time, and of the Evil, by GOD His
permission, waxing, and obtaining in it, could suffer: and, which, in the wise
purpose of GOD His admirable Dispensation, was neither needful, nor expedient.


Eriphilus. Did I not devine, rightly, ( Eubulus) to what pintches this Point
would drive you? When all is done, what do you, but vanish away, in your
Invisibilitie; giving us a Church, by miere imagination? A Church, invisiblie
visible, and, visiblie invisible. Are you not ashamed, so to dally? Our Church
was al-wayes visible, (say you) but it was not seen: and, I pray you, what a
visible Church, is that, which none does see?


Eubulus. Ajax, transported with fury, ( Eriphilus) did VII.
slay many sakelesse Sow, in stead of Ulysses. And, you are, now, in great
chafe, with your own Shadow. I did not say, neither ever minded I to say, That
none did see our Church: but, I, justly, taxed a false Conclusion, led from
VISIBILITIE, to common, and continual seeing. For, many things are visible,
which yet neither are, in common, nor al-wayes seen. And, this makes not our
Church invisiblie visible; but it shows him, who will deny it, to be
visiblie blind. I acknowledge, That, how-so-ever Antichristian Darkness, has
over-gone the whole Church, in common, yet that ever still, with-in the
compass of that Usurpation, under the common Ensign, were numbers of true,
and lawful Worshippers, and, a true, and lawful Worship: which were,
al-wayes, visible, by the Ensign, and common Body: as white is visible, in
the rucke and heap, how-so-ever covered with the over-going Chafe, or Strae,
till the Fanner come, and purge the Floor. And, to come yet more near, (
Eriphilus) I say, That they were not only visible in this sort, but, al-so, in
their persons, and practice of pure Worship: and, that they were seen, al-so,
al-be-it not, in common, perceived. For, many things, will be both visible,
and seen, al-so, which yet will escape perception, even of the Seers. Yea,
which you will yet, perhaps, more admire, I affirm, That they were not only
visible, and seen, but perceived, al-so; though not in common, nor of the
blinded worldly sort, (which was the LORD His Providence, for their
preservation;) but only of their Rev. 14
sealed Brethren, who were brought from the Earth; and, being spiritual
Virgins, only got Eyes, to see, and perceive; and, Ears, to hear, and
understand, that sweet, and hightuned Song, which the Beast's stupefied
Sectators could neither hear, nor learn. Now, then, though I affirm, and
that justly, That from Visibilitie, one may not conclude of seeing: neither,
from seeing, may one conclude of perceiving: neither, from both seeing, and
perceiving, of seeing, and perceiving, in common: yet I deny not, but freely,
and truly affirm, That our Church was all-wayes visible, seen, and
perceived, but not of such as had no Eyes. Do you not know, that many things
may be visible; which yet, through the blyndnesse of beholders, are not seen?
yea, and many things are seen, which even the seers, (through mis-regard, or
over-vayling mist, or GOD, in justice, benumming their Senses) yet, will not
take up, nor perceive: which, yet, the illuminated, will both see, and perceive
clearlie.

To reason, then, from Visibilitie, to common sight; or, from Visibilitie, and
common sight, to conclude common Perception; or, to conclude of what is not
seen, or perceived, in common, That it is not seen, or perceived, at all;
yea, is not visible; yea, is not at all; it is such a dead kind of
Argumentation, ( Eriphilus) as, where-in all your choler will never kindle the
life of good Logic. How many Papists, and how much Popish worship, is,
and that visible, within this YLAND, which, yet, is not seen, in common, or
perceived? Yea, ( Eriphilus) though I be visible, and you do, al-so, both
see, and hear me; yet, you neither perceive, nor understand me. How many
things will be lying, even hard by us; yea, before our Eyes; which, yet, will
we not, a long time, perceive, though, sedulouslie, seeking after them? I ask
you, ( Eriphilus) was not Lot; were not his Guestes, the Angels, (in their
condition, at that time;) were not his Wife, and Daughters; was not his House,
and the Gates thereof, visible?


Eriphilus. Does it agree with your pretended Gravitie, to ask of me, such
scornful Questions?


Eubulus. That you may see, how I do, very pertinentlie, I.
and seriously, ask this of you; I tell you, That, how visible so-ever they
were, yet they escaped the perception, ^ 11.
of all SODOM, even greedily groaping after them. The Sun was visible, yea,
and clearlie, both seen, ^. 21.
and shyning, in GOSHEN, when, not-with-standing, in all EGYPT, was palpable
Darkness. And, what wonder, then, though that great City, which,
spirituallie, Rev. 11. ^.
is called Sodom, and Egypt, did not see, or perceive, what, yet, was
visible, seen, and shyning, in the midst of her? And, what marvel, that they
are still so blind; as, not to perceive, how these former things, in GOD His
purpose, were Stampes of the like; but, greater Cases to fall out there-after?
Was either ELISHA, or SAMARIA, 2. King. 6.
or the Region, through which the ARAMITES were led, there-fore, either
invisible, or not seen of them; because GOD syled their Eyes; that seeing, yet
they should not perceive? But, ( Eriphilus) to be yet more plain, and to come
even close to your hand. As, before, I cleared, how the Church continued
al-wayes, al-be-it not al-wayes in one, and the same Condition: so, I tell you,
now, That the Church was ever, and in all Ages, visible; how-so-ever not
al-wayes in a-lyke measure of Health, and Spiritual Vigor: which is your Men's
gross Fallacy. A Man, even brought to bed with sickness, is no les visible,
than when he walked abroad, in perfect health, albeit neither seen of so many,
nor so healthful as before. Your men are ridiculous, in asking incessantly,
where our Church was, before Luther: whereas the Church now, the Church in
Luther's days, and the Church before his days, even upward, to the infancy
thereof, is, and was, still one, and the same Church, and always visible: but,
first, in health, and healthsom vigor: next, by degrees, contracting sickness:
at length, heavilie infected, affected, and afflicted, with that disease,
whereof you, Eriphilus, are dangerously sick, and Philomathes has somewhat
tasted also: and now is convalescing, through the Medicine of the Word and
Spirit: and alyke in all these cases, was ever, and is, visible, and seen also,
according to her distinct conditions, in diverse times. Neither have we
another Church, or a new Church, as your Doctors would persuade the Simple: but
the same Church; and a renewed Church. Neither have we forsaken the Unity, and
Communion of the Church, within which, and whereof we still are: but we have
forsaken Babel, in the Church which has ^firmed her self against al Cure.
For, howsoever the sick Body, was the Church, yet the Sickness oppugning,
and wasting the life thereof, was never the Church: and, albe-it in it, yet
never of it. Now, ( Eriphilus) you see, I am far from dallying, and, am come
to more plain Dealing, than, perhaps, well pleases you.


Philomathes. Verily ( Eubulus) I can not deny, but your Reasons are sound,
and solid; and, your Distinctions are subtle. But, it seems exceeding
strange, that any such Case, and so long a time, should have befallen the
Church of GOD: which makes me yet to suspect, that your Arguments, are more
out of subtlety of Logic, than according to the Verity of the Matter: and,
that, how-soever they evince, indeed, clearlie, a Possibility of such a Case:
yet, that any such Case, in truth, was, they will not conclude: And, it were
a rash Conception, so to think of holy Church. So that, according as* I said
before, you seem still to reason, but A posse, ad esse, from Possibility, to
Real existence, which will not necessarily follow.


Eubulus. I confess, ( Philomathes) that the Case is, and will seem, strange,
to any not acquaynted with the clear course of Scripture, and the LORD His
wise, and wonderful Dispensation, clearlie fore-tolde there-in, and fallen out
accordingly. For, the works of GOD are wonderful, and, He is marvelous, in
the Case of His Saynctes. As, great is the Mystery of Godliness; so, al-so,
is that of Iniquity. And, without true illumination, to know the Scriptures of
GOD, none ever shall attain, either to the healthsome Knowledge of the one, or
happy Discovery of the other. But, ( Philomathes) seeing you confess, That I
have clearlie evinced the Possibility of such Apostasy in the Church, as
where-by Error may take place, in common; and, that, yet, not-with-standing,
GOD may, very well, preserve Truth, and true, and lawful Worship, and
Worshippers, al-be-it, in common, vnperceived: and, considering the many, and
capital Points, wherewith so many famous Churches, now, so long time,
charge your Church of Rome: I ask you, If in this Case, you think her well
defended, with the pretended Impossibility of Erring? Or, if she has not
great reason, both to suspect, what possibly might befall her; and,
carefully, to descend, to an exact Trial, whether it has so befallen her,
or not?


Philomathes. Certaynlie, I think the weight of so great Points, as are in
Controversy, to-gether with the Challenge of so many Churches, require no
less, than that *IX
Matters be condignlie tried, and examined: and, that a proud Denial, will
not justify any, in such a Case.


Eubulus. Well, ( Philomathes) and, in so clearlie evinced X.
a Possibility of Apostasy, as requires a condign Trial; whether, think
you, is it the surest way, to put the stable Truth of GOD, revealed in His
Word, to this inaequitable, and unsure Condition; as either to approve it
self, by the Multitude, and Continuance of Holders, who, yet, may err, or,
then, to be rejected? Or, rather, to lay, for a sure Ground; That, seeing it
is Truth, there-fore, it ought to subdue all Minds, and take place against
all Praejudices, of Praescription, Praerogatiue of Holders, Times, Places, or
Persons? Because it depends, not on the unstable Humors of Men, who are but,
naturally, Liars, and, may be deceived. But, is, in it self, so clear; as,
being admitted, purelie, to plead for it self, it will, sufficiently,
approve, and, justify, it self, against all, how strongly so-ever grounded
Error; and all, either Quality, or Multitude of Mayntayners, or Praescription
of Time. In short, ( Philomathes) whether ought the Truth of GOD, to be
subject to Men? or, ought all Men, to be subject unto it? ^
And, which of these two Reasons, conclude strongest? and, on which, may a
Christian Soul, best rest? This has long had place, and Approbation, with
most Men: and, ^
there-fore, is the Truth. Or, this is GOD His Truth* there-fore, it ought to
have place, even against all praejudice what-so-ever. And, how-so-ever it has
appeared, to have been perished, from amongst Men; yet, certaynlie, it has
remained all-wayes.


Philomathes. Verily, I can not deny, but that it were a sacrilegious
remeritie, to subject the Truth of GOD, to Man: al-be-it, again, in the
Question, what is that Truth, I think, the judgment of the Church, and what
has long been held of Her, should be much regarded; and not rejected, without
great, and very clear Reasons.


Eubulus. That I yield you, ( Philomathes:) and truly, if, in ^I.
the present Point of our Disputation, we had or could bring no more, but, (as
you alleged) the Possibility of the case: where-of no Evidence might be
produced, that accordingly it had fallen out. And, if my Reasons, and
Distinctions, in this Matter, were but from quirkes of Logic, and not
according to clearelie-fore-tolde, and, accordingly, fallen-out Events, you
had the less reason to regard them. But, besides the Possibility, which I
have evinced; and besides the undoubted Truth it self, so clearlie delivered
in Scripture, as may sufficiently certify a Soul, that, accordingly, the
Case has fallen. The holy Ghost (for our farther Resolution) has also,
(according to both the Possibility, and the event, in effect, agreeable) so
clearlie fore-tolde the whole particular Case, and Course, as, I may boldly
say, to whom it appears strange, They are yet great Strangers, in the written
Word of GOD: and, in such great measure of Light, as now, in GOD'S singular
Mercy, is revealed, who disdain to learn, what even Artificers (in such open
and large offer of Grace) are holden to know, they are worthily blinded, in
GOD'S just indignation. We are not only forewarned, by the LORD Himself,
in the days of His flesh; and, agreeablie, w, 24.
there-after, by the Apostle Paul, of such a common Apostasy in the Church, as
where-by Antichrist should obtain a Throne, even in the Temple of GOD: but,
also, most amply, ^l. 2.
particularly, and delightfullie, under most goodly, and significant Types,
in the Book of the Revelation, the whole course of Story, is plainly, and at
length expressed. So, as ( Philomathes) I have not alleged what probably
might be* but what the holy GHOST has playnlie, and particulie, fore-tolde,
and, forewarned us, should come to pass: and, which, accordingly, we see
clearlie performed. Yo^ Men are deceived, because they know neither the
^criptures, nor the Power of GOD. And, I am so far from seeking subtle
Evasions, in this Argument, as, I, vprightlie, protest, in the Presence of HIM,
Whom I serve, in the GOSPEL of HIS Son; That, (laying aside the very self
clear, and infallible Grounds of Truth, delivered in Scripture, whereupon
against all, either Probabilities* or Praesumptions, our Faith may, and must,
solidlie rely) there is no Reason, in the World, so effectual, to assure my
Soul, of the Verity of our Religion, and, that we are of CHRIST His true
Church; as are the very chief things, which our Adversaries do object
against us. Neither any so pregnant a Motive, to persuade me, (laying aside
the consideration of their plain haereticall Opinions) that they are the
Antichristian Body; as even those things, where-in they do, chiefelie, and,
most insolentlie, glory. Which, to clear unto you, at such length, and in
such evidence, as I well could, and, the Matter, al-so, requires; it were a
longer Speech, than this short Occasion of Conference affords us. But, if you
list to take pains, you may read, what I have, at more length, written
hereof, in my DISPVTATIONS, FOR OUR CALLINGES, and, in my COMMENTARY, on
Revel. 11. and 14
the REVELATION. Which, with the little that I have now said, when you have
more deeply considered; then, if you remain yet unsatisfied, how-so-ever I
neither love, to contend with the Humourous, nor to multiplye Babbling, upon
Blocks; yet, I will, at your Desire, not stick, to take more pains, upon
your Ingenuitie.


Philomathes. I will, GOD willing, read those Books, whereunto you have
sharpened mine Appetite, by that which you have now spoken: having, there-by,
so filled mine Heart, with great Doubts, of such things, as I accounted
inexpugnable points: that, I can not choose, but to insist, till I be settled,
as it shall please GOD to inform me, in that which is the right Way of His
Fear.


Philadelphus. How invisible so-ever we be, ( Eriphilus) and how short
so-ever you be of sight, yet, I hope, you may, now, perceive your own foil,
in the chief Flower of your Forces: so, as Eubulus has not (as you presumed)
evanished, in Invisibilitie, but, has made all your, long, and vaynlie vaunted
of, Visibilitie, to vanish, in a vain Smoke.

What Is visible; but, there-to Visibilitie,
In common, does, though not a-lyke, conveane?
Why should the Bryde, without all Probability,
Visible hers, then singularly, wiene?
Things visible, attour, are not aye seen:
And things even seen, yet will escape Perception,
Of lightened Men: and what perceived been,
Mules against that, will madlie make Exception.
The Church was aye seen, visible, perceived:
Of clear, but no of rakie Eyes, that raved.

Philomathes. Whether we have any such Foil, as you allege; or, you such
Victory, as you presume, ( Philadelphus) you are al-wayes ready to sing your
own Triumph. But, now, al-be-it we have, indeed, al-readie passed through
these Marks, where-in we esteem our selves strongest; and, that Eubulus has
(I must confess) answered, more than I exspected: yet, I pray you, let us
hear what he has to say against the rest. The next Mark, is UNITY: and thus
our Poet speaks of it.


CHAPTER VI.
UNITY. Chrysostom. Homil. 46, in Matthew. He goes not out of the Church, who
goes out bodily; but he who spirituallie leaves the Fundaments of
Ecclesiastical Truth* We went out from them, in regard of place; but, they,
from us, in regard o^ Faith. We have left, with them, the Fundamentes o^
Walls: but, they have left, with us, the Fundaments of Scriptures. Speciosum
qu^dem nomen est pacis, and pulchra est opi^ vnitatis: sed q^ ambigat (...) s^
Ecclesia atque Evangelior^ v^tam p^ce^ esse qu^ Christi est* Hilar* lib. contr.
(...)* and alios Arri^s* Hand ill^ ^ Ecclesia pac^ disc^, imo (...) conseq^
fidei loade^ qui a (...) perfidia sa segrega^, and (...) tagio crimi^ discod^.
Cypr. (...) de U^tat. Eccl^

THis is another Mark, truly,
The Church must have UNITY:
As our Savior has fore-tolde,
One Shepherd, and one Sheep-folde:
One is my Spouse, one is my Love;
One is my Darling, and my Dove.
This is His House, and, at some-tyme,
He does resemble it to a Vine:
HIS Father is the Husbandman;
A Branch is every Christian.
This is HIS Body mystical,
The which HE does HIS Kingdom call,
Where-of Saynct Peter had the Keys,
And his Successors have all-wayes.
This is the Pillar, and the Ground,
Where-in all Truth is to be found.
So, lyke-wyse, Saynct Paul says,
One Baptism, and one Faith,
And, one LORD JESUS;
Have no Dissension amongst you.
Show me any Company,
That in all Points do agree:
Except the Holy Church of Rome,
Then will I be converted soon.
Eubulus. That which, as I think, I have evinced, of all your Man's former
Marks, I affirm, of this also; That, it is, impertinentlie, yea, falselie,
produced, for a proper Mark of the Church: in so far, as it is a common
condition of many things, yea, all things that are, ( hoc ipso quod sunt,
anum sunt) even in that they are, they are, in that same, one; as all Schools
acknowledge. The Devils are united; for, Satan's Kingdom is not divided
against it self: And, Briggands, ^. 25. ^. 14.
banded to rob, and sheede Blood, are one. So, as still, you see, that your
Man's main Proposition, of his main Argument, is vain, and sophistical.
Neither will UNITY, in all points, ever conclude more of the Church of CHRIST,
than of the Antichristian body, except UNITY, in all points, be modified:
and, of an indefinite UNITY, it be defined, an UNITY, in all points, of
Truth. To which, only demonstratiue Mark, (as I have showed of all the
former;) so, this of UNITY, must be reduced also, if there-on, you would
build any sure Conclusion. For, of the Antichristian Company, the holy
Ghost, has in plain Terms, fore-tolde, These have one mind, and shall give
their power, and authority, to the verse. ^.
Beast: and a little after, For GOD has put in their Hearts, to fulfill his
will; and to do, with one consent, for to give their Kingdoms to the Beast,
until the words of GOD be fulfilled. And, this is, indeed, that UNITY,
where-of your Men, so much glory, even a Conspiracy in Error, and no true
UNITY in Truth; as their manifold, and shameless Shiftings, (in a clear
evidence, of a selfe-accusing-guiltinesse) from subduing their doctrine, to
just examination, by Scripture, the sole Rule of Verity, make more than
manifest. Now, Satan never yet envyed UNITY, in Error: or, ZEAL, in
Superstition.


Philomathes. Well: to let this go with you, of UNITY, which you have,
indeed, evinced, of the former: that it is no proper Mark: yet, as I said,
and you also admitted of the others: so, you can not deny, of UNITY, but that
it is a true Attribute of the Church: and, that, therefore, our Man's Argument,
for the Church of Rome, concludes very clearlie, thus:


The Church of CHRIST, must be a Company, keeping Unity, in all Points.

But, only, of all Companies, the Church of Rome, keeps Unity, in all
Points.

There-fore, the Church of Rome, is the only true Church of CHRIST.

Eubulus. I will not quarrel the form of your Syllogism, II.
for that your Assumption, has the nature of a negative Position. I say, your
Proposition is sophistical; and, your Assumption, shamelessly, false:
where-by, your Conclusion comes to naught. As for the Proposition, though you
should modifie your indefinite, all Points, to definitlie, all Points, of
Truth: yet has it in-folded a deep Deceit. For, if it be understood, of All
Points of Truth, so absolutely, as, who keep not Unity, in all, and every
point thereof, be excluded from the Title of CHRIST HIS Church: then is your
Proposition perniciouslie false. And, your Man would but, fraudule^tlie, put
forth a bloody Table of Proscription, where-by, cruelly, to forfault many
good Christian, and Church, from the Communion of the Body, even by a
deceitful confounding, of what-so-ever points of Truth, and, what-so-ever
degrees of Division, or Dissension: which must be wyselie, and carefully,
distinguished. For, there be many points of Truth, wherein diversity of
judgment, breaks not the Unity of the Church: Yea, and many Divisions, and
Dissentions, which, yet, divyde not the dissenting Members, one from another:
or, if one from another, yet, neither of them from the Head, or common Body;
from which those, only, may be said, absolutely, to fall, which hold not
the Head, or, subvert, directly, and with pertinacie, the Foundation. For,
many, in weakness, will hold Opinions, which, in-deede, do even choppe
against the Foundation, by clear, and necessary Consequence; but not
immediately, or directly. So, as, if you should challenge the Holders, of
that which their opinion does import, they will not only deny it, but eve^
abhor the sequel of that which they maintain, but not with that mind. And,
it were great want of Charity, to judge a-lyke of these, and of the others.
We are all, here, still, compassed with Infirmity; knowing, but in part,
and, prophesying, but in part. In which Case, the Apostle, charitablie,
advyseth, That, Who are perfect, they be so minded: and, if any be
other-wayes minded, that the LORD 5.
will reveal it unto them: but that, in the time, in that where-to we are
come, we ought to proceed, by one Rule, mynding the same things. I confess,
and many hundreths do regrate it, with Tears, That the Infirmity of Men's
minds, too far in selfe-wiening, wedded to their own Sense, and, not
humbly receiving Information, or, charitablie comporting, with weak Brethren,
(according to the Apostle's Rule) both has bred, and still breeds, too many
bitter, and unnecessary Distractions, and scandalous Schisms; about such
things, as, if Humility, and Love, had overruled Men's Affections, neither
were, nor are, of such Moment, where-fore the Unity of Men, holding still one,
and the same Head, and, keeping one, and the same Foundation, should be so
lightly broken, or, the Peace of GOD His House troubled: But, the weakness,
and, not duelie-mortified Humors of Men, makes not the Truth of GOD to
fail. That Dissentions, and Divisions are, it declares Men, to be, yet, in
that part, carnal: but, it does not separate them, from the common Body, so
long as they hold one, and the same LORD, one Faith, one Hope, one Baptism,
and are united in one, and the same Spirit: no more, than did this Defect, in
the Church of Corinth; which, al-be-it, that, heere-fore, the Apostle did
rebuke, as carnal, ^h. 3. 1.
in that; yet, he still did entitle, with the Name of CHRIST His Church. And,
though, by any such Schism, either a Person, or Company, should be divided,
from particular, either Church or Churches; it will not, therefore, follow,
(and I think, none dare avouch it) that, there-fore, they are separated from
the Head, or common Body: so, to make them in a-lyke Case, with haereticall
Subverters of the Foundation, and, Deserters of the Head. We see, by
Experience, in natural Bodies, That, by inflicted Wounds, such Gaps will be
made, as the sides of the Wound, either from other, will start a-sunder: and,
so, one part of the Body, by a separating Wound, will be severed from another
part: which, both, will yet remain still united in the common Body, and, be
part-takers of one, and the same common Sense, Motion, and Life, from one, and
the same Head, and Heart. Thus ( Philomathes) your Poet's Proposition,
absolutely affirmed, is false; even when he has modified his indefinite, All
Points, to all Points, of Truth.


Philomathes. That no Unity argues any Company, to be CHRIST'S Church, but
Unity in Truth, I must needs confess it: and, that every diversity of
opinion, or every degree of Distraction, does not separate the dissenters, or
distracted, mutuallie from other; or, at least, either of them from the common
Body, and Head, I cannot deny, but that you have evinced it clearlie. Yet, so
many, and so material, are the Divisions amongst your Churches, and your
Quarrels are debated so bitterly: and, again, so great is the Harmony, and
Concord, of the Romish Church, as, I think, gives just Reason, to suspect of
you, that you are not, nor can not, be united, as you spoke, in one, and the
same LORD, Faith, Hope, Baptism, and Spirit: and, that the Church of Rome,
has only, and evidentlie, this Honor.


Eubulus. Now, ( Philomathes) you put the Life of your III.
Syllogism, in the Hands of your Assumption, to stand, or fall, therewith.
And, denying us any such Unity, as may argue a Church of CHRIST, you have
appropriated all to Rome, how justly, we will, even now, examine: and, first,
your Objection against us, is, many ways sophistical. First, if such be
accounted ours, who are none of us, the imputation is unjust. We acknowledge,
and do lament it, that there is too great Division, and variety of Sects,
calling themselves Christians, in the world: but, what do most part of them,
more, or so much concern us, as they concern your Church of Rome? out of
whose dongue, as noisome Flees, they are bred: and by Satan's craft, coming to
fly on, upon our Churches, (that by the mixture of their Poison, they may bring
the Truth in disgrace) are only, by us diligently resisted, and their
Errors clearlie convinced: while, in the mean time, your Romish Church,
(whose brood they are) is careless of any thing, but to suppress the Truth;
and, calumniouslie, to lay over, on us, the Stink of their own Excrements. As
for such, whom we will not disadvow, in common, (how-so-ever we will not
justify the Ambition, Giddiness, and bitterness of some particular Men, who,
as fyre-brands, disturb, humurouslie, and vnnecessarilie, the Peace of the
Church) I affirm, that no such material Points are in differ betwixt us, in
common, wherefore, we, both, may not, and ought not, embrace others,
mutuallie, as Brethren. Which, that we do not, it is our weakness, and the
malicious work, of but a few evil-inspired Instruments; seeking more their
own Estimation, than GOD his Glory, and good of His Church. And, that no such
Separation is betwixt us, but that, how-so-ever, by a cruel Wound, of
merciless Hands, we are separated, one of us, from another; yet we are still
joined in the common Head, and in the common Body, each of us to other. So, as
your Man's odious enumeration of Protestants, Puritanes, Calvinists,
Zwinglians, and, if you list, to add to them, Lutheranes, also, is but a
calumnious traducing, of such, as, most part, are not separated either from
other: or at least, how-so-ever, by some weakness, they be in that sort
distracted, yet, are but one Body, joined in one, and the same LORD, Faith,
Hope, Baptism; and informed, all of them, by one and the same Spirit, al-be-it
not all, in a-lyke measure. Amongst whom, there is no just breach of Communion:
how-so-ever, that, by a Wound, of some cruel and dispitefull Men, those you
do call Lutherians, are, vnnecessarilie, separated from the rest: but, none of
us, from the common Head, and Body, in which we are still united, and will be
yet more and more nearlie: our Concord, in GOD, and His Truth, growing, as
your Unity, in Evil, shall be broken off: the will of GOD being fulfilled, in
all the work of Antichrist's deceit, justly upon the World, for contempt of
His Truth. And, thus ( Philomathes) your Assumption, where-by you deny us
any such Unity, as, of necessity, is required in the Church of CHRIST, for
keeping, justly, that Account, is false. And, no less false is it, al-so, in
that, what you would rob us of, you do appropriate to Rome: which can not
be, truly, praised for any Unity, except that which before I mentioned,
out of the seaventeenth Chapter of the REVELATION, which is the only Unity
proper unto her, and, accordingly, there fore-tolde of her. For, other-wayes,
she has fallen away, foulie, both from the Head, and the Foundation: and, can
never be said, to have kept Unity with the true Body; other-wayes, than
the accressing Sore, or Apostume in the Body, but not of it, may be said, to
be one with the Body. And, your Man bewrays, very well, how poorly
provided he is, of any sure probation of his Unity: when, for all Argument,
where-by to evince an Union, in one LORD, one Faith, one Hope, one Baptism,
and one true, and sanctifying Spirit, he is not ashamed, impudentlie, to take
that, which is the very main point in question. Whither, I pray you, did his
Poeticke Fury transport him; when, without blushing, to sustain his
Assumption, on which all the life of his Cause depended, he brought this
only, and goodly, Argument?

That Church, only, keeps Unity, in all points, which cleaves to the Pope.

But, the Church of Rome, only, cleaves to the Pope.

There-fore, the Church of Rome, only, keeps Unity, in all points.

The Proposition of this his Demonstration, he prooveth, by this; That the
Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven, were given to Peter. But the Pope is Peter's
Successor. Ergo, do you require me, ( Philomathes) to make any answer to
these your Man his Raveries? Or, if he had been set, of very purpose, to
play the Praevaricator in the Cause, which he pleads; could he more
ridiculouslie, I will not say, have reasoned, but raved: We neither deny, nor
envy your Church, her Unity with the Pope; al-be-it, in christian Compassion,
we pity it. But, we deny, your Mischief to have any Union, either with
the Head, Foundation, or Body, except as a Sore in it, but not of it. And, to
clear yet farther, the falsehood of your Man's main Assumption, of Unity,
(That the Church of Rome, keeps Unity in all points) and how vain he is,
in vaunting thereof: if your Poet had as carefully picked out the
Partialities of his Romish Church, (even in this their damnable and cursed
conspiracy) as he has, with a perverse mind, and poysonable Eye, pryed in
our Distractions: What great matter, of Insulting, has he, or any of his
profession, against our Churches, for any Division, betwixt us, and these whom
they do call LVTHERIANS? If he were as powerful a Peacemaker, as he prooveth
an impertinent Pratler, he might have found, at Home, to work upon, not only
great Dissentions, but even as bitter, and material, Digladiations, as any is
amongst us. When al our Controversy, amongst our selves, about the manner of
Presence, and participation of CHRIST, in the sacred Supper, is duly weighed;
what shall be found, there-in, comparable to the manyfolde Debates, amongst
your Schoolmen, about the manner of their prodigious TRANSSVBSTANTIATION?
whence, as from an horrible Hydra, so many monstruouslie diverse Heads have
sprung up, in their Schools, as never will be reconciled, till Fire, from
Heaven, burn up all that intoxicated Body. When your Poet shall put at one,
the Scotists, and Thomists; the Franciscanes, and Domicians; the Schoolmen,
and the Canonists; their other Clergy, and the Iesuists; when Blacke-well, and
Bellarmine, shall accord, upon that main Point, of the Pope's Supremacy:
(which, to believe, and that both, In temporalibus, and spiritualibus is, de
necessitate salutis: that is, Necessary to Salvation, says the one party)
then might he, with the more credit, praesume, to tax our Distractions:
Loripedem rectus derideat, Aethiopem albus. Now, then, your Man's Proposition,
of his main Syllogism, of UNITY, being sophistical, and, his Assumption,
clearlie false; he will hardly, I trow, upon such Antecedents, conclude well,
that the Church of Rome, is the only true Church of CHRIST.


Philadelphus. You have admitted the Church of Rome an UNITY; but, such, as
where-in they have neither any matter of Glorying; and are, but even scarce,
well united in that same sacrilegious Society.

Who are united, only, but in Evil,
And, scarcely well are in that same compacted;
Less may they glory, than their Guide the Devil,
Whose Kingdom is not, in it self, distracted.
Killers, and Rogues, are, in a Course, contracted.
That Concord, only, comes to be commended,
When vncorrupt Companions, vncoacted,
For Truth, and truly, are to-gether bended,
In Unity, which is not thus defyned,
Fiends, Robbers, Killers, may be close combyned.

Philomathes. As Eubulus in doing his best, to take from our Poet, the praise
of a deep Divine; so, I perceive, ( Philadelphus) that you mind not to permit
him the Monopoly of the MUSES. But, now, it rests, to speak of the Note of
HOLINESS: and, I much muze, ( Eubulus) if, as of all the former, so you will
affirm of this al-so, That it is no proper Mark. For, I am sure, that to
nothing under Heaven, does the property of HOLINESS conveane, but to the
Church of CHRIST only. And, again, (according to the Law you alleged of
Propers) that whatso-ever Men are holy, they must be of the Church of CHRIST:
for, Holiness becomes His House.


Philadelphus. The Prophet ELISHA, being consulted by 2. Kings. 3. 1^
great Personages, and upon great Points, called for a Minstrell. And, mine
Advyse were, ( Eubulus) before you answer to this Mark of HOLINESS, that,
even for refreshing of our Spirits, a little, (...) hear their Man's Melody,
upon that point.


Eriphilus. As your Minds are mistuned, you may, perhaps, find your selves,
nor greatly cheared therewith. For, how-so-ever, Eubulus, like a slipperie
Eele, by subtilties of Distinctions, has slidden through all our preceding
Marks; yet, as Philomathes, has rightly said, I hope, HOLINESS, is such a
sure one, as you can not deny; except, you would once, and in this one Point,
prove true Men, even to profess your selves, a profane Company.


Eubulus. What-so-ever a property we shall find HOLINESS to be, yet, (
Eriphilus) I take bitter Passion, to be no proper Point of it. And, therefore,
what-so-ever your Man's Music, might work in us; yet, shall it not,
incontinently, come praesentlie in place, for mitigating, of your own
Choleric Motions, by some greater Sympathy: which, perhaps, it shall find
in you, than it can waken, up, in our (as you call them) mistuned Minds.
Therefore, Philomathes, bring out your Cure quickly, for succouring of your
Companion.


Philomathes. In-deede, the consideration of HOLINESS, would require, a calm
Constitution. And these are our Man's Verses thereof.


CHAPTER VII.
HOLINESS.
THIS you say, in very deed, ltiwne who ^nge ^. ^ a (...) de ^

When you rehearse the Nicene Creed;
One Church Catholic,
Holy, and Apostolic.
This is another Mark, truly;
The Church must be holy:
Holy Men, holy Service,
Ceremonies, and Sacrifice,
Sacraments, and holy Days,
Are observed in her al-wayes.
As for the Sayncts, and Martyrs all;
And Virgins, which you Saynctes do call:
Whose Names are in your Calendar,
When lived they, and where?
In what Religion was it they died?
By whom were they Canonized?
If it were not the Church of Rome,
Then shall I be converted soon.
If they were not your Company,
Then is your Faith, an Haeresie.
Philadelphus. I am, against both your Wish, and Expectation, ( Eriphilus) so
far cheared with your man's Poesy; as, if it may not trouble your cheer, I
would ask, even cheerfully, of you; why he has passed by the Apostolic
Creed, (which, with some more credit, he might have cited; and, where-in,
he might have found, al-so, the property of HOLINESS) to allege the
Nicene? for, if he thought, that this word [ Apostolicke] would have marred
his Meter, by making his Line a foot longer: yet, the shortness of his
immediately, subsequent verses, might have recompensed that slip: neither
has he been, in the rest of this Ryme, so squimmish, as to stand too
praeciselie, on footes; or, half footes.


Eubulus. We will let this pass, ( Philadelphus:) for as I I^
protested before, I am not to insist, in taxing all his absurdities, no, not
in the Matter, much less in his Meter, which is less material, I come to
speak of this Mark of Holiness: and, before I enter to examine the Man's
Logic, I will yield this much, That, this once, he has fallen on a true
Property of the Church of CHRIST: yea, and I will grant thus much more, That
al-be-it all properties be not Marks, (because more is required for being a
proper Mark, than only to be a proper Attribute) yet, that Holiness is even
a proper Mark of CHRIST His Church; but, where-in the Church of Rome, has as
little, and less advantage, than in any of the former. And, for clearing of
this, ( Philomathes) I must, first, put out your Man, from the Lurking-denne of
Aequivocation, where-in your Doctors delight to lie; and, thence, to shoot at
the Innocent, in secret. For, if, by Holiness, be meaned, that sanctified
Disposition of the Soul, and Affections, by the Spirit of Regeneration,
wrought in all true Christians; in that Sense, it can be no Mark, because
GOD, only, knows the Hearts of Men. And, we concluded, before, with consent
of Bellarmine, That all Marks must, of necessity, fall under Sense. And,
again, if by Holiness, be meaned, that which is seen, and exposed to
perception, in Men's outward carriage, according to the Law of Righteousness,
in Manners, and common conversation; neither, thus, can it be a proper Mark of
CHRIST HIS true Church. For, that, by the restrayning Virtue of GOD HIS Spirit
of Administration, even Heathen men, and Infideles, will appear, in all moral
Virtues, matcheable to Christians; except, that we know, that what-so-ever is
not of Faith, is sin. Was not Paul unrebukable, as concerning the Law;
while, yet, he was not only no Believer, but even a cruel Persecuter al-so?


Philomathes. How-so-ever outward Righteousness may not be a sure Mark of
Men, considered absolutely; for that fair carriage, which by the restrayning
Virtue of the Spirit of Administration, will be even in Heathen men: yet, (as
you did, in short words, make answer to your self) that what is not of
Faith, is sin; and, that, there-fore, no Heathen conversation, how approoved
so-ever, can be counted for true Holiness: So, amongst Professors of
Christianity, I think, that Holiness in life and manners, must be a most
sure discerning Mark, whereby to know the true Church, as which must, in them,
be praesumed, to proceed of Faith. And we are a-searching of such Notes, as
in the community of Christians, all acclayming the Title of the Church, may
discern the Upright, from the Bastard, in that same kind. So, as your
Objection, of Heathen carriage, in this case, is clearlie the same Sophisme,
which, you may remember, that, before, you taxed in our Men.


Eubulus. Do you not know, ( Philomathes) that, II.
even amongst Professoures, not only will Hypocrites, in all these Outwardes,
appear to go far beyond, even the most sincere, and single-hearted
Christians; but, even superstitious, and corrupt worshippers, yet in a blind
zeal, will seem to keep more preciselie, the way of HOLINESS, and
RIGHTEOUSNESS, than who have more, and truer Light?

And if no more were to lead you, to know, that HOLINESS, in this kind, can
be no Mark, this, alone, might tell it you; That your own Men, all-wayes, in
their Disputes with us, about the true Church, Doctrine, and Worship, do
reject, (and that justly) all Arguments brought by us, against any persons,
or personal actions of Men. How-so-ever, again, in charging us, they do
forget themselves, so far, as, all-wayes, to fall to personal, and, those,
impudentlie false, and unjust Criminations. So, as you may see, that, of
necessity, this Mark of HOLINESS, must be understood of an holy, and
lawful Worship, and holy, and pure Doctrine. And, albe-it I confess, that
this can never be anie-where, but, that, therewith, al-so, shall be some
number of Names, both inwardly sanctified, by the Word, and Spirit, and,
al-so, showing forth their Faith, by their works: yet, it is the HOLINESS of
Doctrine, and lawful, and pure Worship, which is the proper Mark of the true
Church: and, not either the inward Sanctification of the Soul, which we see
not: or, the only outward Manners, where-in we may be deceived.

(...) of your Man's Argument, I will now set it before you, that you may see
the Force thereof:

That Company, which, only, has in it holy Men, holy Service, Ceremonies,
Sacrifice, Sacraments, Days, etc. must be the Church of GOD. But, in the
Church of Rome, only, these are to be found. There-fore, the Church of Rome,
is the only Church of GOD.

Now, to grant his Proposition, or Major, in such Sense, as where-in I have,
all-readie, cleared, and you, all-so, ( Philomathes) have confessed, That,
only, it can consist. I deny his Assumption, or Minor, as which is
shamelessly false: except, by the only, sure, and layde-downe Rule, he
prove it.


Philadelphus. You must attend ( Eubulus) the Probation of his Assumption, in
the next Proper Ballad, that happens to break out of the Super-aboundance of
his Poe^ticall Vein: and, suspende his Conclusion, till then. And, that, in
the time, he may, the more seriously, set himself for it; what, if from his
own Grounds, where-of he glories, one should draw this contrary
Conclusion?

That Company, which has turned all the Worship of GOD, (Who will be
worshipped, in Spirit, and Truth) in a profane Histrionicke Farce: which
teaches, for Doctrines, the Traditions of Men': which burdeneth the
Consciences of Christians, (whom their Lord will have to be free, says
Augustine) with innumerable idle, and superstitious Ceremonies, of Man's
inventio^; in the multitude whereof, all true Religion, is not only buried,
but, al-so, lost: Which, after that perfect Sacrifice, which CHRIST offered,
once for all, offers still Expiatorie Sacrifices, for Sin: Which devyseth
Sacraments of their own, which they have not received from the LORD: Which,
superstitiouslie, keep Days, and Times: Which set up Saynctes departed, and
erect Images, to be worshipped, with Religious Adoration: Who, glorying of
Fathers, and Martyrs, are, themselves, Persecuters, and Murderers of the
Sayncts: That Company can not be the Church of CHRIST; but is, undoubtedly,
The Antichristian Synagogue. But, such is the Church of Rome. There-fore, the
Church of Rome, is not the true Church of CHRIST, but is, The Antichristian
Synagogue.

Now, as your Man's stout Asseveration, of holy Service, Ceremonies,
Sacrifice, Sacraments, Days, etc. will not exeeme your Church from the Stayne
of this Conclusion; except you try, and verify them to be such, by that only
Touchstone, which, in any case, you desire never to be touched: so will his
vain Acclaiming of all the Sayncts, Martyrs, and Virgins, contained in our
Calendar, and the pretended canonizing of them, much less help him. What they
have been, who are contained in our Calendar, we are not much curious to
inquyre; because we hold it not for a Register of Sayncts, but for a civil
Rule, where-by to calculate Times. And I praesume, that Ianus, Julius, and
Augustus, are none of the number written in Heaven, as, perhaps, no more are
some others, who are written in the Calendar; whose Names, yet, in civil
use, may serve fitly for Notes of Times. And I think, verily, your Poet has
lost, both the Year of GOD, and Dominicall Letter, al-so, when he is prooving
Religion, from the Calendar: which, we esteemed, ever should be cleared from
Scripture. And, he has dipped his Mind so deeply in this Study, as he
asks, when, and where, they lived. But, foolish Man, it is neither the ryme,
when, nor the place where, any Man, either lives, or dies, that makes him a
Christian. But, that third thing in his Question, which, only, for all; except
to multiply Babbling, he should have asked, namely, in what Faith they lived,
and died? And, then, we answer, That, if they were Saynctes, indeed, they
both lived, and died, in the same Faith which we hold; and were even of our
Company: which Company, is not defined by Time, when, or place where, but by
the union of what-so-ever persons, in what-so-ever place, and of what-so-ever
time, in one LORD, one Faith, one Spirit, on Baptism, etc. for all Sayncts are
sanctified by the Truth: and, Thy Word is Truth, says our Savior. And,
giving this, that all these Sayncts had been, not only in the Company of the
Church of Rome, then, but, also, that they had been of her Company, (for
many, even now, are in her Company, which are not of it: Come out of her, my
People, says the Spirit) and holding one, and the same Faith, which Rome, at
that time, held: yet, as Eubulus has now more than once told you, What will
any Praise, or Praerogatiue of Rome, then, make for Rome, now, which is not
now of the Company of Rome, then; but is the Synagogue of Satan; where-as,
Rome, of old, was of our Company?


Eriphilus. What? ( Philadelphus) will you make those, whom the Church of Rome
has Canonized, to be of your Company? they were Canonized, I tell you, may
Ages before Luther was borne.


Philadelphus. Of their Canonizing, ( Eriphilus) I will not, now, much dispute,
whether it was farther, either to their honor, who were so Canonized; or to
theirs, who sacrilegiouslie praesume to rob GOD of His proper Honor, in making
Sayncts: or to the reproach, and disgrace, of both. I am certain, that whom
GOD has sanctified, he is, and will be, a Saynct, though the Pope, and all
the Conclaue, had concluded the contrary: and, whom GOD has not sanctified,
no power in the World, can make holy. I say, that in this your glorying, of
Canonizing Saynctes, you have as valide an Argument, for the Church of Rome, as
the building of the Prophets Tombs, and garnishing of their Sepulchers, was
for the Jews, ^th, 23. 29.
whose Fathers were Murderers of the Prophets, and themselves, crucifiers of
the LORD of Glory. And our Faith, ( Eriphilus) was not borne, with Luther, no
more, than your Heresy, was borne with you: but, our Faith, is the same Faith,
where-by all Faithful, in all Ages, and Places, ever lived: as yours is that
same deceitful Illusion, which, even in the Apostolic times, Satan was
a-hatching: and, which, having by slow degrees, mounted to so monstrous an
height, is now, again, near the dead-trach, to the Devil's great displeasure.


Philomathes. If EUBULUS, and I, shall give over to you, PHILADELPHUS, and, to
ERIPHILUS, the reasoning of this Matter, I fear, we must provyde us,
some-where, of long Weapons, to go betwixt you, so Satyricke are you, and so
Choleric is ERIPHILUS.


Philadelphus. Verily, ( Philomathes) I mind not to free Eubulus of that
Task, where-of he can much better acquyte himself, than I am able: and, if
Eriphilus take my Counsel, he shall behold you all-so, to plead your part.
And, it is not so much any Satyricke Speeches of mine, (as it pleases you to
call them) which have marred Eriphilus Mirth, as Eubulus sad Syllogismes;
whereby, he has so sacked all your Poet his proper Marks, as, how-so-ever,
at first, rejecting my Sonnets, he summoned us to Syllogismes; yet, I perceive
him, now, so surfeyted with them, that, in a compassion of his Choleric
Passion, I will yet, vouchsafe him one Sonnet, to swadge it; where-in, he
shall not challenge one Satyricke Syllable.

Catholic can not be to Sense subdued:
Continuance is but a common Case.
Things Visible, are oftentimes vnviewed.
What Is Unity; if it be not in Grace?
Hypocrisy, some-tyme, ^surpes the place
Of Holiness, if true Light be not Leader.
Who Flesh, for Spirit, who Shades, for Sooth, embrace:
The more devote, more doting they are, and deader.
Would thou stand stayed, 'gaynst all, both Doubts and Dangers,
Follow CHRIST'S Voice, and flee the voice of Strangers.

Philomathes. I know not, how your Sonnet has wrought on Eriphilus mind:
but, verily, you have made your word good, in this, That in all your Sonnet,
there is not one Sarcasticke Syllable: all-be-it it be so full of Sentence, as
you have compryzed, in a short Sum, the Drift of all Eubulus Discourse,
against our Man's Marks. But, now, both the Day, and the Way, are shortening:
and, we have, yet, one Point, to pass through: namely, of HAERETICKES. You
have been so difficill, ( Eubulus) to grant us the Title of the true Church,
and have so far set at naught all our Notes: as, I would gladly hear, how
you will clear your own Churches, from this imputation of HAERESIE, which our
Man, here, at great length, lays against you.


Eubulus. If he could have prooved his power in any V.
thing, he would, chiefelie, have employed it, for the credit of his own
Church, and Cause. Where-in, if he had prevayled, he should, with one, and
the same travel, have over-throwne us, all-so. As, accordingly, you see,
how, in all his alleged Marks, he labors, to appropriate them so to
Rome, (and, there-vpon, to conclude of her, That she is the true Church) that,
therewith, all-so, by a Consequence, in his Conceit, clear anough, our
Churches, as defective, were condemned by him. And, in-deede, if he could
possibly have well instructed the one, we had the less place to plead
against the other. For Romes Justification, should, sufficiently, convince us;
like as the justifying of our Churches, shows her to be Satan's Synagogue.
But, if I have made him to be seen a weak Soldier, for himself, it may
well be praesumed, that he will prove no great Masteries against us;
how-so-ever he assayleth us, with an Army of Interrogatours; if so be, that
by the hudgenesse of the number, in common, the particular imbecillitie, of
each severallie, might be supplied. And, to manifest this unto you, (
Philomathes) in all his Ryme, (inscrybed HAERETICKS) he racketh his Ingyne, to
prove our Churches, to be haereticall, even by this main Argument:

To whom the Notes of Haeretickes, do, properly, conveane: and, in whom
manyfolde Defectes are found, which can not befall the true Church: they must,
of necessity, be haereticall.

But, to the Protestant Churches, the Notes of Haereticks do, properly,
conveane: and, manyfold Defects, which can not befall the true Church.

There-fore, the Protestant Churches, are haereticall.

The Major of this Syllogism, is so clearlie true, as it can not be
gayne-sayde. How he prooveth his Minor, we will try, GOD vvilling, when you
have read unto us his Verses there-on. And, first, concerning the first point
of haereticall properties, to which I will, first, make answer: and,
there-after, with no great a-doe, we will over-turne all his Interrogatours,
of those Defectes, which he would father upon our Churches.


Philomathes. Then, take heed, how he descrybeth you.


CHAPTER VIII.
HAERETICKES.
OUR Savior warnes us, to have care,
Of false Prophets to beware,
That in His Name should come:
Not sent, yet they would run:
Thieues, not entering by the Door,
That kill, and steal, and keep a-store:
Wolves, in Sheep clothing,
To kill Souls, and steal the Teaching:
Thistles, Thorns, corrupted Ground,
On whom no good Fruit is found:
Living after their Lusts, truly;
Whose god is their own Belly:
Dogs, Foxes, and Masters of Lies,
That new Sects will devyse;
Bringing in Dissension,
And heap to themselves Perdition.
These Marks agree with you,
More than the Pagane, Turk, or Jew:
For they deny the Name of CHRIST,
And counterfeyt no Christian Priest.
Eubulus. Stay there, Philomathes: for in these Verses, is ^
the probation of that first point of his Assumption, whereby the Notes of
Haeretickes are affirmed of us: and, now, I pray you, advert a deadly
Demonstration, where-by you said, jestinglie, that he descrybeth us:

Those Marks, given us, to discern Haeretickes, conveane but to such as
profess the Name, and Worship, of CHRIST.

But, you Protestants, profess the Name, and Worship* of CHRIST.

Therefore, these Marks conveane to you: and, consequently, you are
Haeretickes.

Now, how Choleric so-ever you take Eriphilus to be in this Cause; yet, I
will even admit him Judge, of this sad Syllogism, where-by your Poet will
prove us Haeretickes. Would you allow me, ( Eriphilus) to conclude your
Ballader, a barking Dog, thus? Barking can conveane, but to living, and
sensitive Creatures: but, your Ballader, is a living, and sensitive Creature:
therefore, barking conveaneth to him; and, consequently, he is a Dog.


Eriphilus. He is very skillesse in Logic, who knows not, that of miere
Affirmatiues, in the second figure, no thing can conclude. And, you but
skornfullie afforge to our Man, so senseless a manner of Argumentation.


Eubulus. I am content ( Eriphilus) it be esteemed so of me; I
if, bending there-to all your Skill in Logic, you shall be able, out of
your Man's Verses, to frame any other form of Conclusion, than that, which
you say, I have afforged unto him. This is the sum of his last read Verses;
Such, and such, are the Notes of Haeretickes: which Notes, conveane, only, to
Men professing CHRIST; for, to Jews, Turks, and Paganes, who deny His Name,
they can not be competent. But, you, Protestants, profess the Name of
CHRIST: and, there-fore, etc.


Philomathes. Verily, ( Eriphilus) I fear, that both our Skills, in Logic,
shall, hardly, find out a better form of our Man's words: where-in Eubulus
has so opened a chyldish oversight, as I can not find, well, a Veil to cover
it.


Eriphilus. At worst, it is but a fault in form; which, in a well-consisting
matter, may be soon mended. II



Eubulus. But, I pray you, (good Eriphilus) though you had a Syllogism, at
your own shaping, will you ever find matter, where-of to make it, or, us
Haeretickes, by it; in this, that we profess CHRISTIANITY? or, putting it
even to the Rack, will it afforde any reason, where-fore to bind on us, the
Notes of Haeretickes, more than on the Church of Rome, which professes the
Name, and Worship, of CHRIST, all-so? Except you will be allowed, to reply, as
one of your Profession, one day, disputing with me, of Antichrist, (when I
propounded an Argument, where-by I concluded, that of the Pope; in place of
resuming the parts of my Reason) answered me confusedly, and confidentlie,
That, find him out, as we could, otherwise, the Pope could not, possibly,
be once suspected to be Antichrist, for he is CHRIST HIS Vicar. Shall we
be counted Haeretickes, ( Eriphilus) only, because it pleases your Poet, so
to call us? To whom these Notes do most fitly agree, let the
rightlie-illuminated, judge: and, He will judge one day, who judges
righteouslie, and, whose is all judgment. We pass very little, to be
judged by your Man: yea, we judge not our selves.


Philadelphus. You are too sharp sighted, ( Eubulus:) he has thought, that
under the sweetness of Poesy, such a slip in Logic, might have easily
been concealed.


Eubulus. That might have been praesumed of Sirens, singing IV.
unto Swyne. But, to leave the Man, with his own Logic; I would demand of
you, ( Philomathes) why, in so long an Enumeration of haereticall Notes, he
has passed over those, where-by the holy Ghost witnesses, that Haeretickes,
and of this time, may be most clearlie known? And, what a Conscience does
it argue, to amasse a number, where-of the application may breed but jangling;
and, to keep silence, of the most notifying Notes of all?


Philadelphus. You still mistake the Man, ( Eubulus:) Charity begins at
ones self: and, accordingly, their Poet is so full of Self-love, as he
never minded to produce ought, where-by to praejudge his own cause.


Philomathes. But, what are those Notes, ( Eubulus) with the fraudulent
omission, where-of you do charge our Man?


Eubulus. I will essay, by a more formal Syllogism, than V.
he framed against us, to lead you both to know them, and to acknowledge of
them, that they so nearlie touch your Romish Church, as might make your Man
think, they were no Wares, for him to exhibit:


What Company teaches Doctrines of Devils, and, by Devilish Dealing, do
verify themselves, to be Satan's Children; that Company must be
Haereticall.

But, the Church of Rome, teaches Doctrines of Devils, and, by Devilish
Dealing, do verify themselves to be Satan's Children.

There-fore, the Church of Rome, is an Haereticall Company.

Philomathes. In-deede, ( Eubulus) your Syllogism has a better form, but a
much badder matter.


Eubulus. And if I make the matter, as good as the form, ^
then all shall hold good; where-in, yet, (that I may be charitablie
conceived) I mean by the Church of Rome, (as I have, now more than once
signified) the Evil in the Body, not, absolutely, the Body affected
therewith: the Papalitie, not all, who are named Papists: not all, who have
the Name, or Number of the Beast, but who have his Character.


Philomathes. If, even thus, you make your matter good, we have lost a Gain.


Eubulus. Then, let us examine the parts of mine Argument. V^
I hope you will admit my Major.


Philomathes. It can not be denied. It rests you, to prove your Minor.


Eubulus. My Minor, or Assumption, charge Papalitie, VI^
or charactarized Papists, with two maligning Marks; Doctrines of Devils, and
Devilish Dealing. I will, first, prove the one, and then the other, also. That
the Church of Rome, teaches Devilish Doctrine, I prove it thus:


Who forbid Marriage, and command to abstain from Meats, which GOD has
ordained to be received with Thankes-giving, they teach Doctrines of Devils.
But, the Church of Rome, forbids Marriage, and commands, to abstain from
Meats, which GOD has ordained, to be received with Thanksgiving.

There-fore, the Church of Rome, teaches Doctrines of Devils.

Philomathes. The Major of your Argument, is from Paul, 1. Tim. 4. 3.
and can not be denied. I distinguish your Minor: for, if you say, that the
Church of Rome, either forbids Marriage, absolutely, and, as a thing,
absolutely, and in it self, damnable: or, commands, to abstain from
Meats, absolutely, as from things, absolutely, and in themselves,
unclean; (which is the forbidding, and commanding meaned of the Apostle) then
is your Assumption false. But, that the Church of Rome, in some respects, and
to some persons, forbids Marriage; and, in some respects, commands, to
abstain from some Meats, I do not deny. But, this is not against the Apostle
his mind; who prophesied, in that place, of some ancient Haeretickes, in the
Primitive Church, who, absolutely, damned Marriage, and diverse sorts of
Meats, as, in themselves, polluted.


Eubulus. If so serious, and hazardous points, be well, or IX.
wyselie, put upon the danger of so cavillatorie a Distinction, devysed by Men,
I report me to your own Conscience: that, others, before, have been in the
same sin, and, perhaps, in some farther degree thereof; what does that
excuse the Romish Church; which, in any degree, praesumeth to forbid, and
command that, the forbidding, and commanding where-of, the holy Ghost
affirms, to be Devilish? Is not this to play, and that even perilouslie, in
a serious matter? The Church (you say) does not condemn Marriage: but, the
Apostle makes even the forbidders thereof, to be Devilish Doctors. And, yet,
if who are in the flesh, are, in that, to be condemned, (by the Apostle's
Doctrine:) how can you absolve your Romish Church, of condemning (...), ad
Hime^, cap. 7.
Marriage; when she affirms, of married persons, That they are in the
flesh? Now, where you affirm, the Apostle, in that Prophecy, to have eyed
only the ancient Haeretickes, absolute condemners of Marriage, and Meats; all
circumstances of the place, evince, manyfestlie, that he neither eyed them
only, nor principally: but, that also, and principally, the holy Ghost eyed
your Church of Rome. I let this go, that he speaks of the latter times,
which yet (I am persuaded) has a narrower relation, than that, where-by, I
know, you will seek to shift this point. He speaks, therewith, of such,
as, by great and cunning Hypocrisy, should have so great place, as, by
Authority, to forbid, and command. But, it is well known, that the ancient
Haeretickes, mayntayners of these Doctrines, were, in their very first
out-setting, exsibilated, and abhorred, commonly, of all: and, that, both
they, and their Doctrine, soon evanished. So, as, it is plain, that so
serious a warning of the Apostle, is chiefelie, in regard of more dangerous
Doctors, and so far, by Hypocrisy, obtaining place, and authority in the
Church, as to come prowdlie to (...), (...), (interdicting, and commanding.)
And, thus, ( Philomathes) all your distinction, of mine Assumption, is vain,
and cavillatorie: and, so, will never vindicate your Romish Church, from the
guilt of my Conclusion.


Philomathes. Verily, all-bee-it I dare not condemn the Church, or suspect
rashly of her, in these, or any such points: yet, I will not deny, but that
I could have wished her, to have been less audacious, in so perilous a Case,
and to have given you less advantage against her heere-in. But, go forwards.
You took, all-so, for to prove, against our Church, That, by Devilish
Dealing, they verified themselves, to be Satan's Children; which was the
second point, of your main Assumption, against us.


Eubulus. I prove it, thus: X.


Who are Liars, and Murderers, like their father, the devil, their Dealing is
Devilish; and, they verify themselves, there-by, to be the Devils Children.

But, the Church of Rome, are Liars, and Murderers, like their Father, the
Devil.

There-fore, their Dealing is Devilish; and, they verify of themselves, that
they are Satan his Children.


Eriphilus, Is this, for-sooth, the calm Conference you protested for? And,
are you the Man, that so far abhors bitter Contention; who falls, thus,
not only to Bitterness, but even to open Reproaches, and impudent Railing?
Did not you, in Disputation, about Points of Doctrine, disallow all personal
Criminations? Where-in, to all, and any Instances, which you can bring against
us, when we have opposed as many, and as odious, on your side; shall not all
our Dispute, but finish in a foul Flyting?


Eubulus. I have neither, as yet, touched any man his XI.
person, or spoken of any personal Action, of Lying, and Murdering; neither
mind I, by any such Instances, to strengthen mine Assumption, how many, and
how tragical so-ever, I might easily produce, and those of recent Practice.
So as, thus once again ( Eriphilus) heat, has made you too hasty.
What-so-ever Instances you might oppose to me, of our Men, in personal
Recriminations; yet, I am sure, that you shall never verify of any, on our
side, that they teach, and, by public Books, maintain, That it is lawful
to lie, and to commit Murder. So, as, if I prove, that your ROMANISTES, not
only practice privilie, but, all-so, teach, yea, and maintain, openly, That
it is lawful to lie, and murder, I hope, I shall make mine Assumption good;
and, yet, never a whit, there-fore, declyne from the course of a calm
Conference, and Rules of a lawful Disputation.


Eriphilus. When you clear so great a Calumny, then shall I confess my too
great heat in an evil Cause.


Eubulus. Will you not grant me, ( Eriphilus) that, XII.
who praise the Art of Simulation, and Dissimulation, to be both good, and
profitable, and, call it Prudence, and Virtue, yea, and a good Prudence: and
affirm, That who use it, are to be praised, those are Teachers, of Men, to
become Liars?


Eriphilus. You will not, so easily as you trow, get me in-trapped, with your
Interrogatours: for, there is some even Godly and prudent Simulation.


Eubulus. I mind no such Circumvention, as you XIII
fear, but most plain Dealing, for gayning of you, more than my Point. And,
to show you how far I am, from entertayning impertinent Plea, I will not,
now, question with you, about this, how well any Simulation may be made to
accord with Prudence, and Piety. But, let the Instances, which I shall
produce, bear witness, whether they be such, as may escape under this your
Sconse. As for the Position, which I have brought, in all the Points thereof,
your own Man, Martinus Navarrus Aspilcueta, (who has written a whole
Treatise, of Aequivocations, in Favoures, as he professes, of the Jesuits,
In Cap. humanae aures, 12. Quaest. 5.) affirms playnleie, In d. Cap. humanae,
Page 352. and Page 349. Et page 351.


Eriphilus. You may, perhaps, vvrong him, in this Imputation: But, and though
any one such Man has written so, yet ought it not be counted a common Fault
of our CHVRCH. How many of your Men, maintain Points, which your CHVRCH,
yet, disadvoweth in common?


Eubulus. If I do wrong him, his Book, and places XIV
thereof, alleged by me, will witness. And, that his Doctrine, is a just
Imputation, against your Church, is clear, by this; That Pope Gregory the
thirteenth, approoved, and ratified his Doctrine, as ( Sanctam, and
inconcussam) holy, and stable. And, besides him, Gregorius de Valentia, a
lesuit, Tom. 3. Disput. 5. Quaest. 13. de reo. punct. 2. calls AEQVIVOCATION,
(Prudentem Defensionem) a wise Defense. The forenamed Navarrus, in d cap.
humanae aures 22. Quaest. 5. Page 348. records, and highly prayseth an
Aequivocation used by Saynct FRANCIS: who, being asked, by the Sergeantes,
persuing after a Murder, If such a Murderer had passed that way? did put his
Hands, in his Gown Slieues, and answered, That he had not passed that way.
Understanding, with himself, contrary to common perception, that he had not
passed through his Slieues. And, the said Navarrus, adds, even there, ( Hanc
Doctrinam de Aequivocationibus, fundari in illo insigni facto magni illius
Patriarchae FRANCISCI:) that this Doctrine of Aequivocations, is founded, upon
that noble Fact, of that Great PATRIARCH, Saynct FRANCIS.


Philadelphus. Besides that common dislyke, which al-most all the other Roman
Clergy have of Jesuits, I think, that the Cordeliers have here a proper
Quarrel, and a most competent Plea, and Action, against them: who thus take
unto themselves, wrongfullie, the Craft of AEQVIVOCATION; which, being
founded on the noble Act of Saynct FRANCIS, should, with all reason, have
remained the Property of his Family: as, accordingly, they were called,
once, commonly, LYING FRIARS: till, now, the Jesuits have so far encroached
upon this their Right, as that, how far so-ever the Friars be still set to
maintain their Title, yet the Jesuits do far exceed them, in all the
cunning kinds of Aequivocation.


Eubulus. It is an vnlucklie Debate, where-in the Victors XV.
greatest Honor is, that, there-by, he prooveth to be the more near sib
unto Satan. But, to prosecute my Matter; The same Navarrus teaches, that a
person accused before a Judge, who proceeds not ( juridice) lawfully, is not
holden to confess the Truth: but, may use AEQVIVOCATION, mentallie reserving
within himself, some other thing, than his words do sound: yea, either in
Answer, or Oath, to his Judge, or Superior, that he may use a Bout-gate of
Speech, ( Amphibologia) whether through a diverse signification of the word, or
through the diverse intention of the asker, and of him that makes answer, and
although it be false, according to the meaning of the asker: in cap. Ne quis.
can. 22. quaest. 2. The same Navarrus, instructs a Witness, to depone, that
he knows nothing; reserving this within himself, no thing that he is
holden to tell. And, he gives the same instruction, to Pleaders, who are
required to give their Oaths, de calumnia, or, of Verity, Page 151. Toletus,
a Jesuit, and a Cardinal, teaches these same healthsome Lessons, Instruct.
sacerd. lib. 4. cap. 21. Iacobus Sylvanus, alias, Keller, Jesuit, teaches the
same, Philipp. contr. Anonymum, etc. page 5. Besides all these, ( Eriphilus)
do they not teach men to be Liars, who affirm, that no Oath given to an
Haereticke, or Infidel, is to be kept? And, yet, this was both inacted, and
practiced, in the Council of Constance. Iacobus Simancha, Episcopus Pacensis,
de Catholic* institut* cap. 46, al-so avoucheth it. Conradus Brunus, de
Haereticis, lib. 3. cap. 15, determines, that no Pactions, Conventions, Laws,
Confirmations, ( rescripta) where-by Haeretickes obtain Peace, and Security,
ought to be kept, or counted of any force, or effect. Now, if wilful, and
even purposed Perjurie, may be counted Piety; and if such impudent
instructions of disguysing Truth, you esteem a prudent Simulation, (
Eriphilus) I think him pitifully imprudent, who has any dealing with you.


Philomathes. I beseech you, ( Eubulus) no more of this. For my part, I never
lyked of that Doctrine of Aequivocation: And, I think, verily, that the
Church has been evil beholden to those Men, what-so-ever they were, who have
brought that Blot upon the Catholic Faith.


Eubulus. Then, ( Philomathes) of all others, the Church is XVI.
worst beholden to the Pope, who has approved, and confirmed, and yet still
^hamelessie mayntayneth, that disgraceful Doctrine. And you, who see the
Evil, are yet worse, than wo^st of all, beholden to your-selues; who, in so
playnlie, a perceived Praevarication, yet suffer your selves to be so
sensleslie, and miserably, miscarried. But, how-so-ever I be, in this
purpose, more plain than pleasant unto you: and that, even there-fore, I could
be content to speak no more of it, who am loath to grieve you in any thing;
yet, because I promised it to Eriphilus, and he conceived, that I could not
possibly clear such (as he called it) a Calumny, I must essay, to acquyte
my self, in prooving all-so of your Romanistes, the other Point, and Note of
their spiritual K^nred, propounded by me, of Devilish Dealing: namely, that
they are Murderers, and teach men so, as well as Liars, and, thus, are Satan's
upright Children. Cardinal Baronius, in his Epistle against the Venetians,
speaks thus; The Ministry of Peter, (blessed Father) is two-folde, To feed,
and to kill; according to that, [Feede my Sheepe] and according to that [Kill,
and eat.] For, when the Pope has to deal with refractarie, and averse
parties, (as are the Venetians) then Peter is bidden, Kill, and slay, and pack
them up in his Belly. Is not this, I pray you, reverentlie, and rightly used
Scripture? The same Baronius, in his Paraenesis to the Venetians, Page 9. It
rests, O Father, (the Pope) that you draw against Malefactors the Sword of
Peter; whom to this end, CHRIST appointed over Kingdoms, and Nations. Their
King-killing Doctrine is too well known, and too tragicallie, what attempted,
what archieved by them. Johan. Mariana, Jesuit, de Rege, lib. 1. cap. 6.
affirms, That Subjects, willing to do so, may depose the King from his
Princely state: and, that from all memory, it has been esteemed a
prayse-worthie thing, who-so-ever attempted to oppress Tyrants. And, Page 60.
If no means be of obtaining a public Convention, then who (favoring the
common Wishes) shall attempt to kill a King, or Prince, I will not esteem that
he has done wrong. For, their advowed Impudency, in this pernicious Opinion,
let any Man read the Iesuit's Book, De Henrici tertii abdicatione, which was
put forth at Lions, Anno, 1591: in the Praeface where-of, are these words;
That seeing this is one, and the same common Cause, of that other Henry, a
wicked Tyrant, al-so, etc. therefore, it is, that since we have spoken of the
just abdication of the first, we desire, that we may appear so to have
spoken (de hoc quoque excludendo, immo conterendo and perdendo) of excluding;
yea, downe-beating, and destroying of this other, al-so. Mariana, de Rege, page
59. for King-killing, alleges the Exemple of E^ud: as if common and
ordinary actions, could be warranded by extraordinary, which ought not to
be drawn in exemple. And the same is brought, al-so, in defense of the
Jesuits, Tom. 6. memor. lig. page 281: and, together with it, diverse Roman
Doctors, are alleged, al-so, to this same purpose, as Cajetan. Dominicus
Soto. Thomas Aquin. Sylvester Fumus. But, that you may yet see portentuous,
both Impudency, and Impiety, Johannes Mariana, Jesuit, De Rege, lib. 1. cap.
7. page 65. and 67. has these words; Quid interest ferro an vene^o per^as? etc.
that is, What mattereth it, whether thou kill with Knyfe, or with Poison? That
which is done by Poison, is done with less danger, and more hope of impunitie.
Upon my Warrant, thou may use Poison: but, with this provision, that be who
is killed there-by, be not compelled, himself to drink the Poison, where-by
he may perish: but that it be outwardly applied, by some other, without
using any aid of him, who is killed there-by. Seeing, especially, that so
great is the strength of Poison, that either the Chair, or Apparel, stroaked
therewith, may have force to kill. And, in the end of that same Chapter, page
68. he concludes, That it is lawful, by all means, to compass ones death;
so being, that neither wittinglie, nor unwittingly, he be made his own
Executioner.

And, if it may neither offend Philadelphus, (for some far carnal
conjunction he had with him) nor you, ( Eriphilus) who accounts him an holy
Martyr, I might add to the former, a familiar, and late Proof, of what
Spirit those Men are, in that brayne-sicke Traitor, who being executed this
other year, for peartlie practiced, and phreneticallie professed Treason: yet,
soon after, for-sooth, was canonized, and, by you, ( Eriphilus) esteemed a
Martyr. But it falls you foul, that you can never find one to fill up that
Roll, but Men, both accused, and clearlie convinced, of Theft, or Treason.


Philadelphus. For any Interest I had in that Man, I may, warrandablie, say,
that, vvhat-so-ever he be, of HIS MAIESTIE'S Liedges, who either thinks so
of him, or speaks of him, as a Martyr, he meriteth, most justly, to be
canonized, in the Catalogue of arrand Traitors; and, to receive the Recompense
of such. But, now, ( Eriphilus) has not Eubulus, think you, sufficiently,
cleared the Truth, of that which you called a Calumny? And, are these,
for-sooth, the abstruse Mysteries, of your Jesuits Divinity? And, how
jumplie, are they the Followers of JESUS; who, not only, are open, and
audacious Encowragers to Murder; but, all-so, so cunning Informers, of all the
diverse Manners, of mischievous working; and, are so well practiced, in all the
operative Powers, and application of Poison; that, they may be most apt
APOTHECARIES, for Pluto? And, it is goodly to see, how, in the open practice,
of monstrous Impiety, yet they would make Asses believe, that, at least, they
kill conscientiouslie. For, they are so squimmish, for-sooth, as, in any Case,
they will not have a Man made his own Executioner. And, this is just such an
Holiness, as had the Priests, and Pharisees; who, whiles they were, with all
Falsehood, Cruelty, and bloody, and unbridled Rage, murdering the LORD
JESUS, yet they would neither pollute their Sanctity, John. 1^. 2^. Matthew. 27.
6.
by entering into the Common HALL, nor receive the price of Blood into their
TREASVRIE. Thus, Hypocrites, even in the open Practice, of most gross, and
detestable sins, yet bear the, justly benumbed, world in hand; that,
because they strain Gnattes, they can not, but, in a good Conscience, swallowe
Camels.

But, what a monstrous excecation, of Men, is this; that so prodigious
Impiety finds, amongst Professors of CHRISTIANITY; not only Patrocinie,
but, all-so, Admiration? Where-as, any Heathen Man, of settled Senses, would
skunner, at the very mention, of such monstrous dealing: vvhere-by, all Bands
of Commerce, amongst Men, which either DIVINITY, HVMANITIE, or NATVRE, by
any kind of Law, have established; are, impiouslie, vnhumanlie, and
unnaturally, broken.

When GOD will not be defended, with a Lie; neither, will have us to do any
evil, that good may ensue Job, 1 ^ Romans 3.
thereof; shall a bare pretense of Zeal, and intention of a good end, make
more than Cyclopicke feritie, and devilish Deceit, to become good Religion?
What if those honest-hearted Heathen, whom the Record of Story, extolleth so
much for TRVETH, JUSTICE, TEMPERANCE, FORTITVDE, and others, MORAL VERTVES,
(who yet knew not the true GOD, nor the sole Way of LIFE) were raised from
the Death, and did see, and hear, what Men, called CHRISTIANS, and acclayming
the Title of KNOWLEDGE, and HOLINESS, from all others, do not only
practice, but profess, all-so; would they not be persuaded, that all the
Devils of Hell, had come forth, under Ecclesiasticke Names, and Habites, to
destroy the World?


Philomathes. Let me entreat you, (good Philadelphus) to insist no more in
this Subject: other-wayes, you will turn Eriphilus Choler, into a burning Ague.


Philadelphus. I will, at your request, forbear it: yet so, as I must tell you
this one word; That, I will rather choose, to be mine own Varlot, than either
to have the Chair set unto me, or mine Apparel reached me, by any Page,
which has passed his Prentiship, and, has been initiated, in the Secrets of
the Chamber of Meditations. And, for Eriphilus, I will presently refresh his
Mind, with one Sonnet more; vvhere-by to prevent his Ague, or, at least, to
give him a mature Cooling, in the very beginning of his Fit.

Doctrines of Devils, with their Dealing joined,
Are Signs of Satan's Synagogue most sure.
Wedlock forbidden, Abstinence enjoined,
From what the LORD proclaymeth to be pure,
His Doctrines are: So is it not obscure,
Whom GOD designeth, to be Devilish Doctors.
His works are Lies, and Killing to procure:
And, such men are his proper Sons, and Proctors.
Your works, then, well be wray your Generation:
Knyues, Powder, Poison, and Aequivocation.

Philomathes. Your Syrope ( Philadelphus) is little less unpleasant, than your
Potion: so, as Eriphilus has to provide himself, other-wayes, of Patience.
But, leaving this, I will turn me again, to Eubulus, who gave the Wound,
which you, well satyricklie have rankled. You remember, ( Eubulus) that you
compryzed our Man's whole Discourse, of HAERETICKES, in this main Syllogism:
To whom the Notes of HAERETICKES, do properly conveane; and, in whom are
found manyfolde Defectes, which can not befall the true Church; they must, of
necessity, be baereticall. But, to the Protestant Churches, the Notes of
HAERETICKES, do properly conveane; and, in them are found manyfolde Defectes,
which can not befall the true Church. There-fore, the Protestant Churches, are
haereticall. The Proposition, of this Argument, you admitted. To the first
part, of the Assumption, (as touching the Notes of Haeretickes) you have so
answered; that, laboring to clear your selves, you have laid over, well
sadly, that Imputation upon our Church. Now, then, all-be-it we have, the
longer, but the less Esperance of prevayling; yet, seeing this other point
(concerning the Defectes found in you, or affirmed of you) rests now,
only, of all our Man's Poe^sie, to be spoken of; I would hear your
Aunsweres, all-so, unto his Interrogatours there-vpon.


Eubulus. Of this, ( Philomathes) I will acquyte my self, XVII.
with small a-doe; for, that, all-most, all the Defectes objected unto us, are,
upon your Poet's praesumed Opinion, That we want those Marks, where-of has
been spoken: So, as, any sensible Man, in that which we have all-readie
said, shall find all his subsequent Questions, sufficiently answered.
Besides that, elsewhere, I have answered them, at such length, as my
Discourse, here, may be the shorter, and you yet, abundantly, satisfied; if
not with that which I now say, yet, with easy pains, to read mine other
TREATISES. Now, then, read forth, in order, your Man's Questions.


Philomathes. I will both gladly hear, what you shall now say, and will not
weary, al-so, to read what elsewhere you have written. These, now, are the
Questions.

You say, your Faith did appear,
For the space of six hundredth Year: When the wicked rise, hyde themsel but
when the perish, the Ri^ teous increas^ Prove. ^. ^

But tell me, if thou can,
When Papistrie first began?
Where were the Servants of the LORD,
That none of them durst speak a word,
To defend the known Truth?
* * * * * * * * * * * * * *
Did Saynct Peter's Faith fail?
Did the Gates of Hell prevayle?
Did the Salt lose its savor?
Was the Bryde out of favor?
Was the Pillar over-throwne,
By which all Truth was to be known?
By this thou would prove plain,
All CHRIST'S Promise to be vain.
Sea, Heavens, and Earth, shall pass in-deede,
But of this Word no jot, we read.
Where have you been so long a time?
To whom did your Light shine?
Caput nostrum est in coelo: sed n^ putes quod sit separatum caput a corpore.
Discretum est enim loci^. sed junctum ^ffectious. Angnstm. in Psalm. 91.
Chrysostom. homil. 35. in Matthew. cap. 20. Who-so-ever he be, that affects
Primacie in Earth, shall find confusion in Heaven: neither shall he, come in
the count of CHRIST'S Servantes, who makes business about Primacie.
Where did your principal Pastor sit?
Who kept your Keys? who fed your Sheep?
Show me some Church, that you have built.
I can show many, that you have spilt.
Were all damned eternally,
Who were not of your Company?
How might a Man have found you out,
To have trial in matters of doubt;
When no such Company did appear,
For so many hundredth Year?
Till LUTHER, a lying Friar,
On whom the Devil ^ad desire,
Brake his Vow, and married a Nun:
And then your Haeresie first begun.
And favored, in SAXONY,
By a Duke, that loved Liberty.
And in King EDWARD'S time, truly,
It first infected our Country.
For, a thousand years, you say,
That Papistrie did bear the sway:
And during all that space,
No Protestant did show his Face.
Who kept the holy Scripture then,
From the hands of wicked men?
Who had Authority, to ordain,
Or make Priests, or Bishops, again?
For he that enters without order,
As a Thief, does kill, and murder.
He is a Wolf, and not a Priest,
And Enemy to our Savior CHRIST.
And, one thing does make me muze,
That no Priest you did refuse,
Ordained by the Church of Rome,
But he was excepted soon:
If he would say your Service,
He should have a Benefice:
Without any farther Order,
And accounted for the Better.
How may she make a lawful Priest,
If she be not the Church of CHRIST?
Answer this, if that thou can,
And I will be a Protestan.
But, while your Answer you devyse,
I counsel all Men, that be wise,
To hold the Faith mayntayned here,
The space of a thousand Year:
Brought to us Englishmen,
By our Apostle, Saint Austine:
Who from Rome was hither sent,
When EDWARD was King of KENT:
Who learned his Faith of Gregory ^
Which Faith was kept successively,
By threescore Bishops, and three,
From Saynct Peter's time, we see:
Who learned his Faith of CHRIST JESUS,
Who is the Son of GOD most true.
To HIM be all Honor, and Praise,
Who does defend HIS Church al-wayes.

Eubulus. You may perceive ( Philomathes) the truth of that XVIII.
which I said unto you; that all these yourman's questions, are coincident,
with the cases of Continuance, and Visibilitie, whereof we have spoken: except,
that, in end, for giving us a deadly blow, in his conceit, he close all up,
with the question of our Callings. And, to make clear to you, how your man
multiplieth words, in vain, without knowledge, I reduce all his impertinent
prattling, to this main Argument:


If things, affirmed by you, of your Churches, can not consist with the Promise
of CHRIST, made to His Church, and Her certain condition thereby: and, if you
are forced, to acknowledge of the Church of Rome, that which can not be
competent to any Company, but to CHRIST'S Church; then are your Churches
Haereticall, and the Church of Rome, is the Church of CHRIST. But, the things
affirmed by you, of your Churches, can not consist with the Promise of CHRIST,
made to His Church, and Her certain Condition there-by: and that which you
grant of the Church of Rome, is only competent to CHRIST HIS Church.
There-fore, your Churches, are Haereticall, and the Church of Rome, is the
Church of CHRIST.

Philomathes. Verily, our Poet, if he were even here present, could allege
no Prevarication on you, in the upright compryzing of the sum of his
Discourse. And, if you shall answer to it, as clearlie, and ingeniouslie, as
you have ingeniouslie propounded it, undoubtedly the best of this Game will
be yours.


Eubulus. The Proposition of his Argument, is true: but XIX.
his Assumption, is extremely false: where-of he labors, to fortify the
first part, touching the Defects alleged on our Churches, thus:

The Promise of CHRIST, to His Church, is, That Peter's faith shall never
fail: that, The Gates of Hell shall not prevayle against her: that, The Salt
shall not lose its savor: that, The Bryde shall not be out of favor: that,
The Church shall remain the stable Pillar of Truth, etc. and, According to
this Promise, the certain Condition of the Church, is, That She al-wayes
continues, and is, visible. But, by these things, which you affirm, of your
Churches, Peter's Faith should have failed: The Gates of Hell should have
prevayled: the Salt should have lost its savor: the Spouse should have been
out of favor: the Pillar should have been over-throwne: and, the Church of
CHRIST, should not have continued, and continued visible. There-fore, things
affirmed by you, can not consist with the promise of CHRIST, made to His
Church, and her Condition, accordingly: and, consequently, you are
Haeretickes.

Thus, having, as he thinks, set us aside, from any Interest in the Title
of CHRIST'S Church: next, upon a ground, confessed by us, but miserable
mistaken by him, he builds a Conclusion, for the second part of his main
Assumption, which concerns the Church of Rome, thus:

To give lawful Ordination to Pastors, is competent only to the Church of
CHRIST. But, you, Protestants, acknowledge, That the Ordination, given by the
Church of Rome, was lawful Ordination. There-fore, the Church of Rome, must
be the Church of CHRIST.

Do you not, now, perceive ( Philomathes) whither your Man's meaning tends,
by all this his great Squadron of Interrogatours: with the multitude where-of,
he would, in a Musical Mood, over-whelme us?


Philomathes. I now perceive it well anough: you have reduced all, to so clear
and compendious a form. And, granting the Major of his main Argument, you
denied his Minor. And, first, that part thereof, which, upon the Defectes,
laid against you, he assumed of your Churches. For Probation where-of, I must
confess, that no-thing is brought, by him, in his second Syllogism, but the
all-readie disputed points, of Continuance, and Visibilitie. Where-of you have
said ^o much, as we can not, goodly, require any more of you. So, that,
except it please you to answer unto his last, and, appearinglie, insoluble
Objection, against you, grounded on your own Grant, of lawful Ordination by
the Church of Rome, I think, for me, there rests no other point undiscussed
of all our matter.


Eubulus. Of his Objection, of lawful Calling, by the XX.
Church of Rome, and all that he can possibly build thereon, I shall, GOD,
willing, either pay him, or prove him al-readie paid, more than abundantly.
And, al-be-it I have before, al-so, spoken of the other points; yet, for more
clearing, whether he better prooveth, or I deny his main Assumption, let us
take a short view of his Interrogatours.


Philomathes. Then, say to them, and we will hear gladly. Thus they are.

You say, your Faith did appear,
For the first six hundredth year:
But tell me, if thou can
When Papistrie first began?

Eubulus. We affirm, that our Faith, which is the only XXI.
true Faith, has appeared, not six hundredth, only, but, now, all-most,
sixeteene hundredth years; though not in alyke evidence, at all times, or to
all persons: and, though not al-wayes, perceived, even of them, to whom it
appeared. For, as the Smoke of the bottomless Pit, by degrees prevayled;
so, was true Light, the less, and of the Revel. 9.
lesser number, perceived, And, yet, even in the height of that Evil, (when a
Throne was erected to Satan, in the These. 2. and Revel. 11.
Temple of GOD, and Antichrist obtained, not only the Court of the Temple,
but, al-so, all the holy City) there were Candle-stickes, still, in the
Temple, and good numbers of Sealed Ones, following the Lamb, on Mount ^evel.
14. and 7. and 9. 4.
Syon, while all the miscarried Earth, followed the Beast: although none could
hear, or learn, their Song, but themselves; who, in that common Apostasy,
were bought from the Earth, to be the true Citizens of Heaven, al-be-it in the
Earth, yet not of it.

Now, what time Popery did first begin, what Man is he, that needs to make
any question, who reads Paul, These. 2. 7.
affirming plainly, that the Mystery of Iniquity, was even then begun to
work: or, who reads John, avouching that Antichrist 1. John, 4. 3.
was even then in the World? That the first beginninges, and subtle
Insinuation, were not, commonly, marked, it was the LORD His wise
Dispensation, and Satan's deep Deceit: for, other-wayes, it had been no
Mystery. Does not the LORD Himself, teach us, in Parable, That Matthew. 13. 2^
the envyous one, did sow his Tares, even with the good Seed, in the LORD His
own Field; and, that, so covertlie, and subtillie, while the Servauntes were
sleeping; that, all-bee-it mixed with the good Seed, and waxing in the midst
thereof; yet, it is not espied, until, by different Stalk, Flower, and Ear,
it bewray whose Hand did scatter it: so, as the very Servants, al-be-it, by
time, they see it growing, and waxing, and discern it to be adulterous; yet,
they can not tell how, by whom, nor what time, it was sown? And, shall
Tares, I pray you, be counted good Wheat, except the moment, and first Sower
thereof, be shown? Your Man doteth, and deceives, in reasoning,
Sophisticallie, from Popery, in the first Seed, to Popery begotten: and,
even from Popery begotten, in the first subtle Insinuation, and
cunninglie-covered beginninges, to Popery borne, and brought forth: and, from
Popery, even brought forth, but yet still masked, under fair and plausible
Pretenses, and swedled up, in the Clouts of GOD His Children; to Popery, at
length, kything, openly, Teeth, Horns, and Claws: so, bewraying, evidentlie,
whose Brood it was; all-bee-it long, and fraudfullie fostered, in the midst
of GOD His own House. Satan was, long, in all Subtlety, and deep Deceit,
a-bringing out of that Monster, as the last, and greatest Master-stich, of all
his Policy, and Power: and, much, and dark time, behooved to be allotted, to
the begetting of that great Hercules, of the infernal Jupiter. First, in the
Seed: Next, in the Egg: whence Satan, long, and sedulouslie, sitting
there-on, at length, hatched out a Serpent: which became, by time, a fyrie
flying Dragon. For, the Beast arose out of the Earth, Revel. 13.
slowly, and insensibly: not as that Tages, repent doctus in ipso nascendi
Articulo. You may read, if you list, ( Philomathes) a more large Answer, to
this same vain Question, sent to my self, by one of your side, in my
Discovery of his Dotage there-in.


Philomathes. I will, GOD willing, read it. But, what say you to this?

Where were the Servantes of the LORD,
That none of them durst speak a word,
To defend the known Truth? etc.

Eubulus. They were even where Satan's Throne was: XXII.
and, all-bee-it tollerating spiritual Fornication, (for which Revel. 2. 13.
the LORD had something against them) yet, keeping the NAME of GOD,
themselves, and, informing others, in the true knowledge thereof; they were
in the Temple, while Antichrist trod down the Court thereof, ^evel. 11. 3.
and the holy City: and, powerfullie, dispensing, there-in, both Light, and
Grace, to true Christians; and, having Vengeance in readiness, against their
Enemies; they were in the Wilderness, both fed, and feeding others. They
Revel. 12. 6. 14. ^evel. 14. 1.
were on Mount Syon, with the Lamb, both worshipping, purelie, themselves,
and leading others there-in; though none either heard, or learned, their Song,
but the sealed Virgins, while the Beast miscarried all the Earth, to commit
spiritual Fornication.

Thus, they were, all-wayes, and, both spoke the Truth, and, for the Truth.
But, the blind, and stupefied Sectatours of the Beast, neither saw, nor heard
them. For, how soon the Beast of the bottomless Pit perceived them: then
was The Patience of the Saynctes: and, then, Blessed were ^evel. 13. 10. and
14. 12. ^evel. 11. 8.
the Dead, which died in the LORD: then lay they unburied, in the Streets of
that great City, which, spirituallie, is called Sodom, and Egypt: and, then
the VVhoore was drunken, ^evel. 17. 6. ^evel. 17. 3.
with the Blood of Saynctes; and, the Beast became, wholly, of the Dragon's
Color.

Now, where, upon this, That no opposition was made by them, your Man
concludes, That, there-fore, none at all were; I pray you, ( Philomathes) what
kind of Logic do you account it? Because, in Spain, and Italy, no open
opposition is made to Popery; are there, there-fore, no Protestant, either
Pastors, or Professors, in those parts? The future Ages, might, perhaps, be
induced to think so; because that so the Story of the Time may carry;
no-thing being recorded, but what, in common, obtayneth in the Time. But, we,
who now live, would laugh him to heading, as an impudent, or senseless Liar,
who would but deny, that, even in Rome, are hundreths, who hold the Pope, to
be Antichrist. And, how great encowragement so-ever, our too great Lenity,
gives them of kything; yet, would they be contented, that their numbers,
amongst us, were esteemed, but according to their open and advowed opposition?
When the golden Calfe, was set up, Exodus 3^.
in the Wilderness, and that, by so common an Apostasy, as that Aaron was
carried away with the violent Stream of that Evil, it might appear, that
none had been, there, for the LORD, or free of that common Guiltiness: and,
Exodus 32. 26.
yet thousands did kythe in the convenient time of challenge. Were there none
true, either Prophets, or Professors, 1 Kings, 19. 24. 1 Kings, 18. 13. 1
Kings. 1^. 1^.
in Israel, the years of Elias, lurking? And, yet, who spoke publicly for
the Truth? Did not even Elias think, that all were gone, when yet there were
an hundredth Prophets, in one Cave, and seven thousand true Professors, in
one, and the same Kingdom? Shall Tolleration, specially in perilous times,
conclude approbation, of what is tolerated, in all the Tolleraters thereof?
Does not Augustine acknowledge, in his time, (where-in the Mystery of
Iniquity, was not so far advanced, but that Truth still obtained some
place, in common) that, for regard of the CHVRCHES peace, they were compelled
to tolerate many things, which, other-wayes, they utterly mislyked? Attour,
in your Man's Objection, is another ridiculous Fallacy; by confounding the
diverse and distinct times, and, accordingly, the diverse and distinct degrees
of growth, of that Apostasy, in the course of time: and, not distinguishing,
accordingly, the diverse sorts and degrees of Opponers, and of opposition
thereunto. No Age, since the Apostolic times, wanted its own opposition, and
Opponers, according to the degree of Evil, all-though they came not to that
last, and highest degree, to which the open discovery of the Evil, in the
top of all importable, and incurable Impiety, did force Men.

Love, is ever loath to cast off, till all hope be past. And, sober Men,
some-tymes, in a laudable judgment; some-tymes, again, in weakness, will
even choose, often, in a prevayling Iniquity, rather to lurk, and keep
themselves clean; than, with perilous Contestation, either to disturb the
CHVRCHES Peace, or object themselves, to desperate Dangers. Which,
not-with-standing, when they perceive, that (without plain peril of all
Christianity, and imputation to themselves, of betraying the Gospel) Peace
can no more be kept; will then, rather contest, with all hazard, than
tolerate a clearlie-discovered, and a desperatelie-pernicious Mischief. Shall
a Thief, be counted no Thief, but from the time of his open Endytement? Or,
shall the first beginninges, of injurious Usurpation, on the one part; and, an
undoubted, and clear Right, on the other; be reckoned only from the first
public points of Litiscontestation? A Man, disposed to Peace, will long bear,
and, patiently, expect Reparation of Wrongs; and, even comport, with many
injurious Encroachmentes: upon hope, that Reason, and gentle Admonition, will
bring the Party to do him measure. Who, not-with-standing, at last,
perceiving his Adversaries waywardness, and daily progress in wrong doing;
will, then, intend plain Action against him, for his Right. Now, shall the
usurping, and injurious Party, have, in this, any reason, where-by either to
justify himself, or eschew Reparation of all his bygone Wrongs, and
usurpation; because they were never, till then, challenged, in that manner, and
degree? You may see more, heere-of, in my TREATISE, Defense of Ca^. Sect. 19.
Rev. 1^. and 2^.
of our CALLINGES, and COMMENTARY on the REVELATION.


Philomathes. Well: let us go on.


Did Saynct Peter's Faith fail?

Eubulus. No: but, if it had, what should have followed XXIII.
there-vpon unto the Church, more than upon the fall of Judas? What a
ridiculous Question is this? as, if, on the standing, or falling, of any one
Man, or, what-so-ever number of Men, did hang the fall, or stabilitie, of the
Church: which is builded, neither on Man, nor Men; but, on that immooueable
Rock, which can not fall.

Yet, your Bellarmine confesses, That, though the Pope should fall away from
Truth, yet, the Church should not, there-fore, fail.


Philomathes. You, who are so quick a Carper of Aequivocations, fall, now, to
the same Play, which you reprove so often in our Poet. For, by Peter's Faith,
he does not mean that Spiritual Virtue, wherewith Peter was endewed,
there-by apprehending CHRIST to Salvation, (as you would, perhaps, descrybe
it:) but that Doctrine of Faith, which Peter professed, and taught.


Eubulus. Then, ( Philomathes) the playing with Aequivocations, XXIV.
shall be still your Poet's part: for the Lord prayed, for the stabilitie of
Peter's particular faith, where-of Satan sought to sift him; and, which,
remaining steadfast, was his Victory, in that his Temptation, as I have before
signified. And if your Man, will have it permitted unto him, by Poetical
License, against the LORD'S mind, to wrest Scripture, and to entitle, thus,
the Doctrine of Faith: yet, why is it called Peter's faith, more than Paul's, I
am's, or John's? And, why would not your Poet rather (according to Scripture
speech) call it the Faith of our LORD JESUS CHRIST? But, in what-so-ever sense,
giving him, that the Fall, or Standing of the Church, had depended, wholly, on
the failing, or stabilitie, of Peter's Faith; could that Faith, be no
other-wayes preserved, but in the Church of Rome? And, shall the fall of Rome,
conclude, that Peter's Faith, and, consequently, CHRIST'S Church, is fallen?
To make this Conclusion infallible; your Man must bring a better Argument, than
a vain vaunt, of a bare personal Succession: while, in the time, they are
fallen away from Peter's Faith, to the faith of Simon Magus.


Philomathes. Did the Gates of Hell prevayle?


Eubulus. No: but they did so far assail, and with such XXV.
success (in GOD His just judgment, and wise permisssion) as Satan obtained a
Throne, even in the Temple of GOD.


Philomathes. Did the Salt lose its Savor?


Eubulus. It did so far lose its Savor, in common; and, XXVI.
such as should have been the Salt of the Earth, became so vnsavourie, that
they could serve for nothing, but to be Revel. 11. 2.
cast out, and trodden under foot: ( Cast out the Court, which is without the
Temple, and mete it not, etc.) yet ever still the LORD had Ministers, so
seasoned, with the Spirit of Light, and Grace, as they were, al-wayes,
Candle-stickes, and Olives, to the Temple: al-be-it, long, few, and laboring
in many Tears; and, at length, cruelly, murdered, by that vnsavourie, and
unsanctified Fellowship.


Philomathes. Was the Bryde out of favor?


Eubulus. Never: al-be-it, often-tymes, the Brydegrome XXVII.
has had somewhat against her: while, dwelling where Revel. 2. 4. 14. 20. and
3. 1. 15.
Satan's Throne was, and keeping even there, the Name of Her LORD; yet, in
weakness, she tolerated spiritual Fornication. She was never out of
favor: yet she has been often afflicted, and tossed with tempest, having no
(...). 54. 11.
(...): but, beaten, even of the Watchmen: and glad to Cant. 5. ^.
lurk, and to be fed in the Wilderness: while the masked Revel. 12. 1^
Whore, with subtle deceit, made all the Earth to drink Revel. 27.
the Cup of her Abominations.


Philomathes. Was the Pillar over-throwne?


Eubulus. No: but stood still stable, upon Mount SYON, XXVIII.
with the Lamb; while all the Earth was, in GOD HIS Revel. 14. 1. Revel. 13.
3. 8. 1^.
justice, miscarried, after the Beast; receiving his Name, Number, or
Character. And, so, ( Philomathes)


CHRIST'S Promise prooveth true and plain, And your Man's Ballad is but vain.

Philomathes. Where have you been so long a time?


Eubulus. Even where Satan's Throne was: and, even XXIX.
there, keeping the Name of JESUS, against the terror Revel. 2. 13.
of Bloodshed.


Philomathes. To whom did your Light shine?


Eubulus. To the hundredth, forty, and four thousand XXX.
sealed Virgins, Followers of the Lamb, by the Light shyning Revel. 14. 1.
before them, and seen of them, (while all the Earth, depryved of Eyes, to
see, wondered, blyndlinges, after the Revel. 11.
Beast:) who, there-fore, rested not in the common pollution of the holy
City, and Court of the Temple: but, stepped inwardes, to the Temple, where
were, all-wayes, Candle-stickes, and Olives.


Philomathes. Where did your principal Pastor sit?


Eubulus. At the Right Hand of the FATHER, yet filling XXXI.
all. For, in any other, this Title were a sacrilegious Usurpation of CHRIST
His Honor.


Philomathes. Who kept your Keys? who fed your Sheep?


Eubulus. Even those, who (when all, in common, had lost XXXII.
the Key of Knowledge; and, neither entered themselves, Lake. 11. 5^. Matthew.
23. ^3.
nor suffered others, to enter into the Kingdom of Heaven) were still the
true Lights, and Olives, of the Temple: and, who, at length, by the true Key,
have so opened up, and discovered Antichrist his Deceit, unto the long-blynded
World, as, the Beast is going, sensibly, to Destruction; though the
characterized Company, should never so much gnaw their Tongues, for Sorrow.

If the Scrybes, and Pharisees, to whom CHRIST objected, the loss of the Key
of Knowledge, and, shutting of the Kingdom of Heaven, had laid over, against
Him, this your Man's Objection; and argued, there-vpon, the failing of GOD His
Church; and, consequently, of His many and great Promises: would He nor,
soon, and easily, have answered, That, how-so-ever they had so fallen away,
in common; yet GOD still had true, both Scrybes, and Israelites, even in the
Bowels of that, commonly, corrupted Body?


Philomathes. Show some Church that you have built, etc.


Eubulus. A great many, that you have spilt. To your XXXIII.
Man, (Philomathes) Destroying is Building, and Building is Destroying. Upon,
and by that Doctrine, whereupon we build, and which we teach, has the true
Church been builded, and instructed all-wayes: as, by the right Rule of
Examination, we have, a thousand times, evinced: and, he, who gathers not
with us, but scatters.


Philomathes. Were all damned eternally,
Who were not of your Company?

Eriphilus. Seeing, that without the Church of CHRIST, there can be no
Salvation: and, that you do take to your selves, the Title of the CHVRCH, and
deny the same unto the Church of Rome: I would gladly hear, ( Eubulus) what
you can answer, to this Question: and, how you can, so vnwynde your self
thereof, as not to fall, in some one of these Absurdities: namely, That
either all our Fathers, many hundredth years a-goe, were damned eternally;
and, that, now, all-so, all Men, professing Popery, do perish: or, you must
acknowledge, the Church of Rome, to have been, and, yet, still to be, the
Church of CHRIST: in which case, your Churches must be haereticall.


Eubulus. I will answer directly, and, even, categoricallie, XXXIV.
to your Man's Question: and, even, so, clearlie, free our selves, of all your
Absurdities. But, I must, first, protest, for your patience, ( Eriphilus) that
you will not start at my first words; which, may, perhaps, appear strange,
unto you: until I have cleared them; and, therewith, have unfolded the Deceit
of your Man's Question.

I answer, then, and affirm, playnlie, That all were damned eternally, who
were not of our Company. For, there is but one Way, one Verity, and one Life.
And, yet, it shall neither follow, heere-vpon, that, all, our Fathers, in Ages
past, were damned: or, that, all, presently called Papists, and professing
so, do perish. For, we are not so praesumptuouslie audacious Determiners; or,
so uncharitable judgers of other Men, as your Men are of us; secluding,
absolutely, all who die in our Communion, from Everlasting Life. But, it is
well, that, to them, all judgment is not committed. Neither, yet, heere-vpon,
shall either the Church of Rome, be made the Church of CHRIST; or, our
Churches, to be haereticall Companies.


Eriphilus. I will take to me patience, according to your Protestation, to
attend the clearing of these so evill-consisting Assertions: all-bee-it, I
fear, that my patience, in this point, shall neither beget me EXPERIENCE, nor
HOPE.


Eubulus. Who hardly conceive HOPE, may, happily, fall to XXXV.
^e ashamed: but, the aequivocation of this word [ COMPANY] where-in lies your
Man's Cavl^lation; and, according vhere-vnto, you are also misc^led in the word
[ CHVRCH] ^eeing cleared: that, where-of you despare, to find the Experience,
or, con^ine the Hope, shall be manifest, and certain, to any, who will
perceive, and be persuaded.

First, then, I say, That all Christian Churches, are one Church; and, all
Christian Companies, are one Company: united, at least, in one common
Profession, of the NAME of CHRIST, and in one Baptism, being all under one,
and the same general Ensign: and, so, within one and the same Catholic
Church, (as the same is absolutely, all-beit not most properly, taken:) but,
not all, truly, and properly, of it. For, within the Catholic CHVRCH, are
CHRIST, and Antichrist; PROTESTANTS, and Papists; Orthodox; and haereticall
Christians. Now, again, in this one, and general Church, and Company, there
be many diverse Companies, (as in a great Army, are several and distinct
Bands, discerned by their proper, and particular Colors, and Cognizanses)
according as they are divyded, each from other: and, that, either
vnnecessarilie, by prydefull, and uncharitable Renting, of turbulent Men: or,
necessarily, for keeping the clean, and health some parts of the Body, from
the dangerous Contagion of affected parts, in that same common Body.

In a diseased natural Body, ( Eriphilus) three distinct Considerations,
offer themselves to be observed: First, the Body in it self. Secondly, the
Evil, or Disease in the Body. And, thirdly, the Body affected with the
Evil, or Disease. The health some Body, or considered in its own natural
state, is one thing. The Body affected, or diseased, is (in that
consideration) another. And, yet, the Disease is the third. The Evil, or
Disease, all-bee-it it be in the Body, yet is it not of the Body: but, the
affected, or diseased part, is of the Body: not, in that it is affected, or
diseased; but, in that it communicates, yet (all-bee-it weaklie) with the
Life, Sense, and Motion of the common Body. Again, we must put a
difference, betwixt parts diseased, which, ^vel. ^. 2.
all-bee-it heavilie affected, and having parts ready to die, yet are not
past Physic, but may be cured, and quickened, by the Purgation of the Word,
and Spirit; and, such as are quyte dead, in the Evil, and are incurable, as
now, no more part-taking of the common Life, and Sense of the Body: as in an
Hydropicke Body, some parts will be free, by lively Vigor repelling the
vicious Humor; some, not all-to-gether free, but yet less affected: some,
much affected, and ready to die; but, yet, in some measure, communicating with
the common Life, Sense, and Motion of the Body: some, lastly, in which the
vicious Humor has quyte drowned, out of all Sense, and Motion.

Now, to clear this, by Accommodation: I say, That the BODY, is the
CATHOLIC CHVRCH, in which are all sorts of Christians: the Evil in this
Body, but not of it, is Haeresie, Antichristi anisme, or Papalitie. Now, as a
much different, and distinct consideration, was put betwixt the Evil,
considered in it self, and the parts of the Body, affected therewith: and,
again, amongst affected parts, a great difference betwixt those, who yet
retain life, and Motion, and are cureable; and others, who are dead, or
consumed by the Disease: So, ( Eriphilus) you must not confound PAPISTS, and
PAPALITIE; ANABAPTISTS, and ANABAPTISME; BROWNISTES, and BROWNISME. GOD
forbid, that we judge so hardly, as, because PAPALITIE, ANABAPTISME,
BROWNISME, etc. are damnable, that, there-fore, all who are called, or profess
themselves PAPISTS, ANABAPTISTS, BROWNISTES, are damned. Because, all-bee-it
affected, in some degrees, and even dangerouselie sick, of those Evils, yet
they may have the life of the common Body; part-taking, thus, with the common
Head, and be curable, by the Purgation of GOD. How many PAPISTS,
ANABAPTISTS, BROWNISTES, are there, who, not knowing the deepnesse of Satan's
deceit, (wherewith some of their Seducers, and many al-so of their Companies,
are infected deadly, and diverted from all true life) are, in simplicity of
Heart, miscarried, with glistering and plausible pretenses, of the Church of
Zeal, of Purity, singular Holiness, and such like; having yet, and,
all-bee-it somewhat affected, holding the life of GOD, and true Foundation?
And, so, in distinct considerations, are of one, and the same Company, with
all good Christians, and true Professors: and, yet, are not of one, and the
same Company. Because, al-bee-it one, in the common Body, and some measure of
the common Life, yet separated each from other: for keeping the clean parts
free, not from the others parts, but from the Evil, wherewith they are
affected; till GOD, by the Purgation of His Word, and Spirit cure them.

When we dispute against the Church of Rome, and deny her the Name, or Title
of CHRIST's Church; we mean the Papalitie, not all Papists;
Antichristianisme, not all, who, in simplicity of Heart, are miscarried after
it, (which no more justly may be excluded, from the account of Christians,
than those two hundredth Men, accounted Traitors, 2. Sam. 15. 11.
who went with Absalom, from Jerusalem) those who have received the Character
of the Beast, (against whom, only, in all the Revelation, is wrath, ever
denounced) not all such, as have received, but his Name, or his Number: as,
handling this Chapter 13.
same Question, in my COMMENTARY on that Book, I have, at more length,
cleared. And, thus I hope, that, if you will, you may see, how it stands
true, that all were damned eternally, who were not of our Company: and; yet,
not all who were, or are, called Papists, are damned. Neither makes this the
Church of Rome, to be the Church of CHRIST: because such Papists, as are
saved, are not saved by the destroying, and consuming Gangrene, wherewith they
are affected, and which fights against the life of GOD: but by the remnant of
the life of the Body, so far, as yet, prevayling in them, that the evil
has not gotten force, to suffocate, or extinguish it. In which respect, they
were, and are, of our Company: as, in some measure, joined to, and holding
still, the same Head: al-beit each from other separated, either by an
unnecessary wound, of turbulent Men, or, by a needful disjunction: and
(al-be-it not all in a-lyke measure of strength, and health) enjoying the
Common Life. For it is not diverse Nominations, whether foolishlie taken, or, at
apperite imposed, that disjoyne the, so diverslie named; either from CHRIST, or
from the Communion of His Body, and Life. It is a gross Sophistication, in
your Men, what is true of the Catholic Church, to conclude, that, properly,
of any one part thereof: but, it is both gross and impudent, to conclude the
Properties, and Privileges, of the Body, of the inherent and consuming
Gangrene in the Body, but not of it.


Eriphilus. By this your Discourse, ( Eubulus) you make it an indifferent
thing, what either Company, or Religion a Man be of. And, if one may attain
Salvation, being Papist, Protestant, Anabaptist, Brownist, or what you will, so
he profess CHRIST; to what end make you so great a stir? And, why go you
about, by all means, to have us converted unto you? Do you not see, that,
while you would feign appear, to have Charity, you overthrow all Piety?


Eubulus. Because, ( Eriphilus) in Cities, and Houses, infected XXXVI.
with Plague, or Leprosy, Men may live, as who either may escape the
Contagion, or be cleansed, or cool out of it: is there, there-fore, no
regard to be had, what City, or House, a Man come into? Or, is all care, to
keep the Clean, from the Foul, superfluous? Or, is there no care to be had,
of curing the Diseased, and cleansing away the Contagion? In such Companies,
some, possibly, may live, and escape the Evil: but, the abode, is extreme
dangerous, and Death more ready, than Life.

Without the CATHOLIC CHVRCH, it is most true, that there can be no
Salvation, But, it were high praesumption, for the most pure worshipping
Company, in all that common Body, to confine, absolutely, all Salvation,
within their particular Society: how-so-ever, Salvation, there, must be most
assured, and less danger of Damnation. So, as, ( Eriphilus) in this your
Objection, is little, either Piety, or Charity, or common Sense.


Philomathes. Whether the Disease of the Body, be with us, or with you:
whether it be Papalitie, or Lutheranisme; I will not, now, more dispute, much
less, determine. But, verily, ( Eubulus) I can not, but much allow your
Discourse, which is no less solid, and true, than it is quick, and subtle.
And I commend, much more, your charitable judgment in this case, than our
Men's hard determinations of you. And, you have, exceeding well cleared, that
this charitable Opinion, can, nor should, diminish nothing, of that Care, which
lies on all Men, to search, and embrace Truth. But, let us come to the rest
of our Interrogatours.

How might a Man have found you out,
To have trial in matters of doubt;
When no such Company did appear,
For so many hundredth Year?

Eubulus. To this Question, I have, al-readie, answered, XXXVII.
more than once: and, it is the same, which, more than thrice, your Man has
not been ashamed to demand. For, from that Question, [ where were the
servants of the LORD; that none of them durst speak a word*] what have all his
Interrogatours been, but a pievish repetition of one, and the same thing, in
substance? Any truelie-lightened, and humbly, and sincerely seeking, might
al-wayes have found us out, under the common Ensign. And, if, perhaps, Error
had so far prevayled, in common, as he could find, or hear, nothing, in
all the holy City, and Court of the Temple, but the Dragon's mouth; yet
Candle-stickes, and ^evel. ^1.
Olives, were never wanting in the Temple. And, even when all the Earth,
committed Fornication, following the Revel. 14.
Beast, yet Virgins would have found, on Mount Syon a Song, which chaste
Hearts might hear, and learn. To your Man's Rhetoric, (where-by, here, in
a Poetical license, he loses his Tongue so liberally, upon, LVTHER) I
disdain to answer: but, refer him to the Fish-Market, where-of his
Aeloquence most smells. I come to examine his Logic. Because before LVTHER,
and such others, as were in the same Age, and cause, with him: none did
contest, so openly, or in so high a degree, against Antichrist; does it
follow, there-vpon, that none, at all, were before him? Why, then, were JOHN
HVSSE, and HIEROME of PRAGVE, an hundredth years, ere then, cruelly, and
barbarously, burnt; against public Faith, and assurance, given them? Why
were all the Bo^emian Churches, so sore vexed? Because the two Witnesses,
Revel. xi. after the Spirit of Life, had entered in them, stood more
vigorouslie, and advowedlie, than before: and, because, by Divine Warrant, at
that point of time, they were first bidden, Come up hither; their Enemies saw
them, and were afraid. And, so, then, first, they were, publicly, separated,
from Antichrist his Contagion; and his Kingdom begins to take an open fall,
(where-by the Holy Ghost, paynteth out, playnlie, the time, and dealing, of
LVTHER, and his Fellows, in their State, Course, and Condition:) will it
conclude, there-fore, that those Witnesses, were not till then? or, that they
did not contest against Evils, before that time, all-be-it not in that degree,
either of Strength, or Success? Had not the Beast, ere then, murdered them,
even with applause of the World? Yea, and before any advowed Contestation
with him, or Violence from him, were they not long prophesying, in the Temple;
all-bee-it lurking, and in Sacke-cloath?

Because, in KING EDWARD'S days, the abolishing of Popery, and reparation of
true Worship, were, first, by public Laws, established; will any Logic
conclude, heerevpon, That no Protestants were, before that? VVhere-fore, then,
were so many martyred, before the days of KING EDWARD? What did your Men
mean, by the barbarous raising of JOHN WICKLEFE, and his Disciples Bones, some
Ages before that?

The Name of PROTESTANTS, (your Man would say) was never heard of, before
LVTHER. But, I pray you, ( Philomathes) were it good Logic, to conclude, That
never a Christian was in the World, before a Church was raised in Antiochia;
because, till then, that name was not Acts* 11. 26.
heard of? Will your Poet admit, that where Popery is not, by laws,
established, there no Papists are at all? Popery, in-deede, did bear sway,
for the space of a thousand years; for, so long time, the holy Ghost puts
betwixt the Dragon's imprisonment, at which point of time, Antichrist
Revel^ion, 20.
had his first open degrees of usurpation, to his loosing again: at which
point, that Mischief was come to the top of all sacrilegious Impiety. But,
it did not bear, all that time, a-lyke sway; neither, at any time,
universally, with every one, how-soever it did commonly, with all: but had
much different, and slowly, and slielie comming-on, degrees, which your Poet
confounds, most vnskilfullie: and, there-vpon, no less chyldishlie, in
different times, and cases, yet requires one, and the same Manner; and, one,
and the same Measure of Contestation. Which, in GOD'S wise Providence, was
reserved to the challenging of the Beast, in the height of his impiety, for
working of his fall. He was, first, a fraudulent spotted Pard; but, by Revel.
13. 2. Revel. 1^. 3. Revel. 13. 1. Revel. 17. 3. Revel. 2. 14. Revel. 2. 20.
time, became of the Dragon's Color. He, first, had on his head, the name of
Blasphemy; but, by time, all his body was full of the names of Blasphemy.
He, first, craftily, laid stumbling Blocks, as Balaam; but, by time, the
Whore; horn up by him, like furious and bloody Iezabel, did, openly,
overthrow all true Worship, erect Baal, and drink the blood of Sayncts.
Finally, ( Philomathes) this your Men's Question, (where-by they so much
stupifie the Simple) Where was the Church, so many hundredth years, etc? is,
even, just, such a Question, as, if one, who had lain long diseased,
convalescing, at length, should be asked, by one, who had never seen him,
walking in perfect health; Where were you, before this time? To which foolish
Demand, as he might, very well, answer, That he, both had been, before,
and, were the same self Man, which the Demaunder had seen before: al-though
not in the same state, and condition.

So, we affirm, That the CHVRCH, is still, the same CHVRCH, which was, all
those hundrethes of years, where-in they would appear, to make Her
a-missing: but, that She was long sick, by a long, slowly, and, at first,
insensibly comming-on, Disease: which, at length, had become extreme
dangerous, and deadly; but that, by the Cure of Her LORD, She has
convalesced of it.

And, it were an extremely ridiculous Claim, If, in a Body, which had been
over-gone, with a great Disease; and, yet, by the power of the Noble parts,
retayning Integrity, had so far recovered, that even the Dregs, and force
of the Sickness, were fallen into the Legs, and Feet: If, there-fore, (I
say) the swollen Legs, and Feet, should deny the rest of the Body, and
take all Privilege thereof, to themselves; because, they, for-sooth, kept
still the Dregs of a long Disease.

As the CHVRCH, at first, even in the Apostolic times, and, some while after,
retayning PVRITIE, and Spiritual Health, was the CHVRCH: So, afterward,
contracting Sickness, in all the growing Degrees thereof; yet was still the
same CHVRCH; all-bee-it* not in the same good condition, of Health, and
integrity, of all her Members: and, now, again, by the Purgation of of the
WORD, and SPIRIT, convalescing, is yet, still the same CHVRCH; all-bee-it in a
greater Degree of Health, than before.

And, still the CHVRCH lived the same Life of GOD, all-though not, all-wayes,
in a-lyke measure, and force. And, the Evil, or Disease, was still one, and
the same, wasting the Life of the CHVRCH; all-be-it, not, at all times, in
a-lyke force, or seen working; neither, yet, ever, over-going, universally,
every Member: howeso-ever, it, in common, over-went, and affected, all. For,
it never, utterly, extinguished the Life of GOD, in the CHVRCH. If your
Doctors would; or, if your seduced ones, could, understand this; all your Men's
vain Objections, of the Church, should go in Smoke. But, of this matter, I
have written so largely, in my Defense of our Callinges, and, Discovery of
the Adversarie's Dotage; as, I weary, here, to multiply so many words unto
you. And, this, which I have, now, more than once said, sufficiently answers
your Man's next Question.


Philomathes. The next Question, is:

Who kept the holy Scriptures then,
From the hands of wicked men?

Eubulus. In this Interrogatour, I can not tell, whether XXXVIII.
he shows himself, more ignorant, or impudent: for, first, it is asked, as
if nothing had been in the Body, but the Sore. If, besides the consuming
Gangrene, there was ever a Body, where-in it was, and, though affected
therewith, in common; yet, having Members, some lightly affected, some wholly
free of that Evil; how shameless is your Man, in this his question? Next,
what if the keeping of Scripture, had been even by the contagious Company? Is
this either impossible, or a new thing, to the LORD? And, has it not
foregoing Examples, of the like marvelous dispensation, to the high
commendation, of His Wisdom, and Providence; but, where-in the Keepers have
nothing to glory of? Did not the Jews, who neither pleased ^. Th^ss. ^. 15.
GOD, and were Enemies to all Men; who crucified the LORD of Glory, and
rejected Salvation; and, on whom the wrath of GOD was come, to the out-most;
yet, by His wise disponing Providence, keep, so carefully, the Canon of holy
Scripture; as, there-fore, they obtain the name of ( Christianorum Librarii)
The Libraries of Christians? Made not GOD, the holy Vessels of the Temple, to
be, carefully, E^ra, 1. 7.
kept, even in Babylon, till the time of Restitution? And, what wonder, then,
if, in mystical Babylon, the Vessels, and Instruments, of the true Sanctuary,
were long, both kept, and captived? And, may not the Conformity of Case, so
jumplie aunswering, make us, to advert, in a deep Heavenly Wisdom; how
those former things, were, also, in GOD HIS Purpose, Stampe^ of things to
come? Was not the Ark of GOD, kept, carefully, amongst the Philistimes? Of
what Mood has your Man been, ( Philomathes) 1. Sa^. 6. ^.
when he moved, so ridiculous a Question?


Philadelphus. Why should you so much marvel heereat, Eubulus? You did tell
us, before, That their Poet, in this his Army of Interrogatoures, did more
trust in the M^ltitude of all, than in the particular Strength of any one.
And, in such common Convocations, it is no wonder, though many be found, not
well appointed, in their Gear. And, now, verily, I count it strange, that
Men, professing great things, yet should not only, bewray a shameful Want,
both of Light, and Sense, in laying, for the only Rules of Examining, and
discerning GOD HIS Truth; What, or where, or what time, or by what Men,
ought has been mayntayned, and, most commonly, holden: But, even not
obscurelie tax the ALL-MIGHTIE, as leaving His Church, so weaklie warranded,
of the Way of Truth.

Not when, nor where; not who, nor what a number,
Most carried Vogue, is most to be inquyred.
Satan (seducing) with the Spirit of Slumber,
Soon, wydelie, Stars, and multitudes inspyred,
GOD gave up Men, to what their Hearts desired.
Thus Satan's Throne was set, even in the Temple.
Try Truth, for Error early was ing yred;
We live by Laws, and not by loose Exemple.
In darkest times, some true light aye remained,
Though secretly, and, but of some, retained.

Philomathes. We are, now, come to our last point, and, as we account, the
most choice Shaft, in all our Quyver. Our Man's last part, of his Discourse,
upon this point of HAERETICKES, you reduced, ( Eubulus) unto this Syllogism:


If things, affirmed by you, of your Churches, can not consist with the
Promise of CHRIST, made to His CHVRCH, and her certain Condition there-by:
and, if you are forced, to acknowledge, of the Church of Rome, that which is
competent, only, to CHRIST His Church: then are your Churches Haereticall;
and, the Church of Rome, is the Church of CHRIST.

But, the first is true.

There-fore, the second, all-so.

Eubulus. That was, in-deede, the Syllogism, where-in I XXXIX.
compryzed this last part of your Man's poetical Discourse, upon HAERETICKES.


Philomathes. Thereof, granting the Proposition, you denied the Assumption;
and, have, accordingly, done your best, to show it false, in this part, that
any thing is affirmed by you, of your Churches, wherewith the Promise of
CHRIST, can not consist. The other part of the Assumption, seems, yet, to
stand strong: namely, that you are forced, to confess, that of the Church of
Rome, which can not be competent, but to the Church of CHRIST: and,
there-fore, that the Conclusion, at least, for that part, is true: namely,
That The Church of ROME, is the Church of CHRIST. This point, confessed, by
you, of Rome; and, which can be competent, to none other Company, but to
CHRIST His Church, is the lawful Ordination of Pastors; as you, your self,
did, before, very formallie, take up, in this Syllogism:


To give lawful Ordination, to Pastors, is competent, only, to the Church of
CHRIST.

But, Protestants acknowledge, That Ordination, given by the Church of Rome,
was lawful Ordination.

There-fore, the Church of Rome, was the Church of CHRIST. And, consequently,
Protestants are Haeretickes, who have forsaken her communion.

Eubulus. If I have well, and clearlie, over-throwne the XL.
first part of his Assumption, as you confess, ( Philomathes) that I have
done my best, to that effect: consider, with your self, what Feet, the
other part thereof, can possibly find, for to stand upon. But, to try this:
You acknowledged* That I prooved no Praevaricatour, in taking up the sum of
your Man his Argument: but, that, vprightlie, I have brought it forth, in all
the strength his words can give it.


Philomathes. I acknowledge it, in-deede; and, approve your Ingenuitie, in
such points.


Eubulus. Then, will I, as clearlie, unfold to you, the XLI.
manyfolde Deceit thereof. For, first, his whole Argument, is a beguiling
Sophisme; a communi indiviso, as the Schools speak; to be a separate part
in the Community. And, to clear this, I will, orderly, go through the
parts of his Syllogism. You have to advert, the deceit of his Proposition:
For, that lawful Ordination of Pastoures, is competent, to no Company, or
Body, but to the Church of CHRIST; it is most certain. For, the Ordayners of
Pastoures, must, of necessity, have outward lawful Place, and power, in the
visible CHVRCH: in which, except they, both were, (...) did, all-so, obtain,
Place, and Power there-in, they ^uld be no lawful Ordayners at all. Now,
because that Body, in common, in which all lawful Ordayners are, and must
be, is, undoubtedly, the Church of CHRIST: there-vpon, to insinuate, that
all, or most part, of Ordayners, in this Body, are of it: and, though
lawful Pastoures, yet, either true Pastoures, or Christians, it is a
Sophistical Deceit, a communi indiviso, as I have said. And, upon your Man's
Proposition, thus, rightly understood, and, as it can only be admitted, to
be true; when you have assumed, that, Ordination, given by the Church of Rome,
was lawful Ordination: yet, shall you never be able to conclude more,
heere-vpon, than, That the Church of Rome, is in the CHVRCH, and common Body.
Where-by it was, (before visible Separation was made, from that Contagion, in,
but not of the Body, by divine Commandment, to the VVitnesses, to Come up,
hither) that Ordination given by the Church of ROME, (...). 11. and 14.
was lawful Ordination. And, that, which, a little before, I answered to your
Man's Question, ( Were all damned, aeternallie, Who were not of your Company?)
may clear to you the infolded Fallacy of this your Man's Proposition also.
For, within the CATHOLIC CHVRCH, are CHRIST, and Antichrist; TRVETH, and
Lies; WHEAT, and Chafe; PASTOVRS, and Wolves; the true TEMPLE, and the
Abomination of Desolation, standing, all-so, ( in sanctis Ecclesiae loc^) in
the holy places of the Church; the Body, and the consuming Gangrene.

Now, upon that, which is proper, and competent, to the whole Body; and,
there-fore, rightly propounded of the Body, in common: and, which, all-so, is
rightly assumed, not only of parts of the Body, (because, of that Body:)
but, even, of the Apost^me, or Gangrene, (because, in the Body,) to conclude,
That the Gangrene were in the Body, it will hold: but, to conclude, thereof,
That i^ is of the Body, it will not: much less, That it is the only, and
self Body. Shall the Sore, in the Body, appropriate, there-fore, to it
self; or, glory of the natural, and lively Actions of the Body, because it
is in the Body; yea, and has even over-gone the Body, in common? A man has
the Goare, in his Leg: which Leg, all-bee-it, in an hudge degree, festered;
yet, walks, and mooveth, through the remnant of living, and mooving power,
which it yet retayneth. Now, shall the Goare, here, glory, that, by it, the
Leg walks, and mooveth; vvhere-as, it is, by it, that the Leg creapeleth,
and halteth?

Lawful Ordination, is a good, yea, and proper Action, of the Church of
CHRIST: not of the Goare, or for the Goare, which is in the Church, and
stayneth it: but, through the Life, and Power of the Head, yet remaining in the
Body, al-be-it affected, and having diverse Members, even corrupted, with the
Sore. Papalitie, is the Goare in the Church, but not of it: of which, to
conclude, the proper Actions of the Church, because it has place there-in; and
there-vpon, farther, to conclude, of it, the Title of the Church, and Body,
whose, properly, the Actions are; it is but a fraudulent Illuding. Neither,
because lawful Ordination, is a proper Action of the Church of CHRIST, will
it, there-fore follow, That who ever give lawful Ordination, are of the
Church, how-so-ever they must be in it. For, as I have, elsewhere, evinced,
clearlie, lawful Ordination, may be taken from a Wolf, and Thief, who, as
yet, still retayneth outward Place, and Power of ordayning.

Thus, then, ( Philomathe^) if your Man's Proposition, be understood so, as,
that, where ever lawful Ordination of Pastors were, that Body, (considered
wholly) behooved to be the Church of CHRIST, I yield it to be^ true: but, if
he, fraudfullie, would insinuate, That all with-in that Body, who gave
Ordination, were the Church, or of the Church of CHRIST, then is his
Proposition deceitfullie false; and he concludes nothing.

Now, let us see his Assumption. ( But, the Protestants acknowledge, That
Ordination, given by the Church of Rome, was Lawful Ordination) This
Assumption, as it may be understood, in an^e of two diverse Senses; so, I
must, accordingly, answer it. For, first: if by the name of the Church of
Rome, be understood, the common Body of the visible Church, al-be-it, at that
time, affected, so far, even in common, with that Antichristian Sore, as by
Fraud, and tyrannical Usurpation, the Name or Number of the Beast, sitting
there-in, were imposed: al-be-it numbers, there-in, never received his
character; I grant his assumption (...) be true: but, where-on, he shall
conclude nothing, either against us: or for the Church of Rome, as we oppugn
her. For, we never pleaded against the Body; neither have we ever separated
our selves from the Body, as your Men would feign bind upon us: but, we
plead against Papalitie, in the Body; and, have separated our selves, from
the Sore, and such deadly contagious parts, as are infectiue, and incurable:
offering, still, the purging Medicine of GOD HIS Word, for the cure, and
Health, of all affected Members, who will admit Physic; and, for destroying
of the annoying, and eating Evil: praying GOD, heartily, for the perfect
convalescing of the whole Body. And, the Sore, is still more than ridiculous
to oppone, for defense of it self, the actions, or properties, of the Body,
where-in it is: for, with-in that Body, even affected, in common, and bearing
the name or number of the Beast, were, always, numbers, of not only lawful,
but, also, true Pastors, to give Ordination. For, a sick Body, is still a
true, and living Body: but, the Sickness, in it, is no part of it, and is
Enemy to the Life thereof. Next, again, if, by the name of the Church of
ROME, your Poet understand, even the Papalitie, or characterized Papists: that
is, the incurable parts, deadly festered with the Sore, (which only we
impugn:) then, al-be-it not absolutely, yet, in some respect, we grant, the
Ordination, even so given, to have been lawful: namely, so long as they
retained outward Place, and Power of Ordination; before Antichrist's full
detection, and separation of the revived Witnesses, from the contagious
Company. Because, albe-it the Ordayners were Wolves, and Thieues, yet they
were not, in common, known to be so: but, retained still, with all, in
common, the reputation, if not of true, yet, of lawful Pastors. In which
case, the receiving of Ordination, from them, was nothing praejudiciall to the
sincere Receiver of the same, who had not, as yet, espied them to be Traitors.
And, this Lawfulness was not, because it was ministered by the Sore, or deadly
festered parts in the Body: but, because those festered parts were still in
the Body of the Church, and, in common, all-so, esteemed to be of it: and,
al-be-it dead, incurable, and contagious, yet were not cut off, outwardly,
from the Body: thus, retayning, still, the account of Members; al-be-it, in
effect, they were none, but a deadly consuming Evil.

If your Poet, poor Man, had either understood, or considered, what, I
think, I have, playnlie, laid before you: if he had not been, first, a
very shallowe Ignorant, and unstable PROTESTANT; and, now, (I warrant you) no
profound PAPIST: how could this have, so much, stupefied him, and casten him
into such a Musing; that, in the REFORMATION of the CHVRCH, we made no
question, to receive, and use, the MINISTRY, of PRIESTS, ordained by the
CHVRCH, which he calls ROMAN?

For, as the Body, all-bee-it affected, yet was the Body: So, the Calling of
the MINISTERS therein, all-bee-it taynted, and corrupted, in common, yet, was a
CALLING; and, that, according unto the state, and time, lawful.

And, your Poet his Muzing, has, heere-in, so marred his Memory; that,
forgetting what they most object against us; he yields us, heere-by, that
our PASTOVRES, and REFORMERS, had an ordinary Vocation.

Now, as I have opened, the employed Deceit, of your Poet his Proposition, and
Assumption, you may see, ( Philomathes) what Conclusion he can be able to
build thereupon; either for the Church of ROME, not-withstanding any
Confession of ours; or, yet, against us.

And, this, for-sooth, is the Argument, where-of all your Men, so much glory,
as, they do entitle it, their INVINCIBLE ARGUMENT: and, where-in your Poet
has so much pleased himself, that he has reserved it, for his last Blow:
and, falls, even for to muze, what we can be able to answer thereunto:
and, is so secure, of getting none Answer from us, as, he is content, to set
this, to all his Disciples, for a term of adhering to the Romish Faith: till
we, for-sooth, find out an Answer thereunto. But, besides that little,
which I have, here, said, as I think, I have answered thereunto, so at
length, and playnlie, in my Defense of our Callinges, and Epistle, to a
Recusant, (where, of purpose, this point is handeled) as, I need not, here,
at this time, insist farther there-in. I refer you, to those TREATISES, for a
more distinct Light, and fuller Resolution heere-in. Which, if you shall read,
with care, and that Ingenuitie, which I conceive to be in you; it may fall,
that your Poet repent him, of praefixing you so short a time, to remain a
Romanist.


Philomathes. I will, GOD willing, read them, both carefully, and vprightlie.
And, seeing that in them, as you say, this point of matter, is purposelie
handeled; I will not urge you to speak more thereof, at this time. For, even
in the little, which you have said, you have given me somewhat more, to muze
upon, than I expected: and, which will stir me, to search what, more
accuratelie, heere-of, you have, elsewhere, written.


Philadelphus. I hope, ( Philomathes) you shall find your self so satisfied,
in this, which your Men esteem, and call, their Invincible Argument, by
reading those TREATISES; and, shall find it, in them, so solidlie answered,
as though your Poet should not only fall from his Muses, to muzing: but, even,
from Muzing, should fall to Madness; yet shall he never be able, to make
thereunto any sound Replye. As for his Counsel, which, upon vain Confidence
of this his Argument, he gives, of cleaving to the Romish Faith; let them
follow it, whom GOD has not, and upon more ^ure Grounds, advysed better.

If he were able to prove, either, That the Doctrine, preached by his
Apostle, AUGUSTINE, was the true, and uncorrupted FAITH of CHRIST; or, that,
since AVGVSTINE'S time, it had not received great Increase of Corruption; he
might the better bind us to his Counsel. But, bare Personal Succession,
without Evidence of the principal, and most proper Succession, will never
conclude that. And, your Poet prooveth, but still like himself, and closes
up his Ryme, ridiculouslie, in bringing it.

Our Callings, still, you, impudentlie, quarrel,
Though Answers you have gotten many one.
Your Poet's pricked, with plain approaching Peril,
Of your Empire, and Romes now tottring Throne.
Not daring more our Doctrine then oppone,
He fettleth, faulty to find our Vocation.
Forgetting straight, and what he says, anon,
Muzing, he mooues to us this Exprobuation;
That Popish Priests, with us, kept Place, and Title.
Your Poet, poor Man, muzeth much on little.

CHAPTER IX.
PHILADELPHVS. NOW, ( Philomathes) I think, you see, how, at your Entreaty,
Eubulus has, clearlie, answered, unto all your Man's Questions: vvhere-of, at
the beginning, you praesumed so much, as, that there were some of them, to
which, very hardly, he would find an Answer.


Philomathes. Verily, ( Philadelphus) I can not deny, but that I rest
greatly Debtor, both to you, and to Eubulus, for this Days Communication:
and, that, so cowardly, at mine Entreaty, you were induced thereunto:
where-in, I think, the time has been so well spent, as (if it may not be
unpleasant unto him) it may make me to be, often, heere-after, a more than
troublesome, Interrupter of Eubulus better Thoughts.

As for your Aunsweres, I will not, so rashly, determine, what to think: but,
truly, I must, vprightlie, confess, that I have heard more, than I expected:
which, stirs me, to covet yet more; and, will make me, carefully, to
catch all Occasions, to breed Eubulus farther Molestation.


Eubulus. Your honest Heart, ( Philomathes) will make I.
me, all-wayes, glad, and ready to give you Contentment, in ought I can: For,
other-wayes, truly, I, utterly, abhor all contentious Disputation; and, I
account, all, both Speech, and Paper, but badlie employed, which is spent, upon
any of such a Disposition.

My Counsel, unto you, and, out of upright Love, is; As GOD has given you
this, that you, both hear, and read, calmlie, and carefully: So, that you
be, both earnest, and instant, in all humble, and fervent Prayer, unto GOD,
for the Direction of HIS Holy Spirit, in the right way of HIS Fear; which is
the only Way, to true Illumination: and, not heat of Contention,
Bitterness, Pride, Self-love, and Singularity; which: (in GOD His justice,
Who resists the Proud, and gives Grace unto the Humble) but involue Men,
still, more and more, in Blyndnesse, and induration of Heart.


Philomathes. I give you hearty Thanks, all-so, for this your good, and
loving Counsel: which, by GOD His Grace, I shall be myndfull of, and labor
to follow. And, now, unto that Grace of GOD, we must, even heartily,
commend you: For, both the declyning time of the Day, and our Effayres, do
call us another way.

PHILADELPHVS, and EVBVLVS. The BLESSING of GOD, accompany you, in all your
ways: and, direct you, in the right Path of SALVATION.


PHILOMATHES, and ERIPHILVS, apart. PHILOMATHES. AND, have we not, think
you, ( Eriphilus) spent, both pleasantly, and profitablie, a piece of time?
Trust me, I can not, but like well of this Eubulus, his discreet Disposition:
though but even now first acquaynted with him. And, has he not, think you,
said much more, in the points, which we have passed, both against us, and for
themselves, than we could have imagined, that, possibly, they might have
brought? So, as, verily, the longer, the more, I am induced, to think, and
see, that it is a good, yea, a necessary thing, for Christians, to be
humbly, and prudentlie careful; in prooving, and trying, what they do hold,
in Matters of Faith; where-in Men stand, in no less hazard, than of missing
of, or hitting on, the right Way of Salvation.


Eriphilus. I am so far from your Temper, in this matter, ( Philomathes) as,
by the plain contrary, I think, we have badlie bestowed this Day: where-in,
with great indignation of Heart, I have been forced, to hear the Holy
Church, disdaynfullie mocked, and bitterly rayled upon. So, as I, both blame
my self greatly, for casting in any such purpose, and you, al-so, for so
curiously insisting there-in. And, by this Days experience, I perceive, well,
how just reason our Holy Fathers have, to interdict Catholics, absolutely,
of all; either hearing of these Heretics, or conference with them, or reading
of their Books: and, that how-so-ever, some coole-mynded Men, can not brook
it, thereis great reason, of ridding away, and dispatching, out of the World,
even by all means, of such pestilent and pernicious Men: who, except they be
quyte razed out, will not fail, to subvert the whole state of the World. For,
I see, ( Philomathes) that, by your giving Ear, to their charming Speeches,
you are, all-readie, put in the Stays; yea, half over-turned. For me,
when-so-ever I hear ought of them, to which I can not make Answer; I, then,
make the Sign of the Cross, over my Person; and, I turn mine Heart, and
Ears, another way. So, as, let them speak, write, or preach, what they
please, (how true, plain, and infallible, so-ever, it appear;) yet, I
determine, with my self, That it is false: and, I rest, upon the Authority of
holy Church; whose Doctrine, I count it sin, once to put in question.


Philomathes. Against an undoubted Light, and clearlie convincing Truth, it
were, in-deede, high sin, once to deliberate: much more, curiously, or
carnally, to make question. But, for attayning to Knowledge, and Resolution,
in doubtful Matters; to enquire humbly, soberlie, and sincerely; we not
only well may, but, all-so, are, of duty, holden. And, who, without Light,
are carried, upon any Man's Credit, in Matters of Salvation; I think, they
more resemble senseless Blocks, than wise Christians.

As for your other Opinion, (of ridding away, out of the World, by
what-so-ever means, those you call Haeretickes) I am sorry to hear it of you:
and, so much the more, if you have uttered it, not only out of Passion; but,
all-so, out of a settled judgment. And, to speak freely to you, in this; I
think, this Doctrine, in many of our Men, bewrays, evidentlie, what Spirit
they are of. And, for me, I not only, can account them, no Christians; but,
even, no Men at all; or, worthy of humane Society: who, under any Praetext
of Zeal, do shake all Bands of Piety, and Civilitie.

And, it will be, assuredly, seen, ( Eriphilus) that this Tragical, and
bloody Wisdom, (where-by Men, now, are begun to think, that the Catholic
Faith, must be mayntayned) shall be the Mean, to hasten the Ruin of the
Romish Church: while all the World shall be wakened, by their own Peril,
and clear Sight, of such monstrous Inhumanitie, to destroy the Destroyers of
the Earth.


EVBVLVS, and PHILADELPHVS, apart. EVBVLVS. YOU did tell me, very rightly,
at our first II.
Discovery of these two Gentlemen, that, all-bee-it, both of them Papists;
yet, they were, of a much contrary Disposition: for, so we have, in-deede,
tried them. I love this Philomathes his Towardness; and, I hope well of him.
The other's Waywardness, and bitter Disposition, I dislyke as far.


Philadelphus. You remember, how, even before our encountering of them, I was
wishing you, to make some Answer to these Questions, of this Ballader: and,
Theriomachus was, all-so, of my judgment. Now, though you refused to do so;
yet, let me entreat you, thus far, as to write, but a short Record, of this
our Days Conference.


Eubulus. Though, even that piece of Pains, were, in my III.
Opinion, but idle, and unprofitable; yet, it is too small a matter, where-of
to refuse you: whom, for many respects, I am holden, both to love, and honor.
For, other-wayes, to write, either at length, or of purpose, any Answer, to
such things, (so often, and, so learnedl^e, confuted) I neither think it
expedient, for any, so ^o bus^e himself; and, for me, in so manifold
Distractions, which, you know, I have, and, a daily Employment, in the matters
of my Calling; together, with such imbecillitie of Body, as can not endure
great Pains; I were even greatly blame-worthie, so to waste, either Time, or
Travel. There-fore, hence-foorth, let no Man put me to business. GOD grant,
we may earnestly study, to our own Sanctification; and, according to that
great Dispensation committed unto us, we may labor to work the same,
carefully, in the Hearts of others: and, not to delight in contention of
Disputations; about Questions, which but engender Strife; and, do more feast
idle Humors, than they edify Godly Souls.

Illuminate, O Blessed LORD of Lights,
The syled Eyes, of simple ones, to see:
Disclose the Deepnesse so of Satan's Slights,
That straying Sheep, may turn again to THEE.
Sling Babell, as a Millstone, in the Sea;
And let the NEW JERUSALEM, All-Glorious,
Twelve Ports of Pearl cast up, for Entry free,
To All, who in the Lambs Blood are victorious.
Bring down that Beast, of all this Evil th'Enacter;
His Name, his Number, and his cursed Character.

FINIS.
A PASTORAL ADMONITION, TO REPENTANCE.
WHat wonder, though they have so small success,
All Enterpryzes by us undertaken?
We, meschantlie, have readmitted Mess,
Which, happily, was from our sholders shaken.
Thus, having foulie, then, our Faith forsaken,
All our Endeavors, duly, GOD deludeth.
HIS Choler kindles still, and can not slaken:
HE, justly, still, our sinful Suits secludeth.
Nor, shall our Foes, but daily vex, and wrong us,
Till once we put all strange Gods from among us.
No love of Mess, had ever led us to it:
This Grounds was, on Politic Praetences:
But, no Fraetence, had driven us to do it,
If, in our GOD, we had placed all Defenses.
But, from HIS Word, so strayed have our Senses,
In Humane Help, we our Repose have placed.
And, there-fore, GOD us rightly recompenses.
Our Designs fail, our Doings are disgraced.
To Asa, King, what GOD spoke, by Hanani,
Concerns us, much more than him, or any.
From Syrian's King, Asa succor sought,
And, hired them, with State, and Temples Treasure.
We vayner help, at dearer ^ate have bought:
Of Asa's Sin, exceeding much the measure:
And, doubled thus, have on us GOD'S displeasure;
On-drawing, vndeclynable Destruction,
Repent we not, while we have any leisure.
It Is clear, by undeniable Induction,
Some Wages, Asa war'd out on that Nation:
Of Babell, we bring in th'Abhomination.
Proud Ammons King, with Iabesh, was contented,
For to conclude, a Covenant, of Peace;
So being, beastly, that they had consented,
To undergo a singular Disgrace:
That, pulling out their right Eyes, from their Face,
All Israel he might, so make ashamed.
But, much more ignominious is our Case,
Our Beastliness, and much more to be blamed.
Our Parties Pride, surpasse^h that Exemple:
To Molech, we must re-erect a Temple.
Then, let us turn again to GOD, who smytes us:
And, doubtless, He will unto us return.
Slyding abacke, so long as it delytes us,
We never shall miss Matter for to mourn.
It Is senseless Pride, against the Pricks to spurn.
Take counsel, then, while CHRIST upon us calls:
His kindled wrath, begin it once to burn,
Woe to the Wicked, in His Fangues that falls.
Will we but put all strange Gods from among us,
And all the World will be too weak to wrong us.
With Pity, LORD, respect Thy People poor,
In JESUS CHRIST; who, gracious and good,
Salvation to Sinners, did procure,
By sheeding, on the Cross, his Sacred Blood.
HE is our Solace, and Celestial Food;
Us nursing up, in hope of endless Glory:
HE has remooved all that us with-stood:
HE comforts us, against all may make us sorry.
Since, here-to, naught, but Mercy miere, did move THEE,
Should we not, LORD, with all our Souls, then, love THEE?
FINIS.
The Author his Meditation, on the 63 Year of his Age, now (...)-(...).
THis is (I know) my Climactericke year,
And, where-in, if it shall please GOD to take me,
What profit, or what pleasure, have I here,
So lovely, as the love thereof may make me,
Affect frail Life, which must, at length, forsake me?
Which is of Illes, but a Succession Sphericke:
Where-of each hour, I count my Climactericke.
On ^irier Hopes, my Soul it self here stays:
I neither loathe, nor love, long here to live.
Long byding, here, my Blessedness delayeth.
Here, under Sin, I do but groan, and grieve:
Heart-broken, but that, firmlie, I believe,
My Death, an End shall set to Sin and Sorrow.
Gladly, come on, then, grateful Guest, to morrow.
Mean while, my GOD, with Thy good Sprite direct me,
So as I never wander from THY Ways:
And, by THY Potent Power, so protect me,
As, stable I may stand, gaynst all Essays.
Discowrage not THY Servaunt, with Delays:
But, how-so-ev'r it shall please THEE to prove me,
Still let me feel, my LORD, that THOU do love me.
Each moment teach m^e, of my Day^s, to number:
To Wisdom, wholly, that mine Heart applying,
I never sink down, in a senseless slumber:
But, (Lusts, and all ungodliness denying;
And on THY loving Promises relying)
In all Assaults, I may have Hope, and Hearting:
And, last, to THEE, a peaceable Departing.
I seek not Peace, with Sinners, or with Sin:
But Peace, which passes understanding all.
Which New Birth, here, does in our breasts begin:
In that me keep, till hence, LORD, Thou me call.
From Faith, Hope, Love, LORD, let me never fall:
But, fighting out this good Fight, by THY Grace,
Aeternallie, syne, let me see THY Face.
There shall I find, that inexhausted Fountain,
Of endless Bliss: there shall my Soul be filled,
With sight of Thee: there, settled on my Mountain,
I shall have more, than Heart ever wished or willed.
In Book of Life, there shall I see me Billed.
Sacietie of Joys lies there-in Store,
And vnperturbed Pleasures, ever-more.
Pass up, then, Soul; possess that pleasant Place.
Only for GOD'S peculiar Ones prepared.
Go in to Glory, by the Gate of Grace;
Where never more in Sin thou shall be snared.
What we shall be, there shall it be declared.
I long to know the Cafe, which never Eye,
Here saw, Ear heard, Heart thought, what that may be.
FINIS.
ESCAPES, IN PRINTING.
Page lin. for read 10 35 exceeding opportunity, exceeding opportun^lie. 11 22
Thessalonian, Thessalian. 12 5 Thessalonian, Thessalian. 27 8 to her own, of
her own. 37 26 Mamackes, Maniackes. 41 22 are seen, are not seen. 46 30
Gates that are, Gates are. 66 3 and no part, as no part. Ibid. 9 notiue,
nociue. 70 31 his is, this is. 71 5 clears you, cheareth you. Ibid. 13 Mules,
Moles. Ibid. 15 at a lite, not a little. 78 3 separablie, separatelie. 88 16
Mules, Moles. 97 19 in doing, is doing. 113 24 a gain, a Game. 127 31 cloze
all, clozeth all. 128 21 ingeniouslie, ingenuouslie. ^51 18 to be a separate,
to a separate.


