THE SERVANTS DVTIE. OR THE CALLING AND CONDITION OF SERVANTS.

Serving for the instruction, not only of Servants, but of Masters and
Mistresses.

By THOMAS FOSSET, Preacher of the Word of GOD.

GENESIS 16. 9. Return to thy Dame, and humble thy self under her hands. LONDON.
Imprinted by G. Eld. 1613.

TO THE THRICE WORTHY, AND WORSHIPFVL GENTLEMAN AND BOVNTIful hous-keeper
Master THOMAS SPENSER of Clardon in the County of Warwick Esquire Thomas
Fosset wishes the felicity of this life, and of that to come.
IT is written of one Periander, who for his great wisdom was reputed of many
to be one of the seven Sages and wisemen of Greece: that among other laws and
ordinances, which he made for the Corinthians (over whom he ruled) this was
one, that whosoever was proved unthankful for a good turn received should be
put to death, to show (as I take it) what an unnatural and execrable sin
unthankfulness is, and that he is unworthy to live, who is ungrateful and
unkind to him by whom he lives. Wherefore (Right worshipful) fearing least I
may seem to have incurred and run already into that odious and capital
crime of unthankfulness, for the good turn and kindness which your worship
bestowed upon me, now almost twenty years since: I gladly laid hold of this
occasion, that hereby I might acknowledge, and confess unto the world, how
much love and duty Iowe unto you: howsoever, by reason of my poor and obscure
estate, I have not bin able all this while to manifest the same. Moreover I
supposed that this little piece of work, containing the calling and duties of
servants, could to no man more fitly be exhibited, then to him who is and has
been a long time so great an house-holder, and Master of many servants, many
laborours and hirelings, and had experience (no doubt) both of the good, and
evil, and so found that true by proof and practice, which we find written,
and prescribed in the sacred and everlasting word of God. Wherefore (good Sir)
pardon I beseech you this my boldness, whereunto necessity has, as it were,
urged me, and let not the greatness of your worship, and worth, despise this
little and slender gift, but give it leave like an Orphan to cover and hide it
self under the shadow of your excellent dignity, that it may the better creep
into the hands of them it concerns most, and for whose sake I wrote it: If it
do good to any, honor be to God, and thanks to your worship for concurring
to the same. For all the good that I have received from you, I have in my power
but one thing that I can do, and that by Gods leave I will. perform all the
days of my life; I will pray to God above, the author and giver of all good
things, long to bless, keep, and preserve you alive, that you may be more and
more blessed upon the earth, that you may live as you have don along time in
much peace and prosperity, and honor, and credit to your house, a great
peacemaker in your country, full of good works as Dorcas, Act. 9. 39. to cloth
the naked, to feed the hungry, to comfort the comfortless. That when the day
of your dissolution shall be at hand, and that you must needs enter into the way
of all the world, you may sweetly and joyfully in a good old age fall a sleep
in the Lord: and all those good deeds which you have done follow you (as
witness of your faith) even to the Tribunal seat of Christ, where GOD will
crown in you his own works.

Your worships humble and poor Orator. THOMAS FOSSET Minister at Ladbrooke.

To the Reader.
FOr three things (says the wise man) the earth is Pro. 30. 21
moved, and for the fourth it cannot sustain it self; first, for a servant
when he reigns, etc. as if he had said, when a servant reigns, that is
despises his masters government, and follows his own will, and his own
ways, it is a thing so evil, and disorderly, that it makes the earth to be
moved, the whole house, yea sometimes the whole town, or city to be
disquieted; many be the disorders of servants in these our days, and much is
the troble, and disquietnes which comes thereby; and the cause of all is this
(as I am persuaded) that servants do not know their duties, neither consider
the state and condition of life whereunto they be called, In tender pity and
consideration whereof, and hoping of the good acceptance of my late published
treatise, of the young man in the Gospel (good Christian Reader) I was the
bolder, and willinger to diuulge this little treatise, and short sermon, which
does contain and discover the duty, calling and condition of a servant, not
for any worthiness or excellency that is in it, but to do good (if it may be)
to the evil, to teach the inorant, to reprove the stubborn, and to let all
servants see and understand what is required of them, and whereunto they be
called and the rather for that this doctrine being so needful, so little or
nothing (to my knowledge) has been of late written thereof: although of many
good matters, many good men, have written many good books, spent many good
hours, to the honor of God, and edification of his church for all which
blessed be the name of the Lord, from this time forth for evermore. Amen.

Thomas Fosset

THE CALLING AND CONdition of Servants, for the instruction of Servants and
Masters.
1. PET. 2. 21. For hereunto ye are called, for Christ also suffered for us,
leaving us an example that ye should follow his steps.
WHen the Lord commanded Moses to build the Tabernacle, and to make all things
belonging thereunto, namely the Arc, the propitiatory or mercy-seat, the
table, the candlesticks, and the snuffers: for the form and fashion of all
these he gave him this charge: See (said he) that thou make all things
according to the pattern Exo. 25. 40 Hebr. 8 5
that was showed thee in the mount; for while Moses was in the mount with him,
the Lord had showed him certain forms, imaginary forms, and samplers of all
these things which he would have him to make, expressing thereby both the
matter whereof, and the fashion how he would have them made, and here now
again. Exodus 25. 40. he puts him in mind thereof, and charge him that
they be all made exactly and precisely according to those forms and patterns.

So we Christians in the building of our spiritual Tabernacles, in building of
our salvation upon the Rock Jesus Christ, in framing and leading our lives
according to Gods holy will and his word, must do al things, frame out all our
actions and works according to that sampler, which Jesus Christ our Lord and
Master did show us in the mount of Caluary, where he was crucified for us,
that is, according to the passion of Christ, we must always have the bloody
passion of Christ in our minds, as a frontlet betwixt our eyes, as a ring upon
our fingers, and as a nosegay betwixt our breasts, according to that which is
written in the Canticles: My beloved is unto me as a bundle Cant. 1. 12.
of myrhe, he shall lie betwixt nay breasts. For what is the passion of Christ
but a samplar and pattern of all piety, wherein the Lord has described and
set down for us the very Images and forms of many good virtues, needful for
the leading of godly and christian lives, that we may learn thereby to be
perfect, as our father in heaven is perfect. Mat. 5. 48.


The passiion of Christ is as a book wherein wemay read many good sweet and
comfortable lessons, it is a glass wherein we may see our defects and wants,
and wherein we come short, of many good gifts and persections which are
required of us, and wherein the Lord has discovered unto us the ways of life
and the paths of righteousness. There we may see and learn humility,
obedience, charity, patience, hatred against sin, contempt of this world, and
of all the riches, pleasures and vanities thereof; there we may see how the
eternal and natural son of God, he that was equal to the father, and so
equal that he thought it no wrong, nor robbery, to make himself equal unto
him, because he was equal to him by nature Phil. 2. 6.
and right: how he humbled himself and became obedient unto death, even the
death of the cross, which was the most shameful and reprochful death of all
other, and the lowest degree of humiliation that might be, there we may see a
certain, admirable and miraculous love wherewith he loved us, and so loved us
that he laid down his life for us. For greater love then this can no man
have, then that a man dye for his friends: John 15. 13
there we may learn patience in adversity, and how to suffer all the aflictions
and miseries of this life, to enter into heaven by many tribulations, and to
contemn this world, which is altogether set upon naughtiness. For as a good
father says; the man Jesus suffered and endured all the evils and adversities
of this world that he might teach us how they are to be suffered, and he
despised and contemned all the pleasures, yea the best things of this life that
he might show us how they are to be contemned, that neither in the one we
should seek for our felicity, nor in the other fear adversity: but ever with
a steadfast, and immovable mind, and a good courage, go foreward to the end;
our hearts always there fixed where our treasure is, set upon the chief and
supreme good: but the chiefest lesson that we may learn in this book is
obedience: For what is it that brought the son of God from heaven into the
Virgin womb, from the womb into the manger, from the manger to the cross,
from the cross to the grave but obedience to do the will of his father, the
will of him that sent him. Whereupon the prophet David in the Psalm, induces
and brings in the same son of God coming into the world, taking our nature
upon him, and speaking to God the father thus: sacrifices and burnt-offerings
thou would Psalm. 40. 6. Heb. 10. 5.
not, but a body have thou ordained me: then said I lo I come, that I should
do thy will O Lord: where the holy Ghost confesses, that the cheifest thing
that brought Jesus Christ from Heaven to earth was obedience, to apply himself
to the will of God the Father in all things. So his self confesses in the
Gospel: And as my Father gave me commandment, so do Ioh. 14. 15
I. Wherefore seeing that every action of Christ is our instruction: and as a
learned father speaks: not only the words of the word Jesus Christ, are our
documents and lessons, but the facts and deeds of the word, are our examples
also, it follows that the first and greatest business whereunto we are to
apply our selves in this world is, to know the will of God, and to do it. And
as our Lord and Master his self has taught us this lesson, so his servants
and Apostles, Peter 2. Pet. 3. 15
and Paul according to the wisdom given unto them, do urge and press the
same: that as Christ obeyed God the Father for us, so ought we to obey the
Lord our God in all things: yea that in God, and for God, every one in his
place and calling is to obey his superiors, whom the Lord has placed over him:
subjects must obey their Princes, wives their husbands, children their parents,
and servants their Masters with all fear. And to this end they lay before us
this pattern and sampler, the sampler that was showed us in the mount, I
mean, the passion of Christ and his obedience to move and stir us up
thereunto, even as Antiochus the tyrant laid before 1. Matthew. 6.
the Elephants in the day of battle, the red and bloody juice of grapes and
mulberies to make them fight more fearcely and valiantly. The passion of Christ
is such a thing, if it be well considered of, that nothing to a Christian man
can be so bitter but it may be endured, nothing so sweet but it may be
refused. I mean that nothing is so powerful and able to withdraw a man from
evil, and to stir him up to good, as is the passion of Jesus Christ our
Savior. And here in this Chap. ver. 13. Peter begins with the duty and
obedience of 1. Pet. 2. 13
subjects toward their Kings and Princes: Submit your selves (says he) to all
manner of ordinance of man for the Lords sake, whether it be to the King as
unto the superior, or unto governors as unto the^ that are sent of him for the
punishment of evil doers, and for the praise of them that do well: for so is the
will of God that by well doing, ye may put to silence the ignorance of foolish
men. Where the Apostle gives us two reasons why subjects must obey them that
be in authority, first, for that (as he says) so is the will of God, God
will have it so, it is Gods ordinance, which can not be resisted without
sin. Secondly, that ye may (says he) put to silence the ignorance of
foolish men, that whereas foolishmen do ignorantly belly, and slander you,
reporting you to be traitors and rebels, and enemies to the states and higher
powers, by welldoing, that is, by your obedience and orderly subjection, ye
may stop their mouths, and they have nothing whereby justly they may speak
evil of you. Indeed in the primitive Church when the Christian faith first
began many newly made Christians, newborn babes (as Peter calls them)
having 1. Pet 2 2
scrupulous consciences doubted whether they being now become the servants of
Jesus Christ, and entered into so holy a profession, might and ought to obey
such wicked idolatrous kings, such as Nero and others which succeeded him then
were: yea many servants then also being under the yoke, doubted after the same
manner, whether obedience were to be performed by them to such Masters as
were not only Infidels, but enemies also to Christ and his Kingdom, whether
the liberty of the Gospel did not set them free from the yoke of bondage, under
which they were called. O no, (says Peter) submit your seluesto every one that
has power and authority over 1. Pet. 2. 13
you, to al public magistrates and officers, that no man may find fault with
you, or challenge you in that behalf. Ye (says Paul) let every soul be
subject to the higher powers, for there is no power but of God, and Romans 13. 1.
the powers that be, are ordained of God. whosoever therefore etc. In which
places ye may see and read how earnestly these faithful servants of Jesus
Christ do exhort, yea charge and command subjects to be obedient to their
Kings, and Princes: and that not for fear of punishment, but for very
conscience sake, under no less pain then everlasting condemnation.

And this to deliver the Christian religion from slander, obloquie and reproach,
that it might not be said that Jesus Christ came into the world, to dissolve
obedience, and good order, and to teach men so to do; for he came not to
dissolve and to set men free from the law and lawful subjection; but to fulfill
all obedience and righteousness, as he said to John the Baptist. Then the
Apostle Peter comes here in the 18. verse to the obedience of Mat. 3. 15
servants toward their Masters, because many of them doubted in this behalf
what they might do, as I said before: Servants (says he) be subject to your
Masters 1. Pet. 2. 18
withal fear, not only to the good and courteous, but also to the froward: for
this is thank-worthy if a man for conscience toward God, endure grief,
suffering wrongfully, for what praise is it, if when ye be buffeted for your
faults ye take it not patiently? But and if when ye dowel ye suffer wrong and
take it patiently, this is acceptable to God: then in the next verse he gives
them the reason why they must do so: for hereunto ye are called, God has
called you to this, that is, to obey and to suffer. For Christ suffered for
you, and for us all much wrong, injury and contradiction, at the hands of
sinners, and evil men: and therefore they which are the Servants of Christ
ought much more so to do. For he suffered and obeyed, and did all that he
did to teach you, and to leave you an example that you should follow his
steps, that is, walk as he walked, obey as he obeyed, and suffer as he
suffered: Yea says that disciple whom Jesus loved 1. Ioh, 2. 6
most, who also leaned his head in his bosom in the super-while: whosoever he
be that says that he abides in him must walk as he walked. And in the next
verse which is the two and twentieth verse; he urges the Servants further, that
for as much as Christ did obey and suffer, therefore they ought so to do: and
he uses an argument drawn a maiori ad minus, from greater to the lesser: who
did no Isa. 53. 9
sin, neither was there any deceit found in his mouth: as if he should have
said, Christ did no sin, was innocent and free from al sin, and punishments due
for sin, Yea he is the Lamb of God which takes away al sin, yet he for
conscience and obedience to God vouchsafed both to obey, and to suffer: how
much more then ought ye to do the same, who are sinners, and by your sins
have and do daily deserve many plagues and punishments for the same? where
note I pray you how he exhorts servants to patience and obedience by the
example of our Savior Jesus Christ. Hereunto ye ar called, every man has a
calling, and every creature is called to some one thing wherein his calling
does consist, as the bird to fly, the fish to swim, and man (says Job) is
called to travel, and labor as the sparks Job. 5. 7.
fly upwards: yea men being all of one and the same nature have diverse
callings the King to rule, the master to teach, and command, and the servant
to obey: yea the servant is called to three things, to labor, to suffer, and
to serve. He is called to labor two ways, first in genere, generally, as he
is a man. Secondly, as he is a Servant, generally as he is a man, because the
whole life of a man in this world is a continual labor, as the bird is to get
his food by flying, so is man by labor, and by the sweat of his brows. His
days as Genesis 3. 19
Job speaks, are as the days of an hireling: as an hireling is hired of
purpose to labor, so is every Christian man hired into the vineyard to labor
continually and faithfully in his place and calling, yea Mat 20. 8.
the time will come in the evening when the great steward shall call the
laborers and give every man his hire: and that we shall all answer to this
Interrogatory of his own accusing conscience: how have thou labored? what
says the preacher: all things are full of labor, every calling, state and
condition of man. Man cannot Eccle. 8.
utter it, and express with words how painful and labourious a thing the
life of Eccl 18. 6.
a man is, if men deal faithfully in their callings. When a man (says wise
Syrach) has done his best, he must begin again, and when he thinks to
come to an end, he must go again to his labor. And Job accompteth Job 5. 7.
this one of the miseries of this life that a man is borne thus to travel. If
man, speaking generally, if the whole nature of man be called thus to labor,
then much more this man, this particular man, which is a servant. And if this
seem much, that a servant should spend all his time in labor and pains, let
them which be Christian Servants look upon the author, and the finisher of
their faith, Jesus Christ: who whereas he was the first begotten, Heb. 12.
and heir of al things, the brightness of the glory of his father, and the
very Image of his substance, that is, whereas he was God of God, light of light,
very Heb. 1. 2.
God of very God: that same great Lord of heaven and earth, at whose presence
the pillars of Heaven do tremble, and in respect of whom the stars are not
Job. 26. 11
clean, for the ease and joy which was set before him, chose a laborious and
painful Psalm. 88. 15.
life: and (as the Prophet speaks) from his youth upward suffered the labors
and terrors of this life, was proved and tempted as we are in all things,
Hebr. 4.
sin only excepted. So that if thou be his disciple and servant, thou must
not disdain that which thy Master chose. There is no disciple above his
Master, no servant greater then his Lord; it is well and enough Mat. 10. 24
for the disciple, if he be as his Master is. It has ever been the manner of
good and loving scholars to like of, and to affect those things, which they saw
in there Masters, yea many times their Masters very deformities, as it is
written of Aristotle's scholars the Peripatetickes, that because their Master
had a hooked nose, and a crooked back, therefore it was a glory and a credit
among the^ to have the same marks which their Master had, how much more then
ought we Christians to love, delight in, and to imitate the virtues, the
patience and obedience of our Lord and Master Jesus Christ, at the least not to
disdain and abhor that whereof he liked and made his choice. And therefore as
he said unto the Apostles after he had washed their feet: If I being your
Lord and Master have washed your feet, ye ought also to wash the feet one of
an other, for I did it to give you an example. So say I to al servants that
believe, and fear God, and make any conscience of their ways, if Christ being
your Lord and Master, did not only like of, but choose a painful and
laborious life, how much more does it become you to endure that with patience
which he suffered with joy, for he did it to teach you, and to give you a
samplar how that by well-doing ye should endeavor to fulfill al righteousness.
Christ has taught you this lesson two ways, by his word and by his deed also,
for he began (as S. Luke says) facere and docere, to do and to Act. 1. 1.
teach: to do, that thereby he might teach us to do, and indeed that is the
best, and the most powerful kind of teaching: to teach, not with words only,
but also with works and deeds, so to say, and so to do, and they that so teach
and instruct other men to righteousness shall be happy and blessed: for as the
Prophet says, They Dan. 12. 3.
shall shine like stars in the firmament for ever and ever. The second thing
whereunto a servant is called, is to suffer, what must he suffer? al those
evils and injuries which his service and servitude does bring with it, Why so?
for hereunto he is called: and Christ suffered for us, leaving us an example
that we should follow his steps: but what and how did he suffer? why says
Peter, when he was reviled he reviled not again, when he suffered he
threatened not, but committed all to him that judges justly, when he was
reviled, when they told him that he was a Samaritan, and had a devil, that he
was a glutton, and a wine-bibber, a friend of Publicans and sinners. etc. he
reviled them not, railed not upon them, But as a sheep before the Shearer, so
opened he not his mouth, when the soldiers buffeted him, spit on him, and
struck him on the head, he threatened not to be Isa. 53. 7
revenged, but with silence and patience he referred, and committed all to
him, to whom it does justly belong to punish and take vengeance: So says this
blessed Apostle Peter, you and all servants must do, if ye be reviled and
wronged, ye must be silent, committ and commend your causes and cases, your
bodies and souls, to your faithful God and creator, who has a care over you,
and in his word has promised that not one hair of your head shall perish,
that is, not the least evil which may be, shall happen unto you without his
providence and your good, if ye be still patient and expect the Lords leisure.
And here as the Apostle does teach, so he does reprove many proud, stubborn
and disobedient servants of this time, who in the pride of their hearts take
scorn and disdain that their Masters should speak unto them sharply and
roughly, and much more that they should give them a blow, though they deserve
it never so much, such refractary and stubborn fellows forget God and
themselves, they forget whereunto they be called, how and what Christ suffered
for us, and for them: that it was to give them an example to follow him in
humility, meekness, patience and obedience: they forget (I say) the samplar
and pattern which was showed them in the mount. Let such servants read the
story of Agar, Saraes handmaiden and servant, which Agar because Sara her dame
or Genesis 16.
mistress (seeing her self despised in her eyes) dealt roughly with her, fled
away from her in to the wilderness. But the Angel of the Lord found her out,
and because she was in misery comforted her, and advised her to return unto
her mistress and to humble her self unto her, teaching thereby all servants
that if they be dealt with after the same manner, that is, hardly and roughly,
yet they must not run away, deny and detract from their masters their service,
duty, and obedience: as the manner and practice of many proud and stubborn
servants is to do, who when they be weary of their service, and cannot be set
at liberty, at their own pleasures, and desires, then they take their heels
and run away.

To which Servants I say thus: that albeit their masters do not well to deal
hardly and euilly with them, neither can they be excused for so doing, yet if
the malice and peruersenes of their masters be such, they notwithstanding
being servants must not shake off the yoke, set themselves at liberty, and
depart when they list, first because they have not power of their own selves,
they couenanted with their masters, tied and bound themselves to serve them so
long, and in such sort.

And therefore to break those bonds, covenants and promises, is a thing
neither good, honest, nor lawful by the laws of God or men: for it is plain,
perfidia, falsehood, unfaithfulness, and evil dealing, and such Servants may
be called (as the Carthaginians were) foedifragi, covenant and
promise-breakers, starters aside, and runagates: a disobedient and stubborn
generation, a generation whose Gen 16. 9.
heart is not set aright, whose spirit is not faithful to God nor to man; and
such are reproved by the words of the Angel Psalm 78. 8.
unto Agar Genesis 16. 9. Secondly they must not do so, because it is against
their calling, I mean the calling of a servant, which is (as I have said) to
labor and to suffer; it is against the example of Jesus Christ our Lord, and
consequently against his holy will, his mind and meaning.

The servant that is in afliction as Agar was, has none so good, and perfect a
remedy to help and relecue himself, as according to the Angels counsel, to
humble himself under the hands of his Master, and with industry, labor and
patience to get and recover his Masters favor, and so to win his Master with
well-doing, with doing good for evil: and as blessed Romans 12. 21
Paul does counsel us all, to overcome evil with good. Moreover concerning your
sufferings, and that ye are called to suffer: ye must in any wise look into
1. Pet. 4. 15
the cause for which ye suffer, That none of you suffer as a malefactor, a
murderer, a thief, or as a busy body in other men's matters, take heed that
ye suffer not so, for such evil causes, but if any of you suffer as a
Christian, let him not be ashamed, but let him glorify God in that behalf:
yea let him rejoice, in as much as ye are made thereby partakers of Christ's
sufferings.

In all suffereings men must look into the cause for which they suffer, for it
is not the pain or punishment which a man suffers, but the cause for which
he suffers that deserves praise, or is thanke-worthy, for many men suffer
many and great things: Traitors suffer thieves and murderers suffer, and that
cursed fellow which muthered, of late, the Noble French King suffered: but
what? Digna factis? things worthy of that which they had don, these sufferings
are so far from deserving pity or commendations, that they shall be
testimonies against them, and brand them with a mark of infamy for ever, he
that suffers for righteousness sake, that is, in a just and good cause: or
unjustly with patience is happy and blessed, for 1. Pet 4. 14
he suffers upon Christ's own cross, and the spirit of glory and of God
shall rest upon him. Wherefore let not the Christian servant murmur nor grudge
at this suffering if it be laid upon him, but let him remember that hereunto
he is called; this is a burden which the Lord has imposed upon him, this is
the case and the place, and the state of life in which he must serve the LORD
his GOD, if he will serve him at all, and look for the recompense of reward,
Col. 3. 24
the reward of inheritance which is promised to all good and faithful servants.

The third thing whereunto a servant is called, is to serve, that is, to obey
and to be in subjection, to have no will of his own, nor power over him self,
but wholly to reseigne himself to the will of his Master, and this is to obey;
for what is obedience, but as it is defined by the learned, Spontaneum and
rationabite voluntatis propriae sacrificium, a voluntary and reasonable
sacrificing of a man's own will, voluntarily, freely, and without any
constraint: and reasonably, that is, according to reason and religion in the
obedience, and fear of God, to deny his own will, his own affections, and to
submit himself altogether to the will of GOD, and his superiors in GOD, and
that is called propria voluntas, a man's own will, which is contrary, and not
subject, and subordinate unto the will of GOD, as Paul calls the wisdom Romans
8. 7
of the flesh, which is not, neither can be subject to the wisdom and law of
God. Here then servants may see and learn how they must serve and obey. They
must be obedient at a word, at a call, and at a beck as the Servants of the
Centurion were: who says of them, if I say unto one go he goes and to another
come, he comes, or to my servant do this, he does it. So must servants Mat 8.
9.
hearken with all willingness and alacrity of mind: they must say and do as the
lad Samuel did who served under Eli the high priest in the temple of the lord:
when the voice called him Samuel, Samuel, he 1. Sam. 3. 5.
answered by and by, here I am, and ran quickly to Eli and said, behold
here I am, for thou call me. Where ye may observe and mark his readiness in
hearing, and his speed in going, as soon as he heard himself called he made
answer presently, here I am, and then he ran, it is not said that he went,
but he ran, this confounds the carelesnes, or rather the contempt of many
ungodly Servants in these our days, who will not hear when they be called,
but will abide many calllngs', and answer when they list, and then not
cheerfully, and willingly, but slowly, and grudgingly, and when they be dispose
to come, they do not make have and run as Samuel did, but they go as
though they cared not whether they went or not.

Servants must perform their services, and do their duties willingly, and
heartily, as the Apostle tells the Collossians, and as to the Ephesians he
says: they must Col. 3. 23.
do all from the heart with goodwill serving the Lord and not men: where he
gives Ephesians. 6. 5.
them them the reason, why they must do it heartily and willingly, because in
serving their masters they serve God, also they serve the Lord Christ, and
whatsoever services, and duties are done to God and to our Lord Jesus Christ,
must be done joyfully, for God (as Paul says) loves a willing and a
cheerful giver and doer in all things. 2 Cor 9. 7.


Wherefore I wish and exhort Servants, as many as fear God and be desirous to
know and to do their parts and duties, for to search and read the scriptures,
and cheefely these two places of the blessed Apostle Paul to the Ephesians, and
to the Colossians. and there they may see how earnestly, and zealously he, yea
rather the spirit of God by him does move and stir up their minds to these
good and Christian duties if they only read the places with consideration.

And here now by this time ye may see who is a good servant, he that
labors, he that suffers, and he that obeys: and and if ye search the
scriptures ye shall find that the praise of such a Servant is much, and the
reward exceeding great.

What says our Savior Christ to the Mat. 25. 21
good Servant who had labored in his Masters service: It is well done, thou
good and faithful Servant, because thou have bin faithful in a little, I will
make thee ruler over much, enter into thy masters joy, as if he had said:
because thou have labored, suffered, and obeyed, therefore thy labor shall not
be in vain. But to the evil Servant, that is to him that has not labored,
nor suffered, nor obeyed, but neglecting his masters will and commandment,
carelessly had hid his masters talent, what is said? Cast therefore the
unprofitable Servant into utter darkness, there shallbe weeping and gnashing
of teeth: although indeed these Servants here spoken of in this parable
mystically are we Christians, and he is a good Servant to the LORD our GOD,
which labors in the service of God for the honor of God and his own good,
not for the bread that perishes, but for that which Ioh. 6.
remains to life everlasting. He that suffers all the afflictions and
contradictions which a Godly and Christian life brings with it. He that
obeys the Gospel, the will and the word of Jesus Christ in all things, and
to this Servant it is said, it is well done thou good and faithful servant etc.
Enter into thy Masters joy, into everlasting life, where is fullness of joy and
pleasures for ever. Now if it like you to walk abroad into the fields and
pastures of the holy Scriptures, ye shall find examples both of good and evil
servants, whereby ye may learn what to follow, and what to avoid. For the
holy Scriptures lay before us (as a lookingglasse) both the vices and virtues
of men, their vices to avoid them, their virtues to follow them, to teach us
both to decline from evil, and to do good: upon which two points al Christian
doctrine Psalm. 34. 14
is grounded.

Judas, the son of Iscariot, was a Servant, but neither good, nor faithful,
for he was a Traitor and a Thief, he carried the bag, the purse and
received Joh ^2. 6
those things which were given: yea he dealt falsely and kept that to himself
which was given to Jesus his Master; for the relief of himself, and of those
which followed him. This covetousness, this inordinate desire of having, this
root of all evil, increasing and growing in him more and more, at the length
it brought him to that wicked and horrible designement, that he was content
for lucre sake, to sell and betray his Master, his good Master, even the Lord
of life, the King of glory: which when he had done, his own conscience became
unto him, an accuser, a witness, a judge, and a hangman: and forthwith he Act.
1. 18
took an halter and hanged himself, his belly burst, and his bowels gushed
out, and so he perished fearfully, to the great terror and admiration, not
only of all that were then at Jerusalem, but of all the world beside, as many
as have or shall hear of it hereafter. Wherefore by his example let Servants
beware and take heed how they be false, and deceive their Masters, let them
be true and lust, and faithful in all things, let them take heed of
coueteousnesse which is such a pestiferous and cancrous thing, eating, and
creeping still more and more into the hearts of men, that it consumes and
deuoureth in them all faith to God, and love to men, and brings them to most
wicked resolutions and attempts. Covetousness (says an ancient father)
neither fears God nor regards man, neither spares father, neither knows
mother, with his brother he accords not, nor with his friend keeps be
truth. This made the 1 Timothy 6.
Apostle Paul to say that the love of money is the root of all evil; and the
wise man Syrach to conclude, that there is nothing worse then a covetous man
nor Eccl. 10.
a more wicked thing then the love of money, For (says he) such a man will sell
even his own soul, not only his friend and his master as Judas did, but his
own 4 Reg 5.
soul also. Such a Servant had Elisha the Prophet, and man of God, called
Gehezi, who crossed his good master in that which he hated, that is, in
forging of lies and in taking gifts and bribes, when his master had healed the
noble man of Syria freely, and as he freely received the gift, so freely had
bestowed it for the honor of the God of Israel, this fellow esteeming a little
money and raiment. more then the glory of God, and his masters credit, ran
after him, and by a lie obtained money and apparel. But the Lord, to whose
eyes al things are open and naked, discovered the fraud of Heb. 4.
this servant unto his master, the Prophet who reproouing him for it, the
fearful plague of Leaprosie, which he had that was cured, was laid upon
this fraudulent fellow, to cleave to him, and to his seed for ever.

Let Servants take heed of lying, dissembling, and such cunning practices to
get unto themselves, without their masters knowledge, and let them show all
good fidelity, and faithfulness, assuring themselves, that howsoever Eccl 23.
19.
they may deceive the eyes of men, for a time, yet they cannot deceive the al
seeing, and al-knowing God, whose eyes are ten thousand times brighter then the
Sun, who will lighten the hidden 1. Cor. 4. 5.
things of darkness, and make known the very counsels and thoughts of the
heart.

There be many servants in these days such as this Gehezi was, greedy
bribing companions: yea one can not come to a man of any place or fashion to
seek for favor, justice, and equity but Gehezi waits and gapeth for
somewhat, or else he shall hardly be welcome, and he may chance to stand
without. And thus Covetousness and Bribery began to creep into the houses of
great men, of such as be in sublimity, and authority, by means of the
Servants, but now the Masters perceiving this practice and gain of the
servants, have taken it into their own hands, not that they would not have
their servants covet, and take, but that they would have them do it for them,
and not for themselves, the master his self will not be seen to take any
bribe, or any way to be corrupted, because these things be directly evil, but
he will have one about him that shall take bribes, out of the bosoms of men,
and put them into his masters pocket.

By which means much wickedness and many evils are committed, much wrong,
oppression, and injustice, as in the days of Amos the Prophet, which made him
complain against the Rulers and magistrates, and say: ye have turned
judgment into gaul and the fruit of righteousness into wormwood, meaning, that
whereas Amos. 5. 7.
men poor and oppressed looked for judgment and justice, help and delivery
and thereby for joy and comfort, they on the contrary fide find nothing but
bitterness of soul, sorrow and heaviness of heart.

Ioab one of the sons of Zeruia, was a servant to King David, and the chief
Captain, and governor of his host, and Garrisons, but he was not a good
servant and that for two causes, first for that he dealt not simply and
plainly with his master the King, but by craft and subtilty practiced to
reconcile Absolon unto 2. Sa 14 2.
his father, for he provided a bold and audacious woman, a subtle woman (says
the text) such an one as the world is full of now which can lie and dissemble.
And this woman after this Ioab had instructed and taught her her lesson,
comes to the king, fayning, and counterfeiting a certain heaviness, puts
a case to him; the King being a merciful man, and one that ever pittyed the
needy and distressed, spoke so much and so comfortably unto her, that when he
perceived what her drift and meaning was, he granted her request, and asked
her whether the hand of Ioab were not in that business: where upon she
confessed the whole matter, how he the said Ioab subornd her to that end, that
is, to work that with the King by subtilty, and cunning, whereunto he would
not have been brought with direct and plain dealing.

The King because he had spoken the word was content that his incestuous, and
rebellious son should be recalled from banishment, and come to the city: but
not admitted to his sight, and presence; which fact of Ioabs the king
remembering although he were content to be ouer-ruled for the present: yet ^
King. 2. 6
when the time was come that he should dye, and enter into the way of all the
earth, he charged Solomon his son, that for this, and some other
displeasures which he had taken against this Ioab, that he should not suffer
his hoary head to go to the grave in peace, albeit that this Ioab was his old
Servant, his near kinsman, even his own sisters son. Showing thereby that
it is a great heinous offense, and almost not pardonable for a Servant toward
his Master, or a subject toward his King to use any fraud and dissimulation,
and not to deal simply, and singly with them in all things. Servants as they
must serve their Masters in truth and fidelity, so must they Ephesians. 6. 5.
do it in singleness of heart, as unto Christ, all duplicity and double
dealing, as it is evil in all men, so is it specially in every inferior
toward his superior, whom the Lord has commanded him to obey voluntarily, and
conscionably, as to his own self.

Secondly this Ioab was not a good servant, for that he did not only consent
unto his Masters sin, but was the worker and finisher of the same. Fot
whereas the King being possessed with the unlawful love of the wife of Vrias,
and lusting after her, wrote unto this his servant Ioab 2. Sam 11. 6.
to make away this innocent man, he as soon as he received the letters, put
it in execution, set him in the most dangerous place of the battle, where he
was sure to be slain: which being effected, he sent word to the King, saying,
Vrias ^. Sa. 13.
is dead, such were the servants of Absolon, evil servants of an evil Master,
as ready to work wickedness and to do evil, as their Master was to command
it. For when as Absolon of a malicious and revenging mind had bid them to
smite, murder, and kill his brother Ammon at the table, when he and the rest
of the Kings sons were merry and full of wine: these swaggerers and hacsters
made no bones at it, but did so in deed, boldly and bloudily they kill the
son of a King in the sight and presence of the rest of the Kings sons, and
other of the nobility, then and there assembled: This world is full of such
ungodly servants, whose feet being (as the Prophet says) swift to shead
blood, and their right hand a right hand of iniquity, nothing can be by their
Masters so abominably commanded, but it shall be by them with speed desperately
attempted, so must not servants do, they must not do euili under a color and
show of good, I mean of pleasing and obeying their Masters: they must please
and obey, but in the Lord, in all good, honest and lawful things, so far as
the Lord in his word does will, command, or give them leave, vsque ad Aras: and
no further.

All obedience must be subordinate unto the divine obedience due unto God. If
thy Master bid thee do evil, hurt thy neigbours cattle, or steal his goods;
if he command thee, or give thee example to cogge and lie, to steal or use
any fraud or deceit in buying, or selling, to sell that which is evil for
good, to exact more then a thing is worth, to do any thing which you would not
be content should be done to you: then say as Christ, the Master of us all
said, when one told him that his mother and his brethren stood without Mat. 12
48
to speak with him: Who (says he) is my mother, and who are my brethren etc.
And as Peter and John answered to the Senate of the Jews, when they for-bad
them to speak any more in the name of Jesus, whether it be right in sight of
God to obey you rather then God, judge ye. Act. 4* 19.
Thus much of evil Servants, that ye may learn what to avoid and to take
heed of: now look ye upon some good servants, that ye may see and know what
to imitate and follow. Jacob in his youth was a good servant to his Master Genesis
31. 38. 39.
and uncle Laban, whom he served a long time, twenty years together in much
labor, patience, affliction and tribulation both of body and mind: yea with
all his might (as he confesses in the sixth verse of the same Chapter) in the
day time consumed with heat, and in the night with frost, even so much that
he could not sleep. By which means God blessed Laban his Master, and
increased his cattle for Jacobs sake. Yea this Jacob is a notable example and a
pattern of a good, godly, and faithful servant, and chiefly for having a
special care over his Masters goods and cattle: which is a principal thing to
be respected and required in a servant; for my servant is to me, alter ego,
another my self, and is to have a care of my goods in mine absence as I my
self have, and I must do that by my servant which I can not do by my self.

It is said here by his own mouth, that for the space of those twenty years,
neither his Masters Ewes nor Gotes did cast their young ones, nor went over
barren: none of his cattle perished to him.

If any were stolen by day, or by night, torn and devoured of wild beasts, he
supplied and made it good of his own, which although it were more then he was
bound to do, yet it showed in him a marvelous love to his Master, and what a
care and desire he had of his Masters profit and commodity, more then of his
own.

And this was more then his Master did deserve at his hands, for he dealt but
hardly with him in many things. For whereas Jacob served him seven years for
Rahel, he beguiled him with Lea, bleare eyed Lea, the worse for the better. Ten
times changed he his wages, even so much that if the God, whom Abraham and
Isaac served and feared, had not bin with him and blessed him, this good
servant Jacob had come away empty, and having little enough. Where it appears
that all this good service which Jacob performed to his Master Laban, he
performed it for very conscience sake, that is, because he knew that it was
the duty of a servant so to do. Here then servants may learn how to serve
there Masters faithfully, carefully, and conscionably, to refuse no pains, no
labors, heat nor cold, by day nor by night: to be careful for their Masters
profit, studious and desirous to see them go foreward and prosper in the
world. And this the must do howsoever their Masters deal with them, and
although they deserve it not. And yet this I say, that if any man have a good
Servant which does well: if he deal not kindly and friendly with him great is
his sin and shame. But howsoever the Master deals, let the Servant do well
in all things, and then look for the reward of recompense at the Lords hands.
Joseph Genesis 39.
the son of this Jacob, was a good Servant unto the Egiptian which bought him
of the Ismacl^tes. Who because his Master loved him, and reposed a trust in him
therefore he could by no means be brought to wrong him, but made a conscience
to do or commit any thing against him, especially to defile (...) marriage
bed; for when his filthy and adulterous Mistress did move, solicit and
importune him thereunto, he answered her: How can I do this great wickedness
Genesis 39. 9.
and so sin against God, it is a great wickedness and sin against God, and
against my Master: God has been my good God, and the GOD of my Father
Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, my Master (as thou know) has committed his house
and all that he has into mine hands, and has reserved nothing to himself,
but thee onoly which art his wife, how then can I do it? How can I do that
which is against the duty which I owe both to God, and to my Master, and also
against this my resisting and reclaming conscience?

Many a bad servant if he meet with a Dame or a Mistress as bad as his
self, will not say, how should I do this sin and wickedness, but with the
reprobates. Come let us be pertakers of wantonness, Wisd. ^. 9.
let us enjoy the pleasures that are present, let us leave some token of
pleasure behind us in every place. From which wicked resolution and unlawful
love, there grow and spring many great and grievous sins, many thefts, and
adulteries and murders. The Dame must needs steal from her husband, to
maintain her man, to feed and nourish in them their unlawful lusts, their
gluttony, drunkenness, chambering and wantonness: all which without cheer and
charges cannot be maintained, but will wax cold.

As for soul adulteries, filthy lusts, and longings one after another, and
sin that cease not, their eyes are full of them and of nothing else.
Moreover by these evil means, many an honest and innocent man is murdered, I
mean through the unlawful love of the wife, as many lamentable examples, both
of old and of late, yea as the prisons and galloses can testify: and all by
the vices of wicked and evil disposed servants. Abraham had good servants, one
especially, who in the Scriptures is commended Genesis 24.
for his fidelity in seeking a wife for his Masters son Isaac. Yea all his
servants were good and obedient, and such as are not now to be found in all
the world. For when as the Lord had commanded him to circumcise himself, his
son, and all the male servants of his Genesis 17.
house, whether borne in his house, or bought with money, that every one should
be circumcised, that is, have the fore-skinne of his flesh cut off round:
Abraham like a good man full of faith and obedience went home presently, and
put it in execution out of hand without delay: First he circumcised himself
being ninty years of age and nine, then his young son Ismaell, but thirteen
years old: next and immediately all his servants: who as the text faith, Every
one without murmuring or resistance obeyed the will of God and their Master.
Genesis 17. 26
The self same day was Abraham circumcised and Ismaell his son, and all the
men of his house. And this (if ye mark and consider well of it) was a very
admirable and strange thing, not only that Abraham should so soon circumcise
and cut himself, and his son, of whom he had power, but chiefly that his
servants would be brought so quickly to so great a matter as to have their
skins cut in that place, and after that manner: being a thing not only
exceeding painful, but very strange and never before heard of, since the
world began, they had no scriptures nor laws so to command them, no examples
so to show them: and therefore their obedience was the more marvelous and
commendable that they would so speedily conform and resign themselves, and
their wills to the will of God and their master, in a matter of so great
importance. I think if ye seek all the world now ye shall find no such
Servants: nay ye shall scant find any subjects that will do so much at the
commandment of their Prince, much less shall ye find Christians which will be
so obedient to the will and word of the Lord their God. But what was the cause
that these Servants of Abraham were so tractable and willing to be ruled?
Abraham himself was a good master, who had instructed them, and trained them
up to this knowledge of their duty toward God and man* as himself does
testify for him: I know that Abraham will command Ge. 18. 19.
his sons and his household after him that they keep the way of the Lotd, to
do righteousness and judgment etc* nothing makes good servants so much as
the goodness of the Masters; the better and the wiser masters be in
governing, the better will the servants be in obeying, and serving, as a wise
man Seneca
says: melius imperanti melius paretur. In like manner the Servants of the
Centurion were so ready and willing that if their master had said but go, or
come, or do this, forth with they hearkened and obeyed. How came this to pass?
he was a good man and a good master, and esteemed his servants dear and
precious unto him.

When Jesus (says Saint Luke) entered into Luke 72.
Capernaum, there was a certain Centurions Servant sick which was dear unto
him.

One cause that there be now so many bad servants is, that there be so many bad
masters, which esteem not, neither make any account of their Servants, but
only to serve their own turns, as men do of their cattle, and not for the
good of the servant, but only for their own gain and lucre, nay there be
many men which respect not their servants so much as they do their dogs.

I have known some men who when they have been all the day abroad swaggering
and swearing, hunting and whoring, when they have come home at night would ask
carefully what their dogs had, and how they had been served, and what was
provided for them: which men I think verily in all their lives never once
inquired of their servants how they were used, or what was provided for their
suppers, although they had labored never so hard all the day.

And hence it is that servants, for the most part, are so bad and careless,
and such as do not their work for love and for conscience sake as they ought
to do, but only for fear and fashion-sake, with service to the eye as
men-pleasers, and to speak the truth, servants many times and in many places
are so badly used that some of them forsake all service, give themselves to
idleness, become vagabonds, rogues and thieves. Wherefore let Masters in the
fear of 2. Tim. 3. 16
God learn to know and perform their parts and duties in this behalf, and to
this end let them search the Scriptures which are able not only to instruct
them, but to make them perfect. The Col. 3. 22
same Scriptures which call upon servants to do their duties toward their
Masters; the same cry also to the Masters to do the like unto their servants.
After that the blessed Apostle Paul had charged the servants among the
Collossians to be obedient to their Masters in all things, serving them in
singleness of heart, fearing GOD, knowing that of the Lord they shall receive
the reward of inheritance etc. By and by he turns his speech to the Masters
saying: And ye Masters do unto your servants that which Col. 4. 1
is just and equal, knowing that ye also have a Master in heaven.

Where it is apparent that as servants owe much duty to their Masters: so
there Masters owe a duty to them also, and that is to use them well, and to do
nothing unto them but that which is just and meet, and beseeming men which
profess piety and Christianity: and this is the reason which the Apostle
gives: Because they also have a Master in heaven, because there is one common
Master of us all, who if Masters do abuse their servants and the power which
they have over them, he will requite, repay, and revenge it: as it is said
there by the Col. 3. 25
Apostle: He that does wrong, shall receive for the wrong which he has done,
and there is no respect of persons with GOD; the Lord will reward abundantly
all that do wrong and evil, whether they be Masters or Servants. Wherefore
ye that be Masters hear this: it is your parts and duties if your servants
do well, to use and entreat them as brethren and coheires with you of the
same grace, and of the same glory: as the Lords freemen and Christ's 1. Cor
7. 22 Ioh. 15. 14
Servants: as the friends of Christ, as Christ's little ones, and as partakers
of the benefit.

That hard and cruel servitude, bondage, and slavery which was used among the
Gentiles, which knew not God, is taken away by the law of grace, by that grace,
mercy, love and commiseration which Jesus Christ our Savior bought us, brought
us, and taught us one toward another. Yea God as he has created us all alike,
redeemed us all alike, and called us all alike, so he esteems us all alike.
With him there is neither Jew, nor Gentile, poor nor rich, young nor old,
Master nor Servant: but in every Nation, in every state, calling, or degree of
Act. 10 34
men: whosoever fears him, and does righteousness is accepted of him; and
whosoever does otherwise shall receive for the evil which he has done, GOD
is no acceptour of persons.

Harken also what good counsel the Col. 3. 25
wise man gives you. If thou have a faithful servant, let him be unto thee
as thine own soul, entreat and use him as thy brother, for thou have need
Eccl. 3. 29
of him, as of thy self; and in another place he says: Whereas thy Servant
works truly, entreat him not euilly etc. Let thy soul love a good servant,
and defraude him not of Eccl. 7. 20
his liberty, neither leave him a poor man.

In Deuteronomy, also it is written: thou shall not opresse the hired* servant that is
poor and needy, neither of thy brethren nor of the stranger that is in thy
land, within Deuteronomy. 24. 14
thy gates: thou shall give him his hire for his day: neither shall the sun go
down upon it, for he is poor, and therewith sustaineth his life, least he
cry against thee unto the Lord, and so thy sin remain: mark first what is
said: thou shall not oppress a poor hired servant, what is it to oppress
him, to deny and detain from him his hire, his wages, for which thou hiredst
him, thou must not detain Eccl 34. 14
and keep back this from him, no not one night, the sun shall not go down
so much as once upon it, because his wages is that wherewith he nourishes and
maintains his life. The wages of the needy is the life of the poor servant;
and therefore he that defraudeth him thereof takes away his life, and so
kills him: take heed of this, for it follows if he cry against thee, unto
the Lord, the Lord will hear him: and then thy sin shall remain written and
registered in Gods infallible knowledge: and in the book of thine own
conscience as a thousand witnesses against thee. So Saint James speaks to
certain evil hard-harted, and cruel rich men and masters Ia. 4. 5
behold the bire of the Laborers which have reaped your fields (which is by
you kept back by fraud) cries, and their cries are entered into the ears of
the Lord of hosts. Where ye may see and learn that it is a grievous, and a
crying sin, to wrong and hurt a poor hired servant, and a poor laboring
man, and specially to detain and keepebacke from them their hire and wages.

And yet this notwithstanding (good Lord) it is an usual and common thing in
every place so to do: many men have no remorse nor make any conscience at it;
but when this wages is due, and there is great reason that the poor man had
it, he is constrained to go to a Justice, and fetch a warrant, or else he is
sure to have none there and when the master has promised and given his word
before the Justice to pay it, yet by your leave for all that he shall stay his
masters leisure, and come twice for it before he have it, and perhaps in the
end not have it at all. Some time (it may be) because they will not of malice;
Some time because they cannot through want, and have it not.

These be horrible crying sins, and the cries of them which be thus wronged
(as James says) entered into the ears of the LORD of Hosts, that is, of the
GOD of Israel, and the same Lord will avenge them quickly, if they cry unto
Luke 18. 8.
him day and night, and sure I am that the patient abiding of the poor shall
not be forgotten for ever. Wherefore (beloved Psalm. 140. 12*
in the LORD) let every man remember his vocation whereunto he is called. Art
thou called to be a Servant? care not for it; Think thy state and condition
1. Cor. 7. 21
never the worse, thy salvation is never the further from thee: only endeavor
that thou may be found faithful, and have the wages of the good Servant.
Labor, suffer, serve. Labor faithfully, suffer patiently, obey diligently
and humbly. Grudge not at thy labor, for thereunto thou art called. Labor is
common to all men: yea Jesus Christ him self made choice of a painful and
laborious life. Grudge not at thy servitude, for it is Gods ordinance, and the
effect of sin, as all the evils and miseries of this life are: for if there
had been no sin, there had been no misery, no servitude, no bondage. The
Lord for a punishment of the woman's sin said unto her. Thou shall be under
the power Genesis 3. 16.
of the man, and he shall rule over thee.

Neither do thou murmur that men being all of one, and the same Nature are so
unequally placed, one to rule, and another to obey: for this also is of GOD,
even his good ordinance, which thou may not resist, nor cotemne. And to this
end, I mean, that thou being a servant may perform these duties: pray unto
the Lord to make thee meek and lowly, that thou may be in thine own eyes a
little one, little not in sense and understanding, but concerning all
maliciousness: otherwise thou will never humble and bow thy self to these
good duties. For (as a wise man says) and we see it by experience, only
those things, quae exilia sunt, fllexibilia sunt, which are small and little
are flexible and apt to bow, as in a twigge or rod; look how much more it is
little, so much the better will it bend and bow, even so a servant look how
much more he is meek and lowly, that is, little in his own eyes, so much the
better he plaieth the servant, and bends his heart and affections to those
things which are required of him. When a servant is proud, high-minded, and
well conceited of him self, there is no hope of him: Pro. 26. 12.
there is more hope of a fool. There can be no true service and obedience
without humility and lowliness of mind.

Therefore harken what your Lord and Master says to you, and to us all, Mat 11.
Come learn of me because I am meek and lowly of heart, and ye shall find
rest for your souls. And now if ye know these things blessed are ye if you
do them. Ioh. 13. 17
And that ye may the better do and perform them: The grace of our Lord
Jesus Christ, and his good spirit be with you, labor with you, and remain
with you all for euer-more.

Amen.
FINIS.

