The means to keep Sin from reigning in our mortal Body.

A SERMON PREACHED AT PAVLS CROSS, May 26. 1629.

By William Foster, Master of Arts, and Parson of Hedgeley in the County of
BVCKINGHAM.

LONDON, Printed by John Haviland. 1629.

TO THE RIGHT Honorable, Robert Lord Dormer, Baron of Wing, Earl of
Caernaruon, Lord Lieutenant of the County of Buckingham, my very good Lord: As
also To the right honorable and virtuous Lady, the Lady Anna-Sophia Countess
of Caernaruon, his most gracious, dear, and loving Wife.
Right Honorable,
I Formerly provided this Sermon for you in a Country Auditory. Your occasions
then carried you elsewhere. The approbation it received from such learned
Divines as happened to be present, made me settle my thoughts and meditations
again upon it. Those second thoughts and meditations gave it a new being, and
that growth, that it came from the Country to the City. Meeting there with the
Press, it presumes to press from the City to the Court, bearing your Honors
name in the forehead. For whither could it be sent more fitly to cry down the
reigning of sin, than to Court? where virtue and not sin should reign
among the Peers and Nobles of so virtuous and pious a King as we have: (...).
histor. (...) 4. 3.
who like the Emperors Theodosius the younger (besides his private devotions)
leaving his Princely sports, is an assiduous frequenter of public prayer;
Eus^b. de vit. (...). l. 4. ^. 33
and Constantine the Great, (besides his private reading) is a great and
constant hearer of Sermons, the means to receive sacred instructions to keep
sin from reigning in his mortal body. Let me not be thought then
presumptuous if I dedicate this small work of mine to your Honors, to be a
Remora to stay you from yielding to the enchanting allurements of such
perdition-working Sirens, as are always seducing the frail nature of man unto
sin. Neither do I this, because I any ways deem your Honors prone to
follow such, or because you want either good precepts or near examples to
follow. D. Prid^^ux, his Majesty's Professor or Divinity in the University of
(...)
For, my good Lord, besides your own gracious disposition, you have been
brought up at the feet of Gamaliel in the University, that has furnished you
with the one: you have those noble Lords, The Earl of Pembroke Lord Steward,
and the Earl of Montgomery Lord Chamberlain to his Majesty's household.
your Uncle and Father in Law, near and bright shining Lights to you in the
other: you have the daily attendance of D. Williams, with others.
such as are able and ready to direct you in both. And you, right noble Lady,
(as inheritrix of your deceased Lady-mothers virtues) are ready to join in the
practice of such actions as may bring eternal happiness to you both. But I
dedicate these my poor labors to your Honors to encourage you to go on in
what you are. For your Lordship well knows that of the Poet; Qui monet vt
facias, quod jam facis, ipse monendo Ovid.

Laudat, and hortatu comprobat acta suo.


I deuote them to you, as a sure testimony of my unfeigned respect to your
Honors, and hearty desire that you may be saved in the day of the Lord. For
seeing this Sermon (such as it then was) should have been yours before, seeing
you have been graciously pleased to receive me for yours since, to whom may
it more fitly be appropriated than to your Honors? So that I may say to each
of you with the Poet; Hoc lege quod possis dicere jure meum est.
Marti^^


Censurers I shall have, and do expect, many; but I fear or regard none. My
aim is Gods glory, to cast my mite into the Treasury of the Church, for the
good of my Country in general, and to testify my desire of doing your Honors
service in particular. This is the mark I look at, and I shall ever endeavor
by Gods grace to hit it. The critical Spectators I pass by, without any
glance on them; I shall never care to please them. That Archer which looks on
the standers by, and not on the mark, cannot but miss his aim; and that
Writer which endeavors to please all, shall please none, neither God, good men,
nor himself. But if (next to Gods glory and the Churches good) your Honors,
out of your wonted candor, will be pleased to accept it, I shall attain my
wished scope, and shall be encouraged further to show my self,

Your Honors devoted Chaplain and

A SERMON PREACHED AT PAVLS Cross, May the 26. 1629.
ROMANS 6. 12. Let not sin reign therefore in your mortal body that ye
should obey it in the lusts thereof.


IN Adams being we had all our being: and in his fall we all received a fall.
His person (being the first) infected our humane nature: our humane nature
(being from him) infects our persons. So that now no man living, without the
brand laid upon him by S. John, of deceiving himself, and lying to others, can
say he is without sin: 1 Ioh. 1. 8.
If we say that we have no sin, we deceive our selves, and the truth it (...)
in us, 1 Ioh. 1. 8. (Lawne, and that the ^^est, has his bracks, Roses, and
those the sweetest, have their pricks; Men, and those the best, have their
faults.) S. James outstrips S. John, and says, that we do not only offend
all, but we offend all many ways; (...)
In many things we offend all, Iam. 3. 2. The Prophet David (though this be
already too much, for our store) augments the store, and makes the many sins,
many many sins, so many, that we know not how many; Who can tell how often he
offends? Psalm ^9. 12.
Lord cleanse me from my secret faults: Psalm. 19. 12. So that then the
righteousness of man consists not in having no sin, for then no man could
be justified, no man could be righteous; but it consists in man's stout
resisting and suppressing of sin, that it reign not in him, and
presumptuously get the dominion over him, and Gods free remission of sin, that
it be not imputed unto him, he condemned for it. David therefore prays
against the dominion of sin, that he may be innocent from the great offense:
(...). ^9. 13.
and S. Paul exhorts us to resist and suppress sin and his lusts, that it
reign not in us, and we incur the irreuocable sentence of eternal death
for our offense. Let not sin reign therefore in your mortal body, that ye
should obey it in the lusts thereof. As if the Apostle had said; To exhort you
to an absolute purity, were to enjoyne you an absolute impossibility. For
there was never yet any man altogether pure, and without sin (Christ Jesus
excepted, who was (...), both God and man) but yet a man need not be all sin;
he need not yield the powers and faculties of his soul, and members of his
body, as instruments of unrighteousness unto sin, and so let sin have his
full careere in him, and rule and reign in his mortal body, but he may by
the grace of God resist sin, and so have but few, and those but underling
sins; and those few underling sins, by the great and superabundant mercy of
God in Jesus Christ forgiven, and not imputed unto him. For, as when we walk
abroad in the fields to take the air, ye cannot hinder the Fowls thereof from
flying and houering over our heads, but we may well hinder them from roosting,
building, and making their nests there: (...)*
Even so, as long as we live in this vale of misery, clad with these weeds of
mortality, this body of ours, we cannot choose but have sin houering up and
down in us, but we may choose whether we will let it roost there, we may choose
whether we will let it build and make his nest there, to rule and domineere in
our mortal body; therefore the Apostle here in my Text says, Let not sin
therefore reign in your mortal body, that you should obey it in the lusts
thereof.

In which Text I shall commend three things to your observation.

1. Here is a King described by his reigning, namely Sin; (...), Let not
sin therefore reign. 2. Here are his laws declared, by obeying, viz. his
lusts; (...), That you should obey it in the lusts thereof. 3. Here is his
Kingdom specified by the place where he would reign, viz. your mortal body,
(...), in your mortal body.
For, Origin in Epis.
Peccatum velut sedem quandam and solium regni sui in nostro corpore collocatum
habet: ad Rom lib. 5.
says Origin. Sin has, as it were, cap. 6. tom. 2.
the fear and throne of his kingdom in our mortal body.

In all which there is such an (...), and disorder, that this Commonwealth
cannot stand long.

1. The King he is insulting, it is Sin, which at first got footing in Adam,
(...).
a little new inspired slime of the earth, and by that wound it self into all
the men of the earth.

2. The kingdom that is decaying, it is your perishing mortal body: which as
soon as it has life and being, tends to dissolution and not being. Like
apples of Sodom, (...) 48.
a touch turns it into dust and ashes.

3. Lastly, the laws they are unlawful, they are lusts: Quicquid libet licet.
What it lusts, that it wills.

Here is aliud ex alio malum, Disorder upon disorder. A wilful king, a rufull
kingdom, and hateful laws. S. Paul therefore, the Ambassador of the King of
Kings and Lord of Lords, teaches us in my Text, how to order this disorder,
and how to deal with each of these.

1. Sin must be suppressed, and kept from reigning: Let not sin reign
therefore.

2. Lusts, the laws; they must not be obeyed, obey it not in the lusts thereof.

3. Your mortal body, the kingdom, that must be repaired, and of ^uinate
decaying mortal bodies, you must make your selves strong and lively bodies.
For so it follows in the verse after my Text. Neither yield your members as
instruments of vnrighte^usnesse unto sin, but yield your selves unto God, as
those that are alive from the dead, and your members as instruments of
righteousness unto God. And of these three in their order. And first of sin,
that he must be suppressed. Let not sin reign, etc.

Let not sin reign therefore.
IT is the Parable of Iotham in the ninth of Judges, (...). 9. 25.
that of all the trees the Bramble (that base hedge creeping shrub) would needs
take upon it to be King. So of all that man's nature is incident unto, sin
(that base deprauitie of nature) must needs take upon him to be king, and to
reign in our mortal body. Nay that will not content him, to reign as a king,
but he will make havoc of all like a tyrant. For Sin is the greatest tyrant
that ever the world had.

Other tyrants (though monstrously raging) killed but some persons; Nero killed
his mother that bare him, and his Master Seneca that taught him; he burnt the
City of Rome that was under his sovereignty and obeyed him; but these are but
petty slaughters in respect of those which sin makes. For, that spares none;
it killed all those that lived before us, it will kill all us that are now
living, and all that ever shall be borne after us. It is good therefore to
keep our selves freemen, from being slaves to so hauocke-making a Tyrant. Let
not sin reign therefore in your mortal body, that you should obey it in
the lusts thereof.

No man would be willing to serve a Master, how great a Prince soever he were,
that when his servant had spent his youthful years, cripled his sturdie
limbs, and wasted his plentiful estate in his service, and comes for his
reward, will draw his sword and kill him (surely none would be willing to
receive their pay in such cracked coin:) but sin deals so with us; when we
have yielded all the powers and faculties of our-soules, and the members of our
bodies, to be commanded by sin, what is the reward he gives us but death? so
says the Apostle in the last verse of this Chapter: Romans 6. v. vlt.
The wages of sin is death, but the gift of God is eternal life through
Jesus Christ our Lord. Those then which neglect the service of God, and give
themselves over to the tyrannous subjection of sin, are like the perfidious
Jews, who rejected Christ the giver of life, (...) 27. 21.
and desired Barabas a murderer to be given them, Matthew. 27. 21. Let us
therefore shake off the murdering yoke of sin, and by true and hearty
repentance send a messenger of defiance unto it, saying with those citizens in
the Gospel, Luke 19. 14.
Nolumus hunc regnare super nos; We will not have this man, we will not have
sin reign over us. And as Origin exhorts, Origin. in Epist. (...) Romans lib.
5.
vnusquisque pessimum regem regnantem in sua carne depellat: cap. 6. tom. 2.
Let every man expel this evil king reigning in his flesh. Let not sin
reign therefore in your mortal body.

Now Kings, as the Politickes teach us, do ordinarily obtain their rule two
ways, either by Succession, and so are Kings, as it were, naturally: or
Election, and so are Kings adoptiuely.

but this king sin, because he would be sure to be king some way, claims the
rule of our mortal body both these ways, both by succession and election. But
his title of succession has been found weak long ago. That indeed shows
his antiquity, how Lucifer begot him when he was cast out of heaven. That
indeed shows that he has freehold of inheritance in our mortal body; but
truly no Lord to command it, or King to rule it. Elect him not therefore for
your King, so you shall prevent him of his kingdom; so you shall keep him
from reigning in your mortal body. Let not sin reign therefore in your
mortal body.

And that you may not elect him, you must know that as there are three things
concurring to the election of a political King; 1 Nomination. 2 Consultation.
3 Consent or Approbation.


So this spiritual King sin comes to his kingdom by three steps. Gregor.
Mag. Pas^or Curae par. 3. admon. 30. tom. 1.
For as S. Gregery observes, there are three degrees in sin; 1 Suggestion,
offered by the Devil. 2 Delight, administered by the flesh. 3 Consent, yielded
by our reason.


The first, that is, Suggestion, is like to Nomination.

The second, that is, Delight, is like to Consultation.

The third, that is, Consent, is all one with Appr^bation.

Suggestion begins sin, (...)
Delight continues, Consent finisheth sin. Now resist sin in the beginning,
so you shall prevent him of his kingdom, and keep him from reigning in your
mortal body. Let not sin therefore reign in your mortal body.

When the Devil profereth his intising suggestions, bid him a^aunt Satan, (...)
thou shall not tempt those which belong unto the Lord thy God. Nay, Saint
Chrysostom says, that every man of God may say as God himself, Matthew 4. 7.
Thou shall not tempt the Lord thy God, Chrys^st. hom. 5. in opere imper^.
Matthew. 4. 7. Quoniam qui hominem Dei tentat, Deum tentat. For he which tempts
a man of God, tempts God also. Resist him then we must in his temptations; and
that we may do to good purpose; for in resisting him, we shall be sure to
foil and vanquish him. For the the Devil is an arrant coward, he is like a
shadow. (...)


Si fugio sequitur, sed me fugit illa sequentem.
If we be afraid of the Devil, and fly from him, he will pursue us; but if
we resist the Devil, and pursue him, he will fly from us. James 4* 7.
Therefore Saint James says, Resist the Devil, lu^. Scalig. de Subtle (...).
181. (...)
and he will ^ly from thee, James 4. 7. The Devil may well be compared to a
tree (whereof Julius Scaliger makes mention) growing in a Province called
Pudiseram, to which if a man come, ramos constringit, it shrinkes up the
boughs, as angry and displeased; but when he departs, ramos pandit, it spreads
and opens the boughs, as content and pleased again: So the Devil, if we be
afraid of him, and fly from him, ramos pandit, he uses all subtilitie he can,
to catch us, and spreads his nets of vanity to ensnare us; but if we take
heart-a-grace, and affront him, and meet him in the teeth, ramos constringit,
he withdraws himself, and vanishes; as he did when our Savior Christ
repelled him with Sic scriptum, It is written. Then the Devil left him, Matthew.
4. 11.
and Angels came and ministered unto him, Matthew. 4. 11. Christ could have
repelled him by the power of his Deity, but then we could not have imitated
him, but he quelled him by the Word of God, to teach us that no weapon is like
the Scripture to resist the Devil; no sword like the Sword of the Spirit,
Ephesians. 6. 16, 17.
no shield like the Shield of faith, whereby we may be able to quench all the
fiery darts of Satan, Ephesians. 6. 16, 17.

But you will say that the suggestions of the Devil do often get possession
of our hearts before we are aware! True, he is malicious, sparing none, not
Adam in Paradise, not Christ the Son of God in the wilderness; he is a
cunning impostor, and can slily convey his delusions into our hearts, making
himself of a devil seem a Saint, of a foul fiend of darkness, 2 Cor. 11.
14.
a bright Angel of light, 2 Cor. 11. 14. But if he have gotten thus much of
thee, give no more place to him, stay here, and thou may do well enough
yet: proceed not to the second degree, that is, let not thy flesh be delighted
with his suggestions of sin, and so thou shall prevent sin of his kingdom,
and keep it from reigning in thy mortal body. The Devil may present his
suggestions to us, but unless our flesh with delight entertain them, they
cannot hurt us: P^ecata non nocent, Greg. Mag. Moral. expo^it. in Job, sib. 16.
si non placent; Sin hurts not, if it please not. Thieves may peep in at our
windows, but if we keep our doors and windows close shut, and fast barred,
they cannot hurt us. So the Devil may peep in at the windows and doors of
our hearts, the eyes and ears of man; but if we shut the windows, and stop
those doors of our flesh with the deaf Adder, that they may not harken to the
voice of this Charmer, charm be never so cunningly, he cannot hurt us. Let us
tell then our flesh ready to be tickled with delight, that our senses are
deluded, and that she hatcheth but a viper, which in the end will gnaw asunder
the very bowels where she was conceiced. For the bread the Devil presents
thee, is truly no bread to feed thee, but a stone to smite thee; the fish he
shows, is truly no fish to nourish thee, but a serpent to bite thee; and the
egg he would make thee put thy hope in, will not hatch to prove a bird to
delight thee, but a Scorpion to sting thee. Keep then thy flesh from
delighting, and thou shall keep these from hutting, and sin from reigning.
Let not sin reign therefore in your mortal body.

But you will say that our flesh is impure, and so may quickly infect us, and
carry us headlong with delight, as the Devil carried the swine into the sea.
Let it be so; if thou can but stay here, thou may do reasonable well.
Consent not to sin; let not thy will and reason, thy superior, and rational
appetite, yield to thy flesh and her delight, thy inferior and sensitive
app^tite. Though the Devil have suggested thee, the flesh delighted in it, yet
let not thy will consent and yield unto it. For it is consent that finisheth
sin, and causes it to reign in our mortal body. Iuest peccat^m cum
delecteris, regnat autem cum consenseris, (...) in (...).
says Saint Anselme. Sin is then in a man, when he is delighted in it, but it
never reigns till he has given his full and express consent thereto. And
Saint Bernard, (...) Par. (...).
Vitios^s dico, qui ex voluntate consenti^^^, nec resistunt, quantum possunt. I
call those vicious men which willingly consent to sin, and resist not what
they are able.

But you will say our reason is depraved, and so may easily be deceived with
apparent good, and the sensitive appetite tainting the rational, may make the
will to finish what Satan suggested, and the flesh lusted after.

O wretched sinner, now thou pressest me too far! now thou come too near
the pit! I scarce know what to say unto thee! But yet that thou may not be
swallowed up in the gulf of despair, there is one vltimum re^ugium, one last
refuge yet left, that is, that thou accustom not thy self to sin. Though
the Devil like the Serpent, have glided in his suggestions; though thy flesh,
like Eua^, ^^en. 3.
have thought them fair to the eye, and pleasant to the taste, and delighted
in them; though thy will and reason, like Adam, have been drawn to consent
unto them; yet let not Custom, like the river Jordan, carry us as the fish
that follow that stream in mare mor^^am, (...) contra (...).
into the dead sea, and inu^e us to sin all our life time. There is an axiom
in war, ^^^^tarch. in A^^^heg regum (...).
that, Non licet ^is pe^care; No man must offend twice. Oh that we could
abserue it in our Christian warfare in the Church militant, so should we stop
the course and habit of sinning; so should we prevent sin of his kingdom,
and keep it from reigning in our mortal body.

Saint Augustine therefore adds a fourth degree of sin, August. in Joan.
cap. 11. tract. ^9. (...). 9.
and that is, the use and custom of sinning. The three first degrees of sin,
may easily be resisted, but if it once come to the fourth, and grow to a
custom, it will hardly, Aug. in Psalm. 36.
if ever, be removed. Cons^^t^dinem vincere dura pugna; It is hard to overthrow
a custom, says the same Father. For custom makes the face impudent, we blush
not to sin, the heart senseless; we feel not our sin, our sin
tyrannous, our mortal body is ruled by sin. For, though sin it self he a
tyrant, yet custom will set a sharper edge upon it. Custom is a monstrous
tyrant, it rules both Church and Commonwealth; sta^ pre ratione volum as; if
it be customs pleasure that it must be so, it shall be so, Law will not
control it, sufferance has made it above all law Saint Augustine in his
fourth book, and 24* August. de doct. Christ. l. 4 c. 24, tom. 3.
Chapter, De doctrina Christiana, tells (...) that the people of Cas^^ea had an
ancient custom, once a year for certain days together to meet, and divide
themselves into parts, and throw stones one at another, the father not sparing
the son, nor the son the father. Which custom, though it were a most
barbarous custom, and yearly the occasion of the slaughter of many men; yet
Saint Augustine (whom we count the most learned and eloquent of all the
Fathers) found it an exceeding hard matter to dissuade them from their custom;
Idem. Ibidem.
^gi quidum granditer quant^^^ valui; I dealt with them (says ^e) with all the
might and maine I could.

But let us come home to our selves. It was taken up for a custom, for
Carriers and Drouers, to labor themselves and their cattle upon the Lords
day. Which custom though it were expressly against the Commandment of God, and
for above sixty years together daily cried out against, by zealous Preachers
in their P^lpits, yet it continued, and looked the Law in the face, till the
Parliament made a penal Statute to reform it.

And if we should come yet nearer, and take a survey of personal sins, we
shall find them by custom and habit made as hard to be cast off, as local
and national sins. For Consuetudo peccandi tollit sensum peccati. and in
alteram naturam vertitur; The custom of sinning quite bereaues us of all sense
and feeling of our sins, and is changed into another nature. The common
swearer makes it a matter of nothing to thunder out a multitude of ^oulevgly
oaths together; nay the more mouth they give their oaths, the more
gentleman-like grace they think their oaths give them. ^^^kg. Confess. l. 2.
cap. 3. tom. 1.
Like Saint Augustines companions of his youth, Tanto gloriantes magis, quant^
sunt turpes magis; Glorying in that most, whereof, if they had any grace, they
should be ashamed most. Nay, I have known some, whom the custom of swearing
has carried so headlong to swear, that they know not when they swear; so
that being reproved for their swearing, they would presently swear they did
not swear. The common drunkard whilst he swallows his liquor, is so
swallowed himself, that no remorse for his sin appears in him; Ier^^. 3. 3.
he puts on a wh^res face, ^^d refuses to be ashamed, Ierem. 3. 3. He rises
early to p^^ire in strong drink, as Esaias speaks. He thinks there is no
kindness, where there is no drunkenness, and makes one drunkenness a
medicine to cure the distemper of another, and professes that nothing but a
hair of the same dog, can allay the distemper of his dog-like appetite. Oh
to what an height of impiety does evil custom bring men. It makes a man,
(...)
Peccare quasi pecucare; So to sin, that he degenerates and becomes a beast
in his sin, as Iunius observes. I could show you the like of gluttony and
luxury; so that Pope Julius the third being by his Physicians, for his health
sake, Vergerius in Historia Spierae. Sladanus. Surius. Crispinus. Bal^us, and
alii.
forbidden porke; missing it one day at his table, gluttony made him reprove
his ser^^^, and command him to fetch him porke; for (says he) I care not what
the Physician says, I will eat porke in dispight of God himself. And Ioannes
a Pisa, Archbishop of Beneuentum, and the Popes N^^cio for Ve^ice, wrote a
book, and printed it, in commendation of that sin, that I tremble to name,
that sin, for the reigning of which in Sodom, the Lord rained upon them
brimstone and fire from heaven and consumed them. But let these examples teach
you how hard a thing it is to remove and alter an evil custom. Can the
Aethi^pian change his skin, Ier. 13* 23.
or the Leopard his spots? Even so may they do good, that are accustomed to
do evil, says the Prophet Ier. 13. 23. O then, beloved, if you will prevent
sin of his kingdom, prevent the custom of sinning, so you shall keep sin
from reigning in your mor^all body. Let not sin reign therefore etc.

But you must remember, that I told you that this was but vltimum refugium, a
last refuge; and a last refuge is to be embraced only, when our case grows
desperate. The best and safest way then to suppress sin, is to deal with
him in the first or second degree thereof: Nay in the very first ^ustfull
motions, we must crush this cockatrice in the shell, Psalm. 58. 7.
and make out lusts and suggestions like the untimely fruit of a wom^n* which
perish^th ere it see the Sun, Psalm. ^8. 7. For lusts are the laws of sin,
and if you would not have sin reign over you, you must not obey the laws
thereof. Therefore, says Saint Paul, Let not sin reign in your mortal
body, that you should obey it in the lusts thereof.

So that, as sin is to be suppressed, so his laws which are his lusts must
not be obeyed. Obey not the lusts thereof. And this leads me by the hand to the
second part of my Text: that the laws of sin must not be obeyed. Obey not
the lusts thereof.

2. Obey not the lusts thereof.
DRaco, the Athenian Lawgiver, made such cruel Laws, (...). Gell. Noct.
that Solon abrogated them, and Demades the Orator said, (...). lib. 32. c. 18.
that Sanguine non atramento scribebantur: They were written in blood, not in
ink. But we have more need to abrogate the laws of sin, and it may be more
truly said of Lusts these laws, that they are written in blood, not in ink.
For lusts the laws of sin, are not barren lusts, but they are teeming and
conceiving lusts. Lusts, if they be obeyed, bring forth sin, and sin
finisheth his work with nothing but death: so says S. ^ames; ^am. 1. 15.
When lust has conceived, it brings forth sin, and sin when it is
finished brings forth death, Iam. 1. 15. And S. Paul says, Romans 6. 2^.
that The wages of sin is death, Romans 6. 23. Lusts, the beginning are
deceitful; sin, the progress, hateful; death, the con^lusion, dreadful.
For, six malis praemissis nunquam colligi potest bona conclusio: Out of so ill
premises can never be gathered a good conclusion. Jesus therefore the son of
Syrach says, that we must fly from sin, Ecclu^. 21. 2.
tanquam a facie colubri; as from the face of a Serpent; for if thou come
too near (...), it will bite thee, the teeth thereof are as the teeth of a
Lion, ^^aying the souls of men: Ecclus. 21. 2.

We must fly from sin, as from the face of a serpent; For, as in the face of
a serpent lies all the danger, because there is the poison, and the teeth; so
in obeying of lusts, which are the faces, and first appearings of sin, we shall
swell with the poison of sin, and be bitten with the teeth of death. Or we
must fly from sin, (...) from the face of a serpent, that is, from the heads
and first lustful motions of sin. A serpent has a head, a tail, and a
body. Procop. in Exodus
Capite immisso totus statim illabitur, And if she get her head into a place,
the whole body is so glib and ^ubricke, that it will quickly enter in after:
So in yielding to lusts, which are the heads of sin, the whole body of sin
will quickly follow after. For lusts, the heads of sin, though they seem
small, yet they will make no small work where they enter. They are like young
rogues, who getting their heads in at the windows, creep in and open the
doors for the great thieves to spoil the house. For lusts, the heads of
sin, are not idle heads, but like Jesuits heads, working mischeeuous heads,
contriuing treason against the state both of soul and body. Lusts will hatch
sin, sin will produce death, and death will bring a thousand endless woes
and miseries.

Now our lusts are many, our acts of sin many, and the deaths produced by
sin and the lusts thereof as many.

Mi^^e ^^dis homines miser^s mors ^na f^rig^^.
Death assayes men a thousand ways. But death in general produced by sin
and his lusts, is threefold,

Viz. Mors 1. Corporis. The death of the body. 2. Anima. The death of the
soul. 3. Corporis and anima. The death of both.

1. John 11.
The death of the body. So dead was La^arus, John 11.

2. The death of the soul. So dead are such widows, whereof S. Paul
speaks, 1 Timothy 5. 6. So dead was he to whom out Savior Christ said, 1 Timothy
5. 6.
Let the dead bury their dead, Matthew. 8. 22.
follow thou me, Matthew. 8. 22. A strange speech, Let the dead bury their
dead. As if the dead had not as much need to be buried themselves, as to bury
other dead; and as unable to bury other dead, as themselves. But our Savior
Christ meant it of those which followed sin, and not him (being via, vita,
and veritas; The way, the life, and the truth,) that they were dead already in
their souls; Theophylact. in (...) cap. 7.
that in them (as Theophylact speaks) (...) was (...), their living bodies
were nothing else but coffins of their dead carrion stinking souls,

3. Luke 16. 24.
The death both of body and soul. So was Dives, Luke 16. He prayed, therefore
he had a soul. He had a tongue to be cooled, therefore a body: He was dead;
therefore dead both in body and soul. Thus die all they that suffer sin to
reign in their mortal body. Nay, they are not only dead, but buried while
they live. Their sins become their graves: (...) Luc.
Tumulusiste mali mores; says S. Ambrose. (...). tom. 1.
Their throat is an open sepulcher; says the Prophet David, Psalm. 14. 5.
Psalm. 14. 5. Nay, they are not only dead and buried, but they are dead and
buried, and in hell whilst they live. Ambros. de Bon. (...). c. vit. tom. 5.
Nobiscum videntur vinere, sed sunt in infern^, says S. Ambrose, They seem to
live with us, but in very deed they are in hell. For where are presumptuous
sinners, but where the Devil is, that first presumed to sin? And where is
hell, but where the Devil is, that was without redemption cast out of Heaven?
O then my beloved, take heed of going on in wickedness, nip sin in the bud,
yield not obedience to the lusts of sin; Lusts are the jaws of sin, and the
king reigns where his laws are obeyed. Lusts will go on to acts; acts will
go on to custom; custom will go on to the death and destruction both of
body and soul. For God will wound the hairie scalpe of such as go on still
in their wickedness, Psalm. 68. 21.
Psalm. 68. 21. The sinner goes on in his sins, and God goes on to punish
their sins, sin follows sin, and one death follows another. The second
death follows the first: the death of the body begins, and the death of both
body and soul follows after. The death of the body is, cum anima deserit
corpus, when the soul forsakes the body, and is by order natural, statutum
est omnibus, Heb. 9. 27.
etc. It is decreed for all men once to die, Heb. 9. 27. The death of the soul
is, cum animam descrit Deus, when God forsakes the soul, and is by divine
Justice judicial; Ezekiel. 18. 4.
the soul that sins shall die, Ezech. 18. 4. The death of both body and
soul is, August. de Ci^it.
cum anima a Deo deserta, Dei. lib. 13. cap. 2.
deserit corpus; when God forsakes the soul, and the soul forsaken of God,
forsakes the body; and is by equality proportional. For both body and soul
have sinned, Cyprian. Epist. lib. 1. epist. 4.
therefore they both die, both are punished. Qui i^^guntur in culpa, non
separantur in poena; says S. Cyprian; Those that are partners in the fault,
must also be partners in the punishment for the fault. But yet a man may so
die the first, that he may escape the other death: He may so die, that he may
repair the ruins of his mortal body, and not die for ever.

For as a ruinous house (though the walls be fallen down, and the roof
perished) may by reparation be sustained, and be made more beautiful than at
first, so long as the maine and principal posts thereof are kept sound: So
this mortal body of ours, though it be ruinous, and the fleshy walls falling
down, and the thatch of the roof thereof decaying with hoatie hairs, yet so
long as the principal pillars thereof be not pulled down (as Samson did the
house upon the Philistines) that is, (...) 16. 29.
so long as the members of our body (the pillars thereof) are not yielded, as
instruments of unrighteousness unto sin, to let sin reign; but yielded,
as those that are alive from the dead, as instruments of righteousness unto
God, and sin suppressed, we may repair this mortal body, and make it more
beautiful than before; Corruption putting on incorruption, (...)
and mortality putting on immortality; death being swallowed up in victory.
O death where is thy sting? O hell where is thy victory? 1 Cor. 15. 44, 45.
And this leads me by the hand to the last part of my text, to speak of the
kingdom, our mortal body, and the repairing thereof. Let not sin reign
therefore in your mortal body.

3. In your mortal body.
ANd here by our mortal body, we must not understand only our lump of
flesh, part of man, but totum composuum, the whole man, consisting of both
body and soul. For by a Synecdoche, the part is put for the whole. The whole
man, both body and soul, have sin in them, working their ruin and
destruction, therefore the whole man, both body and soul, are to be repaired,
and we are to labor for their restoration.

I know there is a great dispute betwixt the body and soul, each endeavoring
to put off the enormitie of sinning to the other. The body pleads for it
self; that that is but inanimis truncus. a dead and senseless trunk, void of
all action and motion, and so could not sin, nor exercise any operation, if
the soul did not actuate and enforce it. The soul, that pleads for it self,
that that is purus and simplex spiritus, a pure and simple spirit, void of all
organs, without eyes to behold vanity, without hands to commit folly, without
feet to follow enormitie, and if the body did not detain it as prisoner, it
would mount aloft, to take up its residence in the place of spirits, and
therefore the fault of sinning must needs rest on the body. But the very
truth is, that neither the body sins without the soul, nor the soul
without the body, but like Simeon and Leui, Genes. 49. 5.
they are brothers and partners in mischief, and so tend both to eternal
destruction, unless we wisely endeavor their timely reparation.

Peter Martyr in his Commentary on the fourth book of the Kings, Pet. Mart.
in 4 Reg c. 4. page 215
illustrates this by a pretty Simile. There was (says he) a master of a
family, that committed the custody of his Orchard to two servants, one of them
lame of his feet, and the other blind. The lame servant being taken with the
beauty of the apples, told his blind fellow-seruant, that if he enjoyed the
use of his limbs, and could go as well as he, it should not be long but he
would be possessed of some of those apples. The blind servant said, he was as
desirous of them as himself, and if he could but see as well as he, they
should not rest long upon the tree. In the end they agreed to join together:
the whole-limb'd blind man took the well-sighted lame man on his shoulders,
and so he reached the apples. Their master coming, and missing his fruit,
expostulated the matter with them. Each framed his excuse. The blind man said,
he could not have them, for he could not see so much as the tree they grew on.
The lame man said, he need not be suspected; for it was well known he could
not climb, or stand to reach them. But their master perceiving their craft,
how they had both joined together, put them as they were, one upon the
shoulders of the other, and punished them both together. So in very deed,
neither the body sins without the soul, nor the soul without the body,
Ambros. de fide (...). c. 5.
but corporis animique communis est actus, says S. Ambrose, It is the common
act of both: therefore both body and soul tend to death, and if they be not
repaired, will fall to utter ruin and destruction. Wherefore as sin the
tyrant must not reign, nor lusts, the laws, be obeyed: So our mortal body,
his kingdom, must not run to utter ruin, but be repaired; corruption must
put on incorruption, and mortality put on immortality.

And the means to repair our mortal body is threefold:

Viz. 1. Diligent watching. 2. Often fasting. 3. Zealous praying.

Fasting, that is good to repair the body, that though it be cast down it may
be raised again, ^ Cor. ^. 27.
and not become a castaway, 1 Cor. 9. 27.

Praying, that is good to repair the soul, it consecrates it to God, makes the
soul the temple and habitation of the everliving God.

Templum mentis amat non marmoris, aurea in illo (...) vtra (...).

Fundamenta manent fidei. --
Watching, that is good for both body and soul. By watching, we may see and
know when the lusts of sin do tempt us, and so keep them off and avoid
them. By fasting, we may so tame our bodies, that concupiscence shall not
delight us: and by praying, we shall so rectify our depraved will and reason,
that it shall not consent unto sin, to obey it in the lusts thereof.

First, we must watch, that sin enter not into us. And here we must do, as
is done in besieged cities, keep the strictest watch, where the places are
weakest, and the enemy the most likely to enter. The places where sin would
enter, are three, the heart, the mouth, and the hands. Therefore S. Bernard
says, that every man must keep a threefold watch.

There must be Vigilia 1. Cordis 2. Oris 3. Manus super Cogitationes and
affectiones. Bernard in Seut.
Verba. Opera.


A Watch of the Heart Mouth Hands over our Thoughts and affections. Words and
speeches. Works and actions.






First, we must watch over our hearts, that they be not stained and polluted
with evil thoughts. For, says our Sa^iour, Matthew. 15. 19.
Out of the heart proceed evil thoughts, murders, Adulteries, fernications,
thefts, false witnesses, blasphemies, Mat. 15. Psalm. 14. 1.
19. And, the fool said in his heart, there is no God, Psalm. 14. Ierem. 17. 9.
1. The heart (says the Prophet Jeremy) is deceitful above all things, and
desperately wicked, who can know it? Ier. 17. 9. It is good therefore to follow
the counsel of wise Solomon, Keep thy heart with diligence, for out of it
issues life, Prou. 4. 23.
Prou. 4. 23.

Secondly, we must watch over our mouths, that we speak no evil words: For,
says our Sa^iour Christ, By thy words thou shall be justified, Matthew 12 37.
and by thy words thou shall be condemned, Matthew. 12. 37. And the wicked
servant was condemned out of his own mouth, Luke 19. 12.
Luke 19. 12. For the tongue in vdo est, August. ^n Psalm. 38. ^om. 8.
ideo facile labitur (says Saint Augustine) is placed in moisture, and
therefore is apt to run over to our own destruction. Ber. de 3. custed.
Facile volat, ideo facile violat, says Saint Bernard, It runs glibly, and
offends quickly. Our evil words, Bernard.
says the same Father, are like arrows, Leuiter volant, sed grauiter
vnl^erant, The fly lightly, but they wound deeply. Saint Gregory in the fifth
of his Moralls, says there are three sorts of men, viz. 1 Some, that let loose
both heart and tongue to impiety; they travel with mischief in their heart,
that they may utter and bring it forth with their tongue: Such was Eliphaz the
Temanite to Job: Though he knew he should grieve him, yet he must speak; Who
can withold himself from speaking? Job 4. 2*
Job 4. 2. Such are the proud ungodly men, which have said, Psalm. 12* 4.
with our tongue we will prevail, we are they that ought to speak, who is
Lord over us? Psalm. 12. 4. 2 Some, Gregor. expos. Moral. lib. 5. cap. 12. tom.
1.
that though their hearts conceive evil, yet they refrain their lips, they
bridle their tongue from speaking evil. 3 Others, that keep a watch over both
heart and tongue; that so near as they can, they neither think nor speak
evil. (...). 39. ^.
Thus the Prophet David, I said I will look to my ways that I offend not in
my tongue, Psalm. 39. 1. I said I will look to my ways, that is, my heart,
from whence are the ways to a man's tongue. Matthew. 12. 32.
Out of the abundance of the heart the mouth speaks, Matthew. 12. 32.



And of these three, the last is the pious and godly man, and the surest to
keep sin from reigning in his mortal body. (...) 3. 2.
Therefore Saint James says, If any man offend not in word, the same is a
perfect man, and able to bridle the whole body, (...) 1 26.
Iam. 3. 2. And, if any man seem to be religious, and bridle not his tongue,
that man's religion is in vain, Iam. 1. 26.

But there are many that esteem lightly of words; words are (think they) but
wind, and who do they hurt? Though in their words they repine and murmr like
Corah, against Moses; rail like Goliath against David; flatter the State like
Ierobeams young Councellers; curse like Shemei; lie like Gehezi; blaspheme like
Senacharib, and are as vainglorious as Herod; yet, so they abstain from open
violence, and pay every man his own, they think their lives good enough: but
these deceive themselves; Evil words corrupt good manners, 1 Cor. 15. 33.
1 Cor. 15. 33. Where evil words reign in the mouth, there sin must needs
reign in the mortal body. Ambros. in Ephesians. cap. 4. 10. n 3.
Non credibile est cum been viuere qui male loquitur, says Saint Ambrose; It
cannot be thought that that man's life is good, whose speech is bad. It may more
truly be said to him, than it was said to Peter, Thy very speech bewrayes thee,
Matthew 26. 37.
Matthew. 26. 73. It stands every Christian then upon, to bridle his tongue, to
refrain his lips, Prou. 13. 3.
to watch over his mouth; He that keeps his mouth, keeps his life, but he
that opens wide his lips, shall have destruction, Prou. 13. 3.

And in this watch of our mouths over our words, we must observe three things.

There must be 1 Veritas in verbis, truth in our words. For lying lips are an
abomination to the Lord, Prou. 12. 22.
Prou. 12. 22. 2 Vtilitas in verbis, some profit must redound by our speech.
Let no corrupt communication proceed out of your mouth, Ephesians. 4. 29.
but that which is good to the use of edifying, that it may minister grace unto
the hearers, says Saint Paul, Ephesians. 4. 29. For one day we shall give an
account for our corrupt communication, we shall answer for every idle word that
proceeds out of our mouths. And if you would more distinctly know what an
idle word is; Verbum ^tiosum est quod sine vtilitate, vel loquentis, (...)
vel audientis profertur; That is an idle word, by speaking of which neither
speaker nor hearer is bettered. 3 Parcitas in verbis; A mean and sparing in
our speech. (...)
For, says Solomon, In the multitude of words wants not sin, but he that
refraineth his lips is wise, Prou. 10. 19. And, A fools voice is known by a
multitude of words, (...)
Eccles. 5. 3.

3. There remains yet the third and last watch, that is, the watch of our
hands over our works; we must watch over our works, that we neither omit
that which we should do; nor commit that which we ought not to do. And here
we must be sure to keep the most severe and strictest watch. For there
redounds greater dishonor to God, and more ill examples to men, by the evil
acts of our hands, than by the thoughts of our hearts, or the words of our
mouths. If it please you therefore to cast the eye of your understanding upon
the Decalogue, upon the ten Commandments, you shall find more Commandments
forbidding sin in action, than in the speech, or cogitation. Look into the
first Table; there is one commandment forbidding sin in the heart, namely,
the first, Thou shall have no other gods but me. There Is another forbidding sin
in the tongue, namely the third, Thou shall not take the name of the Lord thy
God in vain. But the other two forbid sin in action. Look into the second
Table, there is one Commandment forbidding sin in the heart, namely the
tenth, Thou shall not covet, etc. There Is another forbidding sin in the
tongue, namely the ninth, Thou shall not bear false witness against thy
neighbor. But the other four forbid sin in action. And hereby we are taught,
that if we will keep sin from reigning in our mortal both, we must watch
over our hands, to keep them from acting and committing sin. Esaias 56. 2.
For, says the Prophet Esaias, Blessed us the man that keeps his hand from
doing any evil, Esaias 56. 2. So that to conclude this point, the first way to
suppress sin, and keep it from reigning, is diligent watching. A watching
over our hearts for our thoughts, (...)
a watching over our mouths for our words, but chiefly, and most diligently, a
watching over our hands ^or our actions.

The second means to suppress sin, is often fasting. (...)
but fasting is like the pulling him down, the spoiling and disarming him. For
what are the arms and weapons of sin, wherewith he fights against us, but the
members of our mortal body? (...)
And how are these arms made to be laid down? How are they pulled out of this
tyrants hand, but by fasting? Thus Saint Paul disarmed sin, suppressed and
kept it under; 1 Cor. 9. 27.
I keep my body under (says he) I keep it in subjection, left, by any means,
when I have preached unto (...), I my self should be a castaway, 1 Cor. 9,
27. And in very deed our sins are like those devils which could not be cast
out, Matthew. 17. 21.
but by prayer and fasting, Matthew. 17. 21.

This exercise of fasting produces three excellent effects: 1 Vitia compri^i^.
It allayes the heat of sin, it tames and pulls down the lusts of the body.
Therefore S. Basil calls it, Basil. the (...). 1. (...). 1.
(...), A medicine to take away the m^lady of sin. 2 Diabolum fugat. It puts
the Devil to flight. Saint Ambrose says, that if a Serpent tastes but of
fasting spettle, Ambros. Exam. lib. 6. c. 4. tom. 1.
it kills it: Vides quan^^ vis ieiu^^^, vt and sput^ sue home terre^^m
Serpente^ interficiat and merit^ spirit ^^em; Ye see the force of fasting,
fasting spettle will kill a bodily Serpent, much more the spiritual. 3. Mentem
eleuat. It eleuates a man's mind, and makes him apt to be rapt into
contemplation, and his life here in earth to approach near in likeness to the
life of the Angels in heaven. Therefore says Saint Ambrose, (...) ^lia and
ieiun. c. 3. tom. 1.
Quid est enim ieiunium, nisi vitae coelestis image? For what is fasting, but a
representation of our heavenly life? Hoc gradu Elias ascendit antequam curru;
Elias ascended into heaven by this ladder of fasting, Idem, Ibidem.
before he ascended in his chariot of fire, says the same Saint Ambrose.



Bonauenture therefore compares fasting to three things. 1 To a little wood
under a pot. (...). Diat. Salut. tit. 2. c. 6. Opusc. tom. 2.
2 To the nimblenesse of a little bird. 3 To the hollownesse and concauitie of
a musical instrument.



1. It is like a little wood under a pot. For as by withdrawing the wood from
under the pot, it incontinently cease boiling: So by withdrawing the usual
store of food from the body, the pride and sustinesse of the flesh is abated.

2. It is like the agility and nimblenesse of a little bird. For as a little
bird can easily by flying aloft eschew the snares of the Fowler: Frustra enim
iacitur rete ante oculos pennatorum; In vain is the snare of the Fowler laid
before the bird that can take her wing, Prou. 1. 17. But gross and fat fowls
which cannot fly are taken: So the mind of a temperate and abstinent man may
easily, by mounting aloft to heaven upon the wings of his contemplation, eschew
the snares of the deceitful fowler, the Devil, whilst those which with swine
give themselves over to feeding, are carried into a sea of misery.

3. It is like the hollownesse or concauity of a musical instrument, For as a
Lute or Vial yields no delightful and musical sound, unless the belly
thereof be hollow and empty: So a man, unless his belly be so hollow and
empty that his bones desire not rest, yields no musical and delightful
harmony of prayers and thanksgiving in the ears of the Lord.

For fasting is not commended of it self, ex opere operato, of the thing done,
Chem^it. Exam. Council. Trident. part. 4.
(as Chemnitius says some Papists teach; though Bellarmine disauowes the
opinion) but it is commended ex opere operantis, Bellar. de Bon. operib. in
partic. lib. 2. cap. 11. Contro^. tom. 4.
out of the faith and devotion attending the action. Devout prayers, divine
eiaculations, and heavenly meditations must accompany our fasting. It was a
caveat therefore which Saint Hierom gave to Calantia; Hieron. ad Calant. epist.
14. tom. 1.
Ca^e, ne si iei^nare aut abstinere caeperis te p^tes esse sanctam. Hac enim
virtus adi^ment^m est, non perfectio sanctitatis; Beware lest if you begin to
fast or abstain, you presently think your self holy. For this virtue of
abstinence is but the help, not the perfection of sanctity. We must
therefore, to suppress sin, and to keep it from reigning in our mortal
body, not only abstain from meat and drink, but from all vice and impiety; and
exercise our selves in acts of devotion, spend our time in prayer and
meditation, relieve the needy, and perform works of charity. Ambros. in D^m.
4. Quadrag. tom. 5.
Qui ieiun^^t a cib^ and non abstinent a malo, ^^^les sunt Diabolo, qui non
manducat and tamen a malo non cessat, says Saint Ambrose. They which fast from
meat, but abstain not from impiety, are like the Devil, who eats never, but
is wicked ever. Therefore says Saint Origin, Ieiuna a mali^ actibus, Origin.
in Leuit. cap. 16. ^om. 10. tom. 1.
abstine a malis sermonibus, conti^e te a pes^^^^is cogitatio^^bus; Fast from
evil actions, abstain from vain speech, refrain thy self from naughty
cogitations. To our watching then we must join fasting, and to our fasting we
must join devout prayer and holy meditation, and this is the third and the
last help to repair our mortal body, and to keep sin from reigning in it.

Let not sin therefore reign in your mortal body, that you should obey it
in the lust thereof.

The first help, that is, watching, is the besieging of sin; the second,
fasting, is the disarming of sin; but this last help, praying, is the utter
vanquishing and suppressing of sin. Exodus 17. 9.
For as Moses lifting up his hands, Israel prevailed against their enemies,
Exodus 17. 9. So let us lift up our hearts and hands to God, in humble and
hearty prayer, and we shall prevail against sin, and keep it from
reigning in our mortal body. The deadly serpent the B. siliske (as Isiodorus,
Hispalensis reports) is killed by the breath of a Weasell: ^s^od. Hispal.
Ae^imolog. lib. 12. cap. 3.
So the breath of a faithful praying man is able to kill sin, and drive away
the old Serpent the Devil, who suggesteth us to sin, and desires that it
should reign in our mortal body.

I will reduce all for you into three words, and so conclude.

Explora.

Deplora.

Implora.

Explora. Let each Christian, to keep sin from reigning, find out his sin
by watching* Deplore. Let him drive it out when he has found it, by weeping
and fasting. Implora. Let him desire the gracious assistance of God, that he
may continue this combat, by praying. So shall Sin, Hell, and Satan be
confounded, your mortal body here be repaired, and after death most
gloriously be crowned. Revel 2. 10.
So says God, Be thou faithful, unto death, and I will give thee a crown of
life, Re^. 2. 10. Thus doing, though we cannot altogether acquit and clear
our selves of sin, yet we shall have but few sins, and those few sins
shall be remissible and pardonable sins unto us. Not for that they do merit
remission, or are so small that they are unworthy Gods punishment; but because
remission does follow such sins, neither shall they be imputed to us to our
condemnation. Herein we shall be happy, that our sins shall not be imputed
unto us. For they are not blessed, which have no sin; for then no man could
be blessed (we are all miserable wretched sinners: Psalm. 32. 1, 2
) but says the Prophet David, Blessed is he whose unrighteousness i^
forgiven, and whose sin is covered. Blessed is the man to whom the Lord
imputes no sin, Psalm. 32. 1, 2.

So that all men being sinner^, here is the difference betwixt the sins of
the wicked and the sins of the godly. The sins of the wicked are committed
with an high hand, they meditate on them in their beds, they commit them with
all greediness, they draw sin with cart-ropes, they sin without
repentance; therefore their sins are peccata regnantia, sins reigning in
their mortal body, and never forgiven them, but death and hell reigns over
them; they die the second death, the eternal death, the death both of body
and soul. But the sins of the godly are committed without meditation,
through infirmity, they are committed with a reluctancie, there is a combat
betwixt the flesh and the Spirit, they are resisted by watching, they are
suppressed and kept under by fasting, they are cast out by praying, they are
repented of with repent me never to be repented of; therefore their sins are
(...) sins no^ reigning in their mortal body, but by the great mercy of
God, in Christ Jesus, forgiven and not imputed unto them, so that death has
not full power of them, they die the death of the body only, the first, not
the second death, Revel. 14. 13.
and so die in the Lord, and die blessedly. For blessed are they which die in
the Lord, even so says the Spirit, they rest from their labors, and their
good works follow them, Reu. 14. 13.

In one word then to conclude all, with a true and lively faith in Christ
Jesus, resist sin, let it not reign in your mortal body; and then you have
done all which is required to your salvation: then you shall live happily, die
blessedly, be rewarded plentifully, and possess Heaven everlastingly. Which
God of his infinite mercy grant unto every one of us. To which God the
Father, the Creator of all, and hater of sin; God the Son, the Savior of
all, and Redeemer from the punishment of sin; God the Holy Ghost, the
Sanctifier of all, and Purifier from the prauitie of sin, three Persons, one
only wise God, be ascribed of us all, all honor, glory, power, dominion,
might, and majesty, now and for evermore. AMEN.

FINIS.
Errata.
Page 2* lin. 15. read and he page 16. lin. 31. for jaws, read laws. page 20.
in ^argine, read c^ntra.


