THE MOST PLEASANT History of Ornatus and Artesia. Wherein is contained the
unjust Reign of Thaeon King of Phrygia. Who with his son Lenon, (intending
Ornatus death,) right Heir to the Crown, was afterward slain by his own
Servants, and Ornatus after many extreme miseries, Crowned King.

LONDON Printed by Thomas Creed. 1607.

To the right worshipful, Brian Stapleton of Carleton, in the County of
York Esquire, the heavens grant health, content, and after life, everlasting
happiness.
THis vnpollisht History Right worshipful, wanting the Ornament of Eloquence
fit for rare invention, presents it self in his natural and self
expressing form, in well applied words, not in tedious borrowed phrases:
wherein neither the lewd can find examples to suit their dispositions, the
virtuous no terms to discontent them, nor the well affected any cause of
offense. Here shall you see lust Tyrannizing, avarice, guilty of murder, and
dignity, seeking his content with usurpation, yet all subverted by virtue.
Which I am bold to present unto you, not for the worth, but to express my
good will, which is not unmindful in some sort to gratify the manifold
courtesies I have received of you. And although it be altogether not worth
estimation, and to be accounted no requital for so many good turns, yet I
desire you to accept the same in steed of a better, and the sum of that which
my ability at this time can afford: Which being but a fancy, vouchsafe to
esteem, though not agreeing with your gravity, yet (as many both Noble and
wise in such like matters have done) to be red for recreation. As the value of
the gift expresses not the affection of the giver, nor the outward show the
inward meaning, so I trust you will esteem my good will, not by the worthiness
hereof, but the quality of my well affected intent, which is devoted unto you
in the bands of perfect good will, and will be ready to show it self
constant in any trial you shall make thereof. And for that I know your
wisdom and courtesy to be such, as that you will not misconceiue me, but
esteem well hereof, and my affection to you, to be expressed in the dedicatio^,
I have adue^tured to dedicate the same to your protection, though altogether
undeserving the title of your patronage, which your further kindness shall
bind me hereafter to requite the same, with some worthier work collected by
my labors. Thus being loath to be tedious and troublesome unto you, I commit
this silly present to your gentle acceptance, and your self, to the gracious
protection of the Almighty.

Your Worships most ready at command, Emanuell Ford.

THE EPISTLE to the Reader.
GEntlemen, I have published this History, at the entreaty of some of my
familiar friends, being at the first collected with no intent to have it
printed, for as yet having taken but one flight, I durst not too boldly
venture again, lest my unskillfulness might cause my repentance. But being
supported by the assistance of your gentle favors, I shall grow hardy, and
hereafter labor to procure your further delight: the reward I expect, being
your kind acceptance. But if contrary to my thought, this my summer fruit be
gathered before it be ripe, I promise amends with old fruit, that has been a
year in ripening, and in the beginning of the next winter coming forth. In
the mean time, peruse this History, which sauoureth more of pleasure, then
Eloquence: and although hastily compiled, yet let it pas^e under your
favorable censure: and by your courtesies, be shrouded from the variable
dislikes of Momu^ vain imitators.

The learned, wise, and courteous, will according to the quality of their
dispositions, esteem well of this unworthy work, valuing the same, not by
the worth, but by the will of the writer.

As for such as either rashly condemn without judgment, or lauishly dislike
without advice, I esteem them like the down of Thistles, inconstantly
dispearst with every blast, accounting their discontent, my content: not caring
for to please those that are pleased with nothing.

But did my gains, counteruaile my labors, I would then frame my fancy to
sit their humors, but getting nothing, I can loose no less, only to have a
good opinion of the well affected to learning, is all I crave: and that I hope
your good minds will afford.

As at a Banquet there are several kinds of meats, some pleasant, other
sharp, yet all tasted. Amongst Grapes, some sour, some sweet, yet all
esteemed, so with indifferency, amongst variety of eloquent Histories, let
this serve as one dish to furnish out a Banquet, and like sour and sweet
intermingled, make a pleasant taste, by your courteous construing of my good
meaning, and your favorable opinion of Ornatus love. So shall I account my
debt to you great, my labors well bestowed, and my self bound to requite your
kindness. You shall show your affection to learning, virtue in favoring good
endeavors, and give encouragement to more worthy labors. I rest well
contented, my reward rich, and hereafter be both ready and willing to deserve
your courtesy. But if Ornatus love breed my blame, as it bred his banishment,
then may I wish I had never known thereof, and cry out of Mala fortuna, as my
reward. With the bird Cel^s bred in Africa, who wandering far from her nest, by
forgetfulness cannot return: and so for ever after abandoneth company. So I
too boldly building on your courtesy, may be wounded with repentance, and by
my oversight be brought in despair, unless your courtesy prevent the same:
on which my hopes depend. And so I cease.

E. Ford.

THE MOST PLEAsant History of Ornatus and Artesia.
Chap. 1. How Ornatus was enamoured of the fair Artesia.
IN the rich and renowned country of Phrygia, in Provinces not far distant
from near neighborhood, dwelt two ancient Knights, the one named Allinus,
the other Arbastus, men of great possessions, and much honored. Betwixt whom,
such extreme contention and hatred remained, by reason of the death of one
Reno^, brother to Allinus, long since slain in a quarrel by certain gentlemen
belonging to Arbastus, that neither their own wisdom, nor the sundry
persuasions of friends to either party allied, were of any force to mittigate
the same. Both of them being enriched with innumerable blessings, especially in
their fair progeny.

Allinus having a son of goodly stature, and commendabl^ gifts, named
Ornatus. And Arbastus a daughter called Artesia, of exceeding comeliness,
exterierlie beautified with abundance of gyfts of nature, and inwardly a^orned
with abundance of divine perfections. Yet by reason of their parents discord,
they remained as far ignorant in knowledge one of the other, as if they had
bin separated by an innumerable distance of strange countries.

Ornatus above all things delighted in Hawking, and on a day, being weary, he
wandered without company with his hawke on his fist, into a most pleasant
valley, where he shrouded himself under the shaddowe of a tuft of green
trees, with purpose to rest himself, and even when his eyes were ready to
yield to slumber, he was revived from his drowsinesse, by the noise of a
kennell of hounds that past by him in chase of a Stagge, after whom Arbastus
and diverse in his company (though to him unknown) followed, who being passed
by whilst he was in a deep study to think what they should be, he espied a
beautiful damsel entering the same valley* who being somewhat weary, liking
the prospect of that shadie tuft of trees, alighted there, which Ornatus
seeing, withdrew himself from her sight, whilst she tying her steed to a
bush* laid her dilicate body down upon the cooling earth, to breathe her
self, and dry up her swet, which the sooner to accomplish, she unbraced her
garments, and with a dece^t and comely behavior, discovered her milke-white
neck and breast, beautified with two round precious teats, to receive the
breath of the cool wind, which was affected with a delight to exhale the
moystened vapors from her pure body. Ornatus seeing all, and unseen himself,
noted with delight each perfect linament of her proper body, beauty, sweet
favor* and other comeliness, which filled his heart with exceeding pleasure,
therewith growing into an unrestrained affection toward her, and a great
study what she should be, when suddenly his hawke feeling his fist
vnmoouable, thinking to perch herself with quiet, primde her self, and with
the noise of her belles, made Ar^^sia start, who as one half aghast, with a
fearful behauior arose from the ground, looking round about her from whence
that sound came, she espied Ornatus (who unwilling she should perceive he had
yet seen her, lay as if he had slept) Artesia maruelling what he should be,
and accordingly thinging he had slept, closed her naked breast with great haste,
and unloosing her horse, thought to go away unespied. Which Ornatus perceiving,
and unwilling without speaking to her to loose her sight, seemed to awake, and
raising himself* stedfestly beheld her, which infused such a red vermillion
blush into her bewtifull cheeks, and withal such a bashful confusion spread
it self in her conceits, that she stood like one half amazed or ashamed.

Which Ornatus perceiving, drew toward her, and greeted her with these
speeches. Fair Damosel, be not abasht with my presence, though a stranger,
which shall no way if I can choose offend you, but rather command me, and I
will be ready to do you any service. Artesia notwithstanding his speeches,
withdrew her self, leading her horse to a bank, where with ease she mounted,
and so rode away, not giving him any answer at all. Ornatus marvelled
thereat, yet rightly imputed her unkind departure to her fear, not
discurtesie. And seeing himself deprived of her sight, the night approaching,
departed home to his fathers house. After supper, betaking himself to his
chamber with intent to rest, he was possessed with such remembrance of the
bewtifull Damsel he had seen, that his sleep was transformed into
continual cogitations of her beauty, form and favor, and the pleasing sight
he had seen in the discovery of some of her hidden bewties, imprinted such a
delight in his aff^ctionate conceits, that he could take no sleep, but
continued all that night in those meditations.

The next day thinking to shake off all further remembrance of her, he gate
into company of his most chosen friends, wherein before time he took most
delight, yet now by reason of his distemperature, he rather seemed weary
thereof. He had not continued long with them, but he was saluted by a
gentleman named Phylastes, with whom he was familiarly acquainted: this
gentleman belonged to an ancient Duke named Turnus, who in honor of his birth
day, from which Allinus excused himself of purpose, because he thought he
should meet Arbastus there, but because the Duke should take no offense at
him, he granted that his son Ornatus should go to do him honor. Which
Phylastes acquainted Ornatus withal, who glad thereof, departed thither in
company of diverse other gentlemen: the Duke likewise had sent another
messenger to request Arbastus company, who being of a more m^de nature then
Allinus, willingly went, and with him, his L^dy, and fair daughter Artesia.

CHAP. II. How Ornatus came to knowledge of Artesia, and entreated Adellena to
make known his love to her, and of the rebuke Artesia gave her.
AFter the feast was ended, and the Duke had honored his guests with all manner
of curtes^ie, he and the principallest, amongst whom Arbastus was one of the
chief, according to the custom used in ye country, seated themselves to
behold certain games and exercises to be performed by the young Gentlemen:
which was, running, wrestling, and diverse other exercises, for trial of the
strength, and nimblenesse of the body: amongst the rest, Ornatus (having never
before made trial of himself) had such good success, and behaved himself
with such agilitie and strength, that he woonne the chiefest honor, and was
presented before the Duke, to receive a rich reward.

Which when he had received, casting his eyes upon the beholders, he espied
Artesia whom he perfectly knew again, ^eadie to depart with her parents,
who had bidden the Duke farewell. Ornatus coming to Philastes, asked if he
knew that damsel, showing him Artesia, who told him what she was. Ornatus
was glad of that small knowledge, which could add^ little means to his hopes,
yet somewhat discontented that she was daughter to Arbastus. And thus the day
being ended, every one departed to their abodes.

Ornatus having again attained his chamber; spent his time of rest in sundry
cogitations of his love, and how to give her knowl^dge of his affection,
noting every danger, and pondering how discontentedly his parents would take
the same, if it should by any means come to their knowledge, finding so many
le^tes to hinder him, that he was oftentimes in utter despair of attaining to
the least hope of good success. But finding his affections to increase more
and more, and burning with a fervent desire, which nothing but only her savor
could extinguish.

After that night was past, earelie the next morning he wandered toward the
place where he had beheld her with such exceeding content, and by the way
as he went, he met with a gentlewoman named Adellena, of mean birth, and
small living, yet of good education, who oftentimes resorted to Arbastus house,
and was going thither at that instant, into whose company he insinuated
himself, for that he saw her alone, and said as follows.

Gentlewoman, I am bold to entreat a word or two with you. Sir replied she,
with a good will, I will satisfy you in what I can. Know you not (quoth he)
Arbastus? I do quoth she, both know him, and am very well acquainted with him,
unto whose house I am now going. So would I quoth he if I durst, for I serve
Ornatus, son to Allinus, whom I do not doubt but you know well, of whom I
would tell you more, but that I fear to commit his secrets to them I know
not, and thereby unwillingly do him injury: but would you vouchsafe but to
hear them, keep them secret, and withal add your help^ to further him,
which you may with safety perform, you should do him an exceneding
pleasure, and withal, be so highly rewarded, and thankefully gratified, that
you should think your labor very well employed: do a beede of pity, and
bind him to you in the perpetual bands of kind friendship.

Sir replied Adellena, I know not ^he Gentleman, yet I have heard him much
commended, in whom if I could any way pleasure, I would use both diligence
and secrecy, promising you upon my says and credit, if you will make me
acquainted with your mind, I will either do my good will to further him, or
else conceal what you shall commit to my priuitie.

Then said he, my master not long since walking in yonder valley, beheld
Artesia, fair Artesia, daughter to Arbastus, to whose beawtie he is
exceedingly inth^alled, that unless some means of comfort be found to ease
his torments, I fear me it will in danger his life: whom you only may
pleasure, by making his love known to her, in such sort as shall best agree
with your wisdom. This is all, and yet so much, that the revealing thereof
may do much harm. And to effect such a contract, might procure peace and
unity ^wixt their parents. Therefore I entreat your aid and furtherance
herein: with which good news, if I return to him, I know it will breed no
little comfort to his disquiet heart.

Sir (said she) since I perceive his love is grounded upon virtue, not drawn
thereto by any desire of reward, I undertake to be his assistant therein, and
will to the uttermost of my best endeavors labor to procure his content: Which
this day I will in some sort put in execution. And if you return to me to
morrow, you shall know her answer. I will said he, and so they departed.
Ornatus having left her, entered into many cogitations of his rash attempt,
accounting himself over credulous to commit his secrets to her priuitie, of
whose fidelity he had never made trial: sometimes comforting himself with
hope of good event, and again dispairing of comfort, for that he supposed
Artesia would rather esteem him as an enemy then a friend, by reason of their
parents hatred, and therefore would the more hardly be drawn to give any
credit to his suit. And reuoluing a chaos of these and such like confused
cogitations, he attained his fathers house, thinking the time tedious until
his appointed meeting with Adellena; which he ouerpast with great care.
Adellena after her departure from him, soon attained to Arbastus house, using
her self as she had formerly done, yet withal, careful how to execute the
charge she had in hand, which she could by no occasion utter, till after
dinner when she found Artesia all alone in the gardein, insinuated her self
into her company, which Artesia kindly accepted, entering into variety of
discourses, and continuing some time in giving certain herbs their proper
names: amongst the rest, Artesia espied an herb with party colored leaves,
demanding of Adellena if she knew the name thereof, which she told her she
did not. I have oftentimes quoth Artesia seen this herb, and it has two
pretty names, it is by some called Love in Idleness, and by some Haris Case:
with that Adellena fetched a deep (though counterfeit) sigh, which Artesia
noting, said: What makes you sigh to hear it named Haris Case? Mary (quoth
she) one way because those two names so all agree, an other, for by the same I
call to remembrance the hearts grief I heard a young man complain of procured
by love, which was not in idleness, but I think in good earnest. Why quoth
Artesia, can love procure such hearts grief to any, and not rather content?
Yea said she, because the party in love, has no hope to attain the good
liking of the party be loves. The^ quoth Artesia, I account him a fool that
will love so deeply without hope of reward: and that to be rather fondness
then true friendship, that pleases his affections with such inequalities. But
I pray tell me what is he into whose secrets you were so suddenly admitted? Not
admitted (quoth she) for unawares I heard his complaints, which afterward I
promised him not to make any acquainted withal, but the party whom he so
in^ierly loves. Then quoth Artesia, I may not know, neither do I care, for it
is but a vanity that troubles ones cogitations. Yes quoth she, you may and
shall if you please, know who he is, conditionally you will neither be offended
with me for telling you, nor reveal what I shall impart. Why quoth she, am I
the pretty, or does it any way concern me, that I should be offended? If it
be, then keep your counsels unrevealed, for it will prove unsavory to my
stomach, for be it far from me to be troubled with the vain suits of doting
lovers. Yet let me answer quoth Adellena, you hear too grievous a conceit of
love, which is the divine purity whereby hearts are united in virtue. Wit^out
the which, neither mortals can attain heaven, nor other creatures have their
being: therefore not to be abhorred: and for that any should love your self,
can that be an offense to you, but rather be accepted in kind sort? we
should by nature love them that love us, then will you contrary to nature,
yield hatred for love? For you indeed are the party that is beloved, and the
party that is so far in love with you every way to be commended, and one way
disco^mended, whose name I will not reveal, and then I hope I shall breed no
offense to your ears. Do so quoth Artesia, for in concealing the same, you
please me, and if you will be welcome into my company, use no more of these
speeches. Had I thought quoth she, they would have bin offe^sius, I would not
have uttered them, but in so doing, I did but fulfill your request: then at my
request again quoth she, give over. After this communication ended, they
parted, Adellena, home to to her house, and Artesia to her supper, and
afterward to her chamber, where at first, some cold thoughts of those
speeches past in her fancy, but afterward she spent the rest of that night
in quiet sleep.

CHAP. III. How Adellena co^ueled Ornatus letter into Artesias Casket, and with
what impatiencie Artesia took the same.
THe morning being newly approached, Ornatus who had long expected the same,
arose and soon gate to Adellenas house, where he arrived before she was up,
who having knowledge thereof, soon came down to him, (taking him to be no
other then Ornatus man) to whom she declared the very truth of all her
speeches had with Artesia. Which nipt him at the heart, but being put in some
hope by her persuasions, at last giving her a purse full fraught with Gold in
recompense of her pains past, and to entice her to undertake more, he said
as follows.

Good Adellena be not dismayed to prosecute my suit for Artesias first frown,
for I am not Ornatus man, but poor Ornatu^ himself, that languish with desire
to attain her love, which I would my self prosecute, if the discords betwixt
our parents did not hinder the same. Therefore I beseech you once again do
something in my behalf, for you see how cruel desteny has shut me from all
means to be put in practice by my self, and you may pleasure me without any
hazard at all: for which I will rest so thankful unto you, as that you shall
account your pains taken well bestowed.

Sir replied she, I would undertake any thing to further you, if I kn^w which
way, but I perceive Artesias frowardness is such, that nothing I shall bring
her will be welcome: but if you will advise me what I shall do, I will once
again hazard the loss of her good liking for your sake. Which said, Ornatus
wrote a Letter, which he desired her by some means to convey to her sight,
the contents whereof were these.

To the fair Artesia.
FAirest of creatures, be not offended with my boldness, but rather
favorably censure of my good meaning: for being bound to honor none but most
virtuous, I thought it my duty to give you knowledge thereof, desiring you to
pity the extremity of my passions, procured by the attainture of your
conquering perfections. I confess you may allege many things as reasons, to
dissuade you from giving credit to my speeches, or yielding me the least favor
in your conceits: yet I beseeeh you, make but trial of loyalty, love, and
duty, so far as shall agree with your liking, and you shall find me
constant in the one, and perseuerant in the other, as one that has submitted
himself to your command, vowed his devotions to purchase your favor, and
everlastingly bound himself to be only yours: unable to express my humble
meaning: unwilling to be offensive, and desirous of favor: then I beseech you
be favorable to me, though bearing the name of an enemy, in whom you shall
find the true heart of a constant friend, whose safety, comfort, and
preservation, rests in your power. The first view of your bewties (which was
in the valley when you were last hunting) surprised my heart with such humble
regard to your virtue, that ever since my heart has endured the bitter
torments of fearful despair, which urges me to this presumption, desiring
from your sacred lips to receive my sentence of comfort, or affliction,
rather then to spend my life in languishing unrevealed torment. Then be you
gracious to him, that is otherwise most miserable, and show favor to an
undeserving unknown friend, so shall you not only show that you are
merciful, but also save a miserable lover from utter ruin.

Your humble friend Ornatus.


Adellena having received this Letter, told him she would deliver the same,
which the next day she performed in this sort: Being come to Arbastus house,
she continued most part of the day in Artesias company, not once renewing the
least remembrance of the talk she had with her the day before, but espying
her open her Casket wherein she put her works, whilst Artesia was busy, she
privily conveyed the Letter unseen into the same, which by and by Artesia
locked, for none but her self had the use thereof.

Adellena thought long till she was gone fearing least Artesia should upon some
occasion open the Casket again, and so find the Letter, whilst she were
there, therefore she soon found means to depart. When the time of rest was
come, and Artesia alone in her bed, taking a book (according to her usual
manner) to read a while, she suddenly fell a sleep, and in her sleep was
possessed with a dream, wherein her thoughts called to remembrance Adellenas
speeches, which moved such a disquiet conceit of anger in her breast, that
thinking she had chid her, with the motions of her spirits she awaked,
feeling and exceeding distemperature in all her parts, and seeing the light
still burning, she marvelled at her drowsinesse that had before forgate to put
the same out, and by this means called to remembrance Adellenas speeches,
maruelling what he should be that was in love with her, and suddenly again,
reproving her self for giving her mind liberty to think of love, she would
have banished al further remembrance thereof out of her mind, but the more she
labored, the more unable she was to prevail in ouermaistring her fancies,
that being both vexed with her self, and Adellena, she uttered these speeches.

What disquiet is this possesses my heart, procures such unwonted cogitations
to rise in my fancies, and disturbeth my rest? I was not wont to trouble my
thoughts with such vain cogitations, which the more I labor to suppress, the
more they increase.

Could Adellenas speeches have such force (which I had welnigh forgotten) as
thus long to stick in my remembrance? Or what reason have I to regard them
that were not worth the regarding? but rather tended to demonstrate the
affection of some ouerfond lover, that se^keth to intrappe my chastity?
Accursed be her lips for uttering them, and would to God I had been deaffe
that I might not have heard their inchaunting sound.

This said, she caught up her Book, thinking by reading to drive away all
remembrance thereof, but her heart was so fully possessed with a kind of
cogitation what he should be, that she neither could read, or when she did
read, remember what she did read: and finding this means not available,
she started from her bed, opening her Casket to take out her sampler,
wherein she took most delight, when suddenly she espied the Letter, and
reading the superscription, was half astonished thereat, especially how it
should come there, and what the contents should be, being oftentimes in mind
to tear the same in pieces and not to read it, which her heart would not
suffer her to do before she had seen what was the contents: yet striving to
ouermaister her affections, she tore the same in the midst: which done, such a
remorse rose in her fancy, united with a desire to know further thereof, that
leaping into the bed, she closed the same together, and betwixt a willing and
unwilling mind, read the same throughout. With that, fetching a deep sigh,
she said: Aye me poor soul, how are my affections betrayed to mine enemy?
Was it Ornatus she meant? can it be that he will prove my friend, that is my
professed enemy? O no: he intends nothing less then love, but rather under
color thereof, seeks my ruin. Was it he that I beheld in the valley? or it
is possible that he should be so deeply in love with me upon that small
sight? No, no, I will not credit his speeches, but still repute him as an enemy,
as indeed he is: and henceforward abandon Adellenaes company, by whose means
this Letter was conveyed into my Casket: then tearing the same into a thousand
pieces, she abstained (so near as she could) from all thought of yielding
the least consent to love, and sought to increase her disdain, and suspect of
his falsehood, spending the rest of that night in co^fused contrarieties of
doubtful thoughts. Early in the morning she gat up, and within short time met
with Adellena (who was come as desirous to know what issue her devise had
taken) and ^^ading occasion fit when none was by, she uttered these speeches.

Adellena, I marvel what folly rules your mind, that you (whom I had
thought had been virtuously given) should seek my ruin: wherein have I shown
my self so unkind, that you should requite me in this discourteous sort? You
remember the speeches past betwixt us the other day in the Gardein, when I
finding out your intent by your speeches, desired you to give over to use any
more talk to that effect, which you faithfully promised, but now most
unfaithfully have broken, and more impudently have betrayed my quiet with your
disquiet and ill sounding news: if your rudeness had been such that you could
not desist, you might then have delivered Ornatus false and fained inchauntment
into my hands, and not so secretly have conveyed the same into my Casket,
wherein you have made me amends for my love, to seek to betray my life into
the hands of mine enemy: for otherwise I neither can nor will esteem him.
Therefore henceforwards come no more into my company, for I forswear your
familiarity, hate your counsel, and will cause my father to banish you his
house, and alienate his friendship from you for ever.

Adellena would have answered, but Artesia refusing to hear her, departed, and
left her so much grieved, that for extreme vexation, she immediately departed
toward her own house.

CHAP. IIII. How Ornatus dispairing, left his fathers house, and disguising
himself, was entertained of Arbastus.
ORnatus desirous to hear how Artesia had accepted his Letter, came to
Adellenaes house, and found her weeping for anger, desiring to know the cause
thereof, which she declared to him at large, which wrought such an exceeding
passion of grief in his mind, that without yielding her either thanks for her
pains or other speech, he departed: being so much overcome with inward
sorrow, that finding a solitary place, he laid himself down upon the
earth, uttering these lamentations.

O miserable castiffe, what haste thou to do but lament when thy ill fortune
yields nothing but cause of lament? Why should thy life last to endure these
torments, and not rather to dissolve into unseen essences? Could any thing
have happened to me more miserable, then to behold Artesia, and now to endure
her cruelty? or more fortunate, if she had been merciful? But my Destenies
have drawn me to like her that hates me, and to become thrall to a cruel
unrelenting enemy. Well, my love is sweeter then my life, and therefore I will
venture life and all to purchase her liking.

Having said this, he a while sat silent, when suddeinly to favor his
extremities, he beheld certain of his familiars pass by, with whom he
departed home.

Early the next morning (being exceedingly troubled in mind and impatient of
delaie) he l^st his fathers house to visit Adellena again, whom he had the
day before left so unkindly, whom he found ready to go to Arbastus house
again: saluting her, said: Adellena, be not offended at my last unmannerly
departure, for my heart was so much disquietted at the ill success my suit
took, that I could not use that behavior toward you your pains deserved,
but now I am returned to crave your counsel what is further to be done
herein.

Sir replied she, I know not what further means to use, neither dare I any
more attempt to try Artesias courtesy, who is already so much offended with
me, that I fear to loose her friendship for ever, if I should utter that
again that is so unwelcome to her.

Ornatus hearing her speeches, thought she was unwilling to prosecute his suit
any further, with a heavy heart left her, entering into many thoughts and
cogitations which way to comfort himself. Oftentimes utterly dispairing, and
yet purposing to leave no means unassayed, nor danger unattempted, though
with hazard of his life to purchase some rest to his troubled heart.

At length he thought with himself what should make Artesia so hard hearted
as to give no credit to my speeches: it is not her want of lenity, pity, or
wisdom, for she is young, and therefore subject to love: bewtifull, and
therefore to be won wise, and therefore will with consideration pity my
sorrows. What then should alienate her good liking from me, more then from an
other? My Name: for by that she reputeth me an enemy: then were I not
Ornatus, she would peradventure give some regard to my suits. Therefore I will
change my name, and be an other then I am, that she not knowing me, may (if
not love me) yet disist to hate me: then began he to study what means to
use to enjoy her sight (without the which he could not live,) and yet not be
known what he was. Amongst many other devises, this took deepest root.
Within few days after (having provided all things necessary) he attired
himself like a virgin of a strange Country (which he might well be
esteemed to be by his youth.) And taking with him his Lute, whereon he could
play exceedingly well, in the silent of the night he departed toward the sea
coast, which was near unto Arbastus house: and seating himself upon the
Rockie shore, began to play upon his Lute. Early the next morning, a
shepherd happened to pass by that way, and espying his strange disguise, and
hearing his sweet Music, was so exceedingly delighted therewith, that he
stayed to see what he was.

Ornatus turning himself about, espied the old man stand gazing upon him,
wherewith he drew toward him, and said as follows.

Good Father, muse not to see me in this unfrequented place, being by shipwreck
cast on this shore, and preserved from a grievous death by sea, to perish for
want of comfort on the land, in a strange place, where I neither have
friends, nor know which way to get comfort. Therefore I beseech you, yield
comfort to my distress, and succor ^o my want. Fair Damsel quoth the
shepherd, if my homely Cottage can yield you any comfort, so please you to
accept thereof, it shall be at your command, whither so please you go, without
more circumstance of speeches, you shall be most heartily welcome. I thank you
quoth Ornatus, and I accept your gentle proffer; so they departed together. And
when they were entered, and the sh^pheardesse in the best manner she could had
welcomed him, and he had tasted of such food as was set before him, he told
them his name was Syluia, and telling a tale of sufficient countenance to bear
credit of the manner of their shipwreck, and the cause he undertook that
voyage by Sea. Which the old folks believed* Likewise framing himself to
such a kind of behavior, that it was almost ^mpossible to discern but that
he was a woman indeed.

Where Syluia (for under that name he shall a while pass) stayed some two
days, yet without any hope how to enjoy Artesias company. But the third day it
fortuned Arbastas being abroad hunting, was by a violent storm driven to seek
shelter, and must fortunately lighted on the shepherds Cottage, where he
boldly entered without calling, and suddenly espying Syluia, was half
astonished to behold a damsel so bewtifull and richly attired in that homely
place, but after that he had a while viewed her well, (Syluia being alone) with
a courteous behavior he thus spoke.

Fair damsel, pardon my boldness, if I have disquietted you, I little
thought to have found such guestes in this homely place. Syluia knowing him to
be Arbastus, arose, but made him no answer: when presently the old shepherd
came in, using great reverence to Arbastus, who demanded of him, what damsel
that was, whereupon the old man declared all that he knew.

Arbastus then thus said: Damsel, I understand by this shepherd some part of
your misfortunes, which I so much pity, that offer to do any thing rests in
me to do you pleasure. And for that this homely place is not agreeable to your
birth, which may be greater then I can judge of, let me desire you to accept of
such entertainment as my habitation yields, whither you shall be welcome.
Syluia being glad of that profer, yet fearing to be discovered by his
willingness to yield, made this answer. Sir, this homely place is best
agreeing to my poor estate, being by misfortune brought to misery: which I am
also unworthy of, for that I know not how to make my host amends, desiring
rather to live in this quiet palace void of care, then in places of more
dignity: but for that I shall be too chargeable to this poor man, and you so
earnestly desire me, I will be so bold as to take your profer, though unable to
be so grateful as I would. Many other speeches past betwixt them, and in the
end they departed toward Arbastus Castle: where Syluia was kindly and
worthily entertained, having his hearts desire, which was to enjoy the sight of
fair Artesi^.

Ornatus being alone by himself, began to meditate of the good success he had
in this attempt, and how fortunately all things had fallen out to further him
in his love. But most of all he meruailed how the eyes of all that beheld him
were blinded, that they could not perceive what he was. In these and many such
like comfortable meditations he spent some three or four days, taking most
great content in beholding Artesiaes perfections, that he was more and more
inthralled in the bands of vowed affection, hearing her speech, noting her
behauior, admiring her virtue, commending her courtesy, affecting her beauty,
and imprinting each liniament of her divine torme, in his devoted affection,
with such immooueable resolve of constant loyalty, that he did not only love
her, but also honor her as an I doll, being by Arbastus admitted her company,
that at all times he was with her. Artesia likewise took no little pleasure
in Syluians company, in whom so much curtesse abounded, that every one both
liked and commended her.

CHAP. V. How Adellena brought news to Arbastus house of Ornatus sudden
depature. How he naming himself Syluian, a long time enjoyed her company, and
what success he had in his love.
ADellena having heard of Ornatus departure from his fathers house, and of the
exceeding care and grief his parents took, fearing least he might by some
treachery be murdered, with which news she came to Arbastus house, and soon
published the same, that the news came to Arbastus hearing who was exceedingly
sorry to hear the same, for that he esteemed well o^ Ornatus. And now coming
into the garden where Artesia was walking with Syluian, she could not withhold
herself from speaking, but uttered her mind in these words.

Artesia be not offended with that I say, but rather be displeased with your
self, who are the original of this woe. Ornatus whom you supposed your
enemy, though indeed your most faithful friend, taking your unkind refusal
most heavily, and accounting himself not worthy to live if you despised him,
either has wrought his own untimely death, or dispairing to find favor at
your hands, has abandoned both this parents, country and acquaintance, to
live in exile. What will be said of you when the cause of his sorrow^ shall be
known? how may your own concience accuse your self of hard-hartednesse, that
would not yield pity to the distress of so worthy, virtuous, and courteous
a Gentleman, who for his humble suit, was spightfully disdained, and his
hearty good will, disdainfully rejected? Which cruel deed of yours, no doubt
will be one day repayed with the like disdain, where you shall most affect. I
know his love was firm, constant and immovable, which makes me so much the
more pity his estate: I know his meaning was both virtuous and honorable, his
birth you know, what virtues abounded in him, all can witness: and how heartily
he loved you, the heavens ca^ witness. Poor Ornatus farewell. Hard was thy
hap, to place thy true love so firmly, where thou reapest so little reward.
Artesia hearing her speeches, could not tell whether she might blame her, or
accuse her self, sometimes doubting whether she spoke this of policy to try
her, or of truth. Being as ready to blame her self, as Adellena, and yet
willing to do neither. For she thought if she spoke true, she had good cause
to say that she did, and her self more to be blamed then any. For
notwithstanding she had given Adellena so flat a denial, yet her conscience
knew, that some sparks of love were kindled in her breast: That her heart
being somewhat oppressed with these thoughts, caused the water to stand in her
eyes. Ornatus seeing all this, took no little comfort thereat, especially when
he perceived Artesias heart to relent, but for that by his disguise, being
known no other then a woman, he kept silence, when saine he would have spoke,
least he should discover himself. Adellena seeing she had disquieted Artesia,
being her self full of grief, and unwilling to urge her any further,
departed. And Artesia withdrawing her self from Syluians company, into an
Arbor, uttered these speeches. And can it be that Ornatus love was so great,
that for my sake he has done this? Could he love her so constantly that was
his professed enemy? is love of such a force, to draw one into these
extremes? Then may I compare it to the herb Artas, found in Persia, who being
but holden in the hand, causes a heat through all the body: so love but
entertained in thought, disquieteth all the senses. But why do I conceive so
well of Ornatus, when I know not the truth of Adellenaes report: it may be he
has hired her to do this, and thereby I may be deceived, yielding to pity,
when there is no cause, and with the bird Akanthu^, ready to come at every
call. Admit it were so, I am not bound to favor him, is he not my enemy, and
son unto my fathers cheifest foe? what reason then have I either to give
credit to his love, or her protestation, when both may be feigned? Well I will
be advised before I yield my self to loves intangling baytes, and before I
love, I will know whom I love. I but Artesia thy fancy yields remorse
already, and thy conscience bids thee pity him because he loves thee, for
love in a reputed enemy may be as constant and loyal as in an open friend,
and an enemy becoming friend, will be the more constant: then what have thou
to do, but make further proof of his constancy, and finding him true, yield
reward to his desert? Soft Artesia, wade not too far: if he be constant, if he
be loyal, if he love thee so entirely, if now thou have made him forsake this
country, or procure his untimely death, then is there nothing else to be don
for thee, but to pity his death, and accuse thy self of some discourtesie.
All this while Ornatus shrowding himself from her sight, by the thickness of
the green leaves heard her speeches, to his exceeding comfort, and again
closely withdrew himself. Artesia having ended her speeches, her heart being
oppressed with many doubts, arose and came to Syluian, to whom she said: My mind
is much troubled with the news Adellena told me of Ornatus absence, whom for
that you know not, I will tell you what he was.

There dwells not far hence, one Allinus, that mortally hates my father, and
all that belong unto him, whose son Ornatus was, whom if I should commend,
you might think me too cruel to refuse his love so unkindly: only thus much I
will say of him, he was every way worthy to be beloved, though my fancy could
never be drawn to like of him: who upon what occasion I know not, but as
Adellena told me, made his love known to her, which she likewise told me of,
but I refusing to hear her, answered her plainly, that I was greatly of^ended
with her, for making any such motion: and forbad her for ever to speak of him
again. But now this day you have heard what she has told me, which I can
hardly believe to be true, or that Ornatus would be so rash without wisdom to
enter into such extremes. But if it be so (as I would it were not) it
greeueth me for him, and I wish that I had not refused to hear his suit,
though I am not willing to yield thereto. For I would not have it said of me,
nor my name so much blazed, that my cruelty procured him to that extremity,
though his wisdom might have foreseen such mischief, and he more
moderately have tempered his love.

Ornatus taking occasion said, I neither know the gentleman, nor how constant
his love was, but thus much my mind persuades me, that had not his love been
great, he would not have grieved so much at your unkindness: but love is of
this force, that it turns the mind into extremes, or utterly breaks the
heart, which force belike it had in him, else would he not have done himself
so much h^rme. But it may be (as you say) Ornatus has not done himself
outrage, but only abandoning company, lives in despair, and so means to
die: which if it be so, then in my fancy, you might do well to let him by
some means understand that you did pity him Stay there quoth Artesia, you
must first know whether I can do it or no: for If I should say I pity with my
lips, and he not find it so, it would drive him to more despair, and therefore
I will leave off to do that, until I can find whether I can do so or no.

These her speeches drove Ornatus into a perplexed doubt what to think, being
no way assured o^ her love, nor yet utterly dispairing thereof, for that her
speeches gave likelihood of both. Therefore he durst not speak too boldly,
least she should suspect him, but only rested in good hope to find comfort,
and by other means to try her.

Then taking his Lute, he began to play so sweetly, as would have ravished a
comfortless mind, with great content: to hear which harmony pleased Artesia
so well, that when he left, she would request him, calling him Syluian, to
play again. Whilst he sat playing, Artesia sitting close by his side, fell
fast a sleep, which he perceiving, left of his play, to sur^et himself with
beholding her sweet beauty, in which he took such delight, as almost ravished
his senses, sometimes thinking whilst she slept, to imprint a kiss upon her
sweet ruddie lip, but fearing thereby to wake her, and loose that
delightful contemplation, he desisted, beholding each part of her visible
form, which was most divine, his mind was affected with inward suppose, what
perfections her hidden bewties did comprehend, which his fancy persuaded him,
he did in conceit absolutely contemplate. Then seeing her stir, he suddenly
caught his lute again, striking his sweet noate, to continue her in that
slumber, and then again, laying by the same, to enter into his former
contemplation. Comparing his delight to exceed all heavenly joy, and wishing
though Artesia could not love him, yet that she would always grant him so
to behold her.

When he had a good while continued in these meditations, Artesia awooke,
which somewhat grieved him, but when he beheld her bewteous eyes fired upon
him, he thought himself enriched with a heavenly happiness, to whom A^tesia
said, I thank thee good Syluian, for thy sweet music has somewhat eased my
heart, by this quiet sleep. O what content do they enjoy, that live void of
care, and how happy was I before I heard Ornatus name? With that she arose,
and there together went in: when night approached (which Ornatus thought so
soon come, for by that he must loose Artesiaes sight) every one betook
themselves to their several lodgings.

Ornatus studying what means to use to further his love, wherein he found many
difficulties, sometimes in thinking Artesia was in hope never to hear of him
again, and sometimes supposing she did pity him, and being overcome with
contrarieties of doubts, he uttered these complaints.

What should I do to procure my content, when my miseries are one way great, and
my joys as exceeding: when my despair exceeds, and yet ^y comfort
abounds? I enjoy not Artesiaes love, yet she loves me not: I enjoy her
sight, and yet not her sight. I have as much comfort as fills me with joy, and
yet I am desperate with despair. How can that be? She loves me as I am
Syluian, but hates me, because she loves not Ornatus. Under the name of
Syluian, I enjoy her sight, but not as Ornatus, and so am I deprived of her
sight. I reap exceeding comfort by beholding her bewty, but I live in
despair, that she would shun love if she knew what I were. Though I enjoy many
things by being Syluian, yet am I deprived of all comfort, as I am Ornatus.
For she deemed him either dead or fled, has no hope ever to see him, and if I
should show any sign that he were living or near, she would presently
eschew my company: which being as I am, I may enjoy: and thus am I void of all
means of attayning her love, yet living as I am, I shall still enjoy her love.
Why Ornatus, thou have better means to give her knowldge of thy love in this
disguise, then if thou liuedst as Ornatus. Suppose thou should make known to
her what thou art, think thou she would bewray thee, considering thou
offerest no other behavior toward her, then that which agrees with virtue?
Or what if she did betray thee, were thou not better to indare the greatest
extremity by her don, then pyne away with grief in her absence? Yes Ornatus,
in being as thou art, thou art more happy, and therefore may thou be in
some better hope of comfort. What if she will not love thee, yet for thy good
will she cannot hate thee. And though she know what thou art, she will
rather conceal thee, then bewray thee then try whether she loves thee or no,
but how? Make my self known.

No. I will write a letter, which I will leave in some place where she may
find it, and so by that means I shall see whether she will love or no. And
taking pen Ink and paper, he wrote as fo^^oweth.

To the most virtuous Artesia, the forsaken Ornatus sends humble greeting.
WEre you but so merciful as fair, I would not despair of pity. Or were
you willing to know my truth and loyalty, you would though not yield to my
suit, yet pity me. I cannot use protestations, nor dissemble grief: but be
you most assured, that what proceeds out at my lips, comes from my heart:
xtremitie makes me ouerbolde, and despair makes me more desperate, in
uttering my mind: I cannot choose but say I love you, for that I love indeed. I
cannot set forth my love with fyled terms, but in plain truth, protest that
my love is constant, loyal, virtuous, and immovable: and though you hate, I
must love: and though you for ever deny to love, yet will I persist in
constancy: for the woorst I can endure is death: and that my soul already
inwardly feels. I have forsaken my parents, friends, and all to become
acceptable to you: for whilst I was Allinus son, you did hate me, then I
beseech you, now that I am not Allinus son, nor Ornatus, pity me. For
without your pity I die, and little can my death profit you: but letting me
live, you shall for ever enjoy a faithful servant. So most virtuous Artesia, I
commit my cause to your wise consideration.

Your inseparably, neither Ornatus, nor himself, but your poor servant.


When he had written this Letter, and sealed the same, the next morning he
laid it in a place of the garden, where he know Artesia would walk. And from
thence coming to her chamber, he found her ready to go forth.

Artesia welcomed Syluia kindly, and forth they went together, and walking up
and down a prittie while, Artesia espied the white paper, and desirous to see
what it was, took it up, reading the superscription, marvelled what the
contents should be, and how it should come there, and turning to Syluian, see
you this letter, it is directed to me, I marvel how it should come here,
unless it were laid of purpose: well howsoever that was, I will read the
contents, and you shall be partaker of them. When she had read the same, and
well understood that it was Ornatus, at the first she was so exceedingly
v^xed, that she said: I now perceive, that Ornatus was wiser then I took him
to be, for I see he has committed no outrage upon himself, but wisely will
try me first, and if I will not yield to love him, what will he do? marry
return to his father again. This is Adellenaes doing, and according as I
thought they are agreed: she left this letter here, and her may I blame, and
not him. For did not she promise him to do it, he would never of himself
attempt it. Syluian I pray thee counsel me, what I should do herein, for my
heart is oppressed with many thoughts, that I will not utter until I know thy
mind?

Syluian thus answered: since you have given me license to speak that which my
heart thinks, first I say, i^ Ornatus loves according as he protests, as
no doubt but he does, you have good reason to pity him, for that by your own
report, he is every way worthy thereof, which if you do, you shall be sure of a
constant friend, preserve his life, and make unity betwixt your parents. As
for Adellena, if it were her deed, she did but the part of a friend, but it
was very unlikely, for that she was not here since yesterday. Neither can I
think any man can dissemble so much as to make these protestations, and yet be
false. For his words in my fancy, bear an evident likeliehood of truth.
Therefore, if I may counsel you, yield to that which is virtuous, and in so
doing, you shall purchase your own good, his content, and perpetual quiet to
both your families.

Would you have me then (quoth she) yield to love mine enemy? How is he
your enemy (quoth Syluian) when he loves you? He is mine enemy, because
his father hating me, how can he love me? Nay rather (quoth Syluian) his father
not loving you, how can he choose but love you, because he sees them hate you,
that are worthy to be beloved: besides their ha^red being unjust, it shows
his virtue the more, to love those his parents hate: and it is commonly seen,
where there is hatred betwixt the parents, the children have loved most
dearly, as in common experience it is seen: have you not red the Histories of
Pryamus and Thysbe, Romeo and Juliet, and many other? whose love was the more
constant, by so much the more their parents hatred was deadly.

I remember such Histories (quoth Artesia) but what was the end of their love,
was it not most miserable? I grant it was, (quoth Syluian) which was procured
by their parents cruelty, but not their love, wherein, notwithstanding, they
took such felicity, that they rather chose to die together then to be parted:
which argues, that the enmity twixt parents, cannot break off love twixt the
children, yet might such tragical events have bin prevented by wisdom. But how
know I (said Artesia) whether Ornatus love be so constant or no? Can you have
any greater proof thereof, then his own letters, the forsaking of his parents,
and living peradventure in pennurie: but if you doubt of that, once again try
him. Well (said Artesia) I asked but thy counsel, but in stead thereof, thou
use persuasion: but seeing thou art so forward to do me good, which I hope
is thy intent, if thou will keep my counsel, thou shall know both my mind,
and what I intend. Assure your self (quoth Syluian) I will rather loose my
life then prove unfaithful. Then said she, I confess to thee Syluian, that
love has made entrance into my heart, that I would willingly both pity
Ornatus, and grant him his request: for that with often remembering him, I
cannot forget him, neither does any thought please me, but when I think of
him. But there are so many slips to hinder our love, that though I love him, I
shall never enjoy him. For should my parents know hereof, they would pry so
warily into my actions, that it were impossible for me once to have a sight of
him, whom I do scarce remember, I have so seldom seen him. You may (quoth
Syluian) both love him, and enjoy him, and since you have begun to like of him,
he being worthy thereof, and equalling you in affection, increase that love:
and might I but once come to speak with him, I would not doubt but ^ffect all
things with such secrecy, that you should with quiet enjoy him.

Well quoth Artesia, I commit all to you, my life, for that depends on my
love, being willing to do any thing that shall not disagree with modesty.
Destring you to keep my counsels secret, for to bewray them, may indaunger
both his and my life.

After many other speeches past betwixt them, Adellena entered the garden.
Artesia espying her, at the first thus greeted her. God-morrowe Adellena, I
know not whether I may salute thee as a friend, or a privy foe, for that by
thy means I am brought into bandage.

I pray thee tell me without dissembling (which I fear me thou can do too
well) when thou saw Ornatus? and yet I know thy answer before I ask. Do
thou not know this letter? did thou not hide it in this garden, that I might
find it? did not Ornatus hire thee to say, that he was departed from his
fathers, whilst he lies at home in thy house? I know thy aunswer^ will be
no: but how may I believe that? Do thou not likewise say he loves me
when thou know the contrary, and do but dissemble? If thou harborest any
virtue in thee, tell me the truth and dissemble not? for in doing so, thou
shall greatly con^ent me, discharge thy conscience, and peradventure do
Ornatus a good turn.

Adellena hearing her speeches, was so astonish at their strangeness, that for
a good while she stood as one senseless, but at the last, she made this
answer. Your demands are such, as that I know not how to answer them: but
heavens punish me, if I dissemble. I saw not Ornatus since the time he came
to me, to know how you accepted the letter I conveyed into your Casket. For
that Letter I am altogether ignorant therein, neither did I ever see the same
before now: I never spoke with Ornatus, saw Ornatus, or heard from him since I
last gave him your answer: neither do I know where he is: but this I know,
that he is not to be found: but poor Gentleman, languisheth in love, which I
dare protest, loves you most dearly, neither need you misdoubt that he is
absent, or think that he is hidden at my house, for it is too true, he has
taken such grief at your unkindness, as will I fear me indaunger his life.

I would it were not so, but that he were at my house, then would I counsel
him rather to forget to love, then indaunger his life thereby.

May I believe (quoth Artesia) that this thou say is true? Heavens let me
live no longer (quoth Adellena) if I dissemble. Then (quoth Artesia) how
should this Letter be conveyed into this garden, but by himself? With that the
Crystal tears fell from her eyes.

CHAP. VI. How Ornatus love was hindered by the news of Arbastus death. How
Floretus to attain Sylulans love, both confessed he slew Arbasius, and intended
to poison Artesia.
TO augment Artesiaes tears, a messenger hastily running, came in and brought
this news, uttering the same with a ghastly countenance.

O Artesi^, hear my tragic discourse, your Father as you know, rode forth
this morning to chase the fearful Dear, who wandering from his company, at
last by his long stay was mist, and all of us coming together, studied amongst
our selves, what should be become of him, at last we were commanded by
Floretus your Uncle, to post several ways in search of him: whom at last we
found most grievously wounded and dead. Artesia hearing his words, with
sudden grief, fell down dead. Which when Sylnian perceived, caught her in
his arms, rubbing her pale cheeks, until she was revived again. Then they
conveyed her to her bed, in such extremity with that sudden grief, that
they feared to loose her life, which exceedingly tormented Syluian to behold.
Then was there such an uproar in Arbastus house, as al seemed in utter
despair, one coniecturing this, an other that of Arbastus death, but all in
general concluding, that it was done by Allinus in revenge of his brothers
death.

Arbastus wife, likewise conceived such sorrow at this unexpected event, that
with very grief thereof she dyed. Artesia with both together, was ready to
yield up her latest breath, and had done so, had she not been carefully
preserved by Syluian, and Adellena. Who by their counsel and endeavors,
pacified the extremity of her perplexity. This news was soon spread into
most places of the country: but because there was no just proof of the
murderer, there was no great question made thereof: Arbastus having never a
trusty friend to prosecute revenge. Floretus now took upon him to rule and
govern all that belonged to Arbastus, as his brother, and soon caused him and
his Lady to be worthily interred, and built a sumptuous monument in their
remembrance. Which being ouerpast, he came again to Artesia, (as in the mean
time he had oftentimes done) and finding her very weak, used many speeches to
comfort her, giving such as were about her special charge, to minister all
things necessary to restore her to her former health: Seeming to be most
careful of her guard, promising and protesting to be unto her instead of a
Father.

Syluian all this while was exceedingly grieved in mind to see his love grown
so weak, and in such danger of life, not once forsaking her in all the time of
her sickness, but continually comforting her with hearty speeches, careful
tendance, not so much as once departing her chamber, but taking exceeding pains
to pleasure her, that she took great comfort in her supposed Syluian, who
oftentimes would steal a sweet kiss from Artesiaes lips, which she
permitted, taking the same to proceed from a courteous mind, when Syluian did
it of deep affection: accounting the estate wherein he lived, to exceed all
joys, and his delight past compare, profering many familiarities that Artesia
took in kind part, which otherwise she would have refused, had she known
whom her companion Syluian had been. Ornatus marueiled that all this time she
spoke not of him, which he devised to urge her to do, by many occasions: but
these extremities had bannished all remembrance of him out of her mind: Which
exceedingly tormented Ornatus, fearing this delay would some way turn to his
ill. That whereas before time, he was pleasant, merry, and oftentimes would move
Artesia to mirth by his disporte, now that humor was alienated, and he became
continually melancholy and sad, oftentimes when Artesia was from him, getting
into a sollitary place, to bewail his hard fate. Which she noted and woondred
at, thinking the same had proceeded from being so long absent from his country
and friends. One day she found her deemed Syluian sollitarie alone, and coming
unawares, heard her utter these words. Oh how unhappy am I, to love and not to
be beloved.

Syluian espying her, left off: to whom Artesia said. Why how now Syluian, are
you in love, can it be, that your mind is attainted with that venomous serpent,
that poysoneth the senses, alters the complexion, and troubles the head and
heart? Shake it off, and cast it out of your sight, for it never did any good,
but has brought many to perpetual misery.

Since you have ouerheard me (quoth Syluian,) I must needs confess I am in
love, which does not any way work any such effect in me as you speak off, but
I take all comfort therein, my senses, heart, head, and all my parts, take
exceeding pleasure therein. Why then (quoth Artesia) sit you thus pensiuely
alone, as it seems to me bewayling your estate to be in love? I do not (quoth
Syluian) sorrow that I am in love, but that I am not beloved again: for being
in love, I have vowed to live so ever, and sooner shall end. What hard-harted
man (said Artesia) is he ye knowing you love him, will not love you again? Such
is my har^ estate (said Syluian) that the party whom I love, knows I love,
and yet causelessly does hate me: neither am I far absent from him, but enjoy
his company, without which, my life would decay. Is he in this house you love?
can it be you are entangled since you came hither? No (quoth Syluian) I loved
before I came hither. How can that be, when you are a stranger, and cast in
this country by shipwracker? either you must needs be some other then we take
you for, otherwise, these things are impossible. But if you dare put trust in
my secrecy, impart your mind to me: and I promise you I will do the best I
ca^ to further your love. You may do much therein (quoth Syluian) and none more
then your self, but I beseech you pardon me for revealing the same, before you
assure me of one thing, which you may do without any harm to your self and be
not offended with me if I ask you. Tell me what it is (quoth she) and I will
answer you? Then (said Syluian) I would first know whether you love Ornatus or
no? With ye she started? saying: Ay me, that name brings death to my heart,
and thou woundest my souls with grief, to hear him named. Do thou think I
have cause to love and not rather above al men to hate him: do thou not see
my father lately murdered by him, or some by his appointment, and think thou
I can love so deadly a foe, by whom I am brought to this misery? No assure thy
self Syluian, according as I have just cause I do hate him, as the greatest
enemy I have. Whose very name affrighteth me with terror, and if thou had
loved me as I was persuaded thou did, thou would not have troubled my heart
with that omnious name. And yet for all this mischief that he has done me,
did thou not see how he sued for my love, and had so much prevailed, that my
heart began to yield to his suit? With that she pulled out of her pocket the
letter, saying: these lines the trutes of his dissimulation, were actors in his
villainie: with that she tare them into a thousand pieces. Syluian seeing the
same, was ready to sound with grief, breathing soorth a heart burning ^igh,
said. O how is poor innocence suspected.

And being ready to say more, was disappointed by Floretus coming, who even
then entered the garden, and finding them out, used many courteous speeches to
the^ both, especiallly co^forting Artesia. To whom he said. Dear coozin, since
these mishaps cannot be remedied, let wisdom now ouersway your passionate
sorrow: and with patience remit all further grief, for things past cure are
not to be lamented: but now commit the care of your safety to my trustines, ye
will as tenderly regard your good as mine own life. Therefore be of comfort,
and whatsoever you desire, shall be to ye uttermost accomplished. Artesia yielded
him many thanks, and so they went in. Artesia being alone by her self, could
by no means forget what speech she had with Syluian: either thinking she did
dissembl^, or was some other then she seemed: or else that she was in love with
Floretus. Then she remembered her speeches, saying. How is innocence
suspected. Which she knew she spoke by her accusing of Ornatus* which brave her
into many doubtful cogitotions, and troubled her senses exceedingly: but by
reason of her little suspect of Syluians disguise, she could not judge any
thing thereof. Syluian likewise not daring to offend her, and loving her so
dearly, that he could not endure to see her disquietted, used no more
speeches tending to love, but frequenting her company wherein he took his
whole fel^ci^ie, accounting himself most happy to live and enjoy her sweet
presence, being out of hope to attain her love, refreshing his heart with
many sollaces of sweet delight, in beholding that which she little thought he
had noted.

Many days continued Syluian in this disguise, in which time, Arbastus death
was almost forgotten. And Floretus drawn by Syluians manifold virtues, began
exceedingly to affect her, showing such kind behavior toward her, that she
suspected that which afterward she found true: for Floretus co^cealing his
love, felt the flame to burn the more inwardly, and living in that scorching
pennari^, thought it better for him to manifest his love, the^ by hyding the
same, augment his torment. Assuring himself to obtain his desire, for that
Syluian was a stranger, far from friends, and without his friendship, likely
to come to poverty, which he thought would be a means of importance to
draw her to like of him: besides, he thought that he might do as he list
with Artesia, for that she was only in his custody.

And on a day finding Syluian alone in the garden, coming to her with a
submisse behavior, he said as follows. My dear^ Syluian I would gladly
utter a matter of an importance, if you will vouchsafe me gentle audience: So
it is fair Damsel, that my heart has long time been inthralled to your
beauty, which I have retrained to utter, fearing to be refused: but knew you
how faithfully my heart is devoted to your service, and with what torment I
have concealed the same, you would pity me. My estate is sufficient to
maintain you well, though not so worthily as you deserve: you shall live with
me in contented ease, and have so faithful and constant a friend, as no
torment nor affliction shall alter.

Therefore I beseech you, let me receive some hope of comfort by your gentle
speeches, which shall expel many cares from my troubled heart.

Syluian had much adoo to abstain from smiling, to think how unfit he was so
yield such a reward as Floretus expected: committing further consideration
thereof, to time more convenient, gave him this answer. My mind sir is unapt
to entertain love, considering how far I am from my country, and how soon
I may be overtaken, therefore I pray you seek not that at my hands which I
will not grant, but if with your favor I may live so quietly as since my
coming I have done, I shall think my self more beholding to you for that;
then for your porfered love, which I cannot yield unto, Floretus thinking her
soft answer was a sign she would soon yield, still prosecuted his suit with
earnestness, in so much that Syluian told him that as yet she could not
fancy him, because she had no trial of him, but that she would consider
further thereof. And so for that time they parted. Floretus in hope to attain
that which was not to be had, and Syluian in hope by this means the sooner to
attain Artesias love. First considering that Floretus had the disposing of
her, and therefore he must please him: least otherwise he might be deprived of
her company. Then he began to think of Arbastus murder, knowing assuredly,
that it was not acted by his fathers counsel, but rather by some secret foe,
that might as well be Floretus as any other, for that he was the next heir,
if Artesia hindered him not: which conceit took such effectual instance in his
fancy, that with that his suspect, beholding Floretus behavior, countenance,
and little inquiry for the murderer, he plainly inspected him, which by the
divine providence, rather then by any evident proof, was stirred in his
opinion. Such murder is never unrevealed, and though never so closely done,
yet God by some extraordinary means or other reuealeth the same. So came it to
pass with Ornatus, although he was no war privy to any such act, or had any
probability thereof, yet he thought that Floretus countenance bewrayed his
treachery, and therefore he longed to have some conference with him, to see
if he could gather the truth, whereby he thought both to discharge himself of
that suspect Artesia had of him, and also when she saw his innocence and
constancy, she might yield to love him: purposing to leave no means
unattempted to try him: which he did the next time be spoke with him, in this
sort.

E^rly the next morning, Floretus not unmindful of his love which kept him
from his sleep that night, never left till be had found Syluian, and coming
to her, with manifold submisse speeches, solicited his suit: whom Syluian
cunningly handled, still putting him in hope, and yet making him no promise,
which set him the more on fire, being so far ouergone with affection, that
he purposely determined either to win her love, or hazard his own life, and
to leave no meane^ unattempted, were it never so dangerous, to procure his own
content. That the more unwilling he saw Syluian, the more importunate he grew.
Till at last Syluian said as follows. Floretus I know no reason you have to
be so importunate, when I see in you no token of fidelity: but once having
attained your purpose, you will esteem me as lightly as easily won: besides,
I see not wherein you can perform any such matter as you promise, for I being
in a strange country, have nothing: and you for ought I see, as little: then
by matching with you, I shall but bring my self to poverty, and misery, and
then your love now so hot, will be as cold: and I as rejected, cast off to
utter misery. Floretus not suffering her to proceed any further, made this
answer. Syluian do you not see A^bastus wealth, will not ye be sufficient? the
great possessions I now enjoy by him, are of substance to maintain you in all
quiet, and yield you your hearts content. Arbastus wealth said Syluian, that
is A^tesiaes by right, then how can you possess the same she living? Do but
grant me love, said he, and I will quickly satisfy you in that. I have a
mean to get ^ll into mine own hands: and therefore I beseech you, let no such
matter trouble your mind, but be assured, that in enjoying me, you shall have
al happiness and quiet, by my humble, dutiful, and constant loyalty. Do but
assure me of this (quoth Syluian) and you shall know my resolution afterward.

Artesia entering the chamber, brake off their speeches, whose presence vexed
Floretus at the heart, being scarce able to speak, by reason of his inward
rancor: for indeed he hated Artesia, because she only kept him from
possessing his brothers living: the want whereof, kept him from attaining
Syluians love: therefore he resolved by some means to work her downfall
which within short time he acquainted Syluian withal by this occasion.

One day finding her alone in a secret place in the garden, after many speeches
past betwixt them: whereby he perceived the chiefest things that hindered him,
was his want of wealth, and after that Syluian had in some sort made him a
grant (only to try him,) he began to utter his intent in this sort. My dear
Syluian, I am so well persuaded of your virtue, and put such confidence in your
trustiness, that I will reveal to you the very depth and secrets of my heart,
would you but swear to keep my counsel: for to purchase your content, I have
determined to put in practice a matter of secrecy, which concerns my life to
be revealed.

Syluian hearing that, thought it better to swear a thousand oaths and break
them all, then by niceness to endanger the life of Artesia, which she supposed
he aimed at promised him by many protestations, to keep secret whatsoever he
told her: whereupon Floretus urged with hope to win her love, and imboldned
in mischief, cared not what he did to attain his will, said as follows.
Syluian, you see Arbastus is dead, which was one stop that kept me from
inioying great possessions, and my purpose is, so you will but vouchsafe to aid
me therrin, to be rid of Artesia: and then all that belongs to her by her
fathers death, shall be yours to dispose of. Syluians heart throbde to hear
his speeches, but determining to sift him to the full, said as follows.
Floretus I am sure you speak this only to try me, and so entrap me, and not
of any intent you have to perform the same, wherein you shall do me great
wrong, and your self no good: for I cannot believe you bear the least thought
to do it. By heaven quoth he, it is my full intent, and for that you may be
assured thereof, it was I that slew Arbastus, howsoever the matter is imputed
to Allinus, and purpose likewise to be rid of Artesia, only for your sake.

Therefore make no doubt of my resolution: for I am absolutely purposed to do
it. (O thought Syluian) rather shall thou see my blood, then spill one drop of
hers: why Floretus would you have me do any thing therein? You only may do it
(quoth he) with more safety then any other, and the manner how is this.

Within some mile from this Castle, Arbastus has a banqueting house in his
Park, where oftentimes he would for his recreation lie, whither I will
persuade Artesia to go for a season to take the air, and to recreate her
senses dulled with grief: and none but you to keep her company, and some two
servants whose trustiness, I am assured of. This done, I will get a drink to
be made, the force whereof, shall expel life, and yet by no means nor any
cunning or skill be found out, when you shall think it most convenient give
unto her: and being once dead, who will make any inquiry, but that she died of
a natural sickness? and then you shall be mistress both of her heritage and
my self. Syluian said, when shall this be put in practice? Within these two
days at the farthest said he: in the mean time frequent you Artesiaes
company, in such familiar sort as heretofore you have done, and my self will
use her with no less kindness. Many other speeches being past betwixt them at
that time, they parted.

CHAP VII. How Ornatus told Artesia of Floretus intent, and upon what occasion
he discovered himself.
Floretus being by himself, began to consider how rashly he had committed his
secrets to Syluian, entering into these meditations; Does Syluian think that my
policy exceeds not her shallow capacity: poor simple stranger, she has
undertaken a matter of great importance for me, that mean nothing less then
good will to her, she for my love has promised to poison Artesia, and is likely
that once done, to taste of the same sauce, for loved she me never so well, I
will not trust her with my life, but peradventure she hates me, and will
reveal my drift to Artesia. No Floretus thou art deceived, she is so far in
love that she doteth, and would I am sure to any thing at my request. What a
world is this, what villainy can be intended, that some either for favor or
reward, will not execute? If I should trust her that is so easily won to do
such a heinous deed, might I not be accounted mad? yes, and therefore I will
not trust her: Artesia being once dispatched, she shall follow next. Ornatus on
the countrary part, was glad that he had felt the depth of Floretus counsel,
thinking likewise that he was so far in love with him (taking him for a
woman,) that for his sake he sought. Artesias death: which was the only means
to help him attain her love, which he likewise determined to give her
knowledge of, and discover himself, hoping that when she saw his innocence,
his faithful love, and how by his means her life was preserved, she would
yield him due guerdon for his good will. Whilst he was in the depth of those
cogitations, he espied Artesia enter the garden, and taking his Lute, found
her seated upon a flowrie bank, under the shade of a myrtle tree, and
perceiving that she was somewhat heavily inclinde, he satte down by her, and
with his sweet melody, brought her a sleep, when she had slept a good while,
being exceedingly aff^ighted with a dream, she started up, looking earnestly
upon Syluian, saying; I pray thee Syluian do not poison me. Syluian seeing her
so affrighted, was exceedingly amazed, and she her self not yet fully
recovered, seemed to be afraid of him, till at last Syluian said. I beseech
you what is it that affrighteth you? O Syluian said she, I drempt thou would
have murdered me. Heavens forbid (quoth he) that I should attempt to heinous a
deed: But would you vouchsafe to hear my tragic report, you should be rid
of that doubt, though Syluian is much tempted to do such a deed: who esteem
your life more dearer then mne own, and would rather with my own hands tear
out my woeful heart, then think the least thought to wrong you. But because I
have so fit occasion, and I hope your patience will permit me, I will rehearse a
most monstrous and heinous intended michiefe. The other day I remember you were
exceedingly offended with me for naming Ornatus, for that you supposed him to
be an actor in Arbastus death, but both he and Allinus are innocent, and far
from any such thought, for your uncle Floretus was his murderer, which he
told me himself: he has been oftentimes importunate to win my love (which
an other possesses) but I suspecting as much as I now find to be true, held
him of with this delay, that he had not wealth to maintain me. Which when I
had often alleged, he told me all that belonged to Arbastus was his: then I
demanded how that could be, since you were living? Quoth he, swear but to be
secret, and I will tell you how, With that upon my protestations* he told me
that he had murdered Arbastus, and meant to poison you: persuading me to consent
thereto, for that he said, I only could do it: with that (I not purposing to
do it, but to preserve you) promised him my uttermost assistance, which he
told me should be done, in this manner. I will (quoth he) persuade Artesia, to
forsake this Castle, and to soi^^rne some few days in a house Arbastus has in
his Park, where none but you and two others servants, whose secrecy I nothing
doubt, shall keep her company, where I will give you such a potion, as shall
end her life, and yet by no means be perceived, neither can there be any doubt
thereof: for that I and none else am left of her kindred, to search the truth.
This is the sum of that he told me. Artesia hearing her words, sat like one
without sense a good space, being so far overcome with grief and fear, that
she could not speak a word, but at the last burst forth into these
lamentations. Ay me, vnknde, and most unnatural Uncle, can thou speak me
so fair and intend me so much harm? Who would have thought so foul impiety,
had been shrouded under so fair pretext? Could thou be so unnatural, as to
murder thy own most natural loving and dear brother, and not contented with
his tragedy, to seek my untimely death? What frenzy or folly does possess
thy breast, that I esteemed replete with virtue? How can thou suffer so
impious and heinous a thought to sink in thy breast, much less to act such a
notorious outrage against him ye loved thee as his life, and her that honoreth
thee as her friend? O Syluian, may I credit thy words, and not rather accuse
thee, and excuse him? May I think him so simple, to trust thee with his
secrets? no I fear me this is some policy invented by thee to some bad cud.
Yet I pray thee pardon me: for what can thou get by telling me so unless it
were so? or not rather have kept his counsel, and then thou might have been
my heir. And pardon I ask of thee good Ornatus, though thou art absent, for
that I accused thee as accessarie to my fathers death, when thou art innocent.
With that a flood of tears stopped ye passage of her speech, and Syluian said,
Artesia, yet vouchsafe to hear my counsel, which shall prevent al these
imminent evils. You may peradventure make some doubt of the truth, of that
which I have spoken: but I take heaven to record, no word is false: for I
regard your good above all things, and your quiet above mine own content: for
should you dye, I could not live: for by you I draw my breath. I diued into
Floretus counsails, not to aid him, but to prevent them: for that I knew
Ornatus was no way guilty of any such treason, but would have ventured his
own life, to have preserved your Fathers, whom he both loved and honored as
himself. Of whom I could have told you more, but that fearing to offend you,
and partly seeing how vehemently you accused him, I durst not, whose love is
loyal, and thereon I will pawn my life. Syluian (quoth Artesia) thou tellest
me things of wonder, but especially ye thou art so privy to Ornatu^
thoughts, and ye thou dare so boldly affi^me he loves me, when thou may
be deceived. Most virtuous Artesia (quoth he) were you but so privy to ye
thoughts of his heart as I am, you would say as much as I, and believe all ye I
tell you: and to put you in assurance of what I know, I give you knowledge ye I
am Ornatus, y^ in the disguise have sought to attain your love: for which
boldness, I most humbly beseech you to pardon me. With yt a ruddie blush
spread it self in Artesias cheeks, before pale with fear, being so much
ashamed y^ he had bin to privy to many of her actions, that she could not
tell with what countenance to behold him. Then Ornatus said, I beseech you
pity my sorment, which has urged me to this boldness, being frustrated of
other means to enjoy your presence: my meaning being no other then virtuous,
but resting at your merciful disposition. Desiring you to put assured
confidence in me, for preventing Floretu^ intent, which you had not doubt of,
for to my grief I know it to be so true.

Artesia marvelled exceedingly at the strangeness of these news, but most of
all admired Ornatus love, which she could not tell how to reject, for that she
both well knew, he deserved love, and the necessity of time was such, that
her safety rested in his secrecy: yet being not willing at that instant to
yield without further assault, said: I know not by what name to call you, when
neither I know whether you are Syluian or Ornatus, but which of both, your
words bear great show of true friendship, which I fear me is not grounded in
your heart, neither do I greatly care: for since my uncle seeks my life, let
him take it, for I am weary thereof.

Let not your gentle heart (quoth Ornatus) make any doubt that I am Ornatus,
though my counterfeit disguise does show me other, but either vouchsafe me
love, or give me leave to dis for Artesia, for that potion that should dispatch
you, shall end my life: for my life is bound to your command, and all my
felicity rests in your favor. Which unless you grant, my life without the
same will be but short, and the time I have to live, an endless labyrinth of
sorrow.

Adellena by occasion entered the garden, and found Artesia weeping, and
Syluian in a heavy dumps, ready to torment himself to see her sorrow, but
Artesia espying her, said: Adellena, do thou love Ornatus; so much, as that
thou would hazard life and credit to do him good? for that I know him to
be a most virtuous and honest Gentleman? I but would thou quoth she keep
my counsel if I reveal a secret of importance to you concerning Ornatus? And
upon Adelleanas promise, she said: do you know Ornatus if you see him? behold
there he is. Adellena was at the first half astonished at her speeches: but at
last she perfectly remembered that was he indeed: rejoicing most exceedingly to
see him there, especially with Artesia. Then they declared unto her all that
had happened, and of Floretus intent, desiring her to be secret, and make no
show of discontent, least he should suspect Syluian had bewrayed his secrets:
and after some other speeches past, they went in together.

CHAP. VIII. How Artesia departed to the Lodge with Syluian, and from thence
secretly departed to Adellenas house, and how Ornatus taken to be Syluian, was
by Floretus accusation, and Artesias want, banished.
IT fell so out the next day, that the King with diverse of his company, amongst
whom was his only son and heir Lenon, being wearied with travel, arrived at
Arbastus house, thinking to have found him there, but the King hearing of his
sudden death, was exceedingly sorry, persuading himself as all men else did,
that he was slain by some of Allinus house? which made him make small tariance
there, but departed to his Palace. Now it fortuned that Lenon beheld Artesias
beauty, and was with the first view thereof, exceedingly bewitched, that after
he was gone, he could by no means forget her? but determined ere long, to
return to see if he could attain her love. Now the time was come that
Floretus had appointed to set abroach his villainy, and (according as Ornatus
had before told Artesia) he came to her, persuading her for a season to lie in
the Country, which she as forearmed consented unto, and so the next morning,
she with Syluian, Floretus, and diverse others, departed: at night Floretus
returning, and leaving with her according as he had promised Syluian, and only
two servants that were to provide them necessaries, but knew no part of the
conspiracy. When Ornatus and Artesia were alone together, for that she was
undoubtedly assured of his love, faith and sidelitie, she used these
comfortable speeches to him. Ornatus, whereas always before this time too
unkindly I have reputed you as a (...), I now crave pardon, being sorry that my
h^a^t has done you so much wrong, which now I will requite with kindness. I
carresse it was strange to me to entertain love, but now I willingly yield my
self to be her subject, and your true and faithful friend: committing my life
to your custody, and my love and self to be yours to dispose of. Ornatus
hearing her speeches, was ravished with a heaven of joy, with a gentle and kind
behavior, foulding her in his arms, and imprinting a sweet kiss upon her
rosiate lips, he said. Never was poor wretch exalted to more happiness then
I am, by being enriched with this inestimable treasure of your love. O how rich
a reward have I now reapt for my cares, and what glory, joy or wealth, can be
compared to the riches of your love? O heavenly Artesia, how fortunate have you
made Ornatus? how have you blessed Ornatus? how full of joy is Ornatus, by your
sweet consent? was ever any so unworthy, so exalted, for his kindness and
love? I will perform more then my tongue can utter, and be more faithful then
your heart can wish. Then began they to embrace each other, and to surfeit
themselves in the sollaces, true love yields. He sometimes lending her a
kiss, and she with interest paying two for one: for one sweet look two, and
so many imbracings as are not to be explicated: their hands and hearts joined
in such firm bands of true affection, as is not to be dissolved: and
sur^etting with such exceeding content, as is impossible to be described. These
storms of love somewhat mittgated, they began to consult of their dangerous
estate, and to devise how to prevent the intended mischief. In this place they
continued some two days in exceeding content, still expecting to hear from
Floretus: who the third day fearing to trust any with a matter of such weight,
came himself to bring the potion, (yet in show of kindness to visit Artesia)
delivering the same to Syluian, willing her the next night to give it her,
which she promised him faithfully to accomplish.

When he was gone, Artesia came to Ornatus to know what news Floretus
brought, who told her all, and showed her the poison in a glass, which he had
charged should be given to her the next day. With that Artesia began to wayle
and exclaim against her Uncle, in most extreme sort. But Ornatus entreated
her to cease such vain grief, which could not hurt him, but her self,
promising her to prevent the same, if she would follow his counsel* which she
willingly yielded unto. Then quoth he, let us presently depart hence to
Adellenaes house, which you know is not far off, who you know is agreed with
us already, where I will leave you, and return. Which said, while the
servants were absent upon some special occasion, they departed with little
labor, arriving at Adellenas house, who was ready to receive them, and after
many farwels, Ornatus returned back to the Lodge. And when it was supper time,
the servants brought up meat, but Ornatus told them that Artesia was scarce
well, and therefore they would not sup that night. And being alone by himself,
he studied what excuse to make for Artesias absence, when Floretus should come,
spending that night in much care, and many unquiet cogitations, which took
away his sleep.

Floretus was no sooner returned from the Lodge, but he met Lenon, who of
purpose came to meet Artesia, whom Floretus kindly saluted: maruelling much
wherefore he came: to ease which doubt, Lenon said.

My friend Floretus, I come to visit the fair Artesia, to whose beawtie I am
inthralled, not as regarding her wealth, but her sweet love, of whom you
only have the government: therefore I pray befriend me so much, that I may
come to speech with her. Floretus was so ^xceedingly amazed to hear his
speeches, that he could not tell what answer to make, nor how to excuse her
absence. Lenon seeing him in such a study, continued his speeches, saying:
Floretus be not unwilling I should match with Artesia, for that shall no way
binder your preferment, who think peradventure the longer she lives
unmarried, the more wealth you shall get by her, but to rid you of that doubt,
be but a means to win her consent, and I vow by heaven, I will not take one
peniworth of Arbastus substance from you, but freely give it you all. For it is
not her possessions I regard, but her love, therefore I pray resolve me of your
mind herein.

My Lord replied he, your offer is so bountiful, besides my duty urging me,
I am ready to perform your will to the uttermost of my power. I thank you
good Floretus quoth Lenon, then I pray thee bring me to her, for my love is
impatient of delay. My Lord replied he, that can I not do instantly, for
Artesia some two days past, with the strange damsel Syluian, departed
thence, and are now at the Lodge: whither (if you please to to take such
entertainment as this place yields) we will both go to morrow morning.
Agreed quoth Lenon, I will accept your profer. When the time of rest was come,
Floretus being alone by himself, entered into these cogitations. What
inconveniences have thou run into Floretus? Thou have hired one to murder
Artesia, in hope to get her wealth, and made Syluian acquainted with thy
counsel, which wealth thou may now attain by preserving her life: and
besides, winning her to love Lenon, thou shall find him thy faithful friend
for ever. What were thou then best to do? if thou should murder her, he
would make inquiry of her death, and so thou be undone: If not, then will
Syluian be displeased, and so bewray thy drift: that the mischiefs thou by
folly have run into, are so intricate, that thou know not which way to
shun them. Were it not better to save her life, and win her Love for Lenon,
then to poison her, and so to die my self? If I save her life, Syluian will be
discontented: what of that? then let Syluian smart for it, for if she will not
be contented with that I shall do, she shall never live to bewray my
counsel. And therefore will I first try her, and finding any suspicion
thereof, I will stabbe her my self, whose death I may eastlier answer then
Artesias. Early the next morning, Lenon and he rode to the Lodge, where no
sooner arrived, but he met with Syluian, to whom he said: How now Syluian, I
have news of importance to bewray to thee, Lenon whom thou here beholdest, is
son to the King, who is deeply in love with Artesia, and has given me
assurance of all Arbastus livings, if I can win Artesia to match with him, now
I think it good to defer our purpose as concerning her death, until we have
made trial whether she will love him or no. Which if we can effect, we shall
be quit of so cruel a deed, enjoy her heritage, and have an assured friend of
Lenon whilst we live: therefore let me know your opinion herein. Syluian was
exceedingly amazed to hear his speeches, thinking that if he did tell him where
Artesia was, she should be wrested from his possession, and so himself
disappointed of her love: and on the other side, he thought what michiefe would
arise if he should say he had already given her the poison, yet his love
ouermaistring the fear of any danger, made him say, All this I like: but
Floretus, it is now too late, for I have caused Artesia to drink the poison you
delivered me, and she is dead, which was of such force, that all her body
purpled into blisters and swellings, which because I knew would bewray what we
had done, I took her body and conveyed it into a deep pit, where it is
impossible to be found. Floretus now fearing to have his treason bewrayed,
thought to stabbe Syluian; and so to be rid of them both, that in a monstrous
rage he drew his dagger, and unawares struck Syluian in the left arm, who
feeling the smart, with violenc^ more then Floretus expected, stepped to him, and
in spite of his vtermost strength, wroong the dagger out of his hands, and with
the same wounded him in three places, and had not Lenon stepped betwixt them,
Floretus had been slain. With that Lenon parting them, demanded what the
matter was: Floretus thinking rather to accuse, then be accused himself, and
terrified with affright, said that wicked woman has murdered Artesia.
Syluian made no answer until Lenon laid hold on her, demanding where Artesia
was, she answering, that by the intiseme^t of that wicked Floretus, I gave her
a drink that unknowing to me has poisoned her. O wicked creature said Lenon,
thou have condemned thy self to death. With that he began to draw his sword,
but Ornatus thinking it now no time to ^ally lest he might by them be
murdered, caught hold on Lenons sword, having such advantage, that he easily
wroong it from him, and said; Worthy Lenon be advised, do not thou s^eke to
spil my innocent blood, without further consideration, least for the same thou
loose thine own. Think thou I am as faulty and guilty as Floretus is? be
assured I am not. But if thou love Justice, late hands on that Traitor, for
he not I, is culpable of sheading her innocent blood. By this time Lenons
servants perceiving their contention, came running in with their swords
drawn, by their Lords commandment, apprehending Floretus, and a^terwards
saking by violence to take Syluian, but he standing in his own defense,
resiste^ them, alleging innocence, till Lenon vowed and protested if he were
not accessory thereto, he should have no other then justice, and that his cause
should be heard before the King. Ornatus thought it better to yields by fair
means, rather then by compulsion, and esteeming it less grief to be made a
prisoner, then to bewray where Artesia was, and so have her taken from him,
yields: both of them being conveyed to the Palace, and for that night
committed to several prisons. Floretus conscience so deeply accused him of
villainy, that he continued cursing and exclaiming against his hard fortune,
with bitter bannings raging against himself for trusting Syluian, seeming with
extreme fear of death, desperate.

Ornatus on the other side, took that trouble patiently, as endured for
Artesias sake fearing nothing, for that he knew himself innocent, and could
easily acquit himself of such accusation, purposing rather to hazard the
worst, then bewray what he was: which to conceal, was his greatest care. The
next day they were brought before the Prince, where Floretus upon Syluians
accusation confessed the truth, both concerning Artesia, and how he slew
Arbastus, for which he was adjudged to die within two days. And quoth he to
Syluian, for that thou art a stranger, and by his counsel rather then of thine
own inclination, were: drawn unwillingly to do that deed, I will pardon thy
life, but adiudge thee to be banished this Country: and quoth he, because I
fear that some will seek thy life, thou shall presently be conveyed hence.
Which doom shall stand irreuocable. Then gave he commandment, he should be
conveyed to the haven presently, committing her to the custody of certain
rude Moors. Who not staying to hear what answer she would make (whereof
poor Ornatus was not readily provided of, in that extremity) immediately
carried her away: to whom Ornatus would have told the truth of all, but he
spoke to them that understood him not, who with speed executing their
sovereigns command, rudely haled him aboard, and hoysing sail, never rested
until they arrived near the coast of Natolia, where they were commanded to
leave her.

CHAP. IX. Of the sorrow Artesia took for Ornatus banishment, and of the
several adventures befell. him in Natolia.
ARtesia remaining in Adellenas house, marvelled she heard not from Ornatus
according to his promise, which drove her into some doubt of his safety, that
coming to Adellena, she desired her to haste to the Lodge, to entreat him to
come to her, for that by her hearts misdoubt she suspected some heavy news.
Adellena immediately hasted thither, finding the servants in great sorrow, whom
she asked for Syluian. Ay me, quoth one of them, by this time she is past
speaking withal: for such heavy news is befallen since your departure, as
greueth me to utter, yet notwithstanding he told her all that was happened.

Adellena brooking no delay which in those affairs was dangerous, stood not
to immitate of those greefes, and how contrarily every thing fell out, but with
all haste returned to Artesia, who espying her coming, thought her countenance
bewraied some unwelcome accident; hastily enquiring how Ornatus did. Adellena
for want of breath could not speak a good space, but at the last she said.
Artesia, tedious lament is not now to be used, but speedy counsel how to save
Ornatus, for he is carried before the King, is accused by Floretus to have
murdered you, for coming to the Lodge with Lenon the Kings son, who
pretends great love to you, and not finding you, Ornatus told Floretus he
had given you the poison, whereupon Floretus would have slain him, but Ornatus
taking his dagger from him, had done the like to him, had not Lenon stepped
betwixt them. Then Floretus accused him for your death, and he Floretus: and
both were yesterday carried before the King.

Ahlas poor Ornatus, said Artesia, what misery is befallen thee for my sake?
how art thou rewarded for preserving my life? Good Adellena, counsel me what
is to be done: Ornatus being amongst them a reputed stranger, having no friend
to plead for him, and peradventure ouerswayed by Floretus persurie, may have
his life indaungered, and the rather for that he is taken to be a Natolian.
Therefore Adellena, if thou love him or me, will save both his and my life,
and discharge him of that false accusation, run to the Court, and finding out
Lenon, tell him at my safety, and request him for my sake to pity poor
Syluian. Adellena according to her commandment, mounted a Horse, and with
great speed by that time it was night, attained the Court, and finding out
Lenon, uttered these speeches. Most worthy Lenon, vouchsafe to hear me
speak: The fair Artesia whom you suppose dead, is alive and in safety at my
house, who has sent me unto you in the behalf of Syluian, fearing some wrong
might be done to her, as inspected to be her death, when she only has
preserved her life.

Lenon was so amazed at her speeches, that he could not tell what to say, being
exceedingly grieved for Syluian, but at length told her what his Father had
done: which appalled her senses with deadly fear. Lenon, notwithstanding it
somewhat grieved him for Syluian, yet his heart was glad to hear of Artesias
safety, and therefore he determined to go with Adellena to visit her; which
likewise he performed, and entering where she was, making exceeding
lamentation, he said.

I beseech you grieve not fair Damsel for Syluian, for no harm is done to
her, only my father upon her own confession and Floretus accusation, has
banished her, to her own Country.

Artesia hearing his speeches, with very grief fell into a deadly trance,
both Lenon and Adellena having much a do to bring her life again. And being
conveyed to her bed, when her senses were come to their perfect use, and Lenon
standing by her, whose sigh^ was most grievous to her, she turned her head
from his sight, sheading such abundance of tears, that she bedrawed the
place where she lay. Lenon perceiving that she was displeased with his
presence, withdrew himself, giving Adellena this charge. Adellena, since
Artesia is in thy custody, I charge thee let her not depart hence, until thou
hear of me again, for if thou do, thou shall answer the same: but if
thou will stand my friend, and in my behalf entreat her favor, I will prove so
grateful a friend, as thou shall account thy labor well employed.

He was no sooner gone, but Artesia uttered these lamentations; Most accursed
wretch that I am, to be thus separated from my dear Love, whose courteous
mind is the fountain of all virtue: how unfortunate am I made by my fathers
death, and my Uncles cruelty, but especially by his loss, that is unjustly
banished into a strange Country, where he prooe true and loyal Gentleman,
never set foot? how unhappy was he made, when he first began his love?
but now most miserable, by seeking to preserve my life, has cast away his
own; and fearing to be disappointed of my love, has quite diss^uered himself
from my ^^ght, to hazard his person by sea and land. Is it possible that he
should ever return, being so far conveyed from his native soil, and left
to the mercies of strange people, that will be ready to destroy his guiltless
life. No I ^eare me, never shall I be so happy as behold him, and though I
do not, yet shall my love to him remain immovable. Therefore now will I
arm my self to endure all perilles, to live in care, and continual lament,
for want of beloved Ornatus, whose heart I know is replete with sorrow, and
peradventure misdoubteth my loyalty, having been so unkind to him before: and
knowing Lenons affection, may suppose his dignity might alter my constancy.
But sooner shall Ornatus hear of my death, then that I have altered my love,
or yielded his right to an other, were he the greatest Potentate in the world.

Which said, another flood of brinishe tears ouerflowed her eyes, and her
passage of speech was stopped by heart-pearcing sighings, which in confused
multitudes issued with her sweet breath, never ceasing her lamentes, but still
bewayling her true Loves absence, that it pierced Adellenaes heart with such
sorrow, that she wept as fast as Artesia, both being so much grieved, that
they seemed to strive how to exceed one another in laments. In which
sorrowful estate, Artesia remained so long, that she waxed extreme sick;
and grew to that extremity, that Adellena feared her death.

Lenon likewise being come to the Court, gat^e pardon of his Father for
Floretus death, but notwithstanding he remained in prison all the days of his
life. Lenon likewise hearing of Artesias sickness, refrained from visiting
her, only he would oftentimes repair to Adellenaes house, to enquire how
she did.

Ornatus being left in the Country of Natolia, took his misfortunes in such
heavy sort, that had not his hope to see Artesia again withheld him, he had
offered himself some outrage, for a season giving himself to forlorn and
careless desperation, neither regarding which way to provide for his safety,
nor otherwise respecting what danger he might run into in that strange
Country, for the Moors had landed him in a waste and desolate Coaste of the
Country.

Thus careless did he continue a whole night and a day, not so much as
seeing toode to preserve him from famine: but in the end, hunger constrained
him to seek succor, but when his stomach served him, he could find no
meat, that with the extremity thereof, calling to remembrance his estate, he
uttered these plaints.

Thus contrary is Nature to her subjects, sometimes hoysing them to the tappe
of all felicity, and then with violence tumbling them down headlong into the
depth of extreme misery.

Was ever more fortunate, and suddenly miserable then I am? Could ever any man
whatsoever, attain more heavenly felicity and happiness then I did, by being
possess of Artesia? and now again more accursed being thus far absented from
her: and banished my native soil into a strange Country, ready to be
famished or devoured by wild beasts, or that which is worst, never likely to
see Artesia again. How could any man contain himself from desperateness,
being so miserable as I am? How can I withholde my hands from murdering my
self, when by doing it, I should be rid out of a wretched life? What should
I do, which way should I go? Here I am in a desolate and unfrequented place,
where no humane creatures inhabit, but wild beasts, without food, without
weapons, in woman's apparel, and without hope of comfort. Shall I state here?
then shall I be famished: shall I leave this place and travel further? then I
go further from my beloved, and meeting with some ravenous beast, may be
devoured. Now being hungry I want food, and here is none, unless I will eat
the earth, leaves of trees, or roots of the grass. Well I will seek my
fortune, be it good or ill: and in this desperate mood he traveled on, and
by good fortune found a Tree laden with exceeding, pleasant, and goodly
fruit, with which he slenched his hunger: not far from which place, he
took up his nights lodging.

Early the next morning he arose, first filling his belly, and then his lap
with that pleasant fruit, the taste whereof, was like pleasant wine, that
being drunk in abundance, will make the head light: which made Ornatus heart
merry, that he traveled on space, but Fortune not contented with the misery
he had endured already, sent him in an other affliction: he entered into a
place like a Forest, beset with Trees of huge proportion, scattered here and
there, where he met with a wild and fierce Boore, that haunted those Deserts,
who espying Ornatus, with a terrible groyning bristled himself coming
toward him, Ornatus being now driven to his uttermost shifts, began to
run with all his force from the beast, but he making the more speed had
almost overtaken him, when one of the Apples Ornatus carried about him fell
down, and the Boore espying the same, staled his haste to take it up, whereby
Ornatus had gotten some little ground of him, and seeing him so much affect the
fruit, cast down another Apple after which the Boore run, with greediness
devouring the same. Ornatus was glad of this poor shifte, and still cast down
one Apple and then another, that in the end he had almost thrown away all,
and notwithstanding that, feared to be destroyed, but the Boore feeling his
belly full, and his hunger stauncht, left off his egar pursuit and followed him
more cearelesly, whom he still fed with Apples, so long as his store lasted,
that in the end the Boore being drunk with the pleasant fruit, began to
reele and stagger, and lying down fast a sleep, which Ornatus seeing, having
no other then a knife about him, with the same approached the Boore, and
without fear, violently thrust the same so deep into the Boores briffled
side, that it pierced his heart, and he after some struggling died.

Ornatus then held up his hands to heaven for joy, exceedingly applauding this
his fortunate and unexpected escape; which he took as a fortunate presage of
good success. But yet before he could determine what to do, Fortune once
again showed her mutabilitie, for when Ornatus had parted the Boores head from
his huge body, and with the same was ready to depart, there past by as it
seemed, a knight gallantly mounted, in green armor, who espying a woman bearing
the Boores head, drew toward her, and said: Woman where had thou that Boores
head? I pray thee deliver it me. Ornatus made this answer. Sir I need not do
either, unless I know more cause then as yet I do. The Knight hearing that
short answer, alighted, and said: I will show no other reason but that I
will have it: with that he began to strive for the same, but Ornatus having
more mind to his sword then to keep the Boores head, suddenly caught hold on
the Natalians sword, and drew the same out, which when he had gotten, he said:
Disloyal and discourteous Knight, now will I keep the Boores head in despite
of thee, with that he thrust at him, and contrary to his thought, wounded him
so deep that he le^t him for dead, wishing that he had not done that deed, but
not knowing how discurteously he would have used him, let pass all further
remorse, and casting off his woman's apparel, put on the Knights apparel and
Armor, mounted the steed, and with the Boores head, roads back the same way
he saw the Knight come, and within a little space, found a beaten way that
conducted him to a goodly Town, whose Turret tops he saw long before he
came to the same: then began he to study what to do, sometimes thinking it
best not to enter into the Town, from whence it is likely the Knight he slew
came, and so he being taken for him might be known, and so afterward
indaungered for his death. For peradventure the Knight might be of good
estimation, and of purpose sent to slay the Boore, and if it should be known
that he had slain him, his friends would for the same, and the rather for that
he was a stranger, prosecute sharp revenge against him. Whilst he was in
these meditations, he came near the Town, not fully resolved what to do,
where he was soon espied of some of the people, who seeing the Boores head,
came running toward him making exceeding joy: which when he saw, he thought it
too late to turn back, but that he must go on and hazard the worst: and being
entered the Town, a number of the Inhabitants flocked about him, some with
garlands, some with praises, and all with joy, uttering these speeches. Welcome
home most brave Alprinus.

Ornatus then perfectly knew that the Knights name was Alprinus, and went of
purpose to ^lea the Boore, whom they took him to be, and that he must of
necessity be known? which drove him into exceeding care what excuse to make,
to avoid the danger of death. Then presently he beheld a troop of bewtifull
Damsels, with the sowndes of sweet Music coming toward him, (amongst
whom, one as chief and more bewtifull then the rest, was crowned with a
wreathe of flowers, bearing another in her hand) who all at once applauded his
victory, dancing before him, until he came into the midst of the Town
where satte the chief Magistrates, where the Damsel that was crowned, thus
spoke to him.

Sir Alprinus, your conquest has released these Inhabitants of care, extolled
thy fame, preserved thy life, and won me for thy Love. You have well
performed the talk you undertook, and according to your desert, I come to
Crown you with these flowers, and to yield my self as yours for ever.

Ornatus hearing her speeches, thought to try the end of this adventure, which
could be no worse then death, which of force he must now hazard, alighted,
laying down the Boores head upon a Table that stood before the Ancients, with
humble and comely behavior kissing the Damoselles hand, who set the wreathe
of Flowers upon his head, and taking him by the hand, brought him before the
Ancients, one of whom stood up and said? Worthy Gentleman, whereas before
thou were by us adjudged to die as worthy thereof, for this thy valiant deed,
we freely pardon thee, and acquit thee from all trespasses that thou host
committed against any whomsoever until this present hour.

And taking the Damsel by the hand said, Lucida, according to thy desire,
and his desert, I yield thee up to be his wife. And Gentleman quoth he, take
her as thine own, as freely as she was by birth adopted mine: and after my
death, be thou inheritour of my land.

To all this Ornetus gave a reverent consent, and the night now approaching, he
with Lucida went to her fathers house, where was a great feast provided, from
which Ornatus excused himself in this sort. When he was entered the house,
being still Armed, only lifting up his Beuer, he took Lucida by the hand, and
withdrawing her aside, said.

Lucida, I now find your love to be infallible, and your constancy to
excel all women that I have known? and that Alprinus is so far indebted
unto you, as that he shall never (might he live a thousand years) be able
to recompense this inestimable favor of your love, which has preserved my
unworthy life from destruction.

But notwithstanding your Love Alprinus, his debt is so great as can no way be
gratified, I request one further favor at your hands, whereon my cheifest
felicity depends, yea my life, your love, and perpetual good, which I fear
to utter, lest you should misconceiue the same, there being n^ other thing to
hinder the content Alprinus seeks, but only your favorable consent, so
banish all mistrust of my faith.

Lucida marvelled at his speeches, indeed loving him so well, that she would
have spilt her own blood for his sake, saying: Alprinus, what need you make
doubt of my consent to any thing whatsoever it be for your sake? know you not
how faithful I have continued, though you slew my only brother? and that I
esteemed your love far dearer then his life, and when you should have died
for that deed, obtained this at my fathers and the rest of the ancients
hands, that slaying the Boore that destroyed many people, you should save your
own life, and win me as your Love. And notwithstanding all this, do you
make a question whether I will yield consent to any thing that shall be for
your good? O Alprinus, if your love were so constant as mine, if you intended
to continue my love for ever, if your heart felt so deep a sting of love as
mine, you would not make such a doubt of my loyalty, of my truth true love and
constancy. For you know whatsoever you should ask, I will grant: whatsoever
you should request, I will perform: and wherein soever a Lover may show
infallible tokenes of her truth, I will do as much as any: but since you will
not believe me without an oathe, I swear by my love, my unspotted virginity,
and by all the good I wish my heart, I will consent, agree, perform, or do
any thing: not be offended with any thing, be the news never so unwelcome, so
it be for Alprinus good: nor leave any thing unperformed you shall require.

Ornatus hearing with what constancy her speeches proceeded from her, and how
grievously she conceived it, that any doubt should be made of her loyalty,
thought most certainly that he might put his life into her hands, and
therefore having already studied a device, said, It ill agrees with my nature
to dissemble: and hardly could I have been drawn thereto, but that desire to
preserve love, drew me thereto for know most worthy Lucida, that I am not
Alprinus, but one that for his sake, has undertaken this: The truth whereof,
if you will hear with patience, I will declare.

Yesterday, I travailed through the Forest, or desert, where I met Alprinus,
sore wounded, and flying from the Boore that pursued him with celeritie: which
when I beheld, to rescue him from death, I set upon the Boore, and by good
fortune slew him: which when he beheld, he declared to me the cause of his
coming: which when I heard, pitying his estate, I bid him take the boores
head, and withal, help him to mount his steed, but his wounds would not
suffer him to ride, that I was in some fear of his life. When presently we
beheld an ancient Hermitte coming toward us, who lived in a Cave in those
w^^ds, who undertook to cure his wounds, being glad of the Boores death. To
whose Cell I conveyed Alprinus: At whose request, I have performed this which
you see, and have undertaken to hazard my life, to discharge him of death, and
to win the assured possession of your love.

Now I most humbly entreat you for his sake, to conceal what I am, that I be
not known: and so both disappoint your self of his love, and him of safety.
Only devise a means to excuse me from this feast: which I trust you will do
for Alprinus sake, and then we may have time to study for your further
content.

Lucidas love, made her believe that all he said was true, and therefore
said: Sir, I trust there is no cause why I should mistrust you: and therefore
relying upon the truth of that which you have sad; I will tell my father you
are wounded, and desire rather to go to your Chamber, then to the feast, who I
know will deny me nothing. This said, she went to her father, and so
prevailed with him, that he was contented she should have the tending of him:
whom she took to a chamber, suffering none to come at him, but her maid,
whom she trusted: and well might trust for her fidelity. A^terwardes Lucida
came to Ornatus, to determine how she might come to see Alprinus, being most
careful of his health: and amongst many other speeches, they concluded, that
Ornatus the next morning should depart toward the Forest to Alprinus, and
that she by some means would come thither the next day after, if he would
meet her, to give her directions where to find him, which he promised to
do. According to this agreement, Ornatus very early the next morning, armed
himself, and as Lucida had instructed him, took his leave of his father, who
little suspected he had been any other then Alprinus, gave his consent, and so
Ornatus in Alprinus armor again departed the Town, being glad that he was
escaped from death, which he was sure to have ind^red, if it had bin any ways
known that he had slain Alprinus.

And being now alone by himself, having she wide world to travel into (...)
never a friend to go too, void of fear, but not o^ care: he (...) whither to
direct his journey: sometimes his conscience accu^^^g him of too much disloyal
dealing toward Lucida, in betraying her virtues by his dissimulation, in
tell^^^ her Alprinus was living, when he knew it to the co^^^ry.

Then he contrarily, thought it was lawful for him to dissemble with her, to
save his own life, and though he had slain Alprinus, he did it but in defense
of his honor.

Amongst at these, this cogitation seemed most to acquit him o^ dishonor,
that fortune and the destenies had by that means ordained him to escape.
Whilst he rode on in these deep meditations, he met with an ancient hermit,
who coming toward him said: Discurteous gentleman, how cammest thou by that
armor? and yet I need not ask thee, for I know thou slewest the worthy
gentleman Alprinus, which I beheld to my grief. Father (quoth Ornatus) if thou
did behold the same, thou can witness I did it against my will, and in
mine own defense: for whose death I am so sorry as thy self, and would as
willingly have done any thing to preserve the same as any man living.

Will you then (said the Hermit) do this for him, vouchsafe to come and
speak with him, who is in reasonable good estate in my Cell?

I would to God (said Ornatus) thy words were true: for if he be living, it
will revive my heart with joy, that is almost vanquished with care: desiring
nothing more then to see him. He is living said the Hermit, and if you will
go, I will bring you to him presently.

Ornatus being come to the Cell, accordingly found Alprinus very weak, by
reason of his green^us wound, to whom Ornatus declared all that happened
between him and Lucida: which added no little comfort to Alprinus heart, that
he thought himself of sufficient strength to go and meet with her: and
therefore told Ornatus he would go and meet with her, and withal yielded him
so many thanks, as if by his means, his life had bin preserved.

In the mean time they continued in the (...) Hermittes Cave, Alprinus in
great comfort, and Ornatus in no less care, for the absence of his dear
Artesia, breaking forth many a scalding sighe, and uttering many a sad and
mournful lamentation: sometimes utterly dispairing of attaining her love, and
then again by remembering her virtues, growing into some better confidence of
her constancy. Yet most of all, fearing that Lenons love to her, might either
by persuasion of his death, force, affect of dignity, or other means, win
her to consent to him, especially for that she had no parente^ to govern
her, nor he never a faithful friend to counsel her.

The next day Alprinus and he went out to meet Lucida, whom they met at the
entrance into the Forest, and after many kind salutations past betwixt the
two lovers, they altogether went back into the Town, to Lucidaes Fathers
house, who that morning was departed to a Haven, about business of importance.

Ornatus was most kindly used of them, remaining there until Alprinus had
wedded Lucida: but then he thought it high time for him to depart: And on a
time finding Alprinus alone, who had shown sufficient tokens of his
friendship, he declared unto him, the whole truth of his forepassed love to
^rtesia, requesting his help, for his passage into Phrygia.

Alprinus with great regard, attended the whole discourse, promising his
uttermost assistance: which (quoth he) none can effect so well as Lucida,
whose father is a merchant, and sends for ships into sundry Provinces, who
only may pleasure you: which charge I will undertake, and cause her to deal
so ^ffectually with him, that you shall attain your desire. Ornatus continued
in good hope, somewhat abandoning his former despair, whom for a time we will
leave, attending the time that some of the ships should depart, to speak of
Artesia his careful Lover.

CHAP. X. How Lenon caused Artesia by violence to be carried from Adellenaes
house, to the green Fortress: of the miseries she endured there. How she was
rescued from thence by Allinus, and from him taken by Pirates. And how Allinus
accused by Lenon for her death, was imprisoned.
AFter that Artesia by Adellenaes careful te^^ance had somewhat recovered her
health, Lenon began to visit her again, being unable to endure the heavy
burden of burning love: thinking her sickness had proceeded from fear of
Floretus, not for want of Ornatus company, finding an occasion, saluted her in
this sort. Most fairest Artesia, my heart is so firmly inthralled to your
beauty, and my affection^ so admire your virtues, that I am constrained to
utter my mind, and to tell you, I love your Beauty, Virtues, and other most
rare perfections wherewith you are adorned. That I humbly sue to you for
favor, and prostrate my self your thrall, desiring to be enriched with those
Jewels of inestimable price: which having once attained, I shall think I had
more wealth in my possession, the^ all the world besides my self, does
contain. Your unkind uncles cruelty, you need not fear, nor other
misfortune: neither have you any parents to ouerrule you in making your choice:
then vouchsafe to accept my suit, and yield consent to my love.

My Lord (replied Artesia) I thank you for your good will, but I know not how
to accept of your love, being yet so far from knowing what it is, that if I
should but dream thereof, my heart would be out of quiet: besides, many cares
continually attend the same, and my mean estate so far unworthy thereof,
with innumerable other discontents and cares that I would make my self subject
unto: that I had rather a thousand times remain in the estate I am now in.
Therefore, I entreat you to settle your love elsewhere, more agreeable to your
estate and fancy: for I shall think my self most fortunate, if I never fall
into that labyrinth of disquiets: but will during my life, labor to keep my
self free from loves bands. Lenon would not take this for an answer: but with
many other speeches continued his suit, whom Artesia still put out of hope:
that he departed for that time exceedingly disconte^ted, leaving her no less
disquieted in her thoughts how to avoid his love.

In this sort did he daily visit her, still growing more importunate, amongst
many other, this conference past betwixt them: Artesia (quoth he) how long
shall I sue, and be frustrated in my hopes, by your unkindness? is your heart
hardened against me? Or am I of so base conditions, that you cannot conceive
well of me? Or is it possible you bear so hateful a conceit of love as you
make show for? then may I accuse mine eyes, that have betrayed my senses, in
making them your thrall: then may I think my woe began, when I first began to
love. O Artesia be not so cruel, as to punish me with this disdain.

My Lord (replied she) I seek not your disquiet: for at the first motion I
told you my mind, which shall never alter, neither is my heart hardened
against you more then others: for I am determined not to love: then seeing you
see my intent, it were a point of wisdom in you to shake off this fond and
foolish love, which is but a toy, and an idle fancy, that is bred by vanity:
and do not seek to make love grow without a root, for in my heart it shall
never take root: but rather when it is rooted, I will pull out heart and all,
but I will ^oote it out. Then (quoth be) you are led by obstinacy and not by
reason, for that you are subject to love, you cannot deny: then why not me
before another, considering my love is more faithful then any other? And I
being most worthy, why should I not be first accepted? Artesia was weary of
his speeches, having her constant thoughts only bent on Ornatus: therefore to
rid him from her, she said; It is in vain to use many words, neither am I like
to those that will at the first seem ^oye, but afterward yield: but I desire
you to be satisfied with that which I have already said, that I cannot love.

Fair Damsel, how can I be satisfied with that unreasonable answer, when my
life depends on your consent: which your denial will finish: then give me
leave to say, I cannot be so satisfied: but being extremely refused, I must
grow perforce to be as unreasonable in my request. Consider you not what
dignity I might advance you too, by making you my wife, consider you not the
pleasures, joys, and abaundance of all contents you might enjoy with me, and
how faithfully I love you, and with what humility I seek your love, and yet
notwithstanding you remain obdurate? My power is great, that whereas I sue, I
might command, and by authority compel you to consent: then be not so
ouerconceited, as so obstinately to reject your good. And think, that if my
love were not constant, I might use extremes, which would soon alter your
mind.

Suppose (replied Artesia) I were so peevish as you term me, yet being borne
free, I am not to be made bond by constraint: and were you the greatest king in
the world, you could not rule the heart, though you might by injustice punish
the body: for it is not kingdoms, wealth, nor cruelty, can turn hatred to
love: but it may sooner turn love into hatred. But by your speeches I may
partly know your thought, and the lips utter what the heart intends: do
with me what you will, I cannot love: neither will I love you, were you
Monarche of all the world.

Leanon was so much grieved and vexed at her speeches, that he was ready to
tare his hair, his loves extremity making him rather mad then sober, that
presently he departed, saying no more but this: Farewell hard-harted Artesia.

She was glad he was gone, presently telling Adellena all that had past
betwixt them: and how peremptorily she had answered his importunate suit,
telling Adellena, that since Ornatus was for her sake bannished, she would
never love any but him, and preserve her life in hope to see him once again:
but the first knowledge of his death, should be the latest date of her life:
both she and Adellena thinking that Lenon would never return to prosecute his
love. But he being come to the Palace, betook himself to his chamber,
raging more like a mad man, then a passionate lover, sometimes swearing,
cursing, and stamping, yielding so much to that mad fancy, that in the end, he
vowed to obtain Artesiaes love, though he hazarded his life, honor, and good
name: that ranging in this sort, up and down his Chamber, he espied an old
Gentlewoman, named Flera, going by his window, whom he called unto him, and
thus said. Flera, because I have assured confidence in thy fidelity; and
purpose to reward thee liberally, I crave thy counsel, and with it thy
consent, to be faithful in concealing my secrets, and very diligent in doing
my command. The old hagge making an evil fashioned low courtesy, said: My
dear son Lenon, be it to do you good, I will hazard my life, and rather be
torn into a thousand pe^ces, then reveal what you shall vouchsafe to tell
me. Then (quoth he) counsel me which way I should begin to win a fair
Damsels love. Marry my Lord (quoth she) give her knowledge thereof: and then
with fair speeches woe her: i^ that will not prevail, give her gold, and
there is no doubt, that fair bayse will catch her.

No no (quoth he) these are of no force, I have made my love known to her, by
humble suits, submisse behauiours, and by all kind of courteous means,
entreated her consent: yet for all that, she remains obstinate: she is rich,
and therefore gold with her is of no force: she is fair, virtuous, noble, and
chaste: then what engine have thou to undermine that chastifie? Means enough
(quoth she) peradventure she is ruled by others counsel, which may prevail
more then your suit: but might I have access unto her, I would not doubt but
to alter her mind: for being fair, young and rich, she cannot choose but
delight to be praised: subject to love, and therefore yield to desire. Do
thou think (quoth he) thou could win her, were thou her keeper? I warrant
you, (quoth she) I would do it.

Then shall thou be her keeper, see that thou be to morrow at my fathers
Castle in the green forest, where to morrow by night this Damsel shall be,
whose name is Artesia, daughter to Arbastus lately dead: use her kindly, let
her want nothing: nor be not in any wise known that thou know me: nor that
the Castle belongs to my Father: nor speak not of love in any case: use her
in this sort until I speak with thee, for thou only shall have her custody.
Flera being gone about her business, be found out two of his trustiest
servants: to whom he imparted both his mind and intent: willing them the next
morning with speed to go to Adellenaes house, and either by force or fair
means to take Artesia from thence, and carry her unto the green ^ortresse in
the green Forest, where they should find Flera, ^o to whose custody they
should commit Artesia: and themselves should remain there to provide all
things necessary until his coming.

Early the next morning, the servants rode to Adellenas house, whereinto they
boldly entered, and coming to Artesia, first spoke her fair, but afterward
told her she must go with them, i^ not willingly, by constraint. Artesia
then began to bu^st into tears, weeping and lamenting exceedingly, upon her
knees entreating them, not to offer by violence to carry her from thence, but
if they would needs, that they would take Adellena with them: but all was in
vain, for they constrained her to mount up beehinde one of them, and away they
rode in great haste: this heavy parting was so sudden, that Artesia could
not a bid Adellena adue, but with tears, nor Adellena speak a word for
grief, their senses being so far confounded with care, that their hearts were
ready to burst therewith. Artesia thought this was Lenons doing, and
therefore sorrowed the more: not that he used her unkindly, but that he loved
her, not fearing his cruelty, but his lust: not regarding what cruelty he
could use by hatred, but fearing his love would make him seek her dishonor.
Being come to the Fortress, and committed to the custody of Flera, the old
woman began to speak her fair, and use her kindly, yet her very words and
countenance bewraying her guilty conscience, to whom Artesia would not
speak a word, least thereby she should give her occasion to prate: meat she
brought unto her, but she refused to taste thereof, and when she came to her
Chamber, she lay on the rushes, refusing the bed, tormenting her heart with
care, vexing her head with thought, and busying her senses, or meditating to
what issue this usage would sort, sometimes calling on Ornatus name for
comfort, sometimes accusing Lenon of barbarous cruelty, and cursing her
crooked destenies: uttering such plaints as would have turned tyrants to ruth,
weeping her eyes dry, and her garments wet, tearing her h^ire, and tormenting
every one of her senses with vexation, refusing sleep, rest, ease, or quiet.

The next day Lenon came thither, asking Flera how she fa^ed, who told him
that she would not speak, eat nor sleep, but ^ared like one mad and
senseless. But let her alone quoth she, and you shall see this fit^e will
soon be over, the extremity whereof, being once past, I will use my skill to
try her.

Lenon giving order to have all things necessary provided, departed. Dinner
time being come, and meat set before Artesia, she refused to eat: likewise
supper time being come, she determined to do the like. Which Flera perceiving,
said: Fair gentlewoman, to behold your outward appearence, would make one
judge your mind harbored many hidden virtues, but I comparing your actions
with your apparent show, suppose that you are either mad or careless: this
behavior, to seem dumb, to refuse sustenaunce, and to refrain from sleep,
are instances of folly, not of wisdom. What if you speak, what if you did
eat, or take rest, should you be ever the worse? or refraining, can that do
you good, or banish grief, and not rather make your estate worse? do you
think to prevent any thing by doing your self harm? no fond Child, eat
thy meat, and preserve thy ^fie: for living thou may attain thy desires,
but dying thou art past hope. With that she departed smiling.

Artesia hearing her speeches, began to consider indeed what folly it was
to refuse her meat, and for fear to shorten her self by distemperating her
self, which might be the means to further Lenons intent, whom she knew
would seek her life, if he could not win her love, she presently left off
such desperate behavior, and with well wayed consideration, attended the
event of the worst misfortune, that from that time she both eat her meat,
and did all that she could to comfort her self, still living in good hope of
Ornatus return.

Some few days after, Lenon came to the Fortress again, enquiring of Flera
how Artesia fa^ed. Well quoth she, but you willed me to conceal that it was
your doing to bring her hither, and some body else has told her thereof,
for she knows the truth as well as your self or I, and therefore I would
wish you to visit her, and after that let me alone to persuade her.

Lenon was ruled by the old woman, and came where Artesia was saluting her,
but she disdaining either to look on him, or hear him speak, withdrewe her
self from his presence. Wherewith he departed, willing Flera to do that
which she had undertaken. And Flera finding her as she thought in a fit
mood, began to commune with her of many things, amongst which love was one.
Artesia a while heard her, but in the end, perceiving her drift; cut her off
with these speeches.

Old iniquity, I know whereto thy talk tends: think thou I will ever
harbor a thought of Lenon, that has used me thus dishonourably? no rather
will I rent my woeful heart from out my breast before his face: neither need
thou tell me that he has entreated thee to speak for him, for I know too
well both his and thy intent, which shall nothing prevail, but harden my heart
against him. Therefore do not speak to me, for I will not hear thee, nor
answer thee: but hate him, thee, and thy counsel, and remain so constant in
despising him, that a thousand deaths shall not alter me. Is it love that
has made him with violence carry me from my friends, make me a prisoner, and
commit me to the custody of such a hellishe hagge as thy self? If that be his
love, let him turn it to hatred, and never trouble me, but with hating me: for
in so doing, he shall better please me.

Often Flera would have replied, but Artesia would not suffer her, that she
began to w^xe angry, and in the end to plain fury, that running to
Artesia, she caught hold on her, and began to tear her garments from her
body, and withal, caught sometimes such firm hold on her pure fl^she with
her nails, that the blood followed: that Artesia began to cry and shrike for
fear, and smart.

When the old Beldame had executed some part of her intended revenge and
cruelty upon her in this sort, she said: Proud girl, think thou to bear
it away with out-facing me? No, do not think I will leave thee thus, but thou
shall repent that ever thou come here, and before I go, I will have my
^^inde of thee: then pulled she out a knife, and catching hold on her, swore,
that unless she would promise to use Lenon kindly, when he next came, she
would cut her throat: which drane Artesia into that fear, that she began to
entreat her and speak fair, promising to condescend to any thing that agreed
to her honor. Stand not upon those nice terms with me quoth Flera, but here
swear to yield to love him, for so thou may delay him, and frustrate his
hopeful expectation, whom thou art not worthy to touch, much less to bear
such a presuming mind as thou do, in scorn of his love. Therefore yield
to that which I request or stand to my mercy. Can thou bestow thy love
better then on so honorable a Prince? Can thou attain more dignity, reap
more content, or enjoy more quiet with any then with him? Then do not deny
me, for I purpose not to be denied.

Artesia trembling for fear, made this answer only to satisfy her, I am
contented to be ruled by Lenon, whose meaning I know is honorable. Therefore
I pray do not offer me this ou^rage, but suffer me to live in quiet until his
coming. If this will not satisfy you, then do the worst you can: for death is
more welcome to me then life in these extremities. Well quoth she, I will
try you, but if you dally, beware what will ensue, for I am resolved what to
do. Artesia was glad she had satisfied her, though it were with uttering
words which she never intended to perform.

Adellena seeing how suddenly Artesia was taken from her, caused one of her
servants privily to follow them to the green Fortress, who returning, told
her what he had seen. Then Adellena began to study how to release her from
thence, and with all haste rode to Allinus house, where being arrived, she
declared all that she knew as concerning Ornatus, and how Lenon had carried
Artesia by violence into the green Fortress. Allinus being glad to hear that
Ornatus was alive, promised to redeem Artesia from Lenons custody, and that
to effect, the next evening caused his men to mount themselves, and himself
with some fi^e of them, disguised from being known, came to the green
Fortress, and one of them knocking whilst the other hid themselves, the
servants little suspecting any such ambush or intent, opened the gate, when
presently they rushed in, and soon found out Artesia, whom Allinus told who
he was, and to what intent he came: Artesia was glad thereof, and willingly
yielded to go with him, but the old woman made such an outcrie, that all the
place rung thereof: one of Allinus servants seeing she would not be pacified,
drew his sword and thrust it through her body, and so with a yelling cry,
she gave up the ghoast. Then presently Allinus departed with her, intending to
carry her to his own house, to keep her there unknown, until he could hear
of Ornatus. And remembering that the two servants were fled, and would no doubt
certify Lenon what was done, would not go back the same way he came, though
the readiest* for then he thought he should meet them, but went a more
secret way, thinking by that means to pass unseen, and entering into the
plains where cattle fed, Allinus espied a company coming toward them, whom
he presently suspected to be Lenon, which in reason he could not think, but
that fear persuaded him thereto? the company likewise espying them (who were
certain Pirates that were wandered from their ships to steal cattle) wondered
what they should be that were so late abroad, and being ready to any
mischief, set upon Allinus and his company, who thinking it had been Lenon
would by no means yield, nor speak, fearing he should descrie them, but
resisted the Pirates, who being used to many such meetings, soon slew two of
Allinus servants and had given himself many grievous wounds, enforcing him to
yield. Who taking from him all that was good, constraining A^tesia to go with
them, and hasted to their ships, when having conveyed her aboard, to prevent
the worst, hoysed sail, and launched into the deep. Then was Allinus left in
most miserable estate, with all speed hasting to his house. Lenons servants
likewise were by that time it was mindnight gotten to the Palace, and called
their Lord out of his bed, to cer^ifie him what was happened, who presently
mounted himself, and with a sufficient company rode to the Fortress, and
entering, found Flera slain, and all else fled, then began he to muse who
should do that deed, and what they should be that had carried away Artesia: by
this time it was daylight, and Lenon rested in exceeding v^xation to be
dispossessed of his bew^ifull Love, yet he commanded his men to post by
companies several ways, if it were possible to find those that had done that
deed: whilst he himself remained there bewailing that misfor^une, his servants
had not rode far: but (by the light of the day, which discovers things done
in darkness) they found Allinus two servants, whose dead bodies they carried
back to the fortress. Lenon seeing them, presently assured himself that
Allinus was a party in this action, and that he had taken away Artesia to
seek her death To prevent wihch mischief (as he thought then or never to be
done) he presently rode home to the Court, and humbly upon his knee, entreated
his father to grant him license with a sufficient power to rescue Artesia from
Allinus, who intended to murder her, declaring how he himself found her in
Adellenas house, and how that he had placed her in the green Fortress, to
defend her from Allinus and others cruelty, being left fatherless: and how
that night Allinus had taken her from thence by treason, and intended no less
then her ruin. The king hearing his sons speeches granted his request. Then
presently diverse to the number of t^ree hundredth men, with as much speed as
could possibly be, armed themselves, and in haste with Lenon, went to Allinus
Castle, into which they violently and unawares to any within entered. Lenon
presently laid hands on Allinus, whom he ^ounde sore wounded asking him for
Artesia, who thinking some of his servants had before bewrayed what he had
done, presently confessed the truth of all, both of his intent and how Artesia
was rescued from him, but by whom he knew not, and how at that time two of
his servants were slain.

Lenon giving no credit to his speeches, never left till he had searched the
whole Castle throughout, but not finding her, accused Allinus that he had
murdered her, commanding his men to bind him, and carry him as a Traitor to
the Court. Who being come before the King, confessed the truth as before he had
done, utterly denying that he never sought Artesias death, but her safety:
but yet notwithstanding the King was so ouerruled by Lenons accusations and
persuasions, that he committed him to prison, his goods and lands were seized
upon as a Traitor, his Lady wife turned out of do^res in poor array, and al
cruelty and outrage committed against his servants and kin^folkes, and
commandment given, that none should succor them. Allinus being in prison
laden with yrons, and hardly used, yet endured that affliction patiently, but
hearing of his Ladies calamity* and how she was vaiustly constrained to beg
that all her li^e long had been tenderly brought up, thought those sorrows
would soon bring her to an end, and entered into many bitter lamentations
for her and his own misfortune which were too tedious to recite, his servants
were constrained to disguise themselves, and travel into farther places of the
Country to live unknown, otherwise none would have entertained them. His
Lady was compelled to seek out kinswomen of hers, that lived in the country,
of whom she was entertained, and there lived a poor life, far differing from
her former life, which she took most patiently. And thus was Allinus house
defaced, his goods and lands seized upon, himself imprisoned, his wife in poor
estate his servants driven to wander from place to place, ready often to
perish for want of succor and all his dignity turned to mise^ie, only by
Lenons malice: who had no ground for those accusations he used against him, but
only of a vain suppose, and mad frantic affection that ouerruled his heart,
which so much prevailed with him, that he sought by all means he could, his
death.

CHAP. XI. How Ornatus gatte shipping into Phrygia. How Allin^s was set al
liberty: and how the Pirates cast lottes who should possess Artesia.
ORnatus all this while remained in the country of Natolia, with Alprinus and
Lucida, in great grief, for want of means to depart into Phrygia, to see what
was become of his dear Love Artesia: but being a long time frustrated by
reason none of the ships that were at sea came home, he began to despair,
thinking that Artesia supposing him to be dead by reason of his long absence,
would now marry Lenon, which grief, and many other doubtful thoughts oppressed
his heart with such passion, that he began to wax sick, and afterward fell
into an exceeding fever, which held him for the space of three months in great
extremity, which surely had abridged his days: had he not been most
carefully nourisht by Lucida, who had an especial care of his good. During
which time of his sickness, certain ships of Phrygia arrived on the coast of
Natolia, some fourteen miles distant from the Town where Ornatus was, of
which he had intelligence by certain Factors belonging to Lucidas Father,
which news revived his spirits with joy, before drouping with care, that
within few days he recovered his former health, which greatly rejoiced
Alprinus and Lucida, whose hearts were linked unto him, in hands of inseperable
friendship: who likewise dealt so effectually for him, that they attained
warrant for his passage, and furnished him with all kind of necessaries, and
sufficient store of gold to bear his charges.

Lucida likewise entreating her father to agree with the Phrygian Merchants for
his conuoy, for that himself would not be known, disguising himself into the
habit of a Pilgrim, which kind of people, might without disturbance pass
unexamined, and without molestation. And the time of his departure being come,
he took his leave of Lucida. Who took his departure with such exceeding
sorrow, that the abundance of her flowing tears stopped the passage of her
speech. Alprinus likewise with many courtesies bad him farewell, and wished his
prosperous success. Thus departed he the confines of Natolia, where he was in
so short space so well beloved, and so kindly used, that had not his, love to
Artesia, and hope to find her in safety constrained him, he could have been
contented to have spent the term of his life in that place.

The Merchants of Phrygia had not sailed many days, but they arrived in a
haven some ten miles distant from the Court, whither Ornatus determined to
travel, and having taken his leave of the Mariners, and paid them their due,
furnished with all things fit for his disguise, he took his journey, and the
first night lodged at a village near adjoining to his fathers Castle, the
custom of which place he well knew before, and therefore framed his behavior
accordingly. And being set at supper amongst such gues^s as lodged in that
house with him, the Host named Mylo, suddenly fight, which one of them noting,
demanded what inward grief drove him thereto. Marry sir quoth he, if you have
not already heard the news, I will tell you so much as I know, which I would
I had never known. Within few^ days there dwelt an ancient Knight hereby
named Allinus, exceedingly well beloved of all men, who is lately fallen into
great misery, the occasion whereof was this, then did he declare the manner of
all that had happened unto Allinus, how Artesia was taken from him, but by whom
no man ^nows, himself in prison, his goods confiscated, and his wife and
servants turned out of doors, with command that none should succor them.

Ornatus heart was so pincht with this news, that he was ready to fall under
the Table, which old Mylo and the rest noted, perceiving such a change of
countenance in him, that they all denied him to be exceedingly sick: but he
fearing to discoue^ himself, told them it was but an ordinary course with
him, to be so troubled: but being unable to mittigate that passion, he rose
from the table, and gat to his chamber, where being alone, he began to meditate
the depth of these mischances, imputing the original thereof to proceed from
himself. That he entered into these bitter plaintes. My misfortunes are without
compare, and I more miserable then any wretch living: By my evil destenies,
Artesia was first left in misery, afterward imprisoned, and now surprised by
those that will intend her ruin, or dishonor. My father imprisoned, my mother
bannished: all his lands, livings, servants, and friends, taken from him, and
he subject to Lenons mercy, that is merciless, cruel, deceitful, and
malicious.

Only by my folly, are these mischances befallen. Can there then be any more
wretched then my self? has not my father cause to wish that he had never
begotten me, and my mother that she had never borne me? Has not Artesia
cause to accuse me, hate me, and forsake me? When for my sake, by my folly,
and want of wisdom, she is brought to so many miseries? What shall I do? or
what remedy shall I seek, when all things is past recure? Whom may I blame,
but my self? Is there any that is interressed in the cause of these woes, but
my self? Lenon, Lenon, as well as my self, has procured these evils: his
affection to Artesia, has caused my banishment, my parents woe, and her loss.
To travel in her search, and leave my father in prison, the one would be in
vain, when I know not whither she is conveyed, and the other dangerous to
his sa^etie, for Lenon no doubt of malice will seek his death.

In these and such like plain^s he spent most part of that night.

Early the next morning coming out of his Chamber, he heard a great tumult
in that Village: the occasion whereof, was this: Such as were Tenaunts and
friends to Allinus* hearing of his unjust imprisonment, and with what cruelty
Lenon sought his overthrow, assembled themselves together, with purpose to
entreat the King for his release: that in the end there was three hundred of
them assembled. The common people, and such as were idle persons, and ready to
any attempt, misconceiuing their intent, and bearing a mind desirous of
liberty, which they thought they were restrained from, by certain strickt
laws the King had made, gathered unto them, that contrary to their
expectation, there was a multitude: the intent of whose assembly, being
demanded, they answered, that they meant to redeem Allinus: amongst whom,
Ornatus in his disguise, thrust himself, using many forcible persuasions to
urge them forwards to that attempt. That they were ready to run confusedly
to the Court, not regarding danger, nor the displeasure of the King.

One of Allinus friends named Thrasus, standing up amongst the rest, craved
audience, to whom they all listened, whilst he said.

I perceive your intent is to release Allinus, wherein you shall show your
love to him, and do a deed a worthy to be eternized, for that he has not
at all deserved to have such injustice ministered unto him: therefore be wise in
this attempt, and first know against whom you bear arms: that is, against
your lawful King, who may punish this fact with death: for that we^ undertake
to break those laws which he has ordained.

But follow my counsel, and I will set you down a course, whereby you
shall attain your desire, and be void of any such danger, which is this.
First let us all repair to the Court, and humbly entreat the King for his
release, if he will not grant that, then that he would have his cause tried
by the rest of the Peers of the land; Which if he also deny, then may we
with good cause venture our lines in his rescue: The multitude hearing Trasus,
in sign of consent, all cried, Trasus, Trasus, shall be our Captain.

Then presently every one with such furniture as they had, hasted to the
Court, and coming together, would not seem to enter by force, but with a full
consent yielded to Thrasus directions. Who desired one of the guard to certify
his Majesty that there were a number of his subjects gathered together, with
no intent of evil, but only humbly to crave a boon at his highness hand.
The King being certified hereof, was much troubled in his mind what the thing
should be they would demand, and being persuaded by Lenon, would not
himself come out, but sent one of his Knights to demand what was there
request. Thrasus declared unto him the cause of their coming, and what they
demanded. Which when the King understood, being exceedingly enraged at their
boldness^, bad the knight make them this answer, that he was not by his
subjects to be controlled, and therefore denied to perform the least of their
demand: commanding them presently to depart every man to their several
place, least he punished their presumption with death. The messenger had not
scarce ended his words, but presently the unruly multitude began to rush in at
the Court gates, some carelessly ruinating whatsoever came next hand, some
breaking down windows, some assayling such as resisted them, and every one
bent to do mischief. The King fearing the peoples unruly rebellion, would
come to some greater mischief then cou^de suddeinly be prevented, and might
also indaunger his person, not knowing who had instigated them thereto, with
the Queen and Lenon fled. Which when Thrasus knew, calling to the multitude,
he willed them in any wise not to destroy the Kings house, not attempt any
thing more to displease his Majesty, for that the King was departed, and he
had Allinus at liberty. But notwithstanding some bent only to enrich
themselves, spoiled the Kings treasure, and utterly defaced the house: by which
time the night drew nigh, and every one began to withdr^w themselves. Allinus
seeing what exceeding mischief this attempt had bred, which was done contrary
to his thought, and without his consent, yet thought it best not to trust to
the Kings mercy, though he were never so innocent, for notwithstanding that
he would suppose it was done by his procurement, therefore (after Thrasus had
willed the unruly multitude to depart as secretly as they could, every one to
his house, to prevent further danger and save their lives, by keeping
themselves unknown) he and Thrasus that night, without delay disguised
themselves, and fled toward the coast to get shipping for Armenia, whither
they intended to travel.

Ornatus was by and beheld all this, glad of his fathers escape, not purposing
at all to discover himself, until he had found Artesia, in whose search he
meant presently to travel: but such confused thoughts, whither to direct his
steps, did so ouerwhelme his conceits, that he rested like one metamorphosed,
not knowing whether he would ^eeke her by sea or by land. By sea he thought his
labors would be in vain, and if he should go to find her by land, he knew
not whether she might be at sea, and so conveyed into foreign Countries. At
last remembering he had heard Mylo say she was rescued from Allinus in the
desert where his Cattle fed, he determined to travel thither, though he had
little hope to find her there. And being come thither, sometimes bewayling her
absence, accusing his hard fortune, breathing forth bitter ^ighs in
remembrance of her loss, and renewing the remembrance of their love, be spent
some three days in that place, uttering those plaintes to the trees and
birds, for otherwise there was none to hear him. Where for a while we will
leave him.

The Pirates having as is before said, taken Artesia from Allinus, and with
her such wealth as they could find about them, having withal furnished
themselves with the spoil of such Cattle as fed in those places, returned to
their Ship, and with haste hoy^ed fail, the night being now past. One that
was chief amongst the rest, named Luprates, went down to view Artesia,
having as yet not seen her beawtie by reason of the night, and now coming
near her, and beholding her divine form, his mind was presently ravished with
that sight, and he thought that none but himself should enjoy her, which took
such efficacy, that whereas before he intended nothing but her dishonor, his
mind was now altered, and he intended to use her in most reverent and decent
sort, and not by cruelty, but curtes^^, to win her love. But beholding her
tears, and exceeding lamentation, and how impatiently she endured the
extremities she was driven unto, coming toward her with a most submisse
gesture, friendly countenaance, and gentle speech, he said. Fair Lady, be
not any thing disquieted that you are made captive to such as delight in
spoil, for though our minds are otherwise bent to all inciuilitie, yet to
your self shall no wrong be offered, such virtue has beauty imprinted in my
heart, and whereas heretofore without mercy, both I and the rest of my
consorts have not regarded the plaints, distress, nor what wrong we have
offered either to Lady or damsel, yet toward your self is my heart altered,
and my meaning honestly bent: that I assure you not only of quiet, and to be
void of all wrong by us to be done, but also, wherein soever I may work your
will, quiet, ease, or desire, I will most willingly employ my uttermost
endeavors. Then I beseech you mittigate these cares, bannish this sorrow, and
dry up your tears: for you have no cause of care, nor occasion of sorrow: but
rather to say, this virtue rests ^^me, to alter rude and barbarous minds, to
civil and virtuous behauior. Artesia looking earnestly upon him, being endued
with an exceeding wit, and thinking it best to speak him fair that used her so
kindly, said. Sir, I know not how to mitigate my grief, when it increases: or
how can I be void of care, unless I should grow altogether careless, being
only subject to woe, and none so unfortunate as my self, having endured so
many afflictions and crosses in all respects, that I know not how to assure my
self of the least quiet? Then give me leave to continue my endless plaints,
and do not blame me of impatiencie, nor think I suspect your speeches, or
distrust your fidelity, if in some sort I continue my sorrows: for I have so
long continued in them, as I can better away with the^ then mirth: for that to
me is a stranger. Yet notwithstanding my heart will harbor some quiet, if by
your courtesy I may rest in security, and be sheltred from wrong. By this
time they were arrived at their place of harbor, which was betwixt the hollow
of two Rocks, or rather Rockie Islands, where their ship lay safe from weather,
and so far under their shadow, that it could not be seen. Themselves
conueying such wealth as they from time to time got into hollow Caves, of great
largeness, where was al things necessary; and the rest of Luprates fellows
called him up. When having fastened their ship, Luprates brought Artesia into
the Cave, who beholding the same, was surprised with an exceeding discomfort,
of ever getting from thence.

Some of the ruder sort liking Artesia, began their rude behavior toward her,
but Lupratus stepping unto them, uttered these speeches. My masters, thus long
have I lived your Captain in this place, with care respecting your good as
much as mine own, and taking but an equal share with you, of such prizes as
we have taken, and rather the least part, now only in respect of my faith and
fidelity, I request to have this Damsel as my prize, the rest of the wealth
take you. In doing which, you shall bind me unto you for ever. One of the
rest liking Artesiaes beauty as well as he, and of a more rude mind,
disdaining that he alone should have her possession, said. Captain, all which
you say we confess to be true: neither has our care bin any way less the^
yours: therefore, there is no reason why you should claim any peculier
privilege above any of us: besides, you know we made a law, and bound our
selves to perform the same by oath, which was, that none should possess any
thing without the general consent of us all. Then perform those conditions,
and let her belong to us all, or to the chiefest of us, and in so doing,
neither of us shall sustain wrong: thus began they to contend about Artesia,
every one desirous to possess her, and yet neither willing any should have her
but himself, that they were likely to mu^inie and fall out, till at the last
they concluded to cast lots and she fell to Luprates share, that was the most
worthy of that privilege, for that he bare the most virtuous mind. Thus for a
time this strife was ended, and Artesia was by Luprates kindly used for many
days: in the end their victuals began to waste, and they thought it high time
to seek for more, y^ they determined to fetch in some as before they had done.
But then began Luprates to take care in whose custody to lea^^ Artesia, least
in his absence they should do her wrong. Amongst the rest he chose out one
whom he thought fittest, and to him he committed her, by whose means Artesia
rested void of disturbance, though not void of exceeding care that continually
torment^d her, fearing never to see Ornatus again, nor to be released from
that place of bondage.

CHAP. XII. How Ornatus found Artesia, and preserved her life: and how she was
again taken from him by Lenon, and what afterward befell.
LVprates and the rest, being landed, came in the night into the plains to
steal Cattle, and by chance lighted on the place where Ornatus haunted,
being directed to him by the sound of his lamentations: Luprates demanded what
he was, I am (quoth he) a most miserable forlorn creature, by misfortune
drawn to all extremity. Then quoth he, art thou not for our company: and
with that they departed, leaving him ther^. Ornatus heart began presently to
misdoubt that they were the very same that had taken Artesia from Allinus
which made him presently study how to have them apprehended: remembering that
he had heard many complain that their cattle were often stolen, he supposed
verily them to be the thieves, that with all the haste he could, he ran to
the next village and raised the Townes-men, telling them what he had seen, who
presently issued out, and with such weapons as came next to hand followed the
Pirates, and soon found them, setting upon them, took two of them, and the
rest, some sore wounded and hurt, fled to their Ship, and with all the haste
they could get to their harbor.

Early the next morning, the inhabitants conveyed the Pirates to the Court, who
being come before the King, confessed the manner of their life, and where they
lived. Then Lenon presently supposed, that they were the very same that had
taken Artesia from Allinus, and demanding the same of them, they told him
that there was such a Damsel in their Cave, and that she told them her name
was Artesia. Then Lenon without delay strongly accompanied, rode to the next
Haven, and there gat shipping by the Pirates directions, to find out their
fort. Ornatus likewise, after he had raised the people, secretly followed the
Pirates unto the place, where their ship lay, and amongst the rest entered the
same: who by reason of their haste and exceeding fear, regarded him not, who
thrust himself into that danger, only to see it Artesia were in their
custody, not reking how his life might be endangered thereby, but the Pirates
by Luprates directions hasted to the fort, and from thence took Artesia into
their ship, not daring to stay there, for that they knew some of their
fellows were taken, who might by compulsion be constrained to reueal^ the
place of their abode.

Ornatus no sooner espied Artesia, but he knew her, and his heart leapt within
him for joy to see that happy sight, but he durst not speak to her, nor
scarce settle his eyes to behode her, for fear of suspect, for that Luprates
meruailed how he came amongst them: demanding what he was, and what he made
thrre? I am (quoth he) a poor Pilgrim, that against my will was by some of
this company constrained to come aboard.

Luprates believing he said true, made no farther question, but with have
sailed from Phrygia, conueying A^tesia into his Cabin, using many speeches to
comfort her.

They had not sailed many hours, but a contrary wind began to arise, and
the Heavens were darkened with thick Clouds, and such a mighty tempest
arose, that the ship was by violence driven back, their maine Maste broken
and thrown ouerboorde, and all in danger of destruction, had not the land
been near, for the ship driven by violence of the Sea, ran a ground, and
there splitte in sunder, and the Pirates with great hazard escaped drowning:
none of them nor Luprates once regarding Artesia, but Ornatus seeing in what
peril she was, caught hold on her, and getting on to a planke, being withal
somewhat skillful to swim, with much adoo ga^e on to the firm land, and
preserved her from a miserable death by drowning.

He was no sooner past danger, but Luprates would have taken her from him, but
Ornatus seeing none but himself there, and all the rest fled for fear, told
him since he had forsaken her in extremity, he was not worthy of her, and
therefore should not have her. Villain (quoth Luprates) yield her me with
quiet, or else thy life shall not deteine her. With that Ornatus caught hold
on a board which he cleft in sunder with his foot, and with the same gave
Luprates so sudden and deadly a wound, that the brains fell about the
place, and he died. By this time the storm was quite ouerpast, and Ornatus
seeing his dear Love very weak with fear and distemperature, by the arm
led her unto a mossie bank, where the Suns bright beams had full force to
dry her garments dropping with wet.

Artesia seeing how tenderly this stranger regarded her, and with what pain
he had preserved her, when she was of all but him forsaken, being willing to
show that she was grateful, said* Sir the pains you have taken, and
friendship you have shown to me, deserve more thanks and recompense then I am
able to give: and therefore I desire you so think, that if I were able I would
requite the same: but my mis^ortunes are so exceeding, that they withholde me
from doing that I would: only thanks is the small requital I can yield in
token of a grateful mind: being by your means at more quiet then many days
I have been, though more disquietted then you would judge: but now I rely upon
your virtues, with hope thereby to be preserved, and not driven to further
misery.

Fair Lady, (quoth Ornatus) my life shall be spent in your defense, neither
will I part from you until I have brought you to the place which you desire,
requesting you to make us doubt of my loyalty. I suppose your name is Artesia,
because (quoth he) in my travels I have met a Gentleman of this country named
Ornatus, of whom I learned the truth of many of your misfortunes: who I assure
you is in good health. O blessed news (quoth she,) then will I hope once
again to se^ my dear Ornatus, whose absence has been my only cause of woe.

She had scarce ended those words, but Ornatus espied a ship even then come a
shore, where theirs was cast away, most of the men landed, which was the ship
wherein Lenon was, who beheld the other ship cast away, and the storm being
ceased arrived there. From whom Ornatus knew not how to hide himself: and
Artesia not so much as thinking Lenon had been in it, but that it was some ship
that likewise by the storm was driven to land there. Presently the men
began to spredde themselves every way, and some of them soon espied Artesia,
giving Lenon knowledge thereof, who immediately came toward her, most kindly
saluting her, but she being exceedingly dismayed with his sight, whom she
most mortally hated, for very grief burst into tears, that in abundance
gusht from her eyes.

Lenon maruelling thereat, (and little thinking how much she hated him, and
how unwelcome he was) rather expecting thanks for his pains then reproof,
said; My dear Artesia, be not now discomforted, since there is no further
cause of care, I have most diligently labored to release you from grief ever
since Allinus by treason conveyed you from my custody: taking your absence in
great heaviness, for that it pinched my heart to think you should fall into
such distress: but now that all those misfortunes are past, I beseech you
go with me to the Court, where I will labor to procure your content.

Artesias heart was vexed to hear his speeches, that she made him this answer.

Most discurteous Lenon, none but your self are cause of my woe, whose sight
more tormenteth me, then all the afflictions I ever endured: Allinus carried
me indeed from the green Fortress, not by treason, but to shelter me from
dishonor, which you did intend, else would you not have inffered me to endure
such miseries as I did by my hellish keeper. Think you I have cause either to
think you intend my good, or take any comfort by your presence, when you only
disquiet me, not suffering me to enjoy my liberty, but would perforce
constrain me to that I cannot like. Had you left me in Adellenas house, then
had I not fallen into such miseries as since that I have endured, nor Allinus
for his virtue have been brought to poverty, that being before my professed
enemy, seeing my misery, it so mollified his heart, that he has pitied me,
and sought my liberty, and only by cruelty, not by justice, have you sought
his overthrow. Then I beseech you leave me here, for I had rather endure the
hazard of my misfortune, then live to be tormented with your importunacie.
Lenon was so amazed to hear her unkind reply, little thinking he had been so
much out of her favor, that he could not tell what to say: sometimes thinking
to leave her there, and utterly to forsake her, but that thought was soon
overcome by his affection or violent sting of desire to enjoy her love: that
once again he said; Why Artesia do you regard my good will no more, then for
my pains, to yield me rebukes: and for my love, disdain? That I caused you
to be brought from Adellenas house, was, for that being there you were subject
to many misfortunes. And if I imprisoned Allinus, it was for that I supposed
him your enemy, and feared he would have done you wrong: so that whatsoever I
did with intent of good, you repay me with dislike: and convert all my doings
to the worst meaning: wherein you show your self too cruel, that will not
yield me the least favor for my constant love. O Artesia be not so hard
hearted, Artesia notwithstanding many fair promises, vows, and protestations
he made, would not yield to go with him, but desired rather that he would leave
her there. Lenon told her, though not for his sake, yet for her safety, it
were best for her to go: which said, he commanded his servants to place her
in a Litter. Which when she saw she must needs do, she called to Ornatus,
saying: Good Palmer go along with me, that for the kindness you have showen
in preserving my life, I may yield you some recompense. And (quoth she) to
Lenon, I request nothing of you for my self, but for this strange Pilgrim,
who when by the storm the ship was cast away, I ready to perish, caught me
out of the water and preserved my life: and do not for his good will to me, use
him as you did my dear Syluian, whom you banished, for that she preserved my
life from my unkind uncle, with that she wept exceedingly. Then Lenon asked
Ornatus what he was, I am (quoth he) as you see, a Pilgrim, that was forced
to come aboard the Pirates ship, and (amongst the rest) was ready to perish,
but that by the divine providence, I was ordained to preserve that virtuous
Damsels life. For that deed quoth Lenon, I will reward you most kindly:
therefore go along with us. Then they all departed to the Court. Lenon
presently caused Artesia to be lodged in a most sumptuous place of the Court,
appointing diverse Damsels to attend her, thinking by those means to win her to
consent to love him: but all proved vain, his care was cast away, his cost to
little effect, and his kindness unregarded. For Artesia was so constant to
Ornatus, that she hated Lenon: her heart was wholly employed to wish his good,
and Lenons ill. For she determined never to love him, though she were assured
of Ornatus death: that she spent her time in continual care and sadness,
showing no sign of joy, no show of comfort, but even as one that regarded no
rest, nor took felicity in any thing, that Lenon both admired the same, and
labored by many means to alter that humor: but the more he sought to please
her, the more she was displeased: and more discontented at his kindness then
any thing else. In this sort she continued many days, without the least show
of alteration.

Ornatus all this while remaining in the Court, (making the cause of his state)
to receive Lenons promised reward, whereas indeed he stayed to see what would
become of Artesia, or by what means to get her from thence To effect which, he
saw no possible means, nor could in many days come to see Artesia, which
filled his heart with grief: only comforted himself with remembering her
constant loyalty And one day being by himself alone, he entered into these
cogitations. Ornatus thou have remained many days in this place, kept from thy
Love, and sought no means to set thy heart at rest, or her at liberty. Do
thou make no more account of her love, then to attempt nothing to attain the
same? or are thy spirits of no more courage? then they will do nothing: thy wit
so shallow, thou can devise no stratagem^, or thy mind so cowardly, thou
dare not revenge the wrong Lenon does she? What though he be the Prince and
heir of this land, is not both he and his father hated, ruling by usurpation,
and with cruelty, not with justice, has sought the downe-fall of thy house?
Can Artesia think either valor or virtue to rest in thee, when she shall
know how near thou art her so, but dare not touch him? will she not
esteem she a coward and unworthy to enjoy her love? Nay when she knows
this, will she not alter her love? Why should not thou seek thy own
content, though it be with his discontent? thou art every way as good as he
by birth, though he now rule the land: has not thy father said, that his
father was but a Captain in the last Kings days, and by treason put his
lawful King to death, and so wanne the rule? Then Ornatus revive thy spirits,
seem not dismayed with any danger fear not misfortune, seek to release thy
Love, and venture thy life therein: for living thus thou shall be deprived of
her love. Lenon will by force or fair means overcome her, and then may
thou blame this delaie. The King is now sick, and he being dead, Lenon must
reign, who then may do what he list. Then take the advantage of the time, and
do not frostrate thy blessed hope^ with slothful delaie. Having ended this
m^ditation, he then began to study how to perform his will: wherein he found
many contrarieties. But presently he beheld Lenon entering the Court, before
whom he stood so opposite, that he could not choose but note him, and withal
remembered how earnestly Artesia had entreated him on the Pilgrims behalf,
whom he thought she esteemed, and therefore suddenly this cogitation arose in
his fancy, to use him as an instrument to win her love: that calling Ornatus
unto him, he said: Pilgrim, I pray ^hee blame me not for forgetting to
perform my promise made to Artesia as concerning thee, which I have not
neglected for want of good will, but by reason of thousands of cares that daily
torment me, only procured by her unkindness: but if thou will undertake on my
behalf to persuade her to yield to my just request, for that I think thou
may prevail with her above any, I will not only reward thy former kindness
so shown to her, but also for thy pains herein, promote thee to high
dignity. Therefore I pray thee give consent to follow my counsel herein.
Ornatus was willing to be employed in that business, which fell out according
to his hearts desire: and therefore made him this answer. My Noble Lord, for
that I perceive your intent is good, I will be ready to follow your
directions, and do you any service I can: wherein I know not whether I shall
prove fortunate or no: but assuring you that I will deal both faithfully and
effectually in that which I shall undertake.

Lenon was as glad as he, that he yielded to do that which he thought least to
perform: and therefore presently gave command, that the Pilgrim only should
have her in custody, Artesia marvelled that her keepers were changed,
misdoubted some intent of hard usage, but seeing it was the Pilgrim that now
had her custody, her heart was comforted.

CHAP. XIII. How Ornatus had the custody of Artesia: how he discovered
himself unto her: how Allinus and Trasus arrived in Armenia, and gat the King
to send Ambassadors into Phrygia.
ORnatus at his first coming, found her sitting in the darkest corner of the
Chamber, bewayling her misfortune, with salt tears bedeawing her purple
cheeks: her ornaments disorderly put on, and her golden tresses hanging
carelessly down, which added beauty to her sweet beawtie, and though
disordered, most comely. Leaning her arm upon a Chair, and her cheek laid
upon the back of her hand: when he beheld her sitting in this discomfortable
sort, his heart was ready to melt with remorse: and he breathed forth so bitter
a sigh, that she heard the same, which he perceiving came toward her with
humble behavior, saying. Most virtuous Lady, pardon my presumption, in
presuming thus unmannerly to interrupt your quiet: Lenon the Prince has
appointed me to be your atte^dant, therefore I beseech you, notwithstanding I
am his substitute: command me in any doubtful sort, and I will most willingly
employ my uttermost endeavors to purchase your content. Artesia raising her
self from the ground, said. Pilgrim, I thank you for your kind profer, and
am glad you are my keeper, for two causes: one, for that I trust your virtues
will not suffer me to be injured, the other, for that I would hear out your
discourse of my dear friend Ornatus, which I was hindered from by Lenons
sudden finding me. Lady, (quoth he) you shall be assured of the one, and hear
more of the other, if first you will vouchsafe without offense, to hear my
speech, and suffer me to execute the charge Lenon has given me, and I have
undertaken. Why what is that (quoth Artesia) I will not be offended? Lenon has
made known to me his love, and how long, and with what constancy it is
grounded, commanding and entreating me in his behalf to become an humble
suter unto you: he tells me that still you ungently disdain him without cause,
reason, or consideration. Therefore I humbly desire, both for that he is
constant, a Prince, and of good and virtuous gifts, yield to his love or else
to satisfy me of the chiefest reasons that withold you from the same. Pilgrim
(quoth she) for that my mind persuades me, you in wisdom will conceive of
reason: and will be faithful in concealing that which I shall disclose: I
answer you thus. First, admit Lenon did love me (yet by his usage I find the
contrary) nor I cannot fancy him, for that I already have plighted my faith
to another, more worthy then himself, which is that most virtuous and kind
Gentleman Ornatus, who likewise equalleth me in affection: and therefore I
should dishonor my name, break my faith, and reap perpetual infamy, if I
should show my self so inconstant. These I think are reasons (to a
reasonable creature) sufficient, and of such force, as none can contradict: and
therefore no more can be said therein. Besides were not all this so, you have
no reason to persuade me to that which I have so often denied, and will never
yield unto. Your reasons indeed (quoth he) are great, and the cause such, as
should no way be violated: but now you are subject to his mercy: and he may
enforce you to that which you are most unwilling to have done: then what
remedy have you, but rather to yield, then endure such extremity as he may
use? Yes, (quoth she) when I can preserve my self no longer from his lust,
death shall rid me from his power, which I will execute upon my self, rather
then condescend to yield him so much as an outward show of favor. Therefore I
pray use no more words tending to the breach of my faith, and furtherance of
his love, for kne^ you but how hateful his name were unto me, and how odio^s
to think of his doting love, you would of pity desist to ^orment one with
the sound of that ominous monster, but rather seek to comfort my distressed
^tate, and poor pining heart, almost most drowned with sorrow: being more
unfortunate, then ever any was by these afflictions, and the loss of my dear
Ornatus, whose presence should release me from this thraldom, and labyrinth of
discontent. Of whom if you can tell me any tidings, I beseech you impart them
unto me: thereby to add comfort to mittigate my care.

Ornatus was so ravished to hear her utter such heavenly speeches, that he had
much adoo to refrain from embracing her: uttering these speeches. How happy
is Ornatus by attaining the love of so virtuous and constant a Lady, worthy to
be admired, eternized, and for ever honored? what comfort may these pleasing
words bring to his heart? What torment can be not account pleasure, endured for
so sweet a Ladies safety? and what pains should he refuse to procure her sweet
content? O Artesia, divine Artesia, Ornatus is not able to express his
content, nor your desert: unable to recompense your kindness, and
everlastingly bound to you in all f^r^^e bands of faithful loyalty. In your
heart is the harbor of true loyalty, grounded upon virtuous love. Then how
happy is he by being enriched, and possessed of such a love? His reward is
greater then his pain: his pleasure more then ever his sorrow could be: and
his gains a thousands times beyond his loss. Why should I then conceal the
troth of his safety from you? With that he said: Behold Artesia, your Ornatus:
with that he discovered himself unto her, and she perfectly knew him. Being
almost amazed with that heavenly sight: when with a sweet behavior, they both
embraced each other, intermingling their kisses, with tears of joy that in
abundance distilled from their eyes, surfeiting so much in that sweet
delight, that they were loath to part, but that fear to be espied, compelled
thm. Taking such exceeding comfort in each others presence, as is not to be
expres^: withal, using many kindnesses usual betwixt faithful friends, to
express their joy, he sometimes imbr^cing her, and she again with a sweet
kiss, welcomming him, being so many, kind, and hearty, as would ask a skillful
discretion. At last having somewhat recreated themselves, and with sudden joy
bannisht some part of their care, they thought it time to study how to procure
their happiness, least ye same might again be crossed by Lenon. Who by that
time expected to hear from him. Therefore Ornatus said? My most dear and kind
Artesia, by whose love my life is preserved. I am not able to express the joy
my heart conceiueth, by this fortunate meeting, being likewise as sorry to
think of the misfortune you have endured by my careless oversight, and how to
get you from this place, and from Lenons affection, whom I know to be of such
uncivil a disposition, that he will leave no disloyal means unattempted to
further his intent.

Therefore in this urgent extremity, if you will be contented to esteem me as
your friend, and follow my directions, I will labor all that I can to get you
from this place. My true friend Ornatus (said Artesia) I have dedicated my self
to your disposition, and made my self all one with you, both in heart, body,
and mind, that whatsoever you would wish your self, you do to me, and
whatsoever pleases you, cannot displease me, for I am your self: therefore I
commit all things to your wisdom and rest to be ruled, counseled and ordered
by you, in whatsoever you shall think convenient: and will do any thing you
shall counsel me unto, both for our escape from hence, or otherwise:
accounting my bliss yours, and yours mine, your cares mine, and your quiet, my
content.

Lenons love is most hateful unto me, and iniutie to you, then what means can
you work to rid me, of that and revenge your own wrong, perform, for my
consent is ready to yield to any thing you shall think convenient.

I most humbly thank you, said Ornatus, and first I think this is the best
course, to procure my good liking with him, and to rid us from hence, that at
his next coming, you show a little more friendly contenance unto him, then
heretofore you have done, as shall best agree with your wisdom, and he
perceiving that my service has done more for him then ever he could attain,
will not only credit me, but also be ruled by me in any thing I shall
counsa^le him unto. Which if you will perform commit the rest to me My deer
Ornatus at your request I will do this, which otherwise I would never of my
self yield unto, for that my love to you, and hate so him, would not suffer
me so much to dissemble: but I pray God deliver me well from forth of his
power, that I may in quiet enjoy your sweet company. These speeches being
ended, they parted with a sweet kiss, he sighing, and she for grief shedding
tears. Not long after Lenon came to Ornatus, requesting to know whether he had
prevailed any thing with Artesia in his behalf* My Lord (quoth he) I have used
many persuasions to her, which in some sort have prevailed, but hereafter I do
not doubt by my persuasions, but to win her full consent: if you with wisdom
will be directed by me, and not with rashness mar all: therefore go in unto
her, but not to rashly, and see if she be not altered, Lenon embraced him in
his arms, saying: thou bring me tidings of exceeding comfort, for which I
will reward thee most bountifully, With that he gave him a purse of gold: which
Ornatus took, thinking that should be a means to further him, and hinder the
giver Lenon entered Artesias chamber, using many kind speeches and submisse
behauiours, whom she used more kindly then ever she had before done, which
both filled his heart with joy, and made him according to the Pilgrims
directions, more careful of his behavior, least by any boldness he might
offend her, that having past some small time with her, he departed.

Now was Ornatus studying how to release Artesia, to further whose intent, the
o^casion thus fell out. Allinus and Trasus as is before said, gate shipping for
Armenia, and arrived there with safety: first directing their course to the
Kings Palace, where Allinus was most honorably entertained, being somewhat
allied to the King, to whom he declared both the cause of his exile, and the
injury done to him by Thaeon, king of Phrigia. Turbul^s the Armenian King,
comforted him all that he could, and bad him withal, request any thing at his
hand and he would grant it him. Allinus alleging many things to persuade
T^^bulus to yield thereto, requested him to send Ambassadors into Phrygia,
either to request performance of certain articles, or else to give him open
defiance for war. The articles were these: that Allinus should be restored to
his lands, and the damage and loss he had sustained, should be repaied to
the full, that his wife should be recalled from banishment, and that he should
yield up Artesia to Allinus, if she should be in his custody and that the
King and Lenon should be sworn to perform all this. Turbulus was easily
won, and therefore presently sent four of his Noble men as Ambassadors, to
request the performance of those conditions. Who even at that instant were
landed in Phrygia, and news thereof brought to the Court, the King being
himself somewhat sickly, sent Lenon to meet them, and give them
entertainment: who was loath to go from Artesias sight, but assuring himself of
the Pilgrims faith, committed her wholly to his custody. Ornatus thought it
now the fittest time to seek to escape, but he was hindered by other of Lenons
servants, whom he had secretly appointed as overseers to look into the
Pilgrims action: that it was impossible for him to attempt any thing that way,
but it must needs both be discovered and prevented. Ornatus seeing himself
disappointed of his purpose that way, made Artesia acquainted with what he
intended, and how he was prevented, spending the time of Lenons absence
continually in her company. But having met the Armenian Ambassadors, brought
them to the Court, where they were honorably entertained, and having declared
their Embassage, Thaeon the King, told them they should receive answer within
two days.

Lenon hearing the articles, counseled his father not to yield to perform any
such conditions, but rather to send Turbulus defiance For (quoth he) your
Majesty are as absolutely King of Phrygia, as he of Armenia, and then what
dishonor were it unto you to stoop to his command, and show your self as
it were afraid of his threats? for to bind your self to this, were to become
his subi^ct: which would soon be published through the whole world to your
dishonor. The King being ouerruled by his persuasions, gave the Ambassadors
this answer, that he went not ^o perform the least of those articles they
demanded, nor feared their Kings threats of war, for that he was able to
deal with a mightier foe then he. Using many other words, and some of
reproach, that the Armenians denouncing open war according as they were
commanded, departed.

CHAP. XIIII. How Ornatus staying too late in Artesiaes chamber, was accused by
Lenons servants, whom he slew. How Allinus with a band of Armenians landed in
Phrygia: and how Ornatus was imprisoned.
THaeon knew that the King of Armenia would perform his word, and therefore
gave Lenon charge to muster up men throughout the whole land: committing the
chief charge of the Army and ordering of these affairs, unto him, who more
hardy bold, then wise, undertook all, and within short space, had gathered an
exceeding great Army, and furnished certain ships, to meet with the
Armenians by Sea if it might be possible, to vanquishe them before they
should land.

These troubles fi^led the Commons hearts with grief, and their mouths with
murmurings: for they understanding that the King of Armenia did offer war to
Phrygia, in the behalf of Allinus that was generally beloved: there was few
of those that were pressed to those wars, but came unwillingly, and rather by
constraint, being more ready to turn their sword points against Thaeon, then
against Allinu^.

Ornatus likewise hearing of these wars, by his wisdom found out the
opinion of the multitude, and with what unwillingness they came to the wars,
which when he was in some sort assured off, he came to the Camp, and amongst
all the rest of his Familiars, espied Phylastes, who always loved him most
dearly, him he knew to be of a most faithful and constant resolution, in
performing his promise, and was by Lenon appointed one of the cheifest leaders.

Ornatus finding him remote from the Camp, came to him, and after salutation,
said: Sir Phylastes, I am sent unto you by a dear friend of yours, named
Ornatus who trusts so much in your virtues, that he is willing to put his
life into your hands, which you shall hazard, in denying him one small favor,
which with safety you may grant. First therefore, I request but your promise
for your warrantie, and then I will declare what I have in charge.

My friend (quoth Phylastes) thou tellest me news of wonder, when thou say
thou come from Ornatus, whom I fear is long since dead: but if thou know
the contrary, and can resolve me thereof, I promise and swear to perform
whatsoever thou shall demand: for I am sure Ornatus knows that I love him,
nor makes any doubt thereof, which if he do, he iniurieth that love and
friendship that has past between us.

Then kind sir (quoth he) that Ornatus is not dead, but in safety, and I am
that Ornatus, that notwithstanding my speech, make no doubt of your love.

Phylastes beholding his countenance, knew him well, and for joy caught him in
his arms. My dear friend Ornatus (quoth he) I am glad of your safety, and
accursed be my soul* if I do not any thing that you shall command.

I thank you (quoth Ornatus) to enter into the tedious discourse of my
afflictions, would be tedious: but in few words I will tell you all. I loved
Artesia long, but found no hope nor means to attain my love, which made me
disguise my self into woman's apparel, naming my self Syluian, and was
fortunately entertained by Arbastus, whose death I found to be acted by
Floretus, who falling into love with m^e told me for my sake he would poison
Artesia at the Lodge, whither he conveyed her, I fearing to have her taken
from me, and having won her love, told her his intent, and conveyed her to
Adellenas house: then Floretus and Lenon came thither, demanding her of me,
whom I told I had poisoned her, according to his counsel: we striving, were
brought before Thaeon, who banished me into Natolia, from whence I came back,
and by good fortune have the keeping of Artesia in this disguise, the manner I
will tell you at more leisure. Now my dear friend Phylastes, my desire is to
change my place with you, you to have the custody of A^tesia in my Palmers
weeds, and I to march into the field in your Armor, which if you grant, you
shall bind me unto you for ever. Phylastes yielded to fulfill his request, and
so for that time they parted, appointing to meet the next day. Ornatus being
come to Artesia, told her where he had been, and what he intended, which made
Artesia sad, dissuading him from his purpose in this sort: My dear Love, what
need you venture your person in the dangers that are incident to war? will you
leave me hear in doubt, and not rather stay with me to my comfort? there are
enough besides and too many in the field, and Phylastes is able to execute his
own place: then I beseech you do not leave me in discomfort, for how can I be
void of care, when I shall think you are amonst so many enemies ready to be
slaughtered? My dear Love (quoth he) that which I will do shall be without any
hazard at all, but shall procure both your and mine own content. Then I
beseech you remit this care for my safety, for I will preserve my self from
danger for your sake. Besides Phylastes virtue is such, that you need not once
so much as think amiss of him: who I know would venture his life for my
sake. Besides, my honor urges me, revenge of injuries done to your self and
me, and my fathers safety, are reasons sufficient to persuade your consent:
besides many other causes more forcible then these, too tedious to recite. Then
I beseech you deny me not: for when it shall be known that my father was in
armor in the field, and I in this place not regarding to aid him, it will turn
to my great dishonor: and those which before did esteem well of me, will then
begin to hate me: then let not your doubt and true love to me, hinder my
determination: for on that mine honor, your safety, and my fathers life
depends. Artesia seeing she could by no means dissuade him, thought not to
let him depart so suddenly, but cla^ping her tender arms about his neck, a
thousands times kissed his lips, whilst with her abundant tears she bedeawed
his manly cheeks. Ornatus took great sorrow at her heaviness, and delight in
her imbracings, that the contrarieties of his conceits were exceeding: pleasure
it self, seeming more pleasant intermingled with care, and care a pleasure to
be endured with such delight. Artesia was loath to let Ornat^s depart that
night, for that she deemed he should be in danger the next ^ay, and he as
unwilling to leave her in sorrow: she on the one side sollacing her self in
his company, and he by her kindness making him forget to depart, that before
they were aware, night was come and well spent, and Ornatus then bethinking
himself, thought it was too late to depart. And Artesia, hearing him make a
motion to be gone, desired him to stay. And yet my dear Ornatus (quoth she)
do not you indaunger your self for my sake, for should Lenons servants find
you here, it might redo^nd to our great disquiet. Ornatus likewise well
considering the inconvenience, took his leave of her, and left her sheadding
abundance of tears. Ornatus being gone, found the servants awake, and
watching his coming out, one of them saying; Pilgrim what makes thee so
saucy as to court my Masters Love? Is this a fit time of the night to be in
her chamber? my Lord shall understand your behavior, and what familiarity is
betwixt you: we take you to be some counterfeit, else would not such
behauiours pass betwixt you as we have beheld. Therefore here shall you
stay, until we give him knowledge of your doings and fidelity: with that
they locked fast the door, not suffering him to go out or in. Ornatus by that
perceived that they ha^ seen the kindness betwixt him and A^tesia, which he
knew if Lenon should understand, he would find out what he was: these
thoughts troubled his heart exceedingly, that he was assured unless he could
be rid of them, there was no means to escape death, if Lenon should know
him. With these studies he sat a good while silent, till he perceived them
inclinde to sleep, and casting his eye aside, espied a bill hanging by the
wall, to which he stole secretly, and taking hold of the same, he drew toward
them, entering into these meditations. And shall I now commit murder, and
endanger my soul by so heinous a sin? what will Artesia say if she know thou
art so bloodily bent? and that thy heart is so hard, as to shead thine own
country men's blood? Ornatus be well advised before thou do this deed, and
bethink of some other mean: avoid the danger thou art ready to fall into.
Other means Ornatus, yea but what other means have thou? none at all, do
thou not see how they have betrayed thee, and made thee prisoner, what then
need thou make a question, to save thy self, and by their deaths preserve
thine own life? which thy living, will be endangered, and being once done,
thou art safe, but by delay, thy own life may perish. With that lifting up his
arms with more then woonted force, he smote the one on y^ head, and beat out
his brains: wherewith y^ other began to awake: but in his awaking, he struck
him so full on ye breast, that the bill piearst his heart, and he lay
breathless sprawling in his gore. This done, Ornatus found a vaw^e and into
the same he co^ueied their dead bodies, purposing never to reveal what he had
don. Then returning, he bethought himself of the keys of ye doors that he had
thrown into yt vawte with their bodies, devising how to get out, without
suspicion of the deed he had done, y^ he was enforced to take the bill, and by
maine force, and often striving, wroong asunder the locks. His mind being
exceedingly affrighted with these cares, he entered into Artesias chamber, to
see whether he had disquieted her or no with the noise, her he found in bed,
and fast a sleep with the light still burning by her-beds side, her breast
uncovered down to the waste, and nothing to shrowde her from his perfect view,
but the single sheet, that say carelessly cast over her tender body, her arms
c^st to either side of the bed, and her head leaning on the one side, with so
sweet an aspect, as would have ravished a thousand beholders. Ornatus heart
was revived to behold this sweet sight, that the remembrance thereof had
bannished all remembrance of his troubles past, and affected his heart with
incomparable delight: that he stood like one amazed to behold her sweet
beawtie, and to take a surfeiting view of those her perfections, so amiably
faide forth. Artesia suddenly awaking blushed to see him so nie, yet therewith
more comforted then dismayed she caught the clothes and covered her self*
whilst he folding his hand in hers, desired pardon for his boldness: but she
viewing him well, beheld his pale and ghastly countenance, which drove her into
fear, and raising her self upright in her bed, caught him in her arms,
asking what he ayled to look so pale: M^ dear Artesia (quoth he) since I
parted from you, I have endured great danger, and past through ^ hell of
calamities, which now I fear not. With that he let his head fall into her
sweet bosom, and there made the period of his speech, feeling her tender
heart pant, with the motions of her troubled spirits. In which palace he
rested it a good while, whilst she with her soft hand curled his hair, and with
sweet kisses, mollified his lips. Using many other familiarities, and sweet
favors, proceeding from the depth of kind love, wherewith Ornatus was so
ravished, that he not only took heavenly comfort therein, but also desired a
further content, and possession of her love, which he never before asked, nor
thought she would grant, but being hartned by the assurance of her Love, he
used more bold behavior, which she permitted: but at last growing more bold
then she thought convenient for her modesty to permit, with a kind and
lovely behavior, she both blamed and hindered him, but the motions of
affection so far prevailed with them both, that he desired, and she inwardly
yielded, though outwardly she refused, but his behavior, her own Love, the
present occasion, so fit opportunity, their hearts unity, and other sweet
enticements, so far prevailed, that she yielded up her unspotted body, and
pure chastity, to his possession, and the impression of his attempt, dissolved
her Virgin zo^ne, giving full interests of her heart, Love, and body, to him,
that pursued the possession of those riches, with earnestness: Sometimes
blushing, sometimes shreeking, and yet yielding, denying, and yet granting,
willing and unwilling: yet at last, she gave that she could not recall, and let
him possess her spotless virginity, which being past, her heart panted with
the motion, and she felt her senses sad, a little repenting, yet not
al^ogither sorry: sighing for sadness, and yet not sad at all: whilst he
bathed himself in that haven of Bliss, passing the rest of that night in such
unspeakable pleasure as cannot be desciphered. Early the next morning he
arose* taking his farewell with a sweet Adie^, leaui^g Artesia sad for
sorrow, and lamenting his absence, but yet with earnest and hearty prayers,
inuocating his happy success: bathing her heart in lukewarm t^^^es,
thinking she had been too prodigal of her favors to him, and yet esteeming
him worthy of a thousand times greater gift, if she had it in her possession,
with repentance rejoicing, though deeming herself metamorphose, and other then
she was w^nt to be, being glad she had no more company to converse withal;
least her guilt should make her blush, and so bewraye her fault. And when
Phoebus began to lighten the Chamber with his splendour, the hid herself within
the bed, as if the daylight had accused her of that she had done in the
dark. Ornatus being come to the Camp, found out Phylastes, and brought him
to Artesia^s lodging, by the way instructing him how to order their business
when Lenon should come. Where being entered, Phylastes having saluted Artesia,
and a while conuersed about their affairs, they changed their habits. Ornatus
with many a sorrowful sigh taking his leave of her; whilst her heart bled
warm ^rops of blood. Ornatus again took his leave of Artesia, and entered
the Camp, framing himself to such kind of behavior, that he was of all
taken for Phylaste^. N^wes cam^ that the Armenians were landed and had brought
their Forces within a days march of T^aeons Camp, the King ^ssembled all the
chief Leaters together, to ^ppoynt every man his charge, and consult what to
do. Ornatus in Phylastes stead, had under his charge four thousand men, whom
by his own seeking he was appointed to conuoye into a wood that stood fitly
to offend the ennemie, and the rest appointed to other places that seemed for
most advantage. Ornatus having his soldiers alone, thought it time to execute
what he intended, and therefore called unto him such as were Captains and
chief under him, uttering these speeches Fellow soldiers, I would willingly
utter my mind which is troubled in some sort with remembrance of the injuries.
Allinus has already causelessly endured, against whom now we address our
selves to fight: wherein in my mind we deal unjustly: for he was never
traitor to his country, nor now comes to disturb the land with oppression,
but only to claim his own inheritance and liberty, which our selves do
permit: therefore I think it best before we draw our weapons, to consider
against whom we draw them, and whom we offend, one that loves us, his
Country and people, and would not willingly shead a drop of our blood. Now if
I could find a remedy for all this, which stands with equity, would you
follow my directions? With that they all at once said, they would be ruled by
him Then he said, Thaeon that is now our King, destroyed all his family, and
such as are in any degree near to him in blood, the last of whom is Allinus,
whose utter ruin he now seeks, not by justice* but that neitheir he nor any
of his progeny should hinder his succession. Therefore if you will follow my
counsel, when the armies ar^ met let be not offer to offend the Armenians, but
keep our selves from fight, until Lenon affrighted therewith, and fearing the
peoples revolt, will peradventure yield to perform the articles the A^menian
Ambassadors demanded: and by this means shall we restore All^n^s to his
right, save the effusion of blood, and yet not wrong our reputation. The people
hearing his speeches, generally gave their consent: crying, Phylastes,
Phylastes. With that Ornat^s bestowed the gold among them that Lenon had
before given him, which prevailed with the multitude exceedingly. Ornatu^
having effected this according to his desire, went unto the A^m^nian Camp,
desiring to speak with Allinus the General, to whom he declared what he
intended in his behalf, not discovering him to be other then Phylastes. For
which Allinus yielded him many har^y thanks. Whilst Ornatus was absent, a
Captain named Ortonus, drawn by desire of reward, and above the rest
favoring Lenons party, stole from the wood, and coming into the Camp to
Lenon, bewrayed what Phylastes intended, and how that he was now gone to the
Armenian Camp, to confer with Allinus.

Lenon hearing that, thought it best, not to send for him by warrant, but
amongst the rest, to assemble him to council: and to that effect, sent a
Herault. Ornatus being returned had knowledge of the general assembly, and
willingly went, little suspecting what Lenon intended, and being entered the
Camp, and Lenons Tent, he was before all the Estates, by a Herault arrested of
high treason. Ornatus the^ thought his intent was bewraied, demanding what they
could lay to his charge: Whereupon Ortonus before them all, declared what he
had done, which he could not deny, upon which accusation, he was presently
sent to the Court, and there imprisoned.

CHAP. XV. How Ornatus was delivered out of prison and carried Artesia from
the court. How Ornatus in a single combat, overcame Lenon, and caused Thaeons
flight. And how Artesia to escape Thaeon, fled to Adellenaes house.
TThe news of Ornatus imprisonment was soon blazed through the whole camp,
court, and country, and at last came to Artesia hearing, who with exceeding
lamentations bewailed his misfortune, but Phylastes coming unto her, comforted
her all that he could, promising to set Ornatus at liberty (if quoth he) at
Lenons next coming, yo^ will request his signet, to keep as his warrant for
your safety. The next day the armies should meet, and therefore Lenon that
night visited Artesia, finding her very sad, demanding the cause thereof: my
Lord (quoth she how can I be otherwise then sad, when I am ready every hour to
fall into more misery, not knowing whither your life may be endangered by
these wars, and I thereby subject to some misfortune. Therefore in sign you
love me, grant me your signet, to be my warrant and privilege, against all
injury y^ may be offered me: with y^ she kissed him, which she had never
before done, not drawn by any good will, but with desire to help Ornatus.
Lenons heart was so overcome, that he presently gave her the same, staying
sometime with her, entreating her consent to his love. He was no sooner gone,
but Phylastes taking the ring of Artesia, went unto the place where Ornatus
was, and coming to the Iayler, told him that he must deliver Ornatus to his
custody, showing him the Princes signet, as his warrant: the Iailer seeing the
same, and knowing that the Pilgrim was of great credit and trust with Leno^,
made no doubt, but presently delivered Ornatus unto him: both departing
together, to Artesia, who seeing her beloved so fortunately delivered shead
tears of joy for his escape. After salutations in the kindest sort past,
Ornatus declared what he intended, and how he was betrayed by Ortonus.
Phylastes then counseled Ornatus, that night to convey Artesia from thence,
unto some place of better security, who sometimes thought to carry her to
Adellenaes house, but he thought Lenon would misdoubt yt place, at last he
concluded to convey her to her castle, where Arbastus her father dwelt, which
was still kept to her use, by certain of her fathers servants. Foth Artesia
and Phylastes liked ^his well, and therefore leaving the court, they departed
thitherwards, Artesia not woonted to travel, could scarcely endure to hold
out, but by their help, they arrived there at midnight and knocking, awaked the
por^er, who looking over the battleme^ts, demanded who was below at that
unreasonable time of the night: My friend quoth Ornatus, it is Artesia that
comes in time of her most need, for harbor in this place. The Porter viewing
her well by the bright light of Scynthia, and knew her, calling up the rest of
his fellows, came running down, and opened the gate, where he and the rest,
received her in with great joy.

Ornatus was glad of this happy escape, but yet exceeding sad that he could
not assist his father against Lenon, but that he must perforce be absent from
his rescue, which filled his heart with such care, that all that night he could
take no rest, and though he enjoyed Artesias company without control, he
could harbor no rest or quiet to his distempered thoughts: that Phylastes
demanded the cause of his sadness. My assured friend Phylastes (quoth he) the
remembrance of my fathers estate, and fear of his mishap, makes me thus sad,
and griefs exceeding torment possesses me, that I cannot be present to aid
him against Lenon, that by towardly malice, not with valor, will seek his
ruin before any others. O were I but present to defend him, though I offended
none, my heart would be at quiet. Artesia hearing his speeches said; Good
Ornatus do not again hazard your self, as you lately did: for had not fortune
and Phylastes wisdom, assisted v^, both your life, and with it mine, had been
cast away. My dear^ Artesia (quoth he) that misfortune has taught me
wisdom, and by remembering it, I will learn to esch^e such mischiefs, and
know whom I trust: therefore I beseech you, grant I may once again go to do
my ^utie in ayding my father, which I will now do without danger, for that I
will make none privy to that I intend, nor attempt more then I am able to
perform. Artesia seeing how fully he was vent to go, preferred his will
before her own desire, knowing her duty not to contradict, but to counsel
him, and therefore said; My dear Ornatus, my duty binds me to consent, but
my love wills me to deny: fear of your mishap makes me unwilling, but
will to fulfill your desire, makes me give ^n unwilling consent: only let me
request this, that you will take Phylastes in your company and leave me to the
custody of my servants, whose fidelity I am assured of: for having him with
you, hi^ aid^ and counsel may much avail to preserve your life, which if you
loose (as heavens forbid) with the same shall mine expire for if so impossible
Artesia should breathe, Orna^us being breathless. Ornatus with a few tears
that by exceeding grief were wroong from his heart, participated her laments.
First requesting the servants to be careful of her good, and then without
delay, both furnishing himself and Phylastes, with rich armor and horse, of
which there was great choice in that Castle: and for that the day began to
appear, they thought it time to depart, least their coming from thence might
be discovered: There might one behold sorrow at parting in his right form,
hart-breaking sighs, breathing sad Farewels, and sorrowful tears at so sad a
parting, when their lips were parted, their hands still fast, their hands
disioynd, then their voices oftentimes uttering, that woeful word, Farewell: and
when they were past hearing, their eyes unwillingly leaving each others sight,
he being without looking back, and she within looking after, so long as she
could perceive the glimering glance of his bright armor, and he being pass
sight of her, with watery eyes beholding the place of her abode, thus parted
they, as if they had parted never to meet. Drawing nigh the armies, they
beheld them met and in hot skirmish, standing still a good space, to see to
whether party it was likely the victory would incline: and in the end they
beheld the Armenians begin to retrait, and Lenon with Thaeon his Father in the
midst of the throng, making exceeding slaughter, and proud of their deemed
conquest: which set Ornatus heart on fire, that he rusht amongst the thickest
of his Country men, yet not once offering a blow, nor sheading a drop of the
blood he loved, but only making way to come to Lenon, which made them not
offer to stay his passage: but admiring what he was, let him go free; after
whom Phylastes hasted. The Soldiers seeing those two new come Knights
offend none, admired what they should be, not one of them all offering a blow,
because they offered none. By this time Ornatus was come to the place where
Lenon was, who even then and not before had met Allinus, betwixt whom many
blows and some wounds were given and received, but Allinus had the worst by
reason of his age. Ornatus knowing his Father by his armor, came betwixt them
with his sword drawn, saying: Lenon stay thy hand: let age go free, and let
thy youth cope with me, that am come to challenge thee before both the Armies:
and therefore as thou art the Kings Son, a knight and honor arms, give order
by thy Herault, to stay the fury of the Battles, till thou and I have tried
our valors, otherwise this Knight and I have vowed to huht thee from place to
place, and never give over, until we have spilt thy blood.

Lenon, hearing this Champions proud challenge, said: If thou art a knight, a
gentleman as I am, and can show wherein I have wronged thee, I will answer
thee, otherwise know, that I scorn thee, although I know my self of
sufficient strength to abate thy haughty presumption, were it never so great.
With that two heraults were sent from either General, to part the soldiers,
which done, Ornatus before the open assembly said. Lenon, first I say I am a
Gentleman, as absolute and as good as thy self: Prince I am none, neither art
thou by right, but that by tyranny and usurpation thou hold the same. I
come as Artesias Champion, to challenge thee of disloyalty, as the outrages
thou have committed, by detaining her liberty, do manifest. I challenge thee
for doing injustice against Allinus, whom thou withholdest from his right, by
treacherous malice. I challenge thee, as a partaker of Arbastus death, for that
thou suffer and vpholdest his murderer Floretus, that has deserved death.
I challenge thee for oppression laid upon this whole land. And lastly, for
detaining Ornatus living, who never was impeached of treason: and therefore if
thou dare answer my challenge, I am here ready, otherwise, I here pronounce
thee for a coward, and a miscreant, not worthy to bear Arms. Lenon made this
reply. Being accused by a stranger, without cause, I regard it not, and
being judge my self, will not by thee be adjudged: but for thy proud
challenge, I will answer thee, as little regarding what thou can do, as
thou boastingly do vaunt of thy valor. Therefore even now before I deport, I
will without delay abate thy haughtiness, though thy accusations are
manifestly false: for I both love and esteem Artesia as dearly as I do my
self: my title to the Crown, is just: for Allinus he is both a traitor at
home, and abroad: first in causing his comp^ices to seek my fathers life: and
lastly, for bringing these Armenian bands, to destroy the Country. For
Floretus pardon, it is mercy, not injustice. As for oppression done to
Ornatus, all know, I never iniuried him: but if he take the Justice that is
done to his traitorous father, as done to him, I cannot help that: but revenge
it thou, since thou art his Champion. Ornatus had much adoo to stay to hear
out his speech, which galled him to the very heart, that without speaking a
word more, he smote at Lenon, and Lenon with courage, answered his blows,
beginning a most flerce and forceable encounter, and with like fury continuing
the same, til both had received many wounds, and their steeds began to be
furious and mad, with the smart of some strokes that mist their aim.

Ornatus calling to remembrance, first the injuries he had received, and that
Lenon and none else could dispossess him of Artesias Love, and many other
wrongs he had done him and his parents, thought now to revenge them all, and
dispossess Thaeon of the Crown by Lenons death, revived his spirits with such
courage, that he began with renewed strength to assail Lenon, who even then
began to fainte, and would have yielded, but that shame withheld him. Which
when Ornatus perceived, he thought at once to end the strife, that with one
forceable blow, he gave him so de^p a wound on the right arm, where the
Armor was broken away, that be let fall his sword, and fell senseless on
his horse neck. Thaeon perceiving his son in that danger, with his guard
came rushing in, and rescued him from Ornatus sword, which otherwise had p^rted
his head from his body. With this, both the Armies joined battle again: the
Armenians with new courage rushing upon their enemies, whose hearts began to
fail, seeing Lenon so near death, which made such a confusion among the^, that
they were readier to fly or yield to Allinus, the^ to fight it out: that on a
sudden, the Armenia^s had slain an infinite number of them, and all the earth
was dyed to a purple color, with their blood. O^natus heart was vexed to see
so much of his Countres blood shead, that he entreated Phylastes to persuade
the Soldiers to give over, and himself rode betwixt the two Armies with a
Herault, desiring them to stay their fury for a while. Long it was before
they would give over, but at last by the Drums and Trumpet sound, having called
back the Armenians, Ornatus placing himself in the midst of his Country men,
that a multitude might hear him, said. Renowned people of Phrygia, hear my
speech that am tormenmented to see so much of your blood shead, the effusion
whereof, I seek by all means to stop, having as you see for the love I bear
to you, not lifted my hand against any of you, but only Lenon: the causes that
urge me to challenge him, is the manifest wrongs he and his father has done to
your selves, this Country, and all the Nobility: for the true testimony
whereof, let every one inwardly examime his own conscience, and they will not
deny my words, but find themselves exceedingly grieved with his oppression.
Do you not see what destruction he has brought upon this land? Are not almost
all the Nobility slain and destroyed? Are not your liberties, goods and
friends, taken from you? Is not the whole land in an vproare, and every one
driven from his quiet at home, to venture his life in the field, and all this
for satisfaction of his will and self command, not grounded upon law nor
justice? Examine your consciences, is he your lawful King? did he not murder
your lawful King, only to make you his vassels? Again, does Allinus seek to
do his Country wrong? does he come to oppress you? does he seek to abuse
your liberty? No: he only comes to claim his possessions, by injustice
taken from him: he comes as urged by grief, not to live as a banished man,
being himself, his wife, children and family, driven to live in misery and
slavery, for the satisfaction of his Lust. Then I beseech you good soldiers,
consider well what you do, whom you defend, a traitor: and whom you resist, a
dear friend, that loves and tendereth your lives as dear as his own: whose
estate the Armenians pity, to whom he was never gracious: but his own
Country men's hearts are hardened against him, repaying cruelty for his love,
and resistance to withhold his right. I could allege so many reasons to
dissuade you from following Thaeons will, as would ask a tedious recital, but
I know you are o^ wisdom to conceive the right: your hearts merciful to
pity him, and your minds apt to do Justice: then give him over, discharge
your minds of care, and disburthen your selves of his oppression. I stand
here as an Advocate to plead for Allinus right, that has endured too much
wrong. I stand here as A^tesias Champion, that is imprisoned by Lenon, abused
by Lenon, and withhelde from her liberty by Lenon. I stand here to entreat you
save your own lives, to preserve your liberty to execute Justice, and to do
Allinus right. Then I beseech you, lay aside your arms taken in defense of
wrong, and turn your hearts to pity innocence: whereby you shall save many
of your lives, show your selves men that are ruled by wisdom, and not by
rage: and purchase liberty, freedom, and peace, for ever. Then you that bear
the true hearts of Phrygians, follow me, and give over to follow that usurper,
and stay such ruins and destructions as are like to ensue by your refusal:
and let the rightful heir possess the Crown, who will love you, cherish
you, and seek his Countries peace. The peoples hearts were so altered with
his speeches, that many came running to him, crying, Allinus, Allinus: and the
rest that were not yet resolved, stood in a doubt what to do. Whilst Duke
Ternu: commanded his Forces to follow him, who withdrew himself from the
Camp, espying so fit occasion, determined likewise not to follow Thaeon
longer, whom he neither hated nor loved, but yet esteemed as unlawful usurper
of that Kingdom: and rather desiring Allinus should possess his right of
inheritance, then any way willingly contradicting the same: being as many
others were, forced to come to those wars, fearing T^aeons displeasure, who
cared not in what sort his will was performed. Ternus therefore drew himself
apart with this policy, that if Thaeon prevailed, yet he could not impeach
him: and if Allinus had the best, yet he could not allege that Ternus
withstood him, thinking it the greatest point of wisdom to keep himself
upright. Thaeon had no sooner conveyed his Son to his Tent, and with much
adoo recovered him to his senses, but there came a m^ssenger Poasting from the
Court, with news that Phylastes was two days since escaped out of prison. And
presently after him, an other brought news that Artesia with the pilgrim, was
fled, but no man could tell whither. Lenon hearing the news, became almost
mad, and raged so extremely, that his wounds burst into fresh bleeding: and to
fill up his heart with sorrow and vexation, an other messenger from the camp,
came running in, crying, Fly Thaeon, fly, we are betrayed to the enemy, the
lea^ers captains and soldiers are revolted, and the enemy is near at hand
to surprise thee: Fly and save thy life, for thine own subjects have left
thee, and refused thy government. Thaeon was so amazed and terrified with
fear, that without regard of Lenons life, he fled to save himself. Every one
saving those that were fled with Thaeo^, with haste running to their reuolting
fellows to save themselves. This news was brought to Allinus, who hearing the
same, and being past fear of Thaeons rage, sent a Herault^e Turnus, to know
whether he were his friend, or still continued those bands to resist him as
his foe? who returned this answer, that he was never foe to him, but always
wished his good. Afterward dismissing his soldiers, and sending every one well
rewarded to his own house, himself coming back to his Tent, where he met
Allinus whom he kindly saluted. Thither were assembled the chief states of
the land, to whom Allinus said. My Lords, since Thoeon and Lenon are fled, and
none left but your honors in place of justice, with right and equality to
minister the same to such as have sustained wrong: I as one that have abode the
greatest loss, commit my cause to your wisdoms: you know what injuries I
have endured by his malice, only for that I sought to set Artesia at
liberty, that was by Lenon imprisoned, and badly used: requesting nothing of
you, but that which by right is mine, and belongs to me by inheritance. The
nobles with a general assent, granted that he should enjoy his former
possessions: and that his loss should be repaid out of the Kings treasure.

O^natus standing by, said: Most noble peers, you stand here debating masters,
whilst the cause of your woe is living, and far enough from yielding to that
you grant, who now peradventure is mustering new forces, to make frustrate
what you intend, and to work revenge. Which to prevent, give me your consents
to pursue him, and he being once taken, then may you without control, either
establish him, or choose a new, that should by right be your king.

To this all the nobles gave consent, and Ornatus with three thousand horsemen,
followed Thaeon, who first look the green Fort^esse, with five hundred men, who
continued firm, won by great rewards, but hearing of the Armenians approach,
under the conduct of the stranger, that i^ue Lenon, in the night he fled with
a hundredth of his nearest friends and allies, to Arbastus castle, where he
thought to live secure and unknown, for that he thought his enemies would
least of all suspect that place. He arrived there in the dead time of the
night: but knocking, was denied entrance, which made him almost desperate, that
he assayed to enter by force, and prevailed so, that he gat in with the rest
of his company, making fast the Gates again after them.

Artesias servants knowing what he was, some ran one way, some another, to
hide themselves from him. One amongst the rest, came running into Artesias
chamber, declaring to her what had befallen, and how that the king had taken
the castle. Artesia having not yet heard of Lenons death: nor what success
Ornatus had in the camp, wringing her hands made this lamentation. Twice has
my dear Ornatus left me in this danger, and hazarded his own life, hoping to
attain good success, but cruel fortune has still cross his laudable
attempts, and le^^ both him and my poor self, in extreme misery. Now am and
assured he is taken prisoner again, and my self am like not long to go free,
for I am sure the king has heard of my being here, which makes him come
thus late. Well, might I but be made prisoner in the same place my Ornatus
lies inthralled, that I might yet enjoy his sight, then should I think my
self happy in misery, but I fear me too much, they will pri^^tie murder
him, and never let me know thereof, whereby I shall be held with long
frustrated hope to see him, and in the end be deceived. Never was poor maiden
brought to such misery, nor I think true love never crossed with such pitter
adversities, which both he for me, and I for him, have been continually subject
unto ever since our first acquaintance. As she was still continuing her
laments, the same servant whose name was Thristus, came running in again,
saying D^are mistress, I have found a means for your escape from hence
unespied, if you will attempt the same* which is without any danger at all.
Never tell me what it is (quoth she) but be thou my guide and I will follow
thee: for I will attempt any thing to escape from him. Then (quoth he) fear
nothing, but follow me. Then took he her by the hand, leading her out of that
room into a dark entry, where by reason of the night, there appeared not the
least glimse of light, and through that into many back rooms and unfrequented
places of the Castle, until he came to a postern gate which he opened, and
after he was out, shut the same fast again, saying. Now mistress you are out
of the Castle, and past fear of the King, who little knows you can pass out
this way, therefore I pray tell me whither I shall conduct you? I thank thee
good Thristus quoth she, for this thy good assistance, for which I will one day
be thankful unto thee, and now I pray thee direct me to Adellenas house, who
is my faithful friend, and will rather die then discover me. This said, they
began their journey, which was but three miles, and therefore they soon
overcame the same, even by the morning light arriving at the wished place.
Adellena hearing some knock at the gate, commanded her maid to rise, to see
who it was, the Damsel coming down, before she would open the gate asked who
was there? Artesia knowing her voice, said; It is Artesia, good Anna let me in.
With that the Damsel opened the gate, conducting her to her mistress Chamber,
who espying her, was so surprised with joy, that she embracing her, shed
abundance of tears, saying: Welcome my dear Artesia, I was afraid I should
never have seen you again, you have been so long time absent. Indeed (quoth
she) I have bin long absent from thee, though still not far some thee: but I have
news of importance to tell thee, which I will forbear to speak of until I
have refreshed my self, for care and travel has made me exceedingly weary.
Then Adellena brought her into a sweet and pleasant Chamber, where she laid
her down to rest.

CHAP. XVI. How Ornatus surprised Thaeon in Arbastus Castle, who was slain by
one of his Servants.
ORnatus hearing the King had taken the green Fortress, beset the same round
with horsemen, who took certain of the Kings followers, that being brought
before him, told him the King was fled with some hundred in his company to
Arbastus Castle, which when he heard, without delay he rode thither, fearing
least Thaeon getting in and finding A^tesia, would offer her some injury: he
was no sooner come, but he sound it so: for he was denied entrance, nor could
see one of Artesias servants, whom he left as keepers of the same, which so
much disquietted his heart, that he could not tell what to do: thinking it
best to entreat Thaeon kindly, least he should seek revenge against
Artesia, though she were innocent, and no way to be blamed for any thing: and
such a multitude of contrarious fears arose in his fancy, that he seemed
therewith metamorphosed. Which Phylastes soon perceived, and coming to him
said; How now Ornatus what has fear taken away your courage? O my friend
Phylastes (quoth he) Thaeon is within, and thereby possessed of Artesia, whose
mind is so far from the least thought of virtue, that no doubt he will
seek revenge on her.

Fear not that (quoth he,) but summon him to the walls by the sound of a
Trumpet, and will him to yield him self, and stand to the courtesy of his
Nobles, and promise him with safety to conduct him thither. Ornatus allowed
his counsel, and therefore commanded a Trumpet to sound a Parley, and thereupon
one from the King appeared on the walls, demanding what he would have. To
whom Ornatus said: Tell Thaeon the King, that we come to him from the Peers
of the Realm. The messenger told the King what he said. Whereupon Thaeon came
in sight, demanding what he would have.

Quoth he, I would have you yield, least by resistance, you procure a greater
mischief to your self, then is by us pretended. Suppose I should yield
(quoth he) how would you use me? Like a King (quoth Ornatus) honorably. I
have found (said he,) so small cause to trust you, that it were fondness to
put my life within compass of your mercy: therefore I will keep my self
where I am, not doubting ere many days, to have so many friends, as shall
both chase thee, and the Armenians from the walls, and so out of this
Country: which he spoke upon the confidence he had in certain friends, that
had promised to gather new forces, but meant never to perform the same.

Ornatus was much troubles in his mind, to think what was become of Artesia,
maruailing that he spoke not of her, nor could hear of any of her servants,
that he might give him knowledge how she fared. But seeing his fair words
would not prevail, said. Thaeon, since thou refusest the courteous profer I
make thee, know, that my intent is altered, and since thou will not by fair
means yield, I will enforce thee to submit thy self to my mercy, or abide
my rigor: for not all the friends thou can find shall shelter thee from my
revenge: for I have sworn thy death, and nothing but that shall satisfy me.
Which vow I will once again revoke, if thou will yield without inforcement,
and deliver me Artesia, in safe^ie, that is within that Castle. Artesia,
(quoth Thaeon,) had I her in my custody, I would be revenged on her, because
thou wishest her safety, but she is far enough from me, therefore thou
seek her in vain at my hands, who would as readily deliver her unto thee,
as thou could ache, for that I esteem her not. But as for my self, it shall
never be said, my mind would floupe to base submission, nor that a King
yielded to a slave and base vassal as thou art. Do thou think that a Royal
mind can put on so degenerate a habit? no I tell thee, whatsoever thou art, I
had rather by inforcement die, then by submission live: but be thou advised
what thou do, nor stay long before these walls, for there are so many
whetting their swords, and putting on Armor in my defense, as ere the
mornings Sun arise, will fear thee from hence. Ornatus heart could not endure
these braued, and being withal vexed for fear that Artesia should sustain
some injury, thought speedily to work revenge. Which by Phylastes counsel,
he remitted until it were night, that then unawares they might by some means
get entrance into the Castle, and so surprise them.

Ornatus thinking to walk alone by himself, to breathe forth in sighs some
part of the fear that possessed his heart, and withal, determining to view the
Castle, how he might with conueniencie get into the same without destroying
it, for that it belonged to his dearest beloved, he espied the Posterne gate,
whereat thrusting, it presently flewe open, which way as yet, neither Thaeon
nor any of his company had found. Ornatus heart was glad he had found so good
a means to accomplish his will, putting the same too again, came to Phylastes
and told him thereof. Then both of them presently agreed to enter that way and
surprise them: conueying a hundredth of the best Soldiers secretly under the
wall of that Posterne, and placing all the rest in the open view of the
Castle, as if none of them had been wanting.

Ornatus and Phylastes entered, and after them she rest followed, who passing
along through the waste rooms, at last came to the place where they had left
Artesia, but found her not, and such success had they in their attempt, that
Ornatus coming behind Thaeon, smote him with his hand on the back, before he
had any knowledge of his approache. Thaeon therewith starting, and looking
back, was amazed, but running forward, drew out his sword, crying; My Friends
save and defend your selves: wherewith those that were about him drew their
swords: To whom Ornatus said in this manner.

How now usurping King? where are those mighty Forces should chase me hence?
will you yet yield, or stand to the trial by fight? I yield (quoth Thaeon,)
but much against my will, for had friends dealt fai^hfully, I had not been left
in this misery. But since fortune so much favors thee, as to make me thy
prisoner, use me well for that I am a King, and to none but thy self am in
thrall. Tell me (quoth Ornatus) what is become of Artesia, that not many days
since I left in this place? I saw her not (quoth Thaeon) nor know I where she
is, only I found certain servants in this place, whom I have put to death,
least they should bewray my being here. Tyrant quoth Ornatus, think thou
their death shall go unrevenged, could thou be so cruel as to murder
those that were innocent? with whom I fear me, thou have made away Artesia.
Why what art thou (quoth Thaeon?) that use such vndecense words to a King?
that art thy self not worthy to speak to a King? and why make thou such
enquyrie after Artesia, that for ought I know have no interest in her? suppose
I have slain her, that was the cause of all this woe, what can thou
challenge at my hands for her? it had been good she had never been borne^,
for she only has caused the original of these troubles. Art thou a King
quoth Ornatus, and bear so unkingly a mind, as to slander true virtue? No,
thou art a villain, a murderer, a Traitor to this Land, an usurper of the
Crown, and a most wicked and cruel homicide: but for that thou would know
what I am, know that I have more interest to the Crown then thou have, my
name Ornatus, and thy enemy, to whom by right that Crown belongs: which
thou shall no longer enjoy. Therefore said he, such as are my friends lay
holds out his Trator. He had no sooner spoken those words, but Thaeons own
Servants were the first that apprehended him, being weary of his government:
and one amongst the rest, thinking that he had commanded them to slaye him,
and withal, hoping for some reward for that forward exployte, having his sword
ready drawn, suddenly (whilst Ornatus did but turn back to confer with
Phylastes) thr^st the same through Thaeons body, that giving a pitteous groan,
he gave up the ghost. Ornatus turning back, demanded who had done that deed,
with that the murderer drew back, fearing to come before him, until he was
compeld, To whom Ornatus said; What art thou that have done this deed, art
thou not one of his servants, have not thou been maintained by him, did he not
trust thee with his life, was he not thy king, then how durst thou presume to
strike thy master, be ungrateful to him that gave thee gifts, prove false to
him that trusted thee, and stay thine anointed king? My Lord (quoth he) I did
mistake your words, and hope to preserve my own life, made me to do that
deed, which I thought would have pleased yau. I am not (quoth he) sorry he is
dead, but for that thou flewest him, who thou in all du^ie ought to have
defended: for which thou shall die a miserable death. Then he commanded that
he should be drawn in pieces with horses, which before he departed thence,
was performed.

CHAP. XVII. How Ornatus was chose^ King. How he departed unknown in search of
Artesia. How Lenon sought again to betray him, and was disappointed. How he
was banished. Tyresus pardoned. And Orntius and Artesia royally married.
THe King dead, Ornatus with Phylastes, returned to the Court, where all the
Peers were assembled, who before his coming, had by a voluntary messenger,
understood the manner of Thaeons death, the care whereof was already past, for
that few or none at all loved him: but now their care was whom to choose as
their King, but first they welcomed Ornatus, none of them all knowing him, nor
once suspecting what he was, who now could find no further occasion to co^ceale
himself, but humbling himself before Allinus, ^e said. My renowned Lord, the
cause I have so long cencealed my sel^, has bin fear of the kings cruelty,
and Lenons envy, who both would have endangered me, but now being void of that
misdoubt, your poor son Ornatus, submits himself, humbly craving pardon
for my neglect of duty. With that he unarmed his head, and his father knowing
him, in most loving wife embraced him, sheading tears for joy of his safety,
whom he thought had been long since dead. Duke ^ernus and the rest, rejoiced
to see him, and with imbracings expressed their joy, entering into admiration of
his honored parts and noble chivalry. Plylastes being likewise known, was
much commended, whom they deemed had been murdered in the prison by Lenon, for
that he could not be found. Allinus beholding Ornatus, and with what valor he
had bahaued himself, rejoiced exceedingly, the Commons clapped their hands for
joy, and the Peers amongst themselves began to relate how virtuously,
valiantly, and prudently, he had behaved himself in all that he had
undertaken. After many welcomes past, Ternus craving audience stood up,
uttering these speeches: My Lords, we need not now defer giving of Allinus his
right, because there is none to contradict what we establish: besides, we being
all now assembled together, and our late usurping king dead, there can be no
fitter time to choose a new king, and such a one as by right of blood, and by
our general consents may rule us. Thaeon you know was no way interessed in the
Crown but by usurpation, and has rooted out almost all that he knew to have
any title or interest in our late kings blood: of which house Allinus issue is
the last, by marriage of the Lady Aura, niece unto our late king, therefore
the right being in him, if there be any man in this assembly that can
contradict that which I have said, let him speak. Which when he had said, he
again sat down. Upon his speeches the Nobles conferd, the people consulted,
and at last the common soldiers cried out, Let Ornatus be our king, Ornatus is
our king. The nobles likewise gave consent to that the multitude liked, and
Ornatus was chosen king, whom they would have crowned: but at his desire they
defered the day of his Coronation for a month. In the mean time, esteeming him
as their king, and that day with great royalty setting him in possession
thereof, all business for that day being ended, the Armenians richly rewarded,
feasted, and with joy ready to return. Allinus in quiet but for the want of
his Lady, and all things in good order, Ornatus being alone by himself
endured much disquiet for Artesia, maruelling what was become of her, sometimes
thinking she was slain by Thaeon, and then supposing she was escaped out at
the posterne gate which he found open, that in these contrarieties of doubts he
continued, sometimes dispairing, and then again feeding himself with hope.
After Artesia had rested her self, and received some part of her sleep she
had lost that night, though but with broken st^mbers, she began to declare to
Adellena what miseries she had endured, and troubles she had past since she was
by Lenon carried from her house, how she met with Ornatus again, and every
thing that was befalne, with the cause of her flight at that instant. But
Adellena said she, I fear me I shall never see him again, for had he not bin
taken, and his father ouerthrown, Thaeon could not have had so much leisure as
to come to surprise me there, but the heavens granted me a fortunate escape.
And if I could be so happy as to hear that Ornatus were in safety, though he
had not that success his desires did aim at, my heart would be at some rest,
which is now pinched with suspicious torment. His aduenterous valiant heart
could not be withdrawn by any persuasion to leave to aid his father, but
notwithstanding infinite perils hung over his head, yet to show the duty of a
loving son, and the mind of a virtuous v^liant gentleman, he would not desist
to hazard his person: which now I fear me is fallen into the hands of his
enemies. But yet Phylastes I hope will by his good and ^riendly counsel be a
means to keep him from danger. Many other speeches Artesia used: and Adellena
used as many on the contrary part, to persuade her that Ornatus was in safety,
the truth whereof she told her, she should soon know: for (quoth she) I have
sent one of my servants to learn the truth of all that is happened, who I know
will shortly return. Which fell out even as she had told, for the servant
returned, bringing news of Lenons death, acted by a strange knight, and how
that Thaeon was fled, and being likewise by the strange knight surprised in
A^bastus Castle, was slain by one of his own servants.

Which Knight, was now known to be Ornatus, and was elected King by the
Peers, but he had deferred his day of Coronation, by reason of some special
grief that troubled him. Artesias heart was revived with these news, knowing
the grief Ornatus endured was for her absence, that presently she determined
to send him word of her safety: and wrote a Letter, the contents whereof were
these.

MY dear Ornatus, no news could have come more welcome to me then your
safety, and nothing more unwelcome, then to hear of your heauines^e, which I
would entreat you to cease, for that I am in safety at Adellenas house, being
by one of my servants the same night the King took my Castle, at a posterne
gate in safety brought hither, where I trust ere long to see you: which will
replenish my soul with exceeding comfort, for on your safety, my life and
felicity depends.

Yours for ever, Artesia.


Having wrote this Letter, she gave it to Thristus, willing him to deliver the
same to Ornatus with all speed.

Destenies do allot many to exceeding misfortunes, and some men are of that
dishonorable and unmanly dispositions, that they account all means to attain
their desires lawful, not regarding the shame and peril will ensue thereon. O^
which nature was Lenon, who being conveyed from the Camp by his frien^s, soon
recovered, and kept in a secret place, least he might be known, having no
other means but by absenting himself to save his life: whose supposed death,
caused Thaeons flight to the green Fortress, from whence likewise he was
departed before Leno^ could come to give him knowledge of his safety, and
knowing that it was then too late to salve those miseries, he (...) concealed
himself, following Ornatus (though unknown to him) with intent to murder him,
if he could by any means take him at advantage. But he was still disappointed,
and withal saw the death of his father done by his own servant, still
intermingling himself amongst the soldiers, that he was taken to be one of
them, and never suspected. But Ornatus being returned to the Court, Lenon was
then compelled to leave to follow him, and harbored sometimes in one place,
and sometimes in an other, having knowledge of Artesias absence, he could not
tell whether she were alive or dead* but dead he thought she could not be, but
rather by some means escaped. And even when Thristus was newly come out of
Adellenaes house, Leno^ espied him, and knowing him to be one of Artesias
serseruants, be suspected his Mistress was there, to whom he came, saying: My
friend well met, I take you to be one of Artesias servants, unless I be
deceived: which if you will resolve me of, I will do a message to you, that I am
willed to deliver to her from her dearest friend Ornatus. Indeed (quoth
Thristus) I serve Artesia, and am now going to Ornatus with a letter from
Artesia, who is in safety in Adellenas house. Lenon hearing his speech, being
before determined what to do, drew out his dagger and suddenly stabbed him,
casting his body into a pit, and taking the letter from him, brake off the
seal and red the contents, which when he had done, he began to study which
way to revenge himself on Ornatus, and afterward to get Artesia into his
possession, and for that he thought delay might hinder his intent, he first
wrote a letter in Artesias name, the contents were these.

ORnatus my dearest friend, the news of your happy victory, and conquest of
your enemies, is come to my knowledge, then which nothing could have been more
welcome unto me. Likewise I hear, that much heaviness possesses you for my
absence, that am in safety: and desire you to meet me to morrow night, and
you shall find me with Adellena, at the lodge in the Park near unto my
Castle: in the mean time, remitting all further report of my escape, and
manifestation of my Love, until the happy time I may meet you.

Yours in all Love, Artesia.


When he had written this letter, and imitated therein Artesias own hand so
near, that it could hardly be discerned, he went to the Court, and behaueed
the matter so cunningly, that he was no way suspected, but was admitted into
Phylastes presence, to whom he delivered the letter. For Ornatus himself
being exceedingly troubled in his mind, had left the Court, with some three in
his company, to go in search of Artesia, and left Phylastes in his chamber, and
in his stead, to answer such as should come with any suites to him. Phylastes
being taken of all, but of some certain that attended him, received the
letter, promising to meet Artesia there, at the same time appointed, giving
the messenger a reward. Lenon being d^parted, went to a place where he found a
certain kinsman of his named Lucerius, to whom he declared both what he was,
and what means he had wrought for his revenge on Ornatus, who without respect
joined hands with him, and promised with many oaths to exp^ore his life in
pursuit of revenge, who with Lenon included before Ornatus coming, to be in
the lodge with a sufficient company to surprise him, and work the premeditated
revenge. Lenon being assured of his aid, next determined to take Artesia from
Adellenas house, and to bring her to Lucertus Castle, until the time appointed
staying with Lucertus, to see him depart with his ambush to the lodge, which he
saw effectually performed. Phylastes presently upon the receipt of that letter,
sent out a messenger to seek Ornatus, and to certify him, that Artesia would
meet him at the lodge we Adellena that evening, and that he should find
Phylastes there: who (being by Artesias messenger taken for himself) had
appointed to be there, least he should not conveniently be found. The messenger
with great haste departed, and inquiring after four Pilgrims (for in that
habit Ornatus and such as were with him went) by that time the day drew near
to an end, the messenger found out Ornatus, to whom he declared what Phylastes
had given him in charge, only mistaking the place, for whereas he should by his
direction have said at t^^ lo^^e, mistaking Phylastes words, he said at
Adellena house. Ornatus hearing that heavenly tidings, leapt for joy, presently
hasting toward Adellenas house, which was not far off. Lenon to further his
attempt (which he thought he could not with violence execute: for he thought if
he should carry her away perforce in the day time, he should be prevented)
devised an answer of the letter, that he had taken from Thristus, which he
determined to deliver to Artesia, as from Ornatus, y^ conse^ts whereof were
these.

MY most dear and beloved Artesia, I have received the letter you sent me by
your servant, whom I have employed about a matter of great importance, that
none could so fitly execute as himself, which news was most welcome to the
comfort of my heart, that was almost overcome with despair of your safety,
whereon my chiefest felicity depends. Therefore omitting further recital of
my joy for your safety, which this paper cannot express, therefore I will
meet you soon, where this my servant will bring you, whose fidelity I assure
you to be such, as that he will do nothing but what I have given him in charge:
until which time of meeting, I cease all further circumstance of speeches.

Yours, Ornatus.


With this letter Lenon went to Adellenas house, and knocking at the gate, was
brought to her, to whom he delivered the same, who reading the contents, and
being before not well acquainted with Ornatus hand, nothing at all suspected
the contrary, but both believed that it came from him, and determined to go
with the messenger to meet him: whilst she was preparing to go with Lenon,
Adellanaes maid came in, telling her, that there was another to speak with
her from Ornatus: with that Lenon changed countenance, and Artesia willed her
to bring him in. Ornatus beholding her, had thought to have embraced her, and
discovered himself, but seeing a stranger there, and a letter in her hand,
he stood in a study. Artesia noting well his countenance, thought it was
Ornatus himself, but standing in a doubt thereof, said, I have received this
letter from Ornatus already, and therefore if you have any further message from
him tell it me, for any news from him shall be most welcome. Ornatus thought
that it was sent by Phylastes, but not knowing the messenger, meruailed thereat,
saying: I cannot believe that it came from him, for while within this hour,
he had not knowledge of your being here. With that Artesia gave him the
letter, willing him to read the same. Ornatus soon knew that it was invented
by some treachery, and therefore said: I know this came not from Ornatus, for
this is not his hand, nor he that brought it any of his Servants, for himself
sent me before, appointing to be here within this hour.

Lenon hearing his speeches, wished himself a thousand miles off, fearing to be
discovered, for that he could not t^ll how to excuse himself, nor by any
color avoid that danger. To whom Ornatus said: My friend, when did he
deliver thee this letter? Yesterday (quoth he.) Thou lie said Ornatus, for he
has not been at the Court these three days. Lenon thinking with impudency
to out^^ce, having no other means left, that was likely to help him, and
therefore said: This letter came from Ornatus, and thou lie in saying the
contrary, being some villain that art set to betray this Lady, therefore
(quoth he) speaking to Artesia, believe him not for he is come with some evil
intent. With that Ornatus bad those that were with him lay hands on him, who
presently apprehended him, and pulling of his hat, and a subtle disguise that
he wore, knew him to be Lenon, at the first being half afraid ^o touch him,
for that they would have sworn he had bin dead. Ornatus seeing Artesia in an
exceeding flight, discovered himself, and with great joy embraced her,
desiring her to fear nothing, Artesia knowing him, soon forgot her fear,
embracing him with exceeding joy. To whom he said: Fear him not my dear
Artesia, for be it himself or his ghost, I care not, it shall go hard, if he
now escape my hands. To whom he said:

Most discurteous and cowardly Villain, could thou not be contented, to
live in quiet, having once escaped my Fury, but that thou must by further
complo^s seek to betray this Lady, that never did injury thee? How often
have thou interrupted her quiet, and from quietness brought her into misery?
and knowing that she could not like thee, yet thou were so impudent, as never
to give over thy suit: but to attain thy desire, first depriuedst her of
liberty, banishedst me in the disguise of Syluian, and soughtest to betray my
Fathers life: and not satisfied with all these, like a cowardly miscreant,
seek by villainy to betray her: and notwithstanding thou haste be held thy
fathers woeful downfall and meritorious punishment, thou seek to betray this
Ladies life, by some unknown treachery not yet revealed. For all which, thou
shall suffer such punishment as I have devised, and have power to execute.
Lenon seeing himself discovered, gr^w desperate, and scorning to be so rebuked
at his hands, whom he still esteemed his inferior, but especially vexed, that
it was he that had so long hindered his Love to Artesia, said: Ornatus, I
think thou have either forgotten thy self, or else what I am, that at thy
pleasure rebukest me in such uncivil and ill beseeeming terms. Am I not thy
better, and one that not long since, might have commanded thee, and is thy
mind so much elevated and proud, that thou will not acknowledge it? Thou
make brags of thy victory, when thou may rather with shame keep silence,
and with remorse, repent that thou have sought the death of thy lawful king,
being thy self a traitor. As he would have spoke more, Ornatus interrupted
him, saying: Hold thy peace, and do not stir my mind to more sharp revenge by
thy reply, for I scorn to hear thee speak, therefore give over, least I
punish that tongue of thine for uttering such high words in defense of vice.

Since (quoth Lenon) thou will not hear me speak in defense of my self, let
me be conveyed from thy presence, for thy sight is as odious unto me, as mine
to thee. Whilst they continued in Adellenas house, a messenger came running in
breathless, uttering these speches: Behold most worthy Ornatus, I bring a
message of much woe and heavy import: yesterday there was a messenger came to
the court, that brought a letter in Artesias name to Phylastes, as supposing
him to be your self, wherein she requested you to meet her this night at the
Lodge in her Park. Phylastes, who presently sent out a messenger to give you
knowledge thereof, not hearing of his return, went himself with some twenty
in his company, to the place appointed, and entering, he found not Artesia
there, but a crew of Rebels, amongst whom Lucertus was chief, who all at once
set upon him and his followers, taking him for your self, having so many above
the small number that were with Phylastes, that they had soon slain most of
them that were with him, and himself not able to withstand such a multitude,
had received many grievous wounds, and had bin surel^ slain, but that the
heavens sent them this aid: It fortuned that day, that Duke Ternus was going
from the Court to his own house, who by great fortune hearing ^he noise, with
his men hasted thitherwards, and having knowledge of what was done, most
valiantly both himself and his men set upon Lucertus, whom they soon
vanquished, having first slain many of his accomplices, and him has he carried
prisoner, with the rest of such as were alive unto the Court, and with them
Phylastes in great danger of death. Ornatus heart was exceedingly vexed to
hear of his dear friend Phylastes hurt, but especially, to think that he
had not before attached Lucertus, which he was once in mind to have done,
which would have prevented all these mischiefs. The night now being come,
Ornatus caused Lenon to be bound hand and foot, and put into a strong place of
the house, with some to to watch him, least he should do himself violence:
himself with Artesia spending that evening in many speeches, relating the
manner o^ all these misfortunes, but especially comforting themselves in each
others love, with Adellena, calling to remembrance the whole manner of their
troubles only procured by Lenon, which sad relations made the renewing of
their Love more pleasant and defectable. Early the next morning, Ornatus
putting himself in his Palmers weeds, and covering Artesias face with a vale,
and carrying Lenon with them bound, departed toward the Court. The next
morning the Peers of the Land being still there, assembled themselves, amongst
whom was Allinus, that likewise had found his Lady, who hearing of his happy
success against Thaeon, was that morning newly arrived at the Court, and by
him entertained with exceeding joy.

By that time they were assembled, and had called Lucertus before them, Ornatus
with his company, were likewise come, though unknown and standing by, heard
Lucertus confess that Lenon had instigated him to work that revenge against
Ornatus, himself being likewise gone to betray Artesia. The whole assembly
marvelled when they heard him say that Lenon persuaded him to it, that Allinus
stood up, saying: Is not he dead, then how can this be? Lenon (quoth Lucertus
is not dead) with that Ornatus stopping in thrusting Leno^ before him, said:
Here is the man that has procured him to all this mischief. The Nobles
beholding him, were amazed at his sight, but being assured it was he, by the
perfect knowledge they had of him, Ternus said: Lenon, I had always thought
thou had borne the mind of a Gentleman, but now I find the contrary in thee,
and that in the most shamefulst degree. What fury led thee to such mischievous
attempts, to hire Lucertus to slay Ornatus, which he has almost performed? and
thy self to seek the death or misery of that virtuous Lady, that has
already endured too much wrong by thy folly? Allinus had not as yet heard of
Ornatus hurt, nor any knew the contrary but that Phylastes was he, for he
according to the mind of a most virtuous and constant friend, still co^cealed
himself. Nor the Lady Aura had yet seen her son, whom she had but heard of,
that Allinus said: Is my son Ornatus almost slain? O traiterous villain* with
that Aura likewise began to make exceeding lamentation: which Ornatus was not
able to behold, and therefore pulling off his disguised habit humbly reverenced
himself before the^ upon his knee both his Parents knew him, and with
exceeding joy imbr^ced him shedding abundance of tears for his safety. With
that, Duke Ternus and all the rest came to him, using him with such behavior
as belonged to him they had chosen King, seating him in an Imperial chair.
He being set thus, said: My Noble Lords, I thank you for intituling me with
this exceeding honeur: therefore my desire is, since you have elected me of
your free and bounteous hearts so be your King, let me this day and
instantly, be installed with possession of the Dyademe, for that I have now
no further cause of care to cause me defer the same: and likewise, that I may
give judgment against these most wicked conspirators. The Nobles with joyful
hearts gave consent, and immediately crowned him, with bended knees doing him
reverence: which done, Ornatus rising from his imperial seat, came to
Artesia, taking her by the hand, and leading her up the throne, seated her in
the chair, placing the Crown upon her head, saying: My Lords, I pray
likewise be contented we that I do, and as you have elected me king make this
your Queen: the^ pulled he off the vale from Artesias face, and her clear
beauty appeared to the admiration of all, who beholding, in humble sort did
her reverence, making exceeding shouts for joy, their hearts being all
exceedingly glad of her safety.

When this was done, she came down and embraced them, yielding them many
thanks, who all showed such exceeding kindness, as expressed their hearty
goodwill, and rejoiced both her and Ornatus to behold: especially Aura and
Turnu^ duchess, with many imbracings which they thought they could not
sufficiently express, rejoiced to see her in that safety. By that time Ornatus
was again seated and Artesia by him, Phylast^s hearing of Ornatus return
being though grievously wounded, yet in no great danger of death, as well as he
could came into the presence, where beholding Ornatus and Artesia crowned,
kneeled down before them, his heart conceiving exceeding joy, to behold that
heavenly sight. Whom O^natus kindly embraced, rejoicing to see him in that good
estate: after Artesias salutation, willing him to sit down amongst them. Then
Ornatus first commanding Floretus to be sent for out of prison, thus said: Now
there rests nothing but to give sentence against these, that by conspiracies
have been murderers, which fact is so heinous, that it makes them both
odious to God and man, in which offense, both thou Lenon, Lucertus, and Tyrefus
are gu^^tie: therefore Lenon (quoth he) first declare what moved thee from
time to time, to commit so many and greedous acts us thou have done. Lenons
heart was dead with vexation to see him crowned, and Artesia chosen his Queen,
that hanging down his head, he would not speak: but Lucertus humbling himself
upon his knee, asked pardon. By this time Floretus was brought in, looking with
such a meger and pale countenance, by reason of his long imprisoment, that
Artesia wept to behold him, and could not choose but run and embrace him, upon
her knee entreating Orn^tus to pardon the offense he had committed, which was
against none but her self. Ornatus seeing her kneel, suddenly caught her up,
embracing Floretus, and commanding his hands to be unloosed, withal saying: I
not only we a willing heart pardon you, but also give unto you forever, al those
possessions yt belo^ged unto your brother Arbastus. Floretus before expecting
nothing but death, which was turned to such exceeding joy, humbly upon his
knee yielded many thanks.

Then Ornatus ^easing himself again, said: Because this day is the first of
our reign, which should begin with mercy, and not with rigor, there shall not
a drop of blood by our command be spill: and therefore Lenon, though thou have
deserved no favor, but a most miserable death, we pardon thee. And Lucertus,
commanding thee upon pain of death, within ten days to depart this land,
for ye we banish thee hence for ever: which doom is too merci^ull for thy
fact. For thee Lenon, we only bannish thee this Court, where on pain of death
set not thy foot, least they life ransom thy presomption. This said, taking
Artesia by the hand, he was by the Peers with a noise of trumpets and
exceeding joy, conducted to a Chapel, and in royal sort that day married to
Artesia, and from thence to an Imperial feast, spending all that day in great
pleasure, and at night taking lawful delight in her love, both then and during
the time of both their lives, living in most pleasant loving, and virtuous
sort, that most places of the world were filled with the report of their
virtuous life, and peaceable government.

FINIS.

