A SECVRE AND PRVDENT CHOICE of Belief.

Written by a Student in Divinity.

Anno M.DC.XXXIX.

NOTHING in this world does more import a Man for his good, both temporal and
eternal, then the profession of a true Religion. What more confessed amongst
Christians not infected with Atheism? yet such is our poor Condition, that
nothing ordinarily is less valued: many stubbornly retayning what they have
been taught from their youth; Others embracing what is most common where they
live; Others indifferent, merely Animals, their wits serving them no further
then how to have good days; Others, loath to take pains, least thereby their
Conscience be moved to Cross their covetous appetites; Others, with a kind of
frenzy, persuading themselves of I know not what Ghost: Others, lurking under
affected and wilful ignorance, persuaded they are incapable of their right
level in these troubled waters: Multitudes finally, apprehending little
difference in points of Religion, sleep securely upon any pillow. Many of
these, though of different beleifes, flatter themselves with hope of salvation,
when they have little reason to be secure thereof; as it will appear by the
infallible rule of a Secure Choice I will propose in this ensuing Discourse:
For which purpose.

1. I suppose first, that our Blessed Savior, when he was to depart in visible
presence from this world, his last care was to leave his Church provided with
such as should sufficiently govern, teach, and augment it after him, to whom
and their Successors for that purpose he promised his especial assistance and
protection to the end of the world: As my Father has sent me, so I send you.
Io. 20.21. Going into the whole world, preach the Gospel. Mark 16. Here we
see the Apostles Commission, not only to go as being sent, but also to send
others their Successors with the like authority to be successively delivered.
That also he left ample power for the perfect government of the same Church,
besides these places, that of S. Matthew. 28. deserves special Consideration:
All power is given me in heaven, and in earth; going therefore, teach all
Nations. Where that illation, Going therefore, implies a most ample authority
for having said all power is given me, he presently practizeth and gives the
like, saying going therefore. Moreover that we may know nothing should be
wanting to the perpetual government of this his Church, and that justly it may
be esteemed to be directed, not so much by humane wit or industry, as by the
spirit of God; he promised Io. 14. And I will pray my Father, and he will give
you another Comforter, that he may abide with you for ever, the Spirit of truth.

2. It cannot be denied, but these places enforce an eminent, perpetual, and
infallible Authority of Christ's Church, to which such ample power is given,
and where the spirit of truth is promised to reside. Yet because means are
found to delude the force of them (as of any others there may be) I insist not
upon them, but for the present only make this Dilemma: Either these Texts are
clearly to be understood as they lie, or not: if they are; then there has ever
been a perpetual, absolute, and infallible power of government in the Church
of christ established. If not, this only I will gather, as out of other Texts
it may be, that scarce any can be produced so clear for the proof of any
verity, which may not maliciously be wrested to a strange sense, by tongues
sounding nothing more sacredly then Scripture. Thus all Sectaries, though
contrary amongst themselves, avouch for their undoubted warrant, Holy
Scripture, some understanding it in one sense, others in an other: when indeed
the proof is not out of Scripture, but out of their own private judgment. Who
then does not see, how vainly Scripture only, is pretended for warrant of
their contrary inventions; and how hard it is to convince the truth by it
alone? not for that it contains not all truth, and all sufficient instruction
for salvation, but because following our own private judgment we may err in
the sense thereof. Since therefore no man, though of never so entire judgment,
can sufficiently show his own sense to be true and the contrary false, as it
appears by such monstrous Contradictions upon the same Texts; it is evident,
that from Scripture alone, we can promise our selves little, or no security.

3. Secondly, I suppose there is a Church of Christ extant, that bears the
true marks of his promises and providence; renowned for antiquity and
continued Succession; perspicious for extent; knit in unity; adorned with
unanimous Consent of Doctors throughout the world; established and maintained
by Councels; beautifyed and enriched with multitudes of holy men, admirable for
their Conversation and virtue; strengthened with miracles; finally in Doctrine
and Custom professing piety, that any one beholding it may say, here is the
finger of God, this is the light, this the hill on the topp of hills.

4. Thirdly I suppose what truth it self (Marc. 16.) denounces; He that will
not believe, shall be damned. Whence under pain of Damnation we are obliged
not to disbelieue any point proposed unto us in holy Scripture; for Christ
specified not any particular article or articles, but to all disbeliefe of his
Gospel he denounces Damnation, Going into all the world, preach the Gospel,
he that will not believe etc. Hence it follows, that amongst different
opinions concerning the same Scripture, that part is less secure, that denies
the articles proposed out of it, since for disbeleife Damnation is denounced,
not for belief.

5. Fourthly, I suppose as consequent to what is said, that if an article
commonly believed, be judged hard by any private man, it is not secure for him
to condemn it, relying only upon human discourse, though joined with his own
or some others interpretation of holy Scripture, for all this is but in the
degree of probability, and not different from the means the Arians, and other
impious heretics used; consequently insufficient to disprove the contrary
possessed belief, though it be but supposed probable: but he must produce
clear Scripture without addition, diminution, supposition, or interpretation,
since these are subject to doubt, and consequently to danger of leading into
disbeliefe; who does not see how impossible this is?

6. Finally, for the end of this prudent Choice, I suppose, as sufficient, in
that religion which first belieueth many articles, denied afterward by others,
a moral probability of the sense of Christ's word: and this no wise man can deny
to a Church ancient, and consisting of Councels and learned men in all parts of
the world: agreeing in one opinion without any alteration evidently proved. To
say that any article is improbable, because it is impossible, is to prove by a
ground not possible to be proved, and to overthrow all faith, as is manifest.
We seek not then what seems possible or impossible to our poor
apprehensions, but what most probably Christ delivered: and he that with
probabilities only denies what is but probably believed, is not in secure
state of his salvation.

7. By these grounds clear enough in themselves, every Christian may easily
discern what Religion is secure in practice, to wit, that which remoueth him
furthest from danger of that sentence, Who will not believe shall be damned.
According to this Touchstone for the better instruction of the common sort, I
will examine the chief points now in question, that by these examples the rest
may be easily examined.

What Choice ought a man to make concerning the Real Presence of Christ's body
and blood in the Sacrament of the last Supper.
8. TO justify the belief thereof, we have first the words of Christ, Joan. 6.
where he amply promises his body and blood: My flesh is truly meat, and my
blood etc. he that eats my flesh etc. he that will not believe this, but
understand it in a different sense from his predecessors, persuaded by those
obscure words, the spirit gives life, the flesh profits nothing, exposes
him to danger of disbeliefe with the Jews, and blasphemy, since Verse. 56. it
is said: he that eats my flesh, and drinks my blood, dwells in me, and I
in him. And S Paul to the Col. c. 1. You which were in times past strangers and
enemies etc. has he now reconciled in the body of his flesh through death to
make you holy; how then can those words, the flesh profits nothing without
danger be understood of the flesh of Christ as profiting nothing? is it not
profit to us that Christ should dwell in us, and we in him? that we are
reconciled in the body of his flesh?

9. Secondly, the words of Christ performing: This is my body; take and eat;
do this etc. which words if we wrest to a figurative sense, we must bring
clear Scripture for it, else our interpretation is dangerous, denying such a
clear mystery upon human motives. Thirdly, we have the testimony of S. Paul 1.
Cor. 11. If these places be obscure, we have besides the Consent of Nations,
the common voice of the whole Christian world for a thousand five hundred
years without Contradiction. Finally, in the belief and practice thereof,
there is no impiety, but praise and honor of Christ, who upon sufficient
grounds is supposed present under the forms of bread and wine; he is received
with reverence, the soul being first prepared with hearty sorrow for sins
past, accompanied with love, thankfulness, and lively remembrance of his sacred
Passion etc. For denial of this belief we have but small authority, not one
clear testimony of Scripture that interprets those words of Christ as
figuratively spoken, all other arguments can be but probable.

10. Now I ask any indifferent man's judgment, what he would do, in case a
perfect figure of Christ should visibly appear, commonly acknowledged and
worshipped by all with sincere intention. If furthermore it were delivered
commonly, that to suspect the apparition, as an illusion of Satan, were a
wrong to Christ; will he adventure to spit at it? will he not rather forbear
that, and judge it secure to believe and worship with others, since therein he
finds no hurt, but invincible motives to do so? Clear then it is, what we
ought to resolve in this point, since for the belief we have invincible
motives; in the practice there is no danger of any impiety, as certainly there
is in the denial, if we grant but probability in the belief.

11. Only it may be objected, that if Christ be not under those forms of bread
and wine, there is danger of Idolatry. But this is a manifest mistake; for
Belieuers adore not bread nor wine, nor any Creature, but Christ, whom upon
good grounds they suppose present sacramentally. Know therefore, that Adoration
consists of outward reverence joined with interior, as of body and soul:
the outward is indifferent to God and Creatures, the interior joined with it
makes the difference. Exterior reverence applied by our intention to a
temporal Lord is but a Civil worship: the same applied by our intention to a
Saint, as a Creature of God highly in his favor, is a higher degree of honor,
yet within the limits of inferior worship. It is likewise applied by our
intention to God our Creator and Savior, thus it is perfect adoration and due
only to God. He then that belieueth Christ is contained sacramentally under the
forms of bread and wine may securely adore, since his adoration proceeding
from his belief, transferreth the outward act from all Creatures, and
directs it to God himself, even in case in his immediate belief he should
be mistaken; there remains then no danger in the belief, but great danger in
the denial. He that will not believe etc.

What of the Mass?
12. Mass is a complete performance of that command; Do this in remembrance
of me. Luc. 22. Wherein by the Priest, prayers are said for the whole Church,
the holy Scripture is read, all the parts and ceremonies thereof represent the
life and passion of Christ, who by means of those words pronounced in his
name, Hoc est Corpus meum, is daily offered in sacrifice to the honor of God,
and profit of his Church. Whence it comes to pass that faith, gratitude, and
love toward our Redeemer is daily renewed; and the known prophecy of Malach.
c. 1. fulfilled: From the rising of the Sun unto the going down of the same,
my Name is great among the Gentiles: and in every place a pure oblation is
sacrificed and offered to my name, according to the most ancient and common
Translation. Thus innumerable Belieuers constantly hold and practice, upon
sufficient grounds, without the least show of impiety; why then, may I not
securely believe I see not; nor how the denial can be free from danger, since
upon Disbelieuers only Damnation is denounced.

What of Confession and Absolution, commonly called the Sacrament of Penance.
13. HEre a Christian, after due examination of his Conscience with hearty
sorrow and purpose of amendment (which acts are necessarily required)
confesses his sins, expects absolution by the ministry of the Priest.
What danger can there be in this belief and practice? The Jews charged Christ
of blasphemy, saying: Who can forgive sins but God? Against Christ they
sinned, because they believed him to be man only; which error he chastised by
miracle. Matthew. 9. giving them withal to understand, that men also by power
received from him, should forgive sins; for in that they conceived he taught,
that man had power to forgive sins, he checked them not, but rather confirmed
it: And that you may know (says Christ) that the Son of Man has authority
in earth to forgive sins etc. And the multitude glorified God who had given
such authority to men. Moreover Christ to his Apostles Io. c. 22. says:
Receive ye the holy Ghost, whose sins ye remit, they are remitted unto them,
and whose sins ye retain they are retained: Likewise Matthew. 18. Whatsoever
ye shall bind on earth, shall be bound in heaven, and whatsoever ye shall
loose on earth, shall be loosed in heaven. Questionless, the prime sense of
these words import a power given to men to forgive sins: nothing then is
presumptuously assumed by the Belieuers thereof; for though it is proper only
to God to forgive sins by his own power and of himself, yet the light of
nature teaches that man may also forgive sins by Commission from him; as it
is proper to a King only to forgive Treasons committed against his person, yet
by Commission and his name a Subject may have power to do the same without
injury to the King, or exceeding the degree of a Subject. Why may not the
Minister of God by authority given him forgive sin in his name without
offending or exceeding the limits of a dutiful creature? this is at the least
probable. In opposition I find no Scripture, but only admirations of a few
dangers in comparison of the Belieuers; evident reason there can be none.
Dangerous then is the denial, Belief secure. Qui non crediderit; Who will not
believe shall be damned.

What of one Church, and one Head thereof?
14. IN Common Wealths throughout the world, I find an Unity is most sought
for, and to that end one supreme governor and ruler; in one house one Master,
in one Town one Mayor, in one Company one Captain, in one Army one General,
in one Kingdom one King; can it bear any color of offense, to believe that
in the most perfect Commonwealth, instituted by Christ, there is ordained one
flock under one Pastor? Vt fiat vnum ouile, and vnus pastor. We see that in
two supreme gouernements there is no mutual subordination, therefore not
properly one; and where there are two Kings, it is sufficient to conclude two
Kingdoms. If then in Gods Church we admit diverse supreme Governors, we cannot
so perfectly call it one Church, as one flock is one under one Pastor; which
Christ promised should be so. Whence it seems manifest, that for the
preserving of unity in Gods Church one head is necessary, and that in the
belief thereof there is no danger, though there were no Scripture at all to
warrant it. For as temporal Kings, though they have no warrant for their each
particular regal power out of holy Scripture, yet by law and justice and
conscience we are justly obliged, not to question it: So I understand not, with
what security a man may deny the authority of one supreme Governor of a Church
so many hundred of years prescribed. I need not here heap up texts of holy
Scripture for proof of the belief of one Church under one head, since in the
belief thereof there is no show of impiety, but in the denial as much danger
of impiety, as in denying any Prince his due. Yet that it may appear, that the
deniers are not only in danger of injustice, but also of disbelieuing Christ's
words, I lay down some few Texts to be pondered. Matthew. 6. Thou art Peter, and
upon this rock will I build my Church, and the gates of Hell shall not prevail
against it. Behold one rock, one Church, and that permanent against all
assaults. Io. 21. to Peter he said, feed my sheep; which words imply the full
office of a Pastor, that is, not only to provide nourishment, but also to
govern and defend, without which the office of a Shepherd is not complete.
That also these words were spoken only to Peter, it is manifest by that thrice
repeated interrogation of Christ, saying: Simon Peter, love thou me?
especially when he adds, more then those? whereby he excluded the rest of his
Apostles; to which when S. Peter had answered that he loved him, Christ
thereupon replied, feed my sheep; as if he should say, the supreme dignity of
Pastorship and Vicegerency which I give you, requires greatioue and charity,
and as you truly love me, so be a true Pastor in my Church; and because I give
you a dignity above the rest whom you are to rule (...) my place, therefore I
require that your love to me be singular.

15. This little I have observed, yeildeth such probability at the least, that
it is manifest, it cannot without danger be denied, but that God his Church is
one, under one head. But grant these places are not clear in themselves, yet
the Common voice of the world so long continued, expressed also in the two
Creeds, may justly excuse any Belieuer from the least danger of that sentence
Who will not believe etc. Securely then with the Apostles creed we co^ses to
believe the holy Catholic Church: and with the Nicen, One, holy, Catholic,
and Apostolic Church: and not one, unless it have a supreme visible Governor,
to whom all are subordinate. What danger can there be in this belief, if fear
of God and Conscience only be regarded?

What concerning recommending our selves to the intercession of Saints.
S. Paul did commend himself to the prayers of living Christians? If it be
answered, it is an injury to Christ, who bids all come to him; I see not
first how S. Paul can be excused, that often commended himself to the
intetcession of inferior Creatures, who should have gone to Christ only, and
to no body else. Look what must be answered in excuse of S. Paul, the same must
justify our praying to Saints Moreover, to justify S. Paul, and those that
commend themselves to the intercession of Saints, it seems evident that both
he and we go truly to Christ for we go not to Saints to give us this or that,
but to obtain their mediation for favors at God's hand; as truly we are said
to have recourse to the King for honor, if we desire his Fauorits to intercede
for us: and as notwithstanding this mediation, we are truly said not to wrong
the King, but to seek to him; so by our intercession to Saints we wrong not
Christ, but go to him; unless a man should be conceived not to seek to Christ
at all, but only to pray to Saints, which in no good Christian can be imagined.

17. If it be answered, that Saints in heaven cannot hear us; I ask, how can
this be known? not by Scripture, since it witnesses that many Prophets saw
objects not only absent, but not existent many hundred years after their time,
only by divine inspiration: nor by reason; for though were their hearing by
corporal ears, there might be some difficulty, yet since their hearing is
understanding, which is indifferent to conceive objects, as well absent as
present, this difficulty to any will appear vain and impertinent, since we
know not, how our soul understands, nor how our eyes see, or ears hear.

18. Hence I gather, that the Belieuers of this Article though they had no
express Scripture for proof thereof, (which for the present I examine not)
yet since their practice is conformable to reason, and consequent to the
practice of S. Paul, and the whole Church, they may rest secure in the belief,
until the denyers bring some clear places of holy Scripture to the contrary;
such places, I say, that need no explications, suppositions etc. For these
being but probabilities, are not sufficient to make the Belieuers deny what
before they believed, least perchance by not believing they prove guilty of
damnation; from which they are doubtless free, though peradventure the Saints
hear them not. As for injury to Christ, I have showed before, there is not the
least color thereof.

What Choice may be securely made concerning the making, and worshipping the
Image of Christ, and his Saints?
19. FOr the end of a safe resolution in this point, it is necessary first to
declare, what kind of worship is pretended due to Images; and for example, I
will discourse of the Image of Christ crucified, whereby what may be said of
the rest with proportion, it will easily appear.

20. The worship then pretended, never tends to the Image, out of an
apprehension of any Divinity therein contained, but only out of a faith in
Christ represented by that Image, that is, believing Christ worthy of all
honor, represented by this picture, in manner as he visibly once appeared.
Whence evident it is first, that by such worship Christ is immediately
worshipped. Secondly, that no honor due to God, is transferred to a Creature.
Thirdly, that whatsoever honor exterior or interior te^deth toward the
Image, is not for it, nor rests there, but by our faith and interior
reverence, is referred to Christ, for whom and to whom it is exhibited: for
since perfect worship consists both in the exterior and interior acts
conjoined, the interior giving life, and the very being worship to the
exterior, the interior respecting Christ for himself, and the Image only for
Christ; no sign of injury to Christ can be imagined. Or in a word, the worship
here in question is only an outward honor toward the Image, proceeding from
an inward reverence to Christ himself. And as S. Mary Magdalen worshipped
Christ as a man out of belief of the Divinity contained in him, or rather as
some worship their Communion for the Connection it has with Christ, whom it
represents; so in like manner the worship given to Images, is for the
Connection they have with Christ himself. The question then is, whether the
worship thus understood be lawful or no?

21. According to the new translations of the Bible, the negative part against
the Belieuers seems justified. Exodus 20. expressly forbidding the making and
worshipping of any Image whatsoever. But the first doubt that here occurreth,
and that a maine one, is; how this latter translation can be justified,
reading, Image, against the ancient, Idol, or graven thing, and so interpreted
by ancient Doctors, and Fathers. Secondly, grant Image, the right translation,
how can we be sure, that the same law is now in force, more then the law of the
Saboth or Circumcision? I see not how these two doubts can be solued by clear
Scripture which is necessary to repeal an anciently received belief in a
Church.

22. Moreover, admitting the word Image, and the Law to stand; it is manifest
that place proves nothing against the worship of Images as explicated before,
but only against Idolatrous abuse of them.

23. First, out of the end of the Law, which was, that the honor of God should
be inuiolably kept, by giving divine worship to him, and to no Creature;
therefore in the beginning it is said; I am thy Lord God, thou shall have no
other Gods but me: and after he had commanded, that no Idols, nor other
likeness of any thing should be made, he added the cause: For I am thy Lord God;
a jealous God; that is, make not to thy self any Idol or Image for thy God,
for I am thy God. Where mark, that particle, for, which gives a reason, why
he does forbid Images; because he was their God, and a ^ealous God: which
reason must suppose such a use of Images as should transfer Gods honor from
him to them; else that particle, for, is impertinent, if due honor of Images
may consist with the honor due to God; as that before declared does, and I
will show more hereafter.

24. Secondly, because, if that Command have force now against worshipping, it
is likewise of force against all making of Images, in so much that the very
Kings coin must be proved unlawful: but this is palpably absurd, therefore
also absurd, that the Law should now be of force against all Image worship. The
first proposition is manifest: for what the Law forbids to be worshipped, it
also forbids to be made; or if it forbids them not to be made, how does
it forbid them to be worshipped? the law expressly says; theu shall not make to
thy self, nor worship. If any reply, that those first words, thou shall not
make to thy self etc. signify thou shall not make to worship, intimating that
the worship only, and not the making of Images is forbidden; I ask him first,
how he can prove this his interpretation by Scripture? If he cannot, I may not
without danger receive, or make any Image. Secondly it is manifest that, that
interpretation can have no ground in Scripture, unless we also say, that when
Genesis 3.4. it is said, Adam and Eve made themselves, or to themselves Aprons;
and cap. 6. Make thee, or to the self, an Arc: and Number. 10. Make thee, o^ to
thy self, two trumpets, is to be understood of worship. Thirdly, if the fir^
part, thou shall not make to thy self, be understood, thou shall not make to
worship why should it be added, and thou sha^ not worship? If then we
understand thi^ place to be of force against Image worship, we must conclude it
to be of forc^ against the making, and receiving of all manner of Images, which
Christ himself reproves, commanding Ca^ sars coin to be given to him. Whence
it being manifest, that the second proposition is true, to wit, that this is
absurd, it follows evidently that it is also absurd to say, that the law is
now i^ force against Image worship.

25. A third and chief reason is, because we have clear warrant out of holy
Scripture, both for the making and worshipping of Images; the same Lawmaker
commanding Cherubims over the Arc Exodus 25. and a Serpent of brass Number. 21.
Cherubims, Lions Reg 6.7. to be made; how can this stand with a total
prohibtion of Images? That Arc represented God not so properly as the Image of
Christ represents Christ, yet David teaches us, Adore the footstool of our
Lord, for he is holy: which he says not, out of any Command there ever was of
adoring the Arc, since there was none; but only out of Consideration, that it
represents in some sort the Majesty of God. Iosuac. 7. fell prostrate before
the Arc: where I see not, what he did more or less then is required in the
worship of Images: did Joshua then break God's command? We read Genesis 8.2. Nu.
22. Ios. 5.14. and else where, how the holy Prophets adored God in Images, or in
Angels representing his person, prostrating themselves before them: and though
their intention was directed to God, yet their outward worship was directed to
those sensible apparitions, or Images representing God to their imaginations;
wherein they conceived God as represented, and these Images representing God,
morally one object; in the same manner as it happens in the honor of Images,
and in the worship of the figurative Communion, or as all Civil Nations do,
when they honor the Chair of State, or Presence Chamber of a King, without
wrong to Christ, or to the King.

26. These three arguments do manifestly show, that whether in the Commandment
we read Idol, or Image; by it nothing can be proved, against the declared
manner of worshipping Images, unless we will prove a Contradiction in holy
Scripture. Moreover since it is clearly proved, by those examples and practice
taken out of holy Scripture, that in such worship there is no sign of
dishonor to God; it is doubtless more secure with the common practice of the
world, to honor them, then by the denial of it to condemn such manifest
authority.

27. That in the refusing there is no security, it is also manifest, since the
Scripture brought is not clear for condemnation of Image Worship, therefore not
sufficient to cry down an ancient practice, proved by sound Texts of
Scripture, which can never be reconciled with those words of the Law, unless
where Image is read, we read Idol: which word signifies a Command that no
Creature should be made, nor worshipped as God. This use of Images declared is
justified both in respect of making and worshipping, by other texts of Scripture
without any Contradiction to those words of the Law; when the contrary without
any necessity compels a man to deny clear reason and Scripture.

28. It may be objected; that since Idolatry has been begun and maintained by
Images, and since men are prone to forget God, and apply themselves wholly to
corporal objects, the secure way is to abandon Images, at the least in
Churches. This is spoken without reason, or law; Without law, for there can be
none brought, since not Images, but Idols were the beginning and maintayning of
Idolatry. Images I have proved warra^table in holy Scripture. Without reason:
for, whereas an Idol represents nothing besides it self, and so is
worshipped, an Image represents a true thing, therefore moves a man to a
reverence proportionable to the object represented Whence in reason an Idol
occasioneth Idolatry not representing any further object whither our thoghts
and honor may be transferred; when contrariwise an Image of a true object
necessarily draws our minds, and reverence to some thing besides it self: so
that ask any simple Belieuer, whether he pray to an Image, or put any
Confidence in it, he will say no; ask him again, when he is kneeling before a
picture with his eyes fixed on it, whither he directs his prayers? he will say
to Christ, or some Saint. What hurt is there in this? S. Mary Magdelen
prostrate, kissed and bathed with her tears the feet of Christ: what justified
that act, but the union which those sacred feet had with his divinity, which
notwithstanding she saw not, but apprehended by faith? Though between Christ
and his picture there be not so immediate connection, yet a moral Connection
there is, such as between the King, and his Picture, Chair of state,
Ambassador etc. why then may not a Christian apprehend this connection between
Christ and his Image representing him, and accordingly exhibit due honor,
without danger of Idolatry?

Whether is holy Scripture, the only Rule of our Faith?
29. HIther to I have showed, that supposing Scripture the only rule, belief
is more secure, then denial; for both parties relying upon the same Scripture,
can never convince each others interpretation of falsity, as experience
sufficiently shows, and probability at least must be supposed on both parts;
in which case finding no further evidence, prudence compels me to choose
that part which is most remote from danger of Condemnation: Who will not
betieue, shall be damned.

30. Now, that there may remain no doubt at all, of the secure Choice of
belief; I will show it consequent to reason, and holy Scripture, that we must
admit of some other rule besides Scripture. If then belief be grounded not
only upon probable authority of Scripture (wherein it is equal at the least with
authority of Deniers or Disbelieuers) but also upon an other rule apparently
known and seen, as it is fit for a rule to be, there can be no doubt of the
security of belief.

31. And first, I suppose it is more then probable, or either Physically
certain, that there has ever been a Church, teaching and practizing those
points of belief aforementioned, not sufficiently disproued in point of
Continuance and incorruption in Doctrine, though the gates of Hell have
breathed forth all malice against it.

32. Secondly, I suppose holy Scripture as inspired by the holy Ghost to be a
certain rule of Christian belief; yet for that it is certain that al is not
written that was delivered by Christ, neither does it any where say, that it is
the infallible and sole word of God, and for that it is obscure, and does not
clearly explicate it self, as it is manifest by experience; it can not be an
infallible rule for the deciding of contradictory opinions drawn from the
same, though it alone may be a sufficient direction to let us know what more
securely may be believed.

33. The question then is: Whether besides the Scripture, a Church also, as an
impartial Interpreter thereof, be to be admitted; which is as much to say:
Whether the common voice of a Church interpreting holy Scripture, be a more
secure rule, then the voice of some particular men, whose private
interpretations, as before I showed, are not certain proofs out of holy
Scripture, but only probabilityes out of their own judgment: which
notwithstanding, some will oblige all to admit as Scripture, and contemn the
explication of an ancient Church.

34. For the negative part I find no clear Scripture, but such texts as
require hard interpretation, and which as much oppose the practice of the first
Primitive Church, then admitted as a doubtless rule, as it will appear to any
that shall consider them: You shall not ad a word. Deuteronomy. 4.2. Search the
Scriptures. Joan. 5.39. These things are written that you may believe. Io.
20.31. All Scripture divinely inspired is profitable. Are not these places of
as much force against the Primitive Church? Do they and the like say, that all
truth is written? or that what is written is divine Scripture? or that it needs
no help of interpretation, no not of a Church but of private spirits? What
ground then does there remain for the enforcing of sole Scripture, as the only
rule of our belief?

35. For the affirmative part, we have first, that Article of the Apostles
Creed: I believe the holy Catholic Church: How can we believe the Church of
Christ to be holy and Catholic, and doubt of Gods protection of it in point
of true belief and Doctrine?

36. Secondly, the authority of the Evangelists: Math. vlt. Teach all Nations
etc. Behold I am with you every day even to the consummation of the world.
Math. 18.17. If he shall not hear the Church, let him be to thee as a heathen
and publica^. Luc. 10.16. he that hears you hears me, and he that
contemns you contemns me. Besides, the Church is called, the Pillar and
firmament of truth. Tim. 3.15. Light of the world. Math. 5.14. Do not these
texts probably point at a living rule?

37. Thirdly, since Christ obliges us to a belief of his doctrine under pain
of damnation, it is manifest that by some means he will make it appear unto
us; but by Scripture alone it does not sufficiently appear, for by it we know
not what is Scripture, nor which is the true sense of Scripture, else all would
soon agree: therefore Scripture is not sufficient alone to deliver unto us our
saving faith. But the most undoubted and indifferent Interpreter thereof is an
universal Church; so as we may securely be ruled by it, interpreting the said
Scripture, and cannot be rejected without danger of disbelieuing God's word.

Grant to disbelieuers probability of reason, yet their danger is certain.
38. SOme may think, that this Discourse proves Belieuers secure, but not
that Dis belieuers are in certain danger, if they be ruled according to the
means and capacity God has given them, and that such are not stubborn
Deniers of truth, consequently secure enough. I grant, that invincible
ignorance may excuse Disbelieuers, as such, from sin; yet it follows not
that continual and final disbeliefe (though invincible) can consist with
grace necessary to Salvation: but this I dispute not, nor against these, but
against such as do, or may discern a difference between belief and
disbeliefe; and who may see that the grounds of belief are at least probable,
and the practice harmeles; who finally know damnation to be denounced upon
disbelieuers: notwithstanding adventure upon the denying part, moved only by
the same reasons, which they must suppose in confessed Heretics. Let any one
define what disbelieuer may be guilty of damnation, he shall find thereby, that
either he shall condemn these Disbelieuers I speak of, or else conclude that
there never have been any.

39. Some again may say, if the belief be supposed only probably true, then
the denial is also supposed probable. I suppose neither probability in the
negative part, nor only probability in the belief; but shunning this dispute
as endless, only out of the undeniable probability for the belief, and the
security thereof, I convince the danger of the denial.

40. But it may be replied, that at least the Disbelieuer by this Discourse,
judging the belief but probable, may also judge his own probable, and
consequently his danger also but probable. I answer, that notwithstanding the
Disbelieuer think his opinion probable, he cannot judge his danger only
probable. For as probability in the Belieuer, where no hurt appears, freeth
him certainly from danger; so the probability only, which the Disbeliener
supposes, leaves him in certain danger of disbelieuing what Christ has
revealed: first, because his danger is certain in the same degree as the
belief is probable; but the belief is certainly probable at the least in
respect of the great authority of the belieuers; therefore the Disbelieuers
danger is also certain, though he conceive a probability of his disbeliefe.
Secondly, because the disbeliefe is as certainly dangerous, as it is certainly
not evident (and more evidence is required to free the disbeliefe from danger
then is necessary to free the belief; this, though it were too much,
containing no hurt) but the Dis-belieuers doctrine is certainly not evident,
therefore it is certainly dangerous. The first proposition is clear, for if
there be not euidency for the disbeliefe the contrary ^hen may be true,
consequently obli^ing to belief. The second Proposition, that the Disbelieuers
doctrine is not e^ident, appears by the nouelty, in^onstancy, disagreements,
and other circumstances incident to it; as also by ^he ouerswaying authority of
the Belie^ers who want not any thing necessari^y required to a probability at
least, as ^y reflection any one may observe; nei^^her can the want of euidency,
in the Articles denied, warrant the Disbelie^ers; else who could believe? or
rather who could be charged of heresy? Whence ^he last Consequence of the Reply
is ^alse, for though to some their disbeliefe nay seem probable, out of a
probable ^udgment, that Christ delivered not such words, or in such a sense;
yet their ^anger is certain, because the contrary ^eliefe is certainly
probable at least, which may convince them, that they ^eaue the secure belief,
wherein there can be no danger, and choose that p^^ whereon Christ's
denunciation (...) fall. Nor may this argument be retort^ against Belieuers
though their doctri^ be supposed but probable, because their Belief there is
contained (...) harm or danger as in the disbelieue^ and danger known
breeds an ob^^gation of further inquiry, and remoue^ all ignorance which only
can excuse ^^rour in belief.

51. Again it may be replied, that a^ this hinders not, but that Disbel^uers
may conceive their disbeliefe pr^bable, consequently at least not impu^^ble to
sin, and therefore free from danger. I answer, that if a man conceive his
disbeliefe probable, he ha^^ reason justly to doubt, especially if h^^
probability arise out of apprehensio^ of probability in the contrary belie^^
which alone makes the disbeliefe dangerous in practice: as if a man shou^^
probably think Baptism not necess^^ry for infants, he may not neglect (...)
since in this the danger is apparent: b^ case inuincibly he conceive his opi^on
true, I meddle not, as impertinent this purpose, and a metaphysicall case
amongst understanding men.

52. If it be asked, what degree of pro^ability Belieuers may be conceived to
^aue? I answer, that as great as can be ^or any thing. They have Scripture,
Tradition, Consent of Nations, reason, ^euer clearly disproued as it is
evident; ^ince in numerable daily answer all ob^ections made against them: or
let any body set down what is sufficient to make an opinion apparently
probable, that he shall clearly find in the doctrine of Belieuers.

53. But Disbelieuers will say, that they believe in God's word, and deny only
what they find not contained in it. This is not in question; and who will not
believe God's word? The Devils (as S. James witnesses) believe and tremble:
the question is, whether they disbelieue nothing, or by their denials put not
themselves in danger of denying what is sufficiently delivered as God's word,
forging or rejecting it accord (...) to the Touchstone of their fancy. N^ther
is it in question, whether what (...) mighty God has revealed in Script^ ought
to be believed; but what God ha^^ revealed: and this is not only the wri^ten
word, but the sense, which we ^^ceiue, not perfectly from the bare lette^ but
by the help of prudent rule which to reject is dangerous, especial^ on their
part that deny Articles prob^^bly delivered.

54. In Conclusion of this Chapter, will answer one objection, by man esteemed
a secure Quietus est; They say God obliges not men to impossibl^ ties: since
then at least the vulgar sort o^ people cannot discern those differences,
wherein learned men do disagree^ech one may securely rest in that religion he
is taught, believing the Cree^ etc. This Discourse supposes holy Scripture the
only rule of belief: about the true sense whereof, since it is euiden^ learned
men do not agree, and no private man can be Judge between these differences,
it is manifest that who relyeth only upon Scripture, cannot be secure that his
disbeliefe is true, or that he refuse not to believe what he is commanded to
believe under pain of damnation. To say, that every one may securely believe
according as he understands, is but a desperate shift and concludes an
impossibility of any heresy. The objection then conuinceth the necessity of a
Church as a living rule; for God obliges us not to impossibilities; but it is
impossible for any to discern the monstrous differences of private men's
interpretations of God's word: Therefore he obliges not to the belief of his
word upon these private interpretations: But he obliges us to believe;
therefore by some other way then by Scripture alone, he makes it possible: this
can be no other but the Church.

The Conclusion.
55. THus I have sufficiently showed the security of belieuers, exemplifyed in
a few Articles most in question, containing no harm, nor opposite to any
known Law of God, as the better part of the Christian world ever has
witnessed, but at least most probably conformable to Christ's express word: I
see not what part of this can be doubted.

Consequently to this, I have also showed in what manifest danger Disbelieuers
are: first by rejecting and contemning the authority of an ancient Church, and
the only known Church when Luther began this denying belief, confessed to
have been the true Church, and as yet not convicted of corruption in faith, nor
as much as charged by any greater authority then it self: Let them take heed,
that be not spoken of them, He that despises you, despises me: Who will not
hear the Church let him be reputed as a Heathen and Publican. Secondly, by
choosing the disbelieuing part, out of seeming reasons, exposing themselves to
needles dangers of that sentence: Who will not believe etc. For if the contrary
belief must be supposed probable, as undoubtedly it must, then the disbeliefe
may with probability be a denial of Christ's word, consequently may be, it
deserves damnation; this is evident to reason, and no judicious man can deny
it.

If any fear, that as disbeliefe of what Christ delivered makes him a liar,
so also belief of what he delivered not; let them but observe the disparity
between Belieuers and Disbelieuers; those deny what Christ delivered as
manifestly as he delivered other truths: But Belieuers upon the same grounds
that move them to belief of other articles, suppose the points controuerted
delivered by Christ, which if they were not delivered they are only guilty of
mistake, not of making Christ a liar.

Who then sees not how much it concerns a Christian not rashly to deny what
anciently is delivered by the Church? On true belief God's favor depends,
on this our eternal welfare. We expect but one death, one irreuocable
judgment, one Eternity of happynes or misery. This is promised to Disbeliefe,
that to true Belieuers. Shall a Christian adventure upon seeming probabilities,
and leave security? Belief is secure, void of harm; to Disbelieuers it is
said: Who will not believe, shall be damned.

Let then all Disbelieuers examine their Disbeliefe, and harken to the
admonition of S. Augustine. cap. 1. de Baptis. Grauiter peccat, qui in rebus ad
salutem animae pertinentibus, certis incerta praeponit. Heavy is his sin, who
in matters concerning the safety of his soul, prefers uncertain means
before certain.

THE CONTENTS of this Discourse.
THe Preface. page 3. What choice ought a man to make concerning the Real
Presence of Christ's body and blood in the Sacrament of the last Supper. page
11. What of the Mass. page 15. What of Confession and Absolution, commonly
called the Sacrament of Penance. page 16. What of the Church, and one Head
thereof. page 18. What concerning the recommending our selves to the
intercession of Saints. page 22 What choice may be securely made, concerning
the making and worshipping the Image of Christ and his Saints. page 25.
Whether is Holy Scripture the only Rule of our faith. page 35. Grant to
Disbelieuers probability of Reason, yet their danger is certain. page 40. The
Conclusion. page 48.
FINIS.
THE CONVICTION OF NOVELTIE, AND DEfense of antiquity.

OR DEMONSTRATIVE ARGVMENTS of the falsitie of the new Religion of England:
And truth of the Catholic Roman faith.

DELIVERED IN TWELVE PRINCIPAL Sylogismes, and directed to the more
scholasticall wits of the Realm of great Britanie, especially to the ingenious
students of the two most renowned universities of Oxford and Cambrige.

AVTHOR R. B. Roman Catholic, and one of the English, Clergy, and Mission.

-- GRATIAS AGO DEO MEO PER IESVM CHRIstum pro omnibus vobis quia fides vestra
annuntiatur in vniuerso mundo. Romans 1.6.

QVISQVIS ES ASSERTOR NOVORVM Dogmatum queso te vt parcas Romany auribus,
parcas fidei quae ab Apostolico ore laudata est. S. Hier. ep ad Pamachium and
Oceanum.

CATVAPOLI, Apud viduam MARCI WYONIS.

Anno M.DC.XXXII.


