A PLEA FOR THE REALL-PRESENCE.

WHEREIN The preface of Sir Humfrey Linde, concerning the book of Bertram, is
examined and censured.

WRITTEN by I.O. unto a Gentleman his friend.

With permission. Anno 1624.

TO HIS MVCH HONORED FRIEND.
SIR, I have received the Book of Bertram, translated into English, reprinted
by Sir Humfrey Linde, with a dedicatory, and a long Preface before it, and
together your request to have my judgment, as well concerning the credit of
the treatise, as the verity of the Preface. Your singular affection and
manifold courtesies showed toward me, joined with your so religious love of the
Catholic truth, have so obliged my self and my studyes unto you, as I may not
be backward in yielding unto your so pious and just request. For I know your
require this Censure not for your own satisfaction (who are better grounded,
then to be removed, or moved with the vanity of such a trifle) but for the more
full information of some of your friends, whom Sir Humfrey would engage to run
the same unadvised course with himself, who does Praefa. fol. 3. b. lin 21.
and fol. 14. b. lin. 16.
engage the credit of his Religion, and the surety of his Salvation upon the
worthiness of this Tracte. I have heerin exceeded the breuity of a Censure, as
being desirous to lay open not only the insufficiency of this Preface, to
prevent the Readers danger, but also briefly the verity of the Reall-presence,
for the Prefacers, by me desired, conversion unto the Catholic church. The
work being wholly and totally yours by the free and full gift of the Author,
you may dispose thereof at your pleasure, and if you judge the same prolixe,
you may select such particles thereof, as you shall esteem most fit to be sent
to your friends, and to accept of the whole (as I know you will) with the same
affection as it is offered unto you by him, who does ever rest,

Your servant in Christ Jesus. I.O.

A PLEA FOR THE REALL-PRESENCE.
THERE are five points about which you may require satisfaction touched in Sir
Humfreys Preface. First concerning the divided Jury of the dissension of
Catholic Authors about Bertram. Secondly the truth concerning the Author and
authority of the book. Thirdly, concerning the fidelity of the translation
thereof into English. Fourthly, concerning the sentence of Gods word about the
Reall-presence. Fifthly, concerning the belief in this point of the Church of
the nynth age wherein Bertram lived, whereof Sir Humfrey does much presume, and
seems to prefer the same before the word of Christ, as shall appear. These
points I will declare with the most breuity and clarity I may.

THE FIRST POINT. Sir Humfrey convicted either of falsehood or gross ignorance
about the Jury.
COncerning the Jury of Catholics about Bertram, the Preface utters many
untruths, showing (if this be done wittingly) the falsehood (if unwittingly) the
ignorance of the author and that as well about the nature of things, as in the
latin tongue.

In the first kind, he has six gross errors and mistakings, upon which are
grounded the six pretended dissensions of the twelve Catholic (by him chosen)
Jurors, to go upon Bertram his doctrine and book.

The first is, not to distinguish betwixt writing darkely of the truth, and
openly against the truth. By this mistaking he imposes a falsehood upon
Cardinal Bellarmine the Foreman of the Jury, and so makes a jar betwixt him
and Preface fol. 7. b. lin 1. and fol. 4. b. lin. 6. 8. fol. 5. lin. 5.
F. Persons, the second of the Jury who says, that Bertram dyed Catholic and
never taught heretical doctrine: but this book after his death has been
corrupted by heretics. This verdict is the truth as shall afterward appear.
Neither does Cardinal Bellarmine say to the contrary that Bertram was a
singular Nouelict, or that he was opposed for his heretical doctrine. These
are Sir Humfreys mistakings, not Bellarmines assertions. Bellarmine only says,
that Bertram (and Scotus before him) writ doubtfully of the truth, and moved
questions about the Real presence, yet (says Bellar. l. 3. de Eu. char. c.
8.. iam sententia.
he) neither they, nor any other in that age did teach openly against it. So
that by Cardinal Bellarmines judgment Bertra^ might be Catholic in his
opinion, as F. Persons says, though for his dark writing he were misliked.

The second error, is to think that if one write truly in sense, he is not
to be condemned for using dark and doubtful speech against the style of the
church. Upon this error is built the second opposition betwixt the two next
Jurors. Because Langdalius says: Bertram Preface fol. 5. a. circa fine^ and b.
init.
for sense held the Catholic doctrine, Aug. epist. 188.
but transgressed in the form of words, Sir Humfrey inferres, that then
Garetius had no reason to say, that Bertram writ fondly or dotingly. As though
to cross the tradition of the Church though but in form of words were not
Dotage or insolent madness, and against the prescript of the Apostle: 1. Tim.
6.20.
Shune profane nouelty of speech: Use 2. Tim. 1.13.
the form of sound words.

The third error, is to make the publishing of doctrine against the truth, and
the publishing of a book that writs darkly of the truth, to be the same. By
this error, he puts varia^ce fol. 6. lin. 4.
betwixt D. Sanders saying: The Sacramentarian doctrine was not published in
Bertra^s age. And M. Reynoldes, who affirms, That Bertram (as Scotus had done
before him) writ doubtfully of the truth of the Sacrament. What oppositio^ I
pray you betwixt these two sentences, that Sir Humfrey should say they hold
together, like fol. 5. lin. vltim.
a rope of sand? Yea, does not the saying of M. Reynolds confirm the saying
of D. Sanders? For if (as M. Reynoldes, says) even Bertram and Scotus that are
most challenged in this matter, taught not sacramentarian doctrine openly, but
only writ doubtfully of the truth, then most true is the saying of D. Sanders,
that the sacramentarian doctrine was not published or taught publicly in that
age. Is it not great seelines to challenge those speeches as contradictious and
holding together as a rope of sand, which so agree, and are so knit together
as the one includes the other?

The fourth error, to think that one cannot be the disciple or follower of
one that is dead many hundred years: according to which error men now living
could not be the disciples and followers of the Apostles, and of their
doctrine. This is the ground of the discord he deuiseth betwixt the seventh
and eighth of the Jury. Because Valentia says, that Bertrams book is taynted
with the leven of Berengarius his error; Sir Humfrey Fol. 6. a lin. 20.
urges his saying as opposite unto Posseuinus, that Oecola^padius corrupted
the book, and set it out under Bertrams name, for (says Sir Humfrey)
Berengarius lived 600. years ago, and Oecolampadius an hundred. As who should
say Oecolampadius could not be a Berengarian in opinion, and infect books with
that leven, because he lived five hundred years after Berengarius.

The fifth error, is to think, that Catholics, who say Bertram writ a book
of the body and blood of our Lord, do therefore affirm, this book set out by
Oecolampadius, to be his book, and also to be pure and incorrupt without any
novel insertion of heretical stuff. This error is transcendentall in all
this quarrel with the Jury, but fol. 6. b. lin. 10.
particulerly, it causes him to conceive a dissension betwixt Heskins, that
says Bertram writ a book suspiciously, and Sixtus Senensis, who says, that
the book was corrupted and set forth by Oecolampadius in Bertrams name. A
great contradiction sure. Might not the book that was written doubtfully by
Bertram, be corrupted afterward by plain heretical assertions, and set out in
his name so corrupted by Oecolampadius?

The sixth error, that a pious and godly man may not write darkely concerning
some mystery of faith. Hence because Espencaeus the 11. Iuror says, Bertrams
book to be dark, obscure, intangling his Reader, he urges him to contradict
Tritemius In chronico.
the twelfe and the last Iurour, saying: Bertram was a learned and Godly man,
and writ a book of the body and blood of our Lord: yea sir Humfrey fol. 7. a
lin. 18.
to make here some show of contradiction where none is, with more cunning then
sincerity, helps the matter. For whereas Tritemius says, Bertram writ a
prayse-worthy work of Predestination, and one book of the body and blood of
our Lord, Sir Humfrey leaves out the book of predestination, and turns the
title of prayse-worthy from it, on the book of the body and blood of Christ,
making Tritemius say: Bertram writ a prayse-worthy work, to wit, one book
concerning the body and blood of our Lord. Can this be well excused in sir
Humfrey from witting misrelation to deceive?

In the second kind, to wit concerning sir Humfreys either of falsehood or
ignorance of latin, I set down these six examples, which joined with the
other, six make up a Jury.

First, to win a few years of antiquity unto Bertram, and to make him seem
the great writer of Charles the Great: whereas Tritemius says, that Bertram
writ a prayse-worthy work Ad Carolii Regem fratre^ Lotharij Imperatoris. Unto
King Charles, brother of Lotharius Emperor, he translates, Unto fol. 7. a lin.
13.
Charles the Great the Brother of Lotharius the Emperor, which is gross and
ridiculous absurdity in history, every man that has any smacke of learning
knowing that Lotharius was Grandchild to Charles the Great, not his brother.

Secondly to the same purpose: Whereas the Iudex expurgat Belgic. in Bertramo.
Doway-censure says, that Bertram was Carus Carolo non tam magno quam caluo.
Dear unto Charles not so great as bald, he translates, Dear fol. 10. a. lin.
2.
unto Charles the Great. Sir Humfrey was loath that this his so much esteemed
Bertram, on whose head he has set all his credit he has, or is like to have,
should be thought to have written to a bald Emperor, fearing some should thence
infer that he was a bald Author, as they may, with as much reason as Sir
Humfrey does conclude, fol. 3. b lin. 5. and 6.
that he was a Great author, and no fly, because he writ to a Great Emperor.

De visib. monar. l. 7 An. 816.
Thirdly, whereas D. Sanders says: Quidam suspicantur, some suspect the book
of Bertram to be forged under his name, he translates fol. 5. b lin. 9.
some say, and upon this, and no better euidency fol. 6. a lin. 3.
accuses Doctor Sanders that he says, The book is not Bertrams, but some
obscure Author. As though there were no difference betwixt doubting and
judging, suspecting and saying, whereas when we have but suspicion of a thing,
the common phrase is, I cannot say it.

Fourthly, whereas Valentia says: Dubium Valen. de presen. Christi in Euchar.
l. 1. cap. 2.
est, it may be doubted whether Bertram be author of this book, and fieri
potest, it may be that Bertram writ catholikly, and his book was afterward
corrupted. Notwithstanding this so great cautelousnes of Valentia, to show he
did but conjecture, Sir Humfrey makes him peremptory absolute, and to say
without any doubt or fear: The fol. 6. a lin. 13.
work is spurious.

Fifthly, whereas Garetius says: Delirare coepit Bertramus: Bertram began to
write dotingly. Sir Humfrey translates, He fol. 5. a lin. 20.
was an old dotard: fondly and dotingly. For to be a dotard, and to write in
one matter dotingly be different things seeing one act implies not the habit,
yea a learned man in some occasion may write absurdly. Neither does Garetius
mislike Bertram in regard of his agednes or antiquity, as Sir Humfreys
translation insinuates, by making him say: He was not only a Dotard, but an old
Dotard, but contrariwise in respect of the nouelty of his phrase, and for his
new doting, and because the former part of the book is Catholic and contrary
to the later, which soundes of heresy, a sign that either the book is
corrupted, or else the Author when he writ, was not present to himself.

Sixthly, whereas the Doway-censure says: Non diffitear Bertranum nesciuisse
exact. I will confess Bertram knew not exactly, how accidents subsist without
a substance; fol. 10. b. lin. 22.
Sir Humfrey translates: I doubt not but Bertram was ignorant, how accidents
exactly subsist. Had Sir Humfrey been exact and not ignorant in Latin he would
not perchance have so many ways misconstrued a few latin words. Especially he
would never have joined exactly with to subsist, which both the text and reason
show must join with to know; for there is difference betwixt knowing and exact
knowing, but no difference betwixt subsisting and exact subsisting. So that the
Censure says not that Bertra^ was wholly ignorant, as Sir Humfrey pretendes
they say, but only that he knew not so exactly how to declare the manner of
transubstantiation, as Deuines in this age.

I omit many other the like errors committed, as I suppose not in fraud, but
through ignorance of Latin, though Sir Humfrey turn, and make use of them to
the aduantagement of his heresy in blindenes of zeal. These I have noted, show
sufficiently, that the contentions betwixt Catholics which Sir Humfrey would
exhibit in his Preface, have no other ground, but his ignorance, and
misprision, and therefore are like to the battailles of Lucian Lucian verae
histo.
fought by mighty armies upon the Island of Cobb-webs.

THE SECOND POINT. Concerning the truth of the Author, and authority of this
Book.
THIS question may easily be decided among them that will set wrangling aside,
and seek sincerely after the truth, that will distinguish what is doubtful
from what is probable, and what is probable from what is certain, evident and
agreed upon, as will appear by the proof of these assertions.

First, it is very probable, that this book of Bertram was written in the
Nynth Age after Christ, when Bertram lived. For though there be not any ancient
author that maks mention thereof, none I say that lived and dyed before Luther
(for See Possem. his Apparatus
Tritemius the auncientest of Sir Humfreys Jury, and to whom he does attribute
most, dyed since Luthers revolt from the Church) yet See Paschas. his book de
corpore and sangui. Domini. tom. 4. Bibliot. SS. PP.
Paschasius Abbot that lived in that age of Bertram writes in so direct
opposition against this book, as it is likely he writ of purpose against it,
as will appear probable unto any that shall compare the two treatises
together. Whence I infer, that it is great want of judgment in Sir Humfrey
fol. 4. lin. 10.
to contend, that Paschas^us writ not against this book For heerby he
overthrows the very ground of all his discourse; seeing Paschasius his writing
against this book, is the only argument that the same was written about the
time of the nynth Age after Christ, and affords some possibility, that it might
be Bertrams.

Secondly it is evident, that the book is dark, doubtful, intricate. For
this is more then apparent unto all them that are able to judge, and with any
indifferency peruse the book. And to omit diverse dark passages of his book,
and particulerly where he Vide l. Bertram. in catalog. Test. verit. l. 10. col.
1602.
seems to teach most clearly the foolish and impious Paradoxe of Beza, That In
council. Montis-belgart etc contra Hessus. p. Corpus Christi no^ tantum
efficacia sed etiam essentia tempore Abrahae extitit.
the body of Christ did truly and substantially exist before his incarnation in
the womb of the Virgin. This is a manifest sign of Bertrams obscurity, that
even some Catholics think the book inclines unto the Sacramentarian
doctrine, against Transubstantiation: and on the other side, even Protestants
acknowledge, that the book favors Transubstantiation. In so much as the
famous Protestant historians of Magdeburge write: Semina Cont. 9. c 4.. de
caena. col. 212.
transubstantiationis habet Bertramus. Bertrams little book conteyneth the
seeds and original ground of Transubstantiation. Which is confirmed by the
testimony of De verbis institut.
Paschasius, who writing against this book does testify, that though in those
days some spoke obscurely about the Real presence, and out of ignorance
erred, yet says he, no man hitherto has openly denied what the whole world
does believe and confess, to wit, the Real presence, or the change of bread
and wine into the body and blood of our Lord.

Thirdly it is agreed upon, that additions have been made unto this book,
since the first writing thereof in the nynth age. For this no Catholic denies,
many Catholics constantly affirm, the parts of the book so dissona^t in
doctrine, the one from the other confirm: The Index expurg. Belg. Non obscure
infusa and inserta.
Doway-censure unto which Sir Humfry does appeal, consents and gives sentence,
that the book has been corrupted, and that this is manifest. Finally Josias
Simler. in Biblioth. vniuer. and concord. Genesis
Protestants themselves confess, that when they censura Duace^. in Bertra^.
first printed the book in this age, to wit, Coloniae anno 1532. that the same
was printed with additions: Additis Augustini, Ambrosij, and Eusebij super ea
re sententijs, The sentences of Augustine, Ambrose, and Eusebe being added
thereunto. And if the sentences of Augustine, Ambrose, Hierome, (for in lieu of
Eusebe they should have said Hyerome out of whom some sentences are challenged
in this treatise, but none out of Eusebe) if I say these sentences were added
unto the book, as Protestants confess, then also the inferences and
consequences framed thereupon were added, and consequently the greatest and
most ill-sounding part of the book.

Fourthly, it is exceeding doubtful, whether Bertram were the Author of this
book, whereof neither Sir Humfrey, nor any man else has brought so much, as a
good coniecturall proof. For though it be probable the book was written in
Bertrams age, yet it does not thereupon strayghte follow, it was written by
Bertram, yea there be better conjectures for the contrarary. For if Bertram had
been author of this book written against the Real Presence, as Sir Humfrey
thinks: certainly Berengarius would have named Bertram for his predecessor,
and which yet he never did. For why not Bertram as well as Ioannes Scotus that
was in the same age with Bertram, whose book the said Berengarius did magnify,
because written doubtfully of the Real presence, calling him his master, and
Lanfrancus in libro cont Berenga.
extolling him above the more ancient Fathers. Again if that book had been
published in that age with Bertrams name, Paschasius who wrote against that
book, would not have spared Bertrams name, but have written against him by
name, so to have impaired his credit, that otherwise might give authority to
the error. Specially seeing he named some of that age, that spoke and wrote
darkely of the Real Presence, as Feuedardus the knight. Why, was there never
any mention of Bertram as inclining unto the Doctrine of Berengarius if he were
author of this book? yea the Protestant Pantaleon cronograph. p. 65.
making a Catalogue of the works of Bertram, leaves out this pretended book.

Finally it is certain, that though Bertram were author of this book, and
the same written directly against Transubstantiation, yet this is a matter of
small moment for Protestants, and not a sufficient warrant that there has been
so much as one Protestant of the now English religion before Luther or Calvin.
For certain it is that Bertram (put case he erred in this point of the Real
presence) was Catholic, and against Protestants in other, as appears even by
this treatise, where he urges Mingling Page 56. lin. 23.
water with wine, affirming, that it is not lawful to offer wine not mingled
with water, as a thing sacramental and mysterious: he Page 27 lin. 14.
does acknowledge the daily sacrificing and immolating of Christ on the Altar
in the Sacrament of his body and blood. He ranckes Chrisme or confirmation in
the number of the Sacraments with Baptism and the Eucharist, giving it the
middle place, and finally private Masses, or celebration with administration
and communion.

Hence we may conclude two things. First the great vanity of Sir Hu^frey his
preface, who ingageth his credit, to wit, Preface fol. 3. lin. 21.
the credit of a pure professor of the Ghospel, that is his faith his Religion
upon the worthynes of this tract, who so earnestly and constantly affirms
Bertram to have been the author thereof, and so triumphs against us for a
supposed dissension among our writers about this toye. This I say is great
vanity, the dissensio^ being greater in his own Church (to omit more main
matters) even about this book of Bertram, which though Sir Humfrey urge as
written by Bertram, as never since corrupted, as confuting Transsubstantiation:
yet Protestants of greater credit, are of another mind. Some reject the book
from the number of Bertra^s, as Pantaleon: some confess the same to have been
corrupted with new additions, as Josias Simlerus. Some contemn it as sauouring
of Papistry, namely of Transubstantiation, as Illyritus. And seeing Sir Hu^frey
knew this well enough as appears by his Praefa. fol. 5. b. lin 12. Reynold
treatise against Bruise c. 5. fol. 27.
ma^gling a sentence of M. Reynolds, wherein this is discovered; I wonder he
could be so seely and blind, as not see that this furious blast of bitter
inuection against us coms back by reflection thoroughly v^on his own self,
against whom rather then us, he thus thu^ders: How preface fol. 11. a. lin.
20. and sequent.
comes it to pass, there is so much difference of opinions concerning Bertram?
How is it their kingdom is so divided against it self that they cannot by any
glue of concord, nor bond of unity be conjoined? Some hold with Paul, some with
Apollo, some allow the book, others deny the Author, Is the workman, and the
work divided? Is this the wisdom and policy of the Church to cry some one
thing, some another? Thus Sir Humfrey, and more of the like stuff uttered in
the same tune, flourishing blindfold in his ignorant zeal, with every word
wounding himself, and his own disagreeing religion.

Secondly, hence appears Sir Humfrey his extreme and intolerable ignorance in
matters of fact in saying: That Preface fol. 8. a. lin 18. and b. lin. 1.
P. Clement the eight, and the Council of Trent condemned Bertra^ without a
fol. 8. b. lin. 9. and fol. 9. a. lin. 7.
legal, proceeding without trial of the party, without hearing him, or his
advocate to speak for him, seven hundred years after his death, a strange
thing neither allowable in Church, nor state. Thus he. And it is strange that
a man no better learned, would undertake to be a writer, unto whom we may say
what S. Augustine Lib. 1. cont. Crescon. Gra^mat. c. 3. Si non penitus
instructus es cur non potius taces?
said to the lay-Donatist Cresconius. Though want of learning in a layman be
not blameworthy, yet being no better learned who forced thee to write? Being
void of learning, why did thou undertake the task of writing, not being
thereunto obliged by calling? First for (to examine his speech a little) is it
not gross ignorance in state, and state-matters, to think that men may not be
condemned after their death? wherein I will refer Sir Humfrey unto Lawyers
more learned them himself, and unto that famous Process of their Gospel,
Sander. de schism. Anglican.
whereby S. Thomas of Canterbury, four hundred years after his Martyrdom was
solemnly arraigned and condemned of Treason.

Secondly concerning the Church and her affairs, I dare say there is not any
man of learning that knows not this doctrine of Sir Humfrey, that books and
their authors after death may not be challenged and censured of heresy, to be
Nestorian. Which doctrine was accordingly condemned in the Vide Council. Sanctum
General. collat. 3. 4. 5. 6.
fifth general Council almost in every action thereof called of purpose, to
condemn Collat 8. can. 12. 13. 14.
Theodorus Bishop of Mopsuestia, and his Nestorian works with some books of
Theodoret, and of Ibas Bishop of Edessa. In which Council likewise the Fathers
anathematized Collat. 8. can. 11.
Origenes four hundred years after his death, cursing them that should think
this not to be a practice allowable in the Church. But alas, good Sir Humfrey
dreamed not of this Council, but spoke of condemning men after their death
only out of his mothers wit, according to which, that proceeding seemed to him
unjustifiable. Besides what more false, then that the Council did not hear
Bertram speak, seeing the Commisioners read his book, and so heard him
speak, as plainly as dead men can speak, to wit, by their writings?
Fourthly, who that knows of what he speaks would say, that Protestants,
Bertrams pretended Preface fol. a. can. 19.
Aduocats, were not admitted to speak for him? For were they not cyted and
summoned thither with license, liberty, yea intreatyes to speak freely their
mind and produce the proofs of their doctrine? And because they made show to
fear danger, had they not See this safe conduct sess. 13. 14. 15. eos omnibus
charitatis officijs vt inuitat, ita etiam co^plectetur.
security from the Pope, from he Emperor, from the Council, from the
Catholic Princes? The truth is, that being guilty of the falsehood and impiety
of their Religion, they durst not appear, though Sir Humfrey tells us a tale
of a Tubb, or, which is as good, of a Purita^ pulpit: That they were not
admitted to speak. Finally his whole discourse is framed and founded upon this
falsehood, that Bertam and his book was in the Council, and by the Pope
condemned of heresy, whereas the person of the author was not touched with any
censure, nor the book condemned as heretical, but only forbidden not by the
Council, but by a commission from the Council, as being dark, obscure, full
of ignorant phrases, corrupted by heretics. Fol 8. a. lin. 14.
And this is also the judgment of the Doway-censure, to which from the
Council, and Pope, Sir Humfrey does appeal in Bertrams name; for it ce^sureth
that book, See this censure in Indice expurgat. set out by Iunius ann. 1699.
as of no worth, as dark, as full of ignorances, as corrupted by heretics,
not fit to be read vulgarely by Catholics. Then add, which the Coucell did
never deny, that the book being purged from heretical insertions, and cleared
by the stars of marginall annotation set over against the dark passages
thereof, may be read without danger. Whence appears the seelines of Sir
Humfreys said appeal from Pope and Council unto these Doway-censurers,
concerning whom he has this sentence wherein every man that knows any thing,
will see there is not one true word as may likewise be seen by the references in
the margent: They hear Who was chose^ Pope 20. years after
the Popes sentence, the Councels That never was made.
decree, the Who made no judgment, but asked counsel of Doway.
Inquisitours severe judgment: they weigh soberly his accusers reasons: they
examine diligently the author himself, and finding the former doom Which they
confirm.
too heavy for so slight errors committed by him Conde^ning the book, as
dark, ignorant, corrupted by heretics.
they repeal the sentence, and upon more mature deliberation had of the They
hold his doctrine, not to be against the Roman.
author, and of the doctrine, with the consent He forsooth, gave his consent,
that Doway should repeal the decree of pope and Council.
of Philip the second, and the Duke of Alba, to all The book of Index
expurgatorius for Inquisitours not for all Catholics.
the Romish Catholics in his behalf send greeting. And then having set down
the censure of Doway, corruptedly, omitting that part, wherein they affirm,
that it is manifest that the book was corrupted by Protestants in their first
editio^ thereof at Colen, he concludes: Here then is their last definitive
sentence: which saying of his is sufficient to define (where the matter is
otherwise doubtful) that Sir Humfrey his ignorance is intolerable, and even
ridiculous in one that presumes to be a writer.

THE THIRD POINT. That Sir Humfrey in his translation, has most grossly
corrupted the book of Bertram.
NOW let us pass from the Preface to the Translation which I take to be Sir
Hu^freys; for though he not directly so affirm, yet he insinuates so much, and
his adorning the same with a Dedicatory, with a long Preface, his engaging all
the credit he has, and is like to have in his church, upon the worthynes
thereof, shows him the Author. And makes me fear that he would take it ill,
should I suspect the Translation to be any others then his own. Wherefore that
Sir Humfrey may receive his doom from Bertrams own mouth, of whom he does so
brag, I will in lieu of a Jury produce twelve places of Bertrams book, making
so clearly for transubstantiation and Catholic doctrine, Catalog. Testium
veritatis, l. 10. anno 1568 apud Iacobum Staer, and Ia. cobum Chouet.
as Sir Humfrey had no other way to hide the matter, but to translate the
places falsely, and that with excessive audacity. The latin, according to which
I examine Sir Humfrey his translation, is set forth by Protestants in their
book termed Catalogus Testium veritatis.

The first place is page 4. lin. 19. That bread which by the Ministry of the
Priest is made the Body of Christ, Catalogus testiu^ col. 1058. circa finem.
does show one thing outwardly to man's senses, and sounds another thing
inwardly to the mind of the faithful; outwardly indeed the Form of bread,
which Substance it was before, is set out, the color thereof is showed, the
savor tasted, but inwardly a thing far differing is set forth, yea much more
precious and excellent, because divine, because heavenly, to wit, the body of
Christ. Fittly does Bertram speak in the behalf of Transubstantiation: and
Sir Humfrey ashamed to see such papistry in him, seeks by mis-translation to
lay a cover over it. First, whereas Bertram says, efficitur, bread is made, by
the power of the Priest, the body of Christ, he translates, becomes the body.
Secondly whereas Bertram says: Aliud long pretiosius and excellentius
oste^ditur, another more precious and more excellent thing is showed, he
translates, Is more precious and excellently showed. Thirdly and principally,
whereas Bertram says: Exterius quidem panis quod ante fuerat forma,
pretenditur. The form of bread (which thing or substance before it was) is
showed, he trannslats, Outwardly the form of bread which it had before is
showed. Most falsely and grossly. First he makes the substantial verb
fuerat, which signifyes substa^tially to be, to suppose, for habuerat the
accide^tall verb, which signifyes the being of things as adjacent unto
substance, not the prime and substantial being. Secondly quod, which is here
taken substantiuely, and signifyes the thing or substance of bread, which
quiddity, or essence of bread, Bertram says before consecration was, but after
consecration is not. Sir Humfrey taks quod adiectiuely, referring the same unto
forma, the form and shape of bread, so construing the text, Forma quod
ostenditur, which is such childish and shameful ignorance, as it is unworthy
to be noted: yet by this ignorance he peruerts the substance of the Authors
meaning.

The second place is page 7. lin. 11. What I pray you, In Catal. col. 1059.
circa medium.
can be more absurd then to take Bread to be flesh, and to affirm Wine to be
blood? And a mystery it cannot be, in which there is no secret or hidden thing
contained. And how can it be said to be Christ's body, in which is not known
that there is any change made. Thus Bertram. Sir Humfrey in the margent notes,
that here Bertram proves, that no change is made in the elements of the
supper: clear against the drift of Bertram, who by all means labors to
prove, that the bread is changed not by change according to sensible accidents
apparently, but in the inward substance inuisibly.

This is proved more clearly by the third place page 9. In Catal. col. 1059.
circa fine^.
lin. 12. This change (to wit according to outward qualityes) is not known
here to be made; for nothing here can be found to be changed, either in
touching, In Catal. col. 1059. circa fine^.
or color, or taste, or savor. Therefore if nothing be changed herein, it is
not then any other thing or substance, then what it was before, but it is
another thing, or substance, because bread is Sir Hu^frey here translates
becomes the body not made, which word he still carefully auoides. In catal.
col. 1060. l. 6. and seq.
Made the body of Christ, and wine his blood: for so himself says: Take ye
and eat ye, for this is my body; and speaking of the cup, he says likewise:
This is the blood of the new testament. Thus Bertram, clearly showing, that the
Bread is changed substantially, but not so that the same outwardly appear, but
is hidden and covered with the figure and form of bread.

This is again made clear by the fourth place page 11. lin. 4. Seeing then
this cannot be denied, let them tell us how, and in what respect the elements
are changed, for corporally Sir Hu^frey translates substantially to signify
there is no substantial change.
nothing is seen to be changed in them. Therefore they must of necessity
confess, either that they are changed otherwise then according to the body,
and so not to be the thing that in verity they seem, but another thing or
substance, which they are not Here Sir Humfrey understood nor the latin
seen to be according to their own proper being. Or if they will not confess
this, they are compelled to deny, that they are the body of Christ, which is
wicked not only to say, but also to think. This place is plain, and Sir
Humfrey does many ways by translation obscure it, as I have noted in the
marge^t.

The fifth place page 22. lin. 5. We are truly persuaded that no faithful
man doubts, In catal. col. 1062. lin. 41. and sequent.
but that bread was made the body of Christ, of which he himself giving it to
his disciples, says: This is my body. Sir Humfrey translates quite contrary.
For we think truly that any faithful man doubts whether that Bread becomes
Christ's body, making Bertram to affirm, that every man doubts of this change
of bread into Christ's body.

In catal. col. 1063. lin. 6. and 7.
The sixth, page 24. lin. 1. Bertram makes Christ speak in this sort: Do not
think you shall corporally eat my flesh divided into parts or drink my
blood. Sir Humfrey translates: Think not I pray you, that you must either
bodily eat my flesh, or bodily drink my blood. So that Bertram his denial of
carnal eating, by tearing Christ's flesh into pieces, Sir Humfrey turns into a
denial of substantial eating thereof, by real su^ption, whereas Cyril. 10. in
Ioa^. c. 13. corporaliter and secundu^ carnem. In catal. vbi supra lin. 12. 13.
14.
the Fathers in this sense say expressly: we take in the Sacrament the flesh of
Christ corporally.

The seventh, page 24. lin 13. Bertram bringes Christ saying: Then (after my
ascension) the bread and wine turned into the Substance of my body and blood,
shall by the mystery, or Sacrament be truly eaten of the Faithful. A place so
clear, that Sir Hu^frey like a bat that endures not the light, would beat the
same out by mistranslation. For thus it pleases him to make Bertram speak,
Bread and wine being turned into my body, and blood All this is added.
the substance thereof shall in a mystery Vere omitted.
be received. First he adds the word Substance, bread turned into the
substance of Christ's body shall be eaten, says Bertram, bread being turned
into the substance of Christ's body, the substance of bread shall be eaten Sir
Humfrey will have him say. Is this to translate, and not rather to pervert the
meaning of Authors, and make the^ to speak fo^dly? For if bread be turned in
the substance of Christ body, how can the substance thereof remain and be
eaten. Secondly he leaves out the word truly, saying only it is eaten, whereas
Bertram says: it is truly eaten, which is a substantial omission in Bertram:
because Bertram in the beginning of his book, declares that he takes truly, to
signify the same, as in substance, really, and not only in figure, so that if
the body of Christ be truly eaten in Bertrams opinion, it is eaten in the
substance thereof really, and not only in figure.

The eight Bertra^ says page 27. lin. 13. Was not Christ immolated in
himself only once, Catal. col. 1063. circa finem.
and that about Easter: and yet in the Sacrament not only in all the festival
days of Easter, but also every day he is sacrificed, or immolated by the
people. Thus Bertram, which is rank papistry. Now hear Sir Humfrey
translating Bertram not into English, but into Protestancy. Was not Christ
offered about that time: And yet notwithstanding he is not only every feast of
Easter but every day offered unto the faithful people. Thus is Bertram trimmed
by Sir Humfrey according to the Protestant cut.

In Catal. col. 1064. circa medium.
The ninth, Bertram says page 30. lin. 8. It is not said, that Christ does
suffer in himself every day which he did but once? Sir Humfrey to make this
place sound against the Mass, or daily oblation of Christ's body, translates,
It is not said that Christ offers himself every day, because he did it but
once.

The tenth, Bertram says page 41. lin. 6. Catal. col. 1066. circa finem.
According to the substance (or corporal Mass) the creatures what they were
before, the same they afterward remain. But they were before bread and wine,
according to which form and shape they are seen still to remain. Therefore
the thing is inwardly changed by the mighty power of the holy Ghost, which
change faith beholds. This place is too perspicuous for Transubstantiation,
therefore Sir Humfrey in his translation makes a Transubstantiation thereof,
changing the very substance of the sense into his own contrary meaning:
Whatsoever they were before consecration they are even the same afterward,
but they were bread and wine before, and therefore they remain the same, which
is proved, because we see that even when they are consecrated, they remain in
the same kind or form. Surely Sir Humfrey, this is not to translate Authors
out of Latin into English, but to translate fancyes out of your own head into
their Treatises. For Bertram was wiser, then to make this foolish argument,
which you foyst into his book; Bread remaynes in form and shape, therefore it
remaynes in substance.

The eleventh, Bertram often in this Treatise names the daily celebration of
the mysteryes, signifying the custom of private masses, or celebrations
without communion, which Sir Humfrey not e^during, still as well in Bertram as
in the sentences of other Fathers translates celebration and administration, by
this addition to make Bertram a Protestant.

The twelfe and last place page 42. is most notoriously corrupted, Catal. col.
1067. init.
where for forty lines together, he translates not one sentence, line, or
almost word with corresponde^ce unto the latin text. I will note only his
corruption of one line thereof. Bertram has this sentence: Corpus est Christi
quod cernitur, and sanguis qui bibitur; nec quaerendum quomodo factum sit, sed
tenendum quod sic factum fit. What is seen is Christ's body, what is dru^k is
his blood, neither ought we to search the manner how it is done, but believe
that so it is done. Sir Humfrey thus translates: That is Christ's body which is
seen, that is blood which is drunk, and we must not enquire how it is made,
or becomes his body, but believe and hold, and so it is become his body. Thus
he thrusts into Bertrams book his Puritanicall faith, Creed quod habes and
habes: I now appeal unto the judgment of any indifferent Reader to give
sentence. First whether Sir Hu^frey have not manifestly corrupted the book of
his Bertram? Secondly, whether the book can be clear against
Transubsta^tiation, and utterly overthrow the same, as Sir Humfrey boastes,
that in so many places makes so clearly for it. Thirdly, whether it be not the
greatest vanity in the world to build a Religion against the Roman Catholic,
and salvation out of their Church, upon this tract which is so papisticall, as
sir Humfrey his English translation is even ashamed thereof. Finally, whether
the Protestants be not in extreme misery and beggary for want of professors and
recorders of their Religion before Luther, that can find no better then this
Book, and this Author, whereof they brag beyond measure?

THE FOVRTH POINT. A grand Jury against Sir Humfrey, showing the Real
presence, which he terames, a dead letter to be the doctrine of Gods holy word
and the perpetull doctrine of the Church.
THE infinite wisdom of Gods holy spirit foreseeing with what difficulty the
Real presence of Christ's sacred flesh, and precious blood in the Sacrament
would be believed of carnal men, in regard of the repugnance with reason, the
same seems to have in their judgment, would have all the holy Scriptures to
set down this truth, more often, and sequently, more solemnly, and of set
purpose, more clearly and expressly, then the truth of any other christian
doctrine. Out of which I gather these twelve express and formal sentences in
this behalf from Christ Jesus his own mouth.

Joan. 6.51
The first. The bread which I will give, is my flesh, which I will give for the
life of the world.

Ibid. 53.
The second. Verily, verily, except you eat the flesh, and drink the blood of
the son of Man, you shall not have life in you.

Ibid. 54.
The third. Whosoever eats my flesh, and drinks my blood, has eternal
life, and I will raise him up at the last day.

Ibid. 55.
The fourth. My flesh is meat indeed, my blood is drink indeed.

Ibid. 58.
The fifth. This is the bread that comes down from heaven.

Ibid. 57.
The sixth. As the living Father has sent me, and I live by the Father: so he
that eats me, he shall live by me.

The seventh. Ibid. 56.
He that eats my flesh, and drinks my blood, dwells in me, and I in him.

The eight. Ibid. 59.
Not as your Fathers did eat the Manna in the wilderness, and are dead: He that
eats this bread, shall live for ever.

The nynth. Mat. 26. v. 26. 27. and 28.
And as they were eating, Jesus took bread, blessed, brake, gave to his
disciples, saying: Take, eat, This is my Body. And he took the cup, and gave
thanks, and gave to them saying: Drink ye all of this; for this is my Blood
which shall be shed for many unto the remission of sins.

The tenth. Marc. 14. v. 22. 23. and 24.
And as they did eat, Jesus took bread, and blessed, and brake, and gave to
them, saying: This is my Body. And he took the cup, and when he had given
thanks, he gave to them, and they drunk all thereof, and he said to them:
This is my Blood of the new Testament, that is shed for many.

The eleventh. Luke 22.7 19. and 20,
He took bread and gave thanks, and brake, and gave to them, saying: This is
my Body, which is given for you. Likewise also the cup, after supper, saying:
This cup is the new Testament in my Blood, the cup that is shed for you.

The twelfth. 1. Cor. 11. v. 24. 25.
Our Lord Jesus the same night in which he was betrayed, took bread, and when
he had given thanks, brake, and said: This is my Body that shall be given for
you. This do in remembrance of me. In like manner the Cup, when he had supped,
saying: This cup is the new testament in my Blood.

What could be spoken more clear, more express? wherein will Protestants
believe Christ upon his bare word, submitting thereunto their carnal fancyes,
since they contradict the truth of this his text so reiterated in Scripture?
Rejecting the same as a dead letter that kills, as does our Sir Humfrey?
Against whom, to prove these words are to be taken in the litterall sense, I
will bring one only argument, but that used by all the ancient Fathers, and
conuincing. The word of holy Scripture is to be understood in the litterall
sense, when that sense is neither wicked, nor absurd. This is a rule delivered
by Lib. 3. de doctr. christian. cap. 7.
S. Augustine, and received of all hands, else if it be lawful by metaphore to
destroy the literal sense of Scripture, when without inconvenience the same
may be understood literally; we shall never be certain of any sense, but men
will turn and toss the word of God by figurative construction, as they please.
But the litteral sense of this word of Christ, This is my body, is neither
wicked nor absurd, as I thus demonstrate. The sense of Scripture, that is
possible unto God, is neither wicked nor absurd; for God can neither be author
of a wicked thing, because he is infinitely good, nor of an absurd thing,
because he is infinitely wise: but the litteral sense of this place, to wit,
that bread is become really and substantially the body of Christ, being changed
into the substance thereof, is possible unto God. Who dares deny this?
Protestants though some Calu. lib. 4. inst. c. 17.. 24.
of the^ mutter between the teeth against the omnipotency of God, yet I have
not read any that does in plain terrmes affirm, that God cannot turn the
substance of bread into the substance of his body. Yea Conf. Wittemb. cap. 144.
some profess they believe this to be possible, and that they would Melan.
epist. ad Carolum Geralit.
rather burn then say that God cannot put the same body in many places at
once. Therefore the Catholic, that is the litterall sense of Christ his word,
This is my body, is possible unto God. And this is the argument (as I said)
used by the Fathers Cyril. Ambros. Gaudent. Eusebius. and alij apud Claud. Zants
repetit. 3. c. 4
who prove the Real Presence, because Christ being God can do it, to wit, can
convert the substance of bread and wine into the substance of his body and
blood. For if this literal sense be possible unto God, then it is neither
wicked nor absurd; if neither wicked nor absurd, then to be received as the
true sense: if to be received as the true sense, then also to be received as an
article of faith, being the true litterall sense of Gods word, concerning the
substance of a most main mystery of Religion; and consequently the Protestant
Metaphore that destroys this litterall sense, is an accursed Heresy.

But the fault of our Adversaries in this affair, is not to believe more then
they can understand: and to color with fine words foul infidelity of heart.
Thus then yielding unto carnal imagination against the litterall sense of Gods
holy word, they christen, and call by the style of following the quickening
spirit. They are so blinded, as they cannot discern the suggestions of the
flesh, from the motions of the spirit. For wherein they differ from us about
this Sacrament, do they not therein agree with all Infidels that are in the
world? Do not heretics, Jews, Turks, Pagans, believe as Protestants do against
us, that the Christian Sacrament is really and substantially bread, and that
the body of Christ is not really and substantially present therein? Yea their
dogs that sometimes lick up the crumbs and bits that fall from their communion
table, could they speak, would they not profess with their Masters so far as
their said masters differ from us; to wit, that it is bread, and not changed
really into Christ's body? And yet this carnal Protestant-fancy, wherein
Infidels, yea brut beasts conspire with them, is forsooth the quicenkning
spirit, a doctrine which only the holy Ghost teaches, and we want faith, and
the spirit of heavenly life, because we do not believe that to be bread that so
seems to flesh and blood, following the letter of Gods word, rather then the
seeming of sense. What can be more absurd? or what also more wicked, then to
say, as Sir Humfrey does, that the Real Presence, that is the body of the son
of God, taken by faith and really is, a dead letter, and a thing that kills.

THE FIFTH POINT. Concerning the judgment of the Nynth Age, about the litterall
sense of Christ his word, This is my Body.
FROM this litterall and express word of Christ, Sir Humfrey dares appeal
unto the judgment of the Christian Catholic Roman Church of the nynth age
wherein Bertram lived, who^ therefore he terms his Mother; her word he
preferres before the word of Christ, and commends her, refusing the word of
Christ, as being but a dead letter, even 3. Reg. 3.
as one of the two strumpets that strove before Solomon, being the true mother
of the living child, did well not to allow of the word of her fellow-strumpet
offering her a dead body. These are his words: The Preface fol. 6. lin. 19.
and seq.
mother of the child, although she were a strumpet, yet would she by no means
suffer her son to be divided, nor accept of a dead child, though it was
presented to her, as her own. Bertrams mother (the Catholic church of this
age) although at the time of his birth, she had lost much of her wonted
modesty, yet would she not agree to have her blessed Body of the Sacrament, to
be divided, or given by the halfes, yea although what was offered her, Christ
told her it was her Body, yet by no means would she allow of the dead letter
which kills, but of the quickening spirit, that gives life. Thus Sir Humfrey
applies the Metaphore, and (though he speak of the credit he has, or is like
to have in his Church) yet I fear, if he come to be tried by some Puritan
Classis, he may receive the like doom and disgrace, as one M. Hockenell,
whom, having preached before them, for his approbation, they rejected, Until
B. Ba^croft danger. posit. l. 3. cap. 14
he had taken more pains at his book, because he iumped not meet in
delivering the Metaphore of his text. For I dare say, that never foul
Metaphore was more vnha^dsomly trimmed to the purpose, then this is by sir
Humfrey. His comparing the Church unto a stru^pet, and saying, that with time
she lost much of her wonted and former modesty, that is, the pure profession of
saving truth, is not this against christ's express promise: That Ioa^. 14.17.
and Matt. 28.20. Cypr. de unit. Eccl. Adulterari non potest sponsa Christi.
the spirit of truth should remain with his Church for ever? His reprehending
the dividing of the blessed Body of the Sacrament, is it not most gross,
uttered in direct terms against Christ his command: Take, Luc. 22.17.
divide this among you? This 1. Cor. 41.24.
is my body that is broken for you? Against the practice of the primitive
Church: The 1. Cor 10.16. and Act. 5.28.
bread which we divide, is it not the communion or the body of our Lord? yea
against the Protestant English Church, which deuides her blessed body of the
sacrament, her Eucharisticall loaf into halfes quartars, yea sometimes into
twenty or forty pieces? His saying that Christ told the Church the Sacrament
was her body, is it not incredible boldness, rather then not apply a foul
Metaphore, thus to change and effeminate Gods most holyword, by changing his
Body into her body? But that which surpasses in blasphemy all that can be
spoken, is to compare the word of Christ, telling the Church, This is my body,
with their words that presented a dead child to the mother of the living child,
which was the word only of her fellow-strumpet, contesting with her and
speaking falsely against her conscience. Thus openly does Sir Humfrey profess
that it is not the Church of Rome, but Christ Jesus and his word, with whom he
and his Ptotestant Church stands at defiance about the Real presence. For
although Christ himself tells the Church, what is offered her in the
Sacrament, is his Body, yet says he: We Protestants will by no means
believe, nor need we believe him more then that mother believed her lying
Stratagonist.

Verily, rather then to oppose so openly, and with so foul, and irreuerent
comparison disgrace our Saviors word, and this word the most sacred and
venebrable of all other, This is my body, they might with less shame and show
of blasphemy follow the council that their Father M. Luther gave the^. What
Luth. defens. verb. coen. tom. 7. Wittemb. fol. 411.
have you no wit? You must venture. Say then that the words, This is my body,
were first written in the margent, and thence by some Papist thrust into the
text. For you have a good rule to prove this, and your rule is, that that is
not written which seems superflous unto you. Now without these words your
supper is full and completly set down in the Gospel: Christ took bread,
gave thanks, brake it, and gave it to his Disciples, saying: Do this in
remembrance of me. These words alon co^taine as much as you believe, to wit,
that bread is to be eaten by faith and remembrance of Christ his body, passion
and death. Why then do you not raze these words, This is my body, out of your
Bibles, and Co^munion-books, whereof you have not any need, or use, as touching
the faith, and the celebration of your supper?

But because the high conceit of the Church Bertrams mother, and his persuasion
that she by no means would allow of the Real presence, or the litterall sense
of Christ's word, This is my body, is so great a scandal unto Sir Humfrey, I
will show how much he is heerin deceived, and how earnest the Church of that age
was for Transubstantiation, and against the Protestant metaphorical
exposition; by producing the verdicts of twelve principal Authors that then
wrote.

Paschasius Corbeyensis, Anno 880.
In this Inquest, Paschasius may justly challenge the first place, seeing he
has written a whole Treatise of this argument, Pascha. de corpor. and sang.
Domini. c. 1.
wherein he may seem to confute the phrase of Bertram, that in the Sacrament
there is not the same flesh that was borne of the Virgin. In this treatise
there are as many verdicts for Transubstantiation, as there are chapters, or
sentences; but this one, the first in his book, may suffice. Although in the
sacrament there is the figure of bread and wine, yet after consecration it is
to be believed, that they are no other thing or Substance, but the Body and
blood of Christ. Hence verity it self unto his disciples says: This is my
flesh for the life of the world: and that I may speak a thing yet more
wonderful, not any other flesh, but that which was borne of the B. Virgin, that
suffered on the Cross, that rose up from the grave: This is the self same
flesh, and therefore the very flesh of Christ it is, which even to this day is
offered for the life of the world.

2. Strabus 840.
Laying aside things doubtful, In cap. 11. prioris ad Cor.
being assured by most certain authority, we profess, that the Substance of
bread and wine is converted into the Substance of the body and blood of our
Lord: though we do not blush to confess that we are ignorant of the manner of
this conversion. The Accidents that remain of the former substance, to wit,
the color, the savor, the figure, the weight neither qualify the body of
Christ, nor inhere in it.

3. Amalarius Treuirensis 830.
De officijs Ecclesiasticis. l. 3. cap. 24.
We believe the single Nature of bread, and the Nature of wine mingled (with
water) to be turned into a reasonable or intellectual Nature, to wit, into the
nature of the body, and blood of Christ.

4. Remigius Antisiodorensis 870.
They are termed bread and wine by Christian truth, In psalm. 22.
not that they retain the nature of bread and wine, but only according to
figure and shape, taste, and odor. For he that could personally and ineffably
conioyne by his word flesh assumed in the womb of the Virgin; he also was able
to turn the nature of bread and wine, into the Nature of his body and blood.

5. Hinckmarus Rhemensis 850.
It is true flesh, and true blood of Christ, In encomio S. Remigij.
which by eating and drinking we take in the Sacrament, as himself does
testify. And we that under the Sacrament do verily take his body and blood, are
made by them the same, even in Nature with him. In which after co^secratio^ the
likeness or shape of bread does remain, that we may not have horror of blood,
but the grace of Redemption abides in them.

6. Alcuinus 800.
The bread of it self is an irreasonable Sustance, as also the wine, Lib. de
divine. offic. c. 29. de celebrat. Missae.
but the Priest prays, that the same consecrated by the omnipotency of God,
be made a reasonable Substance, by passing into the body of his son. For as
the divinity of the word of God is one and the same that fills the whole
world; so this body, though it be consecrated in many places and at innumerable
times, yet are there not many bodies, nor many cups, but one and the same body,
one and the same blood, the very same that he took of the Blessed Virgin.

7. Haymo. 820.
Because bread strengthens the heart of man, In passionem Christi secundu^
Marcum.
and wine breeds blood in the body of man, therefore the bread is worthily
changed into the flesh of our Lord and wine is turned into his blood, not by a
figure, not by a shadow, but in verity and indeed. For we believe, that in
verity it is the body and blood of Christ.

8. Elias Cretensis. 804.
In orat. 1. Nazian.
Nazianzen by the external sacrifice understands that which is performed by
bread and wine, which being upon the sacred Table, are by the ineffable power
and strength of the Almighty, truly converted into the body and blood of
Christ.

9. Florus Magister. 860.
Christ is eaten, when the Nature of bread and wine, Ad Canonem Missae
by the ineffable operation of the Holy Ghost, is changed into the Sacrament of
the body and blood of Christ.

10. Theophilactus. 899.
Our Lord by saying, This is my body, shows, that bread sanctified on the Altar
is his very body, In cap. 24. Matthew.
and not a figure and resemblance thereof; for he said not, This is the figure,
but This is my body; for howsoever it seem bread unto us, yet by an ineffable
operation it is transformed. Again: In cap. 14. Marc.
This is my body, this I say, which you eat, for bread is not the figure, nor
the image of the body of our Lord, but is converted into his body. Our Lord
says: The bread I will give is my flesh, he said not the figure of my flesh,
but my flesh. But thou may say, How is it, that I see not flesh? O man, this
is by reason of thine infirmity, unto which God mercifully condescending,
retaynes the form of bread and wine, which thou do use to feed on, but it is
transelementated, that is changed even according to the primordiall substance
thereof, into the virtue of flesh and blood. And again: In cap: 6. Joan,
The bread that is eaten of us in the Sacrament, is not only a certain figure
of the flesh, but also the very flesh of our Lord. For he said not, the bread I
will give, is the figure of flesh, but my very flesh; for bread by the sacred
words, by the mystical blessing, by the assistance of the holy Ghost, is
transformed into the flesh of our Lord. And be not troubled to think that
bread becomes flesh: For when our Lord did live on earth and was nourished by
the substance of bread, the bread that was eaten, was changed into his body,
and became of the same substance with his holy flesh: therefore now also bread
is changed into the flesh of our Lord.

11. Valafridus Strabo. 830.
De rebus Eccles. c. 17.
When the son of God says: My flesh is meat indeed, and my blood is drink
indeed, it is so to be understood, that we ought to believe the mysteryes to be
the very body and blood of our Lord, and gages of that perfect unity, with our
head, whereof now we have the hope, and shall afterward enjoy the thing.

12. Altercatio Synagogae and Ecclesie. 890.
Cap 8.
We believe that before consecration it is bread and wine, after consecration
it is the true body, and the true blood of Christ, not only sacramentally, but
also essentially. And when we say the body of Christ, we do not understand the
body without the blood, nor do separate the blood from the body, as it was
shed, and flowed out at his wounds; but we believe the same body to be whole,
undivided, under each form, the same whole in heaven, and together in all
places where it is consecrated, or received by Christian men. And although we
can not comprehend by reason, how the substance of bread does pass into the
body of our Lord, yet we are bound to believe it.

The Council of Nice. 796.
Unto this Jury of Fathers we add a Judge to give sentence, to wit, the
seventh General Council, celebrated about Bertrams age, in the days of
Charles the Great, thus defining and saying: Act. 6.
Read as long as thou will, thou shall not find, that either our Lord, or the
Apostles, or the Fathers did call that unbloody sacrifice offered by the
Priest, an Image, but the very Body, and the very Blood of Christ.

CONCLUSION.
You have in this short censure, Sir Humfrey, and his religion araigned, and
condemned by five Iuryes and Judges. First by the Jury of Catholic Authors,
with one consent auerring, and the Council of Trent as Judge, giving sentence
accordingly, that this Tract on which Sir Humfrey does engage the credit of his
Religion, is dark, obscure, intricate, corrupted since the first writing
thereof, by heretics, not fit to be vulgarly read.

Secondly, by the Jury of his own falshoodes and errors, and the Round
Councell-table of the Protestant historians of Magdeburge, as Judge pronou^cing
sentence, and censuring this book of Bertram to be papistical, eue^ in the
point of Transubstantiation; so condemning sir Humfrey of want of judgment,
that builds his Religion against this point of Papistry upon it.

Thirdly, by the Jury, or rather injury of mistranslations offered unto the
book, particulerly in twelve (besides many other) passages thereof, Sir
Humfreys own conscience being Judge, and condemning both this book as being
so papistical, as not fit to be truly set forth in English; and himself of
vnsincerity, in thus corrupting the works of ancient Authors.

Fourthly, by the Jury of the writers in Bertrams age, professing the substance
of bread and wine to be turned into the substance of the body and blood of
Christ, not metaphorically, but literally; not by figure, but by truth; not by
shadow, but in verity; not only sacramentally, but essentially; The general
Council of Nice about the same time as Judge, pronouncing the sentence
accordingly, that bread and wine to be made the body and blood of Christ, not
by figure, not by metaphore, but in verity and really. Whereby Sir Humfrey,
that dares write, that the Church would by no means take the word of Christ,
This is my body, in the litterall sense, and for the real and substantial
presence of his body in the Sacrament, is condemned of being either desirous to
deceive souls in matters of their salvation (a thing unworthy of a Christian,
much more of a Christian Knight) or else as exceedingly to blame, to write and
speak so confidently of things he does not know, nor understand.

Finally, by the Jury of Christ's his own express deposition and sentence, so
many times reiterated in holy Scripture; and his Omnipotency is the Judge that
defines and declares, that here he meant according to the Letter, or else is
unworthy of the title of Verity it self. For is it the part of exact and
infinite Truth to promise a thing often, and earnestly in plain and express
words, and not to perform the same according to the letter, if the
performance thereof according to the Letter lie in his power? Christ Jesus does
often and earnestly promise, that bread and wine in the Sacrament should be,
and is, in all ages to the worlds end, his Body and Blood, and it lies in his
power to perform this promise according to the letter, by turning the
substance of bread and wine into the substance of his body and blood, so making
bread and wine to become really and substa^tially, and according to the letter
his body and blood in the christian sacrament, until the worlds end. And can
they think him to be Verity it self, who think that notwithstanding so many
his express promises, he does not perform his word according to the Letter,
though it be in his power so to perform it? Verily, howsoever they may gloze
the matter in words, they do not esteem of his word, as of the word of
Verity in their heart; which Sir Humfrey as being not very dexterous in applying
Metaphores, nor wise enough to ponder his words as is required in a writer,
does openly profess even also in words by comparing the word of Christ in
this point, unto that notorious lie of the strumpet, so famously recorded in
Scripture, as has been said.

I will end: for what can I say? What can I do more? Verily if I might thereby
reclayme Sir Humfrey from his opposing Christ Jesus, and his Church, I would be
glad to loose as many drops of my blood, as I have here spent ink to show his
error. But if I cannot so prevail with him, I must leave him to Gods justice,
in the number of them described by the Apostle: Tit. 3.11.
Qui delinqunt proprio iudicio condemnati; assuring him, that these words of
Christ, This is my body, howsoever he now would eneruate, Epist. ad Freder.
Miconium cap. 4.
emasculate, and disgrace them by foul comparison, will prove (as Melansthon
says) in the day of judgment, Thunderbolts against the denyers of the Real
presence, who fly unto Metaphores, rather then submit their understandings
unto the irrefragable euidency of the sacred Text, because it is above the
capacity of their carnal Reason.

Faults escaped in the Printing.
Page Lin. Fault Correction. 4. 7. your you Ibid. in m. fol. 3. b. lin. 21.
fol. 3. a. lin. 21. Ibid. in m. fol. 14. b. lin. 16. fol. 14. a. lin. 16. 9. in
m. Preface fol. 7. b. lin. 1. fol. 4. b. lin. 6. 8. fol. 5. lin. 5. Preface
fol. 4. b. and fol. 5. Ibid. over against lin. 10 fol. 7. b. lin. 1. 10. in m.
fol. 6. lin. 4. fol. 5. b. lin. 5. Ibid. 9. shune shun 11. 11. error to
error is, to Ibid. in m. lin. 20. lin. 10. 12. 9. this his Ibid. 22. error
that error Is, that 13. in m. lin. 18. lin. 16. Ibid. 20. either of falsehood
either falsehood 20. in m. Concord Genesis Conrad Ges. Ibid. 26. challenged
alleged 21. 19. predecessor and which predecessor which 23. in m. lin. 14.
lin. 16. Ibid. in m. lin. 21. lin. vltim. Ibid. 9. with administration without
administration 24. 11. this his Ibib. in m. lin. 12. lin. 13. Ibib. in m. fol.
11. a. fol. 21. a 25. 19. First for (to examine First (to examine Ibid. in m.
fol. a. can. 19. fol. 9. lin. 19. Ibid. in m. fol. 8. a. fol. 9. a 29. 21. he
not he does. 31. 1. Fittly does Thus fittly does 32. 17. made. made? 33. 13.
appear appears 35. 7. 8. the substance thereof (the substance thereof) Ibib.
17. in into Ibid. 18. Christ Christ's 39. 11. recorders records 40. 8.
sequently frequently 42. 11. text truth 44. 18. then their 46. in m. fol. 6.
lin. 19. fol. 1. lin. 19. 49. 8. Stratagonist Antagonist 53. 13. sustance.
substance.

FINIS.

