LOVES Sacrifice.

A TRAGEDY RECEIVED GENE

RALLY WELL.

Acted by the QVEENES Majesty's Servants at the Phoenix in Drury Lane.

LONDON: Printed by I. B. for HVGH BEESTON, dwelling next the Castle in
Cornhill, 1633.

To my truest friend, my worthiest Kinsman, JOHN FORD of Grayes-Inne, Esquire.
THE Title of this little work (may good Cozen) is in sense but the argument
of a Dedication; which being in most writers a Custom, in many a complement, I
question not but your clear knowledge of my intents, will in me read as the
earnest of affection. My ambition herein aims at a fair flight, borne up on
the double wings of gratitude, for a received, and acknowledgement for a
continued love. It is not so frequent to number many kinsmen, and amongst them
some friends; as to presume on some friends, and amongst them little
friendship. But in every fullness of these particulars, I do not more partake
through you (my Cozen) the delight, then enjoy the benefit of them. This
Inscription to your name, is only a faithful deliverance to Memory of the
truth of my respects to virtue, and to the equal in honor with virtue,
Desert. The contempt thrown on studies of this kind, by such as dote on their
own singularity, has almost so out-fac'd Invention, and prescribed Judgment;
that it is more safe, more wise, to be suspectedly silent, then modestly
confident of opinion, herein. Let me be bold to tell the severity of censurers,
how willingly I neglect their practice, so long as I digress from no becoming
thankfulness. Accept then (my Cozen) this witness to Posterity of my
constancy to your Merits, for no Ties of blood, no engagements of Friendship
shall more justly live a President, then the sincerity of Both in the Heart of

JOHN FORD.

To my friend Mr. JOHN FORD.
Unto this Altar, rich with thy own spice,
I bring one grain, to thy Loves Sacrifice:
And boast to see thy flames ascending, while
Perfumes enrich our Air from thy sweet Pile.
Look here THOU that have malice to the Stage,
And Impudence enough for the whole Age;
Voluminously-Ignorant! be vexed
To read this Tragedy, and thy own be next.
James Shirley.

The Scene PAVYE.
The Speakers in this TRAGEDY.
PHillippo Caraffa. Duke of Pavy. Paulo Baglione, Uncle to the Duchess.
Fernando Favorite to the Duke. Ferentes A wanton Courtier. Roseilli A young
Nobleman. Petruchio Two Counselors of State. Nibrassa D'auolos Secretary to
the Duke. Maurucio An old Antike. Giacopo Servant to Maurucio. Attendants.

Women.
BIancha The Duchess. Fiormonda The Dukes Sister. Colona Daughter to
Petruchio. Iulia Daughter to Nibrassa. Morona an old Lady.

Loves Sacrifice.
Actus Primus.
Enter Roseilli and Roderico D'auolos.
Ros. DEpart the Court.

R. D. Such was the Dukes command.

Ros. You'ar Secretary to the State and him,
Great in his counsels, wise, and (I think) honest,
Have you, in turning over old Records,
Read but one name descended of the house
Of Le^, in his loyalty remiss?

R. D. Never, my Lord.

Ros. Why then should I now, now, when glorious peace
Triumphs in change of pleasures, be wiped off,
Like to a vselesse moth, from Courtly ease:
And whither must I go?

R. D. You have the open world before you.

Ros. Why then it is like I Am banished.

R. D. Not so;
My warrant is only to command you from the Court,
Within five hours to depart after notice taken,
And not to live within thirty miles of it,
Until it be thought meet by his Excellence
To call you back: now I have warned you, my Lord,
At your peril be it if you disobey; I shall
Inform the Duke of your discontent. --
Exit R. D.
Ros. Do, Politician, do:
I scent the plot of this disgrace; it is Fiormonda, she,
That glorious Widow, whose commanding check
Ruins my Love; like foolish beasts, thus they
Find danger, that prey too near the Lions den.
Enter Fernando and Petruchio.
Fer. My Noble Lord Roseilli!

Ros. Sir, the joy
I should have welcomed you with, is wrapped up
In Clouds of my disgrace; yet, honored Sir,
Howsoever frowns of great ones cast me down,
My service shall pay tribute in my lowness,
To your vprising virtues.

Fer. Sir, I know
You are so well acquainted with your own,
You need not flatter mine; trust me, my Lord,
He be a suitor for you.

Petr. And I Will second
My Nephews suit with importunity.

Ros. You are, my Lord Fernando, late returned
From travels; pray instruct me, since the voice
Of most supreme Authority commands
My absence: I determine to bestow
Some time in learning Languages abroad;
Perhaps the change of air may change in me
Remembrance of my wrongs at home: Good Sir
Inform me; say I meant to live in Spain,
What benefit of knowledge might I treasure?

Fer. Troth, Sir, I Will freely speak as I have found:
In Spain you lose experience; it is a Clymate
To hot to nourish Arts; the Nation proud,
And in their pride unsociable; the Court
More pliable to glorify it self
Then do a stranger grace; if you intend
To traffic like a Merchant, 'twere a place
Might better much your Trade; but as for me,
I soon took surfeit on it.

Ros. What for France?

Fer. France I more praise and love; you are (my Lord)
Your self for horsemanship much famed; and there
You shall have many proofs to show your skill,
The French are passing Courtly, ripe of wit,
Kind, but extreme dissemblers; you shall have
A Frenchman ducking lower than your knee,
At the instant mocking even your very shoo-tyes:
To give the Country due, it is on earth
A Paradise; and if you can neglect
Your own appropriaments, but praising that
In others, wherein you excel yourselfe,
You shall be much beloved there.

Ros. Yet, me thought,
I heard you and the Duchess, two nights since,
Discoursing of an Island thereabouts
Called -- let me think -- 'twas --

Fer. England.

Ros. That, pray Sir,
You have been there, me thought I heard you praise it.

Fer. I Will tell you what I found there; men as neat,
As Courtly as the French, but in Condition
Quite opposite: Put case that you (my Lord)
Could be more rare on horseback than you are,
If there (as there are many) one excelled
You in your Art, as much as you do others,
Yet will the English think, their own is nothing
Compared with you a stranger; in their habits
They are not more fantastic than uncertain:
In short, their fare abundance; manhood, beauty,
No Nation can disparage but it self.

Ros. My Lord, ^ou have much cased me, I resolve.

Fer. And whither are you bent?

Ros. My Lord for travel,
To speed for England.

Fer. No, my Lord, you must not;
I have yet some private Conference
To impart unto you for your good: at night
I Will meet you at my Lord Petruchio's house,
Till then be secret.

Ros. Dares my Cozen trust me?

Petr. Dare I, my Lord! yes, 'lesse your fact were greater
Than a bold woman's spleen.

Ros. The Duke's at hand,
And I must hence, my service to your Lordships.
Exit.
Petr. Now Nephew, as I told you, since the Duke
Has held the reins of state in his own hand,
Much altered from the man he was before,
(As if he were transformed in his mind)
To sooth him in his pleasures, amongst whom
Is fond Ferentes; one whose pride takes pride
In nothing more then to delight his lust;
And he (with grief I speak it) has, I fear,
Too much besotted my unhappy daughter,
My poor Colona; whom, for kinreds sake,
As you are noble, as you honor virtue,
Persuade to love her self: a word from you
May win her more then my entreaties or frowns.

Fer. Uncle, I Will do my best; mean time pray tell me
Whose mediation wrought the Marriage
Betwixt the Duke and Duchess? who was agent?

Petr. His rouing eye, and her enchanting face,
The only dower Nature had ordained
T'aduance her to her Bride-bed: She was daughter
Unto a Gentleman of Millaine, no better;
Preferred to serve in the Duke of Millaine's Court:
Where, for her beauty, she was greatly famed:
And passing late from thence to Monacho,
To visit there her Uncle, Paul Bagloone,
The Abbot; Fortune (Queen to such blind matches)
Presents her to the Dukes eye, on the way
As he pursues the Dear: in short, my Lord,
He saw her, loved her, wooed her, won her, matched her,
No counsel could divert him.

Fer. She is fair.

Petr. She is; and to speak truth, I think right Noble
In her Conditions.

Fer. If when I should choose,
Beauty and Virtue were the Fee proposed,
I should not pass for parentage.

Petr. The Duke does come.

Fer. Let Us break off talk: if ever, now
Good Angel of my soul protect my truth.
Enter Duke, Biancha, Fiormonda, Nibrassa. Ferentes, Iulia and D'auolos.
Duke. Come my Biancha, revel in mine arms,
Whiles I, wrapped in my admiration, view
Lillies and Roses growing in thy cheeks.
Fernando! oh thou half my self! no joy
Could make my pleasures full without thy presence!
I am a Monarch of felicity,
Proud in a pair of Jewels, rich and beautiful;
A perfect Friend, a Wife above compare.

Fer. Sir, if a man so low in rank, may hope
By loyal duty, and devoted zeal,
To hold a Correspondence in friendship
With one so mighty as the Duke of Pavy,
My uttermost ambition is to climb
To those deserts may give the style of servant.

Duke. Of partner in my Dukedom, in my heart,
As freely as the privilege of blood
Has made them mine, Phillippo and Fernando
Shall be without distinction: Look, Biancha,
On this good man; in all respects to him
Be as to me: only the name of husband,
And reverent observance of our bed
Shall differ us in persons, else in soul
We are all one.

Bian. I shall, in best of Love,
Regard the bosome-partner of my Lord.

Fior. Ferentes.

Fere. Madam.

Fior. You are one loves Courtship,
He had some change of words; 'twere no lost labor
To stuste your Table-bookes, the man speaks wisely.

Feren. I Am glad your Highness is so pleasant.

Duke. Sister.

Fior. My Lord and brother.

Duke. You are too silent;
Quicken your sad remembrance: though the loss
Of your dead husband be of more account
Then slight neglect, yet it is a sin against
The state of Princes to exceed a mean
In mourning for the dead.

Fior. Should form, my Lord,
Prevail above affection? no, it cannot.
You have your self here a right noble Duchess,
(Virtuous at least) and should your grace now pay
(Which heaven forbid) the debt you owe to Nature,
I dare presume, she would not so soon forget
A Prince that thus advanced her. -- Madam, could you?

R. D. Bitter and shrewd.

Bian. Sister, I should too much bewray my weakness,
To give a resolution on a passion
I never felt nor feared.

Nibr. A modest answer.

Fer. If credit may be given to a face,
My Lord, I Will undertake on her behalf;
Her words are trusty Heralds to her mind.

Fior. Exceeding good; the man will undertake:
Observe it, Da'uolos.

R. D. I do, Lady; it is a smooth praise.

Duke. Friend, in thy judgment I approve thy love,
And love thee better for thy judging mine:
Though my gray headed Senate in the laws
Of strickt opinion and severe dispute,
Would tie the limits of our free effects,
(Like superstitious Jews, to match with none
But in a tribe of Princes like our selves)
Gross nurtured slaves, who force their wretched souls
To crouch to profit; nay, for trash and wealth,
Dote on some crooked or misshapen form,
Hugging wise Natures lame deformity,
Begetting creatures ugly as themselves:
But why should Princes do so, that command
The storehouse of the earths hid minerals?
No, my Bianchae, thou art to me as dear
As if thy portion had bin Europes riches,
Since in thine eyes lies more than these are worth:
Set on; they shall be strangers to my heart
That envy thee thy Fortunes:
Come, Fernando, my but divided self, what we have done
We are only debtor to heaven for. -- On.

Fior. Now take thy time, or never, Da'uolos;
Prevail, and I will raise thee high in grace. --
Exeunt. Da'uolos stays Fernando.
R. D. Madam, I will omit no Art,
My honored Lord Fernando.

Fer. To me, Sir?

R. D. Let me beseech your Lordship
To excuse me, in the nobleness of your wisdom,
If I exceed good manners: I am one, my Lord,
Who in the admiration of your perfect virtues,
Do so truly honor and reverence your deserts,
That there is not a creature bears life
Shall more faithfully study to do you service
In all offices of duty, and vows of due respect.

Fer. Good Sir, you bind me to you: is this all?

R. D. I beseech your care a little, good my Lord; what I
Have to speak, concerns your reputation and best fortune.

Fer, How Is that? my Reputation? lay aside
Superfluous Ceremony; speak, what is it?

R. D. I do repute my self
The blessed'st man alive, that I shall be the first
Gives your Lordship news of your perpetual comfort.

Fer. As how?

R. D. If singular beauty, inimitable virtues, honor, youth,
And absolute goodness be a fortune, all those are at once
Offered to your particular choice.

Fer. Without delays, which way?

R. D. The great and gracious Lady Fiormonda love you,
Infinitely loves you. -- But, my Lord, as ever you tendered
A servant to your pleasures, let me not be revealed, that
I gave you notice on it.

Fer. Sure you are strangely out of tune, Sir.

R. D: Please but to speak to her, be but Courtly ceremonius
With her, use once but the language of affection, if I
Mis-report ought besides my knowledge, let me never
Have place in your good opinion: oh, these women, my Lord
Are as brittle mettle as your glasses, as smooth, as slippery:
Their very first substance was quicke-sands; let 'em look
Never so demurely, one phillip choakes them: my Lord,
She loves you I know it. -- But I beseech your Lordship
Not to discover me; I would not for the world she
Should know that you know it by me.

Fer. I understand you, and to thank your care
Will study to requite it; and I vow
She never shall have notice of your news
By me, or by my means. And, worthy Sir,
Let me alike inioyne you not to spaake
A word of that I understand her love;
And as for me, my word shall be your surety
I Will not as much as give her cause to think
I ever heard it.

R. D. Nay, my Lord,
Whatsoever I infer, you may break with her in it
If you please, for rather than silence should hinder
You one step to such a fortune, I will expose my self
To any rebuke for your sake, my good Lord.

Fer. You shall not, indeed Sir, I am still your friend,
And will prove so; for the present I am forced
To attend the Duke, good hours befall ye, I must leave you.
Exit.
R. D. Gone already; S'foot I ha marred all, this is worse and worse, he is as
cold as Hemlocke; if her Highness knows how I have gone to work, she will
thank me scuruily: a pox of all dull brains; I took the clean contrary
course: there is a mystery in this slight carelessness of his, I must si^t it,
and I will find it. vd's me, fool my self out of my wit: well, I Will choose
some fitter opportunity to inueagle him, and till then, smooth her up, that he
is a man ouerioyed with the report. -- -- --

Exit. Enter Ferentes and Colona.
Feren. Madam, by this light I vow my self your servant; only yours,
inespecially yours: time, like a turne-coat, may order and disorder the outward
fashions of our bodies, but shall never enforce a change on the constancy of my
mind, sweet Colona, fair Colona, young and sprightfull Lady, do not let me
in the best of my youth, languish in my earnest affections.


Col. Why should you seek, my Lord, to purchase glory
By the disgrace of a silly maid?

Feren. That I confess too;

I am every way so unworthy of the first fruits of thy embraces, so farbeneath
the riches of thy merit, that it can be no honor to thy fame, to rank me in the
number of thy servants, yet prove me how true, how firm I will stand to thy
pleasures, to thy command; and as time shall serve be ever thine Now prithee
dear Colona.


Col, Well, well, my Lord, I have no heart of flint;
Or if I had, you know by cunning words
How to out-weare it. -- But.

Feren. But what? do not pity thy own gentleness,
Lovely Colona; shall I speak? shall I? say
But I, and our wishes are made up.

Col. How shall I say I, when my fears say no?

Feren. You will not fail to meet two hours hence, sweet.

Col. No; yes, yes, I would have said, how my tongue trips.

Fere. I take that promise, and that double yes as an assurance
Of thy faith, in the grove (good sweet remember)
In any case alone (do you mark love) not as much as your
Duchess little dog, (you will not forget) two hours hence,
(Think on it, and miss not,) till then --

Col. Oh, if you should prove false, and love another?

Feren. Defy me then; I Will be all thine, and a servant
Only to thee, only to thee. -- --
Exit Colona. Very passing good, three honest women in our Courts
Here of Italy, are enough to discredit a whole Nation
Of that sex: he that is not a Cuckold, or a Bastard,
Is a strangely happy man; for a chaste wife, or a mother
That never stepped awry, are wonders, wonders in Italy.
S'life I have got the feat on it, and am every day
More active in my trade; it is a sweet sin, this slip
Of mortality, and I have tasted enough for one
Passion of my senses: Here comes more work for me:
Enter Iulia. And how does my own Iulia, mew upon this sadness?
What Is the matter you are melancholy?
Whither away, wench?

Iul. It Is well, the time has bin when your smooth tongue
Would not have mocked my griefs, and had I bin more
Chary of mine honor, you had still bin lowly as you were.

Feren. Lowly? why I am sure I cannot be much more lowly
Then I am to thee, thou bring'st me on my bare knees
Wench, twice in every four and twenty hours, besides
Half turns instead of Beuers; what must we next
Do, sweetheart?

Iul. Break vows on your side, I expect no other,
But every day look when some newer choice
May violate your honor and my trust.

Feren. Indeed forsooth, how ^hey by that la, I hope I neglect
No opportunity to your Nunquam satis, to be called
In question for; go, thou art as fretting as an old
Grogrum, by this hand I love thee for it, it becomes thee
So prettily to be angry: well, if thou should dye,
Farewell all love with me for ever: go, I Will meet
Thee soon in thy Ladies back lobby, I will, wench,
Look for me.

Iul. But shall I be resolved you will be mine?

Feren. All thine; I will reserve my best ability,
My heart, my honor, only to thee, only to thee:
Pity of my blood away, I hear company
Coming on: remember soon I am all thine,
I will live perpetually only to thee, away. --
Exit Iul. S'foot I wonder about what time of the year
I was begot; sure it was when the Moon was
In conjunction, and all the other Planets
Drunk at a Morrice-dance: I am haunted
Above patience, my mind is not as infinite to do,
As my occasions are proffered of doing: Chastity! I am
An Eunuch, if I think^ there be any such thing; or
If there be, it is amongst us men, for I never found it
In a woman, thoroughly tempted, yet: I have a shrewd hard
Task coming on, but let it pass: who comes now?
Enter Fernando. My Lord, the Dukes friend! I will strive to be inward with
Him, my Noble Lord Fernando.

Fer. My Lord Ferentes, I should change some words
Of consequence wi^ you; but since I am,
For this time, busied in more serious thoughts,
I Will pick some fitter opportunity.

Feren. I will wait your pleasure, my Lord, -- Good day to
Your Lordship. -- -- --
Exit Feren.
Fer. Traitor to friendship, whither shall I run,
That lost to reason cannot sway the float
Of the unruly faction in my blood?
The Duchess, oh the Duchess! in her smiles
Are all my joys abstracted; death to my thoughts,
My other plague comes to me.
Enter Fiormonda and Iulia.
Fior. My Lord Fernando, what, so hard at study?
You are a kind companion to your self,
That love to be alone so.

Fer. Madam, no;
I rather chose this leisure to admire
The glories of this little world, the Court,
Where like so many stars on several thrones,
Beauty and greatness shine in proper Orbs,
Sweet matter for my meditation.

Fior. So, so, Sir, (leave us Iulia) your own proof
Exit Iul. By travel and prompt observation,
Instruct you how to place the use of speech;
But since you are at leisure, pray let us sit;
We Will pass the time a little in discourse:
What have you seen abroad?

Fer. No wonders, Lady,
Like these I see at home.

Fior. At home! as how?

Fer. Your pardon, if my tongue (the voice of truth)
Report but what is warranted by sight.

Fior. What sight?

Fer. Look in your glass, and you shall see
A miracle.

Fior. What miracle?

Fer. Your Beauty,
So far above all beauties else abroad,
As you are in your own, superlatiue.

Fior. Fie, fie, your wit has too much edge.

Fer. Would that,
Or any thing, that I could challenge mine,
Were but of value to express how much
I serve in love the sister of my Prince.

Fior. It Is for your Princes sake then, not for mine.

Fer. For you in him, and much for him in you.
I must acknowledge, Madam, I observe
In your affects a thing to me most strange,
Which makes me so much honor you the more.

Fior. Pray tell it.

Fer. Gladly, Lady:
I see how opposite to youth and custom
You s^t before you in your Tableture
Of your remembrance, the becoming griefs
Of a most loyal Lady; for the loss
Of so renowned a Prince as was your Lord.

Fior. Now good my Lord, no more of him.

Fer. Of him!
I know it is a needless task in me
To set him forth in his deserved praise,
You better can record it; For you find
How much more he exceeded other men
In most Heroic virtues of account,
So much more was your loss in losing him.
Of him! his praise should be a field too large,
Too spacious, for so mean an Orator
As I, to range in.

Fior. Sir, enough; it is true,
He well deserved your labor; on his deathbed
This Ring he gave me, bade me never part
With this, but to the man I loved as dearly
As I loved him; yet since you know which way
To blaze his worth so rightly, in return
To your deserts, wear this for him and me.

Fer. Madam.

Fior. It Is yours.

Fer. Me thought you said, he charged you
Not to imparrit but to him you loved
As dearly as you loved him.

Fior. True, I said so.

Fer. O then far be it, my unhallowed hand
With any rude intrusion should vnuaile
A Testament enacted by the dead.

Fior. Why man, that Testament is disanull'd,
And ^ncell'd quite by us that live: look here,
My blood is not yet freez'd; for better instance
Be judge your self, experience is no danger:
^old are my sighs; but feel, my lips are warm.
(kisses him
Fer. What means the virtuous Marquess?

Fior. To new kiss
The oath to thee, which whiles he lived was his:
Have thou yet power to love?

Fer. To love?

Fior. To meet
Sweetness of language in discourse as sweet.

Fer. Madam, 'twere dullness, past the ignorance
Of common block heads, not to understand
Whereto this favor tends; and it is a fortune
So much above my Fate, that I could wish
No greater happiness on earth; but know,
Long since, I vowed to live a single life.

Fior. What was it you said?

Fer. I said I made a vow.
Enter Biancha, Petruchio, Colona, Da'uolos. Blessed deliverance!

Fior. Prevented? mischief on this interruption.

Bian. My Lord Fernando you encounter fitly,
I have a suit to you.

Fer. It Is my duty, Madam,
To be commanded.

Bian. Since my Lord the Duke
Is now disposed to mirth, the time serves well
For mediation, that he would be pleased
To take the Lord Roseilli to his grace,
He is a Noble Gentleman: I dare
Engage my credit, loyal to the state:
And, Sister, one that ever strove (me thought)
By special service, and obsequious care,
To win respect from you; it were a part
Of gracious favor, if you pleased to join
With us, in being suitors to the Duke
For his return to Court.

Fior. To Court! indeed
You have some cause to speak; he undertook
Most Champion-like to win the prize at tilt,
In honor of your picture. -- Marry did he:
There Is not a Groom o'th Querry, could have matched
The jolly riding man; pray get him back,
I do not need his service, Madam, I.

Bian. Not need it, sister? why? I hope you think
It Is no necessity in me to move it,
More then respect of honor.

Fior. Honor? puh,
Honor is talked of more than known by some.

Bian. Sister, these words I understand not.

Fer. Swell not unruly thoughts:
Madam, the motion you propose, proceeds
From the true touch of goodness; it is a plea
Wherein my tongue and knee shall jointly strive
To beg his Highness for Roseillie's cause:
Your judgment rightly speaks him; there is not
In any Court of Christendom, a man
For quality or trust more absolute.

Fior. How? is it even so?

Petr. I shall for ever bless
Your Highness for your gracious kind esteems
Of my dishartned kinsman; and to add
Encouragement to what you undertake,
I dare affirm, it is no important fault
Has caused the Dukes distaste.

Bian. I hope so too.

R. D. Let your Highness, and you al, my Lords, take adui^e
How you motion his Excellency on Roseillie's behalf:
There is more danger in that man than is fit to be
Publicly reported; I could wish things were other wise
For his own sake; but I Will assure ye, you will exceedingly
Alter his Excellencies disposition (he now is in) if you but
Mention the name of Roseilli to his ear; I am so much
Acquainted in the process of his actions.

Bian. If it be so, I am the sorrier, Sir:
I Am loath to move my Lord unto offense,
Yet I Will adventure chiding.

Fer. Oh had I India's gold, I Would give it all
TO exchange one private word, one minutes breath
With this hart-wounding beauty.
Enter Duke, Ferentes, and Nibrassa.
Duke. Prithee no more, Ferentes, by the faith
I owe to honor, thou have made me laugh
Beside my spleen; Fernando, had thou heard
The pleasant humor of Maurucio's dotage
Discoursed, how in the winter of his age
He is become a Lover, thou would swear
A Morris-dance were but a Tragedy
Compared to that: well, we will see the youth:
What Council hold you now, sirs?

Bia. We, my Lord, were talking of the horsmanship in France
Which, as your friend reports, he thinks exceeds
All other Nations.

Duke. How? why, have not we
As gallant Riders here?

Fer. None that I know.

Duke. Pish, your affection leads you; I dare
Wage a thousand Ducats not a man in France
Out-rides Roseilli.

Fior. I shall quit this wrong.

Bian. I said as much, my Lord.

Fer. I have not seen
His practice, since my coming back.

Duke. Where is he?
How is it we see him not?

Petr. What Is this? what is this?

Fer. I hear he was commanded from the Court.

R. D. Oh confusion on this villainous occasion.

Duke. True; but we meant a day or two at most,
Should be his furthest term; not yet returned?
Where Is D'auolos?

R. D. My Lord.

Duke. You know our minds,
How comes it thus to pass, we miss Roseilli.

R. D. My Lord, in a sudden discontent I hear he departed toward Beneuento,
determining (as I am given to understand) to pass to Si^l, minding to visit
his Cozen Don Pedro de Toledo, in the Spanish Court.


Duke. The Spanish Court! now by the blessed bones
Of good S. Francis, let there posts be sent
To call him back, or I will post thy head
Beneath my foot; ha! you, you know my mind,
Look that you get him back; the Spanish Court,
And without our Commission, -- say!

Petr. Here Is fine juggling.

Bian. Good Sir be not so moved.

Duke. Fie, fie, Biancha;
It Is such a gross indignity, I Would rather
Have lost seven years revenue. -- The Spanish Court!
How now, what ails our sister?

Fior. On the sudden
I fall a bleeding, it is an ominous sign;
Pray heaven it turn to good. -- Your highness leave. --
Exit
Duke. Look to her; come Fernando, come Biancha,
Let Us strive to ouerpasse this choleric heat:
Sir, see that you trifle not. How we,
Who sway the manage of authority,
May be abused by smooth officious agents?
But look well to our sister. -- --
Exeunt.
Petr. Nephew, please you
To see your friend to night?

Fer. Yes, Uncle, yes:
Thus bodies walk unsold; mine eyes but follows
My heart entombed in yonder goodly shrine:
Life without her, is but death's subtle snares,
And I am but a Coffin to my cares.
Exeunt.
Actus Secundus.
Enter Maurucio looking in a glass, trimming his Beard; Giacopo brushing him.
Mau. BEard be confined to neatness, that no hair
May stouer up to prick my mistress lip,
More rude than bristles of a Porcupine.
Giacopo.

Gia. My Lord.

Mau. Am I all sweet behind?

Gia. I have no Powlterers nose, but your apparel sits
About you most debonarely.

Mau. But Giacopo, with what grace do my words proceed out of my mouth? have I
a moving countenance? is there harmony in my voice? can thou perceive, as it
were, a hansomenesse of shape in my very breath, as it is formed into syllable,
Giacopo?

Enter Duke, Lords and Ladies above.
Gia. Yes indeed, Sir, I do feel a savor as pleasant as -- a Glister-pipe,
-- -- Calamus or Ciuet.


Duke. Observe him and be silent.

Mau. Hold thou the glass, Giacopo, and mark me with what exceeding
comeliness I could court the Lady Marquess if it come to the push.


Duke. Sister, you are his aim.

Fior. A subject fit
To be the stall of laughter.

Bian. That Is your music.

Mau. Thus I reuerse my pace, and thus stalkingly in Courtly gate I advance,
one, two, and three. -- Good, I kiss my hand, make my Congee, settle my
countenance, and thus begin. -- Hold up the glass higher, Giacopo.


Gia. Thus high, Sir?

Mau. It Is well, now mark me:
Most excellent Marquess, most fair La-dy,
Let not old age, or hairs that are sil-uer
Dis-parage my desire; for it may be
I am then other green youth nimb-ler:
Since I am your gra-ces servant so true,
Great Lady then love me for my ver-tue.
Oh Giacopo! Petrach was a dunce, Dantes a Iig-maker,
S'anazar a goose, and Ar^osto a puck-fist to me:
I tell thee, Giacopo, I am wrapped with fury,
And have been for these six nights together
Drunk with the pure liquor of Helycon.

Gia. I think no less, Sir;
For you look as wild, and talk as idly
As if you had not slept these nine years.

Duke. What think you of this language, sister?

Fior. Sir, I think, in princes Courts, no age nor greatness
But must admit the fool; in me 'twere folly
To scorn what greater states than I have bin.

Bian. O, but you are too general.

Fior. A fool;
I thank your Highness; many a woman's wit
Have thought themselves much better, was much worse.

Bian. You still mistake me.

Duke. Silence, note the rest.

Mau. God-a-mercy brains; Giocopo, I have it.

Gia. What? my Lord?

Mau. A conceit, Giacopo, and a fine one; down on thy knees, Giocopo, and
worship my wit; give me both thy ears: thus it is, I will have my picture
drawn most composituously in a squire table of some too foot long, from the
crown of the head to the waste downward, no further.


Gia. Then you will look like a dwarf, Sir, being cut off by the middle.


Mau. Speak not thou, but wonder at the conceit that follows; In my bosom on
my left side. I will have a lease of blood-red crimson velvet (as it were part
of my doublet) open; Which being opened, Giacopo, (now mark) I will have a
clear and most transparent Crystal in the form of a heart. -- (Singular
admirable.) When I have framed this, I will, as some rare outlandish piece of
workmanship, bestow it on the most fair and illustrious Lady Fiormonda.


Gia. But now, Sir, for the conceit.

Mau. Simplicity and Ignorance, prate no more: blockhead, do not understand
yet? why this being to her instead of a Looking-glass, she shall no oftener
powder her hair, surfell her cheeks, cleanse her teeth, or conform the
hairs of her eyebrows, but having occasion to use this glass (which for the
rareness and richness of it, she will hourly do) but she shall as often
gaze on my picture, remember me, and behold the excellence of her excellencies
beauty, in the prospectiue and mirror, as it were, in my heart.


Gia. I marry, Sir, this is something.
All above. Ha, ha, ha. -- --
Exit Fiormonda.
Bian. My sister's gone in anger.

Mau. Who Is that laughs? search with thine eyes, Giacopo.

Gia. O my Lord, my Lord, you have gotten an everlasting fame; the Dukes grace,
and the Duchess grace, and my Lord Fernando's grace, with all the rabble of
Courtiers, have heard every word, look where they stand: now you shall be made
a Count for your wit, and I Lord for my Counsel.


Duke. Be shrew the chance, we are discovered.

Mau. Pity, -- oh my wisdom! I must speak to them.
O Duke most great, and most renowed Duchess!
Excuse my apprehension, which not much-is:
It Is love, my Lord, that is all the hurt you see,
Angelica her self plead for me.

Duke. We pardon you, most wise and learned Lord,
And that we may all glorify your wit,
Entreat your wisdoms company to day,
To grace our talk with your grave discourse:
What says your mighty eloquence?

Mau. Giacopo, help me; his Grace has put me out my own Bias, and I know not
what to answer in form.


Gia. Vd's me, tell him you will come.

Mau. Yes, I will come, my Lord the Duke, I will.

Duke. We take your word, and wish your honor health.
Away then; come Biancha, we have found
A salve for mellancholy. Mirth and ease. --
Exit Duke cum suis.
Manent Biancha and Fernando.
Bian. I Will see the jolly lover and his glass
Take leave of one another.

Mau. Are they gone?

Gia. O my Lord, I do now smell news.

Mau. What news, Giacopo?

Gia. The Duke has a smackering toward you, and you shall clap up with his
sister, the widow, suddenly.


Mau. She is mine, Giacopo, she is mine; advance the glass, Giacapo, that I
may practice as I pass, to walk a portly grace like a Marquess; to which
degree I am now a climbing.

Thus do we march to honors haven of bliss,

To ride in triumph through Persepolis.

Exit Gia, going back^ward with the glass, Mau. complementing.
Bian. Now, as I live,
Here Is laughter worthy our presence;
I will not lose him so. -- --
She is going out.
Fer. Madam.

Bian. To me, my Lord!

Fer. Please but to hear
The story of a Castaway in love;
And o let not the passage of a jest
Make slight a sadder subject, who has placed
All happiness in your diuiner eyes.

Bian. My Lord, the time -- --

Fer. The time! yet hear me speak,
For I must speak or burst: I have a soul
So anchored down with cares in seas of woe,
That passion, and the vows I owe to you,
Have changed me to a lean Anatomy,
Sweet Princess of my life --

Bian. Forbear, or I shall --

Fer. Yet as you honor virtue, do not freeze
My hopes to more discomfort, then as yet
My fears suggest; no beauty so adornes
The composition of a well built mind,
As pity: hear me out.

Bian. No more; I spare
To tell you what you are; and must confess,
Do almost hate my judgment, that it once
Thought goodness dwelt in you: remember now
It is the third time since your treacherous tongue
Has pleaded treason to my care and fame;
Yet for the friendship 'twixt my Lord and you,
I have not voye'd your follies; if you dare
To speak a fourth time, you shall rue your lust:
It Is all no better; learn, and love your self.
-- Exit
Fer. Gone! oh my sorrows! how am I undone?
Not speak again? no, no, in her chaste breast
Virtue and resolution have discharged
All female weakness: I have su'd and su'd,
Kneeled, wept, and begged; but tears, and vows, and words,
Move her no more then summer-winds a rock:
I must resolve to check this rage of blood,
And will; she is all ycie to my fires,
Yet even that ye inflames in me desires.
Exit. Enter Petruchio and Roseilli.
Ros. Is It possible the Duke should be so moved?

Petr. It Is true; you have no enemy at Court
But her, for whom you pine so much in love:
Then master your affections; I am sorry you hug your ruin so.
What say you to the project I proposed?

Ros. I entertain it, with a greater joy
Then shame can check.
Enter Fernando.
Petr. You are come as I could wish, my Cozen is resolved.

Fer. Without delay
Prapare your self, and meet at Courtanon,
Some half hour hence; and Cupid bless your joy,

Ros. Is ever man was bounden to a friend --

Fer. No more; away: loves rage is yet unknown,
Exeut In his (aye me) too well, I feel my own:
So, now I am alone, now let me think;
She is the Duchess; say she be: A Creature
Sowed up in painted cloth, might so be styled,
That Is but a name; she is married too, she is,
And therefore better might distinguish love:
She Is young, and fair; why, Madam, that is the bait
Inuites me more to hope; she is the Dukes wife;
Who knows not this? she is bosomed to my friend:
There, there, I am quite lost: will not be won;
Still worse and worse; abhorres to hear me speak:
Eternal mischief, I must urge no more:
For were I not beleapred in my soul,
Here were enough to quench the flames of hell.
What then? pish, I must not speak, I Will write.
Come then, sad Secretary to my plaints,
Plead thou my faith, for words are turned to sighs.
he draws a letter. What says this paper? -- he reads to himself.
Enter D'aurlos with two Pictures.
R. D. Now is the time; alone; reading a letter; good; how now? striking his
breast? what, in the name of policy, should this mean? tearing his hair?
passion, by all the hopes of my life, plain passion: now I perceive it; if
this be not a fit of some violent affection, I am an ass in understanding;
why it is plain, plainer and plainer: Love in the extremest: oh for the party,
who now? the greatness of his spirits is to high cherished to be caught with
some ordinary stuff, and if it be my Lady Fiormonda, I am strangely mistook:
well, that I have fit occasion soon to understand: I have here two pictures,
newly drawn, to be sent for a present to the Abbot of Monacho, the Duchess
Uncle, her own and my Ladies: I Will observe which of these may, perhaps, bewray
him: -- a turns about, my noble Lord.


Fer. You Are welcome, Sir, I thank you

R. D. Me, my Lord? for what, my Lord?

Fer. Who Is there? I cry you merey, D'auolos,
I took you for another, pray excuse me;
What is it you bear there?

R. D. No secret, my Lord, but may be imparted to you:
A couple of Pictures, my good Lord, please you see them.

Fer. I care not much for pictures: but whose are they?

R. D. The One is for my Lords sister, the other is the Duchess.


Fer. Ha, D'auolos, the Dutchesses?

R. D. Yes, my Lord: -- sure the word startled him --
-- Observe that.

Fer. You told me, master Secretary, once,
You owed me love.

R. D. Service, my honored Lord, howsoever you please to term it.


Fer. 'Twere rudeness to be suitor for a sight,
Yet trust me, Sir, I Will be all secret.

R. D. I beseech your Lordship;

They are, as I am, constant to your pleasure:

This (my Lord) is the widow Marquesses, as it now newly came from the
Picture-drawers, the oil yet green a sweet Picture; and in my judgment, Art
has not bin a niggard in striving to equal the life. Michael Angelo himself
needed not blush to own the workmanship.


Fer. A very pretty Picture;
But, kind Signior, to whose use is it?

R. D. For the Dukes, my Lord, who determines to send it with all speed as a
present to Paul Baglione, Uncle to the Duchess; that he may see the riches
of two such lustres as shine in the Court of Pauy.


Fer. Pray Sir, the other?

R. D. This (my Lord) is for the Duchess Biancha, a wondrous sweet Picture,
if you well observe with what singularity the Arts-man has strove to set forth
each limb in exquisitest proportion, not missing a hair.


Fer. A hair?

R. D. She cannot more formally,

Or (if it may be lawful to use the word) more really, behold her own Symetry
in her glass, then in taking a sensible view of this counterfeit: when I first
saw it, I verily almost was of a mind that this was her very lip.


Fer. Lip!

R. D. How constantly he dwells upon this portrayture? Nay, I Will assure your
Lordship there is no defect of cunning. His eye is fixed as if it were
incorporated there. -- Were not the party her self alive to witness that
there is a Creature composed of flesh and blood, as naturally enriched with
such harmony of admiral beauty, as is here artificially counterfeited, a very
curious eye might repute it as an imaginary rapture of some transported
conceit, to aim at an impossibility; whose very first gaze is of force almost
to persuade a substantial love in a settled heart.


Fer. Love! heart.

R D. My honored Lord.

Fer. Oh heavens!

R. D. I am confirmed. -- Whst ails your Lordship?

Fer. You need not praise it, Sir, it self is praise.
How near had I forgot my self? -- I thank you.
It Is such a picture as might well become
The shrine of some feigned Venus; I am dazeld
With looking on it: -- pray Sir convey it hencc.

R. D. I am all your servant: -- blessed, blessed discovery!
Please you to command me?

Fer. No, gentle Sir: I Am lost beyond my senses.
Do You hear Sir, good where dwells the picture maker?

R. D. By the Castles farther drawbridge, near Galzazzo's statue; his name is
Alphonso Trinultio -- happy above all fate.


Fer. You say enough, my thanks to you.
Exit R. D. Were that picture
But rated at my Lordship, 'twere too cheap.
I fear I spoke or did I know not what,
All sense of providence was in mine eye.
Enter Ferentes, Maurucio, and Giacopo.
Fere. Youth in threescore years and ten; trust me (my Lord Maurucio) you are
now younger in the judgment of those that compare your former age with your
latter, by seven and twenty years, then you were three years ago: by all my
fideli^y, it is a miracle: the Ladies wonder at you.


Mau. Let them wonder; I am wise, as I am Courtly.

Gia. The Ladies, my Lord, call him the Green broom of the Court, he sweeps
all before him, and swear he has a stabbing wit: it is a very glister to
laughter-


Mau. Nay, I know I can tickle 'em at my pleasure:
I am stiff and strong, Ferentes.

Gia. A Rhedish root is a spear of steel in comparison of
I know what. --

Feren. The Marquess does love you.

Mau. She does love me.

Feren. And begins to do you infinite grace. Maurucio, infinite grace.


Fer. I Will take this time:
Good hour, my Lords, to both.

Mau. Right Princely Fernando, the best of the Fernando's: by the pith of
generation, the man I look for. His Highness has sent to find you out; he is
determined to weather his own proper individual person, for two days space,
in my Lord Narbassa's forest, to hunt the Dear, the Bucke, the Roe, and eke
the Barren Do.


Fer. Is his Highness preparing to hunt?

Feren. Yes, my Lord, and resolved tolye forth for the breuiating the prolixity
of some superfluous transmigration of the Suns double Cadence to the western
Horizon, my most perspicuous good Lord.


Fer. Oh, Sir, let me beseech you to speak in your own mother tongue -- two
days absence -- well -- my Lord Maurucio, I have a suit to you.


Mau. My Lord Fernando, I have a suit to you.

Fer. That you will accept from me a very choice token of my love, will you
grant it?


Mau. Will you grant mine?

Fer. What is it?

Mau. Only to know what the suit is, you please to P^ferre to me.


Fer. Why it is, my Lord, a Fool.

Mau. A Fool?

Fer. As very a Fool

As your Lordship is -- hopeful to see in any time of your life.


Gia. Now good my Lord part not with the Fool on any terms.


Mau. I beseech you, my Lord, has the fool qualities?

Fer. Very rare ones:

You shall not hear him speak one wise word in a months converse; passing
temperate of diet, for keep him from meat four and twenty hours, and he will
fast a whole day and a night together: unless you urge him to swear, there
seldom comes an oath from his mouth: and of a Fool, my Lord, to tell ye the
plain truth, had'a but half as much wit as you, my Lord, he would be in short
time three quarters as arrant wise as your Lordship.


Mau. Giacopo, these are very rare elements in a creature of little
understanding: oh, that I long to see him.

Enter Petruchio, and Roseillilike a soole.
Fer. A very harmless Idiot,
And as you could wish, look where he comes.

Petr. Nephew, here is the thing you sent for:
Come hither Fool, come it is a good fool.

Fer. Here, my Lord,
I freely give you the Fool, pray use him well for my sake.

Mau. I take the Fool most thankefully at your hands, my Lord: Have any
qualities, my pretty fool? wilt dwell with me?


Ros. A, a, a, a, I.

Feren. I never beheld a more natural Creature in my life.

Fer. Uncle, the Duke I hear prepares to hunt:
Let Us in and wait. Farewell Maurucio. --
Exit Fer. et Petr:
Mau. Beast that I am, not to ask the fools name:
It Is no matter, Fool is a sufficient title to call
The greatest Lord in the Court by, if he be no wiser then he.

Gia. Oh my Lord, what an arrant excellent pretty creature it is? come honey,
honey, honey, come.


Fere. You are beholding to my Lord Fernando for this gift.

Mau. True; oh that he could but speak methodically!
Can speak, Fool?

Ros. Can speak; De e e e e --

Feren. It Is a present for an Emperor: What an excellent instrument were this
to purchase a suit, or a monopoly from the Dukes ear?


Mau. I have it, I am wise and fortunate; Giacopo, I will leave all conceits,
and instead of my picture, offer the Lady Marquess this mortal man of weak
brain.


Gia. My Lord you have most rarely bethought you;
For so shall she no oftener see the Fool,
But she shall remember you better,
Then by a thousand Looking-glasses.

Feren. She will most graciously entertain it.

Mau. I may tell you, Ferentes, there is not a great woman amongst forty, but
knows how to make sport with a Fool. Do know how old thou art, sirrah?


Ros. Dud -- a clap cheek for nowne sake gaffer. h ee e e e e.

Feren. Alas, you must ask him no questions; but clap him on the cheek: I
understand his language; your Fool is tho tender hearted'st creature that is.

Enter Fiormonda, D'auolos, Iulia.
Fior. No more, thou have, in this discovery,
Exceeded all my favors, D'auolos.
Is It mistress Madam Duchess? brave revenge.

R. D. But had your Grace seen the infinite appetite of lust in the piercing
adultery of his eye, you would --


Fior. Or change him, or confound him, prompt dissembler!
Is here the bond of his Religious vow?
And that, now when the Duke is rid abroad,
My Gentleman will stay behind, is sick -- or so.

R. D. Not altogether in health, it was the excuse he made.

Mau. Most fit opportunity:
Her grace comes just in the nicke; let me study.

Feren. Lose no time, my Lord.

Gia. To her, Sir.

Mau. Vouchsafe to stay thy foot, most Cynthian hue.
And from a Creature, ever vowed thy servant,
Accept this gift; most rare, most fi^, most new,
The earnest penhy of a love so seruent.

Fior. What means the jolly youth?

Mau. Nothing, sweet Princess,

But only to present your grace with this sweet faced Fool: please you to
accept him to make you merry; I Will assure your Grace, he is a very whole some
Fool.


Fior. A fool? you might as well ha given your self:
Whence is he?

Mau. Now, just very now, given me out of special favor, by the Lord
Fernando, Madam.


Fior. By him? well, I accept him; thank you for it:
And in requital, take that Tooth picker.
It Is yours.

Mau. A Tooth-picker; I kiss your bounty: no quibble now?
And Madam,
If I grow sick, to make my spirits quicker,
I will revive them with this sweet Tooth-picker.

Fior. Make use on it as you list; here D'auolos,
Take in the Fool.

R. D. Come, sweet heart, wilt along with me?

Ros. V v vmh -- v v vmh -- won not, won not -- v v vmh

Fior. Wilt go with me, chicke?

Ros. Will go, te e e -- go will go --

Fior. Come D'auolos, observe to night; it is late:
Or I will win my choice, or curse my fate.
Exit Fior. Ros. and D'auolos.
Feren. This was wisely done now: S'foot you purchase A favor from a Creature,
my Lord, the greatest King of the earth wud be proud of.


Mau. Giacope!

Gia. My Lord.

Mau. Come behind me, Giacopo; I am big with conceit and must be delivered of
poetry, in the eternal commendation of this gracious Tooth-picker: but first,
I hold it a most healthy policy to make a flight supper.

For meat's the food that must preserve our lives,

And now is the time, when mortals whet their knives on thresholds, shoo-soles,
Cart-wheeles, etc. Away Giacopo.

Exeunt. Enter Colona with lights, Biancha, Fiormonda, Iulia, Fernando, and
D'auolos; Colona places the lights on a Table, and sets down a Chesse-board.
Bian. It Is yet but early night, too soon to sleep:
Sister, shall's have a mate at Chesse?

Fior, A mate!
No, Madam; you are grown too hard for me:
My Lord Fernando is a fitter match.

Bian. He Is a well practiced gamester:
Well, I care not, how cunning so er'e he be,
To pass an hour; I Will try your skill, my Lord;
Reach here the Chesse-board.

R. D. Are you so apt to try his skill, Madam Duchess?
Very good.

Fer. I shall bewray too much my ignorance
In striving with your Highness; it is a game
I lose at still, by oversight.

Bian. Well, well, I fear you not, let us to it.

Fior. You need not, Madam.

R. D. Marry needs she not; how gladly will she to it? it is a Rooke to a
Queen, she heaues a pawn to a Knights place; by'rlady, if all be truly noted,
to a Dukes place; and that is beside the play, I can tell ye.

Fernando and Duchess, play.
Fior. Madam, I must ^ntreat excuse; I feel
The temper of my body not in case
To judge the strife.

Bian. Lights for our sister, sirs:
Good rest to you; I Will but end my game and follow.
Fiormrnda takes her leave, attended by D'auolos and Iulia: as she goes out,
she speaks to D'auolos. --
Fior. Let 'em have time enough, and as thou can,
Be near to hear their Courtship, D'auolos.

R, D. Madam, I shall observe 'em with all cunning secrecy.

Bian. Colona, attend our sister to her chamber.

Col. I shall Madam. --
Exit Fior. Col. Iul. and R. D.
Bian. Play.

Fer. I must not lose the advantage of the game:
Madam, your Queen is lost.

Bian. My Clergy help me;
My Queen! and nothing for it but a pawn?
Why then the game's lost too; but play.

Fer. What Madam?
Fernando often looks about.
Bian. You must needs play well,
You are so studious. --
Fie upon it, you study past patience: --
What do you dream on? here is demurring
Would weary out a statue. -- Good now play.

Fer. Forgive me, let my knees for ever stick
he kneels. Nayl'd to the ground, as earthy as my fears;
E're I arise, to part away so cursed
In my unbounded anguish, as the rage
Of flame's, beyond all Utterance of words,
Devour me; lightened by your sacred eyes.

Bian. What means the man?

Fer. To lay before your feet
In lowest vassalage, the bleeding heart
That sighs the tender of a suit disdained.
Great Lady pity me, my youth, my wounds,
And do not think, that I have culled this time
From motions swiftest measure, to unclasp
The book of lust; if purity of love
Have residenee in virtues quest; lo here,
Bent lower in my heart than on my knee,
I beg compassion to a love, as chaste
As softness of desire can intimate.
Enter D'auolos, ieering and listening.
R. D. At it already? admirable have.

Bian. Am I again betrayed? -- bad man.

Fer. Keep in
Bright Angel, that seuerer breath, to cool
That heat of cruelty, which swayes the Temple
Of your too stony breast; you cannot urge
One reason to rebuke my trembling plea,
Which I have not, with many nights expense,
Examined; but, O Madam, still I find
No Physic strong to cure a tottur'd mind,
But freedom from the torture it sustaines.

R. D. Not kissing yet? still on vour knees? O for a plump Bed and clean
sheets, to comfort the aching of his shinnes! We shall have 'em clip anon, and
lispe kisses; here is ceremony with a vengeance.


Bian. Rise up, we charge you, rise; look on our face.
he rises. What see you there that may persuade a hope
Of lawless love? Know, most unworthy man,
So much we have the baseness of thy lust,
As were none living of thy sex but thee,
We had much rather prostitute our blood
To some inuenom'd Serpent, then admit
Thy bestiall dalliance: could thou dare to speak
Again, when we forbad? no, wretched thing,
Take this for answer; If thou henceforth open
Thy leprous mouth to tempt our ear again,
We shall not only certify our Lord
Of thy disease in friendship, but revenge
Thy boldness with the forfeit of thy life.
Think on it.

R. D. Now, now, now the game is a foot, your gray Iennet with the white face
is curried, forsooth; please your Lordship leap up into the saddle, forsooth;
-- poor Duke, how does thy head ache now?


Fer. Stay, go not hence in choler, blessed woman!
Y'haue schooled me, lend me hearing; though the float
Of infinite desires swell to a tide
Too high so soon to ebb, yet by this hand,
kisses her hand This glorious gracious hand of yours --

R, D. I marry, the match is made, clap hands and to it ho.

Fer. I swear,
Henceforth I never will as much in word,
In letter, or in syllable, presume
To make a repetition of my griefe^
Good night to you: if when I am dead you rip
This Coffin of my heart, there shall you read
With constant eyes, what now my tongue defines,
Biancha's name carved out in bloody lines.
For ever, Lady, now good night.
Enter with lights.
Bian. Good night:
Rest in your goodness; lights there; Sir good night.
Exeunt sundry ways.
R. D. So, via -- to be cuckold (mercy and providence) is as natural to a
married man, as to eat sleep or wear a nightcap. Friends! I will rather trust
mine arm in the throat of a Lion, my purse with a Curtezan, my neck with the
chance on a Dye, or my Religion in a Synagogue of Jews, then my wife with a
friend; wherein do Princes exceed the poorest peasant that ever was yoked to
a sixpenny strumpet, but that the horns of the one are mounted some two inches
higher by a Choppine then the other? oh Acteon! the goodliest headed beast of
the Forest, amongst wild cattle, is a Stag; and the goodliest beast amongst
tame fools in a Corporation is a Cuckold.

Enter Fiormonda.
Fior. Speak D'auolos, how thriues intelligence?

R. D. Above the prevention of Fate, Madam: I saw him kneel make pitiful
faces, kiss hands and forefingers, rise and by this time he is up, up Madam:
dobtlesse the youth aims to be Duke, for he is gotten into the Dukes seat an
hour ago.


Fior. Is It true?

R. D. Oracle, oracle; siege was laid, parley admitted, comsition offered, and
the Fort entrred; there is no interruption, the Duke will be at home to morrow
(gentle Animal) what do you resolve?


Fior. To stir up Tragedies as black as brave;
And sending the Lecher panting to his grane. --
Exeunt. Enter Branchae, her hair about her ears, in her night mantle; she
draws a Curtain, where Fernando is discovered in bed, sleeping, she sets
down the Candle before the Bed, and goes to the Bed side.
Bian. Resolve, and do; it is done, What, are those eyes
Which lately were so ouerdrown'd in tears,
So easy to take rest? Oh happy man!
How sweetly sleep has sealed up sorrows here?
But I will call him: What? My Lord, my Lord,
My Lord Fernando.

Fer. Who calls me?

Bian. My Lord,
Sleeping or waking?

Fer. Ha! who is it?

Bian. It Is I:
Have you forgot my voice? or is your ear
But useful to your eye?

Fer. Madam, the Duchess?

Bian. She, it is she; sit up,
Sit up and wonder, whiles my sorrows swell:
The nights are short, and I have much to say.

Fer. Is It possible, it is you?

Bian. It Is possible;
Why do you think I come?

Fer. Why! to crown joys,
And make me master of my best desires.

Bian. It Is true, you guess aright; sit up and listen.
With shame and passion now I must confess,
Since first mine eyes beheld you, in my heart
You have been only King; if there can be
A violence in love, then I have felt
That tyranny; be record to my soul,
The Justice which I for this folly fear:
Fernando, in short words, how e're my tongue
Did often chide thy love, each word thou spak^st
Was music to my ear; was never poor
Poor wretched woman lived, that loved like me;
So truly, so unfeignedly.

Fer. Oh Madam --

Bian. To witness that I speak is truth, -- look here,
Thus singly I adventure to thy bed,
And do confess my weakness; if thou tempt'st
My bosom to thy pleasures, I will yield.

Fer. Perpetual happiness!

Bian. Now hear me out:
When first Caraffa, Pauy's Duke, my Lord,
Saw me, he loved me; and without respect
Of dower, took me to his bed and bosom,
Advanced me to the title^ possess;
Not moved by Counsel, or removed by greatness,
Which to requite, betwixt my soul and heaven,
I vowed a vow to live a constant wife;
I have done so: nor was there in the world
A man created, could have broke that truth
For all the glories of the earth, but thou;
But thou, Fernando: Do I love thee now?

Fer. Beyond imagination.

Bian. True, I do,
Beyond imagination: if no pledge
Of love can instance what I speak is true,
But loss of my best joys, here, here, Fernando,
Be satisfied, and ruin me.

Fer. What do you mean?

Bian. To give my body up to thy embraces,
A pleasure that I never wished to thrive in,
Before this fatal minute: mark me now;
If thou do spoil me of this robe of ^ame,
By my best comforts, here I vow again,
To thee, to heaven, to the world, to time,
E're yet the morning shall new christen day,
I Will kill my self.

Fer. How madam, how?

Bian. I will:
Do what thou will, it is in thy choice; what say ye?

Fer. Pish, do you come to try me? tell me, first,
Will you but grant a kiss?

Bian. Yes, take it; that,
Or what thy heart can wish: I am all thine.
Kisses her.
Fer. Oh me -- Come, come, how many women pray
Were ever heard or read of, granted love,
And did as you protest you will?

Bian. Fernando;
Jest not at my calamity: I kneel: --
She kneeln. By these disheauel'd hayres, these wretched tears,
By all that is good, if what I speak, my heart
Vows not eternally, then think, my Lord,
Was never man su'd to me I denied,
Think me a common and most cunning whore,
And let my sins be written on my grave,
My name rest in reproof. -- Do as you list

Fer. I must believe ye, yet I hope anon,
When you are parted from me, you will say
I was a good cold easie-spirited man:
Nay, laugh at my simplicity; say, will ye?

Bian. No by the faith I owe my Bridal vows:
But ever hold thee much much dearer far
Then all my joys on earth, by this chaste kiss.

Fer. You have prevailed, and heaven forbid that (...)
Should by a want on appetite profane
This sacred Temple; it is enough for me
You Will please to call me servant.

Bian. Nay, be thine:
Command my power, my bosom; and I Will write
This love within the tables of my heart.

Fer. Enough; I Will master passion, and triumph
In being conquered; adding to it this,
In you my love, as it begun, shall end.

Bian. The latter I new vow -- but day comes on,
What now we leave vnfinish'd of content,
Each hour shall perfect up: Sweet, let us part.

Fer. This kiss, -- best life good rest.
Kiss.
Bian, All mine to thee.
Remember this, and think I speak thy words:
When I am dead, rip up my heart and read
With constant eyes, what now my tongue defines,
Fernando's name carved out in bloody lines.
Once more good rest, Sweet.

Fer. Your most faithful servant.
Exeunt
Actus Tertius.
Enter Nibrassa chasing, after him Iulia weeping^
Nib. GEt from me, strumpet, in famous whore, leprosy of my blood, make thy
moan to Ballad singers, and Rimers, they will Iigge out thy wretchedness and
abominations to new tunes; as for me, I renounce thee, thou art no daughter of
mine, I disclayne the legitimation of thy birth, and Curse the hour of thy
Nativity.


Iul. Pray Sir vouchsafe me hearing.

Nib. With child I shame to my grave!
Oh whore, wretched beyond utterance or reformation!
What would say?

Iul. Sir, by the honor of my mothers hearse,
He has protested marriage, pledged his faith:
If vows have any force, I am his wife.

Nib. His faith?

Why thou fool, thou wickedly credulous fool,

Can thou imagine Luxury is obseruant of Religion? No, no, it is with a
frequent Lecher as usual to for swear as to swear, their piety is in making
idolatry a worship, their hearts and their tongues are as different as thou
(thou whorel) and a Virgin.


Iul. You are too violent, his truth will prove
His constancy, and so excuse my fault.

Nibr. Shameless woman! this belief will damn thee: how will thy Lady
Marquess justly reprove me, for preferring to her service a monster of so lewd
and impudent a life? Look to it; if thy smooth devil leave thee to thy
infamy, I will never pity thy mortal pangs, never lodge thee under my roof,
never own thee for my child; mercy be my witness. --

Enter Petruchio, leading Colona.
Petr. Hide not thy folly by unwise excuse.
Thou art undone, Colona; no entreaties,
No warning, no persuasion, could put off
The habit of thy dotage on that man
Of much deceit, Ferentes: would thine eyes
Had seen me in my grave, e're I had known
The stain of this thine honor.

Col. Good my Lord,
Reclaim your incredulity; my fault
Proceeds from lawful composition
Of Wedlock; he has sealed his oath to mine,
To be my husband.

Nibr. Husband? hey da! is it even so? nay then we have partners in affliction:
if my jolly gallants long Clapper have struck on both sides, all is well:
Petruchio, thou art not wise enough to be a Parator; come hither man, come
hither, speak softly, is thy daughter with child?


Petr. With child, Nibrassa?

Nib. Fo, do not trick me off, I ouerheard your gabling; Hark in thine ear,
so is mine too.


Petr. Alas, my Lord, by whom?

Nib. Innocent by whom: what an idle question is that? One Cock has trod both
our Hens, Ferentes, Ferentes: who else? How do take it? me thi^kes thou at
wondrous patient: Why, I am mad, stark mad.


Petr. How like you this, Colona, it is too true?
Did not this man protest to be your husband?

Col. Ay me, to me he did.

Nib. What else, what else, Petruchio? and Madam, my quondam daughter, I hope
h'aue past some huge words of matrimony to you too.


Iul. Alas, to me he did.

Nib. And how many more, the great Iucubus of hell knows best: Petruchio, give
me your hand, mine own daughter in this arm, and yours, Colona, in this;
there, there, sit ye down together; never rise, as you hope to inherit our
blessings, till you have plotted some brave revenge: think upon it to purpose,
and you shall want no seconds to further it, be secret one to another: Come,
Petruchio, let 'em alone, the wenches will demurre on it, and for the process,
we will give 'em courage.


Petr. You counsel wisely, I approve your plot:
Think on your shames, and who it was that wrought 'em.

Nib. I, I, I, leave them alone: to work, wenches, to work. --

Exeunt.
Iul. We are quite ruined.

Iul. True, Colona,
Betrayed to infamy, deceived and mocked
By an unconstant Villain; what shall's do?
I am with child.

Col. Hey-ho, and so am I:
But what shall's do now?

Iul. This; with cunning words
First prove his love; he knows I am with child.

Col. And so he knows I am: I told him on it
Last meeting in the lobby, and in troth
The false deceiuer laughed.

Iul. Now by the stars he did the like to me,
And said, 'twas well I was so hap'ly sped.

Col. Those very words
He used to me; it fretted me to the heart:
I Will be revenged.
Enter Ferentes, and Morona an old Lady.
Iul. Peace, here is a noise me thinks:
Let Us rise, we will take a time to talk of this?

Feren. Will ye? hold: death of my delights, have ye lost all sense of shame?
you are best rore about the Court, that I have been your womans-barber, and
trimmed ye, kind Morona.


Mor. Defiance to thy kindness, thou have robbed me of my good name, did promise
to love none but me, me, only me; swor'st, like an unconscionable villain,
to marry me the twelfth day of the month, two months since; did make my bed
thine own, mine house thine own, mine, all and every thing thine own, I will
exclaim to the world on thee, and beg Justice of the Duke himself:
Villain, I will.


Feren. Yet again; nay, and if you be in that mood, shut up your fore-shop,
I Will be your Iourny-man no longer: why wise Madam Dryfist, could your moldy
brain be so addle, to imagine I would marry a stale widow at six and forty?
Marry gip, are there not varieries enough of thirteen? come, stop your
Clap-dish, or I Will purchase a Carting for you: By this light, I have toiled
more with this tough Carrion hen, then with ten Quails, scarce grown into
their first Feathers.


Mor. O Treason to all honesty or Religion, speak thou
periur'd-damnable-vngracious-defiler of women, who shall father my child which
thou have begotten?


Feren. Why thee, Country woman; thou have a larger purse to pay for the nursing:
nay, if you will needs have the world know how you, reputed a graue-Matron-like
Motherly-Madam, kicked up your heels like a Iennet, whose mark is new come
into her mouth, ee'ne do, do; the worst can be said of me is, that I was ill
advised to dig for gold in a Cole-pit: Are you answered?


Mor. Answered?

Iul Let Us fall amongst'em, -- Love -- how is it chick? ha.

Col. My dear Ferentes, my betrothed Lord.

Feren. Excellent: oh for three Barbary stone horses to top three Flanders
Mares? why how now Wenehes, what means this?


Mor. Out upon me, here is more of his truls.

Iul. Love, you must go with me.

Col. Good Love, let us walk.

Feren. I must rid my hands of them, or they will ride on my shoulders; by your
leave, Ladies: here is none but is of Common Counsel one with another: in
short, there are three of ye with child, you tell me by me: all of you I cannot
satisfy, (nor indeed hansomely any of ye) you all hope I should marry you,
which for that it is impossible to be done, I am content to have neither of ye;
for your looking big on the matter, keep your own Counsels, I Will not bewray
ye; but for marriage, heaven bless ye, and me from ye; this is my resolution.


Col. How, not me!

Iul. Not me!

Mor. Not me!

Feren. Nor you, nor you, nor you.

And to give you some satisfaction, I Will yield you reasons: you, Colona, had a
pretty art in your dalliance, but your fault was, you were too suddenly won;
you, Madam Morona, could have pleased well enough some three or four and thirty
years ago, but you are too old; you, Iulia, were young enough, but your fault
is, you have a scuruy face; now every one knowing her proper defect, thank me,
that I ever vouchsafed you the honor of my bed once in your lives: if you want
clouts, al I Will promise, is to rip up an old shirt or two; so wishing a speedy
deliverance to al your burde^s, I co^mond you to your patience


Mor. Excellent.

Iul. Notable.

Col. Vnmatch'd Villain.

Iul. Madam, though strangers, yet we vuderstand
Your wrongs do equal ours; which to revenge,
Please but to join with us, and we will redeem
Our loss of honor, by a brave exploit.

Mor. I embrace your motion, Ladies, with gladness, and will strive by any
action to rank with you in any danger.


Col. Come Gentlewomen, let us together then,
Thrice happy maids that never trusted men. --
Exeunt. Enter Duke, Biancha supported by Fernando, Fior^nda, Petruchio,
Nibrassa, Ferentes, and D'auolos.
Duke. Roseilli will not come then? will not? well,
His pride shall ruin him. -- Our letters speak
The Duchess Uncle will be here to morrow.
To morrow, D'auolos.

R. D. To morrow night, my Lord, but not to make more then one days abode
here: for his Holiness has commanded him to be at Rome the tenth of this
month, the Conclaue of Cardinals not being resolved to sit till his coming.


Duke. Your Uncle (Sweet-hart) at his next return,
Must be saluted Cardinal: Ferentes,
Be it your charge to think on some device
To entertain the present with delight.

Fer. My Lord, in honor to the Court of Pauy,
I Will join with you: Ferentes, not long since,
I saw in Bruxils, at my being there,
The Duke of Brabant welcome the Archbishop
Of Mentz with rare conceit, even on a sudden
Performed by Knights and Ladies of his Court,
In nature of an Anticke; which, me thought,
(For that I never before saw women Anticks)
Was for the newness strange, and much commended.

Bian. Now good my Lord Fernando further this
In any wise, it cannot but content.

Fior. If she entreat, it is ten to one the man
Is won before hand.

Duke. Friend, thou honour'st me:
But can it be so speedily performed?

Fer. I Will undertake it, if the Ladies please
To exercise in person only that;
And we must have a Fool, or such an one
As can with Art well act him.

Fior. I shall fit ye,
I have a natural.

Fer. Best of all, Madam; then nothing wants:
You must make one, Ferentes.

Feren. With my best (...) and dexterity, my Lord.

Petr. This false out happily, Nibrassa.

Nib. We could not wish it better:
Heaven is an vnbrib'd Justice.

Duke. We Will meet our Uncle in a solemn grace
Of zealous presence, as becomes the Church:
See all the Quire be ready, D'auolos.

R. D. I have already made your Highness pleasure known to them.


Bian Your lip, my Lord!

Fer. Madam.

Bian. Perhaps your teeth have bled, wiped with my handkercher; give me, I Will
do it my self. -- Speak, shall I steal a kiss? believe me, my Lord, I long.


Fer. Not for the world.

Fior. Apparent impudence.

R. D. Beshrew my heart, but that is not so good.

Duke. Ha, what is that thou mislik'st D'auolos?

R. D. Nothing, my Lord, -- but I was hammering a conceit of mine own, which
cannot (I find) in so short a time thrive, as a days practice.


Fior. Well put off, Secretary.

Duke. We are too sad, me thinks the life of mirth
Should still be fed where we are;
Where Is Maurucio?

Feren And't please your Highness, he is of late grown so affectionately
inward with my Lady Marquesses Fool, that I presume he is confident, there are
few wise men worthy of his society, who are not as innocently harmless as
that creature; it is almost impossible to separate them, and it is a question
which of the two is the wiser man.


Duke. Would a were here, I have a kind of dullness
Hangs on me since my hunting, that I feel
As 'twere a disposition to be sick, my head is ever aching.

R. D. A shrewd ominous token; I like not that neither.

Duke. Again! what is it you like not?

R. D. I beseech your Highness excuse me; I am so busy with his frivolous
project, and can bring it to no shape, that it almost confounds my capacity.


Bian. My Lord, you were best to try a set at Maw;
I and your friend, to pass away the time,
Will undertake your Highness and your sist^er

Duke. The game's too tedious.

Fior. It Is a peevish play,
Your Knave will heave the Queen out, or your King;
Besides, it is all on fortune.
Enter Maurucio, Roseillilike a fool, and Giacopo.
Mau. Bless thee, most excellent Duke; I here present thee as worthy and
learned a Gentleman, as ever I (and yet I have lived threescore years)
conuers'd with; take it from me, I have tried him, and is worthy to be
priuy-Counsayler to the greatest Turk in Christendom: of a most apparent and
deep understanding, slow of speech, but speaks to the purpose; Come forward,
Sir, and appear before his Highness in your own proper Elements.


Ros. Will -- tie -- to da new toate sure la now.

Gia. A very senseless Gentleman, and please your Highness, one that has a
great deal of little wit, as they say.


Mau. Oh Sir, had you heard him as I did, deliver whole histories in the Tangay
tongue, you would swear there were not such a linguist breathed again; and
did I but perfectly understand his language, I would be confident, in less
then two hours, to distinguish the meaning of Bird, Beast, or Fish, naturally,
as I my self speak Italian, my Lord. -- Well, he has rare qualities.


Duke. Now prithee question him, Maurucio.

Mau. I will, my Lord.
Tell me, rare scholar, which in thy opinion,
Does cause the strongest breath, -- garlic or onyon?

Gia. Answer him, brother fool; do, do, speak thy mind ^hucke, do.


Ros. Have bid seen all da fine knack, and do you
Naghtye tat-tle of da kna^ue, dad la have so.

Duke. We understand him not.

Mau. Admirable, I protest, Duke; mark oh Duke, mark!
What did I ask him, Giacopo?

Gia. Which caused the strongest breath, garlic or onyons, I take it, Sir.


Mau. Right, right by Hellicon; and his answer is, that a knane has a stronger
breath then any of 'em; wisdom (or I am an Ass) in the highest, a direct
Figure; put it down, Giacopo


Duke. How happy is that Idiot, whose ambition
Is but to eat, and sleep, and shun the rod:
Men that have more of wit, and use it ill,
Are fools in proof.

Bian. True, my Lord, there is many
Who think themselves most wise, that are most fools.

R. D. Bitter girds if all were known, -- but --

Duke. But what? speak out; plague on your muttering
Grumbling, I hear you, Sir, what is it?

R. D. Nothing, I protest, to your Highness pertinent, to any moment.


Duke. Well, Sir, remember. -- Friend, you promised study.
I am not well in temper; come Biancha,
Attend our friend Ferentes.
exeunt. manent Fer. Ros. Feren. et Mau.
Fer. Ferentes, take Maurucio in with you
He must be one in action,

Feren. Come, my Lord, I shall entreat your help.

Fer. I Will stay the Fool:
And follow instantly.

Mau. Yes, pray, my Lord.
Exeunt Feren. et Mau.
Fer How thrive your hopes now, Cousen?

Ros. Are we safe?
Then let me cast my self beneath thy foot,
True ver^uous Lord: Know then, Sir, her proud heart
Is only flx'd on you in such extremes
Of violence and passion, that I fear,
Or she will enjoy you, or she will ruin you.

Fer. M^, Cooze; by all the joys I wish to taste,
She is as far beneath thy thought, as I
In soul above her malice.

Ros. I observed
Even now, a kind of dangerous pretense
In an vn-ioynted phrase from D'auolos:
I know not her intent, but this I know,
He has a working brain, is minister
To all my Ladies counsels; and (my Lord)
Pray heaven there have not any thing befalne
Within the knowledge of his subtle Art,
To do you mischife.

Fer. Pish; should he or hell
Affront me in the passage of my (...),
I'd^ crush them into Atomies.

Ros. I, do; admit you could, mean time, my Lord,
Be nearest to your self, what I can learn
You shall be soon informed of: here is all
We fools can catch the wise in; to vnknot
By privilege of coxcombes, what they plot. --
Exeunt Enter Duke and D'auolos.
Duke. Thou art a Traitor: do not think the gloss
Of smooth evasion, by your cunning ^sts,
And coynage of your polliticians brain,
Shall jig me off: I Will know it, I vow I will.
Did not I note your dark abrupted ends
Of words half spoke? your wel's, if all were known?
Your short, I like not that? your girds, and Buts?
Yes (Sir) I did: such broken language argues
More matter then your subtilty shall hide:
Tell me, what is it? by Honors self I Will know.

R. D. What would you know, my Lord? I confess I owe my life and service to
you, as to my Prince; the one you have, the other you may take from me at your
pleasure: should I devise matter to feed your distrust, or suggest likelihoods
without appearance? what would you have me say? I know nothing.


Duke. Thou lie, dissembler; on thy brow I read
D^stracted herrors figured in thy ^ookes.
On thy allegiance, D'auolos, as e're
Thou hop'st to live in grace with us, unfold
What by thy party halting of thy speech
Thy knowledge can discover: By the faith
We bear to sacred Justice, we protest,
Be it or good, or eui^l, thy reward
Shall be our special thanks, and love vn-term'd:
Speak, on thy duty, we thy Prince command.

R. D. Oh my disaster! my Lord, I am so charmed by those powerful repetitions
of love and duty, that I cannot conceal what I know of your dishonor.


Duke. Dishonor! then my soul is cleft with fear:
I half presage my misery, say on;
Speak it at once, for I am great with grief.

R. D. I trust your Highness will pardon me, yet I will not deliver a
syllable which shall be less innocent then truth it self.


Duke. By all our wish of joys, we pardon thee.

R. D. Get from me cowardly seruility, my service is noble, and my loyalty an
Armor of brass: in short, my Lord, and plain discovery, you are a Cuckold.


Duke. Keep in the word, -- a Cuckold:

R. D. Fernande is your Rival, has stolen your Duchess heart, murdered
friendship, horns your head, and laughes at your horns.


Duke. My heart is split.

R. D. Take courage, be a Prince in resolution; I knew it would nettle you in
the fire of your composition, and was loath to have g^uen the first report of
this more then ridiculous blemish to all patience or moderation. But, oh my
Lord, what would not a subject do to approve his loyalty to his Sovereign?
yet, good Sir, take it as quietly as you can: I must needs say, it is a soul
fault, but what man is he vnd^ the Sun, that is free from the Careere of his
destiny? may be she will in time reclaim the errors of her youth: or 'twere a
great happiness in you, if you could not believe it; that is the surest way, my
Lord, in my poor counsel.


Duke. The ycie current of my frozen blood
Is kindled up in Agonies as hot
As slames of burning sulphur: oh my sat!
A Cuckold? had my Duke domes whole inheritance
Been rent, mine honors leueld in the dust,
So she, that wicked woman, might have slept
Chaste in my bosom, (...) had been all a sport.
And he, that Villain, viper to my heart,
That he should be the man!
That he should be the man; death above utterance!
Take heed you prove this true.

R. D. My Lord.

Duke. If not,
I Will tear thee joint by joint. -- Pew, me thinks
I^ should not be; Biancha! why, I took her
From lower then a bondage; hell of hels?
See that you make it good.

R. D. As for that, would it were as good as I would make it, I can (if you
will temper your distractions) but bring you where you shall see it; no more.


Duke. See it?

R. D. I, see it, if that be proof sufficient: I for my part, will slack no
service that may testify my simplicity.

Enter Fernando.
Duke. Enough: -- what news Fernando?

Fer. Sir, the Abbot is now upon arri^all, all your servants
Attend your presence.

Duke. We will give him welcome
As shall befit our love and his respect:
Come mine own best Fernando, my dear friend. --
Exeunt
R. D. Excellent! now for a horned Moon.

Sound of Music. But I hear the preparation for the entertainment of this
great Abbot, let him come and go, that matters nothing to this; whiles he
rides abroad in hope to purchase a purple hat, our Duke shall as earnestly heat
the pericranion of his noddle, with a yellow hood at home: I hear 'em coming.

Loud Music. Enter 3. or 4. with Torches: after the Duke, Fernando, Biancha,
Fiormonda, Petruchio, Nibrassa at one door. Enter at another door, two
Friars, Abbot, and attendants: The Duke and Abbot meet and salute, Biancha and
the rest salute, and are saluted; they rank themselves, and go o^e the Quire
singing, D'auolos only stays.
R. D. On to your vittailes; some of ye, I know, seed upon wormwood.

Exit. Enter Petruchio and Nibrassa with napkins, as from supper.
Petr. The Duke's on rising; are you ready ho?
Within. All ready.

Nib. Then, Petruchio, arm thy self with courage and resolution, and do not
shrink from being stayed on thy own virtue.


Petr. I am resolved. -- fresh lights, I hear 'em coming.
Enter some with lights: the Duke, Abbot, Biancha, Fiormonda, Fernando and
D'auolos.
Duke. Right Reverend Uncle, tho our minds be scanted
In giving welcome as our hearts would wish,
Yet we will strive to show how much we joy
Your presence, with a Courtly show of mirth.
Please you to sit.

Abbot. Great Duke, your worthy honors to me,
Shall still have place in my best thanks:
Since you in me so much respect the Church,
Thus much I Will promise; at my next return,
His Holiness shall grant an Indulgence
Both large and general.

Duke. Our humble duty
Seat you, my Lords: now let the Masquers enter.
Enter in an Anticke fashion, Ferentes, Roseilli, and Maurucio at several
doors, they dance a little: suddenly to them enter Colona, Iulia, Morona in
odd shapes, and dance; the men gaze at them, are at a stand, and are invited
by the women to dance, they dance together sundry changes, at last they close
Ferentes in, Maurucio and Roseilli being shooks off, and standing at several
ends of the S^age gazing: The women hold hands and dance about Ferentes in
diverse complementall offers of Courtship; at length they suddenly fall upon
him, and stab him, he fal^ down, and they run out at several doors. Cease
Music.
Feren. Uncase me; I am slain in jest, a pox upon your outlan^sh feminine
Antiks: pull off my Visor; I shall bleed to death, ere I have time to feel
where I am hurt: Duke, I am slain, off with my visor, for heavens sake off
with my visor.

They unmask him.
Duke. Slai^e? take this visor off; we are betrayed:
Ceaze on them, two are yonder, hold, Ferentes;
Follow the rest, apparent treachery.

Abbot. (...) St. Bennet, what a sight is this?
Enter (...), Colona, and (...) unmasked, every one having a child in their
arms.
Iul. B^ not amazed, great Princes, but vouchsafe
Your audience; we are they have done this deed:
Look here, the pledges of this false man's lust,
Betrayed in our simplicities: He swore,
And pawned his truth to marry each of us;
Abused us all, unable to revenge
Our public shames, but by his public fall,
Which thus we have contri^'d; nor do we blush
To call the glory of this murder ours:
We did it, and we will justify the deed.
For when in sad complaints we claym'd his vows,
His answer was reproach; villain, is it true?

Col. I was too quickly won, you slave.

Mor. I was too old, you dog.

Iul. I (and I never shall forget the wrong)
I was not fair enough, not fair enough
For thee, thou monster; let me cut his gall,
she stabs him. Not fair enough! oh scorn! not fair enough?

Feren. O, o, oh. --

Duke. Forbear, you monstrous women, do not add
Mu^ther to lust: your lives shall pay this forfeit.

Feren. Pox upon all Codpeece extrauagancy.
I am peppered -- oh, oh, oh -- Duke forgive me.
Had I rid any tame beasts, but Barbary wild Colts,
I had not bin thus jerk'd out of the saddle.
My forfeit was in my blood, and my life has answered it.
Vengeance on all wild whores, I say, -- oh it is true;
Farewell generation of Hackneyes. -- ooh.
dies.
Duke. He is dead, to prison with those monstrous strumpets.

Petr. Stay, I Will answer for my daughter.

Nib. And I for mine: -- oh well done, girls.

Fer. I for yon Gentlewoman, Sir.

Mau. Good my Lord, I am an innocent in the business.

Duke. To prison with him; bear the body hence.

Abbot. Her^'s fatal sad presages, but it is just,
He dies by murder, that has lived in lust.
Exeunt.
Actus Quartus.
Enter Duke, Fiormonda, and D'auolos,
Fior. ARt thou Caraffa? is there in thy veins
One drop of blood that issued from the loins
Of Pauy's ancient Dukes? or do thou sit
On great Lorenzo's seat, our glorious father,
And can not blush to be so far beneath
The spirit of Heroicke ancestors?
Can thou ingrosse a slavish shame? which men,
Far far below the Region of thy state,
Not more abhor, then study to revenge.
Thou an I^alian? I could burst with rage,
To think I have a brother so befooled,
In (...) patience to a harlots lust.

R. D. One, my Lord, that does so palpably, so apparently make her Adulteries a
Trophey, whiles the poting-sticke to her unsatiate and more then goatish
abomination, jeeres at, and flouts your sleepish, and more then sleepish
security.


Fior. What is she, but the sallow-coloured brat
Of some vnlanded banckrupt? taught to catch
The casie fancies of young prodigal bloods,
In springes of her stewe-instructed Art? Here Is your most
Virtuous Duchess, your rare piece.

R. D. More base in the infiniteness of her sensuality,
Then corruption can infect: to clip and inueagle
Your friend too, oh insufferable! A friend? how of
All men are you most unfortunate? to pour out
Your soul into the bosom of such a creature,
As holds it Religion to make your own trust a key,
To open the passage to your own wines womb,
To be drunk in the priuacies of your bed:
Think upon that, Sir.

Duke. Be gentle in your tortutes, ee'ne for pity;
For pitty's cause I beg it.

Fior. Be a Prince?
Thou Had better, Duke, thou had bin borne a peasant.
Now boys will sing thy scandal in the streets,
Tune Ballads to thy infamy, get money
By making Pageants of thee, and invent
Some strangely-shap'd man-beast, that may for horns
Resemble thee, and call it Pauy's Duke.

Duke. Endless immortal plague.

R. D. There Is the mischief, Sir:

In the mean time you shall be sure to have a Bastard, (of whom you did not
so much as beget a little toe, a left ear, or half the further side of an
upper lip) inherit both your Throne and Name; this would kill the soul of very
patience it self.


Duke. Forbear; the ashy palenesse of my cheek
Is scarletted in ruddy flakes of wrath:
And like some bearded met^ shall suck up,
With swiftest terror, all those dusky mists
That ouercloud Compassion in our breast.
You have roused a sleeping Lion, whom no Art,
No sawning smoothness shall reclaim, but blood.
And Sister thou, thou Roderico, thou,
From whom I take the surfeit of my bane,
Henceforth no more so eagerly pursue,
To whet my dullness; you shall see Caraffa
Equal his birth, and matchless in revenge.

Fior. Why now I hear you speak in majesty.

R. D. And it becomes my Lord most Princely.

Duke. Does it? come hither, Sister; thou art near
In nature, and as near to me in love.
I love thee; yes, by yon bright firmament,
I love thee dearly: but observe me well:
If any private grudge, or female spleen,
Malice, or envy, or such woman's frailty,
Have spurred thee on to set my soul on fire,
Without apparent certainty; I vow
And vow again, by all Princely blood,
Had thou a double soul, or were the lives
Of fathers, mothers, children, or the hearts
Of all our Tribes in thine, I would unrip
That womb of bloody mischief with these nails,
Where such a cursed plot as this was hatched.
But D'auolos, for thee -- no more; to work
A yet more strong impression in my brain,
You must produce an instance to mine eye,
Both present and apparent. -- nay, you shall -- Or --

Fior. Or what? you will be mad? be rather wise:
Think on Ferentes first, and think by whom
The harmless youth was slaughtered: had he lived,
He would have told you tales: Fernando feared it;
And to prevent him, under show, forsooth,
Of rare device, most trimly cut him off.
Have you yet eyes, Duke?

Duke. Shrewdly urged, -- it is piercing

Fior. For looking on a sight shall split your soule^
You shall not care, (...) undertake my self
To do it some two days hence, for need to night,
But that you are in Court.

R. D. Right; wud you desire, my Lord, to see them exchange (...), sucking one
another lips, nay, begetting an heir to the Dukedom, or practicing more then
the very act of adultery it self? Give but a little way by a fained absence,
and you shall find 'em -- I blush to speak doing what: I am mad to think
on it, you are most shamefully, most sinfully, most scornfully cornuted.


Duke. Do You play upon me? as I am your Prince,
There Is some shall rore for this: why what was I,
Both to be thought or made so vild a thing?
Stay -- Madam Marquess, -- ho Roderico, you Sir,
Bear witness, that if ever I neglect
One day, one hour, one minute, to wear out
With toil of plot, or practice of conceit,
My busy skull, till I have found a death
More horrid then the Bull of Phalaris,
Or all the fabling Poets; dreaming whips:
If ever I take rest, or force a smile
Which is not borrowed from a Royal vengeance,
Before I know which way to satisfy
Fury and wrong: (nay kneel down) let me dye
More wretched then despair, reproach, contempt,
Langhter and poverty it self can make me:
Let Us rise on all sides, friends; now all is agreed;
If the Moon serve, some that are safe shall bleed.
Enter Fernando, Biancha, and Morona.
Bian. My Lord the Duke.

Duke. Biancha! ha, how is it?
How is it, Biancha? what Fernando? come,
Shal's shake hands, sirs? faith this is kindly done:
Here Is three as one; welcome dear Wise, sweet Fri^nd.

R. D. I do not like this now, it shows scuruily to me,

Bian. My Lord we have a (...) our friend and I.

Duke. She puts my friend before most kindly still.

Bian. Must join.

Duke. What must?

Bian. My Lord!

Duke. Must join, you say.

Bian. That you will please to set Maurucio
At liberty: this Gentle woman here,
Has by agreement made betwixt them two,
Obtained him for her husband; good my Lord
Let me entreat, I dare engage mine honor
He Is ^nnocent in any wilful fault.

Duke. Your honor, Madam! now beshrew you for it,
T'ingage your honor on so slight a ground:
Honor's a precious Jewel, I can tell you;
Nay, it is Biancha. -- Go too, D'auolos,
Bring us Maurucio hither.

R. D. I shall, my Lord. -- --
Exit D'auolos^
Mor. I humbly thank your grace.

Fer. And, Royal Sir, since Iulia and Colona;
Chief Actors in Ferentes tragic end,
Were, through their Ladies mediation,
Freed by your gracious pardon; I, in pity.
Tendered this widows friendlesse misery;
For whose reprieue I shall in humblest duty
Be ever thankful.
Enter D'auolos, Maurucio in poor rags, and Giacopo weeping.
Mau. Come you my learned Counsel, do not rore;
If I must hang, why then lament therefore:
You may rejoice, and both, no doubt, be great
To serve your Prince, when I am turned worms meat.
I fear my lands, and all I have, is begged,
Else, woe is me, why should I be so ragg'd?

R. D. Come on, Sir, the Duke stays for you.

Mau. O how my stomach does begin to puke!
When I do hear that only word, the Duke.

Duke. You Sir, look on that woman; are you pleased,
If we remit your body from the jayle,
To take her for your wife.

Man, On that condition, Prince, with all my heart.

Mor. Yes, I warrant your grace, he is content.

Duke. Why, foolish man, have thou so soon forgot
The public sh^me of her abused womb?
Her being mother to a Bastards birth?
Or caust thou but imagine she will be
True to thy bed, who to her self was false?

Gia. Phew, Sir, do not stand upon that, that is a matter of nothing, you know.


Mau. Nay, and shall please your good grace, and it come to that, I care not;
as good men as I have lain in foul sheets I am sure; the linen has not been
much the worse for the wearing a little: I will have her with all my-heart.


Duke. And shall: Fernando, thou shall have the grace
To join their hands, put 'em together, friend.

Bian. Yes, do my Lord, bring you the Bridegroom hither,
I Will give the Bride my self.

R. D. Here Is argument to jealousy, as good as drink to the dropsy, she
will share any disgrace with him: I could not wish it better.


Duke. Even so: well, do it.

Fer. Here, Maurucio, long live a happy couple.
join their bands.
Duke. It Is enough, -- now know our pleasure henceforth.
It Is our will, if ever thou, Maurucio, or thy wife,
Be seen within a dozen miles at Court,
We will recall our mercy: no entreat
Shall warrant thee a minute of thy life:
We Will have no servile slavery of lust
Shall breath near us; dispatch and get ye hence,
Biancha, come with me. -- oh my cle^t soul!
Exit Duke et Biancha,
Mau. How Is that? must I come no more near the Court?

Gia. O pitiful, not near the Court, Sir.

R. D. Not by a dozen miles, indeed Sir: your only course I can advise you, is
to pass to Naples, and set up a house of Carnality, there are very fair and
frequent suburbs, and you need not fear the contagion of any pestilent
disease, for the worst is very proper to the place.


Fer. It Is a strange sentence.

Fior. It Is, and sudden too,
And not without some mystery.

R. D. Will you go, Sir.

Mau. Not near the Court?

Mor. What matter is it, Sweetheart, fear nothing, Love, you shall have new
change of apparel, good (...), wholesome attendance, and we will li^e like
pigeons, my Lord.


Mau. Will thou forsake me, Giacopo?

Gia. I forsake ye? no, not as long as I have a whole ear on my head, come
what will come.


Fior. Maurucio, you did once proffer true love
To me, but since you are more thriftier sped,
For old affections sake here take this gold,
Spend it for my sake.

Fer. Madam, you do nobly;
And that is for me, Maurucio.

R. D. Will ye go, Sir?

Mau. Yes, I will go; and I humbly thank your Lordship and Ladyship: Pauy,
sweet Pauy farwell: come wife, come Gia-

Now is the time that we away must lag, (copo.

And march in pomp with baggage and with bag:

O poor Maurucio! what have thou mis-doue?

To end thy life when life was new begun.

A ^ew to all; for Lords and Ladies see

My woeful plight; and Squires of low degree:


R. D. Away, away, sirs. --
Exeunt. manent Fior. et Fer^.
Fior. My Lord Fernando.

Fer. Madam.

Fior. Do you note my brothers odd distractions?
You were wont to bosom in his Counsels;
I am sure you know the ground on it.

Fer. Not I, in troth.

Fior. Is It possible? what would you say, my Lord,
If he, out of some melancholy spleen,
Edged on by some thank picking Parasite,
Should now prove jealous? I mistrust it shrewdly.

Fer. What Madam? jealous?

Fior. Yes; for but observe,
A Prince, whose eye is chooser to his heart,
Is seldom steady in the lists of love,
Unless the party he affects do match
His rank in equal portion, or in friends:
I never yet, out of report, or else
By warranted description, have observed
The nature of phantasticke Jealousy,
If not in him; yet on my conscience now,
He has no cause.

Fer. Ca^se, Madam! by this light
I Will pledge my soul against a vse-lesse rush.

Fior. I never thought her less, yet trust me, Sir,
No merit can be greater than your praise,
Whereat I strangely wonder; how a man
Vowed, as you told me, to a single life,
Should so much Deifie the Saints, from whom
You have disclaym'd devotion.

Fer. Madam, it is true;
From them I have, but from their virtues never.

Fior. You are too wise, Fernando: to be plain.
You are in love; nay shrink not, man, you are:
Biancha is your aim; why do you blush?
She is, I know she is.

Fer. My aim?

Fior. Yes, yours;
I hope I talk no news: Fernando, know
Thou runst to thy confusion, if in time
Thou do not wisely shun that Circe's charm.
Vnkindest man! I have too long concealed
My hidden flames, when still in silent signs
I Courted thee for love; without respect
To youth or state, and yet thou art unkind.
Fernando, leave that Sorceresse, if not
For love of me, for pity of thy self.

Fer. Injurious woman, I defy thy lust:
It Is not your subtle sifting shall creep
Into the secrets of a heart vnsoyl'd:
You are my Princes sister, else your malice
Had rayl'd it self to death; but as for me,
Be record all my fate, I do detest
Your fury or affection. -- Judge the rest.
Exit Fer.
Fior. What gone! well, go thy ways; I see the more
I humble my firm love, the more he shuns
Both it and me: so plain! then it is too late
To hope; change peevish passion to contempt:
What ever rages in my blood I feel,
Fool he shall know I was not borne to kneel,
Exit. Enter D'auolos and Iulia.
R. D. Iulia mine own -- speak softly.
What? have thou learned out any thing of this pale widgeon?
Speak soft, what does she say?

Iul. Fo, more then all; there is not an hour shall pass,
But I shall have intelligence, she swears.
Whole nights; you know my mind, I hope you will give
The gown you promised me.

R. D. Honest Iulia, peace: thou art a woman worth a kingdom: let me never be
believed now, but I think it will be my destiny to be thy husband at last:
what tho thou have a child, or perhaps two?


Iul. Never but one, I swear.

R. D. Well, one; is that such a matter? I like thee the better for it: it
shows thou have a good tenant-able and fertile womb, worth twenty of your
barren, dry, bloodlesse deuourers of youth; but come, I will talk with thee
more privately; the Duke has a journey in hand, and will not be long absent:
see, 'a is come already. -- let us pass away easily.

Exeunt. Enter Duke and Biancha.
Duke. Troubled! yes, I have cause: O Blancha!
Here wa^ my fa^e engraven in thy brow,
This smoo^h (...) pol^sht table; in thy cheeks
Nature sum^'d up thy dower: 'twas not wealth,
The Myser^ god, n^r Royalty of blood,
Adua^c'd thee to my bed; b^t love, and hope
Of Virtue, that might equal those sweet looks:
If then thou should betray my trust, thy faith,
To the pollution of a base desire,
Thou were a wretched woman.

Bian. Speaks your love,
Or ^eare, my Lord?

Duke. Both, both; Biancha, know,
The ^ightly languish of my d^ll unrest
Has stamped a strong opinion; for me tho^ght
(Mark what I say) as I in glorious pomp
Was sitting on my Throne, whiles I had hemmed
My best b^lou'd Biancha in mine arms,
She reached my cap of State, and cast it down
Beneath her foot, and spurned it in the dust;
Whiles I (oh 'twas a dream too full of fate)
Was stooping down to reach it; on my head,
Fernando, like a Tray to^ to his vows,
Clapped, in disgrace, a Coronet of horues:
But by the honor of anointed kings,
Were both of you hid in a rock of fire,
Guarded by ministers of flaming hell,
I have a sword ('^is here) should make my way
Through fire, through darkness, death, and all
To hew your lust engendered flesh to shreds,
Pound you to mortar, cut your throats, and mince
Your ^lesh to mites; I will, -- (...) not, -- I will.

Bian. Mercy protect me, will ye murder me?

Duke. Yes. -- Oh! I cry thee mercy. -- how the rage
Of my vndreamt of wrongs, made me forget
All sense of suff^rance! blame me not, Biancha;
One such another dream would quite d^stract
Reason and self humanity; yet tell me,
Was It not an ominous vision?

Bian. 'Twas, my Lord;
Yet but a vision; for did such a guilt
Hang on mine honor, 'twere no blame in you
If you did stab me to the heart.

Duke. The heart?
Nay, strumpet, to the soul; and tear it off
From life, to damn it in immortal death

Bian. Alas, what do you mean, Sir?

Duke. I am mad. --
Forgive me, good Biancha; still me thinks
I dream, and dream anew: now prithee chide me.
Sickness, and these divisions, so distract
My senses, that I take things possible
As if they were: which to remove, I mean
To speed me straight to Luca; where, perhaps,
Absence and bathing in those healthful springs
May soon recover me: mean time, dear sweet,
Pity my troubled heart; griefs are extreme;
Yet, Sweet, when I am gone, think on my dream.
Who waits without, ho? is provision ready,
To pass to Luca?
Enter Petr. Nibr. Fior. D'auolos, Ros. and Fernand^.
Petr. It attends your Highness.

Duke. Friend, hold; take here from me this Jewel, this:
Gin^s him Biancha. Be she your care till my return from Luca:
Honest Fernando, wife respect my friend,
Let Us go: but hear ye wife, think on my dream.
Exeunt omnes, but Ros. et Petr.
Petr. Cousen, one word with you: does not this Cloud
Acquaint you with strange novelties? The Duke
Is lately much distempered; what he means
By journeying now to Luca, is to me
A r^ddle; can you clear my doubt?

Ros. O Sir!
My fears exceed my knowledge, yet I note
No less then you infer: all is not well,
Would 'twere: whosoever thrive, I shall be sure
Never to rise to my vn-hop'd desires:
But Cousen, I shall tell you more anon;
Mean time pray send my Lord Fernando to me,
I covet much to speak with him.
Enter Fernando.
Petr. And see,
He comes himself; I Will leave you both together.
Exit.
Fer. The Duke is horst for Luca: how now Cooze,
How prosper you in love?

Ros. As still I hoped:
My Lord you are undone.

Fer. Undone I in what?

Ros. Lost; and I fear your life is bought and sold;
I Will tell you how: late in my Ladies chamber,
As I by ehance lay slumbering on the mats,
In comes the Lady Marquess, and with her,
Iulia and D'auolos; where sitting down,
Not doubting me, Madam (quoth D'auolas)
We have discovered now the neast of shame:
In short, my Lord, (for you already know
As much as they reported) there was told
The circumstance of all your private love
And meetings with the Duchess; when at last
False D'auolos concluded with an oath,
We Will make (quoth he) his hart-strings crack for this.

Fer. Speaking of me?

Ros. Of you: I (quoth the Marquess)
Were not the Duke a baby, he would seek
Swift vengeance; for he knew it long ago.

Fer. Let him know it; yet I vow
She is as loyal in her plighted faith,
As is the Sun in heaven: but put case
She were not; and the Duke did know she were not,
This Sword lift up, and guided by this Arm,
Shall guard her from an armed troop of Fiends,
And all the earth beside.

Ros. You are too safe
In your destruction.

Fer. Dambe him, -- he shall feel --
But peace, who comes?
Enter Colona.
Col. My Lord, the Duchess craves a word with you:

Fer. Where is she?

Col. In her chamber.

Ros. Here have a plum for Ie'ee --

Col. Come fool, I Will give thee plums enough, come fool.

Fer. Let slaves in mind be servile to their fears,
Our heart is high in-starr'd in brighter Spheres.
Exit Fer. et Col^.
Ros, I see him lost already,
If all prevail not, we shall know too late,
No toil can shun the violence of Fate.
Exit.
Actus Quintus.
Enter above, Fernand^.
Fior. NOW fly revenge, and wound the lower earth,
That I, en-sphear'd above, may cross the race
Of Love despised, and triumph over their graves,
Who scorn the low-bent thraldom of my heart.
A Curtain drawn, below are discovered Biancha in her night attire, leaning
on a Cushion at a Table, holding Fernando by the hand.
Bia. Why should thou not be mine? why should the laws
The Iron laws of Ceremony, bar
Mutual embraces? what is a vow? a vow?
Can there be sin in unity? Could I
As well dispense with Conscience, as renounce
The outside of my titles, the poor style
Of Duchess; I had rather change my life
With any waiting woman in the land,
To purchase one nights rest with thee Fernondo,
Then be Caraffa's Spouse a thousand years.

Fior. Treason to wedlock, this would make you sweat.

Fer. Lady of all, what I am, as before,
To survive you, or I will see you first,
Or widowed or buried: if the last,
By all the comfort I can wish to taste
By your fair eyes, that sepulcher that holds
Your Coffin, shall encoffin me alive:
I sign it with this seal. -- -- --
Kisses her.
Fior. Ignoble strumpet.

Bian. You shall not swear, take off that oath again,
Or thus I will enforce it. -- -- --
She kisses him.
Fer. Use that force,
And make me perjured; for whiles your lips
Are made the book, it is a sport to swear,
And glory to forswear.

Fior. Here Is fast and loo^e;
Which for a Ducat, now the game's on foot.
Whiles they are kissing, Enter Duke with his sword drawn, D'auolos in like
manner, Petruchio, Nibrassa, and a Guard.
Colona within. Help, help, Madam, you are betrayed, Madam, help, help.


R. D. Is there confidence in credit now, Sir? belief in your own eyes? do
you see? do you see, Sir? Can you behold it without lightning?


Col. within. Help, Madam, help.

Fer. What noise is that, I heard one cry.

Duke. Ha! did you? know you who I am?

Fer. Yes; Thou Art Pauy's Duke,
Dressed like a hangman: see, I am unarmed,
Yet do not fear thee; tho the Coward doubt
Of what I could have done, has made thee steal
The Advantage of this time, yet Duke I dare
Thy worst, for murder sits upon thy cheeks:
To It man.

Duke. I am too angry in my rage,
To scourge thee unprovided; take him hence:
Away wi^h him. -- --
They take hold on him.
Fer. Vn-hand me.

R. D. You must go, Sir:

Fer. Duke, do not shame thy manhood to lay hands
On that most innocent Lady.

Duke. Yet again:
Confine him to his Chamber.
Exit D'a. et guard, with I'er. Leave us all;
None stay, not one, shut up the doors.
Exeunt omnes, but Du. et Bia
Fio. Now show thy (...) my brother, brave Caraffa.

Duke. Woman, stand forth before me, -- wretched whore.
What can thou hope for?

Bian. Death; I wish no less:
You told me you had dreamt; and, gentle Duke,
Unless you be mistook, you are now awaked.

Duke. Strumpet I am, and in my hand hold up
The edge that must uncut thy twist of life.
Do thou not shake?

Bian. For what? to see a weak
Faint trembl^ng arm advance a leaden blade?
Alas good man, put up, put up; thine eyes
Are likelier much to weep, then arms to strike:
What wud you do now, pray?

Duke. What! shameless harlot;
Rip up the Cradle of thy cursed womb,
In which the mixture of that Traitors lust
Impostumes for a birth of Bastardy:
Yet come, and if thou think thou can deserve
One mite of mercy, e're the boundless spleen
Of just-consuming wrath ore-swell my reason,
Tell me, bad woman, tell me what could move
Thy heart to cra^e variety of youth?

Bian. I tell ye, if you needs would be resolved,
I held Fernando much the properer man.

Duke. Shameless intolerable whore.

Bian. What ails you?
Can you imagine, Sir, the name of Duke
Could make a crooked leg, a scambling foot.
A tolerable face, a wearish hand,
A bloodlesse lip, or such an vntrimm'd beard
As yours, fit for a Ladies pleasure, no:
I wonder you could think 'twere possible,
When I had once but looked on your Fernando,
I ever could love you again? Fie, fie,
Now by my life, I thought that long ago
(...) had known it; and been glad you had a friend:
Your wife did think so well of.

Duke. O my stars!
Here Is impudence above all history:
Why thou detested Reprobate in virtue;
Durst thou, without a blush, before mine eyes,
Speak such immodest language?

Bian. Dare? yes faith,
You see I dare: I know what you would say now;
You would feign tell me how exceeding much
I am beholding to you, that vouchsafed
Me, from a simple Gentlewomans place,
The honor of your bed: it is true, you did;
But why? 'twas but because you thought I had
A spark of beauty more then you had seen.
To answer this, my reason is the like,
The self same appetite which led you on
To marry me, led me to love your friend:
O he is a gallant man! if ever yet
Mine eyes beheld a miracle, composed
Of flesh and blood, Fernando has my voice.
I must confess, my Lord, that for a Prince,
Handsome enough you are, and no more:
But to compare your self with him, trust me
You are too much in fault: shall I advise you?
Hark in your ear; thank heaven he was so slow
As not to wrong your sheets; for as I live,
The fault was his, not mine.

Fior. Take this, take all.

Duke. Excellent, excellent! the pangs of death are music
Forgive me, my good Genius, I had thought (to this.
I matched a woman, but I find she is
A devil, worser then the worst in hell.
Nay, nay, since we are in, ee'ne come, say on,
I mark you to a syllable: you say,
The fault was his, not yours: why, virtuous Mistress,
Can you imagine you have so much art
Which may persuade me, you and your close marke-man
Did not a little traffic in my right?

Bian. Look what I said, it is true. For know it now,
I must confess I mist no means, no time,
To win him to my bosom; but so much,
So holily, with such Religion,
He kept the laws of friendship, that my suit
Was held but, in comparison, a jest;
Nor did I ofter urge the violence
Of my aflection, but as often he urged
The sacred vows of faith 'twixt friend and friend:
Yet be assured, my Lord, if ever language
Of cunning servile flatteries, entreaties,
Or what in me is, could procure his love,
I would not blush to speak it.

Duke. Such another
As thou art, (miserable Creature) would
Sink the whole sex of women: yet confess
What witchcraft used the wretch to charm the ar^
Of the once spotless temple of thy mind?
For without witchcraft it could never be done.

Bian. Phew -- and you be in these tunes, Sir, I Will leave:
You know the best, and worst, and all.

Duke. Nay then
Thou tempt'st me ^o thy ruin; come black angel,
Fair devil, in thy prayers reckon up
The sum, in gross, of all thy vayned follies:
There, amongst other, weep in tears of blood,
For one above the rest; Adultery,
Adultery, Biancha; such a guilt,
As were the sluices of thine eyes let up,
Tears cannot wash it off: it is not the tide
Of triuiall wontonnesse from youth to youth,
But thy abusing of thy lawful bed,
Thy husbands bed; his, in whose breast thou sleep'st:
His, that did prize thee more then all the trash
Which hoarding worldlings make an Idol of:
When thou shall find the Catalogue enrold
Of thy mis-d^eds, there shall be writ, in Text,
Thy bastarding, the issues of a Prince.
Now turn thine eyes into thy houering soul,
And do not hope for life: would Angels sing
A r^quiem at my hearse? but to dispense
With my Revenge on thee, 'twere all in vain:
Prepare to dye.

Bian. I, do; and to the point
Of thy sharp sword, with open breast I Will run
Half way thus naked: do not shrink, Caraffa,
This dants not me: but in the latter act.
Of thy R^uenge, it is all the suit I ask
At my last gasp, to spare thy noble friend;
For life to me, without him, were a death.

Duk. Not this; I Will none of this: it is not so fit:
casts away his sword. Why should I kill her? she may live and change,
Or --

Fior. Do thou halt? faint Coward, do thou wish.
To blemish all thy glorious Ancestors?
Is this thy Courage?

Duke. Ha I say you so too?
Give me thy hand, Biancha.

Bian. Here.

Duke. Farewell.
Thus go in everlasting sleep to dwell:
draws his poniard and s^abs her. Here Is blood for lust, and sacrifice for wrong

Bian. It Is bravely done; thou have struck home at once:
Live to repent too late: Commend my love
To thy true friend, my love to him that owes it,
Ny Tragedy to thee, my heart to -- to -- Fernand. oo oh.
(dies
Duke. Sister she is dead.

Fior. Then, whiles thy rage is warm,
Pursue the ca^er of her trespasses.

Duke. Good:
takes up his sword and exi^ I^le slake no time whiles I am hot in blood.

Fior. Here Is royal vengeance: this becomes the state
Of his disgrace, and my unbounded fate. --
recedot Fior. Enter Fernando, Nibrassa, and Petruchio.
Petr. May we give credit to your words, my Lord?
Speak on your honor.

Fer. Let me dye accursed,
If ever, through the progress of my life.
I did as much as reap the benefit
Of any favor from her, save a kiss:
A better woman never blessed the earth.

Nibr. Be shrew my heart, young Lord, but I believe thee:
Alas, kind Lady, it is a Lordship to a dozen of points,
But the j^alous mad man will in his fury,
Offer her some violence.

Petr. If it be thus, 'twere fit you rather kept
A guard about you for your own defense,
Then to be guarded for security
Of his Revenge; he is extremely moved.

Nibr. Passion of my body, my Lord, if'a come in his odd fits to you, in the
case you are,'a might cut your throat e're you could provide a weapon of
defense: nay, rather then it shall be so, hold take my sword in your hand, it is
none of the sprusest, but it is a tough fox, will not fail his master: Come what
will come, take it, I Will answer'^ I: in the mean time, Petruchio and I will back
to the Duchess lodging. --

he gives Fer. his sword.
Petr. Well thought on; and in despite of all his rage,
Rescue the virtuous Lady.

Nibr. Look to your self, my Lord, the Duke comes.
Enter Duke, his Sword in one hand, and in the other a bloody Dagger,
Duke. Stand, and behold thy executioner,
Thou glorious Traeytor: I will keep no form
Of Ceremonius law, to try thy guilt:
Look here, it is written on my ponyards point,
The bloody evidence of thy untruth,
Wherein thy Conscience, and the wrathful rod
Of heavens scourge for lust, at once give up
The verdict of thy crying villainies.
I see thou art armed; prepare, I crave no odds,
Greater then is the justice of my cause.
Fight, or I Will kill thee.

Fer. Duke I fear thee not:
But first I charge thee, as thou art a Prince,
Tell me, how have thou used thy Duchess?

Duke. How?
To add affliction to thy trembling ghost,
Look on my daggers crimson dye, and i^dge.

Fer. Not dead?

Duke. Not dead? yes, by my Honor's truth: why fool,
Do think I Will hug my injuries? no, Traitor;
I Will mix your souls together in your deaths,
As you did both your bodies in her life:
Have at thee.

Fer. Stay, I yield my weapon up: --
he lets fall his weapon. Here, here is my bosom; as thou ar^ a Duke,
Do honor goodness, if the ch^st Biancha
Be murdered, murder me.

Duke. Faint hearted Coward,
Art thou so poor in spirit? (...) and ^ight,
Or, by the glories of my nou^ and ^me,
I'^e kill thee basely.

Fer. Do but hear me first,
Unfortunate Caraffa; thou have butchered
An Innocent, a wife as free from lust
As any terms of Art can Deifie.

Duke. Pish, this is stale dissimulation,
I Will hear no more.

Fe^. If ever I vnshrin'd
The Altar of her purity, or tasted
More of her love, then what without control
Or blame, a brother from a sister might,
Rack me to Atomies: I must confess
I have too much abused thee; did exceed
In lawless Courtship ('it is too true) I did:
But by the honor which I owe to goodness,
For any actual folly I am free.

Duke. It Is false: as much in death for thee she spoke.

Fer. By yonder starry roof it is true. O Duke!
Could thou rear up another world like this,
Another like to that, and more, or more,
Herein thou art most wretched; all the wealth
Of all those worlds could not redeem the loss
Of such a spotless wife: glorious Biancha,
Reign in the triumph of thy martyrdom,
Earth was unworthy of thee.

Nib. et Petr. Now on our lives we both believe him.

Duke. Fernando, dare thou swear upon my sword
To justify thy words?

Fer. I dare: look here, -- --
Kisses the Sword. It Is not the fear of death does prompt my tongue,
For I would wish to dye; and thou shall know,
Poor miserabl^ Duke, since she is dead,
I Will hold all life a hell.

Duke. Biancha chaste!

Fer. As virtues self is good,

Duke. Chaste, chaste, and killed by me; to her
Offers to stabbe himself, and is stayed by Fer. I offer up this remnant of my
--

Fer. Hold,
Be gentler to thy self.

Petr. Alas my Lord, this is a wise man's carriage.

Duke. Whither now,
Shall I run from the day, where never man
Nor eye, nor eye of heaven, may see a dog
So hateful as I am? Biancha chaste,
Had not the fury of some h^llish rage
Blinded all reasons sight, I might have se^ne
Her clearenesse in her confidence to dye.
-- your leave --
Kneeles down, holds up his hand^ s^akes a little and rises It Is done, come
friend, now for her love,
Her love that praisd thee in the pangs of death,
I Will hold thee dear: Lords, do not care for me,
En^, D'aualos I am too wise to dye yet -- oh Biancha.

R. D. The Lord Abbot of Monacho, sir, is in his return from Rome, lodged last
night late in the City, very privately; and hearing the report of your
journey, only intends to visit your Duchess to morrow.


Duke. Slave, torture me no more, note him my Lords,
If you would choose a devil in the shape
Of man, an Arch-arch-diuell, there stands one.
We Will meet our Uncle -- order straight Petruchio
Our Duchess may be coffined, it is our will
She forth with be interred with all the speed
And priuacy you may, '^th' College Church
Amongst Caraffa's ancient monuments.
Some three days hence we will keep her funeral.
Damned villain, bloody villain -- oh Biancha,
No counsel from our cruel wills can win us,
"But ils once done we bear our guilt within us.
Exeunt omnes, manet D'ouolos.
R. D. God boyee. Arch-arch-diuell: why I am paid,

Here Is bounty for good service; beshrew my heart it is a right princely
rewa^d: now must I say my prayers, that I have lived to so ripe an age to have
my head stri^ken off; I cannot tell, 'tmay be my Lady Fiormonda will stand on
my behalf to the Duke: that is but a single hope; a disgraced Courtier oftener
finds enemies to sink him when he is falling, then friends to relieve him: I
must resolve to stand to the hazard of all brunts now. Come what may, I will
not dye like a Cow, and the world shall know it. --

Exit: Enter Fiormonda, and Roseilli discovered.
Ros. Wonder not, Madam, here behold the man
Whom your disdain has metamorphosed:
Thus long have I bin clouded in this shape,
Led on by Love; and in that love, despair:
If not the sight of our distracted Court,
Nor pity of my bondage, can reclay me
The greatness of your scorn, yet let me know
My latest doom from you.

Fior. Strange miracle!
Roseilli I must honor thee: thy truth,
Like a transparent mirror, represents
My reason with my errors. Noble Lord,
That better do deserve a better fate,
Forgive me; if my heart can entertain
Another thought of love, it shall be thine.

Ros. Blessed for ever, blessed be the words:
In death you have revived me.
Enter D'auoles.
R. D. Whom have we here? Roseilli the supposed fool?
It Is he; nay then help me a brazen face;
My honorable Lord.

Ros. Bear off, blood-thirsty man, come not near me.

R. D. Madam, I trust the service --

Fior. Fellow, learn to new live the way to thrift
For thee in grace, is a repentant shrift.

Ros. Ill has thy life been, worse will be thy end;
Men flesht in blood, know seldom to amend.
Enter Servant.
Ser. His Highness commends his love to you, and expects your presence: he is
ready to pass to the Church, only staying for my Lord Abbot to associate him.
Withal, his pleasure is, that you D'auolos forbear. to rank in this
solemnity in the place of Secretary, else to be there as a private man;
pleases you to go. --

Exeunt. m^net D'auolo^.
R. D. As a private man! what remedy? This way they must come, and here I will
stand to fall amongst ^em in the reere.

A sad sound of soft (...). The Tomb i^ dis^uered. Enter four with Torches,
after them two Friars, after the Duke in mourning manner, after (...) the
Abbot, (...) monda, Colona, Iuliae, Roseilli, Petruchio, Nibrassa, and a guard.
D'auolos following behind. Coming near the Tomb they all ^eele, making show
of Ceremony. The Duke goes to the Tomb, lays his hand on it. Music cease.
Duke. Peace and sweet rest sleep here; let not the touch
Of this my impious hand, profane the shrine
Of fairest purity, which houers yet
About those blessed bones inhearst within:
If in the bosom of this sacred Tomb,
Biancha thy disturbed ghost does range;
Behold, I offer up the sacrifice
Of bleeding tears, shed from a faithful spring;
Roaring oblations of a mourning heart.
To thee, offended spirit, I confess
I am Caraffa, he, that wretched man,
That Butcher, who in my enraged spleen
Slaughtered the life of Innocence and Beauty:
Now come I to pay tribute to those wounds
Which I dug up, and reconcile the wrongs
My fury wrought; and my Contrition mournes.
So chaste, so dear a wife was never man,
But I, enjoyed: yet in the bloome and pride
Of all her years, untimely took her life.
Enough; set open the Tomb, that I may take
My last farewell, and bury griefs with her.
One goes to open the Tomb, out of which arises Fernando in his winding
sheet, only his face discovered; as Caraeffa is going in, he puts him back.
Fer. Forbear; what art thou that do rudely press
Into the confines of forsaken-graues?
Has death no privilege? Come thou, Caraffa,
To practice yet a rape upon the dead? Inhumane Tyrant,
Whats'euer thou intend'st, know this place
Is poynted out for my inheritance:
Here lies the monument of all my hopes.
Had eager Lust intrunk'd my conquered soul,
I had not buried living joys in death:
Go, Revel in thy palace, and be proud
To boast thy famous murders: let thy smooth
Low-fawning parasites renown thy Act:
Thou come not here.

Duke. Fernando, man of darkness,
Never till now (before these dreadful fights)
Did I abhor thy friendship; thou have robbed
My resolution of a glorious name.
Come out, or by the thunder of my rage,
Thou dy'st a death more fearful then the scourge
Of death can whip thee with.

Fer. Of death? poor Duke:
Why that is the aim I shoot at: it is not threats,
(Ma^ger thy power, of the spite of hell)
Shall rent that honor: let life-hugging slaves,
Whose hands imbrued in Butcheries like thine,
Shake terror to their souls, be loath to dye:
See, I am clothed in robes that fit the grave:
I pity thy defyance.

Duke. Guard lay hands,
And drag him out.

Fer. Yes, let 'em, here is my shield
As they go to fetch him him out, he drinks off a Violl of poison. Here Is
health to Victory. --
Now do thy worst.
Ferewell Duke, once I have out-stript thy plots:
Not all the cunning Antidotes of Art
Can warrant me twelve minutes of my life:
It works, it works already, bravely, bravely. --
Now, now I feel it tear each several joint:
O royal poison? trusty friend? split, split
Both heart and gall asunder; excellen^ bane!
Roseilli love my memory; well searched out
Swift nimble venom, torture every vein.
I, come Biancha, -- cruel torment feast,
Feast on, do; Duke farewell. Thus I -- hot flames
Conclude my Love -- and seal it in my bosom, oh --
dies.
Abbot. Most desperate end!

Duke. None stir:
Who steps a foot, steps to his utter ruin.
And art thou gone? Fernando, art thou gone?
Thou were a friend vnma^ch'd, rest in thy fame.
Sister, when I have finished my last days,
Lodge me, my wife, and this vnequali^d friend,
All in one monument. Now to my vows:
Never henceforth let any passionate tongue
Mention Biancha's and Caraffa's name,
But let each letter in that tragic sound
Beget a sigh, and every sigh a tear:
Children unborn, and widows whose lean cheeks
Are furrowed up by age, shall weep whole nights,
^peating but the story of our fates;
Whiles in the period, closing up their tale,
They must conclude, how for Biancha's love,
Caraffa in revenge of wrongs to her,
Thus on her Altar sacrificed his life. -- --
stabs himself.
Abbot. Oh hold the Dukes hand.

Fior. Save my brother, save him.

Duke. Do, do, I was too willing to strike home
To be prevented: Fools, why could you dream
I would out-liue my outrage sprightfull flood
Run out in Rivers? oh that these thick streams
Could gather head, and make a standing poole,
That jealous husbands here might bathe in blood.
So; I grow sweetly empty; all the pipes
Of ^fe vn-ve^sell life; now heavens wipe out
The writing of my sin: Biancha, ^us
I creep to thee -- to thee -- to thee By -- an -- cha.
d^es.
Ros. He Is dead already, Madam.

R. D. Above hope, here is labor saved, I could bless the Destinies

Abbot. Would I had never seen it.

Fior. Since it is thus,
My Lord Roseilli, in the true requita^l
Of your continued love, I here possess
You of the Dukedom; and with it, of me,
In presence of this holy Abbot.

Abbot. Lady, then
From my hand take your husband; long enjoy
he ^oynes their hands. Each to each others comfort and content.

Omnes. Long live Roseilli.

Ros. First thank to heaven, next Lady to your love;
Lastly, my Lords, to all: and that the entrance
Into this principality may give
Fair hopes of being worthy of our place,
Our first work shall be justice. -- D'auolo^
Stand forth.

R. D. My gracious Lord:

Ros. No, graceless villain,
I am no Lord of thine: Guard take him hence,
Convey him to the prisons top; in chains
Hang him alive; whosoever lends a bit
Of bread to feed him, dies: speak not against it,
I will be deaf to mercy. -- Bear him hence.

R. D. Mercy, new Duke: here is my comfort, I make but one in the number of the
Tragedy of Princes.

ex^t.
Ros. Madam, a second charge is to perform
Your brother's Testament; we will rear a Tomb
To those unhappy Lovers, which shall tell
Their fatal Loves to all posterity.
Thus then for you, henceforth I here dismiss
The mutual comforts of our marriage bed:
Learn to new live, my vows v^mou'd shall stand:
And since your life has been so much uneven,
Bethink, in time, to make your peace with heaven.

Fior. Oh me! is this your love?

Ros. It Is your desert:
Which no persuasion shall remove.

Abbot. It Is fit:
Purge frailty with repentance.

Fior. I embrace it:
Happy too late, since lust has made me foul,
Henceforth I Will dress my Bride-bed in my soul.

Ros. Please yo^ to walk, Lord Abbot.

Abbot. Yes, set on:
No age has heard, nor Chronicle can say,
That ever here befell a sadder day. --
Exeunt.
FINIS.

