PVRGATORIES TRIVMPH OVER HELL, Maugre The barking of Cerberus in Sir Edward
Hobyes Counter-snarle.

DESCRIBED In a Letter to the said Knight, from I. R. Author of the Answer
unto the Protestants Pulpit-Babels.

Judith 11. verse. 15. Et non latrabit vel Vnus Canis.

Permissu Superiorum, M.DC.XIII.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVL SIR EDWARD HOBY KNIGHT.
SIR,
SEEING it pleases you by the Metaphore of Conters page 7.
Gelons yolping Curr, to express the Mystery of your Counter-snarling answer
to the part of my Treatise, wherein you thought your self touched: Sure I am,
you may not justly, I hope you will not without cause, be offended, that I
likewise give you to understand, the drift of my Purgatory Letter, in a
Parable of like nature.

The respectfull affection of my Countries sovereign good, that in the Pinnace
of my short Confutation of a railing Sermon, landed in your learned Courts,
seems to have felt favor at your hands, not unlike unto that, which Aenaeas
his piety to his disceased parent, sailing toward the Elisian fields, found,
at his first setting foot on the shore. You are not to learn (having been
scholar at Eaton) page 61.
with what an unfriendly welcome, the three-mouthed Cerberus, grym Porter of
Plut'os Palace intertayned that pious Pilgrim, with such a noise of Hellish
clamours, as even the damned Ghostes were therewith appaled. Neither have you,
I think, forgotten the peale of unlovely terms wherewith your Counter-snarle
saluted my little Pinnace, making toward the haven of your favor, with an
olive branch, held out, of hearty wishes of your Eternal Happiness, and not
without the displayed Flagg of due Respect, even to your worldly honor, or
any other Worthy Quality in you.

I presented unto you Praf. page 22.
the Merchandise I had bought, and brought with some coste^ ^n treating you, to
vouchsafe a particular perusal thereof, that by comparison, you might discern
the counterfeit stuff of false slanders, which crafty tradesmen had laid upon
your hands. And to the end you might with your eyes, behold the perfidious
dealing of such wily factours, I page 133.
laid open before you two or three pieces of S. Augustine (for such by you
cited) full of holes and patches of another cloth and color, which I had just
cause to think you had taken in gross, upon the credit of some Merchant or
Minister of your Gospel, who fear not to sell such broaken stuff, even for
the fairest garments, hyding their falsehood, with fine words, and with a deep
die of protestations, that they produce Authors sincerely.

I proved M. Crashaw, whom you praised most, was, more then any other,
chargeable of such fraudulent tricks, that he sold you spiders webbs, spunne
out of his own bowels, for cloth of silver, wouen by Catholic Authors, and I
grieved, that so soaring a Wit, as I conceived yours was, should so flutter in
a cobweb of palpable untruths.

Wherein could I declare toward you greater Affection, then in seeking to make
you see the truth, in a business of such weight, whereon your eternal weal or
woe does depend? Or how could I have performed this duty of charity, with more
regard unto your Person, then by freeing you, from the suspicion of false
dealing, declyning the falsificatio^s of that learned Father, on some Minister,
whom I did and probably might suspect, had made them to your hands? If therein
I erred, how easily might you have pardoned my error, caused out of respect
unto your Honor, by imitating Nathan, who reprehended the Kingly Prophet in a
third person? But truly I did believe, those falsehoods did not spring from your
self, and still the baseness of that deformed creature, full of falsehoods and
reproaches against holy things, as I do discover in this Letter, makes me
unwilling to give my consent, to naturalize the same, as the natural issue of
any worthy Parent.

This then was my dutiful Affection, which notwithstanding, you set your
yolping Curr upon my Treatise, that came in so lovely a manner to offer you
service, defiling and tearing the same with foul contumelies. You Hierogliph
my name of I. R. in page 67.
English, page 76.
Latin, and page 4.
Hebrew, making me in the one Jack Rogue, in the other Iscarioth de Rubigine,
and Ishmael Rabshacheh in the third, wherewith you join the Syrname of
Cecropidan Lycaonite in the title of your book, to show that you can also
snarle in Greek, which you do so learnedly, that I confess, I know not what
you mean, nor why you afterward term me falsifying Cecropidan, bellowing and
roaring Lycaonite, hypodidascalian Pedadogue, the most brazen-faced intruder
that ever Fooliana harbored, the most fowle-mouthed Impe that ever Cerberus
bred, or Crete saw, a Polypragmist wholly compact of mocking and railing, that
seems to have the mixed quintessence of them both, that, my undaunted spirit
many miles outstrippeth my leaden art and heauie-heeld learning, an
open-mouthed fellow, a fleeting gudgeon, audacious vassal, Pezantique
fugitive, Rodomantado, and Romified Renagado, which ruding letter springs so
naturally in your mouth, that you read me Rudent for Student in Divinity,
covering the wolues-skin of a Lycaonite, with the long-sided shirts of a fools
coat, saying, you never saw man that was a verier Ass.

These, Sir Edward, and such like snarles, whereof your kennell does sound, I
assure you, do not move me to anger, but to much pity toward you. Had I
thought my respective lines would have put you into such a distemper, I do
verily believe I should have forborne those friendly admonitions I gave you.
You could not have given a greater sign, then loud and rude cries, that my
weapons, which you would have thought weak p. 26. Istae sunt machinae
haereticoru^ vt de perfidia conuicti, ad maledicta se conferant. Hieron.
Apolog. 3. aduers. Ruff. c. 11.
were indeed strong and did pierce deeply: it being the property of Heretics
as S. Hierome notes, when they are convinced of falsehood, to return
reproachful Answers. You could not by any means, have more honored my
Treatise, then by new devised titles, which you would not have sailed into
Fooliana to fetch, had they been the natural fruit of my ground.

Yet that you may perceive, that the noise of your clamours drowneth not in my
heart the voice of charity, which moves me to seek your good, I have taken
the pains to return an Answer unto your lines, which I might most justly
contemn. I have appealed with the wronged widow from Philip unto Philip, to
your second and more sober thoughts, hoping that your ragefull fumes being
spent in this blast against me, your cleared understanding will behold the
foulness of your speech, which then in your writing your passion might hide.

I am not ignorant that the best way to stop the mouth of Snarlers, is to make
no account of their words: yet both my respect of your Honor, and desire of
your everlasting Happiness have won me to seek the quietting of your arring
Passion with a mild Reply before I cast off your snarling reproaches with
disdainful silence. Heerin I follow the example of the Cumaean, Virgin that
was guide to Aenaeas in his foresaid journey. Cui Vates horrere videns iam
colla colubris.
She seeing that Hellish Mastiue to bristle his snakes, and ready to invade her
charge, to divert his anger, cast before him, Melle saporatam and medicatis
frugibus offam, A soppe seasoned with honey and medicinable herbs, which sweet
morsel did so appease his fury, that having fawned on her without more ado,
he laid down his sleepy limbs to rest in his vast kennell.

But having cast your barking Cerberus into a sleep in my first Chapter, the
rest of my Letter I spend in the spoil of your Hell, I mean in the
confutation of the Letter full of blasphemies which some years since you wrote
against Purgatory. I have reduced my discourse to four heads, wherewith I
encounter the four enemies a Christian verity may have, and which in your
Letter band against this point of Catholic Doctrine, to wit, Devils who by
lying, Philosophers who by reason, Heretics who by Scripture, Atheists who
by jesting seek to overthrow the Truth.

I discover the Falsehood, both of your Letter and Counter-snarle concerning the
Canonical authority of the books of Machabees, where the practice of
praying for souls in Purgatory is praised. I lay open the vanity of your
Logic by which you cavil at our Catholic deduction of Purgatory from Christ
his words, in the 12. of S. Matthew. I show the weakness of your Scripturall
assault to defeat the perpetual tradition of the Church, standing in defense
of this Doctrine. By the light of miracles, wherewith GOD does, and still in
all ages did illustrate his Church, I dissolve the smoky mysts of the
Atheistical scoffs which vampe from your pen. And seeing in your
Counter-snarle you will needs pluck a crow with me about the first planting of
Christianity amongst the English Saxons, therewith I conclude my Letter,
showing that we were from Paganism converted to the Catholic belief of
Purgatory; yea that S. Gregory whom your Mynisters use to charge to have been
the greatest Patron of this doctrine, was the chiefest Author under GOD of this
our happy purgation from heathenish superstition. So that this my Letter,
describing five Victories of Purgatory over your Falsehood, Philosophy, Heresy,
Atheism, Idolatry, may be termed, Purgatories Triumph over your hell.

Thus much concerning the matter and substance of my answer. Ne respondeas
stulto iuxta stultitiam sua^. Responde stulto iuxta stultitia^ suam. Prou. 26.
v. 4.
As for the manner, I have sought to join two Counsels of the holy Ghost,
which seem contrary, together in my Letter, To answer, and not to answer a
fool according to his folly; to make my discourse serious as the subject
thereof does require, yet lend now and then a few lines unto the discovery of
your trifles. I have follovved Pithagoras his advise, not to stabbe the fire,
Ignem ne fodito.
which from the bramble-bush of your distempered thoughts flashed: yet have I
done my best to quench it, not with the cold water of a dull denial, nor with
the oil of sinners, which might increase your flame, by soothing you in your
error; but with that liquor you are said to love well, with wine and sugar,
which together with the secret influence of Love, wants not virtue to draw
out the corruption that makes your sores angry.

I have made you a Purgatory sallet into which I have put 5. medecinable
herbs; The Authority of the ancient Church and Fathers before Christ: The
word of Christ himself insinuating the same: The Custom of the Church: The
warrant of Miracles: The first Christianity of our Country. Five potent
reasons to move you to embrace the Catholic doctrine in this point and
others, or at least to purge some part of your profane humors against it. Into
this sallet I have povvred the oil of charitable exhortations, though
sometimes I must confess the vinager of sharper reprehension goes mingled
therewith; yet not in such store as may make the same justly displeasing to your
taste.

The judicious Reader that may perchance look into this Letter, will not
wonder that your rude hammering with heavy reproaches on the rock of Truth,
together with the gentle sound of a solid Answer, has also fetched out some
lively sparks of just disdain. Such sparks did fly sometimes even from that
marble Pillar (as you term him) Saint Augustine, as does appear in his
vvritings, though provoked with injurious speeches, he did (as he says)
endeavor, as much as might be, to curb the motions of anger, Fraenatis atque
coercitis vanae indignationis aculeis auditori, lectorique consulens, non ago
vt efficiar homini conuitiando superior, sed errorem conuincendo salubrior. l.
3. contr. lit. Petil. c. 1.
and seek to overcome his adversaries, not by strong return of injurious
reproaches to disgrace their persons, but by clear demonstration of the
victorious Truth, the belief whereof might bring them unto eternal life. This
is my drift, and having so worthy a pattern and president before my eyes, I
will begin.

THE FIRST CHAPTER. YOUR WEAK ACCVSATIONS OF my Treatise, which you traduce,
as respectlesse and unlearned, with jests at some phrases, doctrines and
histories thereof.
ALTHOUGH your skill in Physike make you write that Letter to M. T. H. page 10.
much fasting causes a vertigo, or giddines of the brain, yet could I have
wished that you had read fasting those few lines of my Treatise which concern
your self; perhaps that which now you mistake as uttered to your reproach,
would have seemed spoken rather in your Honor. For you might have perceived
that in my short Censure you so much repine at, I did divide the three degrees
of comparision betwixt your three most commendable qualities, Valor, Learning,
Wit. I gave the positive to your Valor, which I did suppose was famous, though
not being acquainted with your particular exploites, I could not enlarge my
self in your military praises. The comparatiue I did assign to your Pen,
which is better known unto me, and seeming to deserve precedence, I termed
more famous, praising your curious style, which though over light for a grave
Divine, I was willing to wink thereat, thinking such a gaudy attire might
beseme a courtly Writer. To your Wit I did reserve the superlatiue degree,
whose high pitch, with an allusion to your name I did express under the
metaphor of a soaring Byrd. Neither did my dull capacity then mark how nigh a
kin to a Buzzard the soaring Byrd was I did allude unto. My conceit, which you
acknowledge to be simple, did without any fraud sincerly aim at your praise. If
I did prefer your Wit and Learning, before your Valor, you have no just cause
of offense; for I praised in you those things most, which are most proper to
men, giving you Excellency before some men in those qualities, by which all men
exceed brute beasts: which apprehension of your Wit, if it did extenuate in
my thoughts the just value of your courage, I might excuse my error with a
verse of Cato, Ingenio pollet cui vim natura negauit.
with which kind of stuff you fill your margent.

2. But now your Counter-snarle makes me fall into the account, and find the
true cause why so mild a censure might drive you into so great fitts of cholar:
your ambitious thoughts soar so high in the conceit of your own Worth, that
mean commendations cannot reach them. You must have Countersn. p. 3.
Pandora's box with all gifts in the superlatiue degree bequeathed unto you.
You say, you will not page 20.
undertake to be so cunning a star-gazer as to determine whether Mars or
Mercury had the predominance in your nativity, which also may be the cause
that you say I cannot distinguish betwixt a Helmet and a Couentrie Cap, because
I did crown you rather with Mercuries Hat, then Mars his Helmet. Though you
speak much against praising ones self both in text and margent, where you
cite a verse of Cato against that folly, Nec te collaudes, nec te culpaueris
ipse; yet you are so unmindful of the very next verse, Hoc faciunt stulti,
quos gloria vexat inanis, that you play Miles gloriosus almost in every page of
your Pamphlet. Your skill in Logic has made as pa. 60.
tall Logitians as my self to scratch the best poule they had for an answer.
Your co^ceipt is so exquisit that you can understand page 58.
not only the argument, but even the most artificial conueyance of the best
writers; your memory is so miraculous, that you are able page 59.
to cite more then a piece of S. Austen at the table without a prompter,
insinuating that you have the larg volumes of that learned Father without
book. Your martial valor has made pa. 20.
your enemies feel the sharpnes of your sword, though such has been your
happiness, that your enemies have been few. I confess my pen, though desirous
to spread it self in your praise within the compass of truth, durst not reach
the high pitch of this your self-flattering flight.

3. And now seeing you provoke me thereunto, though I be loath to meddle with
your Mars, yet thus much I will add, that your Letter wherein I found token of
Wit, gave me just cause to suspect your Valor. First because therein you
declare what a most dismal terror of death has possessed your thoughts, in
prudent contempt whereof Fortitude does consist. You confess Letter to M. T. H.
page 3.
that the horror of the gunpowder plot does still lively represe^t before
you, even in my dreams (say you) and imprint in my most serious thoughts that
furious blast, which I my self, my poor self, should have sensibly felt. Had
you detested that wicked treason, as a bloody massacre of so many worthy Peers
of the Realm, had you trembled thereat as at an Conters. 67.
Erynnicall attempt against his sacred Majesty and his Royal issue, with a
moderate feeling of your private danger, such a fit might have beseemed a
Knight. Now the only cause of your tears and fears are, I, poor I, which II's
had that powder put out, the common wealth had not lost any whit of her sight.

4. No less want of Nobility and Valor do you show in desiring, that the
most superlatiue severity, and sharpest research may be prosecuted against
Catholics, especially Letter page 4.
Priests and Jesuits, whom you term the Viperous brood of those merciless
hell hounds, Quibus, say you, ipsa misericordia me viuo numquam ignosceret,
whom mercy it self should be thought cruel ever to forgive. Execution in
these cases were better then disputation. How gladly I would see the one may
appear by my forward attempt of the other. And in your margent you make a
verse that excedeth no less in fury then in feet, stulta est clementia
perituro parcere funi. Thus we may be sure, that as long as your Patrimony
lasts, ropes shall not want to hang us; yea rather then the mercy of the
Prince should spare us, you seem ready to play the executioner your self. Can
any noble blood harbor in that heart, that is so greedy of their innocent blood
who detest that bloody plott, more, and for higher respects then your self? The
Corpora magnanimo satis est prostrasse leoni.
Lion spares his prostrate enemy, whereas At lupus and turpes instant
morientibus vrsi.
you long to tear out our hearts, in which you cannot find any sin, besides
an over fervent desire to help you to heaven.

5. Which my charity and respect toward you the world will more admire,
seeing you protest in that Letter Let. p. 5.
to detest irreconciliably all the incendiaries of the Romish forge, so your
snarling style pleases to term us according to your manner, not our
Quibusdam canibus innatum est, vt ex sola consuetudine latrent.
merit. You will reckon it, you say, amongst page 4.
your capital and dreadful sins, if you do not your best both by sword and
pen to reueng that treason, signifying, that you mean with these two weapons to
make hauock both of our souls and bodies, working our temporal death by the
one, our eternal by the other. If this be your meaning, I do not marvel that
in your Kitish affection you directed unto Catholic ladies a Letter fraught
with falsehood, and profane arguments against truth, which preuayling might
have caused the death of their souls. You thought such rare Creatures as you
term them, an easy and obuious prey, being for the most part unlearned, not
knowing that they had learned of Christ to join Mat. 10.
the wisdom of the serpent, with the simplicity of the dove. That you had
that cruel intent, you give me just cause to think by the vow which you are
ready to make page ^.
never to forgive us (did not your protestant Charity give you a restraint)
until you hear our pardon pronounced by the mouth of the most supreme Judge,
when forsooth we shall have great need of your pardon. But though you were
restrained in your text, you take liberty in your margent, (...).
saying in Greek, you will forgive us neither in this world, nor in the world
to come, and in a Latin verse, Ante leaves ergo pasce^tur in aethere cerui;
Staggs in the air shall sooner fly and feed. Let him make the case his own
that ce^sureth me for over much bitterness. Thus you.

6. Can there be greater cruelty then the desire of our eternal perdition, to
vow it with your mouth, and seek it with your pen? You say in your excuse,
that the devil could not deny pellem pro pelle, but your Protestant Charity
seems to exceed the devils cruelty, not content to have had the skins of
those that would have had yours: you seek also that their souls, yea the
souls of others that profess the same faith may be damned for the sins of
those few. Is this Protestant charity? Tantae ne animis caelestibus irae? I
cannot believe that indeed such barbarous desires lodge in your breast. I think
your passionate pen exceeded your angry wishes: yet you cannot deny, but it
was charity in me to wink at such unworthy writing, and, notwithstanding your
protested irreconciliable hatred against us, to use you with all due respect,
not laying the blemishes to your Valor and Nobility, which I might; yea I let
both your sword and your pen, our professed enemies, pass without touch, yea
rather with praise.

7 Another toke^ could I alledg that you want knightly Prowess, namely your
singular dexterity in the use of the feminine weapon. A barking curre seldom
bites; scarce shall you find one valiant of his hands, that does delight to
skirmish with words; he seems to want the courage of valiant Hector to fight
in his own defense, that like snarling Hecuba seeks verbal revenge. You
cannot deny your barking language, which as you shame not to profess in the
title: so likewise you fail not to perform in your Treatise: the first
Paragraph whereof not able to number threescore lines charge the Church of
Rome with all these reproaches, Her artificial shadows, ugly shape,
counterfeit colors, wrinkled deformities, bainfull lust, forging and forcing
the countenance of Antiquity, impious positions, whorish practices, usurping
impudency, impudent usurpation, a shrewish, distracted, malecontent in her
frantic mood, pulling, hailing, spurning, scratching, and tearing all that
stands in her way, though never so noble by descent, eminent in place, profound
in Judgment, famous for ^^^rning, skillful in tongues, that if they refuse to
dance a round in her Orgious Anticke, she will be sure they shall not pass
without a broken head or black eye. Her suborned Pandars, whifling Agents,
venomous crudities, maleuolous aspersions, surfeyted stomakes, infectious
dregs, and Hellish drugs cast out of her sulphurious pit.

8. These and other snarles you sound out within the compass of few lines; if
(as you say) Counters. p. 24.
he which brings a great army into the field without victuals or munition, is
like to go by the worst, you that muster an army of reproaches against the
Church without the munition of any proof, without any bit of reason to
maintain and make them good, what may you expect? I fear you will go by the
worst title that men of your Order have, to be thought a taller man of your
tougne then of your hands. You make a long discourse of the page 19.
bushells of salt you eat in forre^ countries, Enumerat miles vulnera.
which made you so wise, that you never ran on the pikes of needless dangers:
you speak much of your wars, but little of your wounds; the cause whereof I do
think was indeed your Heedines, which I do commend, p. 68. Periti bellatoris
est non minus scire fugiendi artem quam pugnandi.
and allow that principle of valor you set down in latin (u) that a good
soldier should know as well how to runn away, as to fight, which I mean to
practice if you challenge me to the field, as the Poesy of your Snarle,
Comita^tur praelia praelum, may seem to threaten.

9. I cannot think that your not being given to quarells is the reason you
sleep in a sound skin, except fear make your tongue less unruly then your
pen. You are ready to give me the lie in defense of a Hangman, page 16.
because I said he put a Priest to death in Oxford: you quarrel with me about
a crabb: page 39.
Does he not deserve, say you of me, the wood of the crabb, that is angry with
the crabb of the wood? I know not what should make such sour stuff so sweet
to your mouth, that you are jealous it should come nigh unto mine, that you
seem ready to give me the bastinado for only naming the Crabb after you,
without adding any syllable of mine own. Well, you see that I was sparing in
my censure both of your wit and valor, your Knighthood keeping my pen in awe
that he who shall peruse my lines which you traduce as respectlesse, will find
I did not utter one word without due regard of that Honorable Order. I did
forbear to thrust at you because you were a Knight, though you came on my pen,
still seeking some Minister on whom I might lay the wound of your inexcusable
untruths.

10. One thing you cannot brook (which I will not deny I spoke, as I well
might without any disgrace to your Knighthood or injury unto truth) that I
termed your Cursory lines (so you name your elucubrations, that you say smell
of the lamp p. 62.
an unlearned Letter. You appeal to p. 10.
Parnassus, and would wash away this stain with Helicons water: you take
Sanctuary amongst the sacred Sisters of whose familiarity you brag that were
it not that infirmity does suppress the virility of your spirit, you could
perhaps readily show as many of their favors, as I can, though I seek and
search all the corners of my deske. I will not contend with you about
Parnassus, neither do I envy your familiarity with the Poetical Sisters of
Apollo his quire, unto whom (though in my childehood I knew them, yet) since I
could number thrice five years of my life I have been a stranger, my time has
been spent and my delight settled in more worthy and grauer studdy of
Philosophical and Theological verities; want of which in your cursory lines
(as you term them) made me call them an unlearned Letter: and your appealing
to Parnassus and bragging of the many favors affoarded unto you by the Sacred
Systers, cannot prove your said Letter to be learned in such sense as I termed
it unlearned.

11. I would be loath to be so full as you seem to be of those waters which
flow so fast from your pen, as they ouerrun your paper, your marginall
verses drowning the truth of your text. Sobriety might smile to see the
Poetry of the one, snarle at the Prose of the other; though sometimes even
when they jar most, a man shall find truth in neither. The first sentence of
your Snarle shall be witness thereof, which may serve as a perspectiue unto the
rest: there you say, that heresy in all ages has contrived artificial
shadows, which your marginall muse gain-sayeth in a Latin verse.

Artibus impictas ingeniosa caret, Importing, that witty impiety wants art: A
manifest untruth as the world knows, yet no less notoriously false is your
Prose, that the countenance of venerable Antiquity is the artificial color
wherewith Heresy does paint herself. For that Heresy in former ages still
disclaymed from venerable Antiquity, still refused to stand to the Tradition of
Ancestors, still varnished her wrincled deformityes with fair places of
Scripture, as is your Protestant practice, you would not now be to learn, were
your knowledge in Ecclesiastical Hystoryes equal to your skill in Poetical
fables. Thus you fight with your text against your margent, with your margent
against your text, with both against the truth, nay sometimes your Muse is so
mad that in a Poetical fury, she not only crosses your text, but also
wounds your honor. Such are the verses you bestow on your Indian weed. page
38.
foeda Tobacciferi quid vult contagio fumi?
Praeter inauditam per tua membra luem.
which verses may give a shrewd suspicion that you who have been a great friend
thereof, are tainted with that infamous disease.

12. But Sir the Learning with want whereof I charged your Letter, is neither
Parnassian, nor Poetical, nor profane, but sacred, holy, divine, which not
Apollo but Christ teaches, water which not Helicon, but Scripture yields,
gotten not by light familiarity with sacred sisters, but by diligent and exact
reading of Holy Fathers, in whose writings what a stranger you are, this my
Letter will sufficiently discover. It will appear that you revile the learned
muses of the Christian Church, whom you never read: the doctrines which they
most clearly deliver you dare affirm were not taught but by Heathens and
Hobgoblius; the interpretations they derive from the fo^taine of Scripture you
say were fecht from the pit of Hell. These things shallbe made clear in the
Chapters that follow: now to dispach all your toys, before we enter into more
serious matter, I will show the vanity of your weak assaults against my
Treatise, which you seek to disgrace, that the comparison of your poverty,
with my page 11.
nullity, may purchase you the title of mediocrity. You term my book a page
5.
little pretty Pigmey; yet like one besieging a strong fortress you ride
thrice about it, seeking where you may make a breach to enter, battering the
lines thereof first with flies, then with fyes, finally with lies.

13. First you search how often I have named the fly or spider, page 12.
noting in your margent that those two creatures one with the other have been
forteene times put into my whole treatise, together charging the same with
soloecismes, incongruities of speech, jesting at a parenthesis which you call
iobbing in my first sentence, that many a good man's dog, say you, has broken
his leg over a less style. I must confess sir I do not bumbast my books
with your fustian phrases, nor build my style as you do of strange trees cut
from foreign forests; that sure I am, none will acknowledge your language to
be English, except you get a Parliament to naturalize it. My drift in writing
is not to be admired, but understood, which makes me not stick to utter my
mind rather in a crabbed then a new created phrase thinking it less harm that
a cauelling curre prick his foot, then any learned man break his head. To
climb unto my meaning I am more curious that my doctrine be true, then my
speech smooth, thinking the book written in a style good enough, when words
are so laid in order, and lines drawn in such compass that they keep just
proportion with their center, to wit truth, toward which I did presuppose the
hearts of those worthy Gentlemen unto whom I wrote did so mainly incline, that
the thorns of my phrases had it been more crabbed the^ one iobbing
parenthesis can make it, would not hold them back from perusing my Treatise.
Neither can I say, that therein I have been deceived of my hope.

14. But I have been, you say (h) for want of a good mydwife five years in
travail with my lisping Pigmey: whereas you whelped in few months your snarling
puppye: to which I might answer that a hasty bich brings forth blind
whelps. The seeliest birds are soonest flush Sanctius his animal mentisque
capacius altae.
. Natures perfectest work in many years arriueth unto mature ripenes;
Minerua's, fruitful plant is long a growing, whereas many barren trees spring
up a pace.

Glauca salix properat, sed multum tardat oliua. My fortune is not like yours,
to have still a good midwyfe at hand: the smoke of your chimney inuiting
learned Ministers to your table, who, as you seem to confess, p. 61.
lend you their helping-hand in the prompt delivery of your Impes. Wherein you
compare your self to Jupiter, who was feign to send for Vulcan and his
hatchet, before Pallas could come into the world; without the help of these
Vulca^s and their sharp hatchets, that hewed it out of your head, you might
perchance have been more years in building your fair Pallas, then I spent on
my little Pinnace, though those that know me, can tell, that after I seriously
undertook the task, I was not about it so many months as you name years. In
business of this nature I desire to make no more have, then good speed, Sat
cito, si sat been. The thing is dispatched soon that is performed well. None
are more subject to shameful falls, then such as ride post, as your cursorie
lines seem to do in the slippery vein of writing.

15. I know the Fathers eye is a partial judge in the beauty of his own
Child, yet you give me good hope that my Creatures will not seem deformed,
where learning with indifferency shall pass her censure, seeing your curious
and carping sight, which the least fly could not escape, has not been able to
show therein any true fault. Were not Canon-shot wanting to batter the sides of
my Pinnace, the substance of my discourse, your puerilis sane and augusti
pectoris reprehensio. Arnob. l. 1. con. gentes
childish squibbs would not fly so fast at the sail of my style: you that
accuse me of leaden art, could you have found in my answer, leaden sentences
to have made bulletts against me, you would not have sought to crack my credit
with fourteen flies, with solaecismes, and incongruities of speech. Sure I am
the most judicious Censurers esteem some few such seeming faults not to be vt
facit factem naeuus, quod dicitur, venustiore^: sic vitia quaedam orationis
audiunt figurae and ornamenta.
blemishes but rather ornaments in the purest writers, both of the Latin and
Grecian language. The style is childish which still fears the rod, not daring
to depart one syllable from the rules of Grammar: neither would you be so
sollicitous about a Solaecisme were not the terror of Eaton school still
fresh in your memory. As in a consort of sweet voices a discord now and then
does make the music more pleasing; so the solaecismi sunt apud politissimos
vtruisque l^nguae.
worthyest writers have left some iobbs pass in their works, which do rather
delight then offend a Judicious reader. Thus might I defend solaecismes and
incongruities of speech, which yet you object without any proof. Truly Sir,
these trifling cauills force me to confess, that you had reason to call me
Buzzard, page 21.
for comparing you to a soaring bird of the Eagle-kind, who thus houer over my
book to catch flies, that one cannot so soon light one my paper, but you have
it straight in your margent. This then is your first assault or battery to my
phrase with flies.

16. No less vain is your second assault with fyes. For having wrong the
neck of the first word in my Treatise backward, and made a fie of an if, you
run defying the pious practice of Gods Church proved by me, without any
reason in the world against them. You cry page 11.
fie upon my genericall and accidental christening of Bells, and relative
honor of Images. The first of which practices that it may seem to deserve
your squeamish fie, your snarler in the co^ueyance thereof into your book
slauereth it with his false mouth. For where do you find that Bells are
christened, either generically or accidentally, in my book, or in any
Catholic writer? I say, that the Blessing of Bells has some genericall
similitude with the christening of a child, which may be found betwixt things
of very different name and nature. A geniricall christening I did not term
it: neither would you infer it, had your nullitie of judgment any mediocritie
of logic. I brought an example of a Wether, which has many conueniences with
a man, yet is not a man, nor may be so termed. And I marvel that in the first
place you would but at the bramble-bush of this sottish slander, where M.
Crashaw his Wether stuck by the Horns. A Hoby to give you a domestical
example, has genericall co^uenience with the Bird and Beast, whence metaphors
are drawn, to reproach want of wit unto men, yet he may be thought worthy of
those metaphors, who should thence infer, that an Hoby is either an accidental
Buzzard, or a genericall Ass.

Nec vitulum tauro, nec equum committis onagro. Indeed I am indebted unto your
curious Printer for the last syllable of Razias, which he solemnly calling the
world to witness, bestowed one me and my heirs for ever, together with the
rich Jewel of your latin marginall note. Numquam ego hominem magis Asinum
vidi. When we shall here you shift of your gross corruptions of S. Augustines
sayings unto the mispression of the printer, you will give me just occasion to
repay the man that sallyble in good and lawful money, with all the revenues
and arrerages thereof, even to the last ass. Which now to discharge by your
Logic out of genericall conueniences enforcing the specificall name, were
counterfeit coin, and a sign that such a Logitian does still retain the
sense of that syllable to himself, the sound whereof he gives away to
another. Thus the first fie returns on your own falsehood, seeing the phrase of
christened Bells did never ring in our Church, nor perchance in the world
before, witting or foolish mispression made them gingle at the heels of a
Hoby, whence such witless cauils may be thought to proceed, rather then from
the head.

16. Secondly you cannot conceive nor your stomach digest my relative honor
of Images, yet I do much fear you often practice relative love of the Images
of those fair creatures you keep in your Chamber, referring your inward
affections unto living objects, whilst your eyes behold senseless Pictures. I
wounder any man should be so dull as not to understand that which even children
conceive, that honor done to the Images is no injury to the Person, or that a
Christian will deny to Christ in his Image, what any honorable personage may
challenge unto his. You that cry fie of the relative honor of our Savior in
his Cross, how would you have snarled at the Hieron Epist. 170.
noble Ladies of the Primitive Church, that did lick with their religious
tongues the dust of that thrice venerable relic. Happy was that glorious
Matrone Paula, that wonder of Sanctity, and miracle of Contempt of the world;
highly esteemed by S. Hierome, Epist. 127. Epitaph. Paulae. Prostrata ante
Cruce quasi pendentem dominum cerneret adorabat.
that when she did use to lie prostrate before the Cross, therein with a lively
faith adoring Christ, your cursed curre was not present. He would have
distracted her devotions by biting her by the great toe, as Acts and Monum. in
the life of Cranmer. Franc-Mason of Consecrat. p. 68.
another Protestant dog did the Pope, or at least by yolping at her in an
impure language, that she prostrated her self to the Antichristian Beast,
stained herself with her own works, went a whoring after her own
inventions: in which foul language you snarle at our Catholic In your Epist.
to the Collapsed Ladys.
Ladies.

17. I hoped that in my answer to M. Crashawes eight wound, that practice was
so declared, that none could have mistaken or misliked the same, that should
peruse that discourse, yet now I find my self deceived in you: perhaps because
I did not exemplify in some object that came within the reach of your
Tobacco-pipe. Wherefore now to satisfy your sensuality, tell me I beseech you,
what you think of that relative honor, which one I. D.
of your fellow Tobaccaean writers did use to practice toward the picture of
his Mistress; which he kept in his Chamber, with this prayer unto it, Illumina
tenebras m^^s Lighte^ my darkness dear Lady.
, before which he did not omit to do morning and evening devotions, prostrate
on the ground? was that prayer made to the dumb Image, and not to his loving
Mistres? Did his thoughts adore the dead colors of the picture and not her
fresh rosy cheeks which therein he did behold? O glorious cause which by such
Epicureans is impugned who worship Bacchus or Cupid in their chambers, yet
against us profess themselves grave Cinicks, Doggish, and Diogenicall writers!
They cannot, forfooth, understand the relative honor of Christ his Image, yet
before Images of Venus they can direct their humble duty and hearty affection
unto Queanes, which is nothing else but their relative honor of foul pictures.
Certainly they could never misconster or mislike the pious directing of divine
honor to Christ before his sacred Image, were not their wits as dull in
divine matters, as they are sharp in sensual objects, were they not a kin to
the creature of Dunne color, or to that monster whose head is as blockish as
his body swinish Cui caput est Asini, cetera membra Suis.
. If this discourse seem to you sharp, remember the cause you have given, who
runn railing at ancient doctrines, and pious practices of the Church, declared
in my Treatise, without bringing any syllable of new proof against them.

18. In this squeamish vein you cast a Fie upon my saying, that by Metaphore
God may be said to have divided his Kingdom with the Virgin. What if I had
said, God had given her his whole Kingdom Ego dispono vobis regnu^ sicut
disposuit mihi Pater. Luc. 23. v. 9.
, his Throne, Vincenti dabo sedere in throno meo Apoc. 2.27.
and Scepter, Reget gentes in virga ferrea ibid. 27.
that Christ in person did wait on her, sitting at the table of glory? Faciet
illos discumbere and tranfiens ministrabit illis. Luc. 22. v. 37.
How would your Curr have been mad at these metaphors, and have broken his
teeth against these stones, which yet (...) of divine Scripture, (...) ^ith God
does use to exagg^^ (...) of meaner Saints then his Bles^^ (...) ^^ink that you
have brought me to a (...) force me to confess that our Church-hy^^ (...) ^^re
figurative poems page 15.
, and you fear out of your love toward me, that my fools coat will be well
clawed by my Superiors: but I much fear, that you make Ministers proud in
wearing their liuerie, who laugh I am sure in their sleeue at the follies you
utter in their defense, though perchance they speak you fair to your face. For
are not the Psalms of David the chiefest hymns of God his Church? and are not
those Poemes full of figurative speeches much more then that ancient Hymn of
Sedulius you glance at? yet what prayers more excellent, more devout then
those? Or more forcible to raise a man's Spirits from Earth, to settle his
affections on Heaven, to move him to power out his heart, at his eyes, like
water in the sight of God? Yea Rhetorical figures, Poetical flowers wherewith
that garden of the soul is stored, together with the grace of God,
effectually concur to bring forth those comfortable effects? why then may not a
Theological invocation be uttered in a figurative speech? Why should you
think page 12.
the exclamatio^ of Esaias was not a religious prayer to God, though by a
Rhetorical figure seemingly directed to the clouds? It is lost labor I
preceiue to beat flies from Honey Quid prodest muscas op^ rofis pellere
flagris?
, they will be drowned sooner therein then driven away. Your Church feeds
upon falsehood, the bread of untruth is sweet to her taste; let us beat flies,
and lies from (...) so loud clapps, the noy^^ (...) but they swarm thither
ag^^ (...) M. Crashaws untruths, that (...) divide Gods Kingdom with the (...)
pray unto Images, though you use a (...) ^^ch seems to you finer, because it
is stra^^^^ ^alling them superstitious obsecrations directed to a wodden Cross.

19. With as little care of truth you charge me to defend page 14.
lying stories painted in our Chapels. The stories you mean I proved were
true In the preface p. 29.
naming the places where, and the time when, those cruelties were executed on
Catholic professors. I added, that such false devises and pictures had they
been used, might be no less colourably excused then John Fox his lying
Pageants, wherewith he painteth his fabulous Martyrologe to delude fools, of
whom living he was Father. Is this an honorable defense of devising painters
to rank them in the same predicament with your lying Martyr-maker.

20. More impudent is your other charge p. 14
that when we are charged with an Idolatorus appeal from God to the Virgin,
and the like absurdities, I shift them off to the Poets pen. For the Author on
whom M. Crashaw did father that blasphemy was no Poet, but a Preacher. Neither
did I shift it of to his pen, but sent it back to the head from whence it
first sprange, to wit your poetical preachers brain. I showed Ouertrhrow. p.
2. c. 1. p. 164. 165.
that with incredible impudency he corrupted the ^ext, put this whole sentence
into the Author, Imo and a Deo: one may appeal even from God himself, to make
him sound out that blasphemy, to which you have (...) ^^uly you add new
untruths (...) ^ere that slander, but do (...) ^^en. Did not that Bachelour^
(...) I that the very words by him (...) in all copies both new and old? (...)
^ontest against him they were found in neither: If I did him wrong why do you
not show it? If I said truth, may you not be thought (to use your own
metaphor, p. 74.
seeing you snarle at mine) to have customarily crept on your face, yea to have
Corns on your forehead, which is so hard that you cry fie upon doctrines you
cannot impugn, and repeat clearly-confuted slanders without new proof?

21. The defyling mine own nest, reuiling my Country, for which you cry page
12.
fie upon me, is an impudent slander; my book by you cited for witness,
proclaims against it; yet seeing I may not without your offense, lay it on
some lying Minister rather then give a Knight the lie, I will shift it of to
your Poets pen, giving your Reader warning when he reads your books to be
mindful of the verse, Admiranda canunt, sed non credenda poetae.

The truth whereon you raise the fable, is, that out of a careful respect of my
Countries honor, I did Preface p. 36.
seuerly tax the unrestrained liberty of some Ministers pens, who in hatred
of Catholic religion use to utter such open untruths, as might derive an
infamy upon our Nation, and put Crete in danger to loose her infamous
syrname. Amongst which I did recko^ M. Crashawes slander, that the gunpowder
treason was hatched at Rome by Pope Clement 8. upon the death (...) ^lizabeth:
were all English writers as (...) ^^elour, might not our I Will (think (...)
Crete?

22. I d^^ (...) ^^e same lying Lecturer to keep within ^he (...), Praeface p.
36.
if not of his teeth, yet at the least of our seas, (...) Foul language
wherewith he does use to revile other Nations, not blushing to avouch that
Italians (some privy Protestants excepted) were Atheists or fools, which
seemed to my ears so rude and uncivil a censure, that I did grieve his Sermon
was extant in Latin, that, that noble and religious Nation should see the
grossenes of an English Minister, fearing they might impute it to the northern
climate, accounting him, Veruecum in patria, Crassoque sub aere natum. Did not
fumes of anger unjustly conceived against me dim the light of your reason, I
could be content to make you Judge in this cause, whether they do rather
defile their own nests, that utter reproachful falsehoods which deserve the
hatred of all civil Nations, then I, who only sought for a restraint of such
unruly pens.

23. Here ends the peale of your fyes. Now remains your last battery of my
book with Lies, which you let fly almost at every story I report. You cannot
believe page 16.
that a gentleman of Honor, from my Lord De la Wares own mouth brought me
such news as England knows to be true, that he could not get out of your
Universities more then one Minister to go the Evangelical voyage of Virginia.
You seem ready to fight ibid.
for the Minister that eat up the pease-pottage, whilst his fellows fought
with the Sau^^ ^^^wet if you will Wade into that matter, you (...) London the
author of my report to (...) ^^otestant we have no reason to thi^ (...)
Minister of his own religion. You (...) of p. 27.
the roaring rake-hill of Cambrige, (...) your preacher esteemed as an Angel,
crying Crashaw, Crashaw, go to Geneua, though the voice was so loud, as the
whole University did ring of his folly.

24. You that wonder I should say, that a Counselour did refuse pa. 15.
to patronize your Lecturers Sermon, you cannot deny but the lower house of
Parliament whereof your self were one, did discard his Jesuits Gospel.
Neither durst you raise against me a sleeping witness the late Earl of
Salisburie, but that you know he now is in case that he cannot speak. That
Counselor (Sir Edward) was more politic then you may be presumed to be: he
would look before he leaped into such a dunghill of untruths, as I proved
that Sermon was. You in your credulous vanity, rashly cast your self into
that labyrinth of lies, commending the same as a thing Let. to M. T. H. page
55.
unanswerable: but now ashamed of your folly, you will take noe notice thereof.
Your dull capacity you write Countersnarle page 25.
cannot conceive what I mean to say, that you flutter in a web of weak
slanders. You can tell how often I do repeat spider and cobweb, where I do
clearly declare that M. Crashaw was the spider, his Sermon a web of slanders,
wherein you did flutter; which truly expounded was no reproach, but rather a
praise of your ingenuous disposition, that did easily believe being void of
fraud your self (as I then thought you were) the great and deep protestations
of that deluding Preacher (...) I fear you are sick of the disease, which
(...) page 52. Mulier nihil scit nisi quod ipsa cupit.
womankind with, to understand no (...) please, as now you are pleased to take
no (...) singular co^mendations of that Sermon.

25. Then you name the feature of that daughter of Babel, the twenty
particulers, wherein he accused us to degenerat from Antiquity, An. 1607.
1608. 13. of Februar.
the year of our Lord, the day of the month it was preached and printed, that
we may think you Godfather to the Child. Whereas now finding by the perusal
of my Treatise that she has neither oil in her lamp, nor wit in her head,
although she knock at your door for help, you cast her off with, I know you
not, M. T. D.
as a foolish Virgin. Let the Courtier your friend whom you describe page 16.
as having noe more wit then your self, make you smile with his frowns and
fond looks, yet I do not doubt but that the Printer of that Sermon will aver
as much as I wrote, that when that Sermon flew abroad under the aforesaid
Counsailours name, the same was stayed till the Epistle dedicatorie was altered.

26. You would feign also stinge me pa. 17.
with an imputation to be a slanderer of Queen Elizabeth, that I take upon me
to determine, with what consorts her glorious Ghost is accompained, laying (say
you) a heavy censure on the blessed soul of so worthy a Saint: What Consortes
did I give her? Were they night-ghosts? Why do you not name them? Was the
company appointed her by me any other then her princely Father Ouerthr. page
104.
? Why should his company seem dishonorable, or a blemish, and heavy censure to
that Saint? Do you fear he may marry with his daughter in that world, (...)
^^ported he did in this? Or do you glaunce (...) ^oubtfulnes of her blood,
that perchance no^ ^he King, but some other put to death with her mother, was
indeed her true Father? Durst you have cast such snarling surmises whilst she
lived? Or in time of his ragine have sent him to Hell, to canonize his
daughter? for in Hell he must needs be, if he be not in Heaven with her, seeing
you acknowledge no third place. But I perceive your malicious meaning. You know
many gentlemen still affect the memory of that Princess: you would put a
ielousy into their heads, as if my Treatise had married her Ghost to some
Hobgoblin in Hell. Noe, she shall not receive her doom by my pen, before I
hear it pronounced by the supreme Judges mouth. I could not say she inioyed
the company of her Catholic Ancestors, yet did I not deny it. Though she
seemed to die in a contrary faith to theirs, yet will I not diue into Gods
unsearchable secrets.

27. You call her a worthy Saint of the Gospel, which should I express in a
Catholic phrase, In his sermon at the Court on the 5. of November.
would seem a hard censure. I am not angry that Doctor King sing of her to
them that sought her in Hell, what the Angles said of Christ to the woman that
sought him in the Grave, Surrexit, non est hic, she is risen, she is not here:
and though I could object, if she were never in Hell, how rose she from thence?
If she were once in Hell, how got she out? Yet I will be content that your new
Orpheus be thought able to have wrought such a wonder and fetch her out of Hell
with his Fiddle. Thus you may see, that my heauie-heeled learning (so you
phrase it) with (...) weight of truth and reason crusheth the serpent (...)
head of your snarling malice against it. Though you say, without proof, that
my book has p. 68. 69.
lame and goutie arguments, neither whole head, good foot, nor sound heart, yet
if I could be persuaded, that any great force either of wit, judgment, or
true learning were in you, I might think the same more invulnerable then
Achilles, seeing your forked shaftes, discharged out of so strong a desire to
disgrace me, are not able to pierce so much as into the heel thereof.

28. But I am not so fond as to measure the strength of my Treatise, by the
weakness of your impugnations, nor to think my Pigmie invincible, though it
have put a craking Crane to flight. Sure I am the truth I defend, is Me in mea
causa defiae^te atque prostraeto, victrix erit causa, cui seruio. Aug. cont.
lit. Petil. c. 1.
Gould, howsoever the learning may be Lead, wherewith I defend it. Noe worldly
respect either of honor or profit won me to undergo these combatts: neither
do I regard the private wounds, wherewith you seek to disgrace my person, so
the shield of faith and doctrine wherewith I defend my ghostly Country, the
Church of Christ be safe and sound. Were the shadow of humane glory the mark
I aim at in writing, I would not let my name be buried in two letters in the
frontispice of these books, wherein you imagine I dream to eternize my memory.
I should not match my self with co^te^ptible aduersarys by whose overthrow,
profit, and that eternal, may accrue unto them, small praise redound to my
self, by the conquest of scoulding and feminine writers Nullum aut memorabile
nomen, Foeminea in paena est.
.

29. That the Ladies liberal purse-promises hired me to write, is so base a
surmise, and does so smell of the trencher, that if I may without your
displeasure, I will rather think it the suggestion of some hungry minister or
mercinarie Lecturer, then the conceit of a Knight. If I find no greater
stop in my race to heaven, then the gathering up of goulden-apples, I shall
not need much to fear the loosing of the goal. I am sure, if you know me
well, you would be loath the money you lately made of your woods, should have no
more watchful custody then my thoughts would affoard even unto greater sums,
which education has made over proud to stoop to such base cares. Many that
have more conuersed with me, then you have done, will think some of your
Ministers more skillful in taking other men's purses, then I am in keeping my
own. I am content with the inexhaust treasure of his Providence, who feeds
the Birds of the air, and clotheth the Lillies of the field, which does
assure me I shall not want, when perhaps your page 65.
competent patrimony may be wasted.

30. The Lady you glance at, as giving me first encouragement p. 22.
to write, I never saw her, nor received message from her, nor was a penny
richer by her, whilst she lived, or poorer by her death, who died in the
Catholic faith, as I expected, as I have heard a Knight, though Protestant yet
of better credit then your self, that was present with her not many hours
before her death, avouch; though your Snarling Cerberus seems to bark at her
ghost, as if without Purgatory it had gone to your Protestant heaven. But the
short is, your conscience is so tender, as you blot out your own conjectures,
both against the quick and dead, without any care of truth, or fear of sin.

THE SECOND CHAPTER. THAT THE BOOKS OF THE MACHABEES, WHEREIN Is taught our
Catholic doctrine, concerning Purgatory, is Canonical Scripture; against the
Falsehood both of the Letter, and Counter-snarle.
Now having stopped the mouth of your railing Cerberus, I may the more boldly
survey your Hell, or Letter against Purgatory, to fear me from the discovery
of the folly and falsehood, whereof your Counter-snarle was written. You brag
page 27.
that amongst all you wrote in an hundredth and fourteen pages, I have only a
spite at one leaf, which lies in the heart of the letter; Lies in the heart.
Against what should truth and the friend of truth bear greater hatred?
specialy those lies being gross and inexcusable corruptions of the most
learned of the ancient Fathers, concerning a point of highest importance, to
wit, the Canonical Authority of the book of Machabees, where Purgatory and
other points of Catholyke doctrine, which you peremptorily deny, are clearly
proved? If lying kills the soul (as the Holy Ghost says) Sap. 1. Os quod
mentitur occidit animam.
your leaves that have lies in their heart, what are they but a dead letter?

2. Wherefore I will begin the examination of your letter with that leaf you
term the heart thereof. Which I proved in my Treatise most false and rotten,
not containing so much as one true line, whereof I wrote in this sort:
Overthrow. p. 133.
And here by occasion of S. Augustine, and the book of Machabees, I must give
M. Crashaw warning, that in proof of his assertion, he bring not such
testimonies as are the three Sir Edward Hoby alleges out of S. Augustine, to
prove that he rejected the Machabees, ignorantly and impudently corrupted, not
by Sir Edward himself (I cannot think so dishonorably of men of his calling)
but by his Trencher-school-maister, or some mercinarie lecturer, perchance even
by M. Crashaw himself, who is great in the books of this credulous Knight,
whom they make fly hoodwinkd to catch flies: which if I pull off, that he may
see, how they abuse him, I hope he will take it in good part.

3. These were my words then: which show a double falsehood of your Snarler,
first it is false, that I absolutely accused M. Crashaw, as the Author of those
corruptions which yet you avouch, page 56.
instead of perhaps by M. Crashaw, making me say, yea by M. Crashaw himself:
for though I did as I might specially suspect him whose desire to deceive was
well known unto me, yet I neither did, nor durst so peremptorily affirm,
knowing that many others besides him, may use that coolening art. Secondly you
say, that I termed you notorious falsificatour page 32.
, which was far from my thoughts, and further from my pen. wherewith I did
fence your head from that blow. The truth is, your unsavory Letter is so
sweet to your tast^, distempered with selfe-conceipt, that out of fear some
ministers should lurch you, you greedily put every syllable thereof into your
own mouth, though it be dressed in the sower sauce of manifest falsehood:
rather will you be thought a false corrupter of so grave a Father, then not
the true father of that false brat. Had it been any discredit to have confessed
those quotations were by some minister suggested unto you. Your valiant Writer
and Deane D. Morton, was he not driven by his adversary to acknowledge, that he
had taken some corrupted testimonies of our Authors, Vide his paramble to a
further Encounter.
upon the credit of Io. Stock, or R. C? Why should that, taking authoritys in
gross, be thought a blemish in a Knight, which was esteemed tolerable, yea
laudable in a Doctor? Or why should you snarle at me, for devising in your
defense, such an honorable excuse, that had you stood unto it, you might both
have laid your falsehoods upon another (as that Doctor did) and yet have been
ranked as he is, amongst your Protestants famous authors, the mark your
ambitious pen aimed at.

4. Let it be whose it please, a Ministers, or a Minstrells Child, in the
defense thereof you utter so many new fooleries and falsehoods, that I make no
doubt, but the Reader of this my letter (if those corruptions were yours) will
confess, that you have greater strength of malice to beget falsehood, then
store of wit to mantaine it. You say, p. 27.
that like a Spider-catcher, I trauaise my ground with a goodly flourish, as if
I meant with the weak Goddesses to bind Jupiter: but if I bring not some
Briareus to assist me, it will not be long, before I be out of breath. This is
so mystily spoken, as I understand it not. I dare not say it is an high
mystery, or a soaring Bird, least you flout me, with well flowen Buzzard p.
21.
. If by Jupiter you mean your self, and by weak Goddesses, the corruptions
of S. Augustine I laid to your charge, the examinatio^s of your excuses will
show, that you stick so fast in those briars, that neither Briareus with an
hundred hands can draw, nor all your Vulcans with their hatches cut you out.

5. Let us come to the particulers: the first testimony which Ministers make
the Knight bring to prove the Machabees not to be Canonical, is (said I
Overthrow page 233.
) out of the book de Mirabilibus sacrae Scripturae, which he, by their
direction, cites as S. Augustines, though all learned men, by uniform consent
discard it from that number, as a book of no account: which Censure was made
of this book many hundredth years before Sir Edward was borne, S. Tho. ^. p.
q. 45. ^. 3. ad 2.
or his Church either, whose antiquity he does say truly the Ladies are not
able to conceive, though they may easily conceive her noueltye, seeing some
Ladies may yet live that are elder then his Church, and many are yet not very
old, whose parents were some years before Luther her first Father. But as for
that pretended book of S. Augustine, he that has perused the same, and can
think it to be worthy either of the wit or learning, or to savor of the
style of that learned Father, he has I dare say more skill of trenchers then
of Authors, specially seeing the Author himself in the fourth Chapter of his
second book, does say in express terms, that he wrote the said book in the
year of our Lord 627. almost 200. years after that S. Augustine was dead. And
was not Sir Edward think you here bobbed by the Bachelour or some Lecturer?

6. This was my charge: to which you answer with great admiration saying,
Would any page 28.
man believe that I should father that book de mirabilibus sacrae scripturae
upon Augustine? As who should say it is an incredible thing; and mark the
force of your sentence, consisting in the I: which, did not ouerweening blind,
would perceive his own folly: for are you indeed so singularly learned, that
you can with a wet finger find out all the true works of this Father? If you be
so cunning, is also this your own skill so notorious to mankind, that it may
seem incredible to any man, that you should cite any book under his name,
which is not his? Rabshacheh, say you, auer's that: where, to my ear, your
pen meets with such a iobbe, as I fear your good dog has broken his
leg: Rabshacheh auer's that. Surely I was much to blame to accuse so learned
a Knight of such incredible mistaking. Varius ait, say you, in the margent,
Scaurus negat, you deny it, a man forsooth of such credit as your bare word
must be taken against the proofs of such a Varius as my self. But let us
compare the sayings of your Letter and Counter-snarle together, then will it
appear, who is Varius, who does vary from, and contradict himself, you or I.

7. Your letter to prove that the Machabees were Canonical in S. Augustines
judgment, says in this sort. p. 60.
It is not our surmise that S. Augustine seems to signify so much, who
elsewhere (to wit in the book de mirabilibus Sacrae Scripturae) does plainly
determinately say, that they are not of the divine Canon. Thus did your Letter
then sing, resolutly fathering as your words witness that book on S.
Augustine. Now perceiving by my accusation, that to be gross ignorance, your
Snarler barketh in another tune gag. 29.
. Fynding, say you, that book in their coppies ranked with those other books,
that go under the title of S. Augustine, loath to trouble the margent with any
circumlocutio^, I only noted where it might be found: mark I pray you that
only, which is one of the things that are most disgraceful in a Knight: did
you only note in the margent where that book and sentence might be found, and
not also aver in your text, that it was plainly and determinatly S. Augustines
saying? Who does not see, that your two books snarle at ech-other, that you
play Scaurus in the one, and Rabshacheh in the other, peremptorily denying in
your Snarle, what you did constantly affirm in your letter? This is to be
Varius indeed, and truly Rabshacheh, which signifies in Hebrew, multum Ebrius,
a man much given to drink, which title, whether it rather agree to me, then to
your self, I am content any indifferent man be Judge, that knows us both.

8. And not only is your Snarler forced to eat up the words you spoke in your
Letter, but you do add further a new untruth, that you omitted to note the
ambiguitie of the author of that book, out of loathnes to trouble your margent
with any circumlocution: which idle excuse you likewise repeat in your answer
to the third falsification, p. 42.
that you joined two places of S. Augustine in one, forbearing to note the
place, where either might be found, not to be tedious forsooth to the reader
with long quotations. A man that has cast his eye though but once on your
book, may perceive the vanity of this your figleafe, wherewith you would hide
this your falsehood. For the margent to whose purity you would seem to bear
respect, you fear not to defile with hebrew Characters, with vulgar sentences
both Greek and French, with triuiall verses out of Cato and such childish
authors, with ridiculous phrases, which serve only to wast ynke and blur paper.
If you name me, your margent must also speak Numquam ego hominem magis asinum
vidi p. 27.
. If you see my pinnace a far off, nec operam, nec oleum sapit page 59.
. You swear upon your life, I have been a notorious truant in my days, page
58.
and straight a verse redoundes on your book side, sic vos non vobis. Your
inkehorne has no sooner devised a new Erynnicall word to bestow on a libell,
but Virgil versifieth upon it p. 67.
: Quo tristis Erynnis,
Quo fremitus vocat?
You accuse me with soloecismes, referring me to your latin Notation, page 11.
Si ego indignus hac contumelia, tu tamen indignus qui faceres, which is so
heavy and leaden a load, to be laid upon soloecismes, which I never objected
to you, that the same had reason to cry O. with which letter you mark them,

9. Your own mediocritie is named in your text, the Echo thereof sounds in
the Margent to your praise, Mediocria firma, p. 11.
you say, that it is art enough for you, to please your self, whom you note
with a T. in the forehead, as though you were an humble penitent, yet in the
Margent you versifie in this sort page 39.
: Quem penes arbitrium est, and ius and forma loquendi. Which proud verse
signifies, that by T. you mean Throne, where you mean to sit as M.
Controuller. I omit many other of your impertinent and ridiculous Annotations;
these few may suffice to show, that you never leave your margent white, without
notes, but when your head is blank without matter. Whence it is clear, that
the cause why you did not censure the book De Mirabilibus, as the supposed
issue of S. Augustine, was not your loathnes to trouble your Margent with
circumlocutions, but either ignorance that indeed you thought that book was
his, which I think probable; or else fraud, which made you utter, what you
knew was false, to deceive your Reader; which imputation you would have laid
upon you rather then ignorance.

10. But if one demand of you, why you did cite that book for S. Augustines,
saying, that it was his, against your conscience and knowledge, as you now
confess? You answer in this manner: p. 29,
As near as I can remember (say you) I thus argued with my self, If they
grant that S. Augustines pen did discard those books, the matter will be
soon at an end; if they deny that book to be his, then how will they excuse
their Church, that has played many such lewd prankes? Or how will they answer
antiquity, which distinguished these books? Thus you argued with your self,
which does argue, that your false Ministers teach you to use reseruations and
equivocations in your writings, about matters of religion, to deceive your
lesse-wary Readers. You said in your Letter then, that the book de mirabilibus
was determinatly S. Augustines, which I proved apparently to be false. Now you
confess that it is indeed false, yea that you knew it was false, even when you
wrote it, but you had forsooth a reserved discourse that might make the same
true, to wit, that, that book de mirabilibus is S. Austines, or else the
Church of Rome has played many false tricks, or else how will they answer
Antiquity? Is not this wicked and fraudule^t proceeding?

11. To make the same dealing more apparent and sensible to you, I will use an
example that may touch you near. Suppose I should write, that a Protestant
Knight in England has children by a Black-more, namely a Girl, in the margent
citing Sir Edw. Hoby, that you prove it to be a lewd sla^der, accusing me of
injurious falsehood against you. My answer is like to yours, Will any man think
I fathered those children on Sir Edward Hoby indeed, not knowing to whose
charge I might lay them, loath to trouble my margent with circumlocutions, I
noting the house, where such a mother is found? I knew Sir Edward was not the
Father of those bratts, but I thus argued with my self, If he grant those
children to be his, the matter is at an end: if he deny them, then how will he
answer his Protestant brethren, that accuse him of such lewd prankes? Were
this proceeding, Sir Edward, justifiable, to utter slanderous untruths, which
I know are false, excusing them by mental and reserved discourses? I am sure,
you would detest this manner of dealing in me against your self, which yet you
approve in your self against the Church of Rome.

12. Moreover I add, that your mental reservation which you now utter, is also
false, to wit, that the book de mirabilibus, in our copies is placed in
equal rank with those other that go under the name of S. Augustine; and that
it is still continued by us, amongst his goulden works, which you term a
lewd pranke, and say, that none can read any Fathers in our Editio^s, but he
is in danger to catch a snake for an eele, except he read Thomas Aquinas
before. Vidi Opera August. a Theolog. Louaniens. edita, ann. 1571. ex officina
Plantini^na.
This you speak, which is as gross an untruth as the former. For in out latter
Editio^s, this book is not ranked amongst the whole books of S. Augustine, but
in an Appendix after them, in a different letter, with title of Anonymi
cuiusdam: the Treatise of a namelesse Author. In the elder Editions these
books go printed amongst his in the same letter, but with this Censure in the
beginning and head thereof, nec stilo nec ingenio Augustinum sapit; This
Treatise does neither savor of the conceit, nor style of S. Augustine. Could
the Church of Rome show greater sincerity then this?

13. Do you in your own Bible rank the Apochriphall books (as you esteem
them) Tobias, Judith, Machabees, with those of the divine Scripture cheek by
ioule (to use your own phrase) both in elder and newest Editions of your
Bible? Do not Canonical Scriptures excel the Apochriphall, more then S.
Augustine does any other Father, that lived after him? Why should you term it
a lewd pranke, to coople together the second in the same volume which goes
for Augustines, if it be a holy practice in your Church, to join together the
first in your Bible, that goes under the name of Gods book?

14. Now in the custody of these works of Antiquity, the Church of Rome has
been so Religious, that you chaleng those Charters for your doctrine, which you
cannot deny, but have been for 1000. years at least in her only keeping. If the
books of the Ancient Fathers, should be Pupills or Wards of your Church but
for one age, that you might vncontrolledly cut down, what trees please you not
in their grounds, we might afterward have as great difficulty, to find a
book or sentence in their writings (which we now plentifully allege) for our
doctrines, page 40.
as I should have to find you India^ vapor, if that be true (as you say) that
it is long since flowen out of my sight: yea which does clearly justify the
Roman Churches sincerity, the bastardly boughs, as you term them, more
then any true branches of S. Augustine, make for your doctrine and now does the
book de mirabilibus for your Hebrew Canon, which is a manifest ^^signe, that
these books were not fradulently by her joined with that Fathers, to give
credit unto them, because they favor her cause, as you imagine.

15. To conclude you are forced to grant as much as I desired, to wit, that
the book de mirabilibus is not S. Augustines, as you cited it, but that it is
altogether impertinent to prove your intent, that the Machabees are not
Canonical in his judgment. You page 31.
bragg that you have quit your hands of the first falsehood; which is so true,
that whereas I accused you of ignorance and not of falsehood, not to seem to
have written in ignorance, you have uttered four falsehoods. First that you did
not cite the sentence out of the book de mirabilibus for S. Augustines; the
contrary whereof is extant under your own hand in your letter, which you wish
might be engraven in marble p. 62.
. The second that you did not note the Author of that book was doubtful, out
of respect to your margent, fearing to trouble the same with a learned
annotation, which you lode every where with all manner of impertinent stuff.
Thirdly, you use mental reseruations in your writings, putting that which you
know was false into your paper, keeping that which you did imagine might make
the same true in your thoughts. Finally you slander the Church of Rome, for
lewd prankes, about the Fathers volumes, wherein I have proved her practice to
be most sincere: so that if poor men's purses be never more quit of money, then
your pen is now of falsehood, when they are poorest they will not lack a
groate: yet I think my second accusation of your falsehood will cleave faster
to your fingers, that to clear your self, you will be forced to rubb them
rudlye on your Printers head.

16. The second place you brought out of S. Augustine against the book of
Machabees, was a sentence in his book against the Epistle to Gaudentius, l. 2.
c. 51.
in these very words. Machabaeorum Scriptura recepta est ab Ecclesia non
inutiliter, si sobrie legatur, vel audiatur, maxim propter ipsos Martyrs
Machabaeos; Sed ob hanc causam in Canone morum, non fidei censeri posset:
Signifying (said you) that there must be great sobriety used in hearing and
reading of those books, and that they are in the Canon of Manners, and not of
faith. My accusation was that your minister had added the last sentence,
containing the substance of the matter, unto S. Augustine, Sed ob hanc causam
in Canone morum, non fidei censeri posset. But for this cause that book may be
put in the Canon of manners not of faith: Will Sir Edward (said I) suffer
himself to be thus bobbed and his credit blown up? will he not set such a
frown on his trencher-ministers, as may make the^ vanish out of sight? Can any
stain to his Knighthood be greater, then to be thought a notorious falsifier
of so great and learned a Father, even in print? Thus I wrote in my Treatise,
which you term lame and goutie: let us see how nimble-footed you are in your
excuse.

17. This last clause, say you, I wonder how it should pass my sight, in the
reuiew: for perusing my first draught I find go, written short in another
Letter, to distinguish my inference, from Augustines proof. It seems either
my Manuaries have, or the Printers mispression has turned go, into sed, as if
the same had been contiuned: which former error made the^ omit (consequently)
in the English redditio. Thus you write confessing as much as I accused you of,
to wit, that the last clause was not S. Augustines, but the Ministers or your
own. Now that there was a short Go in your first draught, seems not very
probable, but rather that your Vulcanes have ha^mered it out of your head to
excuse your falsehood. First, what likeness is there betwixt go and sed, that
your Manuarie, or Printer should take the one for the other? what probability,
that he should so consequently corrupt the text, as to leave out consequently
upon the former error? Secondly why should you make your inference in Latin
writing in English? What English Author does use that idle manner of writing
but your self? neither do you use it your self but only in this place, which
makes it more then probable, that in truth you thought not thereof. But now you
say you used it, having noe better cloak then this short go to cover so
notorious a fraud. Thirdly for what purpose, does this iuggling together of
your sentences, both in Latin and English with S. Augustines serve, but only
that the simple Reader may not distinguish the gray-hound from the hare? the
dove from the kyte? Finally may not a man printe whole sentences of his own as
S. Augustines or any other Fathers, and being accused of falsehood have the like
excuse to yours at his fingers ends, that in the draught there was a go, which
the Printer let go.

18. But you had, you say page 33.
S. Hieromes authority for that infere^ce, though you quoted him not, who says
Hier. praefat. in l. Salom.
that the Church does not receive the book of Machabees, adding: legate ad
aedificationem plebis, non ad authoritate^ dogmatum Ecclesiasticorum
confirmanda^, which words, say you, amount to no less sum, then that those
books are in Canone morum non fidei censendi. I answer first, this is nothing
to the purpose, to prove S. Augustine did reject them, who might be contrary
to S. Hierome in this point, not being then defined by any general Counsel,
though S. Hierome may seem to speak according to the opinion of the Hebrews
as he uses to do Vide prafat. in Daniel. and Apol. aduers. Ruffin.
, not in his own. Secondly I say, that those words of S. Hierome, come short
of your sum, and that neither in S. Hierome, nor any Ancient Father, can be
found, your Protestant distinction of the Canon of Ma^ners and Canon of Faith.
Every book that may be read for edification in the Church, may not be
termed a Cano^ or Rule of Manners, as many books may edify Faith which do
not rule it; so some Authors may edify the Church in good life, though their
works be not the rule of manners. A rule must be right, so that a thing
conformable to it cannot be crooked. As what soever is agreeable to the Rule of
Faith, is infallibly true, so what is just with the Rule of Manners is
certainly good. But actions according to these books we speak of, you grant
may be wicked, how then can they be the Canon and Rule of Manners? To kill
himself for example is a thing unlawful, yet it is conformable to those
actions, that you say are praised in the Machabees, which books you accept as
a Rule of Manners. If a book, that allows some things against good Manners,
may be with a little Caution (as you say pa. 37.
) the Canon of virtuous life, I see not why a book teaching false doctrine in
some points, may not with like caution be the Canon of Faith? you see that your
distinction neither grounded upon reason, nor Fathers, nor Scriptures, is
justly a beam in my eye. Neither does Caietan whom you cite, iumpe
altogether with your conceit, and though he did, his sayings are not Oracles
with us.

19. The third testimony you alleged out of S. Augustine against the
Machabees was this sentence. Aug. de ciuit l. 1. c. 20.
In the holy Canonical Books there is no divine precept or permission to be
found, that we may, either to gain immortality, or to escape any peril or
mischief, make away with our selves, vt Razis seipsum occidens laudatur, as
Razis did kill himself, and is therefore commended in the book of Machabees.
This last clause, said I page 135. 136.
wherein the force of the testimony consists is added, both in latin and in
English to S. Augustines words, to make him seem an enemy of the books of
the Machabees. But indeed that Father does not say, that Razias (for that is
his name, and not Razis) was praised for killing himself, but denies it
expressly, l. 2. cont. Epist. Gaud. c. 31.
saying, that the Scripture did report, what had been done, not praise his
death, as a thing that should have been done. Can any corruption, said I be
greater then this? I would wish Sir Edward for his creditts sake, to lay the
matter of his pa^phlet on the Minister that was the true Father thereof, only
chale^ging to himself the style and phrase, which may well beseem a Knight,
and is to rich and goulden to cloth the foul bratt of a Ministers brain.

20 Thus I wrote: in answer whereof, first you say, I show my self a kind
adversary, by quoting the place of S. Augustine in my margent, and adding the
words which were wanting in your quotation, and the latin sentence, for want
thereof lame without sense. I will not requite him, say you, with the Proverb,
That proffered service meritts small thanks, but in lieu of his labor, I will
more fully advertise him of my scope. My purpose was from a ground out of S.
Augustine, to prove, that the book of Machabees is not Canonical: my Mayor is
S. Augustines, as well known as the beggar knows his dish, that in holy
Scripture, there is no precept or permission, to make away with our selves, but
Razias mentioned in the Machabees is commended for a fact of this kind, Ergo,
those books are not Canonical. This syllogism I had a desire to contract.
Thanks be to God. My treatise has wrought a miracle, making your contracted
syllogism stretch out his sinews, and walk on both legs. Now your bird
spreads abroad her wings which before were so couched under S. Augustine, that
a man might have sworn on your Book, that the whole argument both Mayor and
Minor had been his. I dare say Aristotle himself, with whom, you say, you
are well acquainted, page 10.
would not have perceived a sylogisme in your quotatio^, but have thought one
particle thereof as well as the other S. Austines.

21. But have not yor Ministers devised so^e excuse or other of this yor
cunning co^tracting of syllogismes to deceive the simple? yes a very goodly
one, which you utter in these words: Artis est arte^ dissimulare, It is a poi^t of
art to disse^ble art p. 42.
. He is a simple painter that is driven to write Goose or Woodcock ouerhead,
that people may know what feature he has drawn underneath Neither do
Rhetoricia^s use to distinguish their propositio^s by name, leaving work for
the Logical Analysis, to set every part in their proper place. Thus you. Lord
what tricks Devils and their foulers have to hide their art? What mistes do
they cast on their netts to catch Woodcocks? How do they impe their sorry
feathers into the Fathers-Eagle wings? Sell their own green goslings for
white and hoary swannes? when their falsehood is discovered they tell us very
gravely, that they must not write over head Goose or Woodcock, that people may
know the feature they have drawn underneath. And they have reason. For should
people perceive the featour of their writings, soon would a Christian stomach
loath them.

22. Plain dealing, Sir Edward, might best have suited with your pen, who
profess your self the Ladies Writer, page 65.
hoping that the report of the worthiness of the Author might happily induce
those rare creatures to the reading of your lines. But how ca^ they that have
not studied Logic, make a Logical Resolution of your Rhetorical syllogismes?
How shall they that have not read, nor perchanee can read S. Augustine, know
which words are yours, which his, setting every thing in his proper place,
which a learned man may easily do by placing the Mayor, that Scripture does
never command nor commend killing ones self, an Eagle and worthy saying in S.
Augustines works, where indeed it is found but the minor that Razias is
praised in the Machabees for killing himself, l. 1. de Ciuitat. c. 20.
a Goose or Woodcoke in your brain, whence and not out of this Fathers book
it came into your Letter.

23. Another excuse you have which you rather insinuate then stand upon,
perhaps ashamed to go still a begging to your Printer, to maintain the credit
of your poor brat. You will not have your words to be, vt Razis seipsu^
occide^s laudatur, as he printed and I cited the^, but At Razias seipsu^
occide^s laudatur, Counters. p, 43.
and so you still repeat the^, signifying that the Printer changed (At) the
note of a syllogisticall subsu^ption into (Vt). And truly (gentle Reader) that
may happily look into his letter, there is so little difference betwixt (Vt)
and (At) as my heart did much incline to pardon this error of the Printer. But
when looking into the English redition Let. p. 61.
I found, As Razis, instead of but Razias, and that he made As the head of the
name, whereof it is the last part, remembering also that he had given me
Counters. p. ^8.
that last syllable of Razias, against law, not first cutting off the intaile
thereof on Sir Edw. books: These things considered I say, I thought my self
bound in justice to return the (As) to the right place, and entaile the last
syllable of Razias on the Printer to hold it in Capite of Sir Edward Hoby, and
his books for ever. Shall he hereafter presume to print any of the Knights
books, who still returns his falsehoods upon his Printer, without taking
pains to peruse the Authors he cites? he shall have for his wages the whole
word of Lazyas. So that now I may call the world to witness, I am not in his
Printers debt, for any syllable or letter of Razias, except the R. which being
a snarling letter he cannot expect from me, that says I write a lisping
language.

24. Now Sir Edward, let us return to you, who perceiving the vanity of this
first excuse, you devise another, which yet in the end will prove less to your
credit. You say your Assumption also, to wit that Razias is praised in the
Machabees for killing himself, which I auerred was not S. Augustines, is also
the the very sentence of that Father, though not in that place, where your
proposition is found, yet in another, which not to be tedious (forsooth) to
your Reader, with long quotations you then omitted in p. 42.
your letter If you now pay us in current money, we will forgive you the
interest of so long forbearance: if you cannot, as I am sure you will never be
able to do it, your vanity is admirable, who out of fear to be thought
ignorant, undertake to show things that are not.

25. You leave S. Augustine: loath you are to make him at odds with himself p.
43.
: you run unto Lyra, you seek by that instrument to make S. Augustines
doctrine seem to jar with it self. Lyra, say you, upon the 24. Chapter of
the second of Machabees does deliver two cases, wherein the Jews hold it not
only lawful, but also meritorious for a man to kill himself. First, ne
subditus fieret peccatoribus. Secondly, ne in contemptum Dei Caeli, eius vita
in ludibrio traheretur. He concludes, Some think S. Augustines saying which
here follows in the gloss, is thus to be understood. Thus writ you, not very
sincerely relating Lira's doctrine; but because it is not to the purpose I omit
to discover you. At the naming of S. Augustines saying, dreaming that it must
needs be your Goose or Woodcock, your teeth water to have it in your mouth: O,
say you, that I could meet with the saying of Augustine that I omitted to cite!
does Lira say, it follows here in the gloss, then will I presume so far
upon your patience as to write it out. Thus you tune your instrument before you
play. Take heed Sir, you abuse not those worthy Gentlemen's patience, whom you
inuit to be your hearers after all these preambles, if you sound at last the
harsh Hebrew harp of Lyra for the sweet latin Lute of S. Augustine you will
give them just cause to laugh at your folly.

26. The saying you cite for S. Augustines out of Lyra in 2. Match. c. 14.
is this: Vnde and scriptura huius libri, quae recepta est ab Ecclesia ad
legendum pro informatione morum, non videtur sic Raziam arguere; sed
commendare, de suiipsius interfectione: si autem praedicta non sufficiant ad
eius excusationem, dici potest, quod hoc fecit per specialem instinctum
Spiritus sancti. Whereupon the Scripture of this book, which is received by the
Church to be read for information of manners, does not seem here to reprove
Razias, but rather to commend him for killing of himself: and if the aforesaid
excuse, do not suffice, it may be said he did that fact, by special instinct
of the holy Ghost. Thus you write calling me Sophister and dizzi-braynd
Ismaelite, for saying that it was far from S. Augustines gravity to read the
Machabees, with so little sobriety, as to think that Razias was praised for
killing himself, yet, say you, whether S. Augustine was of this mind or no, let
it lie upon Lyra's report.

27. Noe Sir, this false report, will lie upon your self, except you will
confess the truth, that some Minister suggested this lie unto you to disgrace
S. Augustine: you have couched such falsehood and folly together, that I know
not, which I should first and most accuse. But with your patience I will touch
them both, but your folly first. For if this be S. Augustines sentence, who
does not see that your argument, to prove the Machabees not to be Scripture, is
not worth a rush? For if Canonical Scripture, give leave to a man to kill
himself, by the especial command and instinct of the holy Ghost: if Razias
killed himself by such a special precept, what did he against Canonical
Scripture? Why should not the book of the Machabees be sacred though they
praise Razias for this fact, as well as the book of Judges where Sampson is
praised who did the like? Spiritus latenter hoc iusserat, says S. Augustine l.
1. de Ciuit. c. 21.
qui per eum miracula faciebat. The spirit that did Miracles by Sampson,
secretly commanded him to kill himself. Let us put your sillogisme into
form as you desire, this it is. Noe Canonical book does command or praise
killing ones self, without special instinct of the holy Ghost. But Razias
killed himself by that special instinct, and for this respect is praised in
the book of Machabees, ergo the book of Machabees is not Canonical
Scripture. I dare say, you need not write Goose or Woodcock, over the head of
this argument every one will perceive the feature you have drawn, though
underneath you say nothing.

28. This is your ignorance, but now your Ministers falsehood is yet more
notorious and admirable, for you skip over the true sentence of S. Augustine
which Lyra cites, which is also cited in the Gloss, and indeed found in his
works, and you bring Lira's own words and illations, which stand many lines
after, for the very saying of this Father. Thus Lyra writes in that place:
Some say, that the saying of S. Augustine, which is found in the Gloss, is
thus to be understood. Do you long Sir Edward for S Augustines saying; Harken
unto Lyra which does sound it, August. l. 1. de ciuit. c. 21.
His exceptis, quae lex generaliter iusta, and ipse fons iustitiae Deus
specialiter iubet occidi, quisquis hominum vel seipsu^, vel quemlibet alium
occiderit, homicidij crimine innectitur. Those excepted, whom just laws in
general, or God the fountain of justice does specially command to be killed,
what man soever does make away with himself or any other is guilty of the
crime of murder. This is S Augustines saying, which you may find also
verbatim in the Gloss, in that very page. And this saying some did understand,
that when one kills himself to the end that he may not be drawn by torments
to an Idolatrous religion, or not be mocked to skorne in contempt of his God,
that he sins not, because Justice in such cases did allow of it.

29. Which interpretation is both false and against the mind of S. Augustine,
who does often teach and largly prove, against the Circumcellians, that in such
cases, killing ones self is unlawful Quicu^que hoc in seipsis perpetraueru^t
animi magnitudine, fortasse mirandi, non sapientiae sanitate laudandi sunt. l.
1. de Ciuit. c. 22.
, that Razias was not co^me^dable for that fact, which the Scripture did
report, not praise. Look into the Gloss upon that place, which is taken out
of S. Augustine, this piece whereof Lyra cites, you shall not find so much as
a word in defense of Razias. How can this corruption be excused from witting
falsehood, to pass over S. Augustines saying so obuious that lay in the way?
Was he not a nimble fox Illa leui velox superabat deuia cursu; su^maque
transibat positarum lina plagarum.
, that could fetch such a leap over a marble pillar, into a long piece of
ground? But to whose charge shall I lay it? Your Printer is all ready laden,
your Minister I must not meddle with; if I touch your Person, I shall hear you
rage, page 2.
that like a shrewish distracted malcontent, I scrach, kick, spurn, hale,
tear men noble by descent, eminent in places, profound in judgment, skillful
in tongues, famous for learning, virtue, and experience in travails, by which
periphrases you seem to discribe your self. What shall I do but follow an
ancient custom, which was to beat the Minstrell when the Cook did amiss
Tibicen vapulat.
. You compare your self to page 61.
Gracchus, who came not at any time (say you) to make an Oration without a
Minstrell, who by the sound of his Pipe did set him a right and just Key.
Wherefore let your Minstrell, whosoever he was, that piped you this Key, to
sing and play S. Augustines doctrine upon Lyra's ditties, let him have the
reward your ridiculous excuse does deserve, to be thought Asinus ad Lyram.

30. And truly this Father, does so often clearly and peremptorily avouch the
Charter of the Machabees, which confirms Purgatory to be sacred, that I
wonder any man that had read his works (as you would seem to have done) could
undertake to prove the contrary: which attempt would have no other issue, then
you have brought yours unto, Shame and Contempt. When he makes the Catalogue of
Canonical books, l. 2. de Doctrine. Christian. c. 8.
does he not rank these with the rest? That no man can think them, by his
list, less Canonical then the other? did not this Father subscribe to the
Council of Carthage where those books were canonized, as even M. Crashaw does
grant, Sermon. p. 80.
with whom I might join Doctor Field, Reynolds, Perkins and many other
Protestants, See the Protest. Apolog. tract. 1. sect. 10. subdiuis. 11.
who yield unto these books the warrant of the Council, for their Sacred
authority.

31. I can but pity you, who write your learned lines, with Ministers notes
before you, whose lies, when they are once in your books, you will be angry
they be not thought yours: such is your assertion Let. page 63.
opposite to your best Authors, that the Council of Carthage did not admit the
Machabees into the Canon, in proof whereof you say, that our own Canus does
confess, that had they been so ratified, it had been neither for Gregory, nor
for any other to have afterward doubted of them. Shall I tell you the plain
truth. This is not the testimony of Canus that learned Divine, but of Canis,
your Snarling Curre. Canus has, in that place, two sayings so mainely opposite
to both yours, as no Logitian can devise more perfect contradiction by the
rules of Art.

32. First he says expressly, l. 2. de loc. Theol, c. 9.
hanc nostram conclusionem docet Concilium tertium Carthaginense. This
Conclusion (that the Machabees are Canonical) is taught by the third Council
of Carthage, which, says he, though but a Provincial Council, was confirmed
by Leo the fourth, and by the Council of Trullum. This is contradictorie to
your first assertion, that the Council did not admit those books: and against
your other, that had they admitted them, our Gregory might not have doubted of
their Authority, in that very place and paragraph you cite, he says: (b) Id
modo in dubium vocare non licet, quod D. Gregorio, Eusebio and reliquis licuit
aliquando dubitare. It was lawful for Gregory, Eusebius, and others to doubt
thereof (that being but a Provincial Council) but now we may not doubt thereof,
after a General indubitate definition of the Church. Can East be more opposite
to West, light unto darkness, then the sayings of Canus found in his book, unto
those you report as his? Do you think to win creditt by your Cur, that gredily
licks up all manner of foul and false stuff from Ministers trenchers? And
whereas your Snarler says page 36.
that S. Augustine, granting the Jews did not admit the Machabees, held it
small reason, for after-Ages to intertaine them in highest esteem, I wonder
(if that be true you say) that you can cite S. Augustine without a Prompter,
that you had not in promptu, at your fingers end, the known saying of that
Father, wherewith he knockes this puppie on the head: not the Jews but Church
of Christ (says he) libros Machabaeorum pro Canonicis habet; l. 18. de Ciuit.
c. 36.
does intertaine the Machabees for Canonical books, which is the highest
esteem any writings can have.

33. The same does S. Augustine teach, in the testimony by you cited in his
books against the Epistle of Gaudentius, l. 1. c. 31.
which I said in my Treatise made against you. His words are these, The Jews
do not admit the book of Machabees, as they do the Law, Prophetts, and the
Psalms, yet is it profitablie intertayned by the Church if it be read and
heard soberlie. These words (said Ouerth. page 135.
I) signify that the Christian Church admits these books as Canonical,
even as the Law and Prophets were Canonical with the Jews. And though this
my inference, does so displease you, that you say, no sober settled brain, will
stumble upon such a sense page 35.
, yet truly, I see no reason why any man should think you were sober that
stumble upon such a Censure. For by that testimony it appears, that the
Christians gave that Authority to those books, which the Jews did not grant
unto them, that the Church did set them up in the throne, from which the
Synagogue had kept them, which was the Imperial throne of Sacred Authority:
otherwise S. Augustines opposition, the Jews did not, but the Church does,
were vain. For the Jews did admit the Machabees into the number of
Hagiographicall books, which were read for edification of the People. So that,
if the Christian Church does admit them into higher Authorities then the Jews,
that must needs be the highest of all; seeing even the Jews did place them in
the degree next the highest.

34. You rage saying page 35.
, that I infer S. Augustine to speak against his mind, who never meant, that
Canonical Scripture is received with a Si, which is necessary to be
acknowledged, though it fall out by default to be Sapor mortis ad mortem. But
neither did I, nor S. Augustine say, that the books are received with a Si,
but that the books received are profitable to them that read them with a Si.
The books (says he) are received profitably, if soberlie they be read. So
that the receiving of the books is absolute, but the books absolutely
received, do not profit the Readers, without a Si sobrie, except they be read
with sobriety. Had you read S. Augustines words, with S. Augustines Si, you
would not so grossly have missed the finger of his, and my meaning. Are not
things most divine and heavenly, taken without a Si, very dangerous and
hurtful? The most sacred Sacrament of the Altar, the fountain of grace, does
not benefit the soul without a Si digne, except it be worthily taken; which
wanting, it is Sapor Mortis ad Mortem.

35. And if when a man is unworthy of that Celestial food, the Church may
keep the same from him, why may she not also keep the Scriptures, translated
into vulgar tongues from People, whom she does prudently think will not make
benefit thereof: Nor have stomach to digest so strong and solid meat, except it
be first masticated by the Preachers mouth. Why may she not examine their
sufficiency for the one, as she does their worthiness for the other; yet you
say, page 35.
that S. Augustine never dreamed of such a drunken Church, as ours seems to
be, by eloyning the Scriptures in the vulgar tongue, from common people, least
it should hurt the^. I might wonder, that you should call a Church so Ancient,
Famous, and Catholic as the Roman is, Drunken, for a practice so full of
wisdom and circumspection as this is, did I not know, that the custom of men
that are tipled, is, when they stagger themselves, to think that Churches, and
the very heavens reele about them. I will not say you wrote in dark, seeing
you affirm that like Demosthenes you endighted by the lamp pa. 62.
: Rather will I think that your single lamp, doubled in your eye, which
happens to them that love wine when they have their Cup in their hand, --
Vertigine caelum,
Ambulat, and geminis exurgit mensa lucernis.


36. In this case perchance you were, when you wrote let. page 42.
that Purgatory is backed, neither by any express testimony of holy Writ,
nor any exemplarie proof besides Hobgoblins, Rawheades, Bloudybones, and
Night-ghostes, which the world many years since has forgotten to believe. And
again with as little sobriety you say let. p. 79.
unto us: had it not been for your Grand Patriarchs S. Homer, S. Plato, S.
Virgil, you would never have known how to have set your Compass for the
discovery of your new-fond land. Can your Church be thought sober that
permits you to pen such staggering and staring exaggerations as these? For
to say nothing of S. Cyril, S. Chrysostom, S. Damascene, S. Gregory, S.
Bernard, and other Fathers cited for Purgatory in that learned Treatise, which
you would seem to answer, whose plain testimonies for this doctrine may
seem to have been Nightghosts in your way, which so scarred you as you durst
not come nigh them with an answer, I hope your pen is not so far past
Modesty, as you dare term the Doctors and marble-pillers of Gods Church
Rawheads, Hobgoblins, or Heathens. How happy were Queen Elizabeth's Ghost,
might she enjoy the everlasting company of those Blessed, and never see your
Heathenish Saints Theseus, Aristides, Plato, Hercules, and others, Zuinglius
tom 2 pecc. origin fol. 118. et in exposit. fidei Christian. fol. 159.
whom your great Patriarch Zwinglius admits into your Protestant heaven.

37. To omit I say this proof by Fathers, which noe learned divine will deny
to be exemplar, what say you to the Machabees, and the whole Church of God, in
those days, that did practice prayers for souls in Purgatory? Is not he a
Rawhead that conde^neth so many Saints both before and after the coming of
Christ into Hell? That dares call that the doctrine of Devils, which is
taught in books indighted by the holy Ghost, if we believe S. Augustine? With
whom I could join other Fathers noe less ancient then he, canonizing the
same books, would the shortness of this Letter permit me. But his testimony
may suffice alone, which brings with it, the authority of the Church in his
days. For how would he intertaine the Machabees, whereof some Fathers doubted,
but upon the warrant of the Church, without whose word he does profess, that
he would not believe any of the Ghospells l. contr. Epist. Fundam. c. 5.
? And seeing ancient Counsels do curse and say Anathema Si quis dixerit alias
Scripturas, praeter eas quas Ecclesia Catholica recipit, in authoritate
habendas, anathema fit. Council. Toletan 7. in confess. fidei.
to any that shall believe any book to be Scripture besides those that are
admitted by the Catholic Church, seeing also that to intertaine books as
Canonical, which indeed are not, is more dangerous and prejudicial to the
Church, then to reject those that are truly sacred: this supposed, who that
has any reverend co^ceipt of this learned Father, will doubt but he had for
the Canon he cites the warrant of the Catholic Church? Is it not credible
that some Fathers who deny these books, were ignorant of the Churches warrant,
rather then S. Augustine, so rash and presumptuous, as to Canonize them without
it? For how can he be excused from great temeritie if herin he erred? Yea does
he not deserve to be thought a deluder of the Church, if she did not indeed
intertaine those books, which he does constantly avouch she did? From which
imputation the blessed Saint was so free, as even Calvin l. 3 instit. c. 3. 10.
and l. 4. c. 14.. 26.
does allow him the style of the best, and most faithful witness of
Antiquity.

38. You grieve and deplore your hard hap Counters. p. 28.
, that I should endight you for the least wrong done to that Marble-piller,
that glorious Saint, that euer-admired Augustine, to whose heavenly
Meditations, sweet sayings, and learned discourses, I owe (say you) more then
half of my self. Did you owe indeed to this Father one inch of your life, you
would not scornefully reject his authority as you do elsewhere, saying: As
if our says were to be pinned on Augustines sleeue Let. page 71.
: you would not make that the doctrine of Devils, which he did depose, was
written by a pen ledd by the hand of infallible Truth; you would not term
Purgatory, which you cannot deny but he taught, a Satanicall Figment Let. 75.
euacuating the Cross of Christ.

39. As for Wrong offered to this Saint, none perchance ever did him greater,
then you have done in your Letter, writing in this manner of him: Let. page 70.
We find, say you, that the entyre love of his mother Monica, and other his
dear friends, made him somewhat too forward in this point. And why may not
this be one of these things of which he speaks ad Ianuariu^, Epist. 119. c.
19.
There are many things, which I dare not reprove as I would? Thus you wrote,
where you first contradict what now you write in your Snarle, calling him
glorious and euer-admired marble Pillar, whom your former words make a wavering
Reed, beaten with light blastes, either of fear or of affection, into damnable
and diabolical errors. Secondly, you make him guilty of that fault which your
Cato terms shameful Turpe est auctori cum culpa redarguat ipsum.
of sharply reprehe^ding in others the sin of superstitious devotion to the
dead, wherein he was, you say, to forward himself. Thirdly, you offer this
Saint intolerable wrong, in saying that he did dislike indeed the custom of
praying for the dead, but durst not reprove it out of fear to Propter
nonnullarum vel sanctarum turbulentaru^ personaru^ scandala deuitanda.
offend and give scandal. For how could this his forbearance not be damnable,
if the custom of praying for the souls in Purgatory, be injurious to Christ's
blood, as you say it is.

40. And suppose that fear of men might diminish the sinfulnes of his
omission, in not reproving so wicked a custom, yet no excuse can cover his
impiety, in defending and allowing, as he did, the doctrine which you call the
devils, except this your Censure be irreligious. For what fear of God could
be in his heart, if for fear of Men, he did not only forbear to reprehend, but
also teach, and strive to prove, what he knew was against truth, against
Christ's blood, against Gods glory, perverting and dissipating the Christian
faith, as you say Let. p. 74. 75.
the doctrine of Purgatory does. With this gross fear do you charge him, and
yet you think much I should endight you of the least wrong done unto him, yea
you would have me think, you owe to him more then half of your self, whose
head, heart, and tongue, are no more like his, then your go was like the sed the
Printer turned it unto, your conceit does not savor of his wit, nor your pen
of his learning, nor your Style of his modesty, nor your heart of his Fear of
God, and Reverence to the Church. This sentence of yours may suffice alone to
give any judicious Reader, to understand your opposition with S. August. and
how much reason I had to term your Letter Let. p. ^1.
unlearned, you laying together on an heap the points of Catholic doctrine
you mislike, whereof you think Purgatory the groundwork in this sort. 1.
Merits, 2. Satisfactions, 3. Perfections, 4. Supererogatio^s, 5. Masses, 6.
Vigills, 7. Superaltaries, 8. Nooneday Lamps, 9. Dirges, 10. Christening and
Burial Lamps, 11. Oblations, 12. Roodes, 13. Images, 14. Crosse-creepings,
15. Beads 16. Crucifixes, 17. Pictures, 18. Grains, 19. Incense, 20. Hollowed
Cemiteries, 21. Holywater, 22. Oil, 23. Salt, 24. Spittle, 25. Couents, 26.
Professions, 27. Pilgrimages, 28. Relics, 29. Stewish Pardons, 30.
Indulgences, this Riffraff, iuggling, trash, and Babies sports have not only
mutual reference, but fundamental dependence on Purgatory.

41. Is not this a learned enumeration and censure of the articles of our
faith? Can you imagine that any man of Judgment, will think your pen sober,
that went thus tumbling from one point to another, without any discretion or
order? Many of which doctrines by you related, I dare say have no more
connection with Purgatory, then has one part of your discourse with another,
which is, commonly, none at all. What has Salt, Oil, Spittle to do with
Purgatory? Or Beads, Crucifixes, Pictures, Relics, Images, Cross-creepings,
that they may be said to be built upon it? Though Purgatory should be
overthrown, I see not why the former things, as also Merits, Perfections,
Supererogations, Crosses, Vigills, Superaltaries, Noonday-lampes, Christning
and Buriall-tapers, might not remain, and be used as now they are. Much less
can I perceive any sobriety in terming the points of doctrine, which you set
down Riffraffe, Iuggling, Trash, and Babies sportes most of which I think you
dare not for shame, I am sure you cannot with truth, deny to have been most
expressly taught by S. Augustine, to omit the pregnant testimonies of other
ancient Fathers.

42. For to speak only of Meritts, which you set in the first place; Can you
deny, that S. Augustine taught our Catholic doctrine concerning this point?
does not he say, Epist. 105. ad Sixtum.
that as the wages due to sin is death, so the wages due to righteousness is
life eternal? And again: De morib. Eccles. c. 25.
the reward cannot go before Meritts, nor be given before a man be worthy
thereof. Yea L. 3. in Julian. c. 3.
, that God should be unjust, if he that is truly just, be not admitted into his
kingdom? Does, or can any Catholic speak more plainly then he does of
merits? And the same might be proved in most of the rest of the doctrines and
practices you score up for Iuggling tricks, and Babies sports, which had you
any mediocrity of knowledge in S. Augustine, you could not be ignorant that they
are his most express assertions. You desire me to naturalize Counters. p. 59.
your lines, which I dare say, if you are not bound unto some Minister for
them, may be, for S. Augustine, or any interest his learned sayings, or sweet
meditations may challenge in them, as free as the colt of the wild Ass Job. 11.
quasi pullu^ Onagri se liberu^ natum putat.
, which freedom you take to use wild phrases, saying, it is for servile
pens, such as mine is, to write in mood and figure, for you it is enough you
please your self.

p. 39.
43. But to return to our purpose, if S. Augustine be a glorious Saint, as you
say he is, in what a wretched and damnable estate are you, that impugn him, in
most points of the Faith, by which he attained unto glory? If he be an
euer-admired Doctor of Gods Church, does not your blasphemy deserve eternal
hatred, who make that doctrine the Devils, which he reaches to be Gods? Is
not Purgatories Victory over your lying Letter engraven in a Marble-piller,
seeing you cannot give that title to that Doctor, in whose learned works this
point of Catholic doctrine, in most clear and indeleble characters, is
indelebly written?

THE THIRD CHAPTER. THE Vanity of your Logical Cauills AT the Catholic
deduction of Purgatory, from the words of Christ, Matthew. 12. verse. 32.
THE Second Enemy which Purgatory has in your Letter, and which makes you a
mortal enemy to this Doctrine, is Let. to M. T. H. p. 26. and sequent.
a proud conceit of your learning, and of the Logic you got, haunting
Paruies in Oxford, by the principles whereof, you undertake to tripp up the
heels of Purgatory (to use your own phrase) standing upon the ground of
sacred Scripture. Christ in the twelfth of S. Matthew. verse. 32. says of Sin
against the holy Ghost, that it shall be forgiven Math. 12. verse. 32.
neither in this world, nor in the world to come: Whence Catholics infer, that
some kind of sins may be pardoned in the next world. For this text
conteyneth both a distinction of two sorts of sins, some Remissible others
Irremissible, and of two places where Remission may be had, namely this present
world, and the world to come: Signifying that some sins may be remitted in
the one place, some in the other, but Blasphemy against the Holy Ghost in
neither. Whence follows, seeing the next world is the time of Justice, that
God does not there remitt sins, without exacting and inflicting the due
punishment unto the Authors, which is the Purgatory the Catholic Church
does, and has ever taught.

2. This exposition noe sooner sounds in your ear, but your tongue waggeth
in this sort(c), I protest I thought as much, you have turned up Nodie, dic
sodes, deal plainly with your freindes, came this Card out of the Stock? Is
there any such clause in the text? Or any other express Scripture to justify
this assertion? A young Gamster may see, it is but a bad sequel. Here is old
packing, but I will discover you. Thus you did discourse, more like a Carpet
Knight, then a sober divine, showing more skill at Cards then of Scriptures.
But this Chapter, I make noe doubt, will discover your ridiculous vanity, and
make you feel the lumpish weight of your heauy-heeled pride, that your Logike,
whereof you bragg extremely, will be made a laughing stock even to children.

3. And first you cannot deny, but this our inference and exposition of the
foresaid place, is taught by five or six ancient and holy doctors, which that
p. 4. 5. 6.
Treatise cites; will your wisdom term them Nodies? S. Bernard the mirror
of learning and Sanctity in his age, Venerable Bede, the principal ornament of
our Nation, S. Isidore, the most eminent and ancient Doctor, and ouerthrower
of Arianisme in Spain? Shall these learned Fathers be put in the number of
Nodies? Shall one find such a doting Justice of Peace again in a Country, as
will cast such Doctors into stocks, or shut them up as you do in Bedlam?
Take heed, as Diogenes warned a wanton youth, least casting your reproaches
against heaven, De quibusdam leuibus culpis esse ante iudicium purgatorius
ignis credendus est, pro eo quod Veritas dicit, Si quis etc. In qua sente^tia
datur intelligi, quasdam culpas in hoc saeculo, quasdam in futuro posse laxari.
you strike not your own Father. If you be an English Christian, you cannot
deny S. Gregory to be your Father, by whose care, means, and industry the
English Nation was converted unto Christ, as in the sixth Chapter of this book
shall be proved.

4. Hear what he says: l. 4. Dial. c. 39.
We must believe, that for some light faults, there is a Purgatorie-fyre,
before the day of Judgment, because the Truth does say, If any shall utter
blasphemy against the holy Ghost, it shall not be forgiven, neither in this
world, nor in the world to come. In which saying we are given to understand,
that some sins may be forgiven in this world, and some in the next. For what
is denied of one, it is clear that consequently it is granted of the other.
Thus did thou write Blessed Saint, a thousand years ago, even when thy heart
was fullest of comfort for the Co^uersio^ of our Country. It would not a little
have alayd thy joy, had thou foreseen, that heresy in this unhappy age,
should bring back again that barbarous and blasphemous language, which thou
did banish by the Preachers thou sentest us. Perchance thou did then little
think, that one of that Nation, which in the bowels of thy charity thou
did above all other cherish, to bring them forth the children of God, should
presume and be permitted to term thy Expositions of Scriptures (though not
thine alone, but common to thee with other Fathers) Nodies! especially
containing that faith, which by the overthrow of Paganism, thou did plant in
this land! But Sir Edward, what think you of that Father, whom you named a
Marble Pillar, a glorious Saint the euer-admired Augustine, to whom owing more
then half your self, if you lay on his exposition the former reproach of
Noddie, you may justly be thought more then half out of your self.

5. Thus S. Augustine writes upon our place of Scripture; Neque enim de
quibusdam veraciter diceretur, quod non eis remittetur, neque in futuro, nisi
essent, quibus etsi no^ in isto tame^ remittetur in futuro Aug. l. 21. de
Ciuit. c. 24.
It could not be truly said of some men, that their sins should not be
forgiven in this world, nor in the world to come, unless there should be some
men, who though they are not pardoned in this world, yet they should be
pardoned in the world to come. So he* I confess that this Father is more bound
unto you then the rest, for you seek Let. p. 46, 47.
to exempt him (which you do not so much as attempt in their behalf) from the
company of Nodies, with a writ under Viues hand, that the aforecited words
are not in any our known coppies to be found, adding that not to do us wrong,
you will not suppress that Viues goes a stepp further, saying, Perhaps other
impressions have them, So that, say you, the Interpretation of S. Augustine, as
also that Fathers Iudgmen concerning Purgatory hangs on a weak thread upon
(forsan, Perhaps) which is as good as a new-nothing to hang upon your sleeue.
Thus you: here is old and new packing up of truths and untruths together,
which I will discover and make apparent, that some old Gamester, and new
Ghospeller has taught you his iugling tryckes.

6. First Viues Commentar. in illude. In antiquis libris Brugensi and
Coloniensi.
does not say, that the foresaid words are wanting in all our known Copies,
which Card you deal as his, but only in some ancient Manuscripts of Bruges
and Cullen, and in the latter Edition at Friburge, besides which many other
known Copies and Editions are to be found. Secondly he says, that in all
copies, these words are extant, Pro quibusdam defunctis etc. For some deceased
the Prayer either of the Church, or other particular pious Christians is heard,
but for such as being borne anew in Christ, Neque in exemplaribus Eriburgi
excusis.
their life in their body was neither so bad as they were unworthy, nor yet
altogether so perfect that they had noe need of such mercy. These words do
clearly contain our Catholic doctrine of Purgatory, which words Viues does
acknowledge to be S. Augustines, without any (forsan.) How then do you say,
that the judgment of this Father concerning Purgatory, hangs on a weak
thread in Viues judgment?

7. Thirdly Viues does indeed say, that the former exposition of S. Matthewes
words by me cited, is wanting in some Copies, but he adds; Tamen stylus non
abhorret ab Augustiniano, the style dissenteth not from S. Augustines style.
This is somewhat more then a mere Perhaps; yea the sole savor of so grave a
Fathers style, might have stopped your pen from reproaching the doctrine
thereof, especially with so foul a censure as Nody, had not the same been a
Snarler. Finally, says Viues, Either in other copies of S. Augustine, the
former words are found, or taken from some other work of this Father, they
were here inserted. Behold Viues does grant this exposition to be certainly
S. Augustines, without any perhaps, though he doubt whether he did repeat the
same in this place. And that S. Augustine in other places gives indeed our
exposition of the words, he is a mere stranger in his writings that will
deny. l. 21. c. 13.
For in this very book de Ciuitate Dei, not above ten Chapters before this,
thus he writteth, Temporal punishments, says he, some suffer in this life
only, some in the next, some both now and there, yet before the last most
rigorous day of doom. All that after death suffer temporal pain, do not
fall into eternal punishment, which after Judgment is for some. For to some,
what is not forgiven in this world, is forgiven in the world to come, that they
may not be afflicted with eternal torments. Thus he. Now is S. Augustine
doubtful either of Purgatory, or of the exposition of this place, for pardon
in the next world? Has this Doctor in his unfolding the words of Christ
turned up Nody? Or rather your Minister that dealt your Cards, using four
false and deceiptfull tricks, concerning this testimony of Viues, may he not
be thought to have turned up for you all the Nodies and Knaves in the bunch?

8. But this your gaming Metaphore is not so injurious to these Blessed
Saints, as it is blasphemous against the holy Ghost, whose thrice venerable
writings, did you reverence in your heart, more then the follies of your own
brain, your pen would have trembled, to have called that exposition Nody,
which so many grave Fathers, without the contradiction of any, do peremptorily
affirm to contain his meaning. What can be sacred and certain amongst
Christians, if an unlearned Knight may be permitted to deride that which the
most famous Deuines, and Fathers of former ages do deliver, as an undoubted
verity, and Gods infallible word? It is true, that Fathers, to prove this or
that Catholic verity, may sometimes bring places of Scripture, that have other
sense, yea perhaps the sense that one or other does give, may not be the best,
although the doctrine thereby proved be true, which is to err according to the
Analogy of the Place not of Faith. A distinction you understand not, yet when
many Fathers of the Church agree in the same exposition of Scripture, without
the Contradiction of any, the same is to be thought the undeniable sense of
that place. For which cause Calvin cannot be excused of heretical rashness:
Calvin comment. in c. 10. Io.
who dares expound this Text of Scripture Ego et Pater vnum sumus, I and the
Father are one, of unity of Consent and Will, not of nature* and substance
adding, that the Ancients did abuse the same, to prove the Consubstantiality of
the Son of God. Happily the text cannot be so strongly urged, but Caluin^
Arrianizing wit, may find some plausible evasion to escape the force thereof.
Yet seeing the uniform consents of Fathers, have canonized that meaning of the
words, he can not be a true Christian that will not (neither was Calvin that
did not) submit his Judgment thereunto. For the uniform consent of Fathers does
not require, that every one, none excepted, should expressly teach the same
doctrine (for then scarce in any point, could this uniform consent be proved,
seeing all write not of the same point) but it suffices, that many have taught
it in diverse ages, without contradiction of the rest, and such is the
exposition of this place for Purgatory and for the dead in the next world.
Neither is S. Chrysostomes exposition you brought Let. p. 41.
contrary unto this, that the sin against the holy Ghost, shall not be
forgiven in this world, nor in the world to come, that is, Non effugient
poenam, they shall surely be punished in this would, and in the world to come.
For first it is not sure and certain, that universally all such sinners are
punished in this world. Many times they flourish, prosper, and spend their whole
lives in great worldly ioylity, as diverse Persecutors, Sodomites, Apostata's
have done, which you name as sins irremissible, and call their Authors
Sinners in grain. Besides sin, never to be remitted; is more then to be
punished in this world, and in the next. For as you heard S. Augustine say,
some endure temporal punishments in this life only, and some in the next life
only, some in both, so that one may be punished both in this, and in the world
to come, and yet have his sin forgiven at last. The meaning then of S.
Chrysostom is, they shall be punished in this world without pardon, and in the
next likewise without remissiion. Whence it does follow, some may be punished
in the next, with Purgatory Clemency as Boaethius speaks. Lib. 4: praef. 4.
So that this exposition, as I said, though it be not taught expressly by every
Father, yet is it not contradicted by any. These things Sir you should
consider, before you speak: you should wipe away Tobacco smoke from your eyes
when a Card is turned up, before you cry Nody, least often, as now you have
done, you lay the foul Epithete on the holy Ghost, indeed that true King of
Hearts, who moved those Fathers to expound the words of Christ, for the
remission of sins in the world to come.

9. You oppose against our Catholic exposition, another devised by your self
or your Ministers, wherein you do greatly delight. You will grant sins
pardoned in the next world, and yet not yield one penny to our Purgatory box.
In this world, say you Let. page 50. 51.
sins are fully pardoned, quoad remissionis applicationem, by the application
of pardon unto them, and the self same sins may, and shall be pardoned in the
next, per remissionis promulgationem, by the proclamation of pardon. This
distinction you think is the p. 32.
five fingers, which you imagine will carry away the Set from the Fathers, yet I
dare say a man that has bin conversant in Scriptures will judge it no better
then Nody. First because it is a new devise not backed by the authority of any
Father, which therefore may justly be suspected. For Scriptures are to be
expounded, according to the traditions of our ancestors, not by our own
fancies, as the Goulden pair of Grecian Doctors Basil and Gregory did, who
durst never follow therein their own judgments, as Ruffinus (o) records:
neither would you, Scripturaru^ intelligentiam, non ex propria praesumptione,
sed ex maioru^ scriptis and authoritate sequebantur.
whose wit and learning is not to be paralelled with theirs, were you as humbly
conceited of your self, as you have cause. Secondly because you neither do nor
can bring any express testimony of Scripture to confirm this your new fancy,
nor any text, that may give the least color or probability unto it. You cite
the words of S. John, that the vnbelieuer is already condemned, yet say you, he
must come to a second doom: so is it with the belieuer. Albeit he has full
remission granted, c. 3. v 18
and his pardon sealed in this life, yet he must have the same proclaimed at
the general Goal-deliuery in the world to come, in which sense he may as truly
be said to have his sins pardoned, as the other, his condemned.

10. Thus you preach very learnedly as you think though God knows to little
purpose. For first you neither do, nor can tell, what is the first doom the
vnbelieuer undergoes, by which he is damned in this world, and after which he
must come to a second. The ancient Fathers expound that place, not that he is
indeed sentenced in this world, but is said to be condemned and judged, because
the cause of his condemnation is so clear, that no doubt or question can be
made of the sentence he shall receive More prophetico, quia certissima est no^
credentium damnatio, dicuntur iam iudicati. Aug. apud Toletum Annot. 27. in c.
3. Joan
. So we use to say of a Malefactor, whose crime is notorious, that he is a
condemned, or dead man, even before the execution and verdict of the Jury,
Sicut qui homicidium co^mittit, iam iudicatus dicitur, quia lege morti est
addictus. Chrysostom. in hunc locum.
were he not a Nody, that would thence infer that he must be tried twice, or die
two deaths? Yet you infer upon the same ground, that the vnbelieuer must pass
two doomes. Besides, if all sins must have double pardon, one in this world,
another in the next, why should not all sinners also have a double
condemnation, one in this world, another in the next? You seem indeed to grant
this sequel, but Christ seems expressly to contradict it, making it the
special cause of Infidells to be already condemned in this world, and not of
every sinner.

11. Thirdly you mistake your Card, and seem not to know the very principles
of Christian divinity, to wit, the true opposition betwixt the just and the
wicked, in the day of Judgment. For the difference is not, that the sins of
the one shall be pardoned, and not the sins of the other, as you dream, but
that the works of the just shall be rewarded, the deeds of the Infidels
punished, their faith shall receive a crown of Justice, the others Infidelity
an eternity of torments. That is not the day of Mercy but of Justice, 2. Tim.
4.
to give to every one according to his works, not to forgive any man his
Matthew. 16.
wicked works. That shall not be the General Goal delivery, as you surmise, but
rather the^ shall be the general filling of the Goal, with all sinners, to be
locked up in misery everlasting. But the Pardon which the sinners in this life
got of their sins, by their hearty penance, through the merits of Christ
shall be then proclaimed; I grant it: but that shall be the proclamation of Pardon
they have already gotten, not new getting of Pardon. Neither may it be termed a
Pardon, but rather a triu^ph and victory over sin. If the bare Proclamation
of Pardon, may be termed Pardon, I see not why the Proclamation of Baptism may
not be called Baptism; so that by this yr se^sles phrase, one might say, yt ye
Saints shall be baptized and washed from their sins at the day of Judgment,
because their Baptism and sanctification shall be there proclaimed.

12. Some may object, that one absolved in the Court of Conscience may
afterward be pardoned in the exterior Court, by undergoing public penance
and humiliation in the face of the Church, for a sin already forgiven: I
answer, those sins were not fully forgiven, the penalty of this disgrace
being still reserved. But the sins of the Just, before the day of doom are
fully pardoned; noe penalty of disgrace or other pain is reserved; they are
purged in this life or in the next, that they may be unspotted without wrinckle
of the least sin or guilt, at that day appearing. They shall not then appear
as humble penitents, which were requisite, did they expect pardon; but as
triumphers, as sitting in Judgment upon sinners, and as punishers of the
wicked, not as needing any further remission of sin themselves. So that your
exposition crosses the whole course of Scripture not having any congruity with
the phrase thereof.

13. As for the former exposition, to the end you may the better conceive your
precipitation in your censuring it as Nody, and the force of our argument may
more appear, I will particulerly examine your cauills as the former deduction,
and the many windinges and turnings your Ministers have taught you, to elude
the force of Christ's words. Your first assault is by examples: A Kentish
Gentlman, say you Let. p. 33.
, who not purposing to make his heir a great Clark, says, This my eldest
son shall never be student in Oxford or Cambridg: were he not an excellent
Arteist that should thence infer, ergo, some of his sons shall go to
Cambridg? Or if he should say, as without ridiculous absurdity he may, my
son shall neither be Scholar in Eaton, or fellow in Kings-colledg, were he
not out of his wits, that would here conclude, ergo, a man may be fellow of
Kings-colledg, that was never Scholar of Eaton, that being against the first
foundation? These are your goodly instances, by which you would conclude, that
the Fathers expounding the words of Christ as we do, were out of their wits.
Where you do show your self such an excellent Arteist, that you bring
examples that make against your purpose, as shall appear. For your Kentish
Gentleman's speech, that his eldest son shall not be student in Oxford or
Cambridg, nor scholar in Eaton, nor fellow of Kings-colledg, though it do not
import, that either his second, or third, or fourth Son shall be student in
Cambridg, or fellow of Kings-colledg: yet this does follow (except his speech
be ridiculously absurd) that some youths may, and use to be students in
Cambridg, some men fellows of Kings-colledg, else it were foolish to make that
special exception against his first Son, which is general unto all other
men's children.

14. This will appear by other examples. Should this Gentleman say; My eldest
son shall not be a University scholar neither in Oxford, nor in
Queene-burrow Castle, were not his speech absurd? Why I pray you, but because
Quee^-burrow is no University? Should he say, my son shall not be scholar in
Eaton nor Pope in Christ's College, who would not laugh at his speech? The
reason is, because the fellows of that College are not Popes. Should he say,
my son shall not learn his Grammar in Eaton, nor in Oxford, might not one
gather (unless his speech be senseless) that some use, or may learn their
Grammar in Oxford? Now to our purpose and place of Scripture: These examples
show that except there be some remission of sins in the world to come, the
speech of Christ should be senseless, and absurd against one sin, that it
shall be remitted, neither in this world nor in the next, except some sins
may be remitted in the world to come. For he should seem to make, not
remission in the world to come, a special circumstance of this one sin,
which were a general circumstance of all, and every one, if your doctrine be
true; by which it is no more, that a sin be remitted neither in this world
nor in the next, then merely not to be forgiven in this world. So that the
particle nor in the world to come were idle, without sense, which may not be
thought of the world of Wisdom. Wherefore to make the speech of Christ
discreet and wise, we must needs grant, that some sins are pardoned in the
world to come.

15. Whence we further infer, that those sins were not fully and perfectly
pardoned in this life. For the sins that were wholly pardoned in this life,
need no remission in the next, and if any be remitted in the next, such they
are, as were not, at least fully pardoned in this. And this is the difference
betwixt being a Scholar in Eaton, and a fellow in Christs-Colledg, and
Remission of sin in this world, and Pardon thereof in the next; because to be
a scholar in Eaton does not repugne with being afterward fellow of
Christs-Colledg; whereas full Remission of sin in this life, does not agree
with Remission in the next. For how shall that be truly forgiven, that is wholly
forgiven before? So that, though one may not infer he was fellow of
Christs-Colledg, ergo he was not before Scholar in Eaton, yet we may and must
infer, this sin is remitted in the next world, ergo the same was not
formally, fully, and perfectly forgiven in this present life. Thus your own
examples discover your ignorance, thus you are hampered in your own snare.

16. No less vain is your other logical assault, where you think you put us
to a plunge, by returning our Paralogisme as you term it upon us. Thus you
dispute. Let. p. 34.
The sin of the Holy Ghost shall never be remitted, quoad poenam aut quoad
culpam, in this world, nor in the world to come, which is (say you) repugnant
to the position of our own sect, recorded by Suarez, whose words you cite
Tom. 4. d. 45.. ^. p. ^57.
. Thus you return arguments as children use to do stones they are not able
well to lift, which they let fall on there head or foot. First it is not
against the doctrine of our Church, that some sins are forgiven in the world
to come and quoad Culpam and Poenam, both according to the guilt of sin, and
according to the guilt of pain, yea Catholic Deuines commonly teach, that
venial sins are remitted in the next world according to both guilts, namely
Suarez in that very place you cited, though of mortal sins he says, that
remissio mortalium, the remission of mortal sin in the next world, cannot be
understood, quoad Culpam, according to the sin, but only quoad poenam,
according to some penalty due to it. Behold how well you understand the
Authors you name. You had great reason, doubtless, to say, that you
understand the most artificial conueiance of the best of our works, Counters.
p. 58.
who cannot read, without mistaking, six lines of a Scholasticall Author.

17. Secondly your Retortion is of no force against that Position, did we hold
it. For out of the former text of Scripture, is gathered clerly, that some
sins are remitted in the world to come, but what those sins be, venial or
mortal, likewise the manner of the pardon, whether it be according to the
sin or penalty only, or both, cannot hence be proved, but out of other
passages of Gods word these verities are to be searched. To make this clear by
your example; Should your Gentleman say, my son shall go to school either
at Eaton or Oxford, one may infer, that in either of these places, some kind
of learning is taught, but not that Grammar is taught in Oxford and Logik in
Eaton, or e contra. Should a young gentleman say, that he will neither study
in the Innes of Court, nor in the Universities, one may infer, except the
speech be senseless, that in both places studies are professed, but he that
would infer, that common law is studied in Oxford, or divinity professed in
London, were he not absurd? So likewise the speech of Christ does only
signify in general Remission in the world to come, not distinctly explicate
the manner thereof, nor the quality of the sins that are there purged.

17. Feign would you find some Parallel in Scripture to this speech of our
Savior, that may seem no less senseless and idle, then is this sensed in
your manner. For want of better you bring that speech of S. Matthew, c. 1.
concerning Joseph, that he knew her not, until she had brought forth her
firstborn Son. If out of this place (say you) Let. page 39.
we should come upon you, ergo, he knew her after she had borne him, you would
think that Blessed and holy Virgin most irreco^pe^sably disparaged, and yet
(...) seems to imply the same. Thus you discourse, thinking this heretical
and Heluidian inference, not unlike to that of the Fathers, we stand upon. Yea,
say you, Non ouum ouo similius, one egg is not more like another* But if ever I
be so happy as to be at your table to which you seem to inuit me, I should be
loath you be my caruer, you are so apt to mistake and confound things which do
mainly differ, as I might easily have a Scorpion laid on my trencher instead of
an Egg. The speech you bring out of S. Matthew, He knew her not until she had
brought forth her firstborn Son, does only express a truth, that Joseph
did not know the Virgin till that time, neither is any thing wanting or
superfluous in this speech, but in the other speech, this sin shall be
fo^rgiuen neither in this world, nor in the world to come, the last clause
thereof is superfluous and senseless, signifying no more then the former if
there be no remission in the world to come, as has been proved.

19. Moreover the denial of some action, until a certain time, does not
imply any necessary consequence thereof afterward, which may be proved by
familiar examples in our common speech, As if one say, he never yielded unto
sin til death, it is co^seque^t that after death he yielded unto sin. The
same may be showed in a thousand places of Scripture. God the Father says to
Christ, Sit on my right hand until I make thine enemies a foote-stoole to thy
feet Psalm. 109.
, when this is done, shall Christ loose his seat at his Fathers right hand?
Noe. So his Mother, that was untouched until she brought him forth, ceased not
to be a Virgin after her Childbirth. Now noe example can be brought out of the
Scripture, of a speech distinctiue, that is, that has two parts or members,
where one of those particles is idle, the second part implying noe more then
the first. Neither does common sense or discretion, practice, or allow, such
senseles prattling, which may yet be further confirmed by diverse examples, but
one other shall suffice by which any judicious Reader will easily perceive a
maine difference betwixt the Heluidian inference and Catholic deductio^ from
Scripture. What think you, Sir Edward, of this speech? The Virgin never
committed mortal sin from the first moment of her life, until the very last
thereof; does this speech sound vncouthly in a Christian ear? Shall one infer
Ergo after life she committed mortal sin, were not such an inference
ridiculous and absurd? you see then that (...), until, does not imply
consequence of the action afterward. Now should one say of the blessed Mother,
she never committed sin either in this life or after her death, would not
this speech seem to a Judicious hearer absurd? Might not one think the last
clause thereof senseles, except sin may be committed in the next world? I
appeal to the Judgment of any Christian ear, whether there be not a maine
difference betwixt those two kind of speeches, which you would have like. So
that still on your head does light, the scornful Epithete wherewith you
reject the Fathers judicious inference out of our Saviors sentence

20. Yet you have one shift more, which is a rule of logic, whereof you write
in this sort: Let. p. 33. 34.
I am sure it was a rule when I first haunted Paruies, Quod de vno negatur, non
semper de diuersis affirmatur, and e contra. My reason, say you, is, Potest
idem praedicatum de diuersis subiectis praedicari, as thus, Eos qui foris sunt
Deus iudicabit, and this is true: eos qui foris sunt iudicabit Deus, when
subiectum does differ, the praedicatum being all one. Neither may we argue
thus: They are to be judged of God. Ergo, not by the Magistrate; and yet you
stick not to say, This sin is not remitted in this world, nor in the next
world, ergo, some sins shall be forgiven in the next. Thus you talk like a
great Doctor, when you have an ignorant Reader, though any man that has the
least skill in Logic does se you have turned up a notorious Nody. For is he not
a Nody-Logician and a young gamster in that art, that cannot distinguish
betwixt Praedicatum and Subiectum, but takes the one for the other? I am sure,
one that had studied logic but three days, would not have committed such a
gross error as you do, who bragg Let. p. 6
of being a Master of Art, and Seniour of the Act, Absit, say you, inuidia
verbo. Truly some fool may percha^ce envy the word, or Title of Seniour or
Master of Arts, but the logic to which that title was given, I cannot think
an object of envy, you so childishly err in the first principles thereof.

12. For the Praedicatum in your two propositio^s, is not the same, the subject
being different as you say, but the contrary, to wit, two different
Praedicates are spoken of the same Subject, Praedicatum is the thing which is
spoken, Subiectum that whereof that thing is spoken. Who does not se, that in
these propositions the thing spoken is Judge of those without, Judge of those
within, which are diverse titles, praedicates or properties, the thing of which,
that is spoken, is God, one and the self same Subject, on whom both these
titles light. And seeing Subiectum in a speech is that which goes before the
verb Praedicatum, that which follows, the Boys of Eaton may serve to laugh
you out of your witless bragging that you can break tall men's heads with
your Logic. I shall not need for this exployte to muster an Army of English,
both horse and foot, as you do p. 37. Angligenae attollant equites, peditesque
cachinnum.
to laugh against me, pardoning them before hand, though they laugh without
Modesty, because I did warn you by the way not to read Lipsius of the miracles
of our Blessed Lady and other Catholic books, as you did insinuate your
custom was, taking Tobacco and rosting crabbes by the fire side: which
admonition, whether it were ridiculous or no, and not rather necessary, I remit
it to the Judgment of them that best knew your humors. This I say, had you
observed, perchance you would not have impugned our Catholic exposition in the
manner you have done, to your shame, your pride falling into more then childish
Ignorance, when you are prankest in the dirision of the holy Fathers. Perchance
in Oxford, you spent not so much time in haunting Paruies, as in hunting in
Parkes, or houering at Larkes, which Idleness were not so intolerable a fault,
in one borne to such land as you were, did not your Arrogancy exceed your
ignorance, employing your small learning against their religion whose living
you enjoy, except your family be as very an vpstart as your Faith.

22. Your logical rule (though the examples wherewith you declare it to be
childish) we deny not to be true, that, what is denied of one thing, is not
therefore said of another. So by rigor of Logic it does not follow, that
Remission of sin in the next world is granted of some sins, when it is
denied unto one kind of sins, yet does the same follow by the Rules of
Prudency, because otherwise such a speech, though not false, yet should be
idle, and sensles against rules of wisdom. And seeing it is most certain that
no sensles or idle word could proceed from the mouth of our Savior, we
conclude necessarily, that the second clause of the former speech, has some
sense, which cannot be, as has been showed, without remission of sins in the
next world. Many speeches are not against Logic, though a grave Author will
not use them. Your example to illustrate the matter, that Let. p. 38.
a Master shall not read you a Lecture, nor quick, nor dead, though it be not
against the Logic you got in Paruies, yet would it not beseem the mouth of
wisdom: to me it seems a spice of blasphemy, for you to bring your phrases,
which you Counters: p. 39.
confess are neither in mood nor figure, to declare the speech of Christ,
whose words are, in number, weight, and measure.

23. Strange conclusions might we deduce from your speech, did we not think
that their author might be subject to folly, jesting at the Miracles of the
Virgin, of John Swickius, who had his Nose struck of with a bullet, for
playing with the Virgins nose; you say Let. p. 101.
, that he lost the best nose of his face. Had a grave writer used that speech,
I might have suspected that Swickius had more noses then one, but knowing you
to be the author thereof, I can think you might be as ignorant in the number
of his noses, as you are of the biggnesse of your own, who tell us as a great
wonder, that when you take Tobacco, Counters. p. 39.
your nose does not smoke so much as your chimey. Should one have said of
Swickius, after that stroke, that he had on his face, neither nose of flesh nor
wax, I see not what sin he should have committed against Logic: yet I
think, except some men use to have noses of wax, he should have missed the
mark of grave and discret speech. This the wisdom of God could not miss;
wherefore that must needs be the meaning of his words, which taken away,
leaves them in an empty sound, void of grave and full sense.

24. Rather then take to your self the Nody you laid on our expositions; you
seem in a manner to grant all, to wit, that the speech of Christ was indeed
senseless, wherein you would feign have Maldonate join with you Let. p. 38.
: you cite him upon a sentence of Christ, saying in this sort: Haec oration
hominibus absurda videtur, qui non intelligunt; Maldonatus sup. Matthew. 19.14.
this speech seems absurd to those that understand it not: why then, say you,
should this prouerbiall amplification sound so vncouthly in your ears? you
would be loath I should serve you with a Non intelligis, under Maldonates
seal. But Sir, I must by your leave, serve you with Non inuenis, under the
seal of truth. Do you consider, whether you may not serve your Minister, out
of whose Note-bookes you copy these falsehoods, with a Mentiris. Maldonats true
words upon the sentence of Christ, Matthew. 29.24.
that it is easer for a camel to pass through a needells eye, then a rich man
to enter in to the kingdom of heaven, are these: Absurditas, says he, vt
videbatur, aut potius admirabilitas huius sententiae in causa fuit, vt quidam
Cameli nomine nauticum funem, quo Anchorae alligantur, intelligerent. The
absurdity as it seems, or rather the admirabilytie of this doctrine, caused
some interpret Camelum, a Cable rope by which ships ride at Anchor: Which
words of Maldonatus, make not for you but rather against you. We deny not but
the doctrine of Christ and his speech, may seem absurd to carnal men, by
occasion of the height and admirability of his doctrine, which the capacity of
humayne understanding reaches not unto, as Maldonatus says; but that the
speech and words of divine wisdom should indeed be absurd for want of sense
or mystery contained in them, that he should express a truth in a disiu^ctiue
speech, one clause whereof is senseles, which no wise and grave man uses to
do; this absurdity I say and superfluity of speech, we take it a great
blasphemy in you to suspect in the doctrine of Christ.

25. Hence is answered the Question you make p. 27.
: It was an old proverb, say you, when I went to school, Veritas non quaerit
angulos; How comes it to pass, that S. c. 3, 29.
Marks exposition, to wit, that the sin against the holy ghost shall never
be remitted, is such a mote in your eyes, that you are gauled to the quick,
that he should decide the question? To this I reply, with another question, how
comes it to pass that the text of S. Matthew being larger in words then
that of S. Mark, is such a beam in your eye, that you would have the same
broken in pieces till it be no greater then S. Marks mote? The reason is I
fear, because the partition of Eternity into this world, and of the world to
come, to be two places for remission of sins, is a pair of spectacles,
through which you must needs see Purgatory, except you wilfully shut your
eyes. Is not this quaerere angulos, to seek corners, to leave the open field
of S. Matthewes larger sentence, seeking a Commentary in S. Mark, more retired
and concise speech. Seeing S. Matthew is more diffuse in words, we do him
wrong denying them a more copious sense when they may bear it. S. Matthew
deuideth what S. Mark confounds in one: the two parts of eternity which in
S. Matthew are manifest, in S. Mark are hidden; how then can S. Mark be
thought an expositor of S. Matthew, who fouldeth up, what the other lays open?

26. I hope Sir you perceive this Catholic exposition of Christ's words, or
deduction of Purgatory from them, is in it self most suitable with the wisdom
of so grave an Author, specially backed with the authority of so many worthy
Fathers, expounding them with us, against your men's fancy. If S. Augustine
changed l. 6* cont. Iul. c. 11. vel. 23. and l. 1. retract. c. 23.
his exposition of a passage of S. Paul, which he had constantly taught before,
because he perceived the same was against S. Hilary, Gregory, Sanctos, notosque
Doctores.
Ambrose, and other holy and known Doctors of the Church, Melioribus, says
that euer-admired doctor, and intelligentioribus cessi. I yielded unto those
that were better and more intelligent then my self. How dare you so
peremptorily presume upon your new devised exposition, contradicted by many,
not warranted by any ancient Father? How did you not fear to lay upon an
exposition received generally for many ages in the Church, the title of Nody,
yea to say, that the same is backed by noe exemplar proof besides Hobgoblins
let. p. 42.
?

27. What S. Augustine said unto Julian the Pelagian, who branded the doctrine
of original sin with the title of a Manichean fable, may be retorted upon
you, that disgrace Purgatory with the style of Satanicall figment. Having
brought six or seven Fathers for that point of Catholic doctrine, he
concludes in this sort, saying unto him: l. 1. con. Iulia. c. 2. vel 4.
finding you in your writings non antelucano conuiuio temulentum, sed insano
conuitio turbulentum, not so much tipled with wine taken next your heart, as
distempered with senseless railing against truth, I have not brought you into
Zenocrates school, where drunken Polemo was made sober, but have summoned you
unto the quiet and venerable assembly of holy Fathers. Sanctorum Patru^
pacificum honorandumque consessum.
Let not my labor be lost, behold them that look on you, who sweetly and
gently look on you: what son are we, Maniches? are we Hobgoblings or Nodies?
What can you answer? What eyes will you lift up against them? You will say you
did accuse none of them by name of this error. But what will you do when they
shall answer, we had rather your railing teeth should tear our name, then our
faith, by the merit whereof of our names are written in heaven? What sillogismes
will you frame? What will Aristotle's logic avayle you, wherein you would
feign show your self skillful that you may seem an artificial disputer
against us? Will you dare to draw your blade of brass, the leaden poyniards
of your arguments Tuoru^ argumentorum vitrea acies vel plumbei pugiones.
in their presence? What weapons will not tremble, and sheuering for fear,
fall out of your hands Quae abs te, arma non fugient nudumque destitue^t.
, dauntted with the majesty of so grave a Senate? Thus S. Augustine.

THE FOVRTH CHAPTER. THE CHVRCHES PERPETVALL TRADITION to pray for Saints in
Purgatory in the next life. WHERE your i^sts against the Churches Authorities,
and Scriptures, against this Tradition, are answered.
THAT short and pithy Treatise, which you sought to disgrace with froathy
lines, alleged l. 1. p. 1. c. 1.. 4.
for Purgatory the custom of the Church to pray for the dead, and their
relief in the holy Sacrifice of the Altar; which custom he proves was
perpetual even from the blessed Apostles. S. Cyril Archbishop of Jerusalem
living in Constantine the Great his time, writes of that practice in this sort
Cathec. mystag. 5.
. When we offer up sacrifice, we pray for our deceased Fathers and Bishops, and
finally for all men departed amongst us, for we believe that this is a great
help for the souls of them, in whose behalf we offer that holy and fearful
sacrifice, which is laid upon the Altar. S. Chrysostom hom. 79. ad populum
Antiochenum.
says as much, that it was not unadvisedly decreed by the Apostles that in the
fearful Mysteries, there should be a commemoration of the dead, for they knew
the dead received great benifite and vtility thereby. But most clearly S.
Augustine, Sermon. 42. de verbis Apostol.
There is no doubt (says he) but that by the prayers of holy Church, and by
the healthful Sacrifice, and by alms, the souls of the deceased are
released, that God may deal more mercifully with them, then their sins have
deserved: for this, being delivered by our Fathers, the universal Church does
observe.

2. Behold prayer for the relief of the dead, received from the Blessed
Fathers and Apostles, practiced by the universal Church, in that her most
flourishing age, whose authority to impeach, is the badge of heresy, whose
custom to condemn, is insole^t madness. What say you to this Argument Sir
Edward? Sometimes you labor to prove, that this was not an Apostolical
Tradition, nor a perpetual and universal custom of the Church, you bring
page 76. 77.
argument upon argument, five or six one upon the back of another, which it
were lost time to set down For when your swelling and pregnant Mountains come
to their Childbirth, they are delivered of a feely mouse* the force of your
argument consisting in this testimony of Polydore Virgil; that, Purgatorium
aliquando incognitum fuit, and sero cognitu^ Ecclesiae vniuersae, it was a
great while before Purgatory was hard of, and but of late known to the
universal Church: I know I might pose you to find, nay sure I am you cannot
find those words in Polydore. A sign that when you conceive your noble and
worthy lines, you have Ministers note-bookes before you, which is the cause
they are so false and foul, rather resembling a Minister then a Knight, some
of that crew, as it may seem, had summed the substance as he thought of
Polydors discourses in that place you cite De invent l. 8. c. 1.
, which sum you tra^scribe into your Letter as Polydors own words, though
Polydore, in truth, speaks not one word of his own, concerning Purgatory,
but merely relates of Roffensis, whom you also bring; such is your beggary,
making two distinct Authors of one.

3. Roffensis then must bear the brunt of this battle, whom you quote page
77.
, saying, that the Greeks knew not Purgatory unto this day. Nay further he
propounds this challenge, Read he that list the ancient Greeks commentaries,
and he shall find either little or no mention at all of Purgatory. But in this
your English Edition you omit that which you have in your latin Original,
Quantum opinor, as I now think or guess says that Bishop, which is less then
a new nothing to hang on your sleeue. For though Roffenfis at that time art.
18. aduersus Luth.
had such a thought, not having then so fully perused the Grecian Fathers, yet
afterward in that very book, when he comes to speak of Purgatory art. 38.
, he does affirm the contrary in express terms. Whereas Luther did object
Graeca Ecclesiae Purgatorium non credit manens Catholica.
, that the Greek Church did not believe Purgatory, he makes this answer: I
take it you mean the vulgar multitude of that Nation, not the Fathers of the
Grecian Church, for that the Grecian Fathers favor Purgatory, the works they
left behind them do witness, then he brings diverse authorities in proof of
his Assertion. And again Luther obiecting, that Purgatory could not be proved
out of Scripture, he does reply, that to pray for souls in Purgatory is a
most ancient custom of the Church, adding Cum Purgatorium a to^ patribus tam
Graecis quam latinis affirmetur. art. 38. circa principium.
, that seeing so many Fathers both Greek and Latin aver Purgatory, it is not
likly, but that truth was made known unto them, by sufficient proofs out of
Scripture. Behold the swelling waves of your Syllogismes, which occupy a whole
page of your book, now are ended in froath in a silly surmise of Roffensis,
which upon mature and exact perusal of the ancient Fathers, he does himself
peremptorily gainsay.

4. But put case Polydore Virgil or Roffensis had said what you desire, could
his words way down in any judicious balance S. Augustines contrary assertion?
Especially about the custom of the Church in that age, wherein this glorious
Saint lived? S. Augustine against Polydors, or rather your Ministers Sero, that
Purgatory is but of late, he has a Patrihus traditum, that it is delivered
from our Fathers, which Fathers S. Chrysostom declares to have been the
Apostles: against the emphasis of non vniuersae, not the universal; he has
the contradictory, vniuersa obseruat Ecclesia, the whole universal Church does
practice prayer for the relief of some dead. Now you have the whole army of the
Christian Church in all ages set in battle array against you, the blessed
Apostles with Pykes (as I may say) of divine Authority standing in the
forefront. You say Counters. p. 24.
the Apostles long since lent you a bridle to curb the motions of swelling
pride, Si quis se existmet scire aliquid, nondum cognouit quemadmodum oporteat
eum scire. This bit of sobriety, if you had it ever in your mouth, it may seem
that wine has washed it down, so tamquam equus sine intellectu, you run
against this glorious army. You give a double assault; one with Iestes and
Scoffs, deriding Catholics for the reverence they bear unto the Churches
authority. Secondly you bring places of Scriptures, which to your fancy seem
to condeme Purgatory, and the custom to pray for the relief of the deseased.
First you begin (u) to jest at the saying of that Treatise, that it is insolent
madness to contradict in this sort the custom of the Church, pulchre dictum
(say you) this is your Ladies A. B. C. the Church is as much beholding to you,
as was Pythagoras to his Scholars; instead of ipse dixit, you will have ipsa
dixit. Thus you write. And truly from such a Poet as your self, what could we
expect but such irreligious iestes; who perchance take your pen to write about
Theological questions, when you are in the same case, your Father Enuius ever
was, when he set himself to make Heroical verses.

5. For what man that has any bit either of Divinity in his head, or
Christianity in his heart, or Sobryetie in his tongue, would have accused
Catholics, for esteeming the Ipsa dixit of the Church, as much as the
Pythagorians did the Ipse dixit of their Master? Why should not this Ipsa, the
Mother of Christians, the Spousesse of the Holy Ghost, this Pillar and
Foundation of truth, this daughter of God the Father, washed with the blood of
his son, that she might in her doctrine have no blemish of error; Why should
not her word (I say) be more esteemed of by her children, then the saying of
Pythagoras a Pagan Philosopher was with his Scholars? I perceive you do love,
more then believe the Feminine Gender, perchance you suspect in the Church, the
fault you lay upon that Sex, Counters. p. 52.
with some ryme, let them say with what reason Mulier nihil scit, nisi quod
ipsa cupit. This makes you loath to submit your Judgment unto Ipsa dixit. But
you may be sure that the Dixit, or Saying of the Church, is never vt maneat
vobi cum in aeternu^. Joan. 14.
without the dixit of Gods spirit her Master. She has the warrant of her
Spouse, that he will make her words good, he that hears you, hears me, Luc
10.
to which her Commission he subscribeth with a dreadful Curse, He that hears
not the Church, let him be to thee as an Heathen Luc. 18.
. Oh what glorious Fathers and Doctors could I name, famous in former ages for
Sanctity and learning, that submitted their Judgment to the sayings of the
Church! put their fingers to their mouth, when she did gainsay that they
thought true, prostrating their learned penns to be ever at the devotion of her
Censure? How highly did they esteem her Dixit, her Judgment, her Word! Let S.
Augustine speak de Baptis. cont. Donatist. l. 17. c. 33. vel. 53.
: I dare with the conscience of a secure voice, affirm (says he) what in the
Government of our Lord Jesus Christ is established by consent of the universal
Church. And again de Baptism. co^t. Donatist. l. 4. c. 6*
, If he say something, that does say, We follow what we receive from the
Apostles; how much more strongly do we say, we follow that which the Church did
ever hold, what no disputation could overthrow, Contra epist. Fundam. l. 5.
what a General or plenarie Council has defined. Thus S. Augustine: do you
see, what a Pythagorean Dixit, what uncontrollable Authority he grants to
the Church?

6. As little Judgment or Piety do you show in your jest at the Ladies A. B. C,
as though the authority of the Church were not the Alphabet and
Christ-Crosse-Row, in which all Christians ought, and all ancient Christians
did learn to read and believe the Scriptures. The forenamed S. Augustine, the
Phoenix of wits, the Mirour of learning, did he not learn in this book, Ego
vero (says he) Euangelio non crederem, nisi me Ecclesiae commoueret
Auctoritas? Truly I would not believe the Gospel, did not the Churches
authority move me unto it. Why should any Lady or Lord, Master of Arts, or
Doctor, disdain to spell the Gospel of Christ, by the same letters, such
learning and sanctity used.

8. Shall I tell you, your protestant Ladies Has linguas qui nesciunt and saepe
and necessario hallucinantur. Whitaker. de sacra scriptura. page 523.
A. B. C? For the old Testament those Hebrew Characters, now you begin to
learn Counters. p. 7.
and the Greek letters for the new, which if they be ignorant of, I assure
them according to your Nullu^ nos editionem nisi Haebraicu^ in vetere, and
Graeca^ in nouo Testame^to authenticam facimus. Whitaker. controu. 1. q. 2. p.
128.
Churches Principles, they cannot read so much as a syllable, that they may be
certain is Scripture. They may read the English translation, you will say,
that is Scripture. I deny the same to be Scripture except it be conformable to
the Original, whereof those have no means to be sure, that cannot read, nor
understand the two aforenamed learned tongues, in which they were primarily
written. If you say they must believe it, upon the word of your Church Multi
nesciunt literas and tame^fide^sana^ retinent expraedicatione pastorum. Whitak.
de sacra scriptura. p. 588.
you bring them back unto ipsa dixit, and make them read the letters of
Christianity in your Ministers horn book. Were it not better to stick to the
Catholic Ladies A. B. C. that fair Christs-Crosse row, which our famous
ancestors did learn? Cleave to the authority of that Church, which begun in
the Apostles, by perpetual Succession of Bishops, is derived unto this age?
Illam Scriptura^ dicis non esse quam esse dicit vniuersa Ecclesia ab
Apostolicis sedibus vsque ad praesentes Episcopos certa successione perducta.
l. 28. cont. Faust. c. 2.


8. But suppose one would be scholar to your Church, has she so much skill or
any warrant not to err, as we may be sure she will not teach us amiss? Your
selves say The whole militant Church may err, as every part thereof. Fulke in
his answer to a Counterfayte Cath. p. 86.
that she may err, and teach us damnable doctrine. For which, when at the day
of judgment we shall be called to account to say our lessons, we may be laughed
to skorne, loose the eternal reward, and be punished for ever. As it is
insolent madness, to contradict the custom of the true Church August. Epist.
118. ad Ianuarium.
so is it desperate madness, to follow the directions of such a Church, which
though we religiously believe, exactly observe even unto death, yet may we be
perpetually damned. But the Ladies of your Church learn forsooth of the
spirit, they trust to Ipse dixit, who will teach them which is the Scripture.
They are the sheep of Christ and know his voice, from that of strangers. These
are your Ministers fair promises, yet I dare give them my word, though they
have the best spirit that ever possessed any man of your Church;
notwithstanding they may err damnably, mistake Scripture, think that to be
true translation, which is indeed erroneous. Had not Luther the first fruits
of the Protestants spirit? yet he erred most grossly; that even Zwinglius his
fellow-witnes against the Pope, does give this testimony against him, tom. 2.
l. de sacrament. p. 412.
Thou Luther do corrupt the word of God, thou art seen to be a manifest
corrupter of the holy Scriptures.

9. What translation or spirit of your Church may your Ladies trust, if Luther
be so corrupt, as this your faithful witness does depose? I see no remedy for
them, if they mean to be saved from the deluge of errors, but to fly to your
Ark of Noah printed at Venice, Counters. p. 8.
wherein you were shipped when my book came to your hands; your sheep must
learn in an hebrew grammar to understand their pastors; they must nibble on
those roots of Jury which you, who have tasted of them, compare to the fyery
thunderbolts in Gelons belly, wherewith it would be great pity that your rare
creaturs should be troubled. And if this Arca cannot save them, nor assure
them, which is truly translated Scripture, let them fly to the true Ark of Noah, the Caholike Church, to which Luther did foresee, his turbule^t spirit,
raising discord amongst Christians, would force them that truly desire to be
saved, finally to fly to, for rest. lib. de veritate Corpor. Christi contra
Zwingliu^
If, says he, the world continue long, the multitude of interpretations will
force us to receive again the decrees of Counsels, and to fly unto them to
conserve unity of Faith.

10. This is the Felicity of Catholic Ladies, to be already shipped in this
Arc, that by the word of the Church, they know certainly, which is the
letter of Scripture, which your Ladies like stray-sheep must seek on the top of
craggy Mountains, as you term Counters. p. 7.
the hebrew language, not without eminent danger of an eternal downfall,
loosing therein time, they might have better spent in works of charity, prayer,
and service of God. And put case which is morally impossible, they find out
assuredly the true Hebrew roots, the true text of Scripture, yet would they be
as much to seek, to spel and put the leters together, to make the true sense.
What confusion is known to be in your Church, concerning this point, that as
Irenaeus noted l. 1. c. 5. Cum fint duo veltres deijsdem eadem non dicunt.
of ancient heretics, one shall searse find two, that will spell the same
sense out of the same words. These four words, Hoc est corpus meum, this is
my body, containing not above fourteen letters, you have devised above
fourtimes forty expositions 200. expositions of those four words printed ann.
1577. apud Bell. de Euchar. l. 1. c. 8.
, so different, as the Authors of the one, damn the favorers of the other to
Hell. What shall your poor Ladies do in this combat? they may rashly persuade
thmselues, that this or that exposition is the best, but certain of any thing
they can never be, till they admit the Catholic Ladies A. B. C. the Churches
authority, learning of her the sense of whom they took the text.

11. But you go on with your scoffs, Me thinks say you Let. p. 67.
I see you playing Demetrius, your craft is going to decay, and therefore you
cry Magna Diana Ephesiorum, or which is all one in effect, Magna Ecclesia
Romanorum. Thus you. You need I fear the remembrance Zeno gave to a talker,
that was often laughed at for his folly, Loqui lingua in mentem intincta, to
speak with your tongue dipped in wit, not in Wine, we do not in defense of
Purgatory cry, Magna Diana Ephesiorum, nor only Magna Ecclesia Romanorum, but
Magna Ecclesia Christianorum, the great Church of Christians in all ages. When
was the Church of Christ greater, and according to the Prophesies, universally
spread over the world, if not in S. Augustines time? When did Christian
learning and piety more flourish then in those days? And yet even the^
Purgatory was universally believed, Prayer for souls of the deceased practiced
in the whole Christian world, as you have heard S. Augustine witness: what is
Magna Ecclesia Christianorum, if this be not?

12. But you have a salve worse then the sore, to wit, that you take it, when
we name the Church, we have still reference to the former assertion, that the
Roman Church is of more Principality then the rest. Do you call that assertion
ours? did we invent that Title think you? Former you may well term it; for
how ancient do you take this doctrine to be? S. Irenaeus a most ancient Bishop
and Martyr, who lived immediately after the Apostles days, does give the former
Style to the Roman Church, planted by the most glorious Apostles Peter and Paul
l. 3. c. 3
: Ad quam propter potentiorem principalitatem, necesse est omnem co^uenire
Ecclesiam: with which every Church must agree because of her more powerful
principality, which Principality you cannot imagine what else it may be, besides
the Primacy of Peter, to whom Christ did make Matthew. 16. Joan. vlt.
subject all other Pastors and Churches: by the light of which singular
priuiledg bestowed on this Church in her first Pastor, she does shine velut
inter ignes Luna minores.

13. And in this respect the Roman Church may be termed Diana, by which is
understood that clear star, whose beams do chase away the darkness of the
night, which beams the dogs Pierins in Hieroglyph. l. 5. de Cane^
, who thereby see the shadow of their vggly selves, cannot endure, but wear and
wast away themselves with barking at it. Heretics in all ages have bin
condemned by the judgment of the Roman Sea, by the light of her authority, they
were forced to see the deformity of their hellish pride, which has bin the
cause that they have still waged war against her. And when with their united
tails, they could not bring fire enough to burn her Temple, by which like
Herostratus they thought to eternize their names, they have not ceased, with
their devised heads and tongues to rail and bark at her, till some of them
burst. This consideration moved S. Augustine to say De vtilit. cred. c. 17.
, that the Catholic Church derived from the Apostolic sea, partly by
Authority of Counsels, partly by the consent of the world, partly in the
majesty of Miracles, had obtained the height of Authority, frustra
circumlatrantibus haereticis, heretics on every side still barking in vain
against her. In which kenell your Snarler has not the least mouth, so that in
this age, no less then in former the verses are found true applied to the
Roman Church.

Sic latrant, sed vasta volat vox irritaventis,
Et peragit cursus surda Diana suos.
They bark, but wind drowneth their clamours base,
Diana chaste houldes on her heavenly pase.
14 Here may we gather, that you understand not well your self, when you say,
that we have received neither Scriptures nor the Creeds, nor the first four
General Counsels; nor any foundations of faith from the Roman Church, perhaps
your reason was, because these Counsels, were held not in Europe but in
Greece, and therefore you call them Grecian plumes. Wherein you are grossly
deceived, and little perceive how highly you commend the Roman Church whiles you
seek to disprayse it. For the cause why these Counsels were kept in Greece
and not in Rome, as it is most honorable for the Roman Church, so is it little
for the credit of the Grecian. Those heresies against which such Counsels were
called, did spring up in Greece, often times the chiefest Bishops or Patriarks
of the East were either Authors or their fautors. This was the cause, that
often the Orthodoxall Bishops of Greece, in defense of truth, were forced to
fly for succor to the Roman, as did Athanasius, and Paulus, the one
Patriarch of Alexandria, the other of Constantinople, and others Sozom. l. 1.
c. 7.
. To end which dissentions by his Authority, Supreme under God upon Earth over
the flock of Christ, he hid procure that Counsels might be called in Greece,
the discipline of the Church requiring that Counsels meet, examine the cause,
and punish offenders, where the fault was committed. So that the cause why
those Counsels were kept in Greece not in Rome, was the Purity of the one,
never falling into Heresy, and the infelicity of the other, never to be
without inuentours of such monsters.

15. This sincerity likewise of Doctrine, as Ruffinus notes Ruffin. in
expositione Symboli.
is the cause that the Church of Rome did never add any word or syllable to the
Creed, but kept the same entyre without addition, which, says he, happened not
in other Churches, because other Churches having had heresies sprung up within
their own bowels, did add some words to the Creed, to cross and meet with
such errors which the Roman never did, nor had need to do, seeing no heresy
had never beginning in it. Thus Ruffinus, wherefore seeing the Roman, Church,
caused those Counsels to be held in Greece, confirmed the same afterward, and
their Creeds to be received through the whole Church, who ca^ deny but we had
those foundations of Faith more principally from the Roman then any other
Church, the Principal Sea from whence, says l. 4. ep 8.
S. Cyprian, Priestly dignity (one great Pillar and Foundation of
Christianity) did flow. Unto which Tertullian Praescr. c. 31.
, Irenaeus l. 3. c. 3.
Optatus l. 2. co^t. Parmen.
, Epiphanius Haeres. 27.
, S. Augustine Epist. 165.
being urged by Heretics, did fly, as unto the head, deriving Scriptures,
Creeds, and all other Ecclesiastical traditions from them. Wherefore I must
think that many sick and sorry feathers were in that Ministers head that caused
you to call them, rather Grecian then Roman Plumes, though so light a word as
Plumes, applied to so grave matters as Scriptures, Creeds and Counsels, does
savor of the leuity of your phrase.

16. This leuity you show in the praises you give to the Church, no less then
in the reproaches. Thus you preach, Who is he, say Let. p. 67.
you, that says not of the true Church with Augustine: Non parua Ecclesiae
auctoritas; well does her Modesty, well does her fidelity deserve honorable
esteem; she takes not upon her to control the holy Scripture her Mother,
from whom she drew her first breath, she opens not her mouth, till her mother
has delivered her mind, she comes not of her own head with any sleeuelesse
arrant. Thus you discourse, describing the Spouse of Christ and Mother of
Christians, as a mannerly young Maid brought up in Luthers school. You
demand, who is he that does not say with S. Augustine, Great is the authority
of the Church? And yet you your self are the Man, who call that Authority of
the Church which S. Augustine in that very sentence reuerenceth as great and
venerable, idle and sleeuelesse, like the Butcher that called for his knife he
had in his mouth. These are S. Augustines words, De cura pro mortuis. c. 1.
We read in the Books of Machabees, that Sacrifice was offered for the dead,
but if this were no where read in the old Scriptures, yet there is no small
authority of the universal Church, which shines in this custom. Behold S.
Augustine calls Doctrines delivered by the Church without express Scripture,
great and shining, which you revile, and contemn.

17. Thus you contradict the saying of S. Augustine, whilst you would seem to
applaud it: yet is not this contradiction so witless, as is your Assertion
impious, that Doctrines and Decrees of the Church not delivered in Scriptures
are sleeuelesse, the perpetual virginity of the B. Mother after her sacred
birth of the Son of God, you seem so to believe, that you would stop your
ears against any that should dispute thereof Let. p. 39.
: but where is this written in Scripture, what is it, but a perpetual
tradition of Gods Church? S. Augustine says de Baptism. cont. Donatist. l. 2.
c. 7.
, that it cannot be clearly proved out of Scripture, that Heritikes returning
to the Church should not be rebaptized, and yet the Church has forbidden the
same Shall we term this prohibition sleeuelesse? That these and these books
be Canonical, and the other Apocriphall, where it is taught in Scripture? Now
he does not see that Scriptures are the chiefest points of our Faith,
containing the fountain, and as it were principles of faith. Do but read your
learned Author Hierome Zanchius, who will give a newer tune, then that your
Minister piped unto you. That Author famous in your Co^gregations teaches
Tom. 4. l. 1. de lege Dei.
that diverse unwritten traditions concerning doctrine and manners are in the
Church, which are not only profitable Non solum vtiles Ecclesiae sed fere
necessariae.
says he, but in a manner necessary, which have their beginning from the holy
Ghost, which we must reverence and obey, else we contemn the Authority of the
Church, which is a thing (says he) very displeasing unto God: how then do you
preach that the Church never opens her mouth till Mother Scripture have
delivered her mind?

18. I confess that this your Author goes a step backward, saying that these
unwritten traditions are not of equal authority with the written word, Paris
authoritatis non sunt cum verbo in sacris literis reuelato.
but therein he does clearly contradict himself. For the Canon of the
Scripture being as he confesses, an unwritten tradition, how can any thing
contained in Scripture, be more certain then some unwritten traditions are?
Can any man be more certain of a truth proved out of Scripture, then he is,
that his proofs are indeed Scripture? One may see, this does imply in terms.
Wherefore great cause had your Doctor Field Of the Church p. 238.
to grant that Papists have good reason to equal their Traditions to the
written word, if they can prove any such unwritten verities: and his proof is
pregnant, because not the writing gives things their authority, but the worth
and credit of him that delivers them, though by word and lively voice alone.

19. Now put these two sayings of your two Doctors together, and make an
argument for traditions: let Doctor Field give the Mayor, unwritten verities,
can they be proved, are equal to the written word, let Zanchius add the Minor,
but diverse unwritten verities and traditions, profitable and in a manner
necessary for the Church, both about faith and manners, may be proved. What
does follow, but that some unwritten verities and traditions are found, which
have equal authority with divine Scripture? Is not this argument in good
form? Are not the premises thereof certain, which even our enemies do
grant? May traditions be termed sleeuelesse, for which your own Tailors or
Doctors make such glorious wings, that thereby they fly up to the throne of
divine Truth.

20. But I will not bestow on your suggesting Minister a sleeueles garment, but
rather grant him a Coat with four sleeves for his Metaphore, by which he
makes the Church, Scriptures daughter: many Churches as S. Irenaeus writes l.
3. c. 4.
in his time had never read any word of Scripture, yet did they flourish by
keeping the Tradition of Christian doctrine in their hearts. Was the Scripture
the Mother of these Churches? I see not which way you will draw their pedigree
from the Scripture, except in your next writings, you make Scripture
Grandmother, who has bin yet scarce 3. years a Mother. The Church of the old
Testament, was some thousand years 2000 years from Adam unto Moses.
before Scripture, the Church of the New did flourish many years before any
Gospel was written; who ever saw or heard a daughter borne before the mother.
A Son before the mother I have heard of, yet he as Man, according to which
Nature he was her Son, was not before her So that the Church, Child of
Scripture, a daughter before the Mother is the Pallas of your brain, which
some Vulcans sharp hatchet, has helped you to be delivered of. And thus much
of your, no less ridiculous then impious iestes, against the authority of the
Church.

21. After your light skirmish with Scoffs, follows a grave battery of the
Churches custom, to pray for souls in Purgatory with the Cano^ of Scriptures
Let. a page 80. vsque ad 93.
, by which you will prove her doctrine in this point to be a Satanicall
figment, disgraceful unto the great mercy of God, euacuating the Cross of
Christ. The places by you alleged are many, but either so triuiall and
known, together with the Catholics answers, or else so ridiculously
applied, wrung and wrested to your purpose, that their very sound is able to
break a learned man's head, and make him scratch where it does not itch, for
want of an answer. To give some few examples: What (say you: page 86
shall not Hell gates prevail against us, and shall Purgatoryes muddy wall hedge
us in? Has the soul of Christ gone down into the nethermost Hell, and yet
made no passage through the suburbs of Hell? Has he bound the strong Man that
he should not harm us, and will he now torment us himself? or set we know not
who^ to do it? Thus you. Who will not wonder, that Purgatoryes walls fall not to
the ground, with the storm of these your windy interogations? shall I make the
Logical Analysis of your Rhetorical Arguments? They be three Ethymens I
think. The first, the gates of hell shall not prauaile against the Church; ergo
there is no Purgatory. The second, the soul of Christ went down to the
nethermost Hell, ergo, no Purgatory can be found. The third, Christ bound the
strong Man, and took his fortress, ergo, Purgatory must vanish away.

22. I think Aristotle would be grauelled in these arguments to find the Medium
to join your extremes together. For what force has Christ's binding the
strong Man, that he may not harm his children, to prove that God may not
chastize them for their sins either by himself, or another in this world, or
in the next as he pleases, when they have don amiss, and committed lesser
offenses, that deserve his lighter displeasure? When you say, that Hell gates
shall not prevail against us, it is hard to guess, who those your vsses are.
Perhaps you mean the Elect* and Predestinate, among whom you number your
self. Let it be so. Can you deny but many of your Predestinate and Elect are,
for robbing and stealing, and other such crimes locked up in London Goales?
what shall not Hell-gate prevail against them, and shall the wall of a prison
mue them up? has the soul of Christ gone down into the nethermost Hell, and
made no passage through New-gates Limbo, where sometimes your elect are kept?
Has he bound the strong man, that he should not harm, and shall now a hangman
put the^ to death? You perceive I hope the vanity of your inferences.

23. Let us hear you preach again, and build a ladder for your elect, to
pass without Purgatory into Heaven. They that die in the faith, say you p. 100*
have peace toward God, they that have peace toward God are justified by
Christ, they that are justified by Christ, are free from the Law, and being
free from the Law, quis accusabit? who shall lay any thing to their charge?
Thus you dispute. Where I could lay both folly and falsehood to your charge, but
seeing your Protestant faith freeth you from the Law, both of Reason and
conscience, quis accusabit, who dares accuse you, though you write neither
wise nor true word? I could cast your Elect into Hell from the first step of
your ladder. For they that die in the faith have not peace toward God except
their faith be joined with good works. S. John Apoc. 14.
giving the reason, why the Saints rest after life, says, Opera enim illorum
sequuntur illos, which you English, for their works follow them, even at the
heels? But your Protestant faith is so light footed or light headed rather, to
believe you shall be saved, and your charity so heavy heeled to do the good
works by which men must be saved, that an eternity of torments may pass before
your works overtake your faith.

24. I might also fling them down from the highest step of all, where you say
they are free from the Law, if you understand it in Luthers sense Tom. 1. Ep.
Lat. ep. 3^. ad Philippu^.
, that though they commit whoredoms or murders a thousand times aday, they
need not care, the blood of Christ freeth them from the law: does not this
doctrine together with the Author deserve to be flung into the lowest Hell?
But if you understand freedom from the law in the Catholic sense, that the
spirit of Christ makes that yoke easy and the burden light, that in the
spirit of love we may keep the law with great ease, as S. John says 1. Joan. 5.
, his commandemcnts are not hard, I dare say, your Protestants faith has little
of that spirit that dilateth the heart to run the way of Gods precepts Psalm.
118.
that it will never be able to get up this ladder. And let the^ be indeed just,
let them be Saints that keep the law, you object, that against them that does
clearly prove a Purgatory for them in the next life. Yea, say you, but they
have some dross to be purged. Doubtless, Sir Edward, the iustest man falls
seven times a day prou. 24.
, he that says he has no sin, light and venial (as S. Augustine
expounds) is a liar 1. Ioa^. 1.
: who can say that his heart is pure from vain and impertinent thoughts? His
tongue clean from idle and unprofitable speech? His hands not defiled at least
with omissions and sloth, and negligences in Gods service? Do you see your
Just cannot be in this life without Dust.

25. But you answer, indeed S. Paul says, haec fuistis, but he adds, sed
abluti estis, but you are washed, but you are sanctified, but you are justified
in the name of the Lord Jesus, and by the spirit of our God. This is indeed to
allege Scriptures for your purpose. You speak of washing and cleansing, yet
except you have washed away with wine from your tongue, this foolish not to say
impious, abusing of Gods word, I dare say, your lips still need to be purged,
which you seeldome wet (I fear) in the bath of tears and penance. Are you
not skillfull at Scriptures, that apply that sentence which was spoken of 1.
Cor. 6.11.
, without which gross sins, as whoredom, theft, extorsion and the like,
which the Corinthians before baptism committed, and by baptism were cleansed
from them, to the daily venial offenses, without which the just man does not
live? But faith is, say you page 85.
sperandarum rerum hypostasis, the ground of things to be hoped for from
Christ, whereas we will have it thus, fides est ferendarum rerum (...), the
ground of things that are to be suffered by our selves. Thus you. I perceive
your Protestant faith is very weak, we must not lay any great burden on it, of
things to be suffered by your selves, less it break; but of things to be
suffered by others, as much as we will: you can easily endure that others
suffer, so you be well your selves. I much fear that this your faith faints
in the assured expectation of eternal punishments, for grievous sins, which
cannot endure the belief of temporal pain for lesser offenses. I do not now
wonder you have rejected Fastings, Pilgrimages, Disciplines, Hayrecloathes,
Lying on the ground, rising in the night to pray and sing psalms to God,
living in perpetual Chastity, wresling with the lusts of the flesh. No
maruayle, I say, though you reject these things; your faith is not a ground of
penance, nor of any mortifications to be undergone by your selves.

26. Christ must suffer all for you, you will not be partners with him in his
Passion, yet you will share with him in his comforts, you will not by your good
will, have your finger ache for his love, nor taste the least drop of vinager to
purg your sinful humors, yet will you be as bold as any other, except his
Justice keep you back, to put your nose into the sweet cupp of his Glory. But
true faith is a ground not only of hope, but also of fear. As it teaches us
to expect a full reward, if we fulfill Gods commandments, so likewise to be
sure of heavy punishments if we contemn them. As Christ came down from
Heaven to dye for us on the Cross, so faith tells us we must take up our
cross, a small task of sorrow and penance, and march after him to Heaven*
True faith is not an idle beholder either of Heaven or Christ, but urges us to
walk by good works toward the one, and by penance to feel some part of the
passion of the other: yet is faith defined the ground of things to be hoped
for, not of things to be suffered by us, or of things suffered by Christ,
because Christ's sufferings for us and ours, in love and imatation of him, are
but means to conduct us to God, the blessed end hope aymeth at, for hope and
faith being Theological virtues, have for their objects, not Christ's
sufferings, nor our own, but God alone; other things faith and hope does
regard only as they are pertinent to God. These answers Sir Edward I fear,
are to grave both for your head and faith, neither will the one understand; nor
the other believe my discourse, I labor in vain either to build penance or
Purgatory on your faith, or to beat true learning and divinity into your head.

27. Yet you go forward, preaching very gravely to leave our bitter Purgations,
and me^ily drink away our sins, laying all on Christ's back. S. Paul say you
page 85. 86.
thought it enough to know Christ, and him crucified, but he is a dullard in
your School, that knows not Purgatory, and how he must there be purged. As
if the Lords Sommer-liuery of everlasting life, were given us only with this
prouiso, that unless we play the Taylers our selves, and make it up by our
Purgations, it must never come to our backs. Thus you. Much do you fear I see,
least you be forced to play the Tailor with a discipline, to measure therewith
your shoulders, and out of the broad-cloath of Christ's merits, with that sharp
pair of sheeres to cut out a Purgatory garment for your own back. Yet I dare
say, S. Paul was such a Tailor, who did not beat the air, but chastise his
body 1. Cor. ^.
, still carried about with him the Mortification of Jesus Christ 2. Cor. 4
, that he had the Marks of his Passion in his flesh Gal. 6.
, to which participation with Christ in pain he may seem to exhort, when he
bids us feel the same in our selves, that we see in Christ Jesus Philip. 2.
who subjected himself to the death of the Cross. What more frequent in this
Blessed Apostle, then to exhort me^ to the love of the Cross, to suffer for
Christ, to praying, fasting, giving of alms, and other Penitential works?

28. This is indeed to know, by experience, Christ crucified, whereof you talk
in the air. I assure you that a discipline or a whipping for a quarter of an
hour, would make you conceive more deeply of Christ's bitter Passion, better
understand the great love he bare you in delivering you from eternal pain,
give you to know your Savior either fastened to the Pillar, or to the Cross
more perfectly then ever did any Protestants Sermon you heard, or meditation
you made in your life. Had you ever tasted any drop of the sweetness of Christ
crucified, you would never have said, rejoicing in your competent Patrimony:
Counters. p. 65.
Ditescit cui Christus dulcescit, He becomes rich, to whom Christ crucified
becomes sweet Such sweetness did not S. Paul feel in Christ, by whose cross
the world, to wit, riches and honor, were crucified ad Galat. 6.
, that is, were things most hateful to him. The sweetness of the Cross wrought
otherwise in the blessed Apostles, who tastinge thereof, left voluntarily, and
gave all to the poor. Look upon the Primitive Saints Antony, Hilarion,
Benedict, and others.
, you shall find as Christ became to them sweeter, so they became poorer. The
delight they took in him, made them esteem worldly wealth as dunge, placing
their greatest treasure in wanting all things for him.

29. Many borne to greater fortunes of the world, then you are, voluntarily
made themselves so poor that their only demeanes was a wilderness, their
Palace a hole under ground, their meat fasting, their attire contemptible,
their music Prayer, their bed the bare ground, on which they did bath their
wasted bones, which life they did prefer before being Kings in this world,
such was the sweetness they found in Christ crucified, such joy they had to
feel in themselves some little portion of that pain they beheld in him. You
shall hardly persuade me, Sir Edward, that these were dullards in the School
of Christ and Piety, that you do more see into Christ crucified, and more
sweetly taste his Passion then they did: they did not doubt, but the garment of
glory out of the broad cloth of Christ's merits, was to be greater or lesser,
according as they had more or less conformity with the crucified Son of God;
neither did they believe that God gives it to us ready made to our own hands,
as you say, but that those momentary and light sufferings work in us eternal
weight of Glory.

30. These men understood aright, the place of the Apocalips, which you so much
stand upon Let. page 87.
, Blessed are those that dye in our Lord, from henceforth says the spirit,
they shall rest from their labors Apoc. 14.15.
. In which sentence I wonder you living as you do can think to have any part;
that promise belongs to them, that never rest in the course of penance, that
makes the same end together of their labors and their lives, whom death
takes down from the Cross of volu^tary afflictions. Martyrs in the first
place are partakers of this promise, next after them Penitents, who endure, as
S. Bernard says, a martyrdom in perpetual victory of themselves, not so
cruel in show as the other, but no less troublesome for length of time Bern*
Sermon. 27. in Cantica.
. In which penal martyrdom, if you continue unto death in the true Catholic
Church, I dare warrant you both from Hell and Purgatory, and grant you an
immediate passage unto Heaven. For we teach not as you falsely charg us, that no
hold can be taken on Heaven, without a Purgatory in the other life, and that,
even S. Paul must be there purged, these are not our doctrines but your
slanders. Those that dye perfectly in Christ, shall pass without Purgatory
unto Bliss, others who having Christ in the Foundation 1. Cor. 3.
, that is, his faith and charity in their hearts Aug. l. 21. de Ciuit. c. 26.
Amores terrenos non damnabiles.
, do notwithstanding set their affections upon earthly things that alay the
fervor of his love, dye not perfectly in Christ, nor must expect to pass
without Purgatory from idleness unto rest, from worldly pleasure unto heavenly
joy.

31. O Sir Edward, how do I fear that you play not the Taylour aright, but cut
out of Scripture, favorable sententes for your self as this is, Blessed are
those that dye in our Lord, that do concern others whose lives do not so
much suite with Dives daily banketing as yours seems to do. Take heed you
find not a garment of another suite set on your back when your soul shall
depart, more naked of good deeds out of the body, then your body of garments
unto the grave. God grant you be not clothed with these sentences, woe to you
that laugh, for you shall weep Luc. 6.
, woe to you that were rich, that had in this world your comfort Ibid.
, woe unto you that had rich bedds and lay wantonly in soft down Amos ^.
, you deceive your self if you think as you say Let. p. 81
, that as in your Creation you did not help your self, so likewise in your
Redemption, As we lay no claim to have bin any helper in the creation: so can
not we part staks in our Redemption.
you must not cooperate with God to the saving of your self, that the whole
work must be his. He that made thee without thy self, will not save thee
without thy self, says Blessed S. Augustine Look not to wear Christ's
sommer-liuery in life everlasting, who refuse to put one his winter-suite the
freeze-coate of pe^nance and mortificatio^ in your mortal state. This cloth of
Christ's infinite merits suite not with your short charity, no more then a Giants
attire can become a Pygmey: you must by your works and merits, Gods grace
concurring, (...) out a suite for your self; the Nuptial garme^^ Matthew. 22.
wherein you must appear at the day of Judgment, else you shallbe cast out
naked into utter darkness. Christ's blood purges all sins, in such as use the
due means, to have the merit thereof, applied unto them, not in such as
neglect the Sacraments he did appoint, or will not, together with preventing
and helping grace, seek by penal works, to derive his blood upon their
souls, for their perfect cleansing.

32. This penance you think needless; this joining our satisfactions with
Christ's you esteem injurious to his Passion, and dispute in this manner. Let.
p. 91.
The souls in Purgatory, say you, are either punished for those sins which
Christ's blood has wholly purged, or for those which he has not wholly purged.
If for those, which Christ has wholly purged, then there must needs be
injustice in God, to imprison them whose debts are fully discharged; if for
sins, that he has not wholly purged, then it follows, either that he is not
the Lamb, that takes away the sins of the world, or that man's satisfaction
must go hand in hand with Christ's meritts. Thus you do butt against
Purgatories walls with your horned arguments, which if it have any force
against Purgatory, will also break open the gates of Hell, that the damned may
come out. For, for what sins are those wretches punished? For what debts are
they keept in prison? Doubtless for those sins and debts, for which Christ did
offer his precious blood. What? Was not that a sufficient Rede^ptio^ for the
sins of the world? Yes without question. Is God the^ unjust to impriso^ the^ in
yt dark du^geo^ for ever, for those sins Christ paid a full and rigorous
ranson? Nor if God be unjust, to whom does he injury herein? Not to the sinner,
who does suffer no more then he does deserve, neither can he chaleng to
himself Pardon by any title of justice. Neither is there any wrong done unto
Christ. Though his precious death does deserve the ranson of millions of
worlds, yet as the Philosopher says, volenti non fit iniuria, Injustice can
not be done to one, in a thing which he is willing unto.

33. Now it is the will of Christ that such as will not believe in him, or not
receive the Sacrament of Baptism, be not pardoned but punished for ever. If
any sin after Baptism, his pleasure is, that no pardon or remission be
given, except he yield humbly and penitently to confess his sins: if any
refuse to obey so reasonable a law, what wrong is done to Christ if such pride
be sent to Hell? The wicked are condemned, not against his will, but by his
order, not out of defect of his meritts, but out of their stubburnnes and
malice. It is also Christ's holy will, that in sins committed after Baptism,
the whole guilt of pain be not ever forgiven, but sometimes he reserueth a
convenient task of temporal pain, according to the measure his divine wisdom
thinks best. For which we must endeavor to satisfy by fasting, praying, or
other voluntary afflictions, or else with a patient acceptance of such crosses
as shall be sent by the hand of God.

34. This Doctrine strikes you to the heart. You bring two principles you were
taught in logic against it. First the cause, say you, taken away, the effect
cease: punishment is the effect of sin, ergo, when sin is remitted,
punishments must needs cease. This your logic if we yield unto it, will beat
out our eyes, and force us to deny even, what we daily see and feel, to wit,
that punishments and penalties may remain, though the sin be forgiven. What
are death, hunger, thirst, and other miseries of this life, but effects of
original sin? Is not that* sin forgiven unto Christians in baptism? yet
those that are baptized and borne anew in Christ endure the former penalties
and punishments of that sin though the same be pardoned. God pardoned David's
Sin, 2. Reg. 12.
Dominus transtulit a te peccatum tuum, God has taken thy sin from thee, but
did all temporal punishment cease together with the sin? No. The sin was
remitted with a, But thou shall endure these an^ these dreadful afflictions,
because thou have made the name of God to be blasphemed.

35. I will not stand to confirm this truth out of Scriptures, nor out of
Fathers, only because you stand upon Athanasius, whom you call your
Arbitrator, Let. page 43.
and say, that he will not affoarde us one syllable to save our lives, your
ignorance shall receive doom by his sentence, even in that very Treatise. Thus
he writes, There is great difference De verbis Christi, Si quis dixerit verbum
etc.
(says he) betwixt penance and baptism, he that repents cease to sin,
but still retayneth the skarrs of his wound, but he that is baptized, puts
of the old man, is then renewed from heaven, and as it were borne again, by
the spirit of grace. Do you see Sir, how many syllables this Fathers lends
us to know the difference between baptism, and penance for sins committed
after baptism? what are those skarrs which still remain after penance, but
not after baptism? You cannot say they are bad inclinations and customs, for
those remain after baptism; nor the miseries and penalties of this mortal
life, for from the necessity and enduring such crosses baptism does not
exempt. I see not what else can be imagined to remain after penance, and not
after baptism, besides the guilt of temporal pain, which we must willingly
undergo, to satisfy for the sins after baptism* which skarrs and wounds if we
heal not in this life by plasters of pe^nance, they must be seared in the
next by Purgatory fire.

36. Now your logical Axiom against this verity, that the effect cease, the
cause being taken away, who does not se that it fails in a thousand examples?
The Son is an effect of the Father, can not he live though his Father be
dead? the fire causes heat, yet we see that heat does often remain long time
after the fire is put out. The truth is, that Principle is only true, quando
Effectus pendet a Causa in esse and conseruari: when not only the first being
of the effect depends on the cause, but also the conservation thereof, as the
light of the Sun, which the Sun does not only bring forth, but also co^serue,
vanishes away together with the same. Punishment is the effect of sin,
nothing but sin could produce that guilt in our soul, yet when it is once in
the soul, the co^seruation depends on the will of God. It cannot cease, but
when, and in what manner he will have it cease, either remitting the whole
guilt, as in Baptism, or else reserving some part of the penalty, as he does
often in the sins we commit after Baptism. Not that the merits of Christ be
not sufficient alone without our pe^nance and satisfaction, to do away both the
eternal and temporal punishment, but for the other reasons his divine wisdom
knows.

37. This wisdom you would prove to be folly, by another Axiom of your
Logic. Frustra fit per plura (say you) Let. page 38.
quod fieri potest per pauciora: It is vain to use many means, when fewer
will suffice, the Jordan of Christ's blood alone suffices to wash away the
leprosy of Naaman, what need he be bathed in Abanak of his own pe^nance? or
in the Pharphar of Purgatory flames? Sir I must accuse either your memory or
your Master, either he did not teach you that Principle right, or else since
you have let fall some words thereof out of your mind, to wit, aeque been, when
the thing may be done by fewer means altogether as well, to multiply means
is vain and idle: which two words wanting, your Principle is false. Christ
might have redeemed the world, with one drop of his blood, was the rest
therefore shed in vain? No, because it did serve to make his excessive love
more manifest unto us. So likewise, though by the blood of Christ, sins may
be forgiven fully and perfectly in Pe^nance after Baptism, as well as in
Baptism, yet the wisdom of God, has thought it more for his own honor and
for our profit, to enable us to do some part of this pe^nance our selves by the
help of his grace.

38. First that we might more deeply conceive of the malice of sin, and Gods
hatred against it. Secondly, that by feeling some temporal smart, our
gratitude toward Christ might increase, who delivered us freely from the
eternal. Thirdly that we may more carefully for the time to come avoid sin,
flying from the shadow thereof, as from an Adder Quasi a facie colubri fuge
peccatu^. Eccl. 21.
. Fourthly that by voluntary Pe^nance we might more estrange our selves, Felix
necessitas quae ad meliora compellit.
from the dangerous pleasures of this world and alluring sent of the sinful
flesh. Fifthly that this happy necessity of doing of Penance might force us to
retyrednes, where God speaks to the heart Duca^ in solitudinem and loquar ad
cor. Osee. 2.
. Sixthly that by this occasion we might try (what without trial can hardly be
believed) the comfortes that are found in a penitential life, which are so
great, that S. Augustine out of his own exprience of both, says, More
pleasant be the tears of pe^nance, then any recreation of plays Dulciores
su^t lachrimae poenitentium quam gaudia theatrorum. August. in Confess.
. Seventhly that to redeem our sins, we might more carefully supply the
necessity of the poor, purchasing us friends by sinful Mammon Luc. 36.
, that when the soul flitteth from the body, they may receive her into the
eternal Tabernacle. Finally and principally, that hedged in by fire, we might
run with arms spread abroad to embrace Christ crucified, and seek to be like
to the form by which we are saved, crucifiyng our bodies with the
concupiscences thereof ad Galat. 5.
, which is one of the principal things, which in gratitude he requires of us.

39. What S. Augustine said of Hell fire, under pain whereof God commands
his love. l. 1. confess. c. 5. Quid mihi es? Miserere vt loquar. Quid tibisum,
vt amari te iubeas a me, and nisi faciam irascaris, and mineris ingentes
miserias? Hei mihi: Paruane est ipsa miseria, si non amem te?
Lord what am I that thou should command me to love, and threaten eternal
punishment if I love thee not? Is it not misery enough of it self, not to love
thee? the like might we say of Purgatory, which binds us to taste by
imitatio^, more abundantly of Christ's sweet Cross, then else happily many
would. Lord what are we, that thou will have us comfortable to the figure of
thy crucified Son? That thou do force us with fire to taste of his sweetness?
Can any greater felicity befall a man, then not to be like unto that heavenly
Pattern? To live an idle and wanton limme of that body whose head is pierced
with Thorns? Non decet sub spinoso capite membru^ esse delicatum.
These meditations Sir Edward, were they as frequent in your mind, as are
profane jests rife in your mouth, Pe^nance, Satisfaction, and bearing part of
Christ his passion to purge sin, would not seem so burdensome to your faith,
neither would you think such endeavors injurious unto Christ's blood whence
they spring and take their virtue, yea perchance you would prefer our
Catholic Pe^nance and Purgatory before your Protestant pleasant life and heaven
on earth, whereof I should conceive greater hope, did not vain and worldly
delights hold you back more strongly then the misapplied textes of Scripture
you pretend.

THE FIFTH CHAPTER. THE MIRACLES of the B. Virgin at Hall, and Sichem, AND
OTHER CATHOLIC MIRACLES ARE PROOVED Authentical, against the Profane iestes
of the Letter, and Countersnarle. And that they cannot be Antichrists Wonders.
THE last Squadron of the four enemies your Letter mustreth against Purgatory,
are profane iestes, which savor of Irreligion. These run so fast from your
pen, that either it preuenteth your thoughts, or your thoughts be deeply
taynted with that most deadly corruption. I will here alledg an example or two
thereof, which contain more Atheism then I hope you did perceive therein,
when you let them pass to the print. You are very inquisitiue to know Let.
page 79,
in what degree of elevation of the Pole Purgatory is seated. How many miles
from the infernal Cape. Beda's ghoast, say you, comes somewhat near the mark
in his Card, who places it under the earth, in the suburbs of Hell, yet
Alcuinus may be believed as well, who peremptorily maintayneth, that it is
situate in the Air. Hence you conclude, quod vbique est, nullibi est: it is
in so many places, that indeed it is in no place. This is the assault or onset,
by which you seek to beat Purgatory out of the world. But the Captain Mayor
of your argument repeated again in your pa. 17.
Counter-snarle, to wit, qui vbique nullibi, who is every where is indeed no
where, if it be true, is able to beat God into nothing, who cannot be
conceived without immensitie, or a being every where, if you believe not the
royal Prophet, who could find no place, in heaven, or earth, or hell to ly
hidden from his sight and presence, Psalm. 138. v. 6.7.8.
perhaps you will credit your Poet, who sings: Iouis plena sunt omnia, Sea,
Earth, Air, Heaven, all things are full of God.

2. But taking your Proposition in the best sense, to wit, that the thing might
be justly thought, not to be, which learned men cannot tell certainly and
determinatly where it is, yet is the impiety thereof exceeding great. For do not
Deuines both Catholics and Protestants disagree about the place of the soul
after separation from the body? About the part of the world, wherein God
shows himself to his Saints? May one thence infer, quod vbique nullibi?
That the soul after her diuorcement from the body is in so many places, that
she is indeed in no place? Do not learned Christians likewise dissent about
the situation of Hell? Some say Devils and Men are punished in the Air,
others under Earth? In so much as S. Augustine says Lib. 20. de Ciuit. c. 6.
: In qua mundi part sit futurus infernus hominum, arbitror scire neminem, nisi
forte cui spiritus diuinus ostendit. In what coast of the world Hell is placed,
I think no mortal man can tell, except perchance the spirit of God has
revealed it to some? will any true Christian argue in your form? Hell is in so
many places, that it is indeed nowhere? I think not. Neither would you bring
the doubtfullnes of Purgatories distance from the infernal Cape, as a reason
to make away with it, did you not want either Religion in your heart or true
divinity in your Cape.

3. Another example of profaneness and want of Religion, you give in your
perpetual Jesting at Miracles, which confirm any point of Religion,
especially this of Purgatory, which Miracles you term Let. p. 40. 41.
such grave Miracles, that it would make a horse break his haulter to see
them. And in the margent you say, yea Bellarmins devout Marc, which your wanton
Hobby named only to beget a fool on her, thought you might better have turned
him loose to Balaams Number. 22.
prudent Ass, where perchance he might have learned this point of wisdom,
that there is a God, whom even bruit beasts feel, and in their manner serve
and adore, who is able when he pleases to make the^ bray more wisely the^ you
do speak.

4. But no where do you show your profaneness more, then in scoffing at the
miracles of our B. Lady of Hall, registered by Lipsius, which you deride in so
rude a manner, as it may well seem, you did both read Lipsius his story and
write your own letter Let. page 102.
rosting crabbs by the fire side. A Miracle concerning a Faulkner, delivered
from death, by her merciful intercession, Lipsius c. 8.
does elegantly and religiously relate, which you or your Minister mar with
reeling and tottering phrases. His Lord, say you, swore by no beggars, that he
would make him look through a halter, if he found not the Falcon, within the
compass of forty days. As the fellow was going to this geere, the Executioner
being advanced, his eyes mufled, with hearty sighs, he implores that B. Ladies
help. And mark you me now, the noise of the belles began to gingle in the air
(a sweet melody you must think to a drooping heart) and he doubled his prayers
to that Ladies Shrine, and behold that which is most strange, the Falcon came
sousing out of the air, and without any lure, in the sight of all the standers
by, did light upon his shoulder, who for her escape was now tied to a new
perch. Here is a Miracle of the maker, say you, Tush, this is nothing to what
that Lady has done. She has driven out evil spirits, asswadged terrible
tempests, fetched a child that was found stark dead, with the heels upward in a
muddy ditch. Another that was drowned, another that was strangled: nay a
stil-borne child there days buried to rise again. I cannot stand to tell how
she made John Swickius (an Heretic, that swore he would cut off her Pictures
nose) loose the best nose in his face: Nor how Philip Cluuius filed his chains
asunder with an oxe-bone. Thus you play the Summist of Lipsius.

5. Yet I wonder you omitted a story which followed in the same Chapter c. 7.
p. 24.
with John Swickius, to wit, about another Protestant swaggerer John Rysselman,
who reuiling that B. Lady, swearing that he would take her Town and burn her
Picture publicly in Bruxells, stricken with a bullet, lost the best tongue in
his head, the best chinne in his face, and not long after yielded up (though a
very bad one) yet the best soul in his body. You perhaps were scarred with
this stroke, fearing to loose the instrument, wherewith you love both to bibble
and babble. You dare play with that B. Ladies nose, not fearing so much the
loss of your own, whereof you have not such use, since you cast away your
Tobacco-pipe. Yet I much doubt, whether the forenamed Risselman, or that famous
Nestorius an Arch-enemy of Gods Mother, which both miraculously lost their
tongues Euagr. l. 1. c. 7. Nicephor. l. 14. c. 26.
for blasphemy against her, did more deserve that penal forfeiture should be
inflicted upon them, then you have done, who stick not to term the glorious
Queen of Angels, whose Miracles Lipsius does profess to write, the Mother of
God, as her Picture with the King of the world in her arms does witness, a
kind wench, good at a dead lift Let. page 100.
which sounds of a more foul blasphemy, then ever any Heretic before
dreamed of.

6. Who that is sober, will not think that I did honor you much in saying,
the matter of your Letter was not your own, shifting off these blasphemies
rather to your Ministers pen, which you seem to confess, I might have done to
your Minstrels Pipe Counters. p. 61.
. And how could I better have excused his impiety, then thinking he did suggest
unto you those conceits, rosting crabs by the fire side, making those
blasphemies, but the smoakes of Tobacco, or fumes of Bacchus, giving him the
best excuse, a soldier, reuiling Pyrrhus, could find, by which he obtained his
pardon, confessing, that had he taken in more wine, he might have spoken worse.
Merciful Lord in what a drunken age do we live, that such foul blasphemies
against Gods Mother, may pass to the Print! that such witnessed testimonies of
Gods infinite power (which had they been done in Tyrus and Sidon, would perhaps
have joined them to have done penance in sakcloath) may be blasphemed,
derided, and rejected, even in Print, as lewd lies, incredible falsehood
Counters. p. 38*
without any syllable of proof or reason in the world, but only because they
list not to believe them.

7. But to the end that Purgatory may get the conquest also of this your
profaneness, and purge you of this damnable humor, if it may be; I will seek
to show briefly two things. First the credit of the forsaid Histories you
deride as fables. Secondly how wicked your Masters are, that granting the
stories, make the Miracles to be the Devils words I will present you with a
most medicinable herb, which may seem like the herb called our Ladies
gloves. These Miracles adorn her v^rginall hands, signs they are of her
wedding to the eternal King, and of her being crowned Queen of Heaven and
Earth. Which gloves of our Lady may serve also to defend the memory of
deceased Lipsius, whom you revile, pa. 31*
who like the Swan, whose dying notes are sweetest, crowned his famous writings
with a history of her miraculous stories, and hung up before her Altar his
renowned c. 36. page 80.
pen, the wing of his wit, the flight whereof made him admirable in this age.

-- Baccare frontem
Cingite, ne Vati noceat mala lingua beato.
Our Ladies Gloves about his forhead wreath,
That no foul mouth dare on this Author breath.
8. Among many devises, the enemy of mankind has set abroach, in this age, to
infect the world with Irreligion and Atheism, none seems to me, more potent
then the denial of Miracles, together with those shifts, which heresy has
invented, to discard those both of ancient and fresh memory, which please not
their taste: she has taught profane and impious wits to call in question
former Miracles, though never so famously reported and written by most grave
authors: she bidds them not believe the wonders which in these days God does
work above the course of Nature; to shut their eyes against the Clausis oculis
negare factum esse quod nolunt. Hier. Dialog. contra Iouin. c. 17.
light, and stoutly to deny what they list not to believe. And when the light
is so great that even the blind see it, rather then yield due glory to God, she
gives to the Devil power to work true wonders, which things shall be made
clear by the ensuing discourse.

9. As no age since the Creation has been without profane fellows, prone to
deny Gods providence over mankind, to jest and scoff at his servants, so
likewise the same providence has not permitted any age See Iodocus Coccius
Tom. 1. art. vlt. And Prot. Apology tract. 2. c 3. sect. 7. subd 3. 4. 5.
to pass without Miracles and marks of his power, keeping the impious in awe
by punishments, miraculously inflicted upon their mates, and comforting his
true worshippers, with extraordinary favors and benefitts bestowed on them
above natures reach. And though such curbes of the profaneness of the one, and
spurs of piety unto the other, never failed as I said, yet does his divine
wisdom dispense them in Number, Weight and Measure, that neither Scarsity
breed Infidelity, nor Multitude take away Necessity of a constant faith. That
both the wicked may enjoy the freedom of their Nature, with due fear of their
author, and the just have sufficient comfort in misery, with no loss of
their merit. Should God still punish the wicked as they offend, their liberty
would be in a manner extinct; should God still miraculously help his distressed
servants, the constancy of their faith, would want scope to deserve glorious
rewards.

10. Now in what age, since the coming of Christ, has either piety more
needed a spur, or impiety a curb, then in this we live in? The wolf is said
Bartholom. Anglicus. l. 17.
, to be so stifnecked and greedy of his prey, that he never looks back, but
when thunderclaps from heaven afright him. When did such a troop of stifnecked
wolves, void of conscience and fear of God, range so vncontrouledly over the
Christian world, as now they do, though in the clothing of sheep, vested with
the name of Christians? Why then should we bynd the hands of God, that he may
not send down Miracles upon the world, which does so need them? That he may
not scarre ravenous wolves with thunderboltes from heaven in these days, as
well as in former ages? Strike terror into their hearts, causing them to look
back, and consider their wicked courses, ne forte sit Deus, least perchance
there be a God, whose Justice follows the^ at the heels, ready to strike
them with a dreadful death when they least imagine? The stifest-necked wolves,
the prophanest heretics, when they hear the Miracles done in the Church so
great and so witnessed, as those we stand upon are, I make noe doubt, but
sometimes they tremble, and though they set a good face on the matter, yet
their hearts pant in their breasts.

11. These Sir Edward perchance may be the Melancholy fitts, that Lipsius his
story, caused in your heart, which to drive away, you read his book rosting
crabbs, by the fire side, with a pipe of Tobacco in your hand, still calling
for more wine, till your sobriety being wholly spent, you break forth into the
former ridiculous Narration of Miracles, which sobriety it self, say you,
would smile to see Lipsius so seriously tell. I would wish, Sir, when your
smiling sobriety has gotten a more stayed countenance, you would in sober
sadness set down, what conditions or witnesses are required to make a history
credible? Which of the conditions do fail in Lipsius relations? In what other
histories they are found, if they want in his?

12. Lipsius does Praefat. ad Lectore^. Acta and Regesta legimus; ex ij^
selegimus quae dignissima videbantur
protest, that he read the gests and records, out of which he chose those which
he judged most worthy of the print, will not men, says he, believe these
things, done in the sight of many, confirmed by sworn witnesses, oftentimes by
the Magistrates seals, and that which is chiefest, such stories as our
religious Ancestors recorded, before this doctrine, which contemns the
worship of Saints, was sprung up. If they will not take my word, let them send
and inquire that they may believe. They will find more then I have written.
(...).
And though they be (to speak with Plato) as hard as horn, yet they will
become soft and yield, stricken with the majesty of Miracles, which, as S.
Augustine says, are introductions unto faith. But if any man, after such
inquiry, be not moved to believe such credible histories, I may apply that unto
him of Homer,

Thou have ears to hear, that wants both wit and shame. And in his other
Treatise of the Miracles of Sichem, he does alledg yet more authentical
witnesses, to prove the credibilitie of his relations, protesting that he wrote
relations most diligently sifted and inquired into, things done Virgo Aspric.
c. ^ In oculis and uribusa omnium nostrum gesta, concursu, plausu, fructu
gentium celebratae.
, says he, in the eyes and ears of us all, famous, not by report only, but by
the concourse and applause of Countries, by help and redress of miserable
multitudes, that found favor in that sacred Chapel, what certainety can
there be in humane things, if these histories be not certain? thus he.

13 If bare denial without proof, stubburn incredulity without reason,
profane jesting without sobriety, may make histories witnessed by the consent
of learned, judicious, and pious Nations; what place will be left for humane
history, or divine faith or religious piety in humane kind? Have not heathens
in former times, may they not at this present, overthrow the credit of the
Miracles of Christ by these engines? What can be said within the compass of
humane credibility for the certainty of those stories, wherein Christianity is
grounded, which may not most clearly be proved in defense of these? That these
were don openly, that whole multitudes did behold them? so were these. That
many times those were wrought, his enemies being present? the like did happen
in many of these Miracles, which the enemies of the Church did see with their
eyes, and sometimes feel in their bodies. That those were written with such
circumstances, naming the time, the persons, the places and other
particularities, that it had bin most easy for Christ's enemies, who then
lived to have controlled such miracles had they bin false? with the like
particularities does Lipsius report the Miracles of our Lady, that if they were
faygned, our adversaries might have easily convinced them of falsehood, which
they never did, nor will ever be able to do.

14. The story of John Swickius, who lost his best Nose, could any falsehood be
more conspicuous, if he still kept a good nose on his face? Lipsius tells
Virg. Hall. c. 7.
the year of our Lord when the same did happen, not thirty three years since,
within your remembrance, the place where he lived in Brussells, Soldier under
Captain Oliver Temple, famous for his Military skill, who did twice in vain
assault the Town of Hall: that story was so known, that this Swickius was
often derided by his fellows, who in merriment would send him to our Lady of
Hall for his nose. How easy would it be to trace the steps of this story, and
find the falsehood thereof, were it a fable? So that this jesting at Miracles
done in our Church so credibly reported, overthrows the bulwark of humane
authority, which Christianity does presuppose, and opens a wide gapp for
Atheism and Infidelity to enter, and trample under feet the Miracles of Christ
and mysteries of our faith.

15. And that our adversaries either Infidelity or impudency, or folly in this
point, may the better appear, consider I pray you, that by this dealing, they
so crack the credit of all humane relations, that they have left no means to
themselves to make any history, they can tell, credible, as I will seek to make
plain unto you by a late example. Your friend M. Crashaw has lately written
or turned into English, Printed anno 1613.
the life of Galeasius Marquis of Vico, whom he would feign canonize for a
great Saint of your Gospel, which Treatise came to my hands together with
yours. There I find the poor Bachelour In his second Epistle dedicatory.
much vexed to answer an objection, which we might make, requiring a reason,
why that story may be thought of more credit then ours, and that it is not a
feigned thing, devised by your selves, to allure and entice the peoples mind,
and to set a flourish on your Religion, with which kind of dealing you
perpetually charg the stories of our Church. I answer first in general (says
he) far be it from us and our religion to use such means, either for our
selves or against our adversaries. No, we are content the Church of Rome have
the glory of that garland. Popery being a sandy, and a shaken, a rotten, and
tottering building, needs such propps to underset it, but truth dare show her
face and fear no colors: thus he.

16. Is not this wisely and valiantly spoken? You say Counters. p. 9.
, that he has strong powders in store, to batter my Pinnace, which I believe
and think they are such powders, as smoke, and make an empty noise, fearful
to the simple, ridiculous to the learned. Neither do I understand, what he
means to say, that truth fears no colors. Perchance the seely Bachelour
would say, needs no colors, co^te^t with ye show of her native beauty, which
we confess to be most certain of our Catholic truth, not sandy, but grounded
on the Tues Petrus and super hanc petram etc. Matt. 16.
Rock, never shaken, but against which all heretics rushing have been broken,
not rotten though ancient, yet never decaying, the truth of God ever remaining.
Finally not tottering but most constant and not to be moved, which her
strength, none more then her enemies feel. Nulli magis Petrae durities quam
ferientibus nota est, this Bachelour promises In his first Epist. dedicatory.
large volumes to stop the mouths of wickedness. But if his discourse be no
more substantial then this is, I see not what better use the learned can make
of his book, then to stop the mouths of mustard-potts.

17. This in general, but for the particular, says he, I answer, cunning
liars, as many monks were, framed their tales of men that lived long ago, and
places a far off, that so the reports might not so easily be brought to trial:
but in this case, it is far otherwise, the circumstances are notorious, the
persons and places famousely known, Vicum, Naples, Italy, Geneua are places
well known, Cala^tonius his Father, Charles the fifth his Lord and master,
Pope Paul the fourth his uncle, are persons well known. Examine either persons
or places, and spare none, truth seeks no corners. Thus M. Crashaw discourses
for the history of his wiuing He married a second wife his first being alive.
Saint, which we likewise use for the defense of the Miracles of the Virgin
Mother. The places and persons named, in most of Lipsius his stories are
famous, Flanders, Bruxells, Louaine, let them examine persons and places, we
desire no favor, truth seeks no corners: for example, the famous Miracle of
John Clement Lip. D. V. Sichem c. 45.
, that he was lame from his Nativity, and of a monstrous composition of body,
his thighs and feet contracted, and turned toward the forepart of his breast,
so as his knees did grow and stick thereto, his body was round, or in a manner
sphericall, unfit to stand, lie, or walk, this the whole City of Bruxells can
witness. Being carried to our Blessed Ladies Chapel at Sichem in a wagon, and
having confessed his sins, and received the Blessed Sacrament, he did in the
end, find his contracted and bound feet to be loosed and stretched forth with
such strength, that his dublet that stayed them was broken in pieces, so as
presently he stood on his feet himself, the behoulders being amazed thereat.
These things were seen to whole troops both at Louaine and Bruxells, which
knew him when he was lame, and who did not run (says Lipsius) to feed his eyes
with the sight of so great a wonder? I heard principal Physicians (says he)
and those not rash, nor ready to believe Miracles, affirm that this was indeed
the strength and hand of God. Thus Lipsius.

18. Behold Sir Edward, a Miracle. Can you say of the Maker? you cannot with
any truth, except you mean the maker of mankind, who by the Intercession of
his Mother, reformed this monstrous error of nature, Examine places and
persons, disprove the story who can, we crave no sparing, neither is the time
so far past, scarce ten years since, it may be soon examined. I have heard
that those potent, pious, and prudent Princes, whom you so commend, Let. page
105.
did show this miraculous creature and monument of Gods infinite power and
goodness, to that noble Personage The Earl of Hart-ford
you waited on in his Embassage, assuring him upon their knowledge, who knew the
party both before and after the cure, that the Miracle was most undoubted, at
which sight it is very probable you were present. This may be the cause that
you scoff at our Lady of Hall, not daring to meddle with Sichem, the
remembrance of which place could affoard you small comfort to drive away your
melancholy fitts. The Miracles growing from that tree, sweet repast to a
religious mind, are sower Crabbs to an Atheistical taste, which no fire can
make soft, nor any sack and sugar sweet. So that notwithstanding your jests and
skoffes, I may conclude, that the Miracles of our B. Lady, written by Lipsius,
are as undoubted as any historyes, which in the compass of humane certainty
can be.

19. Neither can I wonder enough at the miraculous impudency of your
Ministers, who having accused such famous Miracles as ours are for false, dare
set to sale their own toys and trifles, as most credible things. I will not
serve you in the mold-eaten miracle of John Nicholls, See the Discovery of John
Nicolls and the acts and momuments of Fox.
that a bird muted on a Catholics beard, who dyed by the sent thereof, A
seely fellow that out of want of wit to save his life, by cutting of his
beard, gave a sweet miracle to the Protestants Church.

20. Joseph Hall a more mannerly Minister, brings you in a more fresh dish of
meat, a miraculous tongue which he got in his travails in the low Countries.
A Graphiere told him Dec. 1. ex 5.
that a certain heretic being condemned to be burned, went singing to the
stake, for which the Magistrate caused his tongue to be cut out, and in
punishment hereof, the Magistrates son that was borne afterward, had his
tongue hanging down upon his chinne, like a Dear after long chase. This
Miracle puts so much tongue into the Minister, that he cries out, go now
Lipsius and write the history of thy Goddess, and confirm Superstition by
strange events: judge you that have seen ever the Chapel, if Hall or Sichem
have yielded out more memorable things. Thus he. How would these hens cackle,
could they lay an egg worth the finding, that thus bragg of a shell full of
wind? First, he cannot tell of what Religion that Sectary was, whom he takes
up for his martyr. It is likely he was an Arian or Anabaptist, who are not
wanting in these parts, and run as desperately to the stake, and sing as
sweetly in the fire as any Protestant ever did. The wonder also does not
surpass the power of Nature, much less of the devil, whose delight is to
work Miracles, that may disfigure and mishape men, in whom he hates the image
of God. But what is this story, were it true, to the Miracles Lipsius relates
of our Blessed Lady, surpassing all power of nature, not taken from a Graphyere
whispering into a Ministers ear, but witnessed by the consent of Towns,
Cities, Princes, and whole Countries? Wherefore though those children held out
their tongues lik calves, yet more caluish tongue was the Ministers, that
having derided Lipsius relatio^s, as fables, could tell this tale as a credible
story.

20. If you loath John Nicholls dung, or cannot believe Joseph Halls tongue,
John Fox brings you a dayntie and rare dish, Cranmers own heart, which in the
fire, his whole body being consumed into ashes, was found whole and entire:
which wonder seems to me the greater, in regard of the tenderness of that your
Martyrs heart, more flexible the wax to any Religion which the Prince would
have him bend unto. He changed with See Act. and Monum. the life of Cram.
King Henry, and again in King Edwards reign, and not many days before his
death he recanted and subscribed to the Catholic Religion Acts. vbi supra.
for fear of Queen Mary, wherein he continued so long as he had hope to live,
but when he saw his other treasons had shut the gates of the Queens mercy
against him, he went in a rage to the fire, which being to reueng his heresy,
consumed his body which professed that crime, yet spared his heart, where it
found neither heresy nor any Religion, besides an indifferency to all faiths.
Wherefore I wonder that M. Francis Mason Consec. of the Bishops. p. 73.
in his new book would lymme, or rather lyme that relic with these verses:
Ecce inuicta fides cor inuiolabile seruat,
Nec medijs flammis corda perire sinit.
Cranmer amid the fiery flames
his heart vnscorht was found.
For why? Behold vnda^ted faith,
preserved it safe and sound.


22. But was that heart found perfect and whole in the fire? By whom I pray you?
by Catholics? Why are they not named? By Protestants? Why did they not take it
up? Did they fear to scorch their Protestant fingers in the ashes of that fire
that spared a Protestant heart? If they took it up, what is become of it? Where
is it kept? Who did ever see it in Queen Elizabeth's reign? Either their
impudency is great, so constantly to relate a miracle, which none of them saw,
or else their negligence was extreme, that have permitted such a monument of
Gods power, Miracle of their Gospel, and pledge of their faith to perish. I
dare not urge M. Mason too far, least he bring me the next time he writes as
authentical Records for the co^seruatio^ of Cranmers heart in Lambeth Chapel,
as he has printed now at last, when such are dead as might control them,
which their importunity could never obtain in their life, for the ordinations
of his Bishops in the same place. One thing Sir Edward let me warn you, though
happily M. Maso^ might find out a true Register for that miraculous heart, yet
be not over greedy to feed on it, lest percha^ce you meet with poison: you are
not ignorant I think that Germanicus his heart was found whole and vnco^sumed
in the fire, as In vita Caligulae. c. 1.
Suetonius writes, the cause whereof was through a certain poison his enemies
had given him. Whether your Martyr, who being so ready to have changed his
faith upon hope of life seems to have had a very weak faith of another life,
besides this present, took poison to prevent the pain of fire, specially not
thinking to have gone so soon to the stake Mason vbi supra.
, I will not define. Only this I say, it is not wisdom for any man's faith to
feed over hastily upon so dangerous a dish of meat.

23. This Miracle you see is great, yet M. Crashaw in his late history of his
S. Marquis of Vico has a Miracle of more esteem, to wit two Maids not burned
nor scorched in a great fire. For he tells us, how this Neapolitan living in
Genua, not to be at the charges of a man, kept only two maid-seruants in the
house, for his daily service and attendance, who yet remained still maids,
though the Marquis did so extremely burn, that he could not be kept back from
taking a new wife before his former Life of Gal. c. 16.
were dead. Your holy Calvin did tell him of great scandal that thereby might
accrue to your Gospel, how the wicked would laugh their wiuing Religion to
scorn. But the Gentleman (says M. Crashaw) replied, that the case was with
him so, that he could not abstain, and participated with Reverend Calvin a
secret reason for which he affirmed, he had a necessity to marry. This
notwithstanding you must believe that fire did abstain from scorching of
flax, which so many years together did domestically converse with him. This
is the greatest miracle your gospel did ever beget, greater then the not
burning of Cranmers heart in material fire, yet a man may know Vicum, Naples,
Italy, Genua, and search there long enough, before he find the certainty
thereof. Calvin would perchance say most of this matter, to whom he
participated those secret reasons; but because they were secrets, we will not
sift into them, so that I am content M. Crashaw take up this privy Miracle of
his Italian Professor for his privy Protestants in Italy.

24. I think Sir you do see that your writers cannot be well excused from
impudency, who with the same breath wherewith they explode our witnessed
histories vent their own tales, as things deserving belief. You had reason to
say Let. page 102.
though presuming too much on your Ministers modesty you did err in saying,
that you are not ashamed to confess that you have no other miracles then those
which were wrought by Christ, the Prophets, and Apostles, which were, you say,
seals of the very same truth you hold. Wherein you dance the ordinary
galliard your Ministers pipe unto you, who still beg the question in hand,
that yours is the same truth that Christ, and his Apostles taught. Which we
prove cannot be, because you do not work Miracles, as Christ did, who says,
he that belieueth in me shall do the works I do and greater Io. 14.12.
which words as your English translations on the bible printed 1576.
expound, signify, that the gift of working Miracles, goes still with the true
faith, and shines for ever in the Church, which confessedly wanting in yours,
you have no great cause to vaunt that yours is the Apostolical faith.

25. Some of your writers, seeing our Relatio^s to be authentical, as none can
be more, have not brazen faces to deny the stories, yet their heart and tongue
is no less impious, not fearing to affirm that these Miracles, are Miracles
of the Devil, and Antichrists lying wonders. Which phansy though I find it not
in your book, yet I will seek to confute it, knowing it to be one of the false
Notes your Ministers often sing unto you. Six arguments occurr unto me, which
show the vanity of that conceit, and how inexcusable Protestants are, who
reject our Miracles upon this seely phansy. The first is, the uncertainty of
the doctrine, that the Pope is Antichrist, which Gabriel Powel. de Antichristo
page 2.
though some, who together with their Religion have lost their wits, do set
down as an Article of your Protestant Creed, no less certain among you the^
that God is, yet many of your more learned Doctors do reject the same, as a
fable. The most grave and judicious that hold it, urge it no further, then as a
conjecture His Maiestyes premonitory Epist. page 106.
. Now be you judge, whether one may with a safe conscience upon a phansy, or
upon a confessed uncertain conjecture, deny the broad seal of God, despise
his hand writing, which the eyes and all senses of the body testify to be his.
A Subject that should condemn the Kings warrant or his command, under the
broad seal what Jury would acquit him upon the Plea, that he had a phansy or a
conjecture that it was counterfeit? To give to the Devil the works that sense
and reason judge to be Gods, is the most heinous sin that may be, which the
Jews did commit, Athanas. tract. in illud, Si quis dixerit verbum.
when they said of Christ, in Beelzebub the Prince of Devils does he cast out
Devils Matthew. 13.
. A sin never to be pardoned in this world, nor in the next. Is it wisdom to
venture to commit such a sin upon a conjecture? If conjectures might suffice,
the Pharisees could have alleged diverse for their blasphemy against Christ.
Reason teaches that such smokes must vanish away at the shyning of clear
truth, that fearful surmises yield unto the evidence of sense: this then is
the first reason to prove them inexcusable, that they have but a coniecturall
defense of so heinous a crime.

26. The second reason is, that Protestants have no more reason to condemn
these as Antichrists wonders, then the Miracles reported by ancient Authors
long before Antichrist appeared, according to their own account, for those
ancient Miracles are thunderclapps that shake the foundations of your Gospel,
no less then ours of this present age. Call to mind the points of our faith,
you most impugn in your Letter, you shall find most famous Miracles to
confirm them, recorded by most grave and learned Fathers. What Lipsius of
Louaine did ever write wonders, either more for number or greater for quantity,
done at the shrine of any Saint, then those that S. Augustine in his 22. book
of the City of God, has registered as most certainly wrought by the Relics
of S. Stephen Plurimi conficiendi sunt libri, nec tamen omnia colligi poterunt.
l. 22. de Ciuit. c. 8.
? Read that book Sir, and I dare say, you will there find either Miracles that
may convert your heart to some fear of God, or else matter for senseless
infidelity, to drive a way melancholy fitts with loud laughing. You may behold
Histories as incredible to humane reason, and yet no less seriously told by
S. Augustine then those are of our B. Ladies in both her Chappells which
Lipsius does recount

27. You cannot endure the adoration of the divine Sacrament, which you
blasphemously call a Let. page 54.
breaden Idol in a shauelings hand. S. Chrysostom writes lib. 6. de Sacerd.
c. 4. Senem quendam admirabilem, cui reuelationu^ mysteria multa diuinitus
fuissent detecta,
, that a certain venerable old man, to whom many mysteries were revealed, --
told, that in the time of Sacrifice he once beheld a multitude of Angels,
with shining garments, compassing the wonderful table round about, who with
reverence in honor of him that lies thereon, bowed their heads, as Soldiers
do in presence of their King. And though these blessed spirits be not ever
seen, yet the Majesty of him, that is daily sacrificed is such Quod credere
abunde licet, vel ex tanto illo Sacrificio quod tum peragitur.
says S. Chrysostom, that we may believe, they are in this humble manner
continually present. Now Sir Edward you may send your Ministers to preach to
these Papists, and bid them as you bid us very gravely, Let. page 106.
leave their ducks and tucks and apish toys, and serve God in spirit and truth.

28. The sight of the bleeding wafer-cake at Bruxells, seems to have made
your ears glow Let. page 106.
, but what stories of the like Miracles might you read, were you conversant in
ancient Ecclesiastical histories? A Miracle done by S. Basil in this kind, to
omit others, a grave Cyrus Theodorus Prodromus, who lived an. 440. in Epigra.
D. Basil.
Author, above twelve hundredth years ago wrote in verse, which one thus
turned into English, Behoulding bread and in the cup redd wine,
The Jew did laugh at mysteries divine:
Which when S. Basil saw, both kinds of food,
Reached out, which straight turned into Flesh and Blood.
Our Miracles, that concern the keeping of Christ's Image with honorable
esteem, seems to you to confirm Idolatry: but what say you of that
Miracle, which Eusebius reports lib. 3. Hist. c. 14.
of the Image of Christ erected by the woman that was cured of her flux, by the
touch of his garment, under which a strange herb growing, as soon as it
touched the hemme of the garment of the Image, it had virtue to cure all
diseases? No less wonderful, is the Miracle recorded by S. Athanasius De
passione Imaginis Saluatoris in Berito. alleged by the 2. Conc. Nicen. act. 4.
and by l. 1 de gloria Mart. c. 22.
Gregorius Turonensis of two Images of Christ, which upon violence offered by
the Jews unto the^, did miraculously bleed. These and innumerable other most
authentical Miracles, wrought and written for the confirmation of the chiefest
points of our Catholic faith, before the supposed Antichrist was in the
world, do manifestly confute the wicked blasphemy, by which you would make our
Catholic Miracles to be his.

29. And hence is declared a third reason, that your spite against our
Miracles, forces your Doctors to join against ancient Christians, and
Catholic Fathers, with Infidels and Heretics, and to deny and deride the
same Miracles they did. Your Osiander says Cent. 4. p. 326. Diaboli fimulata
fuga voluerunt vulgi Superstitionem confirmare.
that the Devils vanishing away at the name of Christ, and sign of the
Cross, made by Julian, frighted by his sudden appearance in a fearful
shape, was counterfaite, to bring in the superstitious worship of the same, as
though it had force to drive away Devils, wherein he does shake hands with
Iulians Magitians, who likewise would have it a voluntary, not forced flight,
of that memorable Miracle of the buried corpse of the Martyr Babilas, and of the
Devils forced confession, that he could not give answer in his Idol, by
reason of Babilas being so near, which S. Chrysostom l. 4. co^t. Gentiles.
so much urges against Infidels. The same Author (with who^ your Centuristes
join Cent. 4. col. 1446.
says, Cent. 4. p. 377. Responsu^ haud dubie a Satana ideo datum, vt paulatim
cultu^ Idololatri cu^ Reliquiaru^ in Ecclesiam inueheret.
that it was an answer given by the Devil without doubt, to bring into the
Church the idolatrous worship of Relics.

30. But what need I speak of particular Miracles in general of all the
Miracles done at the Relics, and by the Intercession of Martyrs, which were
so many, as Theodoret writes l. 8. aduersus Graecos.
their Temples over the world, no less in the primitive Church then now, were
full of tables and pictures of hands, feet, eyes, heads and other parts of
the body, hung up, as tokens of miraculous cures obtained by the Martyrs
intercessions. These Miracles Theodoret urges against Infidelles, whereof S.
Chrysostom says Sente^tiae nostrae abunde fidem faciu^t quo tidiana quae a
Martyribus eduntur Miracula. lib. 4. cont. Gentes.
, that the Miracles done by Martyrs abundantly suffice to witness the truth of
Christianity. Of those Miracles I say, M. Robert Abbots Demonstr. 1. Antichr.
c. 11. page 223. Plane superstitiosum est, and non nisi spuma veteris Ecclesiae.
blusheth not to write, that the primitive practice was superstitious, and
those Miracles the froath of the ancient Church, of which, says he, the
Babilonia^ Venus was bred, that afterward brake forth into all manner of
abominable fornication. Thus they reject the Miracles, by which Christianity
was bred in men's hearts, many Countries converted to Christ, the Church of God
enlarged over the Earth, which Church they must grant was a Venus, bred of
foame and froath. What writing is intemperate, if this be sober? What can be
blasphemy against the holy Ghost, if this be not? To assign the Miracles, by
which the world was made Christian, to the Devil, making his foame and froath
the seed of Christianity.

31. The fourth reason is the impiety of this devise, which I touched before.
For this conceit does much impair both the love of God in his servants, and
his fear in his enemies, seeing neither the one may expect from him miraculous
helps, nor the other dread extraordinary punishments. The Devil only in this
age must rule the roast, and be thought the Author of all wonders. If God when
Heretics blaspheme his Mother, and play with her nose, strike their tongues
out of their heads, and their best noses from their faces, Heresy teaches
them to turn their hearts that want tongue, and their faces without noses
against heaven, and call the Author of that miracle, Devil. So that if
Atheists can keep themselves friends with the Devil, they need not by this
doctrine greatly fear Gods miraculous power. Our adversaries themselves namely
M. Crashaw Jesuits Gospel*
, do confess, that such is the Atheism and prophanes of men, that never since
the pla^ting of the Gospel, Miracles were more needful, might they be
expected. Why may they not be expected, if they be so needful? is Gods power
or his love less toward mankind since Luthers preaching? If his providence
never fails his children in so weighty affair as marriage, as the same M.
Crashaw Life of Galeatius c. 21.
says, why should they think the same defective in working Miracles, so
necessary to maintain Religion against profaneness? Why should God be bound,
under pain of being thought Antichrist not to work Miracles?

32. Were this true, we might pardon the same M. Crashaw, for saying Jesuits
Ghos. page 30. 31.
that we always paint Christ in our Churches as a child, but the Virgin like
a woman, and a commanding Mother: that we say, that all the Miracles be hers,
as though he being a child could not, or in the presence of his Mother would
not work Miracles. He might add with as great truth, that we say that he dare
not, for she being a shrew, would rappe him on the fingers, did he stretch out
his hand to do any Miracle before her. But though these be senseles slanders,
yet were your Protestant fancy, concerning Miracles, true, the B. Virgin might
seem to have reason, to hold Christ's hands, from doing any Miracles, whilst
he is a Child, least you make him Antichrist when he comes to be a Man. She
is wise to work all the Miracles her self, whom her Sex may warrant from
being thought the man of sin. Yet B. Virgin be not over bold with Miracles,
least they give us a Pope Mary to be Antichrist, as they have done a Pope Joan.

33. But is it not a Miracle think you, that men endued with reason, should
let such lewd lies pass to the Print? Do we never paint Christ as a perfect
Man, redeeming the world upon the Cross, and Judging the same by fire? Are not
these pictures frequent in our Churches? And when Christ is represented in the
Virgins arms, she is painted not as a commanding, but as a Mother adoring her
Son, that by her countenance one may see, that whilst her breasts gave him suck,
her heart did offer him the frankencense of prayer as to her God. Do we not make
the Miracles of our Church rather his the^ hers, done at her request, but by
his power? Which Miracles she does ask, not for her own honor, but for his,
to establish in men's hearts, that faith Miracula Martyrs faciunt, vel potius
illis orantibus Deus, vt fides illa proficiat, qua eos non Deos esse Nostros,
sed Vnum Deum nobiscum habere credimus Aug. l. 22 de Ciuit. c. 10.
which does believe that not she but he is God, and she only honorable for his
sake, and saved by his blood, holy by his grace, glorious by his mercy,
powerful by his hand. Why should we not think, that the Devil does hate this
faith? How can any Christian think, that the Devils do Miracles to confirm
so pious doctrine?

34. And this is my fifth Argument to prove our Miracles true, that they are
beneficial both to the body and soul of men, which therefore without
blasphemy may not be given from God to the Devil. Those wicked spirits do seek
in their works to make themselves Mirabiles, non vtiles, as S. Augustine
says, wonderful, not beneficial unto men: they desire to amaze and astonish
rather then help and relieve men's senses. Such are Miracles, which Antichrist
shall work, as making the picture of a beast speak, bringing down fire from
heaven, faygning himself dead and rising again. For neither is the Devil so
courteous toward mankind, that he will bestow benefits on their bodies, nor God
so hard, as to let him entrap their souls by so strange illusions as multitudes
of such Miraculous helps and benefits are. Now the Miracles of the B. Virgin
and other, wherewith God does daily adorn our Churches, are suitable to such as
Christ wrought, and have still been done by Saints in all ages since, as
casting out of Devils, healing of incurable diseases, delivering from
dreadful dangers and the like, which either deforme or afflict mankind, some
punishments laid on blasphemers excepted, which are so few, as they may seem a
drop or two of gall in a sea of honey, which is a sign, they proceed from a
boundles ocea^ of goodness, through the sweet conduct of the intercession of his
B. Mother. Yet the benefits, which by these Miracles come to men's souls are
greater, when by them some are converted from heresy, others reclaimed from
bad life, many persuaded to frequent Sacraments, to make sorrowful Confession
of their sins, restore things unjustly taken, satisfy for wrongs offered,
spend much time in prayer, to be bountiful to the poor, finally to give
themselves to heroical exercise of Christian virtues. Which things with great
joy Catholics do daily behold, and have cause therein to glorify God.

35. But a greater fruit reaped from our Miracles and a clearer sign that they
are of God, is the Conversion of Infidels. Many Countries partly by these
means, partly by the good life of our Religious Preachers of Gods word, have
been in this age, wone to Christ to the increase of the Christian name. These
Miracles have bin so clear, and the fruit of the^ so manifest, that some
learned Protestants Phlip. Nicolai de Regno Christ. l. 1. page 312. 313. 314.
Iesuitae licet Idolo latrae sint, tame^ possunt per Nomen Christi magnas
virtutes co^dere apud Indos.
herein not unlike to the Magicians of Egypt acknowledged, both in the Miracles
and conversion, the finger of God. But they add, that such Miracles Iesuitae in
prima Indorum Conuersione sese Lutheranos sieve Eua^gelicos praebent. Ibid p. 53.
, are done in the confirmation of the Protestant Gospel, which the Jesuits
preach in those Countries. I think sobriety will smile at the Protestants
felicity in this point, who may sit by the fire side, or ly quiet in their
warm beds whilst the Jesuits go into barbarous Countries to work Miracles,
to prove, forsooth their Gospel that Friars may marry Nuns, and be saved in
idle life by sole faith. I should think it more probable that Luther in his
nights conference with the Devil De Missa Angulari.
did convert and make him a friend unto Christ, that now he will be content to
work Miracles to glorify and extol his name.

36. My sixth and last reason is the providence of God, most desirous of the
salvation of mankind, not permitting them to be tempted above their power 1.
Cor. 10.
. Much less will he lend his infinite power unto Satan to tempt Jacob. 1. Deus
intentator malorum.
men, that they may be damned. Some few toys and trifles God does permit to
try the constancy of his faithful, as were the Miracles the Donatists did
bragg of Aug. de unit. Eccles. c. 16
, strange visions that their sacred Sisters saw sleeping, or dreamed of waking.
Those which Antichrist shall work are greater, yet the vanity of such signs,
a constant faith with competent diligence may easily discover: but the
Catholic miracles are many, great, and most witnessed as has been proved.
Such I say they are, that our adversaries in the end are forced to grant, that
they are true miracles done by Gods own hand, which no power under his
oronipotency can work.

37. Now their last refuge is, that which your great Champion M. Whitaker
betakes Whitaker. de Eccles. page 348. No^ ignoro vera miracula, non nisi diuina
vi fieri posse
himself unto, to wit, that true Mirarcles, which none but God can do, though
known to be such Ex neutro genere miraculorum sufficiens testimoniu^ aut
certu^ argumentum colligitur.
, do not demonstrate the truth of religion. He gives this desperate reason,
to wit, Constat Deum no^ modo veris sed and falsis Doctoribus vim tribuere
huiusmodi Miracula facie^di, non tamen, quo confirmet eorum falsa dogmata, sed
quo tentet eos, ad quos mittantur.
that God does give power to work true Miracles unto false teachers, not to
confirm their false opinions, says he, but to tempt those unto whom they are
sent. Can any doctrine be more dreadful or harsh in a Christians ear then
this? How can any man know that God does not allow that doctrine, which false
prophets say he does allow, and show his broad seal for their saying? But this
M. Whitaker cannot deny, but that Catholics at the day of Judgment may have
that plea, which a learned and ancient Father thought invincible, which he
setts down for our comfort in these words Rich. de S. Vict. l. 1. de Trinit.
c. 2. Domine si error est, quod credimus, a te deceptisumus.
: O Lord, if it be an error which we believe, we are deceived by thee, for
thou have confirmed these things to us, with such signs and wonders, which
could not be done but by thee! Protestants will grant, that we are deceived by
God, by the wonders and Miracles which our teachers said that he wrought, and
works by the^ to confirm this truth: yet say they we must be damned. The
best is, we firmly believe God is not Satan nor a tempter of men, much less
will he work Miracles to deceive them, least of all lend the Devil his
omnipotency, to draw such as desire to serve and love him for ever to Hell.
This is our comfort grounded upon an infinite goodness, which is so great, that
we cannot envy you the mirth you take in reading our Miracles and roasting your
crabbs by the fire side, to drive away your melancholy fits. God send you
greater comfort in the next world, and that you may not there eat sower crabs
and worse meat Caput aspidum suget. Job. 20.
with Infidells, deriding the Miracles of Christ, at that dreadful fire that
has no end.

38. Here I might end Purgatories Triumph over your Hell, but that in your
Counter-snarle you quarrel with me about the first conversion of the English
Nation, unto the Christian religion, which I said in my Treatise, was performed
by S. Gregory and those holy Monks he sent: you spend two Paragraphs The 13.
and 14.
in confutation of what I said, which discourse you term the pulling of a
Crow, page 46.
being indeed a heap of untruths, plucked out of M. Io. White of Eccles his
book, a Minister not so white in name as black for his false dealing, as may
partly appear by what shall be discovered in the next Chapter, you having copied
in a manner all you have written about this matter out of him Way to the
Church. digess. 49.
, with little variety either in sense or words: where also Purgatory shall be
freed from the imputations of an heathnish superstition, and licentious
doctrine you charge upon it, Let. page 79. and 42.
seeing that in the confessed chief Patron thereof S. Gregory, it triumphed over
the Paganism of our Nation, and brought them not only to the knowledge of the
true God, but also to the profession of most holy life, as shall be proved.

THE SIXTH CHAPTER. THAT S. GREGORY THE Pretended greatest Patron of Purgatory,
by the Monks he sent, FIRST Converted the English Nation unto Christianity,
the now Catholic Roman Faith. Where also the Falsehood of other Ministers,
namly of M. White, and M. Mason about this point are refuted.
THE Occasion of this Encounter, was an insulting Reprehension I found in your
Letter pa. 92.
and did suppose was suggested unto you by some Minister against us, that in
handling Controversies, we are wilfully perverse, that we still persist in our
former opinions, notwithstanding your strong Protestant arguments that have bin
brought against them. You give example, concerning the first Conversion of our
Country into the Christian faith, which I did except against in my Treatise, as
offering us therein exceeding great wrong. And because you indighted me of fraud
Counters. p. 55.
that I conjure your words together to raise my own sense, I will first set
down what you writ, and I objected against you, that the Reader may see,
whether I changed your meaning or no.

2. Having ended your scripturall arguments against Purgatory, you insult over
us in this manner: Lettr. p. 91. 92.
Why should I hope to satisfy you in this? as if I could urge that, which has
not bin long since propounded to this purpose? What is it that can gain assent
in those that are wilfully perverse? To give you one instance for all, how
often has it bin demonstratiuely proved, that setting some frivolous
ceremonies aside, our Country of Britany was no whit behoulding to proud and
insolent Augustine, your Great Gregoryes Delegate, for any matter of faith.
Gildas his testimony has bin urged, who lived before Augustines coming, that
the Brittans received the Christian faith from the beginning. Baronius has
told you, that S. Peter was here, Theodoret that S. Paul, Nicephorus that
Simon Zelotes, and some, that Joseph of Arimathia did plant the faith amongst
us. Many forcible induceme^ts have bin produced, that even in the primitive
Church, Christianity harbored in this isle. These instances and many more,
have bin again and again renewed, without any verified contradiction, and yet
as if it had bin a matter which you never heard of before, you would (as in all
other points) make us in this follow you up and down, wearying the world with
a Circular discuss, bobbing your credulous Ladies with these Syrenicall
insinuations. These are your true words, which I excepting against, complained
of your trencher-Minister, in this sort.

3. They make Overthrow. part. 2. c. 8 p. 318. 319.
the credulous Knight say, that when we speak of the conversion of England by
S. Gregory's means,

we weary the world, and bob our credulous Ladies with a circular discuss, as
though we had never heard of Gildas his testimony, that the Britta^s received
the Christian faith from the beginning; nor that Baronius has told, that S.
Peter was here, Theodoret that S. Paul, Nicephorus that Simon Zelotes, and some
that Joseph of Arimathia did plant the faith amongst us Thus the Knight
writes, by their suggestion, by which it is clear, that he never read the
book he seems to speak against; nay he does not know so much as the subject
and argument thereof, to wit, Of the three Conuersions of England, which book
the Ladies (if they have it at hand, as he seems to complain, that it is
still on their Cushions) cannot look into without seeing the falsehood of this
saying, and how the trencher-Schoolmaisters of the Knight would bob them also
with a plain untruth, as they have done him.

4. For that book takes notice of, and handles largly Gildas his testimony,
declaring the meaning thereof to be, that in the time of Tiberius Christ
appeared to the world, not that Christan faith then entered into Brittayne,
which is altogether improbable; seeing Tiberius lived but five years after
Christ's Resurrection, in which time the Apostles either went not out of Jury,
or did not preach but to the Jews only, nemini loquentes verbu^ nisi solum
Iudaeis, as S. Luke says in the Acts Act. 11. v. 19.
That S. Peter was here, that Treatise does take notice of, and brings diverse
arguments to confirm the same, urging his preaching, as the first conversion
of England, though other Apostles and Disciples might help thereunto. Neither
do I think any English Christian is so auerted from the Roman Sea, that he
will scorn this Kingdom should be the Conuertite of that great Apostle,
though the first Roman Bishop. These things in our books we take notice of,
and examine them more exactly then Protestants have done

5. But to what purpose are these brought by Protestants? The Brittons received
the Christian faith, some of them at the least in time of the Apostles under S.
Peter the first Roman Bishop, the whole Realm openly and publicly under
Eleutherius Pope in the second age, by Fugatius and Damianus sent from Rome, in
King Lucius his time, which Sir Edward makes no mention of: what is this
against the third conversion of the English Nation, which long after this time,
being heathen, having expelled the Brittons, began to inhabit the Realm; who
(the Brittons neglecting them) were converted by S. Augustines means, sent by
Gregory Pope, as that Treatise proves, and all Histories of our Country do
witness, and even Protestants themselves do confess, as is proved in the first
Chapter, and first section of the learned Treatise of the Protestants Apology
for the Roman Church, and that it was converted to the now Catholic Roman
faith? Thus do Ministers bob Sir Edward, making him print such stuff either
false or impertinent, with the loss of his honor, which I dare say, had he
seen the book, he would never have done against his conscience and knowledge.

6. This I then wrote, to which you make this answer: First should I (say you
page 47.
) grant all, that I never read that maister-worke of the three Conuersions, I
see not what inconvenience will ensue. Is there no better employment of my
time, then the perusal of that Arch-fugitiues lines? Or has none besides of
their faction beaten this bush, or harped on the same string? Or am I in
conscience bound to put the seal of my assent to whatsoever F. Persons did
write? Thus you: but who does not see that this your answer is impertinent,
and your lines fugitives from the matter in hand. I did not accuse you, for not
reading F. Persons lines, nor for otherwise employing your time, nor for not
giving assent to what he wrote I charged your Letter with belying and
slaundering his, and our manner of proceeding in that point of controversy
concerning the conversion of the English. I wondered at your saying that we
deal in this matter, as if we had never so much as heard of the conversion of
the Brittons in the Apostles time, which I proved our Authors, namely, the
three Conuersions, to make most particular mention of. I did presuppose that
had you perused that book, you would not have uttered so notorious an untruth,
nor have termed that Treatise, where this point is so substantially handled,
not any instance you could mention being omitted therein, a circular discuss,
or a guilding of old weather-beaten objections, with new glistring words.

7. I know it is to be inexcusable rashness, for one to give a proud and
peremptory Censure of books he never perused: to excuse you from which
imputation, I sought to make your Minister the author thereof, to the end both
to lay your errors before your eyes in the least offensive manner, as also
because I did, and might very probably think that some Minister had had his
finger in your Pie, his heart and hand in that falsehood, I could not acknowledge
that, that accusation was indeed originally yours, without charging you either
with palpable rashness or wilful falsehood: Neither can you, now you have taken
the matter upon you, quit your hands handsomely thereof. For either you perused
our Treatises concerning this matter or no. If not, your rashness is evident to
censure what you never read, to make your self Judge, and condemn a multitude
of learned men in a matter you are wholly ignorant of Iudicant multi priusqua^
legerunt, priusquam inspexeru^t quidem. Lips. de vesta. ad Lector.
: what greater presumption then this? But if you did diligently peruse our
authors, principaly those that thought were to have handled this controversy
most exactly, then your insincerity is inexcusable, in slaundering them of
proceeding, as if they had never heard of your learned Instances, which they do
most largly and particulerly handle, as you cannot deny. I confess (say p. 48.
you) that he (F. Persons, in the three Conuersions) acknowledged that S Peter
was here in England: he mentions also, perhaps upon greater probabilities,
the coming of S. Paul, Simon Zelotes, Aristobulus, and Joseph of Arimathia.
Did you know these things Sir? How then could your heart choose but give your
pen the ly, when you write we deal peruersly with you about this point, as
though the Conuersions of the Britons by the forenamed Apostle and Apostolical
men, were a matter we never had heard of.

8. But you demand, where do I say (say you) that they weary the world, and bob
their credulous Ladies, as if they had never heard of Gildas his testimony, I
never named their author, nor questioned the matter, howsoever it pleases him
to join the pieces of two sentences, which are almost a whole page distant,
and to fetch his marginall note nintie and two pages off. This is the great
injury I have done you, whereof you so grievously complain. This is my
coniuring your words to make my own sense. You would have the Ladies like so
many Hecuba's take violent reueng upon me, for this my causlesse, as you say,
traducing of a Knight, to whom their honor is no less dear then his own p.
55.
. How dear their honor is to you, the vnknightly phrases wherewith you honor
them, in your Epistle, may sufficiently show, to omit the foul Popinians
wherewith you charg them in your Snarle. Which injuries, were they disposed to
revenge out of a worldly stomach, rather then pardon out of Christian charity,
they should need, like frantike Hecuba's (by which comparison you seek to
disgrace them) to fly themselves in your face. They want not their Hectors who
in defense of their Mothers honor, would make you practice that point of
prowess you much commend, p. 68.
to run away as well as fight.

9. To return to your accusation of me, for falsifying the meaning of your
letter, the particulers are so ridiculous and idle, that I am loath to spend
time in the discovery of the^. I fetch, you say, my marginall note 92. pages
off: a great fault doubtless, what if I had fetched it 2000. miles off? I pray
you what matter is it how far of marginall notes are fetched, so they be true
and fit for the purpose for which they are brought: which you neither do, nor
can deny, that mine was? I said, that you seemed to complain that the book of
the three Conuersions lay upon the Ladies cushions, to which I cited in my
margent a sentence out of your Epistle to them; where reproving them for being
over busy with the Antiquity of your Church, which they cannot conceive, you
say, quid quod libri Stoici inter sericos valere puluillos ament? This saying
directed against our books, that discover the green years of your
Mother Church, and the perpetual tradition of the Roman, seemed to me to aim
specially at the three Conuersions that treats of that subject, which was
then very famous and plausible in the hands of many: in which opinion I am now
more confirmed, in preceauing you took your discourse out of M. Whites Church
verbatim who cites that author in the margent.

10. But, I joined the pieces of two sentences together, which in your Letter,
are almost a whole page distant. This accusation is no less vain then the
other. I did not profess to recite your words, but to set down your meaning,
which I might do, though I did put those words first which you placed last:
you set down many instances to prove a Conversion of our Country, before S.
Augustine, and then say, as if we had never heard of that matter, we bob our
credulous Ladies. I begin with this last part, and say that you wrote that we
bob our credulous Ladies, as if we had never heard of your instances, which I
particulerly did relate, being indeed the matter which you would have men think
we never take notice of in our Treatises of that subject. What difference in
sense betwixt these two sayings, as if they had never heard of the matter, they
bob their credulous Ladies, which is your in your Letter, or they bob their
credulous Ladies, as if they had never heard of these and these things, which
contain that matter; what does it import that bobbing of Ladies be the first
clause or the last? Yea but Gildas was no part of that matter you questioned.
Let any man peruse your words, he will clearly perceive both that Gildas his
testimony, was one, yea the first of the Instances, the principal part of the
matter you accused us to make our selves wilfully ignorant of, and that these
your exceptions are either idle and impertinent, as a transposition of words
without change of sense, or else false, denying that to be part of your matter,
which he that looks on it will find to be the very head thereof. But these
particulers, you say, were not by you alleged, as if we denied them. Neither
did I accuse you to have said, that we denied them, but that we make no mention
of them, that we deal as though it were a matter we never heard of.

11. But to what end then did you bring them? To prove, say you, from our
acknowledgment, that we had therefore little reason to magnify the entrance of
that Delegate with the glorious Style of the Conversion of the English Nation.
No Sir: your intention was to prove we are wilfully perverse, that we take no
notice of these matters wherein your Ministers Falsehood is apparent. Your other
Authors indeed bring them to discredit the conversion of our Country by S.
Gregoryes means, wherein I said in my Treatise, they show themselves wilfully
perverse, still coming forth with wether-beaten objections, either
impertinent, or evidently false. For if they, or you mean that the former
Authors do write, that before S. Augustines coming the British Nation was
Christian, you speak truth, but nothing to the purpose. For why might not S.
Augustine convert the English unto Christ, though the Brittons were Christians
before? And if by his entrance, and preaching he did convert them, why should
not the same be styled the Conversion of the English Nation? The impertinency
both of your argument, and accusation of our Authors shall be made clear by this
example. Suppose an Author writing an English history, say there is no fair
City in Wales, some trencher-schoole-maister, or other taking the matter in
snuff, seeks to confute it, by naming diverse fair Cities in England, as
London, York, Lincoln, Norwich, complaining that these Cities have often been
named, and painted, printed, and reprinted, and yet that Historian, as if he
had never heard of the matter, dares write, that there is not any City in
Wales, bobbing his Reader with Syrenycall insinuations. Now if it should be
proved, that, that Author makes full and honorable mention of the former
Cities, and of all the rest that are in England, extolling their greatness
and magnificence, more then any Historian before him, would not that Pedants
accusation be thought no less false and injurious, then his proofs thereof
childish and ridiculous; If I be not deceived, Sir Edward, your self would set
such a frown on him, as might make him vanish out of your sight.

12.. Now lay your hand on your breast, whom this Parable touches, laying open
your unjust proceeding and witless arguing against our Authors. They say that
our English Nation was not Christian before S. Gregoryes time, that S.
Augustine was the first that planted Christian Religion amongst the English;
you snuff, or snarle thereat; you bring out of Gildas, Baronius, Theodoret,
Nicephorus, diverse plantations of the Faith amongst the Brittons, by some
Apostles or their Disciples; you cry out upon us, that we are wilfully
perverse; that we make as if we had never heard of the Instances you bring.
When matters come to trial, you are forced to confess, that indeed they
grant those former Conuersions of the British Nation; they adorn and set them
out more then any other before them. Yea their own Historians reckon our
Treatise upon this Subject, among the worthy Monuments of our Countries
Antiquity The History of Great Britany printed anno 1606. p. 302.
. But how do the Allegations impugn what they aver? What repugnance has that
Original Conversion of the Brittons by the Apostles, with the Plantatio^ of
Christianity by S. Gregory's means among the English? The Brittons were
Christians when S. Augustine came; does it therefore follow, that the Saxons
were not Heathens? The Mountains unto which the Brittons retired, were full of
Christian Churches, might not the rest of the Land be full of Idols? Is not
both the falsehood and folly of your argument apparent? So that, as I said, the
Conuersions named by you, truly understood of Brittans only, are impertinently
brought to prove, that S. Gregory, and S. Augustine his Delegate were not the
Authors of Christianity amongst the English.

13. But if you mean, as you seem to do, that before Augustines arrival,
the Saxons, some of them at least, were Christians, your Assertion as I said,
is evidently false, against all Histories: neither do you bring any probable
reason thereof, only with a list of idle Interrogations, you fill almost a
whole page of your Snarle page 50. 51.
. I demand say you, whether S. Augustine found not in Britain, at his
arrival amongst the English Saxons, seven Bishops and an Archbishop, who were
not only Professors, but also Preachers of the Christian faith? Were there not
at that time in the Monastery of Bangor two thousand Monks? Was not Queen
Aldiberga a good Christian before she came into Kent? or had the Bishop her
Chaplain no faith at all? Will he not believe Bid, who writes that before
Augustines coming, the Brittons were infested with Arianisme and Pelagianisme?
Thus you play the Justice of Peace, wasting paper in frivolous questions. Had
your better employments of your time, to wit in laughing and sleeping pa. 68^
permitted unto you the perusal of F. Persons book, perhaps you would not
have fallen into this vanity, for which in that Treatise he does sharply
reprove another Ministerial Knight. What if some Brittons were Arians or
Pelagians before S. Augustines ariuall, must therefore the English needs be
Christans and Catholics at his coming? Queen Aldiberga and her Chaplain who
were French, had faith when he came, could not therefore the whole English
Nation want Christian faith? Suppose the 2000. of Bangor had been a Million of
Monks, yet being Brittons, quid ad Rombum? may he not be justly thought a
Ba^goring disputant that does thence infer, that at that time the Saxons were
not Heathens?

14. Augustine found an Archbishop and seven Bishops, but were those
Professors and Preachers of Christian faith among the English Saxons, as you
seem to auerr? No, they neither preached unto the^ nor lived amongst them, as
S. Gregory does expressly say in his Epistle to S. Augustine. apud Bedam lib. 1.
Histor. c. 27.
In Anglorum gente tu solum Episcopus, thou art the only Bishop among the
English. Will not you Sir Edward believe S. Bid who writes that the Brittons
could by no means be brought to preach the faith of Christ unto the Saxons?
Yet God, says he l. 1. c. 21.
forsook not his people whom he had chosen, but sent unto the forenamed
Nation, more worthy preachers of the truth, to wit, S. Augustine, and his holy
company of Monks. But the Author of the three Conuersions will teach me, you
say p. 51.
that which you believe I will be scarce willing to hear; viz, Three Conuersio^s
part. 1. c. 9. n. 1.
That from the time of King Lucius, until the coming of Augustine, which was
some hundredth years and more, they, the Brittons, did not alter their faith,
but it remained amongst them when he entered. Why should not I be willing to
hear this saying? or rather why are not you ashamed to dispute thus absurdly,
and then insult, demanding what is now become of your goodly Conversion? Why
should the true Christianity and Religion of the Brittons, when S. Augustine
entered, hinder or overthrow, the belief of that goodly and godly Conversion of
the English, effected by his entrance.

15. I confess I cannot conceive how herein you speak to the purpose, yet
you proceed daring me to a trial by the book of the three Conuersions. Dares
he (say you) let this witness be examined any further? that faith, says he,
which Augustine brought, and that which the Britons had before, must needs be
one and the self same in all material and substantial points. Upon which
evidence you make the Jury give verdict, that, Gregory's was a superficial and
not a substantial Conversion, and triumph over me, saying, has he not now
brought his hoggs to a fair market? has he read the book of the three
Conuersions? The case is clear now that his Ladies shall be able to conceive it.
Thus you: would a man in his senses discourse in this sort? I do not wonder,
that when you disputed in Oxford, men put their hands to their heads, which
you do interpret, scratching their poules for an answer. Such babbling as this,
cannot but make learned men's heads ache. This is your argument. Augustine
converted the English Saxons, to the same faith in all substantial points,
that the Brittons had before, as the three Conuersions says, Ergo he did not
substantially, but superficially convert them. Is not this a goodly argument?
Is any man so seely as not to perceive your Consequent to be ridiculous? that
it has no greater connection with your Antecedent, then has a Racket with a
Ramshorn. Yea the Contradictory of your Conclusion may from your Antecedent be
evidently deduced in this Sillogisme, unto which I dare say you will never be
able to make a clear answer: To convert substantially a Nation unto Christ,
is to plant among them the true Christian faith in all substantial points,
which they had not before.

But (even in the very place you alleadg to discredit S. Augustines Conversion
of the English) the three Conuersions does acknowledge, that S. Augustine did
plant the true Christian faith among the English, which they had not before, to
wit the same in all substantial points, that was before delivered to the
Brittons from Eleutherius.

Ergo, (by that testimony) S. Augustine did substantially convert the English
Nation unto Christ, the contrary whereof you did thence infer.

Have you not brought your Hoggs to a fair market, that send such doting
discourses and gross stuff unto Ladies, whose writer you undertake to be? Yet
your imbecility and weak arguing deserves some pardon.

16. As the draught can hardly be fayrer then the pattern, so neither your
discourses more learned then those Ministers books, whence you copied them. He
is a good Archer that hitteth the white, when the white is deplaced: it is not
his fault though he shoot wide of the mark. Your aim in this discourse at
your White Minister, whose digression about this point, partly in your letter,
partly in your Snarle you have translated as your own, in a manner verbatim,
as I said before, where likewise the said Minister has another ridiculous
discourse about this point, which you did wisely note to copy out into your
learned Snarle. It is objected, says he, that the faith thus planted at the
first in our Country, was extinguished again by Paganism and Heresy, in that
part of the Land, which was inhabited by the English Saxons, whom Austine
converted. This is indeed our objection. M. White let us hear how
substantially you make answer unto it. I Way to the Church p. 356.
answer, says he, three things. First if Religion were among the Brittans
and extingshed no where but in Kent, where Austine arrived, then he converted
not the Land, but one poor country of it, and must be called no longer the
Apostle of England, but of Kent.

11. Do you not see how ridiculously this Minister runs out of Christendom
into Kent, as though this had bin then the complete division of our Country,
and that he that was not Christian, was a Kentishman in those days! How does
it follow, that if religion were amongst the Brittons, it was no where extinct
but in Ken? or that if S. Augustine converted not the Brittons, he converted
only one poor Country? Had the Saxons only taken Kent? did they not possess
the rest of the La^d, beside some Mountains, as Camden notes In his Brinitana
? I might also marvel why this Minister of Eccles* should term Kent a poor
Country, specially in those days, when the King thereof had the rest of the
Kings of the Isle in subjection unto him, did I not know, that these men care
not how true it be they say, so it may disgrace that charitable and happy
enterprise of the Roman Bishop; to make which seem of less esteem, he
terms Kent poor.

18. Let us hear his second Answer. Next, says he, the busiest adversaries
we have in this matter, Three Conuers. p. 1. c. 11 n. 4. and inde ad 12.
say, that all the Land, containing seven kingdoms was converted, within
sixty year of that time, as well as Kent, so that it should seem, they would
have the faith to be extinct, not in Kent alone, but in all the Land besides,
which is untrue. Thus he. Where you may note Sir Edward, a notable false trick
of your Minister, who makes his adversary say, what he does expressly deny,
that he may more plausibly seem to impugn him. For where I pray you, M.
Minister, does the Author of the three Conuersions, whom you quote in your
Margent as your busiest adversary, say, that Religion was extinct in all the
Land? Yea he says the contrary in that very place you allege. The Dominion,
says he, of the Saxons in those days, which was all the Land, except
Scotland, and that other part now called Wales, was divided into seven
several States. So clearly does the Author say, that the seven Kingdoms of
the Saxons, converted by messe^gers sent from Rome, were not all the Land;
whereas you charge him with the contrary, and then say it is untrue, bringing an
army of Bangor Monks, British Bishops, Arian and Pelagian heretics, to
recover Wales, out of the dominion of the Saxons, whom those holy Monks
converted unto Christ.

19. Let us hear M. Whites third answer, whether it contains more substance
and soliditie, then the two former. Having beaten S. Augustine, from tne rest
of the Land into Kent, to be the conuerter of that poor Country, he would
feign drive him thence also. Thirdly touching Kent, satih he, where Augustine
arrived, Bid says, that the Queen thereof was a French woman called Bertha, or
as S. Gregory calls her Aldiberga, a good Christian, and had a Christian
Bishop even at that time when Augustine came. Thus he writes, to what purpose
I see not. He does conclude hereupo^, that Augustine brought not the faith into
the Land with him, but found it here when he came pa. 357.
. Which inference if he mean no more, but that Christian religion was in the
Brittons, and in two French persons at his ariuall, we never denied it, nor
made question thereof. That which we affirm is, that in the English Nation
Christianity never was, before God by S. Gregoryes prayers and Augustines
preaching planted the same in their hearts. Perchance M. White had a further
intention, then he durst utter, he laid the Cocks egg for M. Mason to hatch
the Cocatrice, which he has done in his Consecration of your Bishops Franc.
Mason l. 2. c. 4. p. 57.
.

20. We dare not say, sath he, that they, those holy Monks, laid the first
foundation of Christianity in Kent. It is most likely that Lethardus the French
man the Queens Chaplain, had laid some stones in the Foundation, before the
coming of Austen. Therefore if he that lays the first foundation of religion
in a Kingdom be called an Apostle, then Austine was not the Apostle of Kent,
but rather Lethardus. Thus he writes, without any proof, against all Authors
of our Country, giving a sufficient token, into what desperate absurdities,
Malice against the Sea of Rome, will drive them. S. Bid says l. p. ^^ c. 26.
, expressly that the King upon Augustines coming gave leave for the preaching
of the Gospel. A sign that none did nor durst preach, without his leave,
specially one that was so nigh about him, and so much in his sight as the
Queens Chaplain, who thereby might bring both himself and the Queen into
danger, the King and the whole Nation being cruel and barbarous, as then they
were. Besides that Bishop living in Court, if he converted any, it is most
likly they were noble men, and persons of account, with whom he did converse.
Which thing could not have been hidden from the King, if they refreyned from
going to the Temples of the Idols, and offering sacrifice with the King, as
being Christians, they ought to have done. Finally had any been converted and
secretly baptized before S. Augustines ariuall by Lethardus, doubtless they
would have manifested themselves at his entrance, when the King granted unto
his subjects to embrace and profess the Christian faith, which had been a
thing very remarkable, and would not have been concealed by S. Bid in his
history, had it been true, the rather, those being (if any were) by all
liklyhood me^ of reckoning about the King, as I noted, and Lethardus having
gathered some Clusters of them, as M. Mason says.

21. Wherefore this conjecture of Lethardus his being the Ke^tish Apostle is so
improbable that M. Mason had he not been blind with malice against the Roman
Sea, would never have thought it most liklie. Out of the same malice also the
same Mason and Minister (to make his Reader believe, that Messengers from Rome
did not plant Religion among the Angles or English) dares write in that same
place, that Northumberland was converted in the days of King Oswald, by the
Ministry of Aidan a Scot, expressly against S. Bid l 2. c 12. inde ad 18.
, who writes, that Northumberland was made Christian by Paulinus one of S.
Augustines Associ^tes in that Apostolical enterprise, who converted King Edwin
Predecessor unto Oswald, and brought him to throw down the Tempels of Idols.
The people he baptized were innumerable. Once to pretermit other particulers,
being with the King and Queen, in one of their Princely houses, such a
multitude of people flocked unto him for Baptism, that for thirty days
together, he did not any other thing from morning to night, but Chatechize and
Christen people: what may we think of M. Masons conscience so scrupulous, that
he durst not say, that S. Augustine first preached Christianity in Kent, though
all histories auerre it? Yet so audacious, that to take the glory of the first
Conversion of the Northumbers unto Christ from Rome, he dares write against
all histories, that they were converted by Aidan a Scot, who did not convert
them, but only perfected that conversion Paulinus had begun, and reconciled
some, that out of fear of the Pagan King Penda had abiured their faith.

22. He that was so quick-sighted that he could see Clusters of Christians in
Kent, gathered by Lethardus before Austine, which never any Historian before
him did espy, now he is so blind, that he cannot perceive a whole Vintage of
Christians in Northumberland, gathered by Paulinus before Aidan, whereof yet so
famous mention it made in our Stories? Is not this man think you to be trusted
in his faithful Allegations of Records and Registers, for the Consecration of
their first Archbishop in Lambeth, and not at the Nags-head in Cheapside, l. c.
4.
as has bin often objected to them whom it nearly concerned, who could and
would have said more of the matter, then this Mason, had that blemish in their
Churches face been colorable. They would certainly have brought forth the
Registers long since, had they been extant in those days. But as I said, any
judicious man will perceive, what credit is to be given unto him, about secret,
concealed, and questionable Registers, whose hatred against the Pope transports
him to falsify our known Records so openly, where any mean historian may take
him in the trick.

23. This manner of writing is a sign that the desire not of truth, but of our
disgrace is the Bias of these men's pens and tongues, which make them not
fear to speak, and write any falsehood howsoever improbable, that they think
may serve for that purpose. This Bias doubtless, Sir Edward, was set to your
pen, when it ran into this maine untruth, that our Country is not behoulding
unto proud and insolent Augustine, for any matter of faith, besides some
frivolous ceremonies. Mark your words, Frivolous Ceremonies only, not any
matter of faith was planted by proud and insolent Augustine in the English
Nation. Here you conjure indeed, calling M. Whites spirit in your letter out of
his Church, who was the first (as far as I know) that ever uttered that
impudent falsehood, out of who^ you copied it and the proofs thereof, with a
little cha^g of words. I say, quoth he, that S. Augustine converted not our
Country at all, p. 356.
besides the planting of trifling Ceremonies. And again: His errand, as it may
probably be thought, was about the pla^ting of certain ceremonies, and the
dealing with our Countrymen about the Observation of Easter. And Gregory that
sent him, about that time, was busy in changing the Liturgy, used in those
western parts, and did thrust his new ones, upon all the places he could. It
may be this was a part of the Monks business unto Kent page 357.
. Thus writes your Minister. Which is I dare say one of the greatest untruths
in matter of History, that ever durst appear in print.

24. First it is false that Gregory made a new Liturgy of his own, forcing the
same upon the western Churches, as may be made clear, by that which S. Bid
writes of this l 2. Hist. Gent. Angl. c. 1.
Pope, to wit, that he added to the Liturgy, three short petitions, viz.
diesque nostros in tua pace disponas, and ab aeterna damnatione nos eripe, and
in electorum iubeas grege numerari. Had he changed wholly the old, or made a new
Liturgy of his own, would Bid, think you, who was so curious to note his
addition of only three words, have omitted it? Yet suppose he then had that
business in hand, would this Minister have us imagine that, that matter did so
wholly possess his brain, as he could not remember to deliver unto S.
Augustine, when he sent him, a greater and more substantial errand? So far
was that Blessed Pope from being absorpt with trifling Ceremonies, as this
Minister would have us think, as contrariwise, says venerable Bede l. 2. c. 1.
, whereas former Romanie Bishops had much given themselves to the building of
Churches, and adorning them with gold and silver, this Blessed Pope, totus ad
animarum lucra vacabat, had all his thoughts employed in the gayning of souls
unto God.

25. What more famous then his hearty affection toward our Nation, which to
convert from Idolatry he was coming in person, from which kept back by higher
authority, when the business or mission now lay in his hands sent preachers unto
us? Before his Popedom, the least sound or similitude of words could raise his
thoughts to think of our greatest and everlasting happiness Camde^ in Britannia.

Beda vbi supra.


. The word Angli made him wish us the fellowship of Angels. Aelle the name of
the King to desire that Alleluia should be song in our streets. Deiri (so was
the people, when those youths were brought called) to prophecy that we should
be delivered de tra Dei, from the wrath of God. Now is it probable, that
sending Messengers unto this Nation, he would send with them a message of
trifling Ceremonies, not that faith and Religion, which only was able to
redeem the^ from the wrath of God, and bring them to the fellowship of
Angels? Sure I am S. Bid Bed l. 1. cap. 26.
says otherwise, that S. Augustins errand from Gregory was more heavenly, to
wit, praedicare v^rbum Dei genti Anglorum, to preach not trifling Ceremonies
only, but the word of God to the English Nation, and when frighted with the
fearcenesse of that barbarous People, they began to look back, he sent them
Letters exhortatorie, that trusting in God, they should go forward ad opus
verbi, in the work or mystery of the word: in which Letters also, he does
show, what a deep desire of our everlasting happiness did dwell in his heart,
wishing he might be partaker of the merit of their labors, and that the sight
of our Conversion might be part of his eternal felicity in the next world.

26. When S. Augustine did deliver his errand to King Edelbert, I find in the
same S. Bid, this tenor thereof, se venire de Roma, and nuntium far optimum:
that he came from Rome, and brought a most joyful message, which whosoever
should obey, should have eternal joys in heaven, and a perpetual Kingdom
with the true and living God. Will you hear S. Augustines errand and business
into Kent and England, and the joyful issue thereof, set down by your famous
Protestant Antiquarie Brit. page 125.
? Augustine, says he, commonly named the Apostle of the English, sent hither
by Gregory the great, having destroyed the Monsters of heathenish impiety, with
most happy success, planting Christ in their mynds, converted them unto the
Christian faith. But what stand I seriously to confute such gross untruths,
full of ingratitude as these are, which Englishmen, whom heresy has not made
more savage then those were whom that Blessed delegate found at his entrance,
will wash away with tears but of this Ministers books. He had reason, having
styled his book, The way to the Church, to term his discourses digressions,
that is, Turnings out of the way. For being so full of falsehoods and those most
impudent, as you have seen these are which you copyed into your
Counter-snarle, what can they be but by-ways and crooked paths, that will
conduct the credulous Reader, that walks securely in them, into heresy, the
ready downfall into Hell? I do not marvel Sir Edward, your children be so
deformed, which you conceive with this foul pattern, not whiter then your
Blackmore before your eyes, as I could and would discover, did I not fear to
exceed the breuity of an Epistle, yet I am in hope shortly to have time and
leisure to do it more fully.

27. This only I now add, which also is pertinent to the matter we handle, that
whereas Catholic Religion converted our Country from Barbarity unto
Christianity, this Minister lays the contrary imputation on it, that is,
makes some part of our country still savage and barbarous, which your
Protestant Modesty, and Religion forsooth must ciuilize. All disorders, says
he, p. 110.
be most in those places amongst us, where the people is most Pope-holy: other
parishes, where the Gospel has been taught, being reduced to ciuility, and
the rest that swerve with Priests and Recusa^ts, remaining savage and
barbarous, that no Christian Man can endure their manners. For my own part,
having spent much of my time among them, this I have found, that in all excess
of sin Papists have been the Ringleaders in riotous companies, in drunke^
Meetings, in seditious assemblies and practices, in profaning the Sabbath, in
Quarrels and braules, in stage plays, Greenes, Ales, and all heathnish
customs. The common sort of that people commonly burned in sin, swearing
more then can be expressed, uncleanness, drunkenesse, perfidiousnes, wild and
odious. Their familes untaught and dissolute, their behavior fierce and full
of contumely, iniuiry, inhumanity, full of slanderous reports, wild looks,
and all unchristian usage toward any not of their Religion, that I dare be
bold to say, we may all cast our capps at them for Atheism and all that
naught is. Thus he. Truly, Sir Edward, though you follow your Father White a
good pace, yet I think you may cast your Couentry-cap at him for railing.

28. Catholic Religion, he says, makes men cruel, inhumaine, parishes
savage, and barbarous, but if we desire to find men courteous and bountiful to
the poor, housekeepers, modest, civil, and sweet souls, whither must we
repair, but to the parish, where M. White does purely preach the Gospel. If
any man (says Andreas Musculus Conc. 1. Aduentus.

Si quis videre volet ingentem turbam nebu lonum.


a famous Protestant) be desirous to see a great rabble of knaves, of persons
turbulent, deceitful Coseners, usurers, let him go to any City where the
Gospel is purely preached in qua Euangelium pure praedicatur.
and he shall be sure to find them there by multitudes. For it is as manifest as
day light, that there were never amongst Heathens, Turks and Infidells more
unbridled and unruly persons, with whom all virtue and modesty is quite
extinct, then are amongst the Professors of the Gospel. Thus he. Is not this
a Religious rabble, fit to ciuilize a Country think you? Let the Minister clap
this testimony which not Malice the Author of his Inuiectiue, but Truth did
indight, to his head, least it take cold, seeing he has cast away his horned
Capp after Atheism or Puritanisme, with which he will not appear in Pulpit,
not to fright such pure and courteous creatures as his own wife from his
Sermon. If he desire to know what Ciuilizers of people Ghospellers are, let him
go into Virginia, where he may find one of of the two or three Ministers that
went thither, become savage, not any Savages made Christians by their means.

29. As for the Conversion of our Country, by S. Augustines means, what, not
Civility alone, but also sanctity, what an heavenly (not humanne only) kind of
life, he planted amongst us our Histories do relate, which is such, as I
wonder this new Gospel, which Ambition and Emulation, Wine and Women gave the
beginning unto, dare boast of their Modesty, Ciuility, or Sanctity in her
presence. Let your own Antiquary, whose testimonies I used before, describe
that most happy age of our primitive Church under S. Camden. Brit. page 98.
Land. an. 1607.
Augustine. Thus he writes: Straight upon the preaching of the name of Christ,
the English did consecrate themselves unto Christ in so fervent manner, that
the diligence is incredible they used, in the propagation of the name of
Christ, in the performance of the duties thereof, in the divulging of the
Christian Religion, in building of Churches, in the enriching and adorning the
same, that no Province of Christendom, could have numbered more Monasteries, or
more richly endowed, then England could in Catholic times, and even some Kings
have preferred Religious, and Monastical life, before Kingdoms. So many have
been the holy men England has brought forth, and which for their most firm
profession of Christian Religion, most sou^de constancy and sincere devotion
therein, have been put into the Calendar of Saints, that in this point, it has
not been inferior unto any Christian province whatsoever, yea as Britain was
termed by Porphyrius a profane Philosopher ferax Tirannorum prouincia, a
province fertile of Tyrants, so likewise England may he styled Insula Sanctorum
feracissima, an Island most fruitful of Saints. Thus writes your Camden.

30. Now if the tree may be judged by the fruit, as Christ teaches Matthew. 7.
Arbor bona bonos fructus facit.
what a noble and worthy tree was that conversion, from the root whereof such
innumerable Saints, and excellent works of Piety in such abundance did
spring? What force to purge a Country from Idolatry, heathnish Superstition,
wicked and dissolute life has our Purgatory doctrine? would you now on the
other side seriously consider the thorns and thissles of Atheism and Impiety
Numquid colligunt de spinis vuas?
which your Protestant deformation has brought forth, you might soon perceive
the difference, and which of these two is the vine, which yielded wine breeding
Virgins Vinum germinans Virgins. Zachar. 9.
eminent Saints, that out of love of heaven and delight in God, contemned the
treasures and pleasures of this world. Compare the Monasteries the one builded,
with those the other threw down, the riches which the one gave, with those the
other took from Churches and holy uses. Let the humility, Piety, fear of God,
Reverence to his Church, contempt of the world, which the one caused in great
and mighty Monarkes, be paralelled with the contrary effects, your Religion
bred in those Princes, that first intertayned the same, in their Kingdoms.
These things I say iudiciously weighed would show, which of the two Religions,
Catholic or Protestant has opera plena Apoc. 3.
, solid, full, and working devotion, which is minus habens Daniel. 7.
a lightheaded Religion, that dreameth to be saved only by believing they are
of the number of the elect.

31. Wherefore I cannot better end this my Purgatory Triu^ph, the^ in this
first Conversion of our Country, by the Patrons and defe^ders thereof, ye
triu^pha^t Chariot thereof being honored with the multitude of admirable Saints,
who by the belief of this Doctrine, gave themselves to penance,
mortificatio^, and contempt of the world, seeking thereby to satisfy in this
life for their sins. Did these men believe Satanicall figmentes, and doctrine
of devils? Did they disgrace Gods mercy? euacuate his Cross? dissipate and
dissolve Religion, or no? If they did not, why do you lay those railing, or
rather blaspheming Epithetes upon this article of our doctrine? If they did,
why does your own Historiographer name them, as the true Professors of
Christianity? as eminent Saints, fervent lovers and propagators of the
Christian name, and as ornaments of our Land? And if these be saved, and
Saints in Heaven, how can you ever expect to come to the place where they
walk, being so mainely opposite to their faith in so many substantial points?

32. I know (s) you say, that S. Gregory by his delegate did not plant the
present Roman faith, that we now profess; which I think you say it more with
your tongue, then your heart: sure I am you say it without any proof. And no
marvel M. Whites Original whence you drew it, does auerre the same, without
alleging any reason in the world. Gregory's doctrine, says he p. 355.
was not suitable to that which now is houlden, as may be showed by that which
he has left written against Images, the supremacy, and merit of good works,
and diverse other points: thus White, after whom you snarle in this manner. If
Augustine preached Gregory's doctrine, what will become of the Popes supremacy,
Images, merit of works, which Gregory was so far from countenancing with his
authority, that he disclaymed them with his pen, and so consequently this
imaginary supposition will bruise their own pates. Truly Sir did not your eyes
dazzle with looking upon White, I suppose your pen would not stumble upon such
manifest falsehoods as these are. Who knows not that S. Augustine (upon whose
honesty you presume that he did bring no other faith then his Master gave him
in charg) did enter into England with the banner of the holy Cross carried
before him, in the labell whereof, was a silver Picture of our Savior, as Bede
writes l. 1. c. 26.


33. You ask what will become of Images, if Gregory's doctrine be admitted, I
answer, first they shall be reverently kept and set up in Churches, as books to
instruct ignorant people, whence when the Bishop of Marsils in France had cast
them out, as you Protestants use to do, S. Gregory did severely reprove him
for the same Greg. lib. 9. ep. 9. ad Serenum Massilien.
. Secondly they shall be carried in Processions, and the people following shall
devoutly worship and honor the persons represented in them: in which sort,
your own Bale Imaginem Diuae Virginis circum ferri per misit. Bal. Act. Romans
Pontif. printed at Basil. 1558. p. 44. and sequent.
does witness that he caused the Image of the Blessed Virgin to be carried in
Procession about Rome, to divert Gods anger from the City then infected with
Pestilence Vide vitam Gregor. apud Surium Tom. 2.
. Thirdly Christans shall go in Pilgrimage to the Images of Saints, namly the
Blessed Virgins. Which devotion he will stir up people unto by granting
Indulgences to them Vbi supra page 46. Peregrinationes ad Statuas pro plebis
deuotione per indulgentias confirmauit.
, as the Protestant Friar does confess. Finally people shall prostrate
themselves before them, not as unto God, but before them shall worship and
adore Christ, whom by his Image they remember, either as an Infant in his
Mothers arms, or as crucified, or glorious in heaven, which manner of
honoring Images by adoring their prototype in them, this Pope does expressly
teach Non imaginem vt Deum colimus, nec quasi ante Diuinitatem, ante illam
prosternimur; sed illum ad oramus quem per imaginem recordamur.
. What more devotion unto Images do Catholics show then this? Is it not
strange any man should auerr, that Gregory did disclaim from our Catholic
worshipping of Images, or that his doctrine lighting on Images would break
them, and their worship into pieces?

34. Secondly if Gregory's doctrine be preached in England, the Popes Supremacy
you say, must be gone. And why Sir I pray you? Perchance your reason is,
because he did detest the title of Universal Bishop in John of Constantinople,
calling it profane, sacrilegious, antichristian Greg. l. ep. ep 32: and 36.
. This I know is your common objection, which Catholics have often answered.
Will you believe your own Protestant Historian Carrion in Cronico l. 4. page
567.
, that says that Gregory did tragically declame against that title in John of
Constantinople, yet did he allow and practice himself the same Supremacy that
title did import? Will you hear another Andreas ^riccius.
an excellent learned man So termed by Peter Martyr in his common places part.
4. p. 77.
who gives you our Catholic answer, telling, that you mistake Gregory's
meaning, for that title of universal Bishop lies open unto a double
acception. First it signifies the sole and only Bishop of the world, in which
sense, says l. 1. de Eccles. c. 10. p. 576.
this Protestant, Gregory spoke against it, amplifying and exaggerating the
blasphemy contained in it. Secondly universal Bishop may signify the first
Bishop, unto whom the other be subject, and to whom the care of the rest and
of their Churches appertain: in this sense Gregory did never say, that title
did not in rigor agree to the Roman Bishop, nay he did practice that
authority himself, and thought the same was committed to S. Peter, yet did he
not think, that either S. Peter or himself was the forerunner of Antichrist.
Thus he. Showing that you, and your Ministers may be thought wilfully perverse
who still flourish with this objection, notwithstanding so clear an answer, and
so many testimonies of S. Gregory for the Primacie. For does not he expressly
teach, that the Roman is the Head and Mother of all Churches l. 11. epist.
54. Speculationem suam toti orbi indicere. apud Conturiatores. Cent. 6. colum.
425.
, that it appoints her watch over all Churches, that even Constantinople it
self is subject to the Roman Sea l. 7. ep. 63.
, that there is not any Bishop in the world, which owes not obedience to the
Roman, which may not be reproved and punished by him if he do amiss Si quae
culpa in Episcopis inuenitur nescio quis ei Episcopus subiectus non sit? l. 7.
ep. 64.
? In which speech he does, says Calvin l. 4. institut. c. 7. sect. 12.
, more then any where else vaunt of the greatness of his Primacie.

35. Now this Rock of the Roman Supremacy, whose pate does it bruise? whose
head does it crush in pieces, but that Serpents, which has lately rent, as you
ridiculously vant Let. p. 103.
, the Bishop of Romes slipper, that it has no sound sole, whereon his
triple-crowned Supremacy may tread? I should marvel that your proud heads,
should stoop so low as the sole of the Popes slipper, did I not know, that it
is the nature of Serpents to be biting as the heel. Suppose you devour at
last this slipper with the parings of the Popes great toe Counters. p. 40.
, whereof you seem to say that we make great account, yet the force to bruise
the Serpents head, being not in the shoe, but in the naked sole of the foot,
as Naturalists write Rupert l. 3. de Trinit. c. 20. Perer. in cap. 3. genesis v.
15. Sinuda mulieris planta viuacissimum serpentis vel leuiter pressit.
, this bare truth alone that the Roman Churches Supremacy, was generally
believed of Christians, more then a thousand years ago planted amongst the
English in their original conversion unto Christ. This clear and undeniable
verity, confessed even by the enemies of that Sea, is able I say to strike dead
the heresy of this age, which more then any other, creeping upon the ground,
and on her belly, Super pectus tuum gradieris and terram comedes. Genesis 3.
busied in worldly and veneriall things, hisseth at this point of Catholic
religion.

36. Now as for the meritts of good works, the third point wherein you say we
have S. Gregory against us, your own auhors write, that he did highly
magnify the works of Supererogation, Monachisme, Satisfastions, Vows Carrion
in Cronico l. 4. page 567.
, giving too much to freewill and good works Osiander Cent. 6. page 28^.
. This Saint says, that in heaven there shall be differences of dignities l. 4.
Moral. c. 41.

Qui alium merito superat retributione tra^scendet. l. 2. in 1. Reg. explicans
cap. 7.

Ad delenda peccata id. nea.


, according as in this life there is diversity of meritts, that the affliction
of penance is fit and apt to blot out our sins, when it is enjoined by the
Judgment of the Priests. In brief it is so clear that in all points he taught
the same faith the present Church of Rome houldeth, as diverse learned
Protestants do confess in express terms, that Augustine brought Popery
into England Bale centur. 1. fol. 3. Powel considerat. page 34.
, his entrance was not the Conversion but peruersion of our Country Fulke
against Purgat. Dan. resp. ad Bell. p. 1. p. 780.
. M. Morton in his Catholic Apology places in his lists of Papists, and his
adversaries S. Gregory Apol. Cathol initio.
, whom together with S. Austine M. Wilet ranketh amongst the first Fathers of
Superstition, and ringleaders of Popish deuines Tretrastilon p. 122
, whereupon your famous Historian Lucas Osiander. epitom. centur. 6. page 290.
Haud dubie ad inferos descendit.
concludes, that Augustine subjected England to the Lust of the Roman
Antichrist, and therefore after his death went undoubtedly to Hell, there to
receive his reward. O unhappy religion, the professers whereof, can find noe
hope of Salvation, nor passage unto heaven, without throwing down into Hell
most eminent Saints, and amongst them the Conuerters of Nations unto Christ,
whose Sanctity and Charity, when they are not pressed therewith to abjure
their errors, they cannot but highly commend! O wonderful obstinancie against
truth that makes Christians that would so be thought, prefer Paganism before
the Christian faith, that overthrew it, yea join with the open and professed
enemies of their eternal Salvation, rather then with those that sought the
same with eminent peril of their lives!

37. Do you remember Sir Edward the Title of proud and insole^t Delegate, which
you bestowed bou^tifully on the first Preacher of faith, unto our English
Ancestors, which now you defend by bidding me before I enter into choler
against you for it, to go ask counsel of the British Bishop Counters. page
53.
whose Counsel had it bin followed, before S. Augustines, the whole English
Nation might have bin barbarous, Idolatrous, at this day. The chief reason
that made this Blessed Saint to jar with them, was their want of Christian
charity toward the English, not yiedling to preach Christ and Christianity
unto them. I will not follow counsel to ask counsel of them, but rather pray
with Jacob, non veniat in consilium eorum anima mea Genesis 51.
, let not my soul enter into their assembly, where perchance I might learn
your Pro^testates charity, to vow never to forgive injuries, nether in this
world nor in the world to come. Let. p. 6.
But to let pass that ancient Controversy, this I say, the joining with those
Bishopes that hindered the Conversion of the English against S. Augustine, that
labored in the Conversion osthem is excess of ingratitude and impiety in
those that are descended of those Ancestors, whom that Blessed Saint made
Christians. Is it not an heinous offense in them, to judge and condemn their
own Apostle, their Father that begot them by the Gospel unto Christ, of
pride, and insolency, upon such a sign or token, as to condemn any other man
by the like, were admirable rashness?

38. You say that vultus animi Iudex, the countenance is a token of the heart, I
confess it is so, yet but an uncertain and fallible token, whereupon to frame a
resolute and determinate judgment in the conde^natio^ of any is against Christ's
express commandment, Nolite secundum faciem iudicare; Joan* 7.
Do not judge according to the face, which precept S. Paul repeateth, Nolite
ante tempus iudicare 1. Cor. 4.
. Do not judge before the time till our Lord come, who will discover things
hidden in darkness, and make manifest the secrets of hearts: in which words
the Apostle does condemn as rash, the judgment of any man's heart by outward
signs. How often do godly and discreet superiors, show Anger, State, Gravity,
and Severity in their countenance, when their hearts are full of humility,
compassion, and meekness, in which, and in the sight of God, they prefer
before themselves, even those whom outwardly they seem to disdain? Which
lesson no doubt but this our Apostle had learned of his Master Greg. in
pastorali.
, who being appointed by the Pastor of the whole Church, Primate over the
Brittan Bishops, if for their want of charity toward the English, and for
their Schismatic division from the rest of the world, in their observation
of the feast of Easter, wherein they had obstinatly persisted, he did refrain
those complementes and signs of charity toward them, before their yiedling
unto peace and truth, I neither see why the same may not be excused, nor how to
excuse the rash condemning of so glorious a Saint, in so heinous a crime, upon
no greater presumptions thereof, specially his miraculous sanctity and charity
being such, as the light thereof might dissolve a greater mist, then this seely
suspicion can with any probability raise.

39. If Josias who destroyed Idols and Idolotry amongst the Jews 4. Reg. 23.
2. Paral. 33.
was to all posterity in that respect so grateful, that the memory of him was
no less sweet then perfume to the sent, then honey to the mouth, then music at
a feast to the ear memoria Iosiae in compositione odoris quasi mel in omni
ore, and quasi musica in conuiuio vini. Eccles. 49.
, why should the name of this Blessed Augustine, be less precious and fragrant
to any English, who bestowed the same yea greater benefits and blessings on
their Country? And glorious indeed was the festival Commemoration of this our
Josias, who by his most pure and Angelical life Vita mundissima Sanctorum
delectatus Beda. l. 1. c. 27.
won Edilbert unto the Christian faith Catholic, before your Religion came,
whose opposition with ours in faith, hope, and charity you describe, saying
Let. 9^.
that your faith is wholly directed to Christ's Merits, not looking to gain
Heaven by good works as we do, your hope to his merits, not doing any
penance for your sin,, to satisfy his justice, your charity to his deputies,
the Saints upon earth, as who should say, your charity does not much regard
the Saints of the next world, neither those which be in Purgatory, or in
Heaven, you neither care to help the necessity of the one by prayer, or to
honor the memory of the other with praises.

40. Yea that Machiauillion Maxim, Mortui non mordent, seems so printed in
your mind, that you dare snarle at Saints in Heaven, reuiling their glorious
names with such reproaches, as I dare say your servile Count. page 39.
pen would tremble (not out of fear of hell) to lay them upon any, whose power
and authority you stand in awe of, toward which your Saints on earth, you
are no less obsequious, then conteptuous and blasphemous against those of
Heaven Your Countersnarle yields diverse examples or this base devotion page
20. his Majesty's cipher. p. 70. page 74.
but one I cannot omit, concerning the Lord of Canterbury that now is, your
Saint on earth, in whose commendation you show your self no less light and
lavish, then you were stern and severe in the condemnation of the first Bishop
of that Sea. His praise the last thing by way of execution in your Pamphlet,
may seem to have bin the first in your intentions, and that your long snarling
at me, aimed to end in fawning on him. The cause that your dog, has bin so
diligent in trauayling my piece of ground, was to raise some game, that your
Hobby might have a fluttering flight at his Grace. In the end after much
search, you espy in my River, the Dux of your English Clergy, which though too
swift a winged foul to be caught by so seely a bird, your pen flies in his
praise as fast as your flattering conceits can move it.

41. Yea but M. Crashaw, say you Counters. p. 77.
, has committed such an error, as deserves deprivation ipso facto, wot you
what? In his Jesuits Gospel he makes Dux Cleri the Popes chiefest title,
which (if we believe this Informer) was never given him by any Catholic, but
rather belongs to the Lord of Canterbury. I will not be so curious to stand
upon the numbers of 666. thence collected, but set that a side, I dare say,
Crux Cleri, had been the better word for the Pope: and yet to meet him at the
rebound, I hold Dux Cleri to be but part of his Graces title; who by the
goodness of his affable disposition, bounty in hospitality, painfullnes in
preaching, and dexterity in the dispatch of all occurrences, has well
deserved the style of Lux Cleri, in being such a light in Choro, and Foro, that
if a man should search like Diogenes amongst all the Cardinals, he should
miss of his match. So that me thinks the matter were not to be held so
heinous, if he have taken that part which my Lord might best spare, to pay the
Pope more then his due. Thus you co^me^d the living with as little grace as you
did revile the dead, bearing true devotion unto neither.

42. First it is false that I Overthrow p. 1. c. 1. p. 76.
accused M. Crashaw for making Dux Cleri the Popes chiefest title: my
accusation was, that he made it a Title proper to the Pope only, and that to
make his devise more plausible, englished it the Pastor of Pastors, or
universal Bishop. Secondly I did not say, that never any Catholic gave that
Title to the Pope, but only that it was not the ordinary style Catholics did
use to give him. Thirdly I never affirmed, that Dux Cleri did rather belong to
the Lord of Canterbury then to the Pope, but only that I thought M. Crashaw
durst not deny that Title to his Lord Bishop. Fourthly it is extreme falsehood,
that I stood upon this toye of his iniuring his Lord of Canterbury or that I
urged that error against him, as a heinous crime deserving deprivation ipso
facto. So that it is clear, that your intention was not, to clear M. Crashaw.
You omit what I objected against him, yea you charge him with that I never
dreamed of, that under pretense of defending your Bachelour you might flatter
your Bishop.

43. Now if I would take you at the rebound, as you do me, I might prove by
your words, whatsoever your meaning was, that you take the style of Antichrist
from the Pope, and bestow it on his Grace. Dux Cleri, say you, is but part of
his Lordshipps Title, and that part he might best spare, which therefore M.
Crashaw might well take to pay the Pope more then his due. What did M. Crashaw
pay the Pope by this Title? Was it not the number 666. the number of the beast,
the mark of Antichrist See Jesuits Gospel page 78. 79.
? Now if this be more then the Popes due, does not your Bachelour, whom you
take into your protection, offer the Pope wrong, in laying on him so vild a
reproach that is not his due? If Dux Cleri, wherein the number of the beast and
pride of Antichrist goes enclosed, be part of his Lordships Title, then by
this wise flattery neither is the style of the beast worse, nor yet so ill, as
he does deserve, nor the arrogancy of Antichrist laid to his charge, more then
is due to his Grace. What high and proud Titles do you think due to his
Lordship, seeing those that raise a man to the Throne above God, in your
Judgment come short of his worth? Behold how handsomely you fawn on your
Lord. I think verily had M. Crashaw fidled so foolishly in his Graces praise,
he had been beaten from his benifice and deprived ipso facto.

44. Knights and Noblemen be privileged, who seldom affoard your Clergy a
good word, yea as one of them M. Downam in the preface to his Sermon at the
Cross.
complayneth, you are loath to bestow either your Sons on the Ministry, or
Daughters on the Minister. They will take any thing from you in good part, and
be content with your Daughters, though they have no more grace nor wit, then
have those your houering with your pen over their Dux, though herein you soar,
I am sure, both beyond his deserts, and your own knowledge. For how can you so
certainly tell that not any Cardinal in Rome may match him, in prayer,
devotion, and being Lux in Choro? Me thinks it is not very likely that your
Diogenes with his Lantern should sooner find his Grace spending the night in
prayer, then any of that sacred Senate, among whom some have been trained up
in Religion, and in the continual exercise of devotion from their Childhood?
But as for Lux in Foro, if you mean thereby any public work of Piety or
Charity, built by his Lordship, or any other Protestant Bishop, I dare say a
man with a light at noone, may search long enough in London, before he meet
with so much as a Crux in Foro (except such as are set up, to hang Catholic
Priests) of his making: whereas diverse Churches, which are ornements of Cities
and induceme^ts to devotion, have been built and are now a building by
Cardinals.

45. What you may gain by this flattery I know not, nor what you aim at,
perchance his Graces affable disposition may afford you a friendly look, or his
largenes in hospitality a sumptuous Supper. Supposse, which is the highest
mark your ambition can gaze on, that his dexterity in dispatching all
occurrences, may advance you to some higher place of dignity amongst the
Senators of the Realm. Alas, what are these fleeting honors gotten by
devotion to Saints on earth, compared with that you might purchase to your
self everlastingly, by charity, reverence, and devout prayer to Saints in
heaven, who sit in the same Throne with the King of Kings, ruling the world
Apoc. 3.
. How holy would you be, were you the Cipher Counters. p. 20.
of these Blessed Kings who cannot command amiss? How happy were you, friend
of these favorites, not of a mortal Prince, whose glory shall turn into dung,
whose Majesty be consumed with magots, who this day glittereth in gold, Gloria
eius stercus and vermis. Machab. 1. and 2.
but the next may be cast into Hell Hodie est eras in clibanum mutitur. Matthew
6. Luc. 12.
, but of the Eternal King, whose majesty inviolable, glory immutable, power
invincible, goodness incomprehensible, whose life eternity. The Peers and
Princes of which glorious Kingdom you would not, Sir Edw. so boldly blaspheme
as you do, did you indeed firmly believe, that you must meet with them again
one day, when they shall revenge injuries done to them, bind Kings in fetters
and their Nobles in gyues, did not your Protestant charity so fill your heart
with Earth, that these heavenly and wholeso^ cogitatio^s cannot enter into it.
Saints out of sight are out of mind: your Church has no communication with
the^, you pray neither for them, nor unto them.

46. His Majesty in the Conference of Hampton Court would not have the Custom
of Churching women after their lying in to be abrogated, though Puritans did
much exclaim against it, because he would not have women that are of
themselves backward in that duty, be deprived of such an occasion, as might
force them, thereunto, oftener then other wise they would. Wherein as I highly
commend his religious prudence, so could I wish the like might be used in the
renewing of Catholic Custom, to pray for the souls in Purgatory, and unto
the Saints of Heaven. Men are so ready now a days, to believe there is no
other world but this present, that all things end with this life, that the
soul lives not after the body, or at least they are so apt to forget what
shall befall them after death: so seldom do they think of the last things, to
the remembrance whereof the Holy Ghost does so often exhort us Eccle. 7
Memorare nouissima tua and in aeternum non peccabis.
that no occasion should be omitted in procuring that so profitable a thing
might be continually, as much as may be in men's minds.

47. And to this end not any thing is more forcible then these two points of
Catholic faith, that some souls in the next world need our help, some others
may help us. This belief will not permit charity to be wholly employed upon the
Saints upon earth, the love of themselves will force men often to remember and
call upon the Saints in heaven wishing their blessed company in glory for help.
And affection toward deceased friends, will cause them to call to mind, and
think that shortly they shall be as their friends are, and so procure and power
out devotions for their relief, if happily they stand in need thereof. Why
should we labor to be wiser and perfecter then were the Apostles, who as your
Zwinglius says In Epicherisi de Canone missae fol. 285.
did permit prayer for the dead, exindulgentia infirmitatis humanae, out of
Indulgence unto human infirmity? What infirmity in man's nature is more
frequent or daungegerous then forgetfulness of another life? Or when did this
deadly disease more universally reign, then in this last decaying age, when a
deluge of Epicurian humors threaten to dround in men the belief of a God?

48. Why should not we then grant this Apostolical Indulgence unto Christians,
to pray for the dead, that this custom may be the remembrance of another life
(if not perpetually) yet frequently in men's minds? Specially this custom
being Ancient, practiced by the Machabees, praised by the holy Ghost, a
deduction from Christ's words, the perpetual tradition of the Church, the first
Christianity planted in our Kingdom, as I have proved in this Letter. These
are the five medicinable herbs I made you promise of, to purg your enraged
humor against Catholic and Ancient truth: the best furtherance I could
affoard unto your greatest good, the most charitable and Christian revenge I
could have of you, heaping Purgatory-coales on your head Congere carbones super
cuput inimici. Romans 12.
for those reproaches you charged on mine.

49. Your self allow that common proverb, that Cani latranti praeda elabitur
Counters. p. 58.
a snarling Curre misseth of his pray, which may give you just cause to expect
but hungry gain of your Countersnarle, where snapping at me, you have caught
wind, yea you have beaten your own choppes and bitten your tongue. You lay
the vices of vulgar life upon your adversary, known to be free from the same,
which even (as stones cast up into the Air, fall strongly to the Center) might
return heavily on your own head, did not I hold the^ by force within my pen.
Amongst all your marginall Annotations, I must prefer that of your 58. page,
where you teach me this lesson: Conuitia hominum turpium lauds puta. By the
warrant of which sentence, I may bind your contumelious Pa^phlet to my head, as
a Diadem of honor Circu^dabo illum vt Corona^ mihi. Job. 31.
in which I hope your reproaches shall shine like pearl Matthew. 6. Beati estis
cum maledixerit vobis homines and dixerint omne malum mentienres.
at that day when Purgatory and Penitential life that now have got the
Conquest of your Letter, shall gloriously Triumph over Sin and Hell.

50. What remains, but only that I beseech him who with five precious wounds
on the Cross redeemed the world, that these my five reasons, five Purgative
herbs may work powerfully in you, which I will not fail to do. As your
Iouiall Genius moved you to make a firm purpose never to reply to my answer
page 68.
but to spend your time in laughing and sleeping Aut dormitabo aut ridebo
: so do I feel the divine spirit, urging me to a contrary course, now more
the^ ever to employ the re^nant of my life in watching and weeping Vigilabo and
flebo.
praying with hearty groans Postulat pro nobis gemitibus inenarrabilibus. Romans
8.
particulerly for your reclayming from heresy, that doing penna^ce for your
sins, and making satisfaction in this world, you may without any Purgatory,
or with a short sindge therein, pass unto the place of everlasting Salvation.
From my Chamber in Hierapolis this 8. of September. 1613.

FINIS.
Faults escaped in the Printing.
Page Line Fault Correction Pref. 6. 9. shirts skirts 4. 29. any my 9. 22.
Photinians Popinians 16. 27. fear fair 28. 3. blot bolt 38. 32. Should Could
40. 1. shame sign 54. 16. his puppy this puppy 59. 9. life self 57. 26. as
the at the 103. 18. denying deriuing 105. 5. he who 113. 2. merely merrily ibid.
12. pleasure measure 142. 5. 25. Genua Geneua 145. 28. and told told 146. 6.
lucks tucks 147. 21. flight, of flight. Of

Other faults of less moment by reason of the obscure Copy, and absence of
the Author, have likewise escaped, which the Reader may easily find, and
correct of himself.

FINIS.

