A PREPARATIVE SERMON, TO THE LORDS TABLE, preached by the Reverend Mr. John
Forbes, Pastor to the Company of Merchant Adventurers residing in Delff.

1. Cor. 11.28. But let a man examine himself, and so let him eat of that
bread, and drink of that Cup.

Printed at Delff: 1632.

A PREPARATIVE SERMON. TO THE LORDS TABLE.
John 6. Verse. 27. Labor not for the meat, which perishes, but for that meat
which endures, unto everlasting life, which the Son of man shall give unto
you, for him has God the Father sealed.


Among our manifold enormities, there is not any one, which more grieves the
Lord Jesus, and which does make him more to be offended with us, then when
we abuse, either himself, or his blessed ordinances to perverse ends:
therefore of all things whereunto, we are to look to, in our selves, this is
one of the chiefest, least in shevve of seeking after Christ, and in coming to
his holy ordinances, we thereby increase our guiltines, and provoke the Lord
to wrath, and indignation against us.

We know what fearful judgments the Corinthians did bring upon themselves,
for not eating the Lords supper, as they ought. For which abuse of that holy
ordinance, the Lord plagued them, with sundry diseases, and sicknesses, and
diverse kinds of deaths: so zealous is the Lord, of keeping his holy
ordinances, from the abuse, and contempt of men. See 1. Cor chap. 11.

We are not ignorant also of the severity used by God, against Nadab, and
Abihu, the Sons of Aaron, for offering of strange fire before the Lord, in
consuming them both with fire that came out from the Lord, see Leuit. 10.

The like example have we of the testimony of Gods anger, against Vzzah (as
example to all them, that use not the holy things of God aright nor
respectfully) who presuming contrary to the ordinance of God, to touch the
Arc. Though upon a good zeal, to stay it when he did see it like to fall,
was stricken to death by the Lord.

Let us remember what the Lord did to king Vziah, for attempting to enter in
to the sanctuary, to offer incense before the Lord, which belonged only to the
Priest to do, in striking him with a leaprosie all the days of his life, 2.
Chro. cap. 26.

Annanias and Saphirah are documents to this day of the Lords sore displeasure
against all those, who pretending faith, love, and zeal, and liberality to
Christ, and his Church, dealt hipocriticallie with counterfeit shevve, and not
truly with God, in any thing, concerning his worship, his glory, his
ordinances, and his obedience. who both of them were punished by death, for
dealing falselie with the Lord, in their profane, and counterfeite shevve, of
imitating the charitable liberality of the Primitive Churches, in selling
their possessions, and bringing the price thereof to the Apostles feet, for the
support of those that did want. See Act. 5.

All these do let us see, that the Lord can not abide, that any man should
profane, any of his holy ordinances, or for any by-prete^ce to make show, of
zeal to his glory, or desire of his holy things: it is not possible, that he
should suffer us to go long unpunished, if we do not serve him in all his
ordinances with sinceere, and upright hearts. The truth whereof is confirmed
by this History: For these Jews coming unto Christ, did make a great
shevve, and desire, to enjoy the blessed fellowship, and communion of the
Son of God: and yet Christ is displeased with them, because they sought him
not with upright hearts: therefore having checked, and reproved them, in
manifesting, and opening the poison of hypocrisy, which was in their hearts,
in the preceding verse of this chapter: In this verse which we have now
read, he labors to cure by wholesome medecin, the sickness of their soul,
if possible the perverse disposition of their hearts could be reformed.

The evil that he reproues in them is this, that they sought not after Christ
aright: because they did not set before themselves, the right use of Christ in
coming unto him. They should have sought after him, first, and principally,
for spiritual things, tending to the vvelfare of their souls, but they sought
after him for nothing but the food of their bodies, and the vvelfare of this
their tansitorie life: therefore Christ is offended at them, and so he is
with all others, who follovving their footsteps, come unto him, or his
ordinances in the like manner.

Now to remedy this evil, the Son of God, labors to give them some
wholesome instruction, in which, these points are to be marked. First, What
it is that he enioynes them to? which is to labor. Secondly, For what he
will have them to labor, and that is for spiritual things, namely, the meat
of their souls, and the food of eternal life. Thirdly, we have to consider,
the preparation unto this, by removing the hindrances hereof, in repressing the
love of the world in men's hearts. Commanding them not to labor for that meat
which perishes. Fourthly, we have here set down by Christ, an information,
and an instruction where to find this bread of life, since it were in vain
to labor for it, if we knew not where to find it. Therefore he tells them
the Son of man shall give it unto them. Fifthly, Here is set down an
argument, or reason of confirmation to make this good, and to secure the soul
of him, that seeks this bread of life from Christ, that Christ is able, yea not
only able, but also vvilling, and ready to give it unto them, and that is set
down in these words, for him has God the Father sealed.

First then let us speak of the exhortation which is to labor for that meat,
which endures to eternal life.

By this exhortation we see manifestly, that it never was the purpose, nor
mind of God, since the world began, that men should feed on any meat,
either corporal, or spiritual, without labor, and pains taking for it: you
know, that law of the Apostle to the These. the second Epist. 3. chap. verse.
10. If there be any that will not work, the same man shall not eat: that
man therefore shall never be vvorthie of heaven, that will take no pains for
it, for if it be Gods will, that we should labor, if we would enjoy the
food of our bodies: it must needs be much more his will, that we should
labor for the food of our souls. It is therefore in vain for men ever to
look to be made pertakers of the supper of the lamb, and bread of heaven, if
they will take no pains for it, there is an necessity laid upon us to
labor, for the food, both of soul, and body: it is no slothful, nor careless
man that God will feed: such men therefore as think, to go, to heaven
sleeping, without seeking after heaven, and do hope to have Christ brought
unto them, while they rest in their beds, and will not do so much, as to
rise, and let him in, when he calls, and knocks at their doors, and look to
be fed with the food of Angels, and yet will not stir hand, nor foot to
labor for it. I say such men can never expect, to have it from God. We know
it sufficiently, rhat it is Gods will, and ordinance, that touching this
temporal life, a man should eat his bread in the sweat of his brows, and
we do willingly undergo pain, and labor for it: But here is all our
fault, that howsoever we be busied, and pained for temporal things,
belonging to this life: yet we have neither heart nor mind to take any pains
for spiritual things. And this is one of the greatest sins of this miserable
age, where in men are so diligent, and laborious, for the things of this life,
and yet so careless, and miserably negligent in things concerning eternal
life. Well this we say, (and that truly) the greater diligence men use, and
the more pains they take about vvorldly businesses: the greater shall be there
conviction, and their judgment the more terrible, in the day of Christ his
appearing: If they have not been much more painful about spiritual things,
which do concern eternal life. We shall hear here after what need we
have to vveane our selves from the cares of this world, and of earthly things:
because it is the maine hinderance, and let, of our care, and solicitude for
heavenly things, and therefore it must be first rooted out of the heart, before
the heart can be set as it ought upon spiritual things.

But now let us consider what is comprehended under this word Labor, and
what are the things, that the Son of God requires of us, to be done for the
attaining to this bread of life. Christ himself here after in the same chapter
shows this, in answering the Jews question, when they asked him, what
shall we do, that we may work the works of God? Jesus ansvvered, and
said unto them, this is the work of God, that you believe in him, whom he
has sent, here in steed of all works, Christ places but one, and that is
the work of believing: a work not of the hand, nor of the body, but a
work of the heart. For as a man must have a moving hand, and a stirring body,
in the business that belo^gs to this world: so for obtaying of spiritual
blessings, he must have a stirring, and a believing heart: his heart must
work by faith, if ever he think to have any spiritual blessing from God:
for it is by faith alone, that we draw all good things from God in heaven, and
by faith alone it is, that we render to God any thing, that can be acceptable
unto him, for all though in the Scriptures, our actions are attributed to love:
yet they are in this life more properly attributed to faith: seeing that faith
works by love: and so love being but the instrument of faith, and that by
which faith works: and this is the reason why all the doings, and
sufferings of the children of God, are attributed unto faith, as you may see in
the 11. of the Lev. for the whole operation of a spiritual man, consists
maynly in the work of believing, without which, we shall never receive ought
from God, that is able to save our souls, neither shall we be able to do so
much, as to send up one sound desire, or petition unto God. To conclud in a
word, there is no abillitie, either to speak, or to do, ought, acceptablie
to God, without faith.

This point is of great moment, and we are to Labor above all things, to
attain unto this work of believing, and to this end, we are care fully, to
use all means, by which it pleases God to work faith in our hearts, as
namely, the hearing of the word of God preached, the participation of the
Lords supper, instant prayer to God, with daily meditations in the blessed
word of God, daily conference, and talking of the holy things of God, That
faith by these means be both wrought, and nourished, and daily increased in
our hearts, without which it is impossible, that ever we can come to have
any feeling or sense, either of the life, or love of God in our souls, much
less to shevve forth any evidences of them in our practice, to the eyes of
men, this is that work which must have place in all our works, and season
them all before God, therefore are we commanded, that whatsoever we do,
whether we eat, or whether we drink, that we do all in the name of the
Lord Jesus, which is as much as to say, that we do all in faith, for nothing
can be done in the name of the Lord Jesus, but it must of necessity be done in
faith, this is then that which Christ means, when he wills us to labor.

Now let us go forvvard: here it follovveth, that we should next speak of
that, for which we should labor, but before we come unto it. We will
speak first of the preparition, which Christ requires in us, for the fitting
us to this labor, which stands in the removing of the lets, and impediments,
that hinder us from laboring for that meat which indures unto everlasting
life. And this is set down in these words, labor not for the meat which
perishes.

Here we see, that when Christ wills us to labor for heavenly things: he
first restraines us from the labor for earthly things.

The reason is because, that if the love, and care of earthly things, be not
rooted out of our minds, the love, and care of heavenly things can take no
place in them: this is manifest by that speech of John his 1. Epist. 2. cap.
15. verse. Love not the world, nor the things of the world, if any man love
the world, the love of the Father is not in him. It is a most certain truth,
that man, whose heart, and affections is set upon things belonging to his
body, must be a senceles man, concerning the vvellfare of his soul. It is
expedient therefore, and also necessary, that the care, and solicitude of
earthly things be moderated, and borne down in our minds, if ever we will
embrace this ^abour (commanded by Christ) for spiritual things, for no man can
serve ^vvo Masters, it is impossible to serve God, and the world both, and it
is for this cause, that Christ wills his Disciples, Not to care what they
should eat, nor what they should drink, nor what they should put on, put
that first they should seek the kingdom of God, and his righteousness, with a
promise, that all these things shall be cast unto them. And to move them unto
this, among many other reasons, he brings this for one, to wit, that it is
the disposition, and custom of the hea^hen, and men without God, to seek
after things concerning this life, namely, what they should eat, and what
they should drink, and what they should put on, and therefore co^cludes, that
they, that know God, and profess God to be their Father, should not set their
hearts upon these Temporal thing: for it is a vvretched, and a miserable
thing, to see a Christian ma^s heart disposed, noe better, then the heart of a
profane heathen, and that his labor, and travail, should be employed for no
higher end, for no greater, nor better things, then a blind, and ignorant pagan
labors for. It must needs argue a mind, not truly enlightened as yet, with the
saving knowledge of spiritual things, when as it can mind nothing else but
earthly things. And this is the cause why so fevv professing Christianity,
do manifest any strong desires, or careful solicitude. For things eternal*
even because they lie yet in darkness, and ignorance of them, Not having the
eyes of their understanding opened, to see the spiritual Joy, glory, and
fellecitie of Gods chosen In Christ: for if they did once see them, it were
impossible, that they could esteem so much of earthly, or transitory
pleasures, but that their hearts would be ravished toward heaven, and all
things in this world, would be as dung in their eyes, for what man is there,
who getting a sight of a princely palace, full of inestimable treasures, and
pleasures, unto the which he is invited, when he himself dvvells in a
poor, and miserable cottage, in the mids of a barren wilderness, that would
not gladly forsake this poor cottage, and enjoy this princely palace, and
yet there is much more difference, betvveene heaven, and earth, the things of
this life, and the things of the life to come, the food of our bodies, and the
food of our souls. What vvretched, and miserable fools are these, which
knovving that Heaven is infinitlie above this earth, and that to live with God
is vnspeakeablie better, then any estate can be in this life, that still their
thoughts should be drowned in the cares of this life, and never lifted up to
those unspeakable joys, which are at the right hand of God, where Christ is.
The point then is this, Christ will have us to know, that our hearts must be
freed from the cares of this world, before we can set our selves to seek
things, that are spiritual, and heavenly. Even as a man, if he will
transplant a tree, and set it in a better ground, he must first loose it from
the earth, where in it grows: and in which it is rooted, for otherwise, he
may well break it, or destroy it, but transplant it he cannot: even so man's
heart, that is rooted in the things of this life, and naturally set upon them:
it is in vain to think, that it can be set upon things, that are above,
until this strong hold it has on earth be first loosed: for no tree is so
fast rooted in earth, as man's heart is in earthly things, and it is a greater
difficulty, to pluck the thoughts of man's heart from the care of earthly
things, then to ^ayse the deepest tree, that ever was in the earth, let men
therefore take this warning from Jesus Christ, that if they will seek the
bread of eternal life, they must first have their hearts free, from the
careful seeking of the bread of this life.

Now let us come to speak of that for which we should labor. The
description whereof is set down in these worlds [ Labor not for the meat
that perishes: but for that meat which endures unto eternal life.] In this
description, is set down not only that for which we should labor, but a
forcible argument, to move us to labor for it: and to dissuade us from
laboring for the other this argument is taken from the nature of the meat. For
which we should not labor, and from the nature of that meat, for which we
should labor, which shows then to be in nature contrary the one to the
other, and it stands in this, that the one perishes, and the other endures:
so that Christ's reason is after this manner, labor not for temporal meat,
because it perishes: but labor for spiritual meat because it endures. Let
us now briefly consider these reasons. Touching the first, it cannot be but a
sore vexation to a man's heart when God gives him eyes to see it, that of all
he labors for under the sun, during all the days of his life, there is
nothing of it, that will remain with him, but it will perish and decay: but
this is one of the greatest vanities, and argues the most miserable corruption
of man's heart under the sun, that either they cannot, or they vvil not, see
this, that all things of this world, are perishing vanities, men naturally
are given to think, that both themselves, and their substance shall endure
long, and continue for ever, even as the ^ich glutton, that pulld down his
barnes, and built them bigger, said unto his soul, take thine ease, thou have
goods laid up for many years* he neither dreamed of dying himself, nor of
the decaying of his transitory substance, and yet poor wretch it was told
him, that to morrow he should dye: if we could therefore think upon this,
that every moment, we stand in danger, either to be taken from the things of
this world, or to have them taken from us: it were impossible, that we should
take such care for what we should eat, or what we should drink, etc. yea
if we would, but mark that which the Apostle speaks to the Col. concerning
the food of our bodies it would be an argument to make us lay aside, the
solicitude, and care for them, seeing as the Apostle says they perish, even in
the very using of the^, and therefore the same Apostle in the 1. Cor. 7. wills
them that marry to be as if they married not, and them that possessed, as if
they possessed not, Because (says he) the fashion, or shape of this world
passes a way, and all shall once come to an end: and therefore it were happy
for us, if we could know thus much, that we are but Pilgrims in this world,
and therefore must use all things in it, as Pilgrims use their lodgings, that is
not settling upon them, nor resting in them, as though we could dwell here for
ever: for our habitation is prepared for us in heaven: therefore we should
pass through this earth, as the Pilgrims do their journey, using all things
in this world, as travelers do to make them serve, to further our journey to
heaven, and not as clogs to hinder us, seeing all that is here will perish.

And yet further to consider this point, mark, how the Apostle makes it a
strong reason, in the 1. Cor. chap. 6. verse. 13. why men should not eat of
any meat with offense of their brethren: saying, meat is ordained for the
belly, and the belly for meat, and God shall destroy them both, if men had
hearts to consider this, what reason could they have, to be careful for meat
which serves to satisfy their belly, when both meat, and belly, shall
perish. It is an idle dream for men to think, that these parts of our bodies,
which are only given for temporal use, in this life. That I say we shall
have any use of them in heaven, for there we shall have no use of stomachs to
digest, or bowels to make convayance of our meat, for nourishing these our
bodies, seeing our bodies in heaven, shall be immortal, and glorious, like unto
the glorious body of the Son of God, when therefore we are feeding our
bodies, and satisfying our bellies, it is good for us to think, and remember
that we are feeding that, which shall perish: and that with food which shall
likewise perish, that we may learn neither to care too much for the belly,
nor for food requisite unto it.

Now let us consider the argument of the contrary part, vvherby Christ
persuades us to labor for spiritual meat, in which we are to observe two
things:

The first is, the nature of this heavenly food in it self, all though we
never do enjoy it, which is declared by this [that it endures.]

The second, is the effect of it in the^ that get it, which is that it makes
the^ also to endure and to live eternally.

For the first, we are to consider, that all the spiritual gifts, that God
gives us in Christ Jesus, are all eternal, and such as shall never perish:
whatsoever God gave by creation, it might be defaced, and utterly undone:
yea, even the chiefest gift, that ever was given in nature to Adam, (which
was Gods Image) was by Satan extinquished, and defaced, and as the Scripture
tells us, at the coming of Christ to judgment, the elements shall melt with
fire, and the earth, and all the works thereof shall perish, and the heavens
shall wax old as a garment, and this whole world shall come to an end, but
the gifts of saving grace, given us in Christ, can never be extinquished, or
defaced, for as it is impossible to destroy the Son of God himself, or that
the sorrovves of death, should have held him under them, or that the grave
should have power to retain him, so is it impossible, that Christ given unto
us, and his flesh which we eat, and his blood which we drink, or the
virtue of them in us, can ever possibly be defaced in us, and this is the
reason that Christ says, that his flesh is meat in deed, and his blood is
drink in deed for his flesh is not a perishing meat, nor his blood a decaying
drink, which cannot endure, as the nature of all other meat, and drink is:
but his flesh is everlasting food, and his blood everlasting drink, and his
grace as a well, springing continually, to everlasting life, men might
think, that by the death of our bodies, the virtue of Jesus Christ's flesh, and
blood, were utterly perished, but it is not so, they that eat this flesh,
and drink this blood, shall find the virtue of his flesh, and blood, even
when they are rotten in the grave, and by the same power, where with he
raised himself from the dead, he shall likewise raise them, from the power
of death, this then is the first thing, which we are to consider in this
food, that it is an enduring meat.

But the next thing is a greater comfort unto us, for this is not all the
blessedness of this food, and comfort of this argument, to know that the flesh
and blood of Christ, are in themselves permanent, and eternal, but that which
chiefly refreshes our souls is this, to know that whosoever pertakes of
them, shall partake of eternal life with them, this is a blessed thing in
deed, when I know, that not only the things whereof I am made pertaker are
eternal, but that I my self, by pertaking of them shall be eternal as well
as they. What can move a man to seek this meat, if this do it not? when
we understand that it has this power to work such a blessed effect in him
that is pertaker of it. It is undoubtedly, the miserable ignorance of (this
benefit, which comes by the flesh, and blood, of Christ,) that makes men so
careless to enjoy them, there is nothing in the world, that a man more desires
then to live for ever, all that ever a man has he will give for his life,
that he may not see death, but as David says in the 49. Psalm. No man can by
any means redeem his brother, nor give to God a ransom, that he should live
for ever. Indeed it is no temporal thing, that can procure eternal life, no
not all the means that can be divised, eat what a man can eat, and drink
what a man can drink, yet he shall dye, but here is the comfort of a
Christian, that from Christ, he is fed with that meat, that shall make him to
live for ever: in such sort, that the gates of hell shall not prevail against
him, neither death nor the grave shall have power over him, but he shall have a
glorious triumph over them both, so as he shall sing that joyful song, o
death, where is thy sting, o grave, where is the victory? And this is no
vvo^der, seeing the causes of this life are eternal, it cannot be but that the
life that flovveth from them must be eternal, and they that are fed with him
must needs live eternally, for all that we receive from Christ, is eternal, the
peace eternal, the joy, and life eternal, and this is that vvhervvith Christ
comforts his disciples, John 16.22. saying, Your joy shall no man take from
you: Thus a child of God in the midst of all his troubles, and in the midst of
the valley of the shadovv of death, will fear no evil, but can still rejoice
in God his savior. O how should this stir up our hearts, to seek after this
meat, eue^ as the woman of Samaria, in the 4. of John. the 15. when Christ
told her of water which he had to give, which whosoever did drink of should
never be more a thirst, she said, Lord, give me of that water, that I may not
thirst any more, nor come hither to draw. Likewise the Jews in this same
chapter, when Christ told them, that the bread of God gives life to the
world, they said unto Christ, Lord give us ever more of this bread: even so
when we hear, that they that eat the flesh, and drink the blood of Christ,
shall live eternally. Should we not in our hearts desire it, and beg of
Christ to make us pertakers of it, and earnestly long to enjoy it: surely it
must needs be a most lust thing with God to power down heavy judgment upon
this senceles age, and sinful generation of men, who take greater pleasure to
seek after the stinking delights of this flesh, and to vvallovv in their
beastly lusts, then to enjoy this blessed bread, that endures to everlasting
life: for it is impossible for any man to have perpetuity of being without
this, when therefore we see other men to call their lands by their names, so
to perpetuate their names on earth: let us not follovv their foolish footsteps,
but if we desire to live for ever, let us labor for this meat, which endures
to eternal life, and thus much for the reason, co^tayning also a description
of that, for which we should labor.

Seeing then we see what great reason, we have to seek this spiritual
food, it is necessary for us to know where we shall find it, and that is
the next point we are to consider, set down in these words, [ which the
son of man shall give unto you.] In these words, let us mark these two
things: First who it is, of whom we must have this meat: That is the Son
of man: The second is, how we shall have it, and that is set down in these
words, he shall give it unto us.

Touching the first, we are to mark, that it pleases Christ through out the
Scriptures, to name himself more by this name (the Son of man) then by any
other, especially when he speaks of the works of saving grace: and for the
comfort of his elect ones: it must therefore be a matter of great moment, and
of singular instruction for us, that moves Christ to take this name upon
himself, and certainly it is so, although not perceived, nor comprehended, by
every man. In this same chapter when Christ had told the jews, that unless
they did eat the flesh of the Son of man, and drink his blood, they had no
life in them, many of his disciples murmured at it, and said, this is a hard
saying, and in deed no marvel, that it seem hard to a natural man, for how
can he think, that the flesh, and blood of man, should have the virtue of
eternal life in them, but Christ opens this mystery in the same place, telling
them that it was the spirit that quickens, the flesh prositteth nothing: for
it is true, that all though without this flesh and blood, we can have no life
in us, yet certainly even the flesh and blood of Christ, nakedly considered, as
flesh and blood, or yet, as the flesh and blood of a man, could never give life
to them, that eat and drink it, but as being the flesh, and blood of God, in
the which flesh, all the fullnes of the Godhead dvvels bodily, it is no
marvel that it gives life to them, that eat and drink them, for as much as
the eternal spirit is never separated from this flesh, nor from this blood, and
therefore all though their can be no eternal life, but from this eternal
spirit, yet it is the pleasure of God, that no saving virtue of the Diety, nor
life from the God head should ever be communicated unto man, but in, and
through the flesh, and blood of Jesus Christ the Lord: Let no man therefore
Despise this flesh, and blood, nor the outvvard means, whereby our
fellowship, and communion, in this flesh, and blood is sealed unto us, since
without this flesh, and blood, it is not the purpose of God to save us, let us
therefore lay up this mystery in our hearts, that as the flesh of Christ can
never quicken, but by the spirit, even so also the spirit shall never quicken
but by the flesh.

There is yet more in this to be considered, and that is, that as God will
dispense no saving grace, but in the flesh, and blood, of Jesus Christ the man,
so he will not dispense it, but by Christ as he is man, for God has given
all judgment to the Son, not as he is God simply, but as he is the Son of
man, and by him as he is man, will he judge the world, as the Apostle says
in the 17. of Act. God has appointed a day, in which he will judge the world
in righteousness, by the man whom he has ordained. Jesus Christ, as man, shall
judge both heaven, and earth. For the Father has exalted him in his man hood,
and has given him a name, above all names unto which all knees must bow,
and every mouth confesses him, to be the Lord, therefore it is not without
cause, that David considering this wondered, as you may see in the 8. psalm.
saying: What is man, that thou art mindful of him, and the son of man, that
thou visitest him, for thou have made him a littel lovver then the Angels, and
have crowned him with honor, and glory, and has put all things under his
feet: It is good for us to consider this, that as Christ himself says, all
power is given unto me, over all flesh, the power of ruling, and of judging,
of saving, and damming men, is given to Christ as man, for there is nothing,
that is not subdued unto Christ the man, as the Apostle proves in the 1. Cor.
15. from these words of the Psalm: that God has subdued all things under his
feet, proving thereby that it is manifest, that nothing is unsubdued to him, but
he that did subdue them, until that the last enemy death it self be subdued,
Christ shall still possess the kingdom, but when he has subdued all things,
then shall he render up the kingdom to his father, that God may be all in all:
but in the mean time till this be done, all power is given to Christ as man,
to destroy all adversary powers, either devils or wicked men, thus has God
honored, and highly exalted the humanity of his Son, by ^ertue of the
fullnes of the God head ^vvelling in him bodily, this is the ^eason that
Christ in this place says, the Son of man shall give us this bread of
eternal life.

The consideration of these things, ^erue for a singular comfort to the Godly:
and a fearful terror to the wicked.

Touching the wicked, when they must see, and know this, that the man whom
they have pierced, and put to ^eath, whom they have so despised whose blood,
they have trod under foot, to be exalted to such glory, and when they shall
see him come in the ^louds, in majesty, and great power, accompanied with
innumerable an^ells, and hearing (him sitting in the throne of judgment)
prononce the sentence of eternal death against them.

For the Godly it is a matter of singular joy, to know, that he shall be their
judge, and that in his human nature, vvherin in all things he was made like
unto them, sin only excepted, and wherein he wrought their redemption by
his own death, and when they shall understand, that the dispensation of all
things is put in his hands, and that he has power to give eternal life, yea
he himself to give his own flesh, and blood unto us, unto eternal life,
certainly if this were not, the greatest comfort of Gods elect were taken
away, no consideration of the Son of God, as God simply, could possibly
refresh our souls, if we did not consider him in his flesh, being man, for
he is no less terrible in his Dyetie to a sinner, then the Father: but our
interest in him arises upon this, that he is be come our brother in our
nature, that being man, he might bring us that are men to God. Therefore first
of all he did a base himself, and took upon him the shape of a servant, and
in that nature has wrought our eternal redemption, and did glorify himself
in that same flesh, with that glory, that he had with the Father, before the
world was, all to this end, that he might advance us to the same dignity
with himself: for though as God he had power sufficiently to save us, yet
we had never been pertakers of it, if he had not prepared the way by his
flesh to communicate it with man: and if Christ himself in our nature, had
not taken possession of the glory, and kingdom of God: it had been impossible
for any other man, ever to have come to the participation of that glory or
kingdom, and thus much for the first point, that is of him, from whom we must
have this bread.

Now, let us come to the manner how we shall get it, and that is set down
in the svvords ( he shall give it unto you) A man might think by the former
words of Christ, when he wills us to labor for it, that a man himself by
labor were the purchaser of it? but it is not so, let a man do what he can,
he is still unworthy of it, yet not vvithstanding Christ will have us to
know, that the man that seeks for it shall get it, though neither he nor his
labor be vvorthie of it: Christ requires no more of thee but to seek for it,
and he will freely give it, thou can have nothing vvherevvith to buy it, and
therefore the Lord calls upon every one that thirsts to come, and drink
freely, they may have it without silver, or without any price: seeing they
can have it for the seeking only. O how justly shall these vvretches be
damned, that will take no pains to beg, or seek for it, of all things in the
world, this shall be one of the chiefest that shall gnaw the hearts of men most
miserably, when they shall see themselves eternally damned, because they
never sought after life in Christ, but when they should have sought for it,
they gave themselves to seek their pleasures, and did love rather to hunt
after a whore, and their beastly lusts then after Christ the Son of God, and
Savior of the world, mark Christ's speech John 5. You will not come unto me,
says Christ, that I might give you eternal life: he desires no more of them,
but that they will come to him, and he will give them life. Alas! how many
is there who when Christ does call upon them, and cover his table unto them,
and offer his flesh that was broken for them, and his blood, that was shed
for the remission of their sins, who not vvithstanding will not come at
all, unto the blessed Table of the Lord: shall ever Christ think these men
vvorthie of eternal life, that when they may have the food of it for coming
unto it, do not vvithstanding neglect it. If we did but see our misery, and
our vvretched estate in sin, under Gods wrath, then we would make great
account of that we despise, and our hearts would smite us for our contempt
of that, without which their is no life to our souls, that is the only bread
which brings eternal life to our souls. O what virtue, what comfort, what
life, and efficacy unto life, shall we find in that flesh, and in that
blood, if we did truly embrace it, and receive it from Christ, certainly many
thousands deprive themselves of all joy, and true consolation in Christ, only
because they will not pain themselves to seek it. James vpbraids men in his
time, not only because they asked amiss, but he tells them, they got nothing,
because they asked not, and the same James shows us, that if a man do ask,
he shall receive, when he says, If any man lack wisdom let him ask of God,
that gives liberally to all, and Christ confirms the same in the Gospel, when
he bids us, ask, and we shall have, seek, and we shall find, their
damnation then must needs be just that never sought after Christ.

Now the last point, which we are to know, is concerning the ground of all
our assurance, that we shall get this bread, which endures unto eternal
life from Christ, and that is set down in these words, [ For him has God
the Father sealed.]

These words comprehend a matter of chlefe moment for our consideration, for
if this were not, all the knowledge of Christ were but small comfort, to a
poor sinful soul, but this it is that gives us joy, in the contemplation of
Christ crucified, that we know, that God the Father has sealed him.

To consider this place therefore a right, we are to know, that it is taken
from the custom of men, who when they will have any thing to be made sure,
and sted-fast, and when they will make it to have authority, and strength,
they are accustomed to add their seal to it, to confirm it, by which
whatsoever is promised, is made more strong: so God by this sort of speech
does show us, that not only, he has given Christ to be our Savior according,
as he declares in his Word, and that he is that Lamb of God, that takes
away the sins of the world, and that he has not only reconciled al
things, by the blood of his cross, but also to make all things sure, and
firm, that we might never call this into question, he has ratified all
this, by adding his seal unto it.

Out of this, we are first to learn: That the naked knowledge, and
consideration of Christ, and what God has made him unto us, is not sufficient
to salvation, except we know, that God the Father has sealed Christ to be
all in all unto us, that he has promised, and which he has made him to be,
whereby I may be confirmed, that whatsoever God says, Christ is, or
whatsoever God is said to have made him for me, is undoubtedly so, here we
may se, that in our minds we must ascend higher then Christ himself, or the
promise of God in him, to seek the chiefest ground, or stay of our faith,
which allthough it can have no ground without Christ, and without the
promise, yet neither the promise, nor Christ (in whom the promise is yea, and
amen) could be any sure ground of life, and salvation to me unless both came
from this, and were stamped with this seal of the Father in Christ, for all
though, that Christ's flesh be said to give life to those, that are pertakers of
it: yet the ground, and reason of this stands in this, that the Father has
sealed him in his flesh to be the life of the world, so that without
knowledge of this, our hope and faith were vain.

Let us therefore come to consider this seal of God. First in general, we
know that a seal when it is applied does leave the impression of it self,
most lively in the wax where into it is set, so that all the form, the
shape, and marks, that are in the seal are lively imprinted in the wax, thus
has God the Father dealt with his Son, for there is no promise of mercy, of
grace, of holiness of life, or glory, which God has made in Christ to
sinners, but he has stamped the same in Christ the man, so that every man
that sees the flesh of Christ, with true spiritual eyes, may se that his
flesh, is stamped with righteousness, with the life of God, and with immortal
peace, and everlasting glory. But to come nearer to the consideration of this
seal, it is true, that many men run to his Diety, to find this seal, and that
because it is said in the first of the Hebrews concerning Christ, that he is
the brightness of the glory, and the express, or in graven image of the
Fathers person, for which cause it is said, that he that sees the Son, sees
also the Father: but not vvithstanding all this, if the Son of God had been
sealed by the Father, only in his divine nature, as he is the second person of
the trinity, and that this seal of God had never reached from his God head,
to his humanity, his flesh could never have been the bread of life, therefore we
must labor to see this seal of God, engraven in Christ the man, else how can
we know, that by eating his flesh, and drinking his blood, we have eternal
life, since with out this seal, his flesh, and blood could have no more
force, to give life, then any other flesh, or blood, of any other man: therefore
let us consider, vvherin this sealing of the Son, as he is man co^sists.

This seal has five special things in it, to be considered.

The first is Gods eternal ordinatio^, and appointment, whereby he did ordain
Christ the man, and none but Christ the man, to be the food of our souls, to
be the mediator betvveene God, and us, and so to be the only King, Priest and
Prophet, of Gods house for ever, by virtue of this appointment of God, Christ
comes to be, that to us, that he is, and this eternal decree of God,
concerning Christ in his flesh, to be our redeemer, is made manifest in the
Scripture, when it is told us, that God ordained him before the world was,
in the 1. of Peter the 1. chap. and again where it is said, that there is not
a name given under heaven, by which a man can be saved, but the name of Jesus
only, and this is ratified in the Scripture, by the testimony, both of God
himself, and John Baptist, and of the Apostle. The Father from heaven did
witness so much, when as he said, this is my well beloved Son, in whom I
am well pleased, there by declaring, that in Jesus Christ the Son, (now
made man) his wrath toward us, was taken away: and he well pleased with
us, not vvithstanding our manifold sins, committed against him, and all those
speeches of God, whereby God ratifies, that Christ the man, is his Son,
saying, thou art my Son, this day have I be gotten thee, and where by he
confirms him, to be our everlasting Priest, for ever, after the order of
Melchisedeke, and whereby he vvitnesses him to be made Lord of his church,
saying, the Lord said to my Lord, sit at my right hand, till I make thine
ennemies thy footstool, all these do make manifest the truth of this point,
that it is Christ the man, whom God has decreed to be, both the Author, and
matter of our salvation. And this is the first part of this seal of God, this
knowledge, that God has ordained him only, and none but him, to be the bread
of life.

The second part of Gods seal, where by he has sealed Christ the man,
appears in the works of Gods own power, which the Father gave him to do,
as in raising the dead, commanding of the seas, and tempests, the restoring
sight to the blind, curing of all diseases, yea, and commanding the very
devils, etc. therefore it is that Christ says in the 5. of John verse. 6. after
this manner, The works which the Father has given me to finish, the same
works that I do bear witness, that the Father sent me, and the Father
himself, which has sent me bears witness of me, and again in the 10. of
John verse. 25 If I do not the works of my Father believe me not: But if I do
them, though you believe not me, yet believe the works, that you may know,
that the Father is in me, and I in him, verse. 37.38. These works which none
could do but God him self, being done by Christ the man, are the second part
of Gods seal, whereby God the Father does let us see, that this man Jesus, is
he alone of whom we all must look for life.

The third part of this seal consists in this, that God the Father has laid
upon Christ the man, the chastisments of our peace, that by his stripes we
might be healed, for by inflicting upon him in his flesh, all the punishments,
and wrath of God, which we by our iniquities have deserved, he thereby
sealed his manhood to be the food of life, making him as a Lamb roasted with
fire for our food* And for this cause, it is said of Christ (Hebr. the 5. and
the 9,) That he being consecrated, was made the Author of eternal salvation
unto all them, that obey him: for when God did take vengeance upon Christ his
Son for our iniquities, he made him sin for us, that we might be made the
righteousness of God in him: and by his cross, killed hatred, and brought in
everlasting peace, therefore in as much as it is he alone, that has undergone
the curse of the law, and the wrath of God for us that are sinners: it is
manifest, that God gives none to be the bread of life to our souls, but him
alone, and this is the reason, why the Apostle to correct that great schism,
in the church of Corinth: when one said he was Paul's, another Apollos, etc.
and to force them all, to acknovvledge none but Christ for their Savior, he
uses this form of argument, was Paul crucified for you? etc. as if he would
say none but he who is crucified for you, are you to depend upon for life, and
salvation: and the same is the reason, why the same Apostle vvritting to the
Corinth: the first Epist* chapt. 2. says, that he did determinate to know
nothing among them but Jesus Christ, and him crucified, and again he says in
the 6. of Gal verse 14. God for bid, that I should rejoice, but in the cross of
our Lord Jesus Christ.

The fourth part of this seal stands in this, that God the Father has
raised Christ Jesus his son from the dead, and has taken him out of the
power of the grave, and has set him at his right hand in heaven, and crowned
him with glory, and honor, making him the head of men, and Angels giving him
all power in heaven, and in earth, and above all, giving him to be the head of
his church, thus setting him in that flesh, wherein he wrought our
redemption, and suffered the chasticement of our peace, in the full possession
of the kingdom, life, and glory, which he has purchased unto us, filling
him in that his manhood, vvithall fullnes of grace, and glory, that out of
his fullnes, we might dravv grace, so fitting this his flesh thus glorified,
to be the effectual means of communicating life, and glory unto us in our
flesh, and for this cause it is, that the Apostle does prove, that God shall
judge the world by Christ the man, by this argument, to wit, because God had
raised him up from the dead, Acts. 17.31. and the Apostle: for this cause,
makes this the chief point of the knowledge of Jesus Christ, to wit, that
we have such a high Priest, that sits at the right hand of the throne of
the majesty, in heaven: Hebrews the 8. and the 1. for allthough he had
been man, and in man's nature had suffered all punishments due to us, for our
iniquities, yet not vvithstanding if he had never been raised from the dead,
and triumphed over the grave, we could never have hoped, to have attained to
eternal life by his flesh, for if that flesh of his, had been overcome by
death, we could never have overcome death, in our flesh, therefore it is, that
the Apostle builds our hope of life, upon the resurrection of Christ from the
dead: 1. Pet. chapt. 1. verse. 3. saying, Blessed be the God and Father of our
Lord Jesus Christ, who according to his abundant mercy, has be gotten us
again to the hope of life, by the resurrection of Jesus Christ from the dead:
And again in the same chapter verse. the 21. he says thus, that God raised him
from the dead, and gave him glory, that our faith, and hope might be in God,
and this is the fourth part of this seal.

The 5. and last part of this seal, which is the ground, and foundation of
the rest, is this: That this man in his flesh is not only by Gods eternal
decree appointed, and by the Fathers voice from heaven ratified, to be the only
redeemer, and life of the world, and confirmed to be this, by his works, his
sufferings, and his glorious exaltation, at the right hand of God, but chiefly,
and principally, because in this his manhood, thus abased, and again exalted,
does dvvell all the fullnes of the God head bodily, Colos. the verse 2.9. for if
this were not, all the former part of this seal were not sufficient to make
his flesh the bread of life, for immortal life cannot come to us, but from
that flesh, which has immortal life in it self, and this is the reason that
Christ uses that speech, in the 6. of John, when he would prove, that he that
eats his flesh, and drinks his blood has everlasting life, saying, as that
living Father has sent me, and I live by the Father, even so he that eats my
flesh, even he shall live by me, in the 57. verse. this therefore is the
greatest part, of this seal vvherevvith God the Father has sealed Christ the
man: to wit that he has stamped the flesh of Christ with the Diety it self,
and so consequently with life it self: it is no vvonder therefore, that this
flesh, and this blood do give life to those, that eat and drink it, seeing it
is the flesh. and blood of God himself, therefore it is said in the 20. of
Acts. verse. 28. that God has purchased his church by his own blood: no man
therefore that is not a most vvretched infidel can deny, that this flesh and
blood of Christ, is able to give eternal life to him that does receive it, and
this point is carefully to be marked of us, because the Apostle in the 1.
Corint. the 11. chapt. shevving the reason why the Corinths in eating the Lords
supper, did eat vnvvorthily, yea did eat judgment unto themselves, does
plainly show us that it consisted in this, that they did not discern the
Lords body, verse. the 29. for the banquet of the Lords supper, is not a ba^quet
of the flesh of a mere man: but it is of the flesh and blood, of the
everlasting King, and Lord, of heaven and earth, even of the eternal God
himself, and therefore no marvel, that all those, who eating it, and not
discerning it so, are counted guilty of the body and blood of the Lord. We
see then, what comfort we have in the consideration of this point, to wit,
that God the Father has sealed Christ the man, to be the bread of eternal
life, to all that eat his flesh, giving us full assurance here by in all the
testimonies, which he has given of him, and all the works which he has
wrought by him, and all that he has effected in his humanity, and in that he
has made his humanity, the everlasting tabernacle of the Godhead, that now
we need no more doubt, but that he it is, who not only is vvilling, but
also able to give us that food, that endures to eternal life. therefore let us
come with bouldnes, and chearefullnes, and labor to be pertakers of this flesh
and blood of the Son of God, which if we receive as we ought, we may be
sure our souls shall never perish.

FINIS.

