^Y THE KING OF HEAROLDS OF THIS PROVINCE FROM THE RIVER OF TRENT, North East
and VVestvvard.
TO all and singular as well Nobles and Gentiles as others, to whom these
presents shall come, William Flower Esquier alions Norroy principal Hearold
and King of arms of the North East and West parts of this Realm of England,
from the river of T^^^^ n^^^^ward, sends greeting in our Lord God
everlasting. Whereas it has pleased the Queens most excellent mai^^^^ of her
abundant grace ^o call me unto the room and place of Noroy ^ arms, and in the
execution thereof straightly to commaun^ and enjoin me to have an especial
regard and vigilant care to the reformation of such disorders as may rise and
grow, if the N^bilitie and Gentry should not be preserved in their degrees and
every person be known in his estate without confusion or disorder, and for
that purpose sufficiently to aucthorize me by her highness gracious letters
patte^ts under the great seal of England, dated the tenth day of July in the
sixth year of her happy reign, therein amongst other things prohibiting all
Painters, Glasiers, Goldsmithes, Grauers, or any other Artificers whatsoever
they be within my said province to take upon them to painte, glayse, grave,
devise or set forth any manner of arms, creastes, cognisances or petidegrees,
or any other devises appertaining to the office of arms, otherwise then he or
they shall be allowed by me the said Noroy king of arms, my Deputy or
Deputies. And also inhibiting all other persons to intromit or meddle in any
thing concerning the office of arms within my said province, as well within
liberties as otherwise without mine especial license and authority, in writing
under the seal of mine office, as more at large it does appear in the said
gracious letters pattents. Know ye that I the said Noroy kin^ of arms by the
authority aforesaid, have aucthorized and licenced my well-beloved Peter Proby
of the city of Westchester, in whose honesty, fidelity, and discression, I
do greatly trust to exercise and use his art of painting throughout my said
province, as well within liberties as without, as well in painting and setting
forth of Eskuchons of arms for funerals, with other the furniture thereunto
belonging, as banners, standerds, penons, hachements, helmes, crestes, and such
like, as also I do further constitute, ordain, and appoy^^ him my lawful
Deputy, to (...)e and take up for me the s^yd Noroy and to my use all such
fees (...) and be due unto me throughout ^y said pro^^^ce, at the funerals or
deaths of any honorable or worshipful personages. videlicet, of a Baron five
pounds, of a Knight forty shillings, of an Esquier twenty shillings, of a
gentleman thirteen shillings four pence, and thereof to render unto me a
perfect and true account once in the year, or as often as he shall be by me
thereunto required. In witness whereof I the said Noroy king of arms have
hereunto subscribed my name. Dated from my said office at London the xxi. of
June in the year of our Lord God. 1578. and in the twenty year of the reign
of our most gracious sovereign Lady Queen Elizabeth etc.

2 Furthermore with this my deed granted to the forenamed Peter Proby. I give
my straight commandment to all Painters, Glasiers, Goldsmithes, Grauers, or
any other that does or hereafter shall use the art of painting, that they nor
any of them shall not from this present date exercise nor use any painting in
any wise, appertaining to the office of arms, especially for Escuchons of
arms, or banners, standerds, penons, hachements, helmes, crestes, or any thing
or things appertayning to funerals of any personages, within my said
province, as well within liberties as without, upon pain for every such
offense after that this be openly published in my said province to every such
painter so offending or intermedling without my special license, under the
seal of my office, or at least being licenced and set on work at such
funerals by my said Deputy Peter Proby, or his lawful assigner, or else to
forfeate and be indamaged to me the said N^^oy, principal Herold and King of
arms for every such offense committed, five marks lawful money of Engl^^d to
me and my use.

3 Further, if hereafter any other Nobles, Gentells, or others shall
ha^^(...)esion (...) funerals (...) persons (...) any such arms herein
specified wrought and set forth at the solemnizing of any such funerals. Be it
known unto all such Nobles or Gentells, or others within my said province,
that the said Peter Proby my lawful Deputy, is and will be resident and
abiding in her Majesty's city of Carlell now called Westchester, within my
said province or his certain Atorney for him to supply his want, who will be
ready to work, set forth and solemnize any such funerals of any such persons.

Given from my said office with my hand and seal of my office, the day and
year above written. By me William Fovvler alions Noroy, principal Herolde
and King of arms of this my province.


