A COMPARATIVE DISCOVRSE OF THE BODIES NATURAL AND POLITIQVE. Wherein out of
the principles of Nature, is set forth the true form of a Commonweal, with
the duty of Subjects, and the right of the Sovereign: together with many good
points of Political learning, mentioned in a Brief after the Preface.

By EDWARD FORSET.

LONDON, Printed for John Bill. 1606.

To the Reader.
THe Commonweal with all her parts, The aptest resemblances of a Commonweal.
orders, qualities, and requisites whatsoever, is (for better apprehension and
illustration) set forth by sundry fit resemblances, as by the architecture of
an house, by the swarming and cohabiting of Bees in an hiue, by a ship floating
on the sea, and such like; but by none more properly than either by the
universal mass of the whole world, (consisting of all the several
subsistances in that great frame by the high wisdom and might of God compact
and united) or else by the body of man, being the lesser world, The greater and
lesser world.
even the diminitiue and model of that wide extending universal. And (by the
way) it were a pains well bestowed, to observe the good correspondence
between every the particular parts or faculties in man, and the other distinct
parts, powers, and operations of that bigger bulk: which seems to have been
both sweetly and soundly conceived by that thrice renowned Philosopher
Trismegistus, Trismegistus his great Giant.
when he imagined an huge and mighty Giant, whose head was above the
firmament, his neck, shoulders, and upper parts in the heavens, his arms and
hands reaching to East and West, his belly in the whole spaciousness under the
Moon, his legs and feet within the earth. But for that the discourse or
discovery of this secret, with the agreeable references to arise thereof,
falls not within the line wherewith I have listed and bounded this Treatise; I
will only from this observation of Gods own imitating of himself in the
likeness of the less with the greater, Gods imitating of himself, a
direction for our imitating of him
gather and infer that which gives groundworke unto my purpose: That the
inco^prehensible wisdom of God, in the composing and ordering of his works in
nature, has so dignified them with all perfection, as that they be left unto
us as eminent and exemplary patterns, as well for the consolidating, as for the
beautifying of that we work by art or policy; as well for conioyning of all
discordances into firmness, as also for the applyablenesse of particulars in
their many services, for the use and benifit of the whole. It is beyond the
compass of any contradiction, that in the moral virtues Christ's actions are
our instructions; and no less may the like rule hold, that in the contriuing
of a prudent government, the impressions and footsteps of Gods wisdom (which
in things natural we contemplate by study) be in the point of regiment, our
directories for imitation. Wherefore seeing that the uttermost extent of man's
understanding, can shape no better form of ordering the affairs of a State,
than by marking and matching of the works of the finger of God, either in the
larger volume of the universal, or in the abridgement thereof, the body of
man: I account these two to be the two great lights for enquiry and meditation
concerning this business, and do worthily omit all other worthless
presidents, as inferior starrelights, which oftentimes seduceth by their
dimnesse, and at their best are but deriuatiue and subalterne unto these. And
of these two also (as not daring to gaze too much upon the Sun, Man the
fittest pattern to imitate in the forming of a civil state.
and unable in mine own weakness to run the round of such a large compass) I
have made my choice to pursue only those applyances, which from the so skillful
workmanship of God in man, may be well apted to the civil government of the
assemblies of men: which being of more facility to be understood (as deduced
from a more familiar example) and equalling the other both in dignity (having
the same author) and in certayntie (respecting the fitness of their relation)
may also sort both agreeably with other men's likings (as bred in their bosoms)
and with mine intentions, which seeks wholly a demonstratiue plainness.

This similitude was both fitly and fortunatly enforced by Menenius Agrippa,
Agrippa his tale of the parts of the body. Liuius lib. 2.
who being employed in the appeasing and persuading of the seditious reuoulting
commons of Rome, did by a very tale of this proportionable respectiuenes of the
parts in man's body, and the mutualitie of kindness and aid afforded from each to
other, so sensibly show them their error, that surseasing their malignant envy
wherewith they were enraged against their rulers (whom they accounted as the
idle belly that swallowed the labors of their hands) they discerned at the
last, that their repining against, and their pining of that belly, whence was
distributed unto them their blood and nourishment, necessarily tended to their
own destruction; and were thereuppon forthwith reclaymed into their bounds of
obedience. The like comparison is most divinely enlarged by a much better
Orator, The like comparisons used in the scriptures. 1. Cor. 12.
and in a much more important point of the inseperable union of the members of
Christ with their head, and of the necessary communion of their distinct gifts
and works amongst themselves; yea, it has pleased God himself for the
manifestation in some measure of his unmeasurable infiniteness, and the
incomprehensible nature of his dietie, to vouchsafe unto us as it were some
glimse thereof, by this self same well agreeing semblance, drawn and borrowed
from our weak, mortal, and sinful bodies. His omni-science is set forth by an
all-seeing eye, his omnipotency by a mighty and outstretched arm, his mercy
by the cheerfulness of a loving countenance, his bounty by the opening of
his hand, and filling of all things with his blessings: by which so apt tipes
he opens for our more easy understanding, the profoundnesse of his
attributes, and (as I may say) the mysteries of his essence.

I need not spend any speech in the praise of such familiar and well pleasing
illustrations: In praise of such comparisons.
look but upon that exsuperant and not attainable by humane powers wisdom of
Solomon, is not the brightest appearance thereof in comparatiue parables? but
behold a greater than Solomon, who without parables spoke nothing to them; as
if both the depth and delicacie of wits invention for either proving or
persuading, consisted chiefly in such equipolling and Parabolicall
applications. It remains that before I proceed to the producing or presenting
upon the Stage of State the similitudes themselves, to be scanned and
considered of, (which I wish may prove themselves right paralele) I do for
advantage enterline first a Caution, then a Limitation: My Caution is, A
Caution against crossing with dissimilitudes.
That no man in streyning too hard, do force the blood, where he is offered
milk. It is easy for a curious obiector, even in the fittest comparisons to
make disseuerance by inferring different respects and inequallitie. The
dissimilitudes of things be infinite, and rometh with error in the
circumference, where the well apted likeness setleth in the center of truth,
and is compacted closely in one only point of good congruitie, from the which
it may neither be drawn awry without wrongful wresting, nor enlarged too far
without extreme torturing. It is the greatest miracle of Gods powerful
wisdom, in the innumerable forms of things, to make so infinite variation;
Then it must needs be a great work of the wit of man, in such multiplicitie of
disference to find out the well agreeing semblances, To knit and match together
sundry things by an aptness of application, is the proper effect of union; but
to disioyne the well coupled from their lovely analogy of each to other, is a
violent divorce and distraction: Therefore let such makebates (if any be) abate
their humor of crossing with dissimilitudes, and content their conceits with
that which they shall discern to be matched with a right mirror, and
representingly expressed by the show of a good concordance.

My Limitation is, A limitation not to strive too far.
That it be not exacted or expected of me, so mincingly to manage this matter,
as that unto every particular part or faculty of our humane nature, I must
needs find out in the States body some several members or branches entirely
matchable to the same; like a picture to be newly drawn by a former pattern,
conforming therewith in every line, shape, or shadow. We use to say that one
man is like an other, if but the faces, yea the colors or figures, yea the
frowns or smyles, yea the casting of the eyes, or any other shows in their
visages do seem to agree, though in other respects or parts there be betwixt
them rather apparent repugnances, than any right resemblances; Then let no man
think that I will so be put to my shifts, or that I will impose my self so
hard a task, as (by descending to each singular or individual) to find for it
an even yoak-fellow, or well matching companion, that may serve as a relative
or representative unto it, by the aptness of propriety: The which labor as it
would be endless in toil, so would it be no less needless in use; and I
hope it will suffice, so to compare or make parity between the bodies Natural
and Politic, that each part may be brought in rather easily entreated, than
streiningly intruded; and rather agreeing naturally, than forced violently.
Therefore omitting all industrious curiousity, and frivolous affectation of
following too far (where yet I must needs fall short;) I only desire, that
where I shall show a reciprocal likeness of habitude, affection, or
disposition; there the similitude may pass approved, and induce assent: and
that where these may not readily be had, there I may find such courteous
construction, as that I may neither be charged with partiality of concealing
(where it is meet I should be mute) nor be suspected of insufficiency for not
pursuing where I can find no footing.

It is vnfallable what I propound for my first principle, That in every
particular person, there is both the seed and similitude of a State incorporat,
yet to imagine or seek for in each severed or subdeuided parts, such affinity
and fitness betwixt them, as may mutually illustrate each other; were not to
tune but to crack the strings, and to make quidlibet ex quodlibet, or, ex
quouis ligno Mercurium. Modesty and discretion binds us to a stint, beyond
the which if we shall stretch or streine, Of enforcing a similitude beyond his
agreeableness.
we may justly be said to have borrowed of the wyer-drawers: we must not
compel our applications there to shake hands and embrace, where discrepance of
nature has estranged and set apart. Were it not ridiculous for absurdity, and
blasphemous for impiety, if in that serious similitude of Christ's coming to
Judgment like a thief in the night, we should (beyond the ge^^inall
agreeableness of their unlooked for stealing upon us) in other most ungodly
senses link in Christ in likeness with a thief? Or if that other notable
parable of the unjust Steward, were (from the commendation of his provident
prevention) racked with other references, to make his deceiptfulnesse also
praiseworthy; who would not convince such unfit and lefthanded handling, both
of wildness in wit, and wickedness of heart? To conclude, I will knit up this
point thus, That in the knitting and according of things diverse into one point
of agreement, (making by such their enterchangeable lendings of like reason and
respect, a lightsomnesse of proof and understanding) we must avoid their
diversities as sands and rocks, and keep the right channel of an allowed
likeness; which will conduct us both safely and delightsomly in this course of
comparing.

Farewell.
A Brief of such points as are comparatively handled in the Discourse
following.
WHat is meant in the saying of Pithagoras, that man is the measure of all
things, and how this measure may serve in the matching of the state thereunto.
Folio 1. In every state, Sovereignty the soul, Allegiance the body. 3. In
every civil state there must be the ruling, and the ruled. ibid. Impugners of
magistracy refuted. ibid. Of the good that subjects have by government, with
the end thereof. 3. Mutual offices between sovereign and subject. ibid. Good
government the states happiness. 4. No government without law. ibid.
Sovereigns love to their subjects. 5. Sovereigns care of their subjects well
doing. ibid. The excellency of sovereignty, and how they be ordained of God,
and what thereof is inferred. 5. and 6. Against ambition. 7. Sovereigns have a
weighty charge full of labors and cares. 8. They divide part of their care
and work to inferior magistrates, and be wronged by their negligence. 8. All
command and power in the state derived from the sovereign. 8. Supremacy is
maintained against the Pope, or any other without or within the Realm. 9. The
rights of Sovereigns not too far to be extended, nor too much to be
restrained. 10. Of sovereignty. 11 The soul set forth in his several powers,
and then the sovereignty compared to the same. ibid. Sovereignty in his
vegetable powers. 13. Sovereignty in his sensitive and intellectual parts.
14. Counselors. 15. Favorites. ibidem. Whether the Sovereigns will may stand
for law. 16. Misinforming of Sovereigns. 17. The Sovereigns yielding to the
customs and inclinations of the people. ibid. The sovereign may not admit
different sects of resolution. ibid. The sovereign helped or wronged by
obedience or disobedience of the people. ibid. Sovereigns sometimes suppressed
by Rebels. 18. The sovereign troubled with Courtiers suits. 19. The sovereign
troubled with Male contents. ibid. All offenders have their pretenses;
Especially Traitors. ibid. The sovereigns records; And of the embezilling or
falsifying of them. 20. Sovereigns prerogatives. ibid. Sovereigns not to be
evil spoken of upon supposall of any faults in them. 21. Sovereigns called
gods, and what thereof inferred. 23. The large extent of Sovereignty, by
comparison thereof to God and the Soul. ibid. Whether it is better for the
Sovereign to be much or seldom seen of the people. 25. Sovereigns compared
to the head. 26. In the plantation of civil people, the head the root. 27. The
excellency of the head; It dearly loves all the parts; And it again (...).
ibid. The diseases of the head caused from the body, therefore to be borne
with. 28. No repugnancie of the parts against the head. ibid. How there should
be no opposing, nor deposing of sovereigns. ibid. Good Subjects often take upon
them the faults committed by their sovereign. ibid. Sovereigns, in what sense
they be likened to the heart. 29. Their command and force. ibid. Their bounty
and benefits, binding subjects to all duty. 30. Their love of virtue. ibid.
Sovereigns to look well to them that be near about them. 31. How factions
and sides do grow; And how they be prevented. ibid. The sovereigns sports and
recreations not to be grudged at. ibid. The sovereign wronged, when his
Officers, Judges, and Counselors be wronged. 32. The person of the sovereign
full of majesty. ibid. Diversity of respects in the sovereign, touching his
person and sovereignty; The work thereof shows the majesty of it. 33. The
sovereign may not do wrong to his Subjects. 34. Of certain essential orders
in the state. 35. The gifts of statesmen to be well disposed of. 36. The chief
officers or nobles to be well fafegarded. ibid. Of the Body politic, and the
four elements whereof it is compounded. 37. and 38. How the uneven mixture of
these elements makes abounding of humors, and difference of complexions. 38.
The necessity of keeping these elements in concord, there is often discord in
the parts of one and the same element. 39. Sundry forms of bodies politic
arising from unequal mixture. 40. The harm which comes by distemper, which
conuerteth that to hurt which otherwise were good. 41. The beginnings,
increasings, and endings of Commonwealths, with all their alterations, chiefly
of God. 41. and 42. The peoples different dispositions, and the right ruling of
them all to the public good, by the example of the body in the dieting
thereof, in exercise, and in other sundry tendances. 43. and 44. Equality how
to be observed in the distribution of the profits of the Commonweal. 45.
Against paritie, proving difference in dignity and riches. ibid. Not to
reward, worse than not to punish. 46. Difference of dignities and degrees, 47.
Dignities not to be basely bestowed. 48. Why the body politic is called a
Commonweal. ibid. The mutualitie of helps in the members. ibid. Greatest
respect to be had of the chief parts, against whom the enemies bend most. 49.
Each part to be allotted to his own work. 50. Parts disordred makes the
body monstrous. 50. Against conspiracies, and of the late intended treasons.
51. Against idle vagrant and unprofitable people. 54. Against engrossing of
many offices into one man's hands. ibid. Of many well agreeing in one work. 56.
In the work of ruling no more heads but one. 57. Britania one body needing
but one head. 58. Inducements for Union. ibid. The body politic may have
many imperfections, and yet remain a body. 59. Shifts used for supply of
defects, as to entertayne strangers, to take mercenaries, and to enter leagues
with other realms. 60 And what success such shifts usually have. ibid. What
perfection may be looked for in the commonweal. ibid. Signs of health in the
state. 61. Signs infer no certainty, but often deceive. ibid. Health how
necessary. 62. A grief in part puts the whole out of health. 63. Of
discontentednesse. ibid. The observing of original orders preserves health.
ibid. Alterations dangerous. ibid. Nature best likes that whereto it has
been accustomed. 64. Alterations must not be sudden, or of the whole, but by
leisure and degrees. ibid. Cases of alteration. 65. Better keep health than
recover it. ibid. Of providing in prosperity for adversity. ibid. Timely
preuentions very requisite, because of small beginnings great mischiefs often
ensue. 66. Of tolleration of evils in the state. 67. Cases for sufferance of
evil. 68. We may hurt to heal, and take physic to prevent diseases. 70. Of
the diseases of the state, and how they arise. 71. Difference in faults. 72.
Against equality of sin, and how punishment must be proportionable to the
offense. 72. Outward evils not so dangerous as inward. ibid. Laws compared to
physic, and the sovereign the chief Physician, and under him magistrates,
their great charge. 73. and 74. The cause why their authority is so repined
at. 74. The necessity of magistracy. ibid. Magistrates not to be discouraged
by the repugnancie of the people. 75. Magistrates works agrees with the
Phisicions works. ibid. Sundry sorts of medicines for the state. ibid. Whether
the magistrate may be trusted in altering the punishment by law appointed by
increasing or mitigating of the same. 77. As the faults be not equal, no more
must be the punishment. ibid. Points to be observed of the states Physician.
78. and 79. The Phisicions of the state, are to tend all that be diseased,
especially great men, whose faults are most perilous, and why they be so. 80.
Diverse requisites in the Phisicions of the body politic, and sundry
positions touching the diseases of the state, and their cure. 81. Against
unskillful Pragmatikes. 85. The learned fittest for government. 86. The harm
of imperfect curing. ibid. Discretion in ordering of state business, or in any
other learning. 87. Of severity. ibid. Of lenity. ibid. The same disease may
be cured by contrary ways. 87. and 88. Repealing of old, and making of new
laws. 88. Magistrates may make use of the wicked. 89. The praise of good
magistrates. ibid. Qualities requisite in the Physician. ibid. His love toward
the people. 90. Not to be covetous. ibid. Greediness of gain in some Lawyers.
91. A misery never to be out of law. ibid. Magistrates may have private
faults, and yet be good Magistrates. ibid. Skill in governing his chiefest
virtue. 91. Rather to be Natives than strangers. 92. Their good example of
great force. 92. They must not defist from their duties for any abuses offered.
ibid. The ought not to have too many offices or employments. ibid. Compared to
a Surgion in three properties. 93. They sometimes offend the law, and are then
to be punished by other Magistrates. 93. Their faults no preence for any to
disobey them. 93. Their deseruings soon forgotten, and often not recompensed
sufficiently. 94. Their good endeavors often censured by the events. 94. The
Lawmakers abused and discouraged for want of execution of their laws; And how
great an injury that is. 94. Laws often by cauils illuded to the wrong of
magistracy and Justice. 95. Obedience the chief virtue of subjects. 95. A
knitting the subject and the sovereign in mutual love, making the commonweal
blessed thereby. 95.
In the conclusion.
Political governors made famous by the praises of the learned. 96. The
Benefit which sovereigns may have by reading of Political books. 97 The
dedicattion of such works, due to the governors of the state. 97. Against
curiosity in private persons, of looking into state business. 98. Sobriety to
be used in inquisitiveness, the highest degree whereof is to pry into Princes
dealings and dispositions. 99. The heinousness of that fault. 99. A caveat
against it by a comparison of the sovereign to the soul. 99. Sovereignty as
great a mystery in policy, as the soul in the body. 100.
FINIS.
A comparatiue Discourse of the Bodies Natural and Politic.
IT was pithily spoken of Pithagoras, Homo monsura rerum omnium.
That man is the measure of al things: importing thereby, that man by the
ampliation and application of his powers apprehensiue, discerns, discusseth,
and confineth the several works of nature: with his senses he measures
things sensible, with his understanding he perceives things intellectual,
with his illuminate and inspired knowledge, he comprehends things divine and
supernatural; yea more, by this so large and unmeasured measure, all things
are made suitable to the esteem of man, and be either great or small, light or
heavy, fair or illfauored, desirable or auoydable, as by man's well or ill
conceauing the same be valued. But beyond all this, the meaning of that sage
sentence extends yet farther, That in the very composure of man, there is
manifestly discovered a summary abstract of absolute perfection, by the which
as by an excellent Idea, or an exact rule, we may examine and exemplify all
other things.

The Mathematicians have found out by their observance of the beauteous and
uniform proportion of the body of man, and by the symetrie of the parts
thereof, their true scantlines and dimensions; yea by the laying of it in his
full length, and then spreading the arms and legs to their widest compass,
they have contrived both the perfect square, and the exact circle: The square,
by four right lines at the four uttermost points of the hands and feet; the
circle, by rounding a line about those points, placing the center of their
compass upon the navel. The natural Philosophers reduces the vastness of
the universal (comprehending all things that has either being, or vegitation,
or sense, or reason) unto this same well compacted Epitome of man's fabrifacture.

Then much more may the politic Philosopher, having for his proper subject
the compound of men ciuilly assembled and associate, make man the object of his
discourse and contemplation, to fit his treatise with good fashion to so
imitable a pattern. Therefore this measure (thus induced thereto) I have made
my choice of, to try thereby the form of a commonweal, what therein is right
or wrye, what redundant or defective, what orderly or disproportionable; the
help of such a brief, and the truth of such a standerd, may serve to
balance the matters of deliberation, fitly accommodating and rectifying all
designements and proceedings. And since I do find this line of likeness to be
chalked out unto us in Gods works, I will there begin my applying, where that
profound wisdom has begun his framing.

As in the creating of man God conioined a soul for action, in a body passive:
so in his ordinance of man's sociable conuersing (to make the union of a body
politic) he has knit together a passive subjection to an active superoiritie:
Sovereignty the soul, Alleagiance the body.
and as in every man there is both a quickening and ruling soul, and a living
and ruled body; so in every civil state, In every civil state there must be
the ruling, and the ruled.
there is a directing and commanding power, and an obeying and subjected
allegiance, For as neither the soul alone, nor body alone (if they should be
severed) can be a man, so not the ruler alone, nor the subjects alone, can be a
commonweal. Where all will rule, there is no rule, and where none does rule,
there is all misrule: but to rule well, and to be well ruled, is the surest
bond of humane society. Impugners of magistracy.
Such unruly routs, as (humourously led in dislikes) denies the lawfulness of
Magistrates, may well be likened to certain peevish Malcontents, who
ouertoyled with the tediousness of life (and that often without any apparent
cause) wishes that they had no souls, it being all one to want in the body a
soul, and in the state a governor: yet as the body sustayneth no harm or
wrong, Magistracy works the good of the people.
yea is infinitely benefited and graced by the powerful working of the soul in
his organs; so the people guided by a just government, not only are not thereby
injured, hindered or abased, but much enabled, enobled, and advanced even to
the highest pitch of a welthie and safe repose. Mutual offices between
sovereign and subject.
Then as the soul is the form which to the body gives being, and essence;
and the body is the matter which desiringly affects his form: so both the
ruler should wholly endeavor the welfare of his people, and the subject ought
(as in love to his own soul) to conform unto his sovereign; that both of
them mutually like twins of one womb, may in the near and dear nature of
relatiues, maintain inviolate that compound of concordance, in which and for
which they were first combined. As the coupling of the soul and body, tends
not only to give life, but also to the attayning of a perfect and happy life:
So the right temper of sovereignty and obedience, intends end effects not
only the being, The end of government, to make the state happy.
but also the flourishing and felicity of a Commonweal. For the gayning of
which propounded happiness, as the soul is the worthier agent, taking the
greatest care, and deserving the chiefest commendation, in so much as a man is
not said to be happy for any his strength, his bigness, propernesse, or comely
feature of body, but for the goodness, nobleness, and virtuous endowements of
his soul: So for the acquiring or framing of any perfection in the
Commonweal, we are not so much to behold the largeness, the power, or the
well showing composure thereof, as the prudencie, justice, and other virtuous
sincerity of a rightful government. In man the soul rules by reason, and in
the State the Sovereign governs by laws; All government by law.
which may no less aptly be termed the soul of sovereignty, than reason is
said to be the soul of the soul. It can never be so much as conceived, that
the soul should be without reason, though by the unaptness or repugnancie of
the organs, his power in working is either interrupted or impugned: So
government may not be so much as imagined to be without law, though the force
and life of the law, through the waywardness of the subjects, cannot always
alike be showed or seen in his due effects: no not the Sovereign will
infringe laws, no more than the soul will renounce reason. Herewith the
fiction of the Poets and the Paynters well agrees, which in the description
and portraiture of Jupiter adioined Justice sitting on his right hand;
howsoever it pleased Anaxarchus gybingly to tell Alexander, that Jupiter was
not bound thereby to do justly, but that the people were thereof to conceive,
that whatsoever Jupiter did was just.

It is worthy the noting, The Soueraigns love to their subjects.
that albeit the body does often unthankfully rebel against the soul, yet
the soul ever loves the body, still seeking to reduce it to the better, even
as a workman mendeth his tools, or a Musician his Instruments: whereof good
Rulers do make to themselves this rule, That notwithstanding the subjects by
their misbehauiour do often cause an incitation to wrath in their Soueraign
against them, yet in the punishing of such offenders, he will discover no
hatred to their persons, but to their faults, showing himself grieved and
unwilling to afflict them, seeking rather their chasticement with pity, than
their destruction with cruelty, and rather to hold a conjunction with them by
the mutualitie of loving offices, than to weaken his own strength by the loss
and cutting off the imployable parts of the state public. The soueraigns care
of their subjects welfare.
The welfare and prosperity of the body gives to the soul sweet
contentment, as secured thereby from the cares, perplexities, and griefs which
want occasioneth: so the plentiful and abundant estate of the subjects, is by
a good Sovereign both maintained and rejoiced at, since it gives to him
assurance of supply and comfort in all necessities.

In the creating of man, The excellency of sovereignty.
God is said to have breathed into him the soul, whereby the purity and
dignity thereof is much extolled above that lump of mowlded earth his body: So
is the place of pre-eminence of an high majesty, and of a more choice and
better esteemed worth, as being more to the image of God, and participating
more aptly with his greatness, his power, his justice, his mercy, his wisdom,
his goodness and bounty, and whatsoever else unspeakable perfection in his
unsearchable essence; for if man's governing of the creatures be to the image of
God, then the governing of men is much more to that image.

It was not in the power of the body either to choose or refuse the soul, but
his right of admission depended only on the pleasure of his imediate maker.
Sovereigns ordained by God.
I forbear to force the consequence so far, as wholly to debar the peoples
liking or electing of their governors: yet somewhat to temper the harshnesse,
and to restrain the rashness of some peremptory pragmatikes, I may be bold
from that auerment of the souls imbreathing, to propound this application
comparatively from thence inferred, That in this high point of principality,
God has reserved to himself this prerogative ofbestowing that dignity,
according to his own most vnscrutable counsel: By me (says he) Kings do
reign. And Saint Paul avouches, Romans 13.
That there is no power but of God: Yea Homer produces grave Nestor,
reproouing of Achilles for his obstinate withdrawing from Agamemnons regiment,
and his ouerbold contending with the King, since his Imperie was of God. True it
is, that even in the same phrases all things may be said to be of God, and
from God, as the author, creator, preserver, and disposer thereof: yet when we
find him to single out and appropriat any onething more especially unto his
own designements, we are there to take notice of his greater respectiuenesse,
and his ouerswaying greatness in the disposing and ordering of that matter
beyond the orders and limitations of laws or customs; yea in such a case he
conformeth the secundarie causes, to cooperate with him to his own ends: as
when he framed the peoples hearts, and the concurrance of their consents in the
electing of Saul and David unto the kingly office, whom notwithstanding he had
before himself appointed and anointed to that function. Wherefore as the soul
notwithstanding the mediate means of procreation, is usually said to be
infused from above into the body: so the Sovereign even in his particular
parson, but much more the sovereign authority may notwithstanding the
approbation of men, or any other assisting helps in the establishing thereof,
be rightly avouched to be ordained and designed by God himself.

As the soul (in imitation of that infiniteness from which it was first
breathed) spends all his powers with an insatiate desire in the search and
inquisition of more and more knowledge, Against ambition.
endeavoring thereby a further dilatation or extention of his nature (as to be
like unto God himself:) so does often times a Sovereign (haughtily conceyted
of the likeness he has with his ordainer) strive with all restless thoughts
and dear adventures, to enlarge the amplitude of his dominion, reckoning it
the absoluteness of perfection to be extended beyond the compass of any
limitation, and then wishing the subduing of many worlds, that he might more
nearly resemble the highest God, that made and rules all the world. But unto
them both (out of sorrowful experience) I may add this correcting caveat,
That such ambitious affectation, as it brought upon the one the deprivation of
his former blessedness, so is it commonly punished in the other by the
downfall and dissipation of his so exalted state. And as the one has ever
since been stinted at a measure of understanding acquirable by the organs of
the body (the which to seek to exceed is a renouncing of humility, yea a
forgetting of our humane imbecilitie, and a curiosity beyond sobriety:) so is
each sovereign power listed and confined to his own territories, maynteinable
by the strength thereof, the which who so is not contented with, is accounted
blamable of a presumptuous and unjust usurpation beyond the bounds to him
assigned.

In that the soul is author of action and motion in the body passive,
Sovereigns have a weighty charge.
himself being never idle, it shows by similitude, that the sovereign does
incessantly care and labor for the public good, and that his place is not (as
some vain heads imagine) the seat of idleness and pleasure, but that his
crown is accompanied, and even encompassed with so many restless thoughts,
and stinging cares, as affoordeth him but small respit of ease, no not in the
night season, as Homer describes his Agamemnon.

Howsoever the body be termed passive, in regard of the souls working in and
by his instruments, Sovereigns impart to inferior magistrates a part of their
power.
yet unto it also the soul imparteth his power of moving and acting, and the
more noble parts thereof be the more endued and enabled with the souls best
and worthiest faculties. All command in the state derived from the sovereign.
So is all superiority and command in the state, deriuatiuely branching from
the supreme principality; and the subjects of best sort, and fittest for use
and imploiments do share the greatest portion of such their sovereigns
subdivided authority: the remembrance and meditation whereof cannot but add
unto such designed and derived magistrates a spur of quickening encouragement,
more watchfully to attend so weighty a charge, least through their faintness
and dullness there be procured to their Sovereign a distayning disgrace or
imputation of disabilitie. Sovereigns wro^ged by the negligence of under
officers.
For as when the senses and powers of the body be fallen asleep, the soul
also (as not showing himself in the life of his actions) may be thought to be
fast bound and surprised with the same slumbers: so when the substituted and
authorized officers do desist from their endeavors and vigilancie in the
tendance of the charge or business to them credited; the soul of
soueraignetie is in such their slacknesse or sleepiness greatly discredited,
as if it were wholly deprived of his power, yea of the very appearance of his
governing virtue.

I^ i^ not impossible and insensible, that a body should live or move by any
other soul, than that whereunto by nature it is united. And is it not as absurd
in any man's understanding, and as preposterous by usurpation, that any foreign
power should intrude to rule and exercise jurisdiction in any other kingdom
entire within it self, Against foreign supremacy
and of absolute supremacy and sufficiency to gouerneal persons and causes
within the dominions thereof. Surely, as in every individual body, the own
soul thereof suffices for all natural works requisite to be effected
therein: so in every sovereign state, the ruling authority thereof is of it
self competent and complete, for the well governing and ordering of all the
affairs, needful or behouable to be attended unto, in that entire territory:
and it may in no wise be contradicted, but that in any country, the
commanding, summoning, and censuring of subjects, together with the sentensing
of causes, has his whole dependence and deriuation from the right and
pre-eminence of the soueraignetie and that the duties style and intitelings
usual and belonging, ought with all submissiue acknowledgement and respective
reference, to be rendered thereunto: which points of high regalitie, when any
subject shall either deny unto his Sovereign, or take unto himself, what is
it else, than as if an inferior and ministerial spirit, who has no other
function in the body, but as an agent or deputy for the soul in the works to
him assigned, shall intrudingly usurp, arrogate, and possess the place, name
and office of the soul it self? except we should witlessely imagine two
souls in one body, like two suns in one firmament.

The soul and the body are so firmly and entirely united in nature, that the
Philosophers found it no easy work to bound each from other with just
distinguishment, or proportionable partition. Tullie desirous to hold an equal
or middle course, blames as well Aristippus, for affecting the body too much,
as if there were no soul: as also Zeno, for forgetting that we have also
bodies, The rights of sovereignty not to be to far extended, nor too much
restreyned.
when he refers all unto the soul. Such good respect is observed to have
been had in equalling the rights of the Realm and Sovereign: for such as
extends pre-eminence too far, may be likened to such Philosophers, as
said, That man was all soul, and nothing but the soul: And such on the other
side which kirbeth too much the awful authority of high supremacy, with an
enterpose of any popular or mediate force to restrain or resist it, agrees
with that Philosophy, That darkeneth, drowneth and imprisoneth the soul
within the body, as if it were rather subdued by the body, than the body
endued with his gifts. To be sure to deal indifferently on each part, it is
not amiss to consider of them sundred and apart.

To begin with the soul: If we should gather and bind together all his
distinguished parts, First of sovereignty.
and essential faculties, into one as himself is one, we shall readily find
what in propriety of interest to him belongs. The powers of the soul set
forth.
It fares with the soul in the body, as it did amongst the Poets with Jupiter
in the heavens, who notwithstanding that he did all in all, and was the
unlimited transcendence above al, yet what ever he did in the skies, in the
air, and winds, in the earth, in the sea, or places subterraniall, by nature,
by force, by art, by wisdom, by persuasion, by curious workmanship, by
profitable inventions, by extraordinary instincts of the mind, or by any other
means whatsoever, for governing of the world, or the good of man, and the
commodity of this life, was attributed unto some other feigned gods, so as in
very truth, the multitude of gods in those times, was but the multiplicitie of
power in one God: The soul likewise in the body being but one, and the same,
operating diversely according to the disposition and aptnes of the instruments,
is to challenge to himself as the rightful owner or author, whatsoever life,
sense, motion, discerning, health, strength, beauty, abilities, actions,
graces, or gifts inherent or appertayning unto the body, howsoever the same (by
a change or new purchase of their names) seems to disauow their proceeding
from his essence. Even that faculty of vegetation (which seems so base and
drossie, and to hold most of the earthlinesse of the body) has yet his
original root and plantation in the soul, whether we consider the same in
the power nutritive for preservation, or in the augmentatiue for perfection, or
in the generatiue for multiplication, we shall find it wholly to flow from this
fountain: with the nutritive power must concur appetition, digestion,
retention, and expulsion: In digestion is required an immutation, a formation,
and an assimilation; in all which so necessary and fundamental functions of
life, the soul evidently blazeth forth his effecting force, since neither
without a soul, nor with any more souls than one, the body of it self could
possibly, either so orderly and concordantly contriue his own good by so
helpful means, or perform such worthy actions by any native vigor. The
sensitive faculty is much more sensibly discerned to take descent from the
soul. The senses are as the doors and windows through and forth of the which
he makes his prospects and passages; yea their attendance is so vnseparablie
annexed unto the soul, that where he diuerteth himself, and gives no
attention, there the eye seeing sees not, the ear hearing hears not, and
all other acts of any senses, be void of perceiving or apprehending.

To discourse at large, with full sails, how the senses do recommend their
conceiving unto the fantasy; how the fantasy delivers them over unto the
understanding; how the understanding either absolutely judges them by reason,
or erroniously mistaketh them by opinion; how either reason or opinion,
exciteth affections; how affections either advised by deliberation, or
passionate by humors, induces the assent of the will; and how the will
commands and enforces motion and prosecution in all or any parts of the
bobie: howsoever it might amply and excellently illustrate the powerful
operations of the soul, so orderly lincked, cheyned, and wrapped one within
another: yet lest the delightsomnesse of following the tract of so well
pleasing a theme, should draw me too far out of my way, I will wynd about
again, by making a second survey thereof, in the matching to the same of mine
applications. The governing preeminence of the estate, The matching of the
powers of sovereignty to the powers of the soul.
though it be sometimes in like manner obscured, and wronged by inferior
deriuations; yet such as can surmount the vulgar thoughts, in reducing unto one
glorious and potent head of majesty, all the several branchings and
subalternations thereof, shall easily find how agreeablie it holds semblance
with the soul, in this respect also, as to be but one, yet effecting all, yea,
to be all in all, and all in every part of the body politic. There is not in
the Commonwealth, any the least synew for mocion, the least vain for
norishment, the least spirit for life and action, the least strength for
defense, or offense, the least member for use and benefit, which is not
replenished with this power, and sucketh from this ouerflowing cesterne, all
his subsistence and performance. (And if I thought it not unfit to be
ouer-curious in fitting exactly the particulers of each) I would not pretermit
a more large comparing of them, even in their alike forces of vegetation also.
Who sees not, Sovereignty in his vegetable power.
that it belongs to the office of Soueraignitie, to provide for the
nourishing and mainteining of the state with necessaries, to amplify the
dominions thereof, for profit and dignity, to spread abroad the increase of
the people by Colonies, in the nature of generating or propagating, to cherish
in the subjects an appetite of acquiring of commodities, to grant to them
places of Mart and Market for the digesting of the same unto all parts of the
Realm, and so to change form and assimulate them to their most behoof: to
give order for the holding and retaining of that which is become their well
agreeing and natural sustenance, and for the expelling as well of the hurtful
ouercharge, as the unprofitable excrements of the weal public. Will you yet
see farther the sovereign virtue of the Sovereign power, in all and every
the parts of the State? produce me any (though a person altogether private,
occupying but a room or drawing breath in the Common wealth) that is not
enforced both by foreseeing reason, and after-prouing events, to acknowledge
all his good whatsoever, to be first given, and then secured unto him, by the
force of a well ordered government, out of the circle whereof there can be
neither welfare, nor safety, but contrariwise, all confusion, slaughter,
rapine, and unjust bereauing of him of all that is or can be dear unto him.

But who so lists to behold this Political soul of the State in his full
royalty and amplitude, let him look upon his more noble parts, the sensual
and intellectual; In the sensitive and intellectual.
the according and conforming whereof to his important uses, makes the Gordian
knot of a powerful and peaceful blessedness. Then the Soueraignitie (moving,
working, and ruling in his three estates) matcheth well the three headed
Gerion, whom Iustine interprets to signify the union of three loving
brethren; then it sees more than the hundredth eyes of Argus, and acts more
than the hundredth hands of Briareus. All Subjects will, as the senses, play
the espials and intelligencers; as the members, be stirred and commanded in
cases of employment; and as the spirits imaginatiue, propose for apprehension,
the true shapes and forms of things, either pleasing and eligible, or hurtful
and auoydable.

The Counselors of State like the understanding faculty, Councillors.
apply all their endeavors to advance the glory, and further the enterprises
of this their ruling soul, being themselves also by his supreme reason to be
ordered, or judged in their right or wrong conceiuings.

The favorites of a Prince may be resembled to the fantasies of the Soul,
Favorites.
wherewith he sporteth and delights himself; which to do (so the integrity
of judgment, and Majesty of State be retained) is in neither of both
reproueable. Which of us is there that does not (especially in matters rather
pleasing than important) follow and feed his fantasies, give scope unto them,
suffer them to prevail with him, reckoning it a great part of his contentment
to have them satisfied? I will refrain to press the application farther than
the well taught Subjects will of themselves conceive. There must be no
despitefull envying at the Sovereigns favorites: as they be to him the
recreating comforts choicely selected; acceptablie to consort withal; so their
enriching, aduauncing, and gracing, with the cleerest signs of their
Sovereigns love, is not only allowable, but plainly necessary, since they
cannot walk continually in the Sun, but they must needs be colored.

The will of the Sovereign in the decreeing or enacting of Laws, The
Sovereigns will, and whether it alone may stand for law.
holds the like right as the will of the soul does in the perfourming the
resolves of reason. Allow that the Soul were now in his first clear sighted
innocence, it could not will or affect any thing that were not absolute
reason: So were Sovereigns uncorrupted with that all-taynting canker of sin,
and free from every humane infirmity, their will alone were undoubted law and
Justice; but on the other side, when reason (whose office it is to show the
right) is vanquished by the errors of misconceiuing, then the will by such bad
direction is driven to sin in his designed works: So where the judgment of
the Sovereign swarueth from sincerity of true discerning, there his will and
all decrees, or executions following the same, must of necessity be culpable
and turn to wrong. Wherefore since it will not be gainsaid, but that
Sovereigns through their natural frailties, are subject as well to the
imbecillitie of judgment, as also to sensual and irrational mocions, rising
out of the infectious mudd of flesh and blood, (the observance of which tainte
in man's nature, caused Plato to say, Plato
That the body was more in the soul, than the soul in the body) and that
such their defects may well disable them, from either attayning unto, or
retayning firmly the precise points of perfect Justice: How both prudently and
lovingly do those Sovereigns govern, who neither taking to themselves that
absolutenes of sole power in law-giuing, which by some (being indeed of too
hard a temper) is colourably, claymed to be original and hereditarie to their
places; neither trusting too much to their own sufficiencies, either of
wisdom or vprightnes, (which seldom be without some admixture of
imperfections) do at the making of Statutes and ordinances, assemble for
consultation and consent, a full assistance of the noblest and choicest
aduisours that the State affourdeth: thereby drawing supplies out of their
political body, to make good what wants in their natural?

From the errors of inferior senses, the conceit of the common sense receives
much misinforming, Sovereigns often misinformed.
which in the end and by degrees reaches a seducement to the soul it self:
So may the Sovereign unwittingly by wrong reports of some near about him, be
misled from the knowledge of the truth, into many misbeleeuings. The humors of
the body do often forciblie prevail in the working and stirring of the mind;
Customs and inclinations of the people often prevail with the soueraign.
whereupon some Philosophers have tied the soul unto the temperature of the
body: So the customs and inclinations of the people in each Country, has
otherwhile no small force in the inclyning of the Sovereigns disposition, if
not to approve, yet to tolerate some imperfections. The mind must not suffer
it self, for want of resolution, Resolution in the soueraign.
to be distracted by diversity of undiscussed opinions, as wavering and
wandering without judgment, having war within it self: So the governor may
not well admit or harken unto different and factious sects, tending to the
disturbing and instabilitie of his government. The affections so long as they
be obedient unto reason, Obedience in the people.
stands the soul in great steed; but if they become violent and unruly,
then (of their disordering, and disturbing of the minds tranquillity) they be
rightly termed perturbations. Such is the Sovereigns case; If the people be
tractable, and truly serviceable, with all dutious subjection, in the nature
of right alleagiance, then as loving subjects, by their forwardness in
cooperating with him, they give strength and stay unto his government: but if
they turn mutinous and tumultuous, troubling the governor and State with
seditious disorders, then be they as Rebels by the Justice of the law to be
suppressed, even as the perturbations of the mind must be subdued by reason,
which alone is that powerful Pallas that bestows her golden bridle upon
Bellorophon, Rebels.
to rule therewith that fierce and haughty Pegasus. The force of these headie
and giddie perturbations is tyrannously extreme, and that not only in the
common sort of men, (whom like to a heard of Swine, they whirle headlong into a
Sea of vices) but also in persons of the best quality, whose resistance
proves often too faint to escape, or keep off such violent invasions as
suppresseth and vanquisheth even reason it self: So is the Sovereign
sometimes by Traitors and Reuolters surprised and constrained unnaturally and
unlawfully, to the interruption of his government, and ruinating of the State.
Opinion is the forerunner (if not the father) of affections, Opinion.
himself a very misbegotten, between Self-love the mother, and Supposall the
sire, which (like an amorous make-loue) woeth at once both the virgin Truth,
and the harlot Error, yet affianced to neither, has but imperfect notions
betwixt both; from which notions notwithstanding, as the same shall apprehend a
conceit of good or evil, the affections taking motion, do start forth, putting
themselves in readiness, to repel the imagined evil, and to embrace the
seeming good. Upon the surmise of good, Appetites are excited: These be the
attendants, and as it were the Courtiers of the soul, Suitors in Court like
Appetites.
who immoderately seeking to satisfy their own desires, gives the soul no
rest, till he bestow all his faculties of understanding wit, and devise, to
accomplish their requests: Princes seldom want the Apes of such appetites,
that is to say, begging and flattering petitioners, pleasing and applauding
Parasites, who using all cunning insinuating, are never without their variety
of suits, to advance their own good, howsoever their Sovereign be thereby
either impouerished or dishonored. Upon the opinion of evil arises that
hidious and snakie head of Medusa, fearful, fretfull, greeuing, careful,
repining, and dispairing thoughts, filling the soul with the horror of much
discomfiture; such malcontents and froward cinicks the Sovereign often is
pestered with, Malcontents.
who never well pleased with the aucthorized proceedings, (though most
approueable) do still feed upon their own disliking conceits, and will
always with the Keistrell, fly against the wind, making their opposicion (by
clamorous complaints) against authority. These affections of both sorts,
being in their original altogether oppinionat, will sometimes (by reason of
the neerenesse that opinion has unto reason) make bold to allege reason for
themselves, Pretenses in treason.
and will seem to be judicious and just in their intendements. This wants
not his semblance (as in the natures before described) so chiefly in some
Traitors of better place, who knowing their dignities in neernesse to the
Prince, and of command in their Countries, will take upon them (though
intending their own end) to pretend equity and honesty, yea, and the
Sovereigns authority also, giving out a populer pretext of public good,
only to make way thereby to their foul treasons.

The mind has yet one endowment more, which almost equalleth all the rest;
Records and their imbeziling or falsifying.
which is a faithful memory of his fore-attainted knowledges, in whose good
trust and custody, he treasureth up all his rich acquirings: what semblance
there is thereof also in the soul of State, it cannot be obscure. The
Sovereign is well stored with remembrancers, nothing passes from him, or
setleth in him but by record; All his seats of Judgment enters and
preserves the proceedings in causes; and to forge, corrupt, or embezill the
Records (whereof any good government has a tender and strict regard) what is
it else, Than as if the memory should be clean taken from the mind, to the
which it is inseparable, or should become a lying misreporter; which nor his
nature, nor his office can endure.

These faculties the soul does show and exercise, in and with the organs of
the body, but he has a farther and more enlarged force, Prerogative royal.
beyond and without the compass of any concreat or material substance, as
abstracting and segregating himself to his own purity, and advanced thereby
to a more near resemblanee of the divine nature. For as we rightly conceive of
God, that albeit he works efficiently, and (if I may so say) naturally, by
the mediate causes, yet his potencie is not so by them tied or confined, but
that he often performs his own pleasure by extraordinary means, drawn out
of his absolute power, both preter and contra naturam: So the soul, besides
his usual and functionarie operations, in and by the ministerial abilities of
the body, has other peculiar motions and actions of his own, neither aided
nor impeached by any corporiall assistance or resistance.

To this likeness of God and the soul, let us also shape our Sovereignty:
which (besides that which is regular in regiment, and from his power and
goodness imparted unto the people) has still, and reteineth to it self
certain prerogative rights of most ample extentions, and most free exemptions,
whereof true reverence (filled with all submissiue acknowledgements, and
contented with that portion and interest which it receives from regalitie)
admits no questioning disputes, and whereof just governors do not so far
enlarge the lists, as to do what they lust, but do so moderate the use (as God
in the world, and the Soul in the body) not to the impeach, but to the support
of justice; not to the hurt, but to the good of subjects.

Thus having perused the several parts and properties of the soul, together
with the likeness and corresponde^ce of sovereignty thereto; not without
touching also the dangers and declinations whereunto they both are subject: I
should (if I were not tied within a teather, and thereby restrained from al
affectionate discoursing or dilating) frame unto them both some hortatorie
admonition unto circumspect demeanure, for the preventing of ensnaring evils,
and reproachful obloquies. Sovereigns not to be evil spoken of.
O let not the pure substance of the soul, for some few his imperfections be
vnpurely censured: so neither the dear reputation of anointed majesty
maliciously traduced by some slender imputations. If upon some displeasing
occasions his anger be enkindled, shall any Zeno dare to say of him (as of the
soul) That he is all fire? If he should be thought somewhat to offend in
softlinesse and effeminatnes, will the Philosopher Hippias (as he defined the
soul) so slander him to be but water? If he could be noted for a little
leuitie and inconstancy, must there needs be found out straight some
Anaximenes, to term him as he conceived of the soul, to be wavering and
fleeting air? If caringly he regard the support of his high port, by attending
his profits, and looking to his provisions, is he to be concluded and
pronounced, as Zenophantes thought the soul, to be concreat of earth? How much
better were it rather to apply unto the Sovereign the opinion which Aristotle
held of the soul, that he consists of the pure and excellentest essence,
being to be accounted scant any humane creature, Cicero.
but wholly of a celestial temper, as from thence both originally ordained, and
daily governed? or to make him hold comparison with the soul, in that
supremest title (which Euripides durst bestow upon the soul) even to be a
God. For which appellation to be bestowed upon the Sovereign, the God of
gods has given us a warrant beyond all warrants, The manifold and mighty
effects, which in, and for the body politic, this states soul performs,
does ratify the same by reason also. Is not the body of it self a confused
lump, unformed, senseless, witless, and destitute of all helping means to
mayntaine it self from perishing and utter dissoluing? and does not this soul
(setting to work all his assisting powers) quicken it, move it, care for it,
provide for it, cherish it with his love, furnish it with his gifts, govern it
with his wisdom, establish it with his justice, and protect it with his
puissance? If then he be the deriuatiue, and (as it were) a diminitiue of the
mighty God, shall not his vassals (both respectively to his so high
entitelings, The Sovereign a God.
and gratefully for his great deseruings) refrain their rashness of deeming
and dooming in his doings? and rather reverently recognize the blessed benefits
that binds them to love, than with a Gyant-like presumption seek to deprave
his sacred estimation? to accumilate calumnies and detractions against the
Sovereign (so to abase and pull down majesty) is like to the pyling up of
hill upon hill, to war with heaven: and it may be better called petit
blasphemy, for a subject to blemish the Sovereign with soul aspersions, than
it is called petit treason for a servant to slay his master; since the duty and
priuitie between them is more astringent, and the offenses against a dietie
has an infinity of sin.

There is a question amongst the Philosophers, where and in what part of the
body the soul should be seated; some place it in the head, The large extent
of sovereignty, by comparison with God and the soul.
as in the highest tower, with his chief informers, aduisors and assistants
round about him; some in the heart, as the midst of his kingdom, from thence
to spread and distribute life and spirit more readily to all the parts; and
others alotting to it no chief seat at all, extends it equally unto all,
though it show it self in each member differently as their capacities or
abilities will permit, as if it therein also were in similitude with God
himself, who being by the infinity of his essence, every where, yet is no
where circumscribed, bounded with no including limits, or more certainly in one
place than in another: but as God is said to have his center every where, his
circumference no where; to be in all places, yet not placed; and with every
thing, yet mixed with nothing: So the soul communicating to all the parts his
essential nature, is not encompassed by any part, nor is not more present in
any one than in all. And as God (notwithstanding such his unmeasureable
infinitenes of being every where) is often said possitiuely, and namely there
to be, where he makes the more appearance of his presence: So the soul may be
said there to be resiant, where his force and efficiencies be most discerned;
when he attends the discussing of Intelligence and reason, then is his chair
of estate placed in the upper house, and so seems to dwell in the head. When
he betaketh himself to matter of Action, or follows the feruencie of
affections, then he is thought to be contained within the irascible part
enwalled in the breast, and issuing chiefly from the heart; when he falls
lower to the place of bestiall concupiscence, then he there also discovers
his presence in those inferior parts. And (in a word) according to the aptness
or appliablenesse of any part, wheresoever he acts, there he is: because (as
Aristotle teaches) the efficient must conioyne unto the effect, and the mouer
to the moved.

If any desire to understand how this discourse of the Souls either larger
dilatation of himself throughout the whole body, or of his more especial
appropriating of his presence and work unto particular parts, will accord by
comparison with Sovereignty in a State civil; let him in like sort examine
how fitly the name of the head agrees with the nature of a Sovereign; and how
properly the heart patterneth the preeminence, and how he does severally convey
and impart to any part of his dominions, the very essential faculties of his
government; without the which no people can ever as subjects raunge themselves
into the order, and community of humane society, howsoever, as men, or rather
as wild savages, they may perhaps breath a while upon the earth. It is a truth,
that as the Soul, so the power of principality in government, (though showing
it self in diverse manner, as the variety of events ministers occasion) yet
in all points, and all parts is all one. And that a righteous Sovereign (as
the soul does in defending and succouring any the least member from
destruction and harm) has an impartial and most respective care, which
extends it self (as God and the Soul does) universally to the whole, and
particulerly to each member individual. The which point of so large dilating
his force, (to the resemblance of such two patterns in a manner secresed and
unseen) if I might have leave to strain a little farther, I could have it
serve me also thus far, as (at the least) to make a show in that question
propounded by some great Clerks in policy, touching the Princes over prodigal
imparting of his presence amongst his people: For seeing that both God and the
Soul, Of the Sovereigns showing himself to the people.
working so vnlimitably, be yet undiscerned, in their essence, as hidden and
concealed from the eyes of men; it may seem to stand more with majesty,
Philip Comm.
and to work more regarding, more admiring, and more adoring, if (howsoever
their power in operating does show it self) yet their presence be more
sparingly and less familiarly vouchsafed. What is become ordinary, that we
use either neglectingly to contemn, or fastidiously to dislike; as on the
other side, what has for strangeness a novelty, for worth a dignity, and
for attayning a difficulty, is more desiringly, and more admiringly esteemed.
Hence arises in the minds of subjects such egernesse and longing to satisfy
their senses in the seeing, hearing, and well knowing of their Sovereign, as
if they were to seek after the head of Nilus, which sends them the ouerflow
of their plenty; or after the primum mobile of the world, which governs the
conuersions and fortunes of their life. It is hereof concluded, that a
Sovereign the less he is exposed to public observance, the more he is
presupposed to excel in amplitude of glory: nevertheless it being so
commendable a virtue in a governor to have such a facility and goodness of
nature, as (remitting the high carriage of his greatness) yields to his
people with an affable gentleness easy approach for enterlocution. I cannot
tell whether the contrary sternenesse (in haughtily shunning or repulsing
their aspect) will not have (in the even eye of a well regarding policy) the
greater disallowing. Now let us pass on to peruse the comparisons, taken from
the head.

Plato imagined man to be an heavenly plant; Plato.
his head to be the root; Man's head his root.
his bulk, the stock; his arms and legs the branches; and his root to draw
his sapp from the heavens to feed therewith the under parts, spreading
downward toward the earth. Such a plantation do I conceive in the
institution of a State politic: the soueraign head to be designed, inspired,
depending, and protected from above; and the body with the out-growing parts
thereof, to receive nourishment, strength, flourishing, and fruitfulnes from
that root of a rightful regiment. If the root thrive, sucking abundantly of
his heavenly nutriment, the plant must needs prosper, and cannot do amiss:
but if the root be destitute of grace, as deprived of his sapp, it induces
upon the whole stock of the State, a withering decay and pining barrenness.
The excellency of the head or Sovereign.
In the head is the first wheel and string of motion, giving force and order
to the whole frame, the first fountain of sense streaming from thence to the
other cesterns, and the high erected palace, where the mind keeps his court,
shining in his greatest Majesty. The head is by the order and instinct of
nature, The head loved of the body.
so dearly esteemed and honored of the body, as that every part will not
only seek his ease and health, but even expose it self to any perils for his
sake and safety: the inferior parts do sustain and bear him up, moving at
his beck, and fast bound when he takes rest: the hands and arms, do readily
receive upon themselves the strokes and wounds, intended against the head; yea,
any part does endure pain, by incision, scarifying, ligature, or issue, to
remedy the greeuances of the head. These good duties of kindly subjection, to
kingly power, I leave to the consideration and conscience of every true
subject, wishing him to make his best use thereof by contemplating and applying
of the same in the performance of like offices of alleagiance, love, and
loyalty. We see the head naturally endued with a fellow feeling of any the
griefs in the whole body, in so much as there is scant any disease so weak
or small in any part, as does not affect and disturb the head also; yea, it
holds such a sympathy with the very foot, as that a little wet or cold
taken in that remotest place, Sovereigns have a sympathy with subjects.
has forthwith a ready passage to the head. Gracious Sovereigns have the
like compassions and compunctions in the distresses of their subjects, and be
in the same sort deeply peirced and perplexed with any wrong or
distemperatures, happening to the meanest of their people. How to think of
sovereigns faults.
I have learned of the Physicians, that most of the diseases of the head, are
originally arising and caused from the body: and I think that I may thus
thereof infer; That many the escapes of Sovereigns by omission or commission,
may thus far by this excuse be extenuated, as more imputable to the people than
to them. Subjects have a cause to bear with Sovereigns faults.
Therefore when from the head a flux of humors shall annoy and enfeeble the
whole, or any part, I wish it should be remembered, that such as is our
offering, such should be our suffering. Many and very dangerous be the evils,
that from a distempered heat be distilled into the body. I might laboriously
enlarge what harms he may do to his subjected members, by his several
excesses or defects, the disorder and uneven carriage whereof fills the whole
with remediless mischiefs. Yet let us mark this withal, That in the
natural body, there was never any parts so far digressing from their native
nature of allegiance, and their indissolluble band of obedience, forgetting as
well the good which they otherwise receive, No opposition to the Sovereign,
much less no deposing of them.
as the wrong whereby they continually infest him, as did once presume to
oppose, or but repine against their head, much less seek or attempt to shake
him off the shoulders. How much more kind be those subjects, who out of their
own dutious love, Kind subjects take upon themselves the blame imputed to the
Sovereign.
be content to have the blame of the faults, or ouersights, likely to blemmish
their Sovereign, transferred and imposed upon themselves? It may seem by a
drunkard in Plautus, that the head thought himself privileged, as it were
with a point of prerogative, to charge the inferior parts with the shame of his
own distemper; Siccine fit hoc pedes? statin an non? Nam hercle si cecidero
vestrum erit flagitium. In Pseud.


Here leaving the head in his irresistable right of ruling over the body, I
will to the Soul again, taking a farther view thereof, The soueraign likened
to the heart.
as sitting in his other principal seat the heart: when I behold the intricate
net or curious web of veins, spread from it over all the body; me thinks I
may well liken it to a little spyder, placed in the midst of her work, where
she so caringly and cunningly orders the matter, that she presently feels
the least shake or touch in any though the farthest part of her webb. No less
feelingly does the heart perceive, and partake, with any injury done unto his
veins. Sometimes he sends forth the blood and spirits with a full flush,
replenishing all parts plentiously, other while he rerireth them home with all
speed to his little sconce, to comfort and fortify it self. The command and
force of sovereignty.


It is admirable to see the swift and sudden recourse of blood, now stirred
outwardly at a start like lightning, and anon posting back in fear of danger
to the hearts succor, leaving a palenesse and trembling in the outward parts.
The heart is the well of life, the furnace of heat, the center of blood, the
first living and the last dying part. Agreeably to these virtues or efficacies
of the heart, let it be confessed, that every commonweal acknowiedgeth a
sovereign power, from the which it drew his first beginning, of which it
receives his dearest life blood, with which it is quickened as with a living
fire, to the which it wholly trusts, and returns for refuge, by which it is
employed and directed in all intentions, and without which it fails of
continuance, and is incontinently dissolved. Then to such a Governor which
both imparteth to al parts the veins and artiries of their surest welfare, and
has a sense of any their griefs and wrongs, as of his own; what and how
regardant thankfulness, service, and observance is deservedly due by the
faithful performance (with the uttermost strain of the very heartstrings) of
all obedience to his commands and authority.

The heart is of all other the firmest flesh, yet not fed with blood by any
veins; and from it all other flesh deriueth by veins his borrowed living. I
have heard it argued, Of the Sovereign all hold what they have.
that a King in like sort is alone firmly and absolute stated, in and to the
lands of his realm, and that all other owners take from him by the veins and
conueyances which he passes to them. That which Aristotle says of the heart,
That it gives and imparteth to every member, but it self receives or takes
not from any; is a good pattern of regal magnificence and bounty, Bounty in
a Sovereign.
seeing that nothing more aptly represents the nature of the soul, or
comes nearer to God himself than to do good, and extend reliefs to others,
with free heart and open hand, himself in the mean while having no need of
any. The figure of the heart is shaped sharp poynted at the lower end,
Sovereigns love of virtue.
and upward it is more widely spread abroad: To this form the best princes do
conform, they open their hearts with a full spread toward virtue, goodness,
and heavenly things, but do make narrow and close the same against all base
appetites of this unhallowed flesh. The heart is the dwelling place of the
affections and inclinations of the mind, whereof (as of his own train,
family, or household, Soueraigns to look well to them that be near about the^
he alone is to have the government) if they be let loose with scope to follow
their disordered desires, not only the heart it self is subdued and trampled
upon by their turbulent passions, but the whole body also fares the worse,
and takes no small harm thereby. Right wisely do Sovereigns hereof take
this instruction, to uphold their government in a strict steadiness, tempering
all extremities with an evenness of moderation, that none about them grow too
violent or headstrong, which cannot but work as a disturbance to their
persons, so a disproportion to their states.

Where any affection predominantly reigns, it draws thither such humors of
the body, as are likest and best consorteth to it self: How factions grow*
as anger calls to him choler, to further his fierceness; mirth cheareth it
self with the freshest blood; and sorrow will not be without the company of
sower and dumpish melancholic: So if the Sovereign in the precincts of his
regiment, shall suffer an ouergrowing inequalltie of greatness to get an head,
it will quickly gather to it self a syding faction of like disposed
disturbers, which will make a shrewd adventure, both of ouertopping him, and
ouerturning of his state.

There is nothing that is either more graceful for seemelinesse of show, The
Sovereigns sports not to be grudged at.
or more available to any man for his health, than to have always a light and
cheerful heart: and it was yet never seen that any part of the body ever
grudged at or repugned, but rather willingly furthered the well-pleasing
delights of the heart. From hence good people will learn this well-resembling
inference, That the recreating sports and pleasures of Sovereigns (in whom is
the heart blood of the civil body) be not dislikingly crossed or repyned at,
but rather entertainingly allowed, and comfortably affoorded unto them; yea
though some occasions of dislike should work a distaste, and harder censure
thereof.

We do account as the head, so the heart to receive hurt two ways, Two ways
to wrong the Sovereign.
primarily, or imediatly; and by consent which it has with other more choicely
affected and much agrieued parts: so may we reckon offenses or misdemeanors to
tend to the impugning of the prince, not only when they directly concern his
own person, state, or dignity, but also when they be committed against his
Council, Judges, or chief officers, in whom their Sovereign has engraven
his own image or character, imparting unto them a portion of his own
authority, and with whom he maintayneth a mutualitie of all ayding kindness,
and honorable respectiuenesse.

Admit that the heart or the brain were so laid open to ouraspects, Majesty
in a Sovereign.
that we might attentively behold the substance, the shape, the very life and
actions thereof; would not the consideration of the dignity of the soul, there
resiant and working, work an impression in our thoughts, to regard, esteem,
and admire those parts, as excelling and surpassing all the rest? so when the
person of a Prince is looked upon (whereon we do seldom gaze enough) our
inward cogitations filled with a reverence of the regal majesty seated in
that flesh (otherwise as infirm and full of imperfe^^^ons as other A
Sovereign how to be respected.
is) ought to surmount all sensual conceits (scant thinking of any humane
nature) but making an infinite difference between that body, so (as it were)
glorified with the presence, representation and in dwelling of that supreme or
exalted eminency, and other ordinary persons, which yet does consist
materially of the same substance, and perhaps endued by nature with equal
graces.

Do you desire a brighter displaying of the illustrious majesty shining in
sovereignty? Diversities of respects in the Soueraign touching his person and
his sovereignty.
do but observe how much it surmounteth the person it self thereof possessed,
like a brittle glass all illightened with the glorious blaze of the Sun. The
Sovereign as in his personal respects, has his childhood and his impotencie
of minority, but his Sovereignty is like Hercules the son of Jupiter, that
in his very cradle could gripe Snakes to death, being at no time abridged or
enfeebled, but to be supposed ever of a full strength, age, and power. In his
personal respects he may partake of the mixture of blood and kindred with the
subjects, but sovereignty admits no terms or titles of consanguinitie. In
his personal respects he is as one man, single and individual, yet as in the
right of Sovereignty, he gayneth the appellation and capacities of a
corporation: In his personal respects death makes an end of his life and
glory all at once, but sovereignty never fails (not by the space of one
moment still living in a successiue continuatio^:) and as the consideration of
the excellency of the soul (whereunto the sovereignty, as in these respects
also is agreeably patterned) caused the old Philosophers (not able by their
sharp inquirings to penetrat into the deep profou^dnes thereof) admiringly to
proclayme, Man the great miracle of nature.
That man was magnu^ naturae miraculum. So the resplendence and power of
sovereignty in the royal person of a Sovereign, showing it self both in so
great majesty, as dazleth the eyes of all beholders, and in so admirable
effects, as to transform savageness into civility, repugnances into
concords, vices into virtues, procuring love, yet implying fear; compelling
obedience, yet with yield of highest honor; holding toward all, the
proportion of justice, yet extending withal the remorse of mercy, does in
like sort (by such the conversion of the body natural, into a body political)
beget thereunto a more admired glory, and a more dear esteem.

Let me yet proceed a little farther in the discerning of the wisdom and
goodness of the Creator, in the ordeining and enduing with property of these
principal receptacles of the soul, the head, and the heart: Nor head nor
heart have any power to do wrong.
we do not find that either of them is naturally enabled to offer any wrong by
any means unto the body, or once to incline by any so much as imagination of
mischief thereunto; but contrariwise, fully furnished and accomplished with
store of helping reliefs, to nourish and preserve the same. For as in God
himself (if it were possible that he should do any injustice) it would make a
greater proof of his impotencie, than show forth his power: So if he had
given unto the soul, or to these parts most replenished with the powers
thereof, any such natural ability or quality, as might infer an injury and
prejudice to the rest of the body; it might rightlyer be termed a disabling
than an enabling, and no way conforming to his image: for what a confusion or
rather destruction would ensue, if the head should shrink up his sinews that
conueieth his vigor and spirits unto the members? or if the heart should at his
pleasure withhold or take away the nourishment of blood, that gives sustenance
and substance to the whole body? If the application hereof to our states soul:
How comfortably may we conceive, and even glory in our happiness, that stand
vndubitably assured of our Soueraigns goodness (which limitteth or rather much
exceeds his power) that the sinews of law and justice knitting all
subjection to soueraignetie, shall still from him receive an increase of
strength and firmness: and that this political soul (in the very
tenderness of his soul) will be so far from depriving and impayring of our
necessary nutriments, as that he will rather draine his own heart blood dry,
than the wealth of the land should either be wastfully exhausted, or not
suffisingly maintained?

The Soul also has made choice of some other principal parts in the body,
Certain essential orders in the state.
which he needfully uses and imployeth in the ministerial functions of life;
which if they once either fail in their offices, or decay in their essence,
the body can neither continue living, nor perform his actions: of which sort
may be reckoned, first the lungs and lights, ordained for the alaying of the
heat in the heart, and the necessity of respiration: Then the liver, which
begins the concoction of our susteinance, and the same so prepared, does
recommend over to the hearts more perfect converting and accommodating: Lastly,
the milt, the gall, and the kidneys, every whereof is allotted to some good
work of disseuering the refuse and drossie remnants from the selected and
purified nutriment. But for that in these the soul shows his weakest and
meanest virtue, which is of vegitation only, whereas in the head, or heart, he
displaieth all his glory, conuersing with them as with the darlings of his
love, I esteem it of no great merit, The gifts of statesmen to be well disposed
of.
to meditate too much of their worth, or to labor the likening of them (which
to do were easy and obuious) unto certain necessary and essential orders or
powers in the state. Only two considerations I have conceived, which me
thinks may not be omitted. The first, That as these be placed so helpfully
in the body, with such succeeding each other in their works, as accords to an
accomplishment of health and perfection in the whole: so there must be in the
public weal, a wise and political ordering of the good gifts and employments
of the chief statesmen, that their endeavors be discreetly sorted to the
general good, and not suffered out of course either promiscuously to intrude,
Chief officers or nobles to be well safgarded.
or disorderedly to cause dissentions. The second, that as these parts of
chief use for the preservation of life, be by the providence of nature
strongly sauegarded within an enclosed wall, as more cared for than the rest;
so such as be the more noble and more necessary members of the commonweal,
ought to be attended on with the more tender regard of their safety, and well
provided for against perilles, least in their ruin or subversion, the whole
State also receive a deadly stroke.

The mentioning of these parts of the body (though upon occasion of setting
forth the operations of the Soul, in and by them) has put me in mind of my
fore-intended Method; which after a matching of the ruling preeminence to the
nature of the soul, calls me to a survey or recounting of such obserueable
respects, as may make the like correspondence between the subjects of a state,
and the condition of a body: Wherein I must be feign to deal with the body
of the state, as Minerua did with the body of Ulysses, who in the safe
conducting, and reducing of him to his true Penelope, did transform him into
diverse shapes, sometimes putting upon him the show of a rimpled and withered
age, and anon again restoring him to his freshest hew, and lustiest strength:
So will I also (holding my intention to make at last an everlasting union of
the obeying body to the sovereign authority) turn the same, as I treat
thereof, into different forms, diversities, and altering respects, according
as any variety of consideration shall afford. And I must also further entreat
the good patience and license of my friendly Readers, for affording unto me such
liberty, as my self scantly likes of; which is of inserting and giving a
place in the contexrure of this Treatise, unto some such comparisons, as by
there frequent use in good Authors may seem to be over vulgar, which I could
have been well content to have avoided, had they not pressed upon me with some
show of necessity, since the more notoriously their likeness has bin
discovered and allowed, the more might I be noted either of ignorance in not
discerning so public proofs for my purpose, or of an affected singularity, in
contemningly omitting what the worthiest writers have chosen as diamonds and
precious stones to enrich and garnish their works withal. And thus much
perhaps I may perform in part of amends, that by such (as it were) my new
setting thereof, the same shall be more lightsomly refreshed, and emblazoned
with a more orient luster.

In the composition of the body politic (as of the natural) there is
required a concurrance or even mixture of four Elements, The four Elements of
the body politic.
which I do reckon to be these following: First, the generous, to advance and
maintain the state with their well deserving actions: Then the learned, to
instruct and direct with skill in cases of consultation: Thirdly, yeomen with
their labor to produce and work the commodities of the land: And lastly
Trafiquers which may both vent out by exportation what may be spared, and bring
in the necessaries that shall be wanting. Within these four sorts, all
Subjects compacted into a Civil state, may well be raunged and reckoned. How
these state-Elements may severally hold similitude, with either the Fire, or
the Air, or the Earth, or the Water, I leave to be conceived and disscussed of
such as have good leisure to be idle, or like well to be somewhat curious. This
I think not impertine^t to propound, That where any of these do exceed, The
well mixing of the elements.
or over sway the rest, there such distemper (as in the bodily mixture)
inclines the State to be ruled by that ouer-ruling force. And as in our bodies
by the unequal temper of the Elements the humors get masterie each over other
(of which humors the diversities of complexions do arise:) So in the body
politic, according as either the baser and passive Elements do prevail to
popularitie, or as the other more worthy and active, do reduce to the power of
a few; thereof the humor, complexion, The predominance of the elements active
or passive, makes the complexion of the body politic.
condition, and disposition of the state is discovered: in so much as (if the
Soul or superiority of governing be not strong enough to hold his own) the
exsuperance of the humor predominant, having altered the complexion of the
body, will also violently draw the soul to follow the form of his
temperature: wherefore right needful it is in any Commonweal, to contriue the
true and proportionable mixture of these four Elements, lest when they be put
at odds, reuerting to the original repugnances of their nature, they do fill
the state with hateful strifes, in the steed of blessefull peace. For as in
the body natural, The elements to be held in concord.
if the wisdom of the Creator had not composed into a concord the
contrarieties of the first Elements, it had (as still sticking in the confusion
of the first Chaos) never attained the strength, beauty, and order, which we
now admire: So in the civil body, if prudent policy by advised tempering of
the disparitie of the people, should not conioyne them to a well agreeing
consent, how could any hope be conceived, but that the difference of poor and
rich, vulgar and noble, ignorant and learned, fearful and valiant, Discords in
the parts of one and the same elements.
industrious and such as take their ease, must needs by their opposite
quallities, not only deface the dignity, but also subvert the stabilitie of
the state? yea the differences of such as be all of one Element, through a
natural emulation, (each part seeking to attain nearest to the center and
perfection of that whereunto he is incircled) proves often spitefully
troublesome, and must come under the care of a well disposing prudencie. For as
the more trafiquing makes the greater merchants, the happier husbanding the
richer yeomen; so the more virtuous may stand upon it to be reckoned, the more
generous. And each exsuperance will disturb the temper, if for the governing
of such inequalities, and prevention of strife amongst themselves, the wisdom
of the State (taught by natures example) did not use a correspondent carriage.
From the discrepance of unequal temperature, arises so sundry forms and
shapes of bodies politic. Sundry forms of bodies politic.
Some are hugely big, and their very greatness renders them unwieldy, having
their arms and their legs too far a sunder; some very little, yet well
compact, active and strongly set to save themselves; some carry a goodly show
on their outside, yet inwardly looked into, have great defects, as either a
foul Soul in so fair a body, or some deadly wringes tormenting their very
bowels; Some not so well favored or pleasingly shaped, yet are sound enough,
and in good health; Some be so fat and over fed with wealth, as their
neighbors be thereby tempted to make attempts against them: some so lean and
forlorn, as that their poverty is their best safety: some all sluggish and
sottish, can scant attend their own defense, but do so long pray aid of
others, till they be made a prey to all; some haughty and fierce are never out
of quarrels making, and taking occasions, through the flames of ambition, and
the gall of reuengefulnesse, to exercise a continual enmity. Thus we see how
(after the example of the body natural) the State civil also, is diversely
figured, and varieth his forms, whereof (were I not bound to brevity) I could
of each sort make instance and demonstrance in particular, But it likes me
better, to hold my accustomed course, by speaking in generality: for that I
may so hope to instruct some, and be sure to offend none.

Where the humors are in good harmony of good agreement, and the body thereby
in good health, there we do not dislike to have flesh and fat enough, but if
they be peccant, and so the body crasie, In a distemper all turns to hurt,
even that which otherwise were good enough.
then the more liberally we feed, the more dangerously we do offend. So in
a State, when each degree conformeth it self to his own duties, makng in the
whole a perfection of love and obedience, then the abundance of riches, the
multitude of people, the titles of honor, the increase of power, are both
auailable and commendable: But when any part becomes outrageous or
exorbitant, whereby the body is in a distemper, and gets an evil habit,
then what was otherwise comely and comfortable, will turn cumbersome and
dangerous, working a clean contrary effect, of a greater endamagement, if not
of an utter diuastation.

The natural body has his infancy, his youthfulnes, The degrees of growth in
the body politic.
his confirmed, declyning, and decrepid age: so has each Commonwealth, his
beginning, his enlarg^^ing, his puissance, his drowping, his decay and
downfall. The Philosophers, Philosophers.
for the reason of alterations in both the bodies, direct us to their
principals of generation and corruption, The causes o change in the body
politic.
tells us of the imbecillitie and mutabilitie of things compounded, of the
difficulty of persisting in perfectnes, of the easy declination into the
worse, and of their foreframed connection of effecting causes. The Astronomers
have also alike fitted them both with certain climatericall changes,
Astronomers.
appointed periodes, and fatal reuolutions: yea they teach us, that the
influence of superior planets do forcibly prevail (as in and over private
persons) so also over whole regions and kingdoms, changing and inuerting them
at their pleasures. I will yield unto the Philosophers their consequences and
dependancie of causes, touching the many variable events in both bodies, yet
with this provision, God in alterations works the causes, and often without
causes.
That the first cause, combyning and causing all causes be not forgotten, who
alone has all life and death, beginnings and endings at his dispose. Neither
will I stick with the Astronomers to acknowledge their stinted times, and
prefixed points, beyond the which neither of the said bodies can pass or
prolong themselves one instant: But to attribute that to the Stars, which the
God (which holds all the stars in his hands) challenges to himself, and
his own foredecreeing councels, were to refuse the sun, and be guided by a
starlight: He it is that raises and strengthens some mightier (like to
superior planets) to subdue the worthless, whom he has refused; and his
inclining of hearts is the right powerful influence, that effects these great
chaunges. Then (leaving this humane wisdom fast tied up within these
limitations, as in the iron net of Vulcan) I will only make this gain of that
first comparison, That since the said two bodies are so fitly and fully
conioined in semblance by their whole course, even from the cradle to the
grave; I shall not need to fear blame, for fashioning of their agreeablenes in
other also more particular considerations.

Difference of parts in the Commonwealth vegetable.
In the Commonwealth (as in the body) some parts seem chiefly vegetable,
caring for nothing more than to maintain their growth, by their sucking from
all the veins of the land, the nutriment and provisions of this life.
Sensitive.
Some live all sensually, giving no rest or contentedness to themselves, but
by pleasing of their senses, feeding of their affections, and fulfilling of
their desires; be it of revenge in the course of wrath, and quarelling, or of
haughtines to aspire, or of lust to sensuality. Othersome moderated with
staiednes in both the former, shape their lives after the powers rational and
intellectual, Rational.
disposing themselves by the rules of reason, to virtuous actions, and to
studious cogitations, indeuoring chiefly to deserve well of their Country,
and to uphold the frame of civil policy.

The natural body for the preserving of health, Dieting of the body.
uses the help of a good diet, whereby the humors are kept in their
equality of temper: so must the state also be dieted, neither glutted with
excess, nor scanted with penury: howbeit since it is more dangerous, from
fullness to fall away to leanness, than from leanness to spread and grow fat;
I wish such foresight and forecast, rather to leave than to lack, to rise
than to fall, and to amend than to pair, the defect being ever worse than the
excess, as nearer to a nullitie.

As the regiment of health in our bodies may fail or offend, Too precise or
too careless of health.
in either of the extremities of being either too careless by licencious
adventures, or else too precise and strict by needless restraints: so the
governance of the states welfare may fall into the like opposite disorderings
by either too much remissenes and loosenes for want of hard holding of the
reins of well-ruling, or else by over severe debarring of such lawful liberty
as both nature requires, and reason denies not. It is hard to define which of
these is worse or more hurtful. The stirring nature of man, is like the
quickness and slipperines of the Eele, si laxes erepit, but si string as
erumpit: so that (though he be hardly by either way detayned in steaddinesse)
yet by the feeling of himself to be too much griped, he the more enforces
all his strength and motion for his enlargement: for my part I profess, that I
had rather (as taking it to be less to my harm) go slackly girt, yea quite
loose and male cinctus, than to be straightly pinched with tying or swaddling
too hard: and it is but too often found by experience, that the straight laced
men, whether so held in by any compelling authority, or thereunto fashioned by
a voluntary imposition, from their own austeritie, do break forth more
outragiously, and shake off the cords of obedience more desperately, when
occasion shall move them to streine and strive for a pretenced liberty, by a
course of commotion; opinionat wilfulness, the more check and stop it finds,
the more violently it will seek to make his way forth, vt exeat in ingenuum
suum.

The body also must have moderate exercise for the increase of heat, the
digesting of crudities, and the acquiring of a more active strength. Exercise
of the body.
The like benefit will ensue to the Commonweal, if public occasion do hold
the people in employment, their spirits are thereby enkindled, their superfluous
vanities laid away, and their valor and ableness to atchieue high attempts
much confirmed. Aristotle has a true observation, That that which moves does
not so soon putrify as that which rests. And the wisest Commonweales have
even purposedly made and procured to themselves great business, that their men
should rather be refreshed and purified by action, than be either consumed with
ease and voluptuousnes, or eaten into with the rust of a reuolting disobedience.

Both the bodies do also herein agree, as to be tended and ordered as several
respects shall give occasion: Tendance of the body politic according to
different respects.
nor we nor our judgment is the same when we be children and when we be
elder, when we be full and when we be fasting, when we be sick and when we be
sound, when we be free and when we be bound; we do suffer more at one time
than we will do at another, we be able to perform more in our good plight and
strength than we dare so much as hope of in our feebleness, we be more
circumspect in our fears than careful in prosperities, and we be often so
much distracted with discrepant conditions as we be not always alike our
selves: such interchangeable times and dispositions being in the same sort
incident unto the state, there is good heeld to be taken thereof, that the
counsels and provisions be answerable to the necessities or conueniences that
ought to be regarded.

In the body natural the sustenance is not all carried to one side, or to one
part, Equality to be observed.
to the pining and beguiling of the rest: So in the state, the nobility is so
to be maintained, as that the Commons be not wronged; and the Clergy so to
be cherished, as the Laytie be not ouerlayd, but each part must be fed
competently with a proportionable partition of the profits, alotting the same
with such indifferency, as the plenty of some be not the cause of penury
unto others, nor that the euersucking veins of some do draw dry the poorer
that be in want.

Neither yet must we hereuppon induce any paritie or equallitie, which nature
herself abandoneth: Against paritie to prove differences of dignity and
riches.
for howsoever (like a wise oeconomicall governor) she susteineth every part
of the body with a sufficiency, yet does she give (in her intentions) to some
more worthy and principal than the rest, a precedence to be chiefly provided
for. The blood (unto the which the Turk compared his tribute and treasure,
inferring thereby the moderat expending thereof) though it be derived and
dispersed to all parts, yet is it more abundantly bestowed in the gracing of
the face. The heart though it spredeth his arteries all over the body, yet he
beats and works more strongly with his pulses in one place than in another.
Not so much as our garments but must be fitted to our bigness or smallness,
observing therein such difference as arises by the diversities of our bodies:
Why then should it be grudged at, if the nobility and gentry of the land (in
whom the dignity and the well-shewing countenance of the state consists) be
better stored and furnished than the meaner of the people? why should any body
envy at the glory of some selected persons, in and by whom the Sovereign
does more manifestly discover his purposes, make show of his force, and
express his affections? or why should it be disliked, that honors and
favors, riches, and preferments be bestowed, or rather fitted (regardingly
unto the merits of the virtuous) by taking knowledge (and as it were taking
measure) of their good service and honorable deseruings? And (to wade yet
further) I will confidently make good thus much more, That as in the body it
is a greater mischief not to nourish and sustain the sound and serviceable
parts, than not to cut off the diseased and corrupted: so in the Commonweal,
not to reward and advance the worthy, Not to reward worse than not to punish.
is more pernicious and of more dangerous consequence, than not to afflict,
punish, or pare away the hurtful and infectious: for where the one is but
spared awhile by lenity and impunitie in some hope of amendment, the other
unrespected in his goodness, is so pinched by that coldness of entertaynment,
as he seldom or never can come forward and put forth any shoots of virtue.
Thence will it fall out, that as in the body the decay or corruption of any
part, is but the want of that health, soundness, or good temper which it ought
to have had, and employed to the help and not to the hurt of the whole: So in
the body politic, if in the better part thereof (by occasion of such
discouragement, and the pronenesse of men unto naughtiness more than unto
goodness) there be a want of honesty or virtuous performances, must it not
necessarily effect a general declination from all true duties? diuerting that
to the harm that should have been converted to the benefit of the state, and
introducing thereby, an ouerswelling tide of sin, corrupting and confounding
all, and that merely by the neglect of desert and virtue.

If there be any not yet persuaded of this different respectiuenesse to be had
of men in the state, Difference of dignities and degrees.
according as they differ in esteem and worthiness; let him yet farther
bethink himself of his own different usage of the several parts of his own
body: does he not adorn some of them with silks, veluets, purple, and cloth
of gold, and yet leaves others wholly naked, or but homely and coursely
attired? he has for the head and neck, garlands, chains, and jewels of rich
value; where for the feet (though they do bear up the whole) he has but
leather only. What artificial devices will he not find out, and that with
his extremest cost, to grace and set forth the comeliness of his face? and yet
hides for very shame some other parts unfit and unworthy of producing to
open aspect? and were it not as unfitting, that the dignities and degrees of
reputation, Dignities ill bestowed.
should be promiscuously cast abroad amongst the meaner sort of mechanical
tradesmen, as for the ornaments and dressings provided for the better parts, to
be bestowed so low as upon the feet? Hereof my inference is, That as in our
private, so in our public body, difference of regard makes difference of
advancement, by a distributing justice, which yields to every one (though
not the same) yet his fit proportion.

It is not therefore called a Commonwealth, Why the body politic is called a
Common wealth.
that all the wealth should be common; but because the whole wealth, wit,
power, and goodness whatsoever, of every particular person, must be conferred
and reduced to the common good: and that in the same sort and semblance, as the
distinct members of the body, being ordained to different uses, do yet
concur in this consonance of intention, as to impart and refer all their
helps and endeavors (to the uttermost reach of their abilities) for the
procuring and preserving of the comfort and continuance of this one body.

All the members join their assisting aid, and effect their whole force
according to their diverse functions, Mutualitie of help in the members.
as well for the upholding of the whole and every part in soundness, as also
against a common enemy: And whatsoever presses nature with any grief, is
repelled by the consent of a general resistance. If but a thorn have pricked
the foot, how does the eye seek to spy it out? how does the hand bestirre him
to draw it out? how does the head contriue to work it out? and each part as
his power permits him, does think to procure his own ease by remedying the
disease in another: More respect of the chief members.
but in case any the principal or vital parts be much distressed, or in
great danger, then (as ouermatched with a mountain of misery) the care, the
fear, the sorrow is so far increased, as that remediless of help, and
languishing in despair, they do all yield themselves vanquished, as partakers
also of that calamity so incurable.

This fellow suffering, this strong union, and enterchanged kindness, showed
so lovingly in the parts of the body, instructs all true subjects of any
country to the mutual performance of all friendly offices, and to the firmest
adherence against all opposing enmities, or in all perilous necessities;
remembering that a common danger alike distresseth the less as the greatest;
but especially, to be tenderly affected in the loss or harm likely to befall
their choicest statesmen of the best account and quality, against whom the
enemies of the state do chiefly bend their malignant intentions, The enemies
bend most against the best.
even as in our private combats and affraies, the deadly minded foe watches to
wound the dearest and vital parts.

From this founteine of natures so wise distribution and distinguishment of the
parts, in sorting them so orderly to their several functions, this
consideration also flows and offers it self; that as there must be a
proportionablenesse and a kind of unanimity of the members, for the aiding and
adorning of the public comprehending all: so that foul daughter of darkness
and Chaos confused and all disturbing Anarchie, is to be exiled, or rather
excluded out of this compaction of the body politic each part is to know and
administer his own proper work, without entermixing or entermedling in the
offices of any other. Shall the foot be permitted to partake in the point of
preeminence with the head? Each part to be appointed to his own works.
or were it seemlie for the head, leaving his state, to abase himself to a
toil manibus pedibusque in the trading businesses? For each member to take
upon him all works, as it has in nature an impossibility, so has it in
governance as great an incongruitie. And for any part to neglect the duties
properly to it allotted, or to run forth of the circle within the which it is
fixed (as quartering it self into a new division, by undertaking dispatches of
another nature) as it agrees not with that so well parted, yet uniform frame
of Gods workmanship, so is it not to be suffered neither in any well contrived
policy of the governing wisdom. The eye is nor ordained nor apted to any
other work, than to make use of the light by seeing; and to every singled part
there is assigned some more peculier operation or administration, from the
which as if in possessionem suam venerit excludit alios. To the like confusion
it tends if the parts be prodigiously dislocated or transferred from their
proper to other unfitting places, Parts disordered, makes the body to seem
monstrous.
whereof oftentimes the whole body gets the name of a monster misshapen and
distorted. The senses must hold their station like to Sentinels, and attend
their general in and about the head, where they be settled. And in brief, no
parts inward or outward can either do duties, or be endured elsewhere, than
where both for comeliness and use they be by natures order placed. The civil
body may hereby be admonished how to dispose of the several conditions and
degrees of the people, according to the difference of their breed, education,
conversation, or habitation; that employments or aduancements be not unmeet or
preposterous, but properly and aduantagiously accommodated. Against conspiracy
of the parts in the state civil.
But of all other the loathed impes of tumult and disorder, let this be taken
for the deadliest and most detestable; If any parts disdeining the rule of
their soul, and disliking their subjected condition, shall not only neglect
their dutious performances, but also conspiringly complot against the head,
heart, and other the noblest viols of life, to the utter destruction of the
whole body, by such their horrible commotions and violent conuulsions: which
if it were never yet attempted, or once intended by any natural members ruled
by the law of their creation, how comes it to pass, that any parts of the
political body should so outragiously and sediciously betake themselves to an
Anarchie, most unnatural and rebellious? Of the late intended Treason.
I could exhibit unto the well discerning eyes of all loiall subjects, a right
representing pattern hereof, by relating the true historical narration of the
late most execrable enterprise and cunningly contrived treachery, that ever
any subjects, of any Nation, though never so heathen or barbarous; of any age,
though never so earthly or ironlike; of any religion, though never so erroneous
or scismaticall; upon any occasion, though never so extremely moving, did
against their Sovereign and Rulers, once imagine, much less with enuenomed
and obdurate minds intend and undertake: which nevertheless I rather choose to
leave naked and vndilated to the Readers well appliing meditations, as well
because I refrain to use any unnecessary excursions, as also because I do
find any my faculty much too feeble to express (of so inhumane and bloody a
project) the right shape or substance: for where Hell it self has employed an
whole council of devils to devise an hateful and unheard of villainy; there
unless heaven should afford the tongue of Angels to declare and paint out the
abomination thereof, all the oratorie of man must needs fail and be defective.
What (though never so passionate) exclamations can raise sufficient admiration
of Treasons so damnable? What contestations or accusations by streining all the
strings of art, can reach the height of so heinous and most abhorred
conspiracies? what use can there be of any aggravating or amplifying, when the
plainest tale that can be told, may be thought to be but an Hyperbole beyond
belief? My conceit tells me, that (notwithstanding any the best sincerity
or integrity not possible to be controlled) the report thereof to foreign
Countries, or after ages, will seem incredible, and that it will require a
great dexterity and perfection of art, so to deliver it over, as not to have
it censured rather a malicious fiction, than a true story. I must confess
that it is not for every vulgar verbalist to handle or set forth such a
damnable purpose of murdering a King, and that by such a murder, and such a
King, and so accompanied with his decrest Queen, sweet Prince, and his whole
state of Nobility; the very relating or mentioning whereof, affrighteth and
dawnteth my heart with horror, even shaking the very pen in my hand, whilst I
think what a shake, what a blast, or what a storm (as they termed it) they
meant so suddeinly to have raised for the blowing up, shiuering into pieces, and
whirling about of those honorable, anointed, and sacred bodies, which the Lord
would not have to be so much as touched. I have heard of one so far affected to
poverty, as that he wished all the treasure and jewels of the world in one
room, that he might at once set tehm all on fire: Such a wish had these men so
devoted to Popery, that they would in an instant, and in one room, have
destroyed the true riches, jewels, the majesty and glory of our whole state
at one clap. It was a memorable cruelty of that tyrannous Emperor, that
wished all the Romans to have had but one head, that he might with one stroke
have chopped it off. Their purpose was full of the like heathenish immanitie,
That having all the heads of this Nation assembled in honorable consultation
into one place, would even then and there have as it were beheaded the whole
Realm, and so have induced upon the land a miserable desolation. The tyrannous
Massacre of France, (being an elder issue of that same mother Church the harlot
of Rome) was inferior in fury and wickedness to this plot: They had an excuse
from the warrant of authority; these out of their private dislikes, conspired
the overthrow of all authority: They designed those only to the slaughter
whom they accounted and condemned as offenders in their state, these bundled up
into their butcherie the innocent, and some of their own friends also, whom
they could have no color so to confound and ruinate: They meant the mending of
their state present, and the securing of their future; these not only the
subversion of that which now is flourishing, both in riches ^^rituousnesse, but
also a future precipitation into a swelling surge of ensuing and unavoidable
calamities. I cannot tell whether their obdurate hearts and brazen foreheds will
not contradict my position, if do but say this their designement to be a sin:
This in despite of them all I will maintain, That the very nature of man, not
seduced by the man of sin (who by his aucthorizing dispensations, and
pickpurse pardons has made himself the great patron of sin) acknowledges
the same to be a foul and inexcusable, a cursed and most shameful sin: a
sin and shame that will for ever cleave to their Religion, even as close as
the venomed shirt of Hercules, till it eat and consume the same to the hard
bones: a sin and shame that no conscience (though steeled over with the
Romish metal) can make so much as any colorable defense for: a sin and
shame that God himself of his miraculous mercy, for the honor of his name,
and the love of his truth, so happily discovered, that they might not say,
Where is now their God: A sin and shame, that we shall not need to call
Divines by any their disputings to convince them of; but which the very
Humanists and Moralists out of the grounds of reason and learning, will make
the whole world to wonder, hiss, and gnash their teeth at. And which my poor
self (as the meanness of my wit and erudition affords) even by the
comparatiue respects of the parts in the body, which I have undertaken to set
forth, do condemn to the deepest dongion of hell, whence the fathers and
factors of the Romish faith has first fetched it. Against idle, vagrant, or
vnptofitable people.


In the body there is not any part so weak, so little, or so base, which God
has not framed and appointed to some good use; and shall there in the state
be cherished, or suffered, any so loose, idle, vagrant, and unprofitable
people, as that no use can be made of them for the public behoof? nay, that
be noisome, pernicious, combersome, and contrarious thereunto? Let us but
observe nature, who because she would be sure to make nothing in vain
(thereby teaching us in the order of government, to allow no needless or
fruitles parts) has endued and designed some one part unto many uses. I will
propound only one instance of the hand, which serves for so many purposes, as
I think to resemble thereunto, sometimes the soldier that fights, sometimes
the husbandman that labors, sometimes the merchant that reaches and
fetches far and near, sometimes the artificer, who wholly practices the
handiecraft, sometimes the purueiour, that feeds and releeueth our lives with
needful nutriment. This so provident accommodating of the parts unto many
employments, disproueth our heedlesse tollerating of these begging and shifting
mates, who swarming every where, be so far from doing any good in the State,
as that they will do nothing for their own living.

Nevertheless, I would not be so mistaken, as if by this president of natures
work in bestowing of manifold abilities upon one part, Against engrossing of
offices.
I should make way or proof for the ouer-greedie engrossing of too many
offices into the hands of some one man; which neither the business of the
state may well bear, nor the stomakes of other men with contentedness endure,
nor himself perhaps with sufficiency undergo. Therefore I must cross any
such conclusion with an apparent difference, No need to put many offices upon
one man.
disauow the similitude in that point, since in the larger body politic there
is greater store and choice of well-fitting seruitors for the many diversities
of affairs, that there is no need to huddle or heap too much upon any one
man: wherein it seems that nature has trodden us a path for our practice,
and that way also has for our imitation manifested her intention. We do
find, that the most industrious and isntrumental parts are given us by
couples, as if one (though for one work) would not serve the turn: for
example, She has given us two hands, and each of them divided and adorned with
several fingers; as if she meant in so narrow a compass to couch and compact a
variety of helps, for the more easy and certain dispatch of so diversely
occurring works.

This allotting of two parts to one function might cause in our so little
bodies a great faction, A concorda^ce of the parts of the body politic in
their common works.
if the foreseeing care of nature had not also conioined them in consent, as
well as in operation. We see both the eyes to look both one way, the ears to
conceive alike one and the same sound, the nostrils to be affected alike with
one and the same smell, the hands jointly laboring at one work, and the feet
by equal paces locally moving the body by even length and strength uprightly
supporting it, and by their good agreement jointly acting and lovingly ayding
one the other: the two sides, and the two shoulders, which bear up the high
castle of the head, do with the like matchable equality, and the like willing
agreeableness entertain their task. I wish from my heart (though I show but
by a simily) that in the realm likewise by such concordance of the parts in
each degree, might fasten so their faith each to other, as that the disposing
of many to one service, did tend to a more full and more sure performance of
the same: so should both the civil and the spiritual side, together with the
honorable shoulders on both sides, equally part between them the common care,
and much importing work of upholding the majesty of supreme authority,
without any fainting or interruption: so should the eyes of the wise, and the
senses of the learned be bent all one way, for discerning and increasing of
truth and goodness, without any erroneous mistaking, or wilful reluctations:
so should the meaner and ministering sort, like to the feet and hands run the
race, and catch the goal to them proposed, in making a happy kingdom through
an happy people, without any either rubbes in their way by unruliness, or
desisting from their duties by a retrogradation: And so should every part
become plyant and apt to their places and callings (receiving like wax from a
seal the impressions of the Governor) to execute his designements, without
either distraction by iarres, or perverseness of opposition, or the carelesnes of
a neglecting sloth.

I must yet infer one observation more of natures providence, In the work of
ruling, but one head.
whereupon I will set my mark as chiefly to be remembered: That albeit for the
ordering and effecting of other businesses concerning the body, she has
assigned and conjoined more parts unto one work: yet for the supremacy of
governing over all, she has but one head; as if it were utterly impossible, or
vnsufferablie mischeeuous, to admit any partnership in the regal dignity. Let
us imagine a body so monstrous, as whereunto two heads were at once affixed,
shall not that body receive much damage by the division and confusion of those
two heads? must not the body in that case either be divided by alotting of one
side to the one, and the other side to the other head? or else be wholly
disseuered by a promiscuous and contentious shufling of the several sinews,
forces, and operations from each head proceeding? What we as by fiction do
imagine might be done in the natural body: Man (that imagines nothing but
evil) and therefore can produce more prodigious errors than nature in her
escapes has ever patterned, has indeed often brought to pass (though with
most cursed success) in the body politic. Have we not had within this one
land of England, the hideous Heptarchie of seven heads at once? nay has not
the whole Island of Britania, Britania one body needing but one head.
being a body perfectly shaped, rounded, and bounded with an inuironing sea,
been a long time thus disseuered, and disfigured by that unlucky dualitie the
author of division? until at the last the mighty and only wonder working
hand of God, wyping away the deformity (not by any violent cutting off, but by
a new moulding as it were of the two heads into one) has restored it again to
his first right, imperial, and most monarchiall greatness.

Here I find the matter of Union to lie so full in my way, Proofs for Union.
that even it stops my passage, forcing me (notwithstanding the exact
handling thereof by others) to give it some little touch by the addition of
proof from these my comparisons also: for doubtless, if in the former times
two heads caused the dividing and halfeing of the body; the same reason now
requires, that this one so virtuous and powerful head should reunite and draw
again into one, the distracted and long repugning parts. And can any of this
entire and complete body be either so unnaturally hard hearted, or so
vnconsiderat of his own good, as finding this so happy and long desired
reducement thereof unto one head, will not seek to be conjoined (even in all
the offices of kindness and relief) rather with the whole body, than with
the parts of one side only? or is it fit that there should be any disseuering,
siding, or disuniting by different orders, laws, customs, and other such
points of government, where necessity of communion in all the parts, inforceth
a firmness of love, a likeness of life, and an equality of condition? Surely
such as do not gladly entertain this good opportunity to reunite that which
has so long been sundred, seems to be better pleased with the
imperfection, the weakness and misshapen form of the body under two heads,
and with disagreeing parts, than that the whole strengthening of it self with
a comely concordance, and uniform subjection, should be brought under the
righteous government of one only sovereign head. Therefore if they will not
be thought to dislike, that one head should rule all; let not this offend them
neither, that all be collected and incorporate into one and the same
political government.

The body may have many imperfections and deformities, yea may be bereaved of
whole parts, Imperfections in the body politic, yet a body.
and yet retain still the name and nature of a body: And sundry shifts be
devised (though not to cure) yet to cover such defects. In the steed of the
natural leg, or arm, we stick not to fashion and affixe a wooden arm, or
leg, very necessity constreineth us to make that simple supply, when we find
not otherwise any substantial remedy. The Commonwealth likewise, may (by the
loss or want of her true subjects) become stark lame, or by some foul
disorders made deformed and misshapen; Shifts to supply defects.
yet hold still the style and rights of a Commonweal. Howbeit to redress such
abuses, blemishes, impotencies, or enormities, she is lightly driven to betake
her self unto some mercenarie helps, Mercenarie soldiers and strangers.
as to her crowches; yea to take unto her new lymbs, and lynages of strangers,
like wooden legs to be planted amongst her own people. The body when upon
any quarrel it is to combat with his enemy, uses for more advantage to
combine with a friend: The use of leagues betwixt different Countries.
So when one kingdom is at variance with an other, it seems a wisdom not to
be neglected, to enter leagues, aliances, and confederacies, with some other
well chosen Nation; though it often comes to pass, as in particular bodies:
so in whole Realms, that as well the friendship begun for such purposes, does
prove but feeble and fickle, as also those other additaments of foreign aid,
do in the end by their failing falsehood give the fall to them that trust
entirely to them.

There is a time when the bodies constitution is thought perfect and at the
height, as settled in the middle point between redundacies, and deficiencies,
having neither any distemper within it self, nor disturbance by outward
wrongs: which soundnes of welfare, is manifested in external seemings also; as
in a lively cheerfulness, a fresh color, an active lustiness, and such like
fair blossoms of a prospering plant: The State also has such a time,
Perfection in the State.
of his good estate; the absolute happiness whereof requires an happier wit
than mind, for the exact describing of it in all his complements: nor Plato;
his imagined Idea, nor Aristotle's sharp discussings does fully discover so
much thereof, to my apprehension, but my wishes may exceed the same, by
addition of some further good. When I speak of perfection, I would pattern it
by paradise, or the Jerusalem of God; but we must be feign now to account that
perfect, which bewraieth least imperfection, and comes nearest to that
goodness which may receive allowance. Signs of being in good estate.
Therefore without reducing our conceits to any exquisite perfectnes,
(imitating the Physicians, who will never yield the body to be in perfect
health) we may with them take our conjectures, from the signs of health: So as
where we see public concordant ioying, peace, and plenty kissing each other,
sumptuous shows, triumphant exercises, magnificent solemnities, and such other
apparances of good liking; there it seems that health and good temper has
attained the golden mean, prevailing against all, either homebred or foreign
injuries. But as that rule in Physic is not to be lightly regarded, though it
be not generally believed, The best plight most to be mistursted.
That when health is at his height, then is the body nearest to decline into
diseases: so lightly when any kingdom is in his flowing, and flourishing
fortunes, and in the pride of his prosperity, then the more eminent is his
happiness, the more imminent is his danger, and such his fullness is fuller of
fear than it can give security. And again, as the Physicians
(notwithstanding) do confess good signs to be deceiuable, Signs infer no
certeintie.
and that themselves be often illuded by the imposture of such beguiling
shows: So let it also be acknowledged, and considered, that in the state,
there may be sometimes a well carrying or setting of a face upon the matter,
where inwardly it is fretted with the festring of some swelling and foul
Impostume.

Now (me thinks) I have opened a fit passage for my pen into a discourse very
large, and scantly to be limited; Of the health requisite, the diseases
incident, and the remedies, applyable to a Commonweal, that herein also, I may
make good my comparison thereof to the body natural. There is none either so
witless, or so careless, that considers not of the necessity of health,
Health, how necessary in both bodies.
which where it wants, there can neither be fore-thinking of affairs, nor
courage to attempt, nor strength to persorme, nor cheerfulness in show, nor
manfulnes in deed; but in the steed of these a drowping dismaiednsse, dejected
weakness, and a yeedling faintness, delivers over the body into a very
evil, if not forlorn condition. And surely where the body politic has not
his health, as being either tainted with infectious corruptions, or infested
with public greuances, there all things quickly runs awrie, for want both
of council to contriue, and power to do, what in such cases is behoueable:
The haughtynes of valor is turned all to timerousnes the care of the common
good, to a heedlesse negligence; the forwarding of just actions, to a
languishing in his own afflictions; and his joint force of peace and love,
into a disseuering and tearing a sunder of all his ioints. Then herein let both
the bodies agree, that without health, they have neither mind of their
businesses, nor use of their abundance, nor means of well doing, nor joy of
themselves. The body is not said to be in health, if any part thereof be
grieved; Grief in any one part, puts the whole out of health.
in so much that sometimes a pain in the finger, or toe, so outragiously
disquieteth the whole body, as that we could be content to forgo all the
wealth or joys we have, to be freed from that one torment. This may give
proof unto the State, not to neglect, but rather to redeem by the dearest
means, the welfare of his members, lest in the anguish of them, it self do
feelingly fare the worse. Aristotle Ethic. lib. 3.
Chyron that wise centaure, overcome with the pain of an ulcer, (renouncing
immortality) wished rather to die than to endure, In subjects such an ulcer
is discontentednesse, Discontentednesse.
the sting whereof is so sharp, as pricking them on in perplexities and
despaires, makes them utterly careless of life or living, and so to attempt
the recovery of their comforts, though it be with hazard of a universal ruin.

That health which the body has by the strength and goodness of nature,
Original orders, the best preservatives of health in the State.
is firmer and to be preferred before that, which by a shift of art is peeced
and procured: so each kingdom is in better case when it holds his original
constitutions by his own Laws and customs, than when by the swaruing from
them it is corrupted, and then constrained by extremity unto new provisions.
Alterations, how dangerous.
Hence it is that all alterations (especially in the chief and substanciall
points) be accounted very perilous, because the imutation of that which is
inate and primative, is intended to tend to the decay and destruction of
nature. How full of danger changes be, may be showed by the difference we do
find in our diet; the meat, drink, and air, whereunto we have not been used,
offends our bodies, and subuerteth our health.

Those things whereunto we have been most accustomed do less harm, and are
not to be exchanged, no not for the better; Nature best brooketh things
accustomed.
daily usage agreeably apting the one unto our likings (though not of so
commendable a quality) where the other (though in reason it may seem more
applyable) yet is both distrustfully entertained as unacquainted, and
hazerdable to disturb by his newness: whereof the Phisicions have made this
rule, Si assuetis mederi possis non tentanda noua. And the reason why the
seasons of the spring and fall are aptest to bring sickness, is only the
interchangeable variety of weather then working upon our tenderness and
chillness.

There must be a leasurely and advised proceeding in every alteration:
Alterations must not be sudde^ or wholly, but by degrees and by parts.
nature has left us a pattern thereof in the whole course of our life, who
from infancy to strength, and from thence again to feebleness and age, and
from one complexion to another, do proceed by softly steps, and so stealingly,
as the change cannot presently be discerned: admonishing us, that when we be
disposed to alter any thing, we must let it grow by degrees, and not have it
on too suddenly. It is well noted of some Philosophers, That if a Scythian were
in an instant transported into India, he could not possibly live: so if
without an orderly passing by a mean, the state from on extremity should be
altered to another, it would certainly infer a dissolution and dissipation of
that it was before: wherein the proportion of the perils that may befall,
suiteth with the proportion and degrees of the alteration; in so much, as the
more or less violent and unnatural the change is, the more or less the
danger thereof is to be misdoubted; even as the taking of the more or less
cold, after more or less heat, does more or less endaunger our health.

The mutabilitie of this earthly state stirred by the diversity of causes,
Cases of alteration.
admits no such certeintie or stabilitie in either of the said bodies, as
can quite keep off or exclude alterations. Let us then as in the natural, so
in the political body govern the question of change with such choice and
discretion, as unless either urgent necessity constrain, or evident utility
do entise our assent, we may still retain our wonted orders and vsages with
all permanent firmness, not affecting or enduring any novelties: which
besides their misdoubted harmefulnesse at their first entering, will ask a
continued time of trial, for their gaining of aucthority and acceptance. But
where these respects of an enforced compulsion, or of a gainful consideration
shall prevail; how can it be gainsaid, that the fear of the one, or the love
of the other, (even of a tender sense in nature) should not persuade a
voluntary condescending to so well warranted immutations?

I hold it better physic to preserve health, than to restore it; and a more
commendable care to prevent, Better keep health, than recover it.
than to cure diseases: so it is a greater wisdom to keep a kingdom in his
good government, than to amend it when it is out of order; and to provide
aforehand against mischiefs, than to redress what is become amiss. We do
vsualy account it good wisdom in our health to provide for sickness; To provide
in prosperity, for adversity.
and then to furnish our selves with all such necessaries as may best besteed
us, when we shall be either threatened or assaulted therewith. Hereof also the
civil body does make this use, as in the seasons of the plenty, to store up
against scarcity, and in the times of peace to get and gather together more
plentifully the many preparations of war. To discern an approaching evil
betimes, Time prevention.
and to stop the spread thereof before it become through continuance
incurable, is a like in either of the said bodies, a foresight most
necessary. We see that a very whelke does often breed into a great sore, a
small bruze into a grievous fistula, Of small beginnings, great mischiefs.
and a little distemperature into an extreme fever: Such shaking fits and
horrible commotions have bin felt in the body of the Realm, and have risen
from contemptible beginnings, to incorrigible confusions; which who so well
weyeth, must be forced to conclude a necessity of timely care and circumspect
prevention, for avoiding or resisting thereof. He that neglects dangers,
because the means that imports or threatens the same be but small,
forgets what great plagues, the frogs, lice, flies, and grasshoppers, brought
upon the land of Egypt; nay, let him not account so slightlie of any evil
(though never so little in show) as not to watch it well, for fear of the
worst. We have a common saying, That an evil weed grows apace, and as usual
a practice to root it out as soon as it shows: when one is out of the way,
if he be not straight reduced, it is hard to say how far he will straggle; and
when the body is but a little crazie, if help be not sought, who can tell what
extreamitie may ensue. Such petite evils (reckoned of as scant regardable) do
often (because their venomous quality is not presently perceived) advantage
themselves by the foolish sufferance of such as should suppress them; whereby
Against Tolleration.
the way has bin made for the introducing of the tolleration of them, even
when they have grown more intolerable: for, such their underpropping Patrons,
as in their first springing, and (as it were) in the supposed harmlesnesse
thereof, afforded them perhaps some little countenancing favor, will still be
presumed of to bear toward them a certain tender and relenting fancy,
tending to their defense. And in very deed, such as compassionatly do incline
their affections to bear with evils, cannot readily find a degree of stay; but
are likely enough to hold on with them, as well in their offensive and
excessive, as in their unespied or neglected naughtiness; like to Milo that
had carried the calfe so long, as that he still carried it when it was become an
Ox. I know it to be propounded by some Politicians, that some evils must be
tolerated in the State, like as dregs and gross humors be entermixed with the
blood, which they affirm to be better for health, than if the blood were all
pure and clean without them. But (by their good leave) this their instance is
idle and impertinent; for if it be better for the blood so to be, then it is no
evil, but merely good: and so out of this question of tolleration, I will
fetch my ground from a far more aucthorized principle, which is: Tollite malum
e vobis, and libera nos a malo, And will confess my self in this point a
Stoycall statesman, by auouching no evil to be so small, (cloak it or
extenuate it never so much) but that the ( Tollite) barreth it of Tolleration;
and the ( Libera) sets us at liberty, to have nothing to do therewith. I
know not what nice mitigations, or constructions (by their favors) they may
apply to this word (Evil) but well I wot, that in the prescribed prayer
taught us by Christ, in that very term of (evil) is included and contained
the Devil himself: And therefore whatsoever we assuredly resolve to be
evil, is as absolutely insufferable, as any the limbs or derived issues of the
devil. Now (lest I should be charged by following of a by-path) to have
digressed and raunged from my theme, I will reuert to the proofs and
appliances borrowed from the body. Let me know of them, whether their stomachs
be so strong, as when they be clogged with heavy meats which they cannot
digest, yet will hold and still deteine the same, never once striving to cast
them up? or is there any of them, that in his own body will with his
tollerating patience endure a disease or grief, if it lies in his power to
remedy and rid the same? nay more, admit he be thereby but a little troubled,
and not endamaged at all, yet will he not (for that trouble only) seek
redress thereof? let it be but the itching of some salt humor, or a
fleabyting (by a slight touch of the skin, starting all the spirits) can he be
so contented, as not to attempt to ease himself of such disquieting? Then,
from the warrant of God, the sense of nature, the directions of wisdom, the
necessity and dignity of the State, (which is not only to remove his
opposites, but to advance it self to all perfection) let us abandon all such
party-colored and ambodexter tollerations, not fitting the Justice or
dignity, or good of the Commonwealth. Nevertheless, lest I should too much
lay open my weakness, both in discretion by a presumptuous asseueration, Cases
admitting some sufferance of evil.
and in judgment by propounding that for absolute, which may perhaps be
thought to accept of some exceptions and conditions; I must annex hereunto unto
some respective mitigation, if not a seeming retractation. It cannot be
obscure, but that in a case of unavoidable necessity, to avoid thereby the
extreamitie of a greater evil, the lesser may (though not likingly yet
permittingly, though not absolutely yet in some manner, though not perpetually
yet for a season) receive a bearing or forbearing conueiance, though not an
authorizing approbation. And I must impute it wholly to our impotency, that is
so ouerladen with the manifold cumber of evils, and those often of opposite
natures, as that we be forced by the repulsing of the worst, to make a seeming
show of electing of lesser; scant reckoning that to be any evil at all, which
by freeing of us from a deadlyer mischief, may be deemed to have wrought unto
us our wel-accepted good. And since I have reduced my reason to this degree of
relenting, I must seek to make some probability of farther proving this
point, by the looking also upon my first propounded pattern: Our natural
bodies do willingly and with a kind of chosing, endure some diseases, because
they find the same to free them from other more extremely dangerous. The
opening of an issue stops the entrance and breed of many grievous
sicknesses: and nature seems often pleased to suffer, yea and to entertayne
some enemies contentedly, for the obtaining and purchasing of an ensuing
founder welfare. Therefore for a resolving conclusion whereupon to insist, I
will reconcile any my surmised repugnances with this explayning distinction:
Such evils, as either through an impossibility of removing are grown
necessary, and so require rather fortitude to endure them, than any prudencie
to make choice of them, or that by any helpful use whereunto they serve, do
seem to have put off their former nature, as becoming physic unto us,
partly may, and partly will have our sufferance. But as I take it, in the very
term of tolleration, is meant and employed, a dispensing with and upholding of
such evils, as being confessed to be merely and altogether of that quality,
yet neither so forces us by the restreint of our power, but that we may
suppress them; neither induces us by the appearance of any behoof or
helpfulnesse, to yield them favor. The discerning of which differences in any
particular instances, is fitlier recommended to the aduisednesse of the
discreet governors, than to be left to the temeritie of any over venturous
and peremptory preiudicator.

To conclude this point of health: It is so precious and of so invaluable a
worth, We may hurt to heal.
as that when it is not so perfect as we would have it, or when it is somewhat
impaired, we do not stick willingly to do to our selves farther hurt, to the
end to heal our infirmities the more soundly. Yea, when we have no cause at
all to complain, as being of a constitution not to be disliked, yet do we
then take physic for a purpose to prevent sickness that may ensue, and to
confirm the continuance of our health: So in our body of the Commonweal it
is not to be disliked, that (though there be no great fault found, and all
things seem to stand in good order) yet now and then physical courses be
used, by opening some vein, by purging of superfluities, and putting to pain
some part thereof, for the more certeintie of the general good: that not only
diseases themselves be avoided, but even all fear and suspicion may be
prevented to the preserving and assuring of an inviolable stabititie of the
public quietness. Nevertheless as in the body it is a safe regard not
otherwise to move the humors, than there is likelihood to rid and conquer
them: so in the state it requires a judicious and ponderous consulting when
and how to stir and atempt such medicinal trialls. Aduisednesse aduentureth
not without advantage, knowing that the awaked Dog (not well awed or
ouermatched) will the more insultingly be enraged.

The diseases that may annoy or indaunger the state, are more than I am able to
recount, The diseases of the State.
much less can tell how to cure; neither would I (by a more single comparing
thereof to the diseases of the body) give cause to be censured, as either
superstitiously curious, or superfluously busie-headed. This field is spacious,
and incloseth a large circuit of plentiful matter for discourse: and I take it
to be no less difficulty succinctly to comprehend, under any heads of
division, the discrepant multiplicitie of diseases in the politic, than it is
in the natural body; wherein (as daily experience propounds it unto us)
notwithstanding the almost innumerable and most industrious discoueries of the
learned, in so many reuolutions of ages, yet still more and more diversities
do start up and occur to consideration. I see the pathway and method for an
orderly entrance into a treatise of that nature, by the distinct rehersall of
every the several diseases, either general to the whole, or proper to any
part: but as I must confess my feebleness, standing confounded by the very
sight of the immensitie thereof, so do I humbly yield my meannesse to be far
unapt to intermeddle, where the pains and exquisitnes of some greater Patriot
may be well bestowed. So much only (as in passage) must needs be mentioned,
as may serve for a conductor or leader to help the rest forward.

Diseases arise as in the body natural by distemper of humors; How they do
arise.
so in the political, by disorder of manners: and as in the body natural
they do hinder, pervert, and corrupt the orderly actions of nature; so in the
political they do impeach, infringe, and resist the proceedings and regiment
of a just governance. But as all diseases are not alike either for sharpness
of pain, Differences in faults.
or likelihood of danger: so neither are all offenses equal, either for the
heinousness of crime, or for the harm that can thereof ensue; a stitch in the
side, a pricking in the eye, or a shooting in the sinews, are eager and
extreme griefs, yet not so dangerous as the dropsies, palsies, or
appoplexies: so be the fierce and smart contentions of the learned (in matters
not of greatest moment) exceeding troublesome to the State; yet no way
comparable for danger to Atheism, Popery, and disloyalty. Against equality
of sin. Punishment must be proportionable to the offense.
The inequality of diseases condemns the Stoics equality of sin, and
where the faults be not equal, it seems reasonable, that the magistrate also
must proportion his corrections with like inequality, even as the Physician
must vary his cure according to the greatness or smalnesse of the grief. The
diseases of the skin though they require remedy (because they be diseases)
yet they need not so much tendance, plying, or looking unto, as the gnawing and
tearing pangs of the heart.

Outward evils not so dangerous as inward
The hurts or diseases which the body receives by any outward means, as by
heat, or cold, by wounds or bruises, or by ouerheauie loadings, or laboring,
and such like; as they may more easily be before avoided, so they may more
readily be after cured; likewise has each kingdom against foreign dangers,
both better provision to prevent them, and more advantages to repel them: but
griefs springing, spreading, and ranckling within, being both long in growing,
as hidden and unespied, and also settled in the entrails and vital parts,
surpriseth more suddenly, vanquisheth more violently, and tormenteth more
vntollerably.

As against all diseases of the natural body the skill and application of
Physic is ordained; Laws the physic of the state, and depends of the
sovereign authority.
so against the corruption of manners in the political body, wholesome laws
be provided: whereof where the more be made, the more it argues the
sinfulness of that people, as the use of much physic argues much distemper.
And as physic rightly used is but an assistant, or coadiutor unto nature, by
the stirring up and strengthening of the oparatiue vigor and powers of the
soul, who then having his potentiall faculties so helped and relieved,
digesteth, repulseth, and overcomes his annoying foe, performing the cure and
conquest himself: So the laws and provisions against offenses in the State
(like to a well directed Physic) are to range under the regiment of the
Sovereign with a serviceable subalternation, recognizing him as the principal
Physician for the redressing or remedying the maladies of the body politic.
Nevertheless nature, reason, and all good order admits or rather enioyneth
all the parts, as well by their duties, as by a certain tenderness and
sympathy, to conioine any their kindest and soundest aids both for the
repelling of all impediments or oppositions against authority, and for the
adding of strength thereunto, to perfect the work of suppressing vice, and of
aduauncing the justice, the safety and preservation of the Commonweal. Let it
then be allowed, that all laws, as well in their first enacting, as in their
daily execution; and all magistracy, as well in decreeing as in governing, is
dependant and secondarie to the sovereignty. Such vndergouernours or
subphisicions of the commonweal, having under their charge so worthy a subject
as the states happiness, and enabled by their Sovereign with a portion of his
power, to reform disorders, and rectify what is perverted; ought regardantly
to their place of so great a trust, to be the more painful, faithful, and
careful in their cures. The meanest officers do minister physic to the state.
Not so much as the meanest ministers and seruitors under authority, no not
the Constables, Bailifes, Jurors, and such like (being smaller sprigs and twigs
in the stock of Justice, and used for the inquiry, attaching, presenting, and
conuicting, in trial of transgressors and malefactors) but be to know, that
their employment in their several attendances, tends to the necessary
amending, purging, phisiking, and reforming of the civil body, and that
therefore they are to make a conscience, and to stand upright in their
diligence and duty.

The cause why magistracy is often repugned at.
The negligence, naughtiness, and unskillfulness of some Phisicions occasioneth
many to be both afraid to deal with them, and to condemn their profession and
practice, as unnecessary: So, many there be that taking offense at the
insufficiency or corruptions of some magistrates and officers of justice,
Necessity of magistracy.
either utterly deny the lawfulness of their calling, or at the least spurn
and repine at their administration; in so much as the Recipe of the Physician,
and the Precipe of the Magistrate, be lightly alike irksome and displeasing.
Howbeit, as he that looks into natural Philosophy must needs find pregnant
proofs for the upholding of Phisike, so he that studieth moral Phllosophie,
will acknowledge his very Alpha and Omega, Magistrates not to be discouraged,
or give over their cure.
to be the setting up of magistracy. And as it is but the peeuishnes and
queasinesse of the diseased that will abide no Phisike, so is it the
wilfulness and malecontencie of the wicked, that will not come under laws.
But the Phisicions do not therefore give over their patient because he is
unruly, but rather handles him more roughly: So Magistrates must not desist
from the duties of their offices for the waywardness and unaptness of the
people, but the more stir up their spirits and forces against them with all
austeritie.

The whole work of Phisike is either to continue health when we have it, The
likeness of the work of magistrates and of Phisicions.
or to restore it when it is wanting: So the Magistrates function is either to
hold all upright when the state is in a good case, or to recover and recure
that which shall become unsound. They both in each of their professions, and in
every of their particular practices, do (consonantly to natures rule)
prescribe as well the hurtful to be eschewed, as the helpefull to be taken;
and they both be furnished at all points with good choice and variety of
medicines applyable occasionally to the sundry sorts of griefs. Sundry sorts
of medicines in the state civil.
They have some that be Panchresta, general for all assayes, accommodable to
any disease; they have some that be merely peculier for one or very few
infirmities, and be respective to some one part; they have some, which for
their as well safenesse as virtue be termed Benedicta by the help whereof they
both conceive hope of helpefull success, and assurance from all endangerings:
They have some extremely forcible, even Eradicatiua, pulling up by the roots
the firmly implanted, and predominantly preuayling humors: They have some
which be preparatiues, serving but to make way, and work an aptness for the
stronger ensuing remedies: They have some comfortatiue and cordial, to assist
the softness of nature against ouercharging assaults: They have some
restoratiue, to repair the decaies, and raise again the dejected estate of
health: They have some consuming corrosiues, to eat out what is become dead
and insensible: They have some soporiferous to enduce a sleeping dullness and
stupiditie, whilst cures of great adventure must be effected: They have some
lenetiue, to assuage excessive and raging pains: They have some exasperating
heaters, to digest and draw out the cores of corruption: They have some drying
consumers, to waste away the superfluous confluence of any annoying matter:
They have some attractiue openers, to loose and draw forth any inwardly infixed
festerings: They have dispersers and dissoluers of any gathered together or
swelling putrifactions: They have repercussiues, to suppress and repel all
beginning outrages: They have expellers of all that is hurtful and burdenous,
cleansing the very fountaynes of evil: They have preservatives against all
venomous and infectious contagious: They have substantial consolidators of the
dissolved and apostumed parts, reducing all again to the health and unity of
nature; and they both do enterchangingly use or administer all or any of these,
according to the many different qualities, malice, degrees, disposition, state,
and condition of diseases.

The Physician is not so strictly tied to the usual form or composure of his
receipts and prescriptions, In altering of punishment, what may be left to the
Magistrate.
but that he does often alter the same in particular persons, as he is induced
by the observation of sundry circumstances, signs, and accidents: Such a
discretion (some thinks) the Magistrate might be trusted with, that all
offenses coming under one head of law, should not receive alike the same
unalterable censuring; but that upon advised consideration of diversities,
sometimes there be used quallifications, dispensations, and mitigations, and
sometimes again an increase and addition of pain should be devised, as the
quallitie or manner of the fault shall deservedly give occasion: For example,
does not Justice require that where one felony is of a more heinous nature
than an other, or one Treason more foul and horrible than another, the same
should be condignly rewarded with an extraordinary severity, beyond the
letter of the law? except we should respectively to such inequallitie make
more, and these different laws, which should distinguishingly set forth
diversities of punishment, as the hainousnes of desert shall give cause, and
not wrap up all alike under one general title, binding them to one and the
same recompensing condemnation. But whether is the better to make more choice
of prescribed physic, (which by the multiplicitie of diverse respects might
grow too infinite) or to allow more liberty to the Physicians in sorting their
appliances to the inequallities aforesaid, Id Deus aliquis viderit, This is
proponed for a truth perpetual, universal, and irresistable, that where
difference of considerations makes a Maius and Minus in any fault, the
punishment also should be proportionable by the intention or remission of
lenity or austeritie.

The States Physicians after the order and skill of physic natural, Points to
be observed of the states Physician, and first of the manner of the disease.
be diligently to observe, in what manner each disease takes or setleth, and
how the same may be particularly encountered; that he may the better (for
Militat omnis Medicus) so with Ambuscadoes beset the way, and prepare
resistance to intercept or interrupt it in his courses, that in what sort
soever it shall approach, or give the onset, it may be strongly met withal, and
fitly confronted with his contrary: for right sagely does their wisdoms
discern, Curing by contrary.
that as in the natural, so in the politic body, the remediyng of any
maladies is the more readily performed, by the repelling thereof with their
directest opposites. But for as much as without a discovery of the right cause
of any disease, it cannot be well discerned or resolved, where or how to set
foot to make head against it; it is behoueable studiously to find out the
beginnings, The cause must be first known.
the entrings, the breedings, and the first occasioning causes of each
sickness, that in the contriuing of the cure thereof, it may be combatted
correspondently. Neither is it to be thought less necessary, exactly to know
the constitution and complexion of the body politic, The complexion to be
known.
that in the right applying of remedies, it may vndeceiueably be conceived how
(according to the diversities thereof) medicines may be ministered either
stronger, or weaker, speedier or flower, oftener or seldomer, for the advantage
of prevailing. Yea it seems also requisite that the be well seen in the
observation of times and seasons, Seasons to be observed.
for the more fortunate effecting of his intended cures: for like as in private,
so in public grieuances there is a certain point of opportunity to be
watched, and taken hold on, sorting more fittingly to the furtherance of such
good endeavors. Besides I do not see but (for the manner of his ministering) it
may unto him as unto the Physician be allowed to use (to gain an acceptance
of his receipt) a kind of beguiling love, To minister the medicines in pleasing
manner.
by sweetning and giving of a more pleasing relief to his remedies, that the
same so kindly accomodated, may have rather the welcome of a friend, than be
abhorred as an enemy. One skill more he is yet to borrow of the Physician,
which is, the diligent noting and distinguishing of each part from other, by
the extent of their nature, To know perfectly the body and all the parts.
by their proper place, by their different workings, by their adherence and
mutual respects, or by any other their discrepant proprieties; lest he do
through such ignorant mistaking unaptly misapplie, to the hurt of one, what he
had consideratly prepared for the good of another: he is to have as penetrating
an insight, as careful an ouerlooking, and as particular a knowledge of each
thing considerable in the civil body, as the Anatomist has in the serching
and seuering of every vein, artery, or synew, or in the describing and
bounding out of every the parts, passages, offices, or actions, in the body
natural. In his tendance and care though he be to have the whole in a
general survey, espying and amending whatsoever requires the correction of
any remedies; yet is he more circumspectly, and with all watchfulness, to
look unto such diseases which harmeth and distresseth the best and vital, yea
those royal parts of Nobility and Magistracy, To have greatest care of the
best parts.
(where the soul in sort seateth and shows it self) not only because the
in-dwelling (as it were) of so great a guest, deserves a well cleansed purity
and soundnes; but for other also no less remarkable respects, of the
consequentiall mischiefs thereof, Great men's faults most perilous, and most to
be respected.
arising to the residue of the body, (since when any tender or noble part is
ill affected, or out of order) all the rest be therewithal afflicted; as both
partaking heavily with the unrest, grieuances, and passions thereof, and also
filled with the annoying fluxes upon them vnburdned. Let us for the cleerer
demonstrance of this matter; cast our eyes and imaginations yet more markingly,
upon the body natural, wherein when the distemperature of unequally sorted
humors have invaded and possessed any chief part, the disease therein bred,
or settled, becomes general, extending a touch and taint over all; the
helping functions thereof be withheld, as restrained by such obstructions. In
the steed whereof his infection is sucked and derived all abroad, to the
corrupting and perverting of whatsoever has any dependancie or affinity
therewith; yea so far forth, as not only the common sense by such disturbance
misconceiueth his apprehensions, but also that reason it self is wholly
beguiled and misled; with some rauing error, allowing the furmised, in steed of
the real good: so as the whole body thereby is vexed with giddiness and
tumults: So when great men of a better condition, and higher degree, shall grow
humerous, opinionate, and factious, (besides their withdrawing of their faith,
allegiance, and former good services) they do not only seduce the unskillful
and unruly Commons, but also train on with their suggestion of colorable
causes, some officers of public trust (as parts of the reasonable power) to
adhere unto them in their misconceiuing adventures, till all be endaungered by
such mutinous confusion.

But having dwelt too long in the description of this disease (for the
remedying whereof, prevention is the best prescription) what I have farther to
deliver touching the diseases of the State, or the likeness which they have with
them of the body, or how to carry or direct the manner of tendance or
ordering of them; I must be fail more compendiously to couch the infinitenes
thereof within the compass of some short positions, lest raunging too far, I
be offensiuelie tedious, orseeking to match all, I mar all by making more a do
than I need. 1 Diseases in the nobler parts most to be looked to.
The forenoted diseases settled in the nobler parts, are the more principally to
be provided for, and it is ordinary to withdraw the anguish thereof, to some
of the less principal, yea though it should be with torments of incision,
burning, or ligature. 2 Where the cause is inward.
Where the grief is outward, and the cause inward, it is the surest course of
curing to begin at the removing of the inward cause, whereby the fountains of
supply may be dried up, 3 Where the cause is unknown.
and the braunching evil more easelie withered away. When the disease
proceeds from unknown causes, it is more to be suspected and feared, because
it mateth and amazeth the Physician himself, finding either no appearance of
reason, 4 Where the disease feeds it self from other parts adjoining.
how to make resistance or applying hazardably with likelihood of as well
hurting as helping. It is usual that a disease settled in one part, feeds it
self by sucking the corruption from other parts adjoining; wherein for the
timely cutting off of such a confluence, to make a strong faction, it is
likewise usual to comfort and make good the parts adjacent, that the grief
more singly accompanied, may the more soundly be encountered. The diseases that
be inueterate and oflong continuance asks a long healing, 5 Diseases
inueterate.
and be seldom so soundly remedied, but they will reuert, and join with any
new grieuance, and be lightly then more exasperate and cumbersome than before,
or than the new it self. The relaps into a disease from which we have been
lately recovered, 6 Relaps into any disease.
doubleth the peril of the first sickness, being aduantaged by the weakness
and poor case which it had formerly brought us unto. Some diseases taken in
time are easily helped, 7 To apply cure in time.
which if they be suffered to run on, and through our heedlesnesse confirm
themselves, do as easily grow incurable; and where a small matter at the
first might restore health, there after some continuance the medicine will come
too late. Such diseases as be infectious, 8 Infectious diseases.
and do spread far and near, are to be avoided by all means, as scant to be
helped by any means, seeing that they force the Physicians themselves to
flight, not daring to entrude venterously into the thickest danger, and when
they be chased away, or hide themselves, upon whom our hope of help relyeth,
what can be expected but remediless misery? The diseases that bring with them
a deprivation of sense, 9 Diseases depriving sense.
without any feeling or acknowledging of sickness, argues a great
vnlikelyhood of recovery, because nature yields her self as contented, 10
Diseases coming suddenly.
and no ways opposing thereunto. When sickness comes suddenly and
unexpected, the very violence of that surprise so daunteth the heart, as that
the fort will be lost before the forces be assembled. The disease that haunteth
us, and whereunto we be accustomed, 11 Diseases whereunto we be accustomed.
we do watch and observe very diligently, that we may meet with it at every
turn, and turn away his rigor, before it can get the masterie, and against it
we be better prepared, with usual applications. The disease that is
universal, affecting the whole body, 12 Diseases of the whole body.
awaketh and stirs all the parts to bring together their concordant aid,
and is the more caringly to be withstood, because it aduentureth the whole at
one stake. Where the diseases seems remedylesse, and of desperate condition,
13 Diseases desperate.
there it is permitted and advised to minister desperate medicines. Incurable
diseases shame and foil the Physicians, and then does it go hard with them, 14
Diseases incurable.
when the patient wholly depending upon their help, Iaieth the blame upon their
insufficiency; where contrariwise, if they help at a pinch (all seeming past
help) then do they (as it were) play their prizes, and make themselves well
esteemed, and much renowned. In the diseases of great men, 15 Diseases of great
men require more help and advise.
and those grievous and dangerous, the whole college of Physicians is
consulted with; for the greater the cause or person is, the more will the
attendance and assistance of Council, Judges, and Magistrates concur for the
suppressing of such raging fits, by timely remedies. Many diseases have an
eager appetite to those meats which are fittest to increase their force, 16
Diseases made worse by feeding on that they desire.
and it is a part of the cure appertaining thereunto, to restrain the patient
from the use of such hurtful food; as if a mad man were to be kept from a
sword, he that is aguish from wine, the seditious from seducing books, and
traitorous complottors, and the ungoverned from riches and honor. Such
diseases as detecteth and discovers themseluesby some certain signs whereby
they may be known, 17 Diseases discovered in their signs.
may be sooner suppressed; and the very assuaging or altering of those signs,
does often weaken, vanquish, and drive away the disease it self. Where a
disease is particular only to one part, 18 Destruction of members in any
disease, when to be used.
as to the eye, the hand, foot, or such like, the loss whereof infers not
the destruction of the whole; there, rather than a continual molesting and
annoying grieuance should encumber the joys of life, the part whereunto such
pain sticks and is so affixed, as that it cannot be removed or remedied,
were better to be pulled out, cut of, and disseuered from the body: howbeit
much extremity is to be abidden, and many ways for healing are to be tried
before it com to so hard a pass, as to harden the heart to endure such violence.
Many diseases are dissolved and overcome merely by the strength of nature, 19
Diseases often dissolved by nature.
that the Phisicions aid is not implored at all: and many again because their
nature has been too much trusted unto, and Physic has been neglected or
loathed, makes a conquest over both. The excess of humors, will seek either
to settle in some principal part, 20 Diseases to be forced to break outwardly.
as in a fortified place, entrenching the same with strong obstructio^s; or else
outwardly to get an head, which (if they cannot by scattering be dispatched)
are to beeforced to break out rather than to fester within. Some diseases have
a property like the Adder that turns to be a Serpent, being changed after a
while from being the same it was into an other new and different worser than it
self. 21 Diseases growing to a worse nature than they were.
Most diseases have certain degrees and standing points of either increase or
declination, and according as nature is comforted and seconded by the helps of
Physic, so they either slack their sharpness, 22 The state or standing
point of a disease.
or become outrageous, after they have once touched and attained to those
points. Yet there rests one rule that rules all the rest, which is, That
every disease desires his proper cure; 23 Every disease must have his proper
cure.
wherein if there be any missing or mistaking, the mischief will be this,
That the weakening of nature by that which is wrong applied (for such physic
not fitting the disease, works upon nature) must necessarily augment the
power and peril of the sickness. This position is of a much importing
consequence, and (howsoever I leave all the former to the applying and
moralizing of the Reader) this I may not so sudde^ly forsake, or lightly pass
over: it concerns the skill of the Phisicio^, who has our lives in his hands.

There be sometimes such nimble headed Pragmatickes, Against unskillful
Pragmatickes
that taking upon them to be great entermedlers in state affairs, do for want
of grounded knowledge in the political science, make many foul escapes: whom
I may resemble to the empericke Phisicions, who having been brought up only in
an experimental prentiship, do seldom apply that which is proper, but wholly
trusting to their ordinary receipts, and not able to look into the right
nature of the disease, or the diverse variations thereof, or the complexion and
strength of the patient, or the fitness of the season for ministering, or the
proportion of the medicine to the quality of the sickness, and thereunto
ignorant also of the method for orderly proceeding, or iudiciously to mark or
observe the right prognostica; do daily by their desperate dealings endamage
and weaken, if not cast away such as be so hazarded under their charge. Such
blind adue^turing without rule or art to be used in the needful occasions of
the Commonweal, who sees not how hurtful and pernicious it may prove? and
therefore forbearing (as I have bound my self to do) to enlarge this discourse
out of other learning, I will only serve my turn with stretching of this one
comparison thus far farther: That as the profound and rational Physician is
for certainty of cure, The learned fitter for government than the unlearned.
and direction in the regiment of health, to be chosen and used before the
rash unskillful Empiricke: So the learned and well seen in the principles of
political doctrine, is fitter to be employed and trusted with the public
dispatches and affairs, tending to the preservation and amendment of the
state, than any bold busy bodies that either creep in at unawares, or thrust
in by shouing and shouldring; their agencies being too dangerous, where the
body of the Realm must become their patient: For where their skill is all but
by tradition, and not attained by the study and inquiry after causes and
reasons, how be they able in the midst of so many deceauable differences to
find for each particular occurrance, Imperfect curing.
the proper and right requisite application, without the which whatsoever is or
seems remedied, breaks forth anew, waxing raw and sore again. Thenceit
comes, that oftentimes the medicine is worse than the disease, and the
Physician becomes the heir unto his patient; because where we most repose
our selves in a confidence of help, there through an unadvised carriage in the
party trusted (affecting his own end) and wandering from his right way, we
be most seduced and left succourlesse, exposed to all calamities. Discretion is
the Limbecke that extracteth to his right use all kind of learning, Discretion
in state business.
without it nor the Physician in his manyfold variety of diseases and
medicines, nor the Politician in his multiplicitie of causes and cases, can
affect any thing, either with certainty to good, or laudably to reputation. If
this be not his best guide, like the thread of Ariadne, to lead him through the
laberinth of so many intricat diversities, how shall he be able to rule the
matter, when he stands enwrapped, and even ouer-matched with the
contrariety of rules? Severity.
One rule tells him that Nulla remedia tam sunt salutaria, quam quae faciunt
dolorem: The best medicines do most pain us: by the imitation whereof the
State Physician will perhaps trust most to his sharp and austere remedies.
Another rule advises such application as is Secundu^ naturam, et quod cuiusque
natura desiderat. Hereof it comes, that what delights and pleases (though
it be not for goodness comparable) yet for his familiar agreeableness to our
stomach and nature, is to be preferred unto that which is offensive, unsavory,
or churlish. This consideration prevails in government also, Lenity.
to have all the business of correction and reformation transacted quietly
without contrarious conflicting; and by such means as may rather give
contentment, than make conquest: because what is loathed or not brooked, may
more hurt or molest in recoyling, than avail by an unwilling and painful
retention.

Aristotle propounds as a Probleame, That the self fame inflammations by
some be cured with cooling, Contrary ways to cure the same disease.
and by others are ripened and digested by heating. This physic has also
been wisely put in practice in the tendance of the raging ulcers and
impostumations of the body politic, when the hot humor of haughtiness in
great men has sometimes by gentleness and counsel been allayd, and other
sometimes by urging and more heating brought to a rupture and running out. What
encumbreth or annoyeth nature, is sometimes at his first gathering (before it
gets an head) dissolved and dispersed, Diversities in curing, upon diverse
respects
and sometimes again is suffered, yea and forced to show his uttermost
virulence, and to get unto him his full strength, before it be once meddled
with. The same medicines that eases us of grief in one part, may annoy us in
another, that help at one time, may hurt at another, or that heal one may
dispatch another: We use not the same course in Summer as we do in Winter,
nor the same when the body is too full, as when it is brought low, nor the
same to children and old folks, as to men of confirmed strength; nor the same
in the height or amendment, which we do at the beginning of the disease. Such
respectiuenesse we may expect from the political Physician, that he be not
pragmatically tied to the Idem, or Eodem modo, but that from the axioms and
conclusions of learning, he do so aplie his cogitations to the discrepancie of
occasions, as that (being vsque quaque sapiens) he accomodate his cures rather
by certeinty than at adventure, and even therein to show himself regular, by
varying of his proceedings from his rules, as the variableness of conditions,
circumstances, and considerations shall with reason ouerrule him. And he does
oftentimes (as a well skilled physician does) finding any imperfection or
unaptness in the first remedies repeal and cast aside them by providing and
ordeining new. Repealing of some, and making of new laws.
Yet in one point more let us note the effects of skill in a Physician, who is
able to make even poisons medicinable; which shows, that when Magistrates
shall upon occasion make use of wicked men, Magistrates may make use of the
wicked.
we should be so far from charging them with the objection of ungodly
policy, as that we should rather for such their property and power liken them
unto God, who himself infinitely good, extracteth good out of evil.

Such expert Phisicions of the Realm, do (like far darting Apollo) spread
abroad their golden rays and happy influence, Good magistrates praised.
as well for preserving of public health and prosperity, as also for the
subduing of all poisoned Pithons, and miscompounded monsters, that infect the
air, or defile the land of the Commonweal.

Some other good requisits in our State-Phisicions may not be pretermitted. It
is needful, that they be of a grave stayednesse, and free from fickleness or
flexibilitie. I yield, that a Physician may by occasions and circumstances be
moved to dispose himself to change both his opinion and his practice: yet I
hold it requisite that such his change may appear to proceed rather from
deliberation than lightness, from judicious discerning of right causes, rather
than from a vain affectation of new courses; so he be constant to his
propounded end of effecting the saftie and health of the body, resting upon
his skill and best endeavor, to make trial of sundry different means likely,
and serving thereunto, is no inconstancy at all. The same may be affirmed of
Governors: It cannot but be hateful and scandalous to any Magistrate, to
play the light headed temporizer, by the exchange and often shifting of his
opinion, still to conform to every accidental alteration in the State: for
howsoever it may be allowed unto him (upon preuayling considerations) to
change his medicines rather than his mind, retayning still his integrity and
constancy toward the state: yet is it made a note of common observance, that
such as be either carried about by every tempest of the time, or be swayed by
their own leuitie to entertain diversities in the order of government; as
they do but affect Latebram male fidei, so they give place and passage to every
stirring and vpstart spirit (as the heedlesnes or giddiness of the bodies
physician often does) with force and fury to conquer all. I know that a
remediless necessity may constrayne the skilfullest Pilot (being beaten from
his intended haven) to take into the next harbor that fortune shall offer,
rather than with extreme peril to contend with the storm: Such a kind of
compelled alteration no indifferent obseruer will debar any provident
Politician of, That whenever he shall vary from his first well grounded
resolution, his relinquishing of the former, or his pursuing of any new
intention, may be judged rather necessary than voluntary, more reasonable
than fashionable, and for the performing of farther good rather than to follow
the inclination of his own unsteady humors. They must be loving and
compassionate, The Phisicions loving of the patient.
the proof and demonstrance whereof makes their patients comfortably and
readily to swallow any their prescribed receipts, and it is one step toward
cure, when the sick holds a good thought of his Physician, persuading
himself, that his labors are undertaken out of an honest and hearty desire
of doing good, rather than to enrich himself by undeserved gettings. The
overmuch regard of fees or gaynes in some Phisicions, Covetousness in getting
of fees.
makes good the saying of Philemon an old Poet, O quam male medicus se habet,
cum neminem male sese habere contigit, Desire of gain in some lawiers
medicus valere amicos ne suos quidem cupit: which (howsoever perhaps it may be
touchingly applied to some Lawiers also, whose profession is to find physic
to redress particular wrongs, and therefore that they may be set a work with
the case, wishes their friends sometimes in an ill case) yet far be it that
any the higher magistrates of justice and government, should be shamefully
stained with the black note of so foul an imputation, as out of the diseases,
sores, and corruptions of the people, to enrich and advance his own estate.
And against that sort of Lawyers which shall seek to make us such fools, as
by continual lawing to keep us still to that play at foyles, to fill them
thereby with fees, let us learn this physical lesson, To be never out of law,
a great misery.
That as Medice viuere, est misere viuere, so to be never out of law, is never
to know any happy days: for as too much physic weakeneth and wastes
health; so to be ouerlaid with law, is the utter loss and confounding of all
comforts of life.

But leaving such purse-purging Lawyers, Magistrates may have private faults, yet
good magistrates.
I must return to the pursuit of considerable respects, for the Phisicions of
the civil body. As one may be a good Physician though an evil man; so may
he be a good Commonwealths man, Magistrates to be chosen for their skill in
government.
though otherwise for his private faults reproueable. As in choosing a Physician,
we take not the wealthiest, or that can make best friends, but him that is best
skilled, and likeliest to cure: So magistracy and offices of justice be not
to be bestowed upon the richest or most favored, Magistrates rather to be
native than foreign.
but upon the wisest and worthiest. As we like better a Physician that is our
own Countreyman, or of some neerenesse in blood unto us, than a foreign
borne, or nothing alied unto us: so is it well and lovingly provided for, where
the Sovereign (according to such desire) orders each people to be governed
by their own natives. As the Phisicions to encourage and induce their patients
to take more cheerfully their prescriptions, do readily foretast the same
themselves: so the Magistrates for the drawing of the people to the more willing
observance of the laws, Magistrates must not desist from their duties for
abuses offered unto them
ought to make themselves examples of integrity in the outward show of a just
conversation. Besides, as the Physician though he be often times by the waiward
demeanure of the patient, much abused, yet does he persist in his purpose of
performing of the best help by any course that his skill affoordeth: So the
Magistrate, albeit in the execution of so busy, Magistrates must give good
example.
envious, and troublesome a charge, he must often meet with mischievous
intentions against him, be thwarted with oppositions, and endure indignities,
yet must he with a manly and virtuous constancy consecrate his whole endeavors
to the resolute following of his necessary function. Further, as the Physician
too much set a work or called upon, cannot give to each patient a sufficing
attendance: So where there be too many busy employments cast upon one
magistrate or officer (or too many clyents cloying of one Lawyer) the very
distraction or dividing of his pains amongst so many, Magistrates not to have
too many offices or imploiments.
applies against him the prouerbiall verse: Ad plura intentus minor est ad
singula sensus.

Lastly, I will bestow upon our political Physician that complement of
qualities, which we usually look for in a Surgion; that is an Hawks eye, a
Ladies hand, Compared to a Surgion in three properties.
and a Lions heart: his eye must piercingly spy into all sores and disorders
reformable, his hand must not be carried too heavy, but rather tenderly and
mercifully; and his heart is to be held up undaunted, and unflexible, when it
has uprightly conceived of the right, rejecting from him all remisnes, or
timorousnes of execution. The Physician does not always follow the precisenes
of his own rules, Magistrates do sometimes offend the law themselves.
he does often offend against his own health, (as others do) and then is
disdainfully mocked with Curate ipsum. I would not advise any man to be so
saucy, as to bid the Magistrate look to his own faults; but it must be
confessed, that such as be seated in places of authority, may as basely and
as badly misgouerne themselves as inferior persons, and thereby not
undeservedly fitted with that frumpe, That the greater Theefes hang up the
lesser. Magistrates offending, to be punished by other Magistrates.
Yet when the Physician is sick, other Physicians are provided to minister unto
him; so the vices of the Magistrates, must undergo the censure of other
Magistrates, to be dealt withal as the quallitie thereof requires.
Nevertheless, as the Physicians misdieting of himself, is no good pretense
for the diseased to refuse to be healed by his endeavor: So the objection of
the Magistrates misbehauiour or reproach must not withdraw our subjection from
abiding and yielding to any his orders or judgments concerning our emendation.
Magistrates faults no pretense to disobey them.
It is observed in the nature of Man, that when he is pressed by sickness to
pray aid of the Physician, he holds nothing too dear for him, rewarding him
with rich recompense; but when he finds himself recovered, and no more to
need him, he will scant afford him any his least favors; as if he had
concluded, that as God created him, so he would honor him, only for
necessities sake. Such also is the fortune of those, who spend their spirits,
cares, and industries, in the attendance of the States health; Magistrates
deseruings soon forgotten.
when it is discerned, that they have advised, procured, and ministered the good
of the weal public, then be they extolled by applause, advanced to honor, and
rewarded with bounties; but if the occasion of their meritings be cut off, then
forgetting the forepassed helps, Aesculapius must thence forth loose his
sacrifice of Cocks. Nay, their case is somewhat worse, for if that which by
them is contrived and intended rightly, Magistrates care and wisdom is judged
of by the events.
fails of effect, or falls out sinisterly; then as if the Physician had
either mistaken his cure, or misbehaued himself, he makes a purchase of blame
and shame, loosing both the kirnell for which he took pains, and the credit of
his art, which notwithstanding he exactly followed. Further than this, he
finds one other greeuance much exceeding the former, which is, That when he
has with his earnest study and best circumspection decreed and enacted what
is to be done, Magistrates discouragement for the want of execution of laws by
them made.
his prescriptions will not be received, nor his directions followed; without
the use and applying whereof, the making of such receipt was a bootlesse
labor. He that will see the right image of that wrong offered to the
State-Phisitions, let him but search into his own heart, Reasons resolve vain,
if there be no will to perform*
where when reason has assembled the Senate of his best understandings, and
has by their discussings resolved what is best to be done, if there then
should want a will to obey and perform such decrees, might not reason and his
fellows as well have been a sleep: so verily when wholesome laws are devised
and enacted, for the general benefit of an whole Realm, it is an intolerable
abuse offered to the lawmakers, when for lack of due administration, to
concomitate the consulting power, the same shall not have their execution. Yet
were it the shamfullest injury of all, Laws often by cauils illuded.
and that no ways stands with the Patients own safety, if the receipts or
prescriptions of the Physician, should be illuded by shifts and cauilled at, of
purpose to mistake and pervert the true meaning thereof: So stands the case
with good Statutes, when ill disposed people, will by subtle scanning seek
euasions, and alter the sincerity of them by wrested interpretations. But
virtuous Subjects holding obedience to be their essential and habitual
property, Obedience the chief virtue of Subjects.
and having such Physicians as both zealously loves them, and are best
acquainted with the state of their body, will heartily abhor and abandon such
miscreant corrupters of the governing Justice.

It is now time to find some means for the observing of a mean, lest
tediousnes banish delightsomnesse: I have reserved yet one comparison more,
wherewith at the last to close up all, and to reduce this discourse to my
promised period, of the entire embracements between Sovereign and Subject.
The Subjects chief care to content the Sovereign.
The bodies hoping after health, or affecting of felicity, is no other, or to
any other end, than to rejoice the soul with fullness of comfort and
satisfiyng pleasures; So let the desires and endeavors of the body Politic,
and each part thereof, in the acquiring for the State any supposed or
desirable good, be directed and tend to the making happy of their
Sovereign, by working on all sides his abundant contentation. Then (since at
their first meeting they began with a profession and conjunction of love) their
departure shall not want a recyprocall kindness, with the exchange of all
mutual offices of faith and assuredness. The Princes contentment must be the
happiness of the Subject, and the subjects welfare the security of the
Prince: And so shall the Commonwealth be completely blessed, by the firmness
of that concording union, having Mentem sanam in corpore sano, the
tranquillity of the mind, with indolence of the body.

Thus having adventured to propound unto public view (like as Appelles did
his picture) this portracture of the body Politic, though not so completely
shaped in all the lyneaments, as may either allure the lookers on to liking, or
may suffice to equal the dignity and majesty of the matter represented: I
must entreat of the wise and expert Politicians, their favorable interpreting,
and encouraging entertainments thereof; unto whom I have reason (with all
reverent regard) to dedicate these endeavors; Them has the conjunction of
learning and acting, well entermixed, Political governors are to be made
famous by the praises of the learned.
exactly accomplished; and from the observance of their good labors, has been
bred the collection of book lessons: What they broyling in the heat of
affairs, and even sun-burned with the business of the State, do daily effect
for the public benefit; that we (the contemplators of their merits) in our
solitary priuatnesse at our vnimployed leasures, and from our shadie studies,
ought gladly, for the establishing of their authority, and for the eternizing
of their glory, to recount and recommend to the vndecaying succession of
future times. It was right worthy council which Demetrius gave unto Ptolemie,
aduising him diligently to read the books written of Political government:
but his reason is sharp pointed and touches to the very quick; The benefit
which a Sovereign shall have by the studying of political books.
for (says he) there shall you find that which none dare or will tell you. To
say the truth, such works advisedly and faithfully compiled, be impartial
informers, and uncorrupted Councillors, acquainting their readers with the
generallitie of right and reason, to be applied to use in particular
considerations. From thence may all governors draw their directions, for the
framing and plotting of their most important purposes: and what they thence
shall suck will be simple and sincere, without admixture of either deceiptfull
drifts, or affectionat inclinations. As in the act or ability of right
understanding, the soul does manifest his greatest force and goodness:
Proverb. 24.
so in the multitude of them that can give council, is strength. To such
Atlas-like governors, that be the supporting Arches of a civil State, all
political learning, and whatsoever industry or discoueries, in that subject
does properly belong, and ought in them to be treasured up for store at all
times to besteed the State; even as the light created on the first day, was
after transferred into the bodies of the Sun, Moon, and Stars of the
firmament, to illighten the whole world. The dedication of Political works due
to the governors of the State.
The view of my weakness and unworthiness, together with the awful
respectiuenes whereto I stand bound in all duty, stays me from presumptuous
assuming to my self of any such clearenesse of conceit or judgment, as may
any whit increase the fullness of understanding in our great and superior
lights. Yet if by the propounding of this pair of bodies, so equally matching
in fashion and liknesse, civil consultations upon any occurrance may (by such
correspondence) receive help, I hope it will not be disliked, that I have
endeavored to set open for their light a broader and larger passage. I may not
make my self ignorant, that it is easy to offend in the curiosity of
inquiring into State-secrets; Curiosity of looking Into state business.
there is even in that kind also a forbidden Apple. And it has ever been
reckoned an audaciousnes not to be digested, to intrude with timeritie, where
restraint has placed a cross bar. If every body must know all, counsel
were no counsel. The body politic as the natural, is whole and close
chested, there is not in his breast (no more than in the others) any glass
windows or casements placed, for meddling Momus to look into the reserved
occultanda of the heart. Such as have an itching desire to peer within the
curtain of those vndiscouerable secrets, besides their offensive and
unmannerly sauciness, against the reverend and sage Senators of the State, do
apparently detect themselves to be but babbling and seducing news tellers. Cato
censureth fitly of them percunctatores garruli, and Plautus amply describes
their natures, In Trinumo.
terming them by an old but significant name of famigeratores, as filled both
in the ears and in the mouth, with a certain saleable windy matter of rumors
and reports.

There is a sobriety to be observed in the gayning of knowledge by
inquisitiveness; Inquisitiuenes.
for such as ouerfill themselves, and do drink too deep of harkening and
hearesayes, will likewise incur the other extremities, both of reeling as
disied by untruths; and of casting up again, by the publishing of all they
hear. But when this searching and piercing presumption shall get up to the
highest step, and fall to pry into the Prince himself, to make discoueries
and dinulgings of his dispositions, intentions, affections, qualities, To pry
into the princes dealings or dispositions, how dangerous it is.
weighty businesses, and serious actions; then it has the resemblance, and is
a very spice of the heat of Phaeton, of the lightness of Icarus, of the
treachery of Tantalus, of the blabbing of Sisiphus, of the lust of Ixion, of
the immodestie of Acteon, and of the sly surreption of Prometheus, and is
worthily punishable with some of their tortures. Solomon compares the
unsearchable heart of the King, to the height of heaven, and the depth of the
earth; arguing thereby as well the presumption as the impossibility of
discovering the same, Pro. 25.

Against this odious injury of the subjects overmuch enquiring and spying into
their Sovereign, A caveat from natures work.
I have one arrow or argument left me, to be taken out of the same quiver:
Nature has so provided, that no senses of the body does penetrate into the
essence or inwardnesse of the soul; they be espials for him, not spyers into
him: for Animus oculorum effugit obtutum. Then in the same sort, as well for a
warning to my self, as for a reproof to any other that way offending, let me
set it down for a positive truth, that even herein also our manners and
duty should contemplate and imitate nature, as with a modest reverence to
forbear to intromit our animaduerting curiosity into the bosom of sacred and
unsearchable Majesty: which who so does with an humbled spirit well understand
what it is in his very altitude and latitude, In sovereignty a great mystery
shall certainly find it to be as great an Arcanum in policy, as the soul can
be in nature: So (with all beseeming reservation of my dutious submission to
superior powers) I do to the residue of Readers offer a petition of
indifferency, That if they shall light of any thing defective or wanting
weight, I may be bold to borrow some few graynes of their good favor,
wherewith perhaps the scales may be held upright. If they meet with any matter
seeming an Ulcer, tender of touch, and subject to construction; I may only
challenge them to be charitable, than which (I hope) there will need no other
healing. Finally, if to the dainty ear of this all-scanning age, my simple
and unpolished work shall give no satisfaction, yet the scope of my honest
intentions, and the loyalty of my well meaning, may at the least acquit me of
blame, if not merit acceptance.

FINIS.
Errata.
In the first page of the Brief, line penult. leave out (of resolution.) In
the next page, line 16. for, loves all, read, loved of all. Folio 22. line 15.
for excellentest, read excellent fifth. F. 28. l. 15. for heat, t. head. F. 33.
l. 4. for If, r. of. F. 61. l. 2. for mind, r. mine. F. 69. l. 7. for
conueiance, r. conniuance. F. 76. l. 1. for proponed, r. propounded. F. 87. l.
5. for affect, read effect.


