THE FAMOVS HISTORY OF MONTELYON, KNIGHT of the Oracle, and Son to the
Renowned PERSICLES King of ASSYRIA.

SHOWING His strange Birth, Unfortunate Love, Perilous Adventures in Arms, and
how he came to the knowledge of his Parents.

Interlaced, with much variety of Pleasant and delightful Discourse.

LONDON, Printed by B. ALSOP, and T. FAUCET, dwelling in Grubstreet, near the
lower Pumpe. 1640.

TO THE GENTLEMEN Readers, health.
GENTLEMEN,
your well tried favors h^ve set me so far on fire in my further
proceedings, that I, that ever hitherto followed the endeavors of Pierce
Plainness, seem now ^or your pleasures to become even a bowe-fellow
prodigal, spending the sum of my store to the uttermost, as long as possibly
it lasts.

If you find any cracked coin in these my liberal expenses, yet for FOORD's
sake, afford them starling, and winking at small faults, excuse me to be
mistaken, and so amongst Friends may it pass for current, I am not of the
humor of the new-Fangling Tailor, that for every new-wrought Suite frames a
new fashion: Nor of their presumptuous Nature, that of themselves being but
Vixins, face out their attempts with heroical Lions looks: but I always the
same, rest ever forward to entreat, careful to request, and daily addicted
devoutly to attend Humility. Against biting Theon's tooth, I remain always
patient proof: and the rather considering the singular sentence of one of the
seven Sages, viz.

That even as for a man of understanding, being praised to be led thereby unto
a selfe-loved opinion of his own laudable parts: or as selfe-willed presuming
on his high deserts, may seem an especial argument of no small folly: so
likewise for being discommended, to remain even amort with heavy cheer, and
drooping mind, figuring his sad looks, like to the Anatomy of death, is a
plain proof of his scarcity of counsel, want of patience, (which Phylosopher^
hold the soveraign'st virtue that belongs to the qualified indument of
mortality) and (which is worse) penury of reason, Affectus temporare suos. I
propose not this Gentle Reader, as if Stoycally I regarded your judicious
censure, but rather portray a Preludium, how indifferently I can endure the
diverse taunting reports of the envious: as for your ever regarded judgments, I
account it the sanctuary, wherein my tired sconce may find refuge, the chief
gresse, only whereby my feeble invention ascends; the Colosse that wholly
supporteth my endeavors; yea I reckon it all my being, all my essence, all my
good,

As therefore with a favorable smile, you ere-while entertained Parismus and
Parismenos, my elder off springs, with so cheerful an aspect; now cast your
looks on my Montelyon, whose forwardness to win fame, you shall perceive
nothing inferior to the promptness of the former, although by birth, and
course of time the younger. Oh he can acquaint you with the wonders of
Chivalry, with admirable acts and doubty deeds, supported always with a Fayery
suffrage, as was Ulysses in his ten years venture by the aid of Pallas.

Your well-wishing acceptance, and kind conceit of him, is all the recompense I
ask for my travel, and I wish no more, so (I trust) you will no less, grant
this, and make my endeavors prosperous: Deny that, and leave me so utterly
unfortunate, as hopeless for ever of every good success: ever found
bountiful in giving the one; so my self will not rest ungrateful for the
other: that both in one, and one in both, may not only augment your longing
pleasures, which I heartily wish, but also enrich my lasting content, which I
hope you as courteously will.

Your Well-willer, EMANVEL FOORD.

In praise of the Author.
SHould Monuments of worthy deeds,
Be svvallovved of Oblivion:
What Honor (vvhereon Virtue feeds)
Remembered re^ts for Merits done?
Whence shall proceed that spark of Fame,
That sets on fire the Noble-Heart;
For Honor of his Birth and Name:
In Valors Field to act his part?
Had not great Alexander vievv'd
The blazons of Achilles praise,
Whereat with envious Eye, he revv'd
The world beyond him we should raise.
He scarcely to subdue had sought,
The World under his Command:
Nor had his Conquests Honor bought,
According to his Minds demand.
Had not his acts been Registered,
By Memory in worthy Write:
And Name by Fame forth queristred,
Maugre Obliuions misty spite.
Stout Hectors valor who could tell?
Who could rehearse Ulysses skill?
With thousands, whose Exploits excel,
If not portrai'd by sovereign Quill?
How worthy praise are Writers then,
Whose works show to this vile-grovvne Age,
The worthy lives of Valiant men,
For Virtues Freedom laid in gage?
Then well des^rues he that reviues
The Age-vvorne records of Renown?
Contemning Envy, that depriue's
The well deserved of Lavv^ell Crown.
Thank Foord, thus offering at free cost,
His Talent for our hearts delight,
And reckons not his labor lost,
If it (with k^ndnesse) we requite.
THE HISTORY OF MONTELION, KNIGHT of the Oracle.
CHAP. I. How Persicles was created King of Assyria, and travailed into Persia,
to the Marriage of his sister Piera, to the Emperors Son Deloratus. How he
was enamoured of Constantia: and returned into Assyria.
AN ancient King named Pius, ruled the Land of Assyria in great peace: as well
Fortunate by the love of his Subjects, and other outward blessings, as with two
fair children, a Son and aDaughter, that after his death should succeed in
that Empire, And by reason Age was now so much grown upon him, that he found
himself wearied, and unable to exercise the care that belongs to the
government of so mighty a Nation: also beholding in his Son, more then
ordinary gravity, and so forward a mind to virtue, as that he might well commit
a matter of such weight to his care: he determined to give himself to rest,
which well agreed with his Age, and therefore caused all the Peers of his Land
to be assembled.

Which being effected, and all set in Parliament, the old King uttered his
mind: which was, to establish his Son Persicles in the Kingdom. The Peers
before that, as well by common report, as of their own experience having
perfect knowledge of his manifold virtues, gave their general consents: And so
Persicles within few days was crowned King.

Pius having effected this according to his mind, yet could not b^ at quiet
until he had provided a marriage for his daughter, befitting her estate. To
further which good intent, it fortuned that Deloratus Son and heir to the King
of Persia, hearing of Pieraes beauty (for so was she called) came into the
Country of Assyria, and by long suit, at last obtained her good will, and her
fathers consent: being assured to her in the presence of most of his Peers,
but for that certain conditions were to be ratified by the King his Father,
the solemnization of the marriage was deferred until that was performed: and
for that time should not belong protracted, which Deloratus with earnestness
hastened. Persicles with the consent of his Father, accompanied his Sister
Piera into Persia, attended by a number of Gallant Knights, as well to see the
conditions ratified, and the marriage performed, as also to do Deloratus
honor* After their departure, they within few days arrived in the Kingdom of
Persia, where Persicles and Piera were most honorably entertained by the old
King Torsilus, and the conditions ratified.

The Solemnization of the marriage was deferred for certain days, for that
the King of Persia determined to have the same performed with great pomp,
whether he invited many of his Neighboring Kings, as of Arabia, Natolia, and
Thessalia. The knights of Persia made preparation to attend the Bridegroom in
great royalty.

Persicles being in the Persian Court, hearing what Gallants were likely to be
at the wedding, prepared most rich Ornaments against that day, determining not
to be the last in trial of his valor at the Tilt. The prefixed day being
come, the King of Arabia, Natolia, Thessalia, and many other Princes of great
Estate, with them were arrived, and the City was filled with such a number of
knights and Gallants, that there was scarce room therein to contain them. To
recite every particular of their entertainements, greetings, riches, and what
gallant Ladies were with them* would be overtedious: but in brief, there was
such royal entertainment as befitted such Personages, and such a multitude of
rare shows, and fine devices, as might every way please a curious beholder.

The Marriage being past, the sumptuous Banquets ended, and the Estates set to
behold the Tilt: The first that entered the Lists, was a Persian Duke, named
Osimus, gallantly mounted and a man of goodly proportion: After whom, followed
the rest of the Persian Knights, who were all Challengers against all strangers
that came to make trial of their Valor. Next came the adverse part, the
foremost of which was Persicles, who appeared in Richness, according to the
dignity of his place, being King of so mighty a Country as Assyria: whose sight
led the beholders in admiration of his evident perfection. After whom followed
Nonlus Prince of Natolia, and after him a number of most gallant Knights, so
richly adorned, as would have persuaded a cowardly miscreant to have become
valiant: whose particular description I omit.

As Persicles was chief of the adverse part, and Duke Osimus of the Persians,
so they two began the encounter, breaking of staves with exceeding valor:
but Osimus intending to win the chiefest honor, for that he was esteemed the
best Knight in Persia, had provided staves of tough Wood, which would not start
with an easy encounter: one of which he took, and ran the fourth time at
Persicles, who unprovided of such an unexpected assault was overturned: and his
Steed tumbling, fell upon him, that with the fall he for a time remained
without sense. The King of Persia and the rest, being exceedingly afraid that
he was slain, came running off the Scaffolds to take him up, carrying him
forth of the Lists, to be unarmed: Amongst the rest, his sister Piera used her
uttermost diligence to recover him with whom likewise, were a number of gallant
Ladies to assist her: but chiefly the Queen of Persia, and her youngest
Daughter Constantia, as more regarding him, by reason he was Brother to Piera,
and most of all lamented his mishap.

Persicles finding himself somewhat recovered, at the first opening his eyes,
fixed them on Constantia, which by reason he was not fully revived, stood still
fixed upon the first object, as it were with affectionate earnestness, which
caused an exceeding blush to rise in her cheeks.

But now seeing such a number about him, he was amazed and half ashamed of his
foil, said: I beseech you leave me to my self; and see the rest of the
Tournaments, for I have no harm. With that he started upon his feet, and
fetching a deep sigh departed. They were all exceeding glad of his safety: and
so leaving him to be attended by his own knights, they departed to the
Scaffolds, and again took their places to behold the rest of the Turnament.

Persicles was exceedingly vexed, that he had received such a disgrace, and in
the presence of such and honorable assembly: most of all for that he understood
Osimus intent: presently buckled on one of his Knights Armor^, and mounting
himself, entered the Lists again, by which time, the Tilt was almost ended,
and the Persian Knights bare away the prize; but Persicles then unknown, stood
ready at the Races end, for the next encounter: against whom a Persian Knight
ran, but so far to his disgrace, that he tumbled with his heels upwards.
With that every one began to wonder what he should be, and the people gave an
exceeding shout: with that the other Persian met with him, whose fortune was
much like the former. For his Steed trumbling with the strength of the
Encounter, they both fell down. A Knight of Persia who that day had won
great honor by his valor, seeing that, would needs be the next to meet him,
thinking to revenge his Countrymans disgrace: but at the first race he could
not perform it, for they past by without any other odds, but breaking their
staves most gallantly. And running again, the Persians Fortune was so bad,
that he was overthrown. By this time the day was ended, and the Judges ready
to depart: but Osimus entreated that he might break one staff with the
stranger, which they granted. Whom Persicles well knew, resolutely determined
to give or take the foil, both of them meeting with such terror, that the
Earth seemed to shake, and Osimus (notwithstanding all his strength) was by
Persicles overthrown to salve his h^nor, and requite his discourtesie. With
that the people gave such shouts, as made all the Palace ring with the sound.
And Persicles discovered himself, which made every one rejoice, and wonder at
his valor.

Persicles being unarmed, accompanied the King of Persia, Natolia, and the
rest, having that day won such honor as made him more highly esteemed: and
coming to salute his sister Piera he suddenly espied Constan^ia: thinking he
had before seen that sweet countenance, but he could not remember where, which
cast him into such a deep study, that he almost forgot himself. After he had
saluted the rest he came to Constantia, to whom he said. Fair Lady either I
have beheld your Beauty, and that sweet countenance in some other Country, or
in some vision, for my mind persuades me, I should perfectly know you: for I
am sure this is not the first time I have seen you, which makes me thus bold
to demand of whence you are, if it be not offensive unto you. Sir (replied
Constantia) it may be, I am but an imperfect shadow of her you so perfectly
remember; for until this day I never saw you, which makes me suppose, you do
but take an occasion of course to commend me, that deserve no such matter,
neither shall you offend me: nor I deny to show my Birth, being Daughter to the
King of Persia, but for many years brought up in Arabia. Pardon my boldness
(quoth Persicles) for I would not offend you, neither do I think you a
shadow, but a perfect substance, and not to resemble any but your self: for
there can be no Beauty that excels yours, which mine eyes before this time
have beheld: or else Nature it self has imprinted in my heart an essential
distinct of devotion thereto, which persuades me to this boldness: therefore
I humbly desire you not to misconceiue me, nor esteem me of so rude a
disposition, as to speak otherwise then my heart thinks: and to account of
me as one that earnestly desires to be better acquainted with you, and will
endeavor to make you amends for any offense giv^n, offering my self and all
that is mine, to be at your disposition: which said, he left off further
speech, for he saw others attend to hear what he said.

At night Constantia being in her private Chamber, called to remembrance
Persicles speeches, which made her marvel why he should say, he had before
that seen her, which she knew could not be: but remembering how earnestly he
beheld her that day, when he was scarce revived from his trance, she thought
that sight might breed such a persuasion in him, which was so indeed: withal,
she called to mind, his comeliness, valor, estate, and courtesy, which she
had before noted: all which remembrances made her so much forget all other
thoughts that a great part of the night was unawares overpast: and after she
had revived her senses, she felt such an alteration, as all that night she
could not rest, delighting in nothing so much as to remem^er him. The like did
Persicles, for her Beauty and other outward graces, had pierced so near his
heart, that he was enthralled to her Love, and resolved to win it.

Early the next morning he got up, seeking all occasions to speak to her
again, but he was disappointed all the forenoone. For she by reason of her
little rest in the night, kept her Chamber, and after ^inner, accompanied the
Queen her mother, and the other Ladies whereby he was that day disappointed.
The next morning likewise he arose, studying which way to come to her speech,
for his affection was so great, as no thought contented him but her
remembrance; but before he could bring to pass what he most desired, there
arrived Messengers from Assyria, certifying him that his Father was deceast,
and that their ancient enemy the king of Armenia had entered his Land, and
destroyed many of his Subjects, desiring him in all have to return; For in his
absence the Assyrians seemed like men without courage.

Persicles hearing the unexpected news, was exceedingly astonished, both with
desire to save his Country, and also to prosecute his Love: the one persuading
him to stay, the other to hasten his departure: The one being as dear to him
as his life, the other as dear, as both Life, Country, and all: for without
obtaining of that, he thought he could not live, being so much perplexed, that
he could not resolve what to do: At last the special regard of his Country
overcame his heart, and revived him with a manly courage to revenge, that he
Commanded all things to be prepared for his sudden departure, and going to his
Chamber, he got Pen and Ink, and wrote as follows:

TO THE MOST FAIREST Constantia.
MOst beloved Constantia,
though my Countries preservation, occasioneth my sudden departure, yet my Love
to your perfections, importuneth me to solicit your gentle ears with these
rude Lines, I cannot with colorable Phrases shadow a perfect meaning, nor yet
with painted Eloquence, decipher my true love: but in the truest sort, manifest
my constant affection to your virtues, which unless you grace with some
favor, will be my endless torments I have long desired to make the same
manifest unto you, but I was still disappointed, and my unexpected departure
has now shut me from your presence, whereby I shall live in continual care.
Notwithstanding, I humbly beseech you in my unwilling absence, to esteem me
your faithful and true devoted Servant, and one that has vowed himself for
ever to be yours: whose welfare consists in your courtesy, the hope whereof
shall preserve my life until my return, which my constant love will cause me
to hasten, desiring you, though I be absent, not to forget me, nor for my
little deserts to reject me, but let me be so much bound to your ve^tues, as to
conceive well of me; and to your courtesy, as to pity me: so shall my joys be
lengthened, my unhappy life is preserved, and my good will and constant loyalty
highly rewarded. So with sorrow, I take my leave.

Yours inseparably, PERSICLES.


Having wrote this Letter, he found out his sister Piera, to whom he said as
follows. Dear sister, the sorrows that cause my departure, come so
suddenly, as that I cannot stand long to confer with you; therefore for that
I build upon assurance of our love, secrecy, and assistance, I will unfold to
you the secrets of my heart, and that which none but your self should know. So
it is that Constantiaes beauty has bewitched mine eyes, and I remain so much
inthralled thereto, that unless she pity me, I am but cast away. I desire
your assistance herein, whereby you may preserve my life. I have wrote this
Letter unto her, which I desire you to deliver: and withal to use such
speeches on my behalf, as shall seem best to your wisdom: for I assure you,
unless at my return, which shall be shortly, I find her favorable, my
sorrows will shorten my days. Then good sister show your love to me in this,
and in my absence give her knowledge of my loyalty, which shall make me
everlastingly thankful unto you. Piera promised her utmost assistance, and so
with many fears of her side, they parted.

The news of his departure was soon spread through the whole Court, and
likewise came to Constantias hearing, who left her chamber, and gat into her
mothers company, where she thought to have a sight of him, which some small
sparks of Love that were kindled in her tender breast, procured her unto.
After all farewels were past, he espied her in the company of other Ladies, to
whom he came, and only amongst y^ rest of them all, took his leave of her with
a sweet kiss, breathing forth a bitter sigh at the parting, which every one
noted: Some taking the same in disdain, and others marvelling that he regarded
her above them all. Which made the blood rise in Constantiaes cheeks, and the
waterswell in her eyes.

CHAP. II. How Helyon Prince of Arabia, crossed the love between Persicles and
Constantia. Of a battle fought between Persicles, and the King of Armenia.
And how disguising himself, he traveled into Persia, and how he discovered
himself to Constantia.
HIs departure caused a sadness throughout the Court, for indeed he was the
beauty thereof, so excellent was his person, and so commendable his qualities.
Piera betaking her self to her Chamber, lamented his absence with private
tears, until Deloratus found her out, and caused her with his comfortable
speeches, to give over that grief. The King of Natolia likewise with most of
the Nobles and Knights that came to the Solemnization of the Wedding were
departed, except Prince Helyon, son to the King of Arabia. The occasion of,
whose stay, was to crave Constantia in marriage, assuring himself of her Love,
by reason of the familiarity that was betwixt them in her fathers Court: which
indeed by her former kindness he might be in some assurance off, though not by
any promise she had made him: which motion he made to the King of Persia, who
esteeming so honorably of him regarding his Birth, and most of all, desiring
to be allied to the Arabian King, gave his consent, which was fully concluded
and agreed upon, before it came to Constantiaes knowledge.

Prince Helyon having his assurance, with a merry heart sought out Constantia,
entending to reveal the same to her: and according to his wonted kind of
Familiarity, began to greet her: In whom he found such an alteration, that he
wondered thereat, saying: My dear Constantia, this unexpected unkindness in
you, whom I esteem as my most chosen Friend, makes me admire, whereas I had
thought to have enjoyed your love without interruption. Upon confidence of your
courtesy, I have moved your Fathers consent to our Marriage, who has yielded
thereto: then I beseech you darken not both your and my joys, with these Misty
clouds of care, which will fill my heart with sorrow: but rather increase your
kindness, to both mine and your comfort. Constantia's countenance bewrayed the
angry motions of her heart, incensed by his speeches, that we had much ado to
withhold her eyes from shedding tears: yet with a color as red as Scarlet,
she gave him this answer. Prince Helyon, if that be true which you tell me, I
cannot choose but wonder at your folly, that would without assurance of my Love,
make such a motion: think you my affections are to be limited according to
your disposition? For my part, I disclayme such interest, and renounce such
Affection: for I never intended any such matter, nor ever did you demand the
same. Then my Lord be you satisfied for this, for I never yet did, nor will
give my consent.

Helyon hearing her answer, was nipt on the head, being struck with such
grief, that he could not tell what to say. But at last replied. Constantia, I
confess I have done you wrong, in adventuring so far without your consent,
but yet for that I have not thereby either dishonored your Name, or otherwise
injured you, I humbly crave pardon, desiring you to ratify that which I have
by your former courtesies assured my self of: and let not my overboldnesse
alienate any part of your good will. For you know my affections have remained
inviolable constant many years: and I have attended your liking with such
feruency, as you may be resolutely assured of my truth. Then I beseech you be
not now displeased with me, but according to your wonted kindness, accept me
into your favor.

My Lord (replied she) I cannot deny but that your good will has exceeded my
deserts, for which I thank you: and withal, that I have always esteemed you,
which likewise I would have done still: But now that opinion is altered,
neither can I be induced to conceive well of him that would do me such
manifest injury as you have done. Therefore I pray be contented with that
favor you have had, for my affections are otherwise employed, and my heart
utterly disagreeing to the motion you have made. With that she espied Piera in
the Garden coming toward her, to whom she went down, saluting her most
kindly. Piera thought now to have delivered her Persicles Letter, but by reason
that there were diverse in their company, she could not then perform it. After
a while they left each other, Piera returning to her Chamber, and Constantia
into a secret place of the Garden where she uttered these meditations. What
contrarious disquiets are these possess the center of my heart? what
inconveniences am I like to run into? and how shall I avoid blame for the one,
and reap content by the other? How unkindly has Prince Helyon used me, to
make this motion to my Father, whose disposition must not be crossed, without
hazard of much disquiet? My kindness to him, has caused his over-fond conceit
of himself, and brought me into much trouble: I could have loved him before I
came to the sight of Persicles, whose gifts are so far exceeding his, that
whereas my heart loved him, the thought of that Love is now most grievous.
Wherein I may do my self great wrong: for in hope of his affection, I refuse
Helyons love, which may deprive me of both, purchase my Fathers heavy
displeasure, and my own perpetual discontent, Reuoluing a Chaos of these, and
such like confused cogitations, which overcame her senses with their ambiguity,
in a heavy and discontented vain she went to her Chamber, thinking there to
consider of every particular at the full: where we found Piera all alone,
staying her coming in, who soon espied that Constantia had wept, whereupon
she took occasion to say as follows. My beloved Sister, I am sorry to see
you in this heavy and sad vain, always finding you either sad or weeping,
which makes me wonder; and desi^ous to know the cause, as one willing in any
sort to counsel you, and comfort you with my uttermost assistance, I have of
purpose entered your Chamber, to have some conference with you in private, being
a Messenger sent to you by my Brother Persicles, who I know loves you dearly:
who by me humbly commends himself unto you, being sorry that his sudden
departure was such, that he could not before his going, do you that Service
you do deserve, and he desired. Withal, he desired me to deliver you this
Letter which he left behind, to testify the depth of his affection: which at
my request vouchsafe to read, and withal credit: for I know his honorable
heart endures much care by his absence. Constantia without making reply
received the letter, and read the same: which when she had done, she said:
Dear Sister, I thank you for taking this pains to come to me, and not rather
to have sent for me, that rest at your command* And also I thank that worthy
King Persicles, that he will vouchsafe me such undeserved favor, as to
esteem well of my unworthiness, to whom I am bound in all honorable respect,
but how unfit I am to entertain love, your self would judge, if you knew my
estate, which upon assurance of your secrecy I will unfold. Prince Helion of
Arabia, vainly presuming he was assured of my favor, has asked my Fathers
consent, to a marriage betwixt him and me, which he has granted unto: which
the heavens can testify is utterly disagreeing to my heart, and altogether
without my consent, which he shall never attain, what danger soever I incur
thereby. Which if Persicles should understand, would soon alter his mind:
Therefore it is best for his quiet not to place his affections on me so
unworthy, but let me alone to endure the affliction that is likely to ensue.

I know ( quoth Piera) my Brothers Love is so constant, that nothing can alter the
same which he related to me at large: which makes me testify y^ assurance
thereof. Which would you but accept of, or give me some comfortable hope in his
absence, I should think my self bound to you for ever, and to have done him an
exceeding pleasure: for nothing but the happy tidings of your favor, can
comfort him. The King of Persia will not compel you to marry Helion, when he
understands that you are otherwise bent, for that were cruelty. And I think
Helion himself bears not so dishonorable a mind, as to seek your Love by
constraint* for that were inhumanity. But would you yield to like of my
Brothers love that is every way as good as y^ Prince of Arabia, the knowledge
thereof would soon make him return to ask your fathers consent, which may
peradenture stand as well affected to him as to Prince Helyon. Ay me go.
Constantia: sister I need not doubt to reveal my greatest secrets to you that
I know for Persicles sake will conceal them, I confess without further
circumstances, that I love that worthy King Persicles, which is the cause of
these disquiets: neither did my fancy ever yield the least conceit of liking
Helyons love, which I took to be rather grounded upon common familiarity, then
pretense of Marriage. Therefore now that you are assured of that which you
request, I beseech you not to conceive amiss of my rash confession, nor
esteem my love light, because of so short continuance, for it shall be
immovable: but rather comfort my poor disquieted heart, with your counsel
how to avoid these inconveniences. And if that worthy King be so affected
toward me, as your speeches and his Letter here affirms, I would wish his
return might be speedy: otherwise my sorrows will be endless. For I know my
Fathers nature to be such, that whatsoever he will have, must be performed,
though equity would persuade the contrary.

Grieve not so much (quoth Piera,) with premeditated conceit of fear, which
peradventure shall never come to pass: I will presently send messengers unto
my Brother, which shall carry such news as will comfort his heart, and cause
speedy return: in the mean time I will make Deloratus acquainted with Helyons
practice, not Persicles Love, who shall persuade the King all that may be, not
to consent to marry you against your mind. Be then of good comfort, and in
assurance of Persicles Loyalty, let no fear disquiet your senses, or impair
your health: For things now at the worst may have a good end. These speeches
ended, they parted.

All this while Prince Helion was meditating how to hasten the Marriage, but
most of all to find the cause of Constantias discontent: which he thought was
aggravated against him, by some good conceit we had lately entertained of some
other then himself, which made him prosecute the same with more feruency: and
dealt so effectually with the King, that he swore Constantia should be ruled by
him. And thereupon, the next day sent for her, to whom he said:

Daughter, I think it is not unknown to you that I have promised you in
Marriage to Prince Helyon; one that is every way worthy to match with you, both
for Nobleness of Birth, virtuous qualities, and comeliness of person.
Withal, I am given to understand, that you like not our choice, nor esteem
our command: which if you neglect* you shall not only displease me, but also
loose my favor for ever. For as you are mine, I purpose to dispose of you, but
if you refuse my counsel, refuse me too; for I will not regard a disobedient
child. The manifold reasons I could allege, that persuade me to the
confirmation of this Contract, are of such weight, as I might seem careless
of your welfare, and your self envious of your own good, to deny them:
therefore let me know your answer.

Constantia well knew that if she denied* he would be offended; and his
froward nature to be so much disposed to wrath, that before she could speak
she shook with fear: yet resolution so hazard the worst, humbling her self
upon her knee, she made this answer. My reverend duty to you (most loving
Father) persuades my consent to fulfill your command, though my Love binds
me to the contrary: that I stand perplexed twixt two extremes: the one, fearing
to offend you, the other to procure my everlasting discontent: for in refusing
to do according to your will, I shall incur your indignation, and in
performing the same, my everlasting sorrow. For as yet my heart could never
yield to love that worthy Prince, who far too worthy to be matched with me.
Most humbly beseeching you to consider, that enforced Love never brings
content, but disquiet, which with Helyon, will be my portion: Therefore I
beseech you revoke your determination.

Is it even so (quoth he) shall my command be countervaild by your peevish
conceit? Is this the regard you give to my good will? Are you wiser then I? Or
are you willing to displease me? Shall my will stand at your direction? Is
this the duty you owe to your Father, or fear you no more to offend me? Have I
so carefully brought you up, and tenderly regarded you for this? Henceforth
never come in my sight, for I will not esteem thee as a Child, but as a
bastard: and withal I vow, that if thou do not yield to marry him, use him
kindly, and apply thy devotions to his liking, I will use thee in such sort,
that all Persia shall lament thy case. Having given her this bitter reproof,
he departed: leaving her weeping the fountains of her precious eyes dry,
wringing her hands, and like one in a dead trance, overcome with grief, cast
upon the Earth. The first that entered the room was Helyon, who seeing her in
that agony, took her by the hand to have raised her from the earth, but she
refusing his help, uttered these speeches. Until this time I always esteemed
honorably of you, but now my good opinion is altered, for that you only seek
my torment: my Father has given me charge to Marry with you, which I must
against my heart fulfill: but be assured never to possess my Love, for that I
have bequeathed another: only my outward parts may be yours, but my inward,
affections shall continually esteem you as the only occasioner of my endless
miseries. With that she rose up from the ground, giving him neither better
words, nor other kind behavior, but left him standing still as one astonished.

Piera made Constantia's estate known to Deloratus, who so far as he durst,
persuaded her Father not to constrain her to marry the Prince: but such
wilfulness possessed him, that the more they entreated him the more contrarious
he was, and therefore appointed the day for the Marriage to be within two
months. And in the mean time doubting the King of Arabiaes consent, he sent
his Ambassadors to that effect.

Piera hearing this, presently sent messengers into Assyria to certify
Persicles of all that had happened: and withal, wrote a Letter, which
contained the whole sum of Constantia's consent to his Love. Who with all
diligence hasted until they arrived there, being presently conducted into his
presence: After he had most kindly embraced them, he demanded how Piera did,
and what message they brought from her: whereupon they delivered him the
Letters they had brought: which when he had read, commanding his Knights to
give the Messengers honorable entertainment, he departed to his Tent, one way
so much comforted and another way so much troubled, that he sat him down in a
deep study, not yet knowing what to resolve upon.

When he had along space meditated with what contrarieties his Fortunes were
crossed, the danger his Country was in, how likely he was to loose Constantia,
and how difficult to attempt her possession, and many other, at last he thought
his Life should be nothing without her Love: and therefore he fully resolved to
hazard the same to attain it: but so impossible it seemed which way to
accomplish the same: For first the Armenians war hazarded his Kingdom, whom
he could not suddenly expel: Next to attempt to win her by force, that could
not be, for the Persian was too mighty: and lastly, delay might breed a greater
mischief then all the rest: that calling unto him two of his chiefest Nobles,
the one named Parenus, a wise Counselor, the other Thrureus a Noble Warrior,
he uttered his mind to them, saying: I have sent for you, as the men that I
most respect and trust: being determined to commit to your charge the
government of my Kingdom, for that weighty business, and such as concerns
my everlasting welfare, must for a season withdraw me: and for that I am fully
assured of your Loyalty, I will use no exhortations, to persuade you thereto,
but to order the same in this sort. Thrureus resembling me much, both in
proportion and countenance, shall in my absence possess my room, whom the
people will assuredly take to be my self, and so govern them with more ease.
And you Parenus, by your wisdom order all things according thereto: Thus you
know my mind: which I do not doubt, but you will accomplish in every respect
according to my desire. They first entreated him, not to depart, but when they
saw nothing could prevail, they swore that they would faithfully execute what
he had given them in charge. He likewise telling them that he would depart
within three days, which he deferred so long, by reason that the second day
the Armies of the Assyrians and Armenians should meet. Having ended his
conference with them he returned to the Messengers that came from Persia,
giving Letters to Piera, which gave her knowledge that he would be there
within few days.

The prefixed day for the Batt^il was now come and both the Armies met, betwixt
whom began so hot and deadly a Fight, that many thousands on both parts lost
their lives, and the Armenians greedy of their Enemies overthrow, followed them
so eagerly, that they began to sound a retrait. Persicles seeing that, left the
place of his Government, and with his Lance ready coucht, met an Armenian Duke
so full, that he pierced the same through his body, then drawing his sword,
with the same he slew the next, and after him wounded others: that within a
while his valor made such a Massacre amongst them, that they avoided the place
of his Fight, and thought themselves best that were furthest of him. Thus
valorously did he pursue them, until he was unawares in the midst of their
Army: which advantage the King of Armenia espied, thinking Persicles life
within his power, ran at him with a lance poynted with a steel, but it mist
him: and Persicles seeing him, met him so full with the pommell of his sword
against his breast, that had not his Steed yielded, he had broken his back;
with that the Armenians assailed him round about, with such unequal odds,
being a multitude to one, that sometimes they were thrust so near upon him by
the throng, that they swayed him up and down: Those that came next him dyed by
his sword, their dead trunkes falling down betwixt his Steeds legs, which
made him spring about with such fury, that he soon made them give way. In the
mean time, while the most part of the Battle were bent to destroy him, the
Assyrians had made such a slaughter amongst the outwings of the Army, that most
of them were slain, and the rest fled. Thureus fearing Persicles harm, for
that he mist him with his followers, soon found him out, and by that means
rescued him from amongst the multitude: who by this time had unhorsed him, and
he was constrained to fight on foot, being scarce able to withhold himself
from stumbling upon the dead carcasses of those himself had slain. Thureus
soon got him remounted, and then both of them pursued their enemies so
fiercely, that they began to fly; and had not the day been ended, they had
been all destroyed: which caused Persicles to sound a retraite, and befake him
to his Tent, having that day done such deeds of Arms, as made both his own
subjects and the Armenians admire him.

Early the next morning, word was brought him, his Enemies were all fled, and
not any of them to be found in the Camp, having left all their Riches behind
them, being glad they had escaped alive which rejoiced Persicles to hear, for
that they should be no hinderance to his journey, commanding his Soldiers to
take the spoil and to bury the dead: and for that he had received never a
mortal wound, he determined the next day to depart, which he acquainted
Parenus and Thureus withal, requesting them (if it were possible) not to
discover his absence until his return.

Having ordered every thing according to his mind, the next morning he
departed, attiring himself like a Palmer; with his staff in his hand, which
disguise shadowed him from knowledge, that he past his own Court Gates,
vndiscryed: which assured him, that if his own subjects and servants knew him
not, much less would strangers, that he passed without fear of being
discovered. In this sort did he travel, thinking it no penance to take pains
to find out his Love, until he arrived in Persia, yet not knowing which way to
accomplish his intent, or to come to speech either of Piera or Constantia, for
that he was a Stranger, being denied to enter the Court gates, where he stayed
attending his good Fortune, some three days: but as far from hope then, as
at his first coming: that he was so much tormented in his thoughts, that he
could not tell what to do. The next day he heard that the King should go
forth on Hunting, which made him presently suppose (for that the Park was so
near the Court) the Ladies likewise would see the pastime, hoping by some odd
means or other, to give one of them knowledge of his arrival, that he wrote a
Letter, the contents whereof were these.

To PIERA, or CONSTANTIA.
THese J write to either of you: My Fortunes being doubtful to whether J
should deliver this. The Palmer that delivered this Letter is Persicles, that
desires to speak with one of you, for he says, you both are as dear to him
as his own Soul. Attending an happy hour, J end.

Yours PERSICLES.


The next day, according to his hopes, the King and Queen Dela and Piera,
Helyon and Constantia, and many other came forth whom Persicles soon espied:
and well noting Constantiaes countenance, perceived the same so darkened, as if
she had been fully possessed with discontent. Who coming near him (for he
stood so as they must pass by him) casting her eyes upon him beheld him so
earnestly, that she almost forgate her self, feeling her heart to throb with
unwonted motion, that she let fall her rich Scarffe, most curiously imbroydred,
which occasion Persicles soon espied, as awayting such an opportunity, took
up the Scarffe, and with great ren^rence gave it her, conueying the Letter
therein so closely, that she soon espied the same: wherewith her heart began
to pant, and viewing the superscription, found it directed to her, or Piera:
that closely she put the same in her bosom, lest Helyon or any else should
^spie it, until she could And opportunity to read it. By this time, the game
was rowzed, and all but she alone followed the pastime with earnestness: which
^^e beholding, withdrew her self with one of her Ladies, and read the Letter
through which affected her heart with such joy and fear, that sometimes her
heart leapt with the one, and her Eyes stood ready to overflow with tears with
the other. Presently fo^lowing the company until she overtooke Piera, to whom
she said: Sister, did you not behold the Palmer that stood in the way, as we
came by the Palace wall? Yes (quoth she) and do you not know hi^, said
Constantia? It is your Brother Persicles.

With that Piera smiled, saying: How can that be: or what makes you think so?
With that she pulled out the Letter, and bad her read it: Which when she had
done, she said: Constantia, he is worthy to be kindly used, having travailed
so far on foot to see us. Yea (quoth Constantia) how may we come to speak
with him? Or how may we give him that Welcome his Worthiness deserves? That
for my unworthy sake, has undertaken to hazard his Royal person in travel?
Let me alone (quoth Piera) and the better to avoid suspicion, use Hel^on some
what more kindly then heretofore you have done, that his mind may be vo^d of
jealousy: for I perc^iue when you come in any place or company, he has a
diligent and vigilant eye over you.

And calling unto her a Damzell named Dela, one that was privy to all her
secret counsels, to whom she said: Go thy way and find out the Palmer that
thousawest as we came, for it is Persicles, conduct him into my Chamber, where
let him stay until my return: and if any ask thee what he is, tell them he
is of Assyria, and brings me news from the Knight my Brother. Dela hasted,
and soon found him out, reverently saluting him, and calling him by his name:
which made him marvel that she knew him, until she delivered her Message,
which he was ready to fulfill, as the thing he above all things desired. And
having brought him into the Court, which she did without contradiction, she
returned to certify her Mistress thereof. Whom she met with Constantia, and
some few before the rest, returning to the Court, being both desirous to see
Persicles. Who now entering the Palace, were soon espied of him, which
affected his heart with such content, as it seemed to reviue his senses.

Constantia likewise was possessed with such contrarious passions, sometimes of
Fear, joy, bashfulnesse, desire, and modest love, that her heart seemed to
dissolve: and all the Arteries of her body wrought with internal and strange
motions. By this time they were ascended the stayres, and Persicles ready to
meet them, who first saluted Piera, as reserving the best for the last: which
he performed so superficially, in respect of the behavior he used to
Constantia, whose modesty made her blush: whilst he berest of a sweet kiss:
who with as mild a countenance as if Modesty her self had been there, bad him
Welcome.

Most divine Lady (quoth he) I cannot express my thankfulness ^y outward
means, for that my heart both wishes and intends more good to you then my
tongue can utter: being so far bound unto you in (respect of my slender and
small deserts) for your esteeming well of me, that I shall never be able to
discharge the debt. And though you have little cause by reason of the small
proof you have of my Fidelity, to yield me Love, yet if my faithful How may
satisfy you, and my plighted promise of perpetual constancy assure you you
shall find me both constant in Love to you, Faithful, to deal Honorably with
you, and Loyal, not to do any thing that shall be disagreeable to your Will.

My Lord (said Constantia) in full assurance of your good meaning my heart
willingly affecting you more then any, without farther delay, I yield my self
to your disposition: desiring you not to misconceiue me. And though I am too
unworthy such accounts as you make of me, my possession being linckt to so
many Inconveniences, yet since your desire is to have it so, I am ready wholly
to be ruled and governed according to your directions.

Piera then said, Let further conference for this time cease, because I hear
of the King return: and for this Night I will provide for my Brothers
security, with whom I will confer about this business, until you may
conveniently meet again. This said, Persicles ^ooke his leave of Constantia,
with many ceremonious Farewels, ^s each part interchanging their hearts, such
perfect Love was established betwixt them. He to a secret Chamber to meditate.
Piera, to ^ccompany her husband, and Constantia, with an out wardly merry,
though in wardly heavy heart, to Welcome Helyon.

CHAP. III. How Constantia disguised her self, and departed the Emperors
Court with Persicles.
WIthin this place stayed Persicles so long without means how to accomplish
his desire, which was to convey away Constantia, that the prefixed day for the
performance of the Marriage approached, which brave them to their uttermost
shifts, knowing that now or never it was to be done.

Constantia coming to Pieraes Chamber, with a heavy heart and watery eyes,
demanded whether they had yet determined how she should escape? But hearing
them make no answer, said thus: (My Lord) since the fear you have I should be
discovered, and so dishonored, makes you unwilling to have me hazard my
self, the time of my pretended Wedding now drawing nigh, which I most abhor,
because I love none but your self: Provide but for your own departure out of
the Court, without being discovered, and stay for me in the Evening under the
Myrtle tree, by the Palace wall, and thither I will assuredly come to you: but
by what means, as yet I know not.

Persicles was glad to hear her speeches, but he was much troubled in mind
that his misfortune was such, that he could not carry her thence, without she
her self should hazard her escape alone, but seeing her forwardness, which
was an infallible token of her Constancy, with many thanks and Farewels,
until their happy meeting again they parted: with such careful hearts, and
outward signs of sorrow, as would have made the hardest heart of any
remorselesse beholder relent.

Persicles soon departed, and without disturbance: for in that habit he was
without control, and soon got to the Myrtle-tree, whereunder be sat him
down, uttering many hearty Inuocations for his Loves fortunate escape:
thinking that she alone should endure this hazard, but whatsoever extremity
should follow, should be borne by him. Constantia being in her Chamber with
Dela, many thoughts possessed her fancies, and sundry Devises were soon
invented, and as soon out of content, that many she bethought her of, but none
of them seemed current. At last, leaning out of her Window, she espied a
Country damzell enter the outer Court of the Palace, with a Basket on her
arms, wherein were Grapes, which she came of purpose to present unto
Constantia, for their fairness: being a gift worthy acceptance. The Porter
knowing her mind, sent her to the Princess Chamber with a Gentleman.
Constantia seeing that she came to her, caused her to come in, receiving her
Present most graciously: the Gentleman being departed, Dela by Constantiaes
appointment, led the Maiden into a secret chamber, telling her, that it was her
Mistress pleasure, so much to grace her, that she should attend on her, and
not return to her Fathers house: the damzell being glad of that preferment,
gave her many thanks. Dela then caused her to put off her own Apparel, and
put on other that was Constantiaes. Which done, she left her and carried her
homely weeds to Constantia, which she presently put on: disrobing her self of
her rich ornaments, casting aside all other care, but only to attain her Love.
And the Evening being now come, the happy time of her everlasting weal or woe,
she took the damzels Basket on her arm, and first with many farewels to Dela,
commendations to Piera, and heavy sighs to leave her Parents, not knowing what
misfortunes might befall her: with the water standing in her eyes, which to her
uttermost power she refrained, she went down the stayres, and from thence into
the Court, behauing her self so decently, that none that met her had any
thought, but that she had been a perfect Damzell: and so she past until she
came to the Porter, who knowing of her coming in, denied not to let her out.
Constantia having past thus far without escape, thought not to be long in
going to the appointed place, but fear and hope hastening her steps, she
sometimes ran, and sometimes went: and then again looking behind her, as if
some had pursued her, ran until she gate a sight of the tree, where under like
wise she espied her Love, who before that beheld her, but in that habit knew
her not. To whom she approacht so ^igh, that he noting her well, knew her, and
with that embraced her in his arms, saying: My dearest Love, a thousand times
welcome, and more desired of me, then all the riches of the World: for ever
shall this day be blessed, and the hou^e of this our happy meeting, accounted
Fortunate: Let all that wear this Habit be happy, and enjoy their most
desired content: and let this tree wheresoever growing, be esteemed above many
others: For that it was the appointed place of our meetings. Let the Evening be
the most pleasant time of the day for Lovers meetings: and let all those be
Fortunate in their meetings, whose hearts harbor constant Love. My dear
(quoth he) I cannot express the joy my heart conceiueth at your presence,
being sorry that you are thus driven to hazard your person for my sake: being
like wise as sorry that I have no pl^ce of security to carry you unto, for in
this place we must not stay long, therefore let us depart the nearest way
toward Assyria, and Fortune that has showed her self so gentle, may favor
us with some more happy success.

My Lord ( quoth Constantia) now that I have attained your presence, I have found
the Harbor I expected, where my heart shall rest, what hereafter you shall
intend, I will be as well contented with as your self: therefore direct your
steps which way soever you will, I will bear you company. Persicles heart was
glad to hear her so cheerful, that folding his Arm in hers, the Night being
new approached, they walked along: she by the way discoursing the manner of
her escape: To relate the conference between them, were tedious: but the most
part of the night, they continued traveling so fast, as Constantiaes feeble
legs could carry her: who though not accustomed to such labor, yet endured
the same so cheerfully, as it had been a wonder to behold: but at last
arriving into a solitary place, where seldom any frequented but Shepheardsr
The Night being far spent, and Constantia weary, they seated themselves down
upon a bank, and their minds being now somewhat eased of cares, their bodies
wearyed with travail, and the place void of disturbance: After some
delightful conference, Constantia slept, and within a while Persicles did the
like: not awaking until the Suns bright beams glimmering upon them,
awakened them. Persicles heart now began to be troubled, where to get Food
for Constantia, which he was out of hope to attain in those solitary walks,
and rising up to view the place well, and which way next to travel, he espied
a Shepherds Cottage hard by, to which he with Constantia went, knocking at the
door, when presently the Shepherds Wife came forth, who espying such
unlooked for Ghests, started back, saying; What would you have?

Mother (said Persicles) my Wife and I (for so he thought best to name her, to
avoid suspect) travailing toward Assyria, by misfortune yesternight lost our
way, and have wandered up and down all this night, that we are both weary,
especially my Wife, that has not been used to such unrest: our desire is to
rest our selves, and get us food (if it may be) in this place: Which kindness,
if you will afford us, we will both pay for our charge we put you too, and
withal rest thankful.

The Shepherdess noting them well, thought them other then their habit
declared: with whom his kind words and their countenances so much prevayled,
that she desired them to come in, telling them, that her house rested wholly at
their disposition. So they both entered, and willingly sat them down to rest
themselves: but Persicles asking the old woman what meat she had, she told him
she had none at all: but if it pleased him, she would be ready to fetch any
thing he would send for, at a Village hard by.

Whereupon the old Woman went forth to buy meat, leaving them in the house
alone: In whose absence Persicles desired Constantia not to be offended with
him for saying she was his Wife; For (quoth he) should I name you my sister, or
otherwise, it might breed in them some suspicion. Withal, they hearing of your
escape, which may by some means or other come to their knowledge, will the
sooner suspect you: but under that name, shall you be void of the least
knowledge.

Constantia was contented to be ruled by him in any thing, whose heart would
now have conceited the height of content, had not fear to be disclosed
darkened the same. In which place we will leave them, to speak of Helyon.

CHAP. IIII. Of a merry Jest that befell Helyon Prince of Arabia.
COnstantia being gone down the stayres, Dela as soon left the Country
Maiden, to tell Piera what was done, and to ask her counsel what to do: who
hearing all, at last had he return to the Damozell, and carry her meat for
her Supper, but so closely as none might see her go out and in: which Dela
performed, and telling her where she should lie, so left her: altering her
garments and Attires in such sort, that the Maiden seeing her, should not know
her. The Maiden being alone, was soon tempted to taste of those dainty meats,
for that she was very hungry, thinking her self most happy to be so exalted,
daintily fed, and seeing her soft Bed, her belly being full, and being not used
at home to sit up late, drawing the curtains close about her, went to Bed,
where she was no sooner laid, but she fell fast asleep.

Helyon all that Evening, maruelling he could not see Constantia, and withal,
not seeing Piera, was satisfied, thinking they had been together. When Supper
was ended, he determined to see her, and therefore went to Piera's Chamber,
thinking to find her there, who told him, that she was not there this
afternoon. Then hastening thence, he went to Constantiaes Lodging, finding the
Door shut, which being but latcht, he opened, and so softly as he could, shut
the door again: with easy pace, and stealing steps, passing through the
first room, unto the next, where he saw a light burning through the hangings,
which he softly lifted aside, and looking into the chamber, saw no body
stirring, but the curtains drawn, and Constantiaes Apparel lying not far
off, and drawing nigh the Bed perceiu^d that she was fast asleep: thus
standing by the Bed as loath to awake her, and yet unwillingly to leave her, he
silently uttered these meditations. Sweet Fortune has appointed this happy
hour, in favor of my true Love, that have with constancy long attended my
Love, but never was graced with any title of her favor: which opportunity if I
over slip, it may be I shall never attain the like (...) I should attempt to
wake her, could she be offended? If I should further ask her consent to
possess of her Love: could she take it in ill part? No, she knows my Love is
loyal, and therefore will not be offended: but this fears me most, I never
as yet had any favor at her hand: she for ought that I can see, regards me
not; but in stead of my love, repayeth me with sorrow: yet in that I may be
deceived: Peradventure she has used me to make trial of me, and also has
done this, to try whether I would like a Coward for fear of displeasure, leave
the sealing of so sweet a Fort: therefore be my fortune good or bad, I will
hazard the worst.

Then taking the Damzell by the hand, who slept so soundly, that he had much
ado to waken her, he said; Constantia, be not offended with me, it is your
faithful friend Helyon, that speaks to you: I having mist you, thus boldly
presumed into your Chamber, which I found but slightly shut, and fearing that
you had been sick, I am come to visit you, desiring you to grant me this
favor, both to pardon my bold intrusion, and let me stay to be your Guardiant:
Which said, very boldly he kissed the Damzell twice or thrice. The Maiden hearing
his speeches, was so amazed, that she could not speak, reuolving many thoughts
in her doubtful brain, what he should be, and why the Princess had appointed
her to that place: but being unacquainted with the fashions of the Court, she
thought it was the custom there (as she had heard her Father report) for every
one to have a Lover, she laid still and said nothing: Which animated Helyon to
such confidence, as that fastening the Door extinguishing the light, and
putting of his Apparel, he leapt into the Bed: and first asking pardon with
many humble speeches, repeating with what constancy he had deserved her and how
faithfully he intended for ever to love her, he folded her in his arms, using
such behavior, as soon tempted the Damzell to yield, whom he bereft of her
Virginity, to both their contents: He on the one side thinking he had embraced
the fair Constantia, and she supposing she had gotten a rich and kind Lover.
When he had stayed with her so long as he could, for fear of being discovered:
for that the day began to appear, he told her that now to his hearts
grief, he was enforced to leave her, which she was unwilling he should do;
that by her Embracings, kisses, and other kind behaviors, he stayed longer
then he would have done, and took such full possession of her before he went,
as she thought her self the happiest Maiden alive; and he himself the most
fortunately blessed in the possession of so sweet a Love. At last parting with
many farewels, the Damzels eyes somewhat daz^led with the sport, laid her down
again and ^lept soundly, until she thought it time to arise.

When the day was somewhat aged by the height of the Sun, Helyon with an
exceeding merry countenance, taking a rich standing Cup of beaten Gold, full
fraught ^^th the purest Wine, attyring himself in his richest Robes, went to
Constantiaes Chamber, to present her therewith: and entering therein, he found
his Bedfellow attyred in Constantiaes Ornaments; with which ^^ght he was so
amazed, as that he stood like one in a trance, thinking himself either blind,
or that she was metamorphosed.

The Damozell likewise espying him, was ashamed to see him stand gazing on her
with such a wild countenance, that she blushed exceedingly. At last, Helion
fearing some deceit, said: Where is Constantia, that you are attyred with her
Ornaments? The Damzell making a low courtesy, said: I know not where she is;
her Maid had me put on this Apparel yesterday, appointing me to stay in this
place until her return.

Helyon then perceived that he was deceived, and the Damzell in stead of
Constantia had been his Paramour that night, whom he desired to tell him
whether Constantia had of purpose persuaded her to do that, and also if she
knew where she was. For know (quoth he) that thou have not bestowed thy
Virginity on an unworthy person, but upon the Prince of Arabia.

The Damzell humbling her self upon her knees, told him all that she knew:
Whereby he then perceived that Constantia was fled, by reason that he could not
find the damzels Apparel; that taking her by the hand, he said: Damzell, I
perceive Constantia still reje^teth me; and therefore as thou in her stead,
have taken possession of my Love, that good will and Affection which formerly I
have borne to her, will I bear to thee: and hereafter prefer thee to such
dignity, as otherwise thou should never attain unto and Withal, requesting
thee to conceal my being with thee this night, from any; For if it should be
known, it would redound to my shame, and thy punishment: but when question
shall be made for Constantia, t^ll thou all that thou know of my coming
hither, but nothing of me: and in sign of my goodwill, I drink to thee in
this Cup of Wine, which I had thought Constantia should have tasted. This said,
he left the Damzell, and so secretly as might be, he went to his own Lodging;
so much grieved in mind, fretting with vexation, and desperate with anger,
that he vowed to be revenged, were it by never so cruel means: In his heart
now hating her, whom before he doted on. Which is a sign of an inconstant
disposition; for true Love could by no means be altered.

It was not long before Constantia was mist, and the News thereof came to the
King her Father, who with the Queen, marvelled thereat, causing all diligent
enquiry to be made; but no other news was heard of them, but that she was
gone, and a strange Damzell left in her stead. Who being brought before the
King, told them the cause of her coming, and how she was used after by a
Gentlewoman that waited on Constantia. Whereupon the King caused all the Ladies
and Gentle women in the Court to be brought before him, but amongst them all,
she could not tell which was she; for Dela* had altered her Apparel in such
sort, that the Damzell was as ignorant of knowing her, as of any of the rest.

The King was so exceedingly enraged, that he was ready to tear the hair from
his head, commanding that the Damzell should be punished: but at the earnest
entreaties of the Queen, she was only in disgraceful sort turned out at the
Court gates. The King for that time in an exceeding rage, betaking himself to
his solitary Chamber, to study which was the best way to find out his Daughter.
Helyon pitying the Damzell, being now more in love with her then ever he was
with Constantia, called unto him one of his most trustiest Servants, willing
him in secret sort to follow the Damzell, and to deliver her a Purse full
fraught with Gold, telling her that Prince Helyon sent it her; and withal, to
conduct her home to her Fathers house, that he might know where to find her.
Which done, he presently went to the King, desiring him speedily to send forth
Messengers to find Constantia. Who thinking Helyon had requested him
thereunto, with his former pretense of Love, caused twenty of his Knights
privily to be brought before him, to whom he imparted his intent: which was,
that (not making any privy thereunto) they should that Night depart several
ways in search of Constantia.

All things being complotted according to his mind, the Knights having taken
their Oaths of Fidelity and Secrecy, and departed, the King rested: calming
his disquiet with so merry a countenance, as none supposed, but that he had
remitted all regard of Constantia: Which was so closely effected, that the
Knights were dispersed every way in the Country, before there was any question
made of Constantiaes absence.

Helyons Servant surnamed Aldrus, soon overtooke the Damzell, delivering her
the gift his Lord had sent, which she received with many thanks: telling her
like wise, that he had sent him to attend her home. Which she was likewise glad
of, fearing her Parents displeasure for staying so long: who knew her not at
the first sight but afterward were satisfied by Aldrus, who learning her Name,
which was Selia, left her.

CHAP. V. The pleasures that passed between the two faithful Lovers, Percles
and Constantia, in the Shepherds Cottage. How a Knight that was sent in their
search, found them, and what thereon ensued.
THe Day being far spent, the old Shepherds Wife returned with Provision,
which she had brought, dressing the same very cleanly, though after her
Country fashion, whereon Persicles and Constantia fed heartily: spending the
rest of the day in talk with the old Woman, until at Night the old Shepherd
and his son returned, who wondered to see such Guests in his House, and such
cheer at the fire, that was wont to sup with a Crab put into sour Wigge: and
calling aside his Wife before he would enter, demanded, What they were?
Husband ( quoth she) they came hither in the morning, desiring me to let them have
but Houseroome: For that loosing their way, they had wandered about all that
night, and were sore weary. They are the kindest people that ever I saw: Good
Husband bid them welcome. The good old man waxed so kind by his Wives
entreaties, that he came in, telling them they were most heartily welcome: and
that both himself and all that he had were at their command.

Persicles gave him many thanks, being much comforted with their kindness,
which he found disagreeing with the humors of Rusticke people. Supper time was
come and ended, and then the old Woman called her Husband aside, asking him
where they should lie? Marry (quoth he) in our own Bed. And we for this time
will make other provision: and therefore, I pray make the same ready in the
best sort you can.

Which said, the old Woman went about the same, and the old Man coming to
them, said: Because I know you not, I know not what Title to give unto you, but
less then borne of Gentle blood I am sure you are not: I am sorry my wealth
affoordeth me no better entertainment to welcome you withal. But such as our
homely Cottage yields, shall be at your disposition. Desiring you to accept
this our disable good will, in stead of better performance: my wife is making
ready your Bed, which though homely, yet it is cleanly, we having no choice
but only that, desire you to accept it as the best.

I thank you good Friend (quoth Persicles) but we shall be unmannerly to
thrust you forth of your own Rest: therefore we will rather sit up then
disquiet you. Not so (quoth the old man (I have all my life time been brought
up to hardness, and can endure it well, which I am sure you cannot do without
the hazard of your healths. Then came the old Women bringing a light to conduct
them unto the Chamber, which she had dressed so finely with green Rushes and
sweet flowers, that it was most pleasant, though nothing costly. And leaving
them there departed.

Constantia seeing them gone, began to blush, to think she must be Persicles
his Bedfellow, which he perceiving, folding her in his arms, said: Now
Constantia, you must be a Wife before you are Married, which name you cannot
now refuse, having given your con^ent thereunto already. I must of force be
your Bed^fellow, unless you will have me lie on the green Rushes: therefore I
pray tell me: Whether you are willing to favor me so much, or no?

Constantia betwixt a modest bashfulnesse, and a modest desire, stood mate, not
knowing whether to consent or deny. Sometimes thinking her denial might
disquiet him: and again, that to yield might make him suspect her of
lightness: So that betwixt Fear and Hope, she continued silent, as it were
overcome with a deep study.

Persicles smiling thereat, said: My dear Love, I know with what motives your
mind is now agitated: if you think it will impair your Honor to be my chaste
Bedfellow, I will rather loose my life then persuade you thereto: but if you
will vouchsafe me such favor as to lie by you, in the most virtuous sort, I
protest it shall be no dishonor to you, for that your Virgin purity shall not
be spotted by the least thought of unlawful attempt in me: wherein if you will
trust me: you shall find that I will use you both as beseems your Estate,
agrees with your Honor, and the virtuous meaning of a true Friend.

My Lord (said Constantia,) do not think me either so immodestly scornful
to distrust you, or so curious to think it will impair my Name to be your
Bedfellow: Only this I would wish that the Rights of Marriage were performed,
and then I were at your disposition.

Lady (quoth he,) What needs such strict performance of the outward
Ceremonies, which makes, not the Marriage: but those are truly Married, that
with united hearts have plighted Promise of perpetual friendship; electing one
the other by true Love, and not outward Ceremony; For where true Love is not,
there can be no perfect Marriage, though the outward Ceremony be never so
devoutly performed. Therefore if my opinion can prevail with you, we being
without means to use the outward Ceremony, may confirm as true and constant a
Contract betwixt our selves (as though it were established by the rights of the
Church.) This also makes me use these reasons, sithence the means of
performance of that being wanting, we may nevertheless still protract our
happiness; for who are more happier then those that live in perfect Love,
though never so miserable: For my part, I esteem your loving company above all
joys; and the fruition of your Love more dear to me, then a thousand lives
without the same. Then I beseech you let my entreaties so much prevail, that I
may with your free consent possess your Love; for I vow never to love or choose
other then your self.

Constantia hearing his speeches, and many other reasons that he alleged: At
last made this answer; My Lord, relying upon your Virtues, true Love, and
honorable meaning, I yield to your Request, giving my consent to be your Wife
for ever; desiring you to dispose of me according to your mind; for you shall
find me always obedient at your command. Thus ending their speeches, with many
embracings, they adrest themselves to their Brydall bed, which resembled such a
Bed indeed: For the old Woman had decked the Bed with her best linen and other
furniture, stuck the same round about with sweet Roses, strowed the Chamber
with green Rushes, filled the Windows with green Boughs and Flowers so
thick in every place, giving such a sweet savor, that it might well be
termed a Shepherds Paradise.

The two Lovers being in Bed, used that behavior such Loueres do, thinking
themselves Fortunate, the place pleasant, their meetings happy, and their Love
sweet, enjoying content without control; Love without lust; and Pleasure
without pride; He thinking his joys without compare, and she thinking none to
be compared with hers. The Birds without singing their sweet Ditties in stead
of Music, and the sweet Philomela hard by the Wall, with a merry note
rejoicing at their pleasure.

Thus did they pass over this night with exceeding content; and the next day
in communication with the Shepherd, who committed both the Flocks to the
government of his Son, for that himself would stay to bear them company; to
whom he bare such an inward Love, wrought in him by a natural motion, that he
thought himself most happy to do them any pleasure.

Some three days stayed they with the Shepherd, being past fear to be
discovered, for that they heard not of any enquiry was made after them, At
last, one of the Knights that the King of Persia had privily sent forth in
their search, chanced to come into the Plains where the Shepherds son was
keeping his Sheep, to whom he said: Shepherd, did thou not see a Damzell
lately pass by this way? Not I answered he: Why, what Damzell is it you ask
for* The Knight either by his countenance, or ^tuttering in his answer,
supposing it might be he had seen her, said: It is a Friend of mine that I
esteem dearly; She promised me I should hear of her hereabout, but my
fortune has not yet been so good, I cannot tell (said the Shepherd) it may be
my father can tell you, who dwells hard by yonder thicket. The Knight with
that left him, and rode to the Shepherds house, where he alighting, entered
without calling, and found the Shepherd, his Wife, Persicles, and Constantia,
all together: and presently knowing Constantia, he said; Lady Constantia, the
King your Father makes great lamentation for your absence at the Court. With
that they knew they were betrayed, and she with fear and grief, fell down in
a trance: Whom with much ado they recoue^ed. My Friend (quoth Persicles) thou
art either very unmannerly, or thy Authority is great, that thou intrudest thy
self into our company. Do thou know that this is Constantia? Then where is
thy reverence to her* Were it not for disquieting her, that is already
distempered with thy presence, thou should find cold entertainment.

The Knight being much grieved to see Constantia so disquieted, said: I am
sorry my presence has troubled her, which was contrary to my mind; for be it
far from my thought to work hec disquiet: the King of Persia missing her,
has sent out diverse besides my self to seek her, with Commandment to bring
her back to the Court, and amongst the rest, you see it is fallen to my lot to
perform it; yet such regard do I bear unto her, that I will not do any
thing disagreeing to her honorable mind. Constantia hearing his speeches,
said; What is your name? My name (said he) is Pisor. Art thou of Assyria
(quoth Persicles) and one of the Knights belonging to Piera? I am said he. Then
I fear not but thou bear a Knightly mind, and wilt rather conceal this
Ladies being here, then betray her, by carrying her back: If not (for her own
sake) yet for Persicles thy King, whom she loves; and thou should obey.
Were it (quoth he) to venture my life for my Prince, I would most willingly do
it, and if the Lady loves him, and for that has left the Court, I will hazard
my life in her defense: and to my uttermost power procure her hearts desire.
Then know Pisor, that Persicles hears thy kind speeches and has not sailed
in his kind opinion of thy virtues; For I am he, though thus disguised. With
that Pisor knew him, and humbled himself with great reverence unto him on his
knee.

Persicles rising up embraced him, telling him that he came in a most fortunate
hour to do him pleasure. Constantia with this, was comforted again, and
forget her former passion and fear. The old Shepherd and his wife were half
amazed, until Persicles said: Father, be not any way disquieted with my
knowledge; for though I am King of Assyria, I am thy Ghest, and will for thy
kindness reward thee liberally; desiring thee not to discover me to any; For
if thou should, it might hazard this Ladies life and mine, that are now in
thy hands. With that, they both kneeled down, vowing that nothing should make
them so disloyal. Then he said to Pisor, of old experience I know thou love
me, and therefore I make no question of thy Fidelity, or doubt that thou will
undertake any thing to pleasure me. Therefore I would have thee (with as much
have as might be) to Post into Assyria unto Parenus and Thrureus, whom I left
my substitutes, and to them make my estate known, telling them that my desire
is, that they come to me into this place, with a sufficient number of Horsemen
to Guard me, and the Princess Constantia home; but to let none know their
intent, which I take is the best course for our safety; For if we should seek
other means by travel, Constantia is not able to endure it; which also might
be a means to discover us, so many being abroad in our search. Pisor presently
obeyed him, and taking his leave, departed onwards on his Journey, leaving
Persicles and Constantia in the Shepherds cottage.

CHAP. VI. How Helyon was in love with Selia, and hearing of his Fathers
sickness obtained leave to depart. And of the Desolation that was befallen in
Assiria by the treason of Duke Oretus.
NOw Helyon remembering the pleasure he had with his Country Lover, desired
much to see her again; with whom he was more deeply in Love, then ever he was
with Constantia: for the Love he before bare to her, was turned to hatred: and
the cause of his importunacie to the King to have her found, was with a
malicious disposition of Revenge, not of any Honorable inclination, being of
such variable and inconstant Nature, that the least occasion altered his
wavering mind, either to love or hatred: Which was unfit for a man of so great
a birth as he derived himself from. And now having past many days coloring
his pretense under the shadow of fained sorrow, he longed to visit his Lover
Selia. Therefore finding a time fit for his intent, he with his Servant Aldrus
rode thither. At his coming, finding Selia again clothed in her Country
Weeds. Who espying him, with a modest blush came to meet him: Whom he
embraced most kindly in his arms, asking her how she fared? My Lord (said she)
your Handmayd rejoices to see your worthy person in this homely Cottage, whose
heart can attain no quiet, but by your remembrance. By this time her Parents
were come in, who seeing the Prince did him humble reverence: He like wise
saluting them with great courtesy. When he had stayed there most part of the
day in private conference with his Love, he departed: The next day repairing
thither again. Which he like wise did for many days after.

In the end, growing to such extremity of passion, that he told Selia, he would
Marry her: And withal, made her Parents acquainted therewith, who willingly
gave their consent thereto, and by this means he enjoyed her company of all
times according to his desire.

In this sort did he visit her many days, doting exceedingly on his Country
Selia, thinking no Lady in the Court comparable unto her, and like wise
dissembling exceeding grief for Constantia, so that the King highly commended
his Constancy, esteeming him the more for not altering his mind. Within few
days, News was ^^ought to the Persian Court, that the King of Arabia was very
sick: which caused Helyon to desire the King of Persia's consent to his
departure; which he granted: First having received his faithful Oath to marry
Constantia, which he swear to perform at his return.

Most of the Knights that went in search of Constantia were returned, not one
of them bringing news of her: Which drove the King into such a rage, that he
seemed quite bereft of sense, causing them to make more open enquiry, and to
promise great Reward to those that could tell of her.

By this time likewise Pisor had been in Assyria, and again returned to the
Shepherds house: Whom Persicles welcomed, as glad that he was so soon
returned. But Pisors countenance bewrayed some ill News, which Persicles soon
perceived: and being unwilling Constantia should hear ought that might breed
in her any di^content, walked aside with him into the Thicket of a Wood hard by
the house, where Pisor said: My Lord, I have a Tragic discourse to reveal,
that makes my heart melt to think thereof, which I would had not been my ill
Fortune to have brought you news of.

At my coming into Assyria, I passed many miles before I found an Assyrian to
converse withal: For that the Towns and Villages which before were repleat
with store of Inhabitants, were now consumed by Fire, and not a house standing
alone, but was dispoyled, and the people from their dwellings fled away, which
caused me make the more have: hoping that all was not destroyed. And coming
more near the Court, in my way I found the bodies of the Assyrians lying dead,
and confusedly strowed upon the Earth, as i^ some battle had been lately
fought in that place: Those which lay dead, seeming to have fled to save their
lives. And the farther I past, ^he more did the number increase: which I
followed so long, that I was persuaded, those that destroyed them were not
far off but yet went so far before me, that I could not overtake them, for
the boys of some were not yet cold, and others lay struggling to over ma^ter
Death. Where with I was so amazed, that I set spurs to my Steeds sides and
rode withal the have I could, until at last I espied ^ mighty Army of
Soldiers right before me, upon the Mount Silo, whose multitude seemed to be
innumerable. Near unto which, I was no sooner come, but I espied an Assyrian
wounded grievously, ^o whom I drew nigh, and soon knew him to be Parenus, and
dis^overing my self unto him, desired him to tell me what Treason had ^rought
him to that dangerous estate. With that he knowing me, ^ayd.

Pisor, such misery is befalne us Assyrians, as we shall be a re^roach and
scandal to all the World: Which I would repeat, but before that I can make an
end, Death will stop my speech; therefore first tell me how my Lady Piera
fares?

Noble Duke (said I) she is in good health, and in great prosperity. I rejoice
thereat (quoth he) though I have otherwise everlasting cause to sorrow. For our
Sovereign Lord the King, after he had put the Armenians to flight, was very
desirous upon some occasion (as yet unknown) to leave the Court, in his
absence committing the Government thereof to my unhappy self, and that noble
Knight Thrureus, which we performed with great quiet: until Duke Oretus, one
that was never true to the State, hearing of the Kings departure, which we
could by no means conceal, raised a false report, that we had murdered the
King: Which rumor moved the Common people to such disquiet, that they began to
Rebel: Which he perceiving (aiming thereby to win the Crown) gathered a
great multitude of them together, with pretense of revenge against us, which
when we heard of, with all the have we could possible, we Mustered men for our
defense; but so eager were the multitude to our destruction, together with
Oretus his persuasions, that before we were any way able to resist them, they
set upon us, and shed a great number of their own Country men's blood, that
stood in our defense, and drove us to immure our selves within the City. The
King of Armenia hearing of this Rebellion, with great speed brought a mighty
great Army into this Land, destroying all that came in his way, burning both
Towns and Cities, and destroying the common people with an exceeding great
Slaughter. Which came to Oretus hearing, with such terror, that he presently
fled, and left his Confederate Rebels to be destroyed by the Enemy: Which
caused us by a Herald to demand whether they would submit themselves to us or
no? Or by their treason to see their Countries ruin? With that they yielded,
and we gathered all the Forces we could to resist the enemies, with whom we
fought three great Battles, and in the same lost above thirty thousand
Assyrians, being driven to flight: This day again gathering head to resist
them; but being too few in number, in respect of their strength and multitude,
you see how our bodies be scattered upon the Earth, mangled and cut in pieces:
My self being I think, the last that lives to tell this news. For the Noble
Thrureus is already slain, whose deeds of Valor would contain a great
volume: Which news when our King shall hear, it will no doubt cut off his
virtuous life with sorrow. My greatest grief being that I cannot hear of his
safety before my death. My Lord, said I, our gracious King is living, and in
good health in Persia, who sent me unto your Honor, and Thrureus, with a
secret Message which I need not now unfold. Yes good Pisor, (quoth he) let me
hear my Lords Message, that I may thereby know whether I were still in his
favor or no. With that I unfolded the cause of my coming: Which heard, such a
passion of discontent overcame his vital spirits, that with many bitter
groans he gave up the ghost. When I saw there was no means for his recovery,
I departed, to enquire what slaughter the Enemy had made, who by that time the
day was ended, had vanquished the Assyrian forces, taking the City and most of
the Nobility Prisoners. I stayed some four days, hiding me secretly to bring
you certain News, which is this. The King of Armenia compelled the Noblemen
to swear Allegiance unto Palyon his eldest Son, whom he has crowned King in
Assyria, and left a mighty Army for his defense. When I understood this, I
returned to certify your Highness thereof.

CHAP. VII. How Persicles hearing the news by Pisor, he departed into a
solitary place, and thereby caused the unfortunate separation between him and
Constantia, who in great sorrow wandering to seek him, was found by Helyon, and
carried into Arabia. And of the many sorrows Persicles endured for her
absence. How Pisor became frantic.
PErsicles his heart was overcome with such sorrow to hear Pisors heavy News,
that he had much ado to contain himself from extreme madness; that he
minded a while to withdraw himself to utter his plaints in those solitary
walks; but seeing Pisor follow him, he desired him to return to the ^hepheards
house, and in no case to acquaint Constantia with these misfortunes. But if she
asked for him, he should tell her he would come presently.

Pisor being departed, he sought for the most unfrequented ^lace of the Wood,
wandering long in that discontent, but could find none agreeable to his mind:
neither knowing whether he went, nor almost what ^e intended: his senses being
dulled with such passionate vexation, continuing so long therein, that he spent
longer time in seeking out a place of rest, then he was aware off, which turned
to his greater v^rest, as afterward it fell out. For Constantia marvelling
that he stayed so long, and withal noting Pisors darkened countenance,
supposed some ill news was the cause of both, finding occasion fit, thought to
find her Love in the midst of his dumps, and with her amiable presence to
comfort him, stole from the Cottage into the Wood, where Pisor told her that he
had left him: Where she wandered up and down a great while, not finding him,
which made her marvel, sometimes call^ng him* but not by his right name, least
any should hear her: and finding that means to prevail nothing, she began to
enter into many doubtful thoughts; sometimes calling his Loyalty in question,
then again, reproving her fancies, for entering into suspicion of him, then
thinking some ill news was befalne in Assyria, which might drive him into a
careless desperation, and also fearing tha^ some of the Persian Knights had
met with him, and finding some likelihood of suspicion in him, had carried him
to the King her Father. These Meditations possessed her mind so long, and wrought
such a terror in her fancies, that she fared like one that had been possessed
with the truth, that it was so. Thus did they both continue most part of that
day, she seeking him, and he oppressed with care, not remembering that it was time
to return home, yet both of them directing their steps a contrary way, that
they met not, but wandered a way from one another. At last, he began to remember
where he was, how long he had been absent, and what care she would take for
his absence, which caused him with as much speed to have back, as with
carelessness he had wandered up and down, which before he could at^ain, it grew
to be toward Night. Pisor likewise marvelling at his long stay, and at
Constantiaes sudden departure, fearing that some ill might betide him, and some
extraordinary care oppress her, left the Cottage to find him, and if he could
meet her, to direct her to the place where he left him.

When Persicles found them both absent, he marvelled thereat: enquiring of the
old Woman when they departed: who told him that Constantia went first out, and
he after her. Which made him think, that she missing him so long, might go to
seek him: and Pisor followed her, thinking to direct her, least she should
wander astray, as she might well do in those unfrequented places. But when he
had a long time continued in those dumps, and saw neither of them return, he
began to enter into many misdoubts, such as proceed from the unquiet motions of
distempered thoughts: being fearful to depart thence again, least he might
so miss them.

Pisor being entered the Wood, came to the place where he had left Persicles,
but could neither find him there, nor Constantia, which made him wander up and
down so long, that he was weary: At last coming to a shady place, and laying
himself down to rest, casting up his eyes, espied most beautiful fruit upon
a Tree, hanging right over his head: The sight whereof pleased him so well,
that plucking some of the same, he found the taste pleasant, which caused him
to eat many of them; which made him presently to fall into a deadly sleep.
The name of the Fruit is called Pilos, the nature whereof is, to procure those
that taste thereof, first to sleep, without a waking, for the space of four
and twenty hours, and after to become Frantic, for the space of three
Months, which hindered Pisor from returning.

When Persicles had stayed so long expecting their return, vn^ill it began to
be dark, he again went out, telling the Shepherd that he was going to seek
them; cruel Fortune directing his ^teps directly to the place whereas Pisor
lay sleeping, whom he be^eld, and neither by calling, nor by any other means
could awake ^im: a deadly fear possessed his Fancy, that some furious Beast had
^laine him, and either devoured Constantia, or pursued her, flying from him;
Which caused him like a Frantic man to draw forth ^isors Sword, running up
and down to seek that which was not here to be found.

Constantia by this time was wandered so far in search of Per^^cles, that she
could by no means tell which way to return a^aine, but she was constrained
all that night to wander up and down, ^ith hope to have returned. But contrary
to her thought, going a quite contrary way, her fear and care causing her to
make the more speed; that being wearied with travel, coming to the outside
of the Wood, she sat down upon a Bancke, and there after she had bewailed her
miserable estate, and wearied her senses with sorrow, as she had her body with
travel, she fell asleep.

Now it so fell out, that Helyon the day before, had taken his leave of the
King of Persia, to travel into Arabia, and that Night lay at Seliaes Fathers,
causing her to be attyred in rich Ornaments, that morning carried her with him
into Arabia, intending there to make her his Bride: and by misfortune, past by
the place where Constantia lay fast asleep; some of his followers soon espied
her, and ^hewed her to Helyon. Selia likewise seeing her, presently told Helyon
that her Apparel was either the same which Constantiaes Gentlewoman took from
her in the Persian Court or so like it, that she could not know one from the
other. Helyon himself rode to her and awaked her, by his former disposition
and her Countenance, which was still in his remembrance, perfectly knowing her.
She likewise at the very first sight knowing him, which amated her senses with
deadly fear. To whom he said; My dear Constantia, what has caused you thus
discourteously to reject my Love, and leave the Persian Court, to endure this
hard Fortune, so much disagreeing to your estate? Yet at length I beseech you
accept of my Love, and go with me into Arabia.

Leave off your dissembling speeches (quoth Constantia) and let me alone; for I
had rather all my life lie on this cold Earth, then live in all ease with you.
With that she would have left him, but he commanded his Servants to take her by
force into the Coach, and so carry her along with him into Arabia, not letting
any know what she was but only his Selia. When Constantia saw that of force
she must needs go, she uttered such plaints and made such sorrowful
exclamations, that those which guarded her, thought she would have fallen mad;
though neither knowing her, nor her cause of sorrow, yet inwardly in their
hearts pitying her.

Whom we will leave, fully possessed with the uttermost extremity of anguish
onwards toward Arabia, the place she most of all loathed, to speak of
Persicles who in a mad fury having run up and down a great while in the
Wood, again returned into the Shepherds house, see if Constantia were not yet
returned, but there he found only the Shepherd and his Wife in great care,
awayting his return: who espying the Sword in his hand, and his face and hands
in many places bloody, which was with the scratches he had received in the
dark Wood, were ready to run from him for fear: but he mildly demanded if
Constantia were yet come back, who told him they saw her not? Alas ( quoth he)
poor Lady, I fear she is devoured by some merciless Beast: For I found Pisor
lying dead in the Wood: Which affrighteth me with such fear of her mishap,
that I know not what to do, nor which way to go in her search.

My Lord (said the old Shepherd) I can assure you, there does no Wild Beast
haun^^^ is Wood, for then could not my flocks feed in quiet: of which I have
not lost one Lamb by any casualtie: but rather I think my Lady missing you
all the day, is wandered so far into the Wood, that she cannot return, nor
you find her: whom I do not doubt but to find in the Morning: neither is he
dead, but I believe has tasted some of our unlucky fruit called Pylos, that
has cast him into a dead sleep, and after that he will be Frantic for a
certain space.

Persicles was wonderfully comforted with the Shepherds speeches, yet
notwithstanding leaving him, and all that Night wandering up and down the Wood
to find her, but he spent his labor in vain, neither that night nor the next
day finding her, which drove him so far beyond the compass of natural
continency, that if he remained long in that extreme perplexity, it would cut
off his life. When he saw himself void of all hope, without means how to
find her, and assurance that she was not within the Wood, he laid him down
upon the earth, uttering these laments. How fortunate had I been had I never
set foot in the Persian soil? then had I still bin King of Assyria, and
Constantia in quiet in her Fathers Court: whereas now, both I, but especially
her self, are fallen into extreme misery. Had it only fallen to my share to
have endured a thousand more misfortunes, I could with patience have endured
them: only this tormenteth me, that my misfortune has brought her from Weal
to we: from quiet to discontent: from pleasure, to pain: from happiness to
misery, and from life to death, I cannot tell how to prevent these evils, to
sit here, and utter sad words avails me not: to bewail her estate, helps
her: nor to destroy my self, will benefit her: should I sit still here, so
shall I never find her: and to seek for her out of this place, is to spend my
Labors without hope of comfort. For I fear me she is dead, and then may I
sooner meet her Ghost in this place, then her Body in another. Well, since
neither comfort nor counsel is left to further my hopes, I will forever dwell
in this unfortunate place, and fill the same with my Laments: neither shall my
body rest in bed, nor my stomach taste of other meat then wild fruit, until
I find my Love, or be assured of the place of her abode.

Thus lived he in those Woods many days, and many years, making every Tree a
monument of Constantias v^^^^tunate loss, though he were often dissuaded by
Pisor, who afterward traveled most parts of all those Countries in search of
her, but could never hear of her. The King of Persia had likewise given over
all care of Constantia, as supposing her to be dead: greatly lamenting the
misfortunes of Persicles, and maruelling at his absence, believing verily that
he was murdered, according to the accusation made by Oretus, against Parenus
and Thrureus. Whom we will all leave for a while, to speak of the misfortunes
befell to Constantia.

CHAP. VIII. How Selia was married to Helyon, and of the miseries Constantia
endured by her jealousy. How Constantia was delivered of a goodly Boy: whose
life was preserved by the policy of Palia, and how Selia vexed thereat.
HElyon was no sooner arrived in Arabia, but he was informed of his Fathers
death, which for a time he lamented of common course, not of piety or
affection: in the mean time, causing Constantia to be kept in the old
Monastery under the government of an ancient Lady, that lived not only by
the gifts of the King bestowed upon her, for many badde actions, but also of
many Gentlemen that hau^^ed the Company of the Kings Concubines by stealth. In
this place did he put Constantia, neither her Keeper, nor any other knowing
what she was: Who by this time had ^esolued to endure adversity, for many days
giving her self to quiet, for that by reason of his counterfeit mourning, he
came not at her.

But the time being come that he was crowned King, and on the same day likewise
married Selia, causing poor Constantia as one of her Handmaides to attend her:
Which he did of a malicious intent* only to vex her: but she was well
contented to do any thing to rid her of his hateful Love, whom she abhorred
in the very depth of her Soul. But when he saw she endured the same with such
patience, he again caused her to be closely kept in that Monastery, giving
commandment that none but the old Lady named Palia, should come at her.

Thus did she continue, until she began to feel her self with Child by
Persicles, which drove her to the uttermost exigent of care, how to preserve
her Infants life; Sometimes purposing to make her estate known to Palia, but
having sufficient trial of her wicked disposition, she durst not trust her,
least she should reveal the same to the King.

Selia like wise at that very instant was great with Child by Helyon, both
conceiving at one instant, the one in the Persian Court, and the other in the
Shepherds cottage. Selia made Helyon acquainted therewith, desiring that she
might be delivered thereof in some private place, where the Ladies of the Court
might not know thereof, which would turn to her everlasting scandal.

Helyon well knowing the nature of the people, in what detestable sort they
held adultery in their Queen, thought no place so fit for the accomplishment
thereof, as in the Monastery where Constanti^ was, unto which place she was
soon conveyed: report being given out by the Kings command, that she was for
the preservation of her health, secretly departed into the Country.

The Queen being come into the Monastery, asked for Constantia, who was
presently brought before her, whom Selia now began to hate mortally, being very
Jealous of her, and supposing that the King still Loved her: wh^^ she used so
disdainfully vpbrayding her with many indecent speeches. Which Constantia took
most patiently, only with Tears lamenting her misfortunes. And so proudly and
scornefully did she behave her self toward Palia, and all that attended her,
that they began to dislike of her.

Palia seeing the pride of the Queen, and in what disdainful sort* she used
her, accusing her to be privy to the Kings secret love to Constantia using her
so distrustfully, and with such evil terms, began to hate her. Which
Constantia perceived by some doubtful speeches she gave out against her.
Whereupon, finding a fit opportunity, when she was vexed with her unkindness,
she came to Palia, and said: I perceive the Queen uses you but unkindly,
regarding to use none well, though they give her no cause at all. She likewise
misuseth me, that never in my life offended her, but have been the greatest
cause of her good, I would gladly entreat your aid, and withal reveal many
things unto you, that you yet know not, if I were assured of your secrecy:
which I am the more fearful to reveal, for that they are matters of
importance, wherein notwithstanding if you would vouchsafe your assistance to
pity my miserable estate, you shall do a deed of everlasting merit.

Palia hearing her speeches, said: if I may likewise without fear make my
mind known unto you, be your assured I do so mortally hate her, that
rewards my dutiful service with disdain, that I will not leave any thing
unattempted to vex her, and pleasure you: therefore if an Oath may assure you
of my secrecy, having no other means at this instant to give proof thereof, I
vow by all the good I ever expect, never to reveal what you disclose to me,
but most faithfully labor to pleasure you to my power. Then know ( quoth
Constantia) that I am Daughter to the King of Persia, sometimes brought up in
this Court: and your Queen but the Daughter of a Countrey-Swaine in Persia,
that being exalted to dignity, though basely borne, behaueth her self thus
proudly: I fearing my Father would have married me to Helyon against my will,
having betrothed my self to the King of Assyria, with him stole from the Court
in this Apparel of Selia, that is now your Queen: much search was made for
me, but they could never find me: for I lived with my Lord in this disguise in
a Shepherds house, until one day I missing him strayed so far from the
House, that I could not return, but by misfortune was found by Helyon, and
thus as you see brought into this Country, either to my death or to a worser
end. I am likewise great with Child, and within short space shall be delivered.
My earnest desire is, that you would use some means to preserve my Babe from
death, which no doubt it is likely to endure by her malice and his cruelty.

Palia having heard her Speeches, Reverenced her comforted her, and promised
her with many Vows and Protestations, to fulfill her desire thereby to work
some revenge against the Queen. In her heart pitying the distress of
Constantia, of whose Virtues she had before times some knowledge. With this
Promise did Constantia somewhat comfort her self, hoping yet in the end to
escape from that Bondage, being daily cherished by old Palia: who behaved her
self toward Selia, with such duty and obedience, notwithstanding her often
vpbraydings, that she still kept her self in most place of credit about her.

The day being now come that the Queen was delivered of a goodly Boy, and
Constantia the next Night of another, none being privy thereto but Palia, who
handled the matter with such cunning, that she conveyed Constantiaes Child to
Selia, and hers to Constantia, making her acquainted with her intent therein.
The next day declaring to Helyon, how that the Damzell in her custody was
delivered of a Boy. Helyon hearing that, willing her to keep the same secret
from any, upon pain of death: Not so much as once to reveal it to the Queen,
vowing ere many days to destroy it. Giving Order to have his own Christened,
naming him Perus: And coming to the Queen, told her it were best to be Nursed
in the Country, who was contented to be ruled by him. Then calling to him
Palia, he told her, that she must needs provide a Nurse for his Son, who
already having complotted what she intended, told him that she knew a
kins-woman of hers, that was lately brought to Bed, some twenty miles off in
the Country, to whom she would (if it liked him) convey the Infant.

Helyon was glad of her promise, appointing her all things fit for her
departure, the next morning. Late in the Evening, when Palia was sure none
could see her, she went to Constantia, telling her what she had intended:
Withal, asking her counsel what he should do.

Aye me, (quoth Constantia) I know not in this extremity what to resolve upon,
fearing never to see my Son again: and if thou go I loose my greatest
comfort. Then taking the Chiloc in her arms, and bestowing many Teare-wet
kisses thereon, she said Palia, I pray thee let me know what thou intendest to
do with it? Lady (quoth she) if you persuade me not to the contrary, after I
am departed this Court, I will never leave traveling until I arrive in
Assyria: where I do not doubt but to find Persicles, unto whom I will declare
your misfortunes: But if I find him not there, I will then Travel into
Persia, to the place where you lost him, where I shall then assuredly find him:
that he (knowing your estate) may seek to release you. And will thou do this
for in (said Constantia) that am never likely to make thee amends? I will ( quoth
Palia) and with such faithfulness execute the charge I undertake, as shall
turn to thy everlasting quiet.

Many speeches past betwixt them before they parted, but yet in the end she
was constrained to leave Constantia, almost dead with grief, but afterward
somewhat comforted, with the good hope she had of her faithful dealing: Of two
evils thinking it the best to commit the Babe to her custody, who by all
likelyhoods intended well thereto. Early the next Morning Palia departed,
having none in her Company, with all the have she could traveling toward
Assyria.

Helyon now began to meditate on Constantiaes Fortune, and who should be the
Father of her Child: and whereas before he determined to pen her up in that
Cloister, until she would yield to his desire, he now resolved to revenge the
disdain she had shown, in refusing his Love, with all Cruelty: that finding
occasion when none could interrupt his speeches, being alone with her in her
chamber, he thus said. Disdainefull and discourteous Lady, did you esteem so
basely of my Love, in my contempt, to choose some baseborne Peasant, to
possess that which I long sought with such devoted affection: and refusing my
Honorable proffer, to choose rather to become another Harlot. Who would ever
have thought thy comely person shadowed with so fair a pretext, had inwardly
nourished such ignoble affections. Do you think the King of Persia will
rejoice to hear that his fair Daughter Constantia, (that may well be termed
Incontinency) has so vildly stained her Princely blood and defamed her Royal
stock, with so infamous a fact, or not rather dye with grief.

Therefore to prevent so great a mischief as will come by his death, I will be
the mean to keep thy fact from coming to his knowledge, and in his behalf,
work such Revenge as shall be agreeable to so great an offense. Yet let me
know the cause of thy contempt against me, and who is the Father of thy
bastard? Which if thou refusest to do by gentle means to unfold, I will by
force compel thee thereunto.

Constantia with Patience heard out his speeches, and with as great Patience
answered him. Helyon, I can well bear your Opprobrious speeches, neither will
I impugn how scandalous they are: For the Father of this Infant is as good as
your self, and him I Love, far more honorable and virtuous then Helyon,
King of Arabia, who ensureth me according to the quality of his own
disposition. The reason I left my Fathers Court, was to avoid your importunate
suite, which was unpleasing to me, in respect of the honorable Love I embraced:
therefore beware you abuse not Constantia. For though the King of Persia will
not revenge my wrongs, yet there is a King as mighty as he, claymeth my
possession, and will not suffer me to be injured.

What? is a King the Father of that Bastard ( quoth he?) No thou shall never
persuade me to that, for it looks not like a King, but is the perfect Image
of a Fool. Yea (said Constantia,) and yet a King as wise as thy self, and
that ere long thou shall know, for the Father thereof is privy to all thy
Actions, although thou think me safely kept.

And if thou do murder it, I care not, for thy self will be the first that
shall repent the deed. And for me, use me well, for the Father of this Child
loves thee well, and yet thou will be thine own destruction in seeking his
death.

Helyon understood not her meaning, maruelling who it should be she meant, that
he said: I think thou art mad, or counterfeytest some deceyt by the
ambiguity of thy speeches: for how can the Father of that Brat love me? Or what
cause should there be to make me repent any thing that I should do to it:
Which the rather shall suffer my wrath, because of thy derisions: Therefore
resolve me, or be assured of my everlasting hatred. I neither (said she) regard
thee, nor thy hate: utterly denying to fulfill thy request in any respect. Yet
if thou had not demanded it, I would peradventure have told it thee: Do the
worst thou can, I care not for misery, it self has made me so resolute to
endure the greatest extremity. And know, that I so much the more dislike this
Babe, because it is like thee, that has no spark of honor or honesty in
thee. Ask me no more questions, for I will not answer thereto, esteeming my
self more fortunate in thy hatred, then thy friendship: for the one is but ye
distemperate motion of a Cowardly disposition, and the other, the inconstant
falsehood of a shallow-Wit.

Helyon was much vexed to see how lightly she esteemed him that almost ready to
tear his hair, he went raging and swearing from her, meditating which way to
work hi^ Revenge. Selia noting his distemperature, by his pale Countenance,
asked him what had disquieted him? To whom he gave no answer at all, casting a
scornful look toward her; which she took in such suspicious sort, that she
presently supposed he did it in scorn of her, and her heart being puffed up full
of Jealousy, could not detain it self, from bursting forth into Tears, and
then into these speeches.

My Lord, I now perceive the Love you protested to bear me, is altered, and I
like a poor Cast away, like to live in misery: would to God I had still lived
in my contented estate in Persia, then should I not have been subject to these
misfortunes. Constantia whom you tol^e me loved you not, is she that has
stolen away your Affection, and on her you dote, despising me: wherein you show
the inconstancy of your variable disposition: besides, she has disclosed what
I am, and that makes me be scorned and despised of the Ladies of this Court,
that the misery I am like to endure, is intolerable. Do not (said he)
disquiet your self with the least suppose of such alteration in me: for by
Heaven I vow, I love none but your self: the cause of my vexation is, how to
revenge my self on Constantia, that even now has used me with approbrious
terms. Besides, she is brought to Bed of a Bastard, begotten of some
base-borne Peasant, which shall not live long to vex me. I would I had left
her in Persia, so have been devoured by wild beasts, rather then pitying
her, for to work my self this disquiet. Should I send word to the King of
Persia, he would compel me to marry her, or else bring open War against my
Kingdom: or if I should seek her death, the knowledge thereof would by some
means come to his hearing, and then would he seek revenge against me: that in
this extremity, I know not which way to rid my self from her. Selia, hearing
him say she had a Bastard, presently began to suspect it was his: which she
would then have uttered, but that fear and premeditated hope of revenge
against Constantia, withheld her, thinking first to learn the truth before she
would offend him: perceiving his inconstant disposition to be such, that the
least thing altered his Love: deferring the same until her Month was ended,
by which means Constantia rested void of disturbance. The flame of envious
suspicion, burnt so furiously in her breast, that as soon as she had forsaken
the Monastery, and had a while with all kindness behaved her self toward the
Nobles and Ladies of most estimation, thereby to insinuate into their good
opinion, she came to Constantia fawning upon her with an affable countenance,
and using many speeches of courtesy toward her, with intent to lift out the
truth of her suspicion. Helyon, hearing that she was in the Monastery, fearing
she would have done Constantia some violence, followed her, and found her in
quiet conference with her. Selia seeing him there, was half astonished,
supposing he had not known thereof: and withal, now of a truth suspecting
that he came to visit Constantia of Love, and not to seek her: again burst
forth into tears, whereon he took occasion to say, Selia, I perceive
suspicion is the cause of your disquiet: Therefore so show what little cause
you have to use me so, do but say what I shall do to this dishonorable Lady,
and I will perform it. Constantia then began to fear some mischief was near
her, which might easily have been perceived by the often change of her
countenance: who made this reply. Helyon, if thy Queen knew how much I
disdained thee, such motions of suspect for me, would not disquiet her* For I
contemn the base dispositions, which is ready to alter with the ^last of every
inconstant wind, Or Selia do thou think that my mind will stoop to his
base lust, or become Concubine to so degenerate a wretch, and to thy Husband?
No, I will rather see thy body forne into pieces, and suffer the cruellest
misery in the World: he threatened me with terrible speeches, but his Cowards
heart is not of courage to execute his detested will. Therefore thou that
peradventure art of a more hardy and inhumane disposition, come to encourage
him to mischief: do the worst you can both, for I fear you not, but would
gladly be rid out of this miserable life. And rid thou shall soon be (said
Selia) notwithstanding thy counterfeit dissimulation, thinking with disdainful
speeches to color thy wickedness: I am indeed come to be revenged on thee,
that crossest my content, and first shall that Bastard feel the smart of my
wrath: then catching the Child out of the cradle where it lay, she held the
same by the Heels in the one hand, and the knife in the other, ready to
deprive it of life, until Helyon withheld her, and Constantia said, Nay, Let
her murder it, and let herself be the first that will repent it: yet first
view it well, and see if it resemble not the Father that stands by: I assure
thee it is his, and that thou shall soon know.

Out upon thee (said Helyon) I defy thee. With that Selia viewed it well, and
perceived that it resembled him perfectly, wherewith she cast the same on the
Earth, saying: Did you bring me hither to do me this intolerable wrong,?
Shall I suffer my self to be thus abused, and live to endure perpetual
discontent? The Peers of this Land shall understand the wrongs I sustain, and
if none else, mine own hands shall work revenge. Constantia, then said Selia,
take up the Infant, and cherish it, for it is thine own: My child by this time
is conveyed far enough from thy power, by Palia, who pitying my distress,
and scorning to be subject to the base Pride, has enterchanged one for the
other, leaving thine with me, and carrying my Infant into Assyria, unto the
King Persicles, who is Father thereof, who I do not doubt, will soon revenge
the wrong is done to me: Neither do thou jealously suspect me for that
degenerate K. thy Husband: for she that is Daughter to the King of Persia,
scorneth to be thy Corriuall: if I had dealt unfaithfully with him, then might
he worthily have inflicted this punishment upon me: but his own Conscience
knows I always refused to yield to love him, my Love being before vowed to
the King of Assyria. Both of them were amazed at her speeches. Selia with haste
taking up her son, that lay sprawling at her feet, almost half dead with
crying: an^ ^^lyon after a deep study, saying: Constantia, I perceive thou
know not how unable the King of Assyria is to redeem thee from hence, being
lately dispossessed of his Crown by the King of Armenia, and by the Treason of
his own Subjects, being himself driven to live in obscurity. Therefore this
will I do in satisfaction of my mind against thee: thou shall never depart
from hence, but in this Cloister end thy life, unless the most valiantest
Knight in the world redeem thee: for such a sure Guard will I set over thee,
as shall be overcome by none. Constantia was no whit grieved to hear that
Doom of her Imprisonment, but only the suspect she had of his speeches of
Persicles, overcame her heart with such fear, that she fell down into a
deadly trance: Those that were about her, having much ado to recover her.
Wherewith they left her: Helyon giving command that most diligent search should
be made for Palia, through the whole Country of Arabia.

CHAP. IX. How Helyon built an Enchanted Tower, and put Constantia therein. How
he was imprisoned therein himself in great misery, by the Enchantresse Ila.
WIthin few Days after, Helyon purposing to effect that which he had Vowed,
calling all the cunningest Workmen of his Land before him, asking their
advice, about building a Castle of invincible strength, which they promised him
to perform: and so began to Work, scituating the same upon a Rocky hill of
exceeding largeness, that was encompassed with a Lake of exceeding depth.
First encompassing the circuit of the ground, with a well framed of the hardest
Marble, of such smoothness, without, and height, that it was not to be
ascended. Over the Lake they fram^d a Bridge of exceeding beauty, placing at
the entrance two Porches or Fortifications betwixt them setting a Gate of
Brass, curiously wrought, with carved Images of Lions, being the Arms of
Arabia, On the midst they placed a Draw bridge, drawn upon such devices. as
the labor of one man was able to do the same with speed.

At the further end of the Bridge, was their builded a most curious wrought
Gate House, garnished with stones of sundry colors, and exceeding strange: The
entrance thereto was another Gate of Brass, far exceeding the first, for
beauty, bigness and strength, in the midst above the top thereof, were placed
in the carved form of six Golden Lions of exceeding bigness, whose
proportion might be discerned far off. Within this Porch was there a large
Court, encompassed round with Turrets, Walls, and Fortifications: within the
compass whereof, an Army of Soldiers might lie encamped. The next Entrance,
was three gates of Brass, carved like the other two: over which was built a
Tower of wonderful Beauty, and workmanship framed of Adamant, cut out and
carved into the form of sorts of Beasts, Trees, Herbs, and Fowls: the beauty
whereof, would have held the beholder in admiration: on the tops whereof, were
built four Pinacles in a Squadrant, whose glistering Veins and carved work,
shone against the Sun, as if the same had been framed of beaten Gold. Within
this Tower, was there a Court, encompassed round about with most rich and
stately Buildings, having several doors into every building of an invincible
strength, framed all of one proportion, gilded over with Gold. The Window of
an exceeding largenes and beauty: supported by two Lions of carved Allablaster,
gilded over with Gold: On the top next to the Eues two Cherubs standing in
form of Angels, of carved Gold, supporting the Picture of a beautiful Lady:
the Windows discovering the exceeding richness of the Chambers within. In the
midst of this Court, was framed a clear Fountain, with diverse streams of
water, springing from the same, curiously carved, and gilded over with Gold:
the brightness glistering such a reflection of the Suns beams round about,
that at the first entrance it would have dazeled the beholders eyes.

At the further end of this Court was there a Hall of exceeding largenes,
supported within, with Pillars of Geate, beset with stones of sundry colors,
and exceeding richness, the Skreene being framed of the most curious work of
carued-Wood: the Roof of Stone, wherein were colored out the forms of all
kinds of Fruits: the Walls hung with Rich-Hangings of Arras, containing the
Histories of the Wars of Troy. In the midst of this Hall, was fastened two
Pillars, where to were chained two Lions of huge bigness, and wonderful
strength, denying any farther Entrance. The farther end of the Hall, was
without any Wall at all, supported by Pillars of the same Geate, lying open
into a Garden of exceeding largeness, which at the first entrance into the
Hall was gloriously discerned. In which were made Walks for pleasure, Arbours,
borders of Flowers, the forms of all things cut out in Herbs: Flowers to
delight the Eye, please the smell, and of strange forms, and all things so
curiously wrought, as was strange to behold. In the midst of this Garden, stood
a Banqueting House of round proportion, the foundation supported by 4. Lions of
carved blew Stone called Airs: The Windows round about that encompassed the
same, through which the Light passed clearly without impediment: the Pillars,
Casements, and other proportions of such excellent workmanship, that it seemed
to be altogether framd of Crystal. On the top of this house stood the form
of an Angel framed of beaten Gold pointing with his finger toward the other
Lodgings of wonderful rich Building. At the farther end of the Garden, the
description whereon is hereafter set down. When Helyon had finished this work,
he called unto him, one called Penthrasus, an ancient professor of Necromancy,
and with him alone, went unto the Palace, she wing the same, and why he had
built it, desiring his Counsel and aid to the performance of his Will.

Penthrasus desirous likewise to practice his Art, which before he durst not
do, for by the Laws of the Land, the same was punished with death. Which now
he thought none durst contradict, because the King was consenting thereto:
Promised by his Art to make the same so invincible, that it should never be
overcome by strength nor policy. Then did he advise the King to bring
Constantia thither, and two Damzels to attend her, attyring her with most Rich
Ornaments. When the King had performed this, and delivered her to Penthrasus:
taking a Condition of him, that none but himself should be suffered to have
entrance there, he departed, leaving her there to be entertained of Penthrasus;
who led her into the Castle, appointing her Damzels where they should have all
things necessary: and withal, telling her that it should be many years before
she should be delivered. After he had placed her there, he began to cast
about for to Fortify the same: And first by his Art, he found that there lived
in the Desert of Arabia, two mighty Giants of unwonted proportion, and huge
strength, whom he found out, casting such a bewitched Charm upon them, that
they presently followed him unto the Castle, which he afterward named
Penthrasus Palace; by his Charms and Spells binding them to keep the first
entrance of the Bridge, and by his Sorceries guarding every entrance in such
strong sort, as it was impossible to be overcome. When he had performed every
thing according to his mind, he brought thither his Wife, named Ila,
determined to spend the rest of his life there. Within few years he fell
sick, and by his Art found the date of his life to be nigh an end. Whereupon
he went unto the Oracle of the Hesperian Nymphs in the Desert, which he was
stricktly enjoined unto by a Vision, which he saw in his sleep, to know what
he should determine as concerning those charm, she had set upon the Castle?
Whose answer was this:

Penthrasus, because by thine Art thou have not attempted any wickes Action,
and to disclose the Destinies, many a Knight of sundry strange Countries shall
hear of the beauty of Constantia, and shall come to try their Adventures to
set her at Liberty, but yet none shall perform it: neither shall it be
Revealed, that she is Daughter to the King of Persia; until she be released
by the valor of her own Son. The manner and means how, is as yet hidden
and vnrevealed: until which time. Ila shall live, and by our Directions
govern the Castle, until the Enchantments be ended. Penthrasus having
received his Answer, returned home, and within few days dyed.

Thus was Constantia enclosed, enjoying all the Delights her heart could
desire, but nothing could comfort her, but the Remembrance of Persicles, for
whose absence she lived in continual sorrow.

Helyon kept that which he had done concerning Constantia, from the knowledge
of Selia, determining never to see her again: but within short time, such
discord began betwixt him and Selia, that by means thereof, the whole Court
was in an uproar, and he found such disquiet with her, that then he began to
hate her, abandon her company, and began exceedingly to dote with remembrance
of Constantia: repenting him of the evil he had done her; and resolving again
to set her at Liberty, or else to obtain of Penthrasus, to live for ever with
her in the Castle; and by extraordinary means to attain her Love. And upon a
time he rode thither, determining to have a sight of her: Where when he came,
he found the Gate at y^ entrance of the Bridge fast shut, and nothing but a
horn hanging thereat, fastened to a Chain, which he Winded; and with that one
of the Giants came forth, with whose sight he stood affrighted till he asked
him what he sought? I would (said Helyon) speak with Penthrasus. With that the
Giant had him come in, and shutting fast the Entrance, brought him before Ila,
who presently knew him, saying: I know the cause of thy coming, which thou
shall never obtain: For which disloyal thought, and other ignoble deeds, thou
shall never depart from hence, until the Lady thou causedst to be enclosed
here, be set at Liberty: With that, not suffering him to reply, she caused him
to be bound, and carried into a dark Dungeon, where he was hardly Dyeted, and
worse entreated.

Ila having him in her custody, knowing that none else was privy to
Constantiaes being there, caused these Verses to be written in Letters of Gold,
and hung over the outtermost Gate, and by the same, Constantiaes Picture,
whereon she had cast such a Spell, that all that beheld it, were in Love with
it.

The Verses were these,
Within this Castle is enclosed
The Daughter of a King:
Whose Beauty caused a Traitor fell
Her from her Country bring.
Here must she bide, until a Knight
By Sword does set her Free:
And by his valor end the date,
Of crooked Destiny.
The World shall Fame him for that deed,
And great shall be his gain:
Her lasting Love shall he enjoy,
That rids her out of pain.
When Ila had written these Verses, and placed them under the picture, she
withdrew her self into the Castle, staying the coming of the first Knight for
the Adventure.

CHAP. X. What befell to Palia, how she was devoured by Wild Beasts. How the
young Infant was found by a Lady, who cherished him, and afterward named him
Mont^lion.
NOw returned we to speak of Palia, and what befell to the Infant. After she
had traveled out of Arabia, resolving with a faith^ull heart, to execute what
she had undertaken, and attained to the bounds of Assyria, she soon
understood those evil News of the Armenians victory: whereby she was
assured, it would be in vain to seek Persicles there: and therefore she
returned toward Persia, intending to follow Constantiaes directions to find
him: but being wearied with continual traveling, she sat herself down upon
a Mountain, standing in a vaste and Desolate place, on the top whereof, grew a
tuft of Trees that shadowed her from the heat of the Sun: where she had not
long rested, but the Boy fell fast asleep, and she being very hungry, began to
seek for Fruit, no other food being there to be gotten, leaving him upon the
Mount. Palia, wandering into the Thicket by misfortune was deuoures of a Lion:
and so the poor Infant left ready to be destroyed, but the Destenies that had
allotted him to better fortune, thus preserved him. Not far off, their dwelt
an ancient Knight named Cothanes, who with his Lady, the same day had been
Hunting, and now she being weary of the sport, with two servants in her
company, chanced to alight at the very place where the Babe lay: who by that
time awaked, and missing his Nurse began to cry. The Lady hearing the noise,
searched among the Trees, and presently found the Child, which she took up in
her arms, commanding one of her servants to take up a bundle of clothes that
lay by the same, and to (...) his Horn, that Cothanes hearing it, might come
unto them: Who according to her desire came, asking what was the matter? You
have (said she) all this day Hunted after Wild beasts, and lost your labor,
but I have found a richer Prize* yet by what misfortune left in this place I
know not: With that they both viewed the Child, well noting his exceeding
beauty, and sweet countenance, with great joy carrying him home,: by the way
naming him Montelyon: finding in the fardell many rich Jewels, and a fair
Embroydered Scarffe, whereby they knew him to be of no mean Birth: educating
him carefully, and after he was come to knowledge, teaching him many
commendable and virtuous qualities. When he came to the age of fourteen
years, Cothanes taught him how to Ride and manage a Horse, taking him forth
with him many times on Hunting, delighting wonderful in his forwardness.
Wherein he showed such aptness, that he could not offer to teach him any
thing, but he soon grew to be as perfect therein as himself. Whom we will
leave to be Educated by Cothanes, and return to speak of Persicles; and what
befell to him after the loss of Constantia.

CHAP. XI. How Pisor being recovered, persuaded Persicles to crave aid of the
King of Persia, against his Enemies: How he obtained the same, and carried a
mighty Host into Assiria; which was there overthrown.
AFter that Persicles had in heavines and sorrow wandered up and down those
Woods, the space of three months, and Pisor again come to his remembrance:
Upon a time they both met, Pisor saluting him with great reverence. Persicles
seeing he was come to his right senses again, asked him what became of
Constantia? My Lord ( quoth he) I found her in the Shepherds house, telling her
you would presently return, but when she saw you stay so long, unawares to me,
she went out of the Cottage to seek you: I soon missing her, thought to
overtake her, to direct her unto the place where I l^ft you, and by misfortune
tasted of that Ominous fruit. Then said Persicles, she is assuredly devoured by
wild Beasts, and I shall never see her again. My misfortunes exceeding the
bounds of common miseries: that I would to God I had ended my self when I was
first borne, then should not both Assyria, and Persia have had such cause of
discontent.

My Lord (quoth Pisor) I cannot be persuaded that she is dead, but by some
misfortune wandered out of knowledge, or carried hence by some unexpected
means: Therefore I beseech you bear her loss with patience, and in the end I
do not doubt but you shall hear of her safety. Thou give me words full of
comfort (said he) but thou have no ground for them: Nor can I tell how by them
to add any hope of my restless passions: for that she is lost I am sure, but
that I shall never see her again, I think it impossible: being driven to so
hard an exigent of extremity, that I neither know what to do, nor whose aid
to implore. Thou see another has shut me from my Kingdom, and in my absence
won my subjects heart from me. The King of Persia, hearing of the wrong done
to him, will become mine Enemy, and then is there no place of refuge left for
me but in this place best be fitting my misery. My Lord (said Pisor,) yet if I
may be so bold as counsel you, let us go to the Persian Court, I as I am,
and you in that disguise, for none but your sister Piera, being privy to your
escape with Constantia, you may safely and without fear go thither, both to
confer with Piera, and to crave the Persians assistance to establish you in
your Kingdom.

Persicles unwilling to leave those Woods where he was, determined to dwell for
ever there: But finding no hope thereby to recover Constantia, and also being
persuaded by Pisor, he condiscended to go with him, and thereupon immediately
departed. When they approached near to the Court, Pisor rode on before, and
entering the Court, he soon found Piera declaring to her the misfortune that
was befallen to Persicles and Constantia: and how that he was without the
Court, staying until he returned, to know whether he might with safety come to
speak with her, or no? Piera then presently sent for him by Pisor, and other
of her Knights, who brought him into the Court, whither he was welcomed by
her, with great Joy: With whom he continued sometime in private Conference.
Piera counselling him to discover himself to the King of Persia, and to crave
his aid against the Armenians, who would readily assist him; Whereof she told
him, he needed not to doubt, for that he had ever been his Friend, nor knew
not of his escape with Constantia, which none but her self and Dela were privy
unto.

Whilst they continued in this conference, Deloratus came in, and espying one
in such private with his Wife in that disguise, wondered who it should be. Piera
soon espied him, and leaving her Brother went to him, and told him who it was:
Wherewith he embraced Persicles in his Arms, now perfectly remembering him,
although grief had much altered him. After many speeches past, Deloratus, he,
and Piera, went to the King of Persia, who knowing him, welcomed him, with
exceeding kindness. Persicles then unfolded his Misfortunes unto him, and
desired his assistance, in revenge of the wrongs the Armenians had done him.
Which the King of Persia willingly yielded unto him: giving authority unto
Deloratus to muster Soldiers and make provision for their expedition. The
news hereof was suddenly rumoured in the Court, and many thousands of Knights
unconstrained, prepared to aid Persicles, whom they honored for his exceeding
valor and courtesy; purposing to spend their lives in his Defense, that of a
sudden one part of the Country was up in Arms, and a great Force was
assembled, and conducted into Assyria, by Deloratus, and Persicles, and Pisor,
and Osimus, and also many other Knights of exceeding valor: Of whose worthy
Exployts, we will hereafter speak more at large.

Persicles had such ill success, that after he had continued a long time in
Assyria, yet he so little prevailed, that he was compelled thrice to fly back
into Persia to renew his Forces. These cruel Wars continued many years, the
King of Armenia, defending himself, and keeping possession of the Crown,
notwithstanding the Persian Forces.

Deloratus perceiving that the long continuance of those Wars had wasted a
number of his subjects, and yet notwithstanding Persicles was so far from
possession of his right, as at the first beginning of those tedious Wars,
determined to give over: and therefore assembled together such as were the
chiefest Rulers over the Host, to know their opinion, what further to
determine. Who with a general consent, persuading him once again to renew his
Forces, and if that then they did not prevail, never more to give the Onset.

CHAP. XII. How Persicles his Army was renewed. And how Montelyon, being denied
by his supposed Father, stole to the Camp. And how he preserved Persicles
life. How Cothanes knew him, and discovered what he knew of his Birth. And how
he received Knighthood at Persicles hand.
NOw Persicles seeing Deloratus was ready to shrink away from him, being
himself wearied with that tedious War, went likewise with resolution, either
then to end his life, or ever after to abandon the company of all men, and end
his days in solitariness: Deloratus therefore sent Messengers into Persia, to
muster new Forces, who in short time returned, that the Persian Camp was full
fourscore thousand strong. Amongst the rest, it so fortuned that Cothanes
(being in Youth accounted a man of great valor, and now being somewhat grown
in years, of great Experience) determined not to give his mind to sloth, being
touched with grief, to hear what a number of his Countrymen were slain:
therefore told his Lady what he intended: who with tears and many entreaties
dissuaded him, but all could not prevail, his heart was so fully set thereon.

Montelyon being now grown to man's estate, hearing thereof, entreated Cothanes
(whom he esteemed to be his Father, and so called him) that he might go with
him: but Cothanes would by no means consent thereto: the rather, for that his
Lady most earnestly requested him, that if it were so that he would needs go
himself, yet that he would not leave her altogether comfor^les, by taking
Montelyon with him. Therefore all his entreaties nothing prevailed, but of
necessity he was enforst to stay. Cothanes being departed, Montelyon continued
some two days exceedingly pensive, so much troubled in his thoughts, with
grief to be left behind, that he refused his meat: and notwithstanding the
manifold kindnesses his supposed Mother used him withal, yet he thought all
things troublesome. Which desire so much prevailed with him, that furnishing
himself with good store of Coin, secretly one Night he conveyed his Steed
without the Castle Walls: and when all thought he had bin in his Chamber, he
was departed. By that time it was day he approached near the City of H^lo^os,
where he stayed some three days, until he had furnished himself with Armor,
which he caused a workman to frame of exceeding pure Lydian steel, bearing
this Devise. His Armor Silver, interset with the forms of diverse Beasts and
Trees of burnisht Gold. And in his Shield, a naked Man amongst a tuft of Trees:
Which devise he caused to be made of purpose, to be known different from the
rest.

Having furnished himself in this sort he left the City, and journeyed toward
the Persian Camp in Assyria: Where he was no sooner come, but he found the
Battles joined in most cruel Fight, and a number of Soldiers on both sides
slain, lying covered and besmeared in Blood: Some with their Swords fast
grasped in their hands threatening: Others with a hideous noise breathing forth
their latest gaspes: Then in the Camp beheld he some flying, others pursuing:
some standing fast in cruel Conflict: others with fierce terror sleying those
that was next them: Some with hideous cries, animating their followers: Others
with fear, crying retire. There did he behold both Persians and Armenians,
intermingled slaughtetering each other. Wherewith he a while stood as one
amazed, having never before beheld such cruel Conflicts: At last he beheld a
most gallant Knight, with his Sword drawn, and all covered with blood, hurling
up and down amongst the Armenians: performing admirable deeds of Chivalrie,
but at last encompassed with such a multitude of his Enemies, that he knew it
was im^ossible for him to escape. Which sight, stirred up such sparks of
courage and desire to succor him, that his heart urging him to more
forwardness then his Steed could perform: and yet his Steed with furious
pace, running as swift as might be, rusht in amongst the thickest of them: At
the first piercing his Lance through the bodies of two that were opposite
before him: and his Steed with his unstayed course, ^verthrowing others, and
treading them down under his Feet: ^hen drawing his Sword, whose brightness
dazeled the sight of such ^s beheld it, until he had darkened the Splendour
with their purple ^^ood: mangling, slaughtering, and destroying such as
withstood his passage: until he approached the Persian Knight, who without his
approach, had there ended his Life: but finding himself at more liberty, by
the assistance of this new-come Gallant, he again redoubled his abated
Courage, joining themselves both together, performing such honored Valor, as
by their only resistance, the thronged multitudes of Armenians dispersed
themselves, every one hasting to get without their reach. Now the Knight that
Montelyon had rescued, was the Noble King Persicles, who seeing how valiantly
this New-come Gallant had rescued him, and preserved his life, said thus unto
him. Noble Knight, thy Valor has preserved me: For which Persicles will not be
ungrateful. And if thou be a friend to me, as thou have already shown,
second me, and I will once again try my Fortune. With that Montelyon held up
his hand, in sign he gave consent. Then Persicles with speed hasted into the
foremost of the Battle, and Montelyon followed, making such way, as none stood
to resist them, but they dyed. Where they found Deloratus, Pisor, Osimus,
Cothanes, and a number of Gallant Knights in combat, beset with odds, but that
disadvantage was soon turned to advantage, by their approach: for there did
Montelyon perform such deeds of exceeding Valor, as made the whole Persian and
Armenian Hosts admire him. Then began the Persians to gather new courage to
assail their enemies, continuing the skirmish with equal strength, against
them. Palian the usurping K. of Assyria, thinking to have the advantage against
the Persians, as in times past they had, called the chiefest Rulers to him,
exhorting them to courage to resist their enemies. Upon whose exhortation, the
Armenians with undaunted courage followed the battle on both sides with great
eagernes, that the Persian Governors were enforced to fly^ to their Companies,
to encourage them to resistance, only Montelyon and Persicles still kept
together, making thousands of the Armenians pay their lives for tribute to
their conquering Swords: Whilst they continued the fight in the forefront of
the Battle, they suddenly heard a cry on the outside of the battle, with
which noise, Montelyon not regarding to be counseled set spurs to his Horse,
and hasted thither, where he found Deloratus, though to him unknown, in the
throng of a multitude of Armenians, unhorsed, and fighting on foot, so sore
wounded, and against such ods, that he was ready to faint, and by force to be
taken: Amongs^ whom, Montelyon rushed with such fury, spoiling them, that he
succored Deloratus, and having again with the help of some of his own
Knightsset him on Horseback, sent him to his Tent with a sufficient Guard:
and returning again toward Persicles, he espied Cothanes his Father, whom he
knew by his Armor, unhorsed, and newly by force taken prisoner, but before they
could convey him from thence, Montelyon began so cruel a fight, that with the
loss of many of their lives, he set him at liberty. Then began the Arminians
somewhat to Retire, having such a number of them slain, and finding their
enemies pursue them so fiercely, that Palion perceived the Persians would that
day he conquerors: yet notwithstanding calling to him two Knights, the one
named Althesus, the other Petron, who were most renowned of all the Armenians,
he said to them, Join with me, and let us once again repel these faint
hearted Persians: With that, they three with a multitude of their chiefest
soldiers, kept a head together, and fronted the battle where Persicles
fought, Palion knowing him, with a Lance ready coucht ran at him, which lighted
upon his Shield, where it burst in pieces, not once piercing the well tempered
steel. Then both Pallion, Althesus, and Petron, all at once assailed him, whom
Persicles resisted with exceeding v^lour, continuing so long as any Knight
could possible do: But at last the odds being so great, he was driven only
to defend their swift blows, that were followed with eagernes: then began he
to wish for the strange Knight, that had all that day succored him, expecting
nothing but death. By this time Montelyon had rescued Cothanes, and again got
him Horse and weapon, which done he left him, and even at that time that
Persicles* wished for him, came, and espying three knights assailing him alone,
aiming his sword point at Petrons breast, who was next him, and running at him
with all the force his horse could make, run the same through his body, and
with the like intent, aiming the same at Palion, he ran at him, that had he not
avoided his Encounter, he had either slain, or sore wounded him, but missing,
he let drive at him with his sword with such force, that in short space he gave
him many wounds. Persicles like wise having none but Althesus to resist,
Combated with him bravely, who with like valor resisted him: In the end Palion
finding himself so overmatcht, began to retire, which Montelyon perceiving,
gave him no respit to fly.

Then was their Battle most terrible to behold, the Persians comforted by the
only valor of Montelyon, ran upon their Enemies with unresisted fury. And the
Armenians seeing one of these chief Champions dead, and their General retire,
were amazed: and rather ready to fly then to stand out: which animated their
Foes with courage to pursue the^, even as long as the day lasted.

Montelyon still porsued Palion, in whose Rescue many of his Knights interset
themselves, and dyed by his Sword: and notwithstanding be withdrew himself,
yet Montelyon followed him so near, that he often put him in danger of his
life: until he was so far past i^ amongst their Troops, that he was
compelled with his Sword to make his way to get out again^. In which Retire,
many of the Armenians, dyed.

The Night now drawing nigh, whilst the Armenians sound Retra^, and the
Persian Generals busy in gathering together their scattered Followers,,
Montelyon had time to consider what was best for him to do, and whether it
were convenient to discover himself or no: at last, determining to depart in
secret, he espied Persicles bare hy him, who of purpose had watched him,
misdoubting that which he intended, who came unto him, and said. Sir Knight,
the kindness I have found in you, emboldneth me to desire your company, and
entreat you to accept of my Tent, to ropose your self in: For that I suppose
you are a Stranger, and it were incovenient for you to Journey after so great
labor, having this day with such Honor defended me, that I account my self
yours, and my life preserved by your only Valor. Therefore deny me not, that I
may in some sort requite your kindness.

Montelyon having heard Cothanes oftentimes exceedingly commend the King for
Valor and courtesy, likewise having knowledge how to behave himself, as well
to the meanest as to the greatest personages, being by Cothanes nobly educated,
and of his own Inclination more apt to conceive, then they are able to
instruct, knowing it to be the King himself, bowing his body, said: Most
honored King, I am unfit the honor you proffe^ me, and my deserts no way
deserving the commendations you give them: therefore I beseech you, not to
attribute to me more then is befitting my mean estate, but rather license me
to attend you, in all humble duty: My Life and all uttermost endeavors, being
vowed to be spent in your service, and my self ready to be at your
disposition. This said Persicles and he departed into the Camp, whether they
were welcomed with the shoutes and rejoicing of the Persian Soldiers.
Deloratus hearing that applaud, came forth of his Tent to see what was the
cause thereof, and espying Persicles and the strange Knight together, came unto
them, they both alighting to salute him, Deloratus would by no means suffer
them to depart, but entreated them to lodge in his Tent that night, which
Persicles could not deny: and therefore taking Montelyon in kind sort between
them, they entered the same, where he was unarmed: but when they beheld his
youth, they wondered thereat, to be accompanied with such exceeding valor, both
Delo^atus and Persicles using him with great kindness. Then presently the
principal Commanders of the Camp, assembled themselves to their Generals
Tents, to know what they did determine. Amongst the rest Cothanes, who at the
first entrance into the Tent, espied his son Montelyon, his head being only
disarmed, and by his armor knowing it was he that had so honorably preserved
his life, and defended himself: had much a do to contain himself from
rejoicing: likewise Montelyon seeing him, upon his knee entreated him to pardon
his boldness in coming to the Camp without his consent. Cothanes with great
joy took him up, and embraced him. Persicles seeing that said to Cothanes, My
friend is this thy son? My Lord said he, he is my son, and he calls me
Father, and yet I am unworthy to be father to such a son, that has this day
shown himself rather to be the son of some Heroicke King. And my Lord,
because his worthiness shall not be darkened with the ignoble Title of
Cothanes his son. I will declare to you all that I know of him. Indeed he is
not my son, but my Lady and I being one day a hunting, found him upon the top
of a Mount^in swaddling clothes: which were such, as showed he was not of mean
parentage, but of honorable race: his Nurse as it should seem, being
distr^ssed for want of food, was wandered from him, whose carcass and clothes
we found not far off, destroyed by a Lion: since which time, with
carfulness I have brought him up, esteeming him a^ mine own son. This my
Lord, in brief is the whole sum of all that I know of him. They all
marvelled at his words, especially Montelyon was stricken into such a sudden
meditation, that for a while stood like one metamorphosed, Persicles taking him
by the hand, said: Although I know not what title to give you, yet borne you
cannot be less then of noble blood, as may well appear by the manifest tokens
of your heroicke dispositions: therefore remit the care of that until
hereafter, and vouchsafe to stay with us, who are now both comforted with your
presence, and been preserved by your valor. My Lord (replied Montelyon) were
my desire a thousand times greater then it is yet the desire I have to do you
service, would surmount the same, being in ye depth of inward affection, love,
and duty wholly addicted, and entirely devoted to your worthiness, which no
desire of reward, hope of praise, or wordly respect has bred in me, but only
the instinct of nature, that has effectually engraffed the same in my heart:
therefore I humbly desire you vouchsafe to entitle me with the honor of
Knighthood: where with if I be dignified by your virtuous hand, I shall both
remain with you, and endeavor to deserve the same. Persicles highly esteeming
him, and kindly embracing him, told him he should that night be his bedfellow,
and the next day have his desire. With many other speeches they ended that
nights conference: every Ruler departing with carfulness to set the Watches.

CHAP. XIII. How the Armenians Army with exceeding loss was discomfited.
Early the next morning, Deloratus, Persicles, Cothanes, and all the rest of
the chief Commanders of the Persian Army, were assembled, who gave order, that
every battle should be planted in such sort, as if they expected a present
assault, which being performed. Montelion in great triumph was brought into the
field, and by Persicles invested with the order of Knighthood: which when he
had received, the Soldiers gave such shoutes, as made the air resound with
their Echoes. The Armenians hearing the noise, could not judge what might be
the cause thereof: some censuring one thing, some another. Palian fretting with
exceeding vexation at the last days discom^iture, which went the nearest his
heart, for that in all the time of wars, he had not endured the like, called
unto him the chiefest Knights in his Camp, which were Althesus, Golgron,
Mulatus, and Lamdelyon, Knights of Honorable birth, great wisdom, and
appointed valor, uttering to them his hearts grief, and his earnest desire of
revenge, desiring them with all speed to counsel him which way to suppress
the Persians courage, only revived with the aid the strange Knight had
brought them. Amongst whom it was agreed, and generally held best to surprise
them at unawares in the midst of their joy: that with all speed, and as
speedily as might be they detained their Forces, and without the noise of
either Drum or Fife, issued the City gates. Certain Persian Spies perceiving
their intent, posted to the Camp, and certified their General thereof, who
gave commandment that without making any kind of suspicion, they should
continue their mirth, so that thereby the Armenians might be heartned, to their
own dustruction. Montelyon with a company of Horsemen departed out of their
Camp, a contrary way to that the Armenians came, with intent to get betwixt
them and the City, which afterward sorted to effect. The Armenians thinking to
make a sudden slaughter of them, and nothing at all suspecting their readiness
to receive them with careless have approached the Camp, with greedy desire of
conquest, running upon their Enemies. Whom they found in such orderly sort,
ready to welcome them, that within an hours space they wished themselves again
within the City Walls: To recite every particular of their Conflict, and with
what terror the battle continued would dull my wits with confusion.
Principally, my pen shall barely recite the admirable deeds of the most
honorable of both Armies. Persicles considering what just cause he had and
with what equity he might challenge his right, wrongfully detained up his
usurping Foe, bent his Sword point with the unrelenting Fury, to the
destruction of his Enemies, pitying their deaths who dyed by his Sword, aiming
the same rather at Palians own heart, then against them that were by
constraint enforced to hazard their dearest lives. Which when he had colored
and made drunk with many of their deaths blood, he at last met with Palian,
whom at the first encounter he had surely berest of life, had not his own
Steed by great misfortune stumbled at a dead body, that interrupted his
steps, but notwithstanding his Swords point by that mischance, missing his
right aim, (...) quite through his Steeds neck, who falling, and Palian with
him, both lay groueling on the ground, ready to be trodden to death. Mulatus
being next at hand, rescued Palian, and mounted him on his own Steed, whereby
he lost his own life: For Persicles with both his hands fetched so full a blow
at his head, that with the force thereof, his Armor yielding some scales
thereof, pierced his Brain, and he dyed. Palian for a while continued Fight
with Persicles: with every blow receiving a deep wound, until he felt
himself so unable to hold out, that he must either yield, dye, or retire: but
even then came Golgron fortunately to his aid, who with him maintained fight
against Persicles: who notwithstanding that odds, had near hand brought them
both to destruction, had he not espied Deloratus and Cothanes in distress, who
were unequally assailed by six valiant Knights, two of them being Althesus and
Lamdelyon, unto whom he hasted, giving them succor by the death of the first
he met.

Whilst the Battle was maintained in the Forefront by the chief Commanders
of both Armies, and Montelyon with his resolved Follewers, whose hearts were
enspired with fiery courage, to be guarded by so valiant a guide was gotten
behind them, and began such a Massacre, that multitudes of a sudden were
slaughtered by his approach, whose deeds of valor amazed their senses, with
such fear, and abated their courage with such terror, that like as a flock of
fearful sheep, espying the approach of a devouring Lion, ran with amazed
fear from his paws: Even so the Armenians fled from the destroying hands of
Montelyon, filling the empty air with such dismal cries, that the noise
thereof amazed the hearts of the stoutest Armenians: Palian and Golgron then
turned their backs, making have thitherwards to know the cause, Althesus and
Lamdelyon did the like, whilst Deloratus and Persicles, and the rest made such
havoc against the common Soldiers, that had the fight continued long, the
whole Forces of the Armenian Army had been destroyed.

Palian and Althesus met Montelyon not knowing him: but supposing it was he had
made such slaughter amongst them the last day, both assailed him: who in his
heart rejoiced that he had met with two such Champions to make trial of his
valor continuing to brave a combat against them both, as is not to be
described. By this time the cry began again on the contrary side, with such
hideous noise, that Palians heart was affrighted therewith, and defended
himself as if a flender youth should hold encounter against a strong Giant,
till both he and Althesus were so grievously wounded that it had been a
pitiful spectacle to behold. Both being driven to retire amongst their
scattered Troops, and withal the haste they could, to prevent their utter
overthrow, to sound a retrait, and with all speed haste unto the City, which
could not be accounted a retire, but rather an absolute flight: for it was done
with such haste, as if they had been all amazed, none having the power to
resist: and pursued by Persicles and Montelyon, with such fury, that their own
hearts relented at their own hands cruelty, which covered the earth with the
dead bodies of their affrighted Foes. The day being thus ended to the terror of
the one, and comfort of the other: The Persians retired as Victors, and the
Armenians half mad with grief, and despair within their Walls, not minding
suddenly to issue again. Persicles and Deloratus honoring Montelyon with their
kind embracings, and the Soldiers applauded their valors with rejoycings.
Every one according to the present occasion betook themselves to their charges
spending the time in more joy and security, then erst they had done.

CHAP. XIIII. How the Armenians sent two Knights into Armenia for more aid,
who were met, and one of them taken Prisoner, and of other accidents that
befell.
Early the next morning, Palian assembled his Counsel to determine what order
to take for their security: which it behooued them to do for that their Forces
were utterly discouraged, and the Country Inhabitants knowing their lawful
King to be living, began to revolt, and denied to aid Palian, either with
men or victuals, that he was constrained only to keep himself within the
City Walls, not suffering any to issue out, or daring indeed to do it, they
were so strictly besieged by the Persians. When they had well considered their
estates, and the misery they were likely to fall into, they concluded to send
into Armenia, to certify the King, which Althesus and one Mutellus two Knights
of exceeding valor undertook to perform the next night. Montelyon, being in
his Tent, determining to repose himself, yet feeling no desire to sleep:
calling for the Chronicles of the Wars of Antiochus King of Assyria, and
spending some hours in reading that History, his Squire by his commandment
being gone to Bed, about the dead time of Night, he heard the neighing of a
Horse, as it seemed to him within the City: again reading and again staying to
listen, his mind being somewhat troubled, being as yet in his Armor, he gyrded
his Sword to his side, determining to walk the round, to see how diligently
the Watch was kept: whom he found sleeping as soundly as if they had been in
their quiet Beds, maruelling much at their drowsinesse, but much more at their
carelessness, he went from place to place, not minding that night to sleep,
but himself would watch for them all. He had not long stayed, but he espied
two in Armor, with hasty (though softly steps) passing through the Camp on
foot, whom be little suspected to be any other then of his own company,
thinking them to be some straglers, that seeing their fellows in dead sleep
went to rob: following as closely as he could, he perceiving them to depart
the Camp, but maruelling thereat, he drew nigher unto them, intending to know
what they were before they departed:

Althesus and Mutellus espying one to follow them, and seeing themselves now
without the Camp, purposed to lay hold on him, with purpose to force him to
declare what the Persians intended to do: that turning back to him, Althesus
offered to lay hold on him. Soft quoth Montelyon, let me first know what you
are? We are enemies unto thee said Althesus, and therefore yield. Tell me
quoth he, your names? Althesus knowing himself to be of great valor, and
therefore not to be unknown of any. Besides, little thinking he would have
resisted them, told him his name was Althesus. Then I defy thee quoth
Montelyon, for I am thine Enemy, and will rather dye then yield to thee. With
that Althesus drew his Sword, and struck at him. Montelyon did the like to
defend himself: and afterward they offended him so much, that both he and
Mutellus had enough to do to save their own stakes and lives.

Althesus seeing his valor, desired to know his name, which Montelyon told
him. Althesus was much disquieted therewith: and seeing his companion fallen
and faint with effusion of blood, he thus said: Knight, at this time I cannot
stay to end the combat, for by hazarding my self, I should endanger the lives
of many: therefore farewell until more convenient time to meet thee again.
With that he turned his back, and Montelyon stouped to give his conquered
adversary breath: which revived Mutellus: but seeing Althesus gone, his heart
was ready to dye with grief. Montelyon had him be of comfort, for his intent
was to use him honorably; with that helping him up, he led him to his Tent,
calling up his Squire to attend him, and disarme him, he went presently to
Persicles.

The next day Montelyon caused Mutellus to be carried before the General,
where he declared the cause of their departure toward Armenia, which
Persicles was glad to hear off: that by this foreknowledge he might prevent
the purposed intent of his enemies: but most of all he rejoiced and commended
Montelyon for this noble act. Which had they not been discovered, might have
brought the whole Camp into great distress: by this means every way growing
into such love, and admiration of his valor, virtue and courtesy, that they
esteemed their only defense and felicity consisted in his safety: that
wheresoever he went, the eyes of multitudes awayted him, as being delighted to
behold him. Mutellus desired Persicles to appoint his ransom, but he
committed that to Montelyon, who after he had honorably feasted him, sent him
ransomelesse to the City. Mutellus soon got entrance, and declared what
misfortune had befallen him and Althesus, which turned their conceived hope of
comfort into despair, which had overcome them with fear, had not some little
hope of Althesus escape revived them.

Thus remained they many days within the City, so hardly besieged, that they
were out of all hope in getting Victuals, but were driven to content themselves
with spare diet, scantling out every soldier and Inhabitant their allowance.
Which they continued likewise so long, expecting to hear from Armenia, that
being frustrated, they expected nothing but miserable famine: which caused them
late in the night, to assemble all their old, weak and impotent men, unable to
serve, and all Women and Children, except some few of account, and turned them
out of the City, to the number of sixteen thousand, whose distressed estate
Persicles pitied, causing them to have sufficient food, themselves building
Cabbins to defend them from the weather.

Persicles seeing the miserable estate his own Country was in, and to what
extremity his Subjects were brought; and by this also knowing that Palian was
not able long to endure, but that both he and all those within the City, were
ready to be famished, of whom many were Assyrians; that were constrained to
that subjection, whose estate he pittyed, being unwilling to be guilty of their
destruction by the advice and counsel of those he most esteemed, but
principally of Deloratus and Montelyon, he sent a Herald unto Palian with this
message; that although he did unjustly usurp his Crown and many other ways
done him intolerable injuries, yet pitying the miserable estate he was like
to bring the Citizens into by his cruelty, he made him this proffer, that
notwithstanding he might work sufficient revenge by his death, whose life was
now in his mercy, he should without interruption, with all his Armenians, have
free liberty to depart out of Assyria. The Herald with this message, went unto
the City, declaring the cause of his coming. Palian assembled his Counsel and
returned this answer. That what he held, was his right by conquest, and that
would hold: scorning he should send any such proffer to him, that was well able
to defend himself, and as little regarded his courteous proffer as his malice:
Wishing him, not to stay long, least his Fathers coming inflicted a greater
punishment upon him then he could eschew. Persicles was exceedingly vexed with
his disdainefull reply, fearing indeed, that if the Kings Forces were once
come, it would be a great cause to lengthen the Wars, which he earnestly
desired might have an end, that thereby he might have respite to travel in
search of Constantia, for whom his heart endured exceeding torments, that being
thus disquieted in his thoughts, and desirous of ease to his restless
passions, one day amongst many that he passed over with pensiveness, he got
himself into a solitary place, and there in sad silence meditated on his
misfortune.

Montelyon by chance troubled with remembrance of his unknown estate, chose
the very place for his private meditations, wherein Persicles was already
shrouded, and suddenly espying him, began to withdraw himself, until
Persicles desired him to stay, uttering these speeches. Worthy Knight, I
perceive some inward care has made you withdraw your self from me, but
impart your discontent to me: if not, yet hear mine, for I have long desired
to impart them unto one, on whose fidelity I might repose my self, and you are
the man I have elected, having had so sufficient trial of your courtesy and
friendship, that without doubting I durst commit my self to your secrecy, for
your aid may, as heretofore it has preserved me.

My Lord, replied Montelyon, I account my self only fortunate, in your love,
and my heart acknowledges my everlasting bounden duty to none so much as to
your Majesty, which binds me in all duty to become your vassaile, being more
ready to venture my life and uttermost endeauours in your service then you can
imagine: Therefore good my Lord, fear not to impose any task upon me, for by
your imploring me I shall account my self only blessed. I thank you good
Friend (quoth ^e) and if ever fortune favor me again, I will requite this
kindness, though now I am plunged in the depth of ill luck, being as you see
deprived of my Kingdom by the Rebellion of my own subjects, and the Tyranny
of an ill neighbor the King of Armenia: the brief discourse whereof is this.
My Father when he lived, matched my sister Piera in marriage with this worthy
Knight Deloratus, sending me unto P^^sia with her, who before my return dyed,
whilst I was there I chanced to fix mine eyes on the Beauty of Constantia,
daughter to the Persian King, which by reason of my sudden departure, I could
not give her knowledge, having no other comfort but my sister Piera, to whom I
bewrayed the secrets of my heart, departing with her promise of assistance
whilst I went into Assyria to ^stablish my Kingdom, Prince Helion of Arabia
obtained the King of Persia his consent to marry Constantia. Which news Piera
sent me, I being much troubled therewith, after I had refelled my old enemy the
King of Armenia in a battle, I left the government of my Kingdom to two of my
Noble men, and departed in the habit of a Palmer into Persia, where within
short space I found such means by my sisters friendship, that I was in that
habit without suspicion in Pieraes chamber, and thereby had conference with
Constantia, and attained her consent, nothing remaining, but only means how
we should escape, which afterward we effected, and traveled together until
we came to a Shepherds house, where we were kindly welcomed, contracting a
solemn, marriage betwixt our selves, because we durst not be known the
contrary, where we lived some days in quiet: In the mean time the King of
Persia caused diligent search to be made, and it was Pisors chance to find us,
who kept our counsel, and was by me sent into Assyria, to fetch some of my
own Knights to attend me home, where he found my Nobles at strife: and the
King of Armenia taking opportunity, with a mighty band of Soldiers, slew most
of my part, the rest joining with him, until he had ceazed my Crown.

Pisor with this heavy news returned to me, being unwilling to give me
knowledge thereof, which overcame my heart with such grief, that seeking in a
solitary place, I wandered so far that I could not return to the Shepherds
house the same night.

Constantia missing me, likewise stole from the Cottage to seek me but
directing her steps a contrary way, or meeting with some misfortune that slew
her, I never heard of her since. Pisor, he likewise went forth to seek us,
and unwillingly tasted of an unfortunate fruit, that infused a sleepiness upon
him for four and twenty hours: but notwithstanding his and my most earnest
search, we could never find her, nor I fear never shall. But if I could
recure this evil done me by my Foes, I would then spend the rest of my days
in her search. Having ended her speech, his heart was so much overcome with
grief, that he had much ado to with hold his eyes from tears.

Montelyon was oppressed with no less grief then he, whose heart felt more
inward disquiet then a stranger could have done, in silent sadness seeming to
impart with his sorrows: but not abide to counsel him which way to recure
them. That at last by reason the necessity of the time affoorded little
respite, they were constrained to depart.

CHAP. XV. How Montelyon by a strange and dangerous adventure, won the City,
and took Palian prisoner.
MOntelyon that evening elected out of his own Followers twenty Knights, such
as he esteemed most valiant, telling them he had a matter of great danger and
secrecy to complet, which might be a means to establish Persicles in his
Kingdom, if they would faithfully join with him, Which they steadfastly vowed
to accomplish, and to follow him, although it were even to their deaths. Arm
you then, quoth he, in Armenian Armor, of which you have choice, and come to
me at midnight.

This being performed, and the Knights come, Montelyon with them departed
through the Camp unto the City Gates, where Montelyon knocked, but scarce so
low that the Porter could hear him, who yet notwithstanding, coming to the
Battlements, demanded who it was? I am said Montelyon, Althetus, and other
Armenians, as thou may know by our Armor, and bring good news: therefore
open the Gates lest by the delay we be betrayed for we are pursued. The Porter
being out of all doubt, and hasty to succor them, vnbolted the Gates.
Montelyon was no sooner entered, but he flew the Porter, entering the Lodge, and
apprehending the watch, who lay sleeping, and slaying most of them before they
awaked: One of them submitting himself, thus said. I am an Assyrian spare my
life, and if you be friends to Persicles, I will give you such directions, as
you may surprise the City, and subdue Palian.

Montelyon said, in so doing thou shall be honor of thy King and purchase thy
own liberty. After that they had put the rest to the Sword, the Assyrian
directed them to the Palace, and by so secret away that he brought them even
within the compass of the Castle, to the very place whereas the Guard was.
Montelyon then thus said to his followers. My companions: let not fear now
possess your hearts, but by this exployt win honor for ever. Then by the
Assyrians direction, they divided themselves into two parts, the one to the
foremost entrance, and the other by a By-way. Montelyon like wise knocked, and
one of the Guard misdoubting no mischief, opened the door, whereinto
Montelyon rusht with his sword drawn, not speaking a word, sleying the first,
the next, and all that came within his compass: The Guardiants were so amazed
therewith, that they were confounded in their senses, their courages for lack
of time to consider, abated and their hands which feare-trembling not able to
draw their Swords, and when they were drawn, not knowing whom to offend, for
Montelyon and his Knights were so like them in Armor, and so intermingled
amongst them, that they knew not whether they struck their own fellows or no
not knowing one from the other: by which means Montelyon and his Knights who
by a privy token knew each other, made such a slaughter amongst them, that all
the flood swom with their blood. Some of them made means to fly by the back
door, but even then, as they stepped out, they met death, he that followed, not
knowing him that went before to be slain, that had a thousand come that way,
they had one by one met with destruction, that in the end, by Montelyons valor
there was not one left alive, nor any escaped. And this complet was performed
with such expedition in the dead time of the night, that the rumor thereof came
not to the hearing of any. That within short space and little labor, Montelyon
surprised Palian even in his Bed, who seeing one in Armor besmeared with
blood, with his sword ready drawn, being exceedingly affrighted, asked what he
was? I am quoth Montelyon, thine enemy, and Persicles friend* Thou art a villain
and a Traitor, quoth he, and with that he called to his Guard, crying out treason,
treason, I am betrayed help, help. Thou cryest in vain quoth Montelyon, for
there is none here to help thee: for by this hand thy Guard are slain, and
thou shall follow them the same way to death, unless thou ask mercy; For my
hands can hardly abstain from working vengeance on thy traiterous head, thou
have deserved to be punished with inexorable torments. Montelyon had scarce
ended those words, but the rumoring Echo of an exceeding outcry, solicited
his ears, the occasion was this. After Montelyon was departed his Tent, his
Squire following him, and seeing him enter the City with so few in his Company,
ran back with all speed, and certified Persicles what he had seen, who
fearing least that valourous attempt might endanger his life, and hearing that
he had gotten entrance into the City, with all the haste he could armed
himself, and calling up Deloratus, Pisor, Cothanes and Osimus, and all the
rest of his chief Commanders of the Army, with the choice of their several
Bands, to the number of ten thousand, they soon marched to the City gates,
which they found wide open, and being entered, and by several companies
dispersed into every corner of the Streets, on a sudden on every side they
gave the Alarm, which rung through the City and ears of the Armenians with
such terror, that like men bereft of their Senses, they ran up and down to
their destruction. There did Deloratus fill his hands with slaughter, and Pisor
with cruelty revenged his withholden liberty: There did Cothanes, Osimus, and
many thousands, color pale Death in purple Robes. There did Persicles triumph
over his Foes, his conquering Sword working their deaths, that the City
Channels ran with goare blood, and their hasty steps were intercepted by the
heaps of breathless foes: then began such an outcry, as would have affrighted
the senses of the most valiant: Did men hiding their heads in secret places of
their Houses, the women with their children crying, wringing their hands, and
making exceeding lamentation: the Soldiers ready to destroy one another, not
knowing whom to offend, being ignorant in the original of the Stratagem. The
Counselors and such as sat in Seat of Judgment, with speedy steps
conueying themselves to the Castle, wherein Palian was, where at their Entrance
they saw such sad Spectacles of horror, and dreadful was already entered,
laying open passage to death. Where Montelyons Followers though but few, soon
laid hands on them, slaying those that resisted, and enclosing them that
yielded, within a strong Tower.

Montelyon by this time had haled Palian from forth his Chamber and bound him
hand and foot, brought him out of the Castle, enclosing him in a strong Iayle,
where many malefactors was imprisoned, himself for safety becoming his
Iaylor. And now having intelligence that Persicles was entered the City, he
bent his steps to find him out: by the way destroying the Armenians, who
indeed took him to be one of their own company by his Armor: at last he came
to the Abbey, wherein the greatest part of the Armenian Soldiers lay, in a
large field, encompassed within the wall, whereinto Persicles with some three
thousand Soldiers were before entered, making such slaughter as would have
terrified the heart of any beholder.

Montelyon being alone, thought now or never to make trial of his Valor:
though being on foot, yet rushing amongst the thickest of the Armenians, who
seeing him in that Armor, rather thought he had been of their Commanders, then
an Enemy: who frantic with affright: slaughtered them, because they were slow
to slay their enemies; which when he perceived, he cried unto them, Villains,
traitors, cowards, why shun you me? I am your Enemy, a Persian, and come to
destroy you. Notwithstanding his speeches, by reason they had no respite to
consider what to do, they still fled from him, not so much with thought of
what he was, as with fear to come near him: for none came within his
compass, but he dyed, so that where he fought, their Death tryumphed: and by
reason of their flight, his hasty blows only hurt the Wind, for sometimes,
they were spent in vain. Persicles and Deloratus being nigh, stood and beheld
him with admiration, wondering who it was, that in their judgment with such
fury fought against himself: until he espied them, by his speeches giving
them knowledge what he was, having found him they desired to find, after short
salutations, they followed their enemies with cruel destruction: the bright
day disclosing that nights bloody act, which appeared before them with such a
grimme aspect, as that it made terror seem most terrible, so that before many
hours of the day were spent, the Armenians were utterly destroyed, and amongst
them many Assyrians unknown to be Affricans were also slaughtered. Persicles
gave strict commandment to his soldiers, so make diligent search the City
throughout, and if they found an Armenian, to put him to the Sword, not
suffering one to escape nor live. Which done, he commanded the dead Carcasses
in Carts to be carried out of the City, which were so many that with much ado
they could perform in a days labor. Which done, he gave the spoil of the
Armenians Tents and Houses unto the Persian Soldiers, and also gave
commandment, that the women, children, old men, had impotent people, should
be brought into the City and every one possess his own house, wherein he
dwelt before. This being performed for that day, order being taken for the
wounded, the soldiers enriched with spoil, the Citizens in quiet in their
houses, diligent watch set at each gate, and a strong guard without in the
Tents, for that it drew to night, and their labor required ease, after much
joy, they betook themselves to their rest.

Early the next morning they forsook their Pauilions, first appointing
certain scowtes to watch about the borders of the Country for the approach of
the King of Armenia, which as they suspected would be very shortly: for it was
now two months since Althesus departed.

By that time the day was aged the space of three hours, the inhabitants of
Assyria that had lived under the subjection and tyranny of the Armenians,
hearing of Palians overthrow, and being assured of Persicles safety, which
before that, their doubtful hearts would not believe, came by great multitudes
to submit themselves unto their lawful King: who rejoicing thereat, commanded
them in sign of their obedience, to arm themselves, and return to their own
dwellings, and to destroy all the Armenians that inhabited the Land of Assyria,
not suffering neither man, woman or child to live. It was a wonder to behold,
with what greediness the heady multitudes bent themselves to their Enemies
destruction, every one thinking to be foremost, and he that was last, yet
thinking himself happy that he could graspe a Sword, to seek his own
liberty. Which they effected within three days, that there was not any of the
Armenian Progeny left: for if they chanced to find an Assyrian woman married
to an Armenian woman, both she and all her Children dyed. And if they found a
Woman with child, or having any children that she could not show an Assyrian
was the Father of them, they had all of them dyed.

In the mean while, all those that were Prisoners, were brought forth.
Persicles by the whole consent of all his Nobles, People and Counsel,
appointing them to dye, only Palian excepted, who like wise had that day abode
a shameful death, if he had not been a Kings son, being only committed to
safe custody, where he was honorably used.

These tragical Stratagems ouerpast, and all things in security,
notwithstanding the beauty of the Land was destroyed by the Armenians, yet now
the Nobles and Peers of the land, that for a long time durst not look over
the Castle Walls, assembled themselves unto their King, making all preparation
they could for his more honorable welcome: the Bells rung for joy, and the
people with exceeding rejoy^ings applauded his victory. Within few days
Persicles was with great royalty twice crowned King of Assyria, and Montelyon
honored with such exceeding commendation as his worthiness deserved. Every
one (as of right they should) attributed that honored victory to his valor.
All men growing into deep affection toward him, and with rejoicing manifest
their love.

CHAP. XVI. Of the King of Armenia's arrival with a new Army. How Montelyon
set Palian at liberty, and of a Peace that was concluded.
Certain of the Spies had knowledge of the approach of the King of Armenia,
and brought news thereof unto the Court, which stirred up a new disquiet
amongst them, for then they began on all sides to arm themselves a fresh: but
that haste was soon stayed, by the arrival of certain Ambassadors from the
King of Armenia, who delivered their message in these words. Persicles of
Assyria, the mighty King of Armenia commands thee to deliver his son Palian
in safety, whom he understands thou have taken prisoner. Withal he
requires restitution to be made o^ the Crown and Kingdom of Assyria, which
by right of ancient inheritance i^ his: otherwise he will bring so puissant and
invincible an Army against thee, that shall waste and consume, this ^ and, not
leaving City, Town nor house undestroyed by fire: he will make the Inhabitants
perpetual bond-slaues, and he will cause thee to slye, or abiding his coming,
he will take* thee captive, and lead thee into Armenia, where thou shall
remain his vassaile. This is the sum of that he requires, therefore let us
have answer.

I will not study said Persicles, what to say, but thus say to him. His son
is my prisoner, and I will detain him: as for his threats I fear them not,
utterly denying his false title to my Crown, which in my absence he seized
upon, not by valor, but treachery, And tell him moreover, that I demand
restitution for the wrong he has done me and my Country, which if he deny,
nothing shall make me satisfaction but his sons death. And tell him thus, let
him with haste return, least my fury overtake him, and so he feel the
mischief he intends to me, for I mean to meet him presently, and work
such destruction among his Soldiers, as shall cause them to seek his death
for betraying them into his hands. Persicles spoke these words with such fury,
as made the Ambassadors assuredly believe he meant it, that with this answer
they departed. The King of Armenia little thinking to receive such an answer,
but rather performance of his demand: was so enraged, that he commanded his
Soldiers to march toward the City, vowing to redeem his son, or be taken
prisoner himself. Persicles likewise had collected a mighty band of Persians
and Assyrians to meet him, that it was likely this would prove the hottest
battle that ever was fought in that part of the world.

In the mean time Palian was brought before Persicles, who was seated upon the
Kingly throne in great Majesty, thus saying to Palian: what can thou allege
to excuse thy self from death, having rightly deserved the same? Thou know
that it now rests in my power to set thee free, or put thee to death: which
the just Heavens have inflicted upon thee as a due punishment for thy tyranny*
(...)

Palian made this reply, I am a King as absolute as thy self: therefore I know
thou dare not put me to death: which if thou should presume to attempt*
know that the King of Armenia is hard at thy elbow to revenge the same, whose
power thou can not escape. Therefore I defy thee, and dare thee to do the
same: for I know thee to be of so cowardly a disposition, that if thou once
come within my Fathers sight, thou will run away. The people standing by,
hearing him utter such opprobrious words, cried out, Let him dye, let him dye.
It was long before the multitude could be appeased, but at last Persicles thus
said, standing up in a great rage: Traitor, dare thou utter these words in my
presence: Thou shall dye the death, not all the world shall redeem thee. With
that he commanded his guard to hew him in pieces; with that they began to wound
him, but Montelyon stepping betwixt them humbling himself upon his knee, thus
said:

Noble King, vouchsafe to hear me speak, and without offense, let me claim
my right. This Knight is my prisoner, therefore to put him to death without my
consent, were to do me wrong; yet although I speak this, pardon me, I
challenge not any thing to contradict your will; but I humbly desire your
Majesty to grant me this favor, that as I took him, so I may dispose of him.

Persicles with great have rose from his seat, and embraced Montelyon, saying:
Were it my Kingdom, my life, or any thing that I esteemed more then both, that
you required, I would for ever curse my heart, if it should deny it you; For
you have done me so much good, and my debt is to you so great, as if I live a
thousand years, I shall never pay; therefore I give him freely unto you, and
his life withal. I humbly thank your Majesty, replied Montelyon, with that he
took Palian by the hand, and after humble reverence done, he departed, to whom
being alone, he uttered these speeches. Noble Prince of Armenia, not expecting
reward, nor fearing threats, I here give you liberty. Then did he desire him
to make choice of his horse and armor, where with he armed himself, and so
rode discourteously away, his stout heart not suffering him to give Montelyon
thanks. And being come to the Camp, humbling himself unto his Father, and he
embracing him, thus said: My dear Son, welcome, then strutting up and down,
said: I thought that dastard Persicles durst not detain thee; for if he had,
his life had paid thy ransom, and shall do yet for detayning thee: by
Jupiter this night will I fire the City about his ears, because I know that
the coward dares not come forth to meet me.

Palians heart hearing his Father thus boasting, and considering how unlikely
it was he could perform it, with such a sudden passion of deep consideration,
changed with a sudden alteration, contrary to his former disposition, calling
to remembrance how lately he was in danger of death, the great power Persicles
had about him, the late slaughter he had committed against his Soldiers, the
courtesy of Montelyon, but most of all his ingratitude to him, that had freely
given him his life, thus said:

My most noble Father, not the fear of your forces, nor Persicles his
cowardice (for by his doom I had dyed) has set me at liberty, but the
courtesy of a noble Knight that took me prisoner: who when Persicles had
appointed my death, and the Executioners were seizing upon me, challenged me to
be his Prisoner, honorably armed me, and courteously let me go. Therefore I
beseech you withdraw your Forces, and offer no more wrong to Persicles, who
never offended you, the Kingdom of Armenia is as good as the Kingdom Assyria,
and better: and it is better to enjoy that with quiet, then both that and this
with discontent. If not for that, yet for this, I humbly entreat you to
conclude a Peace with Persicles, for your own safety, for his power is too
mighty to be subdued by the small Forces you have brought. He is now allied to
the Persian, who is not yet your Enemy, but wholly your Friend; but if these
Wars continue long, he will prove your mortal Foe; For if you go forwards I
must stay behind; for it were a great dishonor for me to fight against him
that has so honorably, courteously, and liberally given me my life: If you
should be overcome, how much would it endanger your life, and if your life were
in danger, do you think you could escape? Besides, I will rather submit my
self into the hands of your Enemies or shed my own blood before your face,
then live to see so dismal a day as that will prove; therefore I humbly desire
you to conclude a Peace.

The King heard out his Speeches with silent vexation, being so inwardly
enraged, and with such desire thirsting after revenge, that his heart was ready
to burst with swelling ma^^^e: but at last being more mollified with despair
of Victory, then of yielding to his Sons request, he said: Let it be as you
will have it, for this time you shall over rule me.

Then Palian thus said, My Noble Father, I know to conclude this peace will
turn to our everlasting good* and your ow^ content: Persicles to honorable,
and never offending you. And I know will honorably embrace this peace:
therefore I desire you, let it be concluded with your free consent.

With that he gave his consent, willing him to conclude what he thought good,
and he would ratify it. Palian then mounting himself, presently departed
toward the City, but ere he came there, he met with Persicles mighty band of
Soldiers, and desiring to speak with Montelyon, he kindly embraced him,
yielding unto him so many hearty thanks with such courtesy, love, affection,
and earnest vows for preserving his life, as Montelyon wondered at that sudden
alteration in him, that before was so rude and discourteous, most kindly
welcomming him. Then did Palian unfold the cause of his coming, with such
earnestness entreating Montelyon to join with him to conclude that peace, that
he promised his assistance, and went with him to Persicles.

Palian delivered his message with humble reverence, and Pet^icles with as much
courtesy received it. And so effectually was this wrought, that the Peace
accepted, and both the Armies meeting, in stead of blows, embraced each other:
Then did the King of Armenia and Persicles salute each other: First, in strange
sort, but afterward with more familiarity. After many speeches of both sides,
Persicles accusing him of wrongs, and be alleging the contrary, that
notwithstanding Palian laboring earnestly to conclude the peace, yet the
battle was like to join, and often by iterating hot speeches they both grew to
exceeding rage, which again by Palians and Montelyons good persuasions was
assuaged: Growing to this Conclusion, a Peace was ratified for two years, in
which time Ambassadors should be sent to the King of Persia, and Macedonia, to
entreat their royal assistance to make an end of this controversy, Persicles
heart could hardly endure to yield to his foe any further, or abstain himself
from present revenge, or appoint his rightful Estate to be determined by the
doubtful case of arbitrament, in his heart scorning the Armenians should have
so much scope limited, as though he had any interest at all in his Kingdom,
but rather, that he should then either absolutely win all, or loose all: but
regarding how much he had troubled Deloratus and the Persians, who now desired
to return home into their own Country, but most of all, himself desirous to
travel in search of his dear Constantia, from whom he had been long absent:
For whose sake he would have lost his life, Kingdom and Liberty: whose
absence was a continual grief to his Conscience, and a restless torment to
his heart: for whom he had endured many thousand broken steps, utterly
despairing of finding her, but that, nor length of time, nor other ambiguity
could cause his heart believe, that he should find her, and that she was
living: therefore he constrained his royal heart to yield to any thing.

And having taken the King of Armenia's Oath, not to interrupt him in his
Kingdom, until the time prefixed, they parted, Persicles to the City, and the
King with his Army into Armenia. Palians heart was linckt in such loving
admirations of Montelyons virtues, that he humbly entreated his Fathers leave
to stay in Assyria to bear him company, but he denied him, reproving him
greatly, and with bitter terms checking him: but notwithstanding, within few
days in disguise he departed. The King would have sent after to stay him, but
that he was earnestly entreated to the contrary by his Nobles.

Palian being kindly welcomed of Montelyon, disclosed the cause of his
departure from his Father, only with no other intent, but to enjoy his
company, and by show of duty to do Persicles Service: which proceeded not of
any colored or imaginary dissimulation, but from the depth of a constant
resolution. Such a sudden Metamorphosis had the view of Montelyons virtues, and
his Fathers tyranny wrought in him, that he admired the one, and abhorred the
other. Of which he gave such manifest tokens, that Persicles had no cause to
misdoubt him, nor Montelyon to refuse his familiarity.

CHAP. XVII. How after the Peace concluded, Persicles left the Government of
Assyria unto Pisor, determining himself to travel in search of Constantia.
How they arrived in Persia. Of their honorable entertainment, and of other
contrarious accidents in Love that befell in their Persian Court.
AFter all these troubles were ouerpast, the Persian Soldiers richly sent home
into Persia, and Persicles had established his kingdom, leaving the same to
the government of Pisor, he determined to travel in search of Constantia,
making the occasion of his departure, to be to accompany Deloratus into Persia,
none but Pisor and Montelyon knowing the contrary.

By the way as they went Cothanes desired them to vouchsafe to visit his
Habitation, which the rather they did, to see the robes that were found about
Montelyon. They were honorably welcomed thither, and royally feasted.
Cothanes Lady bringing forth the packet, which they opened and well viewed,
neither Deloratus nor Persicles knowing any of them, for they were such as
Constantia had in Arabia. Amongst the rest, there was a Jewel of exceeding
beauty and richness, which Montelyon in the presence of them all put about his
neck, vowing never to part with it until he had found out his Parents.

Afterward they departed, Montelyon leaving Cothanes and his Foster-mother,
bewayling his departure with abundance of tears. Within few days they
arrived in Persia, the King sending out Troops of gallant Knights to attend
them, the States, Nobles, and Peers of the Land in rich attire to entertain
them, and himself with the Queen, Piera and Lanula his eldest Daughter with a
number of other gallant Ladies forsaking the Court to meet them. The Citizens
likewise hearing of their approach, prepared to entertain them with
delightful shows, the Knights met them some two miles from the City,
welcomming Deloratus with reverence, and the other three Knights with
courtesy. Next the Nobles embraced them, and at the City gates they saw the
King with his royal assembly staying their coming, unto whom Deloratus
kneeled, whilst they with tears welcomed his safe return, and whilst he
embraced Piera, and his sister Lanula, the King and Queen welcomed Persicles:
And when he had left them to speak to Piera, they demanded of Deloratus who
those strange Knights were. The one of them (quoth he) is our late reconciled
friend Palian, and the other is the most valiant Knight Montelyon, that by his
valor has both preserved our lives, confounded his Enemies, and won
himself immortal honor. The King of Persia had Palian welcome into Persia,
he likewise embraced Montelyon, who with humble reverence kneeled at his feet.

All that there beheld him, admired that one of such young years should be
endued with such honored Chivalry; especially the Ladies with their nice eyes,
surueighed each part of his perfect lineaments, which they found to be most
exquisite, judging none like him in comeliness but Persicles. All tedious
saluta^ions being ouerpast, until they came to the Court, entering with such
royalty, as it drove an admiration to the beholders eyes, there might one have
beheld the people with greedy desire by multitudes thronging to behold them:
but especially the White Knight, every one asking which was he, that he
himself might hear them, which oftentimes made the blood revive in his
cheeks, with such a blush, that it might easily have been discerned. To
rehearse every particular would be over tedious, and to stay long in recital
of their Royal entertainment, Feasts, speeches, and welcomes, would detain
you from the hearing of Constantias misfortune, for such entertainment there
was, and every thing performed with such royalty, as might have beseemed the
greatest Monarch of the world.

After Supper, the time of rest being come, the aged King and Queen bad
goodnight to their Ghosts, and every one betook themselves to their several
Lodgings, remitting all conference until the next days opportunity.

Persicles being alone, spent most part of that nights rest in studying which
way to Journey in search of Constantia, Montelyon in consideration of his
unknown Parents, Palian surfeiting in love with Praxentia. She in commendation
of Montelyon, Deloratus in pleasure with Piera, and the old King and Queen in
joyful remembrance of all their safety, every one possessed with a several
conceit, until that slumbring sleep overcome their sense.

Early the next morning they forsook their Beds, Persicles and Deloratus in
conference with the King and Queen, and Piera in the hearing of Praxentia, and
diverse other Ladies, rehearsing the wars in Assyria, and the manner of their
victory, Montelyon in company of Palian, commended the royalty of the Persians
Court, and the beauty of the Ladies. Which s^eech they entered into by reason of
Palian, whose heart could not choose but utter his inward thoughts, which had
entertained a furfeiting view to Praxentiaes beauty, which was so exquisite, as
it might have entangled the senses of any man, with their beauteous object:
Only Montelyon rested as free from, as one that never thought of love, having
his senses so fully possessed with desire to find his Parents, and search for
Constantia, that no other thought could enter his breast. But such a contrariety
had blind Fortune wrought amongst them, that every one desired a contrary
thing, for Palian doted not so much on Praxentias, as she did on Montelyon, and
he was so far from thinking such a thought, that it was in vain for her to
hope: Palian seeking opportunity to give her knowledge thereof, and she
expecting when Montelyon should proffer love to her: and he on the other side,
seeking means to hasten his departure, which he would instanly have done, but
that he could not so soon seek to leave the King of Persia, nor his sister:
but notwithstanding the King of Persia requested him to stay a month, which he
could by no means deny, Palian was glad of this, and Praxentia was not sorry,
only Montelyon thought the time would be too tedious, because his affections
were wholly bent on his journey.

CHAP. XVIII. How Praxentia sent her Nurse to Montelyon with a message, the
Nurse took Palian for Montelyon, and to him discovered her secrets.
PAlian devised by all means he could to have conference with Praxentia,
refusing rest, food, and company, to study thereon: oftentimes enjoying her
company, but not the opportunity he expected, surfeiting with beholding her
beauty, and tying himself faster in the snares of love, and finding no hope of
comfort. But on a day it thus fell out. Praxentia desiring ease, sent a
Damozell to an old Lady, named Lanula, willing her to come and speak with her,
who instantly came, and being alone Praxentia, having this conference. Lanula
(quoth she) I have occasion to your assistance, in a matter of great secrests,
which I have refused to impart to any but your self, for the good opinion I
have of you, wherein you only may do me pleasure, and everlastingly bind me
to requite the same. The old Lady was so forward of her self, that without
further entreating we swore by many Dates she would faithfully execute
whatsoever she desired, were the matter never so great, yea though she hazarded
her own life thereby, I have no reason to mistrust you, quoth she, yet I
cannot but fear to tell it, and blush at the rehearsal thereof, Lady, quoth
she, will you pardon me, if I tell you what it is: is it not love: Yes, quoth
she, it is so, I am in love, but I fear I am not beloved, and him I love, so
honorable a Knight as the world yields not his like: but being a stranger
and unknown. I know he dares not tell me what he loves because my Father will
never consent thereto: notwithstanding I could be contented with his estate,
were it never so mean, might I enjoy him, I have often been in his company,
showing my self desirous thereof, which any but himself might perceive: but I
spent that labor in vain, and shall do still, unless you work some means
in my behalf. Let me know his name (quoth Lanula) and before many hours be
past, I will by some means or other have conference with him. He is the
strange Knight Montelyon, say what thou will to him, without impeaching my
modesty, and I care not: for not being by, I shall not blush, neither care I to
hazard any thing. For if he once go from hence I shall never see him again. As
she had spoken that word she saw him walking alone toward the farther end of
the Garden, at the entrance into a grove. Yonder he is, quoth Praxentia, Lanula
told her, she would even then speak, and to that intent with have she went
down the stairs. Montelyon being come to the farther end of the garden,
espied Palian lying upon a bank either sleeping, or in a deep study, passing
by him unseen, for that he desired no company, entering the Grove. Lanula
likewise seeking him, espied Palian, not knowing either, saluted him in stead
of Montelyon, saying, Sir Knight, to you I think I have a matter of importance
to discover if your name be Montelyon? Palian answered not, but with courtesy
had her say on, There is a Lady of great renown in this Court that bears you
deep affection, who committed her counsels to me but with no intent I should
disclose them, yet I pitying her grief, whom I am bound in all duty to
pleasure, and withal wishing your preferment, am thus bold to intercept your
meditation: hoping that this news cannot be but gratefully accepted, I
heartily thank you ( quoth he) assuring you that I am every way as deeply in
love as any, but with one so far my better, that fear to offend, makes me
silent: therefore I pray let me know her name. It is Praxentia quoth she. And to
her said he, I owe my life, love, affections, and liberty. Sir ( quoth she) I am
glad hereof, and if you will follow my directions, I will work to effectually,
that you shall enjoy her love, whosoever says the contrary. I will be wholly
ruled by you ( quoth he) neither will I refuse any attempt to attain the same:
therefore I pray you tell me where I may find you, and soon in the evening I
will repair to you. My name is Lanula, quoth she, and you shall have me in the
Lodgings over the Posterne in the private Garden. With that she departed,
leaving him in a deep meditation, what to do to enjoy her love, and how to
do it without dishonor to himself, and injury to Montelyon, but that he
thought impossible: entering into these meditations, how contrary is my hap to
all good success, that makes me hazard my honor and to adventure such a
task as may bring me to perpetual infamy? How often already has my life
been hazarded by Montelyons hand? and yet I like a frantic man, forsake my
friends to follow him. Could any thing have fallen out more miserable, then for
me to dote on her, that loves another, and he the only man that has always
prevented my good fortune? Shall I then cherish this love, or root it out of
my heart, as a poison that will infect my Soul, for the King of Persia will
never yield his consent. And that which is worse, she will never love him she
hates. I will therefore leave off, and sal^e the wound before it be past
recovery: and rather abandon this Court, my Life, Friends, and Country, then
sue for love in another man's name. Reuoluing a thousand of these contrarious
thoughts, at length he espied Montelyon coming back from the Grove, whom he
saluted in this sort. Sir Knight, as I lay slumbring on this Bank, my senses
were greatly troubled with your remembrance, and me thought an ancient Lady
taking me for you, told me, that a Lady of great Dignity did love me
exceedingly, and that she of purpose came to know how I was affected. Further
my dream continued not, but as I awake I espied you, and have uttered all to
you. Now what Lady this should be, I know not, unless it be Praxentia.

Montelyon made this answer: What this should mean I know not, neither is it
to be regarded. For dreams are but idle Fancies, procured by the conceit or
imagination of the Dreamer: thinking that of another that he wished to
himself, which is more likely: For the Princess were ouer-fond to place her
love on so dejected a stranger as my self, and if she did so it were in vain:
for my Fancies being now at liberty, cannot become Bondslaues to affection,
were it to the greatest Princess in the World, I speak not this, as rejecting
her courtesy, but as one that esteems himself altogether unworthy thereof.
It may be, said Palian, though you account your self fortunate, yet you dare
not trust me, and therefore you conceal it. Not so quoth he, I have uttered
all I think, or ever entend. Palian was very glad to hear him say so, yet
made no show thereof: passing the way betwixt that and the Palace, in such
like communication.

CHAP. XIX. How Palian in a disguise had conference with Praxentia, who took
him for Montelyon.
HAving left Montelyon, he got himself to his Chamber, exceedingly troubled
in his thoughts, betwixt a striving to overmaster his Love, and yet to love,
and attain his love without hazarding his Honor: but his affection had the
superiority, and those sparks of virtue which were but newly kindled in his
thoughts vanished, and he resolved to try the uttermost issue of that
Stratageme, though it were in Montelyons name. Evening now drawing nigh, he
remembered his promise, which was to repair to Lanula, therefore thither he
went, but so secretly as might be, where he likewise found her staying for him,
of whom he demanded what good news? Lanula shutting fast the door, thus said
to him. After I returned from you in the Orchard, I went to Praxentia, and told
her what speeches I had with you, which revived her heart with joy, willing me
to let you understand, that it is not lewd desire, immodest love, nor
indiscreet intemperancy that has procured her to this liking, but the report
of your valor, regard of your virtues, and the work that Nature never wrought
in her before: therefore she requires you be constant, secret, and loyal: nor
to regard her love the less, for that it was easily won, but to impute the
same to Destiny, that had ordained him unknown to that honor, to be beloved
of her, that has ordained him unknown to that honor, to be beloved of her,
that has refused to match her self to the greatest Emperors in the world. By
Heaven ( quoth Palian) my heart is tied to her in such bonds of constant Love,
that should she command me to rip my heart from forth of my breast, I would
do it to fulfill her desire, and show my duty.

Few words (quoth Lanula) are sufficient, therefore know, that by reason of her
Fathers displeasure, she dares not openly converse with you, but she has
yielded to be directed by me, and therefore late this Night come to my
Chamber, and I will get you the habit of a Gardner, in which disguise you may
with safety through the Garden enter her Chamber. Palian yielding her many
thanks, departed, whilst she went and certified Praxentia what we had
determined. Whose love being grown to a settled resolution, and desirous to
ease her self disquiet, gladly consented thereto, thinking the time
ouer-tedious, company troublesome, and her Supper unsavory, to taste the
sweetness of her stolen affection. Palian at the time appointed went to
Lanula, who had already provided his disguise, wherewith he apparelled
himself, following her directions to find the entrance to her Chamber.

Palian being entered the Garden, soon found the door fast shut, but Praxentia
having a sight of him out of her Window came down her self to open the same.
His heart was so ravished with joy of her presence, that he could not instantly
speak: but humbling himself upon his knee, he said. Virtuous Lady, I humbly
desire you to pardon this my boldness, which I would never have undertaken,
had not some formed hope animated me thereto: but since it is your gracious
pleasure so much to honor my unworthiness, I humbly give my poor heart to
your disposition, which shall account it self everlastingly happy to be
employed in your service.

Good Knight (quoth Praxentia) had I not been fully assured of your virtues, I
would never have admitted you this favor: therefore I accept your gift, and in
exchange thereof will give you mine: so that you promise me to use it
honorably.

Else let me become the infamous reproach of all the World, let my joys be
turned into sorrows, my health into sickness, my pleasure into pain, and
all that I wish to prove my good, to be my everlasting misery.

Your Protestations dear Knight, quoth she, are of sufficiency to overcome my
yielding heart, that harbors no misdoubt of your disloyal meaning, but it
is fully assured your virtues cannot harbor dissimulation, that is altogether
different from virtue: therefore trusting you more then my self, I admit you
that favor, I never before granted, which is to receive you as my chosen
Friend, trusting you will prove as faithful as I desire, and will not reward
my favor with disloyalty.

Which said, taking him by the hand, she led him up into her Chamber, where
many speeches past betwixt them, he with earnestness entreating her consent to
love him, and she binding him by many vows to be constant.

He durst not utter many speeches, least it might bewray him: with all his
conscience guilty of deceit, withheld him from boldness, and though
peradventure she would have taken any thing in good part, yet fear to be
discovered himself, made him think no such matter, but his behavior so near
as he could, framed himself to the estate of Montelyon. Which likewise pleased
Praxentia well, who though she were very affectionate herself, yet she imputed
his colored modesty to virtue, and his dissimulation to pure honesty, that by
this conference he was fully assured of her love, and she nothing doubting of
his loyalty, being constrained by reason of the days approach, to break off
their communication, referring their next meeting to Lanulaes direction: for
that time both parting with many courteous farewels, she fully contented, he
somewhat discontented, that he had attained that favor in anothermans name,
which if he might have claimed as proper to himself, he would have deemed
himself most happy. Clogged with these Cogitations, he gate to Lanulaes
Chamber, to whom he discovered his fortunate success, telling her that in the
evening he would repair to her, to know Praxentiaes pleasure, and her
direction, when and where to speak with her again,

CHAP. XX. How Montelyon was in love with Praxentia, How he was still prevented
by Palian of speaking to her. And how he in disguise lay with her.
Early the next Morning Praxentia forsook her rest, and although she had
slept but a little that Night, yet she was loath to be accused of sloth, and
apparelling her self, framing a more then ordinary kind of merry countenance,
for that her mind was more then wontedly contented, she attended the Queen in
company of the Lady Piera.

It so fell out that day, that the King of Persia himself, with the Peers of
the land, feasted with Persicles, Palian, and Montelyon, which fell out
according to Praxentiaes wish, that she might behold her beloved Knight with a
surfeiting view. Palian like wise was no less glad then she, that he might
behold her on whom his heart was fixed: and every one saving Persicles and
Montelyon, had their hearts inclining to disport, only they two rested sad,
heavy, and unpleasant, which was easily to be espied, and was chiefly noted of
Praxentia with one conceit, and Palian with another. All the dinner time
Praxentiaes eyes were fixed on Montelyon, Palian on her, and his bending
downward with a heavy aspect. Which drove Praxentia into many cogitations:
sometimes thinking he disdained to look on her openly, who had shown her
self so affable in private: then she thought it was care to discover her love,
which is easiliest discerned by the eyes; but when again she saw he made no
show at all of regard to her, her color often changed, sometimes with grief,
sometimes with anger, sometimes with fear, fixing her eyes steadfastly on him,
and then glauncing about to see if any noted her, Palian noted her; and well
understood her meaning, as earnestly noted her behavior, as she did
Montelyons: often changing his countenance, sometimes with fear to be seen,
then with a jealous conceit: then again, with an amorous thought, and again
with accusing of himself, for disloyal dealing toward her and him. Pieraes
mind was most at leisure to note all, which she performed with diligence, but
seeing their eyes placed upon contrary objects, she thought there was as
contrary a Simpathy in their affections, both perceiving Palians double
conceit, Praxentiaes disquiet, and Montelyons careless regard of either. By a
privy token unseen of any giving Persicles an instance thereof, who quickly
conceited her meaning: and jumpt with her in opinion, all the dinner time
noting them. Which being past, and music filling the room with pleasant
harmony, Persicles pulling Montelyon by the sleeve, whispered these words
softly in his ear.

Friend, rowse your self from this sad dumpe, do you behold how you are
noted? Upon my life the Princess Praxentia is in Love with you: and if it be
so, may you not then account your self mo^^ happy.

My Lord, said he, you are disposed to jest, no such good fortune will fall to
my lot: and yet if it did, I know I should never enjoy it. Why (quoth
Persicles) had you but seen so much as I, and noted her looks, you would
think so much as I: follow my counsel, do but try, and you shall find it so.
What if she were the Empress of the Universal World, would you not venture?
and were she not the better to be beloved? and you the less cause to
despair, if she would refuse your love, all the doubt you have, is her Fathers
dislike: neither fear that, Time may bring things unthought of, to good
effect. Do but follow my counsel for this time, and after I will tell you
more.

By this time the Music was ended, and even with that Montelyon cast his eye
upon Praxentia, who steadfastly looked on him: her heart being so much grieved
with contrariety of thoughts, that the water was ready to overflow her
eyelids. When Montelyon, saw that, he presently began to conceive hope, and by
little* and little, love stole the possession of his heart. Withal he
remembered what Palian had before said to him: all which seemed likelyhoods that
it was so. Whilst he continued in these thoughts, and with more boldness had
viewed her well (whose eyes were never off him) the Music began to sound
again, and the old King of Persia, being pleasant and merry with feasting,
took the Queen by the hand to dance, Persicles seeing that took Piera. Then
said the King is there none will make a third? With that Piera desirous to show
Monteyon any favor, desired him to do it: but he with mildness and low
courtesy made a refusal, in regard of his duty to the King of Persia but
suddenly Palian stepped up, and took Praxentia to dance with him, who being of a
mild behavior, refused not, and the rather that none should note her affection
to Montelyon, which she assured her self, he could not call in question.
Montelyon was exceedingly vexed to be so prevented, yet smothering the same
with a pleasant countenance, the music being ended, the King of Persia with
the Queen departed leaving them to their recreation.

Then Palian began to be disquieted with fear least Montelyon by conference
with Praxentia would make known his last deceit, and he by that means be
prevented of all future hope, that he used such means, that Montelyon could
have no conference with her which he by reason of his fear durst not with
boldness seek, nor ^ore greatly expect, thinking to have ^ time of more
convenience to meet.

All this time Montelyon did but entangle himself faster in the snares of
affection, still looking to like, and liking to love, and the more he looked,
the more he loved, being for that time only contented to look, for other hope
he attained not, by reason of Palians prevention, and his own fear to be
accounted over bold, which she thought she might well impute to his mean
estate. The time of departure being come, and every one ready to bid adieu,
Praxentia gave him a flood of her love, with a gentle and kind love, and he her
of his duty with a low courtesy.

Every one parted, Praxentia troubled with doubt of she could not well tell
what: for waying his behavior, she could not compare it to be like the
behavior of an assured Lover: neither could she account it disdain nor want
of government, for she knew him wise, nor want of au^^^ity, for he was bold
enough in other matters; nor to inconstancy, for she could not perceive his
looks ^ent upon any other. Troubled with a multitude of these passions, by
reason of her little suspect of the truth, she made the best construction of
all things, wishing Palian ha^ been further off that day, whom she thought of
purpo^e intercepted their conference. But to ease her of these troubled
thoughts, Lanula comes in with a message from Palian who as soon as the
company was parted, went to her, and noting with what little respect Montelyon
had that day regarded her, he thought some misconceit might cross he purposed
intent: and fearing withal, lest she should send to him he ^ent this message:
that withal humility he desired her not to misconceiue his meaning for the
little respect he gave to her, was with no other intent, but to avoid
suspicion, his he art being entirely bound in all duty to her command. This
message pleased her well and banished all mists of care from her heart,
deviding with Lanula, for a convenient time to have conference with him.

Montelyon likewise had taken such a view of her beauty, that he now yielded
to be Loves thrall, and according to his distempered mind, could ^e pleased
with nothing but solitariness, in ^ilence to meditate upon his fortune, on his
love, and on his likelihood to at feign thereto, on Palians prevention, on his
unknown estate, and on his vowed Journey in se^^^^ of Constantia* troubled
with such contrarieties, that he could not resolve himself of any comfort:
tiring his Senses with meditating, wearying his heart with grief, and
weakening his body with abstinence, void of hope* means, or comfort, and yet
neither able to despair, nor scarce daring to go forward, then he thought to
write, but he wanted a feere^ Messenger: then he thought himself to speak
with her* but he store^ a denial would be his reward, and that would be worse
then death?

Thus troubled in mind, he betook himself to his rest, scarce able to give
his eyes one minutes rest until morning: and then again as void of comfort,
as if he dreamed of a thousand impossibilities, neither able by the counsel of
Persicles, nor otherwise to devise a mean to speak to her: for his love was
now so violent, that it could not be permanent, Fortune intending quickly to
overturn the same: for Paly^n by indirect policy dealt so cunningly that by
often recourse unto her* he at the last won her to such an absolute consent,
that she rested wholly at his disposition, never coming to her but in secret,
and so late, that all lights were out: besides Lanula being old, first taking
him for Montelyon, never made question but that it was he: by which means, he
passed still vndiscried, and betrayed the secrets of her heart to his privity,
that whatsoever he desired, she would perform; and whatsoever he counseled
her unto, was but to prevent all means of discovering his disloyalty:
persuading her to keep her Chamber for many days, which she likewise
performed. That contrary to her expectation, with distemperature of watching,
and keeping her self in the close Chamber, she began indeed to wave sickly,
which Lanula made known to him, appointing him the next day to come to her,
and he should know when again to visit her: in the mean time, she had
wrought so with the King and Queen, that they had appointed her to be her
Keeper, and none might come at her, but by her sufferance* which pleased
Praxentia well. Night being come, Palyon got him to Lanula's Chamber, where he
found her of purpose to meet him, declaring all that had happened, appointing
him that night to come thither. Lanula returning to Praxentia, would not make
known his coming to her that night, with no other intent but that Praxentia
should not break her sleep.

At the time appointed, Palian was in the Garden, and Lanula ready to receive
him, conducting him up the stairs of Praxentiaes Chamber, who was in her bed
and fast asleep. Palian senting himself close by her, although the Lights
were extinct, yet by the light of the Moon, which with her cleerest light
shined upon the Bed, he might take a perfect view of her: who by reason of the
heat, lay with all thy Curtains folded, and the Covering that lay upon her so
thin that the full proportion of her delicate body might easily be discerned,
the same being turned down beneath her wast, with her neck naked, and her
Iuory breasts passing description, laying forth their beauties, her arms spread
the one above her head, the other down by her side.

Palian beheld this pleasant sight, which was able to ravish the Senses of a
most modest beholder, where with his heart was so enflamed, that he had much a
do to abstain from touching that beauty. After, he had not stood long, but
Praxentia being distempered with some slumbring motion, awaked and espying one
so near her Bedside, was ready to give a shrike, but with more regard marking
his habit, she knew him, shrowding her self from his sight, until he
entreated her to pardon his boldness. Protecting his intent was not to
disquiet her. Neither am I disquieted quoth she, how I know you, but I
marvel I was not acquainted with your coming, it is Lanulas doing has thus
immodestly used me. I humbly beseech you (quoth he) take no offense thereat,
but pardon us both, the greatest fault being mine, for which I am contented to
bide any punishment. Your punishment (quoth she) cannot be great, your offense
being done to me, that love you more then my self, having given my self to
you, that if I have discovered modesty will not permit, yet the offense being
procured by you, you may pardon it. The sight quoth be, can procure no offense,
for that it hurts not therefore in seeing I committed not injury: but where
there is mutual love, and consent in love, there nothing can breed offense but
disloyalty, which is as far from me, as impossibilities: therefore I trust I
can offend no way but in that, and in that I will never offend. All this (quoth
she) may be granted in you but not in me. For I account it a great offense to
be immodest, and nothing more contrary to perfect virtue.

You cannot offend in that (quoth he) to me, for having given your self mine,
why should I not both see, touch and enjoy you? the first being granted, the
last cannot be denied. It is not the outward action that unites th^e heart but
the inward consent.

I deny not (quoth she) all that I have is yours, by mine own gift and free
consent, yet you must forbear possession until the bargain be confirmed by
witnesses: otherwise your Title is not good.

Yes (quoth he) my Title is better by your gift then by a thousand witness:
for if you deny they cannot avail me: therefore since you cannot deny me
interest, yield me possession. These words were intermingled with many kisses
and embracings, able to stir affection in senseless creatures; so that
Praxentia understood his meaning more by his behavior then by his words; that
she said.

Dear Knight, I understand your meaning, which I will not, nor cannot grant,
but in any thing else you shall command me, only I desire and am resolved to
preserve my Virginity without blemish: therefore good Knight request not that,
having so much as you cannot desire more, my self, my company, my love, my
life, and all are at your disposition, only I challenge you (as you are a
Knight) not to blemish my virtue.

Notwithstanding he so much prevailed with her at the last, that she gave her
consent he should the next night be joined to her in marriage, by such means
as she would compass, and then he should without denial attain his desire.

This contented him not, but he grew to such importunate requests, intermingled
with such Oaths and Protestations, being such as no reasonable creature, but
one of a shameless disposition would have uttered or requested: withal
framing in himself such a kind of desperate behavior, that she could not tell
well how to deny him: that at last she called Lanula unto her, whispering a few
words in her ear: whereupon we presently drew the Curtains, and went out of
the Chamber. Palian seeing that, put off his apparel, and laid himself down
by her, folding her delicate body in her arms, with sweet embracings,
expressing both their loves, but Praxentia kept her word, for notwithstanding
he did what else he desired, yet she reserved her Virginity vndissolved.
Adjuring him by so many entreaties to leave that unattempted, and often
intermingling her words with such effusion of tears, that the hardest hearted,
and most remorselesse creature in the world would have yielded unto: Promising
him if she did not compass her marri^ge the next night, yet he should
assuredly attain his desire, though she hazarded her self to accomplish it.

In these and such like speeches, the night was unawares to them overpast, and
the necessity of the time enforced his departure, so that taking his leave of
her with many ceremonious farewels, he apparelled himself, and left her to
meditate on that which had past betwixt them.

CHAP. XXI. How Montelyon discovered Palians deceit, and how he was in some
sort revenged. Hasting Persicles to depart in search of Constantia.
IT fortuned that Montelyon that Morning was early up, and more early then
any used, possessed with a troubled head, and a Loue-sicke heart, and walking
up and down the Gardens, at last in a heavy dumpe be sat down in an Arbor
right over against Praxentiaes Lodging, even at such time, as Palian departed,
who seeing one in secret come from thence, he privily followed him, till Palian
came to his Lodging. Montelyon then began verily to think that it was some
Messenger, either sent from her to Palian (...) returned with answer of some
Message he had delivered, or that it might be Palian himself, whom he
resembled in proportion, though not in habit.

The day now waring aged, he found out Persicles, with whom he kept company all
the day, thinking indeed it was Palian himself that he had seen, for that he
kept his Chamber most part of the day: when it grew fowards night, he again
disguised himself, and gyrding his Sword to his side, he entered the Garden,
and as he walked by the door, with purpose to take up his standing in the
Arbor Lanula was come down by that way, to bring a Friar in, which should
secretly knit up the marriage, according to the agreement betwixt her and
Praxentia, and espying one go by, she thinking it had been he that appointed
to come; called, saying; who is there, Montelyon? He hearing that, said, it is
I* You come too soon, quoth she, the Friar that should marry you to Praxentia,
is not yet come, whom I am now going to seek. Montelyon was half amazed: but
thinking to find out the truth, said; What shall I then do? Return to your
Chamber, quoth she, and chang^ your Apparel; for if you come in this, she will
be offended, for she is very fearful, and many troubled thoughts have possessed
her head this day: she did fall out with me wonderfully, for bringing you in
the last night* when she was in bed, and when she had me draw the Curtains,
and be gone. I thought you would have pleased her ere ye parted: but in faith
tell me, was she not kind? Had you not that you would have? Montelyon blushed to
hear her immodest questions, making no answer, soothing her until her
flattering tongue had bewrayed all the mischief herself was guilty of. Well,
quoth she, stay hereby till I am returned, and then you shall go in with me,
for I dare not let you in before.

Montelyon wondering at this ^ccident, by the circumstance of that he had heard,
assuring himself, that some man in his name had attained Praxentiaes love,
which fretted his heart with such vexation, that he was ready to run mad with
grief: but calling himself to better remembrance, he said: you may save that
labor, I have dealt with a faithful friend to that effect, who promised to
meet me here within this hour, therefore return to Praxentia, my self will
stay his coming.

Lanula thought nothing, but went in, telling Praxentia why she returned so
soon. Montelyon covering his Face, as privily as he could from being discryed,
walking up and down by the door, and within short space espied Palyon
coming, asking, who was there. Are you Montelyon? I am he, answered Palian: I
am the Friar (quoth he) that am appointed to marry you to Praxentia, with that
Palyon embraced him, desiring him to make no question, but with all speed to
dispatch the thing he had undertaken. I will do it, quoth he, out of hand:
being both together come to the Door, and by Lanula brought up into the
Chamber, Praxentia embraced Palyon saying: Welcome my dear Knight Montelyon,
this joyful hour shall make us both happy, which I have with great desire
wished for.

I cannot (quoth he) yield you more then hearty thanke^, vowing by Heaven and
earth never to deal disloyally with you, in thought, word, nor deed: therefore
according to your pleasure let it be done: Montelyon so well as he could,
counterfeited the Friar, desiring to have a light. My friend, quoth Palyan, it
may discover us. Shall I then quoth he, marry I know not whom. Lanula said,
never fear to be discovered, for on my life, there is none suspecteth it: with
that she lighted a candle, setting it a far off on the Table. With that he
said to Praxentia, this is not Montelyon, but some villain, that has betrayed
you: and discovering his face, both knew him. Praxentiaes heart with sudden
grief, fear and amaz^ment, was ready to burst, he with a pale and dismayed
countenance, stood as one transformed; and Lanula with fear and abundance of
tears, stood wringing her hands. Praxentia could not speak a word with grief
to be so deceived by him she most hated: and he with very shame, stood as one
senseless: whilst Montelyon said, What disloyal and dishonorable dealing is
this in a Prince, whose mind should harbor nothing but virtue, can
dissimulation take such deep root in a royal breast, then well may base-borne
Peasants be excused for barbarous and faithless dealing: unworthy to b^e so
worthy of that name: Was there none to exercise your detested practice upon,
but the daughter of a royal King, and in the name of a strange Knight, that by
his deeds seeks honor, what impiety can be compared to this, or who can
hope for virtue in that breast that harbors such deceit: Indeed such an Act
desires obscurity: therefore you did well to deny us light: for were it day,
the Sun would blush, or withdraw her bright splendour amongst the mystie
Clouds to behold it. Well may he live, but for ever will he be hated, that
seeks to fulfill his content by such dishonored impiety.

Base fellow (quoth Palyon) presumest thou upon my lenity to abuse me: I count
it not dishonor to win the love of so beautiful a Lady, by any hazard: yet
it grieveth me, that I was compelled to name my self after him that I account
my in^erio^r, I quoth Praxentia, you are inferior in birth, but not in virtue.

By Heaven quoth Montelyon, thou have so much dishonored this Lady, and
injured him, that thou art not worthy to live, and were it not for offending
her sacred eyes with slaughter, she should behold thy Massacre. With that he
drew his Sword.

Nay good friend (quoth she) stay thy hand indeed it will offend me: Therefore
let him go, and live to his dishonor and my shame: for I will not be guilty
of his death. And I beseech thee as thou favourest virtue, not to disclose this
to any, least hearing it spoken by others, it procure my death, as for him, I
think shame of himself will withold him from blazing his own and my
reproach: for Lenula she has done me wrong against her will.

For my part dear Lady (quoth he) it shall never pass my lips, whilst life
does last, for I so much abhor the fact, that I hate to speak of it.

Palian seeing his policy disclosed (though it was now no time of
recantations: for he well perceived Praxentia absolutely hated him) he was so
overcome, that he stood as a living creature transformed to a senseless
picture; whilst Praxentia pull^^ from of her neck a rich Jewel which she gave
Montelyon, in consideration of his pains, withdrawing her self from their
company.

Palian what with shame and grief went thence in a rage, ready to run mad,
spending his time in such anguish, studyes, plots and devices, which was to
win her Love, that before many days he became so sick, that all men
expected nothing but his death.

Montelyon casting off the affection he had entertained, with conceit that
Palian had dishonored her, as he might well suppose by Lanula his speeches,
hasted Persicles in search of Constantia, not once discovering w^y he had so
(...) altered his mind, resolving never to set his fancy on any Ladies beauty,
which did but disquiet the mind, and make it unapt to practice virtue:
purposing never to l^aue searching, though it were through all the world to
find his parents, and (...) him in search of Constantia.

The day (...) being now come, they armed themselves, none knowing the intent
of their departure but Piera. Taking their leaves of the King and Queen with
great solemnity, the hearty love of thousands of Persians, wishing them good
success, many seeming dead with grief for their departure, who with their
Tilt, Turneyes and Tryumphs, had delighted the eyes of the beholders. Persicles
was armed in black armor, with all his furniture correspondent: and Montelyon
in an Armor of silver, without any devise at all therein, with his Steed and
furniture as white as Snow, that by their difference they might easily be
known from all men.

CHAP. XXII. Of certain strange adventures that befell Persicles and Montelyon,
by which they were parted. And the conference that Persicles had with Delatus,
which contains the History of Delatus his misfortunes. And how Persicles by
Delatus counsel returned into Assyria.
BEing without the City, and parted from all company, they traveled directly
toward Arabia, spending many days journey without adventure, and ouerpassing
y^ tediousnes of their travail in conference of sundry matters, but especially
Persicles desciphered the favor, proportion, beauty, and countenance of
Constantia: that Montelyon might (if he came in their company unknown) the
better know her. With tedious travel they arrived in a pleasant Valley,
through the midst whereof ran a most pleasant River, whose Crystal streams
ran with great swiftness, washing the Peble stones in her bottom so clear,
that they might easily be discerned, riding along by the Rivers side, they
beheld a far off two Damzels all in white on horseback, crossing the Meadow
with such swiftness, that they were both soon out of sight, Montelyon
desiring to know what they were, desired Persicles to return. With that he
spurred his Steed, who ran so swiftly, that the earth seemed to shake under
him: he rode a mile before he could overtake them, but so soon as they espied
him, they turned back, and before he could ask the question, one of them
said: as you are a Knight and favor the distress of wronged Ladies, pity us,
and vouchsafe your aid to redeem our Mistress, that even now was taken away
from us by three mighty Giants.

Fair Virgins (quoth he) I profess Arms, and to my uttermost will I aid
you, else were I not worthy of the name of a Knight: therefore let me know her
name. She is Daughter to Amphiador Duke of Ila, her name is Philotheta, for
beauty, virtue, modesty, shape, courtesy, humility, temperance, chastity and
wisdom* not to be equalled, therefore the more to be pittyed, and succored in
distress: we are posting back to bring this heavy News to the Court, and
whilst we stay here, she runs in farther danger. Which way went they
(quoth he) directly by the way we came said they, whom we would have followed
further, but that we durst not venture over the River after them. With that
Montelyon turned back, declaring to Persicles what he had heard. If report lie
not said Persicles, the Damozels have not flatteringly praised her, I have
before this heard of her. Then both of them hasted to follow her, passing the
River with much danger of drowning, by reason of the depth: They had not rode
above two hours, but after they met a Country Swain, running forwards and
looking backwards so fearfully, as if he had been nearly pursued. Fellow,
said Persicles, what aylest thou? O Sir, quoth he, I met with three the
monstrous Creatures that ever I beheld, carrying a Lady that made wonderful
Lamentation. Hearing that, they posted down the way which was beaten plain:
at last the same parted into two ways, being doubtful which of them to seek,
at last they concluded to part, embracing each other, as if they should not
meet again: Persicles on the right hand and Montelyon on the left. Of whose
several adventures, strange accidents befell.

Persicles rode on with great swiftness, not once able to set eye on them, for
that way they went not, therefore he spent much labor in vain, until it drew
to night, and then he thought it vain to seek them wandering along to seek
some convenient place to rest in which he could not do, for those Deserts were
uninhabited. At last drawing near unto a Rocky Hill, he might espy a
glimmering light, as it were to shine through the hollow Cliffes thereof, and
thitherwards he drew, perceiving it to be some poor Habitation, he alighted,
tying his Horse to a Bush, and knocking at the door, which of it self opened,
he espied an aged old man sitting over a little fire in which he was busily
turning of Roots which he roasted. Who casting up his eyes, and espied
Persicles, said to him: Come in good Knight. Distress I know has brought you
hither, else would you not walk those Deserts so late. Pardon me good Father,
quoth he, this bold intrusion: You guess aright of my estate, for I have
wandered out of my way, and sought long for some Habitation, but was frustrated,
until I was drawn hither by the sight of your Candle, Sir (said the old man)
you are welcome, and I would I were able to comfort you in some good sort, but
such as this my poor Habitation yields, if you please to stay this night,
shall be at your command. Neither are you the first that has been entertained
thus by me, therefore disdain me not, nor my goodwill. Father, quoth he, I
gratefully except your good offer, and thank you for this kindness, that
exceeds my desert, or means to requite: and the rather I desire your company
and conference, for that I am but a stranger in these ^^untries, and would
gladly hear something thereof by your report. Sir (quoth the old man) first
sit down, and take such spare Diet as my store affords, and afterward I
will be ready to declare what I can to satisfy you. Which when they had done,
the Hermit thus began.

Sir, I shall first discover what I am, and the cause of my living in this
desolate obscure place: and withal discover those things that (you may
suppose) are beyond my knowledge: For no want of misfortune, nor fear of being
discovered, has made me choose this kind of life, but mine own voluntary
fancy, which persuades I can no other way live, so well agreeing with my
unfortunate disposition: neither would I have you think I intend to fill your
ears with idle prattle or repitition of toys, but as I intend to ease your
heart with some of the care it possesses: So I desire you by hearing my
misfortune, and ayding my estate, to ease me, or at least, to comfort me with
some hope of your favorable assistance: for I know your name, your Country,
your cause of travel, your means of remedy, and your success hereafter:
which I will declare unto you, after your patience has heard out my tragic
History, which I cannot choose but utter first. Persicles wondered to hear his
speech, little thinking he could perform what he promised, but yet determining
to try him, and desirous of comfort, he entreated him to proceed, for he was
desirous to hear his Discourse. Sir, said the Hermit, my name in my
flourishing estate was called Delatus, my dignity the Dukedom of Ila, which I
enjoyed many years in great quiet being both enriched in the gifts of Fortune,
and of Nature: for in my youth I chanced to set my affection on the beauty of
Alsala, Daughter unto a Gentleman of Antiochia, not for her possessions, but
for her beauty, which surpassed all the Ladies of the South parts of this
Continent. I sued long and at last attained her consent, married her, and
brought her into Ila, where I lived with her a year in great quiet and
content: being within that space enriched with a Daughter, naming her
Pilotheta, in her Infancy showing that more years would perform in her more
exquisite beauty, which is the Virgin that you now travel in search of. Living
in his blissful content, there chanced a Knight named Amphiador to take a
view of my fair Alsalaes beauty, which at the first sigh^ ^ierced so deep
that he was entangled therewith, and labored by all means to grow into
Familiarity, thereby to enjoy more fully her sight, and company: Fortune and my
self so favoring him, that I esteemed so well of his company, that I thought
my self not well when he was from me: He on the other side seeming so much
to affect me that I admired at his kindness. All this time did he insinuate
himself into Alsalaes company, she likewise esteeming so honorably of him,
that by reason of the love betwixt him and me, and her own little suspect of
his disloyal dealing, she at all times admitted him her company, and used him
so kindly and familiarly, that she made him privy to most of her secret
counsels. Notwithstanding, all this he durst not manifest his love to her,
seeing indeed her virtues to be such, that he thought it impossible to attain
it, thinking it better rather to live in silence and enjoy her company, then by
uttering his affection to be deprived of all comfort. Upon a time likewise, as
he did, there arrived at my Castle another Knight, named Pallesus, whom in the
same manner that he had done, surfeited on my Alsalaes beauty, and was both
admitted mine and Amphiadors company: both of us esteeming well of him for many
honorable qualities, that he was endued withal. He as little suspecting
Amphiadors love as he did his, nor I my self, nor Alsala once thinking any
such matter, for that one kindness bred in us such familiarity, that many
passionate and amorous actions might be acted: and yet on no side suspected.
Thus did I live in great content some two years, spending the time in Hawking,
Hunting, and other pastimes, as void of disquiet as heart could wish, thinking
my self happy in their kindness, but most in my fair Alsalaes love. They
with colored courtesy seeming to live by enjoying my good company and
familiarity, and she as much as I esteeming them for their love. But at last
this pleasant Summer began to turn to Winter, and our sweet content to
discontent, for Pallesus love burst into a flame, which he was unable to
restrain, that in secret sort he gave my Alsala knowledge thereof, which was as
delightful for her to hear, as it is for one to hear that he has drunk
poison: but notwithstanding, her mind being endued with courtesy, and herSoule
with Virtue, in kind sort she reprooved him, wishing him not to prosecute any
such matter, for she would never yield thereto. Notwithstanding her courteous
denial bred in him no remorce, but rather a hope of comfort, that continually
he followed his suit, which bred an exceeding trouble and disquiet in her
heart, that whereas she was before delightfully pleasant, she became oftentimes
so Melancholy and sad that I wondered thereat, but could not learn the cause
thereof, thinking it had been rather some Sickness then passion of mind.
Being long in this sort troubled with his love, she began to devise how to be
rid of it, but so as it might not come to my knowledge: for virtuous love made
her loath to disquiet me, relying upon Amphiadors virtues, she thought by his
assistance to rid her self of Pallesus: and therefore on a time, being with
him alone in secret, she declared the whole circumstance of all to him,
declaring his counsel and dissuade Pallesus from intending me such dishonor.
Amphiadors heart was suddenly possessed with a jealous conceit against the said
Pallesus: but withal he meant by that means to attain his de^^re, therefore
coming to Pallesus, he told him what Alsala had made him privy unto, not
dissuading him, but counselling him to persist therein, promising he would by
all the means he could further the same. Pallesus was somewhat comforted
therewith, and Alsala was more cheerful, as hoping by Amphiadors means to be
rid of her Lover.

Amphiador one day, being alone with me in my Forest, first using many
entreaties to me to be secret, and binding me by many Oaths, without his
advice, not to declare it to any: he told me that Pallesus did make love to
Alsala, and that it was likely she would yield thereto, giving me knowledge
that oftentimes they met in secret, and withal counselling me but to note
their glances and behaviors, and I should find that to be true which I then
least thought of: Protesting that mere love to me, in regard of mine Honor,
and his own duty, bound him to discover that, which otherwise he would never
have revealed. With this my mind was much disquieted, nevertheless I would not
too rashly give credit to his speeches, before I had observed their behavior
some time, which I found to be somewhat familiar, on deep affection on his
part, but on hers, with a contrary intent, left her countenance should bewray
his love to me, which she knew would breed my disquiet: by reason of Amphiadors
persuasions, who continually augmented my suspicion, I verily began to suspect
them, and grew to extreme jealousy, assuring my self they dealt disloyally
with me, purposing to work revenge against them, but then he began to persuade
me to be well advised, and not to condemn them without manifest proof: as
much persuading me from thinking so, as he had before done to persuade me
thereto: but then nothing could alter my mind, my vehement suspect neither
suffering me to be quiet, nor yet to find his deceit: So that one day being
alone, ^ complained against my hard Fortune, and her disloyalty: in the midst
of which complaints he found me out, intending by my overthrow to work his
own desire. I seeking him so near me, after much conference desired him as a
Friend to counsel me the best way to salve these evils, to be assured of the
truth, and yet to do it without mine own reproach, or her scandal: for that
I was loath to accuse her without just proof.

If I may quoth he, presume to counsel you, thus would I advise you to do:
the King is now sick, and has sent for many of his Nobles to come to him: say
you likewise that you have received Letters from him, and that you must three
days hence depart toward the Court: By this you shall easily find out the
truth hereof, and at the time of your departure, desire Pallesus to bear you
company: which if he refuse you may then judge of him accordingly: My self
will then accompany you unto my Castle, wherein you shall remain in secret
some certain days, and I in a disguise, unknown of any, will return and by
my faithful diligence, will from time to time note their behavior, and so
find the truth thereof. I liked well of his counsel, and followed the same,
making my departure known to Alsala, who with a heavy heart lamented to hear
of my absence, which then by reason of my suspect I esteemed to be
dissimulation. Amphiador in the mean time went to Pallesus, and told him that
I intended by reason of some conceit or suspicion, I had lately conceived, to
carry him with me unto the Court: and therefore he willed him to be absent at
that instant. The time of my departure being come, I thought to try Pallesus,
but he was gone, which augmented my suspicion to a resolution: but intending to
try the uttermost of all, and trusting to Amphiadors faithful dealing, I went
with him unto his Castle, staying there some three days: in the mean time (I
thinking he had been returned to my Castle) he went to an Enchanter named
Penthrasus, and brought him to my Castle, showing him Pilotheta, promising him,
that if he would but work means to rid me away, that I might never return,
when she came to years, to procure her to consent to his love. Penthrasus at
the first sight liked the proffer, and promising to undertake the same, taking
a solemn Oath never to discover the same. Now fearing least some other should
prevent him, and to avoid his Wives suspicion, who had great knowledge in
Negromancy, and often by her skill, crossed his practices, and withal unwilling
to be any way guilty of blood, after I was delivered to him, he brought me into
this place, casting such charms and incantations upon me, that I shall never
be released: which when he had done, he told me the cause why he had done it,
and withal Amphiadors practice against me, I then entreated him to release me*
promising him to fulfill whatsoever Amphiador had promised him: but no
persuasion could prevail, for he told me he had bound himself by a solemn
Vow to perform it, which he could not break, for if he did, with that he
should loose the virtue of his Art. Then did I lament my Misfortune with bitter
exclaimes: but he told me it was in vain, and so departed. Here did I live
many years, until I was quite past all hope of comfort, thinking to end my
days in this place, without ever hearing of them again: but at last
Penthrasus came to me again, rehearsing the sequel of this History as
follows.

Amphiador being sure enough of me, returned to my Castle, and coming to
Alsala, after long circumstance and protestations, told* that the day that I
went from thence, Pallesus having before complotted such a Stratagem, had set
upon me with an ambush of men, and slain me, telling the same with such
protestations and probabilities of truth, that Alsala could not choose but
believe him, counselling her in secret to apprehend him, and cast him in
Prison. Alsala had much ado to keep life within her body, having scarce
breath enough to command her Servants to apprehend him, whilst Amphiador
labored with such as were about her to keep life in her.

The rumor of my death was soon spread abroad, and my Servants believing the
same, some posted to the Court, some searched for my body, neither finding me
alive nor dead, for which Amphiador still had an accusation: ready to satisfy
any doubt, Pallesus hearing that it was Amphiador accused him, and for no less
matter then my death, according as he well might, denied the same, by often
entreaties desiring Alsala, to let him be admitted to his trial: but she
overswayed by Amphiadors persuasions, being before troubled with Pallesus Love,
whereby he fought to dishonor me that was his friend, which bred a persuasion
in her, that to attain that, he sought my life, would give no credit to him:
but resolved he would dye. And within few days apparelling her self, her
Servants, and all her attendants in mournful weeds, she departed toward the
Court, craving Justice of the King against Pallesus for murdering me: the King
told her she should have justice, Pallesus was brought before the King, and
there accused by Amphiador, he alleging what false accusations he could, and
the other still pleading his innocence, that in the end Amphiador desired the
King to grant him the Combat against Pallesus, which should end the doubt of
this Controversy. The King granted it, and appointed a day for the trial. In
which cruel Fortune so ordered the issue, that Pallesus was slain, and all
men accounted him guilty, and me dead, yielding much honor to Amphiador, and
the King in recompense of his supposed loyalty to me, and for that I dyed
without an Heir, created him Duke of it, yet reserving the living to Alsala,
during her life. This being done, Alsala returned toward Ila and Amphiador
with her, but very sore wounded: of whom he had a most special care, tendering
him as her self, for the Love he had shown her in becoming her Champion for
revenge of my Death.

After he had recovered his Wounds, he continued many days with her, not once
mentioning any Love to her, seeming with her to mourn for my loss: But as all
things by Time wear out of Remembrance, so did her Sorrow of me, and she began
to conceive well of him: Which he perceiving, prosecuted his Love with such
success, that in the end he married her, and ever since has lived with her:
Which when Penthrasus declared unto me, it attained my heart with deadly
grief. Then I desired him to release me from that misery. Neither do I intend
to claim the performance of Amphiadors promise, for that Philotheta was Fair,
Chaste, and Virtuous: Neither will I reveal this secret to any but your self,
nor shall you depart from hence, until the adventure of the Enchanted Tower be
ended, built by Helyon, wherein he has shut Constantia, Daughter to the King
of Persia, and betroathed Wife to Persicles King of Assyria* Who shall be the
first Knight that shall arrive in this place: Neither shall that Enchantment be
ended by any but Persicles Son, begotten of Constantia: For (quoth he) the
date of my Life is near an end: and at such time as Persicles arriveth here
(Will him, when he has heard this report) to return into Assyria, to
establish his Kingdom in Peace; For it will be in vain for him to spend his
Days in travel to Redeem her, the finishing thereof must be by his own
Son. When he had spoken these words he vanished, appointing me to a certain
Bound which I cannot pass, nor any yet came into but only your self, which
assures me that you are Persicles, and travel in search of Constantia. You
have (said Persicles) filled my heart with Fear, Hope, and Comfort, the one
striving to over-master the other fear, that the Enchanter dissembled: For
that I have as yet no Son, nor never shall have by Constantia: for she being
still Enchanted, how shall I attain her company? Yet again I am somewhat
comforted, that he could as well tell who should finish the Enchantment he had
made, as of my coming to this place: For I am the most forlorn King of
Assyria, that shall never enjoy comfort until she be released, which doubt
persuades me will never be; For if I must now return into Assyria how shall I
hope to find comfort? Yet he of good comfort, quoth Delatus: for hope has
preserved my life many years: assuring my self that Penthrasus told me
nothing but what was true, and shall assuredly come to pass, both your
comfort, and my long looked for Releasement, being appointed both to one hour:
Why should you then despair more then I, since both our comforts rests on
our release? But according to his Counsel, travel no further, for it were
feign to do that which can yield no hope of comfort.

In doing that (quoth Persicles) I shall both dishonor my self, and leave my
Friend unkindly, whose Deserts has bound my life to requite his Love: he has
only for my sake undertaken to travel in Constantiaes search: the cause of
whose departure from me, was in search of your Daughter Philotheta, that is
reputed Daughter to Amphiador, who was this day stolen from Ila, by certain
Giants: Then he declared how they came to knowledge thereof. It did him good to
hear that she was living, insomuch that he rejoiced exceedingly thereat:
Withal, enquiring of him what knight that was, that was gone in her rescue.
Persicles then said, it were too tedious to make Recital of him: for then I
should rehearse the discourse of my misfortunes. Were it not (quoth Delatus)
troublesome to you, I would earnestly require your favor to hear it. To
requite your kindness (quoth he) I will rehearse the same, which yet I have
concealed from all men but Montelyon. With that he declared the whole History,
from the beginning of his first Love to Constantia, until that hour. Which
when he had heard, his heart was filled with Admiration, who that Knight
Montelyon should be, his Fancy persuading him he should end the Enchantment,
had not the doubt that he was Persicles Son given likelihood of the contrary.
The night was spent in these Discourses, and bright Phoebus lightened the
darkness of that Desert, Persicles neither willing to depart nor stay:
Sometimes minding to find out Montelyon, and to bid him Farewell: but at last
persuaded by Delatus, taking his leave of him with many Farewels, he mounted
his Steed, and so departed directly toward Assyria.

CHAP. XXIII. Of a Combat Montelyon fought against three Giants, and how he
rescued Philotheta. And what befell them in an Hermits Cell.
MOntelyon being parted from Persicles, hasted with more then ordinary pace
after Philotheta, still having intelligence which way they went, by such as met
them: he overtooke them about the setting of the Evening: using few words
until he had dealt some blows, running at the hindermost with so fierce a
carriere, that he overturned him with his heels upwards, the other two looking
behind them, began to laugh at their fellows fortune, thinking that he had
received that fall by chance: but looking further, they espied Montelyon
running so violently against the second, that had he not avoided the point of
his Lance, he had seconded his fellow, or light on worse fortune. With that one
of them said: This fellow is very bold now, but he will trust to his heels
anon. This said the first that was overthrown, ran toward Montelyon, offering
such a forcible blow at him, that had he not spurd his Steed to avoid him, he
had either slain him or his Horse, but he knowing it better, to fight on foot
then on horseback, alighted, whilst the Giant came toward him again,
thinking at one blow to beat him in pieces: the other two seeing him on foot,
went away laughing, but the Giant missing his aim, by reason of Montelyons
nimblenesse, was ready to turn about, with the force of his compass blow: in
which time Montelyon leapt within him, and thrust his Sword so far into his
Body, that he fell down dead: the other two hearing that, one of them came
running back to rescue him, whom Montelyon soon espied, being ready to
receive him: and seeing no more Ods, but one to one, thought his Combat was
not unequal. The Giant seeing the other dead, thought at once to end
Montelyons life, that he struck at him with all his force, but he avoided his
blow not yet daring to come within him, until he was somewhat out of breath,
being furious for revenge, but more mad to miss so many blows, he struck so
full and violently at Montelyon, that his mas^y Clubbe stuck in the Earth,
which whilst he labored to pull out, Montelyon struck him so full a blow on
the Arm, that he cut the same quite from his body, wherewith he gave such an
exceeding groan, that all the place rung with the noise thereof, running away
as fast as he could toward Montelyons Steed, whom he affrighted much with his
grissy and blustering approach, that he brake in sunder the reins of his
Bridle, and ran away with great swiftness: Montelyon was exceedingly vexed
for want of his Steed, not knowing for want of him what to do: and by reason
of the Nights approach he still pursued the Giant, keeping him within sight so
long as he could, which at last he lost: Seeing himself so disappointed, and
unhorsed, he began to study what to do: at last being past hope of either
finding them, or recovering his horse, by reason of the darkness of the night,
he went wandering up and down to seek a place of rest, and by chance lighted
on a Wood into which he entered, but fearing to rest, lest some wild Beast might
devour him, he wandered on, with purpose to pass through the same, where
suddenly he heard the sound of a big voice, which made him stand still and
listen, and with soft steps drawing thitherwards, he perceived it was the
Giants, that cursed and hand him for crossing their Journey. What shall we do,
quoth one of them, shall we stay here, or no? We shall wander I know not
whether, a plague upon that white Devil that haunted us. I am sure he is no
man, for we are men, and one man should be as good in fight as another, but you
two like Cowardly slaves, have suffered such a wretch to have advantage against
you. Hold thy prating quoth the other, thou could have done no more then
we: thou need not vex me, I am vexed enough with the loss of mine Arm.
Let us rest here until it be day, and then we will away, for he has work
enough to find his Horse.

Philotheta was so affrighted with fear, that she lay like one in a dead
trance, to whom one of them said. Sweet Philotheta, be not discomforted nor
offended with me, I have loved thee long, and long expected this happy hour
to enjoy thee: be content to Lodge on the cold Earth one night for my sake,
that have lost many a nights sleep for thine; neither shall thou lie on the
Earth, for my body shall be thy bed, whilst mine arms embrace thee: Then did
he take her in his Arms, bestowing many a loathsome slavering kiss upon her,
but she for fear durst not cry, being almost dead with grief. Montelyon stood
and heard all their vnreverent usage, wishing it were day, that he might
revenge their disloyalty. They had not lain long, but first the one and then
the other fell fast asleep, which Montelyon easily perceived by their routing,
thinking it no discredit to slaughter such miscreants that delighted in no
Knightly action, but in wrong and oppression: there withdrawing unto them,
Philotheta espied him and at the first sight by reason of his white armor knew
him: desirous she was to speak to him, but fear to awake her Keeper withheld
her, and yet she knew the care of her affright, detained him from revenge: At
the last, so boldly as she durst, she lifted up her hand beckning Montelyon to
her, and pointing to the Giant; Montelyon understanding her meaning, thrust his
Sword into him that had her foulded in his Arms, who striving with the pang,
gave her liberty to leap from him, roaring forth such a groan, as all the
Wo^d rung therewith, and his fellow half amazed, started up ready to run away,
but Montelyons Sword overtaking his hindermost leg, at one blow cut in sunder
the sinews, and he fell down, holding up his hands for mercy: Montelyon with
the next blow pierced his brains, and so he dyed a most miserable death.

The other had received no deadly wound, for the point of his Sword lighting
upon one of his ribs, was stayed from ending his life; who whilst Montelyon
was slaughtering the other, he had recovered his staff, bending a full blow at
Montelion, who by good Fortune, and Philothetaes strike, turned about, and
espying the same coming, broke half the force, and running in withal, ran
his sword quite through his Adver^aries body, and with the bruise he had
received, fell down himself in a trance.

Philotheta thought he had been dead, running to him with great striving, with
her tender hands to unbuckle his Beaver, and unlace his Helmit to give him
breath; which though long, yet at last she attained, but in vain: for he lay
as a man quite bereft of Life; her Lamentations were such as would have turned
revenge to remorse, and those senseless trees into tears, yea the Birds
hearing her moan, left off their pleasant notes to listen to her complaints,
the very Earth seemed to weep to receive her moystned tears, and all the
empty Air resounded, as repleat with her waylings. Aye me unfortunate Creature
(quoth she) to be the cause of so worthy a Knights death: How shall my unhappy
life make recompense for his loss? It had been better these Savage and
inhumane monsters had devoured me, then this Knight should have lost his life
in my rescue: better it had been that I had dyed in my Cradle, then to live to
see this dismal day, though he be a stranger to me and I have had no trial in
his virtues, yet his actions show the honor of his mind: his valor, his noble
education, and his courtesy, his wo^thy birth: I know by his Armor he is not
of Arabia, his honorable mind, not hope of requital, procuring him to venture
his life in my rescue, which he has too untimely both hazarded and lost: which
no doubt, will be as great a loss to his Country and Friends, as ever any
endured. Were he once revived, I would not care what became of my self, nor
needed I not to care for his virtuous Valor would shroud me from injuries, and
be as safe a harbor as security can afford. Her Lamentations could not so
end, but she lengthened them sometimes with weeping, sometimes with lamenting:
and then again ready to drown her sorrowful heart in salt tears. Aye me
(said she) what shall now become of me? How shall I escape further misery? Here
I am left alone ready to be devoured of wild beasts, yet what need I fear any
mischief, when so great misery is befalne me, as greater cannot be. Her
laments conducted the steps of an aged Hermit that dwelt in those Woods, unto
the place where she lay weeping over Montelyon. She suddenly espying him,
being half affrighted, said. If thou be a man pity me, and help me to reviue
this Knight. If thou be a Ghost think not to affright me, for I am already
full of fear, and if thou be neither, then tell me what thou art? Damzell,
said he, fear not, for I am a living Creature, as thou art, I pity thy
distress, and well do my best to help you. With that he kneeled down by
Montelyon rubbing his cheeks, and laying his hand upon his breast, felt some
sign of life in him, and seeking for an herb which presently he found, he
bruised the same, letting the juice fall into his Nostrels, with the virtue
whereof his vital senses returned to their former operations, and his eyes
received their sight: With that raising himself up upon his arm, he said: I
perceive I have troubled you, and as it were half ashamed of himself, he
desired her not to be disquieted with his misfortune. Philothetaes heart
rejoiced to see him revived now he was revived, not so well knowing what to
say, as we did when he was in his Trance, but her virtue and his desert
constraining her, she could do no less then utter these speeches. Sir Knight,
your courtesy so far beyond my desert, hindeth me to yield you thanks, and
thanks is an insufficient requital for your pains, although I know you not,
nor never saw you until this day, yet our valor and courtesy in delivering
me from Captivity, has bound me to become grateful, and deserves more
recompense then I am able to yield. Lady (said Montelyon) the Heavens have
assisted you, not my Valor: which I have attempted without expectation of
Recompense: If you think well of my pains, it is all the reward I crave.

The old Hermit perceived some strange accident had brought them thither,
desired them, for that Montelyon was sore bruised, and she much affrighted and
disquieted, to accept of his Cell to rest them in, until they could take
better order for their safety. Montelyon thanked him (saying, he was pleased,
so it liked the Lady.) With that they began to go, but Montelyon, by reason of
his sore bruise, with much ado could stand: The Hermit taking him by the arm,
supported him, whilst he with grief, that his misfortunes had brought him to
such a low estate, said: It ill beseems Youth to be supported by Age: but no
man can prevent Destiny. Philotheta offered to lend him her arm, but he
desired her not to trouble her self. Sir said the Hermit, refuse not her
courtesy, for in time of need it is not good to be curious. With that she lent
him her arm, but he took her hand, and that he thought too much boldness, as
the other trouble, striving against the weakness he had received by his bruise,
to go upright: she like wise wondered that Nature had wrought such a familiar
regard in her, toward him she knew not; often accusing herself of Lightness,
and blushing when he grasped her tender hand, that with fe^re, and Fancies
striving, moystned his Palm; thinking with her self. How is my estate
altered, that to day was free from care, and so suddenly brought to Bondage,
and from Bondage to this disquiet, and all in a moment? I am now like one that
is content with misery, and yet discontented with that Content; I could wish my
self from hence, and yet were I gone, I should wish my self even here again,
because I desire this Knights Welfare, and yet me thinks I should not be too
Familiar, and yet I know he has deserved much more courtesy then I can
proffer. My mind is affected with a regard of his welfare, and yet am persuaded
I should not do so: and if I should not do it, he might accuse me of
discourtesie: and if I be too kind, he may deem me too affable. I would fain^
know my disquiet, and yet me thinks I am not disquieted, feeling my mind
troubled, and know not why, desiring to shake it off, but not knowing how: it
is regard of him, not of my self that troubles me, and yet I neither know how
to think well of him without my own disquiet, nor how to be quiet without
him: many such like cogitations possessed her fancy: that and other things for
her part shortning the way to the Cell, where they arrived: The Hermit giving
Montelyon a Potion of certain commixed Drugges, which comforted him greatly,
and Philotheta* a Cup of Greekish-Wine, which revived and quickened her
affrighted heart: There was no light in the Room; therefore as yet neither of
them had seen each other; Montelyon wished the day would appear, that he
might behold her Beauty; and she, that she might behold whether his person
were agreeable to his prowess: and the Hermit desiring to see what guess he
had entertained. Seeing them both silent, the one abstained for Grief, the
other for Modesty: After he had seated them on soft Rushes and Flagges, he
said: As it seems to me* you are either of you Strangers to each other, which
makes me desirous to know what accident has befallen you? Father (replied
Montelyon) indeed we are so; for as yet I never beh^ld this Ladies countenance,
yet I know her name is Philotheta, Daughter to the Duke of Ila: Which knowledge
I got by this means: As then I and another Knight were traveling in search of
a Lady, that has long time been missing, we chanced to espy two Damzels clad
in white, passing by us with great speed, with whom I entered communication, and
they told me that this Lady Philotheta was taken away from them by three
Giants, I returned to my Friend with this news, and both of us posted after
them, until at a Crosse-way we parted, thinking if they went either way we
should overtake them, but it was my good fortune to light on them, and by their
deaths to free this Lady, thinking my labor well bestowed to redeem her from
their treachery. Philotheta refrained her speech, only thanking him, fearing,
lest he should seem more courteous then modesty would permit, or more coy then
virtue required. Sir, said the Hermit, I know those Giants, and the manner of
their life to be most inhumane* and wicked, whose Habitation is not far off
in the Desert of Arabia, by whose Death, this Country is freed from much
outrage, which they have, and would daily have committed. Sir (quoth Montelyon)
I pray what Country is this? It is (said he) Arabia. Does not Helyon said he,
reign as King? Sir (quoth he) he did reign as King, but whether he be now
living or no, it is doubtful: for some suppose he is dead, others say, he is
Enchanted in a Tower he built himself, situate not far hence, from which he
cannot be released, until the Enchantment be ended, which many Knights of
strange Countries have adventured, but none could finish: the cause of building
thereof, as yet no man can tell. Philotheta having before heard thereof, weary
with that days travel, whilst they were in communication, fell asleep,
which Montelyon perceiving, remitted their communication till the Morning,
being unwilling to awake her with their noise.

The first that awaked was the Hermit, that went out to gather certain
herbs, leaving them both sleeping, who both at once awaked, at the first
blushing at each others sight, he wondering at her exceeding beauty, and she at
his exquisite person, he comparing the Damzels report to her beauty, and her
other gifts thereto, which he supposed beyond conceit. And she comparing his
valor with his youth, and his courtesy with both, thought her eye never beheld
her equal: standing as it were both Enchanted with the other, neither being
able long to withhold their eyes from each others sight, both noting each
others behavior, till Montelyon arose, and she did the like, he first
breaking silence, uttering these speeches.

Fair Lady, now that the Sun has vanished the misty Clouds of night, you
need not fear any mishap, for your enemies being dead; I think there is none
living of so inhumane a disposition, that would disquiet you For my self, my
life, and all that I have, rests at your command.

Sir Knight, replied she, I thank you for your kindness past, and now
proffered, which has rid me from that I was in, and out of fear of other
mishaps to come, for your Virtues have authority against wicked actions, and
your valor a sufficient defense against your enemies. Before any further
speeches past, the Hermit came, bringing in his hand the herbs he had
gathered, some of which he stamped into juice, and strained, giving Montelyon
to drink, others he boiled on the fire, making thereof a most dainty Dish,
which when they had tasted, the Hermit said: though I know you find your self
of sufficient strength, yet by my counsel travel not this day, for that
thereby you may much impair your health. My self if pleases this Lady, will
send a Messenger to Ila, to report her safety in this place. Not so (replied
Montelyon) my self (if please her to accept of my Service) will attend her
thither: which if it please her I will presently do.

Sir (said she) I would not have you endanger your health for my sake that am
in safety, until such time as you are perfectly recovered. Then said the
Hermit, you shall not in this place want any thing, nor fear disquiet, for
here has security dwelt many days, being my self glad, my poor Cell can
yield you any content. The Hermit went forth to get Provision, leaving them
together in his Cell, whose eyes were drunk with a surfeiting survay of each
others perfections, her beauty being such, as might not be equalled by any:
And his proportion besides his youths beauty, and other comeliness of such
form, as would please any Ladies eye, which superficial view of the eye,
conducted an instant of Love into each others part, which settled it self in
that virtuous harbor with such constancy, that it was impossible to be
removed: neither deeming each others so fortunate, to agree in such a Sympathy
of Love, he thinking she would not love, and she persuading her self he had
already settled his Love on that Lady he went in search of. He not knowing
which way to frame his Suit on so small acquaintance, nor she, how to show him
favor without further trial. She first breaking silence with a
heart-breathing sigh bred from the depth of meditation, whereupon he took
occasion to stay. Lady, that sigh be wrayeth some disquiet of mind that
troubles you, the occasion whereof, my small acquaintance and unworthiness to
be so bold, withholdeth me from enquiring, but if you would yield me such
favor as impart your Secrets to me, I would prove so faithful and diligent to
pleasure you, that you would commend my willingness, though not my ability:
For my heart wishes my tongue to utter that which my Fancy persuades me from:
not for that they disagree, but for that my heart harbors that which my
fancy bids me not ^tter, because it fears you will not believe it, and yet
you might believe it if it were of more antiquity: for it is commonly holden
for truth, that all things of Antiquity are permanent, which never would have
been if they had not first begun in youth, youth being the first Foundation,
the Foundation is then constant, then things though young of growth contain
circumstancy, which being cherished grow to perfection.

So Lady, if I might without your misconceit, discover the constant zeal of
^^ur perfections that is rooted in my heart, and find some spark of your
gentle favor to comfort it, it would grow to such settled resolution, that
nothing should remove it, but if in the first Spring it be blasted with
Disfavour, it will then spread it self into all parts of my Senses, tormenting
every part of me, until it be cherished by the dew of your kindness. I cannot
protest, nor vow, nor swear, that I have loved long, yet if your suspect
convert not the truth of my well meaning Words into distrust, I durst, protest,
vow, and swear, that love to your Perfections is settled in my heart an^
nothing can remove it.

Sir (replied she) should I credit your Words, or impart my Secrets to you, it
might be accounted too much credulity: yet without blame I might, it relying on
your Virtues: or should I grant it were as you say, that Love began in a
moment, being the root is the substance, and therefore permanent, yet how
would you think of one, if upon so small probability, I should thank you for
your goodwill, and accept thereof, not measuring me by your self, if you are
constant, but measuring me by inconstancy, would judge me light, as I may
well account your Words of course, yet as much good Will as may grow in so
short an acquaintance I bear you, measuring the same by your own: for if you
find cause to love me, I have more cause to be thankful unto you for your
kindness, that have received good by you. But neither esteem me light, for
being so familiar, nor easily to be won because I am courteous for should I be
coy, you might account me unmannerly, and not wo^thy to be assisted as I have
been by you.

Lady, replied Montelyon, would I harbor a thought that might impeach the
least title of your complete Virtue, I were worthy to be hated: for I know that
truth is plain, and needs no colored Phrases nor Curios^tie: which
animateth me to en^er into this bold conference with you, not framing my words
of course, but of true devotion, trusting that your virtue will pardon my
boldness, and your courtesy censure my meaning aright: for I find in my self
an unwonted alteration, which desire to be gracious in your sight, has bred in
me (Nature now (...) f^aming it) which I neither know how to manifest, nor dare
by reason of the small continuance a vow, though my soul knows my hearts
purity and consent thereto, fearing to be misconceived of you: yet if you will
vouchsafe to make trial of me, and grant me but to be your Ser^ant, in time to
be tried and censured according to my truth, I shall account my self most
fortunate, that yet hope may be anchor of my comfort, one day to be gracious in
your sight.

Sir (replied she) how could I but blame my self, if I should yield you any
favor other then for your late pains, which shall bind me to requite it to my
power* but love, being another subject, how should I give you any credit being
a stranger, altogether unknown to me? Lady (said he) you may do it, if your
gentle heart will yield thereto, though I am a stranger both to you, and to my
self, unknown: for that I am you can witness, but who are my Parents the
Heavens have yet concealed. My name if ever you heard thereof, is Montelyon: my
cause of coming into this Country, was with Persicles King of Assyria in
search of Constantia, Daughter to the King of Persia, his betrothed wife, by
misfortune lost many years since: all that I know of my self I have told you,
and would I had never known my self, unless you favor me. Philotheta
remembered that Amphiador in reciting the Wars betwixt Persicles, and the King
of Armenia, had made ample report of his Valor, so much the more with that
report loving him, yet she concealed the same from him, thinking though he were
never so valiant, yet he might be unconstant: making unto him this answer.

Sir, because you shall not altogether accuse me of discourtesie, I will not
quite deny your suit, nor in any respect grant it, until more convenient time
to make trial thereof, neither shall you name your self my Servant, for that
you have deserved to be better rewarded, which hereafter you shall find.

Lady (quoth he) one favor absolutely granted, would now more comfort my
heart, then many in suspense, nor that I misdoubt your performance, but that
long lingering pain in the mean time will pinch my heart: Therefore without
misdoubt of Truth, gratitude and constancy, enrich me but with one, though the
least comfortable answer.

Sir Knight (replied she) what in virtue I can grant, I will yield you, though
you may account me already prodigal in Favor, and gentle in reply: yet should
I be ungrateful, you might blame me, or too prolixe you might condemn me: but
as much good will as in so short continuance may be, I bear you, and you shall
find me perform, for my heart will never suffer me till this, to conceive so
well of any as I do of you: in urging me further you shall make me suspect
you: consideration of my late Misfortune, rather willing me to regard my
return to my Parents: but you may see your virtues have overmastered my
mistrust, and a good opinion of you, has made me trust my self (...) your
Custody.

CHAP. XXIV. How Amphiador arrived near the Cell, and of the doubt that
Philotheta was driven into: And of the displeasure that arose between
Montelyon and Amphiador: and of Philothetaes strange departure.
As soon as she had ended these words, the Hermit came in, which broke off
their communication, and telling them how that Amphiador with a many followers
were come into the Wood, where the Giants lay dead. Philotheta then thought all
care past, but suddenly remembering she must part from Montelyon, her heart
fainted with grief, and her senses were exceedingly troubled, for she knew
well Amphiador was so rude and suspicious, that he would neither thank him for
his pains, nor invite him to his Castle, for he had with like jealous conceits
disgraced others that had sought her love. Montelyon on the other side, studied
what means to use, still to enjoy her company; and yet he thought it would
turn to his dishonor to follow love, and leave Persicles search for
Constantia, and the knowledge of his Parents. But to rid them both out of their
troubled thoughts, there entered three Knights in green Armor, and without
speaking a word, two of them took Philotheta betwixt them, and led her out of
the Cell. Montelyon started up and drew his Sword, and following to rescue her,
but the third of them without speaking struck at him, where with began a
cruel Combat. At last the green Knight said: Thou strivest in vain, she is
past recoverie. With that Montelyon looking about, saw them quite out of his
sight, marvailing they could so suddenly convey her thence: If thou will find
her (quoth he) thou shall find her amongst the Hesperian Nymphs: which said,
he went away so fast, that Montelyon thought it vain to follow him. By this
time Amphiador and his company were come to him: amongst whom he espied one
leading his Steed, unto whom he went and said: Sir, this is my Steed, I pray
thee deliver him me: the Fellow denying him, he struck him a second blow with
his fist and overthrew him. Amphiador seeing that, said: What art thou that so
boldly strikest my Servant? Montelyon being vexed with the loss of Philotheta
answered, (...) will not now tell thee. Amphiador being likewise vexed with his
scornefulnesse, without more words drew his Sword, and struck at him:
Montelyon thought to revenge it, but suddenly remembering himself, he said:
Were thou not Father to Philotheta, I would make thee repent thy self:
Amphiador hearing him name Philotheta, would have spoke to him again, but
Montelyon mounting his Steed rode away.

The Hermit seeing them at such variance, came to Amphiador, giving him
knowledge of all that had happened: But he rather believing it was some mere
colored excuse for her escape caused his Servants to bind the Hermit,
intending by tortures to make him confess more then he could. Montelyon
remembering himself when he had rode a good way, how ingratefully he had left
the Hermit, turned back, which he had no sooner done, but he espied him bound
amongst Amphiadors men, Which vexed himso much that he drew his Sword again,
and set upon them, wounding some of them, and slaying others, that there with
Amphiador with his Sword drawn struck him again. By Heaven (quoth Montelion)
strike me the third time and thou die. Notwithstanding his words, Amphiador
vexed for the death of his Servants, struck him again, where with Montelyon
not only defended himself, but offended him so much that he had sore wounded
him, and had not his Servants with some of their lives borne of some blows, he
had ended his life: but notwithstanding, he left him in a miserable case, that
his Servants had much ado to keep life in him, until they brought him home.

CHAP. XXV. How Mont^lyon in his Travel arrived at the Flower of the Hosperian
Nymphs. How every one of them gave him a several gift, and how they named him
Knight of the Oracle.
MOntelyon having freed the Hermit, yielding him many thanks for his kindness,
departed with so heavy a heart, that he could scarce speak for grief,
travailing he knew not whether, having so many occasions of care, that he knew
not what to do, nor which way to direct his steps. All the rest of that day he
rode forth-right in this discomfortable sort, until it grew to be Night,
neither caring for Meat nor Lodging, but turning his Horse loose to feed, he
laid himself down under an Oak, whose spreading Branches were as large
Canopie over his head, clogged with so many diversities of cares, that his
heart was dulled with their confusion, and his Senses so overgrowne with
conceit, that they brought him into a dead sleep. In the midst whereof, he
suddenly awake, being called by a Virgin that appeared unto him, who standing
before him, said, Knight, arise, and follow me. Montelyon marvailing what he
should be, arose and followed her, she leading the way he thought, through
many bypath, and crosse-wayes, Hills, Dales, and Woods, until such time as
the Sun arose, she vanished out of his sight, and left him in the midst of a
pleasant green Meadow, beautified with all sorts of fresh blown flowers,
whose beauty delighted the eye, and sweet smell affected the Senses, looking
round about him, he saw the same encompassed with Springs, or Groves of young
Trees, and in the midst thereof, an Arbor, framed of fresh blooming Roses,
made with such Art, as he admired the same: coming near the^eto, he espied
the Floor strowed with green Rushes, and upon them, all sorts of flowers nipt
from the stalks: he stood a while with admiration beholding the same, and
casting his eye aside, he espied a Table with these Verses written thereon.

What ere thou be that shall behold this Writ,
Abstain from entering to this sacred place,
A Company of comely Nymphs here sit,
That rule the Hesperian Oracle of Grace:
Be not too bold, lest thou repent too late,
Thy rash attempt, and hard divining Fate.
Which when he had read, he stood in a deep study, arguing their Ambuguity,
when suddenly he heard the Sound of most sweet Music drawing near him,
turning his eyes that way, he espied a troop of Damzels, attired in most rich
Ornaments, with Garlands of Roses, mixed with diverse colored Flowers upon their
heads, some of them playing upon Instruments, others bearing in their hands a
Bow, and at their back, a sheat of Arrows. Amongst them there was three
taller, more beautiful, and richly adorned then the rest, wearing Crowns of
Palm: amongst them he espied the Damozell that brought him thither, which made
him with more boldness stay their coming, they passed by him continuing their
Melody, until they came within their Pavilion, then two of them came forth,
saluting him with most courteous and gentle behavior; leading him to the
Pavilion, until he came near to the place where they were all seated, and the
three principal sat in the midst, Montelyon Disarming his head, kneeling upon
his Knee, did them Rever^nce, whom presently he heard a voice uttering of these
words.

Most noble Knight, the Nymphs of the Hesperian Oracle, pitying thy cares and
troubles, have brought thee hither to comfort thee with our assistance: unto
which place never any man was yet admitted: therefore to deal not to any what
show have seen: with thy Sword maintain the^e honor, and name thy self,
Knight of the Oracle. Thy Parentage is Noble, thy Father not knowing he has a
Son, and your Mother not thinking to see either Father or Son, yet all of you
shall most happily meet: thy Fortune shall be good, thy misfortune great, that
which thou love best, shall trouble thee most: What thou think thy self
nearest, thou shall be farthest off: thy professed Friends, thy greatest Foes.
Thou were begotten in Persia, borne in Arabia, and brought up in Assyria. Be
constant in Love, true to thy Friends, patient in misery, and lowly in
prosperity. Farewell, and be both happy and unfortunate.

The Voice ceasing, the Nymphs came round about him, one vngirding his Sword,
another unlacing his Helm, and the third vnbuckling his Armor: Others taking
of his Gantlets, and every one busied to Disarme him. Which done, one of the
chiefest of them presented him with a most rich and curious engraven Armor,
wrought of the best and purest Lydian-steele, enamelled all over with green,
richly beset with Diamonds, Saphyrs, Iaspires, and Rubies, the like whereof,
for Strength and richness, never Knight possessed: Which when they had Armed him
withal, the Second gave him a Sheeld, agreeable thereto in Richness, with
this devise thereon: A Knight kneeling encompassed with Nymphs, Crowning him
with a wreath of Roses. And underneath, these Words written in Gold: The Knight
of the Oracle; The third presented him with a most rich Sword, which he gyrded
to his side, Another, a pair of Gantlets: another a Plume: another a Spear:
another a pair of Spurs, and every one something to express their kindness.
When he was adorned with this rich Furniture, which made him most beautiful to
behold, every one of them gave him a courteous Farewell, and departed again
the same way they came from the Grove, with their Music: the Damzell that
brought him thither, came to him, uttering these words: Knight, the Ladies of
this Oracle, pitying the hard Adventures you are to undertake, have bestowed
these Arms upon you, which shall oftentimes preserve your life: and have
honored you so much, as to choose you for their Knight. They have like wise
appointed me to bring you back to the place where I found you: Therefore let
us depart, my self will give you a Steed, whose equal for goodness cannot be
had. Which when she had said, she led the way, and he followed on, until they
came to a Castle, into which the Damzell entered, willing him to stay till she
returned, leading in her hand a Steed, black of color, but of such goodly
proport^on, that his eyes had never beheld the like before: when he was
mounted, the Damzell said unto him Knight of the Oracle, farewell, prosper, and
be fortunate, which she had no sooner spoken, but straight she vanished from
his sight before he could have respite to yield her thanks for her courtesy.
Being parted from her, he entered into these meditations, which shortened the way
as he rode.

How far am I blessed beyond my desert, having received such favor and gifts
of Nymphs, as yet never any man did, insomuch that they have elected me to the
high Honor of being their Knight: and yet for all this, I feel my heart so
much troubled, that nothing can rid me from disquiet, only for the absence and
loss of Philotheta, whom I had thought to have found amongst those sacred
Nymphs but was frustrated, which assures me, my travels in seeking her will
be tedious, yet I shall endure them, although they last to the end of my Life.
I have lost the noble King Persicles, who by this time accu^eth me of
discourtesie for not finding him out, but how can I do that, when I have lost
my self and Philotheta: and in her my essence, being, and substance: which of
these is dearest unto me, I know not: my self I love by nature, him for his
Honor, and her by affection, Which then should I first go in search of, since
they are both so dear unto me, as I think my self deprived of comfort,
missing either of them: my estate is also so uncertain, and the place where to
find them so doubtful, that I cannot assure my self of confidence in either,
but must take my Fortune as it falls, and arm my self with patience to
endure the most hardest trial of extremes: the intricacie of his hopeless
meditations, would have lengthened his speech, but casting off effeminate
lamentation, he quickened his Senses with revived comfort, though his travels
would be long, yet his reward (if he might find his Love) would a thousand
times countervaile them. Then he began to study which way to travel, being as
ignorant of the place that Philotheta was, as he was unacquainted in those
walks: riding along in those and such like solitary dumpes, he at length
lighted in a plain fair beaten Path, in the furrows of whose Dust, he might
perceive the footing of Horses that had newly gone that way, which put him in
some comfort that it would not be long before he should find some Company: He
had not rode about an hour, but the way into which he had entered, ascended a
high Mountain, whose lofty top discovered to his sight the fair Turrets of
the Enchanted Tower, which glistered as if they had been framed of Massy
Gold, which drove him into an admiration: but viewing well the Situation
thereof, he discerned the Valleys round about overspred with Tents, as if the
same had been encompassed with a Host of Enemies, Thither he intended to
travel, forsaking the gallant prospect, to be acquainted with the cause of
that Assembly, making the more have, for that it grew toward night: but ere he
could attain thither, it grew to he dark: therefore for that Night, he took
up his Lodging under the covert of a tuske of trees, pleasantly seated in the
midst of a green Meddow.

CHAP. XXVI. Of the Conference between Constantia and Philotheta in Penthrasus
Castle.
THe History has long discontinued to speak of the Lady Constantia that
remained Enchanted, and of Helyon that like wise lay their inthralled in great
misery, rightly rewarded for his treacherous dealing. Her eyes shedding
continual tears for the absence of Persicles, on whom she continually
meditated, resolving that nothing but death should abolish his remembrance,
that had not Ila comforted her with promises of her release, the extremity of
her Sorrow had soon ended her life: withal thinking that Persicles and her
young Son might both be in safety, and yet she by no means could hear
thereof: which also added some comfort to her heavy heart. Oftentimes she would
entreat her to behold the valiant adventures of Noble Knights that hazarded
their own Persons in the adventure for to attain her Love, and in private
tryall^ amongst themselves, with whom they were deeply in love, only with the
sight of her Picture, but she still refused it, accounting it no pleasure to
her to see their misfortune, that spent their labor in vain, for in the
continuance of so many years as she had been there enclosed, the fame of her
beauty was spread into most parts of those Countries, and many thousand Knights
had been their to try their Fortunes, but all failed: the recital whereof
would be ever tedious, but many of them lay their imprisoned by the
Enchantresse, who now being in despair of her own safety, sought to bring all
to misery, as well as her self: At such time as Philotheta was carried from
Montelyon in the Hermits Cell. Constantia remained in such extremity of sorrow,
that had not Ila wrought that device to bring Philotheta thither to accompany
her, it had been impossible her Senses could have overgrowne the extremity of
the passion tormented her: but sitting alone in a dark corner, best fitting
her sad disposition, she uttered such lamentations as would have turned the
flintiest heart of a most cruel Tyrant to remorse: but suddenly espying Ila
entered, and with her so beautiful a Damzell, with cheeks bedewed with
Crystal tears, that in aboundunce trickled down her face: with that object
she left her own laments to pity hers, and seeing them draw nigh to her, she
arose after a sad fort, saluting their sad aproach. Ila without speaking a
word, left them together. Though they were both women, yet both admiring each
others beauty, either thinking the other to ex^ell all, and yet had they beheld
their own perfections, they might inwardly have conceived as well of
themselves, as they did of the outward object.

Constantia being more familiar with sorrow then Philotheta was, first brake
silence, saying Lady, I perceive your tears that constraint, not your consent,
has brought you to this place, beautiful to the eye, but filled with
discontents, which long experience has taught me: therefore if you want a
companion in care, accept of my company, but if you seek for comfort abandon
me, for my chiefest solace is sorrow, and my very thoughts and meditations of
nothing but discontent. I have not (said Philotheta) been long subject to this
misfortune: but being now plunged therein, I know not how to release my self,
or how to shun the same: neither knowing who is the cause thereof, where I am;
or when I shall be released, that my Sorrows are such as may well entertain a
sorrowful companion, accepting your proffered kindness, with hearty thanks.

Lady (said Constantia) as you vouchsafe me your company, so let me know what
misfortune has brought you hither, which will shorten some of the tedious time
that we are like to overpasse in this place: Which done, you shall know to whom
you have imparted your mind, the recital whereof will be tedious, Philotheta
sitting down by her, uttered these speeches. My name is Philotheta, Daughter
in law to Amphiador: Upon a day as I was walking in my Fathers Garden, upon
what pretense I know not, three Giants surprised me, and by force carried me
thence, none to my knowledge seeing their cruelty: when they had travailed with
me until it waxed late, a Knight armed all in white, gallantly mounted, came
to my rescue, and entered Combat with the Giants, his valiant heart not
refusing to cop^ with all three of them. But one of them thinking himself too
strong for him, stayed to combat with him, the other two with have carrying me
away, but in short space one of them ran back to rescue his fellow whom the
Knight had slain, himself likewise returning with loss of one of his arms,
haling me forwards with violent force, until they came into the midst of a
Wood, where they meant to stay that night. This Knight directed by good
fortune, alighted on the place where they lay, and by his Valor and policy
slew them both, yet so sore hurt himself, that he lay breathless upon the
earth, which afflicted my heart with Sorrow, fearing his death, that I could
not comfort him in ought by my tears and laments, accounting it more
misfortune for me to be the cause of so worthy a Knights Death, then I my
self had been still Prisoner to those Monsters: the Heavens favoring my
sorrows and his mishaps, directed an old Hermit to the place, who with the
juice of certain herbs recovered him, and with my weak assistance brought
him to his Cell, within short space curing him. In which time I noted every
part of his perfections, and found them such as I want skill to decipher
comparing thereto his behavior, which bred a persuasion in me, that as he was
valiant, so he was virtuous, and as he excelled all that ever I beheld in
person, so he did in courtesy. Much conference past betwixt us, which I omit:
The Subject whereof was Love, which he averred to be as constant in him, though
new begun as it was in any by long continuance.

Amongst the rest of his speeches, he told me, that he knew not his Parents,
his name was Montelyon: the cause of his travel was in search of a Lady named
Constantia, betrothed Wife to Persicles King of Assyria who parted from him
that day he rescued me in Arabia. Constantia hearing of such good news of the
safety of Persicles, could not withhold her self from bewraying what she was:
but taking Philotheta by the hand said, dear Lady, this news adds much
comfort to my dispayring Heart, I am that unfortunate Constantia, that till
this time have dispayred of ever seeing that noble King again, accounting my
self so much bound to you, for being the happy reporter of this welcome news,
that I protest my self your everlasting Friend, assuring you, that if that
worthy Knight that rescued you be Companion to Persicles he is endued with all
Heroicke virtues: but I pray you tell me out the rest. The worthy Knights
speeches (said she) wrought so effectually with me, that I could have been
contented to have lived there with him for ever. In the end the Hermit brought
in news that Amphiador was hard by in my search, at which news I was very
glad, yet also displeased, with knowing his rude behavior would not suffer him
to use the strange Knight kindly. Whilst I was in this thought, three Knights
in green Armor entered the Cell, two of them without speaking a word, by force
carrying me forth, whilst the third stayed the Knight in Combat, who hastily
followed to my rescue: but of a sudden, before I could bethink me what they
should be* I was within this Garden, where I met her that brought me unto you,
who willed me to fear nothing, for here I should remain in safety. With that
such a flood of tears gushed from her eyes, that they stopped the passage of her
speech, turning the same into silence. Lady (said Constantia) to add more care
to my Heart, would overwhelme it with grief, therefore I will omit the
Relation of my Tragic History till another time, neither fearing nor feeling
care, now I hear of my Lords safety, who, will set me at liberty from the
thraldom I have here endured almost these twenty years. Ila coming to them
brake of their conference. After Supper convaying them to a Chamber, where they
both lay, continuing some days in much conference of their estate* which for
brevity sake is omitted.

CHAP. XXVII. How Montelyon Knight of the Oracle arrived at the Enchanted
Tower, called Penthrasus Palace. And of the controversy that fell between
him and the Knights that were come to try the Adventure.
THe Knight of the Oracle, as it is aforesaid, having lodged all night in the
Wood, early the next Morning before Golden Phoebus had beautified the Earth
with his brightness, mounted his Steed with an earnest desire to know whose
Tents those were, and what Tower it was they had encompassed, he had not rode
half an hour, but he approached near unto them, passing amongst them without
stay, because he met none to confer withal, he drew toward the entrance of
the Bridge, where Constantiaes Picture hung, which when he had well viewed, he
judged by the outward show thereof, what perfections were adherent to the Lady,
that was owner thereof, thereby calling to remembrance his Philothetaes
perfections, which in his conceit far surpassed that, but yet the Spell that
Ila had cast thereon, wrought so with him, that had not the Virtue of his
Armor, and other gifts the Nymphs had bestowed on him, which had power
against all Enchantments prevailed, he had surely doted thereon: when he had
read the Verses, an earnest desire possessed his heart to redeem that Lady, that
neither regarding Danger, nor omitting Opportunity, he took the Horn and
winded the same, the Sound thereof made many Knights start from forth of their
Tents, being but even then up, and newly Armed: the first, that was mounted,
and came to the Bridge: was a noble Knight of Parthia, named Menon, who calling
to the Knight of the Oracle, said, Knight enter no farther before thou know
whom thou have offended by thy bold intrusion. He hearing his words turned his
Steed saying, if I have offended any it is more then I know but yet I am
resolved to try the adventure who so ever says no. Menon said thy strangeness
does privilege thee, because thou know not what is concluded among the
Knights that are here assembled. Sir (said he) whatsoever agrees with the Law
of Arms I yield unto, and whatsoever courtesy binds me to I will perform:
therefore let me know what it is I must perform before I pass further? By
this time he was encompassed with Armed Knights: and one of them named Linseus,
of Arabia, that thought himself too good for all, and vanquished many that had
Combated with him, said. Before thou pass further, thou must Combat with us:
For the meanest of many that are here assembled, thinks himself able to
perform as much as thee. The Knight of the Oracle wondering at their rudeness,
and moved with his discourteous words, said: I am not to be controlled by any,
but stand free in mine own choice, to do what I think good: therefore if
thou or any here be offended with that I have said or done, Challenge me. I do
Challenge thee said Linseus, and I, said Menon: and after them many other,
every one desirous to deal with him first. The Prince of Parthia, (named
Nessus) stepped forth and said. Fellow Knights, we being all prosessours of
Arms, and every one a Partner in this Quarrel, let us cast Lots, and to his
share that the Lot, first falls, let him begin and the rest fellow: With that
they all agreed. The Knight of the Oracle thought he should not be Idle,
rejoicing that he had so good occasion to make trial of his Valor, The Lot
fell to Arnon of Persia to begin. The place, a goodly Plain, in the full view
of the Tower: and the time, was within an hour. This being agreed upon, the
Knight of the Oracle in the mean time rode about the Tower to behold the
beauty and Situation thereof, which he admired, and casting his Eye up, he
beheld on the Battlement a far off, three Ladies walking together, whom he
could scarcely discerne^ much less if he had been acquainted with them, know.
These Ladies were Constantia, Philotheta, and Ila, that came to behold the
Tilts and Turneys that were daily acted between many and diverse Knights before
the Tower. Constantia hearing of Persicles safety, and of his being in that
Country, hoping thereby in time to be released, desired to behold the
Combatants, which before she had always refused to do. The Knight of the
Oracle little thinking Philotheta had been one of the three, after he had a
while stood to behold them, returned to the appointed place of Combat, where
Arnon was then but newly entered with great Pride and the Sound of Trumpets, and
a number of followers. Whom the Knight of the Oracle, (notwithstanding all his
bravery) overthrew at the first Encounter, to Arnons amazement, and his own
glory. That done, the next that encountered him, was Linseus, who held out two
courses, but at the third, both he and his Steed lay on the earth. The Knights
that beheld this, commended his Valor, yet enuyed his Fortune. After that he
encountered three Knights of Egypt. Then came Nessus Prince of Parthia,
thinking to recover that his Precedents had lost, but his Fortune proved so bad
that he lost both his Styrrops, and had he not hung on the Saddle. Bow, he had
lain on the Ground. The Day by this time drew to an end, which caused them to
remit their further trial till the next Morning. Constantia and Philotheta
beholding the Valor of this one Knight, according to her desire, deemed it was
Persicles, the other Montelyon: desiring Ila, to send a Messenger to know his
Name: Who returning, told them he was called the Knight of the Oracle. Then it
is not Persicles (said Constantia.) No, nor Montelyon (said Philotheta.) Their
Hearts now fainting with care, that before were revived with hope. The Knight
of the Oracle that Night Lodged with a Knight of Persia, named Thymus, in his
Tent, who in courteous sort entreated him thereto. Early the next Morning, he
again entered the Field, ready for him that should next Encounter him, who came
gallantly mounted, having likewise travailed many Miles to try his Fortune in
the Adventure: but before he came to try himself therein, he received so great
a Discharge, by Encountering the Knight of the Oracle, that in a desperate
mood, and ashamed of his Foil, he departed. The Knight of the Oracle being
endued with an extraordinary Wit, as receiving the Essence thereof from two
such goodly Princes as he was sprung of, began in his thoughts to condemn the
fondness of those Knights, that coming to make trial of the Adventure, spent
their time in private Quarrels, still omitting that which principally they had
sought, his Mind being so troubled with the loss of Philotheta and Persicles,
desired not to linger there, but to hasten in their search. Therefore parting
toward the Knights, who were assembled on a heap, studying which way to work
his disgrace, he said to them. Worthy Knights, my coming to this place, was
not to try my Fortune against you, but in the Adventure, and your private Envy
has hitherto hindered me, not regarding into what private Quarrels you enter,
and causelessly troubling me, that have not offended you: Therefore because
business of more importance then to answer your Spleen, urges my departure,
I wish you, not fearing my ability to answer you, to remit this private
Contention until another time: and if any of you either enviously condemn me,
or repine at my good Fortune, I will be ready to answer you several Quarrels
in Persia, at the time that is appointed for the meeting of the Kings of
Assyria, and Armenia: for the cause of your approach, being to release this
Ladies imprisonment, weaken not your force in private Contention: for in the
Trial thereof, you shall find occasion enough to exercise your Arms.

Hearing his words they consented thereunto, yet contending who should first
try the Adventure. In the end they agreed to cast Lots: in which the last fell
to the Knight of the Oracle: every one having a Days respite for the finishing
thereof. Thus did they make trial of themselves: Some with such labor
attaining the Bridge, but then forced by virtue of the Enchantment to yield,
and so were imprisoned in most Lamentable wise, by the Envy of Ila, who desired
the Enchantment might never end, but that she might live there for ever. Others
with fear ran away. Many days it was before it came to the Knight of the
Oracles turn: In the end, all being either fledor imprisoned, he alone was
left to try his Fortune, neither having Friend to succor him, Foe to Envy him,
nor any to behold him: for the Enchantresse had made such Desolation among the
Tents, by casting fires amongst them, that all the Servants to those Knights,
fled as amazed, reporting from place to place their Masters misery, and the
cause of their own terror. Notwithstanding, nothing could affright or
discourage the valiant heart of the Knight of the Oracle, but he rested as
resolute to go forwards, as if there had been no danger incident to the
attempt.

Constantia seeing how many Knights were at that instant imprisoned, all their
Tents destroyed, and no man she thought left, began to discomfort her self,
utterly despairing of releasement, desiring Ila to let her view the Knights
that were Imprisoned, fearing that Persicles was amongst them: but her requests
were in vain, for Ila fretted with extreme fear of the end of her
Enchantment, in a mad rage flung from them, studying which way to lengthen the
date thereof, which tormented poor Constantiaes heart, that had been so long
in misery, and terrified kind Philothetaes mind with extreme fear of further
calamity. Both she and Constantia all that Night bewailing their misery.

CHAP. XXVIII. How the Knight of the Oracle finished the Enchantment. And how
Ila departed with Philotheta.
IN the Morning early, the Knight of the Oracle, survaying the Situation of
the Bridge, which way he might either advantage himself, or disadvantage his
Foe, winded his Horn, wherewith there was such an exceeding Earthquake within
the Tower, that the Foundation thereof shook as if it would have overturned
her stately Turrets. At which first Sound of the Horn, one of the Giants came
forth without speaking, striking at him, but he defended himself a great
while on Horseback, until the Giant pressed so hard upon him, that he was
driven to withdraw him to light. Which when he had done, he again assailed
him, giving him many a deep wound, and receiving many a sore bruise, that had
not his good Armor preserved him, it had brought him in great danger: but in
the end* he prevailed so much by the death of the first Giant, that he attained
the first and second Fortification of the Bridge. And at the third he was so
violently set upon by the other Giant, that he was only compelled to ward his
blows, in the end likewise espying such advantage that he ran his Sword quite
through his body. By which means, he entered the first large Court, where he
beheld the Armours of such Knights as had failed in their sundry attempts,
hanging about the Walls, hearing their hollow voices, which by imprisonment had
endured much affliction. Ila now knowing that the date of her glory in that
place should end, in furious sort came running to the place where Constantia
and Philotheta were, taking Philotheta with violence from out of the Arbor,
and by force of her Enchantment, compelling her to follow her, until she came
to the Court where the Knight of the Oracle was, he suddenly behelding
Philotheta, at the first sight knew her: and seeing them so pass by him,
toward the Entrance, he stepped after them to speak to her, when presently there
rusht upon him a number of Armed men that laid upon him with such swiftness,
that they had no power to stir from the place where he stood. They suddenly
vanished, and he stood so amazed with the sight, and perplexed with such doubt,
that he could not tell what to do: Sometimes thinking to follow in Philotheta:
then persuading himself it was but an illusion: and thinking to cast off that
doubt, and go forwards, his mind was possessed with such desire to see her
again, for that he stood as a man without sense. When suddenly such a Mist
darkened all the place, that he could scarcely see his hands, which continued
by the space of half an hour. Whilst he remained in such thoughts, sometimes
of persuasion it was Philotheta, which troubled his very heart to think what
should be become of her, that he seemed to have lost her Senses by the sight of
her: remaining in many meditations, the Mist vanished, and the Sun with
exceeding Splendour, disclosed the beauty of Penthrasus Palace. When he saw no
further expectation of danger approaching, he entered further, toward the three
Gates of Brass, beholding the curious works thereof, through which he entered
into the Court, which drew his mind into much admiration thereof. Entering the
Hall, he beheld the two Lions (which kept the Passage) that with a fair
prospect discovered the beauty of the Garden. The Lions no sooner espied him,
but they presently made such a noise with their Roaring, that all the Palace
rung thereof. And Constantia hearing the same, cried out, as exceedingly
affrighted. The Knight of the Oracle attempted to pass by them, expecting no
other but cruel resistance: yet contrary to his thoughts, they laid themselves
down at his feet (as it were) reverencing him: Which when he beheld, of his
own inclination, he loosed both their Chains, and they ran forth of the
Palace with exceeding swiftness, which amazed him to behold.

Passing through the Hall, he entered the Garden, looking round about, to behold
the beauty thereof, when suddenly he began to wonder, that he had beheld never
a living creature since he entered, which drove him into an exceeding
Admiration, marvailing that he could not behold the Lady of whose Picture he
had beheld at the entrance, to that finding himself over-wearyed with labor,
purposing to rest his Body, he returned into the Hall, and there seated
himself in a most rich and costly Chair. Constantia being in the Arbor,
beheld when he entered the Garden, and when he went back, marveling what he
should be, and little thinking the Enchantment was ended, not daring her self
to go forth of the Arbor, her heart was so possessed with amazement, desired
one of the Damzels, if she loved her, to go see what he was, and learn the
cause of that uproar, which they had heard in the Palace. One of the Damzels
being more hardy then the other, told her, how for the Love she bare her, she
would adventure, though it cost her her life. Passing on toward the Palace,
with such hasty steps, as if something had pursued her, and yet going forwards,
as if an evil had been before her, that she could neither tell, whether,
wherefore, nor why she went: until of a sudden she mounted the passage into
the Hall, and was right before the Knight of the Oracle: Whom when she saw, she
stood looking upon him, trembling as if she had been distraught. The Knight of
the Oracle, rising from his seat, said: Damzell, fear not, I will defend you
from danger, here is none intends your harm. The Damzell hearing his voice,
was revived, saying: Sir Knight, I marvel what strange accident has brought
you hither, where no Knight has been these many years? Lady (said he) Fortune
and my good Destinies, that have been employed to set you at Liberty. Sir
(said she) it is not I, but my Mistress you mean, by whose command I have
adventured to see what was happened: to whom if you will vouchsafe to go, I
will conduct you. He could remember, it was not her Picture he had beheld,
therefore he blushed to be so deceived, but told her, his coming was to do her
Lady Service. With that they entered the Garden. Constantia soon espying them,
and seeing the Knight come in such peaceable sort with the Damzell, went forth
to meet him, he likewise seeing her, sheathed his Sword, his Heart trembling
at the first sight of her, by a natural inclination, bearing such a Reverend
regard to her majesticall person, that when he came nigh her, he did her
reverence upon his knee, uttering these words.

Most Noble Lady, be not disquieted with fear of restrained liberty, for the
Date of the Enchantment of thisCastle is finished. Constantia stepping to him,
took him by the hand, desiring him not to kneel to her, who was unworthy, but
rather had cause to use him, with the like reverence. Most Noble Lady (said he)
I have all the Reward I expect: yet grant me one favor (which is) to tell me
your Name. Constantiaes heart at that word leapt within her, which caused an
exceeding blush to possess her cheeks, saying: Most Honorable Knight, I were
too blame to deny you so small a Request, my Name is Constantia. Then have the
Heavens (quoth he) made me Fortunate with beholding you, whom my heart has
ever honored. Constantia wondered what he should be, assuring her self it was
not Persicles, for he would not have asked her name, yet she thought that
Sorrow might so much have altered her in the long time of her separation, that
on the sudden he could not know her, that her heart was much troubled with
those thoughts, till he interrupted them with these speeches. Lady, it may be
you suppose me for other then I am, to rid you of which ambiguity, my name is
now Knight of the Oracle, which I have but lately been known by, for before I
was called Montelyon, brought up in Persia, but whether I was borne there, or
who my Parents were, as yet I know not: the cause of my travel into this
Country, was in your search, in the Company of my noble Lord Persicles: who
for your absence lives in continual grief: Therefore I beseech you reviue
your heart from care, and put your confidence in my fidelity: for I will never
part from you, until I have brought you to his presence. Constantiaes Heart
with these words was possessed with such joy, as is not to be expressed. And
remembering that Philotheta had told her of Montelyon, she said: Most honored
Knight, I have long before this heard of your Honorable friendship shown to my
dear Lord Persicles, which makes me without doubt resolve my whole confidence
in you, which came to my hearing by the report of a Lady whom you lately
succored in this Country, named Philotheta. With that he fetched a deep sigh
from the bottom of his heart, saying: Indeed I did once enjoy her presence,
but whether I shall ever see her again, or where she is, I know not: Yet if I
were not deluded, I did behold her departing out of this Castle. It may be so,
said Constantia, for she was with me this day, and has been here this many
days, but the Enchantresse in great have, and by violence took her from my
company, carrying her I know not whether, by whose kind report of your virtues,
I conceive such comfort in their assurance, that I entreat your promise of
assistance, and with that shall my heart rest as void of fear, as if I were in
the Court of the King my Father in Persia.

My heart, said she, rejoices to hear your kind speeches, vowing to employ my
life, and all my being to be at your command. Then they departed into the
Palace, with purpose not to tarry there, but instantly to leave the same: but
coming into the outer Court, he remembered, that he had heard the voices of
men that lay in misery his heart willing to succor them: desiring her not to
be offended, if he had made ^ome stay to release them out of Bondage, which he
might soon do, when there was none to resist them: She willingly consented,
and he in little search found the Keys that opened the Entrance into the
Prison, leaving Constantia in place of security, for that he would not trouble
her Senses with the smell of the Prison: being entered he found a great number
there enclosed, many of them in such poor and distressed estate, that his
heart lamented to behold, so fast as he could pulling of their Fetters: at last
he beheld Helyon, though to him unknown, whose flesh seemed to be incorporate
with the Earth whereon he lay, from whence he could not rise, until he was
helped: who now knew the Enchantment to be finished: repenting himself of the
folly he had committed: when he had set them at liberty, and they were come out
into the clear light, they with one assent yielded him thanks, vowing
themselves his perpetual bounde^ friends. Constantia likewise seeing them,
wept with grief, that so many should be endangered to set her at liberty. They
all proffered their Service unto her, but she desiring not to be known of any,
in courteous sort refused the same, reposing her whole confidence in the Knight
of the Oracle, who presenting according to her desire, left the Palace, and
without the Bridge found his own Steed grasing, in company of others that had
lost their Riders: amongst them he took three, on which he mounted Constantia
and her two Damzels, hasting to travel so far, as the days length would
permit from the Palace, Lodging that Night in a Village some six Miles
distant from the same. The Knights that were released, seeing them departed,
likewise betook themselves to travel, except Helyon, who was so Feeble that
he could not travel.

CHAP. XXIX. How the Knight of the Oracle departed with Constantia. How they
arrived at Delatus Castle: and how she knew him to be her Son.
FOr Constantia found such courteous behavior, and kind assistance, in the
Knight, that she remained in great quiet, but noting his countenance, she
perceived the same to be darkened with some misty Clouds of discontent, which
she supposed to be for the loss of Philo^heta, but yet she concealed her
opinion from him: wherein she jumpt right on his affirmity, for his heart was
pincht with such care for her loss and safety, that it could endure no quiet.
But in the Morning when they should depart, they began to consider which way
they should travel, or whether they should stay to hear of Persicles there,
or go directly into Assyria. Amongst many doubts, they agreed to travel
directly into Assyria, where he told Constantia they should assuredly find him,
for that the time of the appointed meeting of him and the King of Armenia drew
nigh: after many days travel they came to the place where he remembered he
first saw Philotheta, and parted from Persicles, which he revealed not to
Constantia, as unwilling to make her privy to his Love: yet he purposed in his
Journey to visit Amphiador, hoping to find her there, and coming to the
Castle, he was welcomed thither by Delatus, that was again restored to his
Dukedom. Sir, said the Knight of the Oracle, I had thought this had been
Amphiadors Castle. Amphiador did possess it, but indeed the right was mine,
and though I have no acquaintance with you, yet I beseech you accept such
entertainment as it yields, and if not longer yet for this night, that I may
know whom I have Lodged, and you have some knowledge of my affection unto. They
both noting with what hearty affection he spoke, being weary with travel,
alighted to rest themselves, being kindly welcomed by him and Alsala. After
Supper, Delatus began these Speeches.

Worthy Knight, should I rehearse the whole circumstance of my misfortune, and
Amphiadors wickedness, I should both trouble you with the tediousness, and
renew my own sorrows: only this, he wrought means to deprive me of this
Dukedom, and caused Penthrasus to Enchant me in the Desert, with purpose I
should never return: yet he favoring me, bound me there no longer then
Constantia should remain Enchanted in the Tower, built by Helyon Prince of
Arabia, revealing unto me many Secrets that I will hereafter discover. Not many
days since, I found my self freed from this Bondage, whereby he knew that the
Enchantment was finished. The same day the Enchantresse Jla favoring
Amphiador, seeing the date of her power grew to an end, came to this Castle,
and with her brought Philotheta, not his, but my Daughter, declaring to him my
release, with whom he is fled, carrying Philotheta with them, but whether I
knew not: Which I fear me will turn to her great sorrow, for his mind is so
apt to cruelty and mischief, that he cares not to act any villainy to satisfy
his own mind. I rehearse this unto you, though I know it concerns you not:
yet to let you understand that by finishing the Enchantment I was released:
Which Ila knowing, gave him knowledge of, and that is the cause of his flight:
and also I entreat you to grant me one favor: That is, to let me know whether
your Name be not Constantia, for my mind gives me you are the same. I am (said
she) that most unfortunate Creature, and by this Knights noble Valor was I set
at liberty, to whom am I most infinitely bound. My heart said Delatus
rejoices, that I ever had cause to do you any courtesy, and that it was my
good fortune to see you in this place, having long wished for your Releasement:
not only for mine own good, but for that Noble King Persicles sake, who was
with me in the Desert where I lived inthralled since his coming into Arabia,
who with earnest resolution determined to spend the date of his life in your
search: From which I dissuaded him; and by my directions he returned into
Assyria: for the Sequel of your Releasement was revealed unto me by Penthrasus
himself: Which none could atchieue but your own Sonns, which is this Noble
Knight. Nay (said he) doubt not of this, for what he revealed, and I have
published is true, though it r^steth not in my knowledge to ^ilate the
circumstance thereof. They both wondered at his speech^s, and the Knight of the
Oracle said; Can I be more fortunate, or hear better News, or receive any
comfort that can comfort my heart more then this? O Heavens grant that my
joyful hope may not be frustrated, but that I may be assured I am descended
of such Noble Parents: Which may be true, for Cothanes often times told me that
he found me upon the top of a Mountain, lying in swaddling clothes, and not
far from the body of a Woman, torn and dismembered by Wild Beasts, and many
Jewels about me: One of which I have ever since worn about my Neck: When
Constantia saw it, she knew the fame, embracing him in her arms, and kissing
him, whilst he with humble behavior did him reverence. I should be over
tedious to recite their joys, and how much Delatus and Alsala made of them,
who would not so leave them, but promised to Travel with them into Assyria,
where they were assured to meet Persicles: but in such sort that none might
know them, for that yet Constantia feared her Fathers displeasure. They stayed
there but that Night, and early the next Morning betook themselves to
travel. Notwithstanding this joy the Knight of the Oracle left some sparks of
discontent which troubled all his Senses, and turned his quiet into disquiet,
which was with remembrance of Philotheta, whose mishap pincht him to the very
heart: Who likewise was not free from the like disquiet, fearing never to see
him again, little thinking his Name had been changed, and as little thinking
it was he that ended the Enchantment: not only troubled with this Despair,
but also vexed with Ilaes dealing, who having brought her to Amphiador, fled,
and was never seen of them again. Amphiador being alone with Philotheta,
thought it not good for him to discover himself, least he thereby should
hazard his life: but disguising himself and Philotheta, he left Arabia, and
travailed into Persia, thinking to live there until his death vndescryed. And
finding out an Habitation fit for that purpose, he told Philotheta what he
intended, persuading her to abide with him. This troubled her very heart,
fearing some greater mischief would follow. Which like wise according to her
misdoubt, fell out: For now that he saw no means to recover his Dignity, nor
attain other Felicity, then to live in obscurity, his mind being like wise
much addicted to Licencious desire, began to dote on Philothetaes beauty, which
burst out into a flame, and he revealed the same i^ ^his sort.

Philotheta (said he) if you knew what I would say, or if you could conceive my
meaning without words, I would refrain to speak: but since there is no hope
for me to live, without I attain that I desire, I will utter to you the depth
of my good Will, and the thing that I desire so much you should know, which is,
that I love you: this I hope cannot be grievous unto you: Neither will you I
trust deny to love me, considering how tenderly I have always regarded you.
Should I not (said she, Love you) I were to be accounted very ungrateful, and
unworthy to have found you so kind, which binds me to yield you thanks. Then
(said he,) Let me enjoy that Love, for your Beauty has pierced my heart, and
nothing but the sweet thereof, can ease my torment: Here we may live
together, void of disquiet, enjoying each others Love with content, which
exceeds the pleasure that more dignified Honor yields* Philotheta at the
first knew his meaning, replying with mildness, but her heart so much
disdained to yield to that he desired, that she could not contain her self,
but gave him this answer. Amphiador, Do thou think thy wickedness can
overmaster my Virtue? Or do thou think I can like to hear thy odious
Speech, that bewrays the inward rancour of thy heart? or have thou beheld
such looseness in me, that should animate thee to this dishonorable attempt?
or can thou but conceive an opinion that I will yield to thy wicked lust,
which is the fruit of thy ill devising Heart? No, know that I so much abhor
thee, that I shall account the worse of my self to have known thee, and curse
my cruel destinies, that have made me to see thee, and rather will end my life
most desperately, then suffer my Senses, to conceive one good thought of thee.
Then leave off where thou have begun, for thou shall rather see me massacre my
self, then yield to the least part of thy desire.

CHAP. XXX. How Amphiador, Philotheta, and Praxentia met. How the two Ladies
preventing Amphiadors lust, and departed toward Assyria.
AMphiador walking alone in a solitary place, heard the woeful Lamentation of a
distressed Lady, who uttered these words: What misery am I brought into mine
own doting folly, upon that unknown Knight, which neither regards me, nor I
shall never see him again: Fond woman that I am, thus to abandon my Fathers
Court to live in obscurtty, where I was renowned for virtue: For who heard the
name of Praxentia, that did not adore the fame? And who was more reverenced
then my self that now have brought my Honor into disgrace? and for the love
of a stranger have refused the love of so mighty a Prince as Palian? O
Persicles, thee may I curse, for by thy means is he thus absent, and thou have
lost him, or left him where he will never return: Amphiador wondered much to
hear her name Persicles, Palian, and Praxentia, which several names he knew,
marvelling who that should be: but seeing her silent, he drew near to her,
saying: Lady, hearing your Laments, I could not choose but pity you: which
makes me thus bold to approach into our company, proffering my assistance to
aid you in what I can. My friend (said Praxentia) against my will you are privy
to my estate, which if you do pity, then also succor me, for I am brought
low by too much grief, and weak for want of sustenance, Lady (quoth he) my
Habitation is not far hence, whether I will bring you, where you shall not
want any thing you will desire. Being come thither they found Philotheta
drowned in tears, the cause whereof he well knew, but Praxentia wondered at it,
containing another inward Sorrow, to see so sweet a creature in such sadness.
Philotheta likewise marvailed what she was, hoping by her comfort to receive
some comfort, which might hinder his practice.

He on the other side went forth again to meditate, leaving them together,
meaning nothing less then to pity either of them, but devising means to
attain both their loves, which he was fully resolved to enjoy, though the deed
were never so wicked, and the means never so heinous. Praxentia having well
refresht her self with such good food as she had received, demanded
Philothetaes cause of sorrow. Aye me, said she, none so miserable as I, this
Tyrant that brought you hither, is my Father in law, whose mind is so wicked
that he attempteth to win me to his lust, which adds much sorrow to my
heart, as I am weary of my life: my name is Philotheta, Daughter to the Duke of
Ila, whom all men had thought to have been since dead, but he being informed
of the contrary by the Enchantresse, fled, bringing me hither by force, where
he intends to keep me as his Bond-slaue, but the Heavens I hope will ordain
some succor to my distress, your help I cannot desire, for that I suppose
your self in the same state I am in (that is) in distress: to remedy which
evil, you are fallen into a place, that yields no content, but rather
contrarily to ensnare me into more misery.

Before Praxentia could reply, Amphiador came in, entertained her with many
counterfeit courtesies, comforting her with many fair Speeches, protesting so
many Services, duties, and promises, as none but one of so impudent a
disposition could have found occasion on such a sudden to proffer: the intent
of which words Praxentia as fore warned, well understood, fearing some further
mischief would follow thereon. That day she could have no farther conference
with Philotheta, for he was still in their company. That Night they thought to
have lodged together, but he ordered the contrary, by which means, both that
night, and for some three days after, they could find no opportunity to utter
their minds each to other. In the mean time he was never out of one of their
companies, persuading Philotheta to yield her liking, so that he had proffered
and using such speeches to Praxentia, as might draw her to a good opinion of
him: which when he thought he had affected: one night when Praxentia little
thought of such treachery, being overwhelmed in drowsy sleep, he entered her
Chamber by a secret way, and coming to her bed side perceiving her sleep so
soundly, without any more ado, crept into the bed to her: she feeling one in
the bed, was so amazed and affrighted, on the sudden, that before he could
embrace her, as he intended, she leapt out on the other side, and running to
the door opened the same, to whom he called, saying, I beseech you stay. I
meant you no harm, by Heaven I will not offer you injury. What villain art
thou, said she, that seek my dishonor? or what wicked pretense drives thee
hither at such unseasonable time, and in such audacious sort to affright me?
neither intending your dishonor, nor under other pretense then virtuous, came
your poor Servant Amphiador into your presence, but only with thankfulness,
to make manifest unto you my hearts true affection: therefore I beseech you
shun me not, nor suspect me not, for my heart will sooner see it self torn in
pieces, then think a thought to wrong your worthiness: would I be so mad as
trust thee (said she) thou might well repute me for immodest, and well might
I blame my self if I sustained wrong: therefore for this time I will leave
thee.

With that she made fast the Door, and hasted to Philothetaes Lodging,
knocking very hastily, withal calling aloud Philotheta, Philotheta, let me in,
she being a sleep, was half amazed with the noise, not daring at the first or
second call to open the Door: but when she perceived it was a woman's voice,
she opened the door, which was no sooner open, but Praxentia stepped in,
desiring to make fast the same again. Which done, fear made Praxentia so
muse, that until she had reassumed her memorial Senses to their proper use,
she could not speak a word. Whilst Philotheta with much sorrow beheld her
ecstasy, of demanding the cause thereof: At last, she declared how Amphiador
had used her. O most detestable Villain, said Philotheta, will the Fates
suffer him to proceed in his blindness and not cut him off? Or can we devise
no good means to avoid his intent? Lady, said Praxentia, do but join with
me, and you shall soon see, that betwixt us we will rid our selves out of his
tyranny, O Lord, said Philotheta, I shall think my self the most happiest
woman living, and for ever honor you, if by your counsel and help I may
attain this felicity. Then said Praxentia, do but this next night by some
means convey his Swords into my Chamber and there hide your self in secret
until I come, in the mean time I will deal so with him this day, that he
shall again come to my Chamber, without suspect of our intent, but with mere
hope to attain my love: where, when he is come, I will so work with him that
either we will by cunning out reach him, or sheath the same into his Bowels.
All this said Philotheta, will I constantly perform. Early the next Morning
Philotheta fetched Praxentiaes Apparel, which when she had put on, she went
down where she knew Amphiador was: who espying her, presently came to her,
desiring her to pardon his last Nights oversight. Sir (said she) I was
disquieted therewith more then I needed, considering you meant me no violence,
as you protest: but it was a great folly in you to come at so unseasonable a
time, and not make the party acquainted therewith. Pardon me, I humbly desire
you, said he, and withal pity me that am ensnared in the bands of Love to
your beauty, which will be most pleasing to my senses, and preserve my life,
and whatsoever you shall demand me in recompense thereof, I will perform.

Many such speeches he used, and she counterfeited many faint denials, which
yet was intermingled with such hope, that he perceived she would yield: and
therefore he the more earnestly entreated, vowed, swore, and protested to win
her consent, which at last according to her appointment, she granted, but with
such conditions as furthered the purpose of their intended revenge. He joyful
thereof left her, and she went to Philotheta declaring every circumstance, how
she had dealt with him. When Night approached, he left their company, and went
walking abroad, to meditate on his ensuing pleasure, thinking by that he
returned, they would be parted to their several Lodgings. In which time
Philotheta conveyed into the Chamber two Swords, which was all the Weapons
which was in the House, and hid her self closely from being seen. When he
thought it time, he came to the Chamber door, where he found Praxentia very
ready to let him in, whose heart faintly trembled with fear at the sight of
him, but yet she shook it off, with as much courage as might be in a Woman.
When he was entered and the door made fast, having first embraced her with a
lascivious kiss, which we patiently endured, void of doubt by reason of her
promise, he went to Bed, whilst she stood trifling, as if she had been most
buisily vndressing her self. When she saw him in Bed, she came to the
Bedside, giving him a betraying Kiss, uttering these words. Amphiador (said
she,) How much do I now differ from Chastity, that must yield to violate the
same without the holy Rites of Marriage, wherein I shall cast away my self,
and make my Name in Oblique in the whole World, if you forsake me, of whose
faith I have no assurance? Tush (quoth he) fear not, but come to Bed, then
will I make thee so faithful a Promise, that thou shall rest there with
contented. That were (said she) to yield possession before, and afterward
repent. By my Soul (said he) I will dot do so much as touch you before I be
licensed by your free consent. Then (said she,) for my better assurance let me
bind your hands, and then I will without delay come to you. He accounted that
request to proceed from bashful Fear, not from policy: thinking though his
Hands were bound, he should be good enough for her with his Legs, he granted
it. Then she took a Scarf which she had brought of purpose, and therewith
bound his hands so fast, that it was impossible for them to undo them. Which
done, Philotheta stepped forth, delivering one of the Swords to Praxentia, and
holding the other against his Breast, said: Now Amphiador, What has thy
lewdness brought thee unto, but to misery: think thou (that had no mercy
in seeking our dishonor) shall find Remorse in us to work revenge? Nay
villainous Traitor (said Praxentia) should we suffer so vile a miscreant to
live, we should do a wicked deed: for a man of thy impious condition will
infect the World. Art thou so treacherous as thou carest not what Laws thou
violatest, and yet so simple to be over reached by a silly Woman? yet know whom
thou have offended, and to whom thou would have none vio^ence. Know I say
Traitor that my Name is Praxentia, Daughter to the King of Persia, that will
work revenge upon thee, worthy thy heinous Act. Philotheta marvailed when she
heard her Name, and he lay confounded with shame, his Coward heart fainting
with such fear, that with little violence it would have been overcome. To
make him more sure, the one of them bound his feet, whilst the other stood
ready to stab him if he styrred: Which done, they withdrew themselves,
consulting which way to be rid of him. Most Noble Lady (said Philotheta) your
Prudence has set us at liberty from this Tyrant, whom (so if please you) we
will leave in this place, and not stain our Innocent hands, with shedding such
impure blood. But said Praxentia, how shall we escape from hence? Easily (said
she) for leaving him fast bound, there is none to pursue us, but we may with
safety travel whether it please you. When they had thus concluded, Praxentia
came to him, uttering these Speeches, Amphiador, we cannot as yet resolve how
to work sufficient Revenge upon thee, therefore make no exclamation, but with
patience abide our will, which will be too favorable: for if we hear thee but
once open thy mouth, we will in such sort use thee, that thou shall wish thou
had followed our directions. Which said, locking fast the doors they left
him. Then they began to consult, what to do, Praxentia saying; Lady, it may be
your determination is to return into Arabia, which will be an occasion of our
^eparation. For my purpose is to journey into Assyria, upon an occasion that
concerns me no less then my life: which I shall reveal unto you, upon your
promise of Secrecy. I were not worthy to live (said she) would I reveal your
Counsel. Then did she repeat to her, her Love to Montelyon, and how Palian
crossed the same, until his departure with Persicles, Philothetaes heart melted
within her to hear that Speech, fearing to be disappointed of her intent, and
misdoubting his Constancy, being troubled with extreme anguish that so great
a Princess should be her Corrivall: sometimes dispairing with a conceit that
Montelyon did not esteem her according to his speech, and her own persuasion,
but that he proffered his love to her of a customable common courtesy, to try
her, not of affection. Many other cogitations suddenly concurred in her
brain, but seeing Praxentia except a Reply, without further meditat^on she
made this Reply. Most Noble Princess, if you will accept of my company, I will
in regard of your courtesy vndeservedly shown to me, venture my self with
you, and do my best to further you in attaining your desire. Praxentia was
glad thereof. And with this resolution in the Morning they left that place*
travailing toward Assyria, changing their Vpper-Garments, to Palmers-gray, the
best means so pass without molestation.

CHAP. XXXI. How the Knight of the Oracle, Constantia, and the rest, hearing a
lamentable cry, found Amphiador starved to death.
AMphiador lay all that day upon the Bed bound, sometimes persuading himself
they meant him no harm, and again adding doubt to that persuasion, because of
Praxentia: but when it grew to be night, he marvailed they came not again:
then he began to suspect, that which was true indeed, that they were departed,
which vexed him so much, that he would have destroyed himself if he could have
found means: continuing the length of that discomfortable Night, in cursing
his own Fortune and Folly, that had brought him to that misery: thinking to
his greater discomfort, either to starve there without food, or to preserve his
Life by eating his own flesh, and so dye a lingering death. Some four days
after, Fortune so brought things to pass, that the Knight of the Oracle,
Delatus, Constantia, and Alsala, with many others in their company, having lost
their way, lighted on this discomfortable place, where Amphiador lay for want
of food, making such outrageous lamentation, that it pierced the Ears of the
Knight, who first hearing the same, set Spurs to his Steed, entering the house,
the doors whereof he found open, and drawing his Sword, he found the Chamber
from whence that pittious cry proceeded, fast locked, which he brake open, and
found Amphiador in such a lamentable plight, that the Water stood in his eyes.
Amphiador seeing him, cried out to him for meat, as the thing he most wanted.
What art thou, said he? My Name (quoth he) is Amphiador, wicked Amphiador,
that for my sin endures this punishment. The Knight of the Oracle presently
unbound him, and went with him down to search for Victuals, which Amphiador
soon found. By this time Delatus and the rest were entered, and Amphiador
suddenly espying Alsala, whom he knew was so astonished, that he fell down
dead. Farewell said the Knight of the Oracle, had thou dyed sooner, then
should not some have had cause to complain of thy tyrranny. They made short
tarriance in this place, for that it yielded so little comfort, but again
travailed toward Assyria.

CHAP. XXXII. How the Emperor of Persia and Macedonia met, to conclude the
peace between Persicles and the King of Armenia. How Persicles erected a
Pavilion to entertain all strangers. And how the Knight of the Oracle and
Constantia arrived there: How Persicles discovered them: and of the exceeding
joy was made for their safety. And how Persicles knew the Knight of the Oracle
to be his own Son, and was afterward married to Constantia.
THe Emperors of Persia and Macedonia, according to the Peace ratified betwixt
Persicles and the King of Armenia, met at the City of Pisos, where they were
received by Persicles in such honorable, bountiful, and courteous sort, as is
not to be described. This City Pisos bordereth on the utmost Confines of
Assyria, not above a furlong distance from Armenia, on the edge whereof
likewise stood the City of Lisar, rich and populous where the King of Armenia
then lay: between those two Cities, was so large a Valley of Plains, that the
fair prospects of both the Cities lay open to each others view: in the midst
of this Valley were the Royal Tents of Persia and M^cedonia pitched, and about
them a number of Tents of gallant Knights, that came to bear them company: the
Cities were both of them Fortified with Garrisons of Soldiers, to prevent all
occasions of injury that might be offered on either party. The Emperor of
Macedonia likewise brought with him his three Sons. Mentus, Drurus, and Thetus,
his Empress, his fair Daughter Sabina, in whose company were the choice
Ladies of Macedonia. And such Troops of valiant Knights, that all the Valley
was filled with their Tents and Pavilions. Persicles trusting to the assurance
Delarus had given him of Constantiaes release, caused all the beautiful
Damzels in Assyria to be brought before him electing out of them a hundred, for
whom he caused most costly attires of White to be prepared and delivered to
each of them. He caused also a most stately Pavilion to be erected in the view
of all the rest, of such costly and curious work, that all that beheld it
admired the rare Workmanship thereof. Over the Door of this Pauilion were
these Verses written in Letters of Gold.

Honor, Valor, and Virtue, guard this place,
Where Harbor is for all that those embrace:
An absent Knight of honored Gifts and Fame,
Shall be their Host, Montelyon is his Name.
Here boldly enter, repose, and feed,
For Love to him, made Persicles do this deed,
Who so he be, can tell where he remains,
Shall have a principal gift to quite his pains.
Persicles intent in doing this was, that whatsoever Stranger came, that had
not good Provision of his own, should there find Entertainment in Honor of
Montelyon: in whose memorial, he had built the same, as a remembrance of his
Love and Favor. His intent being to draw all strangere thither, (by whose
report hoping he might hear some News of his beloved Friend Montelyon:
Travel within few days had brought the Knight of the Oracle, and his Company
into Assyria, where they met with an Assyrian of whom the Knight of the Oracle,
demanded whose Tents were those they beheld. He declared so much as he knew:
Where may we have Lodging, said he? Not within a City, answered the Assyrian,
for thither are none permitted to come without examination? But in the midst
among those Tents there is one Pavilion, the most beautifullest that ever Eye
beheld, built in remembrance of the Noble Knight Montelyon, that freed our
Country from the Armenians oppression: in which place all that are strangers,
and without provision of their own have Entertainment in his remembrance. Will thou direct us thither (said he) and I will reward thee? I will (said he.) When
they were come thither according to the Assyrians report, they were honorably
entertained, and Lodged in such sort as themselves desired. And for that it was
very late, every one departed to their place of rest, remitting conference
until the next Morning.

Early in the Morning the Knight of the Oracle, Arming himself mounted his
Steed, and rode up and down until it was Noone to behold the Tents, and
beautiful Situation of those two Cities, and some Tilts and Turneys that were
performed by certain Knights. Returning at Noone to confer with Constantia
his Mother about the discovery of them to Persicles. Persicles hearing that
many strangers were in Montelyons Pavilion, that day he disguised himself into
the habit of one of his own men, only to view them, and to see whether his
Servants used them so honorably as he intented they should. And coming into
the room where Constantia, the Knight of the Oracle, Delatus and Alsala was,
at the first sight he knew Delatus and Montelyon, which was called the Knight
of the Oracle, and viewing well Constantia, he likewise at the first sight knew
her: Then did he immediately believe that the Knight of the Oracle had released
her, which was Montelyon: which Delatus told him should be finished by his own
Son. These joys concurring, filled up his Senses with such delight, that he
was enforced to withdraw himself from being discovered, which at that time he
would not be. Altering his disguise again, and without further deliberation,
he went to the King of Persiaes Tent, and finding him in a convenient place,
he uttered these kind words. Most renowned King, the Friendship and help I
have received by your favor, without any merit of mine own, has made me most
infinitely bound to your Excellency: yet nevertheless, I must request one
further favor at your hands, which you may with more safety grant, then deny,
and thereby also make me and your self happy. My loving Friend, said he,
whatsoever it be, I will not deny it you. I make the more doubt (said he)
because I have heard you vow the contrary, and yet should you perform that
vow, it would procure you much discontent. A rash vow, (said he) may be
broken, and therefore let me know your request, and it may be I will dispense
therewith. My desire is, you would pardon Constantia your Daughter, and remit
the offense committed by her, and him that caused her to leave the Persian
Court. Why my Lord (said he) do you know where she is? First, I beseech you
grant my request, and then I will reveal unto you all that I know. For your
sake, said he, I will freely accept her into my favor. Then I most humbly
thank you (said he) both for her and my self: For it was my most unhappy
self, that was the cause of her departure, but since that time I have not
seen her until this day. For going to the Pavillion, which is named by
Montelyon: this day I espied her there, in company of Montelyon, which is
called Knight of the Oracle: The King of Persia rejoiced to hear that News,
which pleased him so well, that he could not choose but reveal it to the
Empress, who was ready to run forth of her Tent to see her. The Emper^^r
and Empress with a goodly Train, accompanied by Persicles, who had sent for
the hundred Damzels, and most of the Peers of Assyria, to welcome Constantia,
with great royalty, went to Montelyons Pavilion, the Emperor and Empress
going before, and he coming after: that when their greetings were past he
might have the more liberty to embrace Constantia. They entering the room where
Constantia was* conferring with Montelyon, knew her, and she them, and falling
prostrate on her knees before them, whilst they welcomed her with such
kindness* as if they had never conceived offense against her. Whilst they
welcomed the Knight of the Oracle, Persicles embraced Constantia, each weeping
for Joy. Oh God, said Persicles, never was I blessed whilst this good happy
hour, after so much sorrow, to enjoy such pleasure. Montelyons approach brake
of his Speech, who kneeled before him. Nay my dear Friend, said Persicles,
kneel not for I am not worthy to be so honored. My Lord (said Delatus) well
may he do it, for he is your own Son, which you need not doubt of, for he
freed his Mother, which none but himself could have done. More Honor, Joy,
Comfort, and Content, (said Persicles) could never have happened to any Mortal
man, then does this day to me, to find a Father, a Wife, and a Son, that this
day knew not I had either Father, Wife, or Son: one so honorable and
magnificent, the other so virtuous, beautiful, and loving, and the last so
valiantly, virtuous, magnanimous and prudent, that all the Worlds wealth cannot
countervaile my Riches. And turning to the Emperor, kneeling down with them,
he said. Renowned Emperor, I beseech you accept us three as your Children, and
into your favor, remitting all displeasure conceived against us. Then did the
Emperor and Empress, and Deloratus and Piera all embrace them, shedding
tears of joy for this happy meeting. The Nobles welcomming the Knight of the
Oracle, and the Lady Constantia, and such joy was made on every side as is not
to be expressed. And parting from thence toward the City in great Royalty, they
were welcomee^d thither by the Citizens, Nobles, Merchants, and Artizans, with
great Royalty, where the Emperor used these Speeches.

See here my Friends of Assyria, your Liege Lord and Sovereign, the Son of
Constantia my Daughter, and your Lord Persicles: How may you applaud the bounty
of Heaven, providing for you such a Noble Prince: Then taking Constantia by the
hand, he said: Here Persicles take my Daughter, I give her thee, as freely as
the Heavens gave her me, that Marriage may join hands, as true Love has
united your Hearts many years since. He took that gift with as great joy, and
in as high estimation, as if he had delivered him the whole Worlds Monarchy,
saying: Most mighty Emperor, I know not how to render sufficient thanks, in
that your Highness is pleased to enrich and honor me with your worthy Daughter
which is the only thing I always desired: For which, I hope to show such
deserts hereafter, as neither she shall be discontented, nor your Majesty
repent your gentle deed.

CHAP. XXXIII. How the two Ladies Philotheta and Praxentia, arrived at the
Pavilion, and how Philotheta discovered to Montelyon, Praxentiaes Love to him,
to make trial if he loved her, whom she her self most entirely loved.
THe end of this days Joy had brought the two Ladies Praxentia and Philotheta
after long Travel unto the City Walls, where (in their Palmers Weeds) they
heard the News, and saw the Triumph, where the Knight of the Oracle bare a way
the prize, whom they were informed to be Montelyon, and Son to Persicles and
Constantia: This News affected both their hearts with exceeding Joy. Praxentia
hoping to enjoy his Love, and Philotheta purposing to live no longer, then to
live in hope to do the like: taking the Entertainment of the Knight of the
Oracles Pavilion, which yielded them such security as they desired. Praxentia
bethinking her self of a course to effect her desire, brake her mind to
Philotheta in these Words. Lady Philotheta, I am more beholding unto you for
undertaking this travel for my sake, then I shall ever live to requite:
Notwithstanding, for that my passions crave pity and your good help, I
beseech you aid me in this extremity, I have made my Name and Fortunes known
unto you, and how it will be in vain for me to stay, for should I manifest my
Love, it would turn to my everlasting dishonor, I will therefore only make
my being here known to none but the Knight of the Oracle, which shall be done
by this means, if you will for my sake undertake it. In this habit you may as
safely go without being known, as if you had never been seen, and finding
him out, give him knowledge of my being here, of my love, and of the Misery I
have endured for his sake, uttering the same in such form of words, as shall
best like you: this will be the means to bring me comfort: and if for my sake
you will take this pains, I will hereafter prostrate my self at your feet,
Philotheta promised her that she would do it the next day, whatsoever ensued
thereon, as faithfully as she did desire, and if it were but to try his
Constancy.

Early in the Morning, Philotheta disguising her self so cunningly that she
could by no means be known, left the Pavilion to seek opportunity to deliver
her Message: and coming to the City Gates with a premeditated excuse, if she
were examined, where she found no resistance, but coming to the Palace, she
entered into the great Hall, where she stayed to see the Royalty of the Court,
until she espied the Knight of the Oracle, only attended by his Page, past by
into the Garden, her Maiden feet treading chaste steps after him, until he
looking back, espying a Palmer follow him, stayed, with courteous speech
demanding if he would speak with him. Who said: Knight of the Oracle. I have a
matter of secrecy to deliver unto you. The most virtuous, beautiful and
constant Lady Praxentia, whom you well know, having ever since she saw you
first, loved you, though without comfort, enduring much sorrow for your
absence, regarding more her love to you* then her own Life, Parents and
Country, and has for your sake left her Pomp and dignity to live in sorrow
and misery to find you out, who remains now in the Pavillion, where for your
sake all strangers are harbored, in such sorrow and anguish, as did you but
behold the same, your virtuous mind could not choose but pity her. This am I
bold to utter unto you, not sent hither, but in pity of her, and to do you
good, she being the only Daughter of the mighty Emperor of Macedonia. Palmer
(said he) I commend thy good meaning, and wish that I could follow thy
counsel, which brings much disquiet to my heart: I pity her more then she
does her self, and could wish not to have been borne, rather then she should
do her self wrong, for my sake: she is worthy to be beloved, and I not the
Honor she intends me: yet can I not without as great and greater torment
(then she endures) after my affections that are already settled, where I yet
reap no hope of comfort, and am kept from by many difficulties, that makes me
equal to her in sorrow. I speak not this with intent you should tell it her,
for that were to make her more desperate, if your words be true: but I fear
me, you are sent by her, which if it be so, you shall do me wrong, and her no
good, therefore I pray you dissuade her if you can, for a strangers counsel in
such matters may prevail much: and if you can bring me News that she has
revolted from this Love, I shall think my self most happy. Sir, said the
Palmer, I would return to you again, if I knew which way I might conveniently
come to speak with you: I will be (said he) to morrow without the City about
this time, hoping to hear better news of her by thy persuasions: Then giving
the Palmer a Rich Jewel for his pains, they parted, Philotheta out of the
Palace, and he into the Garden, meditating on that which he had heard.
Philotheta by this time was returned to the Pavillion, uttering the whole sum
of the conference she had with the Knight of the Oracle unto Praxentia: With
which she was so grieved, that Philotheta expected when she would have yielded
up the Ghost, fearing that she would have run mad, which to prevent, she said.
Be not so impatient, but hearken to my counsel. I have appointed to come to
him to Morrow, at which time I will deal so effectually with him, that he
shall come and speak with you. When seeing your Laments, there is no doubt but
he may be won to consent.

This somewhat satisfied Praxentia, yet her Mind was so full of grief and
vexation, that her eyes could take no rest, with such affection she expected
the next News. Philotheta was not void of care, as she had good cause,
undertaking a matter against her self, yet to make assured trial of his
Constancy, she did it, but being alone, she meditated on the doubtful issue
of this attempt, which would bring her either much Joy or Sorrow: sometimes
persuading her self, it was her self he loved, that he was constant, and that
no persuasions could alter him: yet she thought Praxentiaes Birth, Beau^y, and
Laments, might overcome him, and the rather for that he had no assurance of her
Love, nor ever to see her again. Thus did this fair Lady torment her self
with contrarieties of doubts, longing as much, or rather more then Praxentia,
for the next Mornings speech.

CHAP. XXXIV. Of the Treasons practiced against the Knight of the Oracle.
NOw the King of Armenia seeing such a League concluded by means of this
Marriage between the Emperors of Persia, and Persicles, envying his good,
thought that he was likely to prevail nothing against him by means thereof,
called unto him a Knight, whom he most favored, and had always been
counseled by named Cisor, and unto him he uttered his discontent, who
presently counseled him to break the Peace, and suddenly to surprise the
City. The King liked not that counsel, but rather desired by some secret
means either to poison Persicles and the Knight of the Oracle: or else to set
some discord between them and the Emperor of Macedonia, by which means the
Peace might be broken, and the ambiguity of the doubt be left vnended, whereby
he might renew his war, Cisor promised to perform something to that effect:
who presently, finding out Palian, uttered his mind to him in these words.
Noble Prince, I marvel that you suffer your glory to be darkened by this up
start Knight, that names himself of the Oracle. Can it be that so honorable
a mind as yours should brook such indignities? Is not Assyria yours by right,
are you not more Noble by Birth? are you not every way as worthy to be as
famous as he is? You live here in security, suffering him and his Father that
scorneth you, to carry away the Palm and prize of Honor Are all the Knights
in Armenia too weak to cope with him? Does not his behavior show that he
scorneth you? Has he not alone crossed your good Fortune, then live not to be
laughed at, but to revenge. Join you with the Emperor of Macedoniaes Sons,
who are of the same mind I am, and I will lay you down such a plot as shall
abate his bravery. If these K^ights and such as are now come out of M^cedonia
and Persia, cannot foil them, then shall you live in contem^ of the World, and
be accounted their inferior. Cisor (said he) thou renuest my grief a fresh,
for I have drunk so much of sorrow in that kind of discontentm^nt, that my
heart is overcome therewith, and would feign work my releasement. If you would
be secret, and swear to assist me. I would reveal you the whole depth of my
heart: upon his protestations, he revealed his love to Praxentia, and how he
was crossed by Montelyon, and withal, what had past since, and of her escape out
of Persia, which she did only for his love that regarded her not, and how much
he desired means of revenge: his mind being apt to entertain any complot were
it never so dishonorable, Cisor then said, confer with the Emperors So^s,
and discover to them with what earnestness Praxentia has sought his love, and
receiving scorn for her affection, and disdain for her goodwill, has in a
desperate sort (ashamed to be so rejected) stole from the Court of the King of
Persia, either to destroy himself, or wilfully to live in perpetual exile:
when they hear this, their hearts will easily be won to revenge her wrong:
which done, let them alone to meditate thereon. Cisor having in this sort
whetted him on, left him, which so much prevailed, that he put the same in
practice with the Emperors Sons, that they began mortally to hate Montelyon.
Agreeing to arm themselves in such Armor as none but Cisor should know them,
and for some few days to lodge in the Pavilion, and there to devise which way
to work him some disgrace. Upon this conclusion they parted, every one to
provide themselves of Armor for that purpose.

CHAP. XXXV. How the Knight of the Oracle, arrived at the Pavilion, disguised
to satisfy Praxentia. How he was discovered by Palian, how Palian and the King
of Macedoniaes Sons would have murdered him. How he slew one of them, and was
accused by Praxentia of a Rape, which brake the concluded League.
THe time being come, and Philotheta not failing, met the Knight of the Oracle
to do her Message. How now Palmer said he, do thou bring me news that
Praxentia has given over her love? If thou have tell me, if not, I pray thee
trouble me not. My Lord (said Philotheta) she rages most extremely, and I
fear me, will do her self some violence unless you pity her. That cannot I
do (said he) although it pincheth my heart to hear of her sorrow: what should
I say more? or what would thou wish me to do, to ease her and yet reserve my
loyalty? Sir, replied Philotheta, may you consider that she is honorable,
virtuous, fair, and the Daughter of a King worthy to be beloved, and it may be
the Lady whom you love, is not comparable to her in any of these gifts: No, nor
in love, which may peradventure love another, and then shall you wrong your
self and injury her, expecting that which you have no assurance of.

Peace Palmer quoth he, if my fortunes prove so bad, the greater will be my
misery: therefore tell me what thou would have me do: my Lord (said she) had
I not promised her to bring you to speak with her, she would have destroyed her
self ere this: therefore vouchsafe me such favor, that I may perform my
word, which may be a means to end this malady. Did thou know (quoth he) how
unwilling I am to do it, I think thou would not request it: but to satisfy
her of that, which peradventure she will not credit by thy report, and at thy
request, I will come to her this evening. Till then farewell quoth he.
Philotheta being parted from him, by the way uttered these speeches. O that
fortune would favor me so much, and bless me with that felicity, to be the
party this worthy Knight so constantly loves. By this she was come to the
Pavilion, where even then there entered four Knights in black Armor, gallantly
mounted, by their outward habit portended some fatal stratagem: which were
Palian and the three Sons of the King of Macedon, who had vowed either secretly
or openly to plot the death of Montelyon: taking up their Lodging there to
complot their treason. The day being past, which the Knight of the Oracle
overpast in many solitary meditations, to the great grief of Persicles and
Constantia, who wondered thereat he went to his Chamber, apparelling himself in
the habit of one of the Kings Servants, only gyrding his Sword to his side,
went unto the Pavilion, concealing himself as closely as he could, but the
Heavens ordaining him to endure some misery, and as the eyes of envy and
suspicion, discovering him to Palian, who espied his coming thither, and being
entered the Pavilion, he was met by Philotheta, who with such carfulness
expected his coming, conducting him into the place, where Praxentia was, which
went so sore against her heart to do, that with very grief she was ready to
dye: whither treacherous Palians eyes watched him. Praxentia espying him, could
not abstain from blushing exceedingly, her own heart accusing her of
immodesty, to reveal that which we would have concealed. He saluted her,
uttering these words. Most noble Princess, to fulf^ll your desire, and show my
gratitude unto you for your Friendship bestowed on him that is not worthy
thereof. I am come to you desiring you not to misconceiue of me, nor condemn
me of inhumanity, that am not mine own, and therefore I cannot give my self
unto you. I have uttered unto the Palmer that which I will now conceal as
loath to offend you, yet constrained thereto, desiring you to command my life,
if you please, for that shall be at your disposition otherwise I cannot employ
my self to your liking. I have long since known of your good will to me,
which Palian by his subtilty increased, of whose Love and proceedings I know so
much that I think: I shall wrong him to fulfill your request: my self was the
man that should have joined your hands, when he took my habit and name upon
him which I presume here to utter, that thereby you may remember my innocence
in that complot, and how constantly I have vowed my self to another.

Praxentia what with anger, shame, and grief, stood like one mute, vexed that
he knew of Palians act, shame to make love contrary to the property of her
kind, and grieved to be disappointed: all which together not suffering her to
speak, until at last these passions, and her burning Love so overcame her,
that kneeling down, she said.

Good Knight blame me not, nor do not condemn me of immodesty, but grant
pity to my torment. He taking her up, desired her not to kneel to him that
was not worthy thereof, nor able to deserve it: then taking him by the hand,
she desired him to sit down by her upon the bed, beckning Philotheta to depart
the room.

To repeat what manner of behavior Praxentia used, and the words he spoke,
would have made any modest ear to blush to hear of: but seeing that nothing
could prevail, rage and lust so over ruled her, that in bitter exclaimes she
cried out: Inhumane, disloyal, and dishonorable Knight, do thou require my
Love with this disdain? Or think thou I will live to bear the blot of thy
refusal? At the conclusion of which words, Thetus entered the room, and with
his Sword drawn, ran at him, who by good Fortune beholding him, started aside,
otherwise he had been slain yet he was sore wounded, wherewith he drew his
sword, striking at Thetus, and at every blow wounding him. Philotheta hearing
the noise, came in and seeing the Knight of the Oracle wounded, with fear,
grief, and amazement cried out, help, help, the Kings Son ^ill be murdered.
The Echo o^ her shrill voice sounded throughout the whole Pavilion, and both
the Servants and other Knights came running thither, but before they came, he
had gotten Thetus, and overthrown him, thrust his Sword into his Body. By
this time Palian and his two Brethren came in, who seeing Thetus slain cried
out: Stay the Traitor, he has murdered Thetus, Son to the King of Macedonia.
Praxentia hearing that, tore her hair, rent her Garments, and disfigured her
face in such fort as was Lamentable to behold. Some began to lay hands on the
Knight of the Oracle, but his Fathers Servants knowing him stood in his
defense: Then began there a hot Combat on both parts, and many were slain.
Praxentia being now discovered, was known to Palian and her two Brethren, to
whom she cried; Revenge my shame, and my Brothers death on this wicked Knight,
who seeks by violence to dishonor me, has slain my Brother? What grief
was this to Philotheta you may judge: and how much it vexed him to be thus
betrayed, cannot be uttered: standing in his own defense, against such as
would have apprehended him, that knew him not, until he was grievously
wounded, and many of them slain, in which time news thereof was come to the
hearing of Persicles, the Emperor of Persia, and the King of Macedonia, who
with all have came thitherwards: The Soldiers like wise hearing of the Knight
of the Oracles distress, brake the conditions of the concluded Peace, and by
Multitudes ran forth of the City to preserve them. Persicles first entered the
Tent, next him the Kings of Persia and Macedonia, giving commandment upon
pain of Death, that no man should strike a blow. Yet notwithstanding,
rashness and heady force so overcame them, that it was long before they were
appeased. And the Emperor seeing Praxentia there, in such sort disfigured,
demanded if any could tell the cause of that mischief: First Praxentia spoke
being most guilty, yet first thinking to excuse her self: Noble Emperor, my
brother you see is slain in rescuing me from that Knights violence. The Knight
of the Oracle kneeling down before the Emperor, said: My noble Grand father,
I slew him in mine own defense* neither did I know what he wa^ being my self
trained hither to my death. More he would have said, but the Soldiers having
entered the Pavilion, r^sted not until they had gotten unto him, and he to
satisfy them, and avoid further mischief, departed with them to the City.
Then did the Emperor and Persicles comfort the King of Macedonia, but he vexed
with his Sons death, and his Daughters disgrace, and urged by his others
Sons importunacy, said: Emperor of Persia, I am now much wronged, and too
much abused by thee and thy Progeny, by whose falsehood I see my Children lie
dead before my face: How should I then be contented? By Heaven I swear, I will
revenge this villainy. King of Macedonia (said Persicles) I defy thee, for
accusing me or mine of any dishonor, and thou shall see and find this
Accusation is false; why else are thy Sons here disguised, with my enemy
Palian? by whose complot this mischief, was pretended against my Son, though
the punishment lighted upon themselves.

CHAP. XXXVI. Of the grief Philotheta endured for this misfortune. How she was
taken, and carried to the Armenian Host. Of Raleaes misfortune: And the
Message she delivered to the Knight of the Oracle.
PHilotheta seeing how unfortunately all things fell out* withdrew her self
out of sight, and in bitter exclaimes lamented her hard fortune, but most of
all that she was the cause of Montelyons coming thither, which had so near
endangered his life. Therefore she shrouded her self until it was night,
which being come, she traveled further into the Country, and there by selling
a Jewel, and good fortune, not being discryed, she altered her old habit into
her right form, staying certain days in a Village, some six miles distant
from the City of Pisos, in the house of an ancient Lady named Ralea, to whom
she related her misfortunes, procured by Amphiador, concealing her Love to
Montelyon, which she durst not commit to her serresie. This Ralea being a woman
of great wisdom, used Philotheta wondrous kindly, promising in words, and her
deeds showing it, that if she would stay with her, she would as dearly
tender her, as her own Daughter, whom she caused continually to accompany
Philotheta. She rejoiced at this good Fortune, and being alone she uttered
these speeches. Praxentia, thee only may I accuse for this misery, for whom I
undertook a task, which my heart even then abhorred, and now repent, not so
much inte^nding to procure thee that thou desiredst, as to satisfy my own
disquiet Senses, by the same means having drawn the most loyal Knight into
danger of his life, whose blood thou did seek to spill, else would thou
not so dishonorable and fasly have accused him. The consideration of which
stratageme, drew such a flood of tears from her eyes, that she could not stop
their passage. Which Ralea espying, demanded the cause thereof, but seeing
Philotheta make no reply, she said, Philotheta, I pity your estate, and would
gladly know the cause, that I might use my endeavor to comfort you, Philotheta
trusting to virtue, disclosed to her the love he bare to Montelyon, and all
that passed betwixt her and Praxentia, as is before rehearsed. Ralea thereby
noting her beauty, commended the same: promising her, that if with patience she
would quiet her self some few days, she would use all means possible to
comfort her.

Montelyon having recovered his wounds, gathered together a mighty host, and
brought them unto the City of Pisos, whither were assembled the choice
Soldiers, Noblemen, Knights, and Gentlemen of Persia, to fight in their
Emperors behalf, who entrencht themselves without the City. The King of
Macedonia and Armenia likewise had gathered togethe^ so mighty an Army, as
might have been thought able to make a Conquest of the World, who pitched
their Tents about the City in Armenia, where ^he King of Macedonia and Armenia
lay, Montelyons heart was fixed with desire to drive back those foes, not
staying to give them leave to make the first challenge, but humbling himself
upon his knee, before the Emperor and his Father, uttered these speeches. Most
mighty Emperor, and my Noble Father, I have already I hope satisfied you of my
innocence, being trained by some subtilty to my intended death, by Praxentia
and her brethren: but for that mine honor has been blemished by that
infamous accusation, and the common people rest unsatisfied, and my Foes
vnrevenged, I humbly crave you license, that I may send destance to my false
accusers, and by challenge acquit my self, which am constrained thus hastily
to desire, for that my heart will abide extreme torture until it be finished.
The Emperor rejoicing at his forwardness, and seeing Persicles willing to
have it so, gave his consent. Which done, Montelyon left them, and arming
himself in an Armor of white, which he had caused to be made of purpose, that
no man should know him, rode into the field betwixt both Camps, and by a
Herald sent deffence into the Camp of the Armenians King of Armenia, the^e is
a Knight whom you may behold in the field, that has sent d^stance to all the
Knights in this Army, especially to Palian, whom he accuses to be a most
disloyal and dishonorable Knight, not worthy to be named a Knight, that he
most falsely sought to betray Montelyons Life, and withal he offers by
combat to prove against all Knights, that Montelyon is a Knight both
Honorable and virtuous, and that Praxentiaes accusation is most false and
untrue. This message was no sooner delivered, but thousands of Knights made
suit to combat him first: but Palian to whom it principally belonged, to defend
his own honor, desired his Fathers consent, and obtained it, presently Arming
himself, and gallantly mounted, rode into the field, to him.

Montelyon desirous of revenge, and his heart inwardly tormented with grief,
met Palian with a furious encounter, he answering him with the like breaking
their Lances with great comeliness: then drawing their Swords, began the
combat, which was soon ended for within few blows, Montelyons Sword burst,
that he was enforced to close with Palian, with such force wrinking his Sword
from him, and with the pu^mell thereof striking him so violently on the head,
that he bruised his head, and overthrew him, every one thinking he had been
dead. Which was no sooner done, but Mensus eldest Son to the King of Macedonia,
being ready armed, greeted Montelyon with these words. Knight, thou have
undertaken a tedious task to combat all the Knights in this Camp, yet I hope
thou shall never do that, for my self will abate thy courage. If they were as
many more quoth Montelyon, I ^eare not all: if thou come to combat me hold
thy tongue, and be stir thy hands, for I will have about wit^ thee. With that
they gave each other many cru^ll blows and received some wounds, till
Montelyon again overe arging his Sword with his unmeasurable strength, brake
the same, which so vexed him, that he rusht upon Me^sus to have closed but he
knowing his intent, avoided him, and before he could turn about, gave him some
blo^es which pierced so his Armor and flesh, the blood ran down. Montelyon
having the hilt of his broken Sword still in his hand, flung the same with such
violence, that lighting short on Mensus Horse head, strook^ him down dead, his
master having much ado to get from him without harm: whilst Mensus was
mounting himself on a fresh Steed, Montelyons Squire had brought him the Sword
that was given him by the Hesperian Nymphs, which when he grasped, he said:
Had I armed my self with thee, my Foes had felt some smart, and my self less
disgrace. Meeting again, such cruel blows were dealt, that their Armor was
mangled and the blood appeared in many places, but Montelyon charged his Foe so
hard, that in short space he got the vantage, and wounded Mensus so sore, that
had he not been rescued he had either dyed or been forced to yield: that
Montelyon returned with Victory, to the great rejoicing of the Assyrians,
especially of the Emperor and Persicles.

Ralea that day left her house, according to her promise to Philotheta, to try
whether Montelyon did affect her or no, coming to the Court at such time as
Montelyon was newly affirmed, and had his few wounds dressed, a Messenger giving
him knowledge of her coming. Being come to him, and all avoided the Chamber,
she said: Noble Prince, I come to bring you news, that not many days since,
there happened to come to my house a Lady in disguise of a Palmer, desiring that
I would for certain days entertain her, until the Wars were ended, for
that she had a message to deliver unto you from a Lady in Arabia, named
Philotheta, which she thought good to conceal for a time, until you had
better leisure to hear it, and to perform that which she requested.
Notwithstanding, for that I honor you above all men, and would show my duty to
you in any respect, I have adventured to give you knowledge thereof without her
knowledge, being ready to bring her unto you at any time, if you please to
hear the same. Montelyons heart was exceedingly comforted to hear Philotheta
named, much more that she had sent to see him, and most of all what the message
should be, how she could tell where he was, or how she could remember him, that
had never but once seen him: sitting in a deep and silent meditation, but
before he had ended the same, a Messenger and Servant of Raleaes entered,
uttering these words. Madame, since you departed much sorrow has befalne us,
for certain Companies of the Armenian Host have ransackt your house, stole
your Cattle, carried away the Lady, and consumed all your goods with fire.
Ralia with that fell down in a deadly Trance, and being recovered, uttered
these Words. My Noble Lord (said he) that Lady is the most beautiful
Philotheta, that has long honored you with a constant Love, it was she that
in the disguise of a Palmer came as a Messenger to you from Praxentia, who was
guiltless of that intended practice, her Modesty withholding her from
uttering what she was, and undertaking that for Praxentia, to make trial of
your virtue, and which way your affections were bent. Redeem her my Lord, if
it be possible, for she is the most virtuous Lady living: these words ended,
she dyed, which were sufficient to set Montelyons heart on fire, being ready to
arm himself, but Raleaes Servant seeing it, told him it was too late to
pursue them, for by that time they were in the Host.

CHAP. XXXVII. How the King of Armenia sent Philothetaes Picture on Del^urno
Emperor of Almaigne, who promised to aid him against Persicles. Of diverse
Combats that Delfurno maintained in defense of her beauty.
PHilotheta being now in the Armenian Host, by reason of her exceeding beauty,
was presently carried by the Captain to the Tent to the King of Macedonia, who
no sooner saw her, but he presently thought her a present fit for the greatest
Potentate in the World, and withal fearing their Forces were too weak or the
puissant, Army of their Foes, consulted with the King of Armenia about it and
at last concluded to send Ambassadors unto Almaigne unto Delfurno, that then
newly succeeded his Father in the Empire, being a Prince of great valor: which
Embassage was committed to two Noblemen, one of Armenia, the other of
Macedonia. The Contents whereof was to treat with him of aid, and withal to
proffer him that Lady, whose Picture they carried with them, being drawn by an
exceeding cunning workman. The Ambassadors departed, and being arrived, were
admitted to Delfurnoes presence, one of them uttering their Message in these
words.

Most renowned Emperor, the Kings of Armenia and Macedonia, send friendly
greetings to your Highness, desiring your aid against their mighty Foes, the
King of Assyria and Persia, who are now joined together with oppression, and
unjust war to offer them injury the Son of Persicles, having in most
dishonorable sort deflowred Praxentia, and slew Thetus her Brother, seeking
her rescue: Besides, my Lords, having nothing of more worth then a most
beautiful and virtuous Lady, who surpasses all the Ladies that ever eye
beheld, present her unto you, as being fit for none, but a man of such honor
and dignity as your self: whose counterfeit imperfectly drawn, we present
unto your Highness, desiring your assistance to the aid of virtue, and
suppressing of wrong, which agrees with you magnanimity. Delfurno hearing of
these speeches, and viewing the Picture well, for a while stood in a study. At
last he made them answer thus. I know not upon what ground I should war
against Assyria and Persia, that never did me wrong, yet I would willingly
assist your Lords, not drawn thereunto by this present, that I esteem not,
but for the Love I bear them, and to punish such dishonor as their Foe has
shown: Therefore return your Lords this answer, that within three Months I
will be in Armenia, and bring with me such a power as shall vanquish their
Foes, and set them in peaceable possession of their rights. The Ambassadors
after they were honorably entertained, and sumptuously feasted, departed with
this joyful news, which added both comfort and resolution to the Armenian
Host.

Delfurno being alone, commanded the Picture to be brought into his Chamber,
which he viewed and reviewed, beholding the counterfeit with such a surfeiting
eye, that he began to affect the absent Lady, by beholding her present Picture.
Afterward calling before him the ancientest Captains and Commanders that were
employed in his Fathers Wars, he commanded them to Muster an Army of forty
thousand strong, of the best Soldiers in his Empire, and with all speed to
conduct them to the Host in Armenia, neither staying his coming, nor
expecting other command from him for he would be there before them. This done,
he cau^ed a most rich and costly Armor to be wrought of exceeding strength
wherewith he armed himself, causing a Squire that attended him to cover the
Picture with a rich Veil: he departed unknown of any, with this intent, by
Combat to make all Knights he met, to confess his Ladies beauty surpassed all
others, until he came into Armenia, where he determined to challenge all
Knights whatsoever in that behalf. Where being unknown, and carrying the
Picture covered, he arrived, sending his Squire with this Message unto the
General.

Noble General, my Master being a Knight of a strange Country, having
travailed many Miles in search of Adventures, happening to arrive near the
Host, being neither Foe to this Country, nor Friend to Persicles, desires
that with your favor he may make trial of his valor against the Knights of
this Camp, which he will undertake in defense of his Ladies virtue, beauty and
worthiness, whom he will maintain in single Combat against all comers, to
exceed all others. The King returned this answer. Tell thy Master, he is
welcome, and shall have our free consent so that he requires: but withal let
him take his friendly warning from me, that he beware what he undertake, left
the valor of these Knights turn him to repentance. The Squire returned with
this answer to his Master, who presently hung the vayled Picture upon the body
of a fair spreading Dake, himself resting thereby as a Guardiant, and ready
to combat him that came next.

The Knights of Armenia and Macedonia hearing of this strange Knights brave
Challenge, prepared to joust with him, and the first was a young Knight of
Armenia, named Tellutus, who loved Brisa, Daughter to the Duke of Linsus, who
supposed her beauty by reason of his entyre love, to excel all, but his
Fortune was crossed, and he at the second course overthrown.

The second that Iusted was Arnon, a Knight of Macedonia, that maintained three
courses against him with great agility, but at the fourth he was unhorsed.
Diverse other Knights Iousted him* and had the like Fortune, and his valor bare
away the Prize from the mall.

CHAP. XXXVIII. How the Knight of the Oracle leaving his Parents in disguise,
was entertained by the King of Armenia.
NOw it fell out that Montelyon having heard of the Damzels carrying away from
Raleaes house by the Enemy, which little thought it had been Philotheta,
studied how to redeem her: first he thought it best to be attempted by force
of War, but that course seemed too tedious: then he be thought himself of
some speedier mean, for long delay would pinch his heart. These contrarious
thoughts driving him to his wits end: When he had long studied and yet could
resolve of nothing, he mounted his Steed, and in an Armor unknown, girding
the good Sword he loved so well to his side, he rode forth at a Posterne gate
so secretly as he could, not as yet resolved what to do, riding toward the
Armenian Host, but a contrary way, as if he had not come from the Assyrian
Camp: being come to the Watch, they apprehended him, and he yielded, desiring
to be carried to their General, where being come, the General demanded of
whence he was: I am (quoth he) of Arabia, having travailed many years in
search of strange adventures* What is your name Sir, quoth he, my name is
Honorius. Will you (quoth he) serve me against my Foe the Assyrian? I will
(said he) if your quarrel be just, serve you faithfully, and spend my life to
punish disloyalty. With that the General repeated the History between him and
Persicles, showing the Title and claim he had to the Assyrian Crown, and
amongst many other falsehoods, accusing Montelyon for Praxentiaes rape, and
Thetus death. This vexed Montelyon exceedingly, hoping one day to work revenge
for all, using such behavior and speech as was most fit for the time, so that
he was well entertained of the General, and granted such privilege as the
rest of the Knights had, being neither known, nor once suspected to be the man
he was.

CHAP. XXXIX. How Delfurno arrived at the Armenian Host.
THe next day the Almaine Forces arrived in Armenia, and assuring himself that
Delfurno would not be long behind, caused Philotheta to be adorned with most
costly and rich Roabes, and to be well attended by a gallant train of fair
Damzels, which he did to, please and delight him with her beauty. Philotheta
supposed his intent in doing her so much honor, had been either that he
pretended love to her himself, or did it in the behalf of Palian, which
besides the abundant cares that possessed her heart, bred a fresh disquiet in
her, resolving not to love any but Montelyon. The same day Delfurno like wise,
seeing no more would Combat him* cam^ to the Court, and discovered himself to
the King of Armenia and Macedonia, yet desiring to conceal the same, who with
great honor and courtesy entertained him: and the more to please him,
conducting her to the Palace, where the Queen of Macedonia and Armenia were,
accompanied by Praxentia, but all in mournful weeds: and Philotheta
glistering in gold, dazeling the eyes of the beholders. Which when Delfurno
beheld, at the first view his heart was attainted with loving admiration, even
then vowing his heart her thrall, and of that sudden becoming so bounden a
subject to Love, as his Heart, Hands, Eyes, and every Member, were devoted to
her Service. After salutations to all the rest, (who yet knew him not)
forgetting longer to conceal himself, he came to Philotheta, saluting her
with these speeches: Lady blame me not for undertaking to be the Champion of
your Beauty: I am the Knight that have these many days held Combat against all
Knights in your behalf, not having discovered to any your Name, as fearing
thereby to offend you: the original of my attempt, being the earnest zeal and
love I bear to you. Sir, replied she, your labor was greater then your
reward, and more then you ^eeded to have undertaken, and little pleases me:
therefore I pray leave off to do so, and then I shall think my self more
beholden to you, the subject not answering the Protestation.

Delfurno was nipt with her reply, and so much ravished to hear her Heavenly
voice, that he was to seek of a reply, standing so long in deep study, that
she returned from him, and he started as ashamed of that oversight* coming to
the Kings of Armenia and Macedonia, to whom he said: This Ladies beauty
surpasses all that ever I beheld, I pray tell me of whence she is? Her name
quoth Armenia, is Philotheta, Daughter to a Duke in Arabia, whom if it please
your Highness to accept of, she I know will yield to any honorable request. I
like her well indeed quoth Delfurno, and do me that favor I may enjoy her,
and I will bind my self your everlasting Friend. Many other speeches past
betwixt them, both of them promising to effect his desire with speed,
especially the King of Armenia, who presently left him, and finding her out, he
uttered these speeches to her. Fair Lady, such happiness may be fall you at
this instant, if you will be ruled by my counsel, which if you refuse this,
and live many thousand years after you shall never light on the like, for the
Mightiest Emperor in the world seeks your Love with honorable resolution to
make you his Wife, and renown you with the Title of Empress: this Knight that
even now offered his service to you is he, the Emperor of Almaigne, named
Delfurno, that hearing of your beauty, came purposely into this Country to
behold you, and do you service.

Philotheta hearing so old a man become so earnest a Soliciter, being neither
pleased with his company nor counsel, gave him this short answer. Your
proffers are as great as liberal: yet neither pleasing nor acceptable to me,
for I live in this place by constraint, not by consent, by which means my mind
can think on nothing, but to be released from hence, desiring to live in
another place.

CHAP. XL. How the Knight of the Oracle knew Philotheta, and how she was by the
King of Armenia committed to his charge.
ALl this while Montelyon stayed below among other Knights in the Hall, at such
time as Philotheta, came to go into the Garden, with a gallant train of
Damzels attending her.

Montelyon noting her well, suddenly remembering he had seen her, felt such a
Passion oppress his heart, that he thought it melted within him: When she was
past, he demanded what Lady that was, that was so gallantly attended? Her name
(quoth one) is Philotheta, Daughter to a Duke in Arabia, that was so lately
surprised in Assyria, and brought thither with intent to be married to Delfurno
the Emperor. Montelyon hearing that, held his peace, getting from the company
into a solitary place, where being alone, he uttered these Meditations. And can
it be that Philotheta was in Assyria, in her own person, and an others name to
bring a Message to me? That need I not doubt of, for Raleaes speeches confirmed
it: but may it not be that she sent some other? that cannot be, for they tell
me she was surprised in Assyria. Moreover Ralea told me, that she came in the
Disguise of a Palmer, which Palmer I am assured was even the very same that
trained me to Praxentiaes presence, Whom I now presently remember, had the
selfsame countenance of Philotheta, which made me affect him so much. These
remembrances, may be assurances that she rather hates then loves me, for
otherwise I cannot be persuaded, and then the task I have undertaken over
tedious: for it will be in vain to seek her love that regards me not.
Besides, did she love me, yet having thrust my self amongst such a multitude
of mine Enemies, that if they knew me would end my life: it is impossible for
me to make my Love known to her, yea, or so much as to speak to her: What
hope is there then left for me, but to Despair, or return to my Parents,
seek to win her possession by force of Arms.

Whilst he yet continued in these Meditations he espied the King of Armenia
coming toward him, to whom he used great Reverence. The King suddenly seeing
him, as soon remembered he told him he was of Arabia, which made him utter
these speeches. Well met Honorius, I think thou toldest me thou were of
Arabia, and therefore it comes in my mind, that thou art the only man may
pleasure me if thou will undertake for me, being a matter of small labor, but
much importance: Which if thou will but undertake, and with secrecy conceal,
thy reward shall be so great as thy heart can wish. My Lord (quoth he)
whatsoever it be, I will undertake it, doing my uttermost endeavor therein,
with such secrecy and diligence, as you shall like of. I do both trust and
believe thee (said he) for in thy face I see the sparks of Honor: therefore
this it is. There is in my Court a Lady of thy Country, named Philotheta, whom
I had thought to have matched with the Emperor Delfurno, but now my Mind is
altered, and I purpose to enjoy her my self: and for that thou art her
Countryman, I think thou may prevail more to persuade her then any other:
therefore I have chosen thee as my Friend, yea my dear Friend to solicit my
suit unto her: But thou must not be known but that thou do only speak in
the behalf of Delfurno: for so will I tell him. This is that I would have thee
perform: therefore tell me, art thou resolved to do it? Were the Task far
greater, I would undertake it, but in this I think my self exceedingly
honored by your Highness, hoping to pr^vaile so much, that you shall attained
your desire. Then come with me (quoth he.) Then did he bring him to
Philothetaes Lodging, whether she was newly returning, and uttered these
speeches to her. Lady, for that you are a stranger, sollitary, and unacquainted
with the Armenians guise, I have brought this Knight not to be your Gaurdiant,
for I make you no Prisoner, but to accompany you, and defend you if any should
offer you wrong, whom I hope you will accept of. Philotheta liked his proffer
well, hoping he would prove a means for her to escape by, accepted his proffer
with hearty thanks.

CHAP. XLI. Of the first Conference betwixt Philotheta and the Knight of the
Oracle.
MOntelyon being alone with the Lady he had so long desired to see, and being
now her Keeper that she so dearly loved, thought himself most fortunate, doing
humble reverence to Philotheta: Who demanded his name. My name (said he) is
Honorius. Then did she demand whose Son he was? for which he had not an answer
ready, but stood silent, not caring to be taken in a lie, for that he was
unwilling to maintain a lie. Philotheta seeing that, said, I perceive I shall
have small comfort by thy company, for I see you are not of Arabia. Lady (said
he) whatsoever I am, I rest wholly to do whatsoever you shall command me. Then
should you not (quoth she) please him that brought you to me, for his mind and
mine are quite contrary, else would he not have trusted you. Admit I did quoth
he, yet having no intent to do it, but thereby to enjoy your presence, your
have no cause to suspect me. Yet I think you are deceived in his intent, for
none but my self knows it, which I care not to reveal to you, if you will
conceal it from him, for I came hither to do you pleasure, not to further
him. Tell it me (quoth she) and I promise you I will conceal it. Thus it is,
whereas he with great earnestness has sued unto you in the behalf of
Delfurno, he has appointed me to be a more earnest solicitor in his behalf:
for that he himself is deeply in love with you, but he intends that
Delfurno shall think I am only employed to pleasure him. Which when he
imparted unto me, and willingly undertook, not to do it, but to do you all
the humble service and duty that I can being neither of this Court, nor of
Arabia, but a Knight of Assyria, that have vowed never to leave searching
until I had found you: the occasion whereof was this. Upon a day walking in a
Grove, adjoy^ing to the Palace Garden, I heard a Knight whom afterward I well
knew, making much lamentation for your absence that nothing but news of your
safety could ease his heart. I disclosed my self unto him, and for the love
that I bare him, vowed to travel in your search, first arriving in this Court,
where to my exceeding Joy I have found you, with all humility, faith, and
constancy, proffering you my service, being ready to undertake any Task, and
undergo any peril to do you service, I know not how to trust thee (quoth
she) considering thou regardest not to break thy Word to the King of Armenia,
therefore I fear thou will do the like to me: yet if fair words may deceive
me I shall be deceived in thine I would trust thee but I cannot, and yet blame
me not, for having found no friendship nor truth in many, I know not how to
trust any. My Fortune was ever yet adverse, and therefore I am without hope of
better: then leave me for this time, and if you can find in your heart to be
true to help me, I may hereafter be better advised to believe and employ you:
which words ended, they parted.

CHAP. XLII. Of the sorrow that was made in the Assyrian Camp for the Knight
of the Oracles absence.
NOw let us return to speak of Persicles, who missing Montelyon, within short
space after his departure, went to his Chamber to seek him, and from thence
from place to place, but all in vain, until at last he heard news by a
Servant, that there was a Knight departed that day at a Posterne gate, armed at
every point. Persicles hearing that, returned to the Emperor, and certified
him, and Constantia of his departure: both of them being strooken with sudden
grief, especially Constantiaes heart was overcome with such passion, that
until the time of his return, she could never shake it off. News like wise
was brought, that the Emperor of Almaigne was arrived with forty thousand
Soldiers in aid of the Kings of Armenia and Macedonia. Then began the Emperor
of Persia and Persicles to assemble all the Nobility together to determine what
to do. A general conclusion being agreed upon, within two days to bid them
battle. But the Soldiers hearing of Montelyons departure, seemed to have lost
their former courage, and to have been without comfort.

CHAP. XLIII. Of the secret practices of the King of Armenia and the Emperor
of Macedonia to deceive each other of Philothetaes love, which they imparted to
Honorius Knight of the Oracle.
NOw Montelyon being like wise no less sad, to have left them so carelessly,
then they were for his absence: After he had spent all the Night in sad
meditations, he arose early with purpose to reveal himself and his Love to
Philotheta, whatsoever ensued thereon: yet fearing eftsoone to disquiet her, he
walked down into a Garden, where he had not stayed long, but he was saluted
by Delfurno, who came to him of purpose to know if he had yet motiooned his
suit to Philotheta. Who answered him, that he had had much conference with her
the last Night about it, and how she had deferred him for that days answer.
Thereupon Delfurno promised him great rewards, and he as much fidelity, as
being contented with his speeches he departed: He was no sooner gone, but the
King of Macedonia came in, whose heart was grounded upon a new Subject that
Montelyon thought not off, for he determined, that none should enjoy Philotheta
but only himself, and therefore came to make trial whither this supposed
Honorius would condescend to be ruled by him: which if he would do, then he
thought to convey Philotheta secretly into Macedonia, so as neither Delfurno
nor the King of Armenia should have any suspect thereof. To this effect he
communed with Honorius, first binding him to be secret, then by gifts enticing
him, and lastly, dealing by entreaty, until he had uttered the depth of his
mind, which he promised to effect, using such words as pleased the King,
wherewith he went away contented. Whilst Montelyon and the King of Macedonia
were thus in conference, the King of Armenia was entering the Garden, but seeing
them in such discoursing he withdrew himself until they were parted, and then
he came in, demanding what good news he had for him. My Liege, replied he,
the last motion you made to her about her marriage to Delfurno has hindered
your own, for I had much a do to persuade her that you had any intent at all
to love her, that were so earnest for another: but notwithstanding that, I hope
soon to alter her, and bring her to a better liking of your affection. The
Emperor has been with me already, earnestly soliciting me to prosecute his
suite with efficacy. Likewise has the King of Macedonia, with many promises,
desired me to use what persuasions I could in the Emperors behalf: but for
that by your Majesty I am so honorably esteemed of, I will try the uttermost
of my skill to pleasure you: I thank thee good Honorius (quoth he) and I will
for thy kindness yield thee so large a recompense as thy heart can wish. Which
said, he departed.

What an Office have I undertaken (said Montelyon) to undertake to sue for
three others, that dare not speak for my self, and yet contrary to my liking
am enforced to use it, only to rid my self from grief. Yet because the
time affords me opportunity to work mine own weal, I will try whether she
does pity me or no.

CHAP. XLIV. How the Knight of the Oracle discovered himself to Philotheta:
And how by a stratageme he convayed her thence in safety. And what joy was made
both for their safeties.
WHich when he had said, he presently went to Philothetaes Lodging, whom he
found in a sad and heavy meditation, but she suddenly espying him coming
toward her, turned her self from him refusing to hear him speak, as
supposing his speeches would have tended to persuade her to the loathed liking
he had mentioned the day before. He seeing her unwillingness to hear, knew
the cause thereof, but yet emboldning himself he said. Virtuous Lady, pardon my
boldness, and withal vouchsafe to hear my speech which shall not offend you:
for I have vowed not to utter a word contrary to your liking. You will then (
quoth she) prove perjured, for I know your message before you utter it, and that
will displease me. No dear Lady, said he, I come not now to ask pity for
another, but for my self, that sometimes have been better known of you, I am
the most unfortunate Montelyon, that have adventured thus far amongst my Foes
to seek you out, my heart having honored you, ever since my first sight of
you in the Hermits Cell in Arabia: Now I desire you to pity me, for without
your favor I am not my self, and in your favor I shall account my self most
fortunate, Philotheta noting him, remembered perfectly, it was he, which revived
her heart with joy, saying. Most noble Knight I account my self m^re then
happy, in that you have me in custody, whose virtuous mind I know will shelter
me from dishonor: should I not yield you thanks for deeming so well of me,
that am not worthy. I might be condemned of rudeness: therefore most humbly I
thank you, and withal desire you to pity my estate, that is now rackt upon
the Wheel of despair. Dear Lady, said he, I am most willing to do you
service, and I desire nothing more then to imply my self to do you good, for
my life is yours, and all that I possess with it, I humbly prostrate at your
sacred feet. Desiring to convay you hence into Assyria, where your Parents live
in safety, inwardly sorrowful for your absence. Whether if you will be
directed by me I will convey you with safety.

Sir, replied Philotheta, your virtuous kindness has deserved more at my
hands then I can yield thanks for, then how should I behave my self to the
thing you desire, which is already fixed in my heart: I will rest so far to
be directed by you, as that my mind shall be agreeable to yield to any request
you shall make. Then dear Lady (said he) I will before to morrow this time,
see you safe in my Fathers Court, for much mischief is pretended by these
Kings of Macedonia and Armenia: both of them have been with me this day, and
hired me to motion their loves to you, both of them seeking to enjoy you, but
so as the other shall not know thereof, each seeking to prevent the other, and
both of them the Emperor, which they have revealed unto me: but may I have
your license, I will by that means deliver you from their custody. I most
humbly desire you to do it, (quoth she) referring my self to your good
directions, and committing all to your wise^omes election. Which said,
Montelyon emboldning himself gave and received so sweet a kiss, as seemed to
breath forth a sweet exchange of each others Souls. He going to find out the
King of Armenia, and she into her private Chamber.

Montelyon having found out the King of Armeni^, told him how that the King of
Macedonia went about to convey Philotheta from thence, rehearsing all the
conference that had past betwixt them: and withal (quoth he) the Emperor was
with me this day, promising me great rewards, if I would do the like for him.
Now my Lord, my love and duty to you, binds me only to do you service, and
I have vowed that my best endeavors shall be employed only to your good
liking. The King hearing that both of them went about to deceive him raged
exceedingly, but trusting his Fidelity, he was quieted: asking what he should
do to prevent them both. My dear Lord (quoth he) this Evening you may effect
your desire, or else never: at which time give me but directions, whether I may
convey her to a place of security, or where we may meet you, and I will
adventure my life but I will do it: and by this means you shall deliver your
Signet unto me, for our quiet passage forth at the City Gate, and then may we
meet you where you will appoint us. And that shall be (quoth he) at Friar
Barnards Cell without the City, if you know it, and there is my Signet. Thither
will I convay her (quoth he) at twelve a Clock. Farewell then (quoth the King)
be but Faithful, and thou shall find my friendship such, as shall highly
reward thy pains.

Montelyon having effected this, presently went to the King of Macedonia,
telling him how the Emperors importimacie was such, that it was high time,
(either then, or never) to convay Philotheta thence, whom he found willing to
yield thereunto. He hearing that, desired his counsel, promising well to
reward him, entreating him to do it for him, and both himself and his
Kingdom should be at his command. Deliver me (quoth Montelyon) your Signet for
my Pass, and appoint the place and Time, and I will bring her thither. There
is my Signet (quoth he) the place, at Friar Barnards Cell, and the time, one of
the Clock. After many other speeches they parted.

Montelyon without stay went to the Emperor, with submisse behavior, telling
him how that Philotheta did greatly affect him, and had sent him to make an
humble request unto him: which was, that we might be convayed in secrecy from
the Camp, for that many dangers did invirone her in that place, and that of
such importance, as did concern his Life, whereon her safety depended: which
for that they were of weight, she would reveal to none but himself, desiring
him not to come to her, for that his person might thereby be endangered.
Delfurno hearing this, was exceedingly troubled in his mind, yet glad to hear
that she esteemed him, said: Honorius, I would as gladly affect any thing to
content her, as I would to save mine own life, yet do I not know how, unless
by thy directions: therefore do but counsel me, and I will yield to that
which thou shall advise. My Noble Lord (quoth he) the safest way is, this night
secretly to convay her through the Gate where your Soldiers lie, and I will
bring her to Friar Barnards Cell, about eleven of the Clock, where you may be
ready to receive her, and with a sufficient Guard of Knights to convay her into
Almaigne, or any place of security Moreover, my Lord, she willed me to assure
you, that both the King of Armenia and Macedonia, having disloyally forgotten
their promise to you, seek to win her love to themselves, which dishonor she
cannot endure to be done against you. Delfurno was much grieved to hear that,
yet hoping to prevent them both, he quieted himself, delivering his Signet to
Montelyon, with many thanks and much entreaty, desiring him to be careful,
that nothing might prevent their purpose.

Montelyon being glad of this, thought not so to end, but presently went to the
Queen of Macedonia, telling her the Kings complot, for convaying of Philotheta
thence, showing her his Signet: which when she beheld, exceeding grief possessed
her heart to think of his disloyalty. Montelyon seeing that, said.
Notwithstanding, he has attempted this, I know the Ladies virtues to be such,
as she will rather suffer the extremest miseries in the world, then yield
thereto: and for my self, though he has promised me great rewards, I respect
more mine honor, then to be the agent in so wicked an Act, therefore to
assure, that I entend it not. I yield you his Signet, whereby I should have
past the Camp, to meet at Bernards Cell. I thank thee gentle Knight (quoth
she) and for this d^ed command me any thing, and thou shall obtain it. My
self will meet him there, and by that means, I hope to make him give over
the like attempts.

Montelyon being gone from her, went to the Queen of Armenia, telling her the
like, and indeed the truth of her Lord, both delivering her his Signet and all
other directions for her to meet him by: leaving her so mad with rage and
jealousy, that she was ready to tear her hair: yea even with bitter
exclaimes to reveal her mind, but that she referred it until she might
surprise him with a guilty conscience at Barnards Cell.

By this time it grew to be night, and after Supper, was ended, both Delfurno,
the King of Armenia, and of Macedonia, making more then wonted have to break
company, each being glad that the other was so willing to part, which the two
Queens noted, as privy to their drifts.

Montelyon like wise got him to Philotheta, telling her, that he had so
prevailed with Delfurno, that he had gotten his Signet, as their warrant to
pass through the Camp, entreating her to be in a readiness to go with him,
desiring her to fear no danger, for his life should shield her. She granted to
go with him, desiring him to stay there, until the time appointed which he
performed, passing the time in private conference with her, to both their
likings. The time being come, and all things silent, Montelyon armed himself,
leading Philotheta out of the Court, passing all the guards, watches, and
garrisons, by showing the Emperors Signet, and coming where the Soldiers
lay, they likewise let him go, until they were without the City gates.
Montelyon having without danger effected this, turned his steps directly
toward his own City, which was not far off, and therefore with ease they
got thither. Being come to the City gates, the watch espying them, demanded who
was there. Montelyon had them come down and see: they came down and took
them in, beginning to examine them: but Montelyon discovered himself as loath
to stay there, yet commanding them to conceal it, and to carry him as a
Prisoner to Delatus which they performed, where they knocked, and were let in.
Delatus and Alfala knowing him, did him humble reverence, rejoicing in their
hearts to see him so safely returned. But Montelyon vnvailing Philotheta,
Alfala presently knew her with tears of joy welcomming her, whilst the old
Duke melted with passion to behold his Daughter, whom from her infancy he had
not seen: embracing her in his arms, and a thousand times kissing her tender
cheek. These embracings being past, Montelyon said, Lady, since you are now in
safety with your Parents, my promise is performed, desiring you to have regard
to the passions I endure, which time will not now permit me to utter, but leave
to your courteous consideration: therefore I beseech you in mine absence, let
my loyalty be regarded, and your gentle heart willing to pity me. Which said,
with a second kiss he left her, to submit himself to his Parents.

CHAP. XLV. Of the discord that befell betwixt the Emperor of Almaigne, the
Emperor of Macedonia, and the King of Armenia, about Philothetaes departure.
Of a merry jest that befell the two Ladies. And of the desolation of the
Armenian Host.
FIrst the Emperor choosing unto him some few trusty Knights that he meant
should convay Philotheta into Almaigne, secretly went unto Bernards Cell, where
he shrouded himself under a tuft of Cipresse trees, staying the coming of
Philotheta, but it was an hour before any came, and the first was the Queen
of Macedonia, who attended by one Gentlemen came toward the Cell, whom when
Delfurno beheld, he alone stepped unto her, saying. My dear Philotheta, I am
sorry that for my sake you should take such pains as at this unseasonable time
to be abroad, for which I render all the thanks that a constant heart can. She
hearing that, taking him to be her Lord, yielded him many thanks, purposing to
try the uttermost conclusion, before she revealed her self, saying: Had I not
assured my self of your Love, I would not have come hither: but being here I
rest at your disposition: Delfurno then embraced her, often times kissing her,
and being of a quick conceit, presently bethought himself if she would
condescend, to call up the Friar, and be married. Lady ( quoth he) since you have
vouchsafed to grant me love, enrich me also with possession, which the more
lawfully to effect, we will be married by Friar Bernard. My Lord, replied she,
I am contented: then did he call at the Friars Cell, who arising, Delfurno
taking him aside, told him what he was, and the cause of his coming: who
hearing that, presently joined their hands. Delfurno then purposed not to
convay her thence, but return to the Camp, which he performed. They were no
sooner gone, but the King of Macedonia comes to the Cell, and ere he could
turn him about, the Queen of Armenia, according to Montelyons directions came
taither. The King himself taking her for Philotheta, at the first meeting
embraced her with a sweet Congee, uttering many ^peeches to the setting forth
of his love, which she answered as kindly, that he grew so bold, as he would
have had present possession of her love, but she denied that, alleging that
he had a Queen, who hearing of his Love to her, would seek her death. Fear
not that, dear Love, (quoth he) for ere long I mean to make her sure enough
for ever troubling of you, therefore deny me not, but yield me the fruition of
thy love, I will not quoth she, without further assuran^e, for my mind
presageth some ill. Here is (quoth he) a Friar hard by, will you consent that
he shall marry us? To that she agreed, and he called up the Friar the second
time, who much marvelling thereat, demanded the cause of his coming. Friar,
quoth he, the cause of my coming is to be married to this Lady, therefore I
pray thee do it without delay. The Friar thinking that some mad spirits were
abroad, or that some frantic dream had overcome his senses, without asking
any more questions married them, and sent them away. The King of Macedonia,
carried her into his Tent in the field, for that he durst not go to the
Palace, for fear of his wife, where he stayed with her all night.

Last of all the King of Armenia, premeditating what speeches to use to set
forth his life, resting himself upon a banks side, hard by Bar^ards Cell,
staying there coming the space of an hour, with great patience, but when an
hour was past, and then another, and a third near ended, he waxed impatient,
fearing to be disappointed, but seeing they came not, at last he misdoubted he
had mistaken the time, and stayed too long, that being much troubled he knocked
at Bernards Cell, who started from his Bed, as one affrighted, wondering what
accident had driven so many to his Cell that night. And coming to the door,
the King of Armenia demanded, if there had been a Lady that night. Yes ( quoth
be) here has been two, but what they were I know not. It was assuredly
Philotheta, and with her Delfurno, to whom I married her: but what the other
two were I know not: The King hearing that, in a rage ran back to the king of
Macedoniaes Tent, desiring to speak with him, the Guard knowing him, let him
in, and he standing by his beds side, said. Brother of Macedon, the Lady whom
we determined to marry to Delfurno is this Night fled, and for that deed we
shall loose his friendship for ever. The K. of Macedonia hearing that, lay as
one half amazed, not knowing what to say, and the Queen hearing her husband
there, whom she thought she had embraced, trembled with fear. The K. of
Macedonia seeing there was no remedy, but that his deed must of necessity be
discovered, said. King of Armenia, it is so, I have Philotheta in my custody,
and her I will enjoy, for she lies folded in mine arms. By Heaven quoth the King
of Armenia, thy life shall not satisfy the dishonor thou have done us. With
that he drew his Sword, and he starting from his bed to reach his to defend
himself, in which time the K. of Armenia catching hold on her as she lay, drew
her forth into the floor, where beholding her he was then much more enraged,
being ready to kill her, but that the King of Macedonia prevented him: who
likewise seeing her, stood as one amassed, whilst she hasted to apparel her
self, and ran from thence unto the Palace. The King of Armenia vowing
revenge, went from the Macedonian Tent, and presently caused his Drum to strike
up Alarm, and commanded his Soldiers to destroy the Macedonians, who
according to his command, suddenly set upon them, that there began an exceeding
slaughter amongst them. The Emperor having news thereof, supposing the cause
had been for the loss of Philotheta, commanded two of his knights to go unto
either of them, and desire them to be pacified until they had discovered their
griefs to him, which he could easily remedy, if not he would become a friend
to one of them. The messengers found them both together in single combat, and
delivered their Message, but it was long before either of them would go to
him, yet at last they went both: To whom Delfurno said: My Lords, I believe
your strife arises from the loss of Philotheta, if that be the cause contend
no longer, for as you were both willing I should enjoy her, so I have this
night had possession of her life, being lawfully married unto her at Barnards
Cell. The King of Armenia what with rage and jealousy, not well knowing what
he did, drew the Curtains, and discovered their viewes, the Queen of
Macedonia, who seeing her. Honor so betrayed, lay quits bereft of sense, but
coming again to her self she cried out for pardon, alleging she was
betrayed: but there was now no time of parley, for all of them were enraged,
and as well Delfurno as the rest, betook themselves to Arms. But the Queen
of Macedonia humbling her self at her husbands feet. Said: Both you, my self,
and all of us are deceived: Honorius yesternight declared unto me, that you
intended privily to carry Philotheta from hence. I requested him to counsel me
how to prevent you, whereupon he told me, that you had appointed to meet with
him and her at Barnards Cell and for his Pass he had received your Signet,
which at my earnest entreaty he delivered me, I thinking to surprise you there,
came thither, where the Emperor as I now perceive met me whom I took to be
your self, and he taking me to be Philotheta that went to Bernards Cell, I
still concealed my self, thinking I had not offended, but now I see I am
betrayed. Lady ( quoth he) I willingly pardon this fault, having committed the
same with the Queen of Armenia, and in the same manner deceived by Honorius.
The Emperor hearing that, sent a Messenger to see if Philotheta were in the
Court, but he returned news, that both she and Honorius were not to be found.
The Emperor then said, that knight has dereived us all, therefore let us be
friends. Contented quoth the King of Macedonia. By heaven quoth the King of Armenia,
I will not bear this dishonor, but be revenged to the full, and cause th^e to
repent that ever thou sufferedst such dishonor to Armenia. The King of
Macedonia could not brook his words, but in a rage made this reply. I know
quoth he, thou art a tyrant, and regardest not the laws humain nor divine, as
may be seen by the unjust title thou layest to the Crown of Assyria, which is
forged, and were it not to revenge my Daughters dishonor and Sons death, I
would not have offered arms against that worthy King. Therefore since thou art
so peremptory, do thy worst, for I regard thee not. The King of Armenia went
from thence setting upon the Macedonians. And the King of Macedonia forsook
his Tents to defend himself. The Emperor presently commanded his Forces to
march forth of the City.

CHAP. XLVI. How the Knight of the Oracle and Persicles, suddenly issuing out,
destroyed the whole Armenian Host.
MOntelyon knowing that some stratageme would follow his last nights policy,
after he had submitted himself to his Parents and the Emperor, he armed
himself in the armor which was given him by the Hesperian Nymshs, and
presently mounted himself, leading his sixty thousand Soldiers forth of the
City, which likewise he performed before the Emperor or Persicles heard thereof:
who at last being certified sent for him to know the cause: this night quoth he
shall we surprise our Enemies, who are now together by the cares within
themselves Persicles thereupon armed himself, and Deloratus, Pisor, Cothanes,
and many other Knights of great esteem marching thither wards, where they
heard such cruel alarums, as though the City had been utterly destroyed And
being come near the City, they beheld the Emperor in the field, to whom
Persicles sent a Herald, to certify him that Persicles was never foe to the
Almaigns, and therefore sent to know if Delfurno had any quarrel against him.
Delfurno returned answer, that he was never foe to Persicles. Montelyon was the
first that entered the City, and set upon his enemies with such fury, that many
of them lost their lives, and the day being light, discovered such a cruel
slaughter as eye has not beheld. The King of Armenia, and Macedonia were then
in cruel combat together, betwixt whom, Montelyon stepped, saying: Strive not to
destroy one another but defend your selves, for I am come to do that. They
knowing him to be the Knight of the Oracle, were so amazed, as if they had
been surprised with a sudden trance, running several ways to call back
theirSouldiers from destroying one another, to defend themselves: but before
they could set themselves in any good order, the Assyrians were so intermingled
amongst them, that before they were aware they lost their lives. Palian seeing
themselves so overtaken, perceived it was in vain to strive for victory, stole
forth of the City to Delfurno, entreating him not to forsake them: but he
knowing disadvantage had seized on them, refused, letting him return without
comfort, and entering into the City, he found his father grievously wounded, and
ready to yield to Montelyons sword, at whom he ran with such fury, that he
wounded him in the thigh: Montelyon seeing that and knowing him, let drive at
him with great courage, and continued combat against him, whilst the King of
Armenia began to withdraw himself, Montelyon seeing that, struck so forcible
a blow at Palian, that he astonished him and with that overtooke the King, at
the first blow cutting in sunder his wrist which had lost his Gantlet, and at
the next thrusting his sword quite through his body. Palian by this recovered
himself, and looking about ^im, beheld his fathers tragedy, aiming himself to
revenge. Montely^^ seeing him coming welcomed him with so cruel a blow, that
his ^^mour flew in pieces. Palian would have done the like, had not Montelyons
Armor been of unwonted strength, but in the end he fled, find^^^ himself
too weak to resist him. Persicles and Deloratus all this while ranged up and
down, destroying such as they met, until at last they enc^untred the King of
Macedonia, and his two Sons, accompanied with ^oure other Knights of Macedonia
that made exceeding slaughter where they went. Persicles ran at the King, and
in the encounter overthrew him, but his eldest Son stepped to his rescue, and
with an unlucky blow wounded Persicles on the thigh: then began an unequal
combat betwixt them for those six set upon Persicles and Deloratus, who
continued combat against them by the space of an hour, till both sides were
grievously wounded, especially Persicles and Deloratus had bled so much, that
they were ready to faint. Montelyon came most fortunately to their rescue, who
espying his Father and Deloratus in such danger, was so enraged, that he can at
one of them with such force, that he slew him, and within few blows, left
another bereft of sense, and offending a third with such puissant blows, that
he could not tell, whether he might stay or run away. Another seeing that,
joined himself in combat with him, continuing it but a short space, for he was
soon so sore wounded, that he was not able to resist Persicles being sore
wounded before, yet so valiantly behaved himself, that one of them lay dead at
his feet, and the other fled from Montelyon: then began a desolation in the
Host, for the Armenians cried fly, fly, and the other kill, that of a sudden
the massacre was so hot, that the Channels of the City began to run with blood,
and none could hardly ride or pass on foot for dead carcasses. Then began the
Citizens to run on heaps, the two Queens be took themselves to ^light with
Praxentia, but were taken by Pisor. Palian was taken prisoner by Deloratus, and
the King of Macedonia, and his two Sons by Persicles and Montelyon. The
Soldiers that were left, fled forth of the City and hid themselves in the
fields, and the Citizens, so many as could escape the sword, upon their knees
entreated Persicles to spare their lives, who yielded upon condition they would
pay to every common Soldier a 100. Crowns, and to every Leader 500. which they
performed. Persicles then sounded retreat, and drew his forces out of the City,
appointing Garrisons to keep the same to his use. Delfurno at his return met
him, and offered to conclude a league of amity with him* which he kindly
accepted, riding together to the City of Piso^ where they were received with
exceeding joy, especially Montel^on to whom all men attributed the glory of
that victory.

After this victory attchieued to the great and exceeding a^plaud of Montelyon.
Persicles caused all the dead bodies to be bury^^, those that yielded to be
pardoned, the maimed to be carried to ^ospitals to be cured and every Soldier
to be sent away well rewarded, and highly contented And within few days after
the Emperors of Persia and Almaigne, Persicles, Deloratus, and all the Nobles
there, except Prisoners, assembled to finish the Conclusion of this
Controversy, for that the King of Macedonia hasted his releasement. When being
all set in a most royal and majesticall sort the places near to that royal
assembly being gloriously furnished with the beauties of shining Ladies, the
Prisoners were brought in honorable sort, and after many allygations of
wrongs, they by a general consent desired Montelyon to appoint their ransom,
attributing the glory of that victory to him, and therefore none but he to have
the disposing of the Prisoners ransom, with that unwonted gravity, wisdom,
and d^cent behavior yielded them thanks, as was seldom to be seen in a
Knight so young. First, with honorable courtesy embracing the King of
Macedonia, reconciling him to his Queen and the rest, who had taken offense by
him, setting all free at liberty, but Palian and Praxentia, imposing his task
upon them, Palian to marry Praxentia, and she to acquit him of the wrongful
accusation she had lad upon him, which she presently performed, yet utterly
denying to marry with Palian. Then the Emperors of Persia, Almaigne, and
Persicles, desiring to honor Mont^lyon, stood up, requesting him to require
any thing of them which he further desired, for that above all men in the world
they honored him, as he had best deserved. Montelyon desiring nothing more
then Philothetaes love, presently stepped to the seat where Philotheta sat like
an Angel shining above all the rest, and taking her by the hand, he sa^^:
Fair Lady, do you agree that whatsoever I demand, I shall obtain. Sir, said
she, I yield, as above all the rest bound to ho^^ur you, as one most unworthy,
yet having received most: Then he ^^ading her down with greater royalty then
ever Paris did Hellen, required to be married unto her, which was applauded
with so general a consent, that not the bluntest heart in that assembly, but
did ^^ape with exceeding joy. Not a soul discontented, none disquieted, but
all rejoicing, some commending* some embracing* and every one desirous to show
their love to him. The day of the marriage appointed and likewise performed
with more Royalty, Joy, and Pleasure, then can be expressed.

FINIS.

