3 PANALA MEDICA; VEL SANITATIS ET LONGAEVITATIS Alumna Catholica:

The fruitful and frugall Nourse of sound Health and long Life.

Per Guil: Folkingham Gen: Math. and Med. studiosum.

Principiis obsta; sero Medicina paratur,
Cum Mala per longas invaluere Moras.
LONDON, Printed by Miles Flesher. 1628.

To much enobled Wingfeild my Magnifique
Moecena's, and The Worthies who design
Stanfordian Celebrates of Meets, munifique
Accommodates to animate th'Ensigne
Of Englands Patron great, for royal Standard
To th'Rendezvous of their endeared Regua^d;

CAn it be conceived (Honorable and gentile Spirits of ingenuous magnificence)
that the yet continued Fame that the first British Bowers for the Muses were
built upon the bancks of Welland, sprung merely from the bold Fiction of a
Phanatique idle Brain? Must it be admitted that the bright Pillar of such a
flame could with so long-lasting durance towre-vp from an empty Furnace, that
never was fraught with the foizon, nor ever felt the feruor of substantial
fuel? Shall mere conjecture make slight the authority of yet extant Records
( Chronique writ and Aulique foundation) contesting that Apollos Daughters
honored Stanfordian Cells with theit Mayden-immurage and first residence in
this Isle, long before the Northern Academiques (fallen by discision from the
Southern, and flitting from the Occidentall to the Oriental Foord) seconded
their settling here, in their endeared Reflex to the former? Howsoever, whether
the first foundation were dissolved through Malingene or no, Towns, Honors,
and Times, we see, have their Tides, Turns and Periods: the Muses by Regal]
writ commanded to be banned and remanded to their forsaken Foord, this their
dear Delight, thus deprived of their Cordial Music, and after demolisht by
Mauors (maugre Castle and begirting Wall) could never yet lift-vp her obrute
head from under the heavy rubbish of ruinate depressure, threatening her with
obscuring poverty to interre Ancient Renown in eternal oblivion. Such yet is
the accommodation of the place, both for action and contemplation, as may well
induce present times and posterity to approve of the attests of Antiquity,
touching the affections of the Camaenae caught with the amenitie of the site of
this Town, within whose confines Six Couents of Monastiques, for the singular
salubrity of the Soil, Water, and Air, chose their Cells of commorance. Yea
Nature her self, having molded this Plat-forme for ends of more eminence,
than yet are seen to succeed her ordinance, breathes forth incessant close
murmurings against the injurious neglect of inconsiderate or slow-footed Fate,
that this Center to so sweet a Country (stellified with so many magnifique
Edifices and Towrie Structures) so accommodate for Navigations (of Import and
Export) and affluence of concourse, should not be honored with the right of a
Portable River for Mart, and of an Act for Shire-Towne to competent extents,
and to incompasse Rotell. For matter of Exercise and pleasurable Recreations,
and of Chase and VVing, in such sweet mixed Earths, interlaced with Brooks and
fordible Rivers, Heath, Forest, Light Tilths, large Champaine variegated with
cool shades of some scattered Woods and gentle-rising Hills of Easy Climb to
Plains of no redious dimensions, leading over delightful Downs, shallow Dales
and Valleys of extended discents secure from break-neck precipitatio^, it
affords such variety of venerable venarie ( date veniam verbis) to aggrate and
satiate the eager quest of the most ranging appetite, that Horse, Hound and
Hawke hardly find any place to parallel this Plot in the diverse particulars of
Race, Game and poursuit, viz, Hare, Dear, Fox, Otter; Partridge, Phesant,
Mallard, Heren and his Prey. The noble consideration and just prizing of the
premises, has invited and stirred-vp the magnifique thoughts of many
Honorable Personages to endeare this Place, and by sundry ways and means to
endeavor its readuance to Repute, suiting in some reasonable sort with its true
deserving worth. Amongst which laudable purposes, I must ever magnify your
munifique noble Aims of making Stanford the Rendezuous to the frequent
confluence of good company, with your gracious reflect upon my great
Disbursments (over and above the Magnificent Bounty of euer-honored Exeter) to
gratify all friends with contentfull intertaine, and upon injurious exposure
to unjust sufferings, in my wel-willing to the weal of Town and Country, by
deep wading in the Navigations of Welland, which is long since (through
credulity of some superintendents, permitting unseasoned and improuident
Agents, without control to abuse Noble Intentions, and bury bounteous
contributes in ill-pondred pursuit of fond addle Plots) cast into a profound
Sleep. A Sleep wherein deep wronged Welland is like to wallow and lie
forlorn (howsoever bewailed) till some ingenuous Mercuriall Hand, with the
quickening Spirit of a Golden Elixir (more potent than the Care-charming
Caduceus) discuss her soporiferous Spirits, rouse and raise-vp her torpid
head, and right her rude dissheueld Locks, which shut forth the Sun beams of
Beauty, Life, and Action, from giving bright splendour to deserved renown.
Which good effect of wished C^re and Cure hoping propitious Heavens will in due
time maturely produce with other helps of happy consequence, I haste to the
Medique part of Panala, with intension of the Dietetique, if, by Dignostiques
of the Relish of this, I conceive any hope of dispensing that Composition, to
please the palate of such Worthies, my ever honored Patrons: to whose noble
magnificence, desiring the indulgent favor to be devoted a most zealous and
obliged Seruitour, I rest

Your incessant true Obseruant William Folkingham.

To the Reader.
NOt much amiss surely is the Assertion which averrs The Optimu^, Been Valere;
Secundum, formosumesse; Tertium, Diuitias habere nulla fraud quaesitas: for
Beauty without Health can neither have settled continuance of Abode, nor any
true Being; nor a World of Wealth any right relish of Pleasure. And though the
true extent of this comparatiue Tenet, in the superlatiue Praise of Health,
must admit of confinage ( Quoad summum Bonum) not to out-reach the Ring or Limb
of the lowest Orbs, but designing limitation evermore to bona mundana, Health
doubtless, in due esteem of true worth, is a greater blessing than that
Courted Beauty, or this Cordial wealth. For in reguard, that Man being in
Dures, under the heavy Arrest of fettring Sickness, cannot, in any due
performance, tend unto or attend the end and office of his creation, for
discharge either of the duty of his Calling unto the world, or of his Being
unto the worlds Creator, because the soul though of Celestial Offspring,
whilst it is seated in this our Earthly Palace, (or Prison much the rather)
necessarily Sympathizes with the body, and is so affected with the expense of
precious spirits (Natures best Treasures) and with pains, distractions, and
other sufferings of the same, that her Animal Faculties are depraved, and
miserable he deprived of the sweet solace and happy comfort of Heavenly
Contemplation, and other both Divine offices, and humane Obligations, this in
valuable Jewel of Health becomes a Heavenly Blessing in due Estimate, far
transcenaing the valuation of all terrene Trash, how treasurable soever,
extending its due prisall beyond the dimensions of this Basis. But how takes
this Tenet with the world? Sinckes it into all our thoughts as it ought, and
would if we did duly reflect them, as we should, upon the Divine Deriuation?
Surely it seldom or never sounds the Center of that heart which holds the
fruition of that self-Gem, or bosom friend, sound and well settled Health; For
Bona carendo magis quam fruendo agnoscimus, who never felt the disgust of the
bitter cup of Sickness cannot rightly relish the sweet taste of Sanitude. But
contraria juxta se posita magis elucescunt, Contraries are best illustrated and
distinguished by their contraries; and he, that after long durance or sharp
Torture of a grievous Disease, happily recouers some reasonable measure of
healthful state or relaxation from languor, well knows and will acknowledge
with me, that Bona valetudo maxim Diuinum longeque blandissimum est vitae
condimentum, that sanitude is a Celestial most delicious condiment, and the
best seasoning to relish the Nectarsweets of a happy natural Life. For non
vivere sed valere vita est, Health is the Crown and Life of Life, and Life
without Health is no Life, but even a lingering Death, where both Animal Powers
and Corporal parts suffering, produce but lame and depraved Actions. For
Sickness being an affect against Nature ( ex Diametro Sanitati oppositus) seated
in the Body by intruding seizure, and of it self primarily vitiating the
Natural State and Constitution of Man's fabric, perturbs and peruerts both
corporal and Animal function, with disordred exorbitance confounding the
consociable Oeconomie of the body, and with discordant larrings distuning the
Organs and disturbing the happy Harmony of the Spirits, those sacred Opifices
accommodating our Microcosme to all commendable actions. Now the most general
Seminary of Sickness is superfluous Repletion, with which the strongest bodies
are many times so ouerborne, that, like over ballasted Ships they suddenly
fincke under the heavy load of abundance, but the Cachochymique corpse fraught
and crased with crudities, is evermore exposed to all the injuries of the Six
Non-naturals, insomuch that every ingruent distemper of Heat, Cold, Diet,
Labor, or other Error in the use of any of them, plunges it into one Disease or
other, even like a crasie Ship which is prone with every rough Sea to spring
Lecke, and be dilacerated and split with every Tempest. And who sees not, that
the full and foul feedings of this Nation (advanced through the vicious living
of these times, which hales and draws down from Heaven a heavy curse upon
all Creatures both Aliments and Elements) heap up many crude and impure
superfluities which so vitiate the temperature of the continent vessels and
deprave the harmonious frame of the whole Body, that daily-new broodes of
insolit and strange Diseases (translating Plinies Trecenturiall Number or sorts
of infirmities to infinite) assault man's Bulwark of Health, with insolent
fresh batteries till they sack it with insulting Demolish? Knowing then, that
Repletion is cured by Evacuation, and being by long and infallible experience
well confirmed in good approbation of my Panala (for fit munition against such
Machines) whose Medique part is bred and brought forth by Infusion of a
wel-dispensed Fund or Bag of specifique Ingredients in ordinary Ale (the
Ancient drink of this Isle) than which there can hardly be excogitated or
invented a more general worthy Medicine, that so cheap and choice, without
any curiosity of Preparation or use by the Patient, does Tuto sans hazard, and
jucunde, nor grieuing with ingrate relish of Physic, nor ouer-lading with too
much, and sat scito, quia sat been, good speed is best speed, both conserve the
salutarie state of the body, and prevent and cure most morbid affects and
diseases incident to the same (by clensing and rectifying all parts and members
thereof) whether deriuable from indigested ballastings or otherwise contracted,
I could not dispense with an absolute concealment of it is most precious worth,
but in some sort, ( Quoad medicationis dispositionem, non medicaminis
Compositione^) communicate to the world, the manifold benefits flowing from the
familiar and fruitful operation thereof. But should I be so fond, to
promulgate to the Ingredience and dispense of the Fund or Bag itself, I
should too much derogate from the due esteem and true dignity of the Secret;
and miscendo sacra prophanis, by lavish Publish much profane the sacred
Mysteries of Apollo. Though Charity her self then should plead her best in
approuement of the Discovery with Bonum quo communius, eo melius; yet would
neither the Empericke, nor the Methodist let me pass without a Blow or a
Brand; And worthily too, for Rerum minuit Maiestatem, qui divulgat Mystica, and
with what deliver Passage or commendable posture could I fairly avoid the vile
and odious venue of begetting Broods of Mountebanckes, and so breed the baine
in stead of the Balm both to private and public Health, if Pandarizing to so
dear a Progeny, I should unnaturally and basely prostitute so virtuous and
worthy a Virgin, and so intimate and gentile a Handmaid of divine Physic to
vulgar gaze, and the artlesse base abuse of every Horch-leach, Quacksalver and
Sophisticke? Pardon therefore my yet reserve of further Publication: I am not
so ambitious to cast-bout to make this Magistrall a Cast net to catch Shoales
or promiscuous Schools of Pupils without distinction of worth or Merit. I pity
both this popular silly-poore Ambition of Professors, and the penurious fond
conceits of many Patients, who, to save the least conceived trifle-charge of
Cure, will upon any small Hint of a Physical help, be either raw or more
than ripe Medlars in Medicines, and like blind Byards rashly and rudely rush
into the unsounded Deepes of the Sacred Mysteries of Medication; Faith and
works are necessary Cooperants for salvation of the Soul, but, to redeem the
body from Dures of diseases and repair the ruins of impaired Health, it were
to be wished that Patients would rather be constant, strong Solifidians in
obsequious conformity to the counsel of the Physician, than busy bold
Physmicaries: Tactant fabrilia fabri: let not Patients turn Medicine Mungers,
but containing themselves within their proper Spheres of Prayer, Confidence and
Regularitie, refer each Cure to the honest care of the Rational Artist, who
knows how to keep the Golden Mean, between the superstitious Empiricke, and
the ambitious Methodian, both which do many times make the best Recipes no
better then pressed and fiat Decipes. For the obstinate Empiricke, grossly holding
it a religious Tie, Iurare in verba Magistri, so superstitiously and wilfully
weds himself to experimentalls, that he will not* for a world of reason,
decline or be drawn, ne latum quidem vnguem, not the breadth of a Hair, from
a Probatum, but still in all his practice propines one and the self same
(secret forsooth) totidem verbis and herbis, both in Dose and dispense, to
every man promiscuously. Now the capritious Methodian, out of curious
singularity to transcend the spurnd repute of Empiricie, and by his witty
wanders to impregnate and beget good wits with wonder of his learned worth,
without cause or cautele, so commands over well approved Medicines with his
Protean Quid pro quo, that for most part he disables the Medicine of commanding
over the Malady, and so not seldom fails of finding that good success to
attend his Pragmatique permutations, which often crowns the constant course of
the less literate, but more humble Practitioner. But the true Artist, well
knowing the pernicious issues of Empiricall pertinacie, and the fruitles
vanity of the Methodian his seeming all seeing perspicacie, nor peremptorily
confines himself to his Probatums, nor designs change thereof but in
rational and judicious respect for proprietarie accommodation to the case of
the cure in Quest* This is The Physician, the man that will for no cause (much
less in politic caution to vindicate ignorance from censure) abandon and
leave his Patient in deplorate diseases, but be they past the Period of Cure
before he be called to counsel, or essentially or casually incurable, will yet
continue his careful endeavors to recall and congregate the wandering Spirits
to their Centers there to become quiescent and calm, carminate and compose the
Animal Faculties in case of needful exigence, the better to enable the
Patient to call upon God, and recommend himself to the Redeemer, and to
mitigate and faciliate the Agonies and Pangs of Death, that they may not
interrupt the cheerful Anhelation and erning of the immortal Soul for
Abraham's bosom-Imbrace; which heavenly happy end of divine Physic, imploring
the Author and Actor of Physic ( the endless Deity) may crown thy
Catastrophe and mine upon this mundane Stage with consolable close, I end,

Thine until and after that End. W. F.

Panalaes Etymon.
ANd why Panala? Is It cause all meere-Ale
In sight and taste I seem sans other vale?
Not so confined; I serve for Bread and Broth,
Fell Thirst and Hunger keen I cure them both.
What Is nutritive, what t'Health or Diet tends
The little bulk I bear all comprehends.
The languid Appetite I recreate,
Famelique spirits richly saturate,
Tracts fibrous for'th Mechanique t'operate
With vap'rie Nutriment, I reserate,
The corp'rall parts essentially I nourish,
Make the Animalls effectually to flourish,
Good spirits wing with viue and active vigors,
Malefique void or calm discursant rigors.
I arm Man Cape a Pee against Humor-iarrings,
Whole troops of Sickness quell or daunt their darrings,
I clear the fancy from fanatique wanders,
And Reason aye redeem from false Maeanders.
With blessed Souls I best spirits symphonize,
With pure soil seed prolifique sympathize.
Nor am I tide to Ceres plain'st array
Save when I suit my self to low allay,
Yet then sometimes my habit I do vary,
And fair Pomona dights me for her Fairy.
When Truage unto courtly Dames I render
In due habiliments my self I tender.
Imbroydries fair from France and from Canaries
Make-vp my mantle with what rich and rare is.
Fraught with choice Indian Plants endeard enchase,
Quaint vinie Trailes my Kyrtle entertrace.
Flora the Globe rounds, virtues best infuses
To prime Extracts whose pride my Robe diffuses.
With Pearls and Iems my Buskins are imbost,
My flowery Chaplet round with Beauperes cost.
What Tethys yields, or pregnant Tellus claims
Are subjects to my salutary aims.
The Haven of Health to gain with erning Stern,
Vertumnus like my Garb and Gage I Pern,
My form, my face, my posture and my pall,
My corpse contracting to dimensions small.
Yet nis my Ballast lesser then my Sail,
What Is the Disease in which I not avail?
I am not tho, with doubtful spirits fraught
Which kill in future by impressions raught
From dreadful Minerals suruiuing Ghost,
Though desperate griefs with palliats they accoast.
Ingredients of suspect, each Drug that base is
Abandoned balke my presence; Verdures graces,
Secure-boon-vertues beauie in my Bower,
Where tainted Tinctures find nor place nor power.
Nor am I destute of due aequipage,
Though most I make my progress without Page;
Select Attendants and Associats too
Are pressed aye to perform what I bid do.
My Harbinger with high Herculean hand
The Augean sordid Stals, each stagnant Stand
(Whose turgid gross Illuvies does surround
Man's Edifice with Soakages profound,
Each Room, each Closet, even his lofty Turret,
Taints and infests with vapors of ill Spirit)
Does cleanse and clear, eliminating all
That may my happy intertaine fore-stall.
Both Land and Water-Leech attend my Train,
Rivers and Rils or full or foul to draine.
Vshers me conduct to each Part each Place
Apert, opert, to what is of use of grace;
(Not that I need such Conuoy, save for State,
Since porous Blinds I selfly penetrate)
All which my choice Concomitants and I
Corroborate, Repair and Rectify.
Panalaes Encomion.
Would thou the sweets of Corporal Pleasures relish?
Of Touch, Taste, Souses all Delices cherish?
Make coorse home-fare more gustfull to the Palats
Than Feasts of costly Cates with curious Sallets?
With Banquet Physic would thou Nature feast
And active vigor in whole man inuest?
Would brook secure the Airs various affects
In Bodies foul, straind Labors strange effects?
Would scandalous diseases palliate,
Th'incurable subdue and mitigate?
Would sweet repose sans turbid vaprie steames,
Fantasmaes fond and dire discursant gleames?
Would propagate unto thy progeny
Rich beauty, feature, health, blessed ingenie?
Would Reason, Wit, Invention, Memory,
And each power Animal well Rectify,
Would heavenly wise clear, reserat and polish,
From whatsoere those faculties demolish,
All th'Organs by which their discursiue vigor
Moves, and the brain imbright like purest mirror?
Would wean thy warping will from wanderings clews,
Wing Soul to contemplate Seraphique Thews?
Would Chimacterique seisures supersede,
For longer Lease of Life produce thy Thread?
Would healthful live, till almie Nature crown
Thy honored Head with reverend Elds white down?
Would gently part-with Soul and Bodies Tie,
And sans distracting reluctation dye?
Panalaes Loars embrace, and thou wilt agnize
Their seeds produce such fruits; and breed a Prize
Of more extent, rich use true valued worth
Than my poor Quaeres can at full point forth.
Sine numine nihil.
MAy then Paul plant? Apollo water may?
Nor he nor he, or the one or the other can
If heavenly hand do not their handlings sway;
But say they can: vain are the works of man
If God bless not: he only gives increases,
Addle and idle, else designs all are:
Say the Physician then against diseases
Prescribe aright, and his prescripts with care
The Apothecar dispensing does propine
Unto the sick, whose diligence observes
Each due direct from First unto the Fine
And from the tracts of learned rules never swarues.
Shall wit of man confine the Lord of Hoasts
To Attend his wise behests, intendments bless,
Seal with Amen, sign and make good his boasts
Of former Cures and Cans of sure success?
Toto Caelo errat, who absurdly does
Means mere human confide sans main (heavens stroke)
Abainlesse bit, a cup of wholesome broth,
Unblessed may man in a moment choke.
How can great Galen then with confidence
Of Physic, ever safe prescriptions give?
The wisest fondly act, learned speak Nonsense,
If Boones celestial bless not each contriue.
For without God, Man's wit no whit of good
Can ere beget for Life or liueli-hood.
The Contents of this Book.
OF the Quality and Nature of Ale, the most accustomed and accommodate Body for
the Base of this Composition. Page. 1. That Ale is a fit Body and convenient
Liquor, by Infusion to extract and imbibe the Qualities, and virtues of
Ingredients, and to participate them to the Patient. 6 What Body of Materials
are accommodate for Composition of Panala. 14 Of the particular passages
obseruable about the Infusion of the Fund or Bag. 21 Of the praeparation of the
Body before taking the Ale, and when it is to be drunk. 26 Of the Dose, the
manner of Taking, and the Continuance of using this Ale. 37 Of the Diet and
Order obseruable in the use of this medicinable Ale. 43 Of the diverse and
contemporary Operations of Panala. 50 Observations remarkable in the use and
operation of the Ale. 56 The excellent Virtue of Panala in General. 65 Of the
excellent cautionary Virtues of Panala. 75 Of the cheap and pressed
accommodations of Panala. 90 A summary plain Direction for the Patients
preparation and usage of Panala, with the Cost and virtues thereof in general.
107
Panala Medica.
CHAP. I.
Of the Quality and Nature of Ale, the most accustomed and most accommodate
Body for the Base of this Composition.
I Know it is almost a common received opinion, that Ale is a foggy fulsome
stuff, clogging the stomach, stuffing the Lungs and puffing up the body with
loose fat, and flashie unsound flesh; Nor am I ignorant of the Record of the
ancient Poet ( Henrieus Abrincensis) who, in displeasure to a Pot of Ale that
perhaps pleased not his palate, to cast a foul aspersion upon this out more
ancient drink, falls into this furious rapture.

Nescio quod Stygiae Monstrum conform paludi,
Ceruisiam plerique vocant; nil spissius illa
Dum bibuur, nil clarius est dum mingitur: vnde
Constat, quod multas faeces in ventre reliquit.
I know not I, what Monster's this to the eye,
This Ale, Mud-Mix, like Stoepe of fenny Styx,
More thick no potion, more cleere's no Lotium:
Much dregs remain in the Body then it is plain.
Nor (to speak the truth) is it altogether improbable, but there might in
those ruder Times, be found many Tons of ill conditioned Ale, not unworthy
such splenique Dictoes, before one Stand or Rundlet of pure stuff worthy the
Encomion of a Pot Poet. Have we not yet even in these days many
Mother-Foulsums, scarce worthy the bearing of Bourne, much less the
admittance for Brewing either Ale or Beer, which wanting both Art and industry
requisite for the Mystery, mar no more Malt then they meddle with, and mash
Ale, more like a mash or a medicine for a sick horse then a potable liquor fit
for a man's palate, stomach or health? And surely, it was the Normans ill hap
to have his Cap fitted with a feculent cup of crude muddy Ale, to his morning
Draught; and were not this able to move the patience of a temperate man (much
more the fiery choler of an Old Elderton, or a new Ale-Knight) any way
regardfull of health, and cause him burst into as boisterous a Piece of Poetry,
or other more unmeasurable passion? Howsoever, were this Cynicke Passage of the
Poet, an earnest Quarrel to a Pot of Ale, (uncouth, because vnaccustom'd, to
his wine washed Palate,) or the Vent of a jesting vain of Wit, sluced by some
Slashes of the same Element, it is manifest to most Obseruers, that ill brewed
Ale is commonly of a puddle substance, abounds with gross Phlegmatic and
flatulent Humors, is heavy, and hurtful to the Stomach, stuffes the
Ventricle, obstructs the Mesaraick veins, the Liver, Lungs* spleen, Reins,
Vreters, and other inward vessels and passages of the Body, and by consequence
puffes and blowes-vp the whole bulk thereof with slimie, flashie and faeculent
Ballasts, shortens the Breath, breeds the Stone, Strangury, Gouts, and sends
up to the Brain gross fumie Vapors, which offend the Nerves, and distemper
and obsuscate the Spirits, (the Mechanique Operators of and in all the
Faculties of Man) with much detriment and damage to all the Senses both
Internal and External.

But let a neat hous-wife, or cannie Ale wright, have the handling of wholesome
Bourne, and sound and mellow sweet Malt, and you shall find, and will confess,
there is Art and Dexterity in this common business of Brewing: and that
amongst those that assume unto themselves the Name of skillful Ale-Brewers,
there are more that miss the mark, for all their supposed Artifice, than with
constant Mastery make up the true Mechanique of the Mystery. For you shall then
have a neat Cup of rich nappy Ale, well boiled, defecated and cleared, that
shall equal the best brewed Beer in transparence, please the most curious
Palate with mild quickness of relish, quench the Thirst, humect all the
Inwards with rorid Juice, help Concoction and distribution of Meat by 'its
moderate Penetraction (especially promoted with the Additament of the Vehiculum
which best Alistraes boil with the woort, to wit, such a proportion of Hop as
gives no tact of bitterness to the Taste after the Ale grows drinkable) much
furthering the Attraction of the Parts, and by its substantial succulence much
nourish and corroborate the Corporal, and with spiritual vigor comfort the
Animal Powers. This Ale will be better than beer for extenuated spare
textures of body, by reason of its more nutritive Quality, and that without
inconvenience to the Choleric, for that it excretes and voides the Bilous
humor by urine and by Stoale; or to the Phlegmatique, because it is not
Obstructiue. And for the Sanguine; it may well suite with such Complexions, by
reason of its moderate Heat and Moisture; nor can it be incongruent to the
Melancholic, in regard it dissipates and spends fuliginous fumosities and
exhilerates the Spirits.

Such a Cup of pure Comfort, rich animating Ale (neither Lanted, Gummed, nor
otherwise sophisticated) find many good fellows which walk ere they wash,
for their Morning-Draught of true Darby, which, I dare be bold to say, had
been all sufficient to have induced the famous Basilian, Foelix Platerus (had
he happily ever plied that Pot) to recant and retract his unkind censuring our
Ceruisia, for faetid smell, fastidious Taste, and languid Strength, and to be as
forward in affording such Noble Ale the Prize and praise of a Basilique
Beverage, as we are in giving it the Attributes of Meat, Drink and Cloth.

CHAP. II.
That Ale is a fit Body and convenient liquor, by Infusion to extract and
imbibe the Qualities, and virtues of Ingredients, and to participate them to
the Patient.
THat Liquors may the more fully by mere Infusion, be impregnated with the
faculties of Simples and other Ingredients of impight and compact substances,
it is requisite the Quality and Quantity thereof be both of them competent:
For the first; it must be either of an inciding and penetrating Power, that, by
peircing and entering into all Parts of the subject Materials, it may cut,
attenuate, reserate, divide and dissolve their compact and concrete Juices, and
really also attract, ingest and suck into it self the pure essential forms
(in which the chief efficacy of Medicinal force and virtue consists) of their
several Natures separated from Earthly Feculency; Or of such a Specifique meet
and familiar and pleasurable Essence, that by insinuatio^ it may, (as it were)
allure and entice them to infuse and pour into it their best Spirits so
oblectated and woone.

For the second; since Liquor is evermore Agent in this work of Infusion, it
must be of sufficient Quantity to subdue and attract the Radical humors and
spirits of the Ingredients, because a small proportion is easily imbibed by the
Bulk of the subject Matter, and too much will be too weakly tincted therewith,
where a fit mean does effectually draw-forth and attract the Juices of the
infused Body to a due Impregnation.

For Chymicke Extractions; the Spirit of Wine, Hot waters, distilled waters and
Rain waters are held appropriate to make infusion. For Potions; wine,
Hydromel, Oxymel, Brothes, Whey, Decoctions of attenuating Simples, are in
request.

Now although Ale, by reason of its mild Taste, may seem to participate but of
small penetration, and by consequence be esteemed an unfit Liquor to macerate
Ingredients, and extract their virtues by Infusion; yet by its operation and
effects in the Body and Brain, and by the piercing and combustible Hot waters
drawn from thence, it may well be collected and concluded, that it is not
without subtle and persant Spirits lurking and lying hid and veiled under the
mild soft Mask of its Oleaginous Succulence, and therefore a Liquor no way
improper, but a very specifique and fit Body for the Infusion of most sorts of
Ingredients, both for gaining and retaining their virtues within it self, and
for pressed and effectual Participating them. Howsoever; indubitate Experience
(verissima artis Magistra) truly tells and teaches, both Methodist and
Empirique, that strong right-brewed Ale, well wrought up with Yest, and duly
tunned up to fit Ingredients, (yea to solid and compact Substances, even to a
Body impenetrable by Vulcans sharpest (not hottest) Tools, and more condense
and obdurate than hardest woods) so macerates, penetrates and works upon their
substantial Forms by Fermentation, and Digestion, through force and efficacy
of temperate heat and specifique moisture (neither dissipating the Spirits nor
dulling their vigor, but rather fortifying both by stirring-vp and reducing
their Calidum Innatum into Action Cooperatiue) insinuating with supple joints,
and spiritual Juices into every Cauitie and Perspirable Ouerture of every of
them, that it subtilizes their inspissat thick humors, reserates the recluse
Closets of their impacted Spiris, concocts all Crudities residing in their
Juices, attempers and mitigates Bitterness, corrects aliene Qualities,
digests, incides, and diuides Concretions, and by disbanding and secluding some
Heterogenities to the sides of the vessel, by Precipitation of the feculent,
heavy and earthy to the Sediment, and by Elevation and lifting-vp the light
Refuse or excreat and dead Remain with the Spumie froth to the Swim or
Superficies, separates and amandates the secluded Faeces, and Impure
Purgaments, couching in their inward Penetralia, quite from the Region of its
Depurated Body.

Thus in few Days, (seven or more according to the season of the weather,
hastening or foreslowing the Fining) it Clarifies and purifies its own Body,
and really and effectually impregnates it self (by alliciating and attracting)
with the pure and sincere Tinctures and Faculties of the infused Materials,
and with it vehiculates, caries, communicates and diffuses their virtues and
powers into all parts, of the Propinors or Receivers Body, secret and remote.
And this Distribution is effectuated and wrought by this Liquor, partly through
its liquid proprietarie Body, specificated by th'acquisite Quality of
Penetration, derived from attenuating Ingredients, and partly by the
cooperating of oblectated Nature, which is ever eager to attract and embrace
whatsoever participates of a familiar, succulent and nutritive substance, as
well-brewed Ale is well approved to do, in due degrees of good Proportion
suiting with its strength of Malt and Quantity of Ale, according to which the
Extraction of Spirits from the infused Mass, is evermore made respectively.
For the Quale and Quantum (jointly considered) of Liquors infusiue, bound and
limit their Receptivities of extracted Impregnances, as is before intimated.

Besides that; this Panala, by reason of its apt form and propriety, and
convenient praeparation, together with the fitness of the vessel, and its
own Crowning and Mantling it self all over with the Clothing or Cover of
Yest, retains and preserues even the subtle and halable Spirits of every
Ingredient, mixed and fixed with both their radical Humidums, entire, exempt
and free from Evaporation, and its own Life and Quicknes from euanid flatnes
and dead sowring, much better than most Liquors can do, yea then Wine, which,
though it be Patent in Attraction, is more Impotent in Retention, by reason
that the Spirits are Volatile and nothing so Glutinous and Condensate as those
of Ale; whereas decoctions, (though they have their proper and commendable
uses, being performed according to Art in a close or double vessel, which few
Patients are curious in) do commonly exhale, waste and spend the subtle
Spirits of diverse Materials, (most of all of most Puggers) and extract, ingest
and retain the Heterogene, flatuous and earthy parts of them and of others.

He that denies or doubts of this Penetratiue and extractiue force of such
Infusions, by the mere efficacy of their inward Fire of Nature without help
of foreign Heat, let him drink a Cup of such Liquor after three days (or
Wine after twelve hours) Infuse in Calice Chymico, and his Stomach will not
so much tell Him, that venture non habet aures, as vellicate them for not being
more Believing Ones.

Now if any Man, wilfully wedded to a self-conceit or singularity of opinion,
do yet suspect or will object, that Ale (the Base and Body of this Panala)
more obstructs the passages and puffes-vp full Bodies than Beer: admit this
were granted, it is no impeach to the Potion, because the Ingredience of the
Bag has Power to transform Liquors naturally Obstructiue to Deoppilatiue,
which does far transcend and surpersede that of the ambitious Incoline, the
aspiring Hop, aiming to reach the Head of the highest Pole, (and the Pole of
the Head) and to banish This ancient Ale, which in the 6. of Edward the 4.
(some 147. years ago) was in such request, that the Feast for th'installment
of Nevill Archbishop of York, and Chancellor of England, was constantly
affirmed to be furnished with 100 Tuns of Wine, and 300 of Ale, but not one
Barrel of Beer. Yet for Stomachs that brook not Ale, they may with
conueniencie make the Infusion in Beer (adding more Raisons to palliate the
bitterness) which has worthily gained the Repute of a wholesome drink, as well
for many medicinable Qualities, as for quenching Thirst, insomuch that the now
Raritie of Leapries here, where they were frequent in former times, is
attributed to Beer, in regard of the Hop, which has special Faculties both
Diuretique and Deoppilatiue, whereby it cleanses the Blood from all corrupt
humors, and by excreting yellow choler makes the Body soluble, and all this
without heating it, or offending the head with fumes, if the Beer be not
ouerhopt nor touched until the Bitterness be digested and worn out.

Wine also (chiefly the White) Pyrie, and Cider are very good for this purpose,
especially at the time of Vintage. But generally Ale and Beer are the most
appropriate Liquors to these parts for the base of this Composition, both by
reason of their native and familiar accommodation to our Bodies, and for that
they may be prepared at any time, for active Operation upon the Ingredients,
which is most powerfully and effectually performed by the Ebullition or
reworking of the Liquor in the vessel after barrelling or tunning up, without
any that Loss or Diminution of their own Spirits or vigours which would
ineuitably ensue in too great a proportion, if these or other Liquors once
digested and fined should be drawn out for Infusions.

For Hydromell, Mellicrate, Metheglin, or other made- Drinks, they may be
accommodated against any prefixed time like Ale or Beer, but with caution of
what Materials, lest you cross the Intention or operative Qualities of the Bag
or Composition.

CHAP. III.
What Body of Materials are accommodate for Composition of Panala.
SImples and other Substances in general, which by drying in the Shade, or by
other due siccation, are quit of their superfluous Humidity, but reteining
their Verdures or natural Gloss, and being sound and cleansed from all
putrified and dead parts, and grossly bruised or punned, or rather small cut or
shred, that they may thoroughly imbibe and receive the Liquor for effectual
working upon them by maceration, are fitter for Infusions, than such as still
retain superfluities of Moisture incorporate in them before they be dried. For
the superfluous and aliene Humidity, still inherent in their Bodies, shuts out
and hinders the necessary peircing and insinuating of the Liquor into their
abstruse Inwards; yet the shiced and contused Substances, especially the
strained Juices of some green or moist Simples or Drugges, are to good purpose
many times infused in this case, because they do easily incorporate and
communicate their succulence and virtues with the Liquor, and the strength and
Ebullition of it does concoct and digest their Crudities.

But I have of Dry Ingredients (so many as may well admit such preparation)
composed my Fund or Bagg, fully to answer the Scope and Drift of my Intention,
which is truly to make good unto the diligent Obseruer, all the Attributes I
give it, how great and exceeding numerous soever they may seem to be:
Howsoever other Bags may male audire of many men for Raking, heating, drying
and exhausting their Bodies, chiefly if they be of a feeble and weak
constitution. This fault is in the Physician which Emperically and indiscreetly
compounds it of suspected Purgers and intemperate Simples, not in the Bag: It Is
not the outward, but the inward Form or Composure, that commends or
discommends every Medicine.

Some will in no sort admit the ingredience of Raisons of the Sun into such
like Infusions, affirming they would to small purpose (other than to increase
the Bulk of the Bag, lie sobbing and soaking in the Liquor, but rather
approve the Ingredience of the strained Juice, drawn out with some of the Ale,
or of the closing of the Cup with half a score of them, their stones cast
away. But though the Additament of this succulent Fruit seems to cross the
Canon or Rule of Infusion, yet may their Eunuch-seruice be worthily admitted
the presence of the greatest Prince, both chaste Dians, and jealous Ottomans.
For being washed, displayed, and diskerneld, and then closed again and put into
the vessel, the Ale does with exquisite Extraction so effectually work-vpon
their dissoluble Concretions, that in three days space it eleuates, lifts and
caries them up from its Sediment or Bottom to the Superficies or Swim
(demonstrable in a Violl Glass) dead and insipid, having left all their
Dulcor, and sweet relish, with some third part of their poize (if reduced to
former Drines) in deposito with the Liquor, and who doubts, but that together
with their concrete Sweets, and Elementary spissitude, their entire Virtues are
also extracted and diffused in solution into the Body of the Infusion? I have
not therefore rejected them, but for their manifold and familiar Virtues
presented in pleasant succulence to the comfort of the natural Members, and
especially unto the Parenchyma Hepatis whereunto they are so grateful,
profitable and specifique ( totius substantiae proprietate) that they may be
styled the Life of the Liver (Epatis quasi anima perhibeantur, according to
Sennertus) given them a large patent for place in my Panala. But I often leave
them forth of the Bag for the patient to put fresh and loose into the Ale to
three ounces at least. For the astriction of their kirnels, Grapes impart none
to White Wine; and what does this Infusion extract from such unbroken shellie
Crusts, more than does the Wine press? Et hoc aliquid nihil est, so that they
may sans scruple be whole (but slit) cast into the Caske, and so much the
rather, because some proportion of a binding Quality does better such purging
Diet Drinks: Yet I leave them to the patient to use ad libitum. Myrobalans,
Tamarinds and Sebestens may claim like privilege for Admittance and use.

For Drugges commonly cariosa non cara, known to be deadly-dull slugs of
doubtful kind, but manifestly auerse to the ventricle (whose damage in all
Medications, chiefly in long or continued courses for cures, because it is
totius corporis promptuarium, both for feeding the body and its sickness with
excrementitious, flatulent and nauseous Humidity, must with particular
intention be carefully prevented) especially when the Humors, brought into
commotion by the Medicine, infest the Stomach with their confluence, I could
not by Motive of Empiricall common use be induced to give admittance to their
Ingredience here, where I would not have the happy Harmony of most salutary
Simples distuned or once touched with any manner of impeach or tact by any the
least discordant Heterogenity, let who will magnify the Mountibancke Mixtures
of others, that for cheapnesse admit them. To supersede all such branding
Imputations, the profitable cheapnesse of this dangerous Simple, is abandond my
Bag, and in place thereof, I entertain One well approved (by price and
frequent practice) of the best Physicians for excellent Operation, exempt from
censure and made famous for Attributes of the Virtues and good Effects,
Purgative and corroboratiue, of Rheubarbe and Agarick, and this by the
testimony of Modern Classicke Authors.

Because of the Heat and Dryness, by some suspected to be in Guaiacum, I had
utterly disclaimed it for all its Sanctimonie, save that the oily substance (
praepinguis and resinacea) chiefly in the black Heart (even of the old Stock)
says it participates of a cerain moisture, whereby it conserues and nourishes
the Humidum primigenium of the Intrals and solid parts, ventremque lubricu^
facit praeterquam dum sudores promoventur, and yet with astringent dryness
corroborates the moist, loose and nauseous Stomach, and all other the vessels.
For these virtues and for its further great Fame (see Fernelius and Montanus,
who never had the young tendrels of the two year old Tree, to which some
ascribe the most Virtue) and Bezoardique Quality, in.which it has the Power of
an Antidote, directly opposing and oppugning putrid Contagions, I have
dispensed with some proportionable degree of its Ingredience, yet but as a
Quarter Master, under command of a temperate, potent and most precious
specifique, to moderate all excess.

But for China, the costly and trauell'd Courtier, He is wholly cashierd both
Fund and Caske, for all his Cash-worth, because I find Him, like many Auliques,
mere Complement, rich in promises, poor in performances, besides that
Renodaeus disallowes Him in the sick of Consumptions, and Hucchen says He is
unwholesome for the Sound.

And for that all sorts of Physic, but most of all, all extended courses of
Medication (as this is) do much affect and work upon the primarie Instruments
of Concoctions, the Monarch of the belly, and Fountain of Blood, the Stomach
and the Liver; I have for their special comfort and Corroboration furnished the
Fund or Bag with singular and most specifique Stomatiques and Hepatiques. Nor
are the principal parts any way neglected; Here have you a specifique
Bezoardique to cool and corroborate the vital spirits, and an excellent
Cephalique to fortify the animal, so that nor Heart nor Head want their
munition to maintain valid and constant incounters against diseases; not that
the inherent malignity of any Ingredient necessitates such fortification, but
to accommodate and attemper Heaters with Coolers, and Resoluers and Openers
with strong Roborators and mild Astringents, according to Quercetan from Galen.

CHAP. IIII.
Of the particular passages obseruable about the Infusion of the Fund or Bag.
I Have now enlarged and proportioned the Bag of Ingredients to Panala for two
Gallons (or twelve wine quarts) of Ale, that it may furnish man and wife for
one week, or one patient for two. This is a bottle more than former use, and I
hold it the mean and best proportion for most part to be observed, both for
extracting, preserving and participating the Qualities of the Ingredience. But
this quantity of the Liquor may be somewhat augmented or diminished, and the
potion made stronger or weaker of Medicinable Qualities, to fit the affections
of several Stomachs, the Custom of little or larger drinking, or other
intendments.

An ordinary Stand, Steine or Ale Can with a Tap-hole, will be an apt vessel
to serve well for the Infusion, provided there be always care to keep it
close covered: but a small Rundlet, fitly bungd for Receipt of the Bag, will
best of all retain and conserve the Life and quick Relish of the Liquor.

The Fund or Composition of Ingredients, neatly made up and included in a Bag
of fine Bolter stuff, must be suncke into the vessel, with a Peble stone, or
with some other Poize, or constantly kept down with forked sticks ( Oak and
Ivy much improve the wholsomenes of the Drink) or other force, to prevent its
rising up to the Breaking of the Body of the Yest, because such a breach in
open vessels, would be* as pernicious to this Panala, as the taking of vent,
or wind is unto wine or other Liquors by venting out and evaporating their
spirits.

The Ale or Beer must be well mixed and wrought up with good store of Yest to
crown and keep it from expense of spirits, and the yesting in open vessels
is requisite to be renewed once in 7. Days; for the sowring of the Yest turns
the Drink with its tartness, but shift of yest preserues the spirit and Life
of the Liquor entire, and the Ale fresh and quick for a Month or more Time of
Drinking.

The fittest and only Season to make this Infusion, is the usual Time of the
ordinary Tunning-vp of the Drink, that by Ebullition, working and digestion in
the vessel through its inward Heat of the fire of Nature, it may effectually
work upon, macerate and ingest the concrete Juices and Faculties of the
Subject matter; and for better liberty of working, the Rundlet may have some
hour- Vent after the Liquor is tuned into it, but then it must be bunged up
close. For placing the vessel of Liquor where it may receive the benefit of
accidental or foreign Heat, to promote the Operation upon the Ingredients,
the force and efficacy of the inward and self contained Calidum Innatum or
inbred Heat of this Liquor, is all sufficient for production of perfect
maceration of the infused Materials, so that Cellars which preserve Wine and
Beer, serve as well for this as for them; the like do other close Rooms,
which are exempt from the Extremes of distempered Seasons, no less from the
spirit exhaling Summer Heats and others (though they clarify the Remnants)
then from the chilling and killing rigor of Winter, although a qualified cold,
congregates and preserues the Spirits.

To the continuance of the Infusion: The common practice in like Operations, is
never to strain nor stir the Fund or Bag, until all the Drink be spent;
but it is full sufficient (for matter of evacuating Operation especially) to
infuse it, till there be made a perfect Fermentation or Digestion of the
continent Mass of Ingredients, that the Ale being fully impregnated with the
proprieties illiciated or ingested from them, there may in the Body of the
Liquor be bred and brought forth a new Nature, fully participating, in one
Homogene and entire Body, of native and acquisite Qualities, its own and the
Ingredients.

Three Days continuance is a competent Time for the Infusion to extract the
purgative Faculties of the Bag, before which space to begin Drinking thereof,
to avoid sowring and pricking, is a poor trick of prevention. But if you
defer the broaching thrice three days or more, the Drink will be better
depured and much more pleasant both in Sight and Taste, without impeach to the
Evacuatiue Operation, besides that it thereby becomes more impregnate and
imbibes its whole Dimensum both of Evacuatiue and Alteratiue Virtues: therefore
the best Index for Broaching Panala is the Test of perfect Depuration.

My Custom and Rule for curious palats, is to direct, that after four or five
Days Infusion, the Ale be all drawn into Bottles and Corkt, and kept like
usual Bottle-Ale; for by this means it is neatly preserved forty days, and
more if need, cool, perfect and entire in Taste and Virtue to the last Cup.
This is the best course for frugall keep and husbanding the Potion; for so the
Bag becomes free for a second Infusion, either by Drying the Ingredients
against half or two thirds of the Ale be spent, or by immediate Strayning and
reinfusing the same into fresh Liquor for Meal-drinke.

To make it drink cool, fresh and quick in the hottest Summer, hang it
bottled in a deep Well a little above the Water, twelve or fourteen days,
and you have your desire. For the cold vapor of the water preserues the Ale
from Exhalation of the Spirits, and also irritates and makes them vigorous,
whereby they incorporate all parts of the Liquor in more perfection: The like
may be done at any time and that in the Rundlet it self to the same purpose.

CHAP. V.
Of the praeparation of the Body before taking the Ale, and when it is to be
drunk.
PAnala, together with its Purgative Quality, does so reserate and open the
Ports and Passages of the corporal Vessels, so m^turate and make fluent the
Humors, and so effectually perform all the Parts and Of^^ces of a good
Preparatiue, that, before the use thereof, there seldom needs any other
preparation of the Body in that kind; yet in case the Patient be accustomed to
morning ejaculations or springs of watery Humors or vicious Contents floating
in, or disturbing the Stomach, it is expedient, before the drinking of this
Panala, for praeparation of the Ventricle (to receive, not of the Humors to
obey, the medicine) by gentle provocation thereof with a sprig of Rosemary, or
a feather, agitated about the roof of the Mouth and roots of the Tongue, to
cause eiaculation, or at least some expuition or flux of liquid Humors. Those
Patients which do not affect this practice, although the affections of their
Stomachs crave the like, may do well, some half hour before the Potion, to
eat a small Tossed of light household bread, rubd-ouer with a little Table Salt,
to remedy the fluctuating of the raw phlegmatique recrements, and to digest and
consume the crudities of the Stomach.

For other helps of conuoy into the Body, and all the inward penetralia of the
palace of the Microcosme, Panala is so gracious and so potent an Usher, (a
Vehicle to powders, pills, electuaries) there needs no foreign vehiculation,
where every recluse, with ready expanse, inuites her welcome entrance and
intertaine into each presence.

Touching the time for select usage of this potion: The Spring of the year is
the fittest season of all other, for this and for all other courses of
medication, because it is the most temperate and most wholesome; besides that,
then the blood most increases, (as sap in vegetables) and the recreated spirits
are most active in vigorous rotations, and most apt and able and pressed with
their Opifique powers to cooperate with physical means. Moreover, Euacuations
are then most requisite, because gross pituitous Humors, heaped-vp in winter
(which condensates them and constipates their Meatus) now dissoluing, with
hotter air, will easily, if they be not euacuated, be diffused into the whole
body, and beget grievous Diseases. And in the later end of the Spring, the
redundance of hotter Humors are ready, if obstructions be not removed and they
avoided, to inflame and to putrify and produce Fevers. The Spring therefore
(especially that which next precedes the Clymaterique year) should never
passe-ouer a provident Man's head without some help of physic equivalent to
Panala, though he feel no infirmities. Much more when a man perceiues
spontaneous lassitude, heaviness or indisposition in his body to the actions
thereof, it is then high time by mature euacuation to prevent the ingruent and
approaching sickness, for those are manifest signs, that the mesaraique
veins (the double conduits, Chyliducts from the bowels, and Sanguiducts from
the Liver) are replenished with peccant humors, which not timously euacuated
will shortly bring forth fruits of ill effects. For the vicious matter,
retained in the veins, at length putrifies, breathes forth ill vapors, and
breeds diuturne Fevers, or else converted into a venomous nature, with sudden
assault, like a poisonous Serpent coucht in ambush for a mischievous design,
sets upon the principal parts (heart and brain,) producing grievous accidents
and effects of dangerous sequel. Sometimes these vicious Humors powered forth
into the bowels and other vessels, do cause the Cholick, Iaundice, Cachexia,
and other maladies, and other whiles elapsing forth of the greater branches
into the habit of the body under the skin, they breed itches, scabs, botches,
and other praeternaturall Tumors.

Next unto the Spring is the fall of the leaf, or Autumn, which indeed is a
second Spring, though many degrees short of the former; but here the crudities
and relics of raw fruits and Sommer-indigestions (the banes of health)
ingested and heaped-vp in the veins and other vessels, necessitate that
medication, which there is invited through conueniencie.

For time of the Moon; I hold it not amiss for a constant Man, where occasions
may be accommodated for free choice, to elect the mids of the first Quartile,
and continue the take of the first infusion most part of the two next
Quaternaries or Decrease, and the second or altering potion the Increase,
because the body is then most animated by exaltation of the Spirits, and
thereby Nature most potent for any work. But I would not be too punctual in
this point; there is no necessity of the observe of such precise terms, nor is
it my meaning to confine unto so strict limits, since every temperate season
does excellently serve for this manner of Physic, only the vernall and
autumnall are very meet to be selected for a continued course of the like, when
the purpose is for prevention of sickness, or remouall of rooted diseases,
whose affects are not precipitate or of sudden dainger. But in acute diseases,
where grievous distempers, of violent motion or doubtful issue, infest or
fasten upon the body, a man must neither dwell upon the expectance of
seasonable weather, nor of the beneuolent aspects of the Planets, but setting
apart all dallying delays (the Deluge which few men do dryshod decline and
quit) fall too and follow this familiar Help, be it Winter or Summer, or other
unseasonable time, rather than, by deferring it to a more accommodate season,
suffer the sickness, confirmed by procrastination, to become incurable or of
doubtful consequence. Provided always, that the extremes and injuries of
distempered weather be mitigated or avoided by keeping within prepared rooms;
the means and manner of which preparation are laid down in the dietetique
part of this work, in the corrections of the air upon discourse of that
Element.

But our Summers in this Northern Climate give no true cause nor scarce any
color of that general nice curiosity fondly fostred for decline of
weather-health, for fear of incurring the supposed inevitable hazard thorough
meddling with physical means, in so much that moderate and rational
medication may safely be ministered even in the Dogdayes themselves; which
superstitious scruple (derived from the Canicular aphorism without
consideration of the Authors Country, or indeed of his conceit) of dissoluing,
distracting, and dissipating the Humidum Radicale with the calidum innatum,
has made so obseruable, that the vulgus hominum (at least) will rather
cowardly crouch and prostrate, bend the back to bear the brunt of the
insulting Foe, amating sickness, than draw the dagger of one medicinable Dose
to encounter the assault, much less enter the Lists (by any methodicall
course) of a constant combat to make good the Keep of the Castle of his soul
committed to his religious charge.

In hazardous diseases then, let no man be too precise in curious terms of
choice Seasons, nor yet stand too strictly upon concoction of Humors, but be
the malady acute or diuturn, venienti occurrite Morbo, though you cannot, for
lack of specificall Munition, give apposit encounter to the first assault or
seizure, yet have diligent clearing the common passages (Ventricle and
Intestines) of superfluous recrements, and never permit the redundance of crude
matter to regurgitate, fluctuate and flow to and fro in the veins and
vessels, or to settle and nest upon some principal part, to the ruin of it
and all the rest, nor diuturne or lingering affections to grow more stubborn or
rebellious both against Nature and Physic, to the utter confusion and
demolition of the whole Fabric.

This generous Medicine and gentle Minoratiue, confidently taken and constantly
continued, has power to accelerate the concoction of diseases by helping
Nature both by euacuation and alteration, and to make those which essentially
and of themselves are of doubtful and daingerous event, to become salutary and
safe, and others, of less hazard, but more lingering and tedious, more
tolerable and much shorter,

In diuturne diseases it is profitable, and in acute very necessary to make
some euacuation of superfluous humors before concoction, because that over and
above the continent chief matter of the Malady in the veins or in the
intrals, or in the habit of the body requisite to be concocted, there are many
times vicious contents nested in the ventricle, in the intestines, and about
the precordiall parts (manifest by dolor, heat, nauseous loathing,
bitterness, distention, and other Dignostiques) the concoction whereof
(especially of the stomach recrements) is many times expected in vain; and
Patients thus affected may doubtless profitably be purged, by such familiar
means, at all times of the disease, even before any appearance of concoction.
And were I called in such cases (caeteris concurrentibus) I should advise,
first to prepare the Body, for receipt of so generous a Medicine, by St^matique
Pills, or by Emetique means, and afterward upon occasion open a vein, for
ventilation at least: so should this precious Potion happily produce effects of
excellent worth and secure assurance with more speed and pleasure.

Now touching the time of the day for drinking this Ale, although it be so
mild and familiar a medication, that it may, not much amiss sometimes (when
it is compounded with Purgers) be carded with common Ale or Beer to make it a
meal-drinke, especially for the extenuating and much abating of gross and fat
corpulency, by occasioning more copious detraction of superfluities and
unnecessary juices, yet when the intention is to make sincere euacuation of
vicious or superfluous contents in other constitutions, it will be more proper
and indeed the most approved and requisite method to take it fasting
(especially to such as use to drink next their hearts, as they term it)
betimes in the morning, that it may the more deeply penetrate and carry it
self into the Humors and all the veins and parts of the Body, and by
consequence more effectually produce all its operative effects both of
Euacuation and Alteration.

To others, not used to drink fasting (as they call it) because common drink
coming into their empty stomachs may affect and somewhat offend the head and
nerves, a potcht Egg seasoned with salt and three or four drops of Vinegar,
or some other small morsel of light or easy digestion, may conveniently be
premised or admitted. Not that any damage or dainger depends upon the sudden
entry and conuoy of this Potion into the empty cauity or substance of the
stomach: the body of Panala is an alimentary medecin so mild and benign,
there can be neither cause nor color to suspect the concomitance or sequence
of any violent, sinister, or offensive Effects, by or from the quality thereof,
to the empty ventricle; but that the admission of so small a pittance before
the Potion, subscribing to custom of diet without confounding of Art (Aetius
commends purging medicaments given with meat in bodies naturally costiue)
stirs-vp Nature, and awakes and quickens the mechanique spirits of the stomach
with pleasurable delight to embrace the approach of a greater Peregrine so
vshered into the presence by the aggrating precedence of so welcome a
well-knowne familiar. He that doubts, the medicine and the humors it moves will
corrupt the Meat, precipitate crude indigestions, and conuoy an excrementitious
Chylus into the Veins and Liver, let Him, to avoid all color of scruple,
spare it at meals, and all manner of meat when He drinks it; so shall the
mixture nor work upon his stomach nor conceit.

To conclude, the rightest method is to drink this Ale upon an empty stomach,
and it is a very good order to take it betimes in the morning, and two hours
before meals both dinner and supper also, if the aim be to purge much.

In Summer it may be taken to bedward, and two or three hours also before you
rise only, to the end most part of the purging may be past before the heat of
the day, and that some sleep then upon it may unite natural heat, and promote
the working of the Medicament. For though profound sleep may stay it a time,
it neither quite supersedes the euacuation, nor perturbs the action of the Ale
more than it does of Stomatique or other Pills sine custodia, which are
customably and best so taken.

In Winter take it only before Noone; viz. one Dose or Draught about 6 or 7 in
the morning in bed, and another when you are up after some motion of the body,
with a third (if need be) an hour or more before dinner, or the 2 last only
(if not all three in this order where you like not that first) so shall you
well accommodate the medication, and happily prevent the inconvenience of
night-workings.

These Cautions are specially for tender Bodies, and intemperate Seasons;
ordinary Constitutions, and seasonable Times need no such precise Rule of
definite Drinking this familiar Liquor.

CHAP. VI.
Of the Dose, the manner of Taking and the Continuance of using this Ale.
THe usual Dose of purging Potions seldom exceedes the measure or proportion
of Three Ounces, lest the Quantity should subvert the Ventricle and cause
Nauseum or perhaps Casting: But so small a draught here is too little, it may
movere, but not promouere, stir the Humor, but not extirpe or purge it forth:
This Ale being most benign and familiar to Nature, in Sight, Savor, Taste and
Digest, a man may without error or suspicion of any foul accident, take a
full Draught to ten or twelve Ounces: Some men drink sixteen Ounces or a
whole pint at once, though half a Pint be a reasonable Dose.

For manner of taking the Ale; It is ordinarily drunk without Heating,
according to the custom of common Ale or Beer, and in winterly seasons, it
will do very well, and indeed is very requisite, to fright away the frigidity
with the sight of the fire, or with a brown Tossed attempered, if you will, with
the Tests of Sugar and Nutmeg, to aggrate both palate and stomach. Or you may
scare off the Cold, by quenching in the cup a Gad of Steel, or rather some
pieces of Gold made hot in a silver spoone, (or the spoone alone) with a
chafing dish, because it leaves in the Liquor no astriction nor other
Heterogene quality.

Touching the continuance; this has reference to the Cause that occasions the
course of Medication, which must and best does limit the same. Seven days will
do well for clensing the Intestines, Liver and Veins of the Colluvies of
Humors, and to reserate the vessels and passages; but double that Time will
effectually remove many settled Affects, reform distempers, and produce good
Rectification of all the parts of the Body: and one Fund or Bag, will upon the
first Infusion sufficiently furnish a temperate Patient for a Fortnight, and
the like upon the Second. And the taking of either of them may without error
or much inconvenience in many cases as well Curatiue as cautionarie, be a day
or two omitted or discontinued to correspond some urgent occasions, provided
the discontinuance be redeemed with diligent pursuit for Reparation.

And this is most requisite to be done, if sincere and exact. Evacuation be
not already accomplished. For the noxious humor, since it is an unnatural Alien,
( alienus ac praeter naeturam) must be wholly and absolutely eliminated and
eiected, whether the counsel be precaution or profligation of the disease. I
confess, the Remain of some minute small portion of the peccant humor may by
the spiritual force and fire of Nature, promoted and fortified with an
exquisite rule of Dieteticall Regiment, be so mastred and vanquished, that safe
and sound health may sometimes succeed without fear of Relapse.

But if the Relics be many, except Nature (happily potent in all her
Faculties) do voluntarily subdue and avoid the same, the exactest order of
Life cannot safeguard the sick from the daingerous Machines of the Disease:
for though he may seem in some sort to have received ease by the purging, He
will relapse into the former infirmity, sooner or later, in more or less
latitude, according to the Copy or Malignity of the Relics, and his strength
and Diet, because the Relics of diseases breed Relapses, Quae a morbis
relinquuntur, recidiuos morbos facere consueuerunt, Hipp. lib. 2. Aph. 12. For
when the part remaining, retains the condition of the whole, which was
altogether against Nature, that remain can never be converted and assimilated
into the substance of the Body, but will in process of time corrupt the pure
humors, together with the Aliments, and produce morbid fruits like to the
first. Hence it is, that the more you feed a foul body (not fully cleansed from
impure humors) the more you offend, Impura corpora, quo magis nutris, hoc magis
offendis, Aph. 10. lib. 2. For you nourish not the sick but the sickness.
Therefore to vindicate and clear the Man from his Malady, whatsoever noxious
Humor nests in the Body, it must be absolutely and totally taken away and
eliminated.

This Panala then in rebellions, malign, stubborn, and diuturne diseases,
should be constantly continued a month or more without intermission, or any
other Drink, only the Meale-drinke may be made of a Bag, made up without
Purgers, or else the purging potion carded with other Drinks.

The reason of extending the medication to so long a Time may be, that
Creationis morbi, atque curationis paria sunt quodam modo Temporum Momenta. For
as weeds are hardly hailed and plucked out their Holds, when they are once
deeply rooted, though quickly quit and rid the Plot when they are young; so
diseases long in breeding (though perhaps suddenly breaking forth by occasion
of Cold-taking, ill diet or other error, as newly bred) are for the most part
long in curing. It is almost a Miracle to plow them up in a moment, though such
Herculean helps we find sometimes by specifique Means.

But they fondly run into a gross Error, whosoever in Diuturne Affects or
inueterate deep trenched Maladies give over or negligently interrupt without
reparation the constant course of Medication before the Humors offending, being
prepared by motion and flux, be fully avoided, and the parts and Harmony of the
body duly rectified by competent continuance of the Means.

For although good Euacuation, from diverse parts of the body, may in many
cases be effectually wrought and performed in few days, deep rooted
Impressions do necessarily require longer extent of Physical helps for due
Eradication of peccant causes, and for true Rectification, as aforesaid.

And let no man attempt nor imagine by extraordinary ingurgitation and qua^^ing
up the whole quantity of the Ale in a few days to accelerate the cures of long
continued infirmities; It is the moderate and temperate use of Medicine, with
regular carriage and constant perseuera^ce in the same, that breeds and produces
the best and readiest effects and performance for remouall and riddance of the
dolours and dire affects dimaning from deep impressed diseases.

But the customary use and continuance of the same means ( Meat or Medicine)
breeds dullness of Appetite or of Operation. Forbear the Potion but a few
days (provided a good diet be in the interim observed) and you salve this
Sacietie. For intermission, aggrates in effect with the grateful fruits of
change, and we find that in some sort New, which has for a reasonable space
been intermitted.

CHAP. VII.
Of the Diet and Order obseruable in the use of this medicinable Ale.
THe head of this Chapter is the Subject of the Dietetique or Second Part of
Panala: in which, besides some large discourse of the salutary use of the six
Non-naturalls, the alimentation both of the Spirits and Body, is anatomically
delineated. Yet that this Medique part may not in the mean time, be posted
forth Pede primo claudicaens, with downright halt before, I held it unfit to
be altogether past-ouer here in silence, and have therefore borrowed leave for
a touch or two in a few lines, before I go about to trace out the whole
Lineaments of that Body.

In diuturne, lingering and daingerous diseases it is very conducible and
requisite in all sorts of Physical courses ordained for their cures, to foster
and follow the constant keep of regular strict moderation, not in the
qualities and quantities of Meats and Drinks only, but in the rest of the
Rerum non naturalium likewise. But in the use of this Medicamentum Alimentosum,
there is much less need to prescribe any so exact and precise Rules of Diet,
be the Intension cautionary or curatiue, to secure or arm the Body in
prevention of ingruent infirmities, or to remove or cure them when they have
made seizure. Yet is it very commendable and convenient too, in the use of this
Ale, as of all other medicinable means, to observe and keep a moderate
abstinence from food, of manifest ill condition at least, and in all others to
rise every Meal from Table with good appetite, that Nature, being no way
hindered or oppressed with meats of hard digestion or naughty juice, or with too
large proportion of ingurgitation, may without impediment freely and happily
produce her curatiue and salutary aims and effects.

This General Rule may well serve as allsufficient to the common sort of
People, to whom it is idle folly to prescribe strict orders, which they neither
can nor will keep. Many men's Purses are not furnished for meats of fit juice,
and many robust and laborious persons are happy in their habilities of strong
constitutions, accustomed to hardness and to gross feeding, and meats of
light digest are of slight esteem with stomachs inured to make full meals
on solid strong dishes. One word more yet by the way, of the different fruits
of full and spare feedings.

Repletion or too liberal feeding heaps up abundance of excrements and
superfluous and vicious Humors (the Relicts of ouer-taxed concoctions) begets
crudities and obstructions, oppresses and suffocates the divine and native
heat, much hindering the laudable functions thereof spiritual and corporal,
for it dulls all the Senses, and disanulls all dexterity, agility and active
promptitude of the body, and besides breeding all sorts of maladies humor all,
excrementitious, and such as proceed from Plethora and Cachochymia, it causes
many times recidiuation and return of diseases otherwise quit and cured, and
seldom fails to frustrate the care and cure of the honest Artist, in that
they obtunde, debilitate, and often deprave the salutary operations of
medicinable means. For Nature being ouer-borne with the heavy load of
abundance, sinkes unawares in the midway under her burden.

But contrariwise, the Innatum calidum (that divine Opifex and author of all
natural functions) nor implicated, nor intricated with ingestions of viands
offensive in Quantity or Quality, but free to diffuse it self into and
through all parts of the body, shall be able euerywhere to extend and execute
its native power and strength, to convert good juices and depurated blood by
nutrition into the substance of the body and all its parts, to digest, rarifie
and dissipate by insensible transpiration all superfluous Humors, to concoct
the crude, and change them into sanguineous nutriment, to attenuate the thick,
make fluent the tough, expedite obstructions, make patent all the corporal
Passages, and fortify the expulsive faculty. And by these means, the
operation of this generous medicine shall be rectified, exalted, and more
enhabled to produce and shew-forth its most exquisite worthy effects,
euacuatiue, alteratiue, and otherwise operative, with more speed and facility.
Such and so great is the virtue, force and effects of Abstinence or Spare-diet.

To return; After each morning draught of the Ale, you may to many good
purposes eat a few Raisons of the Sun, and now and then make your Supper of
them and a morsel of Bread if you will, for they leuigate, smooth and supple
the roughness of the rough Artery or Windpipe, by opening and strengthening
they cure the torrifaction, or retardate the sexilitie of the Liver, cleanse
Phleagme, irrorate and madifie the body with nutrient moisture, and make the
juices thereof roscid, less dissipable and more reparable, they breed good
blood, and help infirmities of the Throat, Lungs, Chest, Milt, Kidneys, and
Bladder. For forbearance of meat after purgation taken, some limit the space of
two hours after a strong purging Potion, but in purges of solid form, or in
Pills, double that time should be interposed and past, before other Repast.
And many admit of no meal until the Purge have performed its Office, lest the
meat should be corrupted by mixture with such medicine, but it is
all-sufficient that the substance or body of the Purge has so quit the
ventricle that it has past the Port Pylorus into the Intestines; of which
there is assured test, when neither Belching, nor vpbraiding, nor loathing, nor
sense of gnawing at the stomach, nor any sent of the medicine remains. Then
moderate refection with meat of good juice and easy digest may conveniently,
and must necessarily be taken to refresh Nature. Yea it is a common practice
(contrary to Auicen (Fen. 4. l. 1. doct. 5. c. 5.) to prescribe the taking of a
Mess of thin Broth, after the first or second stool, to wash-down the
Relics of the Medicine, to qualify the tedious qualities thereof, to comfort
the stomach, and to promote the operation of the Physic.

But this Ale is so mild and benign a Medicine, it may safely be admitted a
nearer neighbor unto meals, though it has no need of washing-downe by any
other liquid means.

For keeping the house; This Panala is physic fine custodia, never in respect
of its own nature, confining the patient to his Chamber, but be he of any
indifferent hability of body, or that he intertaine it for caution or
prevention of sickness, he may in the daytime, when the weather is any thing
temperate, either walk or ride abroad, or follow his necessary
field-occasions. But if the day be immoderate in heat, cold, wet, or wind,
common sense will tell every sensible man, that the strong ought not in the use
of this nor any other purging Physic (how mildly soever euacuating) rashly
expose his body (of which neither divine nor humane law permits to make
wilful wrack) to the injury of such distempered Skies, and that
keepe-within-doores is the safest and surest (and indeed necessary) guard for
the crasie in such cases. For the humors stirred up and agitated by purge, are,
in too hot seasons (which debilitate the strength, kindle hot diseases) more or
less, according to the strong or weak working of the Medicine, either drawn
to the Superfice or skin, (a contrary course) or else over heated, do kindle a
Fever: through Cold they grow sluggish and dull, and slowly descend and pass
through the straightened passages. The Air being very moist, in wet weather,
passing into the body through the dilated Pores, loosens the same, and
occasions defluxions, but a more vast and free Air, agitated with blustering
winds, much trouble the Body with a shuffling confusion of the Humors, and
cause difficult Purging.

For Matter of motion: It is very requisite and convenient ( viribus
constantibus) to use moderate Exercise or Labor of the Body after taking the
Potion to stir up and kindle the Fire of the Innatum Calidum (the mouer of
all Medicines and Causa sine qua, without which their spiritual faculties lie
as it were consopited, and produce no good Action) and before meat an hour or
more to further Concoction, Digestion, and Distribution of Viands, to restore
and corroborate all the Corporal Faculties, and rectify the Actions of all
the Senses, but with this Caution, that it be continued ad Ruborem only, in
thin Textures of Body, lest it exhale, dissipate and spend the Spirits, and
debilitate the Members, yet in strong corpulent and stuffy Contextures it may
well be extended ad sudorem, and the rather if be not used till some two
hours after taking the Medicine.

CHAP. VIII.
Of the diverse and contemporarie Operations of Panala.
MVlta nescientes (says Severinus Danus) de multis dubitare necesse est. From
much ignorance must needs issue a numerous brood of doubts: But a Man, that
will needs be a great Master in Physic, fears (or rather faines, translating
plain Cavil, maine scruple,) the confused distracting of Nature with the
various task of meat, and this medicine set to work, if not taken at one time,
and the contemporary Operation of my Panala, from the Circumference to the
Center of the body by deiection or stool, and from the Center to the
Circumference by Evaporation or Sweat.

Is it not Natures Innate Office and common Deuoire together and at once to
operate and produce multiplicious and various effects in our bodies, to incide,
attenuate, deoppilate, to astringe and corroborate, to rarifie the gross,
deterge the tough, condensate the fluid and thin, to digest all Ingestions,
and by separating the impure from the pure, to assign and distribute this for
Nutriment to all parts of the body (how dissimilar soever in substance;) and
that partly to sequester and send unto peculiar vessels and receptacles, and
partly to amandate and expel by Stool, Urine, Sweat, and by sundry other
ways, means, and Emunctories? Does She not simul et semel, at the same time,
and in the same Mesaraique Veins carry the Chylus from the Guts to the Liver,
and the Blood from the Liver to the Guts?

And the familiar benignity of Panala does rather associate and sympathize with
Nature in the diffusing and imparting of her salutary and wholesome Faculties,
than any way affront or impeach their participation. For the contrary Qualities
residing in one substance, worthy Fernelius saues my labor in his various
attributes unto Guaiacum, which says he, if any man marvel at, Veteres
consulat Artis proceres, Let him advise and consult with the writings of the
ancient great Masters of Physic, who have tried and approved One and the same
simple and single Medicine to be endued with, and prevail in diverse
faculties, as of Heating and Cooling, or of Drying and Humecting, or of thin
and gross parts, etc. And that this record of his may not to be thought to be
confined to the first Qualities, Headdes; and except those Primarie Qualities,
were confused and mixed together in one medicine, surely the secundarie, which
dimane and proceed from them, could not be likewise complicate in commixture.
So Rhubarb, and Steel have diverse parts deoppilatiue and astringent.
Wormwood restraines Laxes, and relaxes bodies constipate, it heates the cold
Liver, and by accident through opening Obstructions cooles the Hot: Saffron
congregates and contracts the Spirits too much diffused, and yet expanses and
diffuses them where it finds them contracted. Aqua vitae cures Contusions and
Burnings: To conclude; is it not a common practice amongst the vulgar to help
Hot griefs, with Hot means? Do they not cool Feuer-heats with Hot purgers?
Apply they not Wine and spirit of wine, to Heats and Inflammations of the Head?
Yea, they fire out Fevers with Pepper, with Additament of Aqua vitae many times.

But what will you say to Mercury, which is both moist and dry, the Hottest,
the Coldest, and both rarifies and condensates: The Chemist calls him a true
Healer, a wicked Murderer, the Tobacco of Mineralls, Proteus, Magician, etc.

But to the Doubt; how One and the Selfsame Medicine, should at one and the
same time produce diverse effects of purging and sweating. Quercetanus is so
full and pregnant in this point, He may be instar ommum, and serve for a Sea of
witnesses, for punctual resolution of the Quaere; Take therefore his
Testimony in his Pharmacopoea, upon a Maceration or Infusion (nothing
dissuiting this in the Genus) both Purgative and Sudatiue.

Double Euacuations (says He) are therefore at one and the same time ( simul
and semel) performed by one and the same remedy, which will seeem strange unto
some, as I my self, circumuented and transported with the same error,
conceived before Experience ( Rerum optima Magistra) taught and brought me into
a contrary opinion.

Nor is Forestus (in his Scholia upon his 20. Observation de Lue venerea) his
disauow of this double Euacuation, to be taken absolutely for a general rule
for the reason he alleages proves it not: Si multum sudet, non potest alvus
fluere; si fluit alvus, non potest sudare; This multum surely caries no less
relation unto the Flux than to the Sweat, to wit, meaning both to be profuse,
and Magnos effatu dignos, so that profuse purging may suspend and minorate, but
not supersede the sweat.

And the same Author ( Observe. 11.) approues and prescribes stronger Physic
comprehending both purgative and diaphoretique Faculties in one Medicine, than
this Panala is, with this Testimony of the double working of the same: Habebat
plurimos secessus quotidie and subinde egregie sudebat; He had daily many
Stools, and therewithal also sweat excellently well, and by these means was
perfectly cured.

But sweating here by my Medicine exhales only the rarefied Humors not
attracting the Faeces to the Skin, but leaving them in Deposito within their
peculiar Receptacles, to be in due time eiected. How can I then, without
injustice deprive the remedy of its just rights, by injurious concealing its
special Faculty of causing sweat, since it does with facility vtramque
paginam absoluere?

To the Cumber or inconvenience of discovery or exposure of the open body to
the cold Air by purging in Sweat; what great Dainger or Do is it to convey a
lined Bedstoole or warm Boll to the Patient, even in the heat and height of
the Exhalation, which no man can truly conceive I intend should be profuse or
excessive from Panala, because my declared aim in the dispensation, is at
temperate moderation in all tne Evacuating Attributes I give unto it? And
assuredly, whosoever, after his Morning-Stoole, sweats in bed with this Potion
(made hot as it must be) may securely continue that Evacuation an hour or two
(or more were it not too many at once) before he need fear or expect
provocation to a Second Stool.

If yet any Scruple chance to stick in some fond or froward Stomach, the Fund
without Purgers will assuredly evaporate all such frivolous conceits from out
his fancy; And the Second Infusion will reasonably work such like effects.
But with which infusion soever you sweat, let the body be well cleansed with 4
or 5 days continuance of purging by stool, then take the morning potion
sufferable hot, but in bed and after a stool, if it may be.

CHAP. IX.
Observations remarkable in the use and operation of the Ale.
THat Physic works not alike in all Seasons and upon all subjects, common
sense informs the most stupid poor Obseruer; but sometimes, though it be
methodically ministered by a good Artist, the expectation is illuded by
excessive or diminutiue operation; nor is it a matter of facile disquisition to
beat out and discover the certain reason of such incertaintie. For some
bodies, by a secret propriety of their own natures, are easily and plentifully
purged with mild medicines, and others scarce moved with very strong
Purgations.

But of occult causes it is not pertinent nor fit, either to the place or my
pen to discourse; only a Touch or two of others, because, though more evident,
they are not so perspicuous or manifest to vulgar notion, but that they may
necessarily admit some particular demonstration.

The working of Cathartique medicines does commonly vary ( quoad majus and
minus) according to the variation of Seasons, and the states and constitutions
of men's bodies.

For the first: The hot and dry season or disposition of the Air extracts,
euaporates, and wastes much of the humors of the body, and by consequence
debilitates the same, and leaves less matter to furnish forth copious
deiections; nor is it fit for purging Physic which for most part heats and
weakens.

Cold weather and Northern wind contract and straighten the passages, bind
the body, exiccate and thicken the humors, and make them rebellious, or less
obedient at least, to Physic, which in these cases must needs be less
copious in euacuation.

South winds, moist Climates, and wet or Rheumatique weather, humect the body,
loosen the humors, and occasion plentiful deiections upon due means.

Moderate seasons, Southern wind, (not boystrous) and temperate Regions are
most accommodate to Purgations for production of best operations.

Touching the state of the Body; hot and moist constitutions with most ease and
safety of all others do bear and obey Cathartique medicines.

Hot and dry bodies purge sparingly for lack of matter and its unaptness to
move, and must with caution be purged with well qualified means, lest they
distemper with heating and drying; to meet with which inconvenience let such
constitutions take this Potion a little before meals.

The moist, the young, and those who are accustomed to a sedentary life, are
easily moved by Purge, according to its strength and the Patients ballast of
humors and excrements; the like may be said of women, since they ate usually of
soft, loose, rare and patent textures, yet none of these accord with strong
medicines, though pregnant women may in the third, fourth, and fifth Months (the
ligaments, by which the child adheres to the womb, being then more firm)
admit of moderate euacuations in acute diseases attended with turgent matter.

Robust strong bodies, and those that are inured to laborious living, and
constitutions endued with obtuse sense of the parts, do slowly yield unto
deiectiue means, yet may they safely suffer plentiful euacuations.

Corpulent bodies likewise, though they easily endure purgations, do purge
with some difficulty, because their constitutions are cold, their corporal
passages straight, and their spirits but few, and those turbid and gross.

The thin, the lean, and the temperate, are easily moved by Physic, yet
purge but sparingly, because of the rarity of their textures and tenuity of
their humors, nor are strong purges accommodated for them, by reason they
weaken their languid virtue, and spend their dissipable spirits.

Note further; that Plethorique, full and foggie bodies, whose vessels are
stuffed with turgid illuvies of copious and restagnant Humors (whether congested
by surfeit or other repletions) do many times, upon light and slight
Purgations, power one profuse and copious deiections, with much perturbation of
the Bowels many times. For the redundant humors long pent up, and now finding
the veins and vessels reserate, and the passages of export expansed by the
purge, Qua data porta ruunt, rush and gush out (like liquor forth of a full
cask pierced and vented) in copious flux, without any effrenate or unbridled
force or effect of the medicine, but by reason that Nature, moving to
expulsion, now thus a little inhabled does deonerate and ease her self of
ouer-burthens. For whilst Nature is vigorous, strong and sound, and mannages
well her offices of government over our bodies, she excludes and drives out
of them whatsoever is peccant and superfluous; but when she is ouer-burthened
and ouer-borne with abundance, she so attends and waits all occasions and
opportunities of easement, that she apprehends many times the first and least
hint of help, and ioynes her own forces with the foreign aid.

Yet sometimes profuse deiections fall out contrary to Nature, when through
imbecility of her regent and retentiue faculty, she suffers defluxions.

Or though she be more valid and strong, yet is she sometimes so much provoked
and molested with the copy and acrimony of the humor, that she cannot retain
it, but must even let and suffer it by its own force to sluice and break forth
from out its vessels and receptacles.

Both these euacuations are symptomaticall, unnatural and vselesse, because
the benign and salutary succi, together with the malign and pernicious, do
promiscuously and irregularly, without any election, burst and rush out with
violence.

But these profuse euacuations, whether symptomatique or legitimate
(exterminating only what is cumbersome, either in the kind or in the quantum)
whether occasioned through disorder of the Patient, or proceeding from other
causes (evident or occult) iumping and joining with the contemporary operation
of a purgative medicine (though mild and moderate) cast foul aspersions upon
the Physician, where concurring causes are nor well considered or not duly
weighed of the censurer.

To leave no color of cavil to the carping Momus, and to meet with the many
incomprehensible secrets shut up in Natures closet; my Panala never astonishes
her with sudden, nor debilitates with vehement assault, but gently assayes her
with medication of so mild allay and gradation, ( facilitate non vi operando)
that it may securely, without any endaingering the patient, sound and search
out the abstruse and unknown conditions of any constitution, even of the
commoderate and soundest in integrity of sanitude, which according to
Hippocrates (Aph. 3.37.) brooks not Purgations without difficulty and peril,
because by setting upon the spiritual and balsamique Mumie, for want of
vicious humors to work upon, they cause grindings in the guts, swoundings,
vertiginous and other symptoms, and by continuance colliquation and
consumption.

Observe further; that after four or five days use of this Ale, much matter
being therewith avoided, you cannot expect the daily continuance of like
copious deiection, as you found at first (although by clearing some passages,
which perhaps were blocked up before, the ways for free working become more
patent) if you be temperate in meat and drink, and the time in wind and
weather, except you extend the dose or draughts in taking larger proportions of
the Medicine.

Nor will the Second Ale, prepared by reinfusion of the same Fund or Bag, do
much more, for matter of purging by stool, (though it will then effectually
purge by urine) than keep the body soluble, by reason the purgative spirits of
the ingredients, being more dissoluble and allectiue than the alteratiues, will
be well-nigh exhausted and drawne-out by former infusion.

This orderly descent and passage, from purging by the first Infusion to mere
solubility (which in most cases, will then be all-sufficient) by the Second,
cuts off and preuents all occasions of constipation or costiuenesse (the usual
subsequents to purgers) by continuing the cutting of humors, deoppilating of
the vessels, and by still stimulating or soliciting the excretiue faculty to
the ordinate fit performance of its office. But the addition of two ounces of
Seen with Rubarb and Mechoacan, of each half an ounce, unto the ingredients in
the bag, will now indifferently furnish the second Infusion with purgative
faculties, and for the alteratiue, it retains sufficient force in the first
Composition, as aforesaid.

Note moreover, that in some cases, by competent continuance of this Medicin
(as in other Dietetique Physic) there follow and are brought forth excellent
fruits and effects of Alteratiue working in the Body, long after ending and
giuing-ouer the taking of the same, insomuch, that many time a month or more
thence, you shall find much more fruit and benefit by it (without any evil
Diathasis, or impression of disaffect co^tracted from the extended use thereof,
than, during the continuance of drinking the Ale, you could well conceive, or
by any probable conjecture from present perseverance, expect or propound unto
your self, provided, that you do not relapse through manifest disorder or
gross distemper, the Patients scourge, and the Physicians scandal.

The reason of such Harvest of physical fruits in expectance and future,
rather than in Present, may well be, that Nature, being kept in continual
Action, and the Humors and Spirits in more motion than ordinary, by the daily
use of the Potion (though gentle and moderate) the effects thereof cannot be so
settled, nor so sensibly discerned, during the Machine of Medication, as it will
be after some competent repose and Cessation from the purging, for composing
all agitations. Besides that, the plenteous store of salutarie spirits, derived
from so excellent a potion by an extended course of drinking, diffused and
impressed into all the parts and dimensions of the body, does with the Opifique
spirits of the body continue mutual cooperations, many days, or rather
weeks, after the giving over of the Ale, to the perfect maturation of the
fruits.

CHAP. X.
The excellent Virtues of Panala in General.
PAnala is a true and perfect Medicamentum Alimento sum; ministering to the body
both food and Physic: It is a legitimate Diacatholique, a general happy
Purgative eliminating all humors offensive in quality or in quantity, but
working most on the most redunda^t, in that they are most affluent to
Electiues, and most obedient to expulsiues, though rebel tenants which Nature
most endeavors to eiect, because they infest Her with more frequent and more
mortal Duels then all foreign and other domestique Foes.

It is a Generous and almost a General Universal Medicine, (not inferior to
any Galenicall Physic whatsoever) happily performing all the parts of a good
Preparatiue, Evacuatiue, and Alteratiue, and not a little participating of the
Comfortatiue also, to the Natural, Vital and Animal parts, the Liver, Heart
and Brain, and their Powers or Spirits, and, being compounded accordingly, it
is a Benedict remedy for any infirmity or defect in a manner, even for Hunger
it self, in that it participates of (if not exceeds) the Alimentary virtues of
the Staff of Life, comforting the Stomach and nourishing the whole body.

It Concocts crude and raw humors, cuts, liquifies, attenuates and makes the
thick, the tough and Tartareous become plyant and obsequious to Nature: the
attenuated, the concocted, the serous and watery it digests and consumes: it
clenses the Ventricle from slymie and Phlegmatique Crudities sticking to its
rugosities and wrinklings, deterges the Lungs and Chest from viscous and putrid
Humors, which, cleaving unto them and subsisting in the slender Branches of
the Aspera Arteria, do obturate and shut up those straight passages and cause
difficult breathing.

It dissolues, dissipates and rids terrene and gravelly concretions, it
deoppilates, opens and mundifies the Lungs, the Intestines, the Liver, the
Spleen, the Reins, the Matrix, and all the vessels, Parts, and Passages of
the body, even the neruall conduits of the spirits, and by these means makes
excellent way for further workings, both of this same, and of other Medicines,
by Stool, Urine, Evaporation, and other Operations.

It gently, safely, effectually and most commodiously purges Choler, Phlegm,
Melancholy, nor rudely, nor rashly rouzing this sleeping Lion, (by agitating
or stimulating the stubborn humor) from quiet Denn to furious Do of
daingerous dints, causing fearful Passions or grievous affects; so does it
also cleanse and carry forth all corrupt and putrid humors (Authors of worms
and many other woes) with other peccant and superfluous contents, sincere and
alone leaving the laudable for Natures store.

It is therefore more available for Longaeuity and length of life, than
exercise and sweat, for such moderate purges work chiefly upon the humors,
whereas succulent Juices and good Spirits (not easily repaired) together with
humors and excrementitious vapors are exhailed and consumed by perspirations
and sweats.

Particularly, it purges (without perturbation or shuffling of humors) first
of all the first region of the body, to wit, the Ventricle, the Mesaraicke
veins, (those numerous roots of innumerable Symptoms, and Diseases) the
Cauities of the Liver, the Milt, the Hypochondria, the Mesenterie and Pancreas,
those two Sinkes and Swallows of all Illuvies and Impurities: yea, there is
scarce any other Cathartique that does so mildly and so powerfully draw forth
and eliminate corrupt thick Humors; besides that by continuance and
consequution it euacuates the other Regions, the Unequal or outer parts of the
Liver, the Vena caua and its Concomitant the Great Artery: and after its
effectual expansure and purgature of the first two, it undertakes the third
also (the Task of our Gigantine and most valid purgers) and effectually, by
its propriety, promoted by extended perseverance, performs eradication of
deepe-rooted Maladies from the Muscles, Membranes, Joints, the remote Extremes
and whole Moles and habit of the Body, thereby cutting off and curing many
stubborn diseases able to bear the brunt of the strongest remedy.

Ictibus innumeris cecidit Dodonia Quereus.
The huge maine Oak, which Cannon cannot down,
Hewed through with many strokes, strikes The Earth with his Crown.
Nor does it evacuate the Body by Stool only, but it is likewise both
Diuretique and Diaphoretique, dissoluing and expelling serous thin humors, by
urine, and by insensible Transpiration, (easily breathing forth rarefied
exhalations through the dilated Pores) and effectually causes Sweat being taken
hot, (especially compou^ded without purgatiues) and the Body well happed
accordingly. For as it separates and eliminates Heteragene and superfluous
Humors per secessum, by Stool, so does it also therewithal, and by
Evaporation euacuate Fumes and vapors of malignant quality and vicious
condition, without expense of the Humidum radicale, or Primigenium (the
Foundation and food of Spirit and heat, and by consequence of Life and Being)
thereby preserving Natures rich Treasures Corporal and Animal.

It corrects and remedies Crudities, carminates Wind, and discusses flatuous
discursions and wringings in the body, stays vomitings by diuersion, excites
the Appetite, quenches Thirst, enlarges the Pectoralls, and causes easy
Spitting.

It cures long Fevers, Quotidians, all Intermitters and pestilentialls, the
Green Sickness, (Albas virginum Febres) Cachexias and all lent, tough and
lingering Infirmities, bredd of the impurity of the Viscera or of inueterate
obstructions.

It deoppilates and extenuates the stuffed and distented Spleen, abates obese
and corpulent Bodies, and is very conducible for exhausting and curing of all
Distillations and defluxions to any part: It is auailable for Toothache,
Inflammations of the Eyes, Uvula, and Almonds of the Throat, for the vertigo,
and all infirmities of the Head, womb and Bladder, both new and old; for all
Cephalique Dolors and disturbances through fumes and vapors, and for all
Fluxes, Dropsies, and the Falling Evil.

It helps all Colds, Coughs, Asthmaes, or difficult breathings, the Iaundise
black and yellow; Ill habits of the body, Putrifactions, hard Tumors, and all
other swellings, wandering pains, stinging and fixed Aches; the Cholicke, the
Stone, all Gouts, both the running and the impacted, hot and cold, Palsies and
all ill-affections of the Sinews. It helps Salt Rheumes, Itches, Scabs, Byles,
Botches, the Scorbuto, the Leprie, and other contagious Maladies, and the cure
of all curable wounds and ulcers, (inward and outward) with many other defects
and deformations Intus and in Cute. Foetet anima? deformat Hircus? Make Panala
thy sweet Companion if thou hopest for help.

It rectifies the Stomach and erecting the Digestive Faculty, furthers the
Concoction and Distribution of meat, comforts the Lungs and all the Pectorall
parts, corroborates the heart, strengthens the Liver, purifies it and the whole
Mass of Blood, and breeding laudable Chylus, impinguates ^qualid and
starueling Bodies, by inhabling them in future to become fat or fair and much
better-liking.

It cleeres the Sight, flories the Complexion, cherries the pallid Cheek,
quickens the Memory and all the Senses, Internal and External, refocillates
and exhilerates the Mind and Animal Faculties, incites and enhables
furtherance to conception, nourishes and maintains the Balsamique Mumie of the
Body, increases youthfulness, and retardates and keeps back the approach
and seizure of Old Age.

For the frequent use of evacuating and emaciating dyets is a special mean to
promote Prolongation of Life, for that after them, the body becomes plumpe
fair and almost new, through pure sound flesh, with restoration of youthful
vigor in some degree, as Oxen wrought lean, regaine the flesh of young beefes
by good pasturage.

Touching diseases which are wholly Incurable, or those whose legitimate cure
is very perilous, this Panala is a most approved help producing such
salutarie fruits of Palliation, (the securest and most commendable course of
medication in such cases) as exceed all expectation; for without any Dainger
and incumbring Do of daily newed dispensings, it alleviates and mitigates all
Symptoms of the sickness, which disturb the Patient, if he be but patient,
to persevere in competent continuing the Potion.

By dissoluing coagulate blood, it discusses and scatters inward contusions,
and preserues the body from putrefaction, and other perilous Symptoms.

Some men may perhaps expect I should capitulate and evidence all the
particulars, and instance both the persons and infirmities, as well touching
their Symptoms, as the mediate operation of Panala, for abandoning or abating
at least of their baynings or oppressing burthenings. This I grant had not
been impertinent to the work, but, were I so punctually satisfactory, I
should doubtless of many people be branded for a Matchless Mandevill in
Hyperbolizing, maulger the magnifique good applause of Myriads of Patients,
extolling it beyond the furthest extent of my praising Attributes to the
operation of its Mechanique Spirits. To avoid such Stygmatique Rasures, and
that my intended Manual (of both parts) might not grow voluminous in tedious
Instances (which might perchance incur, with others suspect of fiction and
imposture) I propounded to my self, rather then to press too much upon
provoked patience, cursorily to point at particulars for the present, well
knowing that a word is enough to a man of good meaning, especially if any thing
verst in Physic (though such have most cause of cavil at this Medication
which benefits the Patient, but brings little or no profit to the Physician and
Apothecarie,) for he will easily grant, that such a Remedy may well be
available in all diseases save in Nude distempers sine materia, which are
seldom found in our cold and full-feeding Climates, yet such may easily be
met withal by this medicable Potion.

For as all Geometrique Figures, may be measured by Triangle, so all
Infirmities material and immateriall, may be medicated by Panala: Will you
have an excellent Restoratiue for Consumptions and Bodies emmaciate and spent
with long lingering sicknesses? the Bag compounded without Purger with the
Ingredience of meat of nutrient juice, perboiled until the blood be in effect
decocted away, and minced very small both flesh and bones, presents you with a
cup little inferior in degree to a Chylus, which shall exceed all other
preparations of food for easy digestion, fine and facile diffusion into the
veins and members and for copious Nutrition with least quantity of
excrementitious Relics. To conclude; Would lumpish Melancholy medicate,
And gloomy Fumes at once euaporate?
My Strains cross canuast by brisk-witty Critics,
Change Moods dull-moody to cheer'd-merry Crickets.


CHAP. XI.
Of the excellent cautionary virtues of Panala.
NAture, the best Moderatrix of man's liuelihood, not ignorant, that Praecavere
Morbis quam curare melius est, that mature prevention of maladies is better
than the best medication for cure, ( Magis quippe optandum est, omnino non
pati, quam a passionibus liberari,) duly aims by daily endeauours to
constitute and continue the body temperatum ad pondus, (as in Man's first
creation) that it may be entire and perfect in state of health to the last
period of life, or at least to conserve the same in such latitude of sanitude
as it was produced.

As therefore every intelligent and industrious Hortulan is ever carefully
curious in diligent clearing and curing his Plot of irregularities,
superfluities, weeds, incumbers and undue Ballasts, and of storing and
furnishing it with all commendable and necessary accommodates: So prudent and
provident Nature, administering all things the best she can, does still, without
intermission, moliri and labor the excretion and quitting the Body of all
excrementitious, superfluous and peccant Humors and Contents, with the
supplying of all defects, and reforming of all deformations, which good effects
could she always happily attain unto and accomplish, according to her
intention, there should never need any Physical means to rectify the state,
or preserve the health of the Body.

But the rebellious quality and ouer-maistring quantity of many potent
opposites, together with the repugnance of stubborn and obstructed parts and
passages (contracted many times by erring or undue deuiating from the right
administration or due manage of the Six Non-naturalls) does often delude and
frustrate these her careful intendments of their worthy ends.

Now this noble medicine, a most singular instrument of Physic, (Natures Hand
maid) powerfully oppugnes and resists her opposites, and ioining with her in
her salutary designs subdues and reduces them to her obedience, reserates the
ports and passages of the body, and amandates and expells whatsoever is adverse
or incongruent, and by consequence diuerts a world of diseases, and conserues
the health in good latitude.

A boystrous rouzing Purge, like a rude Ramp that rashly pluckes-vp the Herbs
with the Weeds, shuffles all sorts of Humors into confusion, and promiscuously
with much violence to Nature eliminates and voids both good and bad, as well
Euchimique Balsamaries as Cacochymique Bayners, whereby Nature is defatigated
and debilitated, and the state of the body much endammaged.

But mild Panala, like a discreet Damsel, which preserues wholesome Herbs,
and weeds-vp hurtful Weeds, does by easy degrees gently, pleasantly, and
safely, (nor ouer-heating the body, nor perturbing the Patient) raise and
remove the entrenched enemy, and disburthens Nature of sincere and mere
peccant Humors, thereby preserving the succulent and salutary Juices entire
and exempt both from euacuation and from incident corruption and infection,
which would necessarily be contracted by their continued mixture with the
unnatural, if still retained.

To give some particular instances for the necessity and use of this preventing
Physic, give me leave here, more fully than before, to present unto your view
and consideration the three Grande Colonells which usually with their many
troops of Miscreants assault and batter our Bulwarks of Health, against all
whose infesting forces Panala is furnished with such munition, that all their
mischievous machinations and designs, to demolish and ruinate the whole
fabric of Man's Edifice, are countermined, dashed and disanuld.

The three Chieftaines encamping against our Cittadell, are Cruditie, Rheum,
Obstruction, and under their Colors Bands of Sicari^, bloody Bandetti, do
bandy themselves to bane our Bodies at least, yea many times with stupendous
tortures they distune and destroy the Heavenly Harmony of the Soul.

Under Crudities Colors are encamped Cachexiaes, Hydropicall Diseases,
Oedemata or phlegmatique and serous Swellings, flatuous discursions, and
painful wringings in the Ilia and Colon, the Lienterie or flux of Excrements
and indigested viands, with many other great and long griefs; Imo, Cruditas
assidua Matter est omnium fere aegritudinum Materialium.

Those who live not orderly ( sobrie) do daily, according to Lessius, in his
Hygiasticon, make some additament of Crude Humors, which attracted into the
veins and diffused into the whole moles and bulk of the Body, as into a
Sponge, (to the quantity of 100 Ounces in one year,) do in tract of time
putrify and breed mortal diseases, which cut off most men before their time.
For almost all that dye of sickness before Old Age dye of this Cause.

Amongst all sicknesses marching after Cruditie I beg license not to forget
that numerous Fyle of secret, but forward foes, Serpentine Worms, those
treacherous Underminers of our Microcosmique Castle, which come for most part
of crude, superfluous Chylus, and ravening for the like become Robbers of Rest,
Restoration and Life it self.

These petty, puny Pygmies (subterranean spirits bred of Corruption and humid
Heat) these pernicious pyoners and pyners of the Body, feed-on, devour, and
consume the good Juices provided to nourish and maintain the whole Bulk,
which having the conuoy of Nourishment continualll cut off, does necessarily
become lean, meager, and misliking, and the Appetite many times insatiable, by
reason the famelique or esurient spirits are robbed of the foizon of food, which
the Mechanique should worke-on to furnish all the parts with congruent and
competent food.

Oftentimes the nutrient Succi being incompetent to satiate and glut their
numerous Gorges, they molest and torment the intestines (the very Beds they
were bred in) with corrodant sucking, cause the Cholicke, pains like to the
Hypochondrique flatus (the Girdle of the Spleen) flux of the Bowels,
Distension and Inflation of the Belly, and diverse times stupendous passions,
and in fine, most dolorous death by perforating and eating-thorough the Guts.

Though therefore these Lumbrici, bred and nourisht in the small Guts
(especially) of the Chylous Juices, being crude and pituitous, do often continue
and quietly contain themselves therein a long time, in some bodies, without
any manifest damage or inconvenience, and at length, sans former discovery,
cure or care, descend with the excrements into the Crassa Intestina, and are
with the same from thence eiected and cast out by stool, yet oftentimes in
their hungry hunting after food they ascend, creep and crawle up into the
Ventricle, (yet sometimes produced there of putrid Ballasts) defatigate and
tire the Stomach with tiring, pulling and lugging, hinder concoction, cause
much Dolor, Nauseam and loathing of Meat, Dry Cough, Thirst, Hickup,
Vomitings, and various other violent and perilous accidents, and by gnawing,
crawling about and pestring the Mouth of the Stomach, make difficult
swallowing, and worse Symptoms.

Yea, so woefully fatal are these accursed Miscreants many times to our weal,
that they wrecke us in their own wrackes; for lying dead in the Bowels, till
they be putrified, they send up stinking vapors, and malignant fumes, which
affect and infect both Heart and Head, causing Suffusions and Cataracts in the
Eyes, Falling Evils, Alienation of the Mind, Palpitation of the Heart,
Faintings, Swoondings, Cold and ill-sented Sweats, inordinate Fevers with
horror and rigor, Trembling and dissolution of the Body, Convulsions and
other fearful Symptoms, and other Concomitants of daingerous consequence.
This multiplicious Band of banefull Miscreants are the most timous and frequent
infesters of the Bodies fabric, not only assaulting tender Infancy and
Childhood, but even setting upon Manhood also, with their pestiferous Troops
of Torturess which are many times found to swarm in malignant Fevers. And I
hold it very probable, that the untimely Death of most Children, may truly be
attributed to Worms, and other dints and effects dimaining from such
superfluous and crude Indigestions. But this dainger (says Lessius) by well
purging the body yearly at Spring and Fall, is prevented, and the Life produced
to very Old Age.

For Children therefore and all Students and others of small exercise or ill
Diet, it is most requisite to use such temperate Evacuation every year at such
times, and for all others against every Climaterique or Seventh and Nynth
year, according to the Counsel of Taisnerus, from Marsilius Ficinus, showing
that by help of Astrology and Physic, natural Death may be deferred. Sed
haec parerga: These worms have made me weaue too large a Web of course raw
Thread: therefore no more of Colonel Cruditie.

Rhume musters Inflammations of the Eyes, of the Almonds, of the Throat, of the
Vunla: the Angina, Toothache, pains in the Ears, and others parts of the
Head, Coughs, griefs and weakness of the Stomach; Excoriations, and
Apostumes of the Lungs, Liver, Reins and Bladder, stabbing Pleurisies, pining
Consumptions, Fluxes of the Belly; the Cholicke and the Sciatica, Gouts of
diverse sorts, and Tumors against Nature: Deafnes and Blindness, Palsies and
mortal Apoplexsies.

For this Distillation ( Catarrbus, deflluxion, or falling of supervacuous
humors from the Head into the subjected parts) yssuing from the ventricle of
the Brain, and from its Unequal and encompassing Meninges when it is more
exuperant into the Inwards of the body, stirs up diverse mischiefs in our
Microcosme: For rushing into the Roots or Originalls of the Nerves, it causes
Stupors, Tremblings, Palsies, and Apoplexies: into the Organs of the Senses, it
causes tabring in the Ears, and dullness of Hearing, and Dimnesse of Sight:
into the Nose, Stuffings and loss of Smelling; into the Jaws and rough
Artery, Cough and Hoarsnesse; into the Lungs, the Asthma and Consumptions;
into the Ventricle, Cruditie and Indigestion; into the Intestines, Flux of the
Bowels, and from hence if it insinuate it self into the Liuer-Veines (by the
Mesaraicks) it thickens there and stuffes both veins and vessels with
Obstructions. Sometimes it sallies and comes from without and above the Cranium
or Skull, especially from under the Skin of the Crown (where the Extremes of
the veins, creeping and carried by and through the face and forehead or
Temples, are bestowed and terminated in and about the Vertical point) and then
it passes and disperses into the eyes, into the Mandibles, the Teeth, the
Neck, the Shoulders, Arms, Sides, Back, Loins, Hyps, Thighs, and in
conclusion into all the Ioints; insomuch that all Arthritique and almost all
External pains dimane from this Outward Defluxion.

The last, not the least of the Three-Chiefetaines is Obstruction, a Potent
Foe, vigilant in his designs and never unfurnished of one Machine or other,
Fire-workes, water-workes, and other Munition.

The Liver is a maine mark of his Aim, both because it furnishes all parts
with provision, and for that it lies open to his Battries, by reason, that the
numerous deriuation of Venulae, both from the Port and Hollow-veine (through
which two all the Alimentarie Juices have their Passages) is in most exile and
slender branchlets (apt to be oppilated and stopped with viscid Humors)
dissipated and obliterated into the substance of that Pareuchyma.

Here he commands over Scirrhosities, hard Swellings, Inflammations (to the
fortifying of the Liver sometimes) Fevers, Fluxes, Iaundise; There Hydropique,
Cachectique, Cachochymique affects, Green Sickness, and other Discolorations,
putrefaction of Humors, and Atrophia (snailie extenuation or slow pining away
of the body) with Battries many more.

Now he leuels at the Gall, turns the contained Choler to stony concretion,
and diuerts the affluent to the diffusion of auruginous Tinctures.

Hemorrhages and natural Evacuations of Blood are suppressed in both Sexes
through his designements upon the great veins, and upon the Mesaraiques, the
Hemorrhoids are stopped, and Melancholique and feuerous affections set to broach.

By setting upon the Mist, He obfuscates the Mind with colid fumes,
col^^quates and wastes the Body and defaedates the skin.

By attempts in the Intestines, he hurts the Digestion (occasioning crudity of
Stomach) and hinders Ejection: sometimes though seldom he indurates and even
lapifies the Phlegm heapt up in the Cells of the Caecum and Colon, but many
times stirs up and raises stupendous windy Passions in the Ilia and greater
guts, as if he meant by Mines to blow up the maine Bulwerke with violent blasts.

For impeaching the free Conuoy of the Spirits by obstructing their Conduits
the Nerves and thereby mustering-vp Suffusions of the Eye, Palsies,
Convulsions, Apoplexies, Epilepsies or the like; because it may be
controuerted, whether the inrolment of these belong to this Band or to some
Regiments mustering-vp malign vapors, or other hostile means, I leave it to
the subtle disputes of deeper strains.

But I may not omit his obturating or contracting the Pores of the skin
(whether by mustering the cold and open ambient Air against the Maine, or by
calling-in some ayerie or windy Percolation against any one Member) whereby
excrementitious matter rarefied into fuliginous vapors for exhalation and
evaporation is reverberated and driven back again. For this Reverberation
shuffles the Humors and the Spirits, into confused Combustions, and all the
Intrinsicke Faculties into mutinous and tumultuous Routs to the grievous
pervert and great disturbance of the Oeconomie of the Microcosme and many times
to the utter subversion and ruin of the Fabric. Besides; who has not heard
of the Holla^d Baliue and of the Baylife of the Hundreds (Popular Agues,
Plagues of those parts) how frequently they infest these Fenny and Moorish
Flats? Neither of these walks (and they are ever restless) his Perambulation
(chiefly the Autumnall) but he is furnished with a thousand Warrant Dormants, to
attach with Arrest that will daunt the daring courage of the stoutest Heart
with shiuering cold, and trembling rigor; yea, more, before he leave fingring
him on whom he once fastens his hold, he will amate his manhood, melt his
marowie and brawnie strength, and power out his haughty Spirits in sordid
Sweats. And does the Vp-land Countries escape and go Scot freee from such
bainfull Arrests? show me the Town can truly tell and auow it smells not of
the Summons of a Trienniall Visitation (at least) by some Epedimique Disease or
other? If the black Ague (so the Country calls her frequent but unwelcome
guest, Synochum putridam maligna^) the Measils, small Pocks, Tertian or Quart^n
fever will be sure to have a fling amongst the^: And few or none go about to
ask or once to question them, but let them pass impune as too potent or too
masterfull to be dealt withal. For all these miscreants this mild medication
is a dainty and deliver Supersedeas, to prevent the Arrest, and seldom fails
of an authentic Liberate, to deliver from all dures of such fellon faitors.
Nay, though he is no right Errant nor a true Arrant Bailiffe, that loves not a
Cup of nappy Ale, yet whosoeuer's perfumed with a Fortnight-sent of my Ale,
he is sped of a Spell that will not fail to fright-away all such Miscreant
spirits from nearer approach.

For noble Panala (Penthesilea like armed at all points) passing corporally by
veins and other vessels, and spiritually by invisible Perspirations into all
the members and dimensions of the body ( per totu^ transfluxilis et
perspirabilis) tufts and hunts out al superfluous and vicious contents, and
serrits them forth from out their lurking Holds and Dens, by means whereof no
matter being left for putrefaction nor for obstruction, the whole body actuates
in free perspirability, and the Calidum Innatum, no way obrute but freed from
extinction, yeeldes to no foreign contagion, nor stoopes to inbred
corruption, but stoutly and strongly marches against, encounters, foiles and
eliminates all malignities. For by attenuating, absterging and euacuating, it
quits all the material causes of those and other morbosities, intercepts and
cuts-off their conuoyes of Munition (whether consisting in vicious or
superfluous Humors, indisposition or excess of nutrient juices, or other
contents, or straightness of the passages) and by rectifying and roborating
the principalls, remedies the distemper and imbecility of the parts, and
diuerts or quashes their mischievous designs, and lastly by congruent
association to Nature and by equable and proportionate contrariety to
Sickness, it conserues and maintains the state of the Body in good latitude
of Health, repells incongruent diseases, and effectually repaires lapsed and
impaired sanitude.

Such and so manifest, with many more, howsoever these attributes may seem to
many men to be too many, are the virtues and effects of this duly composed and
truly impregnated Panala, especially if it be (as it always ought to be)
ministrred Medica manu, quae vniuersalia particularibus, ordinata and rationali
methodo, accommodata, adhibet; otherwise, it is (like every other Medicine) but
a Caruers tool in a Carters hand, whose wooden workmanship quickly marres, but
never makes a good Sculpture. It Is not the instrument but the knowledge and
dexterity of the Artist, which makes-vp the Masterpiece in every Artifice:
Argus his ears had kept-open his eyes to keepe-on his head, if better fingring
than Parts rude handling, though upon Apollos Harp, had not charmed them with
harmonious melody to betray their double charge.

CHAP. XII.
Of the cheap and pressed accommodations of Panala.
MAny irrational creatures, led by the mere Instinct of Nature, do, upon
occasion of need, betake themselves to the use of medicinable means for
recovery of health and cure of hurts: But Man, illuminated with the Divine
Beams of a reasonable Soul, is many times (more than only the hominum vulgi)
much more sottish and more absurdly conceited in this kind, than mere bruits,
( Birds, Beasts, Fish, Reptilia and Insecta etiam) which we know do usually
use (with much labor many times to find or fetch) Physical helps for their
hurts and infirmities, where he is so far from the intertaine of the
Practicke or approve of the Art, that he condemns the sacred ordinance, which
God himself created (and gave to our first Parents) divine Oracles so much and
so often commend, and profane Authors of all sorts ( Philosophers, Historians,
Orators, Poets) callaud; in so much that Donzellin holds them worthy to be
abandoned of all mankind ( Anticyras relegandos) which dare seens sentire,
intertaine an ill thought of it, and doubtless would hold him unworthy the
comfort of any creature that should collinire brand or besmeere this heavenly
gift of the Creator with the foul clouted term of Imposture or Iuggling. Yet
for all this fond fancy against Physic, the silliest Man of a million, when
he sees his Jade tainted with the Yellowes, or his Beast infected with the
Murren, will haste for help to some Horsleach, and count it frugality, and
good gain too, to recover a Cart-horse with a Crown cost (sometimes) in hope
to recover ten. Oh, but to bestow five shillings in Physic upon his own
karcasse, it is a peslance expense, the quarter charge will go far in
Ale-berries and Cawdells, and a few pence will furnish the whole Many with
Treacle and Aquavitae: if these and a pepperd Possill with a Head-bind help
not, then farewell my neighbor Hide-bound, he will rather dye thrice, than deal
once with other Drugs than such as his Maud can mash, and his forefathers used
to meddle with for their Medeale.

Thus many people, even whole Myriads of Men, through their superstitious
aduersnesse against Physic, or penurious pedling with paltry trash, or idle
tempering with tinkerlie Physmicaries, do ordinarily, in their penny wise
wisdoms, exhaust and consume both Body and Goods in long languishings, which
might have been easily remedied and redeemed by the timous counsel of an
honest Artist.

For instance; Is it not a world of wonder, to see, what palpable poor neglect
is commonly cast-vpon the curatiue care even of Fury Fevers, chiefly
Quartanes? does not almost every Man (though nigh mated with stupendous
symptoms and passions) feed his fond fancy with this Selfe-soothed Sooth-say,
It Is but an Ague and must have the Course; Incursu nimirum suo Quartanam non
esse impediendam, this misconceiued Tenet must blanch and roborate their sorry
Conceits, which further also to color, one foists a piece of Piso, snatched
from the Sequence, for his plea, and boldly auowes from Hippocrates, that of
all Fevers the Quartane is the easiest and the safest, and vindicates from
other great Diseases, as Convulsions and Epilepsies. Another dights-vp Auisoes
Door with the Ding-dong Proverb, Pro Febre Quartana raro sonat Campana, He
flatly tells you, the Bell seldom tolls for a Quartane, never considering that
Erratique and Quotidian Agues derived from gross and pituitous Humors,
putrefying (whether turning atribilary or otherwise) do for most part turn
Bastard-Quartanes, and that Quartanes concomitant with vicious Liver and other
vessels ill affected do often lapse the Loath-Physick into Scyrrhosities of
Liver, Spleen, Reins, and breed Dropsies, Iaundise, Hypochondriaque
Melancholy, or some other scuruy Disease, of which ever and anon diverse are
dropping away, or else drooping in desperate languishings, to teach them and
all such Selfe-soothing heretics in this kind, that this Opprobrium Medicorum
(the Quartane) springing from the impatience of inconstant Patients, nor
brooking nor abiding any regular course for due cure, can quickly turn to a
sharp and a tough Scourge to school them with a Pay-Home by attorney, shall
make them cry peccaui for so fond sleighting salutary Caves and medicinable
Cautions for due Cure.

These Men are no marks for the bent of my aims, I am well contented my
Composition suits none of their humors; why should a man study the cure or the
care of them, who are so careless of themselves? Fatuitatis suae poenas luent,
let them reap the rotten-ripe bitter fruits of their own follies, and post to
anticipated ends before their times for contempt of the means, or lingering
miserably dye to save charges, if it be saving to be dishabled, by long
languors, of following their Callings which call for their personal manage,
without medication, for most part, very slowly made competible.

For such as blow-vp Trifle-Fees with turgid put-off of wind-puft Complement,
let their empty bladders freely float-on their dunghill puddles and turn
ayrie Bubbles, till their glitterand selfe-swolne greatness, with the Lance
of inward Pride (not of my Pen) burst into Hally-water to besmeare their brows
in their base bows to Mammon.

For those who once assured of cure, by honest care of the careful Physician,
do straight grow sight-sicke, eare-sicke, thought-sicke of him, and in stead
of remunerating his merits, do nauseate his Face, Name, Memory; let their
penance be daily to be verst in public profession of this fourfold
version, till shame, conscience, or dread of Duel with the last auersion,
work his conversion from penurious baseness.

Deus. Vm nigris aegrum prope Mors circumu^lat alis
Funestamque aciem funera jamque parat,
Tum me promissis beat and domus omnis adorat,
Meque salutiferum clamitat esse Deum.

Angelus. Paulo vbi conualuit, paulum de numine nostro
Cessit, and in nostris auribus is it a sona^^,
Tu Caelo nobis demissus es Angelus alto,
Praemia quae vestri quanta laboris erant?

Homo. Iamque Machaonia magis and magis art leuatus,
Cum sedet ante focum progrediturque tripes,
Oh Homo non frustra, tantos subijsse labores
Nosces, quod restat tu modo toll malum.

Demon. Ast ego, si penitus jam sanum praemia poscam,
Ille Deus pridem, mox Cacodaemon ero;
Aurea verba vola^t, mala vox ciru^volat aureis,
Limine me, torvo lumine, pellis onus.

I have transformed the last lines of the Doctors gradarie Disreguard, and
translated it thus; God. Whilst ore thy down-sick Head pale Death does houer,
And's eager Stoops to trusse thy Soul affright thee,
Fair Heights of Bounty bless Me, all do honor,
All Dei^ie, all God of Health do height Me.

Angel. Straight as thy State to better plight inclines,
I Am styled an Angel sent from Heaven to cure Thee,
My Deity to Demi-God declines,
Yet o, what golden words thou give t'allure me!

Man. Still, as thy strength does wax, my worship waines,
Chair, Staff and Stomach, all things gin to ease thee;
Good Sir now say, yet happy are thy pains,
Root out the Relics and I Will richly please Thee.

Devil. But to full freedom bayl'd from bayn-full Evil,
If then my careful Visits speak due prize,
Godhead, Gold-Heights forgot, thou dubst me Devil
And (^^^^uie) con^ures forth with toruie Eyes.
Thus, whom with painful Care J'ue cured my Patient,
The Sick this must I personate, turn Patient.



To meet with some misconceiuings of better minded people, who, willingly
embrace Gods Ordinance, and the use of ordinary means of cure by Physic, but
not well apprehending, heeding or remembering their directions for usage of the
medicines prescribed or given unto them, wrong themselves and cross the
Physician in their preposterous applications, I have selected and settled upon
the composition of Panala, the prescript of whose Administration and usage is
so plain and familiar, no man, of any brain, need fall into any misprise or
mistake, much less commit the palpable gross Errors, which many run into in
most other medicable courses, in which every Practitioner finds mistakings to
be as usual as Eating and Drinking. Here Is one champes his Pills, and for
disgust spits them out with an out, out, another stuphes or bathes with his
potion, a Third drinks his Clister-stuffe, or eats his Suppositarie; and
there is one turns Electuaries to unguents, Injections to Gargarismes, and vice
versa; but he that is so wary, he will not turn the other furnishment to the
Task of his Teeth, yet mistakes the morning-Draught for the Euenings, and
either doubles or diuides the appointed Dose. But in the use and pursuit of
Panala, there are nor curiosities, nor varieties of the Medication, to beget
misprisions, only a constant Course, without any Cumber, to drink a Cup of Ale
twice or thrice a day, as is showed Cap. 5. and 6.

Panala also happily preuents and cuts off the fond irresolution which
ordinarily possesses many Patients, who having taken a Dose or two of any
Prescript, and not finding manifest present-ease thereby, do straight
entertain a strong and a resolute abandoning of all further progress in
Physic, when that they took was perscribed but in Nature of a preparatiue to
the maine Intention, either only to prepare the vessels or the Humors, or to
comfort the Spirits, and enhable Nature to hold out for the cure. For coming
in the Port and customable Habit of mere Ale or common Drinks, what Man
amongst a Million will be so wilful or inconsiderate, as, having past the
Pykes of payment and preparation of the Potion, that he will ever entertain a
thought of refusing or giving over so pressed, so familiar and so freindly a
Companion, before the last Cup conclude and strike the parting blow of a
comfortable kind Farewell? And the resolved Patient by constant perseuering in
propining and following the Medicine, may with good assurance propound and
promise to himself truly to reap the ripe and wholesome fruits of the
principal Intention by beneficent Medication, which so many daily miss of
through impatient and preposterous have to reach and reap them before
Maturitie.

For those therefore that in Heart do honor the honest physician as the
Instrument of God, ordained for their Health, and like good Tenants for Term
of Life carry conscionable minds, to keep the Edifices of their Bodies
committed to their care and custody, in good and sound plight, and to repair
dilapidations and decays respectively, although perhaps neither very able to
bestow much cost, nor in case to spare much time in Quest and pursuit of such
their care, have I published the benefique operation of this most accommodate
Medicine, that I may in some reasonable measure gratify such their ingenuous
respects: And for further gratification, I have at all times Funds or Bags of
the Ingredients in readiness made up complete (as well without purgatiues, as
with them) and fitted for Infusion.

The Bag is portable (in pocket or otherways) many Hundred Miles, and durable
in full vigor and virtue, thirty or forty days at least, yea many Months,
being made up without Raisons, so that any man may furnish himself therewith
in his travel or otherwise, and at his pleasure and leisure, when he comes
home, infuse and use it without Curiosity or Incumber.

For the Body thereof, let that be no Burden of Imputation to any Impeach of
the Reputation, seeing, as I have said, it Supercedes the Additaments which
many famous Medicines of other Forms need Bodying with all for apt taking and
vehieulation, in that being composed into potable Liquor, impregnated with the
Essential parts and Spirits (no whit evaporated with foreign heat) of every
Ingredient diffused in and incorporated with ordinary Drinks, there can be no
vehicle or better Conuoy of medicinable qualities into the Members and Remotes
of the body. The purchase of Panala is too cheap for so precious a medicine;
for the price is but five shillings (with directions for the use) and the same
serving for two Gallons of Ale will furnish two Patients for seven, or One 14.
days Physic, as aforesaid: so that a man may have two Doses or Draughts for
a Tester, which in other Medications is commonly doubled and many times trebled
for one Purge: but compounded without purgers, you have it for the moitie of
the charge, and this makes a most delicate Drink (of like quantity) of much
more true worth than Bragat or Metheglin.

Panala also supercedes and saues the charge of preparations, for cutting of
humors and of vehiculums, for diffusion and carriage into all parts of the body,
both which helps are necessarily required in most other sorts and forms of
Physic. Besides that, this sparing or temperate Diet, requisite in the use
hereof, saues more money in meat and Drink, then the cost this Physic comes
unto: and for the second Infusion of the same Bag, it lasts no less time, and
costs nothing you know but new Raisons, and Ale, yet is it of excellent use,
either for Meale-Drinke in the use of the other, or after the other is spent for
rectifying and confirming the State of the Body. For the new and Nude Infusion
compounded without Purgers, the proportion finds a man altering Physic for a
matter of two pence per Diem, (besides Ale) except it be made a Meal-drinke,
which in most cases is needless.

Touching the Time taken-vp in continuing the take of this Physic, I may say,
Sat cito, vt sat site, fit Medicatio, quae sat been: Good speed is evermore
best speed. But this salve may well be saved, here is seldom any Soar to need
it. For in Cautionare courses, for Prevention of Infirmities, it spends time,
but loses none, because it interrupts no business, save when the Inclemencie
of the Heavens give Caveat of Keepe-in, to avoid the injuries of ill weather,
which no wise man will upon any Natural Flux expose his body unto: and in the
Arrest of Sickness it is the Infirmity, not the Physic, that detaines him
within Doors, not so much for shelter and covert from the frowns and worse
effects of the Sky, as for the necessitated Dures enforced by the Disease:
besides, that if urgent occasions call forth into intemperate weather from
Cautionary courses, he may intermit a day or more, as in Cap. 6. is laid down.

Nor does the medicine given over, or ended after moderate continuance,
constipate or leave the body Costiue, ouer-dryed, heated, debilitated or
exhausted of Balsamique juices, nor affected with any distemper, ill Impression
or deprauing affects co^tracted or dimaning from the same (as is already
declared Cap. 9.) but well disposed, vigorous, active and full of Spirits.

He that is any thing verst in the Practique of Physic, may easily observe
and find, that Nature evermore best accords and cooperates with Medicines which
aggrate and oblectate the Senses, but shows her self auerse in refractary
reluctation against the displeasant, so that even Stomatiques, given for
comfort and fortification, if they be very ingrate, do bring forth little
Good, but in stead of subuening and helping, they subvert and hurt the
Ventricle: what fruit then can be expected from Physic, whose Disgust and
averseness to Taste and Stomach breed^s that nauseous loathing in Nature which
peruerts her operative Faculties in all parts of the Body?

Best practitioners therefore, to prevent all incongruences, and to gratify
the patient, do clarify, color, edulcorate, acidulate and aromati^e Syrupes,
Iulapes, Apozemes, Electuaries, and other Forms of physic, respectively,
palliating pills with gilding, when they cannot paliate their bitterness. For
when familiar Objects delight the Eye, recreate the Sensory of smelling, please
the Palate, comfort the Stomach, and exhilerate the Heart, (that Fountain of
Life,) they Sympathyze and side with Nature, eleuate the Spirits, stimulate and
stir up the languishing Appetite, rouse her drowsy Forces and Faculties
(vital and Animal) sopite in sickness, and resuscitate and refresh the
Native Heat which alone concocts, digests and calmes Diseases, and by
extenuating the Thick, and clensing the viscous Humors, and by expediting
Obstructions, faciliates and promotes the operations both of Food and physic,
insomuch that purges compounded of some Ingredients which of themselves would
subvert or disturb the Stomach, if they be condited, corrected and
accommodated with good Aromatiques, they are little or nothing offensive to the
principal parts, and more safely purge excrementitious Humors by Stool, as
also by vomit respectively.

My care therefore was so to compound my Panala, that besides the little Cost
and less Cumber, it neither offends the Eye with the loathed Object of a muddy
substance, nor the smell with ill vapor or savor, nor palate nor ventricle with
disgust or ingrate Relish, but it is a depured, clear, sweet, delicate and
singular Extract impregnated with the succulent Juices, sincere Spirits and
singular Virtues of Specifique Ingredients. Moreover, it is of a moderate
Temperature indifferently accommodable to every Age, Sex, and Constitution, and
so familiar and pleasing to the Sight, Smell, Taste and Stomach, and so
conformable to the principal Members, that the most curious palates and
daintiest Bodies may and do drink it, and digest its operations with Delight:
yet for all this will I not arrogate the title of a Purum Putum Areanu^ unto my
Panala, though considering the whole progress of preparations of the Potion
(from the growing of the Grain, to the drawing of the Drink) it may well merit
the esteem of a singular Extract and Spagyrique Medicine.

Much less will I be so absurd an Impudent to attribute unto one and the same
Infusion, founded upon irrational Empiricie or other confused Intention, the
potent Supercede of all other Physic, and so to gull the world or beget an
opinion, that my single Panala is simply an absolute Panacea, which instar
vniuersalis cujusdam vniuersalissimi, is able to cure all diseases in all
Persons, and at all Times promiscuously without other means. One Last fits not
the Size and Shape of every Foot, nor can any one Medicine be of that
admirable efficacy, that it can alone perform all the Intentions of Medication
in all Constitutions and Complexions (no less numerous and variable than
Faces) and in all Cases of Sickness without distinction: yet thus much give me
leave to affirm and say of it, though I do entirely honor the Fundamentalls
of Physic found in the most exact observations of our Forefathers (the
Grandees of Medicine) that for virtues and accommodations, this Potion it is
not easily paralleld; besides that, it has this special prerogative, that it
is in a manner a Compendium for all cures, the base and perpendicular that
measure all Triangles; or rather the Triangle which measures (even without
either of them) all Figures, and may easily be reduced to the equivalence of a
Circular Scale, or Sector accommodable and applicable to every Chart or
Dimension, since it is richly suited with preparatiues, evacuatiues, cordialls
and Rectifyers, and may easily be impregnated with the spirits of Spaw Waters,
with more salutary preualence than can be derived from crude springs, whose
far blazed fame superstition rings so loud.

A summary plain Direction for the Patients preparation and usage of Panala,
with the Cost and virtues thereof in general.
THe Bag of Ingredients is commonly here to be had of me ready bound up for
convenient carriage to any place in the Kingdom, the weight and bulk small,
the cost little, for I afford it for five shillings with Purgers, (for half
the money without) yet have I enlarged it for a bottle more of Liquor than
ordinary to last and serve one man a full fortnight, that it may be continued
two whole Quarters of the Moon.

With a pebble stone, a forked stick or other force, sink and keep down the
Bag of Ingredients to the bottom of a small Rundlet, usual Steane, Stand or
Ale kanne, and tun unto it two Gallons of New-ale, and put loose into the
Vessel three ounces of Raisons of the Sun (if there be none in the Bag)
clean washed and slit half through, yet not opened nor stoned.

Yest the Liquor very well and bung it up close, or, with a cloth cover the
Stand or open vessel, and shift the yest of this once in 6 or 7 days to
continue the Ale quick and sweet, keeping it from extreme cold in winter, and
from heat in summer.

The best time of the year to take this potion, is the Spring and the Fall of
the Leaf, yet it may conveniently be used at any other Season, so that the
Patient keep himself from the injuries of Wind, Rain, Heat and Cold.

It is commonly drunk after three days infusion, but if the drinking of it
be deferred twice so long it will be clearer and better.

Take it fasting in the morning, (half a pint or more at once) or after a
potcht Egg, or some other little repast, and two hours before Supper: you may
likewise drink it one or two hours before Dinner, and two or three hours
after Supper also, if you would purge much in few days: but mild working for
many days by moderate drinking is the best order.

In Winter scarre off the cold with a Tossed, and Nutmeg and Sugar if you will:
to prevent Night-rising and taking cold, it is not amiss to take it an hour
before you rise, when you are up and ready, and an hour or two before dinner
also if you please, and none after noone, and at meals the best is to forbear
it.

In fair weather and temperate Seasons, if the body be of ability, never
intermit or forbear your ordinary business, but rather, to further the
operation of the Potion, follow your outward or field affairs or exercise, but
both these must be moderate and between Sun and Sun: Nor is it amiss to
exercise the body in unseasonable weather also, provided this be done evermore
in this case within doors.

Let your meals be moderate, and always end them before your appetite bid you,
evermore rising with a good stomach and desire of eating more, and, so much
as, with conuenience of your calling and occasions, may well be, refrain meats
of ill juice and hard digestion: yet strong constitutions and bodies, inured
and accustomed to much labor, coorse fare or gross food, may use their
ordinary Diet for the quality or kind of meats, so that they exceed not in
the quantity: but raw fruits and very salt meats may not be admitted.

This Panala is a nourishing Potion, yet a gentle purger and clenser of the
Body of all ill Humors and Superfluities, by Stool, by Urine, and by Sweat, a
pleasant Curer, and a singular good preuenter of Crudities, Rheums,
obstructions, (three maine fountains of infinite Infirmities) and most other
maladies whereunto the body of man is subject.

It may with safe and good success be used of young children, tender women,
and weak bodies, both in sickness and before; for it is a comfortable
rectifier of the whole state of the Body.

But in Consumptions of the Spirits and solid parts, it cannot safely be
continued if it be made up with purging Ingredients, though without them it may
be compounded to be of excellent use for singular comfort and strength in such
wastings, and all other weakness.

This is the Sum and Substance of the whole Book.

Ad Beneuolos.
If Hackney-hosts prate lip-lash (humor-pleasings)
Guests t'intertaine, may freely vent sans Gages,
Then why not I word-gawdies, since non-leasings?
Coy chamber-chats to court quaint garb for pages?
For youngsters spruce terse rolls of rhet'rick writ?
Strong lines to line th'weak texture of my warks?
Plain Fustian here the Fresh-mans Cappe to fit,
There Inkhorne terms for Pedants puny Clarks;
Here Ale-froth (Turgent style) for barmy vains,
There Linsey-woolsey Stuff for Trauelliers,
Here phrases phalerate for Courtly Streines
There brisk Embellishments for Cauelliers:
Cramb biscoct for carps, for Momes mushro^ cold
For palate puffe-paste, bumbast for the Brain,
New coin for new-comes, for Eld th'antick mold,
For learned Lads Colors of richer Grain:
For shallows shails, fumes and Mercuriall flashes,
Pressed sulphur-fancies for quick vapourists,
Substanciate salts (extracts from lighter ashes)
And kernels for Sophian Centralists:
Hug, shrug, fleere, jibe and jeere, so th'umor please you,
The bent of my ambition is to ease you,
And send you iocund Health
To joy your louiall Wealth.
Ad Zoilum and Sciolum.
Art'lumpish, muddie, dull? do Spirits gross
Damp and bemould thy mind with musty dumps?
Associate's congregate, Comrades in Gross
But Lit'rates all, else ill the Turba jumps;
Then take Panala, Book I mean, not Broth,
(tho this does brush th'unfurbisht duskie brain)
And let Mas mime or Mome with Gobar-tooth
Read-out some lines, quite Byas native strain:
Odcombian music straight will crown the crowd
With jocund mirth and glee; There Is not a page
But canvast thus dispels each moodie cloud
With garb Sardonian, yea laughes Stentor gage
Will stretch thy Hypochondriques, if in Cue,
By d^nsing on the Text, thou Criticize,
And curious words, with Countenance a-skue
With quibs and quaeres fond Anatomize;
Thus scurui^ brows, this better cloers from clouds
Than craving scrapes of many fidling Crowds.
A Jove principium.
The Reins of Life and Death are in the Lord
Almighties hand, without his providence
Sparrow nor Hair does fall, (it is Christ's own word)
Much less does Man, the lucid Evidence
And pattern of his daily patronage:
Has Grief or Sickness then thee prostrate laid,
And for relief would (provident) engage
Thy resolution for Physic aid?
True-humbled first under Gods mighty Hand
With contrite penitence thy sins agnize,
His mercies crave, with conscience well scand
To him in Christ (the Lamb, blessed Sacrifice)
Thee reconcile: The Means then pray him bless,
And straight to Physic do thy self address.
Flectere si nequeu^t superos Acheronta mouebu^t.
Of secret sickness when some seizure rare
Or Symptoms strange do plunge the judgment poor,
Blind superstition then suggests despair
Of physickes aid from grave or learned lore;
Look-forth rings in the ear, rules in rude hearts
Some planet ill has struck, Fayries have taken,
Or miscreant Tongues, accursed Eyes, damned Arts,
Have plunged man in such plight to work his bane.
The wise man straight, or warped mother Mumble
Must be consulted with in this hard case:
To chatter Charms, or colored Cups to jumble
Their Vocator to fetch them trots a pace.
Thus fancies fond God and his good means slight
And Troth implied with Beliall do plight.
Vna cademque manus vulnus opemque feret.
Does spirit-griefe, or sickness corporal
Thy troubled mind or craised Body cumber,
With dints derived from causes natural
Or supernatural in weight or number?
To physic flying if thou do confide
Simply in Simples, drugs of rare esteem,
Or learned Higaeias Art, Thou art clear wide,
But wider far and wicked, if thou deem
That any Wizard with his Saintish, show
Of means, words, writings, colourably pure,
Or woman wise with superstitious Do,
Of senseless ceremonies can thee cure:
Gods hand that gave the wound, or way unto it,
Must give thee help, 'thout him no power can do it.
Ne Hercules contra duos.
The Patient, Physician and Disease
Do constitute a threefold combatance,
Each couplet siding ever does disseise
And quell th'Opponent with concomitance.
When Patients join in body and in mind
With Doctors Art, sickness is put to flight.
When ill Physicians, or in judgment blind,
Or careless, carry not their cures aright,
But erring'gainst Nature, with sickness side,
Such double force not able to sustain,
Naught save destruction can the sick betide.
But if the Patient fond through fancy vain
Side with the sickness, down then goes sir Doctor,
Against Infamy no Innocence gets Proctor.
Impar congressus Achilli.
Sole Nature, with selfe-Faculties (at first
By the Naturant infused) of Active Spirits,
Diseases potent in Man's bulk impressed
Encounters, combats, forces, foyles, forth-ferrets:
Yet recrudescence often her troop disbands,
Uneath concoct they what rebellious lurk;
And when impact ore-Ballasts all their hands
Do manicle, to weal how should she work?
But lighten straight her load, and break her Bands,
Shele grapple with Gigantine griefs, repeal
Deaths menaced doomes, where Artles-idle stands,
Expecting the aydlesse force, which Time does steal,
Till Nature nill, and Physic will not, work,
Bieres merely build to bear the corpse to th'kirke.
Bis orat, qui been laborat.
When pressed Obedience and industry pace
Concomitants close siding faithful prayer,
Prayer then (sure) purchases th'entrusted Grace
Of health and heavenly helps which man does shaer.
But th'idle verbalist, whose addle brain
Thinks for bare labor of a lip of babel
At Gods immediate hand supplies to gain
Sans mean and self deuoire (grant-seale and label)
To pine or perish in his want deserves
For disobedience to his Ordinance,
Who his best boones and blessings choice reserues
For dooers, the Industrious to advance.
He double prays, who laboring well pursues
Due means for good, ordained of God to use.
Plus Vltra.
He that with Clyster can the Costiue ease,
The stufe Intestines scour with rousing purge,
The stomach and confining parts release
Of Ballasts, which with greivances them urge,
Can slice a vein, and by the trifid sluice
Of sanguisuge diminish peccant blood,
Can dose a Dormatiue shall drive a Truce
To vagrant spirits, when want of sleep make wood,
Thinks himself worthy of the Doctor Chayer
Cause thus he Trots the road they daily plod;
But there is Plus vltra, ere he can repair
The craised Bower of the souls abode;
Treasures of blood and Radique humide st^re,
From depredation shield, Life balsm restore.
Natura non facit-saltum.
The sick are way-farers (with cumber laden
Of trashie relics) bound for pilgrimage,
Physic an Angel, that lends wholesome Leaden,
Lightens their burdens, yields kind aequipage,
Cleers, plains, makes passable, safe guards their ways,
With brizes cool corrects soultrie Heats,
Shades with vmbrels from Phoebus torrid Rays,
Cold, wet and wind, and dirt and dust defeats,
With cord'al food and rich Borachios Arms,
Thirst, hunger, faintings, weariness auerts,
From bainfull Cates, false baits, sly Siren charms,
The Appetite, Senses, Fancy, all diuerts:
Thus with more ease, less time and toil they trip i^
Yet at an instant look not they should skip it.
FINIS.

