A PEACEABLE WARNING, TO THE SUBJECTS IN SCOTLAND: Given in the Year of GOD
1638.

ABERDENE, IMPRINTED BY EDW. RABAN, The Year above written.

BON ACCORD
Insignia Vrbis abredonie*

Aberdeen coat of arms

To the most Noble, My very Special Good LORD, My L: Marquis of HVNTLEY, Earl
of AENZIE, Lord GORDON and BADENOCH, etc. One of his Majesty's most honorable
Privy Counsel, Grace and Peace.
Most Noble, and My very Special Good LORD,
YOur upright love of the TRVETH professed by the REFORMED CHVRCH, now openly
known and notified to many, but to me many years ago evidentlie certain,
as it does undoubtedly portend and promise to all your Friends, the
plentiful Blessings of GOD upon your Lo. and your most Religious Lady, and
your most noble Progeny and House; so likewise it gayneth unto your Lo. the
true affections of those who fear GOD according to His word. Your worldly
Greatness may purchase you outward attendance; but your Piety and Humanity
do command inward Benevolence, and make conquest of the will and affections of
men, to do you honor and service. And, which is most of all, this grace given
to you of GOD, is an Earnest of Eternal Happiness. Your zeal of GOD, lest it
should be without knowledge, has carried you to an accurate trial of all
things, and to a wise holding of that which is best. And for better
information of others also, in these present Dissensions and commotions, Your
Lo. lay de upon me this piece of pains, which I humbly lay down at your Lo.
feet. And I pray GOD Almighty, the GOD of Truth, the LORD of Peace Himself,
who has commanded us to love Truth and Peace, to make us all of one mind,
according to JESUS CHRIST and to give us Peace always, and by all means:
which is also heartily wished to your good Lo. and to all yours, By

OLD ABERDENE, 6 April, 1638. Your Lo: true Servant, JOHN FORBES OF CORSE.

PREFACE OF THE AUTHOR, TO THE CHRISTIAN READER.
IN some Few written Copies of the first sudden draught of this WARNING, before
it was perfected, some haske speeches were found, and have been very hasklie
interpreted. I love not to be offensive to any; and I do playnlie and
openly disallow all other Copies, and hold to this only perfect Edition, in
a meek and calm style: beseeching my de we Contrymen, to pardon what was
amiss in any Copy, or what perhaps may be yet amiss in this first public
and only true Edition; which I do presens unto them, with a loving and
peaceable heart, aiming only at Truth and Peace. And let not any exception
against any weakness of the Warner, hinder them from impartial consideration
of the Warning it self. The Apostle has told us, that the wrath of man,
works not Iam. 1. 20.
the rigteousnesse of GOD. Therefore, let us all lay aside wrath, and bring
our best concurrance to cure this miserable division, and in all singleness
and humbleness of mind, contribute thereunto the best overtures which it
shall please GOD to put into our hearts, if possibly this fearful rupture may
be solidlie and peaceably remedied. Which to obtain, let us all search and
try our ways, and turn again to the LORD. Let us lift up our heart with our
hands unto GOD in the Heavens. Now, the Lam. 3. 40.
LORD GOD of Truth and Peace, who has told us by His holy Prophet, That He
will restore Iere^. 30.
Health unto His CHVRCH, even when Her sore is incurable, bind up this breach,
which is great like Lam. 2. 13.
the Sea: But GOD dries the Sea, and to Him all things are possible. Blessed
be the LORD. His Grace be with thee, that thou may love Truth and Peace.

Augustinus Epist. 7. ad Marcellinum. Ego fateor, me ex eorum numero esse
conari, qui proficiendo scribunt, and scribendo proficiunt.
A Peaceable WARNING, To the Subjects in SCOTLAND, Given in the year of GOD
1638.
CHAP. 1. A true Historical Narration, Concerning our National Confession of
Faith, registrated in Parliament: and concerning that other little Confession,
called General; which was also called The King's Confession, and the Negative
Confession, containing the Oath.
MASTER JOHN KNOX of happy memory, with others his Fellow Laborers, in the
Reformation of Religion in SCOTLAND, did present in name of the National
reformed Kirk of this Realm, unto the Parliament; a Confession of Faith,
distinguished into 25 Articles: which was read in face of Parliament, and
ratified by the three Estates, in the year of GOD 1560, as a Doctrine grounded
upon the infallible Word of GOD. And again, the same Confession and fore-sayde
Act made in ratification thereof, were ratified, approved, and authorized, in
the first Parliament of KING JAMES the sixth of blessed memory, holden at
EDINBVRGH, in December, Anno 1567, as it is extant in the public Printed Acts
of the said Parliament; and Acts were made in that and others succeeding
Parliaments, for mayntayning of the said Confession, and against the
gayn-sayers, and disobedient, as you may read in the Acts of those
Parliaments, Act. 4. 5. 6. 9. 35. 45. 46. 47. 99. 106. etc.

Yet still with that modesty and ingenuitie which the Estates, and all
professing JESUS CHRIST, and His holy EVANGELL in this Realm, did declare, in
their Epistle written to their own native Contrymen, and to other Kingdoms
and Nations professing with them the same JESUS CHRIST, and prefixed as a
Preface to the Latin Edition of the said Confession, as it is extant in the
Book called Corpus and Syntagma confessionum, etc. where their words are
these; Si quis in hac nostra Confessione articulum vel sententiam repugnantem
sancto DEI Verbo notaverit, nosque illius scripto admonuerit, promittimus DEI
gratia, ex DEI ore, id est, ex sacris Scripturas, nos illi satisfacturos, aut
correcturos, si quis quid erroris inesse probaverit. DEVM enim in conscientiis
nostris testem advocamus, nos ex animo omnes sectas, Haereses, omnesque falsae
doctrinae doctores detestari, etc: that is; If in this our Confession any man
shall note any Article or Sentence repugnant to GOD'S holy Word, and shall by
writing admonish us thereof, we promise, by the grace of GOD, to give him
satisfaction, out of GOD'S mouth, that is, out of the holy Scriptures, or to
amend it, if any shall prove any error to be therein: for we in our
consciences call GOD witness, that we do from our heart detest all Sects,
Heresies, and all teachers of false Doctrine, etc.

Now, it being ordained by public Laws above cited, that all Recusants, or
suspected of Papistrie within this Realm, should give confession of their
faith according to the form approved in Parliament, and should assent and
subscrybe to the Articles of the true and Christian Religion, established by
the King's Laws; it was found, that many masked Papists did promise, swear,
subscrybe, and, for a time, use the holy Sacraments in the Kirk,
deceatfullie, against their own conscience; mynding hereby, first under the
external cloak of Religion, to corrupt and subvert secretly GOD'S true
Religion within the Kirk, and afterward, when time might serve, to become
open enemies, and Persecuters of the same, under vain hope of the Pop's
dispensation. Therefore, a certain Reverend Learned Brother, (whose name shall
hereafter appear) in his zeal to remeade that evil, for discovering and
barring out such dissembling and equivocating Seducers, and Persecuters, did
draw up a form of consenting to the said National Confession, by way of a
General Confession of the truth thereof, in all points, and a general
rejection of all contrary Religion, and Doctrine; with a special rehearsal
and refusal of sundry Popish Erroures, and Superstitions, particularly
expressed; and an acknowledging of this true Reformed Kirk, with an Oath, to
continue in the obedience of the Doctrine and Discipline thereof: and,
according to their calling, and power, to defend the fame, all the days of
their life: and to keep duty to the King's Majesty; with solemn
Protestation of the sincere meaning of them that do make this Confession,
Promise, Oath, and Subscription. And for making easier way to this General
Confession, the King's Majesty was moved to subscrybe the same, and his
House-holde, to give example to others: and a Mandate was drawn from his
Majesty, commanding and charging all Commissioners and Ministers, to crave the
same Confession of their Parochiners, under the pain of forty pounds, to be
taken from their Stipend. Subscryved with his Majesty's hand, at
Holy-roode-house, the second day of March, in the year of GOD 1580; reckoning
the year to end at the 25 day of March, but beginning the year at January,
it was 1581, and of the King's reygne the 14 year.

There were there-after, in the same year 1581, holden two General or
National Assemblies of the Kirk of SCOTLAND, one at GLASGOW, in the Month of
April, another at EDINBVRGH, in October: In both which there is mention made
of this General Confession.

In GLASGOW ASSEMBLY, in the 9 Session, after the end of the Book of
Policy, are these words, Anent the Confession lately set forth by the Kings
Majesty's Proclamation, and Subscrybed by his Highness, the Kirk in one voice
acknowledges the said Confession, to be a true, Christian, and faithful
Confession, to be agreed unto by such as truly profess Christ, and his true
Religion; and the tenor thereof to be followed out, as the same is laid out
in the said Proclamation. Thus far are the words of that Act of GLASGOW
ASSEMBLY.

Follows the Act of EDINBVRGH ASSEMBLY, Session 5. For as much as the King's
Majesty, with the advyse of his Counsel, has set out, and proclaimed, a
Godly and Christian Confession of Faith, to be embraced by all his true
Subjects, and by the same expresslie given commandment to the Ministry, to
proceed against whatsoever persons that will not acknowledge and subscrybe the
same: wherein great negligence has been seen, far by the duty and office
of true Pastors: Herefore the Kirk, and the Assembly present, has enjoined
and concluded, That all Ministers and Pastors within their bounds, with all
expedient and possible diligence, execute the tenor of his Majesty's
Proclamation, betwixt this and the next Synodall Assembly of every Province,
and present before the Synodall Assemblies, to the Moderators thereof, their
duetifull diligence in this behalf, to be reported to the next General
Assembly of the Church; under the pain of deprivation of the saydes Ministers
from the Function of the Ministry, that are found negligent herein. Thus
far are the words of that Act of that National Assembly holden at
EDINBVRGH, where the penner of the said General Confession, was Moderator for
the time. Heerevpon followed there after some more Subscriptions.

This Confession, because it was set out in the King's Name, was called
commonly, the King's Confession: and because it insisteth most in rejecting of
Erroures, it is also called the Negative Confession.

CHAP. II. Concerning the Authority of the said little or short Confession,
called General, and Negative.
THE Authority of any such Writing, is either Divine or Humane; for in so
far as any Writing or Preaching of man has in it GOD'S undoubted Truth,
revealed in His holy SCRIPTVRES, it may be said, or that Truth there-in
propounded, may be said to have Authority Divine: because that Truth does
obliedge us, although no humane authority were added thereunto. This sort of
Authority, does absolutely appertain only to the Canonicke SCRIPTVRES of
the OLD and NEW TESTAMENTS. No other Writing, or Preaching, has it
Absolutely, but only Conditionally, and with restriction: to wit, if it
has, and in so far only as it has the same true Doctrine which is
contained in the holy SCRIPTVRES. And, there-fore, all such Wrytinges, or
Sermons, are subject to examination, by the SCRIPTVRES. Neither are we
obliedged to acknowledge them, or any part of them, as Divine Truth, but in
so far as they propound evidentlie the same Doctrine which is delivered in
the holy SCRIPTVRES. And if any thing in Them be found repugnant to holy
SCRIPTVRE, we ought to reject it, to correct and amend it, as our
Progenitoures worthily professed in their Epistle praefixed to their NATIONAL
CONFESSION. Neither can any humane Ordinance, Act, Oath, Promise, or
Subscription, make that to be the Word of GOD, or the true meaning thereof,
which before that Ordinance, Act, Oath, Promise, or Subscription, was not the
Word of GOD, nor the true meaning thereof.

Humane Authority, is either Private or Public. I call Private Authority of
any Writing, or Sermon, that which it has from the credit, and estimation
where-in the Author, or consenter, is had, in respect of his Learning, Piety,
Gravitie, Judgment, Diligence, Experience, etc. such is the Authority of the
Wrytinges, and Sermons, of fandric Learned men, both Ancient and M^derne. And
in this sort that short CONFESSION has respectful Authority, in respect of
the Learning and Piety of the Penner thereof, which was Master JOHN CRAIG of
happy memory, Preacher to the King's Majesty at that time; and in respect
that many well-affected Christians did approve it by their Subscriptions. But
by this Authority we are no more tied unto this CONFESSION, than we are to
any part approven by many good Christians, of the Wrytinges of Ambrose, or
Augustine, or Luther, or Calvine, or Beza, or any other Reverende Divine.
Neither does the particular Obligation of those Subscrybers extend beyond
their own persons, and lyfe-tymes, expressed in that CONFESSION: the example
only appertayning to others, and imitable by others, so far only as the
Word of GOD, and the Rules there-in delivered, concerning our Faith, and
Christian liberty, and practice, do direct.

Public Humane Authority, is either Civil or Ecclesiastical. And both
these sorts in things lawful, that is, not repugnant to Divine Authority,
are so backed, and fortified, by Divine Authority, as the contempt of them
redoundeth highly against Divine Authority. And thus these Authorities are in
such sort Humane, as they are also, in some consideration, DIVINE.

Let us consider, what such Authority this SHORT CONFESSION once had, and what
it now has.

Supreme Authority Civil in SCOTLAND, is either Royal or Legal: For although
the public Laws be the King's Royal Laws, yet because the King may give
Mandates, or Dispensations, or Commissions, which depend only upon his
Royal pleasure, and are not of the nature of fixed Laws; how-so-ever he
ought to be obeyed also in them: There-fore, this distinction will not be
unfitting for our purpose. This CONFESSION had never Authority Legal: for it
was never ratified by Act of Parliament, as was our NATIONAL CONFESSION, which
is registrated in the Acts of Parliament. But all the Civil Authority that
this SHORT GENERAL CONFESSION had at any time, was only Royal, by the
King's Mandate, where-of we shall speak more a little after, GOD willing.

Ecclesiasticke Authority, by two National Synodes, was given to this
Confession; and that twofolde: the one immediate, the other mediate.

The Authority Synodicall immediate, was that Approbation where-by those
Synodes declared this Confession, to be a true, Christian, Faithful, and
Godly Confession; and, that such as truly profess CHRIST, and His true
Religion, ought to agree thereunto. This Approbation, being in matter of
Faith, and of contrary Error, which in Religion is not mutable by any humane
Authority, neither depends thereon; and the agreement to the said
Confession, being declared by those Synodes, to be incumbent upon such as
truly profess CHRIST, and His true Religion, which is a common description,
showing equal obligation upon all Christians: this Approbation, I say, in
these considerations, tending to manifest a Divyne Authority of the
Confession, or Doctrine thereof, does in respect of the matters so approven,
equally obliedge all Christians; neither does it absolutely obliedge any,
because such humane wrytings have not absolute Divyne Authority: yet it has
by that Synodicall Approbation, a respectfull Authority, so far as we are
obliedged respectfully to reverence the Judgment of a National Synod of the
KIRK of SCOTLAND, in matters substantial. But this respect gives no power to
the Synod, to make true that which is not in it self true, by authority of
Holy Scripture; neither to make that repugnant to GOD'S Word, which before in
it self was not repugnant thereunto. I speak now of matters substantial,
aequallie incumbent upon all Christians. Neither are we by this Authority
obliedged to hearken in matters of this nature to those two Synodes, more than
we are obliedged to hearken to the former or latter National Synodes of the
same KIRK, or to any National Synod of any forraygne Reformed Kirk, or to
any of the Ancient Councels of Orthodoxe Fathers. All such Obligation is
Conditional, and with Restriction, as has been before declared. Neither did
those Synodes intend to exeeme this SHORT CONFESSION from lawful examination,
by the Word of GOD, and by the Articles of the National Confession of
SCOTLAND, registrated in PARLIAMENT.

The Ecclesiastical Authority mediate, which those Synodes did give to this
SHORT NEGATIVE CONFESSION, was their Ordinance where-by they appointed and
enjoined all Ministers, within their jurisdiction at that time, to give
obedience to his Majesty's Commandment anent the said CONFESSION, within such
a time, under pain of Deprivation. Nothing is spoken in this their Statute,
but in relation to the King's Mandate, and for that time. There is no mention
of Perpetuity, or time to come, or of any other immediate injunction, for
craving this CONFESSION of the people, except that only which did immediately
flow from his Majesty: so there was never any Constitution Ecclesiastical
immediate, for exacting or requyring of Subscription to this CONFESSION, but
only Mediate by intervention of the King's Mandate: which standing, the
matter and vigor of that Synodicall Constitution remains: and the Mandate
expyring, or being taken away, that Synodicall Constitution does likewise
expyre, and cease to be of force. Causa sublata, tollitur constitutio ex
causa illa orta. 1. qu. 7. quod pro remedio, in glossa. Cessante.

But that Mandate is now long ago expyred, and utterly taken away:
there-fore, what-so-ver Public Authority, either Civil or Ecclesiastical,
did at any time appertain to this SHORT GENERAL NEGATIVE CONFESSION, for
particular obligation of the Ministers of SCOTLAND, to exact of their
Parochiners, Subscription to the same, or for obliedging the Parochiners to
subscrybe thereunto, is now long ago expyred, and taken away.

That Royal Mandate, was no perpetual Law, but a temporary Mandate, given
out in his Majesty's minor age; he being in the fyfteenth year of his age
then current. There-after he disallowed the same, in his ripe age, as is
evident by his Majesty's own Speech, in the Conference which his Majesty had
with the Bisshops, and others of the Clergy of ENGLAND, AT HAMPTON COURT, Anno
1603, in the second days Conference: Where it being moved by a certain
Doctor, That this PROPOSITION, [The intension of the Minister, is not of the
essence of the Sacrament] might be added unto the Book of Articles, the
rather because that some in ENGLAND had preached it, to be essential; his
Majesty utterly dislyked that motion; thinking it unfit to thrust into the
Book every Position Negative; which would both make the Book swell into a
volume as big as the BIBLE, and also confound the Reader: Bringing for example,
the course of one Master CRAIG, (I am using the words published in the Printed
Sum of that Conference) in the like case in SCOTLAND, who with his, I
renounce and abhor, his detestations, and abrenounciations, he did so amaze
the simple people, that they, not able to conceive all those things, utterly
gave over all, falling back to Popery, or remaining still in their former
ignorance: Yea, if I, said his Majesty, should have been bound to his form,
the Confession of my Faith, must have been in my Table-booke, not in mine
head. Out of these his Majesty's words, concerning this Negative Confession,
ye may easily gather his mind, concerning that Mandate drawn some-tyme from
his Royal hand, for exacting Subscription to the said Confession: to wit,
that he did utterly disallow, and annull it: Ad intentionem Mandantis
recurrendum est. Extra, de rescriptis, cap. 8. ad aures, in glossa. More-over;
Although his Majesty had not in his lyfe-tyme made void that Mandate, as he
did; yet now it were expyred, with His Royal Breath: Morte Mandatoris expirat
Mandatum. Extra, de officio and potestate judicis delegati, cap. 19. relatum
est in glossa.

Hence it is most manifest, that this Negative Confession has not, at this
present time, any public Authority at all: neither are the Ministers now
obliedged to require, nor the Parochiners to give Subscription thereto.

CHAP. III. Whether it be convenient for the CHVRCH, at this time, that this
Negative Confession be authorized, and Subscription there-to required.
SAVING better judgment, it seems not to be convenient. And that for the
Reasons expressed in the CONFERENCE at HAMPTON COURT. And because of some
ambiguities, and no small Difficulties there-in.

It is wyselie said in our National Confession, in the 18 Article, (noted 19
in the Printed Parliament) that, when Controversy happens, for the right
understanding of any place, or sentence of Scripture, or for the reformation
of any abuse within the Kirk of GOD, we ought not so much to look what men
before us have said, or done, as unto that which the holy Ghost vniformlie
speaks, within the body of the Scriptures, and unto that which CHRIST JESUS
Himself did, and commanded to be done.

And it is also to be considered, that where-as we ought to be busy, in
instructing the simple people, in the positive grounds of the Truth, it
seems very inexpedient, to be explayning to them, unknown points of
Heresy; which were set down for masked Papists.

More-over; By the Interpretations which some of our BRETHREN do give us, in
their Printed Books, they condemn Episcopacie, and the five PEARTH Articles,
as Abominable, and Antichristian; and do affirm, Sitting at the Communion, to
be the only lawful gesture. These Doctrines how can we receive, without
condemning the Doctrine and Practice of sound Antiquity, and of many Famous
Reformed Kirks, in Britane, France, Germany, and elsewhere? And were it not a
pitiful case, that any of us being in those Countries, might not
communicate with those Reformed Kirkes?

And how does this Oath and Covenant, about these things, agree with the xx
Article of our National Confession, (noted 21 in the Printed Parliament, Anno
1567) where power is denied to General Councels, to make any perpetual Law,
which GOD before had not made?

CHAP. IV. Concerning the keeping or breaking of an Oath; With AN EXHORTATION
to CHARITY and PEACE.
IN so far as the matter of an OATH is lawful or unlawful, pleasing or
displeasing to GOD, it may, and ought, to be kept, or broken. When Herod
beheaded JOHN THE BAPTIST, for keeping of his Oath, he added sin to sin.
But DAVID did well, in sparing Nabal, and his Family, whom he had sworn to
destroy: and he blessed GOD, for the good counsel of Abigaill, where-by he
was diverted from performing that Oath.

Let us not judge hardly, or uncharitably, one of another, nor break the
Bond of Peace, and Christian Brotherhood, for the diversity of Opinions
amongst us, in these oeconomicall and rituall Controversies. But whereto we
have already attained, let us walk by the same rule, let Phil. 3. 16.
us mind the same thing; with all lowliness and meekness, with
long-suffering; forbearing one another in love; endeavoring to keep the unity
of the Spirit, in the bond of Peace. Ephesians. 4. 2. 3.


Now, the ALL-MIGHTIE GOD of Truth and Peace, illuminate our eyes, and unite
us all in the knowledge of His Truth, in the unity of Faith, in the Bond of
Love and Peace, in CHRIST JESUS, our LORD: To Whom be Glory for ever:

AMEN.
AVG. EIIT. 5. AD MARCELLINVM. Non itaque verum est quod dicitur, semel recte
factum nullatenus esse mutandum. Mutata quippe temporis causa, quod recte ante
factum fuerat, ita mutari vera ratio plerumque flagitat; vt cum ipsi dicant,
recte non fieri si mutetur, contra veritas clamet, recte non fieri nisi
mutetur. Quia vtrumque tunc erit rectum, si erit pro temporum varietate
diversum.
FINIS.

