A FRVITFVLL SERMON, Made by the Reverend and Learned Mr. JOHN FORBES.

Pastor of the English Company of Merchants adventurers at Delft.

Published by some of his flock out of sincere affection for common good.

AT AMSTERDAM, Printed by Richard Plater, 1626.

Academiae Cantabrigiensis Liber.
Cambridge University blazon or coat of arms

A fruitful Sermon upon 2. Cor. Cap. 13. verse. 5.
Prove your selves, if ye be in the faith; examine your selves: know ye not
your own selves? that Jesus Christ is in you except ye be reprobates.
IT is no vvonder that in all ages and especially in this sinful and profane
age wherein we now live, there has been and now is so great and universal a
contempt of the blessed ministry of Christ, as of a base and Contemptible
thing: when an Apostle, and such an Apostle, as Paul: had so much a do to
vindicate his ministry from the Contempt and base account thereof amongst the
Corinths. notwithstanding that they had been converted thereby, and the signs
of an Apostle had been so powerfully wrought by him amongst them.

For if the weakness and infirmity of his flesh and outward estate worldly,
did so blind the Corinthians eyes that they could not perceave the divine power
of Christ's spirit in so weak a vessel, what marveil is it, that succeeding
ages, and this present fleshly age, (judging according to the flesh of such as
are far inferior to Paul in grace) do not behold that heavenly power which
accompanyeth their ministry.

The grief of this vanity were easy to be borne if it were only the profane
worldlings that did so, seeing no natural man is able to discern the things of
Gods Spirit: 2. Cor. 2. 14.
But its a more lamentable error, when it falls in such as profes the truth,
and do uphold this ministry, and reap the sweet and unspeakable fruits
thereof, to esteem so baselie of that which is the power of God to their
salvation, if ever they be to be saved. Yet this example of that church which
was not inferior in any thing to other churches 2. Cor. 12. 13.
by the Ap. Paul's pains amongst them, so comtemptiblie speaking of him, who
was not in 2. Cor. 12. 11.
any thing inferior to the very chief Apostles, that his presence 2. Cor.
10, Cap 1 and 10. verse.
was base and weak and his speech of no value, may serve to teach al ministers
patience under the like cross: but withal, as Paul, (who was glad when he
was weak and they were strong) did play the 2. Cor. 13 9. 2. Cor. 12. 11.
fool in boasting of him self, for the defense of his authority and power of
his ministry, not because of any ambitious desire of vaineglorie, but only
to procure their edification, that by their contempt of his ministry they
should not frustrate themselves of the blessed fruit thereof; even so, the
faithful ministers of Christ in this age, have more then just cause with Paul
to speak somewhat for themselves: not vainelie for their own creditie sake,
but only to prevent the like danger in their hearers, upon the like contempt
of their ministry, knowing that the same causes, still produce the like
effects.

In doing this; as it is necessary, so it shall be sufficient, to use no more
Apollogie then is contained in this one verse of this text. As being the
strongest argument whereby not only Paul forced the Corinthians to confess
the mighty strength of Christ in his ministry toward them, but also whereby
all true and faithful Pastors, must convince the conscience of their hearers
that they are not reprobate Pastors. The maine scope and force of the Apostles
argument being punctuallie taken up, is this. You Corinthians must either
acknowledge the divine virtue and force of my ministry, or the^ ye your selves
must be reprobates? but, we trust ye are not reprobates neither will ye have
us think so, therefore ye must acknowledge the virtue of our ministry.

Thus does he reduce them to a necessity either of acknowledging him not to be
a reprobate minister, but such an one in whom Christ did speak, or then of
acknowledging themselves to be reprobate Christians, without faith and without
Christ, the evidence of the truth and soundnes of his argument, we shall (God
willing) manifest in the particular opening thereof.

For the clear understanding of the Apostles meaning we are first to consider
what has gone before, and how this verse depends or cohereth with the former.

Two arguments have been used by the Apostle to show why he behooved to
manifest to the Corinthians the authority of his ministry, in not sparing them
at his coming again. The first was because they were lawfully convinced of
obstinacy, having been now twice or rather thrice admonished, and therefore he
behooved to proceed against them with sharpnes, if they did not now repent
before his coming, even according to the law of God, which ordains that in
the mouth of two Deuteronomy. 19. verse. 15.
or three witnesses every word shall stand.

The second argument was this: They who having felt Christ to be mighty in them
by my ministry do yet seek a proof of Christ speaking in me, must needs have
it in sharpnes to make them know me to be an Apostle of Christ; But ye
Corinthians do yet after your conversion seek an experience of Christ speaking
in me: Therefore you must have a sharper proof, seeing ye acquiesse not in that
which ye have already, and reverence not my admonitions given you upon that
proof which ye have of Christ's power in me.

To show yet farther the equity of this threatening upon this ground he lays
down an assertion of the power of Christ in his ministry toward them,
affirming that Christ in his ministry toward them was not weak but mighty in
them, and therefore this their doing was nothing but a tempting of Christ's
power in him, even as the people of Israel in the wilderness after sufficient
proof of the mighty power of God in Moses by the miracles wrought in Egypt, by
leading them safely through the redd sea which overwhelmed their enemies, by
the waters given them out of the Rock etc. did (notwithstanding of all these
and much more) tempt the Lords power desiring yet a farther evidence thereof,
by covering them a table in the wilderness and giving them flesh to eat, as
though all the preceding wonders had been no sufficient proof of Gods almighty
power: Even so the Corinthians, having had sufficient evidence and testimony
of Christ speaking in Paul, by his mighty working in themselves: yet for all
this did esteem Paul but base and weak and his words of no value, and so
forced him to give them a sharper experience of Christ speaking in him to their
farther grief, if upon this evidence past they would not reverence his words
nor obey his warnings; but would yet tempt Christ in him for a farther proof of
his power.

Now before the Apostle prove this which he has affirmed touching the might of
Christ in them by his ministry (perceaving the chief ground and cause of this
their foolish judgment, to be the weakness and poor estate of the Apostle in
the flesh) he first removed this error, and then confirms his assertion.

The remooving of this error is by way of Anticipation, answering that which
he knew they stumbled at, and might object unto him after this manner: how
can thou show or we fear any might or power of Christ in thee toward us,
who art thy self so weak in Christ and destitute of all strength? The Apostle
answers this by a distinction and confirms it by the like example in Christ
himself, for he denies not simply, but confesses himself to be weak in
Christ, but that this weakness was only according to the flesh,
notwithstanding whereof he was mighty with Christ by the heavenly and divine
power of the spirit of God in him, and in this he was like his lord and master
Christ, who as concerning the flesh was weak indeed, having taken our nature
upon him with all the infirmities thereof except sin, and according to this
weakness did suffer death and was crucified, who notwithstanding lives again
by the power of his Godhead, by the which he mightily raised himself from the
dead. So that even as Christ in himself was weak in, or according to the
flesh, and yet was mighty in the spirit or according to his divine nature:
so also his servants and messengers in him are weak in the flesh and in all
fleshly power, but are alive or mighty with him by the power of his spirit in
them.

This conformity of Christ's ministers with Christ himself in fleshly weakness
and spiritual power is carefully to be marked, not only against the
sacriligious usurpation of both powers or swords by the Pope as Christ's vicar,
but also against the corruption which originallie flowing from his practice
has yet too great place in reformed churches? Its Gods will that the
messengers of his truth should carry that heavenly treasure in earthen
vessels that the excellency Cor. 2. cap. 4. verse. 7.
of the power may be of God and not of them. For the 2. Cor, 2. cap. 10. verse.
4.
weapons of their warfare are not carnal but spiritual, mighty (not through
men either themselves or others but only) through God to cast down strong
houlds etc. So 1 Cor. 1. cap. 3. verse. 5
that nether is he that planteth nor he that waters any thing but only God
that gives the increase. And hereof Christ himself in the days of his
ministry was a livelie pattern, in shunning all wordly perferment, and
disclayming all civil authority, walking in great weakness outward as touching
the flesh, eve^ from his birth to his death, armed with no carnal might or
fleshly power, but only with the heavenly and spiritual power of his
divine nature.

And even as his baseness and weakness in the flesh made the world to despise
him notwithstanding the infinite power of his divine nature: so in all ages and
now, do most men stumble at the weakness of his ministers in fleshly things
belonging to this world, notwithstanding of the spiritual power of Christ in
their ministry.

Now the Apostle having thus answered their objection, he comes to prove his
former assertion, to wit. That Christ in his ministry was not weak toward
them but was mighty in them, so that this their seeking of a farther proof of
Christ speaking in him was nothing but a sinful tempting of Christ, and that
the proof which he should give them behooved to be sharp and bitter unto them
in not sparing them at his coming. If before his coming they did not reverence
his words, and yeald obedience to his admonitions, upon the proof bypast in
themselves of Christ's mighty power toward them in his ministry. The argument
of confirmation is drawn from their own testimonies, grounded upon their own
knowledge and experience in themselves, which testimony the Apostle does
forcibly constrain the^ to yeald, by an argument taken from the woeful
consequence which must necessary follow upon the contrary, the consequence
being, that if they acknowledge not this experience in themselves of Christ's
power in his ministry toward them, then they themselves must be reprobate
Christians, but because many carelessly and negligentlie do pass by the right
consideration and observation of the powerful effects of the ministry of the
Gospel in themselves, and so do fall in this sin of the Corinthians,
despising that which they should highly esteem of, the Apostle therefore
refers not the proof of his assertion to what they would vnadvisedlie say
and witness of this might of Christ toward them in his ministry, but unto
their testimony upon sufficient trial and examination of themselves in
themselves: upon which he boldly affirms that they shall either find his
ministry powerful, or themselves reprobats.

If then we will consider this argument in all the particularities therein
contained, there be 4 things to be marked of us: the 1 is, The trial and
examination of themselves. the 2 is, These things whereof they are to take
trial in themselves. the 3 is, the argument remooving all excuse of ignorance,
or pretenses of impossibilities of discerning these things in themselves. The 4
is, The argument it self, whereby the Apostle draws them to a necessity of
acknowledging the power of Christ in his ministry toward them, from the hard
consequence that must follow upon the contrary. Before we speak of these
particulars, its necessary that first we mark and consider the maine points
of the Apostles doctrine in this place, first laying this supposition that the
hearers are true Christians and not reprobates, he concludes absolutely that
they must have proof and experience of the mighty power of Christ in the
ministry of those men by whom they are either first called, or afterward
confirmed in grace.

Thereupon he seems evidently to conclude these positions followinge. First
where no proof of Christ's power in the ministry is found or felt by the
hearers, either the Teacher must be a rebrobate Teacher, or the hearers
reprobate hearers. Secondly that it is impossible, that those who are the elect
of God can be without sense and feeling of Christ's mighty power unto salvation
in those who are the true ministers of the Gospel. Thirdly, That want of sense
and feeling (in the hearers) of this power of Christ in the ministry of his
faithful servants, does evidently evince such hearers to be reprobates.
Lastly, That those ministers in whose ministry the hearers (being of Gods
elect) do find no sense or evidence of Christ's power unto salvation must needs
be reprobate ministers. For the true ministry of 1, Cor. 1 24
Christ Jesus is the power of God unto salvation to all that are to be Ibidem.
18.
saved and is foolishnes to none but such as perish. And if it be not the
power of God to them that are saved; It must needs follow, that that man's
ministry is not of God. These general positions shall be most clear and evident
unto us after the exposition of the 4 former particular points contained in the
Apostles argument, whereof we are now to speak. The 1 point is the trial
whereunto the Apostle does invite them, wherein 2 things are specially to be
observed. The 1 is, the action it self of trial or examination. The 2 is, the
subject or persons whom he wills them to try. Concerning the action, it is
not only a comme^dable, but also a most necessary duty to be observed of
every man, before he pronounce sentence or pass his judgment upon any thing,
but specially upon the things of God, and his worship in his ordinances,
either in rejecting or admitting, condemming or approoving, for hereby we are
preserved, not only from that great sin of sinistrous and rash judgment,
but also from that great folly that falls in many, of forsaking that which
is for our good, and embracing that which is for our hurt, and so consequently
are kept from doing wrong both to our selves and others. The truth hereof we
may evidently see in these Corinthians, who despised and contemned the blessed
ministry of Paul who was the faithful Apostle of Christ, and did reverence and
highly esteem the deceitful ministers of Satan, only because they
neglected this examination and trial, and hereof also it comes daily to
pass, that many fall in that heavy sin wherewith Christ upbraided the Jews
saying. I am come in my fathers name and ye receave me not, if another shall
come in his own name him ye will receave. Happy therefore are they who follow
the direction of the Aposile Io. In not believing every spirit, but trying the
spirits whether they be of God or not. For many false prophets have in former
ages, do at this present, and shall hereafter 1. John. 4, 1.
go out into this world. The necessity of this action may yet farther be
perceived by the Apostles doubling of his exhortation saying, Prove yourselvs,
examine yourselvs, whereby he inforceth them to this as a thing of great moment
and most necessary, and therefore not to be neglected, for it is the custom
of the Apostles in things of this nature to use repetition, that we may take
them more deeply to heart and seriously practice them, and surely there is not
any one practice more necessary in a christian, then this of trial and
examination, the neglecte whereof makes many not only to despise God, his
Gospel, his ministers, and his salvation, all which they could not but highly
esteem of, and desire above all things, if once they would truly try and taste
how good they are: but also causes many in the ignorance of their own estate
either securely and proudly to boast of themselves as children of grace, when
there is no grace in them; or then in the miserable weakness of their own
hearts to deplore their lamentable estate, as forlorn and forsaken of God,
whenas notwithstanding they enjoy the solid testimonies of Gods favor toward
them; for this cause when the Psalmist would persuade men to seek after God
Psalm. 34, 8.
and draw near unto him, he exhorts them to taste and behold how gracious the
Lord is, whose goodness Peter also makes 1, Pet. 2, 2, and ^*
to be the argument or condition either to persuade or to be required to moove
men to desire the sincere milk of the word: for questionless, they that have
tasted and truly felt what is the goodness of God manifested by his word,
cannot but confess with David, that the Word of God is more to be desired than
much fine gold, and Psalm. 19. 10.
sweeter also than the honey and the honeycomb. For the very feet of Romans 10,
15 Esai. 52, 7.
those who publish peace and Preach good things are beautiful, to all who have
felt the consolation of their ministrye the truth whereof may be seen in the
Galatians who as says the Ap. himself did not despise the trial of him which
was in his flesh, nether abhorred hi^ whenas first he preached the Gospel unto
the^ through the infirmity of the flesh, but upon the falicity which they found
in his mini^^ry received him as an Angel of Galat. 4, 13, 14, 15.
^od, yea as Christ Jesus, so that if it ^^d been possible, they would have
^^ucked out their eyes and have gi^en them unto him; For which ^ause the same
Apostle when ^e wills the Thessalonians ^ot to despise prophesying,
immediately adds this exhortation, to try all things and keep that which is
good as a mean to ^^ing them to the love, desire and estymatio^ of
prophesying, ^or he knew that trial and ^roofe, would make dispisers ^o change
their mind, and ^ighlie to esteem that which ^hey despised before, and this ^s
the 1. Use of the doubling of ^his exhortation. The 2 use is to ^ew the
Apostles assured confidence touching the certainty of that which he had
affirmed, of the mighty power of Christ in his ministry toward then when so
earnestly and instantly he urges them to the trya^ thereof in themselves,
referring the examination of the tru^ thereof to the same persons wh^ did seek
it in him. For a^^ though the spirit of the prophet be subject to the
prophets, yet no^ 1 Cor. 14. 32.
withstanding the trial wheth^^ the spirits be of God, and wheth^^ they
speak in the evidency ^ 1. Io. 4, 1.
the spirit and power of God ^ not, is pertinent and belonge^ in special
manner to the heare^^ whose feeling experience is the most certain testimony,
an^ most infallible proof of Christ speaking in those ministe^^ whom they
hear. And therefore a Pastor may then mo^^ justly boast of the power o^
Christan his ministry, when h^ dare make his hearers his judges and refer
himself to their trial, which teaches us also another ^^sson, to condemn that
vain ^rogancy and foolish pride which ^ossesseth the hearts of many, in ^^ghly
esteeming and vainly ^orying of their own mini^^^y, whenas the virtue and
value ^ereof has no testimony ^^om the sense and experience ^f the hearers,
but from the ^ind conceyt of the teachers themselves. For the Lord Jesus ^oth
arm his messengers with ^e power and virtue of his ^^irit from above, not so
much ^or their own sake as for their ^earers, in whom God will have their
ministry mighty and power^^ll, to cast down all strong houlds, and every high
thing that is exal^^d in 1. Cor. 10. 4 5.
their imaginations against ^he knowledge of God, and to ^ubdue all their
thoughts and intents of their minds to the obedience Christ we conclude
therefo^^ this use, with this warning to a preachers, that seeing (as the^ are
ministers) the honor an^ credit of their ministry co^siste^ most in the power
of God in ^ toward others, they do n^^ glory nor boast of themselves i^
respect of their ministry, but according as the evidence of the power thereof
may be truel^ testified by the conscience o^ their hearers, esteeming nothing
either of their eloquence o^ gifts of preaching how great soever they be in
themselves when as they are without either force or power toward other^ seeing
as says the Apostle. The kingdom of God is not in wo^^ but in power, and
therefore ^^ threatens those false teache^ puffed up at Corinth, that when h^
should come to try them he would take notice not of their words but of their
power. And this shall appear more evidently by that 2 point which in this
trial is to be observed who are the persons whom he wills the^ to prove
and examine, his words are, prove yourselues examine yourselvs. The question
being of the power of Christ in Paul's ministry he refers the trial thereof
to his hearers in themselves, which he would never have done, if the question
concerning this power in all men's preaching were not to be decided rather by
that which is felt by experience in the hearers, than by any thing whatsoever
in the Teacher; Diverse singular uses we have of this point. First, touching the
true knowledge of the nature of all spiritual things; It must be taken from
the trial and experience which we have of them in onr selves; which is the true
limits and bounds as well as the ground and foundation of all true knowledge of
God and all things belonging to salvation, For how excellent and
superemminently good soever they be in themselves, our minds can rise no higher
in apprehending and knowing them, then the experience and sense is which we
receive of their force and effectual working in and upon ourselvs: And this
is true not only in the supernatural knowledge of God and heavenly things,
but also in so far as nature it self can apprehend of God; this is manifest by
the Apostles words to the Romans 1, 19.
Romans, when he says that which might be known of God is manifest in men
themselves. For which cause he justly concludes the Gentiles to have been
unjust detayners of the truth of God, and therefore most justly punished from
heaven, because knowinug God they did not glorify Ibidem. 11, and 21.
him as God neither were thankful. For it is most certain that there can be
no true judgment of these things that are spiritual, and so no way subject to
the apprehension of earnall senses, but only from the sense and seeling of our
souls, according to the measure of working, whereby it pleases God by his
spirit to make our souls sensible of his nature and goodness, which we never
can rightly esteem of, until by his blessed gospel, begetting us again to a
lively hope of an inheritance immortal, undefiled and that withers not, he
1. Pet. 1, 3, 4
powers in by his spirit abundantly in our hearts his love and peace Romans 5. 5.
that passes all understanding, neither can we ever acknowledge the blessed
word of God to be the power of God unto salvation, until that by experience
we find it to be that which the Apostle describes it to be in us, viz. a
living word mighty in operation and sharper then any two edged sword, and Habr.
4. 12.
piercing into the devision of our soul and of our spirit, the joints and the
marrow, and judging the very thoughts and intents of our heart, so that we
may justly conclude that no man has any more true knowledge either of God, the
gospel, or ministry thereof, then so far as in himself he has felt by proof
and experience their efficacy and working upon himself.

Moreover this teaches us another lesson touching the true course of men's
trial in matters spiritual, and specially of the virtue and power of any man's
ministry, it is apparent that the Corinthians did narrowly mark the Apostle
himself in his outward estate, and in his utterance and eloquence, in all
which they externally found nothing in their carnal judgment but baseness,
weakness, and words of no value, but in the mean time they did not mark the
mighty work of that weak man by his seeming weak words in their own hearts
inwardly, which made them perverse and sinistrous Judges of his ministry, the
virtue and power whereof is not to be discerned by ought that outwardly can be
perceaved either by the eye in behoulding the speaker, or by the ear in
hearing his eloquence, but only by the inward sense and feeling of their own
hearts and spirits. And this serves to correct two great vices in our judging,
first concerning the persons, and 2 concerning the matter. Touching the
persons its a common vice to be busy in taking notice and in judging of
others, but not of our selves, whereas our minds ought to be still examining
our selves and not others, for as says the Apostle, who art thou that judge
another man's servant he Romans 14, 4.
stands or falls to his own Lord and not unto thee, and the scriptures of
God continually warn us to absteyn from judging of others, and still to judge
and tax our selves, least we be judged and in judging others to begine first at
our selves, because thereby we shall be the more able to give righteous judgment
of others, for as Christ says, how can a man say to his brother let me cast
out a mote out of thine eye, and behold there is a beam in his own eye. Mat.
74. For how shall a man see to cast out a mote out of his brothers eye unto the
time that first he has cast out the beam out of his own eye. For Christ
himself Mat. 7, 12.
shows, that with what judgment we judge others we shall be judged, and with
what measure we meat unto others; it shall be measured again to us. Besides
that the judgment of others is not left unto us by the Lord, but reserved unto
himself, and therefore the Apostle counts it a very small matter to be 1,
Cor. 4 3.
judged by the Corinthians or any man's judgment touching his fidelity in his
ministry, but this Apostle earnestly invites us to judge and examine our selves,
and shows to the Corinthians that if we judged our selves, we should not
be judged of the Lord with his temporal plagues; as infirmities, sickness, and
temporal Ibidem. 11, 30, and 38.
death, by which the Lord did chastise the Corinthians, for not judging and
examining themselves before they did eat of the Lords body. And this duty of
not judging others but our selves, is the more carefully to be observed by us,
because (as we shall hear afterward) every faithful Christian is able by the
spirit of God given him, to discern of himself, and his spiritual estate
aright, but as concerning others, although in the judgment of charity we ought
to esteem well of all that profess Christ, (yea even of those with whom we
refuse to converse for disobedience in them whom still according to the rule of
the Apostle we are not to esteem as enemies, but to admonish 2, These. 3, 14
15.
as brethren:) yet the infallible knowledge of their estate in Christ, is only
known to God who only knows who is his own. 2, Tim. 2, 19
The 2. error, concerning the matter of our judgment is, hereby likewise
corrected, we see and perceive this to be a common folly in men, to look
upon the person of the preacher, upon his gifts and utterance, and still to be
censuring all men, to be either good or bad preachers according as they find
them to satisfy or displease their judgment in their gifts of knowledge,
utterance, or eloquence and so often fall in a woeful error in contemning the
best and applauding the worst, whereas the matter of all true judgment of
preaching, consists not so much in the matter or utterance of the preacher, as
in the power of that which is spoken: which power is often wanting in the
greatest both of knowledge and eloquence, and often yea most times accompanies
the most simple delivery of the truth in men having far less measure of the
aforesaid gifts. And this trial taken from the power of the word heard, must
needs force every man back to himself, to examine himself, if he will know how
to judge aright of the preacher, seeing his heart and soul is the subject
wherein the virtue and efficacy of all preaching is to be found. For he is the
most powerful preacher who most stirrs and mooves the heart of the hearer unto
faith and obedience, so that a man needs not to go out of himself to look to
any thing but that that's in himself, whereby to discern whether Christ speak
or not in the preacher whom he hears; even as its not so much color or taste
of the wine, or matter of the cup whereout we drink, as the felt virtue in our
spirits refreshed thereby, whereby the valor and virtue of wine is discerned,
both color and taste though in a golden cup deceiving us: As in matereall
temples built of stone, the more the windows be painted the less is the
light: So in the true spiritual Temple of Christ those that are the lights
thereof the more their preaching be painted with the intising words of humane
wisdom and eloquence, the less solid light of the knowledge of the glory of
God in the face of Jesus is ministered by them to the hearts of their hearers.
And thus much for the first point set down by the Apostle: Now follows the
second, vizt. Touching those things wherein the Corinthians were to try and
examine themselves, which are two, First their faith, 2. Christ's being in them:
this last being the evidence of the first. It is true that the words may be
taken two manner of ways, For these words (If ye be in the faith) may be
either the condition required in those that shall try themselves concerning the
power of Christ in ^^e ministry of those who teach ^^em, or then, it may be
taken for the matter it self, wher^^ they are to find out the evidence of
Christ's power in their ^^achers. In what sense soe^er we take it, it servs for
the ^postles purpose, and yields ^^ great instruction. In the ^^^st sense, it
teaches us that which is most true; viz. That ^ntill a man believe he can
^^ue no right judgment of spi^^tuall things, it being faith ^^^ely that
purifies the heart ^^om all sin and filthiness. ^esides that, it remains sure
which the Apostle says. That ^he natural man comprehends not ^^e things of
the spirit of God, for ^^ey are foolishnes unto him; because they are
spiritually discerned, ^ut the spiritual man discerns 1. Cor, 2, 14 15.
all things. Now no man can be a spiritual man but he that believes:
Therefore justly does the Apostle call faith the evidence of things that are
not seen. Heb. 11. 1.
So that before a man can be able to perceave the spiritual power of Christ in
any man^ preaching, he must have this faith, else how can he perceav^ or
apprehend that which is invisible, of which nature this power is. Hereby we
learn that it is no wonder that the Word of the cross is foolishnes i^ most
part of men, yea to all that perish 1. Cor. 1, 18
as says the Apostle. For the arm of the Lord therein is not revealed unto
them, because they believe not the report of Cap. 53, 1.
Gods messengers, as says the Prophet Esa. For belief and knowledge of the
power of God in preaching, are never separate, for which cause Christ himself,
giving the reason that ^is disciples loved him, says, that they believed that
the was ^ome out from the father. And ^gaine when in his prayer to the E^an.
John. 16, 27.
^^ther he has set down diverse ^^asons why he recommended them to the father,
(as that he ^^d declared his name unto them: ^ut they had kept his word, that
^^ey knew that all things which ^^ father had given him, was ^^m the father:
that he had given ^^to them the words which the ^^her had given him: that they
^^d received them, and that they ^^ely knew he was come out from ^^ father) he
subjoynd as the ^^und and foundation of all ^s their knowledge, that they John.
17, 6. 7, 8.
^^eued that the father had sent ^^. The use hereof is first to ^^ch us that
faith is the only eye of the soul, whereby its abl^ truly to discern the
nature o^ all spiritual and heavenly things 2. It lets us see the miser able
^^ state and condition of all infidels who are utterly deprived of a^ ability
to know or rightly t^ perceive the nature of God, o^ Christ, of his gospel, or
hi^ ministers, yea also of themselves in any spiritual thing. Last^^ it
teaches us not to stumble ^ the base account and contem^^ of the Gospel and
ministe^ thereof, in the most part ^^ men in this age, seeing poo^ blind
wretches being destitu^ of faith are not able to kno^ these things, nor to give
a^ right judgment of them, or themselves, and this either having or wanting of
faith in men, the very cause of all differe^ judgment, of all things in
religion, and specially of things indifferent, as may be perceaved by the
Apostles words to the Romans. Cap. 14, saying, One man beleveth that he may eat
al things, and another which is weak eats herbs, and again, I know and am
persuaded through the Lord Jesus, that there is nothing unclean of it self,
but to him that judges ought unclean, to him it is unclean. and again, have
thou faith, have it with thyself before God, blessed is he that condemns not
himself in that which he allows, but he that doubts is condemned if he
eat, because he eats not of faith. and what soever is not of faith is sin,
in all which words the Apostle attributes knowledge and full persuasion of the
indifferent use of all external things as meat drink etc. unto faith, and
ignorance and doubting to infidelity or weakness of faith which gives us a
clear light to discern betwixt man and man in their judgment touching things
indifferent in their use, where it may be without scandal. And abstinence from
them, where the use is scandalous: for undoubtedly true faith where it is,
gives a man knowledge and full persuasion that there is no difference betwixt one
meat, one garment, or oneday and another etc. in themselves: but where one day,
one meat, one garment etc. is esteemd above another, or where there is doubting
of their indifferency and equal law fulness in use as before, there must needs
be weakness of faith, which is a faith accompanied with much infidelity. But
leaving this sense of these words, notwithstanding that it may be probably
taken to be the Apostles meaning, we come to the other sense as being in most
men's judgment, the true meaning of the Apostle, taking the words as a
declaration of that wherein they shall try themselves, viz. whether they be in
the faith or no, according to which sense the Apostles argument will follow
after this manner. If ye be in the faith, ye must acknowledge the power of
Christ in my ministry: But by trial ye shall find that ye are in the faith:
Therefore if ye try yourselvs ye shall find the power of Christ in my
ministry. The confirmation of the second part of this argument viz. That by
trial they shall find themselves to be in the faith is to be taken from the
last words of this verse, which are indifferently to be used for prooving both
the parts of trial, that is, both that they are in the faith, and that Christ
is in them, after this manner, either by trial you shall find you are in the
faith, or that ye are reprobates: But we trust ye shall find ye are not
reprobates: Therefore we trust that by trial ye shall find yourselvs to be in
the faith.

To speak then of this first thing wherein they are to try themselves, we have
two things to be marked in it. First what it is whereabout this trial must be
in themselves, viz. faith. Secondly, what must be tried concerning this faith,
viz. Whether they be in it or not.

Touching the first, Its not without great reason that the Apostle setts down
no other christian virtue whereby to find out in themselves the effectual
power of Christ in his ministry toward them but faith, For all other operation
of the ministry whatsoever, be what it will be, if it have not faith
accompanying it, does never prove that ministry to be the power of God unto
salvation in those men, for as says the Apostle, the Gospel is the 1. Romans 16.
power of God unto salvation to every one that believes, by which sort of
speech the spirit of God will teach us plainly, that the ministry of the
Gospel, is not Gods power to salvation to those men in whom it never begets
faith, so that if any will rightly try himself whether the ministry of men, be
accompanied with the power of Christ speaking in them to his salvation, he is
not to look so much to any effect thereof in himself as to this virtue of
faith, for all other effects may deceive him as doubtless they do many, for
experience teaches, that the Gospel and preaching thereof does work many
great effects even in the reprobate, as we see in Herod, who feared John the
Baptist and heard him gladly, and Mat. 6, 20.
when he heard him did many things, yet in the end, he imprisoned him, and put
him to death. Likewise even Simon Magus which used witchcraft and had bewitched
the people of Samaria a long time, by the force of Philips Preaching is said,
to have believed and to have been baptized, and to have continued with Philip,
wondering at the signs and great miracles which were done by him, and also upon
the acknowledgment of his sin in seeking by money to have power to give the
holy ghost by laying on of hands, did earnestly entreat the Apostles to pray to
the Lord for him, and yet notwithstanding all this, he Acts. 8,
was even then in the gall of bitterness and ba^ds of iniquity: for although it
be said he believed it because he did make profession of faith, yet had he not
this true faith whereof the Apostle here speaks; which if he had had, he could
not have still remained in the gall of bitterness and bond of iniquity. And its
manifest by the parable of Christ in the Gospel that the kingdom of heaven is
like a draw net cast into Mat. 13 47.
the sea that gathers of all kind of things. But as the Apostle says, all
men have not faith. 2, These. 3, 2. For many are called but few are chosen,
nether every Mat. 20, 16
one that calls Christ Lord shall enter into the kingdom of heaven Mat. 7,
21.

Its evident by daily experience that the Gospel works effectually in many
to their conviction, and in many also to their external conversion, and
outward profession of the true God, and unto obedience in many things, in whom
notwithstanding it never wrought true justifyng faith, whereby its evident that
there is no trial sound and infallible to any man, of Christ's saving power by
the ministry of the Gospel toward them, except that which is taken from faith;
our devotion, zeal, holiness, profession and obedience, will miserably deceive
us, if we buyld our trust on them, for it is not they, but faith alone, that
makes us the sons of God and truly justifies us, yea which is more, even
they all are sins, if faith be not their fountain, for what soever is not of
faith is sin. The Romans 14. 23
use of this is principally to teach us, what ought to be the principal scope
and chief endeavor both of Pastors in preaching, and of people in hearing,
that is; that the one by preaching may work, and the other by hearing, may
receive faith in their hearts without which al other things are nothing, seeing
there is nether entry, nor access, nor continuance in grace, but by faith
alone, for as says the Apostle, in Christ Jesus we have bouldnes and entrance
with confidence by faith in him. Ephesians. 3, 12. And again by him also through
faith we have had access unto this grace wherein we stand. Romans 5, 2. And
again, for by faith ye stand. 2. Cor. 1, 24. This does argue both preaching and
hearing of many to be vain and fruitles, whenas either is not chiefly
intended to this end of believing, for if a teacher work not faith by
preaching, whatsoever he do besides shall never save the hearers. And if a
man by hearing, attain not to beeleeving, what ever other fruit he receive shall
but increase his judgment, for faith wrought by preaching is the true
touchstone, whereby both a preacher is tried to have Christ's power in his
ministry, and a hearer does find the Gospel to be the power of God to his
salvation. Now we come to the next touching their being in this faith. Its a
common custom of the scriptures when they speak of the saving graces of God,
or of Jesus Christ in whom we enjoy them, sometimes to require them to be in
us, and sometimes, us in them. Concerning Christ, the Apostle prays for the
Ephesians that Christ may dwell in their hearts, Ephesians 3. 17. 1. Cor. 1, 30.
And again to the Corinthians he says, but ye are of God in Christ Jesus, and
Christ himself in the 15 of John says to his disciples, abide in me and I in
you, he that abides in me and I in him the same brings forth much fruit.
Touching faith the Apostle says to Tymothy, that he desired to see him, when
he called to remembrance, the un^ained faith that was in him, which dwelt first
in his grandmother Loys, and in his mother Eunice, and which 2. Tim. 1. 4. 5.
he was assured did dwell in him also: And here the Apostle wills the
Corintians, to try themselves if they be in the faith, and again to the
Colossians, If ye continue grounded and stablished in the faith, and Col. 1. 23.
again, as ye have received Christ Jesus the Lord walk in him, rooted Ibidem.
2, 6, 7.
and built in him, and stablished in the faith. In like manner the scripture
speaks of love, of patience, of hope, of holiness, of righteousness, and all
other christian virtues. The reason of this form of speech in scripture is,
because of the double use and benefit both of Christ himself, and all other
spiritual graces in him: The first use is of practice, the second of
preservation: For the first, these graces are necessary to be in us, to enable
us to all christian duties, who of ourselvs 2. Cor. 3. 5.
are not sufficient (as of ourselves) to do so much as think any good,
according to that of Christ John. 15. 5.
speaking of himself, without me ye can do nothing. And touching faith its
said of the Apostle, That without faith its impossible to please God Heb. 6.

So that neither we ourselvs, nor any of our actions, can be acceptable to
God, (even although they be the actions commanded by God) unless believing we
do them by ^aith, yea not only are they not acceptable, but it is impossible
to us to have any strength or ability to do them according to Gods will
without faith, for that mighty power Phil. 4. 13.
of God through Christ whereby we are made able to do all things is not in any
but in those that believe. According to that saying of the Apo. praying for the
Ephesians, That the eyes of their understanding might be enlightened, that they
might know what is the exceeding greatness of Gods power toward us that
believe. cap. 1. v. 18, 19. And again, speaking to the Colossians, he says,
We are buried together with Christ in baptism, in the which we are also
raised together with him, through the faith of the effectual operation of God,
who has raised Christ from the dead cap. 2. ver. 12. And therefore John in his
first epistle does attribute our victory over the whole world only to our
faith, saying, All that are born of God overcommeth this world, and this is the
victory that has overcome the world, even our faith. For who is it that
overcommeth this world but he that believes that Jesus is the sone of God? 1
Ioh. 5. 4. 5. And the Apostle to the Hebrews, chap. 11 attributes all the
strength of all the children of God (in doing good, and obaying God) only to
their faith; through which faith as says the Apostle, they subdued kingdoms,
wrought righteousness, obtained the ^romise, stopped the mouths of ^yons,
quenched the violence of fire, escaped the edge of the sword, of weak were
made strong, waxed valiant in battle, turned to flight the ^rmies of the
aliants, the women ^eceaved their dead raised to life, other also were racked
and would not be delivered, that they might ^eceaue a better resurrection, and
others have been tried by mockings and by scourgings, yea meorover by bonds
and imprisonment, they were stoned, they were hewn a sunder, they were slain
with the sword, they wandered up and down in sheep skins and in goats
skins, being destitute, afflicted, and tormented, all which they did endure
and suffer only by faith, by which they all obtained good report. It is clear
therefore for such practices and all other obedience whatsoever, it is
necessary that a Christian have faith in him, without which he has no strength
either to do o^ suffer any thing to the glory of God and his own salvation,
2. Its expedient that as he must have faith in him for practice, so he must be
in the faith for his preservation, for as nothing can enable him to do good
but faith; so nothing can preserve him from all evil unto salvation but faith
only, within the compass and limits whereof, except he remain enclosed, he
cannot avoid evil, therefore is it that the Apostle charge every one in the
house of God, that no man Romans 12. 3.
presume to be wise above that which is meet, but that every man be wise
unto sobriety, as God has dealt to every man the measure of faith, this
measure of every man's faith being unto him the only rule and just measure,
both of his actions and sufferings, seeing whatsoever is not of faith is sin,
for which cause the Apostle defines the life of a Christian, to be the life of
faith in the son of God. Galatians 2. 20. Therefore for the better keeping
our selves from all the assaults of satan, we are commanded to put on, as an
armor given us from God, these Christian virtues, truth, righteousness, peace
hope, and above all faith, whereby we may be able to quench all the siery
darts of the devil, and to stand against all his assaults. Ephesians 6, 10,
11. And in another place we are exhorted by the Apostle as the elect of God
(holy and belooved) to put on the bowels of mercies, kindness, humblenes of
mind, meekenes, long-suffering, love, etc. And finally whatsoever we shall do
in word or deed to do all in the name of the Lord Jesus, which is as much as to
will us to do al in faith. Colossians 3, 12, etc. For as God does not exercise
his power in us to the prastise of good but by faith: So does he not employ his
power to keep us unto salvation but by faith also: as is plain by the words
of Peter saying, that we are kept by the power of God through faith unto
salvation. 1, Ep. 1, 5. Thus faith is both the power of God within us, to
strengthen us to all goodness, and the armor of God upon us, to keep and cover
us from all evil. For which cause, as we must abide in Christ, and Christ
must abide in us unto salvation: So must we also abide in faith, and faith in
us, since Christ is neither in us; nor we in him, nor live we in him, nor he
in us, neither keeps he us, nor we him, except by faith aloue.

Now the reason why the Apostle does not will us to ^ry if faith be in us, but
rather if we be in the faith, is not because both be not necessary, or that
the one can possibly be without the other, seeing the union betwixt us and the
graces of God in Christ, is like to our communion with Christ himself, for as
he is in us and we are in him, so are we in his graces and gifts and they are
in us; even as he is in the father and the father in him, but the cause moving
the Apostle to speak so is this, because our finding of our selves in the faith
is the most clear evidence of the power of Christ in the ministry to our
salvation, for then it is effectual when not only, it does work faith in our
hearts; but also does make us walk in it, so that as in our knowledge will or
affection inwardly; even so in our deeds externally, we manifest this faith.
Not going in any thing beyond the measure of that faith which God has given
us, and to speak the truth it is a woeful error in many Christians to satisfy
themselves with a conceyt, that they believe, without marking, or once
considering, whether they have put on this faith, as a garment to walk in, and
as an armor to fight in, that they may see themselves in it clothed both as
their garment and adorning them, and as an armor defending them, for its
manifest by the doctrine of James, that many boast they have faith who yet do
not walk in it, nor use it as a shield against sin and satan, therefore we
are never to esteem the ministry of the Gospel to be the power of God to our
salvation for any light or perswation it works in our hearts inwardly,
except likewise it make us put on that light to walk in it as the children of
light, and arm us with it to fight against the prince of darkness and all his
works; For, scripture and experience teach us, that many have the light of
the knowledge and truth of God within them, boasting of it in words, who yet in
their deeds deny it, doing as the Apo. speaks of the gentiles who held and
detained the truth in unrighteousnes, and suppressed it in their hearts, because
when they knew God they glorified him not as God, neither were thankful. Romans
1. 18. and 21. And thus much for the first point of the trial: we should now
speak of the second, but that the Apostle does stay us with an argument
preventing an objection, before he specifieth the second point of trial, which
is the mean to know the former, for they might have said, how shall we be able
to know these things which thou willest us to try either that which goes
before, viz. Whether we be in the faith: or that which follows, viz. whether
Christ be in us?

The Apostle to take away this pretense of ignorance and so to enforce them to
acknowledge by this trial of themselves the power of Christ in his ministry
toward them, does use this argument. You must either by trial perceave these
things in your-selvs being christians: or then ye know not your selves; but
its absurd that you Christians, should not know your selves, therefore you may
easily try these things in your selves. Of argument we have no more set down
but the second part, yet so as in the manner of speech he leads us to the
collection and gathering of the rest, the words being these know ye not your
selves, as if he would say this, wherein I will you to examine your selves
cannot be hid from you if ye know your selves? which knowledge of themselves,
he inforceth upon them by this his interrogation, which implies as much, as
that it was not only a shame to the^, but also an impossible thing not to know
themselves, and so insinuates the conclusion, to wit, that therefore they
behooved to know these things where in he willd them to try themselves. In this
form of the Apostles proceeding, we have first to learn, what backwardnes
and untowardnes lurks in our nature still, in that we are loath to acknowledge
any thing whereby we ourselvs may be convinced, except confession be wrested
from us by forcible and unresistable argument, we being still inclind to use
all sort of pretenses to excuse, and amongst the rest, ignorance rather, then
by simple acknowledgment of the known truth, to condemn our selves in any
thing. This vice did evidently appear in Cain, when God inquired where his
brother Abell was, who, although he knew perfectly, he had killed him, yet used a
shifting answer to the Lord, first pretending ignorance, and then bringing in
an argument to convince God of unrighteousnes in requiring such a-thing at his
hand; in that he said, he Genesis 4, 9.
was not his brothers keeper, the like we see also in Saul when he was accused
by Samuel for sparing Agag the King of Ameleck in strongly affirming he had
performed the will of the Lord, notwithstanding that he knew that the
preserving of Agag alive and reserving of the best of the spoil, was direct
contrary to the direction of the Lord, whereby he was commanded to smite
Ameleck, and to destroy all that pertained unto them, but to stay both man and
woman, both infant and suckling, both ox and sheep, both Camel and ass. 1.
Samuel 15. The same also is clearly to be marked in Annanias and Saphira Acts.
5. And this same infirmity appears here in the Corinthians although not in
the same manner, nor measure of inquity: In Cain, Saul, Ananias and Saphira, it
proceeded from profane and unsanctified hearts filled with malice, pride, and
coveteousnes, but in the Corinthians (as in other Godly men) it falls through
infirmity and negligence, but never of obstinate malice or contempt, yet still
to be acknowledged a great weakness, having always mixed with it some selfloue
of our selves, which makes us rather to dissemble a known truth, then to
disgrace our selves, in any sort, but leaving this, we come to thosethings
which principally are to be marked in this argument of the Apostle, which
yealds us two things to our consideration, the first is, that a Christian who
is caled out of darkness to the marvelous light of God, has amongst all others,
this great blessing, that his eyes are open to know himself, which no man can
do, till he be effectually called of God, and have received the spirit of
truth, whereby he is made able to discern all things, this knowledge of our
selves was known to be a great virtue amongst the very heathen, and was
propounded to be followed as a singular virtue by the philosophers, but never
any of themselves could ever attain to it, it being the special prerogative
of those who are taught by the truth of God revealed in his word, to have this
grace to know themselves, according to that saying of John, we know that we
are of God and this whole world lies in wickedness. John 1 Epist. 5, 19. And
therefore is it that the same Apostle says concerning the elect, that the
anointing which they have received of the father dwells in them, and that
they need not that any man teach them, but as the same anointing 1 John. 2, 27
teaches them of all things, and it is true and not lying. The 2. thing which
hereby we learn is this. That the calling of God to the knowledge of his
truth, gives to men (in the knowledge of themselves) the sight and knowledge of
all graces that are given them of God, according to that saying of the Apostle
speaking of the unsearchablenes of the things which God has prepared for them
that love him but (says he) God has reveyled them unto us by his spirit, for
we have not receaud the spirit of the world, but the spirit which is of God,
that we might know the things that are given us of God. 1, Corint. 2, 10, 12.
Therefore is it, that Christ calls his disciples no more servaunts but
friends, because (as he says) the servant knows not what his master does,
but unto them he had made known all things which he heard of his father. John
15, 15. And in another place he shows the reason of this knowledge in his
disciples, as also why the world is destitute of it (speaking concerning the
spirit) saying whom the world cannot receive because it sees him not neither
knows him, but ye know him, because he dwells with you and shall be in you.
John. 14, 17. This place being conferd with the former two, teaches us 3
special things touching the estate of a true Christian. The 1 is, that they
are not ignorant of the things of God, nor of any grace or blessing spiritual
given them by God in Christ. the 2 is. That all this knowledge is taught the^
by the spirit of God which is given them, and remains within them. The 3 that
both the gift of this spirit and knowledge by him, proceeds from this, that
God has not left us in the world nor in the estate of servitude and bondage,
but has taken us out of the world, and by reconcyling us to himself in Christ
has made us his friends as Abraham was. The use of this is to convince the
doctrine of the papisticall church of falsehood, whereby they maintain that a
Christian truly called can have no certain knowledge whether he be in the
estate of grace or not; for if the Apostle urge the Corinthians by this
special knowledge of their own being in the faith, and of Christ's being in
them, to be witnesses of the power of Christ in his ministry toward them, it
must necessarily follow, that both they, and all others called as they were,
must have undoubted knowledge of themselves, that they are in the faith, and
Christ in them, otherwise Christ's argument before alleged could not be true,
when he says, that his disciples did know the spirit of truth, because he
dwelt with them and should be in the^, which argument teaches us thus much,
that the saints cannot be ignorant of any gift or grace of God which dwells
with them and is in them, so that we may Justly concluded that a Papist
(houlding the former position for a truth,) must be both faythles and
graceless, seeing if either faith or grace were in them they could not be
ignorant of them; neither can they have any evasion by their old argument of
the necessity of some special revelation from God; For this which we have
said before, compared with the words of John does fully answer them, saying, If
we receive the witness of men the witness John. 1. 5. 9. and 10.
of God is greater, For this is the witness of God which he testifies of his
son: He that believes in that sone of God has witness in himself. By which
words we are plainly taught, that faith can never be without the testimony
both of those three which bear record in heaven (to wit) the Father, the Word,
and the Holy Ghost, nor of these three witnesses which bear record in earth,
viz. The spirit, the water, and the blood, and therefore that it must follow
that every true believer has a most undoubted revelation of his salvation,
and blessed estate in grace, and on the contrary that whosoever has not this
undoubted warrant is faithles indeed, seeing as says the Apostle, whosoever
believes in the son of God has this witness of the Father, of the Word, and
of the Holy ghost, which are in heaven, and of the spirit, and of the water,
and of the blood, which are in earth: then which there can be no revelation of
greater force to confirm the certainty of ones salvation, For, if according to
Gods own law at the mouth of two or three witnesses every matter Dent. 19. 5.
shall be established, how much more must a true believing christian know the
certainty of his salvation, who has it witnessed unto him and that within
himself, by those six witnesses before mentioned, of which none can lie, and
this is so much the clearer by that which John in the same place speaks ver.
13, saying, these things have I written unto you, who believe in the name of
the son of God, that ye may know that ye have eternal life. Whereby he
utterly annulleth that blind argument of the Papists, seeing it enforces the^
either to confess that they know they have eternal life, or then plainly to
confess that they believe not in the son of God, for faith and knowledge of
salvation are two unseparable adjuncts, and ever such knowledge, as is not
builded upon a doubtful opinion or conjecture, but which is buylt upon the
unfallible testimony of the six witnesses, mentioned before. We conclude
therefore this point, with the confortable use thereof to all true believing
Christians viz. that they rejoice always, I say again with the Apostle that
they rejoice always, seeing their salvation is sure, and that its given unto
them to know that it is sure.

Thus much for the Apostles argument for remooving of all pretense of
ignorance. Now follows the 2 point of trial, which is, whether Christ be in
them or not, but its propounded in another manner then the first, for touching
faith, he willd them to try if they were in it, but this last, he propounds as
a thing which he would have them undoubtedly to acknowledge, and no marveil,
for the effects are more easy to be known then their causes; now Christ he
dwells in our hearts by faith, and therefore we can never have a true evidence
that we believe, until we find, that Christ is assuredly within us, for this
cause we said before, that this 2 point of trial, was the mean to know the
former. Moreover the Apo. subjoins this point, unto his former argument,
whereby he remooves all pretense of Ignorance purposely to teach us, both when,
and wherein it is, that a Christian comes to know himself to be in the faith,
and so receaves experience of the power of Christ in the ministry of the
Gospel to his salvation whereof before we spoke, we will first somewhat
consider the order of the Apostles words. We see that in the first place he
puts them to the trial of their faith, as being the evidence of the power of
Christ in his ministry toward them to their salvation. 2. In this examination
he brings them to the acknowledging of themselves, as the proper effect of true
faith in all true believers. 3. He brings the^ to the acknowledgment of Christ's
presence in their hearts, as the only true testimony of the first, and proper
matter of the 2. For if any man thinks he believes, not having Christ within
him, he is miserably deceaved, and if any man think, he knows himself to be
the child of God, except he find himself and Christ united by faith pitifully
abuses himself by his own judgment. This order therefore of the Apostles
proceeding teaches us this lesson, what way and by what means it is, that we
come to the knowledge of the mighty power and outstreched arm of God in the
ministry of his word to our salvation, in the which 3, things are principally
to be marked. Our faith, our selves, and that in our selves which makes us know
our selves by faith to be the chidren of God. And so by consequence wherein
stands the chief proof that the word of God is Gods power to our salvation, but
in the consideration of these, our faith is the point that makes the
conclusion, For without faith its impossible we can be, or know our selves to
be the children of God. But notwithstanding that which makes the infallible
determination of being in the faith, depends upon the presence of Christ within
us, without which all conceit of having faith is frivolous and vain. The order
then of our minds in searching our spiritual estats is this. 1. We are to try
and examine our selves whether we know our selves to be of God or no, for he
is not of God that knows not himself to be of God, for according to the
saying of John he has given us a mind to know him which is true, and we are
in him that is true, and we know that we are of God. John 1. Epi. 5. 19. 20.
Secondly we are to try if we be in the faith, because we never can know our
selves to be of God until the time we find ourselves to be in the faith,
according to the saying of Christ. He that is of God hears Gods words, ye
therefore hear them not because ye are not of God. John 8. 47. 3. For
confirming our hearts in the knowledge of this. 2. Point, and so consequently
in the full assurance of the first, we are to try if Christ be in us, without
which we can never assuredly know that we believed, and so consequently that
we are of God, according to the saying of Christ (speaking of the work of the
spirit in those to whom he gives it,) at that day shall ye know that I am in my
father and you in John. 14, 20.
me and I in you and again in his prayer to God for his elect, the glory that
thou gave me I have given them, that they may be one as we are one, I in
them and thou in me, that they may be made perfect in one. John 17. 22. 23.
And again I have declared unto them thy name and will declare it, that the
love wherewith thou have loved me may be in them and I in them. Ibidem 17. 26.
For which cause the saints are called the habitation of God by the spirit.
Ephesians 2. 22. Whereupon the Apostle concludes that if any man have not the
spirit of Christ the same is not his. Romans 8. 9. And this dwelling of Christ by
his spirit in our hearts is only wrought by faith according to the saying of
the Apostle, I bow my knees unto the father of our Lord Jesus Christ that he
might grant you according to the richnes of his glory, that you may be
strengthened by his spirit in the inward man, that Christ may dwell in your
hearts by says, Ephesians 3. 14. 15, 16. 17. By all which it evidently
appears when it is that a man knows himself indeed to be the child of God,
and also wherein this knowledge consists, viz. when he comes to a lively
feeling and clear sight that Christ is in him, all other gifts and graces
whatsoever being of no value or force in the least to give any assurance or
true knowledge to a man's soul that he is truly and effectually called by the
Gospel to the estate of grace and hope of glory, for then only it is that the
Gospel becomes the power of God to our salvation, when as thereby Christ is
formed in us according to the words of the Apostle to the Galatians saying my
little children of whom I travel in birth again until Christ be formed in
you. Cap. 4. 19. The same is confirmed by that speech of the Apostle to the
Colossiaus wherein he discribes what is the riches of the glorious mystery of
the Gospel amongst the gentills saying, which riches is Christ in you the hope
of glory. Cap. 1, 27. The use of this is to teach us, that in vain any man
contents himself with any other thing whatsoever, thereby hoping to be saved
if he have not Christ within him, and that he himself know it, for with out him
nothing availes to salvation, since nothing can make a man the child of God but
he aloue, in so far that faith it self is not the true faith of Gods elect
whereby the heart is purified, and a sinner justified and saved, except that by
it Christ be brought in, and made to dwell in the heart, and that in such
evidency that the believing man know that he has Christ within him, for its
impossible that a man can have Christ, but that he must know that he has him,
such is the lively operation and supernatural working of Christ in the soul
where he is, illuminating, quickening, and transforming every man who has him
in the spirit of his mind, and in pacifying and comforting the conscience, and
in filling and replenishing the soul with the sense of Gods love, and hope of
his glory that never man could ever more clearly discern that he has a
soul within him by the natural effects thereof in his body; then a christian
may perceive Christ to be within him by his proper effects before mentioned.

Out of this use we gather a second: viz. That a man should set himself to
gain Christ, rather and above all things, esteeming all other things but
loss, and judging all to be but dung for the excellent knowledge sake of Jesus
Christ our Lord, according as Paul did Philip. 3. 8. So (as with the same
Apostle) he may sencibly know the virtue of his resurrection and the fellowship
of his afflictions. and be made conform to him in his death ibid. ver. 10 For
as Christ himself says, What avails it a man to win the whole world if he
loose? his soul. Mark. 8, 36. But certain it is, that every soul shall
perish eternally hereafter which gayneth not Christ in this present life. This
yealds matter of just reproof against the most part of men (if not all) who
labor so much for the things of this earth, which are but transitory vanities
and help nothing to their salvation, and make so small account of gayning
Christ, for the in^oying of whom (even when they are invited unto him) will not
forsake the smallest ease, proffit or pleasure of this life; but make light of
him, and go their ways, one to his farm, another about his merchandise;
others take the inviters and use them sharply and kill them: As Christ himself
tells us in the ^arable^, Mat. 22. 5, 6. And ^e were to be wished that these
were the worst sort of the dispisers of Christ, (though these be so bad that
they shall never taste of the supper of the great King) but there is another
sort much more to be lame^red who are lovers of sinful pleasures more then of
God, spending the time, appointed and set for the purchase and gayning of
Christ, in abominable filthiness, in chambring, and wontonnesse in gluttony,
and drunckennesse, in sport and unlawful gayming and sinful recreation of the
flesh, and had rather loose the opportunity of gayning Christ in a sermon, then
fail to accomplish the least desire of their sinful hearts in fulfilling the
lusts of the flesh, whose judgment must needs be heavy and grievous before
God, seeing willingly they choose death with the contempt of life.

And thus much for the points of trial, now follows the fourth point which is
the argument it self, whereby the Apostle enforces them to acknowledge that
Christ in his ministry was not weak toward the^, but mighty in them, which
may be fully gathered after this manner in 2 several arguments, the first
whereof is containd in the preceding words in this form: If ye by trial find
yourselves to be in the faith, and Christ in you, the^ must ye acknowledge that
Christ is not weak but mighty in my ministry toward you, but by trial ye
shall find that you are in the faith and Christ in you, therefore ye must
acknowledge Christ to be mighty in my ministry toward you. The 2. Argument is
the confirmation of the 2 part of this, that is: that by trial they shall find
themselves in the faith and Christ in them after this manner, either ye must
find your selves in the faith and Christ in you, or the^ ye must be reprobate
Christians, but we confidently trust ye shall find ye are not reprobate
Christians, therefore ye must find yourselvs to be in the faith and Christ in
you. All the 3 parts of this argument may be easily gathered out of the Apo.
words, for the proposition is plain in the 5 verse, the assumtion, or 2 part
is set down in terms equivalent in the 6 verse, and the conclusion is employed
in the Apostles urged interrogation what etc. in the 5 verse: of which
conclusion we have spoken already: touching the assumption or 2 part we are not
to speak, so it rests that we only entreat of the proposition or first part,
which seems at the first to be a difficile and hard saying, but yet is most
certain and true, for if that sentence of the Apo. be marked, which is set
down in the 13 of the Acts, to wit, that all they who were ordained to
eternal life believed, we shall find that the Apo. reasons according to the
truth of the Gospel, and that it follows necessarily, that whosoever by the
true ministry of the Gospel are not made to believ, and to embrace Christ,
must be of the number of those whom God never ordeynd to eternal life, and
this is clear by 2 places of scripture besides many other, the 1. is in the
Epistle to Tytus. Cap. 1. verse 1. where the Apostle calls faith, the faith of
Gods elect, which is as much as to tell us, not only that the Gospel begets
faith in none but such only as are elected, but also that it does beget faith
in every one that is elected. The 2 is, in the Gospel of Ioh. 10, 26, 27, viz.
But ye believe not, because ye are not of my sheep as I said unto you, for my
sheep hear my voice and I know them, and they follow me, and this is
confirmed by the words of Christ in the 6 of John verse 35, 36, 37. he that
believes in me shall never thirst, but I said unto you, that ye also have
seen me and believe not, all that the father gives me shall come unto me,
where he plainly affirms the cause why they did not believe, to be because
the father had not given the^ unto him, or which is equivalent, because they
were not of his sheep, both which phrases import as much as that they were none
of Gods elect: so that we may conclude in the very words of the Apo. answering
this demand, has God cast away his people what then says the Apostle, Israel
has not abtayned that he sought but the election has obtained it and the rest
have been hardened. Out of all which we are plainly taught by God, that in
whom the Gospel truly preached works no faith, and in whom by faith it
planteth not Christ, they must be reprobats, hereby we learn that tho Gospel
preached is the fan of Christ by which in this life he makes a division of the
chafe from the corn, and severeth those whom the father has given him from
the wicked and such as are forsaken of God, what then have they to boast of who
vilipending the Gospel and ministry thereof as foolishnes do thereby testify
against themselves that they are reprobats, but wisdom is justified of her own
children for whomsoever the Gospel begets, they do acknowledge it to be both
the wisdom and power of God unto salvation, and to them the feet of those that
publish it are beautiful. To conclude this point, we may justly despise those
dispysers, and al their contempt of our ministry, seeing it does no hurt to us,
nor our blessed ministry, but does discover them to us, although not to
themselves that they are rejected of God, for if the Apo. conclude aright in the
first Epist and 1 Chap. to the These. that he knew that they were elected of
God, because his Gospel was unto them not in word only, but also in power,
does not also this conclusion stand on the contrary, that they are not elect of
God to who^ the Gospel is only in word, and not in power, the words of Peter
do demonstrate the truth of this matter plainly, when he sets down this
different judgment of men touching Christ Jesus our faviour, saying, unto you
therefore which believe it is precious: but 1. Pet. 2, 7. 8.
unto them which be disobedient the stone which the builders disallowed the
same is made the head of corner and a stone to stumble at and Rock of offense,
even to them which stumble at the word, being disobedient: unto the which thing
they were even ordained. We need no clearer evide^ce therefore to make known
unto us who are elect, and who are reprobate and forsaken of God, but this;
even the judgment and estimation of every man concerning the Gospel; and
ministry thereof. What shall we say then of this miserable age, wherein we do
live, in which there be so few that make any account at all of the blessed word
of God, and messengers of Christ, who of all men are counted the basest, and
their calling the most contemptible. O Germany, Germany, this is the cheiffest
cause of thy present misery, and that thou above all nations art continually
troad upon, because of all nations thou did most basely esteem of Christ's
servants, and use them in most slavish manner. Lord upon the eyes of these
Provinces where we dwell, that seeing themselves guilty of the same offense they
may in time preve^t the like judgment upon the like sin, by unfeigned amendeme^t
surely we may say that there is no hope of delivery for the one nor of farther
blessing to the other from God, until this iniquity be redressed, oh that they
would give us occasion with co^fide^ce to pray to God for his mercy to them,
and boldly to say to him thou will arise and have mercy Isa. ^ 14.
upon Zion, for the time to have mercy thero^, for the appointed time is come,
for thy servants delight in the stones thereof, and have pity on the dust
thereof, certainly that promise of the Lord in his prophet I say is co^stantely
true, viz. that in Isa. ^
the day wh^^ the bud of the Lord shall be beautiful, and glorious, and the
(...) shall be excellent, (...) that day the Lord (...) every place of mount
Zion, and (...) assemblies thereof a cloud and smoke by day, and the shyning of
a flameing fire by night, for upon all the glory shall be a defense, and a
covering shall be for a shadow in the day for the heat, and a place of refuge,
and a covert for the storm, and for the rain. And now beloved I end with this
warning from that same prophet to you, to them, and all the churches of God: if
thou turn away thy foot from the sabbath, from doing thy will on (...). 13.
mine holy day, and call the sabbath a delight to consecrate it ^s glorious to
the Lord, and shall honor him, not doing thyn own ways, not seeking thyn own
will, nor speaking a vain word, then shall thou delight in the Lord, and I will
(...) to mount upon the high places of the earth and feed thee with the (...)
vid thy father: (...) Lord has (...)

AMEN

