THE TOTAL SVMME. OR No danger of Damnation unto Roman Catholics for any
Error in Faith: Nor any hope of Salvation for any Sectary whatsoever that
does knovvingly oppose the Doctrine of the Roman Church.

This is proved by the Confessions, and Sayings of M. William Chillingvvorth
his Book.

Summa est quae conficitur ex Confessis. Aug. princ. dialect. cap. 3. Vnum est
necessarium. Luc. 10. v. 42. Permissu Superiorum. 1639.

The Preface.
THIS Discourse was intended at first, as the Conclusion and closing up of the
Treatise I termed, The Church Conquerant over human Wit: but being when I
wrote it, in great doubt, that the said Treatise was lost in the transporting
thereof from one place to another (which often happens in Countries which are
infested with war) I resolved to make this Discourse more large, by the
discovery of many other Contradictions in this our Adversary, and with the
Refutation of such tergiuersations, as Cauillers might devise, to stay piously
disposed Protestants, from yielding prompt and assured assent to this most
important Verity.

And as they who make Bills of Account, when they have set down distinctly for
their discharge, the particular Sums of expenses; are accustomed in the end
in few Ciphers to abbreuiate the Total Sum; so this Treatise coming after
the former, as the Conclusion thereof; I have given it the name of Total
Sum, the Argument handled therein being worthy of that style. For what is the
final mark, the Total, the All in all Deu^ time, and mandata eius obserua:
hoc est enim omnis homo. Ecclesiastae c. 12. v. 13.
of our pious endeauours, labors, cares, sollicitudes in this mortal life,
but only to find out the true Religion, wherein one shall be sure of his
Salvation, if simply and constantly he believe the Doctrines, and live
according to the laws thereof.

Verily this is the pith, the marrow, the Sum, the quintessence of all
Controversies ventilated betwixt Protestants and us: and in particular it was
the sole scope of that short substantial Treatise Charity mistaken by
Protetestants; which being by D. Potter, in his Want of Charity, impugned, was
defended and confirmed by the learned labors and elucubrations of Charity
maintained. For the maine Co^trouersy debated in these three books is, whether
Roman Catholics and Protestants may both be saved in their several
Religions: or which comes to the same issue, seeing Protestants grant we may be
saved in our Religion, because our Errors are not Fundamental and damnable,
whether it is not want of Charity in us, that we will not requite them with the
like mild, gentle, and comfortable doom; but constantly maintain, that
Salvation cannot be had in any course of Separation, and Opposition against
Doctrine proposed by the Roman Church, as matter of faith.

And though this our Catholic determination has been in the before named
Treatise demonstrated, especially in the two last Chapters thereof; which show
all Sects and Diuisioners, all Protesters, and Opposers against the Church of
Rome, to be guilty of the two most heinous crimes, Schism, and Heresy: yet I
have thought fit and convenient, to handle this Total of Controversies in a
particular short Treatise: wherein omitting the former two heads of proof, I
have urged peculiar, and proper Arguments, grounded upon evident Truths
confessed, approved, confirmed even by this our Adversary, whose Book
Protestants so much esteem as they stand thereon against the clear
demonstrations for the Catholic Church brought by Charity maintained.

If in this very Book, in which they so much confide (which bears the title,
The Religion of Protestants a safe way to Salvation) the happy security of
Roman Catholics, and together the unavoidable danger of their Opposers be
proved, and proclaimed; if no safe path to Salvation for English Protestants be
showed in his Treatise; but they be forced to go the broad way, wherein the
most damned Heretics that live under the cope of Heaven, not only
Anabaptists and Arians; but also the new Samosatenians, or Socinians may be
saved as well as they: this being showed, our Protestants will be compassed
about on every side with the light and evidence of this eternally importing
Truth, No hope of salvation out of the Catholic Roman Church.

And then, God forbid, they should not yield unto so clear Euictions, but fall
into the extreme misery of peevish obstinacy, whereof S. Augustine says, Nihil
infelicius homine, Lib 3. contra let Petil c. 13.
qui non vult cedere veritati, qua ita concluditur, vt exitum inuenire non
possit: Nothing more unhappy and wretched, then the man that will not yield
unto that truth, wherewith he is so concluded and enclosed, as he knows not
which way to get out.

THE TOTAL SVMME. OR The assured Salvation of Roman Catholics etc.
An Advertisement.
IN this treatise as in the other, I have been exact, and even scrupulous, to
rehearse fully and largely our Adversaries formal words: many times also,
though they were cited before, repeating them again, for the Readers greater
ease, and to make this point whereon the Total of our Eternity does so much
depend, clear and plain. In the text I cite the Page, Number and Line, or
when there is no number in the page, or when the place cited comes before any
number, only page and line. I have also in the margent quoted the Chapter and
number, whereby the Reader may find the words in the second edition of London.

The first Conviction.
1. THis is drawn from the concession of Protestants, that Roman Catholics
may be saved in their Religion; because their errors are but little ons, not
Fundamental, or in themselves damnable; whereas Roman Catholics neither do,
nor can by the principles of their Religion grant the same warrant to any
whatsoever, that continues unto death an opposer of the Church of Rome. An
argument often urged by Charity maintained, grounded on a testimony of D.
Potter, which you say he builds on, in almost Page 279. n. 64.
forty, yea more then in Page 397. n 18.
an hundred places of his book: and you, as often at least, strive and
struggle with this Argument, laboring to remove the pressing difficulties
thereof, with the same progress and success, as Sifiphus Saxu^ versat neque
proficit hilu^.
is said to make, who to advance a huge stone vp-hill, strives eternally in
vain. Your euasions and shifts, I will particularly refute, and lay open
their falsehood and vanity; whereby it shall be made apparent, that both the book
of Charity maintained rests hitherto unanswered, and that this Argument
drawn from the confession of Protestants, is altogether unanswerable. I shall
first propose our Argument, strenthened with D. Potters suffrage. Secondly,
discover how impudently you deny D. Potters text. Thirdly, how at last you
acknowledge it, and give an explication thereof full of gross ignorance.
Fourthly, how weakly, and in vain you would seem to contemn this Argument as
poor, and seely. Fifthly, I will declare the force of this Argument, and show
the reason why Protestants (that be wise, and not distempered with furious
zeal) dare not condemn the Roman Religion and Communion, as damnable of it
self. Finally, that not only Roman Catholics, but that you your selves dare
not maintain, that the Religion of Protestants is a safe way to salvation; yea
you grant the same not to be free from errors damnable of themselves.

The Argument propounded.. 1.
2. THe Argument I set down in this manner. No man shall be, or can be damned
eternally, for errors, which be not damnable of themselves. This is clear;
Because God being just, who renders to every one according to their deserts,
cannot punish men more then their offenses do of themselves deserve, but rather
somewhat under their merit. But the errors pretended to be found in the Roman
Church, cannot of themselves deserve eternal damnation, being but venial, but
little ones, and not damnable of themselves, as Protestants grant. This
Assumption needs no proof, being notorious over all England. For what more
daily and usual, what more frequent and familiar, then for Protestants to
reproach us with want of Charity; because we will not yield their errors not
to be damnable nor destructive of salvation, as they grant ours to be. This is
confirmed by the often reiterated confession of D. Potter specially pa. 77.
where he has these words: To forsake the errors of the Roman Church, and not
to join with her in those practices we account erroneous, we are forced of
necessity. For though in themselves they be not damnanable to them which
believe as they profess; yet for us to profese what we believe not, were
without question damnable. And they with their errors (by the grace of God)
might go to Heaven, when we for our hypocrisy and dissimulation without
repentance, should certainly be condemned to Hell. And again: To him who in
simplicity of heart belieues and professes them, and withal fears God and
works righteousness, to him they shall prove venial: such a one shall by
the mercy of God be delivered from them, or be saved with them. But he that
against Faith and Conscience shall go along with the stream, to profess and
practice them, because they are but little-ones, his Case is dangerous, and
without repentance desperate. And again. page 19. We believe the Roman
Religion safe, that is, not damnable to some, such as believe what they
profess; but we believe it not safe, but very dangerous (if not certainly
damnable) to such as profess it, when they believe the contrary.

Your impudent denial of the text.. 2.
3. YOu acknowledge that Charity maintained urges this testimony of D. Potter,
and builds his discourse thereon often: which you say, he does fraudule^tly as
an egregious Sophister, impudently without conscience or modesty outfacing the
truth. For Protestants Page 400. n. 28. Cap. 7. n. 2^.
you say, neither do, or ever did acknowledge, that our errors are not
damnable: and that you for your part, though you were on the rack, should not
confess it. As for D. Potter you deny, that he said of the errors he imputes
to the Roman Church, though in themselves they be not damnable; yea you contest
that his words are, though in themselves they be damnable. Cap. 5. n. 58. lin.
8.
Page 275. lin. 4. D. Potter confesses no such matter, but only that he hopes
that your errors, though in themselves sufficiently damnable, yet by accident
did not damn all that held them; such he means, and says, as were excusably
ignorant of the truth. And Cap. 5. n. 26. lin. 17.
page 263. n. 26. Where does D. Potter say any such thing as you pretend etc.
He says indeed, that though your errors were in themselves damnable, and full
of great impiety; yet he hopes those amongst you who were inuincibly ignorant
of the truth, might by Gods great mercy have their errors pardoned. Thus you.
And you repeat it, almost in the same words, in an hundred passages of your
Book, still noting these words, though in themselves damnable, in a distinct
character, as D. Potters formal text, which yet is no where found in any part
of his Treatise.

4. And in this denial of the text, in this contestation, that D. Potter said
of our Errors, though in themselves they be damnable, you with great show of
confidence persist, till almost the very finishing of your Book. Then being
but three leaves from the end (as Thieves when they are ready to be cast of the
ladder, make true confessions) stricken with remorse of conscience, you utter
this deposition against your self Cap. 7. n. 29. Indeed D. Potter says of
your errors, though in themselves they be not damnable to them which believe
as they profess; yet for us to profess what we believe not, were without
question damnable, Is this true? Does D. Potter say of our errous though in
themselves they be not damnable? Has he these very words indeed? See the^
whether the reproach which you cast unworthily on Charity maintained, the
reproach of outfacing the truth without conscience or modesty, do not fall
heavily on your own head. For now upon the ending of your Book you confess,
that D. Potter indeed says of our Errors, though in themselves they be not
damnable, whereas before you said and repeated it again and again, with deep
protestation, and insolent insultation against your Adversary, that D. Potter
said no such thing; yea that his words were the plain contradiction, to wit,
though in themselves they be damnable, and full of great impiety. How this can
be excused from the crime of forgery, I do not see.

5. More cunningly and in show not so enormously, but indeed no less
fraudulently and maliciously, do you change the pointing of D. Potters text,
and so turn his assertion into the plain contrary. He page 79. in the name of
English Protestants says of the Roman Religion: We believe it safe, that is,
by Gods great mercy not damnable to some, such as believe what they profess.
Thus he; and he makes a Comma between some, and such, to divide them, and to
show that such is used not to limit the some that are not damned; but to
declare who they be, to wit, all such as cordially believe our Roman Religion
and profess it. You reciting his words Page 404. lin. 20. Cap. 7. n. 29.
leave out the Comma, and join some and such together, making the Doctor
say, We believe her Religion safe, that is by Gods great mercy not damnable to
some such as believe as they profess. As who should say, D. Potter grants our
Religion safe, and not damnable to some, who in simplicity of heart believe and
profess it, not to all such, but some such only. Against his express Tenet
and Page 76. lin. 26.
text, yea further you urge this text corrupted by your dispunction thereof as
an Argument, that D. Potter holds our errors damnable in themselves. Page
306. lin. 1. Cap. 5. n. 105. lin. 23.
It is remarkable, that he confesses your errors to some men not damnable,
which clearly importes, that according to his judgment they were damnable of
themselves, though by accident, to them who lived and dyed in invincible
ignorance, they might prove not damnable. Thus you argue upon your own
corruption of D. Potters text. For in truth he confesses the errors imputed
unto us not to be damnable, and our Religion to be safe, not to some such only,
but to all such as believe as they profess, to all such as be not
hypocritical Professors, but profess it in simplicity of heart, believing it
to be true. Nor does he say, that unto such Roman belieuers our errors are not
damnable by accident (as you feign) but the express contrary, that even in
themselves they be not damnable to them. Behold how opposite is D Potters true
sentence, to that you have forged for him. You make him Page 278 lin. 8. cap.
5. n. 61.
say, Our errors are even in themselves damnable, and only by accident
pardonable; whereas he says the contrary, they are in themselves but
littleons, but venial, and consequently, if any sincere Roman Catholics be
damned, this is by accident, by reason of some extrinsecal damnable
circumstance, not by the intrinsecal malignity of their errors, not by the
force such errors have in themselves, and in their own nature to merit
damnation.

6. But some may object, that D. Potter does not say absolutely, Our errors be
not in themselves damnable, but only, not in themselves damnable to them that
believe as they profess, which is a different thing. I answer, this is a
subtilty which finds a difference where there is no diversity. As to say of a
potion, that it is not of it self deadly to such as drink it, and take it
into their bowels and heart, is all one as to say, it is deadly to none, but
harmless and innoxious in it self: so to say, our errors are not in
themselves damnable to such as heartily believe and profess them, is as much
as to say, they are of themselves damnable unto none, but absolutely venial
and of their own nature not destructive of Salvation. For to whom may they be
in themselves damnable, if they be not so to them that take them into their
heart by sincere and cordial belief. As none can be damned for sin, but
such as commit sin; so none can be damned for erring, but such as err, and
are guilty of erring. Now those that in their heart believe not errors, do not
err, nor are guilty of erring: wherefore, such neither are, nor can be damned
for erring, or holding of errors. For if they hypocritically, profess Errors
which they do not believe, they be damnable indeed; but not for erring, but for
their hypocrisy and dissimulation, as D. Potter truly says.

Your ignorant exposition of D. Potter.. 3.
7. Having at last acknowledged D. Potters text, that he said of our errors,
though in themselves they be not damnable, you Cap. 7. n. 29. initio.
tell us; that we mistake his meaning, by taking a supposition of a confession,
for a confession, a Rhetorical concession of the Doctors, for a positive
assertion. For to say, though your Errors be not damnable we may not profess
them, is not to say, Your errors are not damnable, but only through they be
not: As if you should say; Though the Church err in points not fundamental;
yet you may not separate from it; or, Though we do err in believing Christ
really present, yet our error frees us from Idolatry. I presume you would not
think it fayrely done, if any man should interpret these your speeches, as
confessions that you do err in points not fundamental; that you err in
believing the Real Presence. And therefore you ought not to have mistaken D
Potters words, as if he confessed the Errors of your Church not damnable;
when he says no more, then this, though they be not damnable, or suppose, or
put case they be not damnable. Thus you. Wherein your falsehood is notable, Page
77.
and your ignorance admirable. First, it is false, that D. Potter says no more
but this, though they be not damnable. For besides this he says, that
Protestants who believe them to be errors, must not presume to profess them
because they are but littleons. He says in the name of all Protestants: We
believe the Roman Religion to be safe, that is, not damnable to such as believe
as they profess. We hope and think very well of all those holy and devout
souls which informer ages lived and died in the Church of Rome etc. We doubt
not but they obtained pardon of all their ignorances. Nay our Charity reaches
further to All those at this day who in simplicity of heart believe the Roman
Religion, and profess it. Be these Rhetorical Concessions, not Positive
Assertions, that the errors which Protestants impute to the Roman Church are
not damnable of themselves; but only by accident, when they are hypocritically
against conscience professed?

8. Secondly, I am amazed that you a Master of Arts of Oxford, of so long
standing are ignorant of the difference in speech, betwixt the Present Tense,
and the Preter imperfect, which every man and woman by common sense does feel
and perceive. For the particle though, joined with a verb of the Present
Tense, does suppose a thing present, and existing in reality and truth: so
that, if you will suppose the existence of a thing by imagination, or in
conceyt only; you must use the Preter imperfect. Wherefore neither the Author
of Charity maintained, nor any Catholic that is intelligent, will say to you
in the Present Tense, as you make him, Though the Church do err in points not
fundamental, yet you must not separate from it; but in the Preter imperfect;
Though the Church did err in points fundamental, yet you were not to separate
from her. Nor will he, or any Catholic that is wise, use that either sottish
or impious speech you have penned for him, Though we err in believing Christ
really present, yet our error frees us from Idolatry. God forbid. This were
not a Rhetorical Concession, but a Diabolical Profession, that our belief of
the Real presence is an error. A true Catholic that can utter his mind in
good English will say, Though we did err in believing the Real Presence of
our Lords Body in the Eucharist; yet this error would free us from Idolatry.
Thus the examples you bring of Rhetorical Concessions make against you, being
in deed positive Assertions, and show your discourse to be neither good Logic,
nor Rhetoric, nor Grammar.

9. And I pray you, the Proposition you have forged for D. Potter, though the
errors of the Roman Church be in themselves damnable, and full of great
impiety, yet by accident they do not damn all that hold them; is it not a
Positive Assertion that our doctrines are damnable and full of great impiety in
D. Potters opinion? Wherefore this proposition which is truly D. Potters: though
the errors of the Roman Church be not in themselves damnable, yet Protestants
who know them to be Errors, may not profess them, is a positive Assertion,
that our supposed errors be not damnable in his judgment. Should one say to
you, though in your judgment you believe Christ our Savior not to be true
God, yet you dare not profess it outwardly for fear of the faggot; would you
take this as a Rhetorical supposition, not as a Real accusation, that you are
an Infidel in your heart? Is it possible you should be guilty of so gross
ignorance and nonsense as this? No verily. But perchance the matter is this:
you say Page 395. l. 3. If this did appear, to persuade any man to continue a
Protestant, were to persuade him to continue a Fool.
that Protestants, to whom the Roman Religion appears, though but probably,
the safer, cannot continue Protestants, except they continue fools. Now
Protestants by this confession of D. Potter, cannot but see apparently, the
Roman Religion to be the safer. Wherefore, that, this notwithstanding, they may
continue still Protestants; you would make them such fools, as to believe,
that, though, joined with a verb in the Present Tense, does import only an
imaginary, not a real supposition. Wherefore if you should say (as in effect
you do say) though the Religion of Protestants be false and damnable, yet I
will do my best to defend it; Protestants must be such fools as to take this,
not as a positive assertion, that their Religion is false and damnable in your
judgment; but as a Rhetorical Concession, as if you had said; Imagine, or put
case, the Religion of Protestants be false and damnable. I hope Protestants
will be wiser then to be made such fools by you as to continue in a Religion
which cannot be maintained, but by such fopperies as these.

Your Vanity in contemning the foresaid Argument.. 4.
9. You many times seem to contemn and scorn the Argument drawn from the
confession of Protestants, and the former testimony of D. Potter. You say we
rely upon his private Opinion, upon his uncertain Page 226. n. 63.
Charitable hope, that Page 116. n. 158. in fine.
his thinking so is no reason we should think so, except we think him
infallible, that whosoever is moved with his argument is so simple etc. Wherein
you may seem (which happens very seldom) to agree with D. Potter, who does
much slight our arguing from the Confession of our Adversaries page. 81. If
they have no better ground of their belief then their Adversaries Charitable
judgment of their errors; they will be so far from conuincing their
Adversaries of lack of wisdom, that themselves cannot escape the imputation
of folly.

10. Thus the Doctor endeauours to lay the imputation of folly upon us, for
urging our adversaries favorable judgment of our errors, as a good argument,
that may move men to embrace our Religion. But in this charging us with folly,
his own lack of wisdom and consideration may be convinced, by what he
writes some few pages before against zelots: for these he condemns not only
of want of charity, but also of lack of wisdom, for judging so severely of
our errors as to cut us of from hope of Salvation. Page 76. The Roman Churches
communion (says he) we forsake not, no more then the Body of Christ; whereof
we acknowledge the Church of Rome a member, though corrupted. And this cleeres
us from the imputation of Schism, whose property it is, to cut of from the
Body of Christ, and hope of Salvation, the Church from which it separates. And
if any Zelots amongst us have proceeded to heavier censures, their zeal may be
excused, but their Charity and Wisdom cannot be justified. Thus he. From
which words I conclude a double truth; the one against you, the other against
D. Potter himself. The first; that this Charitable judgment about the
Salvation of Roman Catholics, because their errors are small, and not in
themselves damnable, is not the private opinion of D. Potter; but the censure
and doom of the whole Protestant english Church, condistinct from zelots, or
Puritans. For how can this whole Church be justified, and cleared from the
imputation of Schism, by reason of her Charitable judgment of our errors, if
this be not the Charitable judgment of this whole Church, but only the opinion
of D. Potter, and of some other few private Protestants? Secondly I gather,
that this judgment is not only according to Christian Charity; but also
according to Christian Wisdom, and flows from the rules and Principles of
them both. Otherwise what cause or reason has D. Potter to charge Zelots, who
judge not favorably of our errors, with want not only of Charity, but also of
wisdom: Their Charity (says he) and Wisdom cannot be justified? If the
judgment of Protestants so favorable about our errors be of mere Charity, not
wise, not prudent, not solidely grounded on truth; why may not the wisdom of
Zelots, who will not consent thereunto be justified? On the other side, if the
judgment of Protestants be conform to Christian wisdom and Divine truth,
what wisdom is it in D. Potter to charge us with folly and want of wisdom,
for building and relying thereon?

11. Besides, this iugdment of Protestants, that we may be saved in our
Religion, our errors not being damnable, if it be void of wisdom, and not
solidly grounded on truth; how is it charitable, that is, how can it proceed
from true Christian Charity? If fond love and affection to the salvation of
Creatures, not guided by the rules of Christian truth, be Christian charity;
then the judgment of Origin were full of Christian Charity, who extended
salvation even unto Devils. Wherefore your judgment, that we may be saved,
because our errors are not damnable, cannot be charitable, unless it be
conform to the rules, and principles of Christian truth and wisdom: on which
if it be grounded, why may we not build, and rely thereon? Why may we not
without imputation of folly, make this one pillar of our comfort, and constancy
in the Roman Communion and Faith?

12. Add hereunto, that it is even ridiculous in D. Potter and other
Protestants of his stamp, to brag and boast as they do, that forsooth it is
Cap. 4. n. 63. lin. 22. Excess of charity may make him ce^sure your errors
more favorably, the^ he should do.
excess of their Charity and good will to the Roman Church, which makes them
to judge so kindly and favorably of her errors. For, by their words and
writings, they show themselves to be void of all love and Charity, and to be
full of bitter zeal and passion toward her; so far, that though in their
conscience they judge her free from damnable errors, yet in their passion they
hate, and abhor, rate and revile her, as if she were the vildest Religion in
the world. These speeches of D. Potter against her, she has many ways played
the Harlot, and in that regard deserved a bill of divorce from Christ, and the
detestation of Christians: the proud and cursed Dame of Rome, which takes upon
her to revel in the house of God: Popery is the contagion and plague of the
Church. These speeches I say every man will presently perceive, that they are
void of Charity, words of contumely and reproach, proceeding not from clear
and calm judgment, but from the fuming furnace of passion: you produce them,
as if D. Potter by them did overthrow what we have proved to be his judgment,
that our errors be not damnable: But in very truth they be only passionate
speeches, uttered without judgment, reason, or discretion, yea against his own
judgment; tokens of his mortal auersion from that Church, in whom he can
find no mortal or damnable error. It is not then Charity or kind affection,
or any good will to Roman Catholics, which moves D. Potter, and such other
Ministers to maintain the errors of the Roman Church to be but littleones,
and not damnable; but because they dare not hold the contrary, in regard of the
unchristian absurdities, which they perceive to be consequent thereon, as by the
next Section will appear.

All Christians of former ages damned, if the errors of the Roman Church be
damnable of themselves.. 5.
13. CAn any absurdity be more vast and unchristian then this contained in the
title of this paragraph? What wonder, if Protestants (that be moderate, and not
carried away with precipitous zeal) through horror to be forced unto this
immanity, dare not affirm, that our errors are in themselves damnable; though
otherwise their little love toward us considered, they could do it with all
their heart. To prove this vast absurdity to be consequent upon the said
proposition, we must suppose, what no man does or can deny, that for many ages
before Luther, all the famous men for learning and sanctity, who by heroical
acts of Charity, and other Christian virtues, and working of Miracles
maintained the credit of the Christian name, held the doctrines of the Roman
Church, which Protestants contend to be erroneous. The fame is also evident
concerning the Fathers of the more Primitive times, and is confessed by
Protestants, Defense against the reply of Cartwright page 47.
namly D. Whitgift late Archbishop of Canterbury: Almost all the Bishops and
Writers of the Greek Church, and of the Latin also, for the most part were
spotted with the doctrines of freewill, of Merit, of Invocation of Saints, and
such like; So that, if the Doctrines of the Roman Church, which Protestants
traduce as erroneous, be damnable of themselves; it is consequent, that the
most famous Bishops, Doctors and Saints in so many former Christian ages were
guilty of errors in themselves, and of themselves damnable: which being so,
they should be all certainly damned, without any hope of their Salvation.

14. This consequence I prove by what you by write Cap. 7. n. 26. lin. 30.
page 403. lin. 30. They that have understanding and means to discover their
errors, and neglect to use them; we dare not flatter with so easy a censure as
to give them hope of Salvation. But the eminent Fathers and Christian Saints
of so many ages before Luther, had sufficient understanding, and means to
discover their errors; and yet never made use of them. They had excellent
understandings, they were verst in all manner of sciences, and they had the
holy Scripture, which you say is the only means to know all necessary truth,
and to discover all damnable errors; a means not only sufficient, but also,
in your judgment, most plain, and easy; so that men not only may, but also
cannot but therein discover which be damnable errors, except they wilfully shut
their eyes against the light. Therefore there is no hope of the salvation of
the Ancient Fathers, and Saints of former Christian ages, if your Proposition
be true, they who had sufficient understanding and means to discover their
errors, and neglected to use them, there is for them no hope of Salvation.
Moreover, Cap. 6. n. 64. lin 8.
page 279. number. 64. lin. 8. you say, that which is in it self damnable, will
actually bring damnation upon them, that keep themselves in it, by their own
voluntary and auoydable fault; But the Ancient Fathers and holy Saints in the
ages before Luther held the doctrines of the Roman Church which you account
damnable, full of great impiety and Idolatry, and they kept themselves in them
(according to your grounds) by their own voluntary and auoydable fault: for
they had sufficient means to discover their errors, to wit, they had the holy
Scripture, wherein (as you say) these errors are discovered, not only with
sufficient, but also with abundant clarity, Preface. n. 11. lin. 17. How is it,
possible any thing should be plainer forbidden, then the worship of Angels etc.
page 181. n. 86. Places of scripture against our errors as clear as the light
at noone.
that there cannot possibly be greater; you must therefore of necessity grant,
that these damnable and impious errors (if they be such as you say they are)
brought actually damnation upon the Fathers and Saints of former ages. Again,
page 290. lin. 2. of living in the Communion of the Roman Church, and approving
her doctrines and practices you say, Cap. 5. n. 86.
Though we hope it was pardonable in them who had no means to know their
error; yet of its own nature, and to them who did or might have known their
error, it was certainly damnable. Now the holy Fathers, and Christian Saints
of former ages might have known our errors (if they be errors) because they
had the holy Scriptures in which, you say, such errors are discovered, and
their damnable falsehood, so plainly, as nothing can be more: If then you say
true, that the Roman Religion, is full of great impiety and damnable doctrines,
it is evidently consequent by your principles, that all holy Bishops, Doctors,
and Saints who are confessed to have held the said doctrines, are certainly
damned for ever, no hope remaining of their salvation. Wherefore the reason why
Protestants hold our Religion safe, and a sure way to Heaven, as being free
from damnable error, is not Charity and excess of good will they bear to our
persons, as they pretend; but fear of the vast absurdity, which they see
consequent thereupon, that so many former ages, and worlds of holy Bishops,
Doctors, Conuerters of Nations, workers of Miracles, and admirable Saints, are
certainly damned.

15. There be many Protestant Ministers that could find in their hearts to
grant this dismal position of the damnation of the ancient ever esteemed
Saints, if the same would stand them in steed to maintain the division from
the Roman Church; yet they dare not venture clearly to auerre so much, for
fear that this would produce the contrary effect, and move many of their
followers to recoyle back from them. For in the separation made by Luther from
the Roman Church, there be many piously inclined minds, careful of their
future eternity either of weal or woe, cordially desirous to be secure of the
happiness of the one, and mighty fearful to fall into the misery of the other.
Should Protestant Ministers clearly deliver their minds, that the Roman
Religion is damnable even of it self, a direct way to Hell, and that such as
walk, or have walked therein are certainly damded; these piously disposed and
timorous Souls would feel horror to be of the Protestant Religion, which
cannot be the way of salvation, except the Roman Christianity so great, so
glorious, so continued from Christ and his Apostles, containing within her
bosom, so many worlds of holy Bishops, learned and pious Pastors, and of
admirable Saints be damned, at least all the intelligent Professors thereof. The
apprehension of this dreadful and dangerous state amazed even the stout and
cursed heart of Luther, when he saw himself engaged in a course, out of which
he could not issue with salvation, except so many former ages of Saints were
damned. Praefat. de abroganda Missa prinata, Quoties palpitauit mihi tremulum
cor. and reprehendens obiecit illud fortissimum argumentum; Tu solus sapis, tot
ne erra^t vniuersi? Tanta saecula ignorauerunt?
How often (says he) did my heart tremble and pant within my breast, obiecting
against me that most strong argument; Art thou only wise? Did so many
Christian worlds in former ages all err? What, if perhaps thou thy self be
in error, and draw an infinite number of Souls after thee into error, to be
damned eternally with thee?

16. You say, Page 397. n. 17.
that your Salvation does not depend on ours, that you might be saved though we
were Turks and Pagans: this I well believe. But now that the Roman Church is
not Turcisme, nor Iudaisme, but a Kingdom of Christ diffused over the earth,
the only Christian Catholic Religion in the world, which is come from our
Savior by conspicuous lineage, and line of succession by the Apostles; what
Christian will not tremble to be in a state, wherein he must expect Salvation
from Christ, by damning that Religion, which is so notoriously descended from
him?

17. The innated instinct of Godliness, the sparks of Piety which nature has
hidden within the bowels of every reasonable soul, move men to acknowledge and
reverence that Religion, as being of God, which they see marked and adorned
with divine and supernatural works, above the course and forces of nature.
Which Majesty of miracles shining so gloriously in the Roman Church, can any
man that is Religious and fearful of God, judge the same damnable, and venture
his soul on the damnation thereof? Wherefore not Love, not Charity, not
Goodwill to the Roman Catholics is that which moves Protestants to pronunce
her Religion safe, and free from damnable error; but the horror of damning
together with us, innumerable millions of holy and heavenly men of former
Christian worlds.

18. Finally Protestants under pretense of favoring and comforting us seek
their own comfort and solace; that they may find some shelter of hope of
salvation under the wings of the Roman Religion, who in their opposition
against her find none, or only poor, meagre and miserable hopes. For, laying
for ground this truth, that our Religion is safe; and then assuming this
falsehood, that theirs is the same with ours for substance and in all necessary
points; they cheer up many drooping hearts, that can feel no comfort in
hoping to be saved by damning the Roman Church: so that care of their own
Sparta, desire to stay the wiser sort of their followers in their course of
Division from the Roman Church; this I say is one of the reasons which makes
Ministers to preach the certainty of Salvation in our Church, and to mask
themselves with a vizard of Charity and Friendship toward us.

That Protestant Religion is not safe, even in your judgment.. 6.
19. YOu say in your Preface n. 39. that you have not undertaken the peculiar
defense of the doctrine of the Church of England; nor of any other particular
Protestant Church, but the common cause of all Protestants, to maintain the
doctrine of them all; not that it is absolutely true, (for, that is impossible
seeing they hold contradictions) but that it is free from all impiety and
damnable error. This drift pretended and professed so gloriously in the Title
and Preface of your book, you cross and contradict in the bosom, and heart
thereof, condemning Protestants of errors, even in themselves, damnable, as I
shall make good and clear by the four ensuing testimonies. First Page 218.
lin. 34. I would not be mistaken, as though I thought the errors of some
Protestants inconsiderable things, and matters of no moment: for the. Truth
is, I am very fearful, that some of their opinions either as they are, or as
they are apt to be mistaken, though not of themselves so damnable, but that
just and holy men may be saved with them; yet are frequent occasions of
remisnes, and not seldom of security in sinning etc. Behold you, who in your
Preface made all Protestants secure of their Salvation, because free from
errors in themselves damnable; now are very fearful of them, and dare not
acquit them of errors considerable, of moment, in themselves damnable, though
not so damnable, but just and holy men may be saved, with them; Which
qualification of your errors does not so temper or allay their malignity, as
to make them less damnable then those you impute to the Roman Church: seeing
you often acknowledge, that with them, and in them, good holy souls may be
saved.

20. Secondly Page 21. lin. 39. you write more clearly to make Protestants,
even millions of them, Answer to the Preface n. 26. in fine.
guilty of damnable errors. If any Protestant, or Papist be betrayed into, or
kept in error by any sin of his will (as it is to be feared many millions
are) such error is (as the cause of it) sinful and damnable; yet not
exclusive of all hope of Salvation, but pardonable, if discovered upon a
particular and explicit repentance; if not discovered, upon a general and
implicit repentance etc. Thus you directly accuse Protestants of sinful and
damnable errors, of errors pardonable, and consequently damnable in
themselves. For you say page 16. n. 21. lin. 15. the very saying they were
pardonable, implies, they needed pardon, and therefore were in themselves
damnable. This being so, how have you cleared the Doctrine of all Protestant
Sects, though not from all falsehood, yet from all error in it self damnable?
How do they all of them go a safe way to salvation, if millions of them walk
in damnable errors, which you say, will bring damnation upon all them that
continue in them by their voluntary fault? What reason can you bring, why your
Book might not be inscribed; The Religion of Papists a safe way to Salvation,
as well as, the Religion of Protestants? For you say Protestants err damnably
as well as we; Millions of them as well as millions of ours; their errors are
damnable in themselves as well as ours; Ours pardonable by Gods great mercy
as well as theirs; they cannot be saved without repentance no more then we; and
we may be saved in our errors by a general repentance as well as they? How then
is not our Religion a safe way to Salvation as well as theirs, even by your
Book of purpose written to save them, and damn us.

21. Thirdly, Page 280. n. 95. lin. 19. Cap. 5. n. 91. lin. 19.
Though Protestants have some Errors; yet seeing they are neither so great as
yours, nor imposed with such tyranny, nor maintained with such obstinacy, he
that conceaues etc. In these words you suppose, that Protestants have errors,
and great errors imposed with tyranny, maintained with obstinacy. How then is
their Religion a safe way of Salvation? Can salvation stand with impious
errors, imposed upon others with tyranny, and maintained with obstinacy until
death? But their errors are not (you say) so great as ours, nor imposed with
such tyranny, nor maintained with such obstinacy. Were this true; it would not
prove Protestancy to be a good and safe way to Salvation, and not in it self
damnable; but only, that ours is more damnable, and a worse way. Besides that
our errors be greater then theirs is said by you many times, but not proved so
much as once. And seeing our errors though (as you say) damnable in themselves
yet be pardonable by Gods great mercy; how be the greater then yours, which are
also damnable in themselves, and only pardonable by Gods great mercy? From the
number of all Protestants, whose Religion you defend to be a safe Way, I hope
Socinians or new Samosatenians are not excluded. These hold, that Christ Jesus
is not the Eternal only begotten Son of God; yea that he was, and is a mere
man, though an holy man, and a great Prophet. Will you say that this error
which conceaues no more divinely of Christ then do the very Turks, is not
greater then any we maintain, not more fundamental, and essentially
destructive of Salvation? If you do, most Protestants in England will think
you worthy of the Faggot?

22. Fourthly, Page 290. number. 87. you write, Cap. 5. n. 87.
that Protestants, seeing they be not free from errors, that it is hardely
possible, but they must be guilty of extreme impiety. In that place you
endeavor to answer our Argument, that it was great imprudency in Protestants
to forsake the whole visible Catholic Church, for errors not fundamental,
seeing they confess, that in their separation against her, they could not be
sure of not falling into errors of the like quality and note, yea into
greater, to wit fundamental. You are in this point eager, and protest, that
Protestants are so far from acknowledging that they have no hope to avoid
this mischief (of erring at the least vn-fundamentally) that they proclaim to
all the world, that it is most prone and easy to do so, to all those that fear
God and love the truth; and hardely possible, for them to do otherwise without
supine negligence and extreme impiety. Ponder I pray you this place, and
confer it with other passadges of your book, and you will see, that you make
all Protestants extremely impious. For it is most prone and easy for
Protestants that fear God and love the truth to avoid all errors, specially
such as need pardon, and be damnable in themselves: so that it is hardely
possible for them to be in any error without supine negligence and extreme
impiety. Now there are not any Protestants in the world, no not English
Protestants by name, whom you dare defend to be free from errors not
fundamental; and millions of them as you confess are by the sin of their
will betrayed into, and kept in errors damnable in themselves. Ergo, it is
hardly possible; but all Protestants must be guilty of supine negligence, and
extreme impiety about matters of Faith, Which being so; how is that Religion a
safe way of Salvation, in which hardly any be saved? yea, how be not their
errors unpardonable, seeing you write. Page 275. lin. 15. that, Cap. 5. n. 58.
lin. 18.
God is infinitely just, and therefore (it is to be feared) will not pardon
Catholics who might easily have come to the knowledge of the truth, but
through negligence would not? How then will he pardon Protestants, to whom it
was (you say) most prone and easy to have come to the knowledge of the truth,
and to have avoided all errors, but would not through supine negligence, and
extreme impiety?

23. I have been the larger in declaring and strenghthening this Argument, and
showing the insuperable, force thereof. First, because it is the Argument most
urged by the pithy, and learned Catholic Treatise of Charity mistaken, as
also by Charity maintained, both which books by the clearing of this point are
showed to remain unanswered. Secondly, because this Argument from the
confession of our Adversaries, as it is clear, manifest, and conuincing; so it
is within the reach and capacity of every one. For who so stupide and void of
sense, as not to see that Religion to be the safer, which is confessed to be
safe, even in her Adversaries judgment grounded upon the never failing
principles of Christian Charity, wisdom, and truth?

The Second Conviction.
THough we should grant that most untrue and impossible supposition, that the
Roman Church erreth; yet it would be impossible that Catholics should be damned
for following her errors. The reason is, because their erring cannot but be
excused by ignorance invincible: whereas Protestants, if they err damnably (as
without doubt they do) neither by shelter of Ignorance, nor of General
Repentance can they be saved.

Three Suppositions.. 1.
1. TO prove this, we must suppose three things, which are known and
notorious truths. First, that Christians who believe in Christ the eternal
Son of God and Savior of the world, cannot be damned for any errors of
ignorance invincible, or for any inuoluntary erring. This truth you often
affirm in some passages of your book, and deny it as often in other. Page 19.
lin. 27. 1. Edit. page 19. lin. 9.
you say, That if in me alone were a confluence of all such errors of all
Protestants in the world that were thus qualified (with ignorance invincible)
I should not be so much afraid of them all, as I should be to ask pardon for
them etc. To ask pardon of simple and purely inuoluntary errors, is tacitly
to imply, that God is angry with us for them, and that were to impute to him
the strange tyranny of requiring brick, when he gives no straw; of expecting
to gather, where he strewed not; to reap, where he sowed not, of being
offended with us, for not doing what he knows, we cannot do. Hear you make it
a kind of blasphemy to say, that involuntary errors are pardonable, or need
pardon; because the very saying they were pardonable importes they need pardon,
and consequently, that God is offended with us for them. Notwithstanding, that
errors purely inuoluntary, or of invincible ignorance be pardonable, and need
pardon from Gods great mercy, you frequently profess speaking of our errors.
Page 308. lin. 41. We hold your errors damnable in themselves, yet by accident
through ignorance invincible, we hope they were not unpardonable. Page 291.
lin. 4. Your erring was we hope pardonable, in them that had no means to know
their errors. Page 263. lin. 27. Your errors were in themselves damnable yet
we hope that those amongst you that were inuincibly ignorant of the truth,
might by Gods great mercy have their errors pardoned, and their souls saved.
This is your wavering and tottering manner of discoursing; but the truth is,
God is not offended with errors of ignorance invincible, because God is
offended only for sin, whereas inuoluntary erring cannot be sin; because to
be voluntary is of the nature and difinition of Sin.

2. Secondly, we suppose, that the Roman doctrines, which Protestants accuse to
be errors, are definitions of Generals Counsels, and were for many ages the
public received doctrine in the whole visible Christian Church; for which
reason you say Page 279. n. 64. lin. 8. cap. 5. n. 64. lin. 8.
That even the visible Church, is not free from damnable errors. Thirdly, we
suppose that it is unlawful and damnable for any man to depart from the Roman
Church, to forsake her doctrine, or to oppose the definition of a General
Council, except he have apparent and evident reasons which demonstrate that
the truth stands on his side. This you teach, page 272. n. 53. Cap. 5. n. 53.
It concerns every man, that separates from any Churches Communion, even as
much as his Salvation is worth, to look most carefully, that the cause of his
separation be just and necessary. And page 200. lin. 25. Cap. 3. n. 18. infine.
I willingly confess the judgment of a Council, though not infallible; yet is
so far directive and obliging, that without apparent reason of the contrary, it
may be sin to reject it; at least not to afford it an outward submission. But
D. Potter D. Potter page 166.
more clearly and fully affirms, That General Councels, are the highest
Tribunals which the Church has upon earth; that their authority is immediately
derived and delegated from Christ; that no Christian is exempted from their
censures, and jurisdiction; that their decrees bind all persons to external
obedience, and may not be questioned, but upon evident reasons.

That the belieuers of the Roman Church cannot err, but through Ignorance
invincible.. 2.
3. FOr the title of this Section I argue thus: Those errors are unavoidable
and invincible, which cannot be avoided without damnable sin: But Roman
Catholics cannot avoid the errous of the Roman Church (if she have any)
without damnable sin: Therefore their errors (if they do err) must of
necessity be ignorances invincible, and unavoidable, such as they cannot shake
of without damning themselves. The Minor, or assumption of this argument I
prove; because Roman Catholics that be sincere and cordial belieuers of the
doctrine of the Roman Church, cannot have necessary and forcing reasons, nor
evident demonstrations, that the Roman Church is in error. This is clear: For
if they have necessary and enforcing reasons, and evident demonstrations
whereby they are convicted in conscience, that the Roman Church erreth, they be
now no more Roman Catholics nor belieuers of the Roman Church, but
Protestants, and her Adversaries in their judgment. It is therefore impossible,
that Roman Catholics, so long as they be sincere and Cordial belieuers of
the Roman Doctrine, should have evident demonstrations, that the Roman Church
erreth: And if the^ have not evident demonstrations, it were damnable for them
to forsake her doctrines, which Protestants account erroneous nor can they do
it without damning their souls. Who then does not see, that their erring (if
they err) is enforced, un auoydable, proceeding from ignorance invincible, for
which sort of ignorance it is impossible they should be damned.

4. You to avoid the force of this Argument contend, that though your reasons
are necessary, enforcing, as clear as the light at noone; yet we are not
convicted by them in conscience; not that they want evidence, but that we are
obstinately perverse. This your shift and cavil, is easily showed to be
frivolous and false. Frivolous, because you only say without any proof, that
we are obstinately perverse, and if to say it without proof be enough, then
the same answer will serve, and does de facto serve every Heretic, every
Sect-maister, every forger of new Monsters; for when he finds himself in
straytes, and not able to bring so much as a probable reason for his new
devised impieties; he falls presently to cry, that his Texts of Scripture are
as clear as the sun; his Arguments evident demonstrations; that the reason
Catholics neglect and reject him, is not want of evidence in his arguing; but
that we are wilfully blind, obstinately perverse, men that have eyes to see and
will not see, given over to strong delusions, and unto a reprobate sense. And
what is this but to change schollership into scolding, reasoning into railing,
disputing into clamorous and contumelious wrangling; wherein he gets the
victory who is the stoufest Stentor, and can cry loudest against his
Adversaries, You are wilfully blind, you are obstinately perverse. In which
kind of arguing See page 380. n. 72. cap. 6. n. 72.
you are very eloquent, according to the style of heretics, quorum doctrina
(says In cap. 22. Jsaiae.
S. Hierome) non in sensu, sed in multiloquio and elamore consistit.

5. Secondly it is false: because necessary and enforcing reasons, or evident
demonstrations presented unto the understanding, necessitate the said
Understanding, and compel the Conscience to assent, let the Will be never so
perverse. The peruersity of Will may make a man deny with his mouth, what in
Conscience he knows to be true; it may make him hate and impugn known
truth, but it cannot possibly make him not see, what by the light of evident
demonstration is made clear to his understanding. This I prove by your own
sayings, as page 370. n. 50. Cap. 6. n. 50.
Apparent arguments necessitate the understanding to assent. and Page 371. n.
81. You contend, that Protestants hold not that it is evidently certain, that
these books in particular are the word of God. For (say Cap. 6. n. 81.
you) they are not, either so fond as to be ignorant, nor so vain as to
pretend, that all men do assent to it; which they would, if they were evidently
certain: or so ridiculous as to imagine that an Indian that had never heard of
Christ or Christianity, reading the Bible in his own language, would without
miracle believe it to be the word of God, which yet he could NOT CHOOSE but do,
if it were evidently certain. Here you affirm, that all men in the world
would believe the Christian Bible to be the word of God, yea they could not
choose but assent unto it as unto Divine truth, if it did show it self to be
such with evident certainty. And yet there be millions in the world that be
obstinately perverse against the Christian Bible. Ergo demonstrations which
show a truth to the understanding with evident certainty, necessitate the
Understanding to assent, This is auerred also by M. Hooker, Eccles. Pol.
Preface page 29. lin. 26. An argument necessary, and demonstratiue, being
proposed to ANY MAN and understood; the mind cannot choose but inwardly assent.
though the Will be obstinately perverse. But Catholics though they
understand, ponder, and consider your pretended evident demonstrations, and
texts of Scripture as clear as the sun, can dissent from them, and rest
persuaded in their conscience against your conclusions by pious constancy of
faith. Wherefore your Arguments be not evident demonstrations, and consequently
no man can be moved with them to forsake the Roman Church, and her Doctrine of
General Councels without committing damnable sin: yea they are so far from
being irresistible, as they are vain, weak, contemptible, even those which
you pretend to be so clear as none can possibly be cleerer, as I have showed
in the former Treatise Cap. 6. Convict. 6. n. 29.

That Protestants if they err, cannot be saved by ignorance, or general
repentance.. 3.
6. THe first part of the Title, that they cannot be saved by ignorance, I
prove thus. Either Protestants have demonstrations and evident certainty, that
the Roman Church erreth, that her definitions which they forsake, and keep
themselves in opposition against them, be false and impious; or they have not.
If they have, they be not ignorant, but full of clear and manifest certainty
about all those points wherein they forsake the Roman Church. If they have not,
they are indeed in ignorance; but in such ignorance as will not save them, but
rather make them more damnable, to wit, in the ignorance of Pride. For is it
not damnable, and execrable Pride, for a simple and ignorant man, to abandon
the Roman Church, adorned with so many glorious marks of the true Christian
Church; to reject the definition of General Councels without any necessary and
inforing reasons, without any sure ground, or evident certainty that they be
errors? No doubt such an one, the more ignorant that he is, the more damnable
wretch he is; and by so much is his pride more detestable. Wherefore
Protestants, if in their undertaking and venturing to reject the definition of
Councels, and the received Traditions of so many former Christian ages, they
chance to err, though but out of simplicity and ignorance, this simplicity and
ignorance, will not excuse and mitigate, but rather accuse and aggrauate the
crime of their erring presumption and pride.

7. This truth, that Protestants cannot be saved by ignorance (as Roman
Catholics may,) you seem to acknowledge page 285. lin. 7. We assure our
selves, if our lives be answerable, we shall be saved by our knowledge. And we
hope (and I tell you again, spes est rei incertae nomen) that some of you may
possibly be saved by occasion of their unaffected ignorance. Behold the way of
salvation by Ignorance you leave unto us, and in your great excess of charity
hope, that some of us may possibly be saved through ignorance. But you
Protestants are sure to be saved by your knowledge, by your evident certainty,
that the truth stands on your side, against the definition of former Christian
worlds. Now, if this be the case of Protestants, that they must be saved by
their own knowledge, by being sure they have such evident certainty of truth
as may counter poyse the authority of so many Christian ages and Councels; how
pitiful and lamentable is their case? They cannot be saved except they be
furnished with knowledge, and evident certainty, that they have truth on their
side: For if they want this knowledge, they cannot prudently nor without
execrable Pride oppose General Councels, which stand for the Roman Doctrines.
But Protestants, at least millions of them, are as sure and certain as they
live, that they have no such knowledge, no such evident demonstration or
certainty, that the Roman Church and Councels err: Therefore they cannot
(except they be stupide and senseless) but be sure they are in a damnable
state, and shall certainly be damned except they change their course.

8. The second part of this Section that Protestants, if they err cannot be
saved from their sinful and damnable errors by general repentance is proved;
Because General Repentance does extend only to those things, wherein the
Penitent may lawfully, and with a safe conscience apprehend, 2. Edit. page 20.
lin. 33.
and fear there may be sin. For as you say page 20. lin. 45. General
repentance is universal sorrow for all their sins, both which they know they
have committed, or which they fear they may have. But Protestants believe
their Religion against the Church of Rome to be the Gospel, to be the word of
God, to be most infallible Christian truth, and so do not fear any fault or
sin in their belief; yea they cannot with a safe conscience so much as
apprehend that their belief may be sinful, false, or uncertain. For (as you
say cap. 5. n. 107.) this were to doubt of the certainty of the Gospel. Ergo,
the General repentance of Protestants neither does, nor can extend it self to
recall virtually and implicitly the Doctrine they hold against the Roman
Church; no more then they repent of the Doctrine they hold against Jews and
Turks. For they hold both these Doctrines, as much the one as the other, to be
the word of God; and therefore not to be doubted of, much less repented as
though it might be sinful error. Moreover it is not possible, that a man
should at the same time repent himself of a thing, and together detest from
his heart all repenting thereof. But Protestants abhor and detest as impious
all doubting, and much more all repenting of their Religion, as it is opposed
against the pretended Superstitions, Impieties, Idolatries of the Church of
Rome; for they think it holy Scripture, Divine Revelation as certain as the
Gospel. Wherefore it is impossible, that Protestants should repent of their
opposing the Church of Rome, so long as they be Protestants, and believe the
doctrine of Protestancy to be the Gospel, and the Roman Religion to be full of
Impiety and Idolatry. There is no hope such Protestants can be saved, except
God send into their heart, the light of his Spirit, and make them see their
Religion, so far as it is opposite to the Roman, to be but a mass of old
damned Heresies, and move them to repent and to recall, and detest them in
particular.

Your impudent slandering of Charity Maintained that he grants Salvation unto
any Protestant that is ignorant, or repentant.. 4.
9. YOu are much vexed that the Roman Religion is proclaimed safe even by her
Adversaries; and that yours is wholly destitute of such comfortable
testimonies. Wherefore the warrant you cannot obtain by truth and fair
dealing, you seek to get by falsehood, fraud, and forgery, even of our
Maintayner to whom you speak in this manner page 31. lin. 12. That which you
do say does plainly enough affoard us these Corollaries. Cap. 1. n. 3.
1. That whatsoever Protestant wants capacity, or having it, wants
sufficient means of instruction to convince his conscience of the falsehood of
his own, and the truth of the Roman Religion; by the confession of his most
rigide Adversaries, may be saved, notwithstanding any error in his Religion.
2. That nothing hinders, but that a Protestant dying a Protestant, may dye with
Contrition for all his sins. 3. That if he dye with Contrition, he may, and
shall be saved. All these acknowledgements we have from you, whiles you are (as
you say) stating, but, as I conceive, granting the very point in question;
which was (as I have already proved out of C. M.) whether without
uncharitableness you may pronounce, that Protestants dying in their Religion,
and without particular repentance and dereliction of it, cannot possibly be
saved.

16. Thus without shame you falsify the Tenet of your Adversary and the
doctrine of our Church. Where does our Maintayner say, that whatsoever
Protestant notwithstanding any error? Socinians be Protestants in your account
because they hold the Bible, the Bible, and only the Bible, who maintain
Christ Jesus not to be the eternal Son of God incarnated. Where does our
Maintayner affirm, that these Protestants may be saved in this so vild error,
upon any condition? yea where does he say of any Protestant, that he may be
saved in any error, which the maintaynes knowingly against the Roman Religion,
if he want sufficient means of instruction to convince his conscience of the
falsehood of his own, and truth of the Roman? He has no such words, and his
words from which you pretend to draw this wine of Comfort for Protestants,
have not any the least relish of that sense. These they are: when any man
esteemed Protestant, leaves to live in this world, we do not instantly with
precipitation avouch, that he is lodged in Hell. For we are not always
acquainted with what sufficiency of means he was furnished for instruction; we
do not penetrate his capacity to understand his Catechist; we have no
revelation what light might have cleared his errors, or Contrition retracted
his sins in the last moment before death. Here our Maintayner requires
sufficient means of instruction that a man be bound to believe: but he says
not, as you make him say, that this instruction must convince his conscience,
that his own Religion is false, and the Roman true. If a Protestant be thus
far instructed as to perceive, that the Roman Religion is by the full consent
of former Christian ages, and by the definition of General Councels delivered
as the doctrine of Christ Jesus, and his Apostles; if I say, any Protestant be
thus far instructed, he is so sufficiently instructed, that if he refuse to
believe he is certainly damned. Do not you profess, that to forsake any Church
without necessary causes, is as much as a man's salvation is worth? Does not D.
Potter avouch, that it is not lawful to go against the definition of General
Councels without evident reasons? Wherefore Protestants that have abandoned the
Roman Church, are by your principles convinced to be in a damnable state, if
they know the Roman Religion to be the Christian tradition of their Ancestors,
the definition of Catholic Councels. Nor is it necessary, that they be
convinced in conscience, that the Roman Religion is true, it suffices they
have no conuictiue demonstrations against it. Wherefore it is extreme want of
conscience in you to say, that our Maintayner, and the most rigide Adversaries
of Protestancy affirm, that no Protestant shall be damned for any error
whatsoever he holds against the Roman Church; except he be convicted in
conscience, that his own Religion is false, and the Roman true.

11. And yet not content to have brought this falsehood as a Corollary from his
words, you make it his formal saying, and set it down in a distinct Character
as his verbal and formal assertion. Page 31. n. 4. lin. 6. Charity mistaken
affirmed universally, Cap. 1. n. 4. lin. 6.
and without any limitation, that Protestants that dye in the belief of their
Religion, without particular repentance, cannot be saved: But this presumption
of his you qualify by SAYING; that this sentence cannot be pronounced truly,
and therefore not charitably, neither of those Protestants, that want means
sufficient to convince them of the truth of your Religion, and falsehood of
their own; nor of those, who, though they have neglected the means they might
have had, dyed with Contrition, that is, with a sorrow for all their sins,
proceeding from the love of God. Thus you: showing the Adamantinall hardness of
your Socinian for head and Samosatenian conscience. For this long sentence
which you set down, charactered as the saying of Charity Maintained with a
direct affirmation, that it is his saying, is forged and feigned by your self
from the first to the last syllable thereof: not only against his meaning in
that place, but also the whole drift of his Treatise. For what is the drift
thereof, but only to show, that the Roman is the true Church; and that her
proposing of a doctrine to be believed is sufficient to bind men to believe it,
without any other Conviction besides the authority of her infallible word?

12. Also the second assertion you impute to him, That nothing hinders, but
that a Protestant dying a Protestant, may dye with contrition for all his
sins, is an impudent untruth: no such acknowledgment in all his book. You
seek to gather it from these words, We have no revelation, what light may
have cleared his errors; or Contrition have retracted his sins. This reason
(say you) or contrition have retracted his sins, being distinct from the
former, and divided from it by the disjunctive particle (or) insinuates, that
though no light did clear the errors of a dying Protestant, yet Contrition
might, for ought you know, retract his sins. This is a fond and voluntary
inference: for the clause ( or contrition retracted his sins) was not added
to signify, that a Protestant may have contrition of all his sins, though his
understanding be not cleared from his errors: but to declare, that though his
understanding be cleared from errors; yet this will not suffice that he be
saved, except after the abiuration of his errors, he do further conceive
hearty sorrow and Contrition for the deadly and damnable sins of affection and
action he may have committed.

13. For, that a Protestant cannot be truly penitent of all his sins, until
his understanding be cleared, or at least his zeal allayed, that he become
remiss in his Religion and doubtful; this reason does inuincibly conclude. It
is impossible, that a man should repent of a thing, at that time, when he is
in actual or habitual heat of affection unto it. But Protestants (so long as
they are Protestants, and their Understandings not cleared from their errors,
or their zeal allayed with cold doubtfulnes) are always either actually, or
habitually in the heat of condemning the Roman Church for Impieties and
Idolatries; in the heat of presumptuous Pride, whereby they prefer their
seely conceits about the sense of Scripture, before the judgment of the
Church, and her General Councels. Ergo, it is impossible, that a Protestant
persisting stiffely in his Religion, should be penitent of all his sins
known and unknown.

The third Conviction.
IN this Conviction I am to prove three things: first, that Roman Catholics
hold all fundame^tall truth, and so are secure from damnation. Secondly, that
it is madness to persuade any man to leave the Roman Church. Thirdly, that it
is impossible, that Protestants should be sure they believe all Fundamental
truths.

That Roman Catholics are free from all Fundamental Errors, and your
Contradictions herein.. 1.
1. HE that belieues all Fundamentals, cannot be damned for any error in
faith; though he believe more, or less to be Fundamental then is so. This is
your formal assertion in so many words, page 207. n. 34. Cap. 4. n. 34. lin.
2.
which supposed I assume: But Roman Catholics believe all Fundamentals, that
is, all necessary truth: Ergo, they cannot be damned for any error in faith.
The assumption of this argument might be proved, by many testimonies from your
Book. I will insist upon two, the one in this Section, the other in the next.
Page 16. lin. 8. We grant the Roman Church was a part of the whole Church. And
if she were a true part of the Church, she retained those truths, which were
simply necessary to salvation. For this is precisely necessary to constitute
any man, or Church a member of the Church Catholic. In our sense therefore of
the word Fundamental, we hope she erred not fundamentally. Thus you, who Cap.
5. n. 95.
page 280. n. 95. say the plain contrary, that our errors are fundamental.
And page 289. nu. 86. Cap. 5. n. 86.
that our Church not only might, but also did fall into substantial errors.

2. I know, that to salve this Contradiction, and to put the term of
fundamental Errors upon our Church you have coined a distinction of two kinds
of fundamental errors. Cap. 5. n. 88.
Page 290. n. 88. Fundamental Errors (say you) may signify, either such as
are repugnant to Gods command, and so in their own nature damnable; though to
those that out of ignorance invincible practice them not unpardonable: and such
as are not only meritoriously, but remedilessely pernicious and destructive of
Salvation. According to this distinction you grant, that the Roman Religion
has fundamental errors of the first kind, though as you hope none of the
second. But this distinction (to omit that you overthrow the same in both the
members thereof as will afterward appear) will not serve your turn, nor
reconcile your contradiction. For when you say we believe all Fundamentals, you
profess to take the word in your own sense. But in your sense the word
Fundamental signifies all kind of necessary truth; for so you warn us Cap. 4.
n. 52. in fine.
page 220. lin. 5. May it please you to take notice now at last, that by
fundamental, we mean All, and only that which is necessary; and then I hope
you will grant, that we may safely expect Salvation in a Church which has all
things fundamental to Salvation. Thus you: which is as much as if you had
said, that by Fundamental you understand, not only the things which are
remedilessely and indispensably necessary; but also those that be necessary
only because commanded. For how can men safely expect Salvation without those
things, which by the commandment of God are necessary to Salvation? Though men
with fundamental errors of the first kind may (in your doctrine) possibly be
saved; yet you say their state is not safe, but Page 133. Their state is
dangerous though not desperate.
dangerous. Now such as have all truth Fundamental to Salvation, they not
only may possibly be saved; but also safely expect Salvation, as you contend.
Ergo, when you say our Church retaynes all Fundamentals to Salvation and erres
not Fundamentally, you will have us take notice, that you mean, she is free
not only from such damnable errors, as absolutely destroy, but also from
those which endanger Salvation. Consequently, when you say absolutely (as every
where you do) that our errors are Fundamental, or substantial, or damnable,
or dangerous, you contradict your other assertion, that we retained all things
simply necessary to salvation, and erred not Fundamentally.

3. Besides in the frontispice of your book, you have printed this sentence of
our late King James, Things simply necessary to Salvation be those, which
either the Word of God does expressly command to be believed or done; or those
which the Ancient Church did by necessary consequence draw out of the Word of
God. Now you grant in express terms, that the Roman Church retained all
things Page 16. lin. 7.
simply necessary to Salvation. Ergo, you must grant, that she retained all
those things, which either the word of God does expressly command to be
believed or done; or which from the Word of God, the Ancient Church deduced,
and so can want nothing necessary by Divine command, nor have errors
fundamental, so much as of the first kind.

4. The reason you are about this point so various and continually contentious
and fighting with your self, is the inward combat of your unruly passions. On
the one side, you are incited with fury to damn us, and make our Religion
damnable; on the other, vexed and galled, that neither evidence of truth, no
nor D. Potter himself will give you full freedom to do it. Hence your wave
and wander, you say and unsay, you run this way and that way upon adverse and
contrary assertions; so much, as even in the same short sentence, you plainly
contradict your self page 16. n. 21. lin. 11. 2. Edit. page 16. n. 8.
Though we say the errors of the Roman Church were not destructive of
Salvation, but pardonable, even to them that dyed in them upon a general
Repentance, yet we deny not but in themselves they were damnable. Do not you
perceive, that this speech destroys it self, that our errors are not
destructive of Salvation, and yet are in themselves damnable? what is
destructive of Salvation, but that which of it self, and in its nature is apt
and sufficient to destroy Salvation, and to bring damnation on men? And is not
damnable the very same? How then can our errors be in themselves damnable, and
yet not destructive of Salvation? You say, a poison may be deadly in it self
and yet not kill him, who together with it takes an antidote. Very true: but
can poison be in it self deadly, and not in itself destructive of life? Can
it be of it self apt to cause death and not apt to destroy life? How then are
our errors not destructive of Salvation, and yet damnable and apt to bring
damnation on us?

5. In like manner you profess very often, that the Roman Church retained the
substance and essence of a Christian Church; that you do not cut her off from
the hope of Salvation. And yet at other times being enraged with the title of
Catholic given her by the consent of mankind; you protest, that Page 362. li.
8. Cap. 6. n. 40. lin. 4^.
she is Catholic to herself alone, and Heretical to all the rest of
Christian Churches. Which is as much as if you had said; she wantes the very
essence of a Christian Church. For page 332. n. 11. Cap. 6. n. 11.
you write: It is not Heresy to oppose any truth propounded by the Church; but
only such a truth as is an essential part of the Gospel of Christ. Wherefore
the Roman Church (if she be heretical) opposes some essential, part of the
Gospel of Christ, and consequently she wantes faith of some essential part
of the Gospel. What is consequent hereupon? That the Roman Church, not only
is not an incorrupt Church, but not a Christian Church so much as for substance
and essence. The Consequence is manifest. For that cannot be a Christian Church
for substance and essence, which does not hold the Gospel of Christ the
Christian Religion for substance and essence, as the Roman Church does not if
she be Heretical, as you say she is. For as that cannot be a man which wantes
an essential part of a man: so that cannot be the Gospel of Christ, nor the
Christian Religion for essence, which the Roman Church holds, if she want an
essential part thereof, as you say she does. Behold how furies of passion
distract you into contrary parts. Yea this which now you so peremptorily
decree, that heresy is not to oppose any truth, but only an essential part of
the Gospel, you contradict an hundred times in your book, where you
distinguish heresies fundamental against the Essentials of the Gospel, Page
277. lin. vlt.
and not fundamental against Truths of the Gospel profitable, but not
necessary. How can this subsist, if that only be Heresy which opposes the
Essentials of the Gospel?

The security in the Roman Church is so great, as it is Madness to leave it..
2.
6. THis I shall make good and evident by your own most true and undeniable
sayings. Our Maintayner obiectes, that some Protestants leaving the Roman
Church have fallen away by degrees, even from the Fundamentals of Christianity.
Cap. 3. n. 63. lin. 14.
You answer p. 168. lin. 9. What if some forsaking the Church of Rome, have
forsaken fundamental truths? Was this because they forsook the Church of Rome?
No sure: this is, non causa pro causa: For else all that have forsaken that
Church, should have done so; which we say they have not: but because they went
too far from her. The golden mean, the narrow way is hard to be found, hard
to be kept; hard but not impossible; hard, but yet you must not please your
selves out of it, though you err on the right hand, though you offend on the
milder part: for this is the only way, that leads to life, and few there be
that find it. It is true, if we said, there were no danger in being of the
Roman Church, and there were danger in leaving it, it were MADNESS to persuade
any man to leave it. Thus you. Before I come to the principal intent, let me
note and put you in mind of two things. First that here (as every where also
commonly) you argue fondly, that the cause why some forsaking the Roman Church,
forsook also the fundamentals of Christianity, was not their forsaking the
Roman Church, For else, say you, all that have forsaken her should have done so.
An argument fond and full of ignorance. Otherwise, we might say, that
Covetousness was not the cause, that Judas betrayed his Master; for else all
covetous servants should betray their masters, which we know is not so: we may
say that zeal of Puritanisme was not the cause, that Enoch ap euan murdered
his Brother and Mother; because many zealous Puritans do not murder their
Brothers, and mothers that oppose them. These instances and a thousand more
which might be brought lay open your ignorance, that you do not distinguish
betwixt natural necessary causes, whose force cannot be resisted; and moral
causes, which freely incline the will, leaving it liberty to resist, which is
the reason they are effectual in some, and not in others.

7. Secondly I note, that you also here keep your wont of contradicting your
self. What you here say that the narrow and only way to life and salvation
is hard to be found, hard to be kept, without erring on the right hand or on
the left; how does it agree with, or how does it not directly destroy what you
teach Cap. 4. n. 53. lin. ^9.
page 221. lin. 20. about your Protestant safeway^ This is a way so plain,
that fools except they will cannot err from it; because in this way, not
being free from error, but indeauouring to be free, is the only condition of
Salvation. How is, not being free from error, but endeavoring to be free, in
your way the only condition of Salvation; if keeping the golden mean, and the
narrow way without erring either on the right hand or left, be in your doctrine
the sole means of Salvation? How is the way so plain, that even fools,
unless they will, cannot err from it, if it be hard to be kept without erring
on the right hand or left? And page 290. n. 87. Cap. 5. n. 87. in fine.
whereas the Maintayner says, that Protestants should not have left the Roman
Church, for errors vn-fundame^tall, seeing they were not sure by their
departure to avoid this kind of mischief; yea they were sure they could not
avoid it: you say Protestants are so far from acknowledging that they have no
hope to avoid this mischief (of errors vn-fundamentall) that they proclayme
to all the world, that it is most prone and easy to do so, to all those that
fear God, and love truth; and hardly possibly for them to do otherwise without
supine negligence and extreme impiety. How do these sayings hang together; The
golden mean of saving truth the only way to life, is hard, difficile, and only
not impossible to be kept without erring from it either on the left hand
Fundamentally; or one the right vn-fundamentally: The way of saving truth is
most prone and easy to be kept, without erring so much as vn-fundamentally;
yea, it is hardly possible to err from it, on either side, without supine
negligence, and extreme impiety?

8. But now to the Principal intent; by this your confession it is evident,
that it is madness for any man to to leave the Roman Church, and that your
writing to persuade them to leave it was a fit of distemper in your brain. For
you confess, that if you said there were no danger in being of the Roman
Church, and there were danger in leaving it; is were madness to persuade any
man to leave it. Now I assume: But you say both, that there is no danger in the
Roman Church, and that there is extreme danger in leaving it. That you say the
first, I prove, because you say, that he who belieues all Fundamental truth,
cannot be damned for any error in faith. And page 376. n. 57. Cap. 6. n. 57.
in fine.
he that belieues all necessary truth, if his life be answerable to his faith,
how is it possible he should fail of Saluaton? But you affirm, that the Roman
Church retaynes all fundamental and necessary truth, in that you only charge
her of going from the Golden mean of exact truth, on the right hand, on the
surer part. Wherefore in the Roman Church men may safely expect Salvation; there
is no danger, yea there is no possibility of damnation for errors in faith
with in her Communion. That you say the second, that there is extreme danger in
leaving the Roman Church, I show, eue^ by this testimony. For you say the Roman
Church erreth on the right hand, on the milder part; so that they who leave
her, must of necessity depart so far from her on the left hand, that is, into
the direful gulf of fundamental errors; except they keep themselves in the
golden mean, in the narrow way; But the golden mean, the narrow way, is (as
you profess) hard to be found; hard, and only not impossible to be kept:
Ergo, in leaving the Roman Church there is danger, and exceeding great danger
which can hardly be avoided, of falling into errors fundamental,
remedilessely, and fatally damnable. These being your Co^fessions and otherwise
of themselves manifest truths, you must acknowledge it is even madness and
fury for any man to forsake the Roman Church; and that your writing to divert
men from her Communion, was a fit of phrensy.

That Protestants can never be sure that they believe all fundamental and
necessary Truth.. 3.
9. IT being indispensably necessary unto Salvation to know distinctly and in
particular all Fundamental and essential truths; how can Christian souls
that be pious, careful of their eternity, fearful to fall into damnation
everlasting, rest quiet or calm in conscience, till they know an exact
Catalogue of these Fundamentals; that so they may be sure, they know and
believe them distinctly and in particular? Now Protestants neither do, nor can
agree upon an exact Catalogue of their Fundame^tals, nor will tell their
followers distinctly, and in particular which be the articles essentially
necessary unto Salvation, and you in many places signify, that they are
innumerable.

10. On the Forehead of your Book, you have printed this sentence of King
James: The number of things absolutely necessary to Salvation is not great:
Wherefore the shortest and speediest way to conclude a general peace and
concord in matters of Religion, would be to sever exactly things necessary
from things not necessary; and to use all industry, that in necessaries there
may be agreement, and in things not necessary, place be left unto Christian
liberty. In your Dedicatory you profess, that your Book in a manner is
nothing else but a pursuance of, and a superstruction upon this Blessed
Doctrine, wherewith you adorned and armed the Frontispice thereof. This is the
flattering of your forhead, and your setting a fair Hypocritical face of
Friendship on this sentence, which you hate and blaspheme in your heart, and in
the heart and bosom of your Book. For some few leaves from the beginning you
fall to reject, pursue, and persecute this your Blessed sentence; and your
superstruction thereon is nothing else, but a load of reproaches. You Page 23.
say, that to sever exactly things necessary from things not necessary (which
that learned Prince esteems to be of great use, of great necessity, and the
shortest way to conclude the general peace of Christendom about Religion, and
a thing not only factible, but also which may easily and speedily be done;)
this I say, which your Frontispicial sentence proclaymeth most useful and
factible, the inside of your Book declares to be a thing of extreme great
difficulty, and of extreme little necessity, an intricate piece of business,
apparently unnecessary, of no use, a vain labor, to no purpose. Behold your
words, Page 23. lin. 5. To sever exactly and punctually these verities the one
from the other etc. is a business of extreme great difficulty, and of extreme
little necessity. He that shall go about it shall find an intricate piece of
business of it, and almost impossible that he should be certain he has done
it, when he has done it. And then it is apparently unnecessary to go about
it, because he that belieues all, certainly belieues all necessaries. And
again, ibid. lin. 15. And when they had done it, it had been to no purpose,
there being as matters now stand, as great necessity of believing those truths
of Scripture which are not fundamental, as those that are. These be your
words: by the force of which you knock on the head, the sentence of king
James, nailed on the forehead of your Book: and also give a deadly stabbe on
the heart of poor Protestants, and drive out of it all hope of Salvation.

11. For you neither do, nor can tell them, which points of faith are
Fundamental, and necessary to be known distinctly of all; without the least
of which you say Cap. 6. n. 75. in fine.
it implies contradiction they should be saved. How then shall they be sure
they have all Fundamental truth? You say, he that belieues all, certainly
belieues all that is necessary. And page 225. lin. 1. Cap. 4. n. 59. in fine.
to a Protestant requesting of you to know, which in particular be fundamental
truths, you answer; It is a vain question: believe all, and you shall be sure
to believe all that is Fundamental. This rule of assurance you repeat almost
in the same formal words, I dare say a thousand times, which is craftily
couched in equiuocal, and ambiguous terms, and has a double sense, being in
the one false, and deceitful; in the other impossible to be kept. If ( believe
all) import no more, then, believe in general and confusedly all contained in
the Holy Bible to be true, your rule is false, deceitful, damnable, that men
by believing all, shall certainly believe all necessaries, as they ought, unto
Salvation. For you say Cap. 4. n. 3.
Page 163. n. 3. Fundamental and essential points be such, as are, not only
plainly revealed of God, and so certain truths; but also commanded to be
preached to all men, and to be distinctly believed of all, and so necessary
truths. And Cap. 4. n. 4. lin. 20.
Page 194. lin. 16. you teach, that to the constitution of Fundamental points,
is required, that they be, First actually revealed of God; Secondly commanded
under pain of damnation to be particularly known (I mean, known to be
Divine revelations) and distinctly to be believed. Wherefore your rule ( Believe
all in general, and you shall be sure to believe all Fundamentals sufficiently
unto salvation) is by your own definitions proved false, and damnable. But, if
your rule have this sense; Believe all that is in the Bible explicitly,
distinctly, and in particular, and then you shall be sure to believe all
necessaries, if this (I say) be your meaning, you lay on your Protestants a
most heavy burden, a most unsupportable load, a most tyrannical and
impossible command. For what you say that the burden is light, and that all
Protestants comply with this your command, page 129. n. 5. Cap. 3. n. 5. lin. 4.
that all of them agree with explicit faith in all those things, which are
plainly and undoubtedly delivered in Scripture, that is in All, that God has
plainly revealed; this, I say, is ridiculous; there being millions of truths
plainly and undoubtedly delivered in Scripture, which millions of Protestants
never heard: yea, there be, I dare say, a thousand such truths which your self
are ignorant off.

12. In contradiction of this your inconsiderate assertion, you grant page 137.
lin. 5. Cap. 3. n. 19. lin. 20.
That there be many truths, which in themselves are revealed plainly enough,
which yet are not plainly revealed unto some Protestants of excellent
understanding, nor are believed of them, because they are prepossest with
contrary opinions, and with preiudices, by the strange power of education,
instilled unto their minds. How then is it true, that Protestants, all of
them agree with explicit faith in all things which are plainly revealed of
God? How can those Protestants (who disbelieue many truths revealed in
Scripture plainly enough) be sure they believe all fundamental and necessary
truth; seeing they observe not your command, Believe all, and you shall be sure to
believe all that is fundamental? Who does, or can assure them, that among
these many points of Faith revealed in Scripture plainly enough, none be
fundamental. It is therefore manifest that Protestants (except you give them an
exact Catalogue of all your fundamentals which they are bound under pain of
uamnation distinctly and explicitly to believe) can never be sure they believe
all fundamental truth. And it is seely for you, Page 158. n. 52. lin. 19. page
160. n. 33. lin. 31. page 162. lin. 20.
when Charity Maintained urges you for a Catalogue of your Fundamentals, to
think that you may stop his mouth, with importuning him, for a Catalogue of
our Churches Proposals; for we say of our Churches Proposals, that it is
sufficient to believe them implicitly: we do not say, they must be believed of
all distinctly and in particular. What need then is there of a Catalogue,
wherein such Proposals are set down distinctly, and in particular? Now you
affirm of your Fundamentals, that all men are bound upon their salvation, to
know and believe them in particular and yet obstinatly refuse to give them an
exact account, which in particular they be.

13. Besides, what an intricate and infinite obligation do you charge upon
Protestants, in saying, that there is (as things now stand) at great
necessity of believing those truths of Scripture which are not fundamental, as
those that are so. For the necessity of believing fundamentals delivered in
holy Scripture is under pain of damnation to know them in particular, and
distinctly; which obligation is so strict, that you say it implies
contradiction, that Salvation be had without the least of them. Now if the
necessity of believing not fundamentals, be as great as this; yea the same with
this; no Protestant can be saved that does not believe such passages of
Scripture as be not fundamental distinctly and in particular, even as he is
bound to believe fundamentals. You often (as pa. 169. lin. 12.) Cap. 3. n. 64.
lin. 33.
eagerly and bitterly declame against us for requiring harder and heavier
conditions of Salvation, then God requires, or then were required in the days
of the Apostles. Who more guilty of this crime then your self? For this your
necessity of believing the not fundamental truths of Scripture, as much as
the fundamental, was not ever in Gods Church; seeing your self only say it is
so as matters now stand. Whereby you insinuate, that as matters stood anciently,
this great necessity and obligation had no place in Gods Church. Nor can you
say, that it is required of God: for then it would be delivered in Scripture
and consequently perpetual in the Church ever since the Gospel was written:
whereas your words urging this obligation only (as now matters stand) imply
the contrary. It is therefore manifest, that this necessity so heavy and
direful, is laid upon Protestants, not by Apostolical command, not by divine
Precept; but by your self and other proud ignorant Ministers, who neither know
which be Fundamentals, nor can agree upon any short rule, within the compass
of which they are all comprised. Hence they are forced to send every Protestant
to fish for Fundamentals, in the vast and deep Ocean of holy Scripture; not
giving them any direction, any rule, any assurance of finding them all, except
they can comprehend clearly and distinctly all the innumerable truths plainly
revealed therein.

14. Finally, what you say page 134. lin. 24. That may be sufficiently declared
to one, which is not sufficiently declared to another; and consequently, that
may be fundamental to one, which to another is not. And page 281. lin. 4. Cap.
5. n. 17.
The same error may be not Capital to men that want means of finding the
truth; and Capital to others, who have means and neglect to use them. This
doctrine by you often repeated, drives Protestants into a Thicket of Thorns
and briers: into new insuperable difficulties and uncertainties of their
Salvation. For though a Protestant were sure (which in Protesta^cy he can never
be) that he distinctly belieues all capital and essential truths, which are to
be believed of all; how shall he be sure, that he belieues all truths, which
to him in particular (in regard of his greater knowledge and capacity) are, you
say, Capital and Fundamental? How can he be certain, that there are not some
capital and substantial truths, which he has not found in Scripture, though
he had means of finding them? And if he want belief of these Fundamental and
Capital truths; how can he possibly be saved? For though you should say, that
these are the least of things fundamentally necessary to salvation; yet this
will not possibilitate their salvation: it being contradiction, to say, that
Salvation may be had, without any the LEAST thing necessary to Salvation, as
you affirm, Cap. 6 in fine totius capitis.
Page 382 lin. 1.

The fourth Conviction.
YOu could find no Way to make good the Salvation of English Protestants,
against the demonstrations of Charity maintained; but only such a Way, wherein
the vildest Heretics that now live, or ever lived under the cope of Heaven,
may be saved as well as they; yea even Jews and Turks: these two consequences
from your principles, I will demonstrate in two Sections of this Conviction.

That in your Way English Protestants cannot be saved more then Socinians;
with fixproofes, that you are of this impious Sect.. 1.
1. YOu say in your Preface n. 39. that you have not undertaken the particular
defense of the Church of England, but the common Cause, and Religion of all
Protestants. And page 375. n. 56. you profess, that by the Religion of
Protestants, which you mayntaine to be a safeway to salvation, you do not
understand the doctrine of Luther, or Calvin, or Melancton; nor the Confession
of Augusta, or Geneua; nor the Catechism of Hiedelberge; nor the articles of
the Church of England; no nor the Harmony of Protestants Confessions: but that
wherein they all agree as a perfect rule of their faith and actions, the BIBLE,
the BIBLE, I say the BIBLE only is the Religion of Protestants. This is the
only Religion, the only way you could find to save English Protestants,
wherein they can no more be saved, then any other that believe the Bible, and
only the Bible, as a perfect rule of their life and actions. Now in the number
of Protestants, Ghospelers, and Biblists, the new Ebionites, or Samosatenians
whon we term Socinians, are comprehended; the most blasphemous Heretics
against the Fundamental articles of Christianity that ever breathed, worse
then Arians: For Arians acknowledged the Eternity of our Lord Christ Jesus,
that he had an Eternal most perfect divine Essence; only they would not
confess him to be coequall, and consubstantiall to his Father* But Socinians
deny him to be the eternal Son of God, affirm him to be mere man, and
termed the son of God, as other Just and holy men and Prophets are.

2. Now that Socinians are by your account in the number of them, that go the
safe way to Salvation, as well as English Protestants, is manifest; not only
because they profess the Bible, and only the Bible; but also because they are
that sort of Christians, whose Religion you follow as these six arguments
euince.

3. First, because being so much suspected and accused even in public writing
to be of that impious Sect: and if you were not provoked to make a clear
profession of the Christian faith against them, you have not done it: you say
sometimes, that Christ is the Son of God; but never his Eternal Son, which
omission of the word Eternal in a man so suspected of Socinianisme as you are,
is in the judgment of our late Sovereign Proceeding against D. Vorstius. page
81. For of Vorstius his book styled de Filiatione Christi, without aeterna;
the King faith: For this title only, an Author so suspected as he, is worthy
of the faggot.
King James a sign of guiltines, and makes your Book worthy of the faggot.

4. Secondly, because you dislike words about matters of Faith not found in the
Scripture, which Christians use for the better declaration of the Creed. This
you term, Page 198. li. 16.
a vain conceit, that we can speak of the things of God, better then in the
word of God. You declame also bitterly against, persecuting cursing, damning of
such as will not subscribe unto the words of men, as the words of God. No
reader of understanding in Ecclesiastical affairs can doubt, but you gird at
the word (...), consubstantiall, decreed by the first Councels of Nice, to
declare the substantial Equality betwixt the three divine Persons: and at the
word (...), Deipara, Gods Mother, commanded by the Council of Ephesus to be
given to the Blessed Virgin; to signify, that she was mother to him, that was
personally, not only true man, but also the eternal God: These Canons of the
first general Councels, these sacred forms of Ecclesiastical speech, you
cannot endure; because they thunder against Socinians; they proclaim them to
be Heretics, and strike their Impieties dead.

5. Thirdly, because you Page 381. n. 72. cap 6. n. 72. lin 21.
reprehend them, who by firm resolution of their will uphold themselves in the
belief of their Religion, though their reason and understanding fail them
Which is as much as if you had said, We are not, through pious affection and
reverence of Gods word, to believe things above the reach of reason; things in
the apprehension of which our natural understanding fails: as are the
mysteries of the Trinity, and of the Eternal Generation of the Son of God.

6. Fourthly, because you say, Page 218. lin. 15.
that they who captiuate their understanding, to the belief of those things,
which seem irreconcilable contradictions; may as well believe real
contradictions, Page 217. n. 47. Cap. 4. n. 47.
which no wiseman will do. But he that belieues the mystery of the B. Trinity,
and the Son of God his Eternal Generation, must of necessity captiuate his
understanding to the belief of impossibilities, implicancies, contradictions,
seeming to be such in human reason, as every true Christian by experience
finds. Therefore in your opinion no wise man does, or will believe them.

7. Fifthly, because you join with the Carpocrates, Ebion, Cerdo.
ancient enemies of Christ Jesus his God head, to disparage the Gospel of S.
John; wherein Ioannes aduersus Ebionem scripsit Euangelium, Diuinam Christi
edisserens natiuitate^. Hieron. de. Script. Eccles.
the eternal Generaation of the Word, the only begotten Son of God, is most
fully and plainly delivered; as also the indispensable necessity of believing
the same, Joan. 3.8. He that belieueth in him is not damned; he that belieueth
not is already damned; because he belieues not in the Name of the only
begotten Son of God. For though you dare not say plainly that S. John's
Gospel is of no authority, yet in effect you say as much; contending, that in
his Gospel Page 211. in. 42. lin. 11.
nothing is contained of necessary belief, which is not clearly and plainly
set down Page 212. lin. 1. Such a perfect Gospel.
in S. Lukes Gospel. Wherefore; because Christ Jesus his being the Eternal
Word and son of God, is no where set down so clearly in the Gospel of S.
Luke, you Socinians will not be bound to believe it; through our Lord himself
in S. John's Gospel pronounce, that he who belieues it not, is already damned,
that is, as sure to be damned, as if he were already in Hell. Now what is this,
but in favor of Sociniansme to give the lie to S. John; yea to our Savior
himself?

8. Sixthly, you are proved to be not only a Socinian, but also impiously
obstinate in the defense of that Sect, by your changing the sacred text of Gods
word, that they may not seem therein accursed. S. John in his first Epistle
Cap. 4. v. 2. gives this sign to know the spirit of true Prophets and
Preachers, Every spirit which confesses Jesus Christ to be come in flesh is of
God; and every Spirit which confesses not Jesus Christ to be come in flesh is
not of God, but of Antichrist. And Ep. 2. v. 7. Many Deceyuers are come out
into the world, who do not confess Jesus Christ to be come in flesh; this is a
Deceyuer and an Antichrist. In which places it is manifest, that S. John
speaks of false Christians, namely the Ebion confitebatur Iesum Christum, sed
eum nudum esse hominem afferebat, non autem Deum vnigenitum, Sapientiam and
Verbu^ Dei. Ignatius Epist. ad Philadelphos.
Ebionites, who deny Christ Jesus to be a Person come from the bosom of God
vested with humane flesh who deny him to be the Word made flesh, the Son of
God incarnate. Which being your Socinian Belief, that the same might not seem
damned as Antichristian; you make bold with Gods word, and thrust in your own
words in place thereof, Preface number. 12. The rule, S. John gives to make this
trial of Spirits by, is to consider whether, they confess Jesus to be the
Christ, that is, the guide of their faith, and Lord of their actions. And page
339. lin. 4. you say, S. John Ep. 2. v. 7. speabes not of Heretics, but of no
Christians, of Antichrists, of such as denied Jesus to be the Christ. Thus
still, as often as S. John says, such as deny Jesus Christ to be come in flesh
be false Prophets, deceyuers, Antichrists, you change the text into such as
deny Jesus to be the Christ, as though S. John had spoken in this place against
Jews, who deny Jesus to be the Christ, or the promised Messiah. Whereby you
not only chauge the text; but also foyst in a falsehood into Gods Word. For it
is false, that whosoever confesses Jesus to be the Christ, is thereby known to
be of God, and a true Christian: seeing Turks confess Jesus to be the Christ,
that is, the Messiah promised to the Jews; and yet are not Christians. And
that S. John speaks against Heretics, who under the name of Christians,
went about preaching, that Jesus Christ is not the eternal son of God, is
clear by the words which immediately follow: He Epist. 2. v. ^.
that departs, and abides not in the Doctrine of Christ, has not God: He
that abides in his doctrine, has the Father and the Son. If any come to
you, and bring not this Doctrine, receive him not into your house; bid him not
God speed: For he that says to him, God speed, is partaker of his malignant
works.

9. What then may we think of those English Protestants, and of their state
and Salvation, who have made you the Patron of their Religion, and Pastor of
their souls? can they be excused from being partakers with you in your
malignant works, tending to the peruersion and damnation of many? I confess
you have rewarded them as they deserve. For you give them no better assurance,
or hope of Salvation, then to Socinians, who deny Christ Jesus to be the
Eternal only begotten Son of God, whose damnation goes before them unto
judgment. Miserable they are, who be so desperately bent against Charity
maintained by Catholics, as rather then yield to be saved in the Catholic
Roman Church, will be defended by such a Socinian Patron, and in a Way which
gives them no hope of salvation; but together with Heretics, who deny the
Incarnation of the eternal Son of God, who are branded in Scripture with the
note of Deceyuers and Antichrists: and by the mouth of our Lord himself, men
already damned.

That in your Way Jews and Turks may be saved aswelll as Protestants.. 2.
10. PRotestants of your stamp who pretend to believe the Bible, and only the
Bible, being divided into King James, Proceeding against Worstins page 65.
innumerable sects (agreeing in nothing but in their union against the Pope)
cannot but be full of many contrary and adverse errors, as you grant.
Wherefore in your Way they are saved in their errors by invincible ignorance;
or if their ignorance be vincible, sinful, and damnable, by General
Repentance. But by your Principles, Jews and Turks may be saved in their
false Religions through invincible ignorance, or general Repentance. That they
may be saved by invincible ignorance, is proved by what you write Page 393.
lin. 1. Cap. 7. n. 8. lin. 26. ante finem.
Certainly Religion is one of those things, which are necessary only because
commanded. For if none were commanded under pain of damnation, how could it be
damnable to be of any? Neither can it be damnable to be of a false Religion,
unless it be a sin to be so. Thus you: whereupon I assume this Hypothesis: to
Turks, Jews, Pagans, that are inuincibly ignorant of the falsehood of their
own Religion, and truth of the Christian, it is no sin to be of their false
Religion and enemies of Christ our Lord: This has been already showed by your
acknowledgments; that God cannot be offended with men for errors purely
inuoluntary, nor can he damn them for not doing what he knows they cannot do.
Wherefore it is impossible, that God should damn Jews, or Turks, or Pagans
for errous of invincible and inuoluntary ignorance: so that if your Thesis be
true, that no false Religion is damnable, but only because it is sin: it is
comequent, that men may be saved in any Religion even in Iudaisme, Turcisme,
Paganism through invincible ignorance.

11. You say 2. Ed. page 24. lin. 23.
Page 24. lin. 34. Who can find fault with D. Potter for saying, If, through
want of means of instruction, incapacity, invincible or probable ignorance a
man dye in error be may be saved? Now many Jews, and Turks, and Pagans dye
in their errors, through want of instruction, or incapacity, or invincible
ignorance. Ergo, they may be saved in their false Religions and impious
errors. If you answer that your proposition, that men who dye in their errors
may be saved, is to be understood of such as dye in errors that be damnable
only meritoriously, because sins, and against Gods command, not of errors
which remedilessely, fatally, unavoidably destroy Salvation, which no ignorance
can excuse, for which no repentance can beg pardon without a dereliction of
them, as you say page 336. n. 19. I reply that this answer confirms the
Salvation of Jews and Turks and Pagans in your doctrine and Way. According to
which, to dye in any false Religion cannot be damnable, remedilessely, but only
meritoriously, because a sin, and an offense of God: wherefore if any Jew, or
Turk, or Pagan want capacity, or means of instruction, and so be inuincibly
ignorant, he may be saved, even as Protestants are saved in your safe Way.

12. I omit that you plainly contradict your self in saying that there be
some errors which remedilesly destroy Salvation, because the contrary truth is
necessary, Cap. 6. n. 19. lin. 33.
non solum necessitate praecepti, sed medij, not only because commanded, but
also because the sole means or remedy against sin. This doctrine I say does
not agree with your assertion, that Religion it self is necessary only because
it is commanded; and that it cannot be damnable to be of any false Religion,
but only because it is a sin. For what things or doctrines can be necessary,
not only because commanded, but also because the sole remedy against sin, if
Religion (which is, to believe that God is, and that he is are warder of them
that seek him) be necessary only because commanded; not because the means
without which no man can be justified from sin and saved? If to be of a false
Religion, or of no Religion be damnable only meritoriously; because a sin;
what error can be imagined so malignant, as to destroy Salvation not only
meritoriously, but also remedilessely, or fatally, as you speak?

13. Secondly that Jews and Turks may according to the Principles of your
safe way, be saved in their errors by General repentance for all their
sins, is proved: because there is no repugnance, but they may conceive
contrition for all their sins. For they believe in one only God, Creator of
heaven and earth. The Jews further believe the truths revealed in the old
testament, the Turks believe in Jesus, that he is the Christ, the messiah,
which is to believe in him as far as Socinians believe in him; yea, they pray
unto him and invoke him, which some Bellarmin. l. 1. de Christo. c. 1.
Socinians refuse to do, because they hold we are to invoke the true God
only; and to them Christ is not God, but a mere holy man. Why then may not
Jews, and Turks love the true God, and conceive sorrow of all their offenses
and sins against so good a Lord, so worthy of all love, of all their sins I
say known and unknown, in which number all sinful errors must of necessity
be contained as you say page 21. lin antepenullina, and page 20. lin vltima.

14. To this purpose very forcible and pregnant it is, what you say to us
speaking indefinitely of different Religions and Sects, page 32. n 4. You must
not hereafter affirm, that of men of different Religions, one side only can
be saved; but you must temper the crudenesse of this assertion; by saying, One
side only can be saved, except want of conviction, or else repentance excuse
the other. This your Charitable exception comprehends Turks, and Jews, that
are of a different Religion from Christians; that they may be excused from
damnation through want of Conuictio^, or through a general Repentance of all
their sins known and unknown. You give us warning in the same place saying
to us: You must abstain from affirming, that Protestants dying in their
Religion cannot be saved; For you must always remember to add this caution,
unless they were excusably ignorant, or dyed with contrition. A goodly advise,
which because S. Paul observed not, you must say he was to blame and
uncharitable in pronouncing, 1. Co. 6 9 10. Galat. 5.20.21.
that impious men, drunkards, Heretics, sectaries shall not possess the
Kingdom of God. For he should have remembered to add this caution; except they
be excusably ignorant, or dye with contrition. Nor must you say, that Turks
and Jews dying in their Religion cannot be saved; but you must always
remember to add this caution; unless they were excusably ignorant of the
falsehood of it; or dyed with contrition. And then considering, that you cannot
know, whether or no they were sufficiently convinced of the truth of christian
Religion, you are obliged in charity to judge the best, and hope they are not.
And is not this to mantayne, that men may be saved in any Religion, Christian,
Jewish, or Turkish, as well in the one as in the other? No Religion among
Christians, no Sect among Protestants is found which you do Preface n. 39.
or dare defend to be free from errors against faith and Religion; and so in
your Way none are sure to be saved, but through ignorance, or general
Repentance for their errors. But Jews and Turks may be saved in either of
these ways; their errors (according to your principles) not being
remedilessely damnable.

The fifth Conviction.
THis Conviction over throws the chief cause for which you charge our
Religion to be damnable, and shows: first that the thing for which you would
send us to Hell, is the necessary duty of a constant Christian Faith. Secondly,
that your contrary mutability and leuity is Apostaticall and impious.

You damn us to Hell for being faithful, and constant Christians.. 1.
1. YOu often proclaim us, to be men wilfully blind, sure to fall into the
ditch of damnation. For this your censure of us you give this reason; Page 380.
n. 72.
because we will not enter into any trial of our Religion, with indifference,
with liberty of judgment, with are solution to doubt of it, if upon
examination, the grounds of it prove uncertain; or to leave it, if they prove
apparently false: my own experience assures me, that herein I do you no
wrong; but it is very apparent to all men from your ranking doubting of any
part of your doctrine, among mortal sins. Thus you. And we willingly grant,
and openly profess, that we hold it a mortal sin to doubt deliberately of
any point of our faith. But must we be damned in this respect? O how does
malignancy against our salvation confound your memory and wit? For against
doubting in matters of Religion you write most earnestly page 195. n. 11. lin.
20. which of us ever taught, it was not damnable to deny or doubt of the truth
of any thing, whereof we either know or believe, that God has revealed it?
Thus you. Now if it be damnable to doubt of the truth of any thing we believe
to be revealed of God; what an obliuious Creature are you, who will have us
damned for not yielding to do that very thing, which you proclaim damnable to
be done? you will have us sent to Hell, because we rank doubting of any part
of our faith (which we hold revealed of God) among deadly and damnable sins;
and yet your self rank this doubting among deadly and damnable crimes, with
an earnest tacit detestation of the contrary Doctrine, which of us ever taught
it is not damnable?

2. Have you so soon forgot your self? Are your sayings no sooner out of your
pen, then out of your memory and head? which of us (say you) ever taught it is
not damnable? Even your self good Sir, you William Chilling worth teach it is
not damnable, yea you hold it damnable for any man to rank doubting of the
Religion, which he holds revealed of God among mortal sins, which you
prove; because seeing every man must resolve never to commit mortal sin, it
follows, that he must never examine the grounds of his Religion, for fear of
doubting; or if he do, he must resolve, that no motives, be they never so
strong, shall move him to doubt. This is your argument, upon which you conclude
we are a company of blind inconsidering men, lovers of the darkness, and not
of light. And yet your self, are so blind, so inconsidering, and your wits are
so dulled and darkened, as you do not perceive, that this very argument proves
you and all your Biblists to be in the same case we are; to wit obstinately
blind: for you grant, that all of you rank doubting of your Religion among
mortal sins, that is, you all teach that it is damnable to doubt of the
truth of any thing you believe to be revealed of God. Hence it follows that
seeing you must resolve never to commit damnable sin; that you must never
examine the grounds of it at all, for fear you should be moved to doubt; or if
you do you must resolve that no motives, be they never so strong, shall move
you to doubt. You see your argument against us turns upon your selves, and
proves you are obstinate and blind, and in danger of the Ditch as much as we
are.

3. And do not you further teach and contend, that it is damnable for you to
doubt of the Doctrine of Devils: if you believe it to be Divine Revelation?
Cap. 2. n. 122. lin. 21.
Page 99. n. 122. l. 22. If by the discourse of the Devil I be (I will not say
convinced, but) persuaded, though falsely, that it is a Divine Revelation, and
shall deny to believe it, I shall be a formal (though not a material)
Heretic; For he that belieues any thing to be a Divine Revelation, and yet
will not believe it to be true; must of necessity believe, that God is false,
which according to your doctrine, is the Formality of an Heretic. You who
teach, that he who will not believe (and he that will doubt, will not believe)
that thing to be truth, which falsely by the persuasion of the Devil, he
belieues to be Divine Revelation, is a formal Heretic, and a blasphemous
wretch: you (I say) that teach this, who will not wonder, how you could be so
inconsiderate, as to make us damnable, because we resolve not to doubt of that
doctrine, which by the Tradition of so many Christian Ages, by our Pastors and
Ancestors, men renowned for Learning, Sanctity, Miracles, for expelling of
Devils, for converting of nations, has been delivered, and persuaded unto us
to be revealed of God?

That your Protestant Way to be firm to no Religion, but still in motion and
change, is damnable.. 2.
4. ABout your self, and your being ungrounded and unsettled in matters of
Religion, thus you write, and sincerely profess page 278. lin. 29. Cap. 5. n.
16. in. fine.
I truly for my part, if I did not find in my self a love and desire of all
profitable truth; if I did not put away idleness, and prejudice, and worldly
affections, and so examine to the bottom all my opinions of Divine matters,
being prepared in mind to follow God, and God only, which way so ever he shall
lead me; If I did not hope, that I either do, or endeavor to do, these
things; certainly I should have little hope of obtaining Salvation. Here you
profess, that neither Christian Religion, nor any truth thereof, has been as
yet firmly rooted, or deeply by the fingar of God printed in your heart. You
declare your soul to be a Blanke, noted with no Religion: but prepared for
any, which to you shall seem of God, to wit you are ready to believe not
absolutely, but Preface n. 5.
as most probable for the present; but resolved never to believe God so
firmly, as to rank doubting of what you have received as his word, among
mortal sins.

5. That this your practice implies doubting of all Christian Religion, I
prove; because you profess, to question and examine all your opinions of
Divine matters; to make an if, or a doubt of the certainty and truth of them
all; that is, you examine them, prepared in mind to leave them all and every
one, if upon trial they seem to you false. But among your opinions of Divine
matters, your persuasion that our Christian Scriptures and doctrines are Divine
oracles, and Gods word, is one; for you hold the Divinity of Scriptures, and
consequently of the Doctrines contained therein, only as an opinion very
probable, as is hereafter Convict. 6.
showed. Ergo you question the holy Scripture, the Religion and Gospel of
Christ; you make an if of the truth and certainty thereof: You examine it
doubtingly, with liberty of judgment, prepared in mind to leave it, if
perchance you find the grounds thereof apparently false. What is this, but to
be a Nullifidian, a man settled in no Religion, but doubtful of all? Such an
one as they were whom the Apostle 2. Ti. 3.7.
checketh, terming them, men still learning, but never attayning to the assured
knowledge of any thing. Again Cap. 5. n. 107. initio.
Page 307. n. 107. you write, thus speaking unto our Maintayner: Your eleauenth
falsehood is, that our first reformers ought to have doubted, whether their
opinions were certain: which is to say, they ought to have doubted of the
certainty of Scripture: which in formal and express terms contaynes many of
these opinions. From this testimony I conclude, that you doubt of the cetainty
of the Scripture. You profess to examine and question all your Protestant
opinions of Divine matters; to make a doubt of the certainty of them. But you
contend, that some of your Protestant opinions of Divine matters, be such as to
make a doubt or question of the certainty of them, is to doubt of the certainty
of formal and express Scripture. Ergo, your Way, and practice of doubting of
all your opinions about Divine matters, is doubting even of the truth of the
Christian Scripture, and Gospel of Christ. A thing most impious and
execrable as you now suppose, and yet so fond and forgetful you are, as to
say, you should have little hope of Salvation did you not do it, or endeavor to
do it.

6. In fine, your safe Way is a Labyrinth of implicatory and inextricable
errors. Protestants, that are concluded therein, are lost in a maze of
uncertainties, and in an intricate mixture of contrary doctrines, being sure to
find nothing therein but damnation, which way so ever they turn themselves. Do
they doubt of the truth of their Religion which they believe to be the
Gospel? They are both according to truth, and in your doctrine, damnable
wretches, as being formal Heretics. Be they so firm in their Religion, as
they rank doubting thereof among deadly sins? Then they are (you say)
obstinately blind, sure to fall into the pit of perdition, as much as we are,
at the least you affoard them little hope of obtaining Salvation.

The sixth Conviction.
1. THis Conviction shows, that only Roman Catholics have saving faith,
which is demonstrated by three Arguments. The first: Saving faith, is that,
Hebr. 11.6.
without which it is impossible to please God. Now faith which pleases Gods
must be on the one side certain and infallible; otherwise it is not worthy of
God, to whose word we owe so firm belief; that, if an Angel from heaven
should Euangelize against that we have received as his word, he were not to be
heard, but to be accursed. On the other side, it must be a free and voluntary
assent; not enforced by the evidence of the thing. For if the reason of
believing be evident, and such as does necessitate the Understanding to assent,
the assent is not pleasing to God; because it is not voluntary obedience and
submission to his word. Roman Catholics by believing the Church to be
infallible in all her proposals, obtain a persuasion about Divine mysteries
firm and infallible, and yet of voluntary obedience and submission. But the
Opposers of the Roman Church, not only want certainty in truth; but also know
not which way to challenge infallible certainty, without evidence.

2. This may be proved by what you write, Cap. 6. n. 7. circa medium.
Page 329. lin. 31. The infallible certainty of a thing which though it be in
it self; yet is not made appear to us infallibly certain, to my
understanding is an impossibility. What is this but to say, that faith of a
thing cannot be infallibly certain; except the thing believed be made so
clear and apparent, that the understanding cannot choose but assent unto it?
For what appears to us to be infallibly certain, is seen of us to be
infallibly certain: What we see to be infallible certain, we cannot choose
but assent, that it is so. So that, a firm Hebr. 11.1. 6. Fides sperandarum
substantia reru^, argume^tum non apparentium.
grounded belief of the truth of things not appearing, without which it is
impossible to please God, is by your doctrine to Protestants impossible.

3. Moreover, that Protestants cannot have faith pleasing to God, that is,
faith infallibly certain not grounded on evidence, I demonstrate in this sort.
No man can be assured infallibly of the truth of things not seen, nor to him
evidently certain, but by the word of an Author infallibly veracious in all
his words, delivered unto him by a witness of infallible truth: For if the
witness, or messenger of the word be fallible, let the Author of the word be
never so infallible, our assent to the truth of the thing proposed cannot be
infallible. Now Protestants have not the word of God by means of a witness
and messinger infallible: For the witness, proposer, and messenger of the word
of God is the visible Catholic Church, which Protestants hold to be fallible,
full of false Traditions, not free (so you Page 279. n. 64. The visile Church is
not free from all errors in it self damnable.
say) from error in it self damnable, and in this sense Page 291 lin. 8. From
such fundamental errors the Church Catholic is not secured.
Fundamental. Wherefore it is demonstratiuely certain, that only Roman
Catholics (who believe the Church to be infallible) can have Faith worthy of
God; Faith of voluntary submission to Gods word, that is, faith of things to
them not evidently yet infallibly certain, and consequently they only please
God, by their believing and are saved.

4. The second Argument. You say Cap 3. n. 36. lin. 23.
page 148. lin. 16. There is no other reason to believe the Scripture to be
true, but only because it is Gods word: so that you cannot believe the
doctrines and myestries revealed in Scripture to be true, more firmly and
infallibly then you believe the Scripture to be Gods word: for we must be surer
of the proof, then of the thing proved thereby, otherwise it is no proof, as
you say page 37^. n. 59. But your assurance that the Scripture is the word of
God, is only human, probable, and so absolutely fallible. For you believe the
books which were never doubted of in the Church to be Gods word, and a perfect
rule of faith, only by the tradition or testimonies of the ancient Churches
Cap. 2. n. 27.
page 63. lin. 35. But, the joint tradition of all the Apostolical Churches
with one mouth and one voice teaching the same doctrine, is only a very
probable argument, as you affirm Cap. 6. n. 40.
page 361. n. 40. Ergo, your faith, that Scripture is Gods word, and
consequently of all the mysteries therein revealed, is but human and probable,
and therefore unworthy of God, being not firmer then the credit we yield to
every moral honest man. For to us his word is probable and credible, and to
you the word of God is no more.

5. Protestants commonely pretend, that their faith, that these Books be the
word of God, rests finally, not upon the credit of human Tradition, but upon
the Scripture only; which shows it self with evident certitude to be divine
and supernatural truth and so revealed of God, Calvin. l. 1. Instit c. 7. n.
2. Quod autem rogant, vnde persuade bimur scripturas a Deo fluxisse: perinde
est ac si quis roget, vnde discemus lucem discernere a tenebris, suaue ab amaro
etc.
Even as light is seen by its own brightness, and honey is proved to be sweet
by the very taste thereof. But this point of Protestancy you reject, as fond,
vain, ridiculous, page 371. n. 51. and prove it to be such. Because, if the
Books of Scripture were evidently certain, if they did with evident certitude
demonstrate themselves to be Divine truth; then all men that have understanding
and capacity to apprehend the right sense and sentence of Scripture would
believe them to be true, which experience shows be otherwise. If Protestants
answer, that such as have their taste distempered, to them honey is bitter; so
Infidels, through prejudice and distemper of passions, do not perceive, and
taste the Divinity of the Doctrines of the Scripture. Against this, the reply is
ready and conuincing: For they who through distemper of their palate, judge
honey to be bitter, do not apprehend the true taste of honey, but a taste contrary
to the true taste thereof; which being in their palate, they conceive it to be
in the meat. But Infidels by their understanding do rightly apprehend, and
conceive the true senses of Scripture, and the mysteries of faith delivered
therein more clearly then many Christians of mean capacity do: and yet they
do not judge them to be Divine truth, or truth at all. Ergo the very true sense
and sentence of Scripture, does not with evident certainty show it self to be
Supernatural truth, such as could not be revealed, but of God.

6. Finally, if the Protestants belief of Scripture be grounded upon sight of
the truth thereof, this their belief is not saving faith: for Faith by which
men are saved (as has been said) is that whereby they submit by voluntary
obedience, their understanding to Gods word; believing firmly and assuredly
upon the Authority thereof, things in themselves incredible, and above the
reach of human reason. But Protestants do not believe the doctrine of Scripture
because it is the word of God, but because (as they say) they see it to be
Divine truth, and consequently the word of God. Ergo, they have not the faith
of humble submission to Gods word, which is the only faith that pleases God,
and by which men are saved.

7. The third Argument: Protestants have not faith of infallible adherence,
that is, faith worthy of God, about the sense, and interpretation of Scripture.
For holding the Churches interpretation to be fallible; they pretend to be sure
by this rule, that what they believe, to them seems plainly, clearly,
evidently revealed, and proposed in the Scripture. But this rule of assurance
is not infallible, but very fallible and deceytfull. For even Protestants
themselves contend, that many texts and places of Scripture, which seem plain
and clear, are to be understood figuratively against the plain, proper, and
literal sense. For example the words of our Lord about the chief Sacrament
and mystery of faith, THIS is My Body, This is My BLOOD, in their plain,
proper and literal sense deliver and establish Transubstantiation (as
Protestants B. Morton l. 2. de enchar. initio.
grant.) Hence Protestants, that are resolved not to believe a mystery so high
above reason, and seemingly repugnant to sense, will by no means allow these
words to be true in their proper and literal sense: they will not yield to the
plain evidence of the Divine text. Whereupon it is evidently consequent, that
they cannot be sure, about any mystery of faith, by virtue of the sole seeming
evidence of the sacred Text. For instance; take the most fundamental text of
Scripture, about the most fundame^tal mystery of Christian Religion, to wit,
the Incarnation of the Son of God, Joan. 1. 12.
The Word was made flesh. How does this text evidently convince, that the
Eternal Word, and Son of God was made Man truly, substantially, personally?
What Protestants say of the word of Christ, This is my Body; why may not
Nestorians affirm about this text, The Word was made ffesh, that it is not
true in a proper, plain, and literal sense, but metaphorically, figuratively,
that God and Man were made one in Christ by affectual union, as two great
friends are said to be one? How can Protestants be themselves assured, or how
can they prove by the sole evidence of the text, that this Nestorian
interpretation is false? And if their belief of the mystery of the Incarnation
be not solid and firm, grounded on a rule of interpretation infallibly
certain; how can they be saved?

8. Learned and judicious Readers may find in your book a world of laughter
about your answering the arguments of Charity Maintained: you do it so
vnscholler-like, so okerly and untowardly. Let your answer to this argument
serve for a pattern. Our Maintayner urges D. Potter, that if the Church may
err in points of faith not fundamental, you can never be sure of any such
point: For as you err about some, deceived by the seeming evidence of the
Scripture, so you cannot be sure you do not err about other. You answer Cap.
2. n. 160.
Page 117. n. 160. A pretty Sophisme depending upon this principle, that
whosoever possibly may err, he can never be certain, that he does not err. A
Judge may possibly err in judgment: can he therefore never be sure he has
judged aright? A Traualler may possibly mistake his way; must I therefore be
doubtful, whether I am in the right way from my Hall to my chamber? Or can our
London-Carrier have no certainty in the middle of the day, when he is sober,
and in his wits, that he is in the way to London? And a little after nu. 161.
whereas our Mayntainer argues, that you cannot be sure it is an error to make
the Church Judge of Controversies, because you pretend to be sure by the
seeming evidence of Scripture; but this rule is not infallible, and so you
cannot be sure by the warrant thereof. The ground of this Sophisme (say you) is
very like the former, viz. that we can be certain of the falsehood of no
proposition, but those only, that are damnable errors. But I pray, good Sir,
give me your opinion of these: The snow is balcke, the fire is cold, M. Knot is
Archbishop of Toledo, the whole is not greater then a part of the whole, that
twice two make not four, in your opinion, good Sir, are these damnable
heresies? Or because they are not so, have we no certainty of the falsehood of
them. I beseech you, Sir, consider seriously with what strange captions you
have gone about to delude your King and your Country: and if you be convinced
they are so, give glory to God, and let the world know it by your deserting
that Religion, which stands upon such deceytfull foundations. This you write,
which you could never have written, had you been with your London Carrier
sober, and in your wits. You have proved Gusman de Alfarache his saying, that
the Fools Hospital is of large extent, to be most true: He can range and
revel within the compass thereof in a world of sottish extrauagances; from
hot to cold, from, snow to fire, from Oxford to London, from London to Toledo,
from Toledo back again to King and Country, and then fetch a new carriere
over the whole Universe, and every part thereof, to be sure, that no part is
greater then the whole. What is impertinentcy, what is deserting the matter and
argument in hand, if this be not?

Good Sir, be pleased to understand, that the Controversy betwixt D. Potter and
our Maintayner, is not about all Kind of propositions, nor whether, snow be
black, or fire cold, nor about your not being Archbishop of Canterbury, nor
about the way from your Hall to your Chamber: but about propositions pertaining
to Christian faith, not evident to sense, but only to be known by revelation
from heaven. Our Maintayner avouches, that these Divine truths cannot be
known assuredly, but by the teaching of Gods Church, infallible in all her
proposals. This he proves not (as you feign) by this principle, He that may
possibly err, can never be sure he does not err, but by this: He that may
err, and has some times erred by following some certain Rule, can never be
sure he does not err by following the same rule. If a Judge condemn a man to
death wrongfully, upon evidence given against him by two witnesses, how can he
be sure, that he does not condemn another man unjustly; if he have no greater
assurance, then the deposition of two witnesses, not known to be of better
credit and conscience? A traveler has been misguided out of his way, by
inquiring of the first man he met, and trusting his direction; how can he be
sure he is not out of his way by crediting the word of another directour
equally unknown unto him? This then is the Argument of Charity Maintained,
which you durst not encounter; but ran about the world in the wild-goose chase,
to avoid the force thereof. No man can be sure he does not err by following a
rule which is fallible and deceitful; But to judge of the sense of the
Scripture, by the sole seeming evidence of the text, is a rule fallible, which
often fails, and deceaueth them who rely thereon: because many places are not
taken in their plain, proper, literal sense; and many texts considered by
themselves, seem clear and plain, which conferred with other texts (that
seem to say the contrary) become dark and obscure: Therefore to discern the
true sense and meaning of Scripture by the sole seeming evidence of some text
thereof, is a rule fallible: and Protestants by the sole direction thereof can
never be sure, or infallibly certain about any mystery of faith.

10. And I pray you, good Sir, leave your wild vagaries, come home to the little
closet of your wits, hold them close to the matter, and then tell us: A
Protestant who denies the words of Christ, This is my Body, to be true in
their plain, proper and literal sense; how can he be sure himself, or how can
he assure others, that this text, The word was made flesh, is to be taken, and
true in the plain, proper and literal sense? Do not tell us, that you know the
way from your Hall to your chamber, that snow is white, fire hot, M. Knot is
not Archbishop of Toledo; but give us an assured rule whereby to know, that
this text, The word was made flesh, is literally to be understood in the plain
substantial sense: and the text, This is my body, ought to be figuratively
interpreted, so that the Body of Christ, be taken for but a piece of Bread? The
mean while I conclude that Protestants seeing they have not any infallible rule
to assure them of the sense of Scripture; cannot firmly believe the Mysteries
revealed therein: and so they have, not such a persuasion of the truth of Gods
word, as is worthy of God, and pleasing to him: nor will they ever obtain
saving faith, till they join with Roman Catholics, to acknowledge the
infallible authority of the visible Catholic Church.

The seventh Conviction.
BEcause you cannot damn Roman Catholics for any want of necessary and
fundamental truth; you endeavor to procure their damnation, and plead
earnestly for it, in regard they do not endeavor to know all profitable truth.
In which discourse you prodigiously contradict other assertions of your Book.
By the discovery of which, damnation will be seen to fall a way from us upon
your own head, together with the cause meritorious thereof, the not caring to
avoid vnfundamentall heresies.

1. First you contradict your self in the same sentence, whereby you make your
Way plain, and yet impossible to be gone. Page 221 lin. 19. Cap. 4. n. 53.
post medium.
This is a way so plain, as fools cannot (except they will) err from it.
Because not knowing absolutely all truth; nay not all profitable truth, and not
being free from error, but endeavoring to know the truth and obey it, and to be
free from error, is by this Way made the only condition of Salvation. It is
strange you should say, that fools cannot err from your Way, unless they
will: whereas your self being so wise a man have erred so mightily from your
Way, (no doubt against your will) as you are gone a contrary way. In the first
part of your saying you pronounce your Way to be so plain as fools, except
they will, cannot miss of being saved therein: but in the second, you require
so much, and so hard conditions of Salvation, as you make the same wholly
impossible for fools and ignorant persons; and morally impossible even to the
learned leaders of your flock. For you require to Salvation, that men know,
not only all necessary truth, but also that they endeavor to know all
profitable truth, yea absolutely all truth. For by virtue of your speech they
are bound to endeavor for the knowledge of that truth, which in this sentence,
you say, they are not bound to know. But the truth you say in this sentence
they are not bound to know, is not all necessary truth, but all profitable
truth, yea absolutely all truth: Ergo your followers are bound, as they will be
saved, though not to know, yet to labor, endeavor, study to know all
profitable truth, yea absolutely all truth about Divine matters. Which is, as
much as to say, that none can be saved in your way, but such as have studied
Divinity, and have not omitted so much as one question thereof, not only about
profitable points of that Science, but also about unnecessary and unprofitable
quirks, absolutely all. What can be imagined more vain fond, and absurd, then
to bind all men, as they will be saved, to study and endeavor for the knowledge
of all Divinity, and Divine truth? And yet such is your desire to damn us, as
you will do it upon any condition; though your self, and all other
Protetestants be damned in our company.

2. Secondly you grossly contradict your self, whiles your declame against
our Religion as extreme dangerous, because we do not (you say) care to avoid
errors not fundamental: which declamations are frequent in your book,
particularly Page 277. n. 61. lin. 29. Cap. 5. n 61. lin. 28.
Neither is there any reason, why such a Church should please her self too
much for retayning fundamental truths; whiles she remaynes so regardlesse of
others. For, though the simple defect of some truths profitable only, and not
simply necessary, may consist with Salvation; yet who is there that can give
her sufficient assurance, that the neglect of such truths is not damnable?
Besides, who is there, that can put her in sufficient caution, that these
errors about profitable matters may not (according to the usual fecundity of
error) bring forth others of a higher quality, such as are pestilent and
pernicious etc. Lastly, who can say, that she has sufficiently dicharged her
duty to God and man, by avoiding only fundamental Heresies; if in the mean
time she be negligent of others, which though they do not destroy Salvation,
yet obscure and hinder, and only not block up the way to it. Thus you: who
seem as forgetful of your self, as he was, who is said to have had so little
wit, as he could not remember his own name. For had you remembered your name,
to the questions, Who can give such a Church sufficient assurance? who can put
her in sufficient caution? Who can say, she has done her duty sufficiently?
You would have readily answered, I William Chillingworth: for you often
undertake for a Church that retaynes all Fundamental truths, to be her surety,
and give her assurance of Salvation against all these pretended dangers. You
say, they who believe all fundamentals, believe all necessaries, and so we
must confess, that they may safely expect Salvation: except we will say, that
more is necessary, then that which is necessary. You say, points
circumstantiall (that is not fundamental) be those of which we may be securely
ignorant, such as even the Pastors themselves are not bound to know, or
believe, or not disbelieue them absolutely and always, but then only when they
do see, and know them to be delivered in Scripture as Divine Revelations. I say
when they do so, and know, and not only when they may etc. Otherwise it should
be a damnable sin in any learned man actually to disbelieue any one
particular Historical verity contained in Scripture: for though he did not
know it to be revealed, yet he might have known it, had he with diligence
perused Scripture. You say, he that belieues all fundamentals, cannot be damned
for any error of faith. You earnestly demand, He that belieues all necessary
truth, how can he possibly fail of Salvation if his life be answerable to his
faith?

3. By these sayings do not you give men, that retain all fundamentals, good
cause of too much (that is of excessive) pleasure and content; by telling them
they cannot possibly be damned for any error in faith? Do not you affoard
abundant assurance, that neglect to know truths not fundamental, is not
damnable, there being no obligation to know them, or to use diligence to find
them? The people, and even the Pastors may securely be ignorant of them, yea
actually disbelieue them? Do not you put such a Church in sufficient caution,
that errors not Fundamental cannot bring forth errors pestilent and
pernicious? that she has performed her duty to God and man sufficiently unto
Salvation, by avoiding Fundamental Heresies? Except you will say more is
necessary, then that which is necessary; that can be which cannot be; that is
possible which is altogether impossible; men are bound to know that which they
are not bound to know; men are damned for not caring to know, that whereof they
might be securely ignorant. Into this maze of contradictions you are brought by
your will to damn us, which is much stronger then your wit.

4. Your third Devise to damn us, it yet more full of strange forgetfulness,
and contradiction of your self. You suppose, that we distinguish Heresies into
two kinds, some fundamental, some not fundamental; that we hold the first
damnable and utterly destructive of Salvation, and so to be carefully avoided;
but that men may be saved in their heresies of the second kind. Hence you say,
we regard not Heresies vnfundamentall, we are careless and negligent to avoid
them; being persuaded, that if we hold all fundamental truth, we cannot be
damned for any error or heresy against faith. In regard of this loose doctrine
and our negligence consequent thereupon; you say, we are in great danger of
damnation. This is your Plea against our Salvation, so dull, and so void of
memory as you may seem to have forgotten even the argument of the whole book
of Charity manitayned, and of your own. For this distinction of Heresies into
two sorts, some Fundamental, some not Fundamental, is taught by Protestants,
who by the largeness and laxitie of this doctrine would draw some kind of
Heretics, to wit Heretics not fundamental, within the compass of the fold
of Christ, and the number of them that be saved. This is the substance of D.
Potters whole treatise, which our maintayner impugneth. Is it not the^
prodigious want of memory to charge the Roman Church with this Doctrine, and to
seek her damnation, because (forsooth) she does not care to avoid Heresies not
Fundamental? For our Roman Theology does not allow the distinction of errors
or heresies against faith into Fundamental and not Fundamental in your sense:
for we hold Heresies damnable, and equally damnable, as much those, that are
against Truths profitable only, as those that destroy truths simply necessary.
Hence in the Way of the Roman Church, he that knowing Transubstantiation to be
proposed as matter of faith, by the definition of the Church, shall presume to
gain say it, is as full, formal, and very an Heretic, as he who denies the
personal union of two Natures, Divine and Human in Christ. For the greatness of
the malice of Heresy is not measured by the greatness of the matter denied;
but by the greatness of the pride, whereby an Heretic preferres his fancies of
Scripture before the definition of the Church; and by the greatness of that
impiety, whereby he presumes to reject that doctrine, which he has so many
strong reasons to believe to be revealed of God.

5. If you say, that Charity maintained does suppose, that the Roman Church
has some corruptions and errors in faith not Fundamental; I answer it is
impudently in you so to affirm; and great vanity to gather your affirmation
from these his words, As for our Churchs corruptions in doctrine (I speak
upon the untrue supposition of our Adversaries): you upon no better warrant
then this; say to our Maintayner page 274. n. 58. Cap. 5. n. 58. and 59.
You are so courteous as to suppose corruptions in your doctrine. And a little
after page 275. n. 59. I thank you for your courteous supposall, that your
Church may err. And page 276. lin. 2. You suppose your Church in error; and
yet excommunicate those that believe your own supposition. What found vanity
is this? To say, Our Adversaries do untruly suppose there be corruptions in our
Church, is this a courteous supposall, and not rather a constant denial that
she does err, and a charge of falsehood upon them that so suppose? Is the
untrue supposition of our Adversaries our own supposition? I was even amazed
at your inconsideration when I read these words in your Book page 280. n. 95.
lin. 8. Cap. 5 n 95. lin. 8.
Why I pray may not a man of judgment continue in the communion of a Church
confessedly corrupted; as well as in a Church supposed to be corrupted? A
strange assertion; A man may as well embrace the communion of a Church corrupted
confessedly by the concession of her friends; as of a Church untruly supposed
by her Adversaries to be corrupt. So that with you, for a Christian to say, S.
Joseph was the Father of Christ, and the Blessed Virgin corrupt, according to
the untrue supposition of the Jews, is all one, as to say, S. Joseph was the
Father of Christ, and the Blessed Virgin corrupt confessedly even by the
concession of Christians. Wherefore if it be damnable to neglect Heresies not
Fundamental (as without question it is) this proves Protestants damnable, who
think it not against Salvation to hold errors in faith, and heresies against
the definition of the whole Church, if such heresies be about matters
profitable only, and not simply necessary.

The eight Conviction.
1. YOu inscribe the pages of your last Chapter with this title: The Religion
of Protestants a safer Way to Salvation then the Religion of Papists. For which
assertion (besides bare and bold affirmations, and earnest verbal expressions,
manifest tokens (as you say) of a weak cause) you have one Argument which is
this, page 393. n. Cap. 5. n. 9.
9. If the safer way for avoiding sin, be also the safer way for avoiding
damnation, then certainly the way of Protestants must be more secure, and the
Roman way more dangerous. Take into your consideration these ensuing
controversies. Whether it be lawful to worship Pictures? To picture the
Trinity? To invoke Saints and Angels? To deny laymen the Cup in the
Sacrament? To prohibit certain Orders of men and women to mary. To celebrate
the public service of God in a language the assistants generally understand
not? and you will not choose but confess, that in all these you are on the
more dangerous side for the committing of sin; and we on that which is more
secure. For in all these things (if we say true) you do that which is impious.
On the other side, if you were in the right, yet we might be secure enough; for
we should only not do something, which you confess not necessary to be done.
We pretend, and are ready to justify out of Principles agreed upon between us;
that in all these things you violate the manifest Commandments of God; and
allege such texts of Scripture against you, as (if you would weigh them with
any indiffere^cy) would put the matter out of question: but certainly you
cannot with any modesty deny, but that at least they make it questionable. This
argument I have set down at large, because it is the best in your book, and
yet vain and weak, as I now demonstrate.

The ground of your Safety, only false suppositions, and foolish braggs.. 1.
2. FIrst it is false, that if Protestants say true, we do that which is
impious. For Protestants against Zelots maintain, that our practices though
erroneous in their judgment, yet are not impious, and in themselves damnable;
and that they who in sincerity of heart profess them, shall this
notwithstanding D. Potter page 78.
without doubt be saved.

3. Secondly, it is false, that if we be in the right, yet you may be secure
enough in your refusing to use these our practices, because they be not
necessary. For though it be no sin of it self purely to omit pious
practices, and profitable devotions: yet to omit them out of proud contempt,
and much more out of an Heretical persuasion, that they be impious, is
undoubtedly an heinous and damnable crime. It is not necessary that you marry a
wife, you may be saved if you lead a chaste single life: but if you omit marriage
out of an opinion, that it is a thing impure, or out of contempt of that
doctrine, that Ephesians. 5.32.
Marriage is a great Sacrament in Christ and his Church; you will (except you
repent) certainly be damned. In like manner, if we be in the right, and that
these be pious Christian practices of voluntary devotion, you who relinquish
them out of contempt, and Heretical persuasion that they are impious, cannot
escape damnation without a dereliction of your error.

4. Thirdly, it is false, that if we be in the right, yet you only do not
something which we confess not necessary to be done. For we do not say of all
these practices, that they be not necessary to be done; yea we say, it is
necessary to Salvation to receive the B. Sacrament, and in receiving to adore
it. Besides we say, that you not only omit to do what is not necessary to be
done, but also condemn the universal practices of Gods Church, and
definitions of her General Counsels; which is not only not necessary to be
done, but also execrable, impious, heretical to be done.

5. Fourthly, it is a foolish brag that you can allege such clear texts of
Scripture against these our practices. For if you can alleade them, why do you
conceal them? Why are you ashamed to bring them to light? Why have you not
stored your book with such allegations as are able to put the matter out of
question? Some very few you have produced, Church Conquerant cap. 6. convict. 8.
and those which you term the playnest that possibly may be, I have showed to
be dark, obscure, yea by you falsified in the text?

6. Fifthly, it is also a foolish brag, that your texts of Scripture be
certainly such as make the matter questionable: which you prove very gravely,
because we cannot with any modesty deny it. Verily had you any modesty or
shame, you would blush to dispute so poorly, miserably, seelily in a
Controversy of such moment which concerns the eternal damnation of your
Country. I add, though it were true (as it is most false) that your texts make
the matter questionable; yet your abandoning the Roman Church is damnable. For,
Arguments which make the matter questionable, be not necessary nor evident: But
it is damnable to forsake the Church of Rome, and the definition of General
Councels without reasons necessary and evident, as both you and D. Potter
affirm, as has been often noted.

These doctrines and practices are proved by manifest and plain Scripture.. 2.
ON the other side, Roman Catholics do not boast ridiculously, as you do, of
their texts of Scripture; but by manifest euiction show even these, of the
impiety of which you seem most confident, to be Christian and pious, and
consequently, that your damning of them is damnable and impious.

7. For images of Christ crucified used in the Church with Apostolical
allowance we have the plain words of S. Paul Gal. 3.1. O senseless
Galathians, who has be witched you not to obey the Gospel, before whose eyes
Christ Jesus, is painted Crucified among you. The Greek word is (...) lively
set forth in the picture of his Crucifixion; so that S. Paul proves the
Galatians were senseless people, that honoring Christ Jesus pictured before
their eyes as crucified; yet did not hope for Salvation by his Cross and
Crucifixion; but by Circumcision, and the obseruances of the Law. This sense
being according to the plain proper, and literal sense of the words,
Protestants are bound by the rule of their Religion to admit thereof, and
cannot without impiety refuse it, and expound the place of metaphorical
Painting; except they can evidently demonstrate this sense to be false or
incongruous against the Apostles intent, which they will never be able to do.

8. If you say, that this text at the most proves the using of Images for the
representation, Appeal to Caesar page 254.255.
not honoring of them: I answer with the learned M. Montague your Bishop of
Chichester, that in the using of Images for memory sake, the honoring of them
is necessarily included, which he proves evidently, and together affirms,
that it is strange, that any Christian should be displeased with the Doctrine,
That respect and honor is to be given to Images.

9. The Persons of the Trinity we picture not, but only the person of Goa the
Son in the form and shape of man, as personally he was. Only we represent
the type wherein God the Father appeared, to wit, the form of the Ancient of
days, described Dan. 7. and the type, wherein the Holy Ghost appeared the
form of a Dove, recorded Math. 3.

10. For Invocation of Angels, we have the practice and example of holy Jacob
Genesis 84.15. The Angel which delivered me from all evil, bless these
Children: which text, you cannot answer without iugling and changing the
Angel into the figure of another substance.

11. For the sufficiency of the Sacrament under the form of bread, we have the
express warrant of our Lord, Joan. 6.59. He that eats this bread shall live
for ever. And for the practice of Communion in one kind for lay men we have his
example Luc. 24.30.31.

12. For the adoration of the Sacrament, we have the Scripture in the plain
and proper sense. For (says D. Morton Lib. 2. initio.
your B. of Durham) If the words of Christ be true in a proper and literal
sense, we must yield unto Papists the whole cause of Transubstantiation etc.
the proper adoration of the Sacrament.

13. That we prohibit certain orders of men and women to mary is a slander.
They freely without constraint prohibit themselves, whiles by vow they bind
their faith, and fidelity unto Christ, to live single and chaste, and peculiarly
consecrated to his service. Which faith and fidelity, if they violate and make
void by consequent Marriage (as your first reformer the Friar did, who married a
Nun), we hold their state sacrilegious and damnable, which is the express
doctrine of S. Paul, 1. Tim. 5.12.

14. The Controversy, which language is fittest, and of most edification in
Church service: whether the vulgar, which is best known in this or that
particular country; or some learned language, Greek or Latin, which be best
known in the whole Christian Church; cannot be determined by Scripture, as
has been already proved. So that measuring the way of Salvation even by the
rule of the Bible only, the Roman Religion is the plainer, and safer Way,
better warranted, even by express texts of Scripture.

The Ninth Conviction.
THe chief Fundamental ground of the security Roman Catholics enjoy, that
they are in the right Way of Salvation, according to which if they walk they
cannot be damned; is the direction of an infallible guide, the holy Catholic
Church, which is no other but the Roman. This is convinced by what your self
are forced to grant, as has been showed, Church Conquerant cap. 5.6. and. 7.
but because this business is the maine and the total, I will here repeat
some of the passages though very briefly.

1. First, convicted by the words of S. Paul, you grant, that the visible
Catholic Church is the pillar and ground of truth, that is, the teacher of
all necessary, and profittable truth by duty and office; yea that she is always
in fact the teacher of all truth necessary to Salvation. For (say you) that the
true Church always shall be the maintayner and teacher of all necessary truth,
we grant, and must grant: For it is of the essence of the Church to be so; and
any company of men were no more a Church without it, then any thing can be a
man, and not be reasonable. Thus you grant, that there is and always shall be
a Catholic Church, which shall not only believe inwardly and in heart; but
also teach and (a) propose without fail all divine revelation The visible
Church shall always without fail propose so much of Gods revelation, as is
sufficient unto Salvation. For otherwise it will not be the visible Church.
necessary to Salvation. For it is her very essence to be so. Wherefore not
only in believing, but also in teaching and proposing all necessary truth, she
can no more fail then from her own being which is indefectible. Hence she is
(and you must grant she is) an infallible guide in Fundamentalls: Because to
show men the way to heaven, by teaching them all revealed truth that is
necessary to bring them thither; what is it, but to be a guide of men unto
Salvation; showing them the Fundamental doctrines of Christian Religion,
without which no man is saved?

2. Secondly, the visible Catholic Church, being (as you grant she is) an
infallible teacher or guide in Fundamentalls, must of necessity be also
infallible in all her proposalls. The necessity of this consequence you deny a
thousand times, and almost in every period of your third Chapter; yet you
affirm it in express terms. Page 105 n. 139. lin. 23. To say, that the
Church is an infallible guide in Fundamentals, were to oblige our selves to
find some certain Society of men, of whom we might be certain, that they
neither do, nor can err in Fundamentals; nor in declaring what is Fundamental,
and what is not: and consequently to make any Church an infallible guide in
Fundamentals would be to make her infallible in all things she proposes; and
requires to be believed. Which truth you prove unanswerably. Page 148. n. 36.

3. Thirdly, the visible Catholic Church being a guide in Fundamentals, that
is, always a Teacher of all necessary truth, is a Church (c) of one
denomination, that is, some settled certain Society of Christians known and
distinguished from other Societies, by adhering to such a Bishop. This is
proved by this Syllogism, wherein both the premises be your own formal
assertions. The Church is appointed of God to be the teacher and guide of men
in the way of Salvation, and so she is able and fit for that office. For God
would not by his word have appointed her an office, for which she is unfit and
unable to perferme it; yea, you say, the Church is not only able to perform
the office of guide; but also that always in fact she does exercise the same
in teaching all necessary truth. But you say Cap. 3. n. 55.
page 163. lin. 9. A Church of one denomination distinguished from all others
by adhering to such a Bishop; such a determinate Church alone can perform the
office of Guide and Directour. And Page Cap. 2. n. 139.
105. n. 239. lin. 30. No Church can possibly be fit to be a guide, but only a
Church of some certain denomination, as the Greek, the Roman, the Ahissine.
Wherefore the Visible Catholic Church being fit, and able to perform the
office of Guide and Directour (as you grant she is, and that it is essentially
necessary that she be so) she is, and of necessity must be a Church of one
denomination, subject to one certain supreme Guide and Bishop.

4. From these most certain truths by you granted, approved and proved, it is
necessarily and evidently consequent; that the Roman Church is the Visible
Catholic Church of God, an infallible Teacher of all fundamental and
necessary truth: yea infallible in all things she proposes as matter of faith:
This I say, is clearly consequent of the former grants. For the visible Church
being the Guide, Teacher and Directour of men, is on the one side a Church of
one denomination; else she could not perform that office of guide which she
does (as you confess) always actually perform. On the other side, being the
Catholic, that is, the Universal Church, she must be spread over the face of
the earth; as the Roman is in Europe, Africa, Asia, America, and in many of the
particular Kingdoms, and Provinces of these four quarters of the world. So
that the words of S. Paul to the Romans, come to be verified no less now,
then at that time, your faith is renowned and published in the whole world.
Which universality, or universal Unity agrees to no other Church of one
denomination, as is manifest. Wherefore the Roman Church is the Holy Catholic
Church, the infallible guide of men in the way of Salvation.

5. Hence is concluded the security of Roman Catholics, that they cannot
possibly err about matters of faith, so long as they follow the dogmatical
directions and definitions of the Roman Church. Contrariwise they who oppose
what they know to be proposed by her, as matter of faith, err Heretically and
damnably, and cannot possibly be saved without express repentance of their
errors.

The Conclusion.
6. THis argument of the assured Salvation of Roman Catholics, and of the
assured damnation of all the knowing opposers of their Religion and Church,
being thus evidently demonstrated; for Conclusion I could wish an Ocean of
tears of blood, endued with the quality of mollifying hearts, as hard as the
Adamant: for so I might condignely and fruitefully deplore the pitiful state,
the commiserable condition, the unfortunate thraldom in Error of many
millions in our dear Country, caused by mortal auersion from the true
Catholic Church, which is instilled into their minds by Heretical education.

7. They grant, convicted by the evidence of Gods word, that the Catholic
Church is the ground and rock of Truth, whereon men may securely rest and rely;
an infallible Guide and teacher of all Fundamentals; consequently of all even
profitable truth about Divine matters. They further acknowledge, convicted by
experience and reason, that the Church cannot be fit orable to perform the
office of guide and Directour, except it be of one denomination, of one
obedience, subject to one determinate Bishop as her supreme Pastor and
Governor. They cannot but see with their eyes, there is no Church Catholic,
or universally diffused, of one Faith, of one Obedience, of one Denomination,
subject to one Pastor, acknowledged of all of that Religion, but the Roman:
Consequently, that there is no Church besides the Roman fit, or able to
perform the office of Guide and Directour to men that are saved, as the true
Catholic Church is bound to do, and always actually does. These things they
confess, or see; and yet so inflexible is the obstinacy, the passion, and
pride against the Roman Church, wherewith Education (like Medusa's head) has
dulled, stupifyed, and instoned their souls, as they contemn her Direction,
forsakes her Communion, hate her Authority, scorn her Motherly care of their
Salvation, running to perdition in the way of their own fallible, and palpably
false conceytes fancied to be Scripture.

8. Why did our Savior make his Church the pillar and ground of truth, that
is, an infallible Teacher of the doctrine of Salvation; but that he would have
men to make use of her teaching? As knowing, that, through a world of errors,
which carry with them a fair show of truth, they could not attain to eternal
Happiness, without a Visible infallible Guide. No doubt when he gave her the
office of Mother, he bound us as we would be his Children and Heirs, to love,
honor, and reverence Her; and to live always in the lap of her Communion.
When he gave her the office of Guide, he bound us to follow her directions, as
we desire to speed in our journey to him, and to come to see for ever his
Blessed face. When he gave her the office of Rock, he obliged us to build our
faith and hope of Salvation on her Teaching; assuring us that no sublimity of
wit and understanding, no Omnis caelo inferenda sublimitas in huius Petrae
firmitate consurgit. S. Leo. sermon. 3. in anniuers. Assump. suc.
height of perfection, be it in our conceit never so eleuate, can reach to
Heaven, which is not grounded on the neuer-fayling fortitude of this Rock.

9. They then that have disioyned themselves from the womb and lap of this
Mother, can never be so in Gods favor, as to be his Children, the Heirs of
his glory the fellow heirs with Christ: They that follow not the Directions of
this ever vn-erring Guide, be not in the way toward him, that is Truth and
Life, but wander in a wilderness of Error, the issue whereof is eternal
Death^ They that have not settled the feet of their Faith and Affection on this
Rock, the sole Rock of safety in this vast Ocean of dangers; what are they
but wauing and wavering Babes, floating in a sea of uncertainties, tossed this
way and that way with every gust of erroneous doctrine?

10. For a man not to believe, that our Savior did institute his Church to
continue for ever, the Teacher of all saving truth; the Rock of Salvation,
against which the gates of Hell shall never prevail; what is this, but to stop
his ears against the clear and plain voice of his word? For a man to say,
that he gave the office of Guide to a confused multitude and Chaos of different
Religions and Obediences and not to a Church of one denomination, which alone
is able to perform that office; what is it but to open his mouth into
blasphemies against his Divine Wisdom? For a man not to see, that there is no
universally diffused Church in the world of one faith, and obedience, all the
Professors thereof adhering universally to one certain Bishop, besides the
Roman; what is it but in a desperate mood of neglect, to shut his eyes against
the truth, that may save his soul, the clear evidence whereof shines over
the world? Hebr. 2.3.
So that I may say with the Apostle, Quomodo nos effugiemus si tantam
neglexerimus salutem? How shall we escape from being damned, if we neglect so
great a means; such an assured way of Salvation?

11. A Way so secure to be followed, so obuious to be found so clear to be
seen, so facile to be gone, so hard to be lost? In which we have the succor
of so many Sacraments, not only that of Baptismes to put us in the Way, and
give us Gods Holy Spirit to walk therein; but also that of the Bread of life,
to refresh us when we faint; that of Chrisme to confirm us when we are
strong; that of Penance, or imposition of Hands, to help us up, when we are
fallen, that of Holy Oil to heal us, when we are sick.

12. A Way beaten and made plain by the precedent walking therein, of so many
former Christian worlds; proved to be the sole Way to Heaven, by the writings
of so many most holy and learned Ancient Fathers; sealed and enobled for such
with the sacred blood of innumerable Martyrs; confirmed by the perpetual, and
unto this day continued Conversion of Nations to the Roman Church; by the
glorious labors of her Apostolical Preachers.

13. Finally a Way printed with the foote-stepps of Sanctity of so many
millions of admirable pious and Religions Christians; who went this Way to
Eternal Happiness; and have from thence sent us tidings of their safe arrival,
by the testimony of evident miracles and undoubted apparitions: to assure us,
we cannot fail of coming thither, if we walk constantly in the Way of the
same faith they professed; and in the exercise of the same Christian Virtues
they practiced.

FINIS.
The contents of the Book, and the sum of each of the Nine Conuictions.
The first Conviction.
THe Confession of Protestants, that our Religion is a safe Way to Salvation,
proved against M. Chillingworths falsifications, and ignorant explications of
D. Potters words.. 1.2.3. That the argument drawn from the confession of
Protestants is not voluntary and of mere charity, but enforced by the
principles of Christianity.. 4.5. That M. Chillingworth does expressly teach
the errors of Protestants to be damnable in themselves, and the Roman Religion
to be as safe as it.. 6.
The second Conviction.
Though the false supposition were granted, that the Roman Church erreth; yet
Roman Catholics cannot be damned for following her errors; because they
cannot but be excused by ignorance invincible.. 1.2. That Protestants if they
err (as certainty they do) cannot be saved by Ignorance, or General
Repentance.. 3. M. Chillingworth his impudent falsifying of the Tenet of
Charity Maintained.. 4.
The third Conviction.
The Roman Church holding all fundamental and necessary truth, no man can
possibly be damned in her Communion for any error in faith; so that it is
madness to leave it.. 1.2. That Protestants cannot possibly be sure they
believe all necessary truth; and what impossible conditions of Salvation M.
Chillingworth lays upon them.. 3.
The fourth Conviction.
That in M. Chillingworth his Way English Protestants can be no more saved
then Socinians, who deny Christ to be God; yea no more then Jews and Turks:
with six proofs, that he is a Socinian.. 1.2.
The fifth Conviction.
That M. Chillingworth damneth Roman Catholics for being faithful and
constant Christians. 1. That in his Way Protestants are bound to be still
doubtful, and changing the articles of their Religion, and that this is
damnable.. 2.
The sixth Conviction.
That only Roman Catholics can have faith which pleases God, and saves the
Belieuer, demonstrated by three arguments.
The seventh Conviction.
M. Chillingworth his vain and contradictious endeavor to damn the Roman
Church, because forsooth she does not care to avoid Heresies not Fundamental;
and that this is the damnable state of Protesters against her.
The eight Conviction.
M. Chillingworth his instances in some points wherein he pretendes the way of
Protestants to be safer then ours, proved to be false suppositions and idle
brags.. 1. The Roman Doctrine and practice even in those instances proved by
plain texts of Scripture.. 2.
The Ninth Conviction.
That the true Catholic Church is infallible in all her Proposals, known by
subordination to one supreme Bishop; and that this church ca^ be no other the^
the Roman.
The Conclusion.

Faults escaped in the Print.
PAge. Line. Error. Correction. 6. 20. in marg. omitted Lib. 3. cont. lit.
Petil. c. 18. 37. 5. inforing enforcing 52. 7. so far too far 63. 21.
change change 84. 13. your you 88. 2. impudently impudency


