PANEGYRIC TO THE HIGH AND MIGHTY MONARCH, CHARLES By the grace of GOD, King
of Great BRITAIN, FRANCE, and IRELAND, Defender of the Faith. etc.

By WALTER FORBES.

EDINBVRGH. Printed by John Wreittoun. 1633.

EPIGRAMME.
ILLustrious Top-bough of heroic Stem,
Whose head is crowned with Glorie's Anademe,
My shallow Muse, not daring to draw near
Bright Phoebus burning flammes in his Carreere:
Yet knowing surely that Apollo shines
Upon the dunghill, as on golden Mines.
And knowing this the bounty of best Kings,
To mark the giver, not the gifted things,
Does boldly venture in this pompous throng
To greet thy Greatness with a Well-come song.
And with the Py does Ave Caesar sing,
Whilst grauer wits do greater offerings bring.
PANEGYRIC
ADmyred Phoenix, springing from those Syres,
Whose Souls the heaven, whose merit Fame admyres,
Whose memory is wrapped up in roles,
Keept by Eternity above the Poles:
Thryse-blessed CHARLES, sprung from thy royal Sire
Great JAMES, whose Fame shall with this frame expyre:
And yet begin a fresh for to be sung,
By sacred Quires, in a celestial tongue;
O thou the Subject of this wel-borne thought!
Immortal King, have neither said nor wrought
Any thing yet, which can detract Thy praise,
Since You Are more old in virtues than in days:
Bred in the bed of honor, Thou art blessed
With rare perfections, far above the rest
Of Mortal kind: for as Thy birth is great,
So is thy mind, too high a mark for hate:
Envy may spew her spite, yet cannot harm
The Man, whom all the host of Heaven does arm:
When bright Apollo circling in his Carre,
Does drive away the day-denuncing Star,
His powerful rays diffuse in mortal minds
A sweet desire of day, which straight vnbindes
Sleep-fettered-fences, and his cheerful light
Does waste all vapors closde in cloudie night:
So my dear Phoebus whilst Thy face does shine
Upon this Land, which by descent is Thine
From hundred and eight Kings, thy cheerful rays,
Do change my nights in Halcyonian days:
And straight dissolve these frightfull forms of woe,
Which did possess my troubled thoughts ago.
What sad affliction did my soul possess,
When Ibers streams reflex'd thy glorious face;
My groans are turned to greetings, and my wrongs
Are changed in hymns and sweet Syrenean songs:
My spirit then, which for thy absence groaned,
Rejoices now to see Thee here enthroned.
What greater joy can I conceive, than see
My native Prince, his native Throne supply:
Thryse happy CHARLES with all those gifts enricht,
Which heavens allot to Mortals, I Am bewitched
In admiration of these royal parts,
Which makes thee more then Monarch of Men's hearts,
My heart and hands, and all submitted here,
Attest the Heavens that I account Thee dear,
And dearest dear of all this All: I place
My chiefest joys in favor of thy face,
I do not point my praises, nor this Land,
Although rich Nature with a liberal hand
Has bravely decked her with all kind of things,
Which from her womb for humane use forth springs,
Both Pan and Pales, pleasures, Gemmes and Ore,
Which wretched worldlings for their god adore:
I, only I, when all the World by War,
Was boylde in blood as red as Marses Star,
Did safely sleep, securd from foreign Arms,
And did disdain Bellonas loud alarmes:
The Goths, the Danes, the Saxones here did feel,
And Normanes fierce, the fury of my Steel:
Here Caesar pitched his tents, and prowdly thought
His Trophies over our Tombs to Rome have brought,
But all in vain, his conquering hand was stayed,
And by his troops a wall-divyding laid
At Carons banks, whose ruins yet may tell,
How far in worth I did his force excel:
And as in Mars, so in Minervas field
For Arms and Arts I keep rich Pallas shield,
Did not the Germans borrow light from me,
And France, which all posterity shall see
Even to the fatal doom, when All Is in fire,
Then shall the records of my worth expyre:
Thus Gracious CHARLES daigne with a loving eye,
The sweet desires of my pure heart to spy.
Look with what love and with what cheerful part,
I consecrate to Thee, a loyal heart,
My humbled knees lo! and my heaved up hands,
The sacred oath of love from thee demands:
Thryse Glorious CHARLES, how amiable's thy face,
Whose loving looks my clouds of care do chase:
I reap more joy from this thy coming here,
Then e're Penelope of Ulysses dear:
Who after thousand dangers did return,
And cured those griefs, which did her bowels burn:
O Thou more worthy then Ulysses far,
Honors bright Ray, Goodness, and Greatness, Star,
Long did I wish to see thy sacred Face,
My Towns and Temples with thy presence grace:
Great Jove's Vicegerent look with kind aspect
On my Emporium EDINBVRGH, direct
No oblique Rays, accept in love Her Shows,
Her Verdant Glory which so bravely goes,
To do Thee service, all her cost compense
With kind acceptance, with her faults dispense,
And if in Her omission shall be found,
Let Her Endeavors brave, Defects confound:
If Jove who all the starrie Heavens does guide,
Delights sometimes at Creta to abide,
As in the place, where first he sucked the air.
And if Apollo, Delos does repair,
Leaving his Claros, Tenedos behind;
Thus since the immortal gods have such a mind
To Native soil, it is no wonder then
Though Demigods be moved, and earth-borne men
May still Great CHARLES thy Scotland Creta be,
And Delos where thou may delight, to see
The Naides and the Mountain Nymphs most fair,
With vnaccustomd clamours beat the Air,
The Satyrs dance, the Coribantean Priests
O're-joyde with joy to pulse their paunting briests:
O what great joy has Thy dear presence brought,
Let all the Annalls through all age be sought,
The like was never seen, the senseless stones
Do melt for joy, the Mountains leap at once,
The winds are calmde, and Neptunes lowdest roar
Deavde with my shouts of joy is heard no more,
And when the Air with thy great Name I wound,
The Mountains answer, and the Rocks resound,
The Woods re-echo'd, and the Floods proclaim,
Melodious murmures hearing of thy Name,
The Fishes, Fowls, and Beasts are struck with wonder,
Whilst to the clouds I tell my Joys in thunder.
Thou art my rich Palladium, while I keep
My God and Thee, I may securely sleep,
And fear no terror nor disturbing foe,
Whilst I have Thee, to ante-vert my woe,
GOD has by nature walled me round about,
And given me Neptune sentinel and scout,
Whose tossed Trident threatens death to such
As dare in deep disdain my borders touch
And if by Fates I be enforced to war,
And make my Lions roar be heard afar
O may it be for some such sacred cause!
As does subsist with Heaven and humane Laws.
O! may it be to vindicate the wrong
Of thy dear Sister, and her Children young
Whose matclesse Worth and virtues merit praise
From all which canset, sing, or sound sweet lays,
Till she, (dear she,) be re-invest again
With her own Rights, possessed with her demaine,
Till she be safely situat on her Rhyne,
(And as the Moon amongst the Stars does shine)
Till she in greatness do exceed all those,
Who to her glory did their rage oppose,
Till that Sun-gazing Eagle be forced to fall
Before her feet, and for her pardon call:
Let Us beat Alarmes, and let our Trumpets sound,
Let Cornets shrill the yielding air now wound,
Let frightfull shouts of Soldiers pierce the sky,
And reach the convexe of Olympus high
Above the thundering clouds, let noyses make,
The soaring Eagle for fear of CHARLES to shake.
Let Vienn's walls astonished with our cry
Like stubble before the fire, fall down and fly
Scattred with winds of his revenging wrath,
Who in his hand has power of life and death.
Let Rome with her seven hills be shaken too
And at thy Name O CHARLES obedient bow,
(Heaven grant I may victorious still return,
Drunk with the blood of foes sleep in the vrne
Of my Ancestors, whose Manes shall be glad,
When it shall be to future Ages said
That I in worth did so exceed them far,
As does the Sun in light each little Star)
O may thy Ensigns ever be displayed!
O may my heart and hand be nere dismayde
In thy defense, till all the World adore
Thy dreadful Name from Vesper till Aurore.
Thine be the Night and Day, may stars bright shine,
And Planets wander over no Land but Thine,
And when by Death Thou shall shut up Thy days
Thy memory shall still inherit praise,
And After-age shall Obeliskes vpreare,
In which thy Worth and Virtues shall appear,
High Phanes and Temples shall by Thy Name be called
And Thou amongst the immortal Gods enstalld
Shall see the Offerings and the yearly Vows,
Posterity unto thy Fame allows.
Religious rites and games for Thee erected,
Shall show on Earth how high Thou wast respected.
FINIS.

