PLOYTO-ASTIX: THE SCOVRGE OF Covetousness: OR, An Apology for the Public
Good, against Privacie. A Sermon Preached at the Assizes in Devon, at the
Command of the Lord Bishop of Exon, Anno, 1630. BY THOMAS FOSTER, Master of
Arts and Rector of Farway.

Avaro nihil Scelestius. Eccles. 10. 9. Bonum, quo Communius, eo melius. Ethic.
lib. 1. LONDON, Printed by B. ALSOP and T. FAUCET, for Michaell Spark the
younger, and are to be sold at the Blew-Bible in Green Arbor. 1631.

TO THE RIGHT HONble. Sr. THOMAS RICHARDSON, Lord Chief Justice of his
Majesty's Common Pleas: And Sir JOHN DENHAM, one of his Majesty's Barons of the
Exchequer; All Health and Happiness, here and hereafter.
Right Honorable:
I Will not say, Importunity of friends has pressed this Sermon to the Press:
that is a Common Plea; and implies a Tacit Commendation of the own work; which
is not so commendable; it being as great Wisdom in our sufficiency, not to
know our selves, as, in our Wants to know our selves. But I may boldly avouch,
Ambition has no hand in the Impression. For had I been that way affected I
have had time enough, to be a fool in print (as well as some others) long ere
now- Scribimus indocti, doctique. But I have ever been as desirous to
Suppress my Labors, in this kind, as others to Press theirs. The truth is,
the reason, why I have ventured to come on the Public stage, and to make my
Meditations Legible, is, To see whether I can find more Charitable Readers of
my Well-meant Endeavors, then I had some Hearers; whose unhappy Misprision
(making themselves, occasionally, guilty) would have made me guilty of that, I
neither spoke, nor meant; (of that which I hate) A personal Invective. Whereas
it may appear (upon ingenuous perusal) neither the Person, nor the Place, but
the too-well known Offense (Negligence) of some persons in those Places, is
inveighed against. I can truly say with Saint Ierome-Nullum loesi, nullius
nomen mea Scriptura designatum est: Neminem specialiter meus sermo pulsavit (ad
Nepot.) And the Poet tells me (I take it) discreetly,- Licuit, semperque
licebit.-Parcere personis, dicere de vitijs. Whosoever takes offense at this,
it is- Scandalum acceptum, indeed; and I suppose, he is no Competent Auditor.
For if guilty Consciences, who are Parties should be admitted Judges of Divine
Reprehension, the Pulpit should be counted a Pasquil; every admonition thence
(how discreetly-zealous soever) an invective Defamation. Guilty Consciences are
like the Elephant: which being conscious of his own Deformity, cannot abide to
see his Face in the clear Springs, but seeks for troubled and muddy Channels,
to drink in; So they, knowing their souls to be so filthy, that they dare not
view them in the clear waters of Truth, and Sincere Admonition, flee to the
troubled Channels of Cavillation, and Contradiction* Arbitror te veritate
superatum, ad detractionem, vitae meae, et maledicta converti, says Jerome,
(Contra Helvid.) But- Qui volens, detrahit famae meae, nolens addit mercedi,
says August. (Cont. Petil. lib. 3. cap. 7.) And thus,- Quandiu aegri,
indignantur, whiles men are sick of Impenitencie, they are Impatient of
reproof;- Sed sanati, gratulantur, but being cured by Repentance, they shake
hands with the Monitor, and thank him, says August. (Ad Fest. Epist. 166.)
Then they will acknowledge, It Is better once smart, then ever ache: And so a
Galling truth shall have more thanks, at the last, than a smoothing
Supparasitation,-He that rebukes a man, shall find more favor, at the
length, than he that flattereth with his tongue, (Prove. 28. 23.) But he that
can, now, play with his Euphemismes and Eulogium's, and cry,- Pax pax, when
there is no peace, makes the best music in the ears of this secure Age. He
that bids the wicked AHABS,- Go up to Ramoth Gilead, and prosper, (1. King.
22. 12.) is now the best Politician. He that that can- Dawbe with untempered
mortar, is counted the best Architect of Souls. This they call, Good temper,
Mildness, Discretion. This is the way, they say, to sleep in whole skin, to
rise to Preferment.-(Obsequium amicos, veritas odium,) Such preferment God send
them, who love the praise of Men, more than the praise of GOD. And- whether it
be right in the sight of God, to obey men, rather than God, judge ye. But what
shall I say?

Pro captu Lectoris habent sua fata Libelli. As Books, so Sermons have their
Credit or discredit from the fancy of their Readers or Hearers. And it is ever
an easier matter to Dislike, than to Do the like. -- Facilia sic putant omnes,
quae iam facta; nec de salebris cogitant vbi via strata, (Lips.) If you come to
an Inn in Germany, and dislike your fare, diet, lodging, the Dutch Host tells
you, in a surly tone,- Aliud tibi quaeras diversorium, (Erasm. Dial.) Such is
my resolution: who likes not this, may read some other thing.

My Lords, I have not without Cause, Inscribed this Sermon unto your Names.
First, it was Preached in the great Assembly, whereof your selves were a
Principal part. Secondly, Preached on that Subject, wherein your Places have a
Principal interest; The Common Good of Church and Commonweal. A Subject as
necessary for those Times, as the Times are Subject to Necessity: Private ends
having brought the Public Good, almost, to it is End; and Hungry
Coveteousnesse, like PHARAOH's lean kine, devoured this fat and flourishing
Commonweal. To you therefore (as being- Patres Patriae, and- Ecclesiae
Patroni) this Weak, but Well-meant Labor of mine, flees for Patrociny and
protection. I shall make it my humble Suite, that you will be pleased to
entertain it, as DAVID, lame MEPHI^OSHETH, for his Father IONATHAN's sake.
Lame it is in both feet. ( Lame in the Birth, by unskillful handling, lame in
the Nursing, by uncharitable scanning) yet entertain it for it is fathers sake,
Your Country's sake, whose Love begat it. I remember that Apologue in the
Talmud; the grapes in Babel, sent, upon a time, to the Vine-leaves, in Iudaea
desiring them, to come and over-shadow them; otherwise the heat would consume
them, and so they should never come to Maturity. Your Lordships may easily
guess at the Mythology. If Learning be not sheltred by those, who are in
Eminent place, and if they cast not their Shadow over it, it will soon perish;
But where they favor it, it prospers. If the Spring be cold, the Plants,
Herbs, and Blossoms are nipt and wither; But where the Influence is
seasonable, there all things reviue, thrive, flourish. So where Great Persons
are averse from Learning, the Spirits, which would otherwise, blossom, do
wither and decay. But when it is upholden by men of Higher place, it is like a
Fountain of Living Water. For my part I cannot praise my Present otherwise,
then by the Truth of that heart, from which it proceeds: which shall be
Ambitious of all occasions, that may testify a Grateful acknowledgement of
your Lordships undeserved favors; and wherewith, I will daily Petition the
Lord of Lords for the continuance of your Happiness and Welfare.

Your Lordships most obsequious Servant, in the Lord, THO: FOSTER.

SOme faults (by reason of have) are escaped in the printing. Blame the
Printer, excuse the Author: Whom desires you to Correct judiciously, and Judge
charitably --

In multis offendimus omnes. THE SCOVRGE OF Covetousness.
PHILIP. 2. 4. Look not every man on his own Things, but every man also on
the things of other men.
IT is an old saying, verified by common Experience,- Senes nimis sunt ad rem
attenti: And- Avaritia in seen juvenesset, Covetousness reigns most in old
age. Thus this Old age of the world dotes too much on the things of the world.
And our Apostle foretold it long ago,-In the last days, (...), men shall be
Covetous, (2. Tim. 3. 1, 2.) Covetousness is a Disease fallen into the legs of
those latter times; And our Savior (the great Physician of Souls) tells us, by
a double Caveat, it is a dangerous one (very Epidemicall)-Take heed, and beware
of Covetousness, ( Luke 12.) Dangerous to the Church, Commonwealth, our
selves, Avarus nulli bonus, sibi pessimus: The Covetous, as he is good to no
man, so he is worst to himself.

It is an ill Habit- Remedijs non cedens, medendo exasperatur (B^daeus.) It
grows the worse for Curing, it yields to no remedies. But whosoever is
infected with it, cannot have a more sovereign Remedy, than is here
prescribed,- Look not every man on his own things, etc.

The Remedy consists of a double Direction, delivered in a double Proposition,
--

1. Negat. -- Look not every man, etc. 2. Affirmat. -- But every man also,
etc.
And both these Universal.

1. Universal Negat. -- Not every man, Id est (in Equipollency) No man;
Contrary, I confess, to the rule of Logic -- Non omnis, id est, quidam; But
the Hebrew phrase, having the Sign, [Non omnis] aequiposset vniversaeli
neganti, (Keck. Sist. Log. lib. 2. de Aequip.) Neither is it simply Negat. but
-- ad modum: It is not meant, a man should not, at all, look on (regard,
intend) his own things; but not merely, or too much affect them. 2.
Universal Affirmat. Thus-Let every man intend the Mutual good. The One, you
see, forbids Covetousness, and Privacy: the other commands public Community.
I hope I shall not need to make an Apology for my Division: indeed I might
have Torn my Text into more parts by division and subdivision. But I have
learned of the learned Artists, that a Dichotomy is, commonly, most
commendable. It is a Canon,-Omnis divisio, debet esse bimembris, (Keck.) And a
Philosophical Maxim, Frustra sit per plura, etc. It is true- Variet as
delectat. In this I profess my self a Disciple to Apollonius: I labor wholly
to inform my Hearers understanding, not to please his ear.
But I desire, rather to profit, than to please. Therefore, in imitation of the
best Methodist, who contracted 10. Com. into two. -- Deum and proximum, (Math.
22. 20.) God and our Neighbor, I have divided the Text into two natural
parts. And indeed, what is our whole Christian profession, but a Dichotomy?
Didacticall, Practical: the one to inform the understanding, the other, to
Reform the Will. And the Practical is a Dichotomy too, expressed by the Psalm.
Phil. lib. 8. vit Apol,
Declina a malo, Fac bonum. Eschew Evil, do Good. (Psalm. 34. 14.) And
accordingly, it is office, of the Ministry, Bona decere, Mala dedocere.
(August. de Doct. Christum. Lib. 4. Cap. 3.) To persuade to Good, to dissuade
from Evil. Here you have both Evil and Good: And if I can persuade to the
one, and dissuade from the other, I shall think this hour happily spent.

And so I begin with the former, the Universal Negat. Look not every man on
his own things. The Greek Text reads -- (...): wherein two words are
Emphaticall. 1. (...); This intimates, that worldly men think they have an
absolute Propriety in those Goods of Fortune; that they are their Own; Gotten
by their Own Providence, Kept by their own Diligence; Their Own to use,
their Own to dispose. Their Own, and Theirs only. As though God had no right
in them, either by Donation, or Disposition. As though they were- Domini, not-
Dispensatores; (a mere Solaecisme in Divinity) The Church, the Commonwealth,
the Poor, their Neighbors, in necessity, shall have no part nor portion in
them; They are-(...), their own things. Hence their common Proverb -- Shall I
not do with mine own as I list? Which can suite to no man, but him that is
God and Man -- Is it not lawful for me, to do with mine own as I will.
(Math. 20. 15.) 2. (...): Which signifies- Observare, Considerare, animo
volutare. To observe, Contemplate, and think on; To denote the vehemence of
these men's affection, to those earthly things. It does them good to think on
them, muse on them, Gaze on them- Simul and nummos Contemplorin arca, says he
in the Poet -- Imm^ritur studijs, and amore senescit habendi, says AUGUST. (
Lib. 3. de lib. Arbitr.) And SOLOMON Englishes it -- The greatest benefit, they
have of them, is to look on them with their eyes. (Eccles. 5. 10.)- Cernere
divitias oculis: a notable pleonasmus, to show the bent of their affection to
earthly things; They are as it were ravished with the very sight of them, as
Narcissus with the sight of his supposed-selfe -- Adstupet ipse sibi, vultuque
immotus eodem -- Haeret (Metam. lib. 3.) Or as the Disciples were, with
Contemplating the Temple- Quales Lapides, quales structurae? (Mark. 13. 1.) So
do these men -- Look on their own things.

The point of Observation then, must needs be this -- It is not lawful, it is
not Christian-like for any man, too much to love, to like his own Private.
This is a common place, so copious, that the most barren invention may be
luxuriant in proofs, precepts, examples, to verify, amplify, exemplify the
truth of this Position. If you please to peruse the sacred volumes, you shall
find Covetousness and Self-love, ranked among the greatest sins, and the
Mark of Gods Minacings. ISAIAH thunders on it -- These greedy Dogs can never
have enough: for they all look to their own way, every one for his advantage,
and for his own purpose. (Isa. 56. 11.) And- For his wicked Covetousness I am
angry with him. (Cap. 57. 17.) IEREM. seconds him- Thine eyes and thy heart are
but only for thy Covetousness. (Ier. 22. 17.) Ezechiel joins- Thou have
taken Usury, and the increase, and thou have defrauded thy Neighbors by
extortion. Behold therefore I have smitten my hands upon thy Covetousness.
(Ezech. 22. 12, 13.) Complosi manus: To show how God is incensed against
Covetousness: He wrings his fist, and beats his hands- Ad modum irascentis,
and ultionem minantis. (Carth. in loc.) HABACCVK is sent with a Proclamation
against it- Ho, he that coveteth an evil Covetousness to his house, that he
may set his nest on high. (Cap. 2. 9.) Our Savior makes it good with an oath-
Amen dico vobis: Verily I say unto you, that a rich man, (a Covetous rich man)
shall hardly enter, etc. (Mat. 19. 23.) Our Apostle strikes it dead- No
covetous person has any inheritance in the Kingdom of Christ, (Ephesians. 5. 5.) He
will give you good reason for it. 1. It is- Radix omnum malorum. (1. Tim. 6.)
And humane reason has espied as much- Inde fere scelerum causae. (Iuven. Sat.
14.) All wickedness, almost, springs from this Root. Pride, Ambition,
Oppression, Fraud, Fallacy, Injury, Perjury, Luxury, Inhamanity, Usury,
Bribery, Anxiety of Mind, Hardness of heart, Contempt of GOD, Neglect of
Death, Hell, and Judgment. For these things are not suffered to approach the
sight or sense of Covetous worldlings- O death how bitter is the remembrance of
thee to a man, that lives at rest in his possessions* etc. (Eccles. 41. 1.)
And thus Pullulat herba satis, quae nil habet Vtilitatis: This ill Weed, this
stinking Root, grows a pace: No good Husband, (good Christian) will suffer it
in the Garden of his heart.

2. It makes men err from the faith, (1. Tim. 6.) Covetous men can have no
true Faith in CHRIST,- Sibi scopum alium, prefigentes, quam Christum, (Erasm.
in loc.) The Covetous man's object is not Christ's Cross, but the worlds Dross.
I dare make it a part of my Faith, (yet avouch my self no Heretic) That a
Covetous man has no true Faith. It Is a rare thing to see a rich man Religious.
3. And needs must they err from the Faith: for they are- Idolaters, (Ephesians. 5.
5.) How Idolaters?-Sicut idolatra idola colit, magis quam Deum verum, etc.
(Carth. in loc.) As an Idolater worships Idols, more then the true GOD: so they
make more of their Mammon, then of their Maker. Our common Proverb shows it:
When Riches are conferred upon a man, they say- He is a man made: as tho the
Riches made the Man, not God. Therefore Ioh. de Comb. says,- Homo avarus
exhibet Creaturae, quod debe^ Creatori, (De Avarit.) A Covetous man ascribes
that to the Creature, which is due to the Creator; viz.- Fidem, Spem, and
Delectationem, Faith, Hope, and Love. 1. Faith: Thus in affiance, they Cry,
like Israel, -- These are thy Gods, O Israel, (Exodus 32. 4.) 2. Hope: -- They
make Gold their hope, (Job, 31. 24.) And -- The rich man's riches are his strong
hold, (Prove. 8. 11.) Herein is his Confidence; this is his -- Anchora firma
spei, his fort of Defense, to bear him out; his friend, to Buy him out of
dangers. But, as our translation has well expressed it, -- The rich man's riches
are as an high wall, in his well imagination, (Ibid.) It is but in Imagination,
not always in fact: For Great riches have sold more men, then they have bought
out of troubles, (Bac. Ess. 34.) Men's Great riches do, many times, rob them of
their lives or liberties: It makes them, either a Prey to Thieves, or a B^^ty
to Tyrants. What was the overthrow of the flourishing Roman state, but - Nimia
falicitas, Too much Wealth? (Florus.) And this Great Wealth was one cause of
Cardinal Wolsey's ruin: who being swollen so big by the blasts of
Promotion, as the Bladder not able to contain more greatness, suddenly burst,
and vented forth the Wind of all former favors, ( Speed. Chron. in vit. Hen.
8.) 3. Delectation, or Love: Hereupon our Apostle styles Covetous men -- (...),
Lovers-of-Money, (2. Tim. 3, 2.) and the Common definition shows it, -- Est
immoderatus amor habendi, an excessive love of Having, (Bonavent. cap. 6. Diet.
Salut.) And the Etymon expresses as much, -- Avarw, quasi avidus aeris, A
covetous man has a greedy desire of Money.

But mark our Apostles conjunction in the former place, -- (...): These two,
Lovers-of-themselves, and Lovers-of-Money are one, as it were: so reciprocate,
and correlate in nature, that they can hardly be separated. For what is Pride
and Self-love, but the Daughter of Prosperity? Decet res secundas Superbia; As
Plautus ironically jerkes at it. So odious and detestable is this Sin, that
the Apostle hates the shadow of it: forbids the Name and memory of it- Nec
nominetur, Let it not be once named among you. (Ephesians. 5. 3.) Nec suspicio sit in
vobis. (Ordin. Glos. in loc.) Let there be no name nor fame of Covetousness;
Let no man be able justly to tax you for it. For we must not only, Be good,
but not, Seem ill; Be good, for our selves (- Conscientia propterte) Not,
Seem, ill, for others (- Fama propter Proximum) Appearance alone, which in
good is too little, in evil, is too much. It was well said of CAESAR --
Caesar's wife should not only be free from sin, but from suspicion; So Gods
Saints must not only be void of the fact of Covetousness, but of the Fame. So
heinous a delinquent is the Covetous, that our Apostle excommunicates him, Ipso
facto: Separates him from Christian society -- Cum ejusmodi ne edatis quidum.
(1. Cor. 5. 11.) A cursed sinner he is- Maledictus dispensator avarus, cujus
largus est Dominus. (August.) Cursed is the Covetous Steward, that has so
liberal a Lord- The Lord is bountiful, indeed. He gives all, (...) (...). (
la^ 1. 17.) And he forgives all, Which forgives all thine iniquities. (Psa.
103. 3.) Therefore the Covetous must needs be odious to God; For it is
Likeness that causes love -- (...): And- Simile gaudet simili, every thing
delights in his like. Thus- Go^ loves (his like) a cheerful giver. (2. Cor. 9.
7.)

Haec res and jungit, junctos and servat amico^. (Horat.) Whence is that secret
sympathy, and miraculous Combination of love, between the Loadstone and the
steel, but from a ^ik^nesse of qualities? But -- Quam male convenient? How
unlike are Christ and the covetous? He is an Antipathite to Christ. What
agreement has the Temple of God with Idols? (2. Cor. 6. 16.) And covetousness
(you have heard) is Idolatry. Surely as long as Idolatry it self, and this
picture of Idolatry (Covetousness) bears any sway in this Kingdom, God
cannot be in love with us, in league with us, there can be no good liking
between us; we must look for Plague upon plague, War upon war, Famine
upon famine.

But, I think you look for Applicat. Beloved, marvel not, that you hear
covetousness so hammered on- Malus cunens, Malo nodo: so tough a knot looks
for many blows. For though iterations be commonly, loss of time, yet it is
the best gain of time to reiterate often the state of the Question. I know
Critical ears surfeit of any thing, save Curiosity: and Manna it self, often
served in, becomes Nauseous to squeamish Israelites. When PAMBO the holy
Hermit had this Lesson read to him out of the Psalm.-I said I will take heed to
my ways, etc. He came not near his Master in a long time after: at next
coming his Master checked him for his long absence; he answers, he had been
busy enough all that while, to learn that one Lesson. So say I to you: I
shall have enough to do, this whole hour, and you, a long time, to preach and
practice this one Lesson. When one asked DEMOSTHENES, what was the chiefest
part of an Orater, he answered- Action: what second? Action; what third?
Action. So if any ask me, what is the worst part of a Christian? I shall
answer, Covetousness: What next? Covetousness: What again? covetousness.
-- Avaronihil scelestius. (Eccl. 10. 9.) There was an ominous Prophet rose up
in Jerusalem, some four years before the siedge of the City by Titus
Vespatian: who cried continually, this one Note up and down the streets- Vae,
vae, Jerosolimis: Haec interdiu noctuque clamitans. (Barrad. Tom. 3. lib. 4.
cap. 2.) Woe, woe to Jerusalem; driving this tune both night and day. And so
our Savior for many verses together inculcates this one sentence -- Woe to you
Scribes and Pharisees, Hypocrites. So may I say-Woe to you Politicians,
covetous: Woe to you Projectors, covetous: Woe to you Promotors, covetous: Woe
to you Ingrossers, covetous: Woe to you Regrators, covetous: Woe to you
Depopulators, covetous: Woe to you Oppressors, covetous: Woe to you
Extortioners, covetous: Woe to you Brokers, covetous: Woe to you Bribers,
covetous: Woe to you Usurers, covetous: Woe to you Sacrilegious Church-robbers,
covetous: Woe to you contentious Pettifoggers; covetous. But all these (fast
friends to covetousness) will ehallenge me for an Enemy, with AHAB- Have thou
found me, O mine enemy, (Act. 19. 28.) And cry out, with DEMETRIUS, Magna Diana
Ephesiorum. Magna Avaritia Anglorum, Great is Avarice of the English. But I
answer- Magna est veritas and praevalet. (1. Esdr. 4. 41.) Great is the truth,
and prevails. And I demand -- Am I your enemy, if I tell you the truth?
(Gal. 4. 16.) Yes, what else?- Veritas odium. This same Truth is a naked and
open Daylight, that does not show the fantastic Masks and Mummeries of the
world, half so stately and daintily, as the candle-lights of flattery and
Pepularity,-Obsequium amicos. But the truth is- Veritas non querit angulos,
Truth seeks no corners- Nihil Erubescit, preterquam obscondi. (Tertul.) She
blusheth at nothing, but Hiding; No better place than the open Pulpit, to tell
Gods plain truth,- Nil possumus contra veritatem, is the fittest Plea at this
Bar. (2. Cor. 13. 8.) But then you will reply with AUGUSTINE,- Ama and
objurga: Tell us the truth in love, smite us friendly; Content; And there is
hope of you, if you will so be content; so far submit to the ingenuous
censure of the Text. For though it be true, (considering the abominable
Covetousness, cold Charity, and abounding iniquity of those times)- Difficile
est Satyram non scribere: it is hard for a zealous Minister not to play the
Satyr; yet, being now to take Charities part against Covetousness, I shall be
loath to break charities head, in her defense; (only pardon the Accent of my
voice, and zeal to the truth) I confess it is Heaven upon earth, to have a
mind Move in Charity, Rest in Providence, and Turn upon the Poles of Truth.

Well, beloved- without faith it is impossible to please God. (Heb. 11. 6.)
But- Faith is dead without Charity. (Iam. 2. 17.) And Charity is dead too,
without Bounty.- Benigna est, She is bountiful. (1. Cor. 1. 4.) Est: Bounty is
the Being, and Essence of Charity: She will not be bounded within the banks
of Self-love, Covetousness, and Privacy. Her Council is,- Deriventur fontes
tui for as, let thy fountains flow forth. ( Prove. 5. 16.) That Charity will
hardly water the Neighbour-ground, which stays long to fill its own Poole.
True it is, Charity begins at home: but it may not end there: for then it would
tend, but to private ends; It must go abroad too, this is employed in the Text:
(if ye please to mark the coherence.) A man may not- Look on his own
things, without an- Also: but- Also on the things of other men. -- Charity
seeks not her own things. (1. Cor. 13.) Not her own things, Greedily,
covetously. And will you look every man on his own things? Every man for
Himself? It Is a poor Center of a Man's Actions, Himself: It is right earth;
for that only stands fast upon his own Center, whereas all things that have
affinity with the Heavens. Move upon the Center of another, which they
benefit. Does the Sun shine for it self? Does it not extend it is beams,
universally, to all? He makes his Sun to arise on the Evil and the Good.
(Math. 5. 45.) Does the fire give heat for it self?

-- Sic vos, non vobis nidificatis aves.
Sic vos, non vobis Mellificatis apes, etc.
(Virg.) Every creature in it is kind, is extensively good: only a Covetous man
is good for nothing, but Himself; Not for Himselfe-Sibi pessimus, he is the
worst enemy to Himself- (...), His silver is his soul. ( H^s. (...).) And- He
will sell his own soul for money. (Eccles. 10. 9.) Nay, he will sell his
Savior like IVDAS*, with a- What will ye give me? (Math. 26. 15.) Though it
be but to buy a halter to hang himself. Thus he is good, indeed, for nothing:
like our Saviors Salt. ( Math. 5. 13.) He is good for nothing, but to be cast
out, and trodden under foot both of God, and all good Men.

Dear Christians, your Souls are bought at too dear a rate, to be cast away
on earthly things. In the Philosophers Scale, the Soul of a Fly is of more
excellence, than the Sun: In a Christians Scale, the Soul of Man is
infinitely more precious, than all Creatures under the Sun. What shall it
profit you to win the whole world, to loose your own souls? (Mat. 16. 26.)
Your eyes are set like sparkling Diamonds, in a Gold ring, in too Noble and
stately a place, to be basely dejected upon Gold and Silver, the dross of the
Earth; Oculists observe, that whereas all Creatures have but 4. Muscles, to
turn their eyes round about: Man has a fifth, to pull his eyes up to Heaven.

-- Os homini sublime dedit, coelumque tueri,
Jussit.
!O then depresse not your eyes, as if they were fixed on earth, nor turn them
round by gazing on the fruitless Treasures of the Earth. Which the God of
nature has (as of purpose) hidden under the Earth, out of your sight; and
placed under foot, to be trampled upon, ^ Nihil, quod avaritiam nostram
irritaret, posuit in aperto: pedibus aurum and argentum subjecit, calcandumque
dedit. (Sen. Epist. 94.) Your eyes see all other things but Themselves: and
will you invert the course of Nature, To look every man on himself, his own
private, his own things? Nec potest quisquam beat degere, qui se tantum
intuetur. (Sen. Epist. 48.) No man can live happily, that lives, that looks to
Himself only. An Ant, you know, is a wise Creature, for it self: But it is a
shrwd Thing in an Orchard, or Garden: So, surely men that are great Lovers of
themselves, are greatest Enemies to the Commonwealth. For whatsoever affairs
pass through such men's hands, they crook them to their own ends; which must
needs be Eccentrick to the ends of the Church, and Commonwealth. Self-love
and private ends are like Suckers in the stock of a Graft, which draw all the
Sap to themselves, and starve the Graft. Such is the case of the Weale-publike
among us, in those times: these Suckers, I told you of but now, have drawn out
the very heart-bloud of it; we can hardly say we have a Commonwealth, it is a
Common-woe; well defined by Sir THOMAS MOORE, long ago.- Quaedam couspiratio
divitum, de suis negotijs, ac Commodis, Reipublicae nomine, tituloque
tractantium. (Vtop.) There be too many both public and private persons, that,
Narsissus-like, dote upon the conceited Image of Themselves (their own private
fortune) and look with both eyes on their own Things; worldly Hermits, that
desire- To dwell alone in the midst of the earth-(Isa. 5. 8.) Such extreme
lovers of themselves, as they will set an house on fire, if it be but to roast
their own egs-Their hearts are like I slands, cut off from other Lands: and
their voice is like CAIN'S,- Number ego sum Fratris Custos? (Genesis 4.) And in other
men's extremities, their resolution is, like Christ's Conspirators,-Quid ad nos?
(Mat. 27. 4.)

But as the tree prospers not, that is unkindly embraced with the writhing Ivy:
So the public state must needs wither, whiles these Insinuating, Sucking
selfe-lovers flourish in her. I shall not break the bounds of Charity to make
our Apostles wish- Vtinam abscindantur, (Galat. 6. 12.) I would to God these
Suckers were even cut off (cut off by Repentance, or by Gods just vltion and
vengeance) I would these eyes of Privacy and Self-love, that Look but on
their own Things, were either cured with spiritual Eye Salve, to see with
more Charity. ( Revel. 3. 18.) Or else plucked out. For it is an- Evil eye* An
Enuiovs eye; which with a kind of fascinating ejaculation, bewitcheth the
public welfare. And as the Sunne-beames beat hotter upon a Bank, or,
steepe-rising Ground, then upon a Flat; So does a Covetous man envy the
prosperity of others; seeking to sink them if he can.

-- Alterius rebus macrescit Opimi^. It is said of VESPASIAN Emp. That he did
advance many to promotion, that were most noted for Covetousness: And to what
end? That when they had well scraped and gathered, he might use them as
Sponges: and wring from them, that which by extortion, they had wrested from
others; So, it were no Injustice, at all, if these Jngrossers, Extortioners,
Usurers, and the like, that have Monopoliz'd the Common Treasure into their
private hands, were wrung and pressed, to yield out their Ill-gotten-Goods for
the publike-good. It is observed that during that Triumvirate of Kings, HENRY,
8. of England, FRANCIS; 1. of France; CHARLES, 5. Emp. there was such a jealous
watch kept; that none of the three, could win a palm of ground, but the other
two would straightway Balance it. So should Godly policy still keep
centinell; that neither Selfe-wisedome, nor Privacy, do encroach too far
upon the public. Certain it is, that if Depraved Policy, and Corruption: if
private Engrossing and Usury, in City and Country, be suffered much longer, to
play the Game, all the Money will be in the Box. And then though the Kingdom
may have good Limbs, yet it will have but empty Veins. A sudden Consumption
must needs surprise the Commonwealth.

For what says a Great Statesman of France? Such is the condition of the
Commons, as of the Hand of a Dyall: the motion of this proceeds- Sensim sine
Sensu, by insensible degrees; and is not seen, till it has finished the
course, and points directly to the Hour; So the loss and decay of the
Commonwealth steals on, and is not perceived, but in the final Ruin.
(PASQV. Letter to the Qu. Reg. of Fra.) Perchance I shall be accounted a
Tribunitiall Orator: But my Happiness is, with our Apostle, that I speak
before Grave and Honorable Senators, Who have knowledge of all Customs and
Laws of the Kingdom. (Act. 26. 2. 3.) Whose clear eyes and incorrupt
affections (I hope) scorn to- Look on their own things; But as they are set
in public place. For the execution of Laws, so do they acknowledge the
Conclusion of the Romans 12. Tables-Salus populi suprema lex; well knowing that
Laws, except they be in Order to that End, are but Things Captious, and
Oracles not well inspired; Making it their Prime study and care,- To look also
on the things of other Men.

Which is the second part. The Affirmat. proposit. But every man also on the
things etc,

The Greek Text reads,-(...). As The eyes of Faith can have no better Object
than GOD: So, the eyes of Charity cannot have a more pleasing Object then the
Common-good. (...), His own Things, is like the color of Black-Congregat
Visum: it collects the sight, and makes it look too narrowly, too nearly, too
niggardly; But (...) is like White-Disgregat Visum. it disperseth the sight,
and makes it look abroad on other men's Good. As we are- One body in Christ,
and every one, one another members. (Romans 12. 5.) So should the Members- Have
the same care one for another. (1. Cor. 12. 25.) And, Every man also look on
the things of other men. For whereas our Savior commands- Thou shall love thy
neighbor as thy self. (Mat. 22. 39.) Our Apostle translates it-(...) ( Romans
13. 8.) Id est, Every man, whatsoever he be, (be he friend or foe) that stands
in need of thy help. The love of our selves is but the Pattern, the love of
our Neighbor, the Picture limned, and drawn thereby. The love of our
Neighbor, must be a Sicut,-sicut teipsum: as, or like thy self. It is
observed, that our Savior never regarded-(...) his private: But -- (...) the
public good:-I seek not mine own praise. (Joh. 8. 50.) But -- I lay down my
life for my Sheep. (John. 10. 15.

Well, Faith and Charity are like a pair of Compasses, to take the Latitude
of our Christian Profession: whiles Faith, like the one Foot, stands fixed in
the center of Justification: Charity, like the other, must go round in a
continual circle of Beneficent operation; and- Delight to do good, and
distribute. (Heb. 13. 16.) As Faith is necessary to Justification; (Romans 3,
28.) So are works of Charity, to Sanctification. (Iam. 2. 24.) And as God
looks on our Faith, in the Court of Justification, here: So, will he take
account only of our works, in the Court of Remuneration, hereafter. Faith,
having brought us home to Christ, in this Kingdom of Grace, leaves us (like
our Temporal friends) at the Grave; But Charity is an Inseparable companion-It
does never fall away. (1. Cor. 13. 8.) She, likethe Indian wives, who are
buried alive with their Dead Husbands, goes to the Grave with us, and keeps us
company to heaven. Therefore is Charity preferred Maxima harum charitas. The
chiefest of these is Charity. ( Verse. ult.) And why so?- Vt pote quae in
futura vita non aboleatur, ut aliae, sed perficiatur, because Charity, in the
life to-come, is not abolished, like Faith and Hope; but perfected-( Beza.
Annot. in loc.) Quum fides and spes inres promissas and futuras ferantur, illas
presents adepti, quorsum fidem and spem haberemus? For, seeing Faith and Hope
look to things promised, and to-come, these things being come, what need we
Faith and Hope?

Charity then, you see, is a Good Companion: It is still Communicative,
Explicative. She is altogether Sociable, not Solitary. Like Job, she cannot --
Eat her ^ Morsels alone. (Job. 31. 17.) She is nosooner -- Diffusa
pe^spiritum, shed abroad in our hearts by the Holy Ghost. (Romans 5. 5.) But she
is- Effusa per effectum, communicated to others by the Hand of Bounty; and can
no more be bounded within the Narrow Limits of Selfe-wisedome, than a
Scaturient Fountain within his own Banks. To instance this in the New
Converts of the Primitive Church. The multitude of them that believed, were of
one heart and of one soul, neither any of them said, that any thing of that he
possessed, was his own, but they had all things in common. (Act. 4. 32.) This
Community of Goods would well stand with Christianity, if the Commonweal were
well Constitute: and the people (like those Converts) Combined by the Spirit of
Charity. This only is the Cement, that can join Hearts and Souls, and make
men -- Vnanimes, to have but one soul in a Multitude of Bodies. And from this
Conjunction must needs grow a Community: from the unity of Affections, a
Community of Charitable Actions. When one asked AGESILAVS, why Sparta was not
fenc't about with walls? He answered, That in steed of Walls and Castles,
Cities should be fenc't with the Virtue of the Inhabitants -- Quos si jungat
concordia, nulius potest esse murus inexpugnabilior, who being linck'd together
by mutual concord, are more impregnable then the strongest Castle; So, it is
unity of Affections, and Community of brotherly Offices, that must make us
Invincible against all Diabolical Invasion; but without this- Nihil sumus. (1.
Cor. 13. 2.) we are Nothing; nullivs valoris, aut vigoris, of no value, no
vertve.

But for fuller explanation of this point (a Riddle, a Paradox to the Carnal
sense) we must a little mix Philosophy and Divinity. In Philosophy I find two
contrary Opinions: The one Plato's, That all things should be common to all
men, in a Common wealth -- Et quo ad possessionem, and vsum (Plat. pol. This
Community is impious, absurd, and ridiculous it, takes away all splendour and
Magnificence. Demeer. Iu.
3.) But this is ridiculous, void both of reason and religion: For men in this
Community, would never be at Unity; the Parity of persons, that then must be,
and the Disparity of professions, vocations, Labors, Deserts, would never
agree. Men of place would never abide to be ranked with basest Pesants: nor
these of best Deserts, to share alike with vnworthyest Drones. This would cause
an Anabaptisticall Anarchy. The other Opinion is ARISTOTLE'S; That which is
every man's, is no man's.
That there should be a Propriety of Possession, but a Comunity of Use: And
this I take to be good Philosophy and Divinity. 1. A Propriety of possession:
Otherwise' how should men have Ability in themselves, to Exercise their Bounty
and Charity toward others? -- Rerum Communicate Constituta, Omnis Munificentia
perit, (Arist. pol. lib. 2. ca. 3.) grant a Community of possession, that each
man may have a proper right in another man's Goods, then how can any man show
himself bountiful? 2 A Community of use, there ought to be. Otherwise, every
man would look but on his own things; Think himself borne, but for
Himself, and Private Family; like those worldlings in the Psalm. -- Who having
goods conferred upon them, made no other distribution of them, but to their
babes, (Psa.. 17. 14.) The heathen Orator could give better Counsel -- Non
s^mus nobis nati: Not only our wives Children, and kinsfolk: but our King,
Country, Church, Commonweal, and private neighbors have a share and interest,
in our Means and Money. Res tua est, vsus rei tuae meus est, says Seneca De
Benef. lib 7. cap. 5. The Propriety is only Thine, but the use is thine and
mine. In this Sense, the Philosopher speaks true Divinity -- Bonum quo
Communius, eo melius, (Eth. lib. 1.) Our Goods the more Common they are, the
more Commendable. And S^n. -- Nullius boni sine socio, jucunda possessio.
(Etist. 6.) Nothing that we possess, can give us true content, without a
Companion in the Use, -- Ego sic omnia habeo, ut omnium sunt, says he again.
( De Benef. lib. 7. cap. 10.) I have so the possession of all things, that the
Use is common to all men. What difference is here, between SEN. and JOB? --
Job could not eat his morsels alone, but the Fatherless must have part (Job.
31. 17.) Nay these Endowments of the Intellect (Knowledge, Wisdom, Learning,
etc.) What were they without Communication? -- In hoc gaudeo aliquid dicere vt
doceam, Says SEN. It is my only joy in speaking, to teach others: -- Nec me
vila res delectabit, licet eximia sit et salutaris, quam mihi vni sciturus sim;
neither can I take pleasure in any thing, be it never so excellent, lest others
take part with me (SEN. loc. cit.) And all this is agreeable to the Moral Law
of God: which gives every man his own, in point of Propriety; and requires
this Duty, with all, in point of Community. That the Use of our Goods should
be, to help our neighbors in necessity; who, in this respect, are called --
The owners of thy Goods: ( -- Communicate vsus) and it is injustice to with
hold them, with a Niggardly hand ( Prou. 3. 27*) And the very Beasts, in Saint
BASIL. Do teach us this Community -- Illa enim his, quae ex terra nascunter, a
natura, in Commune vtuntur (Bas. in famac Sic. Hom. 40.) They, out of a
natural Goodness, do share each with other, in those things that grow of the
earth: How lovingly do our Flocks of sheep feed together in the same Common?
and our Herds of Cattle pasture together in the same Lease? All of them do
yield each to other in a mutual fruition of their bodily sustenance. -- Nos
autem in sin^m abdimus ea, quae sunt communia: ea, quae multorum sunt, soli
habemus (Ibidem.) But we (worse then Beasts) do hide, and hord those things,
which God has made Common; and that which should be for the Common good, we
greedily ingrosse to our private gain.

Thus the Distinction of the Shcoolemen agrees, in sense, to this of the
Philosophers: -- Jus proprietatis, Ius Charitatis, A right of Propriety, A
right of Charity; Right of Propriety, is the same with Propriety of possession:
Right of Charity, with community of Use. Right of Charity, that belongs to the
common good: Right of propriety, that appertains to the Private Owner. It was
decreed in the Law -- That a man, when he came into a vineyard, might eat as
many of the grapes, as he pleased. [Deut. 23. 24.] This was Right of charity.
But he might carry none away with him, (Ibidem) This was Right of Propriety. So
the Disciples, passing through the corne-fields on the Sabbath, pull the ears,
to satisfy their hunger (Mat. 12. 1) This was Right of Charity. But they put
not in their sycle, to cut down the Corn, and carry it away: because they had
not Right of Propriety. All this may be Comprised in Saint AMBRO'S description
of Justice -- Est virtus, quae vnicuique quod suum est, tribuit, alienum non
vendicat, vtilitatem propria negligit, ut communem aequalitatem custodiat. It
is a virtue, that gives to every man his due: it challenges no right in
another man's Propriety, it neglects it is own private for the Public good.

Now, would you have all these particulars cast up in a T^tall? The sum is
this- It is the principal duty of our christian Profession, equally to
respect the common Good: To approve our selves true Members of the Body
Mystical. This charity must we have, or we have not faith, (whatsoever we
confess) To believe the communion of Saints. A crowd, is not company; Faces,
but a Gallery of Pictures; Talk, but a Tinckling cymball, without charity, and
brotherly community.

Beloved, I hope, you will give me leave to go so far with you, as my Text
does: To make the Application answerable to the Proposition. The one is
Universal.-Every man: So must the other be; Every man of you must be a good
commonwealths man; Must- Look on the things of other men; The Magistrate, the
Minister, the Private man. 1. The Magistrate, especially: more specially, the
Judge; who, as his place is more eminent, so should he be more intent on the
public good. The higher he sits, the more distant from the earth, from the
earthly speculation of-His own things, to- Look on the things of other men.
This community is the green verdure, which delights the eye of Justice; and
nothing dimmes it more, than when the rheugme of Avarice distills into it- This
blinds it. (Deuteronomy. 16. 19.) True it is, Justice in the Emblem, is blind:
Blind to the persons, sees not the superficies of persons; but- Looks
(clearly, impartially) on the things (the causes) of other men. And that, not
with a squint eye, only on one side: as PILAT looked, more on the clamor of
the Accuser, than the Innocence of the Prisoner. (Luke 23. 23. 24.) Nor with a
poore-blind eye, only upward: as the Governors looked on AHAB the King, not on
NABOTH the poor subject.

Though the eye sees not- per emissionem radiorum, (as the Platonicks conceit)
but- per immissionem specierum, (as the Aristotelians more probably affirm)
yet, in this respect, Justice is a^ Platonicke: and sees not by Taking in the
Goods of other men; but by- Looking on other men's Good. And for you (R. Hon.) I
cannot impute unto you the least blemish of the eye: unless I should look
upon you with the eye of M^mus; who, because he could espy no deformity in
Venus body, would needs find fault with her slipper. Personal Imperfections,
no doubt you have: (who is without?)- Let him cast the first stone. But for
your Places, I may not, I cannot say, Black is your eye. The one of you (to
give CAESAR his due) I thankfully acknowledge, to have had comfortable
experience of: not only for mine own, but the Countries good; A famous Act of
Justice upon an infamous Barrator. As Hercules was famous for purging the world
of Monsters. So are Magistrates famous, that purge the Commonwealth of these
men-monsters.
which being a public cause, why should I not give it a public
acknowledgement? For as Magistrates are- Sent of God for the praise of them
that do well. (1. Pet. 2. 14.) So, great equity it is, That the praise and
Encouragement which they give to other Well-doers, should reflect from others
on their own Well-doings.

Neither let any envious Critic accuse my Gratitude of Adulation: ('It Is from
where there is least judgment, commonly, that the heaviest judgment comes.)
For as we have a Negative command, Thou shall not raise upon the Judges.
(Exodus 22. 28.) (So the former Translation reads) or- Dijsnon Detrabes: (So
the Vulg.) Thou shall not deprave the persons, nor inveigh against the places
of Magistrates; who are- Vice-dei, petty Gods upon earth. (Or Earthly Gods.) So
have we a positive Precept -- Honor the King. (1. Pet. 2. 17.) The King as
supreme: and other subordinate Magistrates, who are Representative Kings;
having the stamp of Regal authority upon their places; these must be
honored, encouraged by due respect to their places, and true affection to
their Graces and Virtues.

-- Laudataque Virtus-crescit: As praise is the reflection of Virtue, so is it
the Nurse of it. And it is a Form due in civilitie, to Great persons- Landando
precipere: This kind of commendative, is a commandative; By telling men what
they are, we represent to them what they should be, more, and more. Go on
then (R. Hon.) to look on your Countries good, (the common good) being the
special Object of your Places; And (if I mistake not) at this time, a
miserable spectacle; lying like him among the Thieves, in Adomin, loco
sanguinario, a bloody robbing place between Jerusalem and Ieriche, (Luke 10.)
Robbed, wounded, and half dead; robbed by racking Landlords, wounded by
Engrossing and Transporting Merchants, Halfe-dead by Devouring Usurers. Here is
work for a Samaritan (for Judges and Justices) for surely the Priest and the
Levite (our inferior Officers) pass it by, with little or no regard, not-
Looking on the things of other men.

And what does the Minister in the second place? What Commonwealths men are
we? We Spiritual men ought to- Look also on the things of other men. We have
a Co^mon-weale to take care of too- The commonweal of Israel. (Ephesians. 2. 12.)
This should every Minister look to; especially the Bishops, who have their
title from a compound of the Text; the simple here (you hear) is, (...)
hence-(...): Inspectors, Supervisors, Superintendents; Such as are appointed,
to- Look on the things of other men; to provide for the Common good of the
Church, both in Doctrine and Discipline. You know what our Apostle says of
these men; The Elders that rule well are worthy of double honor, specially
they which labor in the word and Doctrine. (1. Tim. 5. 17.) 1. They that rule
well. (manage well the Pastoral staff of Discipline) these are honorable
Common-wealths-men in Gods Israel. And this staff had need be walking: for who
sees not, that Schism and Faction begin to be too saucy and unruly? 2. But
they that labor in the word and Doctrine, (they that communicate Spiritual
Food to the Souls of the people) these are more Honorable-(...), specially
these. 3. And they that do both (both rule well, and preach well) are worthy
of double Honor, indeed; And they that deny it them, envy it them, are worthy
of Treble shame.

Then cannot we, for shame, but acknowledge our Happiness: and give hearty
thanks to God, Give to every man his duty: honor to whom honor is due.
for the Honorable Commonwealths man of our Israel: Specially for his
Indefatigable Labors in the word and Doctrine, learnedly and liberally
communicated to the whole Church, Romans 13.
from Presso and Pulpit. And (without prejudice to the Pulpit) I may say, some
of us are not worthy of this Happiness: Some Dunghill-Cockes, that cannot
distinguish between a Barly-corne, and a Jewel. But as Popish MOREN said of
our Reverend JEWEL, A^arem te, ^ewelle, si non esses Zwinglianus: So may I of
them, They would love him, Si; if he were not so good as he is. Every Critic
will have a- Si, of Exception. You know the fable of the Frogs, the croking
Animals were never pleased with their present Governor: when they had a
Storke, he was too stirring; when they had a Stock, he was too still. And so
it should seem by their behavior, -- Insultant, desultant: But a blow or two
of the Pastoral staff will make these Frogs dive under water. Mean time the
Vulgar's envy is Virtues foil; and if ye seek Virtue, you shall commonly
find her by the Tracks of Envy; which, like a cunning Bloud-hound, still
singles out the fattest Dear of the Heard- Invidia pernitiosum, optimis,
t^lum. Envy levels her poisonous dart to those of best Desert.

Surely it much concerns all Clergymen to look to the Common Good of the
Church. For the -- blood of every soul, that perishes under our hands, for
want of a liberal distribution of Spiritual Food, shall be required of us.
(Ezech. 3. 20.) And I wish our Apostles general Reproof in this Chapter of my
Text Did not come too near home to some of us, -- Omnes, quae sua sunt
quaerunt. (Phil. 2. 21.) Some that have most profit from the Church, yield,
least profit, to the Church. Right like, that Inferior Priest, of whom I have
read: who whilst he was without Preferment, had his Table, at meals, spread
with a Net; to mind him of the Mystery of his Profession, and to tell him, He
was a Fisher of men; Afterward, being preferred, he bad his servant: Phadr.
lib. 3.
Take away the Net, I have caught that I fisht for. Aesop Fab.
Suspitione si quis errabit sua, et rapiet ad se, quo derit commune omnium,
stulte nu^abit animi conscientiam:
Let them that be guilty, make the Application. Of whom that Father said
truly, -- Currunt ad Cathedram, non ad curam: They love the Chair, better
then the Pulpit. It Is a wonder how men can have a Cure of souls, without Care.
These men are rather Crassiani, than -- Christiani, (Bub. lib. 5. de Ass.)
More Secular, than Ecclesiastical; very Demasses, indeed. Neither do I speak
this, in envy, to the places, or Dignities, of any of my profession: rather, I
grieve to hear our Sacred Calling, in them, played upon, (not unjustly) Si
quispiam offendatur, and fibi vindicet, non habet quod expostulet cum eo, qui
scripsit: ipse, si volet, secum agat iniuriam, vrpote sui proditor, qui
declaravit hoc ad se proprie pertinere: Erasm. Epist, ad Dorp.
-- Curae leves loquuntur, Ingentes stupent. I deny not, but we may, by
Lawful means, seek Riches, and Preferment: -- We have power to do it as
well as others. (1. Cor. 9. 1 2.) and -- potestatem, non vsurpatam, sed datam
(Jerome de pastor. Eccles.) A power not usurped, but lawful derived; But, take
his Distinction with you: We Ministers are to be considered in a double
quality, -- Vt Christiani, vt praepositi; As private men, as Ministers; In eo
quod christiani, attendatur vtilitas nostra: in eo quod praepositi, non nisi
vestra. In that we are Private men, we have reason to have a provident care
of our Temporal estates, as other men: we are not now maintained by Miracle;
But in that we are Ministers, our chiefest care should be for our Cure. For
-- We be unto the Shepherds of Israel, that feed themselves, should not
the Shepherds feed the flocks? (Ezech. 34. 2.) And my Text does, as it were
Comment on this place, -- Look not every man (merely) On his own things, but
every man also on the things of other men.

And what Common-wealths-men are private men, in the third place? O dear
Christians and Countrymen, Gentlemen, Yeomen, and the like, who make up the
Body of the Commons: Remember, you are one another Members, knit together by
the sinews of policy, to one Monarchical Head; Let it be your care, to study
the welfare of Him, and one another. There be three things, which do much
rejoice God (and most beautify our Christian Religion) two whereof are -- The
unity of Brethren, The love of Neighbors (Eccl. 25. 1) O quam bonum, et quam
incundum; how good, and how comely a thing it is, brethren to dwell together in
unity, ( Psalm. 133. 1.) Therefore as you tender Unity and community, avoid
base covetousness, which is still of the nature of Democritus told
Hippocrates, They daily plead one against another: the son against the
Father. Brother against brother, Kindred and friends of the same quality, one
against another; and all this for riches. Hippocr. Epist. ad Damoget.
Dividing: it divides the dearest friends; Brother and Brother. -- Master, bid
my brother divide the inheritance with me, (Luc. 12. 13.) Hereto SENECA
alludes -- Video ferrum ex eisdem tenebris esse prolatum, quibus aurum et
argentum: So that, sometimes, for body and for mind, Torture and torment in one
Mine we find. Du. Bart. Fur.
I see iron dug out of the same dark mine, with gold and Silver; Ne aut
instrumentum in caedes mutuas deesset, aut pretium; That no means might be
wanting of Mutual contention; Meaning that covetousness begets bloody
quarrels, ( De Benef. lib. 7. cap. 10) In which place the wise Heathen cries
out on the several kinds of v^sury, springing from covetousness, in his time:
and to one he gives a bloody Epithet -- Sanguinolentae centesimae, (Loc. cit.)
Bloody usury: Because, like the Dur-fly, wheresoever it lights, it fetches
blood of a Man's Estate.

This is so the breach of Peace and Charity, that it makes one man odious to
another: So St. BASIL, -- When the Usurious Creditor, and penurious Debtor
meet, Ille velut Canis ad praedam accurrit, hic vero, velut parata praeda
congressum formidat. (In Psalm. 15.) The one runs as a Dog to the Prey: the
other, fearing to be made a Prey, runs away. For, says he, the Insolences
of the Creditor, (intolerable to an ingenuous spirit) must needs cause a
detestation, -- Coram uxore pudefacit, coram amicis contumelia afficit, in foro
strangulat, malus in festo occursus, vitam non vivendam tibi subornat.
(Ibidem.) He shames a man before his wife, reproacheth a man before his
friends, takes a man by the throat in the open Market, at a Feast, his meeting
marres a man's mirth, and he makes a man weary of his life. And can this be a
good Commonwealths man? For a Gentleman to be an Usurer, is most ungenerous;
for a Citizen, most uncivil; for a Minister, most unclarkely, for any man-most
unchristianlike.

O fie upon Covetousness!
-- Quid non mortalia pectora cogit?
What mischief does it not bring upon the Commonweal? Whence are wars and
contentions among you? Saint JAMES asks the question. ( Jam. 4. 1.) I will
answer, are they not hence, even from Covetousness, Usury, Fraud, Oppression?

-- Hinc Vsura vorax, and multis utile bellum. (Lucan.) It was SOCRATES
complaint.- Propria crescunt, communia neglecta jacent: So these men grow
privately rich by the public Ruin: which must needs be, (if the Scriptures
be true) the ruin of themselves and posterity in the end; For the curse of
God is denounced against it- Woe unto him that builds a Town with blood, and
erecteth a City with iniquitiae. (Hab. 2. 12.) Id est, cursed is that Fortune
which is framed of Ill-gotten goods: the very Inanimate Materials whereof (the
stone out of the Wall, and the beam out of the timber) shall cry for vengeance
against the founder. (Verse. 11.) And where this Curse of GOD breathes upon any
thing, it must needs be blasted; Witness the Fig Tree. (Mat. 11. 21.)

Therefore, for the love of GOD, ye Magistrates, Ministers, and private men;
Gentlemen, Yeomen, and all men, Remember the Common good of Church, and
Commonweal. O let this be- Anglorum Helena, Christianorum Diana, The sum of
your earthly delight; Fight for it, pray for it, preach for it, practice for
it; I say Remember it. And that you may remember it the better, take an example
or two, ere I conclude, along with you-

-- Exempla plus ^voent. -- When POLYCRATIDAS, with others, was sent Ambassador
into a Province of Grecia: it was demanded them, before they could have
Audience, whether they came upon private Commission, or public Legation?
Whereto they answered, in a pithy Laconism^, -- Si impetremus, public: Sin
minus, or^vat^^* (Erasm. Apoph. lib. 4.) Wherein they had a special eye to
their Countries good, both ways: if their Message succeeded, it should be for
their Countries Glory; if they had the Repulse, yet their Country should have
no dishonor; they would rather take it upon themselves. When SYLLA had taken
the City Palestrina; he gave order, to put all the inhabitants to death, save
only his Host; on whom he would bestow his life, in requital of his former
Entertainment. But the Host refused his Courtesy, in these words: -- Nolo
patriae meae Extinctori debere vitam. (Erasm. Apoph. lib. 6.) I will not be
beholden to the Destroyer of my Country, for my life: It shall never be said,
I Will outlive my Country, and so dyed amongst his fellow-Cittizens. But to
come nearer home: let the United Provinces learn us to unite our hearts, and
to -- Look every man on the things of other Men: Alterius sic Altera pos. cit
opem Horat. Eget Omnis amicus amico.
They finding any fallen into decay (Specially by designement of Divine
providence) do voluntarily Contribute toward their Necessities: and that, by
a kind of Silent and close Beneficence; That neither themselves, who give, may
do it in Ostentation; nor they, who receive, may fear exprobation. A pious
policy, and worthy imitation.

And now, because Examples are like flaming Beacons, which fame and time set on
Hills, to draw us to a Defense of virtue, whenso'ere vice invades the
Commonwealth of man; Let these examples* fyred by precepts, now flaming in
your eyes from this saecred Hill of the Palpit, excite you all, to a Defense of
Church and Commonwealth; which are dangerously invaded by Deprau'd policy, and
private Ends, -- Look not every man on his own things, but every man also
etc. That so the Multiplicity of our persons being joined in a unity of
Affections unto CHRIST, we may be fit to Enjoy the Glorious vision of the
Trinity in Unity, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost. One only Wise, Invisible,
incomprehensible Majesty. To whom, etc.

FINIS.

