A DEFENSE OF THE RIGHT OF KINGS.

WHEREIN THE POWER OF the Papacy over Princes, is refuted; and the Oath of
Allegiance justified.

WRITTEN FOR THE USE OF ALL English Romanists; more especially, for the
Information of those Priests, or Jesuits, which are by Proclamation commanded
to conform themselves, or depart the Kingdom.

By EDWARD FORSIT, Esquire.

LONDON, Printed by B. A. for Nathaniel Butter, and are to be sold at his shop,
at the Pyed Bull, near Saint Austens Gate.

1624.

TO THE MOST HIGH AND POTENT MONARCH, JAMES, OF GREAT BRITAIN, FRANCE, AND
IRELAND, KING, DEFENDER OF THE FAITH, etc.

TO THE RIGHT REVEREND FATHER in God, GEORGE, by the Divine Providence Lord
Bishop of LONDON, my singular good Lord.
THE whole Church, and Kingdom of England, (Right Reverend Prelate) has a
long time together taken notice of that continual neerenesse, into which it
has pleased his Majesty (who does all things upon Judgment) to admit your
wisdom and faithfulness, in matters of advice especially, which be most
proper to your sacred Function. Which Grace of your Lordships with so wise and
learned a Prince, has persuaded me, that as you were the fittest, so you would
be the willingest to do our Great Master this service; for so I hope this
Office will prove, if your Lordship will be pleased, that this Book may by your
hands have access unto his Majesty. It treats of a Royal Argument, and
therefore (even of duty) to be dedicated to a King, as a thing due unto
Caesar: And due unto our King especially, whom God has raised up in Britain,
as the Fort Royal of Princes, to amate that Tower of Babel, that proud Castle
of S. Angelo. And therefore as his Majesty himself has first of all, and
best of all, written in this kind, and given the ablest directions unto others
to prosecute the Argument; so it might seem presumption, if any thing of this
subject should come abroad without his Royal assent.

His Majesty's example (together with this Gentleman's own zeal to the Cause)
did at first, no doubt, encourage this learned Author to undertake this present
Work, who as he still is by his place a Justice of Peace, so has he here done
Justice upon that saucy Medler with the Rights of Princes, Parsons the Jesuit,
and those two seditious Books of his, one coming our under the name of P. R.
the other of a Catholic Gentleman, both which he has here made to keep the
Kings peace. The Title will (I hope) find gracious acceptance, and the Book
honorable approbation with his sacred Majesty. Which hope of mine has
emboldened me to offer it unto your good Lordship, as a testimony of my most
hearty and humble thankfulness, for those favors which I have received from
your goodness: the remembrance of which shall ever bind me to be at your
Lordships service most faithfully.

Nathaniell Butter.

TO THE READER.
OCTAVIUS the Emperor did rather choose to violate the will of Virgil, then to
consume Inter (...) fragmenta.
those laborious AEneids of his in the flames of Oblivion. Why then should not
this example of his, excuse me from blame of the Author of this following
Work, for attempting to commit to the Press, and commending that to others in
public, which he but lent to me in private? since good things are best known,
by their use; and well considering, how acceptable it may prove to our
hopeful times. The end of his (...), when he first began this Treatise (I am
well assured) was only to satisfy his own private Judgment, esteeming it
(through his too much Modesty) so far unfit for the public view, as for the
space of ten or twelve years since the finishing of it, he suffered it to
rest obscure, amongst his other private Labors; wherein his industry and
ability may appear to be made yet more transparent, in his own vnder-valuing
of what he has so exactly performed: Which coming thus accidentally to my
hands, and viewing the matter it treated of, and the malicious slanders it
retreated, I could not choose but even blame the unkind Author, that would have
made the very Womb of this his seasonable Offspring, the Tomb, and given it
at one and the same time both life and dissolution together.

I have therefore adventured my Endeavors (without his knowledge, beyond his
expectation, and I am afraid, against his desire) for the publishing of that
which I knew might prove so useful: which remaining obscure, and in silence,
neither should the Cause nor the Parsons be vindicated; nor yet the
sovereignty of this Antidote against that dispersed Poison, have been
discernable, or served for public benefit. And though the man opposed be (as I
conceive) incapable of defense, yet there remain many of his Labors, that like
the Vipers brood have sucked a stronger Poison from his death. Nor want there
many of his Iesuited Disciples, who may yet do him right, if they think him
iniuried; though it be true, Vni Caesari multi insunt Marii. Suat. li. 1. c. 1.


All I desire, is pardon from the Author, upon whose Worth so well known, and
Love so often tried by me, I have thus far presumed; not doubting, but the
public good that may ensue his own Labor, will ouer-sway his resolved
retyrednesse. As for thy acceptance, I doubt it not, because the benefit is
thine own; and accounting it reward enough to my self, that I am but the
Instrument of communicating this to others. Farewell.

F. B.

PARTICVLAR MATTERS discussed in this Treatise.
THe occasion of this Question concerning the Popes power. The mitigations of
P. R. touching the Powder Treason. His mangling and omitting of my Lords words.
Whether the Pope cannot err: with the manifold distinctions of the Papists
therein. How the true estate of the Question concerning the Popes power, is
hidden by a cunning form of words. Whether this point be generally agreed upon
amongst Catholics, and how dangerous the same is to the State. How he minceth
and mitigateth the matter in question. The true Question, and how largely it
extends. The reasons made for the position, and the same answered: and that
there neither is, nor ever was, any standing Authority to deprive Kings. No
reason for the Popes power in nature. Whether the universal Pastorship be
instituted by Christ, and what points must be proved, before that come to be
made good. The Jesuits busy entermedling in State-affaires. The proof from
the word Pasce Oues examined, and Baronius his expositions and inferences in
this matter. Other strange arguments for the Popes temporal power. The Pope no
rightful successor of S. Peter, but wrongfully pretends his Authority, or
Primacie. The Pope no successor or imitator of Christ. Their distinction of
Authority, direct and indirect, examined. What necessity there is of this
Pastoral power, and how it is qualified. Politic reaches in Popery, to
advance the Authority aforesaid. The Pope may reduce all causes to his
Cognizance, and how far he may extend the power of Seculare Brachium, the
Sccular Arm. The Doctrine of the Jesuits concerning the deposing of Princes,
holding that even private men may destroy Kings. P. R. yields unto the point
of the Kings Supremacy, in that sense as we do accept the same. P. R. driven
to fall from that which he had yielded. The Pope and Bellarmine will dislike as
much of P. R. for yielding to the Kings Supremacy of preservation, as they do
of M. Blackwell, for taking the Oath of Allegiance. P. R. thought to be the
author of the Letter which replyeth to the Apology of the Oath. He cannot
yield Supremacy in all causes, in his own sense, and yet main aine the Popes
power of deposing. The maintaining of the Popes temporal power, and the
denying of the Oath of Allegiance, is all one. He ought to have showed
particular matter to be disliked in the several parts of the Oath: the true
cause why he does not. His four reasons, whereby he would prove matter of
Religion in the Oath, be examined, and refuted. All limitting of the Popes
power, is not matter of Faith. The allowing to the Pope a power to depose the
King, cannot stand with Allegiance. A short answer (consisting of two parts) to
the whole Book, Written against Sir Edw. Coke, concerning the Popes Authority
in this Kingdom. Difference in the case of subjects under Catholic Kings and
the subjects of this kingdom, and between the now subjects and those of former
times under (...) Kings of England. The distinction of the Popes Authority,
direct and indirect, (...). Reasons to induce the Catholic subjects not to
refuse the Oath That sundry Papists have taken the Oath willingly: and that the
Gent. Wrongeth them in making a doubt thereof. upon any allegation of
constraint by fear. That the Law contains not any compelling or unlawful
means, to make any to swear unwillingly. That they have also sworn
faithfully: and that the equiuocating sense which the Gent. deuiseth, was not
used by them, nor ought to be used by any, being senseless, and against the
Oath directly. The Gent. rage and threats, for enforcing of the Oath. His
Theology controlled, concerning the ministering of an Oath unto such, as he
that ministers the same, suspecteth will forswear himself. That amongst the
Papists, there be greater enforcements to make men abjure Opinions, yea, under
pain of death, as is confessed: And that the answer to maintain the same by
the title of Ius acquisitum, is idle and frivolous. A wish for eternizing the
memory of the Gunpowder Treason, in answer of their anger for our so often
iterating or vpbraiding to them that most abhorred Conspiracy.
FINIS.
AN EXAMINATION OF a Position published by P. R. in the preface of his
treatise, tending to mitigation, concerning the lawfullnesse of the Popes Power
over Princes: with a defense of the oath of Allegiance.
IT pleased the Right Honorable the Earl of Salisbury, in his exactly written,
and necessary published answer, to certain scandalous Papists provoking him by
occasion, and in fashion insufferable, to protest against the insolency and
malignity of the Romish Church, out of the bosom whereof so many Treacheries,
Conspirases and Immanities of the foulest kind, have bin vented into the world,
tending to ouerule or ruinate whatsoever authority, not submitting the neck to
the yoke of that usurping power; in the very first passage of that his
Appologetticall declaration (which envy it self could not pass over without
attribution of highest praise) he was carried (by the contemplation of so many
dangerous designs, and complotting practices, daily pretended and contrived
against the safety and dignity of temporal Potentates) to a more vehement
expressing of himself in the zeal of words following. I have been a long time
sorry, that those which employ so many seditious spirits daily to instruct the
unlearned Catholics, in these mysteries of deposing Princes, have not by some
public and definitive sentence Orthodoxall (in which it is supposed, the Pope
cannot err) made some clear explication of their assumed power over
Sovereign Princes, as not only those which acknowledge his superiority might
be secured from fears and iealousies of continual treasons, and bloody
assassinates against their persons, but those kings which do not approve the
same, and yet would feign reserve a charitable opinion of her subjects, might
know how far to repose themselves in their fidelity, in civil obedience,
howsoever they seem to be divided from them in point of conscience. To which
his Lordsh. so honorable desire, this good father offers and endeavors to
give satisfaction. Aman (if we mistake not his sheepemarke) of some fame, and
note of that side, placed in a degree of pre-eminence, graced with more then
ordinary gifts, confidently conceited of himself, and daring to undertake
matters of highest nature; not withstanding, observation is made of him that
his boldness much ouerbalanceth any other his best worth.

His said preface of the importune exasperations used by diverse to increase our
division and disagreement about matters of Religion is very presumptuous, and
altogether censorious, wholly spent in taxing and traducing not only the
particular speeches, or writings of some especial men of excellent desert in
this state, as if whatsoever they have uttered out of the abundance of just
grief in detestation of the late execrable treason, did wholly proceed from
exasperation, exulceration, aggrauation, exaggeration and calumniation, (for in
those high sounding terms he bears his style aloft) but also the
administration of justice, the vprightnes of our regiment, the newly enacted
penal laws, as making the state of English Catholics under Protestant
government more miserable and intolerable, than that of the Jews under any
sort of Christian Princes, that of the Grecians, or Christians under the Turk
or Persian, or that of bond Subjects, under the Polonians, Suetians, and
Muscouites, only he confesses that in two men's writings he finds more
moderation. The one is his Majesty in his speeches, both in Parliament, and in
Proclamations (whereunto yet he gives some dash or wipe of exception) The
other is my Lord of Salisbury in his said answer, to that fond menacing letter,
or rather frantic commination which yet (he says) wants not his sting,
piercing even to the quick. After he has thus throughout his many licentious
leaves, braued it with exorbitant and exulting phrases, at the last, he falls
in hand with this piece of doctrine occasionally drawn thereunto by the
consideration of his Lordships said desire, and (forsooth) he is the man that
must instruct and settle my Lords judgment by his profound resolves, seeming to
be moved with pity, that his Honor (in a matter not appertaining properly to
his faculty or profession) has been misled or misinformed by his divine.

Before he lancheth into the maine of the matter, he disposes himself
malepertly, to make a cross, or quaere, of the truth of such threatenings and
scandalls expressed in the said leters. For ^ he pauseth upon the matter, with
his parenthesis (if any such were) and after infinuateth his suspicion that the
same came from the forge of some such as (altogether with a blow, to be
thereby given to all Catholics) had a desire to draw forth from his Lordship,
etc.

It seems that these laques of the Romish faction are very frequently
acquainted with such fictions, what destiny can be more disasterous then that
the credence, so publikly delivered by so honorable a person of his place, and
eminency in the state; and of such unspotted integrity, in the carriage of all
causes, and otherwise to be sufficiently testified also, by the concurrence of
sundry men's particular knowledge, must undergo the girds and glances of his
misdoubts and questioning curiosity? but leaving the cauilling fellow to his
maleuolent surmises; I will now come to his other presumption, whereby he
undertakes to assure and satisfy my Lord of the doctrinall position, of
deposing Sovereigns, wherein (albeit I well know, that his honor is most able
with his sharp inquiry, and iuditious discerning, to look into all the
secretest corners and hiding places which he can contriue, or reserve in this
cause, Nequae forte lateat intus garrula cornix, yet not knowing whether his
Lordship out of his many other most weighty affairs can afford unto this
vain discourser so much loss of time, as but to read his so idle, and frothy
stuff. I humbly ask leave of his Lordship, (...) my meanenes, and weakness may
make adventure to take him in hand, to charge him, and combat him, in this so
high and most important controversy.

But before we come to the core of the question, let it be observed what good
cause he has to plead for mittigation, and how well he acts the part of a
mittigator. In the mention which he makes of the late powder plot for the
sudden, and unrecoverable subversion of our gracious King, and the whole
state at once, (the very cogitation whereof, is as full of horror, as the
perpetration thereof, would have been of treachery, and atrocitie) what fit or
equivalent term has his mild, and mittigating spirit, devised to express or
paint forth the hainousnes thereof? he does twice (for failing) iterate unto us
that it was the temeritie of a few. He could not have chosen a more easier, or
more abating word, if he had been, to reprove them for some small
misdemeanour against a petty Constable: can it be otherwise thought, but that
this Artist, and Tradesman of words, did out of his inclination, and
tendernesseof heart, sort out of the gentlest term he could find, lest he
should seem too sharp and sore against them. Does he imagine by such his
initigation to persuade the King and Realm to tolleration? the kings Council,
learned at the law, in the dinotation and amplification of that unspeakable
conspiracy, finding it to conteyne so many treasons in one, declared the same
to be, as Sine exemplo, and sine mode, so also sine nomine. Now this
Rhetorical Father could have taught them all to have framed the indictment
upon his so proper name, the treason of temeritie. I can hardly endure his
other word (few) sauouring of the like mittigation also, yet I know that I
shall even mad him, in telling him the very troth of my thought. He says,
That to extend and draw out the hatred and participation of that fault to
others of that religion, yea unto the whole multitude, is a matter of
exorbitant injustice and intemperate malice. I confess that he has herein
some advantage, both by the admirable goodness and clemency of so loving a
Sovereign that suffers not Jealousy to out trunne proofs, and by the
deffect of discovery of the degrees and depths of that design.Yet (if it be
but to cross him in the conceit) he carries, fronting the same in the style
and inscription of his book. That it is not impossible for Catholics and
Protestants to live together in dutiful obedience and subjection under the
government of his Majesty. (I will let him know) that for my part, I did long
since make it even an article of my belief, that the like plot was rightly to
be resembled to the train of powder; whereby it was to have had his execution,
for as one corn thereof would have fired another, carrying the flash along,
till the whole should join together in full force. So undoubtedly, the maine
corpse of Papacy within this land would have been stirred up being laid in
order and prepared by those wicked traynors, and leaders, according as they had
contrived, the fire of their treason and rebellion to catch hold, and flame
forth. And it may sooner be feared, then it can be known, that (besides the few
powder corns ditected and disappointed) there was a longer and stronger
train, yea great and mighty barrells, that would have been combined to have
wrought the general combustion, and dissipation of the whole state. I will
rest this point with prayer, that (howsoever there may be use or necessity to
trust unto their faithfulness) yet that there may never be opportunity, or
means given them for the trial of her infidelity, and disloyalty.

An other trick of his running in mittigation, is showed in the mangling and
mincing of the sense and feruency of his Lordships speech, he wholly
pretermitteth that part of the recited sentence, which by charging them to have
employed so many seditious spirits to instruct the unlearned Catholics in the
mysteries of deposing Princes, does the more vrgently press them by a just
account to make good the causes of such their mischieuons and detestable
proceedings. Shall I conjecture at his conceit in concealing or withdrawing of
these words? be felt the same to strike into his sides the spur of guiltines,
by the remembrances of his own notorious offenses: who for many years has
been thought a busy instrument of enkindling the simple and devoted
Catholics with the spirit of sedition, and has been a detected confederate
in the traiterous agences, wherein his subordinate Jesuits has been so
disloyally employed. Wherefore (though he had no great liking to hear again
the sound of such words, as must convey an accusing sting into his conscience,
yet he thought to lay it heavy upon him (as a charge that he might not well
avoid) to set forth (by declaring of the Papal right) some seeming show in
justification of his own and his accomplices, undue and disloyal dealings.

In the rehearsal of the same sentence, he makes one other omission of these
words, enclosed in a parenthesis (in which it is supposed the Pope cannot
err.) This prero gatiue point of the Popes new erring judgment, he has
slyly passed by, as not willing to rush upon that rock, upon the firmenes and
stabilitie whereof, their whole Church is bailt, this opinion (as his Lordship
truly delivered) has for some ages passed been received, and stiffly
maintained by the fawning hindes of the Pope, that has been accustomed,
Tribunat Romanum lambere, but this good mitigator, finding no coulerable
defense against many and wayty arguments, whereby such the transcending
exaltation bestowed one his holiness, is utterly dejected and overthrown,
has no great liking to pass his affirmation, and assent to that doctrine,
which the powers of his wit and learning, is not able to uphold. Nay he has
in this controversy taken an head, and singled himself from the common
Catholics, closing hands in conclusion with the Protestants. For in this very
treatise, he Cae. 6. par. 2
has affoarded us this favor, that Popes may err, yea even in the articles
of faith, yea and become Heretics, and Apostataes, and that as Popes, that
for the same, they may be deposed, and deprived of their Papal pre-eminence,
does he not speak like an honest plain dealer, as if he would no more adore
that I doll of Rome? and as if he cared not any whit for the triuiall
objections made out of the words of Christ unto Saint Peter, I have prayed that
thy faith shall not fail: and again, upon this Rock (meaning Saint Peter) I
will build my Church? Nothing more permanent and immovable than a rock,
nothing more certain of effect than what Christ prays for, and whatsoever
endowments of gifts or graces was bestowed upon Saint Peter, did become the
fee-simple and inheritance of the sea of Rome. He that regards not these
inferences, and allegations so generally allowed and insisted upon in the
Church of Rome, and which has hitherunto been used as the shoulders of Atlas
to uphold the earthly heaven of the Pope, their earthly god, does he not give
good hope, that he will revolt from Papacy it self? But (notwithstanding
these fair shows) by the help of some of his fellows, he has found out a
shifting distinction to wind himself out of all the straights, and
entrapments, wherewith he seemed to be fettered so vnuoydably, And this it is.

That albeit the Popes, as Popes may err, become Apostataes and Heretics, yet
that God (as Popes) will never permit them, to decree any heretical (...), to
be held by the Church, or for the whole Church; What can we say to the
subtletie of this distinction? It is like to the buckler of Achilles that had
many plates ensolded, one within the other, to give the more assurance against
all blows or thrusts. It is a fertile and pregnant distinction, it has these
several issues of his body begotten. First, that Popes as men may err, and be
Heretics, yea and decree heretical doctrine, but not as Popes, for that God
will not permit; It is pretty, but what sure mark or token does he give,
whereby it may be known, what he does as Pope, or what he does as man? they
say that God permits not, and we say, that only God knows the difference
Between his actions, or enactings as Pope, and his decisions as man, and so the
Church rests uncertain how far to be bound.

Secondly, God may permit Popes (as Popes) to hold heretical doctrine, but not
to decree it, where shall we find consistendi locum? if in their consistory,
they shall declare, pronounce, and resolve upon Heretical doctrine, may that
amount unto a decree, we have had many such decrees reuersed and repeated.

Thirdly, though God permit Popes (as Popes) to decree an erroneous and false
doctrine, yet if at any time after (as if that wild beast even the Bore of the
forest, had reuertendi animum) he recall or reject the same, or does not
wittingly (as against the known Catholic truth) oppose himself with
peruersitie, that doctrine is not to be adjudged heretical, and thereby
comes under the covert of the first distinction.

Fourthly, though God permit Popes (as Popes) to decree any heretical
doctrine, yet does this distinction affoard one hiding corner more, that the
same is not decreed to be held by the Church. Then let them, at the least,
allow us this footing against the Pope, that the Church is not bound to
maintain all his decrees.

Fifthly, though God permit Popes (as Popes) to decree any heretical doctrine
to be held by the Church, yet the former distinction is further enriched with
this clause, (taken out of Canus) that God permits not that decree for the
whole Church: as if by the permission of God, the Church (like to the moon)
may be for the greater part thereof, darkened and seduced by such heretical
decrees of the Pope; yet that the whole Church, and every member of the same,
as (for instance) the Protestant part, which is divided and departed from the
abominations of Rome, is not carried headlong into heresy by any sentence or
decree Papal

Sixthly, there is yet included and reserved in this distinction one question
more, as conceived in the womb, but not expressed in plain terms, which (at
times of exigent when they be pressed) they forget not to cleave unto; which
is, that the Church here mentioned, is, and must be the Catholic Romish
Church, as if that particular of Rome, were the general of the world, and that
the Romish alone, had this eminent exception, above all other Churches, that
the members thereof were not to be concluded or enthralled by every decrees of
their Head. I cannot yet have done with this seauen-headed subtle serp^et, this
deceitful distinction. Allow it in his perfectest shape, and close it together
in all his joints, God permits not the Pope (as Pope) to decree heretical
doctrine to be held by the Church, and for the whole Church; what has all
this more then an equiualence to this saying? God permits not the devil to
have power to destroy the elect and faithful? And as when the Angel Raphaell
bound the evil spirit from hurting of Tobias, it could not be construed to be
a favor or a sign of love unto that evil spirit: so the not permitting of
the Pope to decree heretical doctrine, is no advancing or advantage of the
Papal authority from being restrained, or not suffered to do so grievous
hurts.

This may suffice for his distinction, and subdistinctions, like the fox and
the cubbs, unto which I have the more respectively cast mine eye, because I
find this matter of the vnfallibilitie of the Popes decrees so closly couched
even to the centure of our question, of his power over Princes. If I have been
too long in examining his malam (...) in the mittigations and omissions before
mentioned, I must (for excuse) confess, that I was well content to take him
tardy in that very fault which he so clamerously vpbraideth to his Antigonist
Master Morton, carping and catching at him throughtout his whole book with a
triumph of phrases for the very same corruption, (as he terms it) though I
nothing doubt but he will sufficiently acquit himself of all those frivolous
and unjust cauells.

The matters that we have hitherto met with, have been but introductory, and
upon the bye. Now it is meet we look into the maine and substantial point of
doctrine, which (as if he were closset-keeper to the Pope) he confidently
delivers to be Catholic and Orthodoxall, inducing his Lordship to set up his
rest upon that unreprovable resolution.

I protest, that when I first considered how to redvce the question to a true
discussable state, I found that I could not draw down the right proposition,
which is to be controuerted between us in that kind of language which he
speaks, I found that he used so much glosing, and dilating so many gay
shows and pretenses, such clothing and decking of the cause with well chosen
words for the fair carriage of the matter, as that the naked and plain sense
thereof was not easily to be discovered.

But after scanning more advisedly, and breaking the rank of his words, to
look into his innermost meaning, and matching the same, with that he must
stay if he will perform his undertakings, I discerned at the last a sour
pill to be wrapped up in a leaf of gold, the doctrine of conspiracy and
rebellion against the state and life of Princes, cunningly covered over with a
thick crust of sweet Candie, to relesh the better with the simple, and so to
deceive them with a fore-inducing sweetness. The Proposition must be this, The
Pope may depose the king, and such his power is approved of all Catholics.
And that appears thus, his Lordship speaking of the seditious spirits, that
instruct the unlearned in the mysteries of deposing Princes, desires therein
some public and definitive sentence Orthodoxall for clear explication of
such. The Popes assumed power, over Sovereign Princes, therefore if this
smooth mittigator will without winding away by circumlocutions, and without his
so finely framed tenderness of Phrase, speak ad idem, plainly, and home to
the purpose, he must avouch this to be a public definitive sentence, That
the Pope has lawful power to depose Princes, but how does he express and
pronounce this point? he is so nice and wary, that he thinks not good to
name the Pope at all, doubting belike that that name is distasteful, but in
stead thereof, he bestows on his holiness the stately style of Supreme
Governor and Pastor of the Church and Commonwealth, repeating the same words
sundry times, and purposedly avoiding the other, does he not employ and
infer by this mounting of the Pope to the title of Supreme Governor of the
Commonwealth, that he is the king of kings, and that Princes hold their
scepters, as Viceroyes, and Lieutenants under him? I understand not else how he
can close the Common wealth within the Popes claws: then again in the like
sort, he shunneth the hateful term of deposing, and uses in the stead
thereof, restraining, repressing, censuring, or judging. And lastly he does very
mildly mittigate the rigor of deprauing the name, or depriving the person of
the Prince, by applying this power, to the restraining or censuring any
exorbitant and pernicious excess of great men, States or Princes, would not
any man judge, that (being so mannerly, so (...), and cautulous, he were
afraid or shamed to fall so foul upon Princes, as to maintain the usurpation
of Papacy, in deposing of them? he sets not one step in this question,
wherein he does not doubt, that he treads upon thorns, yet trusting upon
his two great gifts, facility of speech, and boldness of face. He spares
not to tell his Lordship that his Divine might easily have informed him, that
amongst Catholic people the matter is clear, and sufficiently defined, and
declared in all points wherein there may be any doubt concerning this affair.
Surely, his Lordships Divine, may perhaps concur in opinion with Master
Morton, and most evidently discern the consent and adherensie of Catholics in
the execrable practice of this proposition, but (that they have not agreed in
the judgments and approbation of the point in question) the direct renouncing
and disclayming thereof by some of the best learned of that side, at the time
of their suffering of death for Treason, does clearly and fully make known
unto him and all the world.

I will not take upon me to search out and lay together heaps of rapsodies and
collections, culled our of their writers to demonstrate their differences in
this argument, thereby to disprooue their so pretended agreement in this
definitive sentence; but I trust to show the same to be so false, so weak, so
washie, and of so little weight, as upon the ripping and examining thereof, it
will every whit of it fall quite asunder, failing altogether of all ground,
whereupon to stand, and having no good props to sustain or support the same.

In the mean while he may perhaps do us a little more good than he wishes
by his intimation unto us, That among Catholic people the matter is so clear,
for we are thereby to take notice and warning, how little we are to trust
Catholics, seeing they acknowledge this L. Peramount, above the Kings, and
must yield their Omni-moda^ obedientia^ to that supreme Pastor, combining
themselves at his beck in all dangerous designs when any pretense is made, that
the government of spiritual affairs appertaining to the Cath. Church, is
let or impugned by our temporal governor, for in such case (says this
learned Father) the said supreme Pastor has authority to proceed against the
said temporal governor, for defense and preservation of his spiritual Charge,
had we not need to look about us even with Argus eyes, when we have so many
hands of this Briarius to fasten upon us at every turn: every let of
spiritual affairs is punishable by the supreme Pastor, and such lets may as
easily be imputed or imposed for a crime upon the temporal governor; here is
a good gap opened, and a way made wide enough for the firebrands of sedition,
and the contentious discontented, to revel and route it in a common wealth, to
suggest, inform, object, and oppose against all magistracy.

Here again I must put him in mind of his mittigations and extenuations, in
sorting and using the gentler, and more pleasing words. What shall we think he
means by proceeding against the Temporal governor? might he not as well have
said, cite him, censure him, excommunicate him, depose him, and bear him out
of his chair of estate with the horns of a dreadful Bull? If Paulus the 3, or
Pius the 5, had had this our mealie mouthed mittigator to have bin the penman
of their Bulls, he would rather have the milder words of proyning or
repressing, then the other of extreme and violent (borrowed from the Prophet
Jeremy) of destroying and pulling up by the roots, yet his kindness does not
hold constant, for in after reasonings, when he joins up issue upon the true
state of the question; whether the words of the Prophet be well applied by
allusion to make good the authority of Christ's successors upon earth, and
whether the forenamed Popes by such their arrogant and impudent glosing Cae. 5.
par 2
upon the text, does not (in this forcing and streyning of the Scriptures)
pervert the Sacred Oracles of God, he is content to join with his companions
of that feather, in justification of the right ayplying of the text, for the
confirmation of the Papal power, of pulling up and destroying Sovereign
Governors, though indeed (to do him right all the reason he uses, or
yields in defense thereof, is only and barely this. Is this so great an
impiety think you? Then let him give what allay he lists to the tartness
of this doctrine, by his well seasoning thereof with his soft and supple words;
yet as in the practike, the degrees of proceeding against Princes does grow in
order (or rather in disorder) of consequence by the actual attempt of their
subversion and destruction, so in the disputatiue to allow him his mittigating
terms, of redressing or repressing, will by direct inference and necessary
extention, reach to the crown and life of Imperial Majesty.

Therefore laying aside all masking and mincing of the matter, by his
artificial utterance, the cause in controversy, and to be argued is all one
in the words as we put it, whether the Pope may depose the Prince, and in the
words, as this shye and slye discourser will needs have it, whether the
Supreme Pastor may reftraine the exorbitant and pernicious excess of great
men, etc.

Now that we have the right questioned proposition, set down plainly, and
stripped of that Rhetorical array which dazzled our eyes from discerning the
true understanding and intention thereof, we may proceed to the considering
and sifting of the reasons, devised and alleged for the maintenance of this
assertion: Nevertheless it is not my purpose, nor standing with my profession
(being no Divine, and scant a Scholar) to look into all the sinews and
veins of this question, to the uttermost spread and extent thereof, it
touches upon some principles of natural reason, it also runs through the
course of Histories of all ages and countries, It is triable by many rules and
examples, both in the old and new Testament, it wants not the censure of the
old Doctors, and Fathers of the Church. It is handled cunningly, and
mystically, by the Popes Minions, the Canonists. It must abide a canuasse
amongst the Sophisticating Schoolmen: Finally, it has been by the modern
handlers of controversy, argued with much skill and strength of wit. I have no
intent to lead along this question, through all the parts of learning. I will
willingly leave the load, and tugge off such multiplicity, or rather
universality to his good hand, and dexterity of handling, who is already
interessed and engaged thereunto, and no doubt well provided, and most
accomplished, I mean, Mr Morton, against whom this Popish volume is addressed,
in refutation of his former learned and religious treatise. My endeauours in
this cause, be confined only to that part of the Preface, in the which
(concerning this question) that dissembling Author, has set forth the
Catholic opinion, accompanied, and guarded with some reasons, to confirm and
strengthen the same, pretending thereby to let his Lordship know, that the
point whereof he rests doubtful, is amongst them reduced to a general
resolved certainety; the opinion it self what it is indeed, or what it ought
to be, in the direct opposition, or (as he presumes) satisfaction to his
Lordship has been already sufficiently debated, and laid down. His reasons
to cogere assensum be two; one, that this assertion is founded in the very law
of nature, and nations, the other is also maintainable by the authority,
providence, and ordinance of our Savior Christ: for declaration of his first
reason, he sets forth, that in the Commonwealths that are not Christians,
all Philosophers, Lawmakers, Senators, Counselors, Historiographers, and all
other sorts of soundest wisdom, prudence, and experience, either Jew, or
Gentile, have from the beginning of the world concurred in this, that God and
Nature, has left sufficient authority in every Common wealth, for the lawful
and orderly full repressing of these evils, even in the highest persons; so
what a cloud of witnesses he has brought out with one breath, and yet no
more for the proof of his purpose, than the casual confluence or concourse of
Democritus his motes, did serve to make solid bodies or concreate substances.
In this objection he and I are as sarre a (...), as is from Rome to London,
nay, as far as the (...) is from the West, where he says, all Common wealths
Philosophers, Law-makets, (...), hers, and all sorts of (...)dest wisdom, Jew
or Gentile, etc. I on the other side, will be centent to make the like pompious
and (...): of all Commonwealths, Lawn ^ published or professed, that by any
ordinary authority, such redress as herein is meant by deposition of Princes,
or highest persons, was, or might be, lawfully, reasonably, or justly, had,
used, or exercised. I am not ignorant, that having in this challenge put my
felfe upon the negative, and so given to him so large a scope of advantage, as
to disprooue my generality, with any one affirmative instance, it behooves me
to hold my self close to that very point which I require to be fully proved;
therefore once again (so he will take in for a favor that I do ease him of the
great task which he has undertake to show, that all Common wealths,
Philosophers, etc. wherein his friends may pity him for presumption, in
proposing impossibilities) I redouble it unto him thus, that he cannot produce
from all the infinity of learning, any one president, profane or sacred,
whereby it may appear, that by any publicly authorized orders, there was ever
any standing and ordinary direction, and power, for the deposing of lawful
Princes against their wills from their inheritable rights of Sovereignty; I say
lawful Princes to meet with the objections he is like to cloy us with, of some
Princes, who by reason of their natural impotencies, were accounted incapable
or unlawful, and of other some, who acquiring Kingdoms by the sword invasion,
may be deemed unlawful, and so with like force and violence, to be repressed
and expelled. Likewise I have added (inheritable rights) as well because that
fitteth our state, (in whose bowels this debate has so dangerously striuen) as
also to cut off from him the feeding supplies of his error, which are the
elective governments, wherein perhaps now and then upon breaches of contracted
condition there has ensued deprauation from the possessed dignity, (yet those
deprauations for the most part) have been in tumult, violence, and disorder,
factiously, and mutinously performed, without any reguler or iuridical course,
agreeable to the tenure of the laws of that place. (...) added (against their
wills) both because this enforcement from the Pope is of that nature, and upon
purpose to disfurnish him of some examples, wherein I foresee how triumphantly
he would have gloried. For we do not deny but there has been many
resignations upon due consideration had by those suppressed Princes, of the
many acknowledged, and unanswerable defects, or offenses in their regiment, and
of the vndigestable dislike conceived by the subjects of such their
misgouerning and abusing superiority. Besides, I must (...) him with an other
Caveat, that neither the Roman, Turkish, nor any such Emperors will serve the
turn, for instances in this case, because (to say nothing of their forceable
acquirings for the most part of such their Imperial fears) their deposing
has bin executed by strong hand, and rather by the fury of armed soldiers,
than by any ordinary censure, or proceeding of Law or Justice; much less is
he to allege or propound any (...), wherein private or Phanaticall spirits,
out of humor and (...) revenge, reward, or glory, have attempted or (...) the
(...) of Hostile, and bloody assault, upon the (...) and (...) of Sovereigns.
He must (for very (...), the mention of such, left the may ^ by naming unto us
either the (...), that (...) K. Henry of France, was by (...) with (...) and
Acclamations, or the English (...), who of a devotion to the Pop (...) faction,
poisoned King John of England: yea, he might so bring in diverse Popes and
Cardinals, that have in such good zeal destroyed and made away Princes and
Emperors. I am yet to (...) him a little shorter, I must take from him, his
discoursing vain of mitigating, and blanching the matter, in a disguise of
some selected phrases, whereby he intends to advantage himself. For
example, when we are at this issue, whether there has ever been in any
Commonwealth, any sufficient Authority left by God, and Nature, for the
lawful and orderly deposing of Princes, he inserteth the repressing of evils,
even in the highest persons, so that when he shall be put to it, and the
weight of his undertakings is likely to break his back, or his brain; then
will he take the benefit of this shift, of repressing of evils even in the
higeest, and rather then fail of matter, tell us a stale tale of the Ephori,
or Tribuni, and such like politic Constitutions tendering the liberties, or
safety of the people, against the cruel oppressions, or encrochments of the
mighty placed in Authority: neither is it yet my mind at this time, against
the universal affirmative of all Countries, all Philosophers, etc. or the
Decrees of Lawmakers, or the sage sayings of Senatoricall Statesmen, or the
Reports and Observations of Historiographers, Poets, and Orators, (...) and
proouing the truth of our contradiction.

All the worthy Sentences and examples in (...) of best acccount, either
expressing the excelencie, and Majesty of Sovereignty, or the (...) and
submissiue demeanor of Subjects, are aplyable to this Theme, and would easily
be wrought, and as it were, embroydered into the contexture of a Treatise upon
this Subject. To that which rests in this Assertion, auouching that GOD and
Nature has left sufficient Authority in every Commonwealth, etc. I plead
ignorance of his meaning, not understanding (except he means the Creation,
in which sense he should have said, God in Nature, or by Nature) how God
should leave or institute any such authority, but by his revealed word. I
trust he will not obtrude unto us, any long concealed or closited Tradition,
or any iuggling trick of Revelation, and unwritten Verity, wherewith the
Christian world has been so notoriously (...); and I am sure, that in the
written Law of God, there is not any syllable sounding so harshly (or rather
horribly) as to give any order or rule, to dispoyle Princes of their Diadems,
or to depose the Anointed of God. Now for Nature, if she have any part in the
frame and workmanship of the public body of the State, as she has in the
particular and natural bodies of men, certainly she has allowed the like
right to the Head of the Commonwealth, as she has done to the head of this
fleshly Fabrifacture. Does not the inferior members, patiently, and without
repugnance, bear all the offenses and surcharges, descending upon them from
the head? Is there in Nature any so much as desire (much less means) of
remoouing or repressing of the Head? I acknowledge that Medicines are often
applied for the curing of the griefs and diseases of the Head but what more
ready course is either devised in (...), or assented unto by Nature, for the
cure of the infirmities and faults of the head, then to unload the annoyances
thereof upon the subjected parts of the body? Will you examine another degree
of the opperation of Nature? Next unto the body it self, is the issue and
offspring of the body, what bounds of duty has nature made of the children
toward the Father? Has she left any such Law or liberty, that in any
respects the child may renounce or disclaim his parents? yea, though the
father should (as often as out of judgment he does) cast off or disinherite his
son? Let us now but applyingly remember, that the Prince is Pater Patriae,
the Father of the Country; then will our cogitations aptly accommodate this
similitude in Nature, unto the dutious dependancy of the Subject upon the
person of the Sovereign, with a true natural relation and recognition of all
love and obedience, having from nature (out of the resemblance of these two
paternes) no other Law, then parendi and patiendi. Where shall we find more
representative obedience of Natures intentions and operations, then in these
originals and fountains of Love? Then from what stepdames milk has he
sucked this impuritie of opinion, That Nature has left some sufficient
authority in every Commonwealth for the repressing etc. I will not deny but
that there be some axioms of Reason, engraven in our nature, which perhaps
(being not rightly understood) has occasioned this imputation and slander
against Nature, Omnis natura est conseruatrix sui quisque sibi melius vult quam
alteri, f^^^e nequimus eum qui infert iniuriam, and the like; which as they
argue a sense and sting in Nature, to uphold our own welfare, to feed our
own humor, to further our own desires, to hate our enemies and wrong doers;
so they must admit the brideling limitation and exposition of reason, which
also Nature has given to rule the rest, that all the foresaid private, and
individual respeets, must have no place in the question of our natural
obligation to Superiors, as Fathers, and of our natural union in the
community of humane Society; for the preservation whereof, Nature has
ordained Government, and the Sovereignty thereof to be sacred and inviolable.
The want of upright consideration heercof, has oftentimes been cause of
precipitation in untempered and ill governed natures, when seeking to serve
their own purposes in matters of affection or faction, they will easily make
pretenses of wrong to become auengers thereof against whatsoever lawful
authority.

There be too many such combinations in all Countries, wherein every Sect or
side (with intention to advance that part whereunto it is (...)) does dream
of these redresses and repressings of their opposites, extending their
strength, and endeavor even to the highest persons. Such, actions or pretenses
have no more ground in (...), then if any adulterer should maintain his (...)
by the (...) pronenesse of appetite; The Thief by the natural instinct of
providing (...) or the Murderer, by the natural (...) and (...) of revenge:

But we stand assured, that whatsoever nature by her uncorrupted rules, does
induce or persuade us unto, touching our duties in Moral actions, the same, as
it was written by the finger of God, in the heart of man, at the Creation, so
was it also reduced, and comprised by the Wisdom of God, into the Tables of
the Moral Law, in the which for as much, as we have an express commandment,
of honor and obedience to governors that must remain fixed in our hearts, to
hold us firm in the Bond of allegiance: Then let P. R. and all his conjoined
Catholics, (as he vaunteth) make it plain unto us, that either Nature has
implanted, or the Commandments of God have enjoined, therepressing or deposing
of such Princes, upon any exceptions, surmizes, or accusations whatsoever: As
for the Law of Nations, because that is but secundary and derivatiue, from the
other, what has been averred of the one, holds the same respect and
certainty, as does the root it self, from whence it issues, yet before we
depart from this Argument of Natures working, I have to note that this cunning
and curious Composer of Books, and Contriuer of cases, does in this his chief
proposition, work himself quite out of the question, and puts the Pope
clean out of the doors, for the question being of the power of the Pope, that
is of the power, authority, and jurisdiction of a Foreign Commander, and
Judge, he tells us, that God and Nature, has left some sufficient authority
in every Commonwealth, etc. which directly makes the Popes preheminency with
us altogether needelesse, and a very nullity, since (by his own sayings) and
that more agreeable to reason, there is sufficient authority within the Land,
(not requiring any his (...) or usurpations) to the governing of that body,
which is of it self complete and lives by the vigor, spirit, and powerful
opperation of his own soul, his lawful Sovereign: Thus is the Pope (as
touching the first reason, drawn from the Law or Right of Nature, or Nations)
either left out by him, or cast out by me, from repressing of Princes, or (...)
himself within these our Countries or Territories.

The second reason brings a better Commission, that will make way through all
repugnances, it is enforced in the name and authority of Christ himself, and
it is thus chayned together for impregnable strength, Christ was to found is
Commonwealth of Christians the far more perfection, then other states had
before been establishe, subjecting temporal things to spiritual, and
appointing a Supreme Universal governor in the same, with a general charge
to look to all his sheep; without exception of great or small, people, or
Potentates: Therefore he infers that the Supreme care, judgment,
direction, and censure, of the matter in question, was left by Christ unto the
said Supreme (...) or Pastor of his Church, and Commonwealth: But it was
doubted whether this power was committed to the supreme Pastor directly, and
immediately, or indirectly, and by consequence: The Canonists out of the
Commission unto St. Peter, Pose ones meas, do hold the direct and immediate
authority, charge, and oversight, in temporallities. The Catholic Divines
(upon whom the brunt and pressure by (...), must be said) have thought it
safer, to choose the indirect and consequentiall, which they express in this
manner: When the government of spiritual affairs, is impugned by any
temporal Governors; so as the said spiritual Commission, cannot be executed
without redress or remedy, (...) and in such cases, the said Supreme Pastor,
is to have authority to proceed against the temporal governors; Also, for the
defense and preservation of his spiritual charge, but both parts fully are
agreed, that there is such authority left by Christ in his Church, for remedy
of urgent causes, otherwise he should not have sufficiently provided for the
necessity thereof.

Here is goodly building of Castles in the air, Castles did I say? Nay, of the
Tower of Babell, in the steed of the City of God, Christ (says he) was to
found his Commonwealth of Christians, in far more perfection then other
states, etc. why Christ's intentions, erections and perfections were all to save
sinners, and to bring them unto Heaven, what proof is this that he was to
found the Popish Hyerarchy, or the Antichristian Monarchy? and what is this
far more perfection, etc. Is it an outward pomp or power, to chain and
fetter Princes, under a temporal obedience of a Spiritual Usurper? What is
this same subjecting of temporal things to spiritual, is it to make a
Minister or Bishop of Heavenly matters, tyrannous and rampant, over the
temperall states, setting their imperial feet upon the necks of Lions and
Dragons? what is the nature, end, and eminency, of the spiritual Kingdom of
Christ, is it any other then the Preaching of the Gospel, the way of
salvation, and the possessing of everlasting life? Then what straightness,
what extractions, does the Limbeckes of their brains (bewitched with temporal
vanities) make of a worldly rule, and Dominion? He was to appoint one Supreme
and (...) Governor, etc. we on the other side constantly denying this their
principle, do easily bring them to the end of their wits; yet we will pocket
up one confession in this place, which he is likely to forsake, and not
acknowledge another time: In more perfection (says he) then other states had
before been established, acknowledging thereby, that under the Law, and in the
old Testament, the temporal was not subject to the spiritual.

Has he not well collected and conected his propositions to bring out this
grand conclusion of superiority over Princes? does he not need a distinction
of proof, to make these parts that cleave like sand to hold together, against
the breach which we are to make upon him? His distinction of direct, or
indirect, shall be directly anoyded and his great Mace, which he bears up in
his March of state, of Ordine ad Deum must be directed and ordered to a better
sense; and his commission of pasce, shall be examined how far it can
authorize him to assume the pretented power: If he will but thank me for it,
I will befriend him a little with my directions: I will chalk him out his way,
with a straight line, by the which he must be brought and pass along, if he
desires to come right upon the conclusion.

I will distribute his journey into several baytings, or reposes, otherwise
called common places: I doubt it will prove a long labor, and very troub
esome to carry his commission along with him, he is like to venture himself
in many straights, and hazardable passages, and will be often stayed by the
Kings Watch, but more often foundred by the rubs, and roughness of the way,
which he is to walk through: He must begin and set forth at this point.

1 That Christ purposing to found his Commonwealth of Christians in far more
perfection etc. has appointed the same to be an absolute Monarchy, under one
supreme and universal Governor, visible, eminent, and known as the head on
earth, in all causes of Christ's kingdom.

2 Next who that individual person is, whom Christ appointed to be such a
Monarche, and by what commission is he assigned thereunto, and by what words
thereof can he challenge the obedience of all the subjects or Christians in
that Commonwealth?

3 Whether if St. Peter be affirmed to be the said Monarche, what can be
alleged for his Superiority, that is not equally communicable to the rest of
the Apostles, jointly or severally, by the like authorizement?

4 Whether St. Peter was more especially appointed the chief Apostle for both
Jews and Gentiles; If for the Jews, how came it, that St. Paul reproved him
for misleading the Jews? If for the Gentiles, why was St. Paul by a public
consent and Counsel nominated to be the Apostle of the Gentiles, who at Rome
planted the Church, and from whom the succession is most proper.

5 Whether St. Peter ever came at Rome? since there is evident demonstration by
computing the times and places of his abode, during his life after Christ's
ascension, that he could not be there at all by any conjecture, as by the
Epistles of St. Paul is evicted.

6 Allowing that St. Peter was at Rome, was he not there as an Apostle and so
no more appropriate to that place then to the whole world?

7 Being an Apostle, how came he to be chief, yea the universal Pastor over
both Jews and Gentiles? except such his Pastorship were rather Apostolical
then Episcopal? If his (...) were Apostolical, then all the Apostles had
interest thereunto as well as he: If Episcopal, did he renounce or relinquish
his Apostleship to erect a new state or seat of an (...) Bishop, never
mentioned in the Scripture, and of a larger extent and dominion then the
Apostleship, and by what warrant and authority did he so?

8 If he did found any such Episcopal eminency universal over all the
Churches of the world, and that invested in his own person, why may it not be
thought, that such his Episcopal function was settled upon him rather at
Antioch, where his chiefest abode was (after his departure from Jerusalem) then
at Rome?

9 Whether in case he preferred Rome before Antioch, Jerusalem and other
places, (whereof there is no apparent proof or certainty,) is that successive
sear established at Rome, of the like and the same power, virtue, and verity,
as was conferred on his own person?

10 Whether such supposed succession were afixed to the place, or aplied to the
persons?

11 Whether if the succession were applied to the place, was it not cut off and
discontinued when there was no universal Bishop refiant at Rome? which for
some hundreths of years after Christ, and since the usurpation Papal for a
long time together has come to pass?

12 If the succession were in the persons, did not the abominable wickedness of
life, or the open profession of Atheism, Arianisme, Coniuration, and
contracting with the Devil, damnable doctrines of all sorts, and heretical
positions, (...) by such persons; yeain their Cathedra, dissolve the said
succession? and what (...) they make for Pope Ioane, whose stay stands
vnrefuted?

13 Moveover he (...) me what became of this (...); and where that
Commonwealth of Christians (as they will needs calbit, that they may make
themselves common wealths men) could find there one (...) and (...) Governor,
when there were two, three, or (...) such (...) at once?

14 Yet we have not done questioning with him, This great (...) of doubts must
resolve us how it comes to (...) that the (...) persian, (...) Russian,
(...), and other (...) Churches, have not been made (...) with this (...)
mental part of doctrine, that Christ has ordained the Bishop of Rome the
supreme and universal Pastor of the whole Commonwealth of Christians, which
he has (...) and founded?

15 He is also to (...) himself of an answer to another question, Whether the
succesors of S. Peter (were it once agreed upon) who they were, Clement,
Linus, Cletus, or (...), did over hold or exercise any ditivation of authority
from St. Peter over (...) and other Apostles that survived St. Peter in the
Church or did they or any of them strive for Superioritye with them, yea rather
did they not yield unto them?

16 Besides, this (...) diving determinor in Divinity doubts, must take into
his consideration what warrantize of any lawful vocation, election, and
ordinatio^, the succeeding Bishops of Rome can avow or maintain, since no man
may take on him any (...) ministry or (...) but in that regular and (...)
manner. And whether such their calling to their Ministerial offices, and
Pastoral charge, were ordinary, or extraordinary, the difference in the
admissions and choice of such Bishops which sometimes was by substitution of
the proceeding Bishop, sometimes by election of the people, and in later times
by the suffrages of Cardinals, and sometimes by mere intrusion, gives cause
to move this question.

17 What reasons can be pretended or alleged, why if both Christ and St. Peter
intended the succession of Bishops only in that Sea of Rome, (...) there has
new Titles been taken up, of Patriarch (...), and then of Supreme head of the
Church, and then of Papa or Pope, which seems to infer an alteration, or
else an augmentation of the power or charge, first conferred by Christ or St.
Peter upon that Sea? and so consequently a question, whether the latter
divised Titles be likewise authorized from Christ?

18 Does it not behoue that this so pregnant a Patron of Papacy, do clear all
causes touching the interruption and discontinuance of the supposed succession
of Popes; whereof (some having before been propounded) it shall not be amiss
to cast him one bone more, to whet his teeth or wit upon, I would know
whether (after cannons, and constitutions made by his Holiness, and ratyfied
by Counsels, touching the lawful election, and admittance of the Bishop of
Rome) if a Pope enter unduly, and contrary to such orders and Cannons, by
simony, bribery, faction, yea with strong hand, or any other corrupt courses,
may notwithstanding be held and reputed a lawful Pope? and the acts by him
done, the carnalls by him made, and the decrees or trans-actions of his time,
shall be adjudged as to stand in the right of Christ's Vicar on earth? Are not
in such cases, the linckes of the chain tying together the succession broken,
or let loose since in the particulers (in whom the same should be continued)
such elections and ordinations, are adjudged intrusions and usurpations, yea
utterly void and very nullities?

19 Yet I must make him a little more work with other questions, what is the
cause that for so long a space of 600. years after Christ's Assention, this
position of the Romish Supremacy, and universal head-ship, (if it were so
evident and demonstratiue from Christ's own appointment, as this bold bragger
would have us to believe) was neither by the Fathers of the Primitive Church,
nor by any general Councels, approved or ratified.

20 I am disposed to offer him another objection like a block to stumble at,
which never any Papist yet well passed over, but he brake his shin against it;
and that is the opinion and censure of Gregory the great, Bishop or rather
Patriarch of Rome, how did he inuey against that title of universal Bishop,
as an arrogant style, calling John Patriarch of Constantinople, the forerunner
of Antichrist for assuming of such a title or authority: may it not stagger
this stout Champion of Popery to hear from the mouth of a successor of St.
Peter, such a detestation of that style, as Antichristian, which is avouched to
have been the ordinance of Christ, yet did Bonifacius that succeeded him,
ambitiously affect nd accept the very same appellation given to him from Phocas
the Emperor 600 years after Christ, as is said before.

21 Here, if I should let in upon him a sea of proofs, that the Pope is
clearly convicted to be not a forerunner (as Gregory speaks) but the very
same Antichrist described by so many particularities in Daniel the Appocalips,
in St. Paul and other places of the Holy Scripture, he would never be able to
escape drowning, but would be so overwhelmed in those depthes, that he could
never more get forth, yea, or stir either hand or foot, for his swimming to
any shore; and the great disputant could then hold his breath no longer in this
question even sinking down to the bottom after all his strength spent in
vain, by striving to hold up his head.

22 Now, to draw to the issue in hand, we must trouble him to make manifest
unto us, what is the true extent of this so high power and universal charge in
St. Peter, or any other his successors, and whether the same do include any
temporal jurisdiction, and entermedling in civil causes, to the deciding,
judging, or ordering thereof?

23 Lastly, to bring him home to his rest, and to the ground whereupon he must
rear his foundation, he must euict by proof, that the Supreme, Universal,
Roman, Bishop, by force or tenor of any Commission given by Christ, and
transferred unto St. Peter, and so diriuatiuely and successively conveyed over
to him, may censure, judge, or depose Princes, taking upon him the decision of
Regal rights, assayling of Subjects from obedience, animating at home
rebellion are from abroad invasion, and that under protext of advancing of the
Ecclesiastical regiment of souls, and the good of Catholic Religion.

This is the highest ladder of the Popes eminency, to the which exaltation, he
cannot otherwise assend then by these stayres and steps, before rehearsed,
which must lead him up to his lofty consistoriall Chair: If any of these
stayres be loose and fail him, he falls unrecoverably, and shall never be
able to assume the power, which he pretends himself to be lawfully
possessed of. But when of all these exceptions and interruptions cast in his
way, he can clear or assure not any one, his presumption in taking so much
upon him, will but argue his all daring boldness; and his striking close to
the conclnsion, when the premises run another way will make even Children to
scoff at the want of judgment in his so great undertakings.

By these few indissoluable questions (amongst infinite others) for all the
world knows what a world of doubts, and what a sea of controversies, is
encompassed in this cause. This P. R. or rather R. P. (if he would be better
known) that would seem to be so judicious in his resolves, and so modest and
moderate in his assertions, might have been put in mind to stay his
confidence in concluding so Magistraliter, that case, with his peremptory est
amen, which has so many stopps, windings, and even break neck passages, as
has hitherto perplexed, and plunged the whole Alphabet of their own Authors.

By that time, that he has run through the explication and proof of the
particular difficulties before propounded, he will somewhat slack, the heat
of his audacious affirmations, and to let him know that this point, (as we now
propound it and debate it) is not amongst the Catholic wrighters themselves,
so clearly and generally agreed upon as he avoucheth (for he says) that in
this there is no difference of opinion, or belief in any sort of Catholics
whatsoever, (so they be Catholics) I must remember him (if he forget not his
own name, yea and his nicknames too,) that in the bitter contentions, and
fiery conflicts, between the Priests and the Jesuits, a principal matter of
their variance was this, That the Priests utterly condemned this Turbulent, and
Sedicious opinion of the Jesuits.

That the Pope might and ought to intermeddle in the temporal rights and
preheminencies of Princes, and that he had a power to depose and deiect them at
his pleasure. Does not William Watson the Priest in his book of quidlibets
bestow a whole Chapter with much earnestnes of spirit, and variety of
arguments, upon this very subject, making in the same this R. P. the object of
his scornings and revilings? Does he not in many places of that work impute
all the causes of the many troubles and extremities which they undergo in
England to the violent spirits, and treacherous practizings of the Jesuits,
who neglecting or despising the Ministerial function, are become mere
Statists, and negotiating factors of the Sea of Rome, disturbing the quiet of
all Countries where they be entertained, and working wicked stratagems and
damnable devices against Sovereign Princes? Has he so soon forgotten, or
can he so bold'y dissemble, in what sort the said Priests uncased and
discovered him for his many notorious and scandalous intermedlings in (...)?
Perhaps he will say that they be no Catholics, for so he enterposeth (if they
be Catholics) he dares not to lop away at once so many chief lims, so many
strong arms, yea such stocks and plants of the popish religion, though the
said Priests do not fear or spare to affirm, that the Jesuits are not any
certain order or vocation in the Church, being rather to be reckoned (as their
use and employment is) to be Laymen, Statesmen, busybodies, pragmaticall
agents beyond all limits of any spiritual calling) yet it is necessary, (if he
will constare sibi) to stand to it, that (seeing they vary from him, in this
part of doctrine) they be no Catholics, because in this refusing and refuting
of his Majesty's distinction of the difference of Papists, he expressly
affirms, that he that holds not all and every Article assented unto and
established in the Church, he is not to be accounted Catholic, acording to St.
Augustine. Catholicum is constered to be secundum totam, and not secundum
partem, I will leave the Priests to defend that they be better Catholics then
he, notwithstanding this discrepance and my self will revert to the parting
place where occasion was taken to make this digression.

There is offered for plea the words of the institution, and the very
authentical enstallment made by Christ himself, Pasce oues me as which words
include (say they) acording to Catholic exposition, not only authority to
feed, but to govern also, direct, restrain, cure, repress, and correct when
need is. Allow that these words do appoint and institute a pastoral charge
(which is a geminall understanding thereof) yet such charge is not thereby more
appropriate to Peter, then to other Apostles, but if they so far tender out the
same, to make them beget unto us a Pastor, of Pastors, a Bishop, of Bishops, a
supreme and sovereign governor of the whole Church, I may not yield their
logic such liberty, as to conclude so vnconsequently.

Again allow that in this commission and charge every Pastor were required not
only to instruct the sheep of his fold with wholesome doctrine of faith, but
also to have an eye to their life and conversation to reprove them, admonish
them, and censure them with ecclesiastical discipline, what is that to the
governing in secular affairs, or to the claim of such an vnlimmited power by
the Popes intrusion? I may not yield to their Rhetoric, such a preuayling or
persuading power, as that where they cannot shape so much as a shadow, there
they shall erect and create the true substance, of a more then Monarchiall
principallity: It is here avouched, that Catholic exposition includes within
this word, Pasce the commission of governing also.

Therefore many Catholics that will rather hazard the exclusion of his (if
they be Catholics) then they will condescend to this interpretation. A grave
and profound Catholic, one of the pillars of papacy, Cardinal Baronius being
to animate and confirm his Holiness proceedings, against the Venetians for
their great sin, of executing Justice, against men of clericall habit, in
causes criminal, and ciuilly punishable, passed over this Text of Pasce, as
not sufficiently serving the turn, to prove the Popes right of jurisdiction
in such t^eporall affairs; and thereuppon interpreting and applying the same
restrictiuely, to the teaching function, made choice of a fitter piece of
Scripture, to accommodate unto that case, and to put into the Popes hand, for
the justification of that excess of his authority: He makes the office of
St. Peter to be twofold, the first of feeding and teaching, comprised in the
word, Pasce, the other of correcting, and chastifing contained in the words of
Christ, used in the vision of the beasts presented to Peter, occide et manduca,
kill and eat: You see that he was content to leave that lean and pining
application of Pasce, and to find out a more stinging Text, that might pierce
to the very quick of the cause, does not this same ( occide et manduca) give
authority to draw blood, putting the Sword into his Holiness hand, to execute
at his will and pleasure, such as he shall recon, Beasts without exception of
great and small, people or potentates, Is it not made evident thereby that all
sorts of people whatsoever, clean or unclean, high or low, friend or foe, are
as it were tied and bundled up together, and so subjected and abiected at his
feet, to feed upon, and satiate his devouring appetites? It makes no matter
for the proper sense of the text, (figuring and signifying Jew, or Gentile) the
wrest and streine thereof serves best to his purpose, cutting even to the core
of this question.

Old Father Barronius in his dream, espied more then young S. Peter could
apprehend by vision: He has found and inferred out of that place, that which
St. Peter if he lived to this day (except his successors did teach him) could
never have gessed at, the Excommunication, and further degradation of States
and Sovereigns. In the same his encoraging advice to his Holiness (which I
rather recount, because it so evenly matcheth with their modern divinity) he
stirs up the fainting spirit of the Pope with a Memento te positum esse in
Petram, Remember that thou art placed for Rock, whosever rusheth against thee
shall be crushed all to pieces. Therefore where his Holiness lays a heavy
hand to his fulminating censures, there no resistance, rescue, or relief, can
avail to defend from destruction. For this Prophecy is as fitly appliable to
the Viear of Christ, as it was directly and properly referred to Christ
himself.

Thus this learned Cardinal bestowed upon his Holiness as he were the very
image and character of Christ upon earth the self-same attribute, and
exaggeration used in scripture, to set forth the might and dignity of our
redeemer. Nay further, he will needs comfort the Pope with the application of
that to his person in particular, which Christ assured to his whole Church in
general, that the gates of hell shall not prevail against him, and will
earthly Princes then persume to shut his Holiness out of doors? He that has
a power over Hell it self, shall not he command and overruled the earth?
These being the proud and profane conceits which they have of that Idol of
Rome (their imagined Lieutenant of Christ) they draw not only from the Spouse
of Christ the rich ornaments of her glory to deck that bewitching Harlot with,
but also hold it no robbery, to enrobe the man of sin with the graceful and
blessed titles of the Son of God, for which so Luciferian and blasphemous
arrogatings, I doubt it will not be made good and verified, that the gates of
hell shall not be shut against him. I must confess, that I like better of the
simplicity of our mitigator, in misliking upon the poor probability of reason
picked out of the word ( Pasce) and that rather by a consequence, then by any
direct induction, then I do of the affected and unsearchable subtilty of this
Cardinal, and some others, who studying for unwonted straynes, and forcings,
do cast beyond the Moon to magnify or dignifie his Holiness above the
Sun, I will be bold to set down some more of these deep dug and
far-fetched argum^ets, not with any purpose to vouchsafe them any time, or
pains for answer, but even to admire, if not exclaim at the impious and
presump tuous absurdity, of such their so frivolous and most strange
inferences; Pope Bonifacius the eight (that laid the first stone of this
Babilonian building) out of the words of Christ unto his Disciples, in the
twenty two of St. Luke (they said unto him, behold here are two Swords, Christ
answered it is sufficient.)

By these two Swords (says Boniface) Christ means the spiritual and
temporal, both the which are left by our Savior, for the defense and
preservation of his Church; and because there would be no order, but mutiny,
tumult, and confusion, if these swords should not well agree, therefore there
must needs be employed, and intended by Christ, a subjection, and
subalteration of the one sword unto the other, and both depending upon one
Supreme Command.

From this supposed authority of Christ's leaving and recommending both Swords
unto his Church, Boniface took upon him the power of both Swords, and caused
to be passed as an Article of Faith that the Pope is supreme, over both
estates, spiritual and temporal, and shortly after in a Iubile, publikly
showed himself, with a key in one hand, and a sword in the other.

And that he may the better maintain, the taking of the sword, he further
argues, that one of the swords, was his prodecessors St. Peter's sword, (it
being well known that Peter had a sword; because Christ said unto him put up
thy sword (shall I need to make any refutation of this collection, or
assertion? being declared not as positive out of the word, but expository, by a
sense which the Pope assumeth? Let me yet gather up this note by the way, that
it was good fortune, that Christ did command St. Peter to put up his sword,
else perhaps the sharpness and weight thereof, had long since light upon the
heads, and necks of Princes, as well as it cut off the ear of Malchas: for
the same pretense which occasioned him to draw upon Malchas in rescue and
maintenance of his Master Christ might incite the high courages of his
supposed successors to be as active with their blades and forces, for the
support and furtherance (as they allege) of the Christian faith and religion,
impugned, or impeached by temporal Potentates. I would now know of Master P.
R. whether he accounts the exposition and decree of Bonifacius the Pope, to
be Catholic and Orthodoxall, if he do not, we also will take (by his
example) the like liberty of acceptance or dislike in any the Articles of
Faith, concluded and adjudged by his Holiness: If he do, then what need he
be so slye and mistrustfull in affirming the same Doctrine, absolueth also,
without any distinctions and cooling quallifications, as if he were either
ashamed of confession or afraid of conviction? when he has such an argument
ab authoritate to a rest him to stand unto it? Why should he (I say) run
about the bush, with a Commission direct and indirect, when he cannot but know
that Bonifacius was resolute in opinion, that his power over Princes, and in
temporallities was absolute without any oblique consequence, or respective
dependency, jumping therein plainly, and fully with the Canonists, Papa est
Dominus totius orbis direct in temporalibus. How would this so well tempered
and timorous mitigator be brought to justify the hautinesse of Pope Clament
the fifth, successor to Bonifacius, who not satisfied with the rule and command
over temporal and earthly states, did bravely adventure, by his papal Bull,
expressly to enjoin, and command Angels to execute his will: Me thinks I
should ask him also whether he will hold consonancy of judgment with his
own Countryman, and good friend the renowned Cardinal Allen, who in his
Appology for the English Catholics, out of the miraculous working of St. Peter
mentioned in the fifth of the Acts, of sentencing to sudden death Ananias and
Saphira, does no less miraculously wring out this great Ministry of
excommunicating, censuring, and other proceedings against Princes.

There is no parcel of Scripture wherein any mention is made of St. Peter, but
if it can be racked to afford them any pattern or patronship for either their
deeds or decrees, it is miserably torn, and tormented to undergo that
service: Not so much as the power of Keys; but it must needs be made a pick
lock, to possess prisons, Castles, and Towers: The Key of knowledge for the
saving of souls, is turned to a Key of power to deprive Princes, the binding
and loosing of sins, is but a very legerdemaine of fast and loose at the
Popes pleasure, the fishing for men to bring them to eternal life, is made a
pretense for spreading his nets, to catch and conquer whole States and
Dominions: The Pastoral Sheep-hooke, subdueth Kingly Scepters, Saint Peter's
Aurum and argentum non habeo, does now glitter in all the pompious and copious
varietye of riches, and the promise of Christ, Dabo tibi claues regni caelorum,
is not so much esteemed, as the offer of the Devil, Dabo tibi etc. All these
things will I give thee, if thou will fall down and worship me.

If the Pope will needs enjoy a right of succession of all that Christ said
unto Saint Peter, let him not refuse also (Get thee behind me Satan,) and, O
thou of little faith. Nay, the denying of Christ, so expressly imitated in the
declining, degenerating, and sliding away from the sinceritye of the Gospel,
is apparently branded upon this Antichristian iniquity, where Saint Peter's
either example, or precept, fitteth not their turns, there they will not use,
or rather cannot relieve it, and could be well pleased that it were put over to
their Ezponctorius his charge and admonition, that they subject themselves unto
all manner of ordinance ^ Pet.^^
of man for the Lords sake, whether it be unto the King, as unto the Superior,
or unto Governors, as sent of him for the punishment of evil doers, and for
the praise of them that do well.

And likewise his beseeching of the Elders, as his fellow Pastors, that they
feed the flock not 1. Pet. 5.
as Lords over Gods Heritage, will not fashion to, or cohere with their own
proud doctrines of exemption from Temporal Authority, of opugning and
repressing Princes, of their Lordlinesse over their fellow-Ministers, of their
desisting from Teaching and Preaching, and of Saint Peter's Primacy to rear up
the Roman Papacy. And therefore must be censured, interpreted, distinguished,
abridged, and limited, by such curtelings, and consterings, as the glosser or
goulfe of the Sea of Rome shall devise for the best advantage. In the like
manner do they all so deal with Christ himself, whom whence they fetch and
found the original of their lineally derived Popedom. Christ professed
himself, and so instructed his Disciples, to be humble and meek, but how
does the Pope tread that path? not so much in the exercise of his own
Lowliness, or in the abstinence from high state and loftye carriage, as in the
depressing of the mightynesse and power of Lawful Sovereigns, reducing or
enforcing them to be meek indeed, in a degree of base and contemptible
humiliation.

Christ refused to be made a Judge in a Civil or Temporal cause, the Pope
makes himself Judge of any debates, that by any pretext can be conceived to
be fit for his cognizance: Christ bad, Give unto Caesar that which was Caesar's:
The Pope robs Caesar, of his treasure, of his honor, of his power, of his
rights, and of his subjects. Christ declares his kingdom not to be of this
world, the Pope (besides his own Temporal Soveraignity, will have an Oar,
and command in all the States of Christendom. In which part, of the Temporal
kingdom of Christ in this life, P. R. is much cumbered, and put to his shift,
to find out an even cutting distinction, to save the repugnancye of Christ's
sayings. The Canonists, and some other Catholics, out of these words, All
power is given unto me in Heaven and in Earth, do conclude, that besides his
Spiritual government of our Souls, he has a kingly Dominion also upon our
bodies and goods, and upon all the Kingdoms of the earth, and might justly
have exercised all actions, of temporal jurisdictions, as casting into prison,
appoynting new Offices, Kings, and great Monarckes.

Mark how they compel our Savior Jesus Christ to sallogize against himself?
All power is given to me in Heaven and in Earth, but my Kingdom to be of
this World is such a power, Ergo, my Kingdom is of this same World.

Now observe also his witty and substantial reconcilement, he had a Kingly
temporal power in this life, but he renounced the use and privilege of the
same: Or thus, he had no direct Dominion upon temporal things, yet
indirectly, for preservation of his spiritual Dominion he had and might have
used the same, and in that sense left it to his successor: Is not this most
shameless, and direct abusing of Christ, and his most Sacred Word? When he
said at another time, that the Foxes had holes, and the Birds of the Air had
nests, but the Son of man, had no place to hide his head: If these expositors
had then been known to his Apostles, they would have replied; Sir, you have
places of refuge, but you renounce the use and privilege thereof, or albeit
you have not any place directly, yet indirectly for the necessity of your
function, you have all palces at your Command, or if you have not in your own
individual person, yet in your Successors, you must needs have, else how
should they maintain the having and inhabiting of such Royal and Magnificent
edifices, wherein they keep such stately and more then imperial Courts?

What is this else; then to tell Christ he wotteth not what he says, and to
enter him like a Novice in their new Schools of equivocation, to learn their
falatious mental preseruations? But admit it to be incident into their
Offices, to interpret Christ as themselves lists,

How does it happen, that the rightful successors of Christ does not also
succeed him in his modestye, humilitye, povertye, and meekness (especially
being commanded to learn of him) and so (in like sort as Christ did)
renounce the use and privilege of Temporal Power, or whence have these
successors their so plenarye and direct pre-eminence, when from Christ they
could convey it but indirectlye, and by consequence: Or can they make any
demonstration or plain proof of the stint and circuit of time, at the
periode or expiration whereof, that Temporal Dominion which in Christ was
Indirect and Potenticall, should become unto the Pope, Direct, and Ordinarye?

Or was there not as urgent cause that Christ, (in respect of the many letts,
impeachments, and impediments which he met withal) should for the preservation
of his Spiritual Dominion, directly, or indirectly, in some sort or other,
betake himself to his Temporal Authority? Except they will say, that he was
in his own person militant and suffering, but in these his successors
triumphant and glorious. Let me then be answered, Whether such a Succession
has any image or representation of that first type or pattern which said
(Learn of me.)

To manifest yet more discerningly, the idleness, the fraud, and unfit
applying of this distinction, let them know, that is not to be trusted unto,
because it will serve their adversaries as well as themselves, for where the
question may be propounded and disputed, whether temporal Princes may
suppress or remove Popes, (if the authorities alleged out of Gods Word, and
the Histories of the Church shall not suffice to give in evidence for any such
direct and undoubted pre-eminence in Princes) then we may make bold of this
their makeshift distinction, that Princes have ever had such a power annexed,
and proper to their governing charge, though they have forborne the use and
preuiledge thereof, or that indirectly and by consequence (for the upholding of
their states, and keeping of their people in obedience, which by so many Popish
practices is daily perverted) they may and ought to exercise and execute the
same.

Moreover, let it be examined, how and from what original this distinction
draws his pedigree, what bosom or heat did first hatch it, and what causes
of weight does still nourish and continue the same, Mr. P. R. has fully
acquainted us with the certainty thereof. For if Christ (says he) should not
have left such an authority in his Church for remedy of urgent causes, he
should not have sufficiently provided for the necessity thereof.

It is marvel that this our Moderator, and mollifying Mittigator did not use
the word of convenience, in the stead of necessity, to have avoided the
disadvantage of the stricktnesse of that word, can there (concerning the
subsistence, and stability of the Church) any more urgent causes to be imagined
for the upholding thereof, then there was in the first times of the primitive
purity? or is the usurping power of the supreme Pastor, his over awing or over
peering of Princes, his correcting and repressing of them, by alienating
subjects, and egging enemies against them any constitutiue causes or essential
necessities of the Church? I will not deny but that the height and eminency,
whereunto the Bishops of Rome, have aspired, by encroching upon the rights and
undermining the states of temporal Governors, as indeed to be provided for,
and maintained by this presupposed necessity: But the purity, the poverty, the
simplicity, the feruency, of the first fathers, and propagators of the faith
and Church of Christ needed none of these human and worldly additaments, none
of these temporal encountrings, or conflicting with Potentates, no such
foreseeing perpecations, to affront all occurting causes, nor any such
politiciall circumventings, and fortifications for defense and offense against
Princes: They conquered powers and principalities, but with the spiritual
Armor of God, they beat upon them with the hammer of the word, they cut
deeply into the secrets of their souls, with the sword of the spirit they
prayed for their peace, and prosperity, they embrased the very persecutions
with obedience, and for the countenancing favors, (by giving them respit from
affliction, and the sun shine of liberty) they honored them as the nursing
fathers of the Church, (when I contemplate the composute and frame of the
Popish Monatchy, and the linking together of so many cunningly contrived
positions, tending (all of them) to the increase of gain and advance of Honor
to the Sea of Rome, I wish that some excellent Scholar extraordinarily endued
would out of his many observations collected, exhibit unto the world (in
imitation of Matchauell, who made the shames and vices of the house of
Florence, the pattern of a perfect Prince) this Antichrist of Rome as a true
president of Tyranny and Usurpation by publishing with an apt resemblance, as
well the vilde and unchristian practices, as also the false and pernicious
articles, whereby he has atchived so strange matters, and attained unto so
unmeasurable greatness, which my desire is the more increased, the more I
consider, how the webs of that work, has ensuared, if not enthralled
Christian people, even in the carriage of this controversy. I have traced the
footsteps of many politic reaches, and now in the closing up of the matter,
a fair train is laid, to catch and lay hold upon an easy follower, which we
must not so suddenly pass by, as not to discern the slight thereof, he
speaks plainly in honest and oily words: That that authority temporal is to
be moderated by many perticularities to be considered, There must be just
cause, grave and urgent motives, formal proceedings, great deliberation,
lawful means, and other circumstances, to concur, requiering great
discretion; what a goodly displaying he makes, in terms of the best show,
when yet (howsoever occasins shall alter their intentions) there is no more
contained or propounded thereby, then what is usually requisite in all Benches
of Justice, erected for trial of common rights, But our question is, Whether
the Pope be a competent Judge, upon or against Temporal Governors, let the
matter be carried never so presizely and circumspectly, that makes him no title
for enterposing his usurped Authority. Therefore he might well have spared his
pains, in making this the third question which neither in this, nor any other
judicial power is any question at all. But he conceived, that this orderly
course and discrect carriage which he would have us to presuppose in the Pope,
would carry us along in all conformity, to condescend to any his presumptious
and usurping jurisdiction. Let him tell whether the public denunciation, or
rather execration made every Maundee Thursday against the Heretics whatsoever,
does not also enwrap the Princes of our religion (especially if they have made
and executed feuere laws against the Popish) within the danger and rigor of
that sentence, which if it do, then these flourishing and superfluous words, of
the cognition of the cause, of due proceedings, of urgent motives, of advised
consultations, of lawful means of preambles and circumstances are but snares
to beguile the simple, seeing that his Holiness (for the most part) acts his
solemnities, and ceremonies of Excommunication, both generally and personally,
without the observing of the particularities. Beyond all this the pondering of
such several considerations, to whose breast, or trust are they recommended?
are they not every one wholly and absolutely in the Popes discretion? Let us
but remember the course of proceedings by these perticularities, against our
late Queen, his Holiness took knowledge, as well by public fame, as by
complaining relacions, of the afflicted and distressed Catholics, and of
Queen Elizabeth's hard usage of them in this Kingdom, there is the urgent
motive and importing cause, what were the consultations, what the means, and
what the proceedings, a Bull of Excommunication publicly deprived her, of her
Royal Dignity, sets free her Subjects from their Allegiance, enioyneth all
Catholics to endeavor her deposing, and so exposes her to continual
Treasons, and bloody Assassinates; This is the short Epitome of this all
presuming Papacy, Then let any other Prince take to himself the like
scantling, by the measure offered to Queen Elizabeth, (bethinking himself
whether the enumeration of so many good points, of aduisednes, and the
cautilous respects set forth by glosing words, may sufficiently secure him from
fears and iealousies. One other doubt (of great consequence and prejudice) may
much perplex Princes, which is the vndistinguished and unlimited nature of the
causes, triable by the Popes authority, for what cause can be supposed so
merely Civil, as has not some mixture of cases in Conscience, and so to be
referred in order to a spiritual end, becoming (as in that regard) of a
spiritual cognizance. And then his Holiness (holding himself only in his
own element) being the supreme Judge in spiritual doubts, how extendable is
the amplitude of his power to any manner of debates or variences, which (by
complaint or appeal) under a color of devotion or religion shall be presented
to his holy decision? But the deadliest poison that lies in the Dragons Tail,
is the disposition and ordination of the means, of giving to such Popes
Judgments, the full blow of execution.

For where the spiritual blast of his indignation, is not much regarded, there
(as the inferior rout of the Clergy, does) his holiness will not stick to
implore the aid of the secular arm, be it foreign, be it domestical, be it
directly for the same cause, or indirectly (I am in love (...) that
distinction) upon the fore-plotted quarrels, be it by the sedicious tumult of
insurrection, or by any (...) audaciousnesse of (...). Surely, when I consider
the desperate (...). of some particular men, who abandoning all care or respect
of themselves, and instigated only with a seeming zeal of religion, do with
violent hands of blood, enterprise the destruction of Prince. I am induced to
believe, that they have some direct Commission, or some indirect incitation so
to compel and precipitate their ill governed minds, into the horror of so
vild an action: Nevertheless, I may not dissemble, that concerning any private
exployts, in this kind, they disclayme the approbation thereof; though I am
well assured, that experience to the contrary does make it manifest, that they
dissemble. This authority (says this our satisfying mittigator) does not only
not allow the wicked and unlawful attempts of private men, but also does
expressly and publickely condemn the same, as in the Council of Constance,
the wicked article of lawful killing of Princes, by private men (holding them
Tyrants) is rejected and condemned.

Every man sees how resolved a case he makes it, both by the Catholic
Divines, and by the Cannon of the Council of Constance, that no private
attempts though of never so magnanimous a spirit against the life of a Prince,
though never so much tainted with Tyranny, insuffieiency, infidellity, or
heresy can be in any sort justifiable.

But that it may the better be known, that these be but fallacious and
gay-coated words, Ad faciendum populum, I will (for bearing any mine own
refutations, encounter and contradict this smoothing P. R. with one of his own
fellow Jesuits, that goes more roundly, and plainly to this point: Such a one
as whether he bestowed his skill and faculty, with any mischiefeuous intention
to animate wicked enterprises, (for his Book was Printed about the very time
of our last so memorable plots of Treason) my charity will suspend my
judgment, he casts no colors, nor fears to deliver boldly his
resolutions, and encouragements to all Catholics. It is Johannes Mariana, a
Spaniard and Jesuit, and a Divinity Reader, his Book is entitled, De Rege et
Regis institutione, published in the the year 1605. Dedicated to the King of
Spain, and printed Per missu superiorum, yea and Regia authoritate.

Now if Mr. P. R. will allow this great Scholar, coming forth in lucem et
oculos hominum, accompanied with such estate of attending approbations, to be a
Catholic, he shall hear him speak, and then set him blame his temerity, for
telling tales out of the Jesuitical School. The six Chapter of his first
Book, is wholly bestowed upon this question, of the lawfulness of deposing or
slaying Tyrants. The particularity of killing the French King is argued, the
reasons on both sides produced, pondered and enforced: His determination
decideth, and adjudgeth the fact to have been just, praise worthy, and
agreeable to the Catholic grounds.

He further sets forth, the received opinion of the Church, to be that it
is lawful for Subjects, when the King resuseth to be reformed, and after
sentence against him, to renounce their Obedience, to consult for the leuying
of a necessary War, to tax the people, with the charge thereof, and with
armed force and weapons, (in such case of necessity) to set upon him, to kill
him, and destroy him, and then descends to this conclusion Eademque facultas
esto, cuicunque priuato, qui spe impunitatis abiecta, neglecta propria salute,
in conatum iuvandi rempublicam, ingredi voluerit; Let any private man, which
(casting aside all hope of impunity, and careless of his own safety) will
adventure to enterprise his endevors to relieve the Commonwealth, take unto
him the same liberty, Has he not soundly and definitively declared the
doctrine of the Church of Rome, and the very secresies and mysteries of the
Jesuits profession; to the apparent conviction of this Mittigators fained
attestations? And to the foresaid Council of Constance, (which is produced to
impugn this position of the practices, or attempts of private men against
lawful Sovereigns) he also makes answer in this manner, First, that no
Decree of any Council stands good and holy, without the consent of his
Holiness thereunto, Then, that this Decree was never approved by Pope Martin
the 5th, neither would Eugenius or his successors ever ratify the same, and
after declares also, that the Fathers of that assembly did chiefly intend that
their Session and consultation against the Hussits who maintained that Princes,
for crimes by them committed, did forfeit their estate, and that thereupon they
might lawfully be by any man deprived of that power which they unjustly held,
or obtained. Again, that in particular and properly, they then purposed to
opugne the proposition of Johannes Parvus, a Divine of Paris, who under color
of this defense, that it was lawful by private authority to kill a Tirant,
endeavored to justify the fact of the Duke of Burgundy in slaying of the Duke
of Orleance, In which case there were these diversities from that rule. Here
was between these persons equallitie, and no inferioritie, there was a solemn
oath violated and broken, and here was no attending for the sentence, or
direction of the Superior. Here we see two Jesuits in two different opinions
in a matter of greatest moment, both of them founding upon the faith of the
Church, both approved permissu superiorum by the allowance of the superiors.
Thus having buckled together two principal Jesuits to lugg and tugg each
other by the ears, I will only thus far give my verdit of their variance, That
the Spanierd Mariana deals plainly and constantly to the practice of Popery,
and the ratificacions and afirmacions of the Popes themselves, who will not
endure any abridging of their prerogative power of proceeding against Princes
in what sort soever, And our English P. K. hides the sting, would conceal
deep dissembled treacheries by protesting terms to secure us from suspicions,
till the venom of malice has pierced all the veins of the state, and seized
our very heart and lifeblood, by surprises unthought of, having brought us into
a careless and deceitful security; P. R. has been very curious and copious
in trying, and examining his adversaries allegacions, interpretacions,
falsificacions, translacions, and applicacions, seeming so watchful and
diligent in that kind of animaduersion, as if he accounted it a shame, and
foil, to omit any line or syllable unanswered, for indeed, the whole bulk of
his book in this business, is fraught with no other stuff then with such
wrangling matter, of misavouching, and misconsterings of quoted allegacions.
But that it may appear how his deadly hook resting in the belief of his
heart, is covered over with an honied bait beguiling us with fairer speech, I
shall be bold to trouble him with one question.

What is the cause that Mr. Mortons publication, of the solemn Oration made by
the Pope Xixtus the 5. in the Consistory of the Cardinals, in the commendation
of the notable, rare, and memorable act of the brave Monk that killed the
French King, and the inferrence by him made and urged against the Pope, for his
maintenance of Conspiracy, and Treason, is both by the modrate answer first,
and after, by this mitigating replier laid aside in silence, and not once
handied, or glanced at by any seeming answer. The truth is, they were enwrapped
with a dilemna to allow the fact was against their pretense in their position,
and to disallow the Pope, was against their faith in their religion they must
defend by argument, what for outward carriage is given them in charge, since it
tends to their aduantagious purpose: and they may not (without dispensation)
either presume to censure, or undertake to oppugn, what his Holiness
approves, lest they betray and shake the foundation of their Supremacy. By
this time, I trust his well cloaked dubble iniquity is discovered to his very
nakedness; were it not now very strange that he and I (whom our former
contencions have so far divided afunder) should part reconciled, and well
accorded? In his sixth Chapter (of corruptions and falsificacions) he takes
hold of Mr. Morions exposition, That the Imperial and Kingly Authority in
Spiritual causes, reaches no farther then as to outward preservation, and not
to personal administration: Hereupon he assures us, that if this be really
meant, all the Catholics of England will presently take the oath of Supremacy,
requiring with an earnest challe^ge that as this is publicly printed, and that
by Authority, so it may have public allowance and performance to make it good,
whereby as touching that point there may be an attoneme^t. I fear that the man
in the heat of his sudden apprehension, and without the wary consideracion
which his pen has been accustomed unto, does overshoote and forget himself.
Shall I think that he has never read, or utterly forgotten the Oath of
Supremacy? He has so scanned and canvased the Statutes of Henry the eight,
Edward the sixth, and Queen Elizabeth picking at every mote thereof, and
making a beam of the same (though with a left eye, and a left hand) that I
cannot so much as surmize but that he has had every thread of this question
between his fingers. Therefore (if his former subtillity has not suddenly
betrayed him, and exposed him to derision) as I must admire that he is so
easily reformed in Judgment, so, I shall be content to embrace the occasion of
a well gained agreement. And will P. R. the Jesuit, and the rest of the
English Catholics of the Romish faction abide by this word in good earnest?
that if the Kings Majesty do not claim or assume unto him personal
administration in cause Ecclesiastical, the Oath of Supremacy shall no further
be stood upon, or refused. Then let him bethink himself of this part or
clause of the Oath, That no foreign Prince, Person, Prelate, State, or
Potentate, has or ought to have any jurisdiction, power, superiority,
preeminence, or authority Ecclesiastical, or Spiritual within this Realm, if
he digest this, then see how one thing draws on another: all our former
differences are at once, and in this one compounded: also, for if the Pope
(being a foreign Prelate or Potentate) be excluded, from having any
Ecclesiastical power or Spiritual authority within this Realm. Then our
question of his preheminency or jurisdiction in repressing the exorbitant and
pernicious excess of great men, as an Ecclesiastical Judge, or Supreme
Pastor, direct, or indirect, is at an end clearly determined: I doubt not but
his excellent Majesty of his Princely care to bring home so many lost sheep,
and to bosom them again in his dearest love, will afford them that favorable
interpretation which this there Advocate and Orator, requires in their behalf.

In the mean space (not to loose what we have got) I return unto P. R. the
like charge of making good of his word, touching the Oath of Supremacy, in the
sense and distinction before mentioned, and therewithal might think it not
reasonable, any further to stricke a yielding adversary, that by so voluntary
an offer clears the cause from any further controversy.

But remembering the nature and quallity of our adversary and the many winding
and intricaking tricks he is used unto in the canvassing of this or the like
controversies, I fear that this our reconciliation is rather seeming then
substanciall, and will suddenly upon a small touch, fall a sunder again to as
great a discrepance; for howsoever he does so franckly yield unto his Majesty,
a supremacy, of the Church in Ecclesiastical causes, as touching outward
preservation only, let him be but sifted a little in his meanings, it will
break from him that he never purposed to strengthen the state and authority of
our Sovereign, with any such power of absolute defense and protection, which
shall presently appear by ministering unto him some few questions: I pray you
Sir, what Church, and what Ecclesiastical causes, do you consent to be within
the Kings Royal preservation? is it incident and appropriate to his Princely
Scepter, to mayntaine the religion now established in his Dominions? by making
Laws for enforcing subjects, to an uniform allowance, and profession thereof,
by punishing Recusants according to Justice, and by employing all his powers to
suppress the oppugners, or Conspirators against the same? Dares he to abide
by this? will he henceforth justify this preservation, and that by his
religious oath, which hitherto the impoy-soned pens of these Iesuited spirits
have not spared odiously to term a cruel persecution? we have shaked him
already from his atonement, with us in this point, He will tell us plainly,
That the Church and Ecclesiastical cause which he authorized the Prince to
protect and preserve, is only the Catholic Church, and Religion, and then (as
if orbs, and vrbs, were all one) that the Catholic is the Romish, so that
unless the King will turn Leigeman, with a kind of vazilage to the Sea of
Rome, his right of Supremacy in the outward preservation of the Church, (which
this man dares assure us that all Catholics in England will easily accord
unto) must be denied him, as not due and proper to the Title of his Regality,
Papacy is the pole-starre of all their contemplations, It is the Centure
whereunto are carried and cleaves fast all their drifts and disputations. And
no further shall any Prince hold power (especially, in Ecclesiastical causes
which are all bosomed up in the breast of his Holiness) then the same shall
serve in a sub-ordination to the advancing and exaltation of that most
imperious Romish Hyerarcy.

Nay their temporal authority, also must be kitbed, stinted, and subjugated by
that intolerable yoke of Popish usurpation, except it should be made plyant,
ranged, and accommodated, In ordine ad dominum Papam, Then (not regarding P. R.
his assurance of the voluntary submissions, and subscriptions of all Catholics
of England, to the Kings Supremacy, according to the limitation or
interpretation aforesaid) we may well assure our selves that no English
Papists, (finding this supremacy of defense and preservation to tend to the
subversion and extirpation of their idolatrous Religion) will ever yield oath
to keep faith thereunto: Yet (having closed with him in a full consent unto
this position, that every Prince has Iure divino, the supremacy of outward
preservation of the Church, and Ecclesiastical causes within his Territories
and Dominions) let it be remembered that he never hereafter scandalize the
proceedings and execution of Justice in England against the refractaries and
treacherous oppugners of the Religion established in this Realm, since the same
is the lawful and necessary act of a well warranted and acknowledged
Supremacy; from which our public profession of Faith is to receive protection
and preservation; I cannot but conceive that this Clearke P. R. will be shent,
and receive some check for his Doctrine: For out of question if his Holiness,
and Cardinal Bellarmine, have enkindled their displeasures against Mr.
Blackwell, the Archpriest for allowing the Oath of Alleagiance (which
contains only an acknowledgment of the hereditary rights of temporal
Soueraignity, whereunto natural duty, (in respect of relation) does bind each
subject: How much more heynously will it be taken, that this Arch-Iesuite (as
if both their Arches, had slipped from them at once) should so confidently
condescend to this artickle of Spiritual Supremacy, in the sense,
qualification, or moderation, before expressed? He cannot escape the blame, of
forgetting or forsaking of his principles, neither can he ever salve his
offense, by any wily Interpretation or beguiling distinction.

His direct, and indirect, his absolute and conditional, his mediate and
immediate, his simpliciter and secundum quid or quatenus, and the like (which
in all his discoursiue argumenting does make his way for him through many
Obstacles, whilst he treads out unto us his maze of Circuler shifts, and
manifold euasions) can touching this his confession or protestation have no
place or serve him to any stead, because knowing aforehand how the case
stands in every circumstanciall or considerable perticularity, he has to the
King of England within his several Dominions adjudged the Supreme government
of causes Ecclesiastical, as in the office and care of preserving the Church,
with the faith and Doctrine thereof, from all wrongs or corruptions Foreign
or Domestical.

I encroach not upon him by inferences and constructions, I only take that
which he so fully and clearly gives; and do challenge him that what he has
delivered unto us for his judgment and resolution, (and that in high terms
and vanting and flaunting of his advantages therein.) He will (notwithstanding
any reprehension or retreite from the Pope or Bellarmine) still with the like
bravery and constancy mayntaine unto the end; but shall I disclose a secret or
rather a wonder unto the World? What if the very same Author who so boldly
assumeth and assures at this time for all Catholics the Title of Spiritual
Supremacy, to appertain to the Crown Imperial of this Land, does after in
another set Treatise, published purposedly, or rather maliciously, to traduce
and discredit our government, and to uphold the Popes and Cardinal Bellarmines
censures concerning the Oath of Allegiance, like a very Changling, fall quite
away from this his former so earnestly pro ferred and promised conformity,
declares himself, to be so far from affoording his Majesty by oath his
supremacy of preservation in causes Ecclefiasticall, as that he holds it
unlawful for a Catholic conscience to take the oath of Temporal Allegiance,
as repugnant to the Religion of the Church of Rome, will not every man of
understanding admire, how the same person can refuse to swear Allegiance
Temporal, that has so readily and hotly, granted a Supremacy Spirituail?

To induce me to believe that it is all one person that has so undertaken to
act unto us two so repugnant parts, I have (besides fame and report) and a kind
of idempnity in the phrase and style, some very approveable probabilities, A
Letter of a Catholic Gentleman touching the Oath of Allegiance, Fol. 67.
his mencioning of the powder treason in these weak and tender terms, of
that headlong action of a few Catholic Gentlemen, and such other lamenting
speeches, for the evil carriage, or miscarying of the enterprise without any
one apt or right expressing word to denotate or condemn the foulness
thereof, is certainly molded with the soft hand of this our countersetting
kind-hearted mitigator, his shaping and propounding of the general question
concerning the Popes authority over Princes, is conceaved even in the same
words which this P. R. has used in delivering and expressing the same, and
then acquainteth us with his supposall, That it was never the meaning of such
Catholics as took the Fol. ^^
Oath of allegiance to deny simply and absolutely, That the Pope as supreme
Pastor of the Catholic Church has any authority left him by Christ, either
directly or indirectly, with cause or without cause, in never so great a
necessity, or for never so great and public utility of Christian religion,
to proceed against any Prince whatsoever, temporally, for his restraint or
amendment. Is not this the very same water of the same Cesterne? He yet goes
further for better proof and confirmacion of his said supposall by the
selfsame reasons set forth Verbatim: for that they should thereby contradict
the general consent of all Catholic Divines, and confess that Gods
providence for the conservacion and preservacion of his Church and kingdom
upon earth, has been defectuous, for that he should have left no lawful
remedy for so great and excessive an evil as that way might fall out. I had
set the print of my fingers upon all and every of these words before, so that
by that brand they were presently known unto me, and their Author or owner
apparently discovered, howsoever as a Jesuit he styles himself Gent. who
bound to no order may assume any shape.

Then presupposing upon these likelyhoods, that in the pursuit of this my
slippery adversary (Jesuit or Gent.) I have met with him again as at a new
turning, I must not let him escape until he make me a good answer, how he
can affirm for the King a Supremacy Ecclesiastical for preserving of the
Church, and yet allege against the oath of allegiance a more supreme power in
the Pope, to suppress and annihilate that Supremacy, and that in a course of
Temporal Supereminency? I ever took Supremacy to be such a superlative, as
admits no superior: I never heard of any subalternate supremacy, it has too
harsh and absurd a sound; but that any temporal Prince absolute of himself,
vndependent upon any higher on earth, immediate to God Almighty should be
overawed or over-topped by the pretended primacy of a Luciferian Prelate, and
that by the brandishing of a temporal sword, and employing forces, coercians
temporal, what can be more insensible to be conceaved, more unreasonable to be
maintained, or more impious to be practiced?

Yet the only cause and color why the Pope commands, and the Cardinal
advises, the Catholics of England, to forbear and refuse to take the oath of
allegiance, is this, That in the said oath is couched and included the
derogation, and renunciation of the sufficiency and absoluteness of the Popes
authority over or against his Majesty, claymed by virtue of his high office of
supreme Pastor, whereby he is enabled to proceed against any Prince whatsoever
temporally for his restraint and amendment, or to permit other Princes to do
the same: So that the question of the lawfulness of this oath, and the
question argued in these few leaves of my labor concerning the Popes arrogant
Usurpation, has not any thread of difference sorting both alike to one and the
same purpose. Therefore if unto my former refutation of the Mittigators,
immoderate attribution of power unto the Pope, I shall join some few
animadvercions upon the epistoling Gentlemen: also (an alter idem of P. R.) for
the better observing and discovering of his deceitful and disloyal carriage,
in the reproving of that oath, it will be a continuance of the same skirmish,
and the like battering of the same bulwark which the pride of Rome has
erected and endeavoreth to fortify against the dignity of Kings and the truth
of God.

First I observe that howsoever he undertakes in general terms to make good
the Popes desision touching the refusal of that oath on the part of his
Majesty's Catholics subjects, yet in his particular arguing thereupon, (as if
he were also another Pope, whom as a judge, it becomes not to dispute) he
discusseth not the several parts to be disliked in the oath, or sets forth
plainly and contradictorily the words which he will hold or maintain to be
unlawful or cumbersome to the squemish conscience of their pretended
Catholics, whereby a true state or issue of the matter in question might be
taken in consideration, but in stead of such express and positive mentioning
of the disliked parts of that oath, glideth away in his glosing fashion wiht
bare affirmation of dangerous doctrinall clauses, containing matter of faith
craftily conjoined together, with the exacting of civil duty, prejudicial to
the integrity and purity of Catholic religion.

This kind of handling a controversy, is rather resolving then reasoning, and
more Pope like in determining as a Judge, then Scholar like in demonstrating
as a Disputer: Why does he not to every branch, of the said oath affixe and
oppose his negative, without any such faint plea, or fumbling and broken
speeches, cut of with etc. Will the distinction of direct, and indirect, as he
makes it to serve the Pope for actions and authorities, so serve his turn
also in speaking and argumenting? stands it with any Logical rules, to
induce or enforce conclusions, indirectly by conception and application, which
ought to be produced directly, in a full opposition to the questioned
proposition.

Then where the oath has these plain words, that the Pope has not any power
or authority to depose the King, or to dispose any his Majesty's Kingdoms, or
Dominions, or to authorize any Foreign Prince to invade or annoy him in his
Countries, or to discharge any of his Subjects from their allegiance and
obedience to his Majesty, or to give License or leave to any of them to bear
Arms, raise Tumults, or to offer any violence, or hurt to his Majesty's Royal
person, state, or government, why does not he in justification of the
unlawfulness of this oath, by as plain, full, and broad terms, tell us that
the Pope, by the capacity of his omnipotency, is endued with so plenary a
power, as that he may depose the King, dispose his Kingdoms, authorize
Foreign invasions, discharge his Subjects from allegiance, license them to
offer violence to his Royal Person, state, or government? And that for that
regard the conscience of the Catholics may not be obliged by any such profane
oath, impyous against the Pope, and the amplitude of his Pastoral primacy? But
does he in any-one line of his whole Volume, let slip any word expressly
declaring, naming, or mentioning any power of this nature, and that Lawfully
may produce these effects, to be invested or bestowed upon his Holiness? I am
persuaded that the igniculi of natural duty, the morsus of an acknowledging
conscience, and the pudor of his face (which perhaps yet retayneth some
remnants of modesty) would not suffer him so far to degenerate from natural
notions, so far to be alienated from his dutious recognicion, or so far to
pass all the bonds of shame, as directly, and roundly to deliver unto the
World any sentence so monstrous, and so full of horror and heynousnesse.

Nevertheless he has taken such a taste of the sower grape of Rome, and is
dipped so deep into the venom and malice of that imperious and persecuting
Church, as that yet indirectly, and by a subtle conueyance of his meaning, he
gives us to understand, that his inward soul, has pronounced this doom and
judgment against his anointed Sovereign, and therefore that soul, must not
be entangled, stayed, or bound, by any brideling or restrayning oath to the
contrary.

But how does his outward man manage these difficulties? Just in the same
manner to an hayres breadth, as Mr. Mittigator (whom he may call his ille ego)
does that is closly, dissemblingly, timorously, and treacherously: In the place
of the Pope, he uses the entitleings of Supreme Pastor, the deposing and
killing of Princes, he compriseth, and covers under the words of proceeding
against, and restrayning of them, what is done by invasion, insurrection, or
force of arms, is included in the word temporalty, the stirring up and
appoynting of other Potentates, to partake, in the quarrel, is brought in very
gently in this good show of permitting other Princes, etc.

Now fie upon this blaunching and disguising Oratory, If he could pass away
cleanly with these easy and favoring phrases, he would steal out against
us, (as not suspecting his harmefull intentions) his deadly writ of execution:
This one word of restrayning would (like to a ball of wildfire) disclose it
self, and break a sunder, into censuring, depriving, deposing, destroying,
and murdering of Sovereigns, and would have no mean, or end of oppression or
Tyranny.

Next, admitting him to this liberty, as not to single out any special, or
particular clauses of the oath, let us examine how he proves that there be
enwrapped within the said oath, points of religion as well as of (...)
obedience; he makes reckoning to have showed it by four several distinct
ways: I will bear him witness that the ways be several; for only one of
them has show of leading us to the scope and conclusion fore-intended, the
rest are all straggling paths, quite from the purpose, for are not these I
pray you good arguments? The Pope tells the Catholics that he has heard,
that they are compelled to go to the Churches and Assemblies of Heretics, and
to be at their Sermons, Ergo, the oath of Allegiance contains matter of
Religion, as well of civil obedience. Again, Bellarmine compares the oath to
the crafty composion and commixture of the Images of the Emperor Julian, and
the Pomim gods, all coupled and combined together in this Imperial banner:
Ergo, by an argument ab authoritate, there be in that oath points Spiritual
and Temporal conjoined together.

Lastly, the good Gentleman does kindly make this real offer for satisfaction
of his Majesty, that he will swear unto him, as much Loyalty as ever any
Catholic Subject of England did, unto the lawful Kings in former times before
the change of King H. 8. Ergo, there lurketh articles of says in the said
oath, under the pretense of civil duties. The first of the four, seems to
shute fair, and and at the least to stick in the Butt, though far enough
from the mark; and thus it speaks, from the plain express words, sense,
and drift of the oath it self, That besides the acknowledgment of our
Sovereign to be true King and rightful Lord over all his Dominions; and that
I will be a true loyal Subject unto him and such other clauses, whereat no man
sticks or makes any difficulty, the said oath contains further, that I
must swear in like manner some points, concerning the limitation of the Popes
authority, to wit, what he cannot do toward his Majesty, or his Successor
in any case whatsoever? Which question brought unto the Thesis of all Kings
touches (says he) a point of Doctrine and Catholic belief, concerning the
sufficiency of of Pastoral authority, left by our Savior in his Church unto
St. Peter, and his Successors, for redressing of all inconveniences that may
fall out; and this to forswear has peril of everlasting Damnation.

There must be a monstrous strain, nay, he must break through and steal,
before his Holiness with his predominate power, can get into the Creed. (...)
have before set in his way cross bars, and obstacles ^^ nough, which he
will never be able to (...) impeach his assention into any such height, as
(...) our consciences, The article of Catholica Ecclesia, (...) be no cloak or
conductor for him, nor shall (...) Canopy over his high estate of ^, (...)
callity.

The Argument wherewith this Gent. does (...) Pope to so eminent a place of
power, and reputation that his prerogative is past questioning, and that upon
pain of (...), is this, every oath that conteyneth points concerning the
limitation of the Popes Authority, is an oath belonging to Religion; but this
oath expressing what the Pope cannot do toward his Majesty, or his successor
in any case whatsoever, is an oath concerning the limitation of the Popes
authority, therefore this oath is belonging to Religion: If the Mayor
propofition be untrue or uncertain, all the rest tottereth and falls, as
without foundation: I will examine the same by the pondering of the particular
words thereof. First, (belonging to Religion, in a general sense may
comprehend all the actions and resolves of men: yea civil duties, also are
within the spaciousnes thereof, because a true Christian is govern his whole
life and carriage by the rules of his Religion: but this Disputor must narrow
the signification thereof more precisely, tying and applying the same only to
the articles of Payth. Secondly, the Popes authority must undergo the like
distinction as themselves have propounded unto us, (that is to say) what he may
do as Pope, and what he has accustomed to do by other acquiered titles, or
by mere usurping intrusion.

Now then to say, that every limiting of the Popes authority whatsoever the
same be, or howsoever obtained or exercised belongs to the Articles of
belief, I for my part will never believe it, and I do not think, that any of
their own Secritaries will be so much besotted, I will explayne my meaning by
instances and cases of the like condition; suppose that the Pope would pretend
and plead that the King does hold of him the Crown of this Land, and
therefore as Superior Lord, will require homage or trybute, and in default of
rendering the same, will invade his Dominions with sword and force: If in this
case the King shall for more security of his Imperial State, ask (upon
Allegiance) the oaths of all, or any his Subjects in detestation of that
claim, may the Catholics make scruple of conscience concerning such an oath,
because the same seems to limmit and abridge, the Popes pretended right and
authority? making in the mean time no Religion of the limitting, lessening,
and detracting from the Sovereigns Title and pre-eminence? perhaps they will
say that this is a question of civil right, and that the Subject is clearly
bound to maintain the Prince. But how if the Pope pretend withal his
Pastoral care, and preservation of matters spiritual, then I trust ( in
ordine ad spiritualia) his temporal attempts must be supported, by his
spiritual Children, against the King and Country.

Again, let it be conceived that the Pope much moved with indignation, at the
execution of Justice ministered in this Kingdom, against the Treacherous
Conspirators of the Popish faction, should upon that gnawing grudge toward the
Judges of this Land, take upon him by solemn Censure, to deprive and displace
them from their Iuridiciall offices, wherein (though he can assume no ordinary
or rightful power) yet in ordine ad spiritualia and for the general relief,
and necessity of the Catholic cause he adventureth as from his pastoral
charge, to pronounce them from henceforth to be incompetent Judges, commanding
all Catholics also to reckon of them, and the judgments by them given: Now
the question is, whither to make a constant asseueration that the Pope has no
such authority, be unto a Catholic conscience a point of Faith or Religion,
because of such limiting bounds, disabling the Pope in his supposed sufficiency
of his general function for the good of the Church? If the denying or abating
of the popes authority over these inferior minifters of Justice be not
accounted cumbersome to the c^osciences of Catholics (wherein I think they
will make no doubt) why should the abjuring of this papal power over our
Supreme Magistrate touching the (...) and destroying of him, be thought so
dangerous, and damnable, or repugnant to their own Religion? will Religion
allow him more liberty against the highest, then against the meaner
Substitutes? or if he have such a Rule over Princes themselves, why not also
over the Subordinate Officers of the Kingdom? to command, direct, authorize,
or suppress them, to the best avail and advancement, of the Catholic side,
that so he may become more then Monarchiall, by an absolute and unlimited
Dominion?

This Gent. says that touching the acknowledgement of our Sovereign to be
true King and rightful Lord over all his Dominions, no man sticks at that:
But, I ask, whether if the Pope have already enwrapped his Majesty within any
of his general sentences, or shall declare by any especial means, that he is
not to be acknowledged King, will not then the Catholics stick at that? must
not they refuse to swear unto that clause of recognition also? for fear that
his Holiness be questioned and limited in his own power and preeminence? I
will not fear to affirm, That the true allegiance, and obedience of a
natural subject, cannot dwell together in the corrupted heart of a devoted and
dissembling Papist, and therefore no marvel that the heart preposessed with
Papacy, does cast such doubts, of offending his dearest love, especially having
plighted faith, and vowed his service, by all constant endeavors thereunto.

This contrariety of Masters, must needs breed iealousies on both sides, for as
the Pope forbids Papists, to swear their allegiance and fidellity to the
King, (fearing lest himself should thereby be excluded and renounced) So the
King can never think himself secure and assured of those subjects, who (from
their acknowledgement of the Popes superiorship over the King, and that in such
a degree as may endure no limiting) dare not be affianced by oath to the safety
of the King against the decrees and designs of their Dominus dominancium. Then
what will they say, or do, to free his Majesty from fears and ielousies? Does
this supple Gent. think to make or bring confidence, which I hope in Gods
goodness that the Pope will never attempt any thing in prejudice of his
Majesty. Surely Sir, your hope is too weak a stay for our state to rest or
trust unto: For what if the same great important and urgent cases, concerning
Christian religion do fall out wherein ye averr the Popes authority over
Princes: Then in that case I perceive the best answer we shall expect from
you will be the fools proverb, non putarem. For here again you feed and
foppe us one with another of your hopes (which we hope will never be between
our Sovereign and the Sea Apostolic.) Is it not more then strange that this
so provident coniecturer of future events, should hope that that matter will
never be; which long has been, continually is, and I trust perpetually will
be, seeing, that these same great, important, and urgent cases concerning
Christian Religion have done, and do daily fall out, between our Sovereign
and the Sea of Rome, called by him Apostolic, Therefore it appears that the
man has lost his wits, whilst he would obtrude his hopes. The true conclusion
is, that for as much as these great and important cases are in continual
conflict and question between the Pope and his Majesty, and that consequently
the Authority of the Pope lies pressed in daily readiness to repress and
suppress his Majesty upon all occasions, as it concerns his Royal person,
for the preservation of his Life, State, and Dignity, to assure himself of the
vnviolable faithfulness of his Subjects, so that must needs be accounted a
disloyal and unnatural part for any subject to be so seduced, by
hipocriticall pretenses, as to adhere to a foreign and fained clericall
Primacy, against his alleagiance, love and duty, toward his true Sovereign
Lord and King.

The Gent. uses many glorious and plausible speeehes of the humble
acknowledgment of all temporal duties to his Majesty, and iumpeth with the
Mittigator in opinion, that it is not impossible for the Catholics to conform
in Subjection to the Civil government, and yet to reserve their consciences to
the religion of Rome, if this were affirmed of such Countries only where the
Prince is of the Romish faith, or of this Nation whilst the Pope had some
hold, and prevalency in the same, then perhaps we might come near to an
agreement in this point, but where the Prince and Pope are of religion so
repugnant and opposite, where the Pope is quite secluded and expelled from any
power Eccleslasticall or Civil, and where the Prince as in the right of the
Crown, is the defender and preserver of the faith within his Kingdom, there
we are taught by experience, and directed by reason, that the entertayning and
professing of Papacy, is the renouncing and repressing of regallity. I weigh
not the allegation that is made, of the long continuance for well-neere a
thousand years, of the admission and permission of the Popes Superiority in
this Realm, and how the same for all that space stood vn-offensive unto this
state, for whilst there was either subiugaiton, or conjugation of the two
powerful commands, their contrarietyes and repugnances could not be so
apparently discovered, as they be now manifested, by the distinguishment and
final dissevering of them into their proper natures, rights, and limitations.
I have read diligently that great Volume, avouched Answer to Sir Edward Cook.
by this Gent. written with much labor to this poor purpose, of declaring the
Papal pre-emine^ce within this Cuntry, ever since the first conversion thereof
to Christianity, until the reign of King Henry the eight.

The Authors sedulity and devotion may amongst the Birds of the same feather,
receive his reward, (at the least) of commendation, but I will undertake with
one short answer, (consisting but of two parts) to run my pen through every
line of that huge Bulk, blotting and putting out whatsoever he has painted,
forth for the best show. First, (forbearing to refute their Fables, and
taking their own account of time, which they make of the entry of the Romish
Religion into this Land,) it is evident that the mystery of iniquity, and the
Antichristian arrogance of the Romish prelacy, was then revealed and exalted
into worldly pomp: So as they then sending of Factors into these parts, was
but to Conquer the simple people, of that vninstructed age to the bondage and
yoke of Rome.'

And therefore no marvel, if they were still held in the same, or the like
subjection in the succeeding times, whereunto they were at the first surprised
by political handling, and with much simulation of piety trained one for
intromitting, and acceptance thereof; and I cannot invent a fitter resemblance
whereby to represent the cunning carriage of that plot in those days, then
that which Cardinal Bellarmine has used and applied in this question. Which
is the crafty composition and commixture of Images set by Julian the Emperor
of himself and the panim gods coupled and combined together, in his Imperial
banner, for as that Emperor under the show of reverence due to be performed to
himself, though to have seduced those good Christians to the honoring of
Idols, so in those dark and undiscerning times of our forefathers, by the
tempering and joining of the Christian Religion, and the Antichristian
usurpation, their simplicity was abused, and they by subtle practices, wrought
unto such a credulity, as that together with the sweet comforts of Christ,
they sucked in at once the poison of Romish Idolatry, and the oppression of
papacy: The second part of my answer is, that notwithstanding such
encroachment of the popedom unto this Kingdom, wherein by stealing steps
and sundry Hypocritical passages that had gotten good footing, keeping in the
mean while both Prince and people in an ignorant devotion, and a dread of
damnation: Yet did the Kings of England, from time to time, feel themselves
and their Sovereign state to be enthralled and wronged by the ouer-awing, and
busy intermedling of that universal pastorship, and therefore omitted not,
upon all occasions, to make known their dislikes and reluctations, to uphold
the course, and force of the ancient Common Law, to defend and put in practice
the Imperial prerogatives of their Crown, and to restrain the exorbitant
ambition of the sea of Rome, by providing statutes, under grievous penalties
against the Subjects of this Land, that in derogation of the Justice,
government, and regal rights, of the King, did make recourse unto Rome, by way
of appeal, impetration, or other pretenses contrary to the natural obligation
of their faith and allegiance.

But it will be said, how came it to pass then, that the Subjects held on
their former orders, and no whit refrayned from Rome, yielding still to the
pope the same their dependency, and acknowledgments: That shall I also tell
you, the pope and Council of Rome (knowing right well, how fully they had
possessed all sorts of people, with a blind zeal, carried after idle
Ceremonies, and well pleasing superstitions, and remembering that they had so
seized and fastened upon their Conscience, as that every one held the salvation,
or damnation of his soul, to consist in his obedience, or disobedience to the
Church of Rome,) did cross and avoyde the execution of such states by
decreeing and sending forth their Ecclesiastical execution, of suspending,
and excommunicating, of all Ministers of Justice, or other ministerial
persecutors whatsoever, that should attempt to enforce, or execute any such
(...); by this means of denouncing such terrors to the soul, the mightiness
and authority of the pope, grew dreadful and powerful, until it pleased the
Almighty God, by the revelation of his truth, and discovery of Popish
falsehoods, to inspire with courage and magnanimity the heart of that Right
Noble King H. 8. who finally without any fear of his thunderbots, accomplished
that work of freeing this Realm from the grievous butthen, and heavy yoke of
the popish Supremacy, which diverse of his prodecessors Kings of England, had
often, and much endeavored, and desired to do, if their illightnings with
grace, and enablings with means, had served them thereunto; Thus it is made
clear, that the Popes authority, neither at the first landing thereof upon
the Coast of this Kingdom (which was not in the purer times, but 600 years
after, Christ as themselves confess, when the Church of Rome was fallen from
sincerity) neither in the continuance and exercise of the same was lawful,
allowable, or beneficial, but rather intruded, offensive, and prejudicial
unto this state; and for his motion of sampling our proceedings to the practice
used in other Countries over Catholic Subjects, in this point of excluding the
Pope for intermedling temporally against Princes, showing that they will be
ready to answer as much duty and allegiance to his Majesty, as any such
Catholic Subjects in any other Kingdom does, or is bound to do: He must know
that he must then make and take his pattern, from the Protestant Princes, who
have resumed their ancient and original rights, and not from them whom he
calls Catholics, that honoreth the best, and dishonoreth themselves;
wherefore the Gent. may hold his hand from the book, his kind offer of
swearing unto his Majesty as much loyalty as ever any Catholic Subject of
England did unto the lawful King in former times and ages, before the Change
of King H. 8. will not be accepted as a suffering service or duty; Then was both
King and people made drunk with the Popish cup, of spiritual Fornications,
the Kings then were but half Kings, and the Subjects but half Subjects; his
Holiness had pared away so much from the one, and gained so much upon the
other, the one could not be absolute in commanding, for fear that his Superior
should enterpose, the other could not be absolute in obeying, because there
might come a stronger countermaund; then what has this offer more then thus?
We have been filthy and will be filthy still. And why should not his Majesty
require of his Subjects such obedience, as by the rules of the true reformed
Religion, which he professes he lawfully may do? Or is there any reason that
he should still be held to the former wrongs, and disaduantages, which
ignorance, hypocrisy, pride, and other manifold corruptions did beget and
produce against his Crown, and Soveraignity: Is it to be reckoned a point of
Faith and Salvation to lay forth a limitation of that power which has been
heretofore so infinitely extended, and so unjustly claymed? and what is this
limitation?

Forsooth that the Pope cannot make Kings no Kings, or Subjects no Subjects,
that his spiritual Sheephooke may not subdue the Princely Scepter, nor order
and dispose of temporal rights; why may not the Pope be limited with some
clauses? Of what he may do, and what he may not do? The Gent. dogeth me, with
P. R. his distinction of directly, and indirectly, which imports thus much,
that in plain, true, and in direct course, to his Pastoral office, there be
fixed bounds, which he cannot pass, but in an undue improper, and indirect
course, he may go where he lists, neither hedge nor ditch can hold him,
neither can there any matter of cause be conceived, whereunto this indirect and
outstretched power may not be carried, we reckon in the Common acceptance of
speech, indirect dealing to be fraudulent and unjust dealing, and why should it
not likewise be understood, that this indirect authority is a wrong usurping,
and mis-begotten authority?

The temporal is subordinate to the spiritual therefore ( in ordine ad
Spiritualia) he that has all spirituallity, may in that regard, as occasions
be ministered, rule, and order any temporal thing, or business whatsoever;
this is the reach and strain of their (indirectly) which can be no less then
a direct and shameless illuding shift, for maintayning whereof, and justifying
of that infinity of doing and determining, so many English Subjects, must
forsake and abandon their obedyence, breaking a sunder all the chains of love
and allegiance, which Nature, Laws, Divine, and humane, and necessity it self
does tie them with, alas, that upon so slender proof, not containing so much
as a shadow of any probability, our dear Countrymen enjoying the benefits of
the same soil, and pertaking the protection of so gracious a Prince: whereby
their lives and estates are preserved in peace and good repose, should be
bewitched to their own woe, and seduced to the stirring of sedition: Yet it is
not unknown that diverse of them moved more with the true zeal of rendering to
his Majesty, their dutious respects, then carried with that headstrong, and
blind zeal, of attending the pleasure and commands of their great Dragon, have
willingly (and as we are to judge) faithfully taken the oath aforesaid, to the
exceeding comfort and (as he entertayneth the same with an acceptable
construction) to the assuring of his Majesty, of their unfeigned fidellity.

But this cauilling Gent. takes exception unto, and makes considerations
upon the words, (willingly and faithfully.) First, for show and proof that
they have not done it willingly or freely: he alleges that the statute
imposing such a pain upon the refusors, does make a kind of restraynt
through fear; and so depriueth them both of liberty and freedom; I appeal to
the parties themselves, that have taken the oath, who speaks more truly and
honestly of, then he, or I, when I find it a branch of their oath, that they
do swear willingly, I do believe them, not taking them to be so Reprobate,
as in any such (...) rate manner forswear themselves: Neither do I (...), so
(...) of them, as that the passion of fear could so far transport them as to
make them swear (...): He (belike knowing them better then I) (...) against
them, that they have not taken the oath willingly, and therefore they be
directly (...), yet he thinks he has pleased them again, and falued the
matter by laying the fault upon the enforcement of fear, wrought in their
hearts, by the rigiour of the Law: In the mean time he makes them in their
Religion to be very faint, and of little faith, if worldly respects and dread
of Calamities. can so far stagger them, or prevail over their infirmities,
as to make them fear man more then God; and so in an unbelief and
prophannesse, hazard salvation by forswearing; but because he so carpeth at the
carriage, and composure of that oath, and the enterlacing of those words, I
would ask his opinion whither it be not lawful and reasonable that any
Magistrate may, yea ought, to charge the conscience of him that swears, that
he shall do the same willingly, and faithfully? Or does he know any oath,
wherein the same are equal thereunto, to express the truth and sincerity of
the heart, be not either directly used, or necessarily employed? His supposall
of fears, troubles, or losses, is as applyable to the taking of any other
oath, and by any other persons as well as to this, by them taken, seeing that
there is no oath prescribed to be required or exacted of any subject, but the
refusal thereof does occasionally, and consequently, draw dangers and losses
to the party so refusing. And does he think it fit to infert thereof that
all the oaths that are propounded with such condition, or likely to breed such
inconvenience to the refuser, are not taken freely and heartily? I wish his
wits more freedom, and his heart more loyalty then so to judge.

If the oath had stayed at the recognition of his Majesty's right unto the
Crown, and had not mentioned the Popes Authority, or any restrictions
concerning the same, the heaviness and extreamitye of the penaltye appointed
against the refusors, and so much aggrivated by this Gent. had not been
charged as a compulsarie cause, or any privation, or impediment to the freedom
of the Catholics consciences, whereby it is made evident, that not the manner,
but the matter of the said oath, it is, that stingeth and offends them so
much, for otherwise they will not deny, but his Majesty may lawfully, either
by oath (which puts upon their Souls an awe and obligation spiritual) or
by propounding correspondent punishment temporal (which often works a
suppression of outward attempts) secure himself so far as he may of good
affection, or at the least of no aversion in his Subjects.

As touching the other word (faithfully) howsoever he comments upon the same
either by way of interpretation of the sense and meaning, which his Catholics
retained to themselves, when they took the said oath, or by way of direction
unto such as shall hereafter be pressed thereunto, what cautelous reservation
they may make by a mental conceit, (for surely by giving his judgment what
the former have done, he intends to instruct the rest what to do) yet for my
part, I will still hold my self in my rule of charity which before I have
observed, That for as much as they have sworn, that the words by them spoken
were sincerely acknowledged, according to the plain and common sense and
understanding of the same, without any equivocation or mental evasion, or
secret reservation whatsoever. I do not believe, that any of them have used
any such damnable deceit, or have so apparently and grossly foresworne
themselves. Can this Gent. be so hard-hearted toward his beloved, as when he
sees and rehearses the very words of their religious asseverations, and
protestations, and that with this concluding clause (by the faith of a
Christian) yet to judge that they took the said oath in the same lawful sense
and interpretation which might stand with the true Catholic doctrine, making
them thereby equivocators, and mental Iugglers, yea, express perjured, if
they have secretly retained any others meanings then as the common and plain
sense of the words affords. But how does he convey and conster that part of
the oath as concerning the Popes Authority, in dealing with temporal Princes?
What moderate meaning has he found for the safeguard of the Catholic
consciences that have taken that oath? Truly this devise and exposition is so
slight and simple, as that I am verily persuaded he propounds and publishes
the same, merely for the instruction and practice of the simple and vulgar
Catholics: The learned amongst them would be ashamed of so mean and
vnschollerlike a shift, to wit, that in swearing, that the Pope has no
authority to proceed against Princes, they should subunderstand (without good
cause) for this inperpretation (says he) is agreeable to the integrity and
sincerity of the Catholic doctrine, quia illud possumus quod iure possumus,
And I pray the Gentleman's worship, to tell me whether non possumus etiam quod
iure non possumus, is not power for the most part extendeable beyond right and
justice? But in this case the question it self being De jure, Whether the Pope
rightfully and lawfully (as incident into his Pastoral place) may exercise
power and authority over Princes temporally, how frivolously, and ridiculously,
is this evasion devised, that he may not do it without good cause, which is
as much to say, he may not do it lawfully, except he do it lawfully. Why?
the question is not what he may do unlawfully, for then we might give to
some one Pope an exemption, and dispensation for more sins, then there were
virtues among them all. But when it is asked what this supreme Pastor may do,
or what he may not do, in the right of his ministerial office, this same (
jure) has reference to the authority general, and not to the exercise thereof
in any unlawful particularitie. Yet I may not so have done with this his so
foolish conceit, lest if I let him pass therewith, he may gather upon me
another absurdity, that (with good cause) the Pope may take upon him the power,
which we absolutely deny him, who knows not, that the cause and offense may
be such as may move and provoke the dislike of all men? yet the correction,
reformation and restraint belongs not to all men, but only to a competent and
authorized Judge, which the Pope over Princes can never be, especially in
temporal affairs, neither directly, that is truly and by commission, nor
indirectly, that is coulerably by any devised or fained pretense, wherefore if
he can invent no better an hiding corner for dissembling swearers, I hope there
is no Catholic will make use of his so fond a reservation and favorable
interpretation, which indeed is all one, as if he asked leave to speak
senselesly, to mean deceitfully, and to practice treacherously; presently
after this out of his charity he had conceaved this escape by construction, for
the consciences of Catholics, forgetting (as it seems) that the said oath
had by special words provided against such reserved meanings, he remembers
himself better acknowledging that as this case stands, they may not well
induce themselves to equivocate, or swear in any other sense then from his
Majesty is proposed, and concludes it to be less hurt plainly to deny to
swear, then by such swearing to give no satisfaction neither to God, the King,
himself, nor his neighbors, thereupon falls into a deep grave invective
against this great pressure laid upon men's consciences, showing that howsoever
we reckon it a godly devise and intent, and that God did accordingly bless the
same, yet that no violence or oppression whatsoever is like to this, and that
the devising of this new oath was no blessing, but an unspeakable affliction
and augaracio^ of mind (his angry passion forging unto us that new word) and in
this fuming fashion he preceedeth, not forbearing to tell us that by such
extreme vexing of men, we shall gain nothing, and gives us further to
understand, that such forcing of men against their consciences may make us more
doubtful of their good will after they have sworn, then we were bebefore; and
that injury received, must needs stir them to more auersion of heart,
working contrary effects to that which is pretended; Nay, he dares also to
add hereunto some threats and terrors, Setting forth that amongst all other
passions, none is more strong then that of revenge for oppressions received,
and therefore would have us conceive, and apply it, that such as do not stick
to swear against their consciences, for fear or other passions, will as
easily break that oath upon like motives if occasion serve: In this boiling
manner does the fervency of his spirit inkindle the inclinable hearts of the
male-contended, Catholics, by the memory of their wrongs, and with vehemence
of words, making incitations, to sedition, and insurrection; his Theological
resolving that we commit a grievous sin, when we force and press men to
swear against their consciences, making the same the highest degree of
scandal active, tends to no other end, then to scandalize the Justice of our
state, and to animate their mutining and factious accomplices, to some desperate
undertakings.

And because he says, that such their Catholic Doctrine, will not be denied
of the learned Protestants themselves: He forces for answer a declaration of
the truth, positiuely mayntained amongst us in that behalf; wherein (first
absolutely denying that de facto we enforce any so to swear) or that the tenor
of the Statute, or any rigor contained in the penalty thereof, does press them
to any repugnancy, against their consciences, we confess that amongst private
men in particular neccssities, for discovering of some truth, which otherwise
cannot be made known this course of giving and taking satisfaction by a
voluntary oath is held in use, and that needfully and lawfully; and that in
such debates of private nature, it belongs to the discretion, honesty, and
conscience of any well advised man, not to require or accept of the oath of any
such as he by vehement presumption mis-doubteth will forswear himself. But
when for the public good, and by public authority of the Law, the public
officer or Magistrate is enjoined to urge an oath, or to be satisfied by the
same, he therein (for performing and executing of the direction and command of
the Law) is not to be blamed, neither commits any sin, though in his
private opinion he shall suspect that the party so brought to his oath, will
falsely or corruptly forswear.

For herein he is but a Minister of the Law, and must leave the searching
into the secrets of the heart, to the Almighty all seeing, and all judging God,
his duty and office both works and ends in the act of the Law, saving that
piety and charity may move him zealously to admonish him that so swears, to
have God and his Christian faith in remembrance, and to beware of all
precipitation into the danger of hell fire.

This godly and charitable aduisednesse, (I am well assured) is duly observed
by the Magistrates of this Realm, not suffering any to pass so carelessly, as
not with loving tenderness to admonish them, of the important points, of that
oath, and to adhort him to plainness, and willingness in taking of the same,
that their consciences may not after be combred, and confounded with scruples,
conflicts, or reluctations.

He affirms a likely objection to be made on our side, for defense of the
enforcing of Catholics to this oath, which is by way of justification, of our
doings therein, to be agreeable to the practice of the Romish Church, or in a
course of recrimination that the Popish authority is more or equally culpable
of the same offense, because in the tribunalls of inquifitors, men are forced
to abjure their opinions, and that under pain of death, or other most grievous
punishments.

Now what is his answer, and what is the difference which he finds out, to
convince our constraynings to be dissauowable, and theirs (much more violent
and Tyrannous) to be approueable? marry, because the Catholic Church has Ius
acquisitum over Heretics, as her due subjects, though now gone out of her,
and departed from her; does this answer beseem a Gent. that professes
learning, who well knows that we will presently deny the Popish to be the
Catholic Church? that we have not departed from the Church? but from the
abominations of Rome, that we be neither Heretics, not subjects to that
Antichristian Supremacy, and that their Ius acquisitum is not obtained by any
derivation or substitution from Christ, but it is intruded and usurped, and so
rightly termed acquisitum, being neither Datum nor Legitimum, but gotten by
fradulent contriuings, and strong illusions; in which cases it is not unlawful
to shake of the yoke of bondage, and Tyranny, so unjustly brought upon us, so
soon as any means and opportunity shall be offered.

And the rather because we have (to front this Ius acquisitum with) an old and
strong opposition in our Law, that nullum tempus occurrit Regi, whose Royal
pre-eminence and supreme power, God has in due time redeemed, from that great
captivity of the Romish Babell; and was it not high time, and most requisite
that the dignity, and Majesty of this Kingdom should be exempted from the
servitude of that Ius acquisitum? Do you not note that all such as be or have
been brought under the same, are by this Gent. called the subjects of the
Catholic Church? such is the haughtiness of that high built Tower of pride.

The Pope is here made a Sovereign, St. Peter's nets catches more Kingdoms,
then Fortune cast into the nets of the Athenian Captain. The Monarchies of
Europe must be come the acquisites or perquisites of the Court of Rome. Has
not then the Pope some reason thus to contend for the retayning of his subjects
in his obedience, by barring of them from swearing themselves subjects to his
Majesty, and by performing of the duties of allegiance requierable of
subjects? I shall be driven to avouch in earnest, that which Cardinal
Bellarminegathereth against us as a great absurdity, that is, That no man can
profess unfeignedly his civil obedience, and detest treason and conspiracy,
but he must be forced also to renounce the Primacy of the Sea of Rome. The
headship of the supreme Bishop which bears away in his stream the service
and devotion of so many reputed Catholics, is the headspring of treachery and
sedition, which by claiming amongst us so many subjects, draws from us their
affection and obedience.

The distinction of Spiritual subjection and civil obedience, is become idle
and of no use, because the Pope does not keep his quarter, but will needs
break forth of the rayles and limits of that distinction, taking upon him to
be authorized also temporally, and that, for the suppression and subversion of
the Civil Soveraignity, and so upon that occasion (having his sheep as by his
pastoral charge to attend his call and hear his voice) makes at the lest a
scruple, and distraction, if not a full declination in the wills and duties of
the people of this Kingdom, whence must necessarily arise either privy
complottings, or open attempts, in favor of their opinions, and in furtherance
of their defires, which how far it will extend, and into how deep degrees it
uses to grow, many sorrowful and fearful examples has in this Realm
demonstratively declared unto us, to every whereof Papacy has been the
stirrer and instigator. I scant dare to mention that late most memorable
example (beyond all examples) of the Powder Treason, this Gentleman is so
tender-eared, as that he cannot endure to hear of that, he finds fault with
the appolloger for the odeous and often repetition thereof. I cannot blame them
if the repetition of that purpose be thought odeous, which makes them odeous
to all true Christian hearts, and puts all the world at gaze, in admiring at
a design so devilish and detestable. And because he asks whether there be
no end of reprobation, I will end with a wish, That there were in that hollow
vault some shrill and screeching Echo, that might never cease, by continual
resounding outcries, to beat and fill the air, with the memory of that
hellish enterprise, that a Treason so extraordinary, hatched up with the heat
of Papacy, should even from forth of the stones themselves receave for ever in
all succeeding Ages, a most just reproof and exprobation. My position
wherewith I will conclude is this, That albeit I do not hold all popish
opinions, or Papists seduced with such errors, to be culpable of Treason,
knowing that many simple and vninstructed people, may in some perticulers be
misled, and nevertheless, remain allowable subjects, and perhaps not forsaken
Christians: Yet such and so many of them, as directly, and completely,
maintain Papacy, that is, the Supremacy of the Popes power and Authority in
the sense, and to the purpose, as this Gentleman and P. R. has expressed and
advanced the same, and in upholding thereof, deny their Faith, Allegiance,
Assistance, Subjection, and Adherence unto their Sovereign, do carry
Treasonable hearts, and are thereby apted for the like Actions, as opportunity
shall allure or enable them thereunto.

FINIS.

